Medical Imaging and Computational Image Analysis in
COVID-19 Diagnosis: A Review
Shahabedin Nabavi1, Azar Ejmalian2, Mohsen Ebrahimi Moghaddam1, Ahmad Ali Abin1, Alejandro F.
Frangi3, Mohammad Mohammadi4,5, Hamidreza Saligheh Rad6
1- Faculty of Computer Science and Engineering, Shahid Beheshti University, Tehran, Iran.
2- Anesthesiology Research Center, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
3- Centre for Computational Imaging and Simulation Technologies in Biomedicine (CISTIB), School of
Computing, University of Leeds, Leeds, UK.
4- Department of Medical Physics, Royal Adelaide Hospital, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia.
5- School of Physical Sciences, The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia.
6- Quantitative MR Imaging and Spectroscopy Group (QMISG), Tehran University of Medical Sciences,
Tehran, Iran.

Abstract:
Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) is an infectious disease caused by a newly discovered coronavirus.
The disease presents with symptoms such as shortness of breath, fever, dry cough, and chronic
fatigue, amongst others. Sometimes the symptoms of the disease increase so much they lead to the
death of the patients. The disease may be asymptomatic in some patients in the early stages, which
can lead to increased transmission of the disease to others. Many studies have tried to use medical
imaging for early diagnosis of COVID-19. This study attempts to review papers on automatic methods
for medical image analysis and diagnosis of COVID-19. For this purpose, PubMed, Google Scholar, arXiv
and medRxiv were searched to find related studies by the end of April 2020, and the essential points
of the collected studies were summarised. The contribution of this study is four-fold: 1) to use as a
tutorial of the field for both clinicians and technologists, 2) to comprehensively review the
characteristics of COVID-19 as presented in medical images, 3) to examine automated artificial
intelligence-based approaches for COVID-19 diagnosis based on the accuracy and the method used,
4) to express the research limitations in this field and the methods used to overcome them. COVID-19
reveals signs in medical images can be used for early diagnosis of the disease even in asymptomatic
patients. Using automated machine learning-based methods can diagnose the disease with high
accuracy from medical images and reduce time, cost and error of diagnostic procedure. It is
recommended to collect bulk imaging data from patients in the shortest possible time to improve the
performance of COVID-19 automated diagnostic methods.

Key words: Computed Tomography, Corona Virus, COVID-19, Deep Learning, Machine Learning,
Medical Image Analysis, Medical Imaging.

List of abbreviations:
AI: Artificial Intelligence
COVID-19: Coronavirus disease 2019
CT: Computed Tomography
CXR: Chest X-ray
PCR: Polymerase Chain Reaction
RT-PCR: real-time Reverse transcription-PCR
NAAT: Nucleic acid amplification test
GGO: Ground‐glass opacity
FDG: FluoroDeoxyGlucose
PET: Positron Emission Tomography
SPECT: Single-photon Emission Computed Tomography
MRI: Magnetic Resonance Imaging
CNN: Convolutional Neural Network
BCNN: Bayesian CNN
AE: Auto-encoder
GAN: Generative Adversarial Network
CGAN: Conditional GAN
SVM: Support Vector Machine
AUC: Area Under the Curve
GLCM: Grey-Level Co-occurrence Matrix
LDP: Local Directional Pattern
GLRLM: Grey-Level Run Length Matrix
GLSZM: Grey-Level Size Zone Matrix
DWT: Discrete Wavelet Transform
RF: Random Forest
SNR: Signal-to-Noise Ratio
CNR: Contrast-to-Noise Ration
PPV: Positive Predictive Value
DECAPS: Detail-Oriented Capsule Networks
ICU: Intensive Care Unit
SMOTE: Synthetic Minority Over-Sampling Technique

1- Introduction
Coronaviruses are a large family of viruses that cause disease in humans in the form of a common cold
to more severe respiratory infections. An infectious disease caused by a newly discovered coronavirus,
also known as COVID-19, is a disease that causes an acute respiratory syndrome, which can lead to
the death of infected patients. The disease was first seen in December 2019 in Wuhan, China, and
eventually became a global pandemic. According to the official statistics, the number of people
infected with the disease had reached over 16 million worldwide, with over 600,000 deaths until end
of July 2020 [1].
Patients have a variety of symptoms during the illness, including shortness of breath, fever, dry cough,
and chronic fatigue. Sometimes the symptoms are so severe in patients they can be fatal. The leading
cause of transmission is the contact of the person's hand with the contaminated surfaces and then
touching the face. Despite many efforts by scientists, there is currently no vaccine for the disease.
Therefore, the main advice to prevent infection is to observe personal hygiene by regularly washing
hands, disinfecting surfaces and covering the airways with a mask [2].
CT imaging has been proposed as one way to diagnose the disease. A large number of studies have
been published on the role of medical imaging in the diagnosis of this disease in the short time since
the outbreak stage. Many researchers in medical image analysis are also seeking to provide artificial
intelligence (AI) based solution for the automatic diagnosis of the disease based on medical images.
This review provides a summary of peer-reviewed research articles, conference papers, case reports
and letters to the journal editors related to the role of imaging and also peer-reviewed research
articles, conference papers and preprints related to medical image analysis in COVID-19 to help other
researchers in conducting their studies due to the importance of this disease and its destructive effects
on societies. PubMed, Google Scholar, arXiv and medRxiv were searched for all peer-reviewed journal
articles, conference papers, case reports, letters to the journal editors and preprints that fulfil the
following selection criteria by the end of April 2020:
-

the role of all different medical imaging modalities in COVID-19 diagnosis;
imaging findings related to COVID-19;
advice and statements for using imaging in COVID-19 diagnosis;
automated methods for detection and classification COVID-19 based on medical imaging data.

The rest of this review is structured as followed. Section 2 describes the contributions of the role of
medical imaging in COVID-19 diagnosis. In this section, many articles, case reports and letters to
editors related to this field are reviewed so the reader can understand the main points of these articles
can pick up with literature and critical contributions in a short time. In section 3, articles related to
automatic methods in the detection of COVID-19 based on AI techniques are reviewed. Finally, in
section 4, this article concludes with a discussion and an outlook for future studies.

2- The role of imaging in COVID-19 diagnosis
There are several ways to detect COVID-19, including real-time reverse transcription-polymerase
chain reaction (RT-PCR) and the nucleic acid amplification test (NAAT). Because often the test results
may be negative despite having the person infected, and asymptomatic infections can spread the
infection, there is a need for a more careful approach to diagnosis. Some studies and reports confirm
that medical imaging can be an effective way to diagnose COVID-19 infection, even if the patient is
asymptomatic. Therefore, where it is impossible to access the above tests, medical imaging can help
diagnose the disease and prevent its spread in asymptomatic patients. In this section, we review

studies that have been published on the role of medical imaging in the diagnosis of COVID-19. We
summarise the most essential points of view of articles, including the features of the disease in medical
images.
In the study of Rodrigues et al. [3], chest imaging findings were examined in the literature. Some
pointed out that decisions should be made regarding determining medical imaging as a screening tool
in patients with different severity of the disease. In the study of Nair et al. [4], the use of CT imaging
in the diagnosis and management of COVID-19 disease in the UK was investigated by asking several
questions and answering them. This study considers the results of CT imaging as a standard in the
diagnosis of COVID-19 to be contradictory. As another example, in the study of Huang et al. [5], it is
emphasised that CT imaging should not be recommended as a screening tool in the early diagnosis of
COVID-19 due to two issues. The first is failure to prove that CT imaging can always succeed in
diagnosing COVID-19, and the second is that overexposure of patients to radiation can have long-term
adverse effects. Raptis et al. in their review study [6] concluded that the studies that have examined
the role of CT imaging in the diagnosis and management of COVID-19 could not prove this role due to
their limitations. Although some studies have debunked the role of medical imaging in the diagnosis
of COVID-19, many studies have attempted to prove its importance by expressing the imaging features
of the disease, and using CT imaging is considered an effective solution in early diagnosis, severity
assessment and patient management in the progression of COVID-19 [7-18].
In the study of Zhu et al. [19], 34 studies with 4121 COVID-19 patients have been systematically
reviewed. The main features of CT in this study are ground‐glass opacities (GGOs), air bronchogram
sign, crazy‐paving pattern, consolidation, pleural thickening, lymphadenopathy, and pleural effusion,
respectively. Also, Lesion shapes are patchy, spider web sign, cord‐like, and nodular. In the study of Li
[20], the importance of using chest CT for the diagnosis and follow-up of COVID-19 patients has been
investigated. CT features at different stages of the disease are different according to previous studies.
Hani et al. [21], CT imaging has been cited as a critical complement in the diagnosis of COVID-19. CT
features have been described as peripheral GGOs with multifocal distribution, and a progressive
evolution towards organizing pneumonia patterns.
In another systematic review study conducted by Bao et al. [22], 13 studies have been reviewed. CT
characteristics have been listed as GGO, GGO with mixed consolidation, adjacent pleura thickening,
interlobular septal thickening, air bronchograms, crazy-paving pattern, pleural effusion,
bronchiectasis, pericardial effusion, and lymphadenopathy, respectively. The most anatomic
distributions are bilateral lung infection and peripheral distribution. In the study by Salehi et al. [23],
30 studies consisting of 19 case series and 11 case reports with a total of 919 patients were
systematically reviewed. CT findings are included GGO, bilateral involvement, peripheral distribution,
and multilobar involvement. Other CT findings include interlobular septal thickening, bronchiectasis,
pleural thickening, and subpleural involvement. Rarely found findings include pleural effusion,
pericardial effusion, lymphadenopathy, cavitation, CT halo sign, and pneumothorax.
2-1- Computed Tomography
CT imaging has been widely used as a fundamental modality in the diagnosis of COVID-19 in the
studies. High-resolution [24-29], low-dose [30, 31], thin-section [32, 33] and spiral [34] CT imaging are
mentioned as a main modality in some of researches.
Some studies have shown that CT imaging is insufficient or incapable as a diagnostic modality for
COVID-19 [35-38]. Some other studies show misdiagnosis in early-stage patients of COVID-19 [25], and
propose the combination of CT imaging and clinical findings for better diagnosis of COVID-19 [39, 40],

especially in children [41-43]. A large number of studies have reported the importance of CT imaging
in the diagnosis of COVID-19, and CT features related to the patients infected with COVID-19.
GGOs, patchy and wedge-shaped GGOs, consolidation, vascular enlargement and thickening,
interlobular septal thickening, interstitial thickening, air bronchogram sign, fibrotic lesions, pleural
effusion, crazy-paving pattern, linear and rounded opacities, reticulation, fine reticular opacity,
subpleural and central lesions, irregular solid nodules, interstitial pulmonary oedema, halo sign,
reversed-halo sign, architectural distortion, bronchial wall thickening, subpleural bands, traction
bronchiectasis, intrathoracic lymph node enlargement, lymphadenopathy, thickening of the adjacent
pleura, cystic changes, cord-like lesions, thickening of the bronchovascular bundles, pleural thickening,
cavitation, tree-in-bud sign, interlobar fissure displacement, pericardial effusion, concomitant
hydropericardium and/or hydrothorax, thickened lobular septum, thickened bronchial wall, vacuolar
sign, bronchiolar dilatation, secondary tuberculosis, paving stone sign, pleural retraction sign, fine
mesh shadow, pneumatocele, spider web sign, enlarged mediastinal nodes, underlying pulmonary
emphysema, bullae of lung and obsolete tuberculosis and thickened leaflet interval are CT findings of
patients with COVID-19 in the collected studies (Refer to Table 1).
Some studies have individually examined the characteristics of CT in children. A study by Li et al. [44],
which was performed on five children, has found patchy GGOs as the main characteristic of CT in
children with COVID-19 and believed that the abnormalities in CT images of children are similar but
milder than those of adults. The study of Zhu et al. [45], which was performed on 44 younger (47.5 ±
8.7 y old) and 28 older patients (68.4 ± 6.0 y old) with COVID-19, despite the reporting of some similar
CT features among younger and older patients, considers it more likely that extensive lung lobe
involvement, subpleural line and pleural thickening will occur in older patients. The study of Feng et
al. with 15 cases of paediatric patients diagnosed with COVID-19 [46], identified small nodular and
speckled GGOs as the main features in CT images of these patients. Another study also described CT
findings in children as milder than in adults [27]. In a study of nine children with COVID-19 aged 0 to 3
years by Zhou et al. [43], the CT findings are nodular lesions, patchy lesions, GGO with consolidation
and halo sign noted to be milder than in adults. In their study, Liu et al. [41] believe that a history of
exposure and clinical symptoms may be more useful in the screening of COVID-19 in children than CT
imaging. Procalcitonin elevation and consolidation with surrounding halo signs are frequent in
paediatric-patients than adults based on the study of Xia et al. [42].
Studies have also been performed in pregnant women with COVID-19. According to Wu et al. [31], the
CT findings in pregnant women are similar to those in non-pregnant women. In the study by Liu et al.
[41], consolidation has been described as a more common CT feature in pregnant women.
Table 1 is an overview of studies that have examined the role of CT imaging in the diagnosis of COVID19. These studies have five or more cases of COVID-19, which are sorted based on the number of
cases. CT and other related findings are summarised for each study. Table 2 deals with studies on CT
imaging for COVID-19 diagnosis with less than five cases mostly written as a case report or letter to
the editor. In these tables, to acquaint researchers with the studies conducted in this field, the number
of cases, the features of COVID-19 infection in the studied images and the findings or essential points
of these studies are summarised.
2-2- Chest X-Ray
Among the reviewed studies, seven studies have focused on the signs of COVID-19 in CXR images. In
the study of Jacobi et al. [47], which is a pictorial review, the possibility of using portable CXR imaging
in the diagnosis of COVID-19 has been investigated due to its availability in most medical centres.
Based on this research, CXR imaging also provides the ability to detect COVID-19. Zhang et al. have

reported that the combination of clinical features and radiological findings can predict the severity of
COVID-19 [40]. In their study [48], Wang et al. believe that since the diagnostic role of CT imaging has
not been accurately proven, it is better to use a modality such as CXR with less radiation, especially
for children.
In the study of Lomoro et al. [49], which has been performed on 58 patients with COVID-19, CXR
manifestations are consolidation and hazy increased opacity. In the study of Wong et al. [50],
conducted with 64 patients with COVID-19, GGOs, consolidation and pleural effusion have been
reported as CXR findings. The results of this study show bilateral lower zone consolidation, which
peaked at 10-12 days from symptom onset. CXR findings also had sensitivity lower than initial RT-PCR
testing. CXR manifestations are parenchymal abnormalities, consolidation, GGOs, single nodular
opacity and patchy opacities in the study of Yoon et al. [51]. According to this study, a large proportion
of patients with COVID-19 have normal CXR images. Table 3 summarizes the studies related to this
section.
2-3- Ultrasound
Few studies have suggested the use of lung ultrasound to detect COVID-19. In Lu et al. (2020) [52],
lung ultrasound signs are interstitial pulmonary oedema and pulmonary consolidations. The study
concluded that although the lung ultrasound diagnostic efficacy on the detection of COVID-19 in mild
and moderate patients is relatively low, it is high in severe patients. Thirty patients were examined in
this study. In Lomoro et al. (2020) [49], lung ultrasound signs are B-lines patterns (focal, multifocal,
and confluent) due to interlobular septal thickening or hazy opacities, subpleural consolidation,
thickened pleural line, pleural effusion and mixed pattern with A- and B-lines based on information
from 58 COVID-19 patients.
In the study of Wang et al. [48], lung ultrasound is considered a suitable modality for the diagnosis of
COVID-19 due to its non-radiation nature. Vetrugno et al. [53] also believe that lung ultrasound can
show the severity and involvement of the lung in COVID-19. Kalafat et al. (2020) [54] is a case report
of positive lung ultrasound findings of COVID-19 in a pregnant woman with an initially negative RTPCR result.
2-4- 18F-FDG PET/CT
Some studies have confirmed the role of this modality and its sensitivity to the detection of COVID19. Based on Lutje et al. (2020) [55], this modality can play a complementary role in the management
of COVID-19. It means this modality has the potential to diagnose COVID-19, and it can be used for
estimating the extent to which organs are involved and determining the response to treatment in
patients. Deng et al. [56] also highlighted the sensitivity of this modality in COVID-19 diagnosis and
monitoring disease progression or the success rate of treatment. In a study by Qin et al. [57] that
described the results of 18F-FDG PET/CT for four patients, all patients had peripheral GGOs and
consolidations in over two pulmonary lobes. According to this study, although it is impossible to use
this modality widely, it has good potential in detecting the complex cases of COVID-19. Zou and Zhu
[58] and Polverari et al. [59] are case reports in which imaging was performed with this modality. The
imaging results revealed bilateral, diffuse, and intense FDG uptake in the lower lobes and less intense
uptake in the remaining lobes.
However, there are also conflicting points about the effectiveness of this modality. Prolonged imaging
may cause the disease to spread in imaging centres [60]. Also, due to the large number of COVID-19
patients, the 18F-FDG PET/CT imaging capacity cannot cover this number of patients [61].
2-5- Other modalities:

Some other studies have talked about other imaging modalities to detect COVID-19. Tulchinsky et al.
[62] suggests that since CT-SPECT can diagnose COVID-19, nuclear medicine physicians should be
familiar with the features of the disease in the images. The study of Poyiadji et al. [63] is a case report
related to using MRI images to detect COVID-19–associated acute necrotising haemorrhagic
encephalopathy. Acute necrotising encephalopathy is a rare complication of viral infections like
influenza.
When the level of D-dimer increases during hospitalisation or sudden clinical deterioration, CT
angiography can be a life-saving option for patients, as patients with COVID-19 may be associated with
acute pulmonary embolism [64].

3- Automated image analysis methods for COVID-19 diagnosis
Due to challenges such as the unavailability of PCR testing in all centres of COVID-19 and the high
false-negative rate of this test [65], which has been mentioned in many studies in this field, medical
imaging for early detection of COVID-19 has received more attention. However, evaluating many of
medical images in the epidemic situations will undoubtedly be a time-consuming and error-prone
process. Therefore, given the advances in machine learning, more reliance on these techniques for
the automatic diagnosis of COVID-19 based on medical images should be considered [66-70].
AI-based methods can provide automated tools for detecting COVID-19 [69]. The distinguishing
features must first be extracted from the image to create automated diagnosis methods. The feature
extraction process can either be based on handcrafted feature extraction methods or deep learning
approaches [71]. Machine learning approaches can then be used for medical image classification,
medical image segmentation, severity assessment of disease and other possible tasks based on
extracted features.
This section presents an overview of automated methods in the diagnosis of COVID-19 based on
medical imaging. We review the methods, the main contributions of the studies and the imaging
datasets available in this field. We also discuss the performance of the methods.
3-1- Deep-learning-based approaches
With deep learning, many operations required to analyse images and extract features from images
have become more manageable. Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [72] have been widely used
for image analysis, and this review cites several studies that use this approach to detect COVID-19
from CT or CXR images. A look at the famous CNN architectures shows that they all consist of three
types of layers. These layers include convolutional, pooling, and fully-connected layers. Convolutional
layers, which are based on the use of convolution kernels, are responsible for extracting features from
images. Pooling layers reduce the resolution of feature maps based on operations such as average or
max-pooling so that they can achieve shift-invariance. Fully-connected layers aim to perform
classification based on obtained feature maps from previous layers. The reason for using multiple
layers is that the kernels of the first convolutional layer are used to extract the low-level image
features such as edges, and the subsequent convolutional layers extract the high-level features of the
image. Softmax operation is usually used for the final classification, while other methods such as
Support Vector Machine (SVM) can also be used for this purpose [73].
There is a need for large-scale data to take advantage of deep learning approaches, and some studies
have collected data sets required to evaluate the automatic methods of detecting COVID-19 [74, 75].
Big datasets are not yet available for deep learning methods because it has not been long since the

COVID-19 pandemic. Therefore, many studies have addressed the challenge of data scarcity using data
augmentation [76] or transfer learning [77].
Transfer learning is a way in which knowledge gained from one domain can learn in another domain.
It means it is possible to train a deep neural network and store the knowledge obtained on a domain
where there is enough data and that knowledge can be used to train the network with little data from
another domain. Two different strategies of transfer learning can be used for image classification. In
one strategy, the pre-trained network can be used as a feature extractor, and in another strategy, the
pre-trained network can be fine-tuned on images of COVID-19 patients. There are contradictory
results regarding the use of these strategies, but in general, using transfer learning dramatically
improves the classification accuracy. Using this method can sometimes even outperform human
experts [78].
In the study of Varshni et al. [79], the use of pre-trained CNNs for feature extraction of CXR images
along with different classifiers to distinguish between normal and abnormal images has been
investigated for pneumonia detection. Some pre-trained CNN models including Xception [80], VGG16
and VGG-19 [81], ResNet-50 [82], DenseNet-121 and DenseNet-169 [83], and classifiers including
Random Forest (RF), K-nearest neighbours, Naive Bayes and SVM have been evaluated in the study.
Based on statistical results, the combination of DenseNet-169 for the feature extraction and SVM for
the classification has been selected, and the accuracy of this proposed method is 80%. In the study of
Narin et al. [84], transfer learning has been used on three deep CNNs including ResNet50, InceptionV3
and InceptionResNetV2. A total of 100 CXR images, including 50 images of patients with COVID-19 and
50 normal images, were used to learn the networks, and the results show a 98% accuracy of ResNet50
using 5-fold cross-validation. Another similar study [85], which used the transfer learning technique
to diagnose COVID-19 automatically, evaluates seven deep convolutional neural networks. A 90%
accuracy for VGG19 and DenseNet201 in a dataset, including 50 normal images and 25 images of
COVID-19 patients, has been achieved. In the study of Ghoshal and Tucker [86], a pre-trained network
called ResNet50V2 has been used. Dropweights based Bayesian CNN (BCNN) has also been used to
estimate uncertainty in deep learning strategies to improve diagnostic performance. The study, with
5,941 CXR images, including 68 images of patients with COVID-19, achieved an accuracy of about 89%.
Data augmentation is a way to address the problem of data limitation to avoid network overfitting.
Data augmentation can be done with basic image processing techniques or deep learning approaches.
The former includes geometric and lightening transformations, image mixing and filtering. Deep
learning approaches include generative adversarial learning [76].
Khalifa et al. [87] have presented a combined approach involving transfer learning and the use of
generative adversarial networks (GAN) for data augmentation. A 99% accuracy has been achieved
using Resnet18 on a dataset including 5863 CXR images. Loey et al. [88] have used conditional GAN
(CGAN) for data augmentation, and this method has improved the performance of classification. In
their study, Farooq and Hafeez [89] have used methods such as vertical flips, random rotation of
images and lighting condition transformations for data augmentation. Similarly, the study of
Apostolopoulos et al. [90] has used random rotation and random horizontal and vertical shift towards
any direction for data augmentation. Data augmentation has been done in the study of Zheng et al.
[91] using random affine transformation and colour jittering. The affine transformation comprised
rotation, horizontal and vertical translations, scaling and shearing in the width dimension. The colour
jittering adjusted brightness and contrast. Hu et al. [92] have augmented the data by cropping square
patches at the centre of the input frames, rotation with a random angle, random horizontal reflection
and contrast adjustment using randomly darkening or brightening.

Some studies have also tried to present a deep neural network architecture from scratch. In a study
by Wang et al. [93], a deep convolutional neural network called COVID-NET is proposed to detect
COVID-19 based on 13,975 collected CXR images. This study compared the results of the proposed
method with the VGG-19 and ResNet-50, which shows that the accuracy of 93.3% for the proposed
method is superior to the other methods. As another example, Oh et al. [94] identified COVID-19 in
their study based on a patch-based CNN approach with a relatively small number of trainable
parameters.
Table 4 summarises the automated deep learning-based approaches for COVID-19 diagnosis.
3-2- Other approaches:
Some studies use non-deep learning methods to detect COVID-19 automatically. Barstugan et al.'s
study [95] used methods such as grey-level co-occurrence matrix (GLCM), local directional pattern
(LDP), grey-level run length matrix (GLRLM), grey-level size zone matrix (GLSZM), and discrete wavelet
transform (DWT) to extract the feature from 150 CT images. SVM has also been used for classification,
and the results show a 99.68% accuracy of the classification using 10-fold cross-validation and GLSZM
feature extraction method. In the study of Tang et al. [96], 63 quantitative features along with a RF
model have been used to assess the severity of COVID-19 based on CT images of 176 patients infected
with COVID-19. The accuracy of 87.5% has been obtained based on three-fold cross-validation. In the
study of Al-Karawi et al. [97], FFT-Gabor scheme and SVM have been used for feature extraction and
classification respectively, with results showing a 95.37% accuracy rate among 275 positive COVID-19,
and 195 negative patients.
4- Discussion
4-1- Overview
In this review study, many articles and preprints related to the role of medical imaging and automatic
methods of medical image analysis in the diagnosis of COVID-19 were examined. Despite some articles
that deny the role of medical imaging in the diagnosis and management of COVID-19, many studies
have highlighted this role and examined the characteristics of the disease in medical images. Despite
the sometimes contradictory results, a significant portion of the articles emphasises the use of medical
images including CT, CXR, ultrasound, 18F-FDG PET/CT and so on to diagnose COVID-19. The reasons
for these studies are that the disease shows visible signs in medical images that can be used for early
detection of COVID-19 in the lack of access to RT-PCR and other related methods.
Efforts have also been made to diagnose COVID-19 automatically from CT and CXR images using
machine learning techniques. The wide range of machine learning methods, especially deep learning,
can be used for COVID-19 diagnosis.
4-2- Key aspects of medical imaging for COVID-19 diagnosis
CT is the primary modality in early detection of COVID-19 because a significant portion of the reviewed
studies, including 122 studies, examined the role of CT imaging. GGO and consolidation are the most
common COVID-19 features in CT images based on the significant number of studies. The study of Ai
et al. [98] with 1014 patients studied has the highest population compared to other studies. After that,
Zhang et al. [40] and Ling et al. [36] studies are in the next ranks with 645 and 295 patients,
respectively. The number of patients in these studies shows there are limitations in terms of patient
information. Therefore, more comprehensive studies are needed. There have also been studies on
children and pregnant women. Given the conflicting results, more studies are needed in this respect.

However, if we want to summarise, we can still acknowledge the constructive role of medical imaging
in the diagnosis of COVID-19.
4-3- Key aspects of automatic AI-based COVID-19 diagnosis
Due to the growing potential of AI-based approaches for medical diagnosis and interventions, using
these approaches to distinguish COVID-19 from medical images has received much attention. With
deep learning, the accuracy of the proposed methods has also increased dramatically. In this review
study, 51 studies that used deep learning to diagnose COVID-19 were examined. To compare the
studies conducted in this field, these studies have been summarised in terms of modality,
methodology, accuracy and number of images used in Table 4. Summarised studies show an accuracy
of over 80% in the diagnosis of COVID-19 based on deep learning methods. Therefore, this indicates
the ability of deep learning methods in the analysis of medical images.
The main challenge in this section is the lack of big data for more accurate analysis. Although some
studies have collected data, it is necessary to collect large dataset in this area due to using deep
learning. However, the reviewed studies show the authors used approaches such as transfer learning
and data augmentation to overcome this shortcoming. Fine-tuning of pre-trained neural networks for
image classification can be an approach to network training with a small number of samples. Data
augmentation using GANs or other image processing methods like image rotation and translation,
lightening transformations, scaling and so on can also improve the learning and testing process by
increasing the number of input images.
Although using deep neural networks has mostly been the basis for most articles in this field, handcrafted feature extraction methods along with classification methods can also be evaluated for the
COVID-19 diagnosis.
4-4- Outlook
In this study, two main issues related to COVID-19 were examined. First, the role of medical imaging
in the COVID-19 diagnosis was investigated, and the details of the observed characteristics of this
disease were listed based on different modalities. Second, AI-based automated methods for COVID19 diagnosis in various images were reviewed to shed light on the importance of these techniques.
This study could be useful for medical staff and technologists who want to get acquainted with the
features of COVID-19 in medical images.
In future studies, it is possible to achieve more reliable results by collecting a much broader set of data
from different medical centres and relying on approaches that simultaneously use multiple modalities
and learning methods. Also, there is a need to develop an international protocol for using medical
imaging to diagnose the severity of COVID-19 and its follow-up to control the destructive effects of
medical imaging on patients, especially children and pregnant women.

Table 1: Overview of studies on CT imaging that have five or more cases of COVID-19.
References

No. of
cases

CT findings

Other findings

Ai et al. (2020) [98]
Zhang et al. (2020)
[40]
Ling et al. (2020) [36]

1014
645

GGOs, consolidation, reticulation/thickened interlobular septa and nodular lesions
GGOs and consolidation

295

Four patients with COVID-19 infection showed no clinical symptoms or abnormal chest CT images

Yang et al. (2020) [99]

273

GGOs, consolidation and linear opacities, solid nodules, fibrous stripes, chronic inflammatory manifestation, chronic bronchitis,
emphysema, pericardial effusion, pleural effusion, bullae of lung and obsolete tuberculosis

Colombi et al. (2020)
[100]

236

Patchy GGO, diffuse GGO, GGO and consolidation, pleural effusion, mediastinal nodes enlargement, emphysema and pulmonary
fibrosis

Dai et al. (2020) [24]

234

Bai et al. (2020) [101]

219

Vascular enhancement sign, interlobular septal thickening, air bronchus sign, intralesional and/or perilesional bronchiectasis, pleural
thickening, solid nodules, reticular/mosaic sign, interlobar fissure displacement, bronchial wall thickening, minor pleural effusion,
pericardial effusion and mediastinal lymphadenopathy
GGO, fine reticular opacity and vascular thickening

Caruso et al. (2020)
[102]
Fan et al. (2020) [103]

158

Yang et al. (2020) [37]

149

Li et al. (2020) [104]

131

Wu et al. (2020) [105]

130

GGO, GGO with consolidation, vascular thickening, pleural parallel sign, intralobular septal thickening, halo sign, reversed-halo sign,
pleural effusion and pneumatocele

Bernheim et al. (2020)
[106]

121

GGOs, GGO with consolidation, consolidation, linear Opacities, rounded morphology of opacities, crazy paving pattern, reverse-halo
sign, pleural effusion and underlying pulmonary emphysema

Zhang et al. (2020)
[107]
Zhao et al. (2020)
[108]
Wang et al. (2020) [34]

120

GGOs, nodules, linear densities, consolidation, crazy paving, bronchiectasis, effusion, lymphadenopathy, air bronchograms, tree-inbud sign and white lung
GGO, consolidation, centrilobular nodules, architectural distortion, bronchial wall thickening, reticulation, subpleural bands, traction
bronchiectasis, vascular enlargement, intrathoracic lymph node enlargement and pleural effusions
GGO, consolidation and pleural effusion

Chest CT has a high sensitivity for the diagnosis of COVID-19.
Combing clinical features and radiographic scores can effectively
predict severe/critical types.
The clinical symptoms and radiological abnormalities are not the
essential components of COVID-19 infection.
Age, Monocyte-lymphocyte ratio, homocysteine and period
from onset to admission could predict imaging progression on
chest CT from COVID-19 patients.
In patients with confirmed COVID-19 pneumonia, visual or
software quantification the extent of CT lung abnormality were
predictors of ICU admission or death.
Chest High-resolution CT provided the distribution, shape,
attenuation and extent of lung lesions, and some typical CT signs
of COVID-19 pneumonia.
High specificity but moderate sensitivity in distinguishing COVID19 from viral pneumonia on chest CT.
Chest CT sensitivity was high (97%) but with lower specificity
(56%).
The main manifestations of initial chest CT in COVID-19 is GGOs,
commonly involving single site in patients < 35 years old and
multiple sites and extensive area in patients > 60 years old.
Some patients with COVID-19 can present with normal chest
findings.
The imaging pattern of multifocal peripheral ground glass or
mixed consolidation is highly suspicious of COVID-19, that can
quickly change over a short period.
COVID-19 imaging characteristic mainly has subpleural,
centrilobular and diffused distribution. The first two distributions
can overlap or progress to diffused distribution. In the later
period, it was mainly manifested as organising pneumonia and
fibrosis. The most valuable characteristic is the pleural parallel
sign.
Recognising imaging patterns based on infection time course is
paramount for helping to predict patient progression and
potential complication development.
Using chest CT as the primary screening method in epidemic
areas is recommended.
The follow-up CT changes during the treatment could help
evaluate the treatment response of patients.
Spiral CT can make an early diagnosis and for evaluation of
progression, with a diagnostic sensitivity and accuracy better
than that of nucleic acid detection.

Han et al. (2020) [109]
Zhao et al. (2020)
[110]

108
101

Huang et al. (2020)
[111]

100

150

118
114

GGO, subsegmental vessel enlargement, consolidation, lymphadenopathy, bronchiectasis, air bronchogram, pulmonary nodules
surrounded by GGO, interlobular septal thickening, halo sign, pericardial effusion, pleural effusion and bronchial wall thickening
Ground-glass nodules, patchy GGO, consolidation, cord-like lesions, thickening of the bronchovascular bundles, pleural thickening,
crazy-paving sign, air bronchogram sign, pleural effusion and enlarged lymph nodes
GGO, mixed GGOs and consolidation, consolidation, air bronchogram, centrilobular nodules, tree-in-bud, reticular pattern, subpleural
linear opacity, bronchial dilatation, cystic change, lymphadenopathy and pleural effusion
GGOs, consolidation, nodule, interlobular septal thickening, vascular enlargement, air bronchogram, fibrosis, pleural thickening,
hydrothorax and lymph node enlargement

GGO, consolidation, GGO with consolidation, vascular thickening, crazy paving pattern, air bronchogram sign and halo sign
GGOs, consolidation, mixed GGOs and consolidation, centrilobular nodules, architectural distortion, bronchial wall thickening,
reticulation, subpleural bands, traction bronchiectasis, intrathoracic lymph node enlargement, vascular enlargement and pleural
effusions
GGO, consolidation, crazy-paving pattern, bronchiectasis, interlobular septal thickening and lymphadenopathy

The mechanism of CT features is explicable based on
pathological findings.

Wang et al. (2020)
[112]

90

GGO, consolidation, crazy-paving pattern and pleural effusion

Xu et al. (2020) [113]

90

Liang et al. (2020)
[114]
Li et al. (2020) [115]

88

GGO, consolidation, crazy-paving pattern, interlobular septal thickening, linear opacities combined, air bronchogram sign, adjacent
pleura thickening, pleural effusion, pericardial effusion and lymphadenopathy
GGO, consolidation, linear opacities, discrete pulmonary nodules and cavitation

Shi et al. (2020) [39]

81

Wu et al. (2020) [116]

80

Li et al. (2020) [35]
Liu et al. (2020) [117]

78
73

Zhu et al. (2020) [45]

44
younger
and 28
older
67

Zhong et al. (2020)
[118]
Pan et al. (2020) [28]
Zhou et al. (2020)
[119]

83

GGO, linear opacities, consolidation, interlobular septal thickening, crazy-paving pattern, spider web sign, bronchial wall thickening,
subpleural curvilinear line, nodule, reticulation, lymph node enlargement, pleural effusion and pericardial effusion
Bilateral, subpleural, GGOs with air bronchograms, ill-defined margins, and a slight predominance in the right lower lobe, irregular
interlobular septal thickening, crazy-paving pattern, thickening of the adjacent pleura, nodules, cystic changes, bronchiectasis, pleural
effusion, lymphadenopathy, consolidation patterns and reticular patterns
GGO, consolidation, interlobular septal thickening, crazy-paving pattern, spider web sign, subpleural line, bronchial wall thickening,
lymph node enlargement, pericardial effusion and pleural effusion
GGOs, mixed GGOs, consolidation, interlobular septal thickening, air bronchograms, fibrotic lesions and pleural effusion
Unique GGOs, multiple GGOs, paving stone sign, consolidation, bronchial wall thickening, pleural effusion and thickening of lung
texture
Pure ground-glass, GGO with consolidation, consolidation, reticular pattern or honeycombing, subpleural line, pleural thickening,
pleural traction, pleural effusion, vacuolar sign, air bronchogram and vascular enlargement

Solid plaque shadow, halo sign, fibrous strip shadow with ground-glass shadow and consolidation shadow

63
62

Patchy/punctate GGOs, GGOs, patchy consolidation, fibrous stripes and irregular solid nodules
GGO, consolidation, GGO with consolidation, nodule, rounded opacities, crazy-paving pattern, air bronchogram, halo sign, subpleural
curvilinear line, thoracic lymphadenopathy, pleural effusion or thickening and pulmonary fibrosis

Zhou et al. (2020)
[120]

62

GGO, consolidation, GGO plus a reticular pattern, vacuolar sign, microvascular dilation sign, fibrotic streaks, subpleural line,
subpleural transparent line, air bronchogram, bronchus distortion, thickening of pleura, pleural retraction sign and pleural effusion

Liu et al. (2020) [41]

59

Pure GGO, GGO with consolidation, GGO with reticulation, consolidation and pleural effusion

Meng et al. (2020)
[121]
Lomoro et al. (2020)
[49]
Li and Xia(2020) [122]
Guan et al. (2020) [32]

58

53
53

GGO with peripheral distribution and unilateral location, fine reticulation, subpleural curvilinear line, halo sign, air bronchogram,
vascular enlargement and consolidation
GGO, GGO with consolidation, crazy-paving patterns, fibrous stripes, subpleural lines, architectural distortion, air bronchogram sign,
perilesional vascular thickening, scattered nodules, enlarged mediastinal lymph nodes and pleural effusion
GGOs and consolidation with or without vascular enlargement, interlobular septal thickening and air bronchogram sign
GGO, crazy paving, consolidation, stripe, air bronchogram, pulmonary nodules and secondary tuberculosis

Wang et al. (2020)
[123]

52

GGOs, patchy consolidation and sub-consolidation, air bronchi sign, thickened leaflet interval and fibrous stripes

Lyu et al. (2020) [124]

51

Consolidation, crazy-paving pattern and air bronchogram

Fang et al. (2020)
[125]
Xu et al. (2020) [126]

51

GGOs, GGO with consolidation, consolidation and linear opacity

50

Lei et al. (2020) [127]

49

GGO, mixed GGOs and consolidation, consolidation, thickened intralobular septa, thickened interlobular septa, air bronchogram,
pleural effusion and enlarged mediastinal nodes
GGOs, interstitial thickening, and consolidation, fibrosis, parenchymal band, traction bronchiectasis and irregular interfaces

58

The extent of CT abnormalities progressed rapidly after symptom
onset, peaked during illness days 6-11, and followed by
persistence of high levels.

CT findings vary depending on the time interval between the
onset of symptoms and the CT performing.

No centrilobular nodules or lymphadenopathy.
The size and CT abnormalities are related to disease severity.
Elderly and younger patients with COVID-19 have some similar
CT features. However, older patients are more likely to have
extensive lung lobe involvement, and subpleural line and pleural
thickening.
A solid shadow may predict severe and critical illness.

In patients with dyspno and respiratory distress, CT examination
is very practical in the preclinical screening of patients with
COVID-19.
GGO and a single lesion at the onset of COVID-19 pneumonia
suggested that the disease was in its early phase. Pleural effusion
might occur in the advanced phase.
Atypical clinical findings of pregnant women with COVID-19
could increase the difficulty in initial identification. Consolidation
was common in the pregnant groups. The chest CT imaging
features of children with COVID-19 pneumonia were nonspecific. At the same time, the exposure history and clinical
symptoms could be more helpful for the screening.
CT scan has great value in the highly suspicious, asymptomatic
cases with negative nucleic acid testing.

Low rate of misdiagnosis of COVID-19 in CT images.
Identification of CT features of COVID-19 pneumonia provides
timely diagnostic evidence.
The chest CT images of patients with COVID-19 have specific
characteristics with dynamic changes, which are of value for
monitoring disease progress and clinical treatment.
Severity assessment of COVID-19 pneumonia based on chest CT
would be feasible for critical cases.
The sensitivity of CT for COVID-19 infection is 98% compared to
RT-PCR sensitivity of 71%.
Repeated CT scanning helps monitor disease progression and
implement timely treatment.

Yang et al. (2020)
[128]

44

Pure GGOs, GGO with consolidation, GGO with interlobular septal thickening, consolidation, vessel expansion, air bronchogram,
mediastinal lymphadenectasis and pleural effusion

Xiong et al. (2020) [29]
Long et al. (2020)
[129]
Liu et al. (2020) [130]

42
36

Single or multiple GGO, consolidation, interstitial thickening or reticulation, air bronchograms, pleural effusion and fibrous strips
GGOs, GGO with consolidation, lymphadenopathy and pleural effusion

33

Subpleural lesions, central lesions, ground-glass density shadow, consolidation, interstitial change and interlobular septal thickening

Cheng et al. (2020)
[131]

11
COVID19 and
22 nonCOVID19
27

GGO, mixed GGO, consolidation, air bronchogram, centrilobular nodules, tree-in-bud sign, reticular pattern, subpleural linear opacity,
bronchial dilatation and cystic change

23

GGO, ground-glass nodule, solid nodule, consolidation, halo sign and interstitial thickening

23

GGO, patchy, wedge-shaped ground-glass shadows, intralobular interstitial thickening with consolidation, fibrous stripes and
concomitant hydropericardium and/or hydrothorax

Himoto et al. (2020)
[134]

21

Bilateral GGO, peripheral-predominant lesions without airway abnormalities, mediastinal lymphadenopathy and pleural effusion

Chung et al. (2020)
[135]
Pan et al. (2020) [136]

21

GGOs, GGO with consolidation, consolidation, rounded morphology, linear opacities and crazy-paving pattern

21

GGOs, crazy-paving pattern, inter- and intralobular septal thickening and consolidation

Xia et al. (2020) [42]

20

Zhu et al. (2020) [137]

Han et al. (2020) [33]

7
patients
with
Heart
failure
and 12
with
COVID19
17

Consolidation with surrounding halo sign, GGOs, fine mesh shadow, tiny nodules, interlobular septal thickening, fibrosis lesions, air
bronchogram signs and pleural thickening
GGO and thickening of the interlobular septum in both group. In heart failure group, the ratio of the expansion of small pulmonary
veins was also higher.

Feng et al. (2020) [46]

15

Lei et al. (2020) [138]

14

Zhu et al. (2020) [38]
Chate et al. (2020)
[139]
Agostini et al. (2020)
[30]

14
12
10

GGOs, GGO with consolidation, linear opacities, rounded opacities, crazy-paving pattern, reverse-halo sign, bronchial wall thickening
and bronchiectasis

Zhou et al. (2020) [43]

9

Nodular lesions, patchy lesions, GGO with consolidation and halo sign

Yuan et al. (2020)
[132]
Dane et al. (2020)
[133]
Wu et al. (2020) [31]

GGO, consolidation, GGO and consolidation, air bronchogram, Nodular opacities and pleural effusion

GGO, GGO with interlobular septal thickening, GGO with irregular linear opacities, consolidation, presence of nodule, enlarged
pulmonary vessels, bronchiolar dilatation, crazy paving, air bronchogram, thickening of the adjacent pleura, interleaf fissure
displacement, evidence of pulmonary fibrosis and pleural effusion
Small nodular GGOs and speckled GGOs
Presence of nodular, GGO, bronchovascular enlarged, irregular linear appearances, consolidation pulmonary opacity and pleural
effusion
GGOs, mixed GGO and consolidation, reticulation, crazy paving, cavitation and bronchiectasis
GGOs, crazy-paving pattern, alveolar consolidation, reversed-halo sign and pleural effusion

The features of early-stage COVID-19 include GGO-based lesions
with rare small size consolidation mainly distributed in the
peripheral and posterior part of the lung.
Patients with typical CT findings but negative RRT-PCR results
should be isolated.
An important basis of CT images for early detection and disease
monitoring.
findings of more extensive GGO than consolidation on chest CT
scans obtained during the first week of illness were considered
findings highly suspicious of COVID-19.

A simple CT scoring method was capable of predicting mortality.

Radiological findings and clinical characteristics in pregnant
women with COVID-19 were similar to those of non-pregnant
women with COVID-19.
Important supplemental role of CT imaging to triage and detect
patients suspected COVID-19 pneumonia, before getting the
results of RT-PCR.

Chest CT signs of improvement began at approximately 14 days
after the onset of initial symptoms.
Procalcitonin elevation and consolidation with surrounding halo
signs were frequent in paediatric patients.
There are significant differences in chest CT features, such as
enlargement of pulmonary veins, lesions distribution and
morphology between heart failure and COVID-19.

There is a synchronised improvement in both clinical and
radiologic features in the 4th week.
Dynamic reexamination of chest CT and nucleic acid are essential
in children.

There is a need to develop a new detection technique.

Ultra-low-dose, dual-source, fast CT protocol provides highly
diagnostic images for COVID-19 with potential for reduction in
dose and motion artefacts.
Infants and young children with COVID-19 have mild clinical
symptoms and imaging findings not as typical as those of adults.

Yoon et al. (2020) [51]
Iwasawa et al. (2020)
[26]
Gao and Zhang (2020)
[25]

9
6

Pure GGO, mixed GGO and consolidation, consolidation, crazy-paving appearance and air bronchogram
GGOs, consolidation, linear opacities, reticulation and crazy-paving pattern

6

GGOs, nodule, halo sign, thickened lobular septum, thickened bronchial wall, tree-in-bud sign, crazy-paving sign, proliferation and
calcification

Zhu et al. (2020) [140]

6

GGO, GGO with consolidation, consolidation, reticulation, crazy paving and bronchiectasis

Li et al. (2020) [44]

5

Patchy GGOs

Liu et al. (2020) [27]

5

GGOs with consolidation

Lu and Pu (2020) [141]
Xie et al. (2020) [142]

5
5

Crazy-paving pattern, GGOs, septal line thickening, consolidation and thickened interlobular septa
Multifocal GGO, parenchyma consolidation, mixed GGO and mixed consolidation

U-HRCT can evaluate not only the distribution and hallmarks of
COVID-19 pneumonia but also visualise local lung volume loss.
The imaging manifestations of early-stage COVID-19 are
relatively mild, and the imaging findings of some patients are not
typical, which can easily lead to missed diagnoses.
In the early-stage of the disease, the lesion can manifest as round
nodular-like GGO in the central area of the lung lobe. The followup CT images showed the lesions are migratory manifested as
the absorption of the primary lesions and the emergence of new
lesions.
Similar but more modest lung abnormalities at CT of children
compared to adults
The paediatric patients generally have milder CT findings than
adults.

Table 2: Overview of case reports and letters to the editors on CT imaging that have less than five cases of COVID-19.
Reference

Remarks

McGinnis et al. (2020) [143]
Yan et al. (2020) [144]
Qi et al. (2020) [145]
Zhang et al. (2020) [146]
Tenda et al. (2020) [147]
Erturk (2020) [148]
Xu et al. (2020) [149]
Liu et al. (2020) [150]
Li et al. (2020) [151]
Ufuk (2020) [152]
Hamer et al. (2020) [153]
Kang et al. (2020) [154]

Asymptomatic COVID-19 was detected using CT imaging in a patient with recurrent non-small cell lung cancer.
Chest CT findings are important when there is a false-positive results for COVID-19.
CT imaging can play an important role in managing patients of COVID-19 for diagnosis and monitoring.
CT imaging can be helpful for early detection of COVID-19 based on CT findings.
Three patients with mild to moderate symptoms have been considered. They highly suggest the use of non-contrast chest CT for COVID-19 diagnosis in patients with moderate symptoms.
CT may help diagnose but not screening highly suspected cases.
Six patients from an extended family with COVID-19 have been investigated. It should be avoided to rely on CT for clinical diagnosis.
Chest CT has an indispensable role in early detection and diagnosis of COVID-19 infection, however, further investigation is needed.
Repeated CT scanning could facilitate monitoring disease progression and implementing proper treatment.
A patient with peripheral, multilobar areas of GGO sign in chest CT images and positive for COVID-19 has been presented.
A positive case of COVID-19 and also a review of some studies in this field have been presented. CT morphology can be a support for COVID-19 diagnosis.
A low-dose scanning protocol has been presented that reduces the patient’s dose to 1/8 to 1/9 of the standard dose without significant sacrifice of signal-to-noise (SNR) or contrast-to-noise (CNR)
ratios.
The role of CT in the diagnosis of COVID-19 is not clear, so it is better to use alternative modalities such as Ultrasound or CXR due to lower radiation, especially for children.
A case with GGOs with areas of focal consolidation primarily in the right upper lobe and a focal opacity in the left upper and right middle lobes has been reported.
For patients with fever as the first symptom and with a history of exposure to COVID-19, chest CT examination should be performed soon.
Observe changes in CT images during the disease.
More research is needed into the correlation of CT findings with clinical severity and progression of COVID-19.
Role of radiologists includes not only early detection of lung abnormality, but also suggestion of disease severity, potential progression to acute respiratory distress syndrome, and possible bacterial
co-infection in hospitalised patients.
One case of COVID-19 pneumonia showed multiple subpleural GGOs in bilateral lung, rapid progression, and it also accompanied nodular GGOs on chest CT.
CT may expedite care in symptomatic patients with a negative or pending swab, and in those with worsening respiratory status or developing complications such as empyema or acute respiratory
distress syndrome.
In Singapore, the consensus of the infectious diseases experts is to rely on reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) for diagnosis rather than to use CT.
Patients not initially suspected of COVID-19 infection can be quarantined earlier to limit exposure to others using CT imaging features of COVID-19.
Imaging plays a critical role in initial diagnosis and in assessment of disease severity and progression.
A patient found to be positive COVID-19 after a CT scan performed for an unrelated condition revealed a lesion in the lung field compatible with COVID-19 infection.
Chest CT scan is the primary diagnostic approach for COVID-19 and its feature includes multiple, bilateral, patchy consolidation and GGO with subpleural distribution.
Two cases both demonstrated symptom relief but progression on CT, which indicates that clinical symptoms and imaging findings are inconsistent in early-stage of COVID-19 pneumonia.

Wang et al. (2020) [48]
Zou and Zhu (2020) [58]
Dai et al. (2020) [155]
Lin et al. (2020) [156]
Lee et al. (2020) [157]
Kim (2020) [158]
Zhang et al. (2020) [159]
Singh and Fratesi (2020) [160]
Tsou et al. (2020) [161]
Vu et al. (2020) [162]
Çinkooğlu et al. (2020) [163]
Asadollahi-Amin et al. (2020) [164]
Chen et al. (2020) [165]
Hu et al. (2020) [166]

Lim et al. (2020) [167]
Ostad et al. (2020) [168]
Qanadli et al. (2020) [169]
Mungmungpuntipantip
and
Wiwanitkit (2020) [170]
Danrad et al. (2020) [171]
Joob and Wiwanitkit (2020) [172]
Li et al. (2020) [173]
Guan et al. (2020) [174]
Li et al. (2020) [175]
Lei et al. (2020) [176]
Gross et al. (2020) [177]
Shi et al. (2020) [178]
Qu et al. (2020) [179]
An et al. (2020) [180]
Wei et al. (2020) [181]
Fang et al. (2020) [182]
Duan and Qin (2020) [183]
Shi et al. (2020) [184]
Fang et al. (2020) [185]
Kanne (2020) [186]
Adair and Ledermann (2020) [187]
Burhan et al. (2020) [188]
Feng et al. (2020) [189]
Hao and Li (2020) [190]
Yang and Yan (2020) [191]
Lei et al. (2020) [192]

This case series of three COVID-19 pneumonia patients highlights the variable chest CT features during the acute and convalescent phases. Chest CT is a highly sensitive tool for the delineation of
the extent of lung disease. However, its use as a first-line diagnostic modality to replace RT-PCR is not guaranteed.
Radiologists should know the possibility of artefacts when reporting the axial CT images with limited involvement, especially those cases with focal basal GGO, where linear atelectasis is also
common. In such cases correlation with reformatted planes and utilising thin-section reconstructions are recommended to avoid misinterpretation.
Vascular findings convey both diagnostic and prognostic information and might contribute to disease diagnosis and patient management. The vascular congestion sign may help distinguish COVID19 from community-acquired pneumonia.
Chest CT cannot discriminate early COVID-19 from other diseases.
Early and advanced stage CT finding from patients with documented COVID-19 admitted to University medical center in New Orleans, Louisiana have been described.
If patients have underlying lung disease such as tuberculosis, atypical chest CT findings might be seen. Practitioners have to recognise the broad spectrum of possible CT findings in patients with
COVID-19.
Characteristic imaging changes were found with GGO, consolidation and septal thickening mainly distributed in peripheral and posterior area by thoracic CT scan in the three patients.
A dynamic chest CT scan plays a significant role in the diagnosis and prognosis of COVID-19.
CT plays a vital role in the diagnosis, staging, and monitoring of patients with COVID-19 pneumonia.
Knowing the corresponding CT feature of COVID-19 pneumonia at different stages, which could be helpful to precisely diagnose and understand CT characteristics of COVID-19.
CT may be a useful tool to evaluate the extent of the disease in severe cases, provide prognostic information and guide future treatment options.
COVID-19 pneumonia may present with atypical manifestations, such as haemoptysis and focal GGO with non-peripheral distribution, on initial CT scans.
This study is a report of manifestations of COVID-19 in a patient with lung adenocarcinoma.
Chest CT offers fast and convenient evaluation of patients with suspected COVID-19 pneumonia.
CT showed rapidly progressing peripheral consolidations and GGOs in both lungs of a 40-year-old female patient with COVID-19 pneumonia. After treatment, the lesions were almost absorbed
leaving the fibrous lesions.
Under the circumstances, computed tomography imaging is not only useful for the detection, location of lesions but also helpful in evaluating the dynamic changes of patients with COVID-19. CT
imaging can play a determinant role in clinical decision-making.
At seven days, chest CT showed decreasing GGOs in a 46-year-old woman. At day 13 after admission, the GGOs in the right lung had resolved; the left GGOs showed partial resolution.
This study uses imaging data for patient's improvement monitoring in a case with COVID-19.
The authors report two cases of COVID-19 using CT imaging data.
In the correct clinical setting, bilateral GGOs or consolidation at chest imaging should prompt the radiologist to suggest COVID-19 as a possible diagnosis. A normal chest CT scan does not exclude
the diagnosis of COVID-19 infection.
This case report discusses the imaging findings of one of the first cases in the mid-western United States.
The result may suggest that in an area with high number of COVID-19 case, CT Scan might be a better diagnostic tool compared to RT-PCR in diagnosing COVID-19.
It is challenging to distinguish COVID-19 pneumonia from other viral pneumonia on CT findings alone; however, the authors emphasise the utility of chest CT to detect early change of COVID-19 in
cases which RT-PCR tests show negative results.
If patients have clinical symptoms, epidemiological characteristics, and chest CT imaging characteristics of viral pneumonia compatible with COVID-19 infection, we need to carefully consider the
isolation and treatment of these patients even if the RT-PCR test is negative.
A patient with RT-PCR-confirmed COVID-19 infection may have normal chest CT at admission.
The bilateralism of the peripheral lung opacities, without subpleural sparing, are common CT findings of COVID-19 pneumonia.

Table 3: Overview of studies on CXR imaging and related findings.
References

No. of cases

Findings

Jacobi et al. (2020) [47]
Lomoro et al. (2020) [49]
Wong et al. (2020) [50]
Zhang et al. (2020) [40]
Yoon et al. (2020) [51]
Wang et al. (2020) [48]
Shi et al. (2020) [184]

58
64
645
9
1

Irregular, patchy, hazy, reticular and widespread ground-glass opacities.
Consolidation and hazy increased opacity.
GGOs, consolidation and pleural effusion.
GGOs and consolidation.
Parenchymal abnormalities, consolidation, GGOs, single nodular opacity and patchy opacities.
It is better to use CXR due to lower radiation, especially for children.
This study uses imaging data for patient's improvement monitoring in a case with COVID-19.

Table 4: Overview of deep learning approaches for automated COVID-19 diagnosis.
Reference

Task

Modality

Method

Total No.
Of Images

No. Of Images
From COVID19 Cases

Accuracy
(%)

Remarks

Wang and Wong (2020) [93]
Narin et al. (2020) [84]
Hemdan et al. (2020) [85]
Ghoshal and Tucker (2020) [86]

Automatic COVID-19 diagnosis
Automatic COVID-19 diagnosis
Automatic COVID-19 diagnosis
Estimating uncertainty and
interpretability in deep learning
for COVID-19 diagnosis
Automatic COVID-19 diagnosis

CXR
CXR
CXR
CXR

CNN
CNN
CNN
BCNN

13,975
100
75
5,941

358
50
25
68

93.3
98
90
89

COVID-Net has been proposed.
The pre-trained ResNet50 model provides the highest classification performance.
The VGG19 and DenseNet201 models showed a good and similar performance.
Experiment has shown a strong correlation between model uncertainty and
accuracy of prediction.

CXR

CNN

1,442

224

96.78

CXR

CNN

1,531

100

96

Farooq and Hafeez (2020) [89]

Anomaly detection for fast and
reliable COVID-19 screening
Automatic COVID-19 diagnosis

CXR

CNN

5,941

68

96.23

Sethy and Behera (2020) [195]
Apostolopoulos et al. (2020)
[90]
Abbas et al. (2020) [196]

Automatic COVID-19 diagnosis
Automatic classification of
pulmonary diseases
Automatic COVID-19 diagnosis

CXR
CXR

CNN
CNN

50
3,905

25
455

95.38
99.18

The MobileNet v2 effectively distinguished the Covid-19 cases from viral and
bacterial pneumonia cases.
The model comprises a backbone network, a classification head, and an anomaly
detection head.
COVID-ResNet for classification of COVID-19 and three other infection types has
been proposed.
ResNet50 plus SVM have been used for COVID-19 diagnosis.
Mobile Net has been used for transfer learning.

CXR

CNN

196

105

95.12

Afshar et al. (2020) [197]

Automatic COVID-19 diagnosis

CXR

CNN

13,975

358

95.7

Chowdhury et al. (2020) [198]
Li and Zhu (2020) [199]

Automatic COVID-19 diagnosis
Automatic COVID-19 diagnosis

CXR
CXR

CNN
CNN

2,876
537

190
179

98.3
89.7

Karim et al. (2020) [200]

Automatic COVID-19 diagnosis

CXR

CNN

16,995

259

-

Oh et al. (2020) [94]

Automatic COVID-19 diagnosis

CXR

CNN

15,043

180

91.9

Hall et al. (2020) [201]

Automatic COVID-19 diagnosis

CXR

CNN

455

135

91.24

Rajaraman et al. (2020) [202]

Automatic COVID-19 diagnosis

CXR

CNN

16,700

313

99.01

Luz et al. (2020) [203]

Automatic COVID-19 diagnosis

CXR

CNN

13,800

183

93.9

Tartaglione et al. (2020) [204]
Ezzat and Ella (2020) [205]

Automatic COVID-19 diagnosis
Automatic COVID-19 diagnosis

CXR
CXR

CNN
CNN

584
5,961

405
126

95
98

Hammoudi et al. (2020) [206]
Kumar et al. (2020) [207]

Automatic COVID-19 diagnosis
Automatic COVID-19 diagnosis

CXR
CXR

CNN
CNN

5,863
8,588

62

95.72
97.7

Khan et al. (2020) [208]
Khalifa et al. (2020) [87]

Automatic COVID-19 diagnosis
Automatic COVID-19 diagnosis

CXR
CXR

1,300
5,863

284
-

89.5
99

Santosh et al. (2020) [209]

Automatic COVID-19 diagnosis

CXR

CNN
CNN
GAN
CNN

6,756

73

99.96

Apostolopoulos and Mpesiana
(2020) [193]
Zhang et al. (2020) [194]

and

A deep CNN, called Decompose, Transfer, and Compose (DeTraC) has been
validated.
COVID-CAPS including several Capsule and convolutional layers has been
proposed.
SqueezeNet outperforms AlexNet, ResNet18 and DenseNet201.
COVID-MobileXpert: a lightweight deep neural network based mobile app that
can use noisy snapshots of CXR for point-of-care COVID-19 screening has been
presented.
Evaluation results based on hold-out data show a positive predictive value (PPV)
of 89.61% and recall of 83%.
A patch-based deep neural network architecture that can be stably trained with
small data set has been proposed.
Resnet50 was tuned on 102 COVID-19 cases and 102 other pneumonia cases in a
10-fold cross validation.
The best performing models are iteratively pruned to identify optimal number of
neurons in the convolutional layers to reduce complexity and improve memory
efficiency.
The proposed model has about 30 times parameters fewer than the baseline
literature model, 28 and 5 times parameters fewer than the popular VGG16 and
ResNet50 architectures, respectively.
Possible obstacles in successfully training a deep model have been highlighted.
The proposed GSA-DenseNet121-COVID19 approach is consists of data
preparation, hyper-parameters selection, learning and performance
measurement stage.
The DenseNet169 architecture has reached the best performance.
The machine learning-based classification of the extracted deep feature using
ResNet152 has been reported with the highest accuracy for XGBoost predictive
classifier.
CoroNet, a deep CNN based model, has been proposed.
Resnet18 is the most appropriate deep transfer model according to testing
accuracy measurement with using GAN as an image augmentation method.
The Truncated Inception Net deep learning model has been proposed.

Khobahi et al. (2020) [210]

Screening COVID-19 at early and
intermediate stages
Automatic COVID-19 diagnosis

CXR

18,529

99

93.5

15,085

180

99.56

Automatic COVID-19 diagnosis

CXR

306

69

100

Pereira et al. (2020) [213]

Automatic COVID-19 diagnosis

1,144

90

-

Gozes et al. (2020) [214]

CNN

270

120

-

Shan et al. (2020) [215]

CT

CNN

549

549

91.6

CT

CNN

618

219

-

CT
CT
CT

CNN
CNN
CNN

453
4,356
126

195
1,296
126

82.9
-

Zheng et al. (2020) [91]

Automatic COVID-19 diagnosis
Automatic COVID-19 diagnosis
Evaluation of lung burden
changes in patients with COVID19
Automatic COVID-19 diagnosis

CT

CNN

630

Not mentioned

90.1

Song et al. (2020) [220]

Automatic COVID-19 diagnosis

CT

CNN

1,990

777

94

Gozes et al. (2020) [221]

CT

CNN

270

120

-

Chen et al. (2020) [222]

Detection,
localising
and
quantifying the severity of
COVID-19 manifestation
Automatic COVID-19 diagnosis

CT

CNN

35,355

20,886

95.24

Chaganti et al. (2020) [223]

Automatic COVID-19 diagnosis

CT

CNN

9,223

148

-

He et al. (2020) [224]

Automatic COVID-19 diagnosis

CT

CNN

746

349

86

Hu et al. (2020) [92]

Automatic COVID-19 diagnosis

CT

CNN

450

150

96.2

Fu et al. (2020) [225]

Automatic COVID-19 diagnosis

CT

CNN

89,628

14,944

98.8

Loey et al. (2020) [88]

Automatic COVID-19 diagnosis

CT

CNN and
CGAN

742

345

82.91

Chen et al. (2020) [226]

Automated
multi-class
segmentation of COVID-19
chest CT images
Automatic
COVID-19
CT
segmentation

CT

CNN

110

110

89

CT

CNN

473

473

-

Mobiny et al. (2020) [228]

Automatic COVID-19 diagnosis

CT

746

349

87.6

Wu et al. (2020) [229]

Classification and Segmentation
for COVID-19 diagnosis

CT

CNN and
CGAN
CNN

144,167

68,626

-

Rahimzadeh and Attar (2020)
[211]
Loey et al. (2020) [212]

Butt et al. (2020) [216]
Wang et al. (2020) [217]
Li et al. (2020) [218]
Huang et al. (2020) [219]

Zhou et al. (2020) [227]

CNN
AE
CNN

and

and

CXR

CNN
GAN
CNN

Automatic COVID-19 diagnosis

CT

Automatic segmentation and
quantification of infection
regions
Automatic COVID-19 diagnosis

CXR

A semi-supervised methodology and two auto-encoders for automatic
segmentation of the infected regions have been presented.
A concatenated neural network based on Xception and ResNet50V2 networks
has been proposed.
A GAN for data augmentation with deep transfer learning has been presented.
A macro-avg F1-Score of 0.65 using a multi-class approach and an F1-Score of
0.89 for the COVID-19 identification in the hierarchical classification scenario
have been achieved.
Classification result for Coronavirus vs Non-coronavirus cases per thoracic CT
studies is 0.996 AUC.
Dice similarity coefficients of 91.6%±10.0% between automatic and manual
segmentations have been reported.
An AUC of 0.996 (95%CI: 0.989–1.00) for Coronavirus vs Non-coronavirus cases
per thoracic CT studies has been achieved.
Feature extraction has been done using transfer learning.
An AUC of 0.96 for detecting COVID-19 has been achieved.
A commercially available deep-learning-based tool has been used.

A pre-trained U-Net for lung segmentation and a 3D CNN architecture
(DeCoVNet) have been used.
A Details Relation Extraction neural network (DRE-Net) to extract the top-K
details in the CT images has been designed.
An AUC of 0.948 has been achieved.

U-NET++ has been used for retrospective and prospective COVID-19 dataset
evaluation.
Pearson Correlation Coefficient between method prediction and ground truth is
0.95 (Percentage of Opacity), 0.98 (Percentage of High Opacity), 0.96 (Lung
Severity Score), 0.96 (Lung High Opacity Score).
The approach achieves an F1 of 0.85 and an AUC of 0.94 in a small data set using
a self-supervised transfer learning approach.
A weakly-supervised deep learning framework for fast and fully-automated
detection and classification of COVID-19 has been presented.
A pre-trained ResNet-50 has been used to recognise COVID-19, non-COVID-19
viral pneumonia, bacterial pneumonia, pulmonary tuberculosis and healthy lung.
Data augmentations along with CGAN improve the performance of classification
in AlexNet, VGGNet16, VGGNet19, GoogleNet, and ResNet50 deep transfer
models.
A residual attention U-Net for the lung CT image segmentation has been
proposed.
A U-Net based segmentation network using attention mechanism has been
presented. The obtained Dice Score, Sensitivity and Specificity are 83.1%, 86.7%
and 99.3%, respectively.
Detail-oriented capsule networks (DECAPS) for COVID-19 CT classification and
CGAN as a data augmentation technique have been presented.
A Joint Classification and Segmentation (JCS) system obtains an average
sensitivity of 95.0% and a specificity of 93.0% on the classification test set, and
78.3% Dice score on the segmentation test set.

Maghdid et al. (2020) [230]

Automatic COVID-19 diagnosis

CXR and CT

CNN
CNN

CXR: 170
CT: 361
Not clear

CXR: 85
CT: 203
Not clear

Alom et al. (2020) [231]

Automatic COVID-19 diagnosis

CXR and CT

Razzak et al. (2020) [232]

Automatic COVID-19 diagnosis

CXR and CT

CNN

800

200

98
CXR: 84.67
CT: 98.78
98.75

The utilised models can provide accuracy up to 98% via pre-trained AlexNet and
94.1% accuracy by using the modified CNN.
An improved Inception recurrent residual neural network (IRRCNN) and NABLA3 network models were applied.
The results have been obtained using transfer learning.

References:
1.
2.
3.
4.

5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.

Organization, W.H. WHO Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19) Dashboard. Available from:
https://covid19.who.int/.
Organization, W.H. Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) advice for the public. Available from:
https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novel-coronavirus-2019/advice-for-public.
Rodrigues, J., et al., An update on COVID-19 for the radiologist-A British society of Thoracic
Imaging statement. Clinical radiology, 2020. 75(5): p. 323-325.
Nair, A., et al., A British Society of Thoracic Imaging statement: considerations in designing
local imaging diagnostic algorithms for the COVID-19 pandemic. Clinical Radiology, 2020.
75(5): p. 329-334.
Huang, Y., et al., CT screening for early diagnosis of SARS-CoV-2 infection. The Lancet Infectious
Diseases, 2020.
Raptis, C.A., et al., Chest CT and Coronavirus disease (COVID-19): a critical review of the
literature to date. American Journal of Roentgenology, 2020: p. 1-4.
Chua, F., et al., The role of CT in case ascertainment and management of COVID-19 pneumonia
in the UK: insights from high-incidence regions. The Lancet Respiratory Medicine, 2020.
Duan, Y.-n., et al., CT features of novel coronavirus pneumonia (COVID-19) in children.
European Radiology, 2020: p. 1-7.
Fan, L., et al., Progress and prospect on imaging diagnosis of COVID-19. Chinese Journal of
Academic Radiology, 2020: p. 1-10.
Li, B., et al., Diagnostic value and key features of computed tomography in Coronavirus Disease
2019. Emerging Microbes & Infections, 2020(just-accepted): p. 1-14.
Majidi, H. and F. Niksolat, Chest CT in patients suspected of COVID-19 infection: A reliable
alternative for RT-PCR. The American Journal of Emergency Medicine, 2020.
Nasir, M.U., et al., The Role of emergency radiology in COVID-19: from preparedness to
diagnosis. Canadian Association of Radiologists Journal, 2020: p. 0846537120916419.
Plesner, L.L., et al., Diagnostic imaging findings in COVID-19. Ugeskrift for Laeger, 2020.
182(15).
Rubin, G.D., et al., The role of chest imaging in patient management during the COVID-19
pandemic: a multinational consensus statement from the Fleischner Society. Chest, 2020.
Sahu, K.K., A. Lal, and A.K. Mishra, An update on CT chest findings in coronavirus disease-19
(COVID-19). Heart & Lung, 2020.
Sun, Z., Diagnostic Value of Chest CT in Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19). Current medical
imaging, 2020.
Yang, W., et al., The role of imaging in 2019 novel coronavirus pneumonia (COVID-19).
European Radiology, 2020: p. 1-9.
Ye, Z., et al., Chest CT manifestations of new coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19): a pictorial
review. European radiology, 2020: p. 1-9.
Zhu, J., et al., CT imaging features of 4,121 patients with COVID‐19: a meta‐analysis. Journal
of Medical Virology, 2020.
Li, M., Chest CT features and their role in COVID-19. Radiology of Infectious Diseases, 2020.
Hani, C., et al., COVID-19 pneumonia: A review of typical CT findings and differential diagnosis.
Diagnostic and interventional imaging, 2020.
Bao, C., et al., Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) CT Findings: A Systematic Review and
Meta-analysis. Journal of the American College of Radiology, 2020.
Salehi, S., et al., Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19): a systematic review of imaging findings
in 919 patients. American Journal of Roentgenology, 2020: p. 1-7.
Dai, H., et al., High-resolution chest CT features and clinical characteristics of patients infected
with Covid-19 in Jiangsu, China. International Journal of Infectious Diseases, 2020.
Gao, L. and J. Zhang, Pulmonary High-Resolution Computed Tomography (HRCT) Findings of
Patients with Early-Stage Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) in Hangzhou, China. Medical

26.

27.

28.

29.
30.

31.
32.
33.

34.
35.
36.
37.

38.
39.
40.
41.
42.
43.

44.
45.
46.

Science Monitor: International Medical Journal of Experimental and Clinical Research, 2020.
26: p. e923885-1.
Iwasawa, T., et al., Ultra-high-resolution computed tomography can demonstrate alveolar
collapse in novel coronavirus (COVID-19) pneumonia. Japanese Journal of Radiology, 2020: p.
1.
Liu, M., Z. Song, and K. Xiao, High-Resolution Computed Tomography Manifestations of 5
Pediatric Patients With 2019 Novel Coronavirus. Journal of Computer Assisted Tomography,
2020.
Pan, Y., et al., Initial CT findings and temporal changes in patients with the novel coronavirus
pneumonia (2019-nCoV): a study of 63 patients in Wuhan, China. European radiology, 2020:
p. 1-4.
Xiong, Y., et al., Clinical and high-resolution CT features of the COVID-19 infection: comparison
of the initial and follow-up changes. Investigative radiology, 2020.
Agostini, A., et al., Proposal of a low-dose, long-pitch, dual-source chest CT protocol on thirdgeneration dual-source CT using a tin filter for spectral shaping at 100 kVp for CoronaVirus
Disease 2019 (COVID-19) patients: a feasibility study. Radiol Med, 2020. 125(4): p. 365-373.
Wu, X., et al., Radiological findings and clinical characteristics of pregnant women with COVID‐
19 pneumonia. International Journal of Gynecology & Obstetrics, 2020.
Guan, C.S., et al., Imaging features of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19): evaluation on thinsection CT. Academic radiology, 2020.
Han, X., et al., Novel Coronavirus Pneumonia (COVID-19) Progression Course in 17 Discharged
Patients: Comparison of Clinical and Thin-Section CT Features During Recovery. Clinical
Infectious Diseases, 2020.
Wang, K., et al., Imaging manifestations and diagnostic value of chest CT of coronavirus
disease 2019 (COVID-19) in the Xiaogan area. Clinical radiology, 2020.
Li, K., et al., CT image visual quantitative evaluation and clinical classification of coronavirus
disease (COVID-19). European Radiology, 2020: p. 1-10.
Ling, Z., et al., Asymptomatic SARS-CoV-2 infected patients with persistent negative CT
findings. European journal of radiology, 2020. 126.
Yang, W., et al., Clinical characteristics and imaging manifestations of the 2019 novel
coronavirus disease (COVID-19): A multi-center study in Wenzhou city, Zhejiang, China. Journal
of Infection, 2020.
Zhu, Y., et al., Clinical and CT imaging features of 2019 novel coronavirus disease (COVID-19).
Journal of Infection, 2020.
Shi, H., et al., Radiological findings from 81 patients with COVID-19 pneumonia in Wuhan,
China: a descriptive study. The Lancet Infectious Diseases, 2020.
Zhang, X., et al., Epidemiological, clinical characteristics of cases of SARS-CoV-2 infection with
abnormal imaging findings. International Journal of Infectious Diseases, 2020.
Liu, H., et al., Clinical and CT imaging features of the COVID-19 pneumonia: Focus on pregnant
women and children. Journal of infection, 2020.
Xia, W., et al., Clinical and CT features in pediatric patients with COVID‐19 infection: Different
points from adults. Pediatric pulmonology, 2020. 55(5): p. 1169-1174.
Zhou, Y., et al., Clinical features and chest CT findings of coronavirus disease 2019 in infants
and young children. Zhongguo Dang dai er ke za zhi= Chinese Journal of Contemporary
Pediatrics, 2020. 22(3): p. 215-220.
Li, W., et al., Chest computed tomography in children with COVID-19 respiratory infection.
Pediatric radiology, 2020: p. 1-4.
Zhu, T., et al., A Comparative Study of Chest Computed Tomography Features in Young and
Older Adults With Corona Virus Disease (COVID-19). Journal of Thoracic Imaging, 2020.
Feng, K., et al., Analysis of CT features of 15 children with 2019 novel coronavirus infection.
Zhonghua er ke za zhi= Chinese journal of pediatrics, 2020. 58: p. E007-E007.

47.
48.
49.

50.
51.

52.

53.

54.
55.
56.
57.
58.
59.
60.
61.
62.

63.
64.
65.

66.
67.
68.

Jacobi, A., et al., Portable chest X-ray in coronavirus disease-19 (COVID-19): A pictorial review.
Clinical Imaging, 2020.
Wang, Y.X.J., et al., The role of CT for Covid-19 patient’s management remains poorly defined.
Annals of Translational Medicine, 2020. 8(4).
Lomoro, P., et al., COVID-19 pneumonia manifestations at the admission on chest ultrasound,
radiographs, and CT: single-center study and comprehensive radiologic literature review.
European Journal of Radiology Open, 2020: p. 100231.
Wong, H.Y.F., et al., Frequency and distribution of chest radiographic findings in COVID-19
positive patients. Radiology, 2020: p. 201160.
Yoon, S.H., et al., Chest radiographic and CT findings of the 2019 novel coronavirus disease
(COVID-19): analysis of nine patients treated in Korea. Korean journal of radiology, 2020.
21(4): p. 494-500.
Lu, W., et al., A Clinical Study of Noninvasive Assessment of Lung Lesions in Patients with
Coronavirus Disease-19 (COVID-19) by Bedside Ultrasound. Ultraschall in der MedizinEuropean Journal of Ultrasound, 2020.
Vetrugno, L., et al., Our Italian Experience Using Lung Ultrasound for Identification, Grading
and Serial Follow‐up of Severity of Lung Involvement for Management of Patients with COVID‐
19. Echocardiography, 2020.
Kalafat, E., et al., Lung ultrasound and computed tomographic findings in pregnant woman
with COVID‐19. Ultrasound in Obstetrics & Gynecology, 2020.
Lütje, S., et al., Nuclear medicine in SARS-CoV-2 pandemia: 18F-FDG-PET/CT to visualize
COVID-19. Nuklearmedizin, 2020.
Deng, Y., et al., The potential added value of FDG PET/CT for COVID-19 pneumonia. European
Journal of Nuclear Medicine and Molecular Imaging, 2020: p. 1-2.
Qin, C., et al., 18 F-FDG PET/CT findings of COVID-19: a series of four highly suspected cases.
European Journal of Nuclear Medicine and Molecular Imaging, 2020: p. 1-6.
Zou, S. and X. Zhu, FDG PET/CT of COVID-19. Radiology, 2020: p. 200770.
Polverari, G., et al., 18F-FDG uptake in Asymptomatic SARS-CoV-2 (COVID-19) patient, referred
to PET/CT for Non-Small Cells Lung Cancer restaging. Journal of Thoracic Oncology, 2020.
Joob, B. and V. Wiwanitkit, 18F-FDG PET/CT and COVID-19. European Journal of Nuclear
Medicine and Molecular Imaging, 2020: p. 1-1.
Guedj, E., A. Verger, and S. Cammilleri, PET imaging of COVID-19: the target and the number.
European Journal of Nuclear Medicine and Molecular Imaging, 2020: p. 1-2.
Tulchinsky, M., J.S. Fotos, and E. Slonimsky, Incidental CT Findings Suspicious for Covid-19
Associated Pneumonia on Nuclear Medicine Exams: Recognition and Management Plan.
Clinical Nuclear Medicine, 2020.
Poyiadji, N., et al., COVID-19–associated acute hemorrhagic necrotizing encephalopathy: CT
and MRI features. Radiology, 2020: p. 201187.
Rotzinger, D., et al., Pulmonary embolism in patients with COVID-19: Time to change the
paradigm of computed tomography. Thrombosis research, 2020.
Li, D., et al., False-negative results of real-time reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain
reaction for severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2: role of deep-learning-based CT
diagnosis and insights from two cases. Korean journal of radiology, 2020. 21(4): p. 505-508.
Alimadadi, A., et al., Artificial intelligence and machine learning to fight COVID-19. 2020,
American Physiological Society Bethesda, MD.
Ilyas, M., H. Rehman, and A. Nait-ali, Detection of Covid-19 From Chest X-ray Images Using
Artificial Intelligence: An Early Review. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.05436, 2020.
Rahmatizadeh, S., S. Valizadeh-Haghi, and A. Dabbagh, The role of Artificial Intelligence in
Management of Critical COVID-19 patients. Journal of Cellular & Molecular Anesthesia, 2020.
5(1): p. 16-22.

69.
70.
71.
72.
73.
74.
75.
76.
77.
78.
79.

80.
81.
82.
83.
84.
85.
86.
87.

88.

89.
90.

91.

Shi, F., et al., Review of artificial intelligence techniques in imaging data acquisition,
segmentation and diagnosis for covid-19. IEEE Reviews in Biomedical Engineering, 2020.
Ulhaq, A., et al., Computer Vision for COVID-19 Control: A Survey. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2004.09420, 2020.
Nanni, L., S. Ghidoni, and S. Brahnam, Handcrafted vs. non-handcrafted features for computer
vision classification. Pattern Recognition, 2017. 71: p. 158-172.
LeCun, Y. and Y. Bengio, Convolutional networks for images, speech, and time series. The
handbook of brain theory and neural networks, 1995. 3361(10): p. 1995.
Gu, J., et al., Recent advances in convolutional neural networks. Pattern Recognition, 2018. 77:
p. 354-377.
Cohen, J.P., P. Morrison, and L. Dao, COVID-19 image data collection. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2003.11597, 2020.
Zhao, J., et al., COVID-CT-Dataset: a CT scan dataset about COVID-19. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2003.13865, 2020.
Shorten, C. and T.M. Khoshgoftaar, A survey on image data augmentation for deep learning.
Journal of Big Data, 2019. 6(1): p. 60.
Weiss, K., T.M. Khoshgoftaar, and D. Wang, A survey of transfer learning. Journal of Big data,
2016. 3(1): p. 9.
Litjens, G., et al., A survey on deep learning in medical image analysis. Medical image analysis,
2017. 42: p. 60-88.
Varshni, D., et al. Pneumonia Detection Using CNN based Feature Extraction. in 2019 IEEE
International Conference on Electrical, Computer and Communication Technologies (ICECCT).
2019. IEEE.
Chollet, F., Xception: deep learning with separable convolutions. 1–14. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1610.02357, 2016.
Simonyan, K. and A. Zisserman, Very deep convolutional networks for large-scale image
recognition. arXiv preprint arXiv:1409.1556, 2014.
He, K., et al. Deep residual learning for image recognition. in Proceedings of the IEEE
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. 2016.
Huang, G., et al. Densely connected convolutional networks. in Proceedings of the IEEE
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. 2017.
Narin, A., C. Kaya, and Z. Pamuk, Automatic detection of coronavirus disease (covid-19) using
x-ray images and deep convolutional neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.10849, 2020.
Hemdan, E.E.-D., M.A. Shouman, and M.E. Karar, Covidx-net: A framework of deep learning
classifiers to diagnose covid-19 in x-ray images. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.11055, 2020.
Ghoshal, B. and A. Tucker, Estimating uncertainty and interpretability in deep learning for
coronavirus (COVID-19) detection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.10769, 2020.
Khalifa, N.E.M., et al., Detection of Coronavirus (COVID-19) Associated Pneumonia based on
Generative Adversarial Networks and a Fine-Tuned Deep Transfer Learning Model using Chest
X-ray Dataset. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.01184, 2020.
Loey, M., F. Smarandache, and N.E.M. Khalifa, A Deep Transfer Learning Model with Classical
Data Augmentation and CGAN to Detect COVID-19 from Chest CT Radiography Digital Images.
2020.
Farooq, M. and A. Hafeez, Covid-resnet: A deep learning framework for screening of covid19
from radiographs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.14395, 2020.
Apostolopoulos, I.D., S.I. Aznaouridis, and M.A. Tzani, Extracting possibly representative
COVID-19 Biomarkers from X-Ray images with Deep Learning approach and image data
related to Pulmonary Diseases. Journal of Medical and Biological Engineering, 2020: p. 1.
Zheng, C., et al., Deep learning-based detection for COVID-19 from chest CT using weak label.
medRxiv, 2020.

92.
93.

94.
95.
96.
97.
98.
99.
100.
101.
102.
103.

104.
105.

106.
107.

108.
109.
110.

111.
112.
113.
114.

Hu, S., et al., Weakly Supervised Deep Learning for COVID-19 Infection Detection and
Classification from CT Images. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.06689, 2020.
Wang, L. and A. Wong, COVID-Net: A tailored deep convolutional neural network design for
detection of COVID-19 cases from chest radiography images. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.09871,
2020.
Oh, Y., S. Park, and J.C. Ye, Deep Learning COVID-19 Features on CXR using Limited Training
Data Sets. IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging, 2020.
Barstugan, M., U. Ozkaya, and S. Ozturk, Coronavirus (covid-19) classification using ct images
by machine learning methods. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.09424, 2020.
Tang, Z., et al., Severity assessment of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) using quantitative
features from chest CT images. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.11988, 2020.
Al-Karawi, D., et al., Machine Learning Analysis of Chest CT Scan Images as a Complementary
Digital Test of Coronavirus (COVID-19) Patients. medRxiv, 2020.
Ai, T., et al., Correlation of chest CT and RT-PCR testing in coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID19) in China: a report of 1014 cases. Radiology, 2020: p. 200642.
Yang, Z., et al., Predictors for imaging progression on chest CT from coronavirus disease 2019
(COVID-19) patients. Aging (Albany NY), 2020. 12(7): p. 6037.
Colombi, D., et al., Well-aerated Lung on Admitting Chest CT to Predict Adverse Outcome in
COVID-19 Pneumonia. Radiology, 2020: p. 201433.
Bai, H.X., et al., Performance of radiologists in differentiating COVID-19 from viral pneumonia
on chest CT. Radiology, 2020: p. 200823.
Caruso, D., et al., Chest CT features of COVID-19 in Rome, Italy. Radiology, 2020: p. 201237.
Fan, N., et al., Imaging characteristics of initial chest computed tomography and clinical
manifestations of patients with COVID-19 pneumonia. Japanese Journal of Radiology, 2020: p.
1-6.
Li, X., et al., CT imaging changes of corona virus disease 2019 (COVID-19): a multi-center study
in Southwest China. Journal of Translational Medicine, 2020. 18: p. 1-8.
Wu, J., et al., Novel coronavirus pneumonia (COVID-19) CT distribution and sign features.
Zhonghua jie he he hu xi za zhi= Zhonghua Jiehe he Huxi Zazhi= Chinese Journal of Tuberculosis
and Respiratory Diseases, 2020. 43: p. E030-E030.
Bernheim, A., et al., Chest CT findings in coronavirus disease-19 (COVID-19): relationship to
duration of infection. Radiology, 2020: p. 200463.
Zhang, R., et al., CT features of SARS-CoV-2 pneumonia according to clinical presentation: a
retrospective analysis of 120 consecutive patients from Wuhan city. European radiology, 2020:
p. 1-10.
Zhao, W., et al., CT scans of patients with 2019 novel coronavirus (COVID-19) pneumonia.
Theranostics, 2020. 10(10): p. 4606.
Han, R., et al., Early clinical and CT manifestations of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19)
pneumonia. American Journal of Roentgenology, 2020: p. 1-6.
Zhao, W., et al., Relation between chest CT findings and clinical conditions of coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pneumonia: a multicenter study. American Journal of Roentgenology,
2020. 214(5): p. 1072-1077.
Huang, Z., et al., Imaging features and mechanisms of novel coronavirus pneumonia (COVID19): Study Protocol Clinical Trial (SPIRIT Compliant). Medicine, 2020. 99(16): p. e19900.
Wang, Y., et al., Temporal changes of CT findings in 90 patients with COVID-19 pneumonia: a
longitudinal study. Radiology, 2020: p. 200843.
Xu, X., et al., Imaging and clinical features of patients with 2019 novel coronavirus SARS-CoV2. European journal of nuclear medicine and molecular imaging, 2020: p. 1-6.
Liang, T., et al., Evolution of CT findings in patients with mild COVID-19 pneumonia. European
Radiology, 2020: p. 1-9.

115.
116.
117.
118.

119.
120.
121.
122.
123.
124.

125.
126.
127.

128.
129.
130.
131.

132.
133.
134.
135.
136.
137.

Li, K., et al., The clinical and chest CT features associated with severe and critical COVID-19
pneumonia. Investigative radiology, 2020. 55(6): p. 327-331.
Wu, J., et al., Chest CT findings in patients with coronavirus disease 2019 and its relationship
with clinical features. Investigative radiology, 2020. 55(5): p. 257-261.
Liu, K.-C., et al., CT manifestations of coronavirus disease-2019: a retrospective analysis of 73
cases by disease severity. European journal of radiology, 2020: p. 108941.
Zhong, Q., et al., CT imaging features of patients with different clinical types of coronavirus
disease 2019 (COVID-19). Journal of Zhejiang University (Medical Science), 2020. 49(1): p. 00.
Zhou, Z., et al., Coronavirus disease 2019: initial chest CT findings. European Radiology, 2020:
p. 1-9.
Zhou, S., et al., CT features of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pneumonia in 62 patients
in Wuhan, China. American Journal of Roentgenology, 2020: p. 1-8.
Meng, H., et al., CT imaging and clinical course of asymptomatic cases with COVID-19
pneumonia at admission in Wuhan, China. Journal of Infection, 2020.
Li, Y. and L. Xia, Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19): role of chest CT in diagnosis and
management. American Journal of Roentgenology, 2020: p. 1-7.
Wang, J., et al., Dynamic changes of chest CT imaging in patients with corona virus disease-19
(COVID-19). Journal of Zhejiang University (Medical Science), 2020. 49(1): p. 0-0.
Lyu, P., et al., The performance of chest CT in evaluating the clinical severity of COVID-19
pneumonia: identifying critical cases based on CT characteristics. Investigative Radiology,
2020.
Fang, Y., et al., Sensitivity of chest CT for COVID-19: comparison to RT-PCR. Radiology, 2020: p.
200432.
Xu, Y.-H., et al., Clinical and computed tomographic imaging features of novel coronavirus
pneumonia caused by SARS-CoV-2. Journal of Infection, 2020.
Lei, P., et al., The progression of computed tomographic (CT) images in patients with
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pneumonia: Running title: The CT progression of COVID-19
pneumonia. Journal of Infection, 2020.
Yang, S., et al., Clinical and CT features of early stage patients with COVID-19: a retrospective
analysis of imported cases in Shanghai, China. European Respiratory Journal, 2020. 55(4).
Long, C., et al., Diagnosis of the Coronavirus disease (COVID-19): rRT-PCR or CT? European
journal of radiology, 2020: p. 108961.
Liu, R., et al., CT imaging analysis of 33 cases with the 2019 novel coronavirus infection.
Zhonghua yi xue za zhi, 2020. 100(13): p. 1007-1011.
Cheng, Z., et al., Clinical features and chest CT manifestations of coronavirus disease 2019
(COVID-19) in a single-center study in Shanghai, China. American Journal of Roentgenology,
2020: p. 1-6.
Yuan, M., et al., Association of radiologic findings with mortality of patients infected with 2019
novel coronavirus in Wuhan, China. PLoS One, 2020. 15(3): p. e0230548.
Dane, B., et al., Unexpected Findings of Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19) at the Lung Bases on
Abdominopelvic CT. American Journal of Roentgenology, 2020: p. 1-4.
Himoto, Y., et al., Diagnostic performance of chest CT to differentiate COVID-19 pneumonia in
non-high-epidemic area in Japan. Japanese Journal of Radiology, 2020: p. 1.
Chung, M., et al., CT imaging features of 2019 novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV). Radiology, 2020.
295(1): p. 202-207.
Pan, F., et al., Time course of lung changes on chest CT during recovery from 2019 novel
coronavirus (COVID-19) pneumonia. Radiology, 2020: p. 200370.
Zhu, Z., et al., Comparison of heart failure and 2019 novel coronavirus pneumonia in chest CT
features and clinical characteristics. Zhonghua xin xue Guan Bing za zhi, 2020. 48: p. E007E007.

138.

139.
140.
141.

142.
143.
144.
145.
146.
147.
148.
149.

150.
151.
152.
153.

154.
155.
156.
157.
158.
159.
160.
161.

Lei, P., et al., Clinical and computed tomographic (CT) images characteristics in the patients
with COVID-19 infection: What should radiologists need to know? Journal of X-Ray Science and
Technology, 2020(Preprint): p. 1-13.
Chate, R.C., et al., Presentation of pulmonary infection on CT in COVID-19: initial experience in
Brazil. Jornal Brasileiro de Pneumologia, 2020. 46(2).
Zhu, Y., et al., Clinical and CT imaging features of 2019 novel coronavirus disease (COVID-19).
The Journal of infection, 2020.
Lu, T. and H. Pu, Computed Tomography Manifestations of 5 Cases of the Novel Coronavirus
Disease 2019 (COVID-19) Pneumonia From Patients Outside Wuhan. Journal of thoracic
imaging, 2020. 35(3): p. W90-W93.
Xie, X., et al., Chest CT for typical 2019-nCoV pneumonia: relationship to negative RT-PCR
testing. Radiology, 2020: p. 200343.
McGinnis, G.J., et al., Rapid detection of asymptomatic COVID-19 by CT image-guidance for
stereotactic ablative radiotherapy. Journal of Thoracic Oncology, 2020.
Yan, K., et al., CT challenges the result of SARS-CoV-2 nucleic acid test in a suspected COVID19 case. Infection Control & Hospital Epidemiology, 2020: p. 1-5.
Qi, X., et al., CT imaging of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19): from the qualitative to
quantitative. Annals of Translational Medicine, 2020. 8(5).
Zhang, F.-Y., Y. Qiao, and H. Zhang, CT imaging of the COVID-19. Journal of the Formosan
Medical Association, 2020.
Tenda, E.D., et al., The Importance of Chest CT Scan in COVID-19. Acta Medica Indonesiana,
2020. 52(1): p. 68-73.
Erturk, S.M., CT Is Not a Screening Tool for Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19) Pneumonia. AJR.
American Journal of Roentgenology, 2020: p. W1-W1.
Xu, R., et al., CT imaging of one extended family cluster of corona virus disease 2019 (COVID19) including adolescent patients and “silent infection”. Quantitative Imaging in Medicine and
Surgery, 2020. 10(3): p. 800.
Liu, J., H. Yu, and S. Zhang, The indispensable role of chest CT in the detection of coronavirus
disease 2019 (COVID-19). European journal of nuclear medicine and molecular imaging, 2020.
Li, M., et al., Necessitating repeated chest CT in COVID-19 pneumonia. Journal of the Formosan
Medical Association, 2020.
Ufuk, F., 3D CT of Novel Coronavirus (COVID-19) Pneumonia. Radiology, 2020: p. 201183.
Hamer, O.W., et al. CT morphology of COVID-19: Case report and review of literature. in RöFoFortschritte auf dem Gebiet der Röntgenstrahlen und der bildgebenden Verfahren. 2020. ©
Georg Thieme Verlag KG.
Kang, Z., X. Li, and S. Zhou, Recommendation of low-dose CT in the detection and management
of COVID-2019. 2020, Springer.
Dai, W.-c., et al., CT imaging and differential diagnosis of COVID-19. Canadian Association of
Radiologists Journal, 2020. 71(2): p. 195-200.
Lin, C., et al., Asymptomatic novel coronavirus pneumonia patient outside Wuhan: The value
of CT images in the course of the disease. Clinical imaging, 2020. 63: p. 7-9.
Lee, E.Y., M.-Y. Ng, and P.-L. Khong, COVID-19 pneumonia: what has CT taught us? The Lancet
Infectious Diseases, 2020. 20(4): p. 384-385.
Kim, H., Outbreak of novel coronavirus (COVID-19): What is the role of radiologists? 2020,
Springer.
Zhang, X., et al., CT image of novel coronavirus pneumonia: a case report. Japanese Journal of
Radiology, 2020: p. 1-2.
Singh, N. and J. Fratesi, Chest CT imaging of an early Canadian case of COVID-19 in a 28-yearold man. CMAJ, 2020. 192(17): p. E455-E455.
Tsou, I., et al., Planning and coordination of the radiological response to the coronavirus
disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic: the Singapore experience. Clinical Radiology, 2020.

162.
163.
164.

165.
166.

167.
168.
169.

170.

171.
172.
173.

174.
175.
176.
177.

178.
179.
180.
181.
182.
183.

Vu, D., et al., Three unsuspected CT diagnoses of COVID-19. Emergency Radiology, 2020: p. 14.
Çinkooğlu, A., S. Bayraktaroğlu, and R. Savaş, Lung changes on chest CT during 2019 novel
coronavirus (COVID-19) pneumonia. European Journal of Breast Health, 2020. 16(2): p. 89.
Asadollahi-Amin, A., et al., Lung Involvement Found on Chest CT Scan in a Pre-Symptomatic
Person with SARS-CoV-2 Infection: A Case Report. Tropical medicine and infectious disease,
2020. 5(2): p. 56.
Chen, X., et al., Dynamic Chest CT Evaluation in Three Cases of 2019 Novel Coronavirus
Pneumonia. Archives of Iranian Medicine, 2020. 23(4): p. 277-280.
Hu, X., et al., CT imaging of two cases of one family cluster 2019 novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV)
pneumonia: inconsistency between clinical symptoms amelioration and imaging sign
progression. Quantitative Imaging in Medicine and Surgery, 2020. 10(2): p. 508.
Lim, Z.Y., et al., Variable computed tomography appearances of COVID-19. Singapore medical
journal, 2020.
Ostad, S., S. Haseli, and P. Iranpour, CT Manifestation of COVID-19 Pneumonia; Role of
Multiplanar Imaging. Academic Radiology, 2020.
Qanadli, S.D., C. Beigelman-Aubry, and D.C. Rotzinger, Vascular Changes Detected With
Thoracic CT in Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19) Might Be Significant Determinants for Accurate
Diagnosis and Optimal Patient Management. AJR. American journal of roentgenology, 2020:
p. W1.
Mungmungpuntipantip, R. and V. Wiwanitkit, Clinical Features and Chest CT Manifestations
of Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19). American Journal of Roentgenology, 2020. 215(7): p. W1W1.
Danrad, R., D.L. Smith, and E.K. Kerut, Radiologic Chest CT Findings From COVID‐19 in Orleans
Parish, Lousiana. Echocardiography, 2020.
Joob, B. and V. Wiwanitkit, Chest CT Findings and Clinical Conditions of Coronavirus Disease
(COVID-19). AJR. American journal of roentgenology, 2020: p. W1-W1.
Li, C.-X., et al., Clinical Study and CT Findings of a Familial Cluster of Pneumonia with
Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19). Sichuan da xue xue bao. Yi xue ban= Journal of Sichuan
University. Medical Science Edition, 2020. 51(2): p. 155-158.
Guan, W., J. Liu, and C. Yu, CT Findings of Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19) Severe Pneumonia.
American Journal of Roentgenology, 2020. 214(5): p. W85-W86.
Li, M., et al., Coronavirus disease (COVID-19): spectrum of CT findings and temporal
progression of the disease. Academic radiology, 2020.
Lei, P., B. Fan, and Y. Yuan, The evolution of CT characteristics in the patients with COVID-19
pneumonia. Journal of Infection, 2020.
Gross, A., et al. CT appearance of severe, laboratory-proven coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID19) in a Caucasian patient in Berlin, Germany. in RöFo-Fortschritte auf dem Gebiet der
Röntgenstrahlen und der bildgebenden Verfahren. 2020. © Georg Thieme Verlag KG.
Shi, F., et al., 2019 Novel Coronavirus (COVID-19) Pneumonia with Hemoptysis as the Initial
Symptom: CT and Clinical Features. Korean Journal of Radiology, 2020. 21(5): p. 537.
Qu, J., et al., Atypical lung feature on chest CT in a lung adenocarcinoma cancer patient
infected with COVID-19. Annals of Oncology, 2020.
An, P., et al., CT manifestations of novel coronavirus pneumonia: a case report. Balkan Medical
Journal, 2020. 37(3): p. 163.
Wei, J., et al., 2019 novel coronavirus (COVID-19) pneumonia: serial computed tomography
findings. Korean Journal of Radiology, 2020. 21(4): p. 501-504.
Fang, X., et al., Changes of CT Findings in a 2019 Novel Coronavirus (2019-nCoV) pneumonia
patient. QJM: An International Journal of Medicine, 2020. 113(4): p. 271-272.
Duan, Y.-n. and J. Qin, Pre-and posttreatment chest CT findings: 2019 novel coronavirus (2019nCoV) pneumonia. Radiology, 2020. 295(1): p. 21-21.

184.

185.
186.
187.
188.

189.
190.
191.
192.
193.

194.
195.
196.

197.
198.
199.
200.
201.
202.
203.
204.
205.

206.

Shi, H., X. Han, and C. Zheng, Evolution of CT manifestations in a patient recovered from 2019
novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) pneumonia in Wuhan, China. Radiology, 2020. 295(1): p. 2020.
Fang, Y., et al., CT manifestations of two cases of 2019 novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV)
pneumonia. Radiology, 2020. 295(1): p. 208-209.
Kanne, J.P., Chest CT findings in 2019 novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) infections from Wuhan,
China: key points for the radiologist. 2020, Radiological Society of North America.
Adair II, L.B. and E.J. Ledermann, Chest CT findings of early and progressive phase COVID-19
infection from a US patient. Radiology Case Reports, 2020.
Burhan, E., et al., Clinical Progression of COVID-19 Patient with Extended Incubation Period,
Delayed RT-PCR Time-to-positivity, and Potential Role of Chest CT-scan. Acta Medica
Indonesiana, 2020. 52(1): p. 80.
Feng, H., et al., A case report of COVID-19 with false negative RT-PCR test: necessity of chest
CT. Japanese Journal of Radiology, 2020: p. 1-2.
Hao, W. and M. Li, Clinical diagnostic value of CT imaging in COVID-19 with multiple negative
RT-PCR testing. Travel medicine and infectious disease, 2020.
Yang, W. and F. Yan, Patients with RT-PCR-confirmed COVID-19 and Normal Chest CT.
Radiology, 2020. 295(2): p. E3-E3.
Lei, J., et al., CT imaging of the 2019 novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) pneumonia. Radiology,
2020. 295(1): p. 18-18.
Apostolopoulos, I.D. and T.A. Mpesiana, Covid-19: automatic detection from x-ray images
utilizing transfer learning with convolutional neural networks. Physical and Engineering
Sciences in Medicine, 2020: p. 1.
Zhang, J., et al., Covid-19 screening on chest x-ray images using deep learning based anomaly
detection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.12338, 2020.
Sethy, P.K. and S.K. Behera, Detection of coronavirus disease (covid-19) based on deep
features. Preprints, 2020. 2020030300: p. 2020.
Abbas, A., M.M. Abdelsamea, and M.M. Gaber, Classification of COVID-19 in chest X-ray
images using DeTraC deep convolutional neural network. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.13815,
2020.
Afshar, P., et al., Covid-caps: A capsule network-based framework for identification of covid19 cases from x-ray images. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.02696, 2020.
Chowdhury, M.E., et al., Can AI help in screening viral and COVID-19 pneumonia? arXiv
preprint arXiv:2003.13145, 2020.
Li, X. and D. Zhu, Covid-xpert: An ai powered population screening of covid-19 cases using chest
radiography images. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.03042, 2020.
Karim, M., et al., Deepcovidexplainer: Explainable covid-19 predictions based on chest x-ray
images. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.04582, 2020.
Hall, L.O., et al., Finding covid-19 from chest x-rays using deep learning on a small dataset.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.02060, 2020.
Rajaraman, S., et al., Iteratively Pruned Deep Learning Ensembles for COVID-19 Detection in
Chest X-rays. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.08379, 2020.
Luz, E., et al., Towards an Efficient Deep Learning Model for COVID-19 Patterns Detection in Xray Images. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.05717, 2020.
Tartaglione, E., et al., Unveiling COVID-19 from Chest X-ray with deep learning: a hurdles race
with small data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.05405, 2020.
Ezzat, D. and H.A. Ella, GSA-DenseNet121-COVID-19: a Hybrid Deep Learning Architecture for
the Diagnosis of COVID-19 Disease based on Gravitational Search Optimization Algorithm.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.05084, 2020.
Hammoudi, K., et al., Deep Learning on Chest X-ray Images to Detect and Evaluate Pneumonia
Cases at the Era of COVID-19. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.03399, 2020.

207.
208.
209.
210.
211.
212.

213.
214.

215.
216.
217.
218.
219.
220.
221.
222.
223.
224.
225.
226.
227.
228.
229.
230.

Kumar, R., et al., Accurate Prediction of COVID-19 using Chest X-Ray Images through Deep
Feature Learning model with SMOTE and Machine Learning Classifiers. medRxiv, 2020.
Khan, A.I., J.L. Shah, and M. Bhat, CoroNet: A Deep Neural Network for Detection and Diagnosis
of Covid-19 from Chest X-ray Images. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.04931, 2020.
Santosh, K., D. Das, and U. Pal, Truncated Inception Net: COVID-19 Outbreak Screening using
Chest X-rays. 2020.
Khobahi, S., C. Agarwal, and M. Soltanalian, CoroNet: A Deep Network Architecture for SemiSupervised Task-Based Identification of COVID-19 from Chest X-ray Images. medRxiv, 2020.
Rahimzadeh, M. and A. Attar, A New Modified Deep Convolutional Neural Network for
Detecting COVID-19 from X-ray Images. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.08052, 2020.
Loey, M., F. Smarandache, and N.E.M. Khalifa, Within the Lack of COVID-19 Benchmark
Dataset: A Novel GAN with Deep Transfer Learning for Corona-virus Detection in Chest X-ray
Images. 2020.
Pereira, R.M., et al., COVID-19 identification in chest X-ray images on flat and hierarchical
classification scenarios. Computer Methods and Programs in Biomedicine, 2020: p. 105532.
Gozes, O., et al., Rapid ai development cycle for the coronavirus (covid-19) pandemic: Initial
results for automated detection & patient monitoring using deep learning ct image analysis.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.05037, 2020.
Shan, F., et al., Lung infection quantification of covid-19 in ct images with deep learning. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2003.04655, 2020.
Butt, C., et al., Deep learning system to screen coronavirus disease 2019 pneumonia. Applied
Intelligence, 2020: p. 1.
Wang, S., et al., A deep learning algorithm using CT images to screen for Corona Virus Disease
(COVID-19). MedRxiv, 2020.
Li, L., et al., Artificial intelligence distinguishes COVID-19 from community acquired pneumonia
on chest CT. Radiology, 2020: p. 200905.
Huang, L., et al., Serial quantitative chest CT assessment of COVID-19: deep-learning approach.
Radiology: Cardiothoracic Imaging, 2020. 2(2): p. e200075.
Song, Y., et al., Deep learning enables accurate diagnosis of novel coronavirus (COVID-19) with
CT images. medRxiv, 2020.
Gozes, O., et al., Coronavirus detection and analysis on chest ct with deep learning. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2004.02640, 2020.
Chen, J., et al., Deep learning-based model for detecting 2019 novel coronavirus pneumonia
on high-resolution computed tomography: a prospective study. medRxiv, 2020.
Chaganti, S., et al., Quantification of tomographic patterns associated with COVID-19 from
chest CT. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.01279, 2020.
He, X., et al., Sample-Efficient Deep Learning for COVID-19 Diagnosis Based on CT Scans.
medRxiv, 2020.
Fu, M., et al., Deep Learning-Based Recognizing COVID-19 and other Common Infectious
Diseases of the Lung by Chest CT Scan Images. medRxiv, 2020.
Chen, X., L. Yao, and Y. Zhang, Residual Attention U-Net for Automated Multi-Class
Segmentation of COVID-19 Chest CT Images. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.05645, 2020.
Zhou, T., S. Canu, and S. Ruan, An automatic COVID-19 CT segmentation based on U-Net with
attention mechanism. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.06673, 2020.
Mobiny, A., et al., Radiologist-Level COVID-19 Detection Using CT Scans with Detail-Oriented
Capsule Networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.07407, 2020.
Wu, Y.-H., et al., JCS: An Explainable COVID-19 Diagnosis System by Joint Classification and
Segmentation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.07054, 2020.
Maghdid, H.S., et al., Diagnosing COVID-19 pneumonia from X-ray and CT images using deep
learning and transfer learning algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.00038, 2020.

231.
232.

Alom, M.Z., et al., COVID_MTNet: COVID-19 Detection with Multi-Task Deep Learning
Approaches. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.03747, 2020.
Razzak, I., et al., Improving Coronavirus (COVID-19) Diagnosis using Deep Transfer Learning.
medRxiv, 2020.

