A Secure and Efficient Approach for Issuing KYC
Token As COVID-19 Health Certificate Based on
Stellar Blockchain Network
Kiarash Shamsi, Koosha Esmaeilzadeh Khorasani, Mohammad Javad Shayegan*
Department of Computer Engineering, University of Science and Culture, Tehran, Iran
kiarash.shamsi@gmail.com, k.e.khorasani@gmail.com, shayegan@usc.ac.ir
Received: 2020/08/29

Revised: 2020/09/20

Abstract— Today's world is struggling with the COVID-19
pandemic, as one of the greatest challenges of the 21st century.
During the lockdown caused by this disease, many financial
losses have been inflicted on people and all industries. One of
the fastest ways to save these industries from the COVID-19 or
any possible pandemic in the future is to provide a reliable,
fast, smart, and secure solution for people's health assessment.
In this article, blockchain technology is used to propose a
model which provides and validates the health certificates for
people who travel or present in society. For this purpose, we
take advantage of blockchain features such as being
unchangeable, errorless, distributed, and a single point of
failure nonexistence, high security, and proper use in
protecting people's privacy. Since a variety of antibody and
human health proving tests against the virus are developing,
this study tries simultaneously to design an integrated and
secure system to meet the authenticity and accuracy of
different people's health certificates for the companies
requiring these certifications. In this system, on the one hand,
there are qualified laboratories that are responsible for
performing standard testing and also providing results to the
system controller. On the other hand, entities that need to
receive health certificates must be members of this system.
Finally, people are considered as the end-user of the system. To
provide test information for the entities, the mechanism of
KYC tokens will be used based on the Stellar private
blockchain network. In this mechanism, the user will buy a
certain amount of KYC tokens from the system controller.
These tokens are charged in the user's wallet, and the user can
send these tokens from his wallet to any destination company,
to exchange the encrypted health certificate information.
Finally, considering the appropriate platform provided by
blockchain technology and the requirement of a reliable and
accurate solution for issuing health certificates during the
Covid-19 pandemic or any other disease, this article offers a
solution to meet the requirements.
Keywords— Health Certificate, COVID-19, KYC Token,
Blockchain, Stellar Network.

1.

INTRODUCTION

Today, many strategies are being developed to diagnose
the body resistance against the COVID-19 virus. For
example, many countries are developing vaccines [1] or
antibody diagnostic tests [2]. Ultimately, if any solution will
be approved, the request for the safety certificate against
Coronavirus will increase dramatically all over the world.
Therefore, an attempt has been made to provide a solution
for issuing these certificates to deal with this pandemic in
such a way that be applicable for any other diseases, whether
epidemic or otherwise, like HIV. Based on this issue, an

Accepted: 2020/09/30

attempt has been made at including the following features in
the article proposed solution:
1. Accuracy and irrevocability
2. Except for taking tests, people present in the physical
environment is not essential
3. A fast solution
4. The transaction registration and log should be
unchangeable
to
prevent
the
destructive
Interventions of some governments
5. Can be tracked
6. People's privacy should be fully respected
7. Data transfer speed on the secure platform be high
8. Implementing flexibly based on future requirements
and not be just a theory.
The Know Your Customer (KYC) refers to a mechanism
in which the authenticity of customer information in various
fields is validated through a method of verification and
authenticity [3]. This validation can confirm financial,
identity, or even people's health information. In general,
various organizations need to access users' information in
various fields. Since the accuracy of the information is very
important in areas such as medication, the provided data by
users to the units must be reliable. If any unit wants to test
and verify the authenticity of the data independently, it will
take a long time. Besides, several similar infrastructures will
be established by various units to do the same tasks, which
will lead to wasting many resources. On the other hand, in
each unit, the user has to pay separate financial and time
costs to validate his data authenticity. Repeating this process
multiple times may cause a difficult user experience.
A reliable, comprehensive system is required to solve the
above problems. In this article, the information needed to be
validated by the KYC mechanism is people's health testing
information of COVID-19 disease. The accuracy of this
information is very crucial, and the system can guarantee
unchangeable, accessible, and integration of data, based on
the mechanisms existing in the blockchain. Following the
introduction of blockchain technology in 2008 by Satoshi
Nakamoto [4], with features such as immutability, privacy,
and transparency, and distribution, blockchain can be used
appropriately in the KYC mechanism. Blockchain can be
considered a public ledger that stores all transactions in a
chain of blocks. In this system, mechanisms such as
encryption and various consensus algorithms are used to
maintain the validity of transactions and data integrity.
Another feature that can be used in some blockchain
networks, such as Ethereum or Stellar, which is used in this
article, is the ability to define tokens as digital assets that can

International Journal of Web Research, Vol. 3, No. 1, Spring-Summer, 2020
be exchanged along with the network's native cryptocurrency
[5]. Tokens can be considered a digital representation of
anything that can be traded (whether goods or services)
issued on a blockchain platform. For example, tokens can be
used as a financial or physical asset such as gold or money or
as an abstract concept such as an identity certificate. These
tokens will be provided to users by the system controller,
which verifies the authenticity of the information. By
sending these tokens on the blockchain platform, users will
be able to allow access to their accurate and guaranteed
information to any destination company. In the designed
system in this research, these tokens are a scheme related to
the abstract hash of people's health certificate, which
contains the hash which provides access to the encrypted
information of individuals and can be sent to any member of
the system.
This solution will enable users to buy a specific number
of KYC tokens and sending to various valid destinations
after authenticating only one time in the central entity and
verifying the authenticity of their health test results.
Companies that want to be aware of their customers' health
status (hereinafter referred to as destination companies) at
the lowest cost have access to accurate data, which will
remove all restrictions on traditional systems. Fig.1 shows
the problems with traditional KYC systems. The platform to
issue the KYC token in this article is the Stellar blockchain
network.

Fig 1. Problems with traditional KYC systems

on blockchain use to store people's medical information and
then the use of KYC in the blockchain.
In 2016, Asaph Azaria introduced a system called
MedRec, based on which electronic medical records (EMR)
data can be stored in a decentralized form with the help of
Ethereum's blockchain network. Mechanisms such as
information retrieval, access control, data extract method,
and the list of medical centers where patients referred (for
patients) and the list of patients who have been served (for
medical centers) are maintained and controlled through smart
contracts on Ethereum platform. The EMR information is
located on the local systems of the patient's nodes or the
medical center's nodes. This system aims to solve problems
such as slow and separate access to patient information,
interoperability problems between the system and the Patient
Agency, and improving the quality and measure of data for
medical research. The incentive mechanism considered in
this system, in addition to the intrinsic Ethereum system
award, allows access to aggregated and anonymous patient
information for data mining purposes [8].

Stellar is an open-source, free, and very flexible
blockchain platform that allows developers to use it privately
and publicly. This platform allows users to easily generate
and distribute their favorite tokens with any number on the
network. This ability allows the system controller to easily
produce as many KYC tokens as it needs on a private
network. Each user can purchase as many of these tokens as
he needs. Since the blockchain network is private in this
article, only the system controller will be able to generate
and distribute the tokens. Besides, on the Stellar network, the
average time for producing and registering a block is about 5
seconds, which is about 10 minutes for the Bitcoin network
[6] and about 12 to 14 seconds for the Ethereum network [7].
On the other hand, due to the nature of consensus algorithms
in Stellar, heavy mining processes are not required, and this
increases the efficiency and speed of the system to transfer
medical information. These capabilities make Stellar a
suitable choice to implement the infrastructure needed to
send KYC tokens securely and accurately.

To store people's EMR with the help of the blockchain
platform. In 2018, "Fan Kai" introduced a solution called
MedBlock to create a more efficient and scalable system.
The system includes the following features: A hospital
database where users' information is stored. There is also a
DLT of blocks containing data such as disease and treatment
information, location of finding detailed information, and the
Hash of EMR data. There are also nodes in the system that
play some roles, which include preparing the primary
information, measuring information accuracy, writing the
information on the DLT, and removing the problematic
nodes. In this system, since each node has only one role, the
scalability is greatly increased, and the system becomes more
efficient. A significant point in this system is using the
Breadcrumbs mechanism, where the encrypted medical
information of each person is classified according to the
hospital department, which the patient referred to, and
searching performs much more efficiently [9].

According to the mentioned issues, providing a system
based on the KYC mechanism using the features available on
the Stellar blockchain platform is an effective and efficient
solution and helps governments, industries, and people to
accurately diagnose the level of immunity to this viral
infection. In the rest, this article is divided into the following
sections: Section 2 refers to the related works. Section 3
explains the proposed solution, and Section 4 describes a
scenario from the user's check-up in the laboratory to the end
of the process of presenting results to the destination
company. In the last section, the conclusion and future
development strategies are presented.
2.

RESEARCH BACKGROUND

In 2019, Moyano proposed a solution to optimize the
KYC registration process and cut its ever-increasing costs in
banks and financial centers. For designing, he used a

Since this article is a combination of using blockchain in
healthcare and KYC, this section investigates several articles

43

A Secure and Efficient Approach for Issuing KYC Token As COVID-19 Health Certificate Based on Stellar Blockchain Network

compilation of the distributed database architecture provided
by Siegenthaler and Birman [10]to save information, and the
Ethereum blockchain structure to manage and allocate read
and write permissions on this distributed database. The
process is fulfilled so that once the user goes to one of the
system's banks, his information is stored in the database, and
a smart contract is created for him, which includes how to
access the user's information and the cost of registering
KYC. Moreover, if each of the system's banks pays a part of
the KYC cost, they will have access to user information [11].

producing hash for transactions, keys for encryption,
encryption, or decryption of texts via the RSA method, are
also the responsibility of this section. The other part is the
database; the schema of the tables can be seen in Fig.2.
In general, in the first step of the off-chain process, the
requests are received in the APIs Section, then if the input
and the output are correct, the information is transferred to
the logic section according to the user's request type. After
performing the logical processes, with the help of the DAO
section, changes on the data which are caused by the
processes, are stored in the database and the appropriate
response will be returned.

In 2020, Manoj Kumar provided a solution in which,
after validating for the first time, the bank creates a key pair
and a QR code for the client, which is based on a
combination of KYC data, user ID, and user's public key
which are available to the user. The information in the QR
code is encrypted, and then the user's information is signed,
and this signed information is placed inside blockchain along
with the public key of the financial entity and the user's ID.
After referring to each of the system's banks, the user
provides his KYC information to the destination bank using
his QR code, and after re-validation through signed data of
the previous KYC information in the blockchain, the bank
can verify and use information [12]. Table 1 presents a brief
comparison of the previous works.
3.

3-2. On-Chain Section
This section describes how to design and implement Stellar
blockchain infrastructure to exchange KYC tokens between
users and destination companies that need access to accurate
personal health information. In general, this part of the
system includes a blockchain network to create accounts,
generate a pair of blockchain keys, generating and
distributing the KYC tokens among users, transferring
tokens, and recording transactions. The architecture of this
section can be designed as a public or private blockchain
network, according to the opinion and discretion of the
system controller. Since the exchange of medical data is
sensitive and highly confidential, using a private and
controllable network by the central company is usually
preferred. In this paper, a private blockchain network
architecture is supposed to be used.
This platform should also provide the ability to create new
tokens and distribute them among network users for the
central network administrator in a straightforward and
accessible way. In general, this network should be able to
provide the following services and features:

THE PROPOSED SOLUTION

The whole presented system in this article is based on
how to store and authenticate information using the Stellar
blockchain platform. Laboratories and typical users'
information, as well as destination companies, is stored in the
off-chain section. If the user's check-up result is available
and his information is recorded on the off-chain system, he
can ask for purchasing a specific number of tokens. These
tokens are initially purchased as raw tokens, which contain
no information and will be charged to his wallet by the
System Controller. By selecting the destination company,
which is a specific company using the KYC data, the user
receives the hash of his certificate, and after sending it to the
destination company, the health information is retrieved
through the hash. KYC tokens are used in this system as the
essence of registering transactions, and without registering
transactions, they have no value or information. This will
increase the security of the network and drop the aimless
transfer of these tokens.

1) It can be implemented and used both publicly and
privately.
2) Users and destination companies can easily create
an account and receive their blockchain public and
private keys.
3) Creating a new token by the system controller and
distributing it among users easily.
4) Users should be able to send tokens to the desired
destinations quickly.
5) The hash of people's health certificate data can be
registered in the transactions and fetched by the
destination.
6) The mining mechanism for this network is not justified
because the transfer must be fast and easy, and the
new block must be set up as soon as possible.
7) The token nature is not financial; therefore, tokens
must be defined initially in a certain number, and
their trade is only the exchange of data on a secure
platform, not trading a valuable financial asset.
8) Implementing the system should be fast, easy, and
flexible.

3-1. OFF-Chain Section
The main task of this section is to provide a solution for
storing basic system information such as information about
users, test results, laboratories, destination companies, and
transactions. Moreover, the system is responsible for
assigning keys to Entities such as laboratories and
destination companies which exchange vital and important
user information. It should be noted that the keys allocated in
this section are different from the keys in the chain section.
Another function of the system is to provide APIs to connect
different system components to this section. The duties of
this section, along with the main components and the data
structure, are shown in Fig.2. The server provides tasks such
as exchanging information between components of the
system, including users, laboratories, blockchain network,
and destination companies. This section registers and
modifies or retrieves information in the database if
necessary. Logical functions of the system, such as

Due to these requirements and the native features of the
blockchain network mentioned earlier, this network can be a
suitable choice for developing the network required by this
system.

44

International Journal of Web Research, Vol. 3, No. 1, Spring-Summer, 2020

TABLE 1. COMPARISON OF PREVIOUS WORKS

Title

Author

Year

Goal

MedRec: Using
Blockchain for Medical
Data Access and
Permission Management

Asaph Azaria, Ariel
Ekblaw, Thiago Vieira
and Andrew Lippman

2016

Creating a decentralized system which uses blockchain
platform support for EMR storage

2018

Optimizing the EMR distributed storage process on the
blockchain and increasing scalability

José Parra-Moyano,
Tryggvi Thoroddsen,
Omri Ross

2019

Storage and management of bank customers KYC
information to prevent multiple data registration and
design appropriate incentive mechanism

Dr. Manoj Kumar,
Nikhil, Parina Anand

2020

Storing KYC information in an encrypted QR code and
using blockchain to manage accesses and identify the
user while visiting the bank

MedBlock: Efficient and
Secure Medical Data
Sharing Via Blockchain
Optimized and Dynamic
KYC System Based on
Blockchain Technology

A blockchain-based
Approach for an Efficient
Secure KYC Process with
Data Sovereignty

Kai Fan & Shangyang
Wang & Yanhui Ren &
Hui Li & Yintang Yang

Fig 2. The system main components and data structure

Setting up a network based on the Stellar, which can fully
provide all the services in the Stellar system, requires a large
amount of money and time because of providing and setting
up many servers. This problem Makes independent
developers or researchers who cannot prepare these facilities,
unable to use and study on this network. Therefore, to solve

this problem, Stellar has created a very practical solution.
Stellar provides a network of 3 nodes that form a complete
blockchain network. This network is generally different from
the main Stellar network on which the Lumen
cryptocurrency is located. It has also developed a web
application for the primary use of network APIs under the

45

A Secure and Efficient Approach for Issuing KYC Token As COVID-19 Health Certificate Based on Stellar Blockchain Network

HTTP protocol. This application was created to use and test
several APIs on the network. Stellar calls this network the
Stellar Test Network and the app the Stellar Laboratory [13].
The main reason for developing this laboratory is the use of
independent people who usually work on the network for
research purposes. This lab provides all the services available
on the Stellar network to develop applications. In general,
this network is used for the following purposes:

system, the system controller grants the permission of joining
to the approved laboratories which meet the necessary
standards in performing their tests. These laboratories will be
able to provide services to users if their quality and accuracy
are guaranteed by the system controller and are certified to
perform correctly. This process can vary depending on the
type of test and the requirements of the system controller.
After the laboratory membership in the central system, the
System Controller assigns a pair of keys and delivers the
encryption key to the laboratory. The lab is now ready to
provide services to users.

1) Creating test accounts with test balances for
transactions
2) Producing and distributing new tokens on a trial basis
3) Registering all kinds of transactions from the network
sources to any desired destination in the network
4) Developing applications and researching and training
about Stellar without the possibility of destroying valuable
assets
5) Testing existing programs
6) Performing data analysis on a smaller and
insignificant data set compared to the main network.

Moreover, destination companies that need to certify the
health certificate of individuals registers in this system. At
the time of registration, in addition to assigning a pair of
cryptographic keys to them, a blockchain account will also
be created for these companies. This account will be used by
these entities to receive tokens in the future. After registering
this information on the server of the System Controller, the
keys and information about using the blockchain account
will be given to the destination company so that by entering
its wallet, it will be able to receive and decrypt the health
certificate data.

In this research, this network has been used to provide
transaction services and the KYC tokens in the blockchain
network. Since all APIs and network services are the same as
the main network, replacing the network with the original
version is very easy, both publicly and privately.

In the next step, users must register in the system and
enter their identity information. After authentication, the user
will be shown a list of all valid laboratories in the system.
The user selects a laboratory from the list and goes there to
test. In the laboratory, to authenticate the data in the future,
in addition to the medical test, the user gives biometric
information, including fingerprints or any other model of this
type of data, if it has not been previously recorded. In the
end, after determining the test result, the complete test data,
along with the user's biometric information, is encrypted
using the encryption key that was originally provided to the
lab and sent to the off-chain component of the main server.
On the server, this data is decrypted, and the test information
is recorded in the database using a unique identifier.
Biometric information is also recorded in the user
information section. The user will then be able to purchase a
KYC token. Fig.3 shows the process of laboratory
membership, testing, and recording test results.

3-3. C. User Interface
There will be a user interface that is presented in this
section for the actors, including end-users and destination
companies to interact with this platform to use system
services, and each part will be described separately.
Each user should communicate with the system using an
interface and use the services provided in the system. These
services include registering the user in the system, verifying
the user identity, assigning a unique ID to exchange the
tokens, as well as a platform to purchase and send the tokens
to the user's required destinations. Some of these services are
provided on the blockchain platform, which must be
implemented using SDKs provided by Stellar, and some of
these are provided privately by the off-chain servers of the
system controller. These services must be made available to
users and destination companies in an easily consensual
accessible platform. In this article, a mobile wallet
implemented on the Android operating system will do this
task.

To purchase a KYC token, the user must have at least one
valid test on the system. By referring to his wallet, the user
sends the request to purchase the KYC tokens, up to the
maximum amount specified by the system controller. After
paying the cost of the tokens, the number of purchasing
tokens will be sent to the user's blockchain account, and the
user will be able to view the tokens and exchange them in his
wallet. These tokens are raw at the time of purchasing and
exchange data only at the time of sending with the
mechanism that will be explained. Therefore, these tokens do
not contain any data before being sent to the destination
entity.

In addition to accessing the off-chain services provided
by the system controller, this wallet will also include all the
services related to the transfer of tokens and authentication at
the destination. Although in the current study, this platform
has been implemented as a mobile application, it can be
completely feasible on various platforms, including a web
application.
4.

To send a token to the destination entity in order to obtain
the health certificate, the user must enter the address of the
destination entity in his wallet in the token sending section.
Consequently, a list of all valid tests for sending to the
destinations will be displayed. The user selects the desired
test and starts the sending process. On the server-side, the
desired test ID, source, and destination of the transaction are
received from the user. A 16-byte Hash is then created for
this transaction by the off-chain component, which we will

SYSTEM SCENARIO

In this section, the complete system application scenario,
along with its design method, is described. In the first step,
due to the importance of maintaining the confidentiality of
medical and health information of individuals, it is
recommended that the blockchain network used in the token
exchange subsystem be privately monitored and managed by
the system controller. In the first step, after setting up the

46

International Journal of Web Research, Vol. 3, No. 1, Spring-Summer, 2020

Fig.3. Steps are taken from the registration to the recording result

call it user-hash. The information received from the user is
recorded in the transaction database. Further to the above,
this database has another field, which is the block-hash in the
blockchain. The stellar network generates this hash. This
field will become full in the next step.
After successfully registering the transaction information
on the server, the created user-hash will be returned to the
user wallet. This hash is placed in the Memo section of the
transaction block. A transaction from the user's source to the
destination company is recorded along with the Memo
information on the blockchain network. Fig.4 shows a view
of each registered block.
After successful transaction submission, the block-hash
information which is received in the wallet will be sent to the
server along with user-hash. Block-hash will be added to the
transaction data which existed in the server. After this
process, the server will respond containing the unique
identifier of transaction data.

Fig 4 . Registered Block

This identifier is displayed to the user as a numeric code
as well as a QR code containing the block-hash, as well as
the user is asked to keep this code securely. The user can
retrieve the QR code by the numeric identifier. After
performing this step, the user has successfully sent his health
certificate to the desired destination company. Fig.5 shows a
view of this process.

transaction will achieve the test information of the user.
Access to user information is such that first the hash in
the Memo is sent to the Off-chain server. If such a
transaction is available on the server, the information of the
destination company and the information related to the user's
test ID will be fetched, and through this Test ID, the details
of the test result will be accessible. Finally, the test result is
encrypted with the registered key of the destination company
and is returned to it. If the Hash sending company is the
same as the destination company registered with the
transaction, the sender could decrypt the information using
its private key; otherwise, it will not be able to do so.

The final step of providing the service by the system is
that first, the user attends the destination company and shows
his QR Code. If necessary, in addition to the QR code, the
physical identity document, such as the passport or biometric
information that has already been registered, will be provided
to the destination company to start the information fetching
operation by them.

According to the results of the test, the destination
company decides how to provide the services to the user.

For fetching the certificate information, destination
companies need to fetch the transaction through the BlockHash presented as a Qr Code, from the Stellar blockchain
platform. Then, through the information in the Memo, this

In the end, the destination company can resell the collected
tokens at a price of one-fifth of the token's original price. In
addition to largely preventing the issuance of new tokens,

47

A Secure and Efficient Approach for Issuing KYC Token As COVID-19 Health Certificate Based on Stellar Blockchain Network

this is seen as a side income for the destination company and
encourages it to participate in the suggested system
actively.

this study provided a solution for issuing health certificates
for people, so that, goals such as being reliable, credible,
unchangeable, fast, economical, and secure alongside
protecting individuals' privacy be achieved.

Fig.6 shows a scheme of the operation from the user
attendance moment to the end of the information fetching
process.

The proposed system has three sections; off-chain, onchain, and the user interface. The off-chain tasks contain
storing information and registering entities such as
destination companies, users, testing results and laboratories,
encrypting data, and creating a platform for communication
with others were allocated.

The solution proposed here has these advantages:
1) The whole process of the system from testing to the
assessment of health certificates is automated.
2) Due to using a blockchain network, the proposed
system has more reliability than other solutions.
3) Business costs will be decreased.
5.

In the on-chain, due to the numerous advantages of the
Stellar blockchain network and the compatibility of this
platform with the basic needs in this article, a Stellar
blockchain network was designed and implemented using the
Stellar test network infrastructure. In this strategy, the
network can be developed both publicly and privately. Still,
due to the nature of the medical data sensitivity, the private

CONCLUSION

Concerning the problem of the COVID-19 pandemic and
the many economic and livelihood problems that have arisen,

Fig 5. A scheme of the transaction registration

Fig 6. The process of providing information to the company and receiving services

48

International Journal of Web Research, Vol. 3, No. 1, Spring-Summer, 2020
type is recommended for use in the operating environment.
This network was used to produce raw KYC tokens as well
as secure and unchanged data exchange to purchase and
exchange tokens from users to destination companies that
need medical data. Due to blockchain features, this platform
will guarantee the authenticity of the data and will provide
fast access to valid data at a lower cost. In addition, to use
the services of this comprehensive system, a user interface is
considered as an important part of the system. In this article,
an Android mobile wallet was designed as the user interface.
This wallet is the consensus of all existing services for users.
Token destination companies can also use this wallet to
authenticate the received tokens.

[10] M. Siegenthaler and K. Birman, “Sharing Private Information Across
Distributed Databases:”, 2009 Eighth IEEE International Symposium
on Network Computing and Applications, IEEE, 2009, pp. 82–89.

Finally, in addition to the benefits mentioned above,
providing a comprehensive archive for laboratory clients to
be needless of launching local archives is an advantage for
the system. Moreover, the resale of tokens received by
destination companies to the main system and the creation of
side income for those companies are also among the most
important incentives and benefits of the system.

Kiarash Shamsi has been received the
master of software engineering from
the department of computer engineering
at the University of Science and
Culture, Tehran, Iran. His research
interests include Blockchain, data
science and distributed systems.

[11] J. P. Moyano, T. Thoroddsen, and O. Ross, “Optimised and dynamic
KYC system based on blockchain technology”, International Journal
of Blockchains and Cryptocurrencies, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 85–106, 2019.
[12] M. Kumar, Nikhil, P. Anand, “A Blockchain Based Approach For An
Efficient Secure KYC Process With Data Sovereignty”, International
Journal of Scientific & Technology Research, vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 34033407, January, 2020.
[13]

S. Team, “Stellar Laboratory”, 2020. [Online].
https://laboratory.stellar.org/. [Accessed: 29-Jul-2020].

Available:

The use of such systems can increase the readiness of the
human race to cope with the COVID-19 pandemic or any
other problem in the future that requires the approval of
human health so that no great losses will be seen anymore.
Koosha Esmaeilzadeh Khorasani has
been received the bachelor of hardware
engineering from the department of
computer engineering at the Iran
University of Science and Technology,
Tehran, Iran. His research interests
include machine learning, blockchain,
and IOT.

Our immediate goal for the future is to prepare a big data
platform for using aggregated data in the off-chain section.
The final purpose is to provide a comprehensive data
analysis report for governments and all official health centers
to help them in planning and decision making for society.
REFERENCES
[1]

T. T. Le, Z. Andreadakis, A. Kumar, R. G. Román, S. Tollefsen, M.
Saville, and S. Mayhew, “COVID-19 therapies and vaccine
landscape”, Nature Materials, vol. 19, no. 809, pp.305-306 , 2020.

[2]

A. Petherick, “Developing antibody tests for SARS-CoV-2”, The
Lancet, vol. 395, no. 10230, pp. 1101–1102, 2020.

[3]

N. Kapsoulis, A. Psychas, G. Palaiokrassas, A. Marinakis, A. Litke,
and T. Varvarigou, “Know Your Customer (KYC) Implementation
with Smart Contracts on a Privacy-Oriented Decentralized
Architecture”, Future Internet, vol. 12, no. 2, p. 41, 2020.

[4]

C. S. Wright, “Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash System”,
SSRN
Electronic
Journal,
2008.
Available
at
https://ssrn.com/abstract=3440802

[5]

M. Borkowski, D. McDonald, C. Ritzer and S. Schulte, “Towards
Atomic Cross-Chain Token Transfers: State of the Art and Open
Questions Within TAST”, Distributed Systems Group TU Wien
(Technische Universit at Wien), 2019, [online] Available:
https://dsg.tuwien.ac.at/projects/tast/pub/tast-white-paper-1.pdf

[6]

E. Erdin, M. Cebe, K. Akkaya, S. Solak, E. Bulut, and S. Uluagac, “A
Bitcoin payment network with reduced transaction fees and
confirmation times”, Computer Networks, vol. 172, p. 107098, 2020.

[7]

L. Zhang, B. Lee, Y. Ye, and Y. Qiao, “Ethereum Transaction
Performance Evaluation Using Test-Nets”, in Euro-Par 2019: Parallel
Processing Workshops Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Springer,
Aug. 2019, pp. 179–190,.

[8]

A. Azaria, A. Ekblaw, T. Vieira, and A. Lippman, “MedRec: Using
Blockchain for Medical Data Access and Permission Management”,
2016 2nd International Conference on Open and Big Data (OBD),
IEEE, 2016, pp. 25–30.

[9]

K. Fan, S. Wang, Y. Ren, H. Li, and Y. Yang, “MedBlock: Efficient
and Secure Medical Data Sharing Via Blockchain”, Journal of
Medical Systems, vol. 42, no. 8, p. 136, 2018.

Mohammad Javad Shayegan is an
Associate Professor at the Department
of Computer Engineering at the
University of Science and Culture,
Tehran, Iran. He is the founder of the
web research center, International
Conference on Web Research, and
International Journal of Web Research
in Iran. His research interests include
Web research, data science and distributed systems.

49

