Is this pofma? Analysing public opinion and misinformation in a COVID-19
Telegram group chat
Ng Hui Xian Lynnette1 , Loke Jia Yuan2
1

arXiv:2010.10113v1 [cs.SI] 20 Oct 2020

2

Singapore, lhuixiann@gmail.com *
Centre for AI and Data Governance, Singapore Management University, jyloke@smu.edu.sg†

Abstract
We analyse a Singapore-based COVID-19 Telegram group
with more than 10,000 participants. First, we study the
group’s opinion over time, focusing on four dimensions: participation, sentiment, topics, and psychological features. We
find that engagement peaked when the Ministry of Health
raised the disease alert level, but this engagement was not
sustained. Second, we search for government-identified misinformation in the group. We find that government-identified
misinformation is rare, and that messages discussing these
pieces of misinformation express skepticism.

Introduction
COVID-19 2020. The novel coronavirus pandemic
(COVID-19) is an ongoing global health event. In
this rapidly unfolding crisis, people are unsure about
what is happening and what they should do. They
seek to make sense of their uncertainty (Weick 1988;
Maitlis and Sonenshein 2010). To do so, many
people turn to new media platforms that provide support and real time information that cannot
be found elsewhere (Stephens and Malone 2009;
Choi and Lin 2009). Before the pandemic, more
than 60% of Singaporeans were consuming news
via social media, and we expect this figure to rise
as more people stay home (Newman et al. 2019;
Nielsen 2020).
Public health authorities need to satisfy the public’s need
for information, prevent risk exaggeration, and encourage
desirable behaviors like social distancing and hand-washing.
Understanding online public opinion is one way to understand the efficacy of public health messaging and improve
* Any

opinions, findings and conclusions or recommendations
expressed in this material are those of the author and do not reflect
the views of any organisation or government.
†
This research is supported by the National Research Foundation, Singapore under its Emerging Areas Research Projects
(EARP) Funding Initiative. Any opinions, findings and conclusions
or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the author(s) and do not reflect the views of National Research Foundation, Singapore.
Copyright © 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

future communications. On February 15, World Health Organisation Director-General said “we’re not just fighting an
epidemic, we’re fighting an infodemic”.
We study a Singapore-based Telegram group chat with
more than 10,000 participants that was created to discuss
COVID-19, focusing on the first six weeks of the group’s existence, from 27 January to 8 March 2020. These weeks represent the “first wave” of the pandemic in Singapore, during
which the country saw the number of confirmed cases grow
from 4 to 153, mostly imported from China. For two of those
weeks Singapore had the most number of confirmed cases in
the world outside China. During this period, the Ministry of
Health raised the DORSCON (Disease Outbreak Response
System Condition) level from yellow to orange. The weekly
number of cases and key events in Singapore and worldwide
are listed in Figure 5.
Specifically, we ask the following research questions:
RQ1: How does group opinion change over time?
RQ2: How prevalent is government-identified misinformation in the group?
Telegram public groups. Telegram is an instant messaging service with more than 200 million monthly active users.
Telegram facilitates the building of groups of up to 200,000
members. Messages in the group are only visible to people
who search for or join the group, with no limits on forwarding. Telegram positions itself as a platform that protects user
privacy and free expression (Mike Butcher 2020). Users can
use the platform without revealing personally identifying information to other users. The combination of large group
sizes, partial visibility and anonymity plausibly facilitates
the spread of misinformation.
Misinformation and Government Corrections. The
Singapore government has taken steps to combat misinformation about COVID-19. The official source for updates
about the local situation is a Ministry of Health web page.
Prominently displayed at the top of the page are recent clarifications on misinformation. The Government has also used
the Protection from Online Falsehoods and Manipulation
Act (POFMA) to correct claims about COVID-19.

Related Work
Group Chats. Researchers have analysed the general patterns of interaction in group chats (Caetano et al. 2018;
Garimella and Tyson 2018; Qiu et al. 2016) and the use

of group chats for specific purposes (Bouhnik, Deshen,
and Gan 2014; Wani et al. 2013). Previous papers which
study misinformation and group chats mostly do so in
the context of political elections (Resende et al. 2019a;
Machado et al. 2019; Resende et al. 2019b). Within the
crisis informatics literature, others have studied the role of
group chats in events like floods, war and kidnap responses
(Bhuvana and Aram 2019; Malka, Ariel, and Avidar 2015;
Simon et al. 2016).
Social media and pandemics. (Liu and Kim 2011; Wilson and Jumbert 2018) analyse how public health authorities use social media and other infocomm technologies for
diagnostic efforts, coordination, and risk communication.
Other studies focus on the public instead of health authorities: (Chew and Eysenbach 2010; Szomszor, Kostkova, and
St Louis 2011) study the types and source of content shared
during the 2001 H1N1 outbreak; (Strekalova 2017) analyses audience engagement with posts from the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) Facebook channel
during the Ebola outbreak; (Sharma et al. 2017) find that
misleading posts are more popular than posts containing accurate information during the Zika outbreak in the United
States.
Contribution. In the overall literature on the social science of new media, most studies have focused on public platforms like Facebook and Twitter, as opposed to less-visible,
chat-based platforms like Telegram. Studies that analyse
group chats do not focus on disease outbreaks, and studies
that focus on disease outbreaks do not analyse group chats.
As far as we know, our paper is the first to analyse group
chats during a disease outbreak.

Methodology
We describe how we gathered data from a public Telegram
group and the methods used to process and analyse the data.

Data collection
Several Singapore-based public Telegram groups emerged
after Singapore’s first confirmed case of the coronavirus on
23 January 2020. We found the groups by searching ”Singapore Coronavirus Telegram” on Google and Telegram.
Some groups were: SG Fight COVID-191 , Wuhan COVID19 Commentary2 and SG Fight Coronavirus3 .
In this paper, we focus on SG Fight COVID-19 because it
contains the most discussion and members. In contrast, the
other groups are characterised by one-to-many news broadcasts. From 19 January to 8 March 2020, we retrieved messages with the Python Telethon API. Our method is similar to (Baumgartner et al. 2020). In total, we collected
48,050 messages. Of these, 10,765 were system-generated
(e.g. automated messages about people joining and leaving the group, group name changes), leaving us with 37,285
mixed-media messages to analyse. The breakdown of messages types is presented in Table 1.
1

http://t.me/sgVirus
http://t.me/WuhanCOVID
3
http://t.me/sgFight
2

#Total Users
#Total Messages
#Text Messages
#Images

10,765
48,050
26,153
1928

#Video
#Audio
#Url
#Files

276
36
8830
62

Table 1: Overview of sgVirus Telegram Group

Data Post-Processing
Our post-processing steps include: conversion of timestamp
from UTC to GMT+8 to represent Singapore’s timezone,
removal of stop-words using NLTK stopword module, filtering out urls and names of news agencies (e.g. CNA,
SCMP) often referred to in text messages; tokenizing text
messages with NLTK’s Tweet Tokenizer module(Loper and
Bird 2002).

Data Limitation
Participants in our group chat may be more digitally literate compared to users of other chat platforms. While reliable demographic data about Singaporean Telegram users
is not available, our personal experience is that Telegram is
mostly used by people below 65 years old. People above 65
in Singapore use other messaging channels like WhatsApp.
(Guess, Nagler, and Tucker 2019) found that Facebook users
over 65 are most likely to share misinformation.

How does group opinion change over time?
We analyse group opinion over time with four indicators:
participation, sentiment, topics, and psychological features.

Participation
Active Participants. For each week, we look at the number
of users who sent at least one message, and the total number
of messages. We exclude bots that forwarded messages from
news websites. Our results are shown in Figure 1.

Figure 1: Group Participation and Messages Over Time
Most notable is the peak of participation in week 2. During this week, the Ministry of Health raised the disease
emergency level from yellow to orange. While the news was
officially announced at 5.20pm on Friday February 7, messages discussing the announcement were circulating on the
group since at least 10.30am. That weekend, several supermarkets temporarily ran out of essential items and political
leaders asked the public not to panic buy. After peaking in
week 2, active participation fell over time. The most popular
timing of messages is between 12-1pm and 8-10pm.

Lifespan of participants. We take the ten most active
participants for each week and search for their activity in
other weeks. Of the 50 most active participants, 60% of the
participants were active for 1 week only, while 40% were
active for two weeks.
Discussion. We observe that the increase in group activity
corresponds with a government announcement, rather than
an unusual spike in number or rate of confirmed cases. We
believe this illustrates the importance of unified and coherent
public health communication. The leaked information about
DORSON orange prior to the official announcement likely
increased uncertainty, causing people to turn to the group
chat for information and support. Even true information can
cause alarm, especially if it is shared in an untimely and haphazard manner. The Singapore government has recognised a
need to strength internal processes and no similar leaks have
occurred since (Zhuo 2020).
We postulate that activity rises between 12-1pm and 810pm because people use their devices after lunch and dinner. Furthermore, the Ministry of Health usually releases
daily updates at 8pm, triggering a flurry of discussion.
The decrease in group activity and short life span of participation suggests that the group did not meet users’ needs
for information. Users may have stopped relying on the Telegram group and turned to other sources. Between JanuaryApril 2020, the number of subscribers to the official government WhatsApp channel grew from 7,000 to more 900,000
(MCI 2020).

Sentiment
To determine sentiment in the group, we perform phraselevel analysis before combining the results to obtain overall
sentence-level sentiment (Rezapour 2018). This method was
adopted because Telegram texts, like Tweets, are short and
conversational, so traditional sentiment analysis methods for
articles do not perform well.
We first tokenized words with NLTK TweetTokenizer
(Loper and Bird 2002) which handles short expressions and
strings, then identified Parts-Of-Speech(POS) tags of tokenized words with TweetNLP (Owoputi et al. 2013). Contextual sentiment was determined using the MPQA lexicon
(Wilson, Wiebe, and Hoffmann 2005) by matching the word
and the POS tag to the the appropriate entry to retrieve the
corresponding contextual sentiment. The overall entry sentiment of the text message was determined through the aggregation of all the contextual sentiments.
Figure 2 represents the change in sentiment over time. We
observe that there is generally more negative sentiment than
positive sentiment. From Week 2 (beginning on 3 Feb) to
Week 3 (beginning on 10 Feb), positive and especially negative sentiment increased. The rise in negative sentiment corresponds with the DORSCON orange weekend.

Topics
We use Mallet’s Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) module
(McCallum 2002) to identify the top five word clusters each
week. Clusters are chosen based on coherence scores and
manual assessment. Where some clusters are too similar, we
grouped them as one. Table 2 shows the word clusters, and

Figure 2: Sentiment Dimension (Percentage) over Time

our interpretation of the topic associated with each cluster.
Readers can cross reference the topics with the timeline of
events in Figure 5.
We observe two consistently popular topics. First, topics
related to “cases”. Understandably, the number of cases is a
focal point in a pandemic (Feb 10: [...]unfortunately, the ship
has 60 new cases[...]; Feb 13: A new case in NUS![...]). In all
six weeks, the keyword “cases” is almost always accompanied by “confirmed” (e.g. week 3: cases, health, confirmed).
In week 6, we observe for the first time the keyword “true
cases”. Public health experts have warned that confirmed
cases may not be the same as true cases, especially in countries that are under-testing (Madrigal and Meyer 2020). We
speculate that this distinction is being reflected in the group
chat.
The second consistently popular topic is masks. In weeks
1 and 2, participants seem to discourage people from panicking and wearing masks (e.g. Feb 9: Not sick dont wear
mask.). In later weeks, the keyword “masks” is no longer
clustered with “dont”, suggesting that participants are starting to support mask-wearing (27 Feb: Absolutely agreed!
Wear a mask to protect ourselves and not wear when we are
ill!). In parallel, we observe that participants encourage others to stay home (8 Mar: Students stay at home. Adults try
to work from home.). Our observation that participants begin to discuss socially responsible behaviors in later weeks
potentially indicates that messaging from public health authorities is having an impact.
One behavior that is not a popular topic in the group chat
is hand-washing. Possible reasons include: participants do
not feel that hand-washing is important, or hand-washing
is an obvious and non-controversial behavior that does not
warrant discussion.
Global events that receive attention in the group chat are
the Diamond Princess Cruise ship in Japan (weeks 2 and 3),
and the spread of the virus in South Korea, Italy and Iran
from week 3 onward.

Psychological dimensions
Shift in emotional values. We use the 2015 version of Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count (LIWC) (Tausczik and Pen-

Start
Date
27 Jan

3 Feb

10 Feb

17 Feb

24 Feb

2 Mar

Topics & Keywords
New Outbreak in China- new, health, chinese,
outbreak
Number of confirmed cases- cases, confirmed,
world, chinese
Flight and Travel restrictions - outbreak,
flight, travel, restrictions
Wearing masks- masks, wear, don, think, need
Chinese outbreak- outbreak, orange, travel,
home, chinese, source, masks
Diamond Princess Cruise Ship in Japancruise, ship, japan, ncov, fake
3- new, confirmed, cases, infected, quarantine
Don’t Panic and wear masks- masks, don,
need, buy, dont wear, panic
Outbreak in Hong Kong- world, outbreak, chinese, hong kong
Wearing masks- mask dont need wear
Outbreak in Hong Kong- outbreak, world,
hong kong
Diamond Princess cruise ship cases spike new
cases, cruise ship
WHO releases name of virus- covid 19, cases,
health, confirmed
Sourcing for masks- masks, buy home, need
source
Grace Assembly of God church cluster- church
case, test
Encouraging the wearing of masks- wear
mask, dont spread, really true
South Korea and Italy spike in cases- south korea, infected, italy death
Measures for work- covid 19, going work safe
Keeping track of confirmed and discharged
cases count- confirmed case, discharged hospital, infection
Vaccines- flu, make vaccine, information
Italy cases spike- italy death, spread
South Korea and Iran report cases- covid19
cases, south korea, iran
Encouraging staying home- stay home, don
come work
Confirmation of cases- wear mask, confirmed,
moh, linked
Wearing masks and symptoms- wear masks,
vaccine, ncov, cough, symptoms
Jurong SAFRA cluster- new cases, covid 19,
cluster, safra, hospital discharged
Cases in Iran and Italy- cases test, iran, italy,
confirmed
Keeping track of case counts- infected, true
cases, new patients

Table 2: Summary of topics across the week identified using
LDA

nebaker 2010). LIWC is a word-count lexicon that summarises the emotional, cognitive, and structural components
in a given text sample. We focus on cognitive and affective
components (Figure 3). In terms of affective emotions, anxiety fell over time but sadness increased over time. We speculate that group chat members were becoming more certain
that the pandemic is a serious event.

Figure 3: Psychological Dimensions Over Time
Correlation between Cognitive Processes and Emotions. We perform a Pearson correlation test on affective and
cognitive dimensions (Table 3).
We find that positive emotions are significantly correlated
with cognitive processes. We also find that anxiety has significant negative correlation with cognitive processes. By
analysing 835 messages with both positive emotions and
cognitive processes, we find that 20% of messages contain
words that represent hope (Feb 10: Let’s humanity prevails
and hope all good at the end of the day) and thankfulness
(18 Feb: A huge thank you to our healthcare family for providing our patients with the best care possibl [sic]). In 1148
messages with anxiety, we note many participants experience fear as this disease is unknown (18 Feb: I never sick
for more than 5 years, but still have concern. Why? As announced by the gov, there is a lot we don’t know about the
nCoV-19. So why take the risk?).
Visualising LIWC Features. We reduce our ndimensional LIWC feature set into a 2D space using Singular Value Decomposition (SVD). We first perform SVD by
using different singular value numbers from k=0 to k=50,
and finally select k=20 by the use of the elbow rule heuristic on the singular values generated across the different kvalues. We visualise the salient set of compressed features

affect
posemo
negemo
anx
anger
sad

cogproc
0.94
0.91

insight
0.92
0.91

tentat
0.95
0.95

certain
0.90
0.80

cause
0.91
0.86

discrep
0.99
0.88

0.58

0.52

0.49

0.76

0.62

0.54

-0.83
0.72
0.53

-0.82
0.66
0.50

-0.86
0.72
0.42

-0.70
0.74
0.71

-0.87
0.75
0.58

-0.73
0.51
0.51

Table 3: Correlation values between Cognitive Process
(rows) and Affective (columns) dimensions. Statistically
significant values where p < 0.05 are highlighted in bold

with a t-SNE plot, and use a k-Nearest-Neighbours clustering algorithm to find cluster means, visualised in Figure 4.
In this cluster analysis of text messages using linguistic features, we observe that users participate in five main clusters:
(1) Reposts from news websites, (2) Short netspeak expressions, (3) General discourse, (4) Questions and (5) Sharing
medical knowledge.

Figure 4: Clusters of Text Messages

How prevalent is government-identified
misinformation?
We analyse the prevalence of misinformation in the group
chat, focusing on pieces of misinformation which have been
corrected by the Singapore government. We discuss participants’ reactions to these pieces of misinformation.

Identifying misinformation
We refer to the list of corrections about COVID-19 provided
by the Ministry of Health (MOH)4 and the government’s
fact-checking web page Factually5 . Between 24 January and
8 March 2020, the two sites listed 17 corrections. The fact
that the Singapore government has addressed these pieces
of misinformation suggests that they have been identified as
particularly harmful.
Our approach (relying on a list created by a fact-checking
third party) is borrowed from others including (Resende et
al. 2019b; 2019a). We recognise that the third-party (in our
case, the Singapore government) may not have identified every piece of misinformation. This limitation speaks to wider
challenges in the study of misinformation, namely the difficulty of establishing a ground-truth standard of what constitutes misinformation.
To search for misinformation in the group chat, we focus
on the five days surrounding each piece of misinformation:
two days before, the day of clarification, and two days after. For textual messages, we first filter for keywords, then
manually screen the results. For example, to identify messages challenging the “validity of the maskgowhere.gov.sg
4
https://www.moh.gov.sg/covid-19/
clarifications
5
https://www.gov.sg/factually

site”, we perform automatic keyword filtering for messages
containing “maskgowhere”, which returns 6 results. However, all 6 messages discuss the site in general instead of
challenging the site’s validity, so our final result is 0. For
images, videos, audio and urls, we perform a manual search.

Results
We find that government-identified misinformation is rare
on the group chat. 6 (out of 17) pieces of misinformation are
discussed in the group chat. These pieces of misinformation are contained in 18 textual messages, 3 urls, 6 images
and 1 video, representing 0.05% of all messages. Full results are shown in Table 4. Moreover, we find that messages
that discuss misinformation tend to express skepticism. Participants seek to verify the accuracy of content rather than
simply “passing it on”.(12 Feb: jolibee (sic) lucky plaza got
case?).
Participants’ attitudes towards misinformation deserve a
comprehensive investigation, but here we report two preliminary, interesting observations. First, 0.4% of all messages
contain “Is this fake” or variations (“true or fake”, “true
or not”), almost 10x more than messages discussing misinformation. This suggests that participants are aware of the
prevalence of misinformation. Many people are not passive
consumers; they seek to actively check multiple sources and
verify information (Dubois and Blank 2018).
Second, in 63 instances, participants use “POFMA” in
new ways. The POFMA (Protection from Online Falsehoods
and Manipulation Act) is a Singapore law passed in 2019
aimed at correcting misinformation. Originally the name of
a law, the term is being used as a verb (“POFMA me), an
entity with agency (“POFMA busy), and a byword for misinformation (“that doesn’t look like censoring but pofma”).

Conclusion
We analyse a Telegram group chat about COVID-19 in Singapore. The group was most active from 3-9 February. This
week is notable because of a leaked press release prior to the
official shift to DORSCON orange. We believe this demonstrates the importance of coherent and unified public health
communication. User participation is short-lived, plausibly
indicating that the group chat did not meet users’ needs for
information and support. Across the weeks, emotions shifted
from anxiety to sadness, and negative sentiment decreased.
We also find that government-identified misinformation is
rare on the group chat. Messages that discuss these pieces of
misinformation tend to be skeptical. In general, participants
often express doubt about the validity of content; they are
not passive consumers of (mis)information.
Our study is a preliminary attempt to investigate an ongoing and dynamic crisis. It contributes to the small but
growing literature on group chats as platforms for sharing
(mis)information. A single Telegram group is not representative of the rest of the population, so it is hard to tell if
the findings are generalizable. Further research can include
more group chats, compare cross platform group chats, extend the analysis to cover the “second wave” in Singapore, and/or look for other types of misinformation, not just
government-identified misinformation.

Date

Description

14 Feb

False statements
on
States Times
Review
Facebook
page
Graphic aired
on CNA Asia
listed a death
to Singapore
instead
of
Hong Kong

13 Feb

12 Feb

Keywords
Matches
2 texts: States
Times Review
(2)
1 url

Sample Messages
SST is known
for publishing
fake news

3 texts: CNA
(3), death(3)
5 images, 2
url

Antonio: Isn’t
the 1 death
from Philippines
not
Singapore?
Is this true?
Can’t
find
other source
for the 1 death
in sg
jolibee (sic)
lucky plaza
got case?
Heard theres
a lock down
now on the
Sixth Floor of
Lucky Plaza.
Who
can
verify?

Voice recording via text
messaging
platforms
advising
persons
to
avoid Lucky
Plaza
after
an individual
had fainted at
Jollibee
Message on a
death in Singapore due to
the virus

2 texts: lucky
plaza (2), jollibee (2)

28 Jan

Woodlands
MRT
was
closed
for
disinfection

24 Jan

Suspected
case at EastPoint Mall,
who visited
raffles medical center

4
texts:
Woodlands
mrt (1), disinfection
(4)
4 texts: Eastpoint mall(4),
raffles medical (1)
1 image
1 video

7 Feb

5 texts: died
(5)

Singapore
dorscon level
will change
to orange at
2.30pm. The
condition of
2 people with
the virus have
worsened.
1 of them
in
critical
condition.
most likely
announce
orange follow
by 1 death.
is woodlands
mrt
really
closed
for
disinfection?
is this verified? (regarding eastpoint
suspected
case)

Table 4: Government Clarifications and Chatter on sgVirus
group

References
Baumgartner, J.; Zannettou, S.; Squire, M.; and Blackburn, J. 2020.
The pushshift telegram dataset. arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.08438.
Bhuvana, N., and Aram, I. A. 2019. Facebook and whatsapp as disaster management tools during the chennai (india) floods of 2015.
International journal of disaster risk reduction 39:101135.
Bouhnik, D.; Deshen, M.; and Gan, R. 2014. Whatsapp goes
to school: Mobile instant messaging between teachers and students. Journal of Information Technology Education: Research
13(1):217–231.
Caetano, J.; Oliveira, J.; Seixas Lima, H.; Marques-Neto, H.;
Magno, G.; Meira Jr, W.; and Almeida, V. 2018. Analyzing and
characterizing political discussions in whatsapp public groups.
Chew, C., and Eysenbach, G. 2010. Pandemics in the age of twitter:
content analysis of tweets during the 2009 h1n1 outbreak. PloS one
5(11).
Choi, Y., and Lin, Y.-H. 2009. Consumer responses to mattel product recalls posted on online bulletin boards: Exploring two types of
emotion. Journal of Public Relations Research 21(2):198–207.
Dubois, E., and Blank, G. 2018. The echo chamber is overstated:
the moderating effect of political interest and diverse media. Information, communication & society 21(5):729–745.
Garimella, K., and Tyson, G. 2018. Whatapp doc? a first look at
whatsapp public group data. In Twelfth International AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media.
Guess, A.; Nagler, J.; and Tucker, J. 2019. Less than you think:
Prevalence and predictors of fake news dissemination on facebook.
Science advances 5(1):eaau4586.
Liu, B. F., and Kim, S. 2011. How organizations framed the 2009
h1n1 pandemic via social and traditional media: Implications for
us health communicators. Public Relations Review 37(3):233–244.
Loper, E., and Bird, S. 2002. Nltk: The natural language toolkit.
In Proceedings of the ACL-02 Workshop on Effective Tools and
Methodologies for Teaching Natural Language Processing and
Computational Linguistics - Volume 1, ETMTNLP ’02, 63–70.
USA: Association for Computational Linguistics.
Machado, C.; Kira, B.; Narayanan, V.; Kollanyi, B.; and Howard, P.
2019. A study of misinformation in whatsapp groups with a focus
on the brazilian presidential elections. In Companion Proceedings
of The 2019 World Wide Web Conference, 1013–1019.
Madrigal, A. C., and Meyer, R. 2020. How the coronavirus became
an american catastrophe.
Maitlis, S., and Sonenshein, S. 2010. Sensemaking in crisis and
change: Inspiration and insights from weick (1988). Journal of
management studies 47(3):551–580.
Malka, V.; Ariel, Y.; and Avidar, R. 2015. Fighting, worrying
and sharing: Operation ‘protective edge’as the first whatsapp war.
Media, War & Conflict 8(3):329–344.
McCallum, A. K. 2002. Mallet: A machine learning for language
toolkit. http://mallet.cs.umass.edu.
MCI. 2020. Gov.sg launches new channels to keep the public
informed about covid-19.
Mike Butcher, J. C. 2020. Telegram plans multi-billion dollar ico
for chat cryptocurrency.
Newman, N.; Fletcher, R.; Kalogeropoulos, A.; and Nielsen, R.
2019. Reuters institute digital news report 2019, volume 2019.
Reuters Institute for the Study of Journalism.
Nielsen. 2020. The impact of covid-19 on media consumption
across north asia.

Owoputi, O.; O’Connor, B.; Dyer, C.; Gimpel, K.; Schneider, N.;
and Smith, N. 2013. Improved part-of-speech tagging for online
conversational text with word clusters. Proceedings of NAACLHLT 2013:380–390.
Qiu, J.; Li, Y.; Tang, J.; Lu, Z.; Ye, H.; Chen, B.; Yang, Q.; and
Hopcroft, J. E. 2016. The lifecycle and cascade of wechat social
messaging groups. In Proceedings of the 25th International Conference on World Wide Web, 311–320.
Resende, G.; Melo, P.; CS Reis, J.; Vasconcelos, M.; Almeida,
J. M.; and Benevenuto, F. 2019a. Analyzing textual (mis) information shared in whatsapp groups. In Proceedings of the 10th ACM
Conference on Web Science, 225–234.
Resende, G.; Melo, P.; Sousa, H.; Messias, J.; Vasconcelos, M.;
Almeida, J.; and Benevenuto, F. 2019b. (mis)information dissemination in whatsapp: Gathering, analyzing and countermeasures. In
The World Wide Web Conference, WWW ’19, 818–828. New York,
NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery.
Rezapour, R. 2018. Using linguistic cues for analyzing social
movements. ArXiv abs/1808.01742.
Sharma, M.; Yadav, K.; Yadav, N.; and Ferdinand, K. C. 2017.
Zika virus pandemic—analysis of facebook as a social media
health information platform. American journal of infection control 45(3):301–302.
Simon, T.; Goldberg, A.; Leykin, D.; and Adini, B. 2016. Kidnapping whatsapp–rumors during the search and rescue operation
of three kidnapped youth. Computers in human behavior 64:183–
190.
Stephens, K. K., and Malone, P. C. 2009. If the organizations
won’t give us information. . . : The use of multiple new media for
crisis technical translation and dialogue. Journal of Public Relations Research 21(2):229–239.
Strekalova, Y. A. 2017. Health risk information engagement and
amplification on social media: News about an emerging pandemic
on facebook. Health Education & Behavior 44(2):332–339.
Szomszor, M.; Kostkova, P.; and St Louis, C. 2011. Twitter informatics: tracking and understanding public reaction during the
2009 swine flu pandemic. In 2011 IEEE/WIC/ACM International
Conferences on Web Intelligence and Intelligent Agent Technology,
volume 1, 320–323. IEEE.
Tausczik, Y. R., and Pennebaker, J. W. 2010. The psychological
meaning of words: Liwc and computerized text analysis methods.
Journal of Language and Social Psychology 29(1):24–54.
Wani, S. A.; Rabah, S. M.; AlFadil, S.; Dewanjee, N.; and Najmi, Y.
2013. Efficacy of communication amongst staff members at plastic
and reconstructive surgery section using smartphone and mobile
whatsapp. Indian Journal of Plastic Surgery 46(03):502–505.
Weick, K. E. 1988. Enacted sensemaking in crisis situations [1].
Journal of management studies 25(4):305–317.
Wilson, C., and Jumbert, M. G. 2018. The new informatics of
pandemic response: humanitarian technology, efficiency, and the
subtle retreat of national agency. Journal of International Humanitarian Action 3(1):8.
Wilson, T.; Wiebe, J.; and Hoffmann, P. 2005. Recognizing contextual polarity in phrase-level sentiment analysis. In Proceedings
of the Conference on Human Language Technology and Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, HLT ’05, 347–354.
USA: Association for Computational Linguistics.
Zhuo, T. 2020. Coronavirus: Discipline, processes will be strengthened after moh press release leak, says chan chun sing.

a
Cases were referred from The Straits Times for Singapore News and New York Times for International News. For Week 5 and 6, the situation had grown proportionally
internationally, and we picked the most salient topics that the Singapore group chat was discussing.

Figure 5: Timeline of major news events and number of cases in Singapore for the First Wave, where infections are from persons who come from Wuhan.a

