The application of multivariate classification in
evaluating the regional differentiation by population
income in Russia1
SADOVNIKOVА Natalia A.2
ZOLOTAREVA Olga A.3,

Abstract. The article presents the results of multivariate classification of
Russian regions by the indicators characterizing the population income and their
concentration. The clusterization was performed upon an author approach to
selecting the characteristics which determines the academic novelty in the evaluation
of regional differentiation by population income and the interconnected
characteristics. The performed analysis was aimed at the evaluation of the real scale
of disproportions in spatial development of the country territories by the considered
characteristics. The clusterization results allowed to formulate the condition of a
relatively “strong” position of a group of high-income regions (the changes in the
array of regions constituting it is highly unlikely in the foreseeable future).
Additionally there has been revealed a group of Russian regions that the population
is struggling to live on quite low income. These so-called “poor” regions, within the
crisis conditions caused by Covid-19 are in need of additional public support,
without which their population will impoverish.
Key words: population income differentiation, population poverty, regional
clusterization, Gini coefficient.
1

Данное исследование выполнено в рамках государственного задания в сфере научной деятельности
Министерства науки и высшего образования РФ на тему "Разработка методологии и программной платформы
для построения цифровых двойников, интеллектуального анализа и прогнозирования сложных
экономических систем", номер проекта FSSW-2020-0008.
This research was performed in the framework of the state task in the field of scientific activity of the Ministry of
Science and Higher Education of the Russian Federation, project "Development of the methodology and a software
platform for the construction of digital twins, intellectual analysis and forecast of complex economic systems",
grant no. FSSW-2020-0008.
2
Doctor of Economics, Professor, Head of the Department of Statistics, Plekhanov Russian University of Economics,
Moscow, Russia. E-mail: Sadovnikova.NA@rea.ru
3
Cand. Sci. (Economics), Associate professor of the Department of statistics, Plekhanov Russian University of
Economics, Moscow, Russia. E-mail: zolotareva.oa@rea.ru

Introduction
The world society has lately been focusing their sights on the problem of
inequality within countries that has not evaded the attention of the United Nations
Organization. Among the seventeen global aims at the area of sustainable
development that must be reached until 2030, a special place is held by the goal
enumerated “10”: «Reducing inequality within and between countries» [1]. The
realization of this goal would first be aided by the gradual achievement and support
of the income growth of the least provided 40 percent population on the level above
the country average.
The modern conditions of harmonization of the world and national goals the
vector of Russian economy development has taken the social direction. The solution
of social problems is occurring in the process of development and realization of the
socio-economic policy of the state, which has, as priority, the policy of income
distribution. In this context the main goal of Russian Federation is tackling the
poverty and the reduction of income differentiation of the population.
Let us mark that these goals were defined more than a decade ago but they
have not yet lost their relevance in the present day, as their resolution in the
conditions of internal and external shocks appears a hard enough task. Presently
there is carried out the review of many strategic documents that are connected, with,
e.g., the closure of the Concept of long-term socio-economic development over the
period of until 2020, approved by the order of the Government of the Russian
Federation of November 17, 2008 N 1662-p.[2] One of the priorities of regional
development established by the Concept-2020, was declared as securing the
balanced socio-economic development of the country regions.
In his message to the Federal Assembly in 2018, the President of Russia has
clearly established certain priorities, calling "a person, his present and future, is the
main meaning and goal of our development." These words by V.V. Putin were
reinforced by the May decree, which posed a difficult task for the Government - to

preserve and increase human capital through social, economic and infrastructure
policies.
Among the goals specified in this document there have been highlighted the
following: ensuring sustainable growth in real incomes of citizens, as well as halving
the poverty level in the Russian Federation [3]. According to the head of our state,
the implementation of these measures could allow for a breakthrough socioeconomic development of Russia, improve the living standards of citizens and create
the conditions for their self-realization and the realization of the talent of each
person.
Presently, the national goals specified in the May decree have been corrected,
and already in the Decree of the President of the Russian Federation of July 21, 2020
No. 474 "On the national development goals of the Russian Federation for the period
up to 2030" as a target parameter characterizing the achievement of such a strategic
goal as "Preservation of the population, health and well-being of people", an
indicator is given: "A reduction in the poverty level by half compared to the 2017
level." [4] Moreover, an array of other indicators have undergone correction in the
context of: to enter not the top five but the top ten; to achieve a goal not by 2024,
but by 2030, et cetera. It is inarguably important that the analysis and the update of
goals have been performed. Presently we see the main improvement in the area of
administration, which is its purposefulness / goal-setting. It is only a certain stage of
the work, according to which an initiative is needed for changes / updates / additional
development (if necessary) of national projects, and it must be carried out with the
account of expert evaluations and the suggestions of academic society. Let us note,
according to Dmitry Sorokin the Corresponding Member of the Russian Academy
of Sciences: "The technological breakthrough and poverty are mutually exclusive
things, this is the trivia of economic science," the scientist emphasized, "therefore,
the first national project should be the fight against poverty." [5] However, there is
currently no national project to combat poverty at all.
The above-stated defines high practical significance of statistical evaluation
of regional differentiation of Russia at the current stage of country development, the

data upon which must be set as a basis of informational and analytical support for
making coordinated decisions on the federal, regional and local levels on reducing
the degree of interregional differentiation and the development of the economy of
each region.

Methodology
The global challenges of the XXI century within the conditions of
humanitarian-technological revolution have defined the vector of changing the
paradigm of socio-economic development from “person for the economy” towards
“economy for the person”. In this context the quality of life of the population appears
to be one of the priority indicators positioning the state in the global environment.
Among the life quality indicators there are specified the indicators of income, level
of poverty and the Gini coefficient.The monetary income defines the satisfaction
degree of personal needs, and allows to evaluate the material welfare of the
population. The monetary income includes the wages for labor for all population
categories, pensions and allowances, scholarships and other social transfers, the
receivables of agricultural products sales, the property incomes in the form of
interest on deposits and securities, the dividends, the incomes of individual
entrepreneurs, as well as insurance claims, income from the sale of foreign exchange
and other income [6].
Presently the generation of income is carried out within the conditions of
deep regional disparity of Russia, that is caused by the existence of a conglomerate
of factors, among which the following must be listed: [7]
• the huge space of the territory with extremely uneven placement and
highly differentiated physical density of the citizens, for which about
80% population is concentrated within the Central European part of
the country while the major part of minerals and energy resources are
located beyond Ural;
• the significant and potentially dangerous differentiation in the Russian
Federation regions by the level of socio-economic development, that

periodically causes centrifugal currents, and demands the accounting
of local specifics in making every administrative decision.
• the complicated demographic situation that spawns severe problems
of labor force reproduction, migration expansion and gradual
extinction of separate regions of the country including the strategically
important ones.
This demands the evaluation of regional differentiation by the population
income as well as by poverty level and the Gini coefficient that characterizes the
degree of social delamination of the society as it represents the relation among
average levels of monetary income for the 10% population with the highest
incomes to the 10% population with the lowest incomes.
Thus the substantiation has been established for singling out the three key
characteristics of regional differentiation in population income in Russia. The
instrument that allows to effectively resolve this task is the cluster analysis, as the
clusterization in particular enables to classify the studied objects characterized by
a number of factors, into uniform apriori-undetermined target groups and analyze
a significantly large amount of information and represent the data arrays in a more
demonstrative way. This confirms the result of content-analysis of the clustering
procetures in the modern statistical studies, carried out in the work of Ilyshev M.M.
and Shubat OM, which made it possible to assert: "... the practice of applying
multidimensional methods to various socio-economic aggregates has shown their
effectiveness and the possibility of obtaining highly analytical scientific and
practical results obtained in the course of economic and statistical research." [8]

Results
The clusterization of regions of Russia by level of financial welfare of the
population of Russia was performed by the 2018 time slice upon the three factors:
x1 – average population monetary income per capita, rub.,
x2 – proportion of population with monetary income below living wage, %;
x3 – Gini coefficient, factor/times.

The data for clustering were taken for the year 2018 which is because there
are presently absent the disseminated data upon the three specified factors for 2019.
The R-STUDIO software package was used for the processing and analysis of
the statistical information.
The analysis of squared distances within the clusters has enabled to state the
need of dividing the regions of Russia into 4 homogeneous groups by the level of
financial well-being of the population.
The clustering of Russian regions upon the nearest-neighbor method has also
allowed to conclude that the studied administrative territorial units must be
organized into four clusters (Fig.1).

Figure 1 – The clusterization of Russian regions by the differentiation of monetary
income in 2018, nearest neighbor method
The clusterization quality upon the nearest neighbor method is confirmed by
the obtained correlation coefficient value of 0,951.
Upon the k-means method, eighty-five regions of the Russian Federation were
divided into four clusters differentiating by the indicators that characterize the
financial well-being of the population in 2019. The first group includes 10 regions

of the Russian Federation, the second group includes 8, the third group includes 31
and the fourth group includes 35 administrative regional units.

Clusters

Figure 2 – The clusterization of Russian regions by the level of monetary income
differentiation in 2018, k-means method.
The quality of the method is confirmed by the explained variance percentage
equalling 72.5%. It can be stated that the regions of the country have been
significantly differentiated by the level of population income, which is evidenced by
high dispersion of means by the cluster indicators (Table 1).
Table 1 – The average levels of indicators describing the clusters unifying the
regions of Russia by the degree of monetary income differentiation in 2018
Cluster

First
Second
Third
Fourth

Number of regions

Average monetary income per
capita, rub.

Proportion of the
population with
monetary income
below living wage,
%

10
9
31
35

19 521
62 125
30 196
25 308

24,37
8,00
13,50
13,70

Gini coefficient,
times

0,355
0,409
0,389
0,355

The first group is composed of the regions of Russia with impoverished
population: Republic of Kalmykia; The Republic of Ingushetia; Kabardino-Balkar

Republic; Karachay-Cherkess Republic; Chechen Republic; Mari El Republic;
Kurgan region; Altai Republic; Tuva Republic and Jewish Autonomous Region. The
population of the 1st cluster regions in 2018 is characterized by the lowest level of
average personal population income. The average level of the studied indicator was
19 521 rub., which is 3.2 times less the analogical characteristic for the 2nd cluster
regions, where the average personal income amounted to 62 125 rub. (Table 1).
Simultaneously, the population of the poorest regions of Russia is
characterized by the highest proportion of the persons with monetary income below
living wage that was 24.37%. This indicator is lower than the analogical for the
regions with the most provided population by 3.0 times.
The differentiation of income of the least provided citizens is relatively low,
the Gini coefficient was 0.355 times which is equivalent to the analogical indicator
of the fourth cluster regions with average financial well-being. The Gini coefficient
for the most provided population group was 0.409 times, which is 15.2% greater
than for the ‘poorest’ regions of the Russian Federation.
Let us note that the available data for 2019 allow to state that these regions,
for their most part, will be characterized as “socially unprovided”. In 2019 the
average per-capita monthly income per person in these regions fluctuates between
16497 rub. (Tyva Republic) to 26099 (Jewish Autonomous Region), while the
average income for Russia in overall is 35 188 rubles. The poverty of such regions
as Karachay-Cherkess Republic, Republic of Kalmykia, Republic of Altai, Republic
of Tyva is explained by the insufficiency of support of their economic development:
the industrial production index in 2019 was, in percent to 2018, correspondingly for
these regions: 100,6 %; 97,3 %; 89,3 %; 99,7 (with 102.4% for Russia in overall);
the proportion of investments in capital assets was 0.1% of total investments in
Russia in overall.
The second cluster has unified the least number of the regions of Russia, that
can be characterized as the most financially provided: Moscow and the Moscow

region (constituting the Moscow agglomeration), St. Petersburg, Khanty-Mansi,
Yamalo-Nenets, Nenets, Chukotka autonomous districts, Magadan and Sakhalin
regions. In these regions the average population income in 2018 was 62 125 rub.
The value of this indicator is 2.1 and 2.5 times greater than the analogical indicators
for the regions with the level of financial well-being of above average and of average
level (30 196 rub. and 25 308 rub., corresponsingly). This corresponds to the
economy of the regions (the Moscow agglomeration and the city of St. Petersburg
as two capital regions, and gold, oil, gas and coal-extracting regions), and the high
level of population employment.
The average proportion of people below the living wage was minimal in the
most provided regions of Russia: 8.00%, which is 1.7 times lower than the analogical
indicators of the third and the fourth clusters.
The differentiation of the population by financial well-being in the wealthiest
regions of Russia was the highest and was equal to 0.409 times. The Gini coefficient
for the second cluster regions is 5.15% greater than the analogical indicator for the
regions which population is characterized by above-average financial well-being
(0.389 times).
The third group of Russian Federation subjects is constituted by the Lipetsk
region, the Smolensk region, Krasnodar Territory, the Republic of Bashkortostan
and some other territories. The average income of the regions with the aboveaverage financial well-being was 30 196 rub. in 2018, which is greater than the
analogical indicator for the fourth group by 4 888 rub. (by 19.32%).
The proportion of Russian regions of the third cluster with the income below
the living wage was 13.50%. This indicator is lower than the level of poverty for the
least financially provided regions of the Russian Federation by 0.2 pp (by 1.53%).
The population of Russian regions with the above-average financial wellbeing is characterized by a relatively high differentiation of income. The Gini

coefficient is the second highest for these regions, its value being 0.389 times which
is 9.61% greater than the analogical indicator for the fourth group regions.
As part of the largest fourth cluster, there are the Oryol, Tver and the
Volgograd regions, the city of Sevastopol and many other regions of Russia. The
value of average per-capita population income in these regions was 25 308 rub. in
2018, which is above the per-capita income for the least provided regions of the
country by 5 787 rub. (by 29.60%).
About 13.70% citizens living in the regions of the analyzed cluster received,
in 2018, the personal income below the living wage. This indicator takes the second
place among all obtained clusters and is lower than the analogical indicator for the
population of the ‘poorest’ regions of the country by 77.88%.
The amount of income for the population residing on the Russian regions
territory with the average level of financial welfare is distributed evenly. For the
regions of the fourth cluster the Gini coefficient takes a low value (0.355 times). The
studied indicator is equal to the Gini coefficient obtained for the regions of the first
cluster.

Conclusions
While generalizing the study results, it is possible to state the following
conclusions.
The Russian Federation regions are different in terms of population income,
and it appears expedient to divide them into four clusters, including the group of the
most financially provided regions and the “poor” regions group, or “socially
disadvantaged” regions.
The cluster unifying the regions with the wealthiest population of the country
includes the cultural centers (the cities of Moscow and St. Petersburg), as well as the
largest centers producing the export-meant output (Yamalo-Nenets and Chukotka
Autonomous Districts, Magadan Region). For these regions the average population

income is above its level for the whole country in total, and the concentration of
population with income below the living wage is lower than the analogical
characteristic not only for other clusters but also lower than for Russia in overall,
which can be explained by the effect of regional coefficients for salary of workers.
However, the Gini coefficient in the regions of these cluster is the highest compared
to other regions. The specified cluster is relatively “solidified” by the level of
income, and the changes in its composition is hardly possible in foreseeable future.
The “poor” or “socially disadvantaged” regions cluster includes the regions of
Russia for which the average personal income is lower than the country level in
2018. These Russian Federation regions have the maximum number of people with
incomes lower than living wage, but the subjects of these regions are characterixed
by the lowest differentiation of income which is explained by the low earnings of
the residents of these regions.
The third and the fourth clusters containing over ¾ regions of the country can
be named the regions of Russia with average financial well-being. The values of
such characteristics as average per-capita income and the proportion of population
below the living wage in these regions are the closest to the analogical characteristics
for the Russian Federation in overall. Both identified clusters attest that within the
current conditions connected with the humanitarian technological revolution it is
hard to assume that one or another region will be either the leader or an outsider
among these groups. The regions in these clusters may move from one to another
depending on how effectively they will use their socio-economic potential in the
future.
The study indicated that the differentiation of population income within the
regions with low incomes is insubstantial, while it is maximal within the regions
with the highest earnings. With the growth of average per-capita income within the
population of one or another region the growth of their differentiation will also be
traced, that is, the wealthy will become wealthier while the poor will become even
more impoverished. Moreover, the wealthy regions will continue to accumulate
wealth (or remain the wealthiest among other), and the poor regions will become

poorer. This tendency escalates in the conditions of the current crisis caused by the
pandemic, which defines the need to develop additional measures to support the
“poor” or “socially disadvantaged” regions, whose budgets are unable to withstand
the present challenges.
The amount of average per-capita income in 2018 was 33 178 rub. in overall
in Russia. This incidator is 28 497 rub. lower (by 87.25%) than the average
population income for the ten regions of the wealthiest cluster, and higher than the
analogical indicators for the regions in other clusters.
Consequently, achieving the proportional distribution of income on the
country territory appears impossible due to the effect of institutional economy and
inherently different resourse capacity of each region.

Bibliographic references
1. Goal 10: Reduce inequality within and between countries. UN SDGs. - [Electronic
resource].

-

Access

mode:

https://www.un.org/sustainabledevelopment/ru/inequality/

(date

accessed:

09/10/2020).
2. Order of the Government of the Russian Federation of November 17, 2008 N
1662-r (revised on September 28, 2018) "On the Concept of long-term socioeconomic development of the Russian Federation for the period up to 2020"
(together with the "Concept of long-term socio-economic development ... "). [Electronic

resource].

-

Access

mode:

http://www.consultant.ru/document/cons_doc_LAW_82134/28c7f9e359e8af09d72
44d8033c66928fa27e527/ (date of access: 09/10/2020).
3. Decree of the President of the Russian Federation of May 7, 2018 No. 204 "On
national goals and strategic objectives for the development of the Russian Federation
for the period until 2024". - [Electronic resource]. - Access mode:
http://kremlin.ru/acts/bank/43027 (date of access: 09/10/2020).

4. Decree of the President of the Russian Federation of July 21, 2020 N 474 "On the
national development goals of the Russian Federation for the period up to 2030". [Electronic

resource].

-

Access

https://www.garant.ru/products/ipo/prime/doc/74304210/

(date

mode:
of

access:

09/10/2020).
5. National projects of social policy: how to implement the priorities? - [Electronic
resource].

-

Access

mode:

http://www.veorus.ru/events/chronicle-

events/natsionalnye-proekty-sotsialnoy-politiki-kak-realizovat-prioritety-/ (date of
access: 09/12/2020).
6. Methodological provisions on statistics (issue 1,2,3,4,5) - [Electronic resource]. Access mode: https://www.gks.ru/bgd/free/b99_10/Main.htm (date of access:
09/12/2020).
7. Karmanov M.V., Karmanov A.M. Statistics and management in modern Russia //
Bulletin of the University (State University of Management). 2013, No. 17, P.89-94.
8. Ilyshev A.M. Shubat O.M. Multidimensional classification of data: features of the
methodology, analysis of practice and prospects of application // Questions of
statistics. -2010. - No. 10. - P.34-40.
9. Kapelyushnikov R.I. Is economic inequality a universal evil? Economic issues.
2019; (4): 91-106. https://doi.org/10.32609/0042-8736-2019-4-91-106
10. Rosstat. Social situation and standard of living of the population of Russia in
2019

-

[Electronic

resource].

-

Access

mode:

https://rosstat.gov.ru/bgd/regl/b19_44/Main.htm (date of access: 09/14/2020).
11. Rosstat. Socio-economic situation of federal districts - 2019 - [Electronic
resource]. - Access mode: https://rosstat.gov.ru/bgd/regl/b19_20/Main.htm (date
accessed: 09/20/2020).
12. Anna Murawska, Bartosz Mickiewicz, Małgorzata Zajdel, Małgorzata
Michalcewicz-Kaniowska. Multidimensional Analysis of the Relationship between
Sustainable Living Conditions and Long and Good Health in the European Union
Countries // European Research Studies Journal, Volume XXIII, Issue 3, 716-735,

2020. DOI: 10.35808 / ersj / 1664. - [Electronic resource]. - Access mode:
https://www.ersj.eu/journal/1664 (date of access: 09/10/2020).

