A computational tool for trend analysis and forecast of the COVID-19 pandemic
Henrique Mohallem Paiva 1*, Rubens Junqueira Magalhães Afonso 2,3, Fabiana Mara Scarpelli de Lima
Alvarenga Caldeira 1, and Ester de Andrade Velasquez 1
1

Institute of Science and Technology (ICT), Federal University of Sao Paulo (UNIFESP)

Rua Talim, 330, São José dos Campos, SP, Brazil
2

Institute of Flight System Dynamics, Technical University of Munich (TUM)

München, Bayern, 85748, Germany
3

Department of Electronic Engineering, Aeronautical Institute of Technology (ITA)

Praça Marechal Eduardo Gomes, 50, São José dos Campos, SP, Brazil
*

Corresponding Author. E-mail: hmpaiva@unifesp.br

ORCID:
https://orcid.org/0000-0001-7081-8383 (H. M. Paiva)
https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9209-2253 (R. J. M. Afonso)

© 2020. This manuscript version is made available under the CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0
license http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/

1

Abstract
Purpose: This paper proposes a methodology and a computational tool to study the COVID-19 pandemic
throughout the world and to perform a trend analysis to assess its local dynamics.
Methods: Mathematical functions are employed to describe the number of cases and demises in each
region and to predict their final numbers, as well as the dates of maximum daily occurrences and the local
stabilization date. The model parameters are calibrated using a computational methodology for numerical
optimization. Trend analyses are run, allowing to assess the effects of public policies. Easy to interpret
metrics over the quality of the fitted curves are provided. Country-wise data from the European Centre for
Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC) concerning the daily number of cases and demises around the
world are used, as well as detailed data from Johns Hopkins University and from the Brasil.io project
describing individually the occurrences in United States counties and in Brazilian states and cities,
respectively. U. S. and Brazil were chosen for a more detailed analysis because they are the current foci of
the pandemic.
Results: Illustrative results for different countries, U. S. counties and Brazilian states and cities are
presented and discussed.
Conclusion: The main contributions of this work lie in (i) a straightforward model of the curves to
represent the data, which allows automation of the process without requiring interventions from experts;
(ii) an innovative approach for trend analysis, whose results provide important information to support
authorities in their decision-making process; and (iii) the developed computational tool, which is freely
available and allows the user to quickly update the COVID-19 analyses and forecasts for any country,
United States county or Brazilian state or city present in the periodic reports from the authorities.

Keywords
COVID-19; epidemiology; mathematical modeling; trend analysis; forecast; numerical optimization;
sequential quadratic programming (SQP)

Highlights
•

New mathematical model to describe and forecast the COVID-19 pandemic

•

Innovative trend analysis approach

•

Individual analysis for countries, U.S. counties and Brazilian states and cities

•

Automatic calibrations, with no human intervention, and automatic data update

•

Free computational tool available online

2

Graphical Abstract

3

1. Introduction
On December 2019, a series of pneumonia cases of unknown cause emerged in Wuhan, China, with
clinical presentations greatly resembling viral pneumonia [19]. The Chinese authorities identified a new type of
coronavirus (novel coronavirus, named 2019-nCoV), which was isolated on 7 January 2020 [51].
Coronaviruses are a family of viruses that can cause respiratory, hepatic, and neurological diseases in humans
and animals [13].
Initially, these infections were thought to result from zoonotic (animal-to-human) transmission. However,
an exponential growth of case incidence, with many cases detected in other parts of the world, showed a strong
evidence of human-to-human secondary transmission [27]. On March 2020, the coronavirus disease (COVID19) was declared a public health emergency of international concern by The World Health Organization [49]. A
worrying aspect in relation to the disease is the fact that it is highly contagious, spreading very quickly and
causing overcrowding in the health system [52].
The main symptoms reported are fever, dry cough, and sore throat, with cases of severe pneumonia. These
clinical events are associated with admission to the intensive care unit and have a high mortality rate [19][51].
The nucleic acid test or genetic sequence for 2019-nCoV is considered the standard method to confirm the
infection. A laboratory-confirmed case is defined as a positive result, using high-throughput sequencing or realtime reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) with nasal and pharyngeal swab specimens
[15]. It is important to note that the virus can sometimes be detected in blood tests and in rectal swabs, but not
found in the throat swab (false negatives), with the result that these patients can act as carriers and transmit the
infection [37].
Since January 2020, many studies have been done to assess the transmission potential of 2019-nCoV
nationally and internationally, as well as to forecast its spread. Quarantine measures have been implemented
worldwide, as international travel has helped to spread the virus to other parts of the world [7][52]. At the time
of this writing, more than 20 million people worldwide were infected with COVID-19 and more than 740,000
died. Many countries have community transmission, defined as a major outbreak of local transmission [50].
Many efforts have been done to determine an effective treatment and to develop a vaccine [6][16][30]. It is
expected that infection with 2019-nCoV will result in some form of immunity, but there is not enough evidence
that the antibody-mediated immunity will guarantee protection against a second infection [39]. Currently, the
results of many studies suggest that early detection, hand washing, self-isolation and household quarantine are
effective to mitigate this pandemic [7].
Similar situations, although in smaller scale, occurred during the Influenza A epidemic in 2009 and during
the Middle East Respiratory Syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) epidemic in 2012. The Influenza A virus
appeared in April 2009 [45] and caused a pandemic with more than 280,000 deaths worldwide [43]. The MERS
epidemic emerged in Saudi Arabia in 2012 [22] and caused thousands of infections in dozens of countries
worldwide. This virus, also belonging to the coronavirus family, has a high fatality rate and its symptoms
include severe acute pneumonia [5]. Under these scenarios, Dugas et al. [11] created a forecasting model for
Influenza A and Kim et al. [22] formulated a forecasting model for MERS transmission dynamics and
estimated transmission rates, considering several categories of patients and transmission rates. In fact,

4

mathematical models have been widely used to study the transmission dynamics of infectious diseases,
enabling the understanding of the disease spread and the optimization of disease control [34].
Forecasting models are used to predict future behavior as a function of past data. This is a widely used
method in the implementation of epidemic mathematical models, since it is necessary to know the past
behavior of a disease to understand how it will evolve in the future. Accurate forecasts of disease activity could
allow for better preparation, such as public health surveillance, development and use of medical
countermeasures, and hospital resource management [8].
A similar approach is the concept of trend analysis, which allows predicting future behavior with accuracy,
especially in the short run. A trend is a change over time exhibited by a random variable [28]; trend analyses
provide direction to a trend from past behavior, allowing predicting future data. For better effectiveness, the
predictions should be updated periodically, as soon as new data are available.
The technique of trend analysis is widely used in several areas of science, such as finances [2][48] and
meteorology [28] [36]. In the context of health systems, trend analysis was used by Zhao et al. [57], to analyze
malignant mesotheliomas in China, aiming to provide data for its prevention and control; by Soares et al. [46],
to predict the testicular cancer mortality in Brazil; by Zahmatkesh et al. [56], to forecast the occurrences of
breast cancer in Iran; by Mousavizadeh et al. [33], to forecast multiple sclerosis in a region of Iran; and by
Yuan et al. [55], to analyze and predict the cases of type 2 diabetes in East Asia.
Modeling and prediction of the dynamics of the COVID-19 pandemic is a subject of great interest.
Therefore, a myriad of papers on this theme have been published over the last months, exploiting different
modeling approaches, such as compartment models [18], time series analysis [44], artificial intelligence
[41][54], and regression-based models [17][40]. For this purpose, some research groups extended previous
epidemiological models to describe the COVID-19 pandemics: Lin et al. [25] created a conceptual model for
the COVID-19 outbreak in Wuhan, China, using components from the 1918 influenza pandemic in London,
while Paiva et al. [38] proposed a dynamic model to describe the COVID-19 pandemic, based on a model
previously developed for the MERS epidemic. This list is far from being exhaustive. For a detailed survey on
different modeling approaches in this context, the reader is referred to review papers such as [26] and [32].
It is important to note that the behavior of the pandemic may vary greatly in the different regions of the
world, due to characteristics such as different social habits (higher or lower physical interaction between
citizens), capacity of the local health system, different governmental actions, and so on. Therefore, the
parameters of a mathematical model need to be tailored to the region where the disease behavior is being
studied. Furthermore, even in the same region, the conditions may vary very quickly, in a matter of weeks or
even days (for instance, following the decree or release of a lockdown, or the saturation of the available
intensive care unit vacancies in the hospitals); thus, the model parameters would need to be updated very often,
usually by an expert. However, these analyses might take time and require dedicated work from highly
qualified personnel, thus decreasing their availability. It is natural to expect that such analyses are run
periodically at the country level, but the same may not be a reality locally at every municipality. Therefore, in
this scenario, it is useful to have a computational tool to perform a quick and automatic analysis and forecast of
the disease conditions in any region, following the periodic updates published by the authorities. This is the
purpose of the present paper.

5

2.

Methods

2.1. Mathematical formulation of the curve to describe the data
sigmoid, i.e., letting the independent variable be t, then the dependent variable is given as a function f: ℝ ↦ ℝ

In the present paper, the fundamental curve that is used to describe the historical data is an asymmetric

[42]:

f t =

A

1 + νe

(1)

with the parameters A ∈ ℝ ∪ {0}, ν ∈ ℝ , δ ∈ ℝ , t ∈ ℝ ∪ {0}. In the present work, the independent

variable t is the time in days, whereas the dependent variable is either the cumulative number of individuals

that were positively tested for SARS-CoV-2 or the cumulative number of individuals deceased with the disease
as the cause. Notice that

lim f t = A
→%

(2)

i.e., the modeling of the cumulative number of cases/demises by ( 1 ) implies convergence to a final value A.
number of infected/deceased has been reached. For that purpose, let a time instant τ' be such that a particular
However, the convergence is asymptotic, therefore it is interesting to know when a certain threshold of the final

value f τ' is reached:

f τ' = αA

(3)

1 1 2
τ' = t − δ ln . /0 1 − 134
ν α

(4)

where the parameter α ∈ )0,1+. Then, by replacing ( 1 ) for f τ' in ( 3 ), one may solve to find:

Therefore, from ( 4 ) one can determine the (finite) instant when a certain proportion of the final number of
or not. In this paper, the settling date of the contamination is adopted as τ5.78 , corresponding to the day where

cases/demises is reached, which is a useful figure to evaluate whether the contamination can be considered over

the number of occurrences reaches 98% of its final value. The settling ratio of 98% is a standard value used in
the analysis of dynamic systems [10].
respect to the independent variable t, which yields

The rate at which the number of infections/demises grows can be calculated by differentiation of ( 1 ) with
df t
A
=
dt
δ

e

1 + νe

(5)

6

As a matter of fact, the value of ( 5 ) in a particular day t is an important indicator for healthcare

infrastructure decision-making concerning the number of infected individuals, as a higher value indicates that
the upcoming period might stress the healthcare infrastructure, whereas a comparatively lower value points that
the number of new cases might be accommodated with the existing infrastructure. By analyzing the number of
individuals that are cured each day and discharged from the facilities and comparing it with the rate of newly
infected individuals, if the first is greater than the latter, than the capacity of the facilities is enough to treat the
Differentiating ( 5 ) with respect to t yields

ill and they will not be endangered by lack of proper treatment.

A sign change in ( 6 ) occurs when the term 1 − e

d: f t
Aν
= :
:
dt
δ
;<;
δ

e

1 + νe

1−e

:

(6)

crosses zero, as the remaining terms are all

positive for any t ∈ ℝ. Therefore, there is a single inflection in the curve ( 5 ) at t = t . On the other hand,
since

=> ?

=>

> 0 for t < t and

=> ?

=>

< 0 for t > t , this point corresponds to the maximum rate, i.e., the daily

number of either infected or deceased individuals. Replacing t = t in ( 1 ) yields
Notice from ( 7 ) that ν = 1 entails f t

f t

=

A

1+ν

(7)

= 0.5A, i.e., the sigmoid curve crosses half of the final value at

t = t . This is deemed a symmetric sigmoid. For the sake of understanding, consider two other illustrative

possible values of ν:
a)

for ν = 2, from ( 7 ), f t

= A/√3 ≈ 0.58A, that is, the inflection happens at a later stage, when

roughly 58% of the final values has been reached;

b) for ν = 0.5, from ( 7 ), f t

= 4A/9 ≈ 0.44A, in other words, the inflection happens at an earlier

stage, when approximately only 44% of the final values has been reached.

sigmoid curve, with ν = 1 representing a symmetric curve about the t = t vertical straight-line. This is
It is clear from these examples and from ( 1 ) that the value of ν controls the degree of asymmetry in the

rate. It is interesting to remark that the value of ν impacts the symmetry of the derivative, with ν = 1
illustrated in Figure 1(a), where ( 1 ) is shown for three values of ν whereas Figure 1(b) shows ( 5 ), i.e., the

ν < 1, the deceleration phase of the sigmoid is slower than the acceleration phase; when ν > 1, the opposite
representing a Gaussian curve, with acceleration and deceleration phases occurring at the same rate. When

occurs.

For their capability of representing processes with asymmetric acceleration and deceleration phases,
asymmetric sigmoid curves are interesting to represent the data of a pandemic. Many factors can contribute to
the asymmetry between acceleration and deceleration phases besides the very nature of the disease spread, such

7

as the introduction of policies by health authorities in order to slow down the spread, e.g., reduced social
contact. Therefore, this extra degree of freedom brought by the asymmetric sigmoid curve is useful to better
necessity of estimating a single additional parameter, namely ν.

represent the data. Moreover, the added complexity with regard to a symmetric curve is due only to the

Figure 1 – (a) Sigmoid curves and (b) their derivatives for different values of the parameter L. The
remaining parameters are M = NO, P Q = R, and S = N.

In our context, there are three main sigmoid parameters of interest, which are described in Table 1.
Table 1 – Main sigmoid parameters of interest
Parameter

Eqs.

A

( 1 )( 2 )

t

τ5.78

(1)
( 3 )( 4 )

Description
Final number of occurrences.
Date when the maximum number of daily occurrences is achieved.
Settling date, defined as the date when the number of occurrences reaches
98% of its final value.

The next section presents the algorithm used to estimate the parameters A, ν, δ, and t based on measured

data from either the number of newly infected individuals per day or the number of deceased per day.

8

2.2. Parameter estimation
The parameters A, ν, δ, and t are estimated based on the solution of a constrained optimization problem,

the value of f t output by ( 1 ) and the corresponding data y t obtained from the authorities at the same day.
in which the Integral Time Square Error (ITSE) [10] is minimized, where the error is the difference between

We consider a time window for t ∈ {0, 1, … , t VW= } for which the data y t are available at each day. There is a

small abuse of notation by restricting the real-valued variable t to assume only integer values coinciding with
the number of the day,

Let the vector of parameters to be estimated be defined as

t )Y

(8)

argmin
Θ =
c t+y t − f t, Θ ):
_A ≥ 0, ν > 0, a > 0, t ≥ 0b

(9)

Θ = +A

ν

δ

where the symbol •Y indicates the transpose of a vector •. The optimal value of the vector Θ is given as
∗

def

g5

where the argument Θ was explicitly included in f t, Θ to emphasize that the parameters may be varied during

therefore for the constraints ν > 0 and δ > 0, an arbitrary small positive real number μ > 0 is chosen and the
the optimization process. Note that, for optimization purposes, strict inequalities cannot be implemented,

constraints are approximated as ν ≥ μ and δ ≥ μ. After the optimization problem is solved to yield Θ∗ , the
optimal values of A∗ , ν∗ , δ∗ , t ∗ are fixed values used to build the curve.

The function f t, Θ is nonlinear in the parameters Θ, and the cost function exacerbates that further,

rendering the optimization problem nonlinear. Moreover, the inequality constraints introduce additional
difficulty, rendering the analytical solution of the optimization problem impractical. Therefore, numerical
methods must be used.
One class of methods that are suitable for nonlinear constrained optimization is the so-called Sequential
Quadratic Programming (SQP) [14][20][21]. SQP iteratively approximates the general nonlinear cost function
in ( 9 ) by a quadratic one, and the constraints by linear ones, which entails a Quadratic Programming (QP)
problem. QPs can be solved to global optimality in finite time, therefore each iteration of the SQP method takes
finite time. The solution of the underlying QP approximation is then used to build a next iterate, for which
another QP is solved, therefore the name Sequential Quadratic Programming. SQP presents good convergence
properties, converging quadratically to the optimal solution when the active set does not change [35]. The
implementation of SQP that is used in the present work is that of the function fmincon [31], from the
Optimization ToolboxTM of MATLAB®.

2.3. Multiple sigmoids

A second wave of spread has not been discarded. On the contrary, researchers argue that lifting the social
distance measures might indeed lead to a retake in the infections [1][24][29][53].

9

sigmoids. For this purpose, let Nj be the adopted number of sigmoids. Equation ( 1 ) is then generalized to

In order to describe the occurrence of multiple epidemiological waves, we propose to employ a sum of
lm

f t = c fk t
kg

where
fk t =

n1 + νk e

Ak

o

,o

p

o

, i = 1, 2, … , Nj

( 10 )

( 11 )

Similarly, the vector of parameters Θ, originally given by ( 8 ), is generalized to a column vector with 4Nj

parameters defined as:

Θ = qΘY

where

Θk = +Ak

νk

δk

ΘY:

…

ΘYrs t

Y

t ,k )Y , i = 1, 2, … , Nj

( 12 )

( 13 )

With these extended definitions, equation ( 9 ) can still be used to estimate the value of Θ∗ by considering

the inequalities applied to each Ak , νk , δk and t ,k , i = 1,2, … , Nj .

It is important to establish the number of sigmoids Nj . For this purpose, an evaluation of the number of

switches between acceleration and deceleration phases is performed. The rationale behind this assessment is:

each sigmoid results in a single acceleration and a single deceleration phases, with a clear switching point
between them, as discussed in Section 2.1. Therefore, the number of sigmoids can be estimated by counting the
amount of such switches between acceleration and deceleration phases. However, this counting requires careful
consideration, as one is dealing with real noisy data. More so, recall that for identifying
acceleration/deceleration the second derivative of the cumulative number of either infected or deceased
individuals has to be considered. As it is well known, differentiation is prone to increase the effect of noise in
the measurements [10]. Therefore, to mitigate the effect of noise in increasing artificially the amount of
deceleration. Let S be the set of switching instants between acceleration and deceleration phases, then, for each

switches, a common approach is to consider a deadzone [10] in the difference between the acceleration and
t = 0,1, … , t VW= − 1, the following logic is used to implement an identification of switches with a deadzone:
d: f
d: f
t
≥
ϵ
and
t + 1 ≤ −ϵ ⇒ t ∈ S
dt :
dt :
:
:
d f
d f
t ≤ −ϵ and : t + 1 ≥ ϵ ⇒ t ∈ S
:
dt
dt
otherwise, t ∉ S

( 14 )

where the parameter ϵ can be adjusted to provide a compromise between noise and detection sensitivity. In the
present work, the value was set to ϵ = 3 ⋅ 10

•

persons/day2.

Thus, the number of switches is given by the cardinality of S

10

Nj = |S|

( 15 )

Recall, from Table 1, that there are three parameters of interest. The final number of occurrences may be
obtained as:
lm

A = c Ak
kg

( 16 )

other two parameters of interest, i.e., the date of maximum number of daily occurrences t and the settling
On the other hand, when a sum of sigmoids is used, there are no analytical expressions to determine the

dateτ5.78 . In this case, a numerical search algorithm has to be used to find each of these parameters.
The optimization problems to determine these parameters can be posed as follows:
t =
τ5.78 =

argmax df
t
t ≥ 0 dt

argmin
+f t − 0.98A):
t≥0

( 17 )

( 18 )

These two optimization problems are solved using the Nelder-Mead algorithm [23]. It should be noted that
each problem has only one independent variable (time). Therefore, the search algorithm converges very quickly
to the desired solution.
The rationale to select the use of one or multiple sigmoids will be explained in a following section, which
discusses the complexity of the model.

2.4. Criteria for statistical analysis of the matching between the fitted curve and the data
Two criteria are used to evaluate the degree of fidelity of the fitted curves to the data. The first is the socalled Root Mean Square Error (RMSE), defined as:
def

RMSE = … c
g5

+y t − f t, Θ∗ ):
t VW= + 1

( 19 )

From ( 19 ) the name of RMSE becomes clear, as it involves the square root of the mean of the squared

error. Notice that, in ( 19 ), the values of the curve with the optimal parameters f t, Θ∗ are used to calculate the

error between the data and the value returned by the fitted curve. Moreover, the term t VW= + 1 reflects the

number of terms in the summation, as the index t starts at 0 and ends at t VW= . The RMSE is used in statistical
analysis to measure compactly the degree of fidelity between the fitted curve and the data. The lower the value

of the RMSE, the better the fitted curve matches the data [3].
In this paper, a normalized version of the RMSE is used, obtained as:
normalized RMSE =

RMSE
A

( 20 )

11

where A is the final number of occurrences, as defined in ( 1 ) and ( 16 ) for one and multiple sigmoids,
respectively. This normalization is adopted to allow a fair comparison of the RMSE of different curves.

applied in statistics is the squared correlation coefficient, which varies between 0 and 1, with the latter meaning

A second criterion to determine the quality of the representation of the data by the fitted curve generally

that there exists a perfect linear functional relationship between the data and the fitted curve points, whereas the
first means the opposite. First, let us define the covariance of the data as
def

cov+y • , f •, Θ ) = c
∗

g5

where μ‰ and μ? are the mean values of y t and f t, Θ∗ , respectively, i.e.

qy t − μ‰ t+f t, Θ∗ − μ? )
t VW=

( 21 )

•
t VW= + 1

( 22 )

def

μ• = c
g5

in which the symbol • can be replaced by either of y t and f t, Θ∗ , yielding μ‰ and μ? , respectively. Similarly,

the variances of y t and f t, Θ∗ are

qy t − μ‰ t
var+y • ) = cov+y • , y • ) = c
t VW=
def

g5

def

var+f •, Θ ) = cov+f •, Θ , f •, Θ ) = c
∗

∗

∗

g5

:

+f t, Θ∗ − μ? ):
t VW=

( 23 )

( 24 )

The squared correlation coefficient R: can then be determined from ( 21 )-( 24 ) as:
R: =

{cov+y • , f •, Θ∗ )}:
var+y • )var+f •, Θ∗ )

( 25 )

2.5. Criteria for assessment of convergence of the sigmoid towards the final value
estimated values of the parameters Θ∗ . This is carried out by fitting the sigmoid curves to the data for each
Additional criteria are defined to evaluate whether the data are enough to allow the convergence of the

possible value of n ∈ {10,11, … , t VW= − 21, t VW= − 20, … , t VW= }. Thus, instead of using all available data as in

minimum amount of data to calibrate the curve. Therefore, the sigmoid parameters Θ are estimated within
( 9 ), windows of varying length are used; the minimum length of a window is adopted as 10 to ensure a

different windows as

12

argmin
Θ n =
_Ak ≥ 0, νk > 0, δk > 0, t
∗

where i = 1, 2, … , Nj , depending on the number of sigmoids.

,k

≥ 0b

W

c t+y t − f t, Θ ):
g5

( 26 )

The main parameters in Table 1 are then determined from Θ∗ n as follows:

• For a single sigmoid, A∗ n and t ∗ n are directly extracted from Θ∗ n in view of ( 8 ), whereas
τα∗ n is calculated by ( 4 ) employing t ∗ n , δ∗ n and ν∗ n extracted from Θ∗ n considering ( 8 ).

• For multiple sigmoids, ( 16 )-( 18 ) are used to determine A∗ n , t ∗ n and τ∗5.78 n .

Then, the relative variation of the estimated values of these parameters is calculated for each time window
and multiplied over the time window, composing indices to evaluate if the data are enough to asseverate the
suitability of the sigmoid that was fitted. These indices are defined as
γ•‹

‹

= Œ min
Žg

•∗ t VW= − j − 1
•∗ t VW= − j
,
•∗ t VW= − j
•∗ t VW= − j − 1

( 27 )

where the symbol • represents one of the parameters of interest, namely, A∗ n , t ∗ n , or τ∗α n , for a time

window up to k days of data. It is clear that, if the data are enough and a suitable set of parameters is found,

then each of the terms in the product in ( 26 ) approaches one. Therefore, the closer the value γ•‹ is to one, the
from which it follows that γ•‹ ≤ 1. Analyzing γ•‹ for different values of k enables the conclusion of whether the

better the fit. Moreover, the “min” in ( 26 ) ensures that each term in the product is less than or equal to one,

convergence has occurred or not within variable window sizes. We adopt windows of size 7, 14 and 21 days, in
order to verify the stability of the predictions over the last one, two and three weeks.

2.6. Selecting the complexity of the model
From the previous discussion, it is possible to choose among different curve types (symmetric or
asymmetric) and numbers (single or multiple sigmoids). This plays an important role both in the accuracy of
the fit and in the complexity of the models (as per the different amounts of parameters to be estimated with
each choice).
It should be noted that the choice of a more complex model without a significant increase in the accuracy
may lead to the problem of model overfitting, that is, an exaggeration while fitting of the training data that may
compromise the generalization of the model predictions [47]. In order to avoid this problem, criteria should be
established to enable a compromise between accuracy and complexity. These criteria are described in this
section.

13

2.6.1 Symmetric or assymetric curve
Particularly for cases of regions where the contagion is in its early stage, there are not enough data to
observe a deceleration phase. Therefore, in this case the data are insufficient to support estimation of the
asymmetric curves. In these situations, the symmetric curves can be used in the fitting and an automated
decision of whether to present results with a symmetric or an asymmetric curve has to be done. The criterion
for this decision considers a compromise between complexity and quality of the fitting results. The complexity
is deemed higher for the asymmetric curve, as it requires estimation of one additional parameter, namely ν. As
for the quality, it is evaluated through the following ratio:

η =

1 − R:•
1 − R:j

( 28 )

where R:• represents the squared correlation coefficient obtained from fitting an asymmetric curve and R:j the

one yielded by a symmetric curve.

Recall that the value of the squared correlation coefficient ranges from zero to one and that this latter value
considered a particular case of the asymetric sigmoid, obtained by imposing ν = 1. Since the asymetric sigmoid

implies a perfect relationship between the data and the curve. Furthermore, the symetric sigmoid may be

expected, leading to a value of R:• higher than R:j . Therefore, the value of η is expected to be lower than one.

contains one additional parameter, and therefore one more degree of freedom for optimization, a better fit is

Nevertheless, a value of η very close to one indicates a low increase in the squared correlation coefficient,
To prevent a division by zero, if R:j = 1 (up to 10

which may not be enough to justify the increase in the model complexity.
:

precision), then the symmetric curve is selected, as it

has perfect fit and the asymmetric curve cannot yield better results. This case has been considered for
robustness of the computational code; nevertheless, since this a perfect situation, it is not expected to occur in
practice.
In the remaining cases, to balance between complexity and a more accurate fit, the criterion for selection
follows the rule:

η ≤ 0.5 ⇒ asymmetric curve is selected
η > 0.5 ⇒ symmetric curve is selected

( 29 )

With this choice, a more substantial gain in the accuracy of the fit has to be obtained to justify a more
complex curve.

14

2.6.2. One or multiple sigmoids
Given the number Nj of sigmoids, two fits are performed, i.e., using one and using Nj sigmoids. The

criterion to decide upon the use of one or multiple sigmoids is similar to the one defined in the previous section
for symetric and asymetric sigmoids.
sigmoids
We define a new ratio η: as

η: =

1 − R:“
1 − R:’

( 30 )

where R:’ and R:“ represent the squared correlation coefficient obtained from fitting one and multiple sigmoids
to the calibration data, respectively, provided that R:’ is different from one.. As in the previous case, if R:’ =1
(which is a perfect situation, not expected to occur in practice),
practice thenn only one sigmoid is adopted.

1
⇒ multiple sigmoids are selected
Nj

The criterion to choose between one and multiple sigmoids is then:
η: ≤

1
η: >
⇒ one sigmoid is selected
Nj

( 31 )

2.7. Summary
The methodology proposed in the current paper is summarized by the flowchart presented in Figure 2.

Figure 2 – Flowchart summarizing the methodology proposed in the current paper.
paper

15

2.8. Implementation
The computer program described in this paper was developed using MATLAB® 2020a, with the
Optimization ToolboxTM and the MATLAB CompilerTM.
The program uses as data source reports published in spreadsheet format in the websites of the European
Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC) [12], of Johns Hopkins University [9] and of the Brasil.io
project [4].
The ECDC reports contain country-wise data of the countries in the world, while the reports of Johns
Hopkins University and of the Brasil.io project presents data of United States counties and of Brazilian states
and cities, respectively.
The data inform the number of newly infected and deceased people on each date. These numbers are
informed separately for each region, allowing to perform an independent analysis for each of them.

3.

Results

3.1. The Graphical User Interface
The computer program may be downloaded from the following link, where the data files updated until 12Aug-2020 are also available.
https://gitlab.com/rubensjma/sigmoid-covid-19
The folder contains a “readme” file, which explain the main features and the preliminary steps to use the
program. We emphasize that the program may be installed and run directly from the operating system,
independently of the user possessing a licensed MATLAB® installation. Should the user have MATLAB® and
the required packages installed, he/she may run directly a different file from the package without any
installation.
A Graphical User Interface (GUI), illustrated in Figure 3 and Figure 4, will appear. These figures present
the main screen of the GUI with data from the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control and from
Johns Hopkins University, respectively. A zoom was applied to these figures to allow for a better reading of
their contents; that is the reason why the names of some U.S. counties appear truncated and why the predictions
in the bottom of the figures appear incomplete.
When running the GUI for the first time, the user is advised to initially select the option “File: Download
New Data File” of the main menu, as described in further detail below.

16

Figure 3 – Main screen of the Graphical User Interface (GUI),
(GUI) with worldwide data from the European
Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC).
(ECDC) Note the list of countries on the left side.

Figure 4 – Main screen of the Graphical User Interface (GUI), with U.S. data from Johns Hopkins
University. Note the list of counties on the left side and the search for “Illinois” on the upper left corner.
corner

17

The GUI contains a main menu with the following options:
• “File: Load Data File” – This option is used to load data from a spreadsheet in the standard
formats defined by the ECDC, by Johns Hopkins University and by the Brasil.io project.. Upon first reading, the
spreadsheet will be converted to a MATLAB® data file with extension .mat, in order to speed up the following
readings. When the interface is opened,
opened the last data file is automatically reloaded.
• “File:: Last Data Files” – This option is used to reload one of the last data files,
files as illustrated in
Figure 5.

Figure 5 – “File: Last Data Files” option from the main menu.
• “File: Download New Data File” – This option shows the menu presented in Figure 6, where the
user may select one of the following websites: ECDC, Johns Hopkins University or Brasil.io project.
project The user
may choose to download the data file directly or to access one of these sites, using the default web browser. It
is easier to choose the automatic download;
download however, we opt to also provide an option to access the websites as
an acknowledgement of the work performed by the people responsible for them.

Figure 6 – Options to download new data files and to access the corresponding websites.
websites
• “File: Quit” – This is a standard option to close the interface.
• “Analysis: Run Trend Analysis” – This option runs the trend analysis, as described in the
previous section, and presents its results in an external figure. Examples of results of this analysis are presented
in the next section.
• “Figures: Export Figure” – This option is used to export the graphs of the main screen to a new
figure, in order to facilitate its edition and copy to external software.
• “Figures: Close all Figures” – This option closes all external figures.
• “About: Info” – This option shows updated
updated information about the interface. It also contains an
acknowledgement of the sites used as data sources.

18

On the left of the main screen (Figure 3 and Figure 4), there is a list of all available regions, which will be
henceforth called the region list. In this list, when analyzing data from the ECDC or from Johns Hopkins
University, the user can select the name of the desired country or of the desired U.S. county (in English); when
analyzing data from the Brasil.io project, the user can select the name of the Brazilian states and cities (in
Portuguese). Brazilian states are identified by their two-letter acronym. The names of the cities are presented
without accents; for instance, the cities of “São Paulo”, “Santa Bárbara d’Oeste” and “Santa Fé” are identified
as “Sao Paulo”, “Santa Barbara d’Oeste” and “Santa Fe”, respectively.
Above the region list, there is an edit field where the user can type the name of a region to look for on the
list. The user can select the region name in full or in part, and may also employ regular expressions.
Furthermore, a vertical bar “|” can be used representing the “or” operator, to perform a search for more than
one region; for instance: fran|germ|italy will restrict the countries in the list to France, Germany and Italy. An
empty string is used in the search bar to restore the complete list of regions. Note the search for “Illinois” in
Figure 4.
Below the region list, there are two options: “Show predictions” and “Show dates”. “Show predictions” is
used to enable or disable the mathematical modeling (if disabled, only historical data will be shown). If “Show
dates” is disabled, then sequential numbers are shown in the graphs’ axes, instead of dates.
In the lower left corner of the GUI, there is an edit field where the user can specify the number of days for
testing. For instance, if the user specifies a value of 7 days, then the model is calibrated with all data available
until one week before the data acquisition, and the remaining days are used to test the model, allowing a
comparison between the predictions of the model and the observed data.
The main screen presented in Figure 3 and Figure 4 contains four graphs, representing the accumulated
(top) and daily (bottom) number of cases (left) and demises (right). Each graph contains historical data and
theoretical curves representing them. Observed data are presented using either circles (accumulated values) or
bars (daily values). The model output is represented by the continuous blue line.
Below the graphs, the following predictions are presented, for either cases or demises: final number, date
of maximum daily occurrences and settling date (as defined in Table 1). Furthermore, the equation of the best
presented, as well as the indices RMSE and R: , defined in the previous section. The predictions are presented
sigmoid (or set of sigmoids in case more than one wave is identified) matching the accumulated data is

in editable fields, such that the user can copy their texts and paste them in external software. An example of
such information is presented in Table 2.

19

Table 2 – Example of the information presented at the bottom of the main screen
Canada

Canada

-----

-----

Predictions:

Predictions:

Final number of cases: 122407

Final number of demises: 9030

Date of maximum daily cases: 23-Apr-2020

Date of maximum daily demises: 02-May-2020

Settling date (cases): 11-Aug-2020

Settling date (demises): 18-Jul-2020

-----

-----

Number of accumulated cases on 12-Aug-2020:
120406
-----

-----

Prediction with data from 12-Mar-2020 to
12-Aug-2020
Curve: f(t)=(109370 / (1 + 3.56e-02 exp(((t-42.34)/23.24)))^(1/3.56e-02)) + (13037 / (1
+ exp(-(t-137.34)/7.67)))
Normalized RMSE (cases): 4.904e-03
R^2

Number of accumulated demises on 12-Aug2020: 8991

Prediction with data from 12-Mar-2020 to
12-Aug-2020
Curve: f(t)=(9030 / (1 + 5.93e-02 exp(-((t51.30)/19.77)))^(1/5.93e-02))
Normalized RMSE (demises): 5.499e-03
R^2

(demises): 0.9998

(cases): 0.9998

3.2. Illustrative Results – Time Series
In order to illustrate the use of the tool to perform predictions, Figure 7 to Figure 9 show the model results
for the country of Bolivia, the U.S. county of Los Angeles and the Brazilian capital city of Brasilia,
respectively. Data updated on 12-Aug-2020 were used. The number of testing days was set to seven, meaning
that the model was calibrated with data until 05-Aug-2020 and the following seven days were used to compare
the predicted and observed values.

20

Figure 7 – Graphs of cases and demises for the country of Bolivia. The figure shows accumulated (top)
and daily (bottom) occurrences.

Figure 8 – Graphs of cases and demises for the U.S. county of Los Angeles. The figure shows
accumulated (top) and daily (bottom) occurrences.

21

Figure 9 – Graphs of cases and demises for the Brazilian capital city of Brasilia. The figure shows
accumulated (top) and daily (bottom) occurrences.

3.3. Illustrative Results – Trend Analysis
As previously mentioned, the trend analysis is run when the user selects the corresponding option in the
main menu. Examples of figures resulting from such analysis are presented in Figure 10 to Figure 12, which
correspond to the Brazilian city of São Paulo (SP), the US county of Cook, Illinois, and the Brazilian state of
São Paulo, respectively. Each of these figures contain three subfigures, showing the predicted value of the three
parameters of interest described in Table 1.
The abscissa of the graphs indicates the date of the estimation, meaning that all data available until that
date were used to estimate the value of the parameter under study. It can be seen that, as expected, the values of
On the title of each subfigure, the values of γ• , γ

and γ: are presented, indicating how stable each

the estimated parameters vary with the amount of data used to estimate them.
–

prediction is, considering the last one, two and three weeks, respectively. A value of γ— closer to one indicates
a more stable prediction.

22

Figure 10 – Trend analysis results for the Brazilian city of São Paulo (SP). The abscissa indicates the
date of the estimation.

Figure 11 – Trend analysis results for the U.S. county of Cook, Illinois. The abscissa indicates the date of
the estimation.

23

Figure 12 – Trend analysis results for the Brazilian state of SP (São Paulo). The abscissa indicates the
date of the estimation.

4. Discussion
Figure 7 to Figure 9 indicate that the model represents well the training data and that the observed
accumulated values (subfigures (a) and (b)) follow closely the values predicted by the model. When analyzing
the daily experimental curves (subfigures (c) and (d)), it can be seen that there are high amplitude fluctuations,
which may be ascribed to the nature of the observed data and may be associated to non-uniform delays in the
official notifications of contaminations and deceases. These fluctuations in amplitude are similar to the sensor
noise observed when analyzing physical data. In the study of dynamical systems, it is known that integral
operations are robust to the presence of noise. By analogy, since our methodology uses the accumulated data
(and not the daily values) to estimate the model parameters, it can be concluded that it is less sensitive to daily
fluctuations in the data.
The proposed model is able to identify and represent as many epidemiological waves as necessary. For
instance, the two peaks observed in the model representation of the number of daily cases in Figure 4 indicate a
clear occurrence of two epidemiological waves in the U.S. county of Cook, Illinois - the daily cases were
decreasing until the second week of June, and then started to consistenly increase again. On the other hand,
only one wave is observed in the Brazilian city of Brasilia (Figure 9(c)). To the best of the authors’ knowledge,
no more than two epidemiological waves have been reported in any region yet. However, it may still happen,
especially if there are frequent changes in the public policies, imposing and relieving containment actions. The
model is ready to represent this behaviour.

24

Figure 10 to Figure 12, with the results of the trend analysis, indicate how the prediction of each parameter
of interest varies with time.
Figure 10-(a) represents the final number of predicted demises in the city of São Paulo (SP). It can be seen
that there are oscillations in the predictions until May 5th. These oscillations result from the inclusion of new
data and are expected to occur when the pandemic is at an early stage. From May 5th to June 12th, there is a
clear increasing tendency in the number of demises. On June 13th, the prediction stabilizes around
approximately 15000 demises. Finally, on July 2nd, the number of demises reaches approximately 12600 and is
stabilized around this value ever since. Likewise, Figure 10-(b) and (c) indicate a stable prediction of the date
of maximum daily demises and of the settling date since July 2nd.
Similarly, Figure 11-(a) indicates that the dynamics of the pandemic in the U.S. county of Cook, Illinois,
followed a similar pattern. There were oscillations until the end of April, followed by an increasing trend until
May 17th, a slightly decreasing tendency and finally an stabilized predicted value of approximately 5000
demises since June 17th.
On the other hand, Figure 12 indicates that the pandemic is not yet stabilized in the Brazilian state of SP
(São Paulo). An increasing tendency can be seen over the last weeks. For instance, Figure 12-(a) shows that the
predicted number of demises was approximately 37000 on July 14th and changed to 44000 on August 11th,
indicating an increase of approximately 20% in 28 days.
γ• , γ

The stability of such predictions over the last one, two and three weeks may be verified by the values of
–

and γ: shown in the title of each figure. It can be seen that these values are close to one, indicating

stabilized or near-to-stabilization predictions.

The values of γ‹ are intended to represent the convergence of the estimations. As an additional feature,

they may also be used as a measurement of the quality of the prediction – higher values of γ indicate that the

values of γ: presented in Figure 10-(a) and Figure 12-(a), it can be seen that such values are γ: = 0.963

pandemic has been following the same predicted behavior over the last weeks. For instance, when analysing the

and γ: = 0.873 for the city and for the state of São Paulo, respectively. One may infer from these numbers

that the predictions obtained in the last three weeks are more stable in the city of São Paulo than in the state
with the same name. This is the same conclusion that was achieved by analysing the curves, as described in the
previous paragraphs.
It should be emphasized that the values in Figure 10-(a), Figure 11-(a) and Figure 12-(a) do not refer to the
number of demises on the day of the analysis, but rather to the predicted final number of demises, estimated on
the basis of all data available until that date. This is an innovative approach for trend analysis in this context
and, to the best of the authors’ knowledge, has not been proposed before.
Additionally, the same analyses presented here for the number of demises can be run for the number of
infected people.
Typical trends observed in this kind of analysis are (a) oscillations, (b) increasing values and (c) stabilized
values. High-amplitude oscillations may occur in the beginning of the pandemic and do not allow to reach any
conclusion; however, they usually disappear after the first few weeks. Increasing values indicate a need of more
compelling action by the authorities, while stabilized values indicate that the pandemic is under control.

25

The stabilized results for the city of São Paulo and for the county of Cook, Illinois, allow to conclude that
that the actions of the local governments to control the pandemic are taking effect. It is of public interest to
determine how the disease will spread in each city after the restriction measures are alleviated. For this
purpose, the trend analysis should be run again. Should a new increasing tendency be observed, the authorities
would be advised to reinstate some containment measures.
It is important to point out that these results, although helpful, should be validated by medical experts and
not be considered alone when deciding public policies.
The trend analysis may be run for a country, a state, a county or a city. It provides more useful information
when it is run for smaller administrative regions such as a county or a city, because it allows supporting
decision by local authorities based on specific data of the region under consideration.
A limitation of the proposed approach is that it is not adequate to analyze the pandemic in very small cities
or counties, because the number of infections and demises is usually very low, not allowing a good fitting by
the mathematical model proposed here. However, for medium- and large-sized cities or counties, informative
results are expected, as the ones presented here for the U.S. counties of Cook, Illinois and Los Angeles,
California and for the Brazilian cities of Brasilia (DF) and São Paulo (SP).
The results presented here are illustrative and correspond to the scenario on the date when the data were
acquired, that is, on 12-Aug-2020. These analyses should always employ updated data to increase their
reliability. Therefore, the authors recommend these studies to be repeated periodically, at least on a weekly
basis. The developed computer program allows to easily perform this task.

5. Conclusion
This paper proposed a methodology and a computational tool to forecast the COVID-19 pandemic
throughout the world, providing useful resources for health-care authorities. A user-friendly Graphical User
Interface (GUI) in MATLAB® was developed and can be downloaded online for free use. An innovative
approach for trend analysis was presented.
Resources in the computational tool allow to quickly run analyses for the desired regions. Additional
options allow to access the official website of the European Centre of Disease Prevention and Control, of Johns
Hopkins University and of the Brasil.io project, in order to download new data as soon as they are published
online. To this date, these institutions have been updating their reports on a daily basis.
The analyses run by the program are intended only as an aid and the results should be interpreted with
care. They do not replace a careful analysis by experts. Nevertheless, such results may be a very useful tool to
assist the authorities in their decision-making process.
The proposed program is in continuous development and future added features will be published and
described in the project webpage. The authors would appreciate any feedback and suggestions to improve the
computational tool.
The program, in its current version, is able to process detailed information about U.S. counties and about
Brazilian states and cities. These two countries were chosen because they have continental dimensions and are
currently the focus of the COVID-19 pandemic. Nevertheless, the same resource could be extended to other

26

countries. For this purpose, the main requirement would be to write a code to read other country data files and
convert them to the format recognized by the program, which is quite simple.
Future works can employ the same methodology and adapt the computer tool to describe the dynamics of
other epidemics around the world. In the recent past, no pandemic was as severe as the COVID-19, but there
were occurrences of other diseases such as Influenza A and MERS-CoV. Should a similar epidemic occur
again, the computer program described here would be a resourceful tool.

Acknowledgments
The authors acknowledge the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC), Johns
Hopkins University and the Brasil.io project for making the COVID-19 data publicly available and for allowing
its use for research purposes.

References
[1]

Aleta A, Martín-Corral D, Pastore y Piontti A et al. Modelling the impact of testing, contact tracing and
household

quarantine

on

second

waves

of

COVID-19.

Nat

Hum

Behav

(2020).

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-020-0931-9
[2]

Atan R, Raman SA, Sawiran MS, Mohamed N, Mail R. Financial performance of Malaysian local
authorities: A trend analysis. In 2010 International Conference on Science and Social Research. 2010:
271-276. https://doi.org/10.1109/cssr.2010.5773782

[3]

Barnston AG. Correspondence among the Correlation, RMSE, and Heidke Forecast Verification
Measures;

Refinement

of

the

Heidke

Score.

Weather

Forecasting.

1992.

699-709.

https://doi.org/10.1175/1520-0434(1992)007<0699:CATCRA>2.0.CO;2
[4]

Brasil.io Project. http://brasil.io/. Accessed on August 12th, 2020.

[5]

Chan JF, Sridhar S, Yip CC, Lau SK, Woo PC. The role of laboratory diagnostics in emerging viral
infections: the example of the Middle East respiratory syndrome epidemic. Journal of Microbiology.
2017; 55(3): 172-182. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12275-017-7026-y

[6]

Chen L, Xiong J, Bao L, Shi Y. Convalescent plasma as a potential therapy for COVID-19. Lancet
Infect Dis. 2020;20(4):398‐400. https://doi.org/10.1016/s1473-3099(20)30141-9

[7]

Chinazzi M, Davis JT, Ajelli M, et al. The effect of travel restrictions on the spread of the 2019 novel
coronavirus

(COVID-19)

outbreak.

Science.

2020;368(6489):395‐400.

.

https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aba9757
[8]

Chretien JP, George D, Shaman J, Chitale RA, McKenzie FE. Influenza forecasting in human
populations: a scoping review. PloS one. 2014: 9. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0094130

[9]

Dong E, Du H, Gardner L. An interactive web-based dashboard to track COVID-19 in real time. The
Lancet infectious diseases, 2020: 20(5), 533-534. https://doi.org/10.1016/s1473-3099(20)30120-1

[10] Dorf RC, Bishop RH. Modern Control Systems. 13th ed. London: Pearson; 2016.

27

[11] Dugas, A. F., Jalalpour, M., Gel, Y., Levin, S., Torcaso, F., Igusa, T., & Rothman, R. E. Influenza
forecasting with Google flu trends. PloS one. 2013: 8. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0056176
[12] European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC). Download today’s data on the geographic
distribution

of

COVID-19

cases

worldwide.

https://www.ecdc.europa.eu/en/publications-

data/download-todays-data-geographic-distribution-covid-19-cases-worldwide. Accessed on August
12th, 2020.
[13] Geng HY, Tan, WJ. A novel human coronavirus: Middle East Respiratory Syndrome human
Coronavirus. Science China Life sciences. 2013; 56(8): 683-687. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11427-0134519-8
[14] Gill PE, Wong E. Sequential Quadratic Programming Methods. In: Lee J, Leyffer S, editors. Mixed
Integer Nonlinear Programming. New York: Springer; 2012. pp. 147–224. https://doi.org/10.1007/9781-4614-1927-3_6
[15] Guan WJ, Ni ZY, Hu Y, et al. Clinical Characteristics of Coronavirus Disease 2019 in China. N Engl J
Med. 2020;382(18):1708‐20. https://doi.org/10.1056/nejmoa2002032
[16] Guastalegname M, Vallone A. Could chloroquine /hydroxychloroquine be harmful in Coronavirus
Disease 2019 (COVID-19) treatment? [published online ahead of print, 2020 Mar 24]. Clin Infect Dis.
2020;321. https://doi.org/10.1093/cid/ciaa321
[17] Hernandez-Matamoros A, Fujita H, Hayashi T, Perez-Meana H. Forecasting of COVID19 per regions
using ARIMA models and polynomial functions. Applied Soft Computing, 2020, 106610.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asoc.2020.106610
[18] Hou C, Chen J, Zhou Y, Hua L, Yuan J, He S, Zhang J. The effectiveness of quarantine of Wuhan city
against the Corona Virus Disease 2019 (COVID-19): A well-mixed SEIR model analysis. Journal of
medical virology, 2020. https://doi.org/10.1002/jmv.25827
[19] Huang C, Wang Y, Li X, et al. Clinical features of patients infected with 2019 novel coronavirus in
Wuhan,

China

[published

correction

appears

in

Lancet.

2020

Jan

30].

Lancet.

2020;395(10223):497‐506. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30183-5
[20] Khan WU, Ye Z, Chaudhary NI, Raja MAZ. Backtracking search integrated with sequential quadratic
programming for nonlinear active noise control systems. Applied Soft Computing, 2018, 73, 666-683.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asoc.2018.08.027
[21] Khalilpourazari S., Pasandideh SHR, Niaki STA. Optimization of multi-product economic production
quantity model with partial backordering and physical constraints: SQP, SFS, SA, and WCA. Applied
Soft Computing, 2016, 49, 770-791. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asoc.2016.08.054
[22] Kim Y, Lee S, Chu C, Choe S, Hong S, Shin, Y. The characteristics of Middle Eastern respiratory
syndrome coronavirus transmission dynamics in South Korea. Osong public health and research
perspectives. 2016; 7(1), 49-55. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.phrp.2016.01.001
[23] Lagarias JC, Reeds JA, Wright MH, Wright PE. Convergence properties of the Nelder--Mead simplex
method

in

low

dimensions. SIAM

Journal

on

optimization.

1998,

9(1),

112-147.

https://doi.org/10.1137/S1052623496303470

28

[24] Leung K, Wu JT, Liu D, Leung GM. First-wave COVID-19 transmissibility and severity in China
outside Hubei after control measures, and second-wave scenario planning: a modelling impact
assessment. The Lancet. 2020; 395(10223): 1382-1393. https://doi.org/10.1016/s0140-6736(20)30746-7
[25] Lin Q, Zhao S, Gao D, Lou Y, Yang S, Musa SS, Wang M, Cai Y, Wang W, Yang L, He D. A
conceptual model for the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) outbreak in Wuhan, China with
individual reaction and governmental action. International journal of infectious diseases. 2020a; 93:
211-216. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijid.2020.02.058
[26] Lin YF, Duan Q, Zhou Y, Yuan T, Li P, Fitzpatrick T et al. Spread and impact of COVID-19 in China: a
systematic review and synthesis of predictions from transmission-dynamic models. Frontiers in
medicine, 2020b; 7, 321. https://doi.org/10.3389/fmed.2020.00321
[27] Linton NM, Kobayashi T, Yang Y, et al. Incubation Period and Other Epidemiological Characteristics
of 2019 Novel Coronavirus Infections with Right Truncation: A Statistical Analysis of Publicly
Available Case Data. J Clin Med. 2020;9(2):538. https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.01.26.20018754
[28] Longobardi A, Villani, P. Trend analysis of annual and seasonal rainfall time series in the Mediterranean
area. International journal of Climatology. 2010; 30(10): 1538-1546. https://doi.org/10.1002/joc.2001
[29] López L, Rodó X. The end of social confinement and COVID-19 re-emergence risk. Nat Hum Behav 4,
746–755 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-020-0908-8
[30] Lundstrom K. Coronavirus Pandemic - Therapy and Vaccines. Biomedicines 2020, 8, 109.
https://doi.org/10.3390/biomedicines8050109
[31] Mathworks.

Documentation

of

the

fmincon

function.

Available

at

https://www.mathworks.com/help/optim/ug/fmincon.html. 2020. Acessed on August 12th, 2020.
[32] Mohamadou Y, Halidou A, Kapen, PT. A review of mathematical modeling, artificial intelligence and
datasets used in the study, prediction and management of COVID-19. Applied Intelligence, 2020, 1-13.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10489-020-01770-9
[33] Mousavizadeh A, Dastoorpoor M, Naimi E, Dohrabpour K. Time-trend analysis and developing a
forecasting model for the prevalence of multiple sclerosis in Kohgiluyeh and Boyer-Ahmad Province,
southwest of Iran. Public health, 2018; 154, 14-23.
[34] Nishiura H. Real-time forecasting of an epidemic using a discrete time stochastic model: a case study of
pandemic influenza (H1N1-2009). BioMed EngOnLine. 2011; 10: 15. https://doi.org/10.1186/1475925x-10-15
[35] Nocedal

J,

Wright

SJ.

Numerical

Optimization.

2nd

ed.

New

York:

Springer;

2006.

https://doi.org/10.1007/b98874
[36] Oliveira PT, Santos e Silva CM, and Lima KC. Climatology and trend analysis of extreme precipitation
in subregions of Northeast Brazil. Theoretical and Applied Climatology 130.1-2 (2017): 77-90.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00704-016-1865-z
[37] Ozma MA, Maroufi P, Khodadadi E, et al. Clinical manifestation, diagnosis, prevention and control of
SARS-CoV-2 (COVID-19) during the outbreak period. Infez Med. 2020 Ahead of print Jun
1;28(2):153-165.

29

[38] Paiva HM, Afonso RJM, de Oliveira IL, and Garcia GF. A data-driven model to describe and forecast
the

dynamics

of

COVID-19

transmission.

PloS

one.

2020;

15(7),

e0236386.

https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0236386
[39] Phelan AL. COVID-19 immunity passports and vaccination certificates: scientific, equitable, and legal
challenges [published online ahead of print, 2020 May 4]. Lancet. 2020;S0140-6736(20)31034-5.
https://doi.org/10.1016/s0140-6736(20)31034-5
[40] Rath S, Tripathy A, Tripathy AR. Prediction of new active cases of coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic using multiple linear regression model. Diabetes & Metabolic Syndrome: Clinical Research &
Reviews. 2020. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dsx.2020.07.045
[41] Ribeiro MHDM, da Silva, RG, Mariani VC, & dos Santos Coelho, L. (2020). Short-term forecasting
COVID-19 cumulative confirmed cases: Perspectives for Brazil. Chaos, Solitons & Fractals. 2020,
109853. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chaos.2020.109853
[42] Richards FJ. A flexible growth function for empirical use. Journal of experimental Botany. 1959, 10(2),
290-301. https://doi.org/10.1093/jxb/10.2.290
[43] Ross R. CDC estimate of global H1N1 pandemic deaths: 284,000. Center for Infectious Disease
Research and Policy. 2012. https://www.cidrap.umn.edu/news-perspective/2012/06/cdc-estimate-globalh1n1-pandemic-deaths-284000. Accessed on May 11th 2020.
[44] Salgotra R, Gandomi M, Gandomi AH. Time Series Analysis and Forecast of the COVID-19 Pandemic
in

India

using

Genetic

Programming.

Chaos,

Solitons

&

Fractals,

2020;

109945.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chaos.2020.109945
[45] Sarkar M, Agrawal AS, Dey RS, Chattopadhyay S, Mullick R, De P, Chakrabarti S, Chawla-Sarkar M.
Molecular characterization and comparative analysis of pandemic H1N1/2009 strains with cocirculating seasonal H1N1/2009 strains from eastern India. Archives of virology. 2011; 156(2): 207217. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00705-010-0842-6
[46] Soares SCM, dos Santos KMR, de Morais Fernandes FCG, Barbosa IR, de Souza DLB. Testicular
Cancer mortality in Brazil: trends and predictions until 2030. BMC Urology, 2019, 19(1), 59.
https://doi.org/10.1186/s12894-019-0487-z
[47] Steyerberg EW. Overfitting and optimism in prediction models. Clinical Prediction Models. Springer,
Cham. 2019. 95-112. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-0-387-77244-8_5
[48] Wen M, Li P, Zhang L, Chen Y. Stock Market Trend Prediction Using High-Order Information of Time
Series. IEEE Access, 2019; 7, 28299-28308. https://doi.org/10.1109/access.2019.2901842
[49] World Health Organization (WHO). Coronavirus disease (covid-19). Situation Report – 51
http://www.who.int/docs/default-source/coronaviruse/situation-reports. Acessed 09 May 2020.
[50] World Health Organization (WHO). Coronavirus disease (covid-19). Situation Report – 110
http://www.who.int/docs/default-source/coronaviruse/situation-reports/.Acessed 09 May 2020.
[51] World Health Organization (WHO). Novel coronavirus – China. http://www.who.int/csr/don/12January-2020-novel-coronavirus-china/en/.Acessed 09 May 2020.
[52] Wu JT, Leung K, Leung GM. Nowcasting and forecasting the potential domestic and international
spread of the 2019-nCoV outbreak originating in Wuhan, China: a modelling study [published

30

correction

appears

in

Lancet.

2020

Feb

4].

Lancet.

2020;

395(10225):689‐97.

https://doi.org/10.1097/01.ogx.0000688032.41075.a8
[53] Xu S, Li Y. Beware of the second wave of COVID-19. Lancet. 2020; 395(10233), 1321–1322.
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30845-X
[54] Yang, Zifeng, et al. Modified SEIR and AI prediction of the epidemics trend of COVID-19 in China
under

public

health

interventions.

Journal

of

Thoracic

Disease,

2020;

12

(3),

165.

https://doi.org/10.21037/jtd.2020.02.64
[55] Yuan H, Li X, Wan G, Sun L, Zhu X, Che F, Yang, Z. Type 2 diabetes epidemic in East Asia: a 35–
year systematic trend analysis. Oncotarget, 2018; 9(6), 6718. https://doi.org/10.18632/oncotarget.22961
[56] Zahmatkesh B, Keramat A, Alavi N, Khosravi A, Kousha A, Motlagh AG, Chaman R. Breast cancer
trend in Iran from 2000 to 2009 and prediction till 2020 using a trend analysis method. Asian Pacific
Journal of Cancer Prevention, 2016; 17(3), 1493-1498. https://doi.org/10.7314/apjcp.2016.17.3.1493
[57] Zhao J, Zuo T, Zheng R, Zhang S, Zeng H, Xia C., Chen W. Epidemiology and trend analysis on
malignant mesothelioma in China. Chinese Journal of Cancer Research, 2017, 29(4), 361.
https://doi.org/10.21147/j.issn.1000-9604.2017.04.09

31

