INTERPRETING UNCERTAINTY IN MODEL PREDICTIONS FOR COVID-19 DIAGNOSIS
Gayathiri Murugamoorthy, Naimul Khan
Electrical, Computer, and Biomedical Engineering, Ryerson University, Toronto, ON
ABSTRACT
COVID-19, due to its accelerated spread has brought in the
need to use assistive tools for faster diagnosis in addition to
typical lab swab testing. Chest X-Rays for COVID cases
tend to show changes in the lungs such as ground glass
opacities and peripheral consolidations which can be
detected by deep neural networks. However, traditional
convolutional networks use point estimate for predictions,
lacking in capture of uncertainty, which makes them less
reliable for adoption. There have been several works so far
in predicting COVID positive cases with chest X-Rays.
However, not much has been explored on quantifying the
uncertainty of these predictions, interpreting uncertainty,
and decomposing this to model or data uncertainty. To
address these needs, we develop a visualization framework
to address interpretability of uncertainty and its components,
with uncertainty in predictions computed with a Bayesian
Convolutional Neural Network. This framework aims to
understand the contribution of individual features in the
Chest-X-Ray images to predictive uncertainty. Providing
this as an assistive tool can help the radiologist understand
why the model came up with a prediction and whether the
regions of interest captured by the model for the specific
prediction are of significance in diagnosis. We demonstrate
the usefulness of the tool in chest x-ray interpretation
through several test cases from a benchmark dataset.
Index Terms— interpretability, uncertainty, Bayesian
Convolutional Neural Networks
1. INTRODUCTION
Chest X-Ray images and CT scans for COVID cases contain
useful information for early diagnosis such as ground glass
opacities, infiltrate air space opacities, peripheral
consolidations in majority of the cases, and pleural effusion
to be a very rare worst-case scenario. Since there is a huge
variation at the same time similar features that can attribute
to a type of pneumonia or any other respiratory disease, it is
important to provide radiologists means to visualize why the
model made a decision in addition to just being a classifier
detecting COVID. This could help medical professionals
verify model correctness and apply necessary measures to
the dataset or the model for improving performance.
There have been several research works using point estimate
neural networks for classifying COVID cases. These works
range from binary classification [1][2][3][6], 3-class
classification-COVID/Normal/Viral[1][2][3][4][5] and 4
class classification-COVID/Normal/Viral/Bacterial[2][3][4].

These works used a range of existing state of the art models
such as CheXNet, DenseNet201[3] and also explored use of
new architecture such as DarkCOVIDNet[1], ConvXNet[2],
COVIDNet [5]. A variant to these were use of Monte Carlo
drop weights-based network for computing uncertainty in
COVID predictions [7].
Interpretability in these works were covered for point
estimate networks using GradCAM, GSInquire, Layerwise
relevance propagation methods.
There have been limited work on uncertainty estimation for
a prediction along with its decomposition and its
visualization for interpretability with respect to individual
pixels in a Chest X-Ray image, which can be crucial for
wider adoption in healthcare. Hence, we develop a
visualization framework that captures change in uncertainty
with respect to input pixels for a prediction, where the
uncertainty was estimated using Bayesian Convolutional
Neural Network. We further indicate whether the
uncertainty was due to the model (epistemic) or lack of
features on the training data not sufficient for classification
(aleatoric). Such pixel-level annotation for uncertainty can
help healthcare practitioners in understanding the model
predictions better, resulting in better trust in the computeraided diagnosis process.
2. PROPOSED FRAMEWORK
There are 3 major components used in our approach:
1.
Bayesian Neural Network Architecture [10]
2.
Computing Predictive Difference [8]
3.
Computing Uncertainty and its components [8][9]
We implement a Bayesian Neural Network [10] that learns
the posterior weight distribution p(w|D) given the training
data through Dropout Variational Inference, where w
aggregates weights over all the L layers in a network and D
is the training dataset with N inputs including samples and
labels. Similar to [8], we use a more generic alpha
divergence than KL divergence to reduce the distance/
approximation gap between the true posterior weight
distribution and the dropout approximate variational
distribution. Since KL divergence underestimates
uncertainty due to fitting to local mode of the posterior, we
use Alpha divergence that provides better uncertainty
estimates relaxing this constraint of KL divergence. In order
to determine which input pixels affect the uncertainty of the
Bayesian Model, it is important to compute the change in
predictive uncertainty, epistemic uncertainty and aleatoric

uncertainty related to a pixel. We use a framework discussed
in [8] which is based on the predictive difference analysis
[9] to visualize the interpretability through saliency maps
visualization. The approach estimates the relevance of each
feature in the test input to the prediction by comparing the
model output when the feature is known, to the model
output when it is not known. The extension of this is applied
to estimate the relevance of each feature in test input with
respect to the prediction in terms of change in uncertainty.
In order to find the relevance of features, a kxk patch of
pixels are perturbed to find the change in prediction and
uncertainty which unlike gradient based methods yields
smoother visualizations.

4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Figure 1: Softmax vs Uncertainty for predicted class
3. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
Since there is no single benchmark dataset available for
COVID Chest X-Ray images, the data was compiled from
various open and public repository sources [11][12][13] and
segregated to 4 classes for a multiclass classification :
COVID-19, Viral Pneumonia, Bacterial Pneumonia and
Normal, with a total of 319, 1493, 2772, and 1582 images
for each class respectively comprising a mix Anterior to
Posterior(AP) and Posterior to Anterior(PA) X-Ray images.
Train-test split of 80-20 was done for each class separately
due to imbalanced nature of dataset and limited availability
of COVID Dataset.
All images were resized to 224x224x3 since each image
source had different image sizes. The image pixel values
were rescaled to [0,1].
In terms of parameters, 10 stochastic forward passes
were performed during training. We used Adam optimizer
with a learning rate of 1e-4. Also we choose alpha of 0.5
over 0 or 1 since it proved to yield better predictions and
uncertainty estimates [8]. A stopping criterion based on
validation loss was set to perform early stopping with
patience of 10 epochs, with a total use of 30 epochs. 100
stochastic forward passes are performed during the test
phase. An 8X8 feature patch size to be marginalized was
chosen with a sliding window with a step size of 10 in both
directions to generate smoother visualization. Application of
oversampling/data augmentation during initial trials did not
yield significant improvement in accuracy, hence it was not
considered.
The network resulted in an 80% test accuracy. It is
important to note that although the accuracy of similar
works [2][3][4] with much more complex networks are
around 87%-90%, accuracy was not the focus of our work.
The Bayesian network takes considerable amount of
computational resources to train. Due to lack of time and
limited resources, we stopped hyperparameter tuning with
an 80% test accuracy, which we believe is reasonable
enough to generate the pixel-level saliency maps, which is
the focus of this work.

Figure 1 shows the relationship between the predictive
softmax (max softmax obtained by averaging the softmax
values when the input is passed through each weight
sample) and the predictive uncertainty, epistemic
uncertainty and aleatoric uncertainty for the test samples. It
is observed that the predictive uncertainty is higher for
lower softmax values and lower for higher softmax values.
Decomposing predictive uncertainty into its components
(aleatoric and epistemic uncertainty) shows it is mostly
influenced by aleatoric uncertainty. This means that the
model predictions did not have enough information along
the pixels to predict the output value for an input with a
fixed weight setting. Also, the softmax for majority of the
samples are observed to be above 50%. Epistemic
uncertainty for most cases has less influence on the
predictions than aleatoric uncertainty. Whereas aleatoric
uncertainty is spread more around lower softmax
predictions.
Although this is an overall analysis, it is important to
analyze each case to understand which pixels when
perturbed before passing to the model increased the
uncertainty or certainty in the model predictions.
4.1. Visualizations for predictive uncertainty and
predictive difference:
To demonstrate the usefulness of the visualization tool, we
provide explanations through two test image examples, one
was predicted correctly, the other one incorrectly. The
visualizations generated below for local explanations
consists of images that indicate regions of increased
uncertainty in red and decreased uncertainty in blue for
predictive (indicated in the image as Diff predictive),
epistemic (indicated in the image as Diff epistemic), and
aleatoric uncertainties (indicated in the image as Diff
aleatoric). The scale reflects the change in uncertainty
values. In addition to the uncertainty, the predictive
difference (indicated in the image as Diff pred) of the
predicted class is also generated to understand the
relationship between predictive difference and predictive
uncertainty for each case. Increase in predictive
difference/evidence of pixels towards a class is shown in red
and decrease in predictive difference/ evidence of pixels

against a class is shown in blue. The image content is
distributed as Original Image, Change in Uncertainty, and
Overlay in order. In the Figures 2 and 3, the right lung is on
the left side of the image and left lung on the right side of
the image.
4.1.1. Example of Correct prediction
Figure 2 shows visualizations generated for a correct
COVID prediction. We observe opacities in a continuous
fashion on the edges of the right lung. Based on the scale
and the absolute value, it could be seen that aleatoric
uncertainty is higher than epistemic uncertainty. The model
uses mostly the right lung and a smaller area in the left lung
to make its predictions for a given class. The same pixels
that have contributed to a reduction in aleatoric uncertainty
have contributed to reduction in epistemic uncertainty which
are along the edges of the right lung and in the middle lobe
of the left lung. This shows that the same pixels that provide
information for the classification also make the test input
similar to the training input distribution. We also notice that
in the middle lobe of the right lung, the same pixels
contribute to increase in
epistemic and aleatoric
uncertainty, showing that the model did not have enough
features around the area to make a decision. For COVID
case this input is different from the training input with the
current combination of features.
When comparing with predictive difference, it can be seen
that the pixels that provide evidence for a class reduce
predictive uncertainty and pixels that provide evidence
against the class increase predictive uncertainty. In this case,
the model has correctly picked the regions of difference in
densities in the image relevant to ground glass opacities in
the right lung. However, the left lung opacities have not
been taken into consideration, which requires further
pondering into analyzing why the model missed those
features and help in model correction and better training
samples collection.
4.1.2. Example of Incorrect Prediction:
Figure 3 shows visualizations for an incorrect COVID
prediction. Based on the scale and the absolute value, it can
be seen that aleatoric uncertainty is higher than epistemic
uncertainty. The model uses mostly the right lung and a
smaller area in the left lung to make its predictions for a
given class. Even though the prediction is erroneous, we
observe a high softmax value. This particular false positive
occurs in some of the sample images because in the training
data, some COVID-labeled images were from day 0-2 of
COVID. However, in days 0-2 typically the patients can test
positive through a swab test, but the anomalies will not
show up in a lung X-ray. Hence the model has learnt
erroneous features from these noisy training data, where
apparently normal lung images were labeled as COVID.
Based on such training, for this particular test image, the
model has mistaken the change in density due to bone
reflections in the right lung middle lobe as opacity and the

bronchial vessels as infiltration. Also, the model has picked
on the ribs and the background.

Figure 2: Change in epistemic, aleatoric, predictive
uncertainty and predictive difference. Ground Truth:
COVID, Prediction: COVID, Aleatoric Uncertainty: 0.5657
The pixels adhering to these in the right lung are pixels
which are in common reducing epistemic and aleatoric
uncertainty, meaning that the same pixels that provide
information for the classification also make the test input
similar to the training input distribution. We also see that the
same pixels contribute for increase in epistemic and
aleatoric uncertainty, indicating the testing input has been
different with respect to features than the training data that
the model is not able to use them for classification. When
comparing with predictive difference, it shows that the
pixels that provide evidence for a class reduce predictive
uncertainty and pixels that provide evidence against the
class increase predictive uncertainty.
5.CONCLUSION
A visualization framework that demonstrates interpretability
based on contribution of pixels in a Chest X-Ray image to
uncertainty for COVID 19 diagnosis with local explanations
(providing explanation for specific test instance) has been
presented, which can help making the computer-aided
diagnosis process more trustworthy. The uncertainty
estimates are obtained using a Bayesian Convolutional
Neural Network and alpha divergence and decomposed to
epistemic and aleatoric uncertainty. Aleatoric uncertainty
helps identify whether there has been sufficient training data
the model has been exposed to, so that it has enough
features for a single weight setting to make a classification
decision. Epistemic uncertainty demonstrates if there is
significant changes in the training and testing data

distribution

that

can

help

the

radiologist

Figure 3: Change in epistemic,aleatoric ,predictive
uncertainty and predictive difference. Ground Truth:
Normal, Prediction: COVID, Aleatoric Uncertainty: 0.1284,
Epistemic Uncertainty: 0.0015, Softmax: 98.50%
know which type of training data is missing for training and
tape appropriate measures to source them.
One of the most prominent limitations in the above work is
the lack of a benchmark dataset with enough diversity of
COVID cases. Since it is evolving with increasing amount
of cases in different parts of the world, diversity in dataset
will likely be available in future. The resulting saliency
maps depend on the quality of uncertainty estimates from
the Bayesian Convolutional Neural Network. This in turn
heavily depends on the alpha divergence objective and the
approximation gap between the variational distribution
chosen to approximate the posterior weight distribution. It is
important to make reasonable choices with the distribution
and the objective function. An interesting extension would
be to explore different variational distributions or
divergence objectives and their influence on the uncertainty
estimates.
8. REFERENCES
[1] T.Ozturk, M.Talo, E.A.Yildirim, U.B.Baloglu,
O.Yildirim, U.R.Acharya, "Automated detection of COVID19 cases using deep neural networks with X-Ray Images,"
Computers in Biology and Medicine, 2020
[2] T.Mahmud, A.A.Rahman, S.A.Fattah, "CovXNet: A
multi-dilation convolutional neural network for automatic
COVID-19 and other pneumonia detection from chest X-ray
images
with
transferable
multi-receptive
feature
optimization", Computers in Biology and Medicine, 2020

[3] M.E.H.Chowdury, T.Rahman, A.Khandakar, R.Mazhar,
M.A.Kadir, Z.B.Mahbub, K.R.Islam, M.S.Khan, A.Iqbal,
N.Al-Emadi, M.B.I.Reaz, M.T.Islam, "Can AI help in
screening Viral and COVID-19 pneumonia?", IEEE Access
8, 132665 - 132676, 2020
[4] P.R.A.S.Bassi, R.Attux, "A Deep Convolutional Neural
Network for COVID-19 Detection using Chest X-Rays",
arXiv:2005.01578v2, 2020
[5] L.Wang, Z.Q.Lin and A.Wong, "COVID-Net: A
Tailored Deep Convolutional Neural
Network Design for Detection of COVID-19 Cases from
Chest X-Ray Images", arXiv:2003.09871v4, 2020
[6] A.Waheed, M.Goyal, D.Gupta, A.Khanna, F.Al-Turjman
and P.R.Pinheiro, "CovidGAN: Data Augmentation Using
Auxiliary Classifier GAN for Improved Covid-19
Detection", Special section on emerging deep learning
theories and methods for biomedical engineering, IEEE
Access 8, 2020.
[7] B.Ghoshal, A.Tucker, "Estimating Uncertainty and
Interpretability in Deep Learning for Coronavirus (COVID19) Detection", arXiv:2003.10769v2[eess.IV], 2020
[8] L.R. Chai, "Uncertainty Estimation in Bayesian Neural
Networks and Links to Interpretability", Master's Thesis,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2018
[9] L. M., Zintgraf, T. S.Cohen, T.Adel, and M,Welling,
"Visualizing deep neural network decisions: Prediction
difference analysis", arXiv preprint arXiv:1702.04595,2017
[10] Z.A.Abideen, M.Ghafoor, K.Munir,M.Saqib, A.Ullah,
T.Zia, S.A.Tariq, G.Ahmed,
A.Zahira, "Uncertainty
Assisted Robust Tuberculosis Identification With Bayesian
Convolutional Neural Networks", Scalable Deep Learning
for Big Data, IEEE Access Vol 8, 2020.
[11]https://www.kaggle.com/tawsifurrahman/covid19radiography-database. Retrieved Oct. 2020.
[12] https://github.com/ieee8023/covid-chestxray-dataset ,
Retrieved Oct. 2020.
[13]https://www.kaggle.com/paultimothymooney/chestxray-pneumonia , Retrieved Oct. 2020.

