ICAS 054/20

arXiv:2010.06468v1 [q-bio.PE] 10 Oct 2020

Estimating COVID-19 cases and outbreaks
on-stream through phone-calls
Ezequiel Alvarez(a)† , Daniela Obando(b) , Sebastian Crespo(b) , Enio Garcia(b) ,
Nicolas Kreplak(b) , Franco Marsico(b)?
(a)

International Center for Advanced Studies (ICAS), ICIFI-CONICET & ECyT-UNSAM,
Campus Miguelete, 25 de Mayo y Francia, CP1650, San Martín, Buenos Aires, Argentina
(b)

Ministerio de Salud de la Provincia de Buenos Aires,
La Plata, Buenos Aires, Argentina

Abstract
One of the main problems in controlling COVID-19 epidemic spread is the delay in
confirming cases. Having information on changes in the epidemic evolution or outbreaks
rise before lab-confirmation is crucial in decision making for Public Health policies.
We present an algorithm to estimate on-stream the number of COVID-19 cases using
the data from telephone calls to a COVID-line. By modeling the calls as background
(proportional to population) plus signal (proportional to infected), we fit the calls in
Province of Buenos Aires (Argentina) with coefficient of determination R2 > 0.85. This
result allows us to estimate the number of cases given the number of calls from a specific
district, days before the lab results are available. We validate the algorithm with real
data. We show how to use the algorithm to track on-stream the epidemic, and present
the Early Outbreak Alarm to detect outbreaks in advance to lab results. One key point
in the developed algorithm is a detailed track of the uncertainties in the estimations,
since the alarm uses the significance of the observables as a main indicator to detect
an anomaly. We present the details of the explicit example in Villa Azul (Quilmes)
where this tool resulted crucial to control an outbreak on time. The presented tools
have been designed in urgency with the available data at the time of the development,
and therefore have their limitations which we describe and discuss. We consider possible
improvements on the tools, many of which are currently under development.

E-mail: † sequi@unsam.edu.ar, ? fmarsico@mincyt.gob.ar,

1

Introduction

The COVID-19 epidemic is causing a global damage to practically all aspects of world society
since early 2020. Although a huge effort in many fields of sciences is being made to mitigate its
effects, the disease is continuously spreading and, in many regions, a second wave is causing
great concerns. The difficulties in controlling the epidemic are in part due to a crucial
combination of being highly contagious [1], having a long incubation period [2] during which
contagions are possible a few days before symptoms onset [3], having mild or asymptomatic
cases [1] and also because the diagnosis may take a few days since contacting the Health Care
system. In particular, the latter yields that outbreaks spread and epidemic evolves while
laboratory results are being processed. This effect being more important in low and medium
income countries due to operational and logistic problems, generally caused by technological
and economic inequalities [4, 5].
We present in this work a method to mitigate the epidemic effects by estimating the
number of COVID-19 cases without having to wait for lab confirmations. This provides the
Health Care system a tool to react in advance and evaluate current or next Public Health
policies.
In mass accidents or major catastrophes Early Warning Systems (EWS) play a key role
for disaster mitigation [6–8] decreasing response times and improving their effectiveness. The
main strategy of EWS in infectious disease surveillance is the incorporation of information
produced nearly from the infection [9,10]. In this case, the symptoms onset and their detection
by the individual and community health perception is the first detectable signal of cases and,
in particular, an outbreak. EWS based on syndromic surveillance have been applied in
epidemiological surveillance for early outbreaks identification and confirmation [11–15]. One
of the main characteristics of EWS is the utilization of health information provided by the
population in order to activate local alarms. Nowadays, with the wide use of cell phone
applications and specific health-system phone lines, important databases with information
about syndromic surveillance are generated each day [16]. Geo-location plays a main role is
spatial and temporal definition of the outbreaks detected by EWS [17].
In Buenos Aires Province (Argentina), the COVID-19 phone line 148 is one of the first
contacts between a person that believes to be infected and the Health Care System. The
trained Health Care team receives and responds to people questions generating, simultaneously, a syndromic surveillance database. If the person has symptoms that could indicate
a COVID19 infection, it is instructed to follow the corresponding protocol. Importantly,
such syndromic database was used as input for estimation of cases and outbreak detection in
Buenos Aires Province.
This work is divided as follows. In Section 2 we describe the COVID-line data and present
the details of the mathematical model to estimate the number of cases using the phone calls
data. In Section 3 we show how the model works in Buenos Aires Province and how it can
be used to track on-stream the epidemic. In Section 4 we present the Early Outbreak Alarm

2

and show its details in Villa Azul (Quilmes) case. We discuss the limitations and current
improvements of the model in Section 5, and we present our conclusions in section 6.

Figure 1: COVID-line 148 workflow. As people call the COVID-line upon their health perception, the COVID-trained operators determine whether they correspond to suspicious or
close-contact case. In such a case, their record is passed to the Epidemiological Surveillance
team and a COVID-19 swabbing is ordered. Some days later the swabbing lab result is added
to the corresponding record. The algorithm described in this paper works with the first part
of the information which is delivered on-stream as the operators determine the case passes
the corresponding threshold.

2

Estimating on-stream COVID-19 cases through calls to
a COVID-line

We describe the mathematical model implemented to relate phone calls to a COVID-line to
lab-confirmed cases per district per day. In the following paragraphs we outline the functioning of the 148 COVID-line and then we describe the details of the model.

2.1

COVID-line 148 in Buenos Aires Province

Buenos Aires Province (PBA for its acronym in Spanish) is the most populated province
of Argentina, with more than 17 million inhabitants. Around 13 million people live in the
3

Metropolitan area surrounding the City of Buenos Aires. Importantly, the remaining 4 million
live in the vast area and with low population density known as the interior of the province.
This demographic heterogeneity leads to a hyper-centralized Health Care system. In order
to attend the growing demand for medical assistance caused by the COVID-19, public health
authorities implemented in February 2020 a specific-COVID phone that is reached by dialing
148. The objective of this COVID-line is to address all community concerns related to
COVID, which includes questions, doubts, symptom reports, and reference to the Health
Care system, among others.
The COVID-line grew in personal as the epidemic spread in PBA. The call request grew
from a few hundreds per day at March up to approximately 20k per day at the end of
August. Until late June the system was not outperformed and all calls requiring assistance
were taken. We therefore consider that during this regime an indicator coming from this
COVID-line would be relatively unbiased. This is specially true if one compares this to other
indicators as testing, or lab processing, which were changing their behavior considerably as
epidemic spread during this period. We find that April 1st to June 26th is a period in which
the COVID-line has been relatively stable to major changes.
As people call the COVID-line 148, they enter into an automatic voice menu in which one
of the options corresponds to COVID-like symptoms. As user go into this option their call is
taken by a COVID-trained operator and a short questionnaire on their experience indicates
whether the call does not pass the threshold to be registered or corresponds to one of the
two registered categories: close-contact and suspicious case. If the call corresponds to any
of these categories, then the operator registers their data and in particular the district from
which they are calling. We depict in Fig. 1 the workflow of the COVID-line. At the early
stage that the system was implemented, the record did not include trustful information on
the exact address of the user. This crucial fact led us to develop the system we explain below
by restricting our information on the user to only their district. Although future upgrades
on the system are providing more accurate location of the call, the current work restricts to
the caller district and only once their call is taken by a COVID-trained operator.

2.2

Mathematical Model to estimate cases from phone-calls to the
148 COVID-line

We present the mathematical model to estimate the new infected using the phone call data,
and apply it to PBA. The reasoning in this section follows the same lines as in Ref. [18], but
with different purposes and different filtering in the data set.
We consider a data set of calls from many districts and during a given time range to a
COVID-line. Each one of these calls can either be
background: people with similar symptoms but not infected
signal: people infected with COVID-19.

4

Under reasonable assumptions of homogeneity in space and time we can model that background calls in each district and time-window are proportional to the total district population
and the time-window length. Whereas signal calls are proportional to the total number of
infected people in the district whose record is opened in the corresponding time-window, even
though their lab-confirmation may be available in a later time. Therefore, if we divide all
our data set in chunks corresponding in space to the districts in PBA, and in time to timewindows of ∆t(j) days that can be arbitrarily chosen, we can pose the following equations for
all the chunks labeled by j:
(j)

(j)
n(j)
Np(j) + θI NI .
c = θp ∆t
(j)

(1)
(j)

Where Np is the population of the corresponding district and NI is the number of confirmed
infected at the same district and whose record was opened during the corresponding time(j)
(j)
window. On the Left Hand Side, nc is the fit to the total number of calls, whereas Nc (not
in the equation) is the total number of actually placed calls. Observe, therefore, that this set
of equations (one for each chunk j) can be extended depending on the chosen time-window
length. Once this set of j = 1...k equations has been posed, we can fit the best values of
(j)
(j)
coefficients θp,I that minimize the square distance between nc and Nc . We stress that there
are only two coefficients (θp,I ) that must fit all k different equations for each chunk.
This fit works better if all chunks correspond to periods in which the testing methods
have not changed drastically, as it can be for instance if the number of daily tests is modified
considerably, or if new symptoms are considered as threshold for testing, among others. The
reason for requiring this is to have a coherent balance between the number of infected reported
and the number of calls in all chunks all the time. With this objective, is better to re-fit the
parameters every time there are major changes in the testing and reporting methods.
Once the parameters θp,I in Eq. 1 have been fitted, including their uncertainty from the
fit, we can estimate the number of new infected in a given chunk as
(j)

nI =


1
Nc(j) − θp ∆t(j) Np(j) .
θI

(2)

Observe that the Right Hand Side requires data that is obtained in the same day, and therefore
one can estimate the number of cases nI on-stream, without need of waiting the laboratory
results. Notice, that the algorithm allows to estimate the total number of new cases in each
chunk, but not to determine which of the calls correspond to the new cases. The uncertainty
(j)
in the estimation nI is computed by applying the usual error expansion formula on Eq. 2. If
variables are correlated, as for instance θp and θI , one should take this into account, however
in our case we neglected this correlation in comparison to other terms. For the parameters
θp,I we use the uncertainty coming from the fit, for Nc we use Poisson uncertainty, and for
Np one should decide whether to add a systematic uncertainty or only use Poisson, as we did
in this work. As discussed below, uncertainties in the estimations play a central role in the
design of the Early Outbreak Alarm, and therefore should be handled with care, specially
the systematic ones if present.
5

In order to apply this algorithm in PBA we have used the data set of phone calls to the
148 COVID-line. We work with all the phone calls entering the COVID-line that reach the
threshold for being close contact or suspicious case. The reason for this filtering is because
the district the user is calling from is registered by the operator. Although the address is also
in principle registered most of the times, in the practice many ambiguities, misspelled words,
or other unintended errors yield that only about ∼ 50%-70% of the times it can be correctly
reconstructed. We consider the data set of calls between April 1st and June 26th, since after
this the call center was overloaded and not all phone could be taken, yielding intractable
biases. Along this period we have fitted the data a few times in different data sets, obtaining
fairly similar results and with coefficient of determination always satisfying R2 > 0.85. In
particular, as cases were increasing, we were obtaining more accurate estimations for θI , as
it can be expected.
In order to show the robustness of the hypotheses, we show how this model works with
data from May 1st to June 26th, divided in two equal length time-windows each. We consider
all districts in PBA whose number of calls in these chunks is greater than 100. After this
filtering we are left with 43 chunks, i.e. 43 data points. After performing the fit indicated in
Eq. 1 we obtain
θp = (5.16 ± 1.59) × 10−6 calls per inhabitant per day
θI = 0.69 ± 0.05 calls per infected people
It is worth noticing that the precise values of these fitted coefficients have a strong dependence
on the process of call filtering and call system architecture. In particular, these values differ
from those in Ref. [18] because we are considering a different level of filtering to obtain the
district of each user. The fit for this data set yields a coefficient of determination R2 = 0.91,
which indicates the robustness of the involved hypotheses. In Fig. 2 we show the comparison
between data and fit for the number of phone-calls, as posed in Eq. 1.

3

Tracking epidemic through model estimations

The mathematical model described in the previous section provides a framework to estimate
many days in advance the number of lab-confirmed cases per day, as a function of the spatiotemporal distribution of phone calls to the COVID-line. This is a compelling achievement
because the phone call information is available on-stream, whereas lab confirmation of cases
may require from a few days to up to a week since patient report their first symptoms.
Along this section we show how this system can be used to have an estimate of the epidemic
evolution on-stream, along with real case results in PBA.
As this system was developed there was no time for validation. However, obtaining a
very satisfactory R2 & 0.85 in the fit was a signal that the model was insofar working well.
As months went by, we had the possibility of comparing in a long range time-window the
model estimation against the measured lab-confirmed number of cases per day per district.
6

Figure 2: Placed versus fitted calls during the fitted period (May 1st to June 26th divided
in two time-windows). The number of fitted calls comes out from the number of laboratoryconfirmed COVID cases using the fit in Eq. 1. The upper right data-point corresponds to La
Matanza district whose population of 1.7M inhabitants is about at least three times larger
than all other districts.
In Fig. 3 we show the comparison between the estimation and the late lab-confirmed cases per
day for two any districts in PBA. Similar results are obtained for other districts. Is central to
observe in this figure that the number of lab-confirmed cases (red line) is an information that
is available many days after the corresponding date, whereas the model estimation (blue) is
available at the end of each day. As it can be seen in the figure the estimation has a good
agreement with the real data. There are a few date ranges in which door-to-door swabbing
through DETECTAR operatives [19] induce an expected sub-estimation in cases.
This syndromic surveillance has been used to follow the size, spread, and tempo of outbreaks, to monitor disease trends, and to provide reassurance that potential outbreak has
not occurred. In particular, it has also been very useful as an early outbreak detection, as
we detail in next section. Syndromic surveillance systems seek to use existing health data in
real time to provide immediate analysis and feedback to those in charge with investigation
and follow-up of potential outbreaks. Particularly, the data collected by the COVID-line calls
proved to be a valuable and reliable input to track the epidemic along the PBA.
The tracking of the epidemic through this model is specially useful when the capacity
overload of the diagnostic centers leads to delays in obtaining results. For this reason, having
a real-time and relatively unbiased estimation of cases gives the Public Health authorities the
possibility of taking actions in time [13]. Furthermore, in a disaster scenario prioritization
7

this tool takes a main role when resources and time are limited, as it occurred at the end
of June in PBA. The calls-based syndromic surveillance allowed a rapid characterization of
the different PBA districts in terms of their epidemiological status and the consequent action
was taken in order to mitigate the epidemic effects.

Figure 3: Comparison of real data (red) versus model estimation (blue) for two example
districts of Buenos Aires Province (La Matanza and Lomas de Zamora). Recall that the red
line corresponding to the real confirmed cases with their record opening in the corresponding
date, is reconstructed many days later. In the dates in which the red line goes above the
estimation is usually because DETECTAR operatives (door-to-door testing [19]) were carried
on. In general, the model yields a very good estimation to monitor the epidemic in all affected
PBA districts.

4

Early Outbreak Alarm

Along this section we detail a compelling by-product of the model in Section 2 to detect
COVID-19 outbreaks considerably earlier than through lab confirmation. We briefly describe
the working of the model and then provide its detail through the description of a real case
that occurred in mid May in Villa Azul (Quilmes) and Villa Itatí (Avellaneda) in PBA.

4.1

Identifying an outbreak formation

Provided the on-stream estimation of the cases per day in each district, we are interested
in developing a statistical and automatic tool that can trigger an alarm when a potential
outbreak is on rise. Having an early alarm on this kind of epidemiological features is a crucial
tool to avoid its spread and drastic consequences.
8

To detect a potential outbreak there are many indicators that should be simultaneously
analyzed. On one hand it is important to have an estimation of the daily absolute and
relative number of cases, and on the other hand is also important to have an estimation on
the daily variation of these observables. To have an objective quantitative indicator of the
potential of an outbreak in a given region, it is essential to have a correct assessment of the
uncertainties in all the estimations of the model. Along the system implemented as an Early
Outbreak Alarm, we have considered that the important indicator is the significance of all
the basic indicators which signal an anomaly as they depart from zero. Here significance is
defined as the distance to zero from the central value of the indicator, measured in units of
its uncertainty. Or, in other words,
significance =

central value
.
uncertainty

(3)

As it can be seen in Eq. 3, the correct computation of the uncertainties (or error bars) is
crucial for the functioning of the Early Outbreak Alarm.
The developed algorithm computes everyday the estimation for the total number of new
cases in each district in PBA. Since in the studied time-window, specially before June, the
number of estimated cases per day of many districts were below ∼ 5 − 10, we considered to
include the estimation of cases for the last two days. This would reduce the relative Poisson
uncertainty due to small numbers. We computed the number of estimated cases in absolute
value, and also relative to 100k inhabitants to be equally sensitive to all districts.
A third and decisive observable that signals the level of danger of an outbreak is the
daily increase of estimated cases. Given the daily estimation provided by the mathematical
model, we can recognize a rapidly increasing curve in many ways. We have considered to fit a
straight line to the case estimation for the last three days and use the slope of this line as an
estimation of the central value of the daily increase. We also use the significance as the most
relevant indicator to decide the level of danger of each district. In this case, the computation
of the error bar in the slope of the line includes all the uncertainties in each day estimation
included in the computation of the fit uncertainty through the least squares residuals. We
use three days to fit a line because is the minimum time needed to see a two-day consecutive
increase, while being still well ahead of the laboratory results. In addition, three days is also
a good time-window for the specific COVID-19 characteristics.
This Early Outbreak Alarm has provided to PBA Health Care administration very important tools to identify possible outbreaks during the rise of the epidemic curve. Since the
granularity of the algorithm is very poor (districts), the system needs to be complemented
with other independent indicators, in particular those which can help to provide a more accurate location of the outbreak. This was usually done by calling back manually the recorded
cases, and then by sending DETECTAR operatives [19] to verify if in fact the in-situ conditions would be the predicted. The Early Outbreak Alarm has indicated many outbreaks that
have been controlled since mid-April to mid-June. In particular, we describe in the following

9

paragraphs the very special1 case of Villa Azul (Quilmes) and provide the details on how the
Early Outbreak Alarm indicated the Quilmes district.

4.2

Case study: Villa Azul, Quilmes

We report the details of one of the outbreaks indicated by the Early Outbreak Alarm in midMay in Quilmes district. This case was the first major outbreak in a low-income neighborhood
in PBA and had a great impact in the news [20], not only for its magnitude but also because
of its early detection that drove a strict lock-down and isolation of the outbreak to control
its spread to the close neighborhoods.

Figure 4: Cases-per-day estimation using the model on the COVID-line phone calls for the
last two days. Observe that districts are not sorted by their central value, but by their
significance, which is defined as the rate between the central value and the uncertainty. This
is why error bars are crucial to provide an Early Outbreak Alarm. Results are shown in
absolute value (left) and relative to every 100k inhabitants (right). In the figure we show the
scenario for May 20th in which Quilmes is almost as large as La Matanza in absolute value,
with ∼ 1/3 of its population. Whereas Quilmes is in the top position when scaled to relative
per 100k inhabitants.
On May 20th the alarm was indicating a large number of estimated cases in Quilmes
district (see Fig. 4), in particular Quilmes had the top estimation in number of cases per
inhabitants of the last two days, as measured through the significance of the indicator. In
addition to this, the indicator of the daily increase fit was also indicating Quilmes as the
top district in significance (see Fig. 5). This last indicator on the daily increase fit to the
1

This case covered the headlines in the news for several weeks [20]

10

Figure 5: Slope of a linear fit to the cases per day estimation of last three days. The error
bar corresponds to including the uncertainty in each per day estimation and in the slope
determination in the fit. Also in this plot is crucial to sort the districts according to the
significance in this variable. In the figure we see on May 20th Quilmes in the top position,
indicating a potential early alarm for an outbreak, as it was consequently confirmed by other
indicators a few days later.
last three days can be visualized in Fig. 6a, where we plot the daily estimation for the last
7 days on Quilmes. The fit is obtained using the last three data points in red. Given all
these indicators pointing to Quilmes district, the surveillance team took the duty to locate
the phone calls and observed an excess coming from Villa Azul, a low-income neighborhood
in Quilmes and next to Avellaneda district.
These observations indicated in advance by the Early Outbreak Alarm needed to be
verified by an independent complementary indicator. On the following day a DETECTAR
operative [19] was sent to Villa Azul, where the acute situation was verified and door-to-door
swabbing with urgent lab results started right away. As first results were confirming the
outbreak in Villa Azul, the PBA Administration decided a strict lock-down and isolation for
14 days since may 24th [20].

11

Figure 6: Left: Exact Early Outbreak Alarm visualization on May 20th for Quilmes, as
available to the Health Care team in Buenos Aires Province. Right: The posterior picture
including the lab-confirmed cases (solid red), the day that the Health Care System landed
on Villa Azul to begin testing door by door, and a wider range of dates to capture the big
picture of the case. The strict lock-down in Villa Azul with no entering nor leaving permission
lasted from May 24th to June 8th. As it can be seen in the plot, during the door-by-door
testing, the solid red line goes above and uncorrelated to the estimated cases by phone calls,
as expected.

4.3

Villa Azul epidemiological and operational description

Villa Azul (Quilmes) and Villa Itatí (Avellaneda) are two adjacent low-income neighborhoods.
The last demographic analysis indicates that Villa Azul has a population of 3.128 and Villa
Itatí 15.142. High density building and housing, and tiny streets bring the population into
close contact. These characteristics make these neighborhoods susceptible to a fast spread
[21]. Taking this into account, early outbreak detection implies a main challenge in these
complex cases where detection and propagation block must be done when the first few cases
are reported. In particular, the above described early alarm for the outbreak occurred in
Villa Azul allowing a fast response of the Health Care System team to mitigate and control
its propagation to Villa Itatí.
Once produced the strict lock-down and isolation, water and food-supply were delivered
by the social care-team. People were not allowed to leave the house during the entire isolation.
Active surveillance health teams started with a door-to-door symptoms monitoring. Those
cases with clinical manifestation related to COVID-19 were tested. Confirmed cases were
isolated inside their houses in cases where this was possible (if there was an empty room for
example) and in cases where it was not, the people were sent to an out-of-Hospital center.

12

5

Outlook and scope

The development of the mathematical model to estimate the number of COVID-19 cases was
done in urgency and adapting it to the available data. There was no time to request changes
in data acquisition nor processing. Of course the algorithm and the system can be improved
in many directions. We discuss some of these features in the following paragraphs.
One of the major weakness in the algorithm is the large granularity, which corresponds to
districts. Districts population in the relevant area are in average 500k people. This issue is
translated in that the Early Outbreak Alarm stops working once the density of cases is such
that there are more than a few outbreaks in each district. This happened in late June in PBA.
In a future implementation we are carrying out a workaround for this issue by obtaining a
trustful address from the COVID-trained operator that takes de call. A more stable solution
would be to obtain this information from the telephone company, however regulations many
times block this possibility.
On the other hand, the algorithm has a very important benefit that is its unbiasedness.
Given that the COVID-line works 24 hours the 7 days of the week and with a fair equal
methodology all the time, the algorithm estimation does not rely on tests availability or
overloaded testing facilities, among others. Of course, the system does have slight biases that
may come –for instance– from different backgrounds due to different features in the districts,
or seasonally social behavior as months go by. Some of these biases may be solved by re-fitting
the model once in a while, others by fitting different models in different regions.
Importantly, the algorithm provides information about the background calls that vary in
space and time. Further studies could be done in order to understand and extract properties
of the background, as it can be its seasonality, variations according to regions, to public
announcements or news, etc.
The crucial point in the mathematical model is that recognizes anomalies due to collective
behaviors. Therefore, we find that the mathematical model and the Early Outbreak Alarm
algorithms can be useful for many other epidemiological diseases –as for instance Dengue–,
and other events such as natural catastrophes, among others. We are currently working in the
improvement of this system in many aspects, also including Machine Learning algorithms,
and these advancements will be published in a future work.

6

Conclusions

We have created a syndromic surveillance algorithm based in the correlation between phone
calls to a COVID-line, districts population and reported cases. This algorithm works by
understanding that phone calls to a COVID-line are a part due to non-infected people having
similar symptoms (background) and other part due to infected people (signal). By observing
that background has to be proportional to district population, whereas signal proportional to
13

reported cases, we have fitted our assumption. The coefficient of determination for Buenos
Aires Province (PBA) is always R2 > 0.85 for different samples, which indicates the robustness of our hypothesis. In addition, we have validated our model with real data.
Along the manuscript the model, its estimations, and how we compute their error bars
were described. Also, it has been shown how the estimations, which are obtained in-stream,
can be used to address Public Health policies without requiring to wait for lab results, which
require many more days to converge. The algorithm worked in PBA from April to June, since
during this time the COVID-trained call center was not overloaded. Therefore the estimation
was relatively unbiased.
We have shown how this estimation can be used to create an Early Outbreak Alarm.
Furthermore, we describe how the construction of indicators that have to do with daily
cases, and daily increase of cases, can indicate outbreaks in advance. The relevant statistic
variable in this case is the significance, since it is a real measure on how far from zero are the
indicators. Importantly, this system can detect an outbreak and, in particular, we exemplify
its application in the outbreak detection in Villa Azul (Quilmes).
The limitations on the Early Outbreak Alarm were discussed in this paper, many of them
because of the characteristics of the data available at the moment of its (urgent) development.
We have pointed out many ways to improve its sensitivity and accuracy, on which we are
currently working. This alarm would also be useful, not only for other epidemiological diseases, but also for events that yield changes in collective behavior, such as Dengue epidemic,
natural catastrophes, or others.
The presented algorithm and mathematical model have been one of the main tools in
the PBA Health Care system dashboard during the epidemic, and its current and upgrade
versions are still being used to track the epidemic and detect outbreaks.

Acknowledgment
We thank the fantastic work performed by the 148 COVID call center, in particular to
R. Vaena, P. Rispoli and L. H. Molinari for useful conversations. E.A. and F.M. thank
Dr. I. Caridi for useful conversations. E.A. thanks CONICET, UNSAM, CAF and EasytechGreen for finantial and logistic support during this research.

References
[1] Gao, M., Yang, L., Chen, X., Deng, Y., Yang, S., Xu, H., ... and Gao, X. (2020). A study
on infectivity of asymptomatic SARS-CoV-2 carriers. Respiratory Medicine, 106026.

14

[2] Lee, H., Kim, K., Choi, K., Hong, S., Son, H., and Ryu, S. (2020). Incubation period of
the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) in Busan, South Korea. Journal of Infection
and Chemotherapy, 26(9), 1011-1013.
[3] He, X., Lau, E. H., Wu, P., Deng, X., Wang, J., Hao, X., ... and Mo, X. (2020). Temporal
dynamics in viral shedding and transmissibility of COVID-19. Nature medicine, 26(5),
672-675.
[4] Ahmed, O. B. (2020). Mitigating the spread of COVID-19 in low-income countries.
Scientific Research and Essays, 15(2), 41-44.
[5] Verhagen, L. M., de Groot, R., Lawrence, C. A., Taljaard, J., Cotton, M. F., and Rabie,
H. (2020). COVID-19 response in low-and middle-income countries: Don’t overlook the
role of mobile phone communication. International Journal of Infectious Diseases, 99,
334-337.
[6] Texier, G., Pellegrin, L., Vignal, C., Meynard, J. B., Deparis, X., and Chaudet, H.
(2017). Dealing with uncertainty when using a surveillance system. International Journal
of Medical Informatics, 104, 65-73.
[7] Goniewicz, K., and Burkle, F. M. (2019). Disaster early warning systems: the potential
role and limitations of emerging text and data messaging mitigation capabilities. Disaster
medicine and public health preparedness, 13(4), 709-712.
[8] Kyriacos, U., Jelsma, J., James, M., and Jordan, S. (2014). Monitoring vital signs:
development of a modified early warning scoring (MEWS) system for general wards in
a developing country. PloS one, 9(1), e87073.
[9] Ginsberg, J., Mohebbi, M. H., Patel, R. S., Brammer, L., Smolinski, M. S., and Brilliant, L. (2009). Detecting influenza epidemics using search engine query data. Nature,
457(7232), 1012-1014.
[10] Krause, G., Altmann, D., Faensen, D., Porten, K., Benzler, J., Pfoch, T., ... and Claus, H.
(2007). SurvNet electronic surveillance system for infectious disease outbreaks, Germany.
Emerging infectious diseases, 13(10), 1548.
[11] Lombardo, J., Burkom, H., Elbert, E., Magruder, S., Lewis, S. H., Loschen, W., ...
and Pavlin, J. (2003). A systems overview of the electronic surveillance system for the
early notification of community-based epidemics (ESSENCE II). Journal of urban health,
80(1), i32-i42.
[12] Pavlin, J. A. (2003). Investigation of disease outbreaks detected by “syndromic” surveillance systems. Journal of Urban Health, 80(1), i107-i114.
[13] Katz, R., May, L., Baker, J., and Test, E. (2011). Redefining syndromic surveillance.
Journal of epidemiology and global health, 1(1), 21-31.
15

[14] Stoto, M. A., Schonlau, M., and Mariano, L. T. (2004). Syndromic surveillance: is it
worth the effort?. Chance, 17(1), 19-24.
[15] Hope, K., Durrheim, D. N., d’Espaignet, E. T., and Dalton, C. (2006). Syndromic surveillance: is it a useful tool for local outbreak detection?.
[16] Diwan, V., Agnihotri, D., and Hulth, A. (2015). Collecting syndromic surveillance data
by mobile phone in rural India: implementation and feasibility. Global health action,
8(1), 26608.
[17] Chen, D., Cunningham, J., Moore, K., and Tian, J. (2011). Spatial and temporal aberration detection methods for disease outbreaks in syndromic surveillance systems. Annals
of GIS, 17(4), 211-220.
[18] E. Alvarez and F. Marsico, ‘COVID-19 mild cases determination from correlating
COVID-line calls to reported cases’, doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.26.20162008
[19] DETECTAR Operatives site at Argentina.gob.ar/coronavirus/detectar
[20] Impact on major Argentinian newspapers as Clarín (Spanish), BATimes (English) and
La Nación (Spanish), among others.
[21] Finch, W. H., and Hernández Finch, M. E. (2020). Poverty and Covid-19: rates of
incidence and deaths in the United States during the first 10 weeks of the pandemic.
Frontiers in Sociology, 5, 47.

16

