1

Vehicular Networks for Combating A Worldwide
Pandemic: Preventing the Spread of COVID-19

arXiv:2010.07602v1 [eess.SP] 15 Oct 2020

Ahmet M. Elbir, Senior Member, IEEE, Gokhan Gurbilek, Student Member, IEEE, Burak Soner, Student Member,
IEEE, and Sinem Coleri, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—As a worldwide pandemic, the coronavirus disease19 (COVID-19) has caused serious restrictions in people’s social
life, along with the loss of lives, the collapse of economies and
the disruption of humanitarian aids. Despite the advance of
technological developments, we, as researchers, have witnessed
that several issues need further investigation for a better response
to a pandemic outbreak. With this motivation, researchers
recently started developing ideas to stop or at least reduce the
spread of the pandemic. While there have been some prior
works on wireless networks for combating a pandemic scenario,
vehicular networks and their potential bottlenecks have not
yet been fully examined. This article provides an extensive
discussion on vehicular networking for combating a pandemic.
We provide the major applications of vehicular networking
for combating COVID-19 in public transportation, in-vehicle
diagnosis, border patrol and social distance monitoring. Next, we
identify the unique characteristics of the collected data in terms
of privacy, flexibility and coverage, then highlight corresponding
future directions in privacy preservation, resource allocation,
data caching and data routing. We believe that this work paves
the way for the development of new products and algorithms
that can facilitate the social life and help controlling the spread
of the pandemic.
Index Terms—Vehicular networks, COVID-19, pandemic, UAV,
transportation.

I. I NTRODUCTION
The coronavirus disease-19 (COVID-19) has spread globally, causing 37, 704, 153 confirmed cases and 1, 079, 029
deaths as of 2020/10/14 according to the world health organization (WHO). The pandemic has caused serious difficulties
in people’s social life, such as unprecedented numbers in
unemployment, travel restrictions and strict lockdowns. In
order to stop or at least slow down the spread of the COVID19, authorities initiated precautions to limit the social/physical
interactions by social distancing, i.e., keeping the distance
among people in social space at a certain level, specifically
1 meter (3 ft). Social distancing helps to reduce the effect
of spreading the disease from infected to healthy person.
The need for monitoring the social interaction of people
has motivated researchers to develop social network aware
wireless network architectures [1, 2]. Alsaeedy et al. in [1]
predicts the at-risk regions regarding the spread of COVID-19
by utilizing the mobility information of the mobile users in
Ahmet M. Elbir is with the Department of Electrical and Electronics Engineering, Duzce University, Duzce, Turkey (e-mail: ahmetmelbir@gmail.com).
Gokhan Gurbilek, Burak Soner and Sinem Coleri are with the Department
of Electrical and Electronics Engineering, Koc University, Istanbul, Turkey
(e-mail: {ggurbilek13, bsoner16, scoleri}@ku.edu.tr). Gokhan Gurbilek and
Burak Soner are also with Koc University Ford Otosan Automotive Technologies Laboratory (KUFOTAL), Istanbul, Turkey.

cellular networks. In [2], the proximity sensor data collected
from the individuals in a crowded area are used to monitor and
predict the spread of COVID-19. The extension of these social
wireless network architectures for the support of vehicular networking needs further investigation to meet the requirements
of vehicle based COVID-19 applications while incorporating
high mobility and intermittent connectivity.
Vehicular networking needs to be integrated into the communication architecture built for combating a pandemic to
trace the spread of disease, detect the violation of social
distancing and enable health care applications, since most
people use public and private transportation for their daily life.
The WHO identifies three basic steps for the tracing of the
disease in social life, which are contact identification, contact
listing, and follow-up. Vehicular networks can be used for this
purpose since most people use public and private transportation, where the interaction of the infection is almost inevitable.
The WHO further identifies vehicles as the locations, where
people violate the social distancing most. Using the sensors on
board in a vehicle, reliable data regarding the social distancing
can be collected from the people, and then shared with the
authorities. Furthermore, vehicular communication is required
for health care applications in case of a pandemic outbreak for
the path planning of emergency vehicles and the transmission
of the vitals of the patients from the emergency vehicle in
the field to the hospital. Unmanned aerial vehicles (UAV) can
also be used in social distance monitoring [3] and be integrated
with vehicular communication for more accurate predictions.
In the aforementioned scenarios, vehicular networks can be
used to collect and process the data by exploiting various
communication pairs with vehicles in the heterogeneous architecture [4]. User-to-vehicle (U2V) communication can be
used to collect data from the passengers in a vehicle. Vehicleto-infrastructure (V2I) communication can be used to convey
information from the vehicles to the data centers via road-side
units (RSUs) or cellular base stations. Furthermore, vehicleto-vehicle (V2V) communication can be used to disseminate
the information to the other vehicles for the applications like
emergency warning and route planning. Employing vehicular
communication can accelerate the process of detecting and
monitoring the infection while reducing human interactions,
preventing the spread of the disease.
This article focuses on vehicular networks for preventing
the spread of a highly contagious disease such as COVID19. In the remaining of this article, Section II provides a
survey of prior works related to the usage of general wireless
networks for COVID-19 and the usage of vehicular networking

2

TABLE I
S UMMARY OF M AJOR A PPLICATIONS OF V EHICULAR C OMMUNICATIONS FOR P REVENTING THE S PREAD OF A PANDEMIC
Public Transportation

In-Vehicle Diagnosis

Border Patrol

The health status, contact information of the passengers and
proximity sensor readings can be
collected in public transportation
then transmitted to a data center
for further analysis to monitor the
spread of the pandemic and make
predictions.

In medical vehicles, infection test
and diagnosis can be made on patients without necessarily accommodating them in the hospitals
where the spread of the disease
is a risk. The collected diagnosis
data in the vehicle can then be
shared with medical authorities.

At the checkpoints of cities, vehicles can collect the data from the
passengers and share it with road
side infrastructures automatically,
mitigating the long queues of vehicles and human interactions.

for general health applications. Section III provides vehicular
networking applications and their requirements for combating
a pandemic, which can take place in public transportation,
in-vehicle diagnosis, border patrol and social distance monitoring. Section IV identifies the related design and research
challenges in privacy preserving mechanisms, resource allocation, data caching, vehicular data routing and machine learning
(ML) solutions, and provide future research directions. Finally,
Section V summarizes the article with conclusions.

II. P RIOR A RT
In the following, we discuss the prior works in two categories, namely, wireless networks for COVID-19 and vehicular
networks for health applications.

A. Wireless Networks for COVID-19
Due to its recent emerge in 2019, there have been a limited
number of works on the usage of wireless networks for
COVID-19 [1, 2, 5]. In [1], Alsaeedy et al. exploit the ultradense small-cell deployment architecture of heterogeneous
networks (HetNets) to determine the at-risk regions of a geographical area by inferring the crowdedness and the mobility
information of smart phone users in the cells. The key idea
is that the cellular area is regarded as at-risk if it involves
strong mobility and high number of mobile users. Conversely,
the sparse areas, with people remaining at home, are regarded
as not at-risk. A social internet of things (SIoT) approach is
proposed to determine the contact intensity of people from
the proximity sensors by Wang et al. [2]. The sensor dataset,
collected in a school and a museum (not specific to COVID19), includes the contact intensity of the individuals and the
number of infected cases for different closure time intervals.
The collected data are modeled as a weighted undirectional
graph (WUG), and then fed to an ML model yielding the set
of at-risk individuals at the output. In addition, Nguyen et al.
[5] survey the wireless technologies for combating social distancing, such as WiFi, cellular, Bluetooth, ZigBee and RFID,
without specific interest on the vehicular networks. None of
these studies consider the additional challenges of vehicular
networking, including high network dynamics, intermittent
connectivity and heterogeneous architecture including U2V,
V2I and V2V.

UAV-assisted Social Distance
Monitoring
UAVs can be used to monitor social distancing together with vehicles on the streets to benefit
from the multiple sensors in the
vehicles, such as cameras, proximity sensors and radars/lidars.
Additionally, the collected data
can be used for the prediction of
the spread of the disease.

B. Vehicular Networking for Health Applications
The vitals of the patients need to be transmitted from
the emergency vehicles to the hospitals for faster diagnosis
and treatment. For this reason, vehicular networks have been
examined in various prior works in the context of health
applications for the transmission of health data [6, 7]. Bhoi et
al. study the vehicular communication between the ambulance
and the hospital in [6]. An emergency routing protocol is proposed to transfer the patient current status information to the
nearby hospital through V2V links with smaller link breakage
probability and shorter path. In [7] together with wireless body
sensor networks (WBSNs) in a smart ambulance application,
the vitals of the patients are measured and collected by WBSN,
and transmitted to the hospital from the ambulance via a V2I
communication environment. However, none of these studies
consider the additional requirements of a pandemic scenario
in privacy, flexibility, coverage and prioritization.
III. V EHICULAR N ETWORKING A PPLICATIONS AND
R EQUIREMENTS FOR P REVENTING PANDEMIC S PREAD
In this section, we exploit the structure of vehicular networks specifically tailored for the prevention of a pandemic.
First, we enlist the major vehicular applications and use cases
that can provide a successful response to stop or at least reduce
the spread of a pandemic, and then provide their data and
network requirements.
A. Applications and Use Cases
The major vehicular applications for preventing the pandemic spread are investigated under four categories, as summarized in Table I: 1) Public transportation, 2) In-vehicle
infection diagnosis, 3) Border patrol and 4) UAV-assisted
crowd monitoring.
1) Public Transportation: In case of a pandemic, the tracing of the disease in social life is crucial in order to monitor
and control the spread of the disease. In public transportation,
the passenger data can be collected and then transmitted to a
data server and used by authorities, as illustrated in Figure 1.
The collected data can include the identification, travel history,
health information of the passengers, including the contact
information, the status of having chronic illness, whether being
infected by the disease, and proximity sensor readings identifying the distance among the passengers. The identification,
travel history and health information of the passengers can

3

Fig. 1. Infection tracing and data collection in public transportation.

Fig. 2. Border patrol at city checkpoints.

be collected via U2V communication by either reading the
identity card of the passengers or their mobile phones with a
device located in public transportation vehicles. On the other
hand, the proximity sensors can be placed in various locations
within the vehicle and send either raw data or processed data
to the vehicle via U2V communication. Then, the data can
be transmitted to the cloud servers to be further processed
and stored by exploiting both V2V and V2I communication.
These data are used by the government authorities to monitor
the spread of the disease such that if the infection is detected
in an individual, then the others who have close relation,
and have used the same public transportation are informed.
This may be followed by stay-at-home measures or even strict
lockdowns depending on the spread of the disease and capacity
of the hospitals. Moreover, an infection risk factor can be
calculated using these data and the vehicle passenger capacity
information, so that the public transportation vehicles above a
certain risk factor can be prevented to board new passengers.
Furthermore, individual infection risk factor and infection
severity factor can be calculated for the passengers by using
an artificial neural network (ANN) based data processing. For
example, the collected data from the passengers can be used
to train an ANN whose output indicates the risk factor of the

vehicle in public transportation.
2) In-Vehicle Infection Diagnosis: We have witnessed that
most of the hospitals operate at full capacity during a pandemic, hence, the diagnosis and treatment of the new-coming
patients becomes a real challenge such that some of the
governments have built temporary medical infrastructures. In
this respect, the in-vehicle diagnosis of the disease can be
helpful, as illustrated in Figure 3. Specifically, samples are
collected from the patients and tested for COVID-19 within
the vehicle without necessarily accommodating them in the
hospitals, where the spread of the disease is at a higher risk.
The collected data including the test results and the contact
information of the patients in the medical vehicle are sent to
the medical authorities. Then, the patients can have further
treatment and advices upon the diagnosis in a remote fashion.
This approach enables a rapid diagnosis while keeping the risk
of crowd in the hospitals at minimum level.
3) Border Patrol: In case of a worldwide pandemic, the
travel of the people via public or private transportation may
lead to long queues of vehicles before the checkpoints in
the city entrances or even within the city depending on the
spread of the disease, where the health status, follow-up of
the interaction with infected individuals and travel allowances

4

Fig. 3. In-vehicle COVID-19 diagnosis.

Fig. 4. UAV-assisted social distance monitoring via ML, involving data collection from the vehicles, data processing in the vehicles and model training in
the cloud center and vehicles.

of the passengers are usually checked. In such a scenario,
vehicular networking can be used to automatically transfer
the passenger data from the vehicles to the RSUs or police
cars on the side of the road, as illustrated in Figure 2. The
passenger data can be collected by again reading the identity
card of the passengers or their mobile phones from the RSUs
via V2I communication. Then, the data are transmitted from
the RSUs to the cloud server for further investigation regarding
the interaction of the passengers with infected individuals and
their travel allowances. Such a communication architecture
results in the automatic monitoring of the passengers, stopping
the vehicles only if there is any suspicion about the violation
of regulations, saving time and fuel efficiency. Furthermore,
this will minimize the human interactions in the monitoring
process.
4) UAV-assisted Crowd Monitoring: During COVID-19,
UAVs have been used to monitor the crowd of people for
social distancing, by exploiting their “bird’s-eye-view” and
high flexibility [3]. Cameras mounted on the UAVs monitor the
average social distance in the crowded areas in different cities,
allowing the future predictions on the spread of the pandemic,

for updating/improving the precautionary measures taken by
local authorities. Here, ML is mostly used for the processing
of the image data collected from the cameras of the UAVs
to detect and track the individuals, as illustrated in Figure 4.
These data are then sent to a cloud data server or a ground
data station for model training since ML models require huge
parallel processing resources, which cannot be conducted in
the UAV hardware. Once the ML model is trained, the UAVs
are used over a crowded area for social distance monitoring.
In order to make more accurate predictions, UAVs can be
used together with vehicles on the streets to benefit from the
multiple sensors in the vehicles, such as cameras, proximity
sensors and radars/lidars. Furthermore, the usage of vehicles in
this scenario can provide additional computing hardware and
power capability to improve the battery-limited performance
of UAVs. Hence, the collected data from the UAV can be
sent to a vehicle for data processing to deal with the battery
constraints.
When the vehicular distribution in the cities is sparse in
case of a pandemic, especially during a lockdown, UAVs can
be integrated into the V2V communication architecture to

5

Fig. 5. UAV-assisted vehicular communication. UAVs can act like message relays between ground vehicles, providing reliable communications in case of
long distance, blockages between the vehicles and emergency.

deliver information about the health status of passengers in
the vehicles and path planning. In this scenario, UAVs can
act as message relays for the communication link between the
vehicles, as illustrated in Figure 5. For example, in case of an
accident, UAVs may quickly arrive at the incident scene and
collect critical information from nearby vehicles.
B. Requirements
In the aforementioned applications, the collected data have
unique characteristics in terms of privacy, flexibility, coverage
and prioritization, thus, demand novel vehicular network design approaches to take into account the highly mobile and
heterogeneous architecture of vehicular networks, as detailed
below.
1) Privacy: One of the main challenges in the above applications is preserving the privacy during both data collection
and its transmission over the vehicular network. The data
collected from a user should be available to only the user itself
and the central authority, thus, personal data protection against
large scale malicious activities must be provided. Considering
the privacy during transmission, especially in the cases of
building a connection to a central entity via multi-hop V2V
links, the privacy of the information must be preserved from
the other vehicles in the link and the RSUs.
2) Flexibility: In conventional V2V networks, standard
message structures include Cooperative Awareness Message
(CAM), consisting of vehicle data, including location, heading and speed information, and Decentralized Environmental
Notification Message (DENM), consisting of emergency notification data, including event cause code, sub-cause code
and severity information, defined by ETSI [8]. Since the
data transmitted in CAM and DENM have fixed sizes, these
message structures employ fixed frame size. Moreover, CAM
and DENM enforce strict timing. CAM is sent periodically
at least once every second, whereas DENM is an event-based
notification message with different latency constraints for each
event. However, the data specifically collected for pandemic
prevention are highly unstructured and variable in both frame
size and periodicity. The travel histories of different users
may vary in size significantly. Moreover, the availability of

sensor readings might be highly sporadic in the network. The
variable size and periodicity of the pandemic data requires
the development of adaptive and flexible resource allocation
and management algorithms re-optimized for data with such
unstructured features, while taking into account the dynamic
network topology caused by the vehicle mobility.
3) Coverage: Accurate prediction and documentation demand a fine coverage of the collected pandemic data. The
aforementioned vehicular applications are expected to improve
the coverage of the collected data due to the common use
of vehicles in daily life. However, it may not be always
possible for a vehicle to transmit its collected pandemic data
to the cloud server, due to the dis- and re-connections in the
link caused by the dynamic nature of the vehicular channel.
Furthermore, if the pandemic data are collected sparsely and
dispersively, it is of a great challenge to transfer the collected
pandemic data to the cloud data centers because of the lack
of infrastructure to collect data from the vehicles, e.g., rare
deployment of the RSUs in suburban areas. Then, it may be
possible to have no information on pandemic status for some
suburban regions, preventing the authorities from making quarantine decision for such regions. Therefore, efficient multihop data routing protocols are required for vehicular domain,
aiming to increase the coverage of the network.
4) Prioritization: Late delivery of the pandemic data to
the authorities may prevent taking the necessary precautions,
especially for the regions lacking the necessary infrastructure
to collect data from vehicles. In such regions, the data is
cached by the vehicles and transmitted to the central authority
as soon as they establish a connection to the infrastructure. In
the cases of having limited access to the infrastructure, the vehicles need to choose which message to send. Here, a message
prioritization criteria is required considering both the content
and freshness of the message. Regarding the content, the data
of the users tested positive for COVID-19 should have a higher
priority than the others. Moreover, age of information (AoI),
as a measure of freshness of the pandemic data, needs to be
considered for the prioritization, since the outdated pandemic
data may not be useful to the authorities in determining the
pandemic spread of the region. Hence, pandemic data requires
content-based prioritization mechanisms alongside with AoI-

6

based caching protocols, mainly considering the locations
where the vehicles have limited access to the infrastructure.
IV. O PEN C HALLENGES AND F UTURE R ESEARCH
D IRECTIONS
In this section, we provide an extensive analysis on the
research challenges in privacy, flexibility, coverage and prioritization, which are briefly discussed above, and provide related
solutions as a future direction of research.
A. Privacy Preserving Mechanisms
Privacy protection of the pandemic data must be handled
during both data collection and its transmission over the vehicular network, taking into account that it consists of contentsensitive information as user name, ID and travel history.
The privacy preserving mechanisms during data collection can
be achieved by developing decentralized data collection and
storage [9]. Instead of collecting the data of all individuals in
a cloud server, the pandemic data can be collected and cached
in a decentralized manner, minimizing the vulnerability of the
whole data being hacked. To practically realize this approach
in a vehicular network, each vehicle can act as the nodes of
this decentralized architecture to form a cluster of the data
of its own. Then, a device in the vehicle assigns a unique
code to each of the passengers and share these data with each
individual’s cell phone without transmitting the information
to the cloud data center. When an individual is subsequently
diagnosed positive for COVID-19, he/she can input the diagnosis result into his/her cell phone while informing the other
passengers in the cluster as well as the authorities. Thus, only
the information belonging to the clusters containing at least
one positively diagnosed person is shared with the authorities.
This reduces the risk of large scale malicious activities during
data transmission, by preventing the unnecessary share of the
information of people in the clusters without any positively
diagnosed person.
Regarding the data transmission, vehicular networks have
previously incorporated privacy preserving methods categorized as pseudonymization, randomization and aggregation [10]. Pseudonymization is a procedure that alters the
personal IDs in the data with the artificially created IDs.
However, pseudonymization of the pandemic data is not an
option since the ID and the name of the user is also desired
to be transmitted to the central authority. On the other hand,
randomization is a technique of perturbing a piece of the
data before transmission, to hide the exact information, which
leads to a decrease in the information accuracy. Similarly,
aggregation techniques, targeting to preserve the privacy of
the raw data, lead to decreased information accuracy. Even
though aggregation methods can be applied to some of the
pandemic applications like UAV-assisted monitoring for preserving data privacy, in general, they cannot be applicable to
the applications where the raw data itself is required, such as
border patrol applications. Hence, in general, the corruptions
on the data due to the use of randomization and aggregation
techniques may incur inaccurate results in data processing. As
a result, deeper investigation is required to protect the privacy

of the information, taking into account the aforementioned
vehicular pandemic applications requiring accurate data with
the personal information content.
B. Resource Allocation
Resource allocation is a challenge for pandemic applications
since the data is unstructured and variable in both size and
periodicity. In the literature, there exist some studies on
adaptive protocol design targeting such data characteristics.
In [11], the authors propose an adaptive bandwidth assignment
mechanism for video transmission, by allocating more bandwidth to the high priority packets, which are the inter-frame
packets, and less bandwidth to the low priority packets, which
are the predicted frame packets of H.264 standard video coding
mechanism, ensuring that every packet is sent at the minimum
sending rate for fairness. In [12], an optimal rate-adaptive inplatoon data dissemination technique is proposed. The study
approaches to the resource allocation problem as an end-to-end
optimization problem for a multi-hop communication system,
targeting to minimize the end-to-end latency, and investigating
the impact of packet and platoon sizes on the latency. The
usage of these techniques for the optimal resource allocation in
vehicular pandemic applications requires addressing the flexibility and prioritization requirements through the formulation
of a content-based prioritization mechanism.
C. Data Caching
In addition to preserving privacy, data caching can be
utilized to satisfy the flexibility, coverage and prioritization
requirements of the pandemic data. Regarding the caching
mechanisms in vehicular domain, unlike other wireless terminals, such as smartphones or sensors, vehicles do not have
strict energy or memory constraints. Hence, in vehicular applications, the simplest caching approach is to cache all the data
overheard over the wireless channel, which is called cache everything in the air. However, indiscriminate caching can waste
network resources and reduce the caching efficiency [13].
Therefore, connectivity-aware caching algorithms are investigated with the goal of maximizing the total caching utility,
which is introduced as a function of caching gain and caching
cost. Additionally, the effect of cache size on the delivery rate
and latency has been analyzed for different caching mechanisms. Moreover, for the video streaming applications, bitrate adaptive and scalable caching mechanisms are proposed,
considering the quality of experience as a performance metric.
Furthermore, AoI-based caching mechanisms running at RSUs
are investigated with the objective of maximizing the freshness
of the vehicle received information. These studies need to be
extended for the pandemic applications in vehicular networks,
with the goal of increasing the coverage, when the access
to the infrastructure is not available, as well as providing
more efficient and flexible resource allocation, and reduced
access delay. The caching utility and network performance
of an adaptive caching algorithm need to be investigated
by incorporating a prioritization mechanism for accurate and
fast data extraction while satisfying a fine coverage of the
variable size pandemic data. Moreover, the AoI-based caching

7

mechanisms for uplink vehicular channel need to be studied,
while taking account of the V2V link durability for the
pandemic applications.

explicitly optimized with the objective of maximizing the FL
convergence rate.
V. S UMMARY

D. Vehicular Data Routing
The coverage of the vehicular network for the pandemic
applications can be extended by employing flexible routing
mechanisms [14]. There are numerous studies related to
multi-hop routing protocols in vehicular ad hoc networks
(VANETs). Flexible position-based routing mechanisms have
been proposed with the goal of offering session continuity
and reachability to the infrastructure, by dynamic V2V and
V2I link selection based on the real-time feasibility of the
links. Additionally, for the transmission of the health information of a patient in an ambulance to the hospital, a
routing protocol targeting the V2V links with smaller link
breakage probability is investigated. Moreover, privacy preserving opportunistic routing protocols for vehicular networks
utilizing Paillier homomorphic encryption scheme is employed
to enable the vehicles to compute and compare the similarities
in their routing metrics without compromising the data privacy.
Furthermore, priority and broadcast based routing protocols in
VANETs consider the different quality of service requirements
for the packets at different priority classes. For the usage
of these routing algorithms in pandemic applications, these
routing algorithms need to be extended by considering the
privacy and prioritization requirements of the pandemic data.
E. Machine Learning Solutions
ML-based solutions can be employed for data aggregation to
help flexible resource allocation mechanisms by reducing the
data transmission cost in the network. Decentralized ML approaches, such as federated learning (FL), have been recently
proposed for vehicular communication to reduce the data
processing and inference complexity [15]. In FL, the training
of the ML model is performed without the transmission of
the whole dataset, instead, only the model updates, i.e., the
gradients of the model parameters, are sent to a cloud server
for model training, preserving the data privacy. FL can be
used for in-vehicle infection diagnosis application, where the
input of the learning model can be the collected data from the
individuals, such as infection test data and CT (computerized
tomography) images, and the output can be the classification
of whether the subject is COVID-19 positive/negative. FL
can also be helpful in multi-UAV-assisted crowd monitoring
applications, in which the input of the learning model can
be the image data obtained from the UAV cameras and
the output can be the risk factor in accordance with the
crowdedness. In both VANET and multi-UAV scenario, the
convergence rate of FL greatly depends on the quality of
the communication link between the vehicles and the cloud
server. However, the availability of the network resources
vary significantly among the nodes due to both sparse spatial
distribution and heterogeneous architecture of the vehicular
networks. This makes FL-based model training a challenging
task for vehicular networks, wherein the device scheduling
and resource management during model training should be

This article focuses on the usage of vehicular networking in
combating a pandemic. We investigate vehicular applications
in public transportation, in-vehicle diagnosis, border patrol and
UAV-assisted social monitoring. Each of these applications
is demonstrated to introduce new challenges in terms of
privacy, flexibility, coverage and prioritization of data. We
provide a comprehensive analysis of these requirements and
corresponding research challenges, and highlight the related
future research directions. We believe that this work provides
a comprehensive insight for research and product development
in the usage of vehicular networking for reducing the spread
of the pandemic.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors acknowledge the support of Ford Otosan.
R EFERENCES
[1] A. A. R. Alsaeedy and E. Chong, “Detecting Regions At Risk for
Spreading COVID-19 Using Existing Cellular Wireless Network Functionalities,” IEEE Open Journal of Engineering in Medicine and Biology,
pp. 1–1, 2020.
[2] B. Wang, Y. Sun, T. Q. Duong, L. D. Nguyen, and L. Hanzo, “RiskAware Identification of Highly Suspected COVID-19 Cases in Social
IoT: A Joint Graph Theory and Reinforcement Learning Approach,”
IEEE Access, pp. 1–1, 2020.
[3] “Police to use drone to make sure people are obeying social
distancing,” https://metro.co.uk/2020/04/22/police-use-drone-make-surepeople-obeying-social-distancing-12591529/, Accessed 1 Oct. 2020.
[4] S. Ucar, S. C. Ergen, and O. Ozkasap, “Multihop-Cluster-Based IEEE
802.11p and LTE Hybrid Architecture for VANET Safety Message
Dissemination,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 65, no. 4, pp. 2621–
2636, 2016.
[5] C. T. Nguyen, Y. M. Saputra, N. V. Huynh, N. Nguyen, T. V. Khoa,
B. M. Tuan, D. N. Nguyen, D. T. Hoang, T. X. Vu, E. Dutkiewicz,
S. Chatzinotas, and B. Ottersten, “A Comprehensive Survey of Enabling
and Emerging Technologies for Social Distancing—Part I: Fundamentals
and Enabling Technologies,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 153 479–153 507,
2020.
[6] S. K. Bhoi and P. M. Khilar, “VehiHealth: An Emergency Routing
Protocol for Vehicular Ad Hoc Network to Support Healthcare System,”
Journal of Medical Systems, vol. 40, no. 3, p. 65, Dec 2015.
[7] H. Noshadi, E. Giordano, H. Hagopian, G. Pau, M. Gerla, and M. Sarrafzadeh, “Remote Medical Monitoring Through Vehicular Ad Hoc
Network,” in 2008 IEEE 68th Vehicular Technology Conference, 2008,
pp. 1–5.
[8] “Intelligent transport systems (its); vehicular communications; basic set
of applications; part 2: Specification of cooperative awareness basic
service,” European Telecommunications Standards Institute, Sophia Antipolis Cedex, FR, Standard, Mar. 2011.
[9] “Apple
&
Google,
Privacy-Preserving
Contact
Tracing,”
https://www.apple.com/covid19/contacttracing, Accessed 1 Oct.
2020.
[10] H.-Y. Tran and J. Hu, “Privacy-preserving big data analytics a comprehensive survey,” Journal of Parallel and Distributed Computing, vol.
134, pp. 207 – 218, 2019.
[11] Z. Wang and F. Yu, “A Flexible and Reliable Traffic Control Protocol
for Wireless Multimedia Sensor Networks,” International Journal of
Distributed Sensor Networks, vol. 10, no. 4, p. 102742, 2014.
[12] K. Li, W. Ni, E. Tovar, and M. Guizani, “Optimal Rate-Adaptive Data
Dissemination in Vehicular Platoons,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst.,
pp. 1–11, 2019.
[13] N. Carlsson and D. Eager, “Ephemeral Content Popularity at the
Edge and Implications for On-Demand Caching,” IEEE Trans. Parallel
Distrib. Syst., vol. 28, no. 6, pp. 1621–1634, 2017.

8

[14] C. Suthaputchakun and Z. Sun, “Priority based Routing Protocol in
Vehicular Ad hoc Network,” in 2011 IEEE Symposium on Computers
and Communications (ISCC), 2011, pp. 723–728.
[15] A. M. Elbir, B. Soner, and S. Coleri, “Federated Learning in Vehicular
Networks,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.01412, 2020.

Ahmet M. Elbir received the B.S. degree with Honors from Firat University
in 2009 and the Ph.D. degree from Middle East Technical University (METU)
in 2016, both in electrical engineering. He is the recipient of 2016 METU best
Ph.D. thesis award for his doctoral studies. He serves as an Associate Editor
for IEEE Access since 2018. Currently, he is a visiting postdoctoral researcher
at Koc University, Istanbul, Turkey; and research fellow at Duzce University,
Duzce, Turkey. His research interests include array signal processing, sparsitydriven convex optimization, signal processing for communications and deep
learning for array signal processing.

Gokhan Gurbilek received the B.S. and M.S. degrees in electrical and
electronics engineering in 2018 and 2020, respectively, from Koc University, Istanbul, Turkey, where he is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree in
electrical engineering with the Wireless Networks Laboratory, Department
Electrical Engineering, under the supervision of Prof. S. Coleri. His research
interests include channel characterization and physical layer design in Visible
Light Communication and mmWave systems, and vehicular networks. He
is currently working on next generation inter-vehicular and intra-vehicular
communication technologies as a part of Koc University Ford Otosan Automotive Technologies Laboratory (KUFOTAL). Mr. Gurbilek received a Koc
University Full Merit Scholarship in 2013.

Sinem Coleri received the B.S. degree in electrical and electronics engineering from Bilkent University in 2000, and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees
in electrical engineering and computer sciences from the University of
California at Berkeley in 2002 and 2005, respectively. She was a Research
Scientist with the Wireless Sensor Networks Berkeley Laboratory under the
sponsorship of Pirelli and Telecom Italia from 2006 to 2009. Since 2009,
she has been a Faculty Member with the Department of Electrical and
Electronics Engineering, Koc University, where she is currently a Professor.
Her research interests are in wireless communications and networking with
applications in machine-to-machine communication, sensor networks, and
intelligent transportation systems.

