Machine Learning Research Towards Combating
COVID-19: Virus Detection, Spread Prevention,
and Medical Assistance
Osama Shahid∗ , Mohammad Nasajpour∗ , Seyedamin Pouriyeh∗ , Reza M. Parizi† , Meng Han∗ , Maria Valero∗ ,
Fangyu Li ‡ , Mohammed Aledhari§ , Quan Z. Sheng¶

arXiv:2010.07036v1 [cs.CY] 29 Sep 2020

∗

Department of Information Technology, Kennesaw State University, Marietta, GA, USA
{oshahid1, mnasajp1}@students.kennesaw.edu, {spouriye, mhan9, mvalero2}@kennesaw.edu
† Department of Software Engineering and Game Development, Kennesaw State University, Marietta, GA, USA
rparizi1@kennesaw.edu
‡ Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Kennesaw State University, Marietta, GA, USA
fli6@kennesaw.edu
§ Department of Computer Science, Kennesaw State University, Marietta, GA, USA
maledhar@kennesaw.edu
¶ Department of Computing, Macquarie University, Sydney, Australia
michael.sheng@mq.edu.au

Abstract—COVID-19 was first discovered in December 2019
and has continued to rapidly spread across countries worldwide
infecting thousands and millions of people. The virus is deadly,
and people who are suffering from prior illnesses or are older
than the age of 60 are at a higher risk of mortality. Medicine and
Healthcare industries have surged towards finding a cure, and
different policies have been amended to mitigate the spread of
the virus. While Machine Learning (ML) methods have been
widely used in other domains, there is now a high demand
for ML-aided diagnosis systems for screening, tracking, and
predicting the spread of COVID-19 and finding a cure against
it. In this paper, we present a journey of what role ML has
played so far in combating the virus, mainly looking at it from
a screening, forecasting, and vaccine perspectives. We present a
comprehensive survey of the ML algorithms and models that can
be used on this expedition and aid with battling the virus.
Index Terms—COVID-19, Machine Learning, Artificial Intelligence, Healthcare, Drug Development, Prevention, Predictive
Analysis, Diagnosis, Image Classification.

I. I NTRODUCTION
In December 2019, a novel severe contagious respiratory
syndrome coronavirus 2, which is a type of Severe Acute
Respiratory Syndrome (SARS-CoV-2) virus called COVID-19,
was discovered in Wuhan, China [1]. COVID-19 virus is
airborne and can easily spread and infect people [2]. According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC) [3], the infected people show a range of symptoms
like dry cough, shortness of breath, fatigue, losing the sense of
taste and smell, diarrhea, and congestion. Infected patients can
also present fever episodes. Strangely enough, some patients
who have contracted the virus might not even show any of
the aforementioned symptoms [4]. They can feel completely
Corresponding author: Seyedamin Pouriyeh (email: spouriye@kennesaw.edu).

normal carrying the virus and continuing to spread the disease
without knowing [4]. As COVID-19 has a rapid nature of
spreading, the World Health Organization (WHO) declared
it as a global pandemic in March 2020 [5]. At the time of
writing this paper (i.e., September 2020), the total number of
confirmed COVID-19 cases worldwide was over 32 million
[6]. To tackle this outbreak, scientists in different research
communities are seeking a wide variety of computer-aided
systems such as the Internet of Things [7], Machine Learning
(ML) or Deep Learning (DL) techniques [8], [9], Big Data
[10], and Blockchain [11] that can assist with overcoming the
challenges brought by COVID-19. These technologies can be
used for controlling the spread of the virus, detecting the virus,
or even designing and manufacturing a vaccine or drug to
combat it.
There were two epidemics in the past from the coronavirus
family including Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARSCoV) [12] and Middle Eastern Respiratory Syndrome (MERS)
[13]. SARS-CoV is a respiratory virus that was transmissible
from person to person and it was first identified in 2003. The
virus had over 8,000 confirmed cases worldwide during its
course which affected over 26 countries [14]. MERS is also a
respiratory virus with similar symptoms of SARS-CoV.
ML, as a subset of Artificial Intelligence (AI), has shown a
lot of potentials in many industries like retail [15], banks [16],
healthcare [17], [18], pharmaceuticals [19], and many more
[20]. ML techniques can be programmed to imitate human
intelligence. For example, in the healthcare industry, ML
techniques can be trained and used towards medical diagnosis
[21]. ML models have been vastly trained over a dataset
consisting of medical images like Computed Tomography (CT)
Scan, Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI), or X-Ray to detect

anomalies [22], [23]. Its classification models can be expanded
in diverse areas including cancer [24], diabetes [25], fatty liver
[26], etc. As an example, breast cancer can be diagnosed with
a prediction accuracy of 97.13% [27] using ML models.
During previous epidemics, ML techniques have been
widely implemented in order to assist healthcare authorities
for better actions regarding the diseases [28]. For example,
Sandhu et al. [29] proposed an ML model that utilizes GPS
technology along with cloud computing power and Google
Maps to represent potentially infected patients and provide an
alternative route for uninfected users resulting in potentially
mitigating the spread. The model reaches the classification
accuracy of 80% in re-routing away from infected patients. In
another study, Choi et al. [30] used ML models for sentimental
analysis to review public overreaction appearing in media
articles and social media platforms. This type of in-depth
analysis can rapidly monitor the public reaction. It can also
aid policymakers in taking the right actions in reducing fear
and distress from the public regarding MERS.
ML has also been widely used in order to improve clinical
decision-making regarding the current COVID-19 pandemic
[31]. Researchers, using ML algorithms and clustering technique, are able to forecast the spread in provinces [32], [33].
ML methods of image classification are used by the scientific
community to help in diagnosing the deadly virus [34]. With
the objective of finding a cure for the virus, ML algorithms
are used to evaluate how dependable are off-the-counter drugs
may be used to help infected patients [35].
The aforementioned examples show the potential of ML in
the detection, diagnosis and prediction of viruses. This paper
largely provides a survey reviewing the research that has been
dedicated by the scientific community in using ML technology
in combating COVID-19. In particular, we investigate the role
of ML in detecting or screening, forecasting, and medical
assistance for the virus.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we review the role of ML in detecting and the screening
process of COVID-19. We study the use of different ML
techniques regarding four major sections for diagnosing and
screening including Medical Imaging, Chatbot, and Artificial
Intelligence of Things (AIoT). In Section III, the importance of
disease contamination and its exposure to others are discussed
regarding the use of ML for tracking and predicting the
spread of COVID-19. This section is mainly divided into three
parts reviewing preventing the spread, contact tracing, and
forecasting. Similarly, Section IV reviews the need for medical
assistance during the pandemic and how ML technology can
be integrated. Understanding the virus and developing a drug
or vaccine using ML techniques are discussed in this section
as well. Finally, we discuss, outline future work, and conclude
in sections V and VI respectively.
II. ML T ECHNIQUES TOWARDS D ETECTING & S CREENING
COVID-19
Detecting either a symptomatic or asymptomatic disease in
an early stage could be highly effective in order to start the

process of treatment. Regarding the COVID-19, not only it
helps to avoid the spread of contamination, but also it is costbeneficial. The standard method of diagnosing COVID-19 is
to conduct Reverse-Transcription Polymerase Chain Reaction
(RT-PCR) test [36]. The RT-PCR is a swab test that is used
to detect nucleic acid from COVID-19 in the upper and
lower respiratory system. At the beginning of the pandemic,
the sensitivity of the RT-PCR test could show negative for
patients who were later in-fact confirmed positive, hence the
reporting of false-negative rates was high [37]. There was also
a concern about having a shortage and a limited number of
tests, and the high-cost factor of producing and conducting
them [38]. It is important to explore alternative methods
of diagnosing COVID-19 that would speed-up the process
[39]. To help overcome the challenge presented in diagnosing
COVID-19. ML models and algorithms have shown promising
results in different stages of COVID-19 [40]. In general, ML
techniques have been widely utilized in the healthcare domain
and similarly, it can be used towards analyzing data and
diagnosing COVID-19 using medical imaging which includes
X-Ray and CT Scan images [34]. In this section, we review
different ML techniques that have been used for screening
and diagnosis of COVID-19. Moreover, we discuss other MLbased tools including Chatbots and Artificial Intelligence of
Things (AIoT).
A. Medical Imaging
Diagnosing COVID-19 is one of the most important parts
of dealing with the disease. As a result of low access and
high possibility of false-negative results to the RT-PCR kits,
there is an essential need for using other approaches such as
medical images analysis for accurate and reliable screening
and diagnosis in COVID-19 [41]. In general, analyzing medical imaging modalities such as chest X-ray and CT-Scan have
key contributions in confirming the diagnosis of COVID-19 as
well as screening the progression of the disease [42]. Different
ML techniques that incorporate X-ray and CT-Scan image
processing approaches could help physicians and healthcare
professionals as a better way for diagnosis and understanding
of the progression of the COVID-19 disease.
1) X-ray: During this pandemic, chest imaging can be an
important part of the COVID-19 in early stage of detection.
Classifying patients rapidly is what is expected from these
approaches. Within the categorization of medical imaging,
Chest X-Ray (CXR) was recommended to be implemented as
the first medical imaging regarding COVID-19 by the Italian
Society of Radiology (SIRM) [43]. Figure 1 demonstrates the
CXR images from infected and normal people. According
to Cozzi et al. [44], CXR has a sensitivity of 67.1% which
can be first implemented in special cases including assisting
radiologists with better COVID-19 cases identification and
fast treatment assigning to the patient. Additionally, CXR is
inexpensive and secure because of minimizing the risk of
contamination which makes a safer workplace for healthcare
workers as well.

In order to decrease the amount of work by radiologists, ML
techniques can be assigned to classify patients with respect
to COVID-19. To do that, researchers are mostly focused on
the ML classification models such as Support Vector Machine
(SVM), Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN), DL. One
approach [45] implemented X-Ray in order to classify the lung
lesions (caused by COVID-19) with Multi-level Threshold
(MT) process and SVM model. Within this model, firstly,
the lung image contrast will be enhanced. Secondly, the
image will be reduced into specific sections (using MT) to
avoid duplication of work on uninfected areas. Lastly, the
SVM model classifies the sections of the lung with respect
to the predefined healthy lungs. Sethy et al. [46] developed
a platform using a variety of Deep Convolutional Neural
Networks (DCNN) models classifying within the SVM with
two different datasets in order to detect COVID-19 cases based
on the related CRX image. Similarly, [47] proposed a DCNN
model using the data gathered from two hospitals in Italy to
represents the importance of AI in the detection of COVID-19.
Zhang et al. [48] trained ML models over a large viral
pneumonia dataset of CXR images to detect anomalies. They
tested their model on a completely different dataset that has
COVID-19 CXR images. This is done as one of the symptoms
of COVID-19 can be pneumonia [3]. The results are impressive as the model performs well when tested on the COVID-19
dataset with the Area Under the Curve (AUC) of 83.61%. It is
even more impressive as the model was trained on a different
dataset and yet performed well. Similarly, Wang et al. [49]
utilized COVIDx dataset, a publicly available dataset consists
of COVID-19, pneumonia and non-COVID-19 pneumoniarelated X-ray images. The authors used this data to train their
model for detection of COVID-19, the Deep Neural Network
(DNN) is referred to as COVID-Net showing promising results
in diagnosing infected patients. Apostolopoulos et al. [50]
used transfer learning approaches like feature extraction and
fine-tuning of CNN based models and trained and tested over
similar datasets achieving a prediction accuracy up to almost
98%. They demonstrated that implementing transfer learning
can have a significant improvement in results. Most ML classifiers are trained and tested to achieve high prediction accuracy
of COVID-19; however, it is also important to quantify the
uncertainty that could exist by using such classifiers as a
primary medium of diagnosis. An approach to validate the
ML prediction of diagnosis in CXR images was reviewed by
Ghoshal et al. [51]. It exploited a Bayesian Deep Learning
classifier to estimate the model uncertainty. The result analysis
displays a strong correlation between uncertainty and accuracy
of prediction, which means that the higher the uncertainty
outcome, the more reliable the prediction accuracy.
Many other ML models are utilized for detecting
COVID-19, and a subset of them are presented in Table I.
The references are both published papers and also papers that
are yet to be peer-reviewed. All references that are presented in
the table show high performance towards detecting predicting
COVID-19 through CXR images.

2) CT-Scan: Another applicable medical imaging tool for
COVID-19 diagnosis is a chest Computed Tomography (CT)
Scan which is more accurate in detecting COVID-19 cases
[79]. Due to respiratory problems of COVID-19 which include
lung abnormalities, CT-Scan can be specified as the detecting
procedure for the early stage of a pandemic while none of
the COVID-19 symptoms appear in patients [80]. Figure 2
demonstrates the CT-Scan images from infected and normal
people.
Ardakani et al. [81] implemented a Computer-aided diagnosis system to show the benefits of DL in diagnosing COVID-19
using a variety of CNNs which conclude the ResNet-101 as
the most precise model. The proposed model can lower the
workload of radiology workers as well. Similarly, Li et al. [82]
developed a DL framework known as COVID-19 detection
neural network (COVNet) which can differentiate COVID-19
from typical types of pneumonia using chest CT-Scan images.
An ML model for quantitative infection assessment through
CT Scan images was modeled by Shan et al. [83] suggesting
their model is capable of estimating the shape, volume, and the
percentage of infection. A Human-In-The-Loop method [84]
was proposed that involves healthcare workers to intervene
with the VB-Net (a modified 3D CNN that combines V-Net
and bottle-neck structure) ML model to add more CT-Scan
images into the training model to constantly update the model
and produce more efficient results. Tang, et al. [85] introduced
another method to detect the severity of COVID-19 through
assessing quantitative features from CT-Scan images. The use
of the Random Forest (RF) model including 500 decision
trees along with three-fold cross-validation allows authors to
calculate 63 quantitative features of COVID-19 like infection
volume or lung ratio. However, the model is limited by a
binary classification i.e., results can either be severe or nonsevere when they should be mild, common, severe, and critical.
Gozes et al. [86] trained clinical models integrated with ML
to detect the virus that achieves high accuracy and is also able
to quantify the burden of the disease.
Similar to the previous section, ML techniques that can
be used for detecting COVID-19 from CT-Scan images are
presented in Table II. The list of references includes both
published and yet to be peer-reviewed.
B. Chatbots
Computer programs developed to communicate with humans by adopting natural languages are called chatbots [103].
A chatbot basically can communicate with different users
and generate proper responses to those users based on their
inputs. Recently, the COVID-19 pandemic has led to building
different chatbots instead of using hotlines as a communication
method. This will reduce hospital visits and increase the
efficiency of communicating [104]. Generally, chatbots are
implemented in order to provide an online conversation with
the user by either text or voice displays on web applications,
smartphone applications, channels, and so on [105]. This
conversation can help the user to have a better understanding
of his or her situation and gives some hints to users so

Fig. 1. Chest X-Ray (CXR) images of COVID-19 infected people versus uninfected people [52].
TABLE I
ML R ESEARCH DONE TOWARDS DIAGNOSING COVID-19 USING X-RAY (CXR) DATASETS .
Reference

Dataset

Methods

Remarks

[50]

Multiple Datasets that include 448 confirmed COVID-19 images source: Github

DL - CNN, Feature Extraction (various models)

Various model performance comparison

[51]

68 COVID-19 Chest X-ray images and 5873 Pneumonia images source: Github, Kaggle

Bayesian Deep Learning Classifiers

Using Transfer learning approach with the classifier to estimate uncertainty

Fine Tuning - ResNet Model
Multiple models VGG19, MobileNet

Model achieves high accuracy for multi-class classification
Test and train multiple image classifiers to obtain the highest accuracy identifying the virus;
VGG19 and DenseNet have a high accuracy score
Demonstrate how DNNs are vulnerable to a universal adversarial perturbation causing failure
in classification tasks, fine-tuning may be able to improve this
An alternative modeling framework that has decent performance with low trainable parameters
The model is explained well, to test its robustness authors perform multi-class classification and perform k-fold validation
The authors classify input of X-Ray images of Normal, COVID-19,
Pneumonia using data augmentation and fine-tuning techniques
Semi-supervised learning technique based on AutoEncoders
The proposed approach is able to produce a model with high quality with high accuracy
COVID-Net is publicly accessible for scientists to further build and improve the network to achieve high accuracy
ResNet50 provides the highest classification.

[53]
[54]
[55]
[56]
[57]
[58]

Multiple Image Classification Models
COVIDx

Capsule Network-based framework - COVID-CAPS
DenseNet-121
SqueezeNet-Bayesian based model

[59]
[60]
[49]
[61]

CoroNet EfficientNet
COVID-Net
Three different CNN models (InceptionV3, ResNet50, Inception-ResNetV2)

CXR images of 50 COVID-19 patients, and 50 Normal CXR images

[62]

170 Chest X-Ray images of 45 patients from 5 different sources

Modified Pre-trained AlexNet and a simple CNN

Pre-Trained network achieves a higher accuracy

[63]

295 COVID-19 CXR images and 163 Pneumonia and Normal CXR images

MobileNetV2/SqueezeNet

They use DL models achieve high classification rate

[64]

127 COVID-19 CXR images and 1000 Pneumonia and Normal CXR images

DarkCovidNet (CNN)

Provides two approaches, a binary classification and multi-class classification. Binary model performs better and higher

[65]

A large dataset containing both COVID-19 and Non COVID-19 cases from multiple sources

VGG16, InceptionV3, Xception, DenseNet-121, NasNet-Mobile, etc models compared

VGG16 achieved the highest rate

[66]

306 COVID-19 CXR images and 113 normal CXR images

CNN model using Decision Tree Classifier

The tested method appears to be robust and provides results that are accurate

[67]

CXR images of confirmed 150 COVID-19 patients from Wuhan source: Kaggle

Convolutional Neural Network

The authors are able to get 93% accuracy

[46]

Multiple datasets with 183 COVID-19 CXR images and CXR images of SARS-CoV and MERS

Trained 9 different models for COVID-19

ResNet50 + SVM achieved the highest accuracy

[68]

231 COVID-19 CXR images, and 2100 Pneumonia and normal CXR images source: Github

Novel ANN - Convolutional CapsNet

Model provides highly accurate diagnostics with Binary Classification (whether COVID-19 or no finding)

[69]

423 COVID-19 CXR images, 3064 CXR images of normal CXR and viral pneumonia

8 Different CNN Models

Transfer Learning and Data augmentation Techniques used, CheXNet performs the best

[70]

192 COVID-19 CXR images, and 145 normal CXR images

nCOVnet(VGG-16)

The proposed model is able to achieve high accuracy in predicting COVID-19 infected patients from CXR Images

[71]

10 CXRs from COVID-19 confirmed patients in China and USA

DL U-Net Model

Model shows great promise, with potential use towards early diagnosis for COVID-19 pneumonia

[72]

126 COVID-19 CXR images, 5835 normal and pneumonai CXR images

GSA-DenseNet121-COVID-19 (Hybrid CNN using Optimization algorithm)

The proposed model achieves high accuracy in diagnosing, up to 98%

[73]

250 COVID-19 CXR images, 4934 Non COVID-19 CXR images

ResNet18, ResNet50, SqueezeNet and DenseNet-121

[74]

Multiple datasets including 162 COVID-19 positive CXR images, and Non COVID-19 CXR mages

Truncated Inception Net

The proposed model achieves an accuracy of 99.92% (AUC 0.99) in classifying COVID-19 positive cases

[75]

305 COVID-19 CXR images, and 822 Non COVID-19 CXR images

Transfer Learning method employed on pre-trained models

The authors use Gradient Class Activation Map for detecting where the model focuses more on for classification

[76]

180 COVID-19 CXR images, and Non COVID-19 CXR images

Xception and ResNet50V2

A concatenated of the two models performs well towards detecting COVID-19

[77]

318 COVID-19 CXR images, and Non COVID-19 CXR images

COVID-DA

Propose a Deep Learning model that has a novel classifier separation scheme

[78]

455 COVID-19 CXR images, and 3450 Non COVID-19 CXR images

MobileNetV2

Training the CNN MobileNetV2 model from scratch proves to get higher accuracy compared to transfer learning techniques

that he or she can take proper steps. Chatbots are usually
considered as one of the best suited to screen patients remotely
without interactions [106]. The advantages of them include
quickly updating information, repetitively encouraging new
behaviors such as washing hands, and assisting with psychological support due to the stress caused by isolation and
misinformation [107]. The ML-based chatbots are improved
during the training procedure and using more data makes
this approach more reliable. During the COVID-19 pandemic,
chatbots are getting more attention in order to provide more
details about COVID-19 in different stages. A wide variety
of chatbots with different languages have been implemented
to help patients at the early stage of COVID-19. “Aapka
Chkitsak”, an AI-based chatbot developed by [108] in India,
assists patients with remote consultation regarding their health
information, and treatments. This application is developed on

The models perform well and are tested across multiple parametrs such as Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC), precision-recall curve, etc.

Google Cloud Platform with the main assistance of Natural
Language Processing (NLP) which is compatible with either
speech or text. Similarly, Ouerhani et al. [109] developed a
chatbot (called “COVID-Chatbot”) based on DL model which
uses NLP in order to enhance the awareness of people about
the ongoing pandemic. COVID-Chatbot is implemented to
decrease the impact of the disease during and after the quarantine phase. Another example is Bebot [110] that provides
updated data regarding the pandemic, and also assists patients
with symptoms checking. Some other implemented chatbots
during this unprecedented time are including Orbita [111],
Hyro [112], Apple’s screening tools (website, application,
voice command or Siri) [113], CDC’s self-checker [114], and
Symptoma [115]. A brief description of these chatbots can be
found in Table III.

Fig. 2. CT-Scan images of COVID-19 infected people versus uninfected people [52].
TABLE II
ML R ESEARCH DONE TOWARDS DIAGNOSING COVID-19 USING CT-S CAN DATASETS .
Reference

Dataset

Methods

Remarks

[87]

Open-sourced COVID-CT source: Github

Multi-task and Self-Supervised learning

Clinically useful

[85]

Clinical CT scan images of 176 COVID-19 cases

Random Forest / Three-fold cross-validation

The Random Forest model showing promising performance for reflecting the severity of COVID-19

[86]

Multiple International Datasets of CT scan images (Chinese CDC, Hospitals from China and USA, and Chainz.cn)

ResNet50

High accuracy in identifying whether COVID-19 cases

[82]

4356 CT scan images (including COVID-19 and Non COVID-19 scans) collected from 6 Hospitals

Present a Deep Learning model CovNET

The model has the ability to high accuracy in identify COVID-19 cases from other lung diseases

[88]

618 Clinical CT scan images (including COVID-19 and Non COVID-19 scans)

Deep Learning - ResNet18

Using a location attention mechanism on the model distinguishes COVID-19 cases from others with higher accuracy

[89]

Clinical CT Scan Images from 99 Patients from 3 Hospitals (including COVID-19 and Non COVID-19 scans)

Modified Transfer Learning - Inception Model

Use a fine-tuning technique with pre-trained weights

[90]

Clinical CT scan images from 133 Patients from Hospital in China

Multi Stage - DL Models, LSTM

The model is capable of extracting spatial and temporal information efficiently thereby improving prediction performance

[91]

CT scan images of 413 COVID-19 cases and 439 of pneumonia or normal cases

ResNet50

The model with transfer learning technique performs better than alternative supervised learning methods

[92]

CT scan images obtained from 5 Hospitals in China

Various DL learning models (Inception, ResNet50, 3D U-Net++)

Able to deploy the model in 4 weeks overcoming challenges and achieving a high accuracy rate

[83]

549 CT Scan images obtained from clinics in China

Deep Learning - VB-Net

Introducing a Human-in the loop section to refine automation of each case - the model can segment and quantify infected regions

[93]

Large-scale dataset including 10,250 CT scan images of COVID-19 and Non COVID-19 scans

UNet - 2D Segmentation DL CNN Model

The DL models outperforms radiologists in diagnostic performance

[94]

Clinical CT scan images of 558 COVID-19 patients with pneumonia, collected from 10 hospitals

COPLE-Net + Noise-Robust Dice Loss

The technique presented outperforms standard Noise-Robust loss functions,
COPLE-Net and the framework both perform quite highly in segmenting labels for COVID-19 pneumonia lesion

[95]

Clinical CT scan images of 83 COVID-19 cases and 83 Non COVID-19 cases

BigBiGAN (bi-directional generative adversarial network)

[96]

Large-scale dataset that include 400 COVID-19, and more Non COVID-19 scans

Classification, Segmentation and Encoder-Decoder Model - Res2Net

Model is highly efficient for Classification and Segmentation

[97]

Multiple datasets that include 473 COVID-19 CT scans

UNet

Propose a method to incorporate spatial and channel attention

[98]

Dataset of CT-Scans from 1,684 COVID-19 patients

Inception V1

Validate the model in 3 ways including 10-fold cross-validation achieving high AUC for the validation dataset

[99]

Clinical CT scan images including 146 COVID-19 cases and 149 Non COVID-19 cases

DenseNet

The model classifies COVID-19 over CT Images with high AUC

[34]

219 CT scan images of COVID-19 and 399 CT scan images of normal or other diseases

VGG-16, GoogleNet, ResNet

Support Vector Machine (SVM) was used for binary classification

[100]

746 CT scan images of COVID-19 and Non COVID-19 cases; Open-Sourced - Github

Capsule Networks (CapsNets), ResNet

Authors present a detail oriented capsule network, implementing data augmentation techniques to overcome lack of data

[101]

Clinical CT scans of 88 confirmed patients confirmed with COVID-19 from hospitals in China

DeepPneumonia (ResNet-50)

Model is capable of predicting COVID-19 with high accuracy

[102]

1,129 Clinical CT scan images for COVID-19 detection

UNet, Weakly Supervised DL Network (DeCovNet)

Accurately predict COVID-19 infectious probability without annotating lesions for training

C. Artificial Intelligence of Things (AIoT)
In general, applications of the Internet of Things (IoT)
[117]–[119] and AI can assist businesses with process automation which would decrease the contacts of humans due to the
lower number of people needed [120]. During the COVID-19
pandemic, AI and IoT are getting more attention in the
healthcare domain where screening and detecting procedures
can be done more safely. Thermal imaging and social distance
monitoring are two main functions that are mainly considered
in the screening phase of COVID-19. In fact, the aims of those
devices are high-temperature detection, face mask screening,
and distance controlling that are discussed in the coming
sections.
1) Thermal Imaging: With respect to the IoT thermal
screening applications, AI can assist in this area by implementing appropriate algorithms. SmartX [121], a thermal screening
device using infrared thermal imaging and AI face recognition
makes screening in crowd buildings or entrances more efficient
(see Figure 3). The device captures a visitor’s temperature
and also checks whether he or she is wearing a face mask.

The model achieves high validation accuracy in identifying COVID-19 pneumonia from CT images

A similar device has been developed in Taiwan for a hospital
with the collaboration of Microsoft in order to detect face
mask wearings and temperatures. Consequently, any detection
of proposed problems can easily be reported to the staff which
will maintain an uncontaminated atmosphere [122].

Fig. 3. An industrial thermal imaging system enabled with AI [121].

TABLE III
AI CHATBOTS / VIRTUAL ASSISTANTS COMBATING COVID-19.
Reference

AI chatbot/virtual assistant Name

Origin

Company

Function

[108]

Aapka Chkitsak

India

Academic Research

Remote consultation

[109]

COVID-Chatbot

Tunisia & Germany

Academic Research

Enhancing awareness regarding COVID-19

[110]

Bebot

Japan

Bespoke

Update information & Symptoms checker

[111]

Orbita

USA

-

Reduce contacts

[112]

Hyro

Israel

-

Interacting with patients

[116]

Symptoma

Austria

-

Diagnosing by symptoms checking

[116]

COVID-BOT

France

Clevy.io

Assist with symptoms by knowledge of government and WHO

2) Social Distance Monitoring: Regarding the necessity
of practicing social distancing using IoT devices, AI can
implement an automated screening using computer vision
methods [123]. An instance of such a device is RayVision
[124] which ensures social distancing and face mask wearing
guidelines are followed in the crowd. By using the computer
vision techniques, it can monitor people with a live stream
on its specific dashboard which allows alerting the authorities
in case of any rule-breaking [125]. Figure 4 represents the
process of monitoring using cameras. Similarly, Landing AI
[126] is another AI-based technology which can detect social
distancing violations in real-time. Moreover, a peer-reviewed
research [127] implemented an Unmanned Aerial Vehicle
(UAV) or a drone with the ML application in response to the
need for maintaining social distance in crowds. Interestingly,
masks will be provided by the drone for people who do not
wear a mask.

Fig. 4. An industrial screening system for monitoring the social distance of
people and their personal protective equipment [124].

III. ML T ECHNIQUES TOWARDS PREDICTING AND
TRACKING THE SPREAD OF COVID-19
As we are currently in the midst of a global pandemic, the
ability to predict and forecast the spread of the COVID-19
could i) help the general population in taking preventative
measures, ii) allow healthcare workers to anticipate and prepare for the wave of potentially infected patients, and iii) allow
policymakers to make better decisions regards the safety of the
general population. More importantly, the ability to predict the
spread of the virus can be used to mitigate and even prevent

the spread of COVID-19. ML models can be utilized regarding
the forecasting of the virus in providing early-signs of the
COVID-19 and projecting its spread. Also, contact tracing and
social media data analysis have shown promising results in
COVID-19 spread mitigation [128]. The scope of this section
is to provide a review of the research of ML tools and models
that can make this possible.
A. Early Signs, Preventing the Spread
Obtaining early-warning signs for an outbreak of an epidemic could really help towards slowing and mitigating the
spread of the virus. It also can encourage societies to take
necessary precautionary measures [129]. In this section, we
review the early-warning signs that were made possible using
the ML technology. The World Health Organization (WHO)
made statements about COVID-19 being a potential outbreak
on the 9th of January 2020. There were AI companies like
BlueDot and Metabiota that were able to predict the outbreak
even earlier [130]. BlueDot focuses on spotting and predicting
outbreaks of infectious diseases using its proprietary methods
and tools. They use ML and NLP techniques to filter and
focus the risk of spreading a virus. Using the data from
local news reports of first few suspected cases of COVID-19,
historical data on animal disease outbreaks, and airline ticket
information, they were then able to use their tool to predict
a definite outbreak occurring within nearing cities and other
regions of China [33]. BlueDot had warned its clients about
the outbreak on the 31st December 2019, over a week prior
to the WHO made any statements about it [130]. Similarly,
Metabiota used their ML algorithms and Big Data to predict
outbreaks and spreads of diseases, and event severity [33].
They used their technology and flight data to predict that
there will be a COVID-19 outbreak in countries like Japan,
Thailand, Taiwan, and South Korea.
B. Contact Tracing
One of the major approaches for preventing the spread
of the virus is tracing the confirmed cases of COVID-19
because of the potential spread of the virus through droplets
by coughs, sneeze, or talking [131]. It is recommended that
not only the people who have a positive COVID-19 test,
but also the ones who had been in close contact with the

confirmed cases to be quarantined for 14 days. The contact
tracing applications are applied all over the world for this
purpose with different methods. Basically, it starts after the
diagnosis process because the detected case needs to be
traced. Most importantly, after the data is collected by those
applications, ML and AI techniques will start analyzing for
discovering further spread of the disease [132]. Although the
contact tracing applications could be deeply helpful during the
pandemic, privacy issues can bring high concerns regarding the
surveillance of individuals by some governments as a result
of huge amount of the collected data [133]. Using the digital
footprint data provided by the applications along with ML
technology could allow users to identify infected patients and
enforce social distancing measures.
A real-time contact tracing using AI has been applied
in South Africa using the Sqreem platform [134], which
is developed in Singapore in order to track people by the
metadata of the device. This information is not including the
personal data of the user. If the user enters an infected area,
he or she will be contacted by the authorities with respect
to the probability of infection. Mostly, contact tracing has
been conducted using a major accessible device, which is
a smartphone. A variety of smartphone applications enabled
with ML or AI have been adopted in order to slow the spread
of the virus by tracking and warning regarding the unsafe
contacts [135]. Within the process of development, the very
first part would be the consideration of framework, either
centralized or decentralized using appropriate technologies
such as Global Positioning System, Quick Response codes,
and Bluetooth [136]. ML can enable alerting automatically
and analyzing the massive captured data, which would reduce
the workforce [132]. Apple and Google announced that a
Bluetooth-based platform for tracking close contacts will be
implemented in the upcoming months. This technology will
enable higher participation and better communication [137].
An application is developed in South Korea in order to capture
the areas using location-based information, where a confirmed
case went before testing positive for COVID-19. Moreover,
text messages will be sent to people who may have been
exposed due to the contamination areas [138].
Regarding the numerous implemented contact tracing applications, Table IV presents some of them that have been
implemented in various countries [139].
C. Forecasting
Forecasting epidemics centers on tracking and predicting
the spread of infectious diseases and viruses. During an
epidemic, forecasting methods and models can be trained on
epidemiological related data to provide an estimated number
of infected cases, patterns of spread that can give healthcare
workers guidance on how to prepare appropriately for an
outbreak [157]. Previously statistical forecasting tool such as
Susceptible, Infected, Recovered models (SIR Models) have
been used to determine the spread of a disease through the
population [158]. Recently, with the COVID-19 pandemic,

using ML approaches for forecasting the spread of COVID-19
is getting lots of attention among the research communities.
Hu et al. [32] proposed an unsupervised ML method
for forecasting. They used a Modified Auto-Encoder model
(MAE) and trained it to predict the transmission of COVID-19
cases across 31 provinces or cities in China integrating Kmeans algorithms to achieve a high prediction accuracy. Yang
et al. [159] used epidemiological data of COVID-19 in an
SEIR (Susceptible, Exposed, Infectious, Removed) model to
predict the spread. They also presented another interesting approach by pre-training an LSTM (Long Short-Term Memory)
model which is a Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) model
on data from SARS-CoV to predict the spread of COVID-19.
Their findings discovered that both models achieved similar
results in predicting the number of cases.
Similarly, another ML model with clustering techniques
trained on data from the Chinese CDC, internet searches, and
news articles create a 2-day ahead real-time forecast about the
number of confirmed cases for 32 provinces in China [160].
While in some cases there are not enough COVID-19 data
available for accurate forecasting using ML techniques, Liu
et al. [160] overcame the lack of data by implementing data
augmentation techniques.
Al et al. [161] introduced a novel forecasting technique
that allows them to predict the number of confirmed cases
in China over the next 10 days. The authors combined and
modified a Flower Pollination Algorithm (FPA) [162] and a
Salp Swam Algorithm (SSA) [163] to improve and evaluate
the optimal parameters for an Adaptive Neuro-Fuzzy Inference
System (ANFIS) [164] by creating an FPASSA-ANFIS model
that shows greater performance compared to other optimal
parameters such as Root Mean Squared Relative Error (RMSE)
or Mean Absolute Percentage Error (MAPE).
Alternatively, Rizk et al. [165] integrated algorithms and
techniques like Interior Search Algorithm (ISA) and Chaotic
Learning (CL) into a Multi-Layer Feed-Forward Neural Network (MFNN) creating a forecasting model called ISACLMFNN. Combining the two, CL and ISA, approaches improved the overall performance of ISA. The authors retrieved
a dataset from WHO that included data from USA, Italy,
and Spain between January 2020 and April 2020. They
trained their model on this dataset and the model is then
assessed through the similarly aforementioned techniques such
as RMSE and MAPE, and more.
A new ML methodology GROOMs was proposed by Fong
et al. [166] for forecasting. The authors provided an ensemble
of forecasting and polynomial neural techniques that were
trained over the limited data to determine the technique that
would yield with the lowest prediction error. Ayyoubzadeh
et al. [167] used Liner Regression (LR) and LSTM models
to predict the spread of COVID-19 in Iran. The authors
trained their model on data from Google Trends [168] and
Worldometer [169]. They evaluated the model with 10-fold
cross-validation and use RMSE as a performance metric.
Ghazaly et al. [170] utilized the limited data from WHO about
confirmed COVID-19 cases and deaths between January 2020

TABLE IV
C ONTACT T RACING A PPLICATIONS C OMBATING COVID-19.
Reference

Application

[140]

AarogyaSetu

[141]

Alipay Health Code

[142]

BeAware Bahrain

[143]

COVIDSafe

[144]

CovTracer

[145]

CovidRadar

[146]

Ehteraz

[147]

eRouska(CZ Smart Quarentine)

[148]

GH Covid-19 Tracker App)

[149]

Hamagen

[150]

Immuni

[151]

Ito

[152]

Mask.ir

[153]

MyTrace

[154]

StopCovid

[155]

TraceCovid

[156]

TraceTogether

Function
Track close contacts of users
Notifying user if captured users are infected
Track close contacts of users
Display the situation of user by three colors
The situations include healthy, in need of short or long quarantine
Tracking traveling information, and body temperature
Track close contacts of users
Quarantined and self-isolated tracking
Track close contacts of users
Notifying user if captured users are infected
Track close contacts of users
Notifying user if captured users are infected
Track close contacts of users
Notifying user if captured users are infected
Track close contacts of users
Notifying user if captured users are infected
Track close contacts of users
Notifying user if captured users are infected
Track the places an infected user had gone
Allow for reporting symptoms
Track close contacts of users
Track close contacts of users
Notifying user if captured users are infected
Measure the chance of infection
Guide for better safety manner
Track close contacts of users
Provide a map of contaminated areas
Allow for reporting symptoms
Track close contacts of users
Notifying user if captured users are infected
Track close contacts of users
Notifying user if captured users are infected
Track close contacts of users
Accessing to the user’s information by government (privacy concern)
Notifying user if captured users are infected
Track close contacts of users
Accessing to the user’s information by government (privacy concern)
Notifying user if captured users are infected

and April 2020 to train a Non-Linear Aggressive Model (NAR)
and predict the future cases and deaths that could occur in 9
countries. However, due to not having enough historical data
for their model, the authors concluded their network is unable
to continue to predict the future. Over the same time period
of those three months [171] Roy et al. implemented their
ML techniques to forecast the number of cases for infected,
recovered, and deceased cases country-wise and globally. The
authors used a type of regression model called the Prophet
Prediction Model. Developed by Facebook, this model has a
capacity to create a precise time-series forecast that is simple
to create and could result in accurate prediction.
Bandyopadhyay et al. [172] used a RNN and GRU (Gated
Recurrent Unit) model to predict the number of confirmed
cases and deaths. The model was trained on data sourced
from Kaggle on confirmed cases between January 2020 and
March 2020. The results presented in their findings indicate
that the RNN is capable of predicting the cases and assessing
the severity of COVID-19. Utilizing the ML techniques, the

Origin
India

China

Technology
Bluetooth
GPS location
GPS
Bank transactions’ history

Bahrain

Bluetooth
Location

Australia

Bluetooth

Cyprus

GPS Location

Mexico

Bluetooth

Qatar

Bluetooth
GPS

Czech Republic

Bluetooth

Ghana

GPS

Israel

Location based on API

Italy

Bluetooth Low Energy

Germany

Bluetooth

Iran

Bluetooth

Malaysia

Bluetooth Low Energy

France

Bluetooth

UAE

Bluetooth

Singapore

Bluetooth

Global Virus Tracker [173] built up a system embedded the
location and symptom risk evaluation for the users. They also
developed the chatbot to provide the conversational interface
for the same ML-based evaluation. In the proposed system,
the county or city level risk, population density and updated
virus spreading were incorporated at the moment of the risk
evaluation.
D. Social Media Analysis
Social media has become a platform where people share
pictures, reviews, posts, and exchange stories. A popular social
media platform where people may obtain and access news is
Twitter. Its users can validate live alerts and obtain information
directly through the smartphone application. This is possible
as major news outlets, government bodies, community centers,
etc., all have accounts that they use to share updates on
Twitter. Users can also use the platform to share their personal
experiences via tweets. It can essentially be considered a
form of microblogging for users who just want to share their

insight over a certain topic. Tweets can be a form of data
that can analyze feedback and obtain public sentiment over
certain topics. Over the course of the COVID-19 pandemic,
people have engaged on twitter to share their experience with
regards to testing or lack of testing, social-distancing, and
other challenges that people are facing due to the pandemic
[174]. In the remainder of the subsection, we review the
research dedicated on how ML technology can be used to
analyze social media for COVID-19 related updates.
The COVID-19 was declared a global pandemic in March
2020. However, people had already been posting and discussing it over social platforms. Between January 27th and
March 26th, 2020 there were 5,621,048 tweets with keywords
“corona virus” and “coronavirus” according to Karisani et al.
[175] when they constructed a dataset for their ML models.
The dataset consists of both positive and negative tweets
shared by users. Using this dataset, the authors were able to
implement several ML methods like Logistic Regression (LR),
Naive Bayes Classification (NB) to automate the detection of
COVID-19 positive results shared over twitter by users. Both
LR and NB supervised ML models were also used by Samuel
et al. [176] to obtain public sentiment and feedback about
COVID-19 through users tweets shared over the platform. As
there is an abundance of news and tweets shared over twitter,
a sentiment analysis was done by [177] addressing the need
for filtering it out as there is a potential of misinformation
being spread across social platforms. The authors implemented
an unsupervised ML topic modelling technique known as
Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA). The use of LDA is done
to spot the semantic relationship between words in a tweet
and provides a sentiment analysis on whether the tweets
are positive and showing signs of comfort or whether they
are negative showing discomfort and panic. In their findings,
negative tweets are higher as people are prevalent in anger and
sadness towards quarantine and death.
Jahanbin et al. [178] gathered data from Twitter by searching for COVID-19 related hashtags. The dataset of tweets is
pre-processed and filtered first to reduce the noise by removing
irrelevant data. This would allow training a better model for
classification. The authors used an evolutionary algorithm
Eclass1-MIMO that predicts the morbidity rate in regions.
Mackey et al. [179] introduced an unsupervised ML approach
that analyzes tweets by users who may be infected by the
virus, recovering from it or the experiences they had related to
testing for it. The authors used a Biterm Topic Model (BTM)
combined with clustering techniques to determine statistical
and geographical characteristics depending on content analysis. Obtaining feedback over Twitter and social media outlets
will give a live reflection of how the general public is reacting
to the pandemic and will allow policymakers in making better
decisions.
IV. ML T ECHNIQUES TOWARDS M EDICAL A SSISTANCE
As the virus spreads across the world infecting more of
the population and with the death toll rising rapidly, efforts
are made to develop an effective vaccine or discover a drug

for COVID-19. The immunologists around the world surged
towards studying the symptoms, and the immune responses
that infected patients show in relation to combating the virus
[184]. In this section, we review the efforts of the scientific
community in using ML techniques regarding understanding
the virus [52], how to attack it, and perhaps even be able to
find a cure for COVID-19.
A. Understanding the Virus
Analyzing the genomics and proteomics characteristics of
a viral disease is an important step to combat the disease.
Scientists have been studying the virology of COVID-19
which can give the physical and chemical properties, cell
entry and receptor interaction, and the overall ecology and
the genomics of the virus [185]. A genome is the complete
genetic information that provides the architecture of a virus
and knowing the genome for COVID-19 can help in better
understanding the transmissibility and infectiousness of the
virus [186]. The study of proteomics is knowing the proteins
of an organism. Identifying the proteins of COVID-19 would
allow a better understanding of the overall protein structure
and discover how the proteins would interact with the drugs
[187]. Over recent years, there have been remarkable advancements by scientists in interdisciplinary fields of bioinformatics
and computational medicine and ML techniques have shown
meaningful interpretation towards determining genomics and
protein structures of various diseases [188]. In this section, we
focus on COVID-19 and discuss the ML techniques that have
been implemented regarding the research of interpreting the
genomics and proteomics of that.
COVID-19 is an RNA (ribonucleic acid) type of virus from
the coronavirus (CoV) family. It is a single-stranded RNA with
a large viral genome. These large genomes can have two or
three viral proteases. For COVID-19 it has 2 proteases, which
we will refer to as 3CLpro. COVID-19 belongs to the same
family as the aforementioned respiratory diseases SARS and
MERS [189]. Viruses that belong to this type of family can
infect a range of animal species such as camels, cats, cattle,
bats, as well as humans [190]. They are easily transmittable
and can infect a host in one species and transmit it onto
another species [190]. Multiple findings suggest that the origin
of COVID-19 in infecting humans is transmitted from bats
with an 89% similarity structure identity to a coronavirus that
infects bats (SARS-like-CoVZXC21) [191].
Identifying and determining the biological structure at a
molecular level of a viral disease is important to develop
an effective therapy towards finding a cure for the disease.
However, this process involves a lot of experiments that can
take months. Computational ML techniques and models can
speed up this process and predict the structure of proteins
accurately [192].
The family of coronavirus has multiple classes, and the
virus can belong to either the alpha or the beta class of
virus. SARS-CoV and MERS both were determined to be
beta coronaviruses [193]. To determine and classify what
specific type of virus COVID-19 could be, Randhawa, et al.

TABLE V
P REDICTIVE A NALYSIS T OOLS AND M ETHODS C OMBATING COVID-19.
Reference
[33]
[32]
[170]
[160]
[166]
[172]
[180]
[161]
[165]
[167]
[171]
[181]
[178]
[176]
[177]
[182]
[179]
[175]
[183]

Section
Early Tracking, Prevention

Forecasting

Social Media Analysis

Model and Technology
Predictive Analysis tool
ANN - K-Means Algorithm
Non-Auto Regressive Neural Network
Augmented ARGONet
Polynomial Neural Network (PNN) - GROOMS
RNN
K-Means Clustering Algorithm
FPASSA-ANFIS (ANN)
ISACL-MFNN
LSTM and LR models
Regression Model, Prophet Prediction
AI Algorithms
Eclass1-MIMO
Natural Processing Language
Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA)
Sentiment Analysis
Unsupervised ML (biterm topic model)
Naive Bayes, Logistic Regression, and more.
Shallow Neural Networks

[194] used a supervised ML technique with digital signal
processing techniques (MLDSP) to evaluate the taxonomy of
the virus. MLDSP techniques have previously been used to
achieve high accuracy in the classification of other viruses and
diseases such as HIV-1 genomes and Influenza [195]. Using
this model, the authors could evaluate that like its predecessor,
COVID-19 also belongs to the beta coronavirus. To predict
the protein structure of COVID-19, Heo and Feig [196] used
a ML-based method called TrRosetta. This method can be
used to predict the inter-residue distance and create structure
models for the protein. To do this with higher prediction
efficiency, the authors applied molecular dynamics simulationbased refinement.
Magar et al. [197] highlighted the importance of biological
structure and protein sequences in combating the virus. The
authors developed an ML model to predict how synthetic antibodies inhibit the spread of COVID-19. The model can predict
the response of these antibodies by understanding the binding
between the antibodies and the viral mutations. Training the
model on a dataset that includes virus anti-body sequences and
the clinical patient neutralization response allowed the authors
to predict antibody responses. The authors used ML techniques
such as XGBoost, RF, Multilayer Perceptron (MLP), SVM,
and LR for their model. The XGBoost model achieves the
highest accuracy in prediction over an 80%-20% split of train
and test data.
B. Drug and Vaccine Development
As COVID-19 cases continue to rise numbers of both the
infected cases and the death toll, it has become an urgent
need to discover a drug that could mitigate these numbers
from increasing any further. ML techniques can be used to
analyze how drugs react to the viral proteins of COVID-19.
We have already seen ML methods and techniques like SVM
and Bayesian Classifiers being used for drug discovery and
repurposing [198]. In this section we review the ML studies
and research that had been done about discovering the new

Remarks
Using flight details data and recent outbreaks to predict the spread in nearby countries
Using a MAE to successfully predict 2-day spread
Prediction Error, due to scarcity of error at the time of Analysis
Clustering of Chinese Provinces, and getting a 2-day forecast
Addressing data augmentation and importance of early forecast
Researching predicting using GRU + LSTM combined models
Possible to predict the spread of cases
Predict a 10-day forecast of the number of cases in China
Predict a 10-day forecast of the number of cases in multiple countries
Predict and forecast of the number of cases of COVID-19 in Iran
Time-Series Forecasting
Phone based survey to determine whether a person is high-risk, low-risk or contracting the virus
Classifying a twitter dataset to determine morbidity in regions
Getting public sentiment by classifying tweets
Algorithms used to spot semantic relationship between words
Building a visual cluster to highlighting public opinion over pandemic
Attain content analysis by assessing user tweets
Automate detection of positive COVID-19 report results through tweets
Training multiple word2vec models to put context to words

drugs or repurposing the currently approved FDA ones. We
also review the ML research that has been done regarding the
vaccine development.
1) Drug Development and Repurposing: An exploratory
approach of determining whether commercially available antiviral drugs can treat or help towards reducing the severity
of COVID-19 infected patients was presented by Beck et
al. [199]. They used a pre-trained ML learning model called
Molecule Transformer-Drug Target Interaction (MT-DTI), an
interaction prediction model, to predict the binding affinity
between COVID-19 infected proteins and compounds. The
objective of their study was to identify potential FDA approved
drugs that may restrain the proteins of COVID-19. MT-DTI
is capable of predicting the chemical sequences and amino
acid sequences of a target protein without the whole structure
information. This is helpful to use as there was limited knowledge on the overall structure of viral proteins of COVID-19
initially. Regarding their advantage, the authors used the
MT-DTI model to predict binding affinities of 3,410 FDAapproved drugs. Similarly, Heiser et al. [35] used proprietary
DL techniques for the purpose of drug discovery. They used
their model to evaluate how FDA and European Medicines
Agency (EMA) approved drugs and compounds would affect
human cells, analyzing over 1,660 drugs.
In some cases, various drugs from antiviral to antimalarial
could be used to combat COVID-19 [200]. These drugs used
for combating severe illnesses are referred to as “parents”
by Moskal et al. [200] in their study. The authors used ML
techniques like CNN, LSTM, and MLP analyzing the molecular similarity between these “parents” drugs and secondgeneration drugs that could potentially be also used to fight
against the virus. The authors introduced the second generation
drugs as “progeny”. This study is important in predicting other
drugs that may be helpful in this pandemic. It can result in
having a larger catalog of drugs, which provides alternative
solutions if the “parent” drug fails to respond. To convert the

molecular structure into a high-dimensional vector space, the
Mol2Vec [201] method was used.
Kadioglu et al. [202] identified three viral proteins as targets
for their ML approach. They targeted the Spike protein, the
nucleocapsid protein, and the 2’-o-ribose-methyltransferase
protein. The spike protein acts as a cellular receptor for the
host of the virus. The nucleocapsid protein plays a vital role
in coronavirus transcription and the overall forming of the
genomics of the RNA virus. The 2’-o-ribose-methyltransferase
protein is an essential protein for coronavirus synthesis and
processing. The authors used ML algorithms against the three
proteins in predicting how FDA-approved drugs and natural
compounds react to the three proteins with such key characteristics.
In [203] the authors used a DNN to predict and generate
a new small design for molecules that would be capable
of inhibiting COVID-19 3CLpro. Targeting 3CLpro can be
an essential part with respect to the drugs development for
COVID-19. Alternatively, Zhavoronkov et al. [204] utilized
28 various types of ML methods such as Autoencoders,
Generative Adversial Networks, Genetic Algorithms to predict
and generate the molecular structures. Using deep-Q learning
networks, Tang et al. [205] were able to generate 3CLpro
compounds of COVID-19. Being able to successfully predict
these protein targets can provide advancements in developing
a potential drug for the virus. Hu et al. [206] created an ML
model that predicts the binding between the potential drugs
and COVID-19 proteins.
2) Vaccine Development: Once a virus starts to spread and
turn into a global pandemic, there is a very little chance
of stopping it without a vaccine [207]. That stands true for
COVID-19 as well. Historically, vaccination has been the
solution to control or slow the spread of a viral infection
[208] [209]. It is critical to have a vaccine developed to
provide immunity against COVID-19 and stop this pandemic.
So far, the research for vaccine development of COVID-19
is dedicated with three different types of vaccines [210]. The
Whole Virus Vaccine represents a classical strategy for the
development of vaccinations of viral disease. Subunit Vaccine
relies on extracting the immune response against the S-spike
protein for COVID-19 [210]. This will refrain it from docking
it with the hosts receptor protein [210]. The Nucleic Acid
Vaccine produces a protective immunological response to fight
against the virus by [211].
At present, there are over 22 vaccines that are at the clinical
stage of trials in combating COVID-19 [212]. The process of
developing a vaccine would need to first go through the design
stage and then towards the testing and experimental stage on
animals and eventually in humans. In this section, we review
the implicit research that is done over vaccine development
and how ML techniques have been employed.
Ge et al. [214] used ML techniques to evaluate how small
virus strings (called peptides) bind to the human receptor
cells. The authors created two ML programs OptiVax and
EvalVax. Optivax combines different pre-existing programs

that evaluate combinations of peptides and receptor cells. A
program that OptiVax adopts is NetMHCPan [222], which uses
a feed-forward neural network. Thereby, peptide information
and receptor cell are input data that generate an affinity score
to predict the binding as output. The prediction score is
constantly improved as it uses the back-propagation method.
EvalVax utilizes the genetic ancestry of three different categories of the population, i.e. white, black, and Asian. This
data is used as an objective function to discover peptide and
receptor pairs for OptiVax.
Similarly, Herst et al. [220] in their research about finding
a vaccine employed a similar technique that was previously
used for combating the Ebola virus. They used ML techniques
like Artificial Neural Network (ANN), SVM, netMHC, and
netMHCpan to predict potential vaccine candidates.
Ward et al. [215] mapped out the protein sequences of
COVID-19. This data was used by the authors for prediction,
specificity, and epitope analysis. Epitope is the molecule that
adds antibodies attached and is recognized by the immune
system. The authors used the ML-based program NetMHCPan to locate the epitope sequences. With this, the authors
were able to create an online tool that would aid in epitope
prediction, coronavirus homology analysis, variation analysis,
and proteome analysis. Another study about epitope prediction
was presented by Qiao et al. [219]. They employed DL
techniques that are able to predict the best epitope for peptidebased COVID-19 vaccinations [219]. To do this, the authors
proposed a DL model that utilizes LSTM and RNN methods to
capture sequence patterns of peptides and eventually be able to
predict the new mutant antigens for patients. As an alternative
approach to predicting the epitope and protein sequence, an
ML based tool called Ellipro was utilized by Rahman et al.
[216]. The tool is capable of predicting and presenting a
visual view of the protein sequence of the epitope within the
structure. Similarly Sarkar et al. [217] used the SVM method
to predict the toxic level of some epitopes.
The study towards epitope prediction continues in the research done by Prachar et al. [218] who employed various
techniques such as ANN and Position-Specific Weight Matrices (PSSM) algorithms to predict and verify COVID-19
epitopes. Ong et al. [213] introduced a vaccine designing
approach referred to as Reverse Vaccinology (RV). The aim
of RV is to identify a potential vaccine through bioinformatics
analysis of the pathogen genomes. They used Supervised ML
classifications such as LR, SVM, K-nearest Neighbor, RF,
and Extreme Gradient Boosting (XGB) to train on annotated
proteins dataset with the objective of getting high prediction
accuracy for the protein candidates, the authors used an ML
based tool referred as Vaxign-ML.
V. F UTURE E XPECTATIONS
Although we review many of the ML approaches regarding
the impact of COVID-19 in this paper, there is still an
essential need for developing solutions using ML to address
the pandemic’s complications and challenges. Since there was
no adopted method for fighting against COVID-19 when it

TABLE VI
VACCINE AND D RUG D EVELOPMENT OF COVID-19 U SING ML A LGORITHMS .
Reference
[213]
[214]
[215]
[216]
[217]
[218]
[219]
[220]
[35]
[199]
[202]
[200]
[206]
[204]
[203]
[221]

Sections

Vaccine Development

Drug Re-purposing

Model and Technology
ML Algorithms Logistic Regression, Support Vector Machine, etc
OptiVax, EvalVax, netMHCpan, etc.
NetMHCPan
Ellipro, multiple ML methods
SVM
ANN
DeepNovo, LSTM, RNN
netMHCpan, netMHC
DL Models - Neural Networks
DL - Drug Target Interactions
Neural Networks and Naive Bayes
CNN, LSTM and MLP models
Fine-Tuning AtomNet based Model
Various ML methods
Deep Neural Network
Deep Learning Models

was started, previous ML models regarding infectious diseases
(epidemiological models) can be helpful for the early stage
of COVID-19. As we discussed, detecting and screening
COVID-19 using AI and ML techniques can play a key role
in combating this pandemic. The combination of technologies
like IoT devices with these techniques needs to be expanded
for crowd areas including airports, subways or bus stations,
and so on. This development would enhance the identification
of suspicious cases within lesser both time and contamination.
It is important to implement an efficient method of achieving high accuracy of detecting COVID-19 through medical
imaging and integrating ML techniques. It is essential to
overcome the challenges that are presented by this approach.
Challenges such as lack of data and the privacy issue within
data collection, false information by media, the limited number
of expertise between AI and medical science. AI technologies
can also assist to implement the following expectations in
the future: i) empowering the medical imaging devices using
the noncontact automatic image capturing to prevent further
infection from the patient to the radiologist or even another
patient, and ii) automatically monitoring the patients using
intelligent video analysis. As the countries learn more about
COVID-19, it is essential to have updated datasets. This can
lead to better forecasting by implementing the proper ML
models using those datasets. In addition to the forecasting
concepts, investigating the effects of different social media
and their pathways for detecting early sign of possible future
pandemic.
VI. C ONCLUSION
Machine Learning (ML) models and techniques have vastly
been used in plenty of industries over the past decade.
Within the healthcare industry, ML has been usually used
for screening and diagnosing. In epidemiology area, ML is
basically utilized for forecasting and understanding epidemics
and diseases. In this paper, we presented a comprehensive
survey of how ML applications have been used to fight against
COVID-19. We presented the efforts that are taken by the ML
research communities to combat this virus across three main
phases “Screening”, “Tracking and Forecasting” and “Medical

Remarks
Using a tool called Vaxign to implement Reverse Vaccinology
Predicting binding between virus proteins and Host cell Receptors
Create an online tool for visualisation and extraction of COVID-19 meta-analysis
Predict the epitope structure
Review epitope-based design for a COVID-19 vaccine
Predicting COVID-19 epitopes
Predictive analysis of protein sequences to discover antibodies in patients
Use ML techniques to predict peptide sequences
Analysing how approved FDA Drugs would work against COVID-19
Re-purposing current drugs to find out whether there is an affinity between drug and proteins
Predicting drug interaction between proteins and compounds
ML techniques to predict similarities between available drugs to combat COVID-19
Predicting binding between COVID-19 proteins and drug compounds
Use RL strategies to generate new 3CLpro structure
Creating small molecule interaction and targeting 3CLpro
Provide large scale virtual screening to identify protein interacting pairs

Assistance”. ML applications for each of these phases are
primarily focused as such; “Screening” intended for diagnosing the virus through medical imaging data (COVID-19
related X-Rays and CT-Scans), “Tracking and Forecasting”
towards forecasting and predicting the numbers of cases and
contact tracing, and lastly, “Medical Assistance” with the aim
of understanding the protein sequences and structure of the
virus and whether a cure could be found in combating it via a
drug or vaccine. One of the main challenges that researchers
face when diagnosing using ML techniques was the lack of
relevant data that are made accessible to the public. Lack
of data meant researchers had to use techniques like data
augmentation, transfer learning, and fine-tuning models to
improve prediction accuracy. Though these methods worked
well in some cases, more data would make these models more
robust. Similarly, forecasting models trained on more data for
predicting the spread and number of cases could be more
accurate. Regarding developing a vaccine or re-purposing,
it is important to have a good understanding of virology,
bioinformatics. Additionally, ML is especially important for
researchers from different fields to collaborate and integrate
their knowledge in order to discover a cure.
R EFERENCES
[1] S. Latif, M. Usman, S. Manzoor, W. Iqbal, J. Qadir, G. Tyson, I. Castro,
A. Razi, M. N. K. Boulos, A. Weller et al., “Leveraging data science
to combat COVID-19: A comprehensive review,” 2020.
[2] L. Morawska and J. Cao, “Airborne transmission of SARS-CoV-2: The
world should face the reality,” Environment International, p. 105730,
2020.
[3] CDC.
Symptoms
of
coronavirus.
[Online].
Available: https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/symptoms-testing/
symptoms.html
[4] H. Nishiura, T. Kobayashi, T. Miyama, A. Suzuki, S.-m. Jung,
K. Hayashi, R. Kinoshita, Y. Yang, B. Yuan, A. R. Akhmetzhanov et al.,
“Estimation of the asymptomatic ratio of novel coronavirus infections
(COVID-19),” International Journal of Infectious Diseases, vol. 94, p.
154, 2020.
[5] J. A. Al-Tawfiq, “Asymptomatic coronavirus infection: MERS-CoV
and SARS-CoV-2 (COVID-19),” Travel medicine and infectious disease, 2020.
[6] G. News. Coronavirus (COVID-19). [Online]. Available: https:
//news.google.com/covid19/map?hl=en-US&gl=US&ceid=US:en

[7] M. Nasajpour, S. Pouriyeh, R. M. Parizi, M. Dorodchi, M. Valero, and
H. R. Arabnia, “Internet of Things for current COVID-19 and future
pandemics: An exploratory study,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.11147,
2020.
[8] R. Vaishya, M. Javaid, I. H. Khan, and A. Haleem, “Artificial Intelligence (AI) applications for COVID-19 pandemic,” Diabetes &
Metabolic Syndrome: Clinical Research & Reviews, 2020.
[9] A. Alimadadi, S. Aryal, I. Manandhar, P. B. Munroe, B. Joe, and
X. Cheng, “Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning to fight
COVID-19,” 2020.
[10] N. L. Bragazzi, H. Dai, G. Damiani, M. Behzadifar, M. Martini, and
J. Wu, “How Big Data and Artificial Intelligence can help better manage the COVID-19 pandemic,” International Journal of Environmental
Research and Public Health, vol. 17, no. 9, p. 3176, 2020.
[11] M. C. Chang and D. Park, “How can Blockchain help people in
the event of pandemics such as the COVID-19?” Journal of Medical
Systems, vol. 44, pp. 1–2, 2020.
[12] M. E. Darnell, K. Subbarao, S. M. Feinstone, and D. R. Taylor,
“Inactivation of the coronavirus that induces severe acute respiratory
syndrome, SARS-CoV,” Journal of Virological Methods, vol. 121,
no. 1, pp. 85–91, 2004.
[13] M. Willman, D. Kobasa, and J. Kindrachuk, “A comparative analysis
of factors influencing two outbreaks of middle eastern respiratory
syndrome (MERS) in Saudi Arabia and South Korea,” Viruses, vol. 11,
no. 12, p. 1119, 2019.
[14] WHO. SARS - WHO. [Online]. Available: https://www.who.int/ith/
diseases/sars/en/
[15] L. Jia, Q. Zhao, and L. Tong, “Retail pricing for stochastic demand
with unknown parameters: An online Machine Learning approach,” in
2013 51st Annual Allerton Conference on Communication, Control,
and Computing (Allerton). IEEE, 2013, pp. 1353–1358.
[16] K. Chitra and B. Subashini, “Data Mining techniques and its applications in banking sector,” International Journal of Emerging Technology
and Advanced Engineering, vol. 3, no. 8, pp. 219–226, 2013.
[17] M. Chen, Y. Hao, K. Hwang, L. Wang, and L. Wang, “Disease prediction by Machine Learning over big data from healthcare communities,”
IEEE Access, vol. 5, pp. 8869–8879, 2017.
[18] J. Clemente, F. Li, M. Valero, and W. Song, “Smart seismic sensing
for indoor fall detection, location, and notification,” IEEE journal of
biomedical and health informatics, vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 524–532, 2020.
[19] S. Ekins, “The next era: Deep Learning in pharmaceutical research,”
Pharmaceutical Research, vol. 33, no. 11, pp. 2594–2603, 2016.
[20] I. El Naqa and M. J. Murphy, “What is Machine Learning?” pp. 3–11,
2015.
[21] E. Alpaydin, Introduction to Machine Learning. MIT press, 2020.
[22] S. Wong, H. Al-Hasani, Z. Alam, and A. Alam, “Artificial Intelligence
in radiology: how will we be affected?” European Radiology, vol. 29,
no. 1, pp. 141–143, 2019.
[23] A. D. T. Force*., M. Singer, C. Deutschman, C. Seymour, M. Wildman,
C. Sanderson, J. Groves, M. Wildman, C. Sanderson, J. Groves et al.,
“Artificial Intelligence in healthcare: past, present and future,” Journal
of the Intensive Care Society, vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 268–273, 2019.
[24] K. Kourou, T. P. Exarchos, K. P. Exarchos, M. V. Karamouzis, and
D. I. Fotiadis, “Machine Learning applications in cancer prognosis
and prediction,” Computational and Structural Biotechnology Journal,
vol. 13, pp. 8–17, 2015.
[25] Q. Zou, K. Qu, Y. Luo, D. Yin, Y. Ju, and H. Tang, “Predicting diabetes
mellitus with Machine Learning techniques,” Frontiers in Genetics,
vol. 9, p. 515, 2018.
[26] C.-C. Wu, W.-C. Yeh, W.-D. Hsu, M. M. Islam, P. A. A. Nguyen, T. N.
Poly, Y.-C. Wang, H.-C. Yang, and Y.-C. J. Li, “Prediction of fatty liver
disease using Machine Learning algorithms,” Computer Methods and
Programs in Biomedicine, vol. 170, pp. 23–29, 2019.
[27] H. Asri, H. Mousannif, H. Al Moatassime, and T. Noel, “Using
Machine Learning algorithms for breast cancer risk prediction and
diagnosis,” Procedia Computer Science, vol. 83, pp. 1064–1069, 2016.
[28] M. A. Ahmad, C. Eckert, and A. Teredesai, “Interpretable Machine
Learning in healthcare,” in Proceedings of the 2018 ACM international
conference on bioinformatics, computational biology, and health informatics, 2018, pp. 559–560.
[29] R. Sandhu, S. K. Sood, and G. Kaur, “An intelligent system for
predicting and preventing MERS-CoV infection outbreak,” The Journal
of Supercomputing, vol. 72, no. 8, pp. 3033–3056, 2016.

[30] S. Choi, J. Lee, M.-G. Kang, H. Min, Y.-S. Chang, and S. Yoon,
“Large-scale Machine Learning of media outlets for understanding
public reactions to nation-wide viral infection outbreaks,” Methods,
vol. 129, pp. 50–59, 2017.
[31] S. Debnath, D. P. Barnaby, K. Coppa, A. Makhnevich, E. J. Kim,
S. Chatterjee, V. Tóth, T. J. Levy, M. d Paradis, S. L. Cohen et al., “Machine Learning to assist clinical decision-making during the COVID-19
pandemic,” Bioelectronic Medicine, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 1–8, 2020.
[32] Z. Hu, Q. Ge, L. Jin, and M. Xiong, “Artificial Intelligence forecasting
of COVID-19 in china,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.07112, 2020.
[33] Z. Allam, G. Dey, and D. S. Jones, “Artificial intelligence (AI) provided
early detection of the coronavirus (COVID-19) in China and will
influence future urban health policy internationally,” AI, vol. 1, no. 2,
pp. 156–165, 2020.
[34] U. Ozkaya, S. Ozturk, and M. Barstugan, “Coronavirus (COVID-19)
classification using deep features fusion and ranking technique,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2004.03698, 2020.
[35] K. Heiser, P. F. McLean, C. T. Davis, B. Fogelson, H. B. Gordon,
P. Jacobson, B. L. Hurst, B. J. Miller, R. W. Alfa, B. A. Earnshaw et al.,
“Identification of potential treatments for COVID-19 through artificial
intelligence-enabled phenomic analysis of human cells infected with
SARS-CoV-2,” bioRxiv, 2020.
[36] V. M. Corman, O. Landt, M. Kaiser, R. Molenkamp, A. Meijer, D. K.
Chu, T. Bleicker, S. Brünink, J. Schneider, M. L. Schmidt et al.,
“Detection of 2019 novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) by real-time rtpcr,” Eurosurveillance, vol. 25, no. 3, p. 2000045, 2020.
[37] X. Xie, Z. Zhong, W. Zhao, C. Zheng, F. Wang, and J. Liu, “Chest
ct for typical 2019-nCoV pneumonia: relationship to negative rt-pcr
testing,” Radiology, p. 200343, 2020.
[38] C. Gollier and O. Gossner, “Group testing against COVID-19,” Covid
Economics, vol. 2, 2020.
[39] Q.-V. Pham, D. C. Nguyen, W.-J. Hwang, P. N. Pathirana et al.,
“Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Big Data for coronavirus (COVID-19)
pandemic: A survey on the state-of-the-arts,” 2020.
[40] S. Lalmuanawma, J. Hussain, and L. Chhakchhuak, “Applications of
Machine Learning and Artificial Intelligence for COVID-19 (SARSCoV-2) pandemic: A review,” Chaos, Solitons & Fractals, p. 110059,
2020.
[41] W. Yang and F. Yan, “Patients with rt-pcr-confirmed COVID-19 and
normal chest ct,” Radiology, vol. 295, no. 2, pp. E3–E3, 2020.
[42] S. H. Kassani, P. H. Kassasni, M. J. Wesolowski, K. A. Schneider, and
R. Deters, “Automatic detection of coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
in x-ray and ct images: A Machine Learning-based approach,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2004.10641, 2020.
[43] A. Giovagnoni, “Facing the COVID-19 emergency: we can and we
do.” La Radiologia Medica, pp. 1–2, 2020.
[44] D. Cozzi, M. Albanesi, E. Cavigli, C. Moroni, A. Bindi, S. Luvarà,
S. Lucarini, S. Busoni, L. N. Mazzoni, and V. Miele, “Chest x-ray
in new coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) infection: findings and
correlation with clinical outcome,” La Radiologia Medica, p. 1, 2020.
[45] A. E. Hassanien, L. N. Mahdy, K. A. Ezzat, H. H. Elmousalami,
and H. A. Ella, “Automatic x-ray COVID-19 lung image classification
system based on multi-level thresholding and support vector machine,”
medRxiv, 2020.
[46] P. K. Sethy and S. K. Behera, “Detection of coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) based on deep features,” Preprints, vol. 2020030300, p.
2020, 2020.
[47] I. Castiglioni, D. Ippolito, M. Interlenghi, C. B. Monti, C. Salvatore,
S. Schiaffino, A. Polidori, D. Gandola, C. Messa, and F. Sardanelli,
“Artificial Intelligence applied on chest x-ray can aid in the diagnosis of
COVID-19 infection: a first experience from lombardy, Italy,” medRxiv,
2020.
[48] J. Zhang, Y. Xie, Y. Li, C. Shen, and Y. Xia, “COVID-19 screening
on chest x-ray images using deep learning based anomaly detection,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.12338, 2020.
[49] L. Wang and A. Wong, “COVID-Net: A tailored deep convolutional
neural network design for detection of COVID-19 cases from chest
x-ray images,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.09871, 2020.
[50] I. D. Apostolopoulos and T. A. Mpesiana, “COVID-19: automatic detection from x-ray images utilizing transfer learning with Convolutional
Neural Networks,” Physical and Engineering Sciences in Medicine,
p. 1, 2020.

[51] B. Ghoshal and A. Tucker, “Estimating uncertainty and interpretability
in deep learning for coronavirus (COVID-19) detection,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2003.10769, 2020.
[52] J. Chen, K. Li, Z. Zhang, K. Li, and P. S. Yu, “A survey on applications
of Artificial Intelligence in fighting against COVID-19,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2007.02202, 2020.
[53] M. Farooq and A. Hafeez, “COVID-resnet: A Deep Learning framework for screening of COVID19 from radiographs,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2003.14395, 2020.
[54] E. E.-D. Hemdan, M. A. Shouman, and M. E. Karar, “COVIDx-net:
A framework of Deep Learning classifiers to diagnose COVID-19 in
x-ray images,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.11055, 2020.
[55] H. Hirano, K. Koga, and K. Takemoto, “Vulnerability of deep neural
networks for detecting COVID-19 cases from chest x-ray images to
universal adversarial attacks,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.11061, 2020.
[56] P. Afshar, S. Heidarian, F. Naderkhani, A. Oikonomou, K. N. Plataniotis, and A. Mohammadi, “COVID-caps: A capsule network-based
framework for identification of COVID-19 cases from x-ray images,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.02696, 2020.
[57] L. Sarker, M. M. Islam, T. Hannan, and Z. Ahmed, “COVID-DenseNet:
A Deep Learning architecture to detect COVID-19 from chest radiology
images,” 2020.
[58] F. Ucar and D. Korkmaz, “COVIDiagnosis-Net: Deep BayesSqueezeNet based diagnostic of the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID19) from x-ray images,” Medical Hypotheses, p. 109761, 2020.
[59] S. Khobahi, C. Agarwal, and M. Soltanalian, “CoroNet: A deep
network architecture for semi-supervised task-based identification of
COVID-19 from chest x-ray images,” medRxiv, 2020.
[60] E. Luz, P. L. Silva, R. Silva, and G. Moreira, “Towards an efficient
Deep Learning model for COVID-19 patterns detection in x-ray images,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.05717, 2020.
[61] A. Narin, C. Kaya, and Z. Pamuk, “Automatic detection of coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) using x-ray images and Deep Convolutional
Neural Networks,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.10849, 2020.
[62] H. S. Maghdid, A. T. Asaad, K. Z. Ghafoor, A. S. Sadiq, and M. K.
Khan, “Diagnosing COVID-19 pneumonia from x-ray and ct images
using Deep Learning and transfer learning algorithms,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2004.00038, 2020.
[63] M. Toğaçar, B. Ergen, and Z. Cömert, “COVID-19 detection using
Deep Learning models to exploit social mimic optimization and structured chest x-ray images using fuzzy color and stacking approaches,”
Computers in Biology and Medicine, p. 103805, 2020.
[64] T. Ozturk, M. Talo, E. A. Yildirim, U. B. Baloglu, O. Yildirim,
and U. R. Acharya, “Automated detection of COVID-19 cases using
deep neural networks with x-ray images,” Computers in Biology and
Medicine, p. 103792, 2020.
[65] S. Rajaraman and S. Antani, “Training Deep Learning algorithms with
weakly labeled pneumonia chest x-ray data for COVID-19 detection,”
medRxiv, 2020.
[66] D. N. Vinod and S. Prabaharan, “Data science and the role of Artificial
Intelligence in achieving the fast diagnosis of COVID-19,” Chaos,
Solitons & Fractals, p. 110182, 2020.
[67] M. Jamil, I. Hussain et al., “Automatic detection of COVID-19 infection from chest x-ray using Deep Learning,” medRxiv, 2020.
[68] S. Toraman, T. B. Alakuş, and İ. Türkoğlu, “Convolutional capsnet:
A novel artificial neural network approach to detect COVID-19 disease from x-ray images using capsule networks,” Chaos, Solitons &
Fractals, p. 110122, 2020.
[69] M. E. Chowdhury, T. Rahman, A. Khandakar, R. Mazhar, M. A. Kadir,
Z. B. Mahbub, K. R. Islam, M. S. Khan, A. Iqbal, N. Al-Emadi et al.,
“Can AI help in screening viral and COVID-19 pneumonia?” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2003.13145, 2020.
[70] H. Panwar, P. Gupta, M. K. Siddiqui, R. Morales-Menendez, and
V. Singh, “Application of Deep Learning for fast detection of COVID19 in x-rays using nCOVnet,” Chaos, Solitons & Fractals, p. 109944,
2020.
[71] B. Hurt, S. Kligerman, and A. Hsiao, “Deep Learning localization
of pneumonia: 2019 coronavirus (COVID-19) outbreak,” Journal of
Thoracic Imaging, vol. 35, no. 3, pp. W87–W89, 2020.
[72] D. Ezzat, H. A. Ella et al., “GSA-DenseNet121-COVID-19: a hybrid
deep learning architecture for the diagnosis of COVID-19 disease
based on gravitational search optimization algorithm,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2004.05084, 2020.

[73] S. Minaee, R. Kafieh, M. Sonka, S. Yazdani, and G. J. Soufi, “DeepCOVID: Predicting COVID-19 from chest x-ray images using deep
transfer learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.09363, 2020.
[74] D. Das, K. Santosh, and U. Pal, “Truncated inception net: COVID19 outbreak screening using chest x-rays,” Physical and engineering
sciences in medicine, pp. 1–11, 2020.
[75] S. Basu and S. Mitra, “Deep Learning for screening COVID-19 using
chest x-ray images,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.10507, 2020.
[76] M. Rahimzadeh and A. Attar, “A new modified Deep Convolutional
Neural Network for detecting COVID-19 from x-ray images,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2004.08052, 2020.
[77] Y. Zhang, S. Niu, Z. Qiu, Y. Wei, P. Zhao, J. Yao, J. Huang, Q. Wu, and
M. Tan, “COVID-da: Deep domain adaptation from typical pneumonia
to COVID-19,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.01577, 2020.
[78] I. D. Apostolopoulos, S. I. Aznaouridis, and M. A. Tzani, “Extracting possibly representative COVID-19 biomarkers from x-ray images
with Deep Learning approach and image data related to pulmonary
diseases,” Journal of Medical and Biological Engineering, p. 1, 2020.
[79] H. Choi, X. Qi, S. H. Yoon, S. J. Park, K. H. Lee, J. Y. Kim, Y. K. Lee,
H. Ko, K. H. Kim, C. M. Park et al., “Extension of coronavirus disease
2019 (COVID-19) on chest ct and implications for chest radiograph
interpretation,” Radiology: Cardiothoracic Imaging, vol. 2, no. 2, p.
e200107, 2020.
[80] H. Shi, X. Han, N. Jiang, Y. Cao, O. Alwalid, J. Gu, Y. Fan, and
C. Zheng, “Radiological findings from 81 patients with COVID19 pneumonia in Wuhan, China: a descriptive study,” The Lancet
Infectious Diseases, 2020.
[81] A. A. Ardakani, A. R. Kanafi, U. R. Acharya, N. Khadem, and
A. Mohammadi, “Application of Deep Learning technique to manage
COVID-19 in routine clinical practice using ct images: Results of 10
convolutional neural networks,” Computers in Biology and Medicine,
p. 103795, 2020.
[82] L. Li, L. Qin, Z. Xu, Y. Yin, X. Wang, B. Kong, J. Bai, Y. Lu, Z. Fang,
Q. Song et al., “Artificial Intelligence distinguishes COVID-19 from
community acquired pneumonia on chest ct,” Radiology, p. 200905,
2020.
[83] F. Shan, Y. Gao, J. Wang, W. Shi, N. Shi, M. Han, Z. Xue, and Y. Shi,
“Lung infection quantification of COVID-19 in ct images with Deep
Learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.04655, 2020.
[84] A. Holzinger, M. Plass, M. Kickmeier-Rust, K. Holzinger, G. C.
Crişan, C.-M. Pintea, and V. Palade, “Interactive machine learning:
experimental evidence for the human in the algorithmic loop,” Applied
Intelligence, vol. 49, no. 7, pp. 2401–2414, 2019.
[85] Z. Tang, W. Zhao, X. Xie, Z. Zhong, F. Shi, J. Liu, and D. Shen, “Severity assessment of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) using quantitative features from chest ct images,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.11988,
2020.
[86] O. Gozes, M. Frid-Adar, H. Greenspan, P. D. Browning, H. Zhang,
W. Ji, A. Bernheim, and E. Siegel, “Rapid ai development cycle for
the coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic: Initial results for automated
detection & patient monitoring using Deep Learning ct image analysis,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.05037, 2020.
[87] J. Zhao, Y. Zhang, X. He, and P. Xie, “COVID-ct-dataset: a ct scan
dataset about COVID-19,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.13865, 2020.
[88] C. Butt, J. Gill, D. Chun, and B. A. Babu, “Deep Learning system
to screen coronavirus disease 2019 pneumonia,” Applied Intelligence,
p. 1, 2020.
[89] S. Wang, B. Kang, J. Ma, X. Zeng, M. Xiao, J. Guo, M. Cai, J. Yang,
Y. Li, X. Meng et al., “A Deep Learning algorithm using ct images to
screen for corona virus disease (COVID-19),” MedRxiv, 2020.
[90] X. Bai, C. Fang, Y. Zhou, S. Bai, Z. Liu, L. Xia, Q. Chen, Y. Xu,
T. Xia, S. Gong et al., “Predicting COVID-19 malignant progression
with AI techniques,” 2020.
[91] Y. Pathak, P. K. Shukla, A. Tiwari, S. Stalin, S. Singh, and P. K. Shukla,
“Deep Transfer Learning based classification model for COVID-19
disease,” IRBM, 2020.
[92] S. Jin, B. Wang, H. Xu, C. Luo, L. Wei, W. Zhao, X. Hou, W. Ma,
Z. Xu, Z. Zheng et al., “Ai-assisted ct imaging analysis for COVID-19
screening: Building and deploying a medical AI system in four weeks,”
medRxiv, 2020.
[93] C. Jin, W. Chen, Y. Cao, Z. Xu, X. Zhang, L. Deng, C. Zheng, J. Zhou,
H. Shi, and J. Feng, “Development and evaluation of an AI system for
COVID-19 diagnosis,” medRxiv, 2020.

[94] G. Wang, X. Liu, C. Li, Z. Xu, J. Ruan, H. Zhu, T. Meng, K. Li,
N. Huang, and S. Zhang, “A noise-robust framework for automatic
segmentation of COVID-19 pneumonia lesions from ct images,” IEEE
Transactions on Medical Imaging, 2020.
[95] J. Song, H. Wang, Y. Liu, W. Wu, G. Dai, Z. Wu, P. Zhu, W. Zhang,
K. W. Yeom, and K. Deng, “End-to-end automatic differentiation of
the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) from viral pneumonia based
on chest ct,” European journal of nuclear medicine and molecular
imaging, pp. 1–9, 2020.
[96] Y.-H. Wu, S.-H. Gao, J. Mei, J. Xu, D.-P. Fan, C.-W. Zhao, and M.-M.
Cheng, “JCS: An explainable COVID-19 diagnosis system by joint
classification and segmentation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.07054,
2020.
[97] T. Zhou, S. Canu, and S. Ruan, “An automatic COVID-19 ct segmentation based on U-Net with attention mechanism,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2004.06673, 2020.
[98] K. Yang, X. Liu, Y. Yang, X. Liao, R. Wang, X. Zeng, Y. Wang,
M. Zhang, and T. Zhang, “End-to-end COVID-19 screening with 3D
Deep Learning on chest computed tomography,” 2020.
[99] S. Yang, L. Jiang, Z. Cao, L. Wang, J. Cao, R. Feng, Z. Zhang, X. Xue,
Y. Shi, and F. Shan, “Deep learning for detecting corona virus disease
2019 (COVID-19) on high-resolution computed tomography: a pilot
study,” Annals of Translational Medicine, vol. 8, no. 7, 2020.
[100] A. Mobiny, P. A. Cicalese, S. Zare, P. Yuan, M. Abavisani, C. C.
Wu, J. Ahuja, P. M. de Groot, and H. Van Nguyen, “Radiologistlevel COVID-19 detection using ct scans with detail-oriented capsule
networks,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.07407, 2020.
[101] Y. Song, S. Zheng, L. Li, X. Zhang, X. Zhang, Z. Huang, J. Chen,
H. Zhao, Y. Jie, R. Wang et al., “Deep learning enables accurate
diagnosis of novel coronavirus (COVID-19) with ct images,” medRxiv,
2020.
[102] C. Zheng, X. Deng, Q. Fu, Q. Zhou, J. Feng, H. Ma, W. Liu, and
X. Wang, “Deep learning-based detection for COVID-19 from chest ct
using weak label,” medRxiv, 2020.
[103] B. A. Shawar and E. Atwell, “Chatbots: are they really useful?” in Ldv
forum, vol. 22, no. 1, 2007, pp. 29–49.
[104] A. Martin, J. Nateqi, S. Gruarin, N. Munsch, I. Abdarahmane, and
B. Knapp, “An Artificial Intelligence-based first-line defence against
COVID-19: digitally screening citizens for risks via a chatbot,” bioRxiv,
2020.
[105] J. Cahn, “Chatbot: Architecture, design, & development,” University of
Pennsylvania School of Engineering and Applied Science Department
of Computer and Information Science, 2017.
[106] T. J. Judson, A. Y. Odisho, J. J. Young, O. Bigazzi, D. Steuer,
R. Gonzales, and A. B. Neinstein, “Case report: Implementation of a
digital chatbot to screen health system employees during the COVID-19
pandemic,” Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association,
2020.
[107] A. S. Miner, L. Laranjo, and A. B. Kocaballi, “Chatbots in the fight
against the COVID-19 pandemic,” npj Digital Medicine, vol. 3, no. 1,
pp. 1–4, 2020.
[108] U. Bharti, D. Bajaj, H. Batra, S. Lalit, S. Lalit, and A. Gangwani,
“Medbot: Conversational Artificial Intelligence powered chatbot for
delivering tele-health after COVID-19,” in 2020 5th International Conference on Communication and Electronics Systems (ICCES). IEEE,
2020, pp. 870–875.
[109] N. Ouerhani, A. Maalel, H. B. Ghézala, and S. Chouri, “Smart ubiquitous chatbot for COVID-19 assistance with Deep Learning sentiment
analysis model during and after quarantine,” 2020.
[110] Bespoke, “Bebot launches free coronavirus information bot,” https://
www.be-spoke.io/index.html, 2020, Accessed August 06, 2020.
[111] Orbita, “Orbita launches COVID-19 chatbot screener &
knowledge
base,”
https://go.orbita.ai/orbita-launches-screeningchatbot-covid19-patient-education-triage-virtual-navigation?utm
campaign=[Employee%20Health%20Manager%20-%20Orbita%
20COVID-19]%20April%202020%20-%20present&utm source=
orbitahomepagebody&utm content=covid19landingpage,
2020,
Accessed August 06, 2020.
[112] Hyro, “A free virtual assistant to support health enterprises and their
patients,” https://www.hyro.ai/covid-19, 2020, Accessed August 06,
2020.
[113] “Apple makes mobility data available to aid COVID-19 efforts,”
https://www.apple.com/newsroom/2020/04/apple-makes-mobility-

[114]
[115]
[116]
[117]

[118]

[119]

[120]

[121]

[122]

[123]

[124]
[125]

[126]

[127]

[128]
[129]

[130]
[131]

[132]

[133]
[134]

[135]

[136]

[137]

data-available-to-aid-covid-19-efforts/, 2020, Accessed August 04,
2020.
https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/symptoms-testing/
symptoms.html, 2020, Accessed August 04, 2020.
https://www.symptoma.com/, 2020, Accessed August 04, 2020.
Symptoma, https://www.symptoma.com/en/about, 2020, Accessed August 06, 2020.
H. HaddadPajouh, A. Dehghantanha, R. M. Parizi, M. Aledhari, and
H. Karimipour, “A survey on Internet of Things security: Requirements,
challenges, and solutions,” Internet of Things, p. 100129, 2019.
M. Sheng, Y. Qin, L. Yao, and B. Benatallah, Eds., Managing the Web
of Things: Linking the Real World to the Web. Morgan Kaufmann,
2017.
A. H. Ngu, M. Gutierrez, V. Metsis, S. Nepal, and Q. Z. Sheng, “IoT
middleware: A survey on issues and enabling technologies,” IEEE
Internet of Things Journal, vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 1–20, 2017.
D. Spiliopoulos, “How iot and ai can enable companies to restart their
business during COVID-19,” https://iottechnews.com/news/2020/jun/
02/how-iot-and-ai-can-enable-companies-during-covid-19-to-restarttheir-business/, 2020, Accessed August 07, 2020.
SmartXHub,
“Automatic
fever
screening
tablet,”
https:
//smartxhub.com/tablet-temperature-screening-brochure/,
2020,
Accessed August 07, 2020.
G. Onag, “Taiwan hospital taps AI, IoT and cloud to keep
away COVID-19,” https://futureiot.tech/taiwan-hospital-taps-ai-iotand-cloud-to-keep-away-covid-19/, 2020, Accessed August 08, 2020.
R. Sagar, “How Computer Vision came in handy for social distancing,” https://analyticsindiamag.com/covid-19-computer-vision/, 2020,
Accessed August 08, 2020.
“AI powered workplace safety and compliance,” http://rayvision.ai,
2020, Accessed August 08, 2020.
K. Waddell, “Automating humans with AI,” https://www.axios.com/
ai-employee-surveillance-automating-humans-092f8c36-24bc-4efd8d38-78f1c8a61e1f.html, 2019, Accessed August 08, 2020.
“Landing AI creates an AI tool to help customers monitor social distancing in the workplace,” https://landing.ai/landing-ai-creates-an-aitool-to-help-customers-monitor-social-distancing-in-the-workplace/,
2020, Accessed August 08, 2020.
L. Ramadass, S. Arunachalam, and Z. Sagayasree, “Applying Deep
Learning algorithm to maintain social distance in public place through
drone technology,” International Journal of Pervasive Computing and
Communications, 2020.
A. Rai, “Explainable AI: from black box to glass box,” Journal of the
Academy of Marketing Science, vol. 48, no. 1, pp. 137–141, 2020.
K. Ganasegeran and S. A. Abdulrahman, “Artificial Intelligence applications in tracking health behaviors during disease epidemics,” in
Human Behaviour Analysis Using Intelligent Systems. Springer, 2020,
pp. 141–155.
W. Naudé, “Artificial Intelligence against COVID-19: An early review,”
2020.
CDC, “What you should know about COVID-19 to protect yourself and
others,” https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/downloads/2019ncov-factsheet.pdf, 2020, Accessed August 08, 2020.
T. Coles, “Contact tracing apps use ML to curb COVID19 outbreaks,” https://www.itprotoday.com/machine-learning/contacttracing-apps-use-ml-curb-covid-19-outbreaks, 2020, Accessed August
08, 2020.
R. A. Calvo, S. Deterding, and R. M. Ryan, “Health surveillance during
COVID-19 pandemic,” 2020.
A. N. Desk, “Tracing a million steps: SQREEM launches AI-driven
contact tracing and communications platform to fight COVID-19,”
https://aithority.com/technology/analytics/tracing-a-million-stepssqreem-launches-ai-driven-contact-tracing-and-communicationsplatform-to-fight-covid-19/, 2020, Accessed August 10, 2020.
L. J. Kricka, S. Polevikov, J. Y. Park, P. Fortina, S. Bernardini,
D. Satchkov, V. Kolesov, and M. Grishkov, “Artificial Intelligencepowered search tools and resources in the fight against COVID-19,”
EJIFCC, vol. 31, no. 2, p. 106, 2020.
J. Li and X. Guo, “COVID-19 contact-tracing apps: A survey on the
global deployment and challenges,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.03599,
2020.
M. Panzzarino, “Apple and google are launching a joint COVID-19
tracing tool for iOS and Android,” Tech Crunch, vol. 10, 2020.

[138] S. Kwon, “COVID-19: Lessons from South Korea,” https:
//healthsystemsglobal.org/news/covid-19-lessons-from-south-korea/,
2020, Accessed August 18, 2020.
[139] P. Howell O’Neill, T. Ryan-Mosley, and B. Johnson, “A flood
of coronavirus apps are tracking us. now its time to keep track
of them.” https://www.technologyreview.com/2020/05/07/1000961/
launching-mittr-covid-tracing-tracker/, 2020, Accessed August 18,
2020.
[140] “Aarogya Setu mobile app,” https://www.mygov.in/aarogya-setu-app/,
2020, Accessed August 16, 2020.
[141] “Alipay
app,”
https://mp.weixin.qq.com/s/
amB7fBxLw8KSR9DcUsbTWg, 2020, Accessed August 17, 2020.
[142] “BeAware Bahrain,” https://apps.bahrain.bh/CMSWebApplication/
action/ShowAppDetailsAction?selectedAppID=321&appLanguage=en,
2020, Accessed August 16, 2020.
[143] “COVIDSafe app,” https://www.health.gov.au/resources/apps-andtools/covidsafe-app#about-the-app, 2020, Accessed August 16, 2020.
[144] “COVTRACER,” https://covid-19.rise.org.cy/en/, 2020, Accessed August 16, 2020.
[145] “CovidRadar.mx,” https://covidradar.mx, 2020, Accessed August 16,
2020.
[146] “Ehteraz app made compulsory for citizens, residents,”
https://www.marhaba.qa/qatars-covid-19-track-and-control-appavailable-for-download-in-app-store/, 2020, Accessed August 16,
2020.
[147] “I protect both you and me,” https://erouska.cz/en, 2020, Accessed
August 16, 2020.
[148] “Gh COVID-19 tracker,” https://ghcovid19.com, 2020, Accessed August 16, 2020.
[149] “HAMAGEN app - only together will we beat the coronavirus,” https://
www.gov.il/en/departments/news/hamagenapp, 2020, Accessed August
16, 2020.
[150] “An extra tool to fight the epidemic,” https://www.immuni.italia.it,
2020, Accessed August 16, 2020.
[151] ito, “ito track infections, not people,” https://www.ito-app.org, 2020,
Accessed August 16, 2020.
[152] https://mask.ir, 2020, Accessed August 16, 2020.
[153] https://www.mosti.gov.my/web/en/mytrace/, 2020, Accessed August
16, 2020.
[154] https://www.economie.gouv.fr/stopcovid, 2020, Accessed August 16,
2020.
[155] https://tracecovid.ae, 2020, Accessed August 16, 2020.
[156] “TraceTogether,” https://www.healthhub.sg/apps/38/tracetogether-app,
2020, Accessed August 16, 2020.
[157] D. A. Villela, “Discrete time forecasting of epidemics,” Infectious
Disease Modelling, vol. 5, pp. 189–196, 2020.
[158] C. Anastassopoulou, L. Russo, A. Tsakris, and C. Siettos, “Data-based
analysis, modelling and forecasting of the novel coronavirus (2019nCoV) outbreak,” medRxiv, 2020.
[159] Z. Yang, Z. Zeng, K. Wang, S.-S. Wong, W. Liang, M. Zanin, P. Liu,
X. Cao, Z. Gao, Z. Mai et al., “Modified SEIR and AI prediction
of the epidemics trend of COVID-19 in China under public health
interventions,” Journal of Thoracic Disease, vol. 12, no. 3, p. 165,
2020.
[160] D. Liu, L. Clemente, C. Poirier, X. Ding, M. Chinazzi, J. T. Davis,
A. Vespignani, and M. Santillana, “A Machine Learning methodology
for real-time forecasting of the 2019-2020 COVID-19 outbreak using
internet searches, news alerts, and estimates from mechanistic models,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.04019, 2020.
[161] M. A. Al-Qaness, A. A. Ewees, H. Fan, and M. Abd El Aziz,
“Optimization method for forecasting confirmed cases of COVID-19
in china,” Journal of Clinical Medicine, vol. 9, no. 3, p. 674, 2020.
[162] M. Abdel-Basset and L. A. Shawky, “Flower pollination algorithm: a
comprehensive review,” Artificial Intelligence Review, vol. 52, no. 4,
pp. 2533–2557, 2019.
[163] S. Mirjalili, A. H. Gandomi, S. Z. Mirjalili, S. Saremi, H. Faris, and
S. M. Mirjalili, “Salp swarm algorithm: A bio-inspired optimizer for
engineering design problems,” Advances in Engineering Software, vol.
114, pp. 163–191, 2017.
[164] D. Karaboga and E. Kaya, “Adaptive network based fuzzy inference
system (ANFIS) training approaches: a comprehensive survey,” Artificial Intelligence Review, vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 2263–2293, 2019.

[165] R. M. Rizk-Allah and A. E. Hassanien, “COVID-19 forecasting based
on an improved interior search algorithm and multi-layer feed forward
neural network,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.05960, 2020.
[166] S. J. Fong, G. Li, N. Dey, R. G. Crespo, and E. Herrera-Viedma,
“Finding an accurate early forecasting model from small dataset:
A case of 2019-ncov novel coronavirus outbreak,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2003.10776, 2020.
[167] S. M. Ayyoubzadeh, S. M. Ayyoubzadeh, H. Zahedi, M. Ahmadi, and
S. R. N. Kalhori, “Predicting COVID-19 incidence through analysis
of google trends data in Iran: Data Mining and Deep Learning pilot
study,” JMIR Public Health and Surveillance, vol. 6, no. 2, p. e18828,
2020.
[168] Google. Coronavirus search trends. [Online]. Available: https:
//trends.google.com/trends/story/US cu 4Rjdh3ABAABMHM en
[169] WorldPop. Worldpop COVID-19. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.worldpop.org/covid19
[170] N. M. Ghazaly, M. A. Abdel-Fattah, and A. Abd El-Aziz, “Novel
coronavirus forecasting model using nonlinear autoregressive artificial
neural network,” Journal of Advanced Science, 2020.
[171] A. N. Roy, J. Jose, A. Sunil, N. Gautam, D. Nathalia, and A. Suresh,
“Prediction and spread visualization of COVID-19 pandemic using
machine learning,” 2020.
[172] S. K. Bandyopadhyay and S. Dutta, “Machine Learning approach for
confirmation of COVID-19 cases: Positive, negative, death and release,”
medRxiv, 2020.
[173] M. Han, “Global virus tracker,” https://globalvirustracker.org/, 2020,
Accessed August 20, 2020.
[174] M. Cinelli, W. Quattrociocchi, A. Galeazzi, C. M. Valensise, E. Brugnoli, A. L. Schmidt, P. Zola, F. Zollo, and A. Scala, “The COVID-19
social media infodemic,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.05004, 2020.
[175] N. Karisani and P. Karisani, “Mining coronavirus (COVID-19) posts
in social media,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.06778, 2020.
[176] J. Samuel, G. Ali, M. Rahman, E. Esawi, Y. Samuel et al., “COVID-19
public sentiment insights and Machine Learning for tweets classification,” Nawaz and Rahman, Md. Mokhlesur and Esawi, Ek and Samuel,
Yana, COVID-19 Public Sentiment Insights and Machine Learning for
Tweets Classification (April 19, 2020), 2020.
[177] D. Prabhakar Kaila, D. A. Prasad et al., “Informational flow on twitter–
corona virus outbreak–topic modelling approach,” International Journal of Advanced Research in Engineering and Technology (IJARET),
vol. 11, no. 3, 2020.
[178] K. Jahanbin and V. Rahmanian, “Using twitter and web news mining
to predict COVID-19 outbreak,” Asian Pacific Journal of Tropical
Medicine, vol. 13, 2020.
[179] T. Mackey, V. Purushothaman, J. Li, N. Shah, M. Nali, C. Bardier,
B. Liang, M. Cai, and R. Cuomo, “Machine learning to detect selfreporting of symptoms, testing access, and recovery associated with
COVID-19 on twitter: Retrospective big data infoveillance study,”
JMIR Public Health and Surveillance, vol. 6, no. 2, p. e19509, 2020.
[180] M. K. Siddiqui, R. Morales-Menendez, P. K. Gupta, H. Iqbal, F. Hussain, K. Khatoon, and S. Ahmad, “Correlation between temperature and
COVID-19 (suspected, confirmed and death) cases based on Machine
Learning analysis,” J Pure Appl Microbiol, vol. 14, 2020.
[181] A. S. S. Rao and J. A. Vazquez, “Identification of COVID-19 can
be quicker through Artificial Intelligence framework using a mobile
phone–based survey when cities and towns are under quarantine,”
Infection Control & Hospital Epidemiology, vol. 41, no. 7, pp. 826–
830, 2020.
[182] Y. Zhao and H. Xu, “Chinese public attention to COVID-19 epidemic:
Based on social media,” medRxiv, 2020.
[183] L. Schild, C. Ling, J. Blackburn, G. Stringhini, Y. Zhang, and S. Zannettou, “”go eat a bat, chang!”: An early look on the emergence of
sinophobic behavior on web communities in the face of COVID-19,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.04046, 2020.
[184] M. Gao, H. Igata, A. Takeuchi, K. Sato, and Y. Ikegaya, “Machine
Learning-based prediction of adverse drug effects: an example of
seizure-inducing compounds,” Journal of Pharmacological Sciences,
vol. 133, no. 2, pp. 70–78, 2017.
[185] R. Lu, X. Zhao, J. Li, P. Niu, B. Yang, H. Wu, W. Wang, H. Song,
B. Huang, N. Zhu et al., “Genomic characterisation and epidemiology
of 2019 novel coronavirus: implications for virus origins and receptor
binding,” The Lancet, vol. 395, no. 10224, pp. 565–574, 2020.
[186] “The proximal origin of SARS-CoV-2, author=Andersen, Kristian G
and Rambaut, Andrew and Lipkin, W Ian and Holmes, Edward C

[187]

[188]
[189]
[190]
[191]

[192]

[193]
[194]

[195]

[196]
[197]
[198]
[199]

[200]

[201]
[202]

[203]
[204]

[205]
[206]
[207]

and Garry, Robert F, journal=Nature medicine, volume=26, number=4,
pages=450–452, year=2020, publisher=Nature Publishing Group.”
M. Hoffmann, H. Kleine-Weber, S. Schroeder, N. Krüger, T. Herrler,
S. Erichsen, T. S. Schiergens, G. Herrler, N.-H. Wu, A. Nitsche et al.,
“SARS-CoV-2 cell entry depends on ACE2 and TMPRSS2 and is
blocked by a clinically proven protease inhibitor,” Cell, 2020.
E. Lin and H.-Y. Lane, “Machine Learning and systems genomics
approaches for multi-omics data,” Biomarker Research, vol. 5, no. 1,
p. 2, 2017.
L. E. Gralinski and V. D. Menachery, “Return of the coronavirus: 2019nCoV,” Viruses, vol. 12, no. 2, p. 135, 2020.
Z.-W. Ye, S. Yuan, K.-S. Yuen, S.-Y. Fung, C.-P. Chan, and D.-Y. Jin,
“Zoonotic origins of human coronaviruses,” International Journal of
Biological Sciences, vol. 16, no. 10, p. 1686, 2020.
J. F.-W. Chan, K.-H. Kok, Z. Zhu, H. Chu, K. K.-W. To, S. Yuan,
and K.-Y. Yuen, “Genomic characterization of the 2019 novel humanpathogenic coronavirus isolated from a patient with atypical pneumonia
after visiting wuhan,” Emerging Microbes & Infections, vol. 9, no. 1,
pp. 221–236, 2020.
P. K. D. H. John Jumper, Kathryn Tunyasuvunakool
and the AlphaFold Team. Computational predictions of
protein
structures
associated
with
COVID-19.
[Online].
Available: https://deepmind.com/research/open-source/computationalpredictions-of-protein-structures-associated-with-COVID-19
CDC. Types of coronaviruses. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/types.html
G. S. Randhawa, M. P. Soltysiak, H. El Roz, C. P. de Souza, K. A. Hill,
and L. Kari, “Machine Learning using intrinsic genomic signatures for
rapid classification of novel pathogens: COVID-19 case study,” PLOS
ONE, vol. 15, no. 4, p. e0232391, 2020.
G. S. Randhawa, K. A. Hill, and L. Kari, “ML-DSP: Machine Learning
with digital signal processing for ultrafast, accurate, and scalable
genome classification at all taxonomic levels,” BMC Genomics, vol. 20,
no. 1, p. 267, 2019.
L. Heo and M. Feig, “Modeling of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) proteins by Machine Learning and
physics-based refinement,” bioRxiv, 2020.
R. Magar, P. Yadav, and A. B. Farimani, “Potential neutralizing
antibodies discovered for novel corona virus using Machine Learning,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.08447, 2020.
H. Chen, O. Engkvist, Y. Wang, M. Olivecrona, and T. Blaschke,
“The rise of Deep Learning in drug discovery,” Drug discovery today,
vol. 23, no. 6, pp. 1241–1250, 2018.
B. R. Beck, B. Shin, Y. Choi, S. Park, and K. Kang, “Predicting commercially available antiviral drugs that may act on the novel coronavirus
(SARS-CoV-2) through a drug-target interaction deep learning model,”
Computational and Structural Biotechnology Journal, 2020.
M. Moskal, W. Beker, R. Roszak, E. P. Gajewska, A. Wołos, K. Molga,
S. Szymkuć, and B. A. Grzybowski, “Suggestions for second-pass
anti-COVID-19 drugs based on the Artificial Intelligence measures of
molecular similarity, shape and pharmacophore distribution.” 2020.
S. Jaeger, S. Fulle, and S. Turk, “Mol2vec: Unsupervised Machine
Learning approach with chemical intuition,” Journal of chemical information and modeling, vol. 58, no. 1, pp. 27–35, 2018.
O. Kadioglu, M. Saeed, H. Johannes Greten, and T. Efferth, “Identification of novel compounds against three targets of SARS CoV-2
coronavirus by combined virtual screening and supervised Machine
Learning,” Bull. World Health Organ, 2020.
N. Bung, S. R. Krishnan, G. Bulusu, and A. Roy, “De novo design
of new chemical entities (NCEs) for SARS-CoV-2 using Artificial
Intelligence,” ChemRxiv, 2020.
A. Zhavoronkov, B. Zagribelnyy, A. Zhebrak, V. Aladinskiy, V. Terentiev, Q. Vanhaelen, D. S. Bezrukov, D. Polykovskiy, R. Shayakhmetov,
A. Filimonov et al., “Potential non-covalent SARS-CoV-2 3C-like
protease inhibitors designed using generative deep learning approaches
and reviewed by human medicinal chemist in virtual reality,” 2020.
B. Tang, F. He, D. Liu, M. Fang, Z. Wu, and D. Xu, “AI-aided design
of novel targeted covalent inhibitors against SARS-CoV-2,” bioRxiv,
2020.
F. Hu, J. Jiang, and P. Yin, “Prediction of potential commercially
inhibitors against SARS-CoV-2 by multi-task deep model,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2003.00728, 2020.
S. M. Bartsch, K. J. O’Shea, M. C. Ferguson, M. E. Bottazzi, P. T.
Wedlock, U. Strych, J. A. McKinnell, S. S. Siegmund, S. N. Cox,

[208]
[209]
[210]
[211]
[212]
[213]
[214]

[215]

[216]

[217]
[218]
[219]
[220]

[221]

[222]

P. J. Hotez et al., “Vaccine efficacy needed for a covid-19 coronavirus
vaccine to prevent or stop an epidemic as the sole intervention,”
American journal of preventive medicine, 2020.
G. A. Weinberg and P. G. Szilagyi, “Vaccine epidemiology: efficacy,
effectiveness, and the translational research roadmap,” The Journal of
infectious diseases, vol. 201, no. 11, pp. 1607–1610, 2010.
A. T. Harding and N. S. Heaton, “Efforts to improve the seasonal
influenza vaccine,” Vaccines, vol. 6, no. 2, p. 19, 2018.
W.-H. Chen, U. Strych, P. J. Hotez, and M. E. Bottazzi, “The SARSCoV-2 vaccine pipeline: an overview,” Current Tropical Medicine
Reports, pp. 1–4, 2020.
N. Restifo, H. Ying, L. Hwang, and W. Leitner, “The promise of nucleic
acid vaccines,” Gene Therapy, vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 89–92, 2000.
WHO, “Draft landscape of COVID-19 candidate vaccines,”
https://www.who.int/publications/m/item/draft-landscape-of-covid19-candidate-vaccines, 2020, Accessed August 04, 2020.
E. Ong, M. U. Wong, A. Huffman, and Y. He, “COVID-19 coronavirus
vaccine design using reverse vaccinology and Machine Learning,”
BioRxiv, 2020.
G. Liu, B. Carter, T. Bricken, S. Jain, M. Viard, M. Carrington, and
D. K. Gifford, “Computationally optimized SARS-CoV-2 MHC class
i and ii vaccine formulations predicted to target human haplotype
distributions,” Cell Systems, 2020.
D. Ward, M. Higgins, J. Phelan, M. L. Hibberd, S. Campino, and
T. G. Clark, “An integrated in silico immuno-genetic analytical platform
provides insights into COVID-19 serological and vaccine targets,”
bioRxiv, 2020.
M. S. Rahman, M. N. Hoque, M. R. Islam, S. Akter, A. Rubayet-UlAlam, M. A. Siddique, O. Saha, M. M. Rahaman, M. Sultana, K. A.
Crandall et al., “Epitope-based chimeric peptide vaccine design against
S, M and E proteins of SARS-CoV-2 etiologic agent of global pandemic
COVID-19: an in silico approach,” PeerJ, vol. 8, p. e9572, 2020.
B. Sarkar, M. A. Ullah, F. T. Johora, M. A. Taniya, and Y. Araf,
“The essential facts of wuhan novel coronavirus outbreak in China and
Epitope-based vaccine designing against 2019-nCoV,” BioRxiv, 2020.
M. Prachar, S. Justesen, D. B. Steen-Jensen, S. P. Thorgrimsen, E. Jurgons, O. Winther, and F. O. Bagger, “COVID-19 vaccine candidates:
Prediction and validation of 174 SARS-CoV-2 epitopes,” bioRxiv, 2020.
R. Qiao, N. H. Tran, B. Shan, A. Ghodsi, and M. Li, “Personalized
workflow to identify optimal t-cell epitopes for peptide-based vaccines
against COVID-19,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.10650, 2020.
C. V. Herst, S. Burkholz, J. Sidney, A. Sette, P. E. Harris, S. Massey,
T. Brasel, E. Cunha-Neto, D. S. Rosa, W. C. H. Chao et al., “An
effective ctl peptide vaccine for ebola zaire based on survivors CD8+
targeting of a particular nucleocapsid protein epitope with potential
implications for COVID-19 vaccine design,” Vaccine, 2020.
H. Zhang, K. M. Saravanan, Y. Yang, M. T. Hossain, J. Li, X. Ren,
Y. Pan, and Y. Wei, “Deep Learning based drug screening for novel
coronavirus 2019-nCov,” Interdisciplinary Sciences, Computational
Life Sciences, p. 1, 2020.
M. Nielsen, C. Lundegaard, T. Blicher, K. Lamberth, M. Harndahl,
S. Justesen, G. Røder, B. Peters, A. Sette, O. Lund et al., “NetMHCpan,
a method for quantitative predictions of peptide binding to any HLA-A
and-B locus protein of known sequence,” PLOS ONE, vol. 2, no. 8, p.
e796, 2007.

