Drug Repurposing for COVID-19 via Knowledge Graph
Completion
Rui Zhanga,∗, Dimitar Hristovskib,∗∗, Dalton Schuttea,∗∗, Andrej Kastrinb,∗∗,
Marcelo Fiszmanc , Halil Kilicoglud

arXiv:2010.09600v2 [cs.CL] 5 Feb 2021

a Institute

for Health Informatics and Department of Pharmaceutical Care & Health
Systems, University of Minnesota, Minnesota, USA
b Institute for Biostatistics and Medical Informatics, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia
c NITES - Núcleo de Inovação e Tecnologia Em Saúde, Pontifical Catholic University of Rio
de Janeiro, Brazil
d School of Information Sciences, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign,
IL, USA

Abstract
Objective. To discover candidate drugs to repurpose for COVID-19 using
literature-derived knowledge and knowledge graph completion methods.
Methods. We propose a novel, integrative, and neural network-based literaturebased discovery (LBD) approach to identify drug candidates from PubMed and
other COVID-19-focused research literature. Our approach relies on semantic
triples extracted using SemRep (via SemMedDB). We identified an informative and accurate subset of semantic triples using filtering rules and an accuracy classifier developed on a BERT variant. We used this subset to construct
a knowledge graph, and applied five state-of-the-art, neural knowledge graph
completion algorithms (TransE, RotatE, DistMult, ComplEx, and STELP) to
predict drug repurposing candidates. The models were trained and assessed
using a time slicing approach and the predicted drugs were compared with a list
of drugs reported in the literature and evaluated in clinical trials. These models
were complemented by a discovery pattern-based approach.
Results. Accuracy classifier based on PubMedBERT achieved the best performance (F1 = 0.854) in classifying semantic predications. Among five knowledge
graph completion models, TransE outperformed others (MR = 0.923, Hits@1
= 0.417). Some known drugs linked to COVID-19 in the literature were identified, as well as others that have not yet been studied. Discovery patterns
enabled identification of additional candidate drugs and generation of plausible
hypotheses regarding the links between the candidate drugs and COVID-19.
Among them, five highly ranked and novel drugs (paclitaxel, SB 203580, alpha
2-antiplasmin, metoclopramide, and oxymatrine) and the mechanistic explanations for their potential use are further discussed.
∗ Corresponding
∗∗ Authors

author
contributed equally

Preprint submitted to Journal of Biomedical Informatics

February 8, 2021

Conclusion. We showed that a LBD approach can be feasible not only for
discovering drug candidates for COVID-19, but also for generating mechanistic explanations. Our approach can be generalized to other diseases as
well as to other clinical questions. Source code and data are available at
https://github.com/kilicogluh/lbd-covid.
Keywords: COVID-19; drug repurposing; knowledge graph completion;
literature-based discovery; text mining

1. Introduction
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), caused by a novel coronavirus named
severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2; formerly 2019nCoV), first emerged in China in late 2019, and was declared a global pandemic
by the World Health Organization (WHO) on March 11, 2020. Since then,
COVID-19 has disrupted human life across the globe, with enormous human,
economic, and societal costs. At the time of writing, it shows no sign of abating
[1, 2], although the final months of 2020 have brought some good news. First, on
October 22, 2020, after the initial submission of this manuscript, the Food and
Drug Administration (FDA) approved remdesivir for the treatment of COVID19 requiring hospitalization [3]. Then, on November 9, 2020, Pfizer/BioNTech
announced the effectiveness of their coronavirus vaccine BNT162b2 and over a
month later after the release of additional data, FDA granted it emergency use
authorization [4]. A second vaccine, by Moderna, has also been authorized for
emergency use on December 18, 2020 [5].
Rapid development of effective vaccines for COVID-19 was by no means guaranteed, however. Moreover, de novo development and approval of an effective
antiviral therapy remains a risky, costly, and time-consuming process. In the
absence of an effective vaccine or other therapies, there have been significant
efforts in repurposing drugs approved for other diseases for COVID-19 treatment, some of which have been tested in clinical trials (e.g., dexamethasone [6],
hydroxychloroquine and lopinavir/ritonavir [7]) and one ultimately approved by
FDA for treatment of patients hospitalized with COVID-19 (remdesivir [3, 8]).
Computational approaches to drug repurposing have also garnered much attention to accelerate discovery of therapies for COVID-19 [9, 10]. Common computational drug repurposing methods include drug signature matching, molecular docking, genome-wide association studies, and network analysis [11]. These
data-driven approaches involve systematic analysis of various types of biological
and clinical data (e.g., gene expression, chemical structure, genome and protein sequences, and electronic health records) to generate hypotheses regarding
repurposed use of approved or investigational drugs [11]. The potential of recent advances in artificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning for COVID-19
drug repurposing has also been highlighted [12] and several studies using these
techniques have reported promising results [13–16]. In particular, approaches
leveraging network medicine [17] principles and biological knowledge graphs
have been emphasized [12].
2

Most of the computational approaches to drug repurposing have focused on
biological data, such as gene expression, protein-protein and drug-target interactions, and used SARS-CoV-2-related data. However, COVID-19-specific data is
meaningful in the context of the larger body of diverse knowledge underpinning
medicine and life sciences, a primary source of which is the biomedical literature.
While some COVID-19 drug repurposing studies incorporated literature-based
knowledge [13, 16], their focus has remained largely COVID-19-specific. We
argue that efficiently and safely repurposing drugs to treat COVID-19 requires
more effective integration of literature-based knowledge with biological data
collected via high-throughput methods.
In this paper, we propose a novel literature-based discovery [18, 19] approach for COVID-19 drug repurposing. Similar to related work [16], we cast
drug repurposing as a task of knowledge graph completion (or link prediction).
We use a large, literature-derived biomedical knowledge graph constructed from
SemMedDB [20] as well as COVID-19 research literature [21], as our data source.
We use several state-of-the-art, neural network-based algorithms [22–26] for the
task, and also complement these approaches with an approach based on discovery patterns [27]. Furthermore, we highlight the role of discovery patterns in
search of mechanistic explanations for candidate drugs. Unlike most approaches
that focus on COVID-19-specific knowledge [13, 16], we consider a larger body
of biomedical knowledge, as captured in the PubMed bibliographic database as
well as in the COVID-19 research literature. Our results show that our approach
can identify known drugs that have been used for COVID-19 and discover other
novel drugs that can potentially be repurposed for COVID-19.
2. Related Work
2.1. COVID-19 computational drug repurposing
Significant computational work has already been done to prioritize FDAapproved drugs for repurposing to treat COVID-19 [9, 10]. For the most part,
these studies can be categorized as molecular docking-based drug screening studies and network-based studies, the majority of them belonging to the former
category. In molecular docking studies, small molecules in compound libraries
are screened for effectiveness against the host proteins in the SARS-CoV-2 host
interactome. Many studies of this kind have been reported, and some of the
proposed drugs such as ritonavir, ribavirin, remdesivir, and oseltamivir have
been used in practice and many are being evaluated in clinical trials [28–35].
While not as common as docking studies, network-based approaches to
drug repurposing have also been explored. In one early study, a virus-related
knowledge graph which consists of drug-target and protein-protein interactions
and similarity networks from publicly available databases (e.g., DrugBank [36],
ChEMBL [37], BioGRID [38]) was constructed and network-based machine
learning and statistical analysis were used to predict an initial list of COVID-19
drug candidates. This list was narrowed down based on text mining from the

3

literature and gene expression profiles from COVID-19 patients, and a polyADP-ribose polymerase 1 (PARP1) inhibitor CVL218, was proposed for therapeutic use against COVID-19 [13]. Cava et al. [39] used gene expression
profiles from public datasets to construct a protein-protein interaction network in conjunction with pathway enrichment analysis to identify 36 potential drugs, including nimesulide, thiabendazole, and fluticasone propionate. In
another study, network proximity analyses of drug targets and HCoV-host interactions in the human interactome were used to prioritize 16 potential repurposed drugs, including melatonin, mercaptopurine, and sirolimus, which were
validated by enrichment analyses of drug-gene signatures and transcriptome
data in human cell lines [14]. Potentially useful drug combinations (e.g., melatonin plus mercaptopurine) were also suggested. A follow-up study combined
network medicine approaches based on human interactome with clinical patient data from a COVID-19 registry to show that melatonin was associated
with reduced likelihood of a positive SARS-CoV-2 laboratory test [15]. The
approach was further extended to explore deep learning [16]. A comprehensive knowledge graph of drugs, diseases, and proteins/genes (named CoV-KGE)
was constructed by combining molecular interaction information from the literature with knowledge from DrugBank. A knowledge graph embedding model,
named RotatE [23] was used to represent the entities and the relationships in the
knowledge-based in low-dimensional vector space. Using the ongoing COVID19 trial data as a validation set, 41 high-confidence repurposed drug candidates
(including dexamethasone, indomethacin, niclosamine, and toremifene) were
identified, and further validated via an enrichment analysis of gene expression
and proteomics data in SARS-CoV-2-infected human cells. Another study used
node2vec graph embeddings and variational graph autoencoders for the same
purpose [40]. Gysi et al. [41] evaluated three algorithms (graph neural network,
network proximity, and network diffusion) on a network of drug protein targets
and disease-associated proteins for COVID-19 drug repurposing. While they
obtained low correlations across the three algorithms, an ensembling approach
that combined the predictions of all algorithms was shown to outperform the
individual methods, ranking ritonavir, chloroquine, and dexamethasone among
the most promising candidates. Some limited literature knowledge relevant to
COVID-19 has been incorporated to network-based approaches; however, their
focus remains largely on structured molecular interaction information encoded
in databases.
2.2. Literature-based discovery
Literature-based discovery (LBD) [18, 19] is a method of automatic hypothesis generation pioneered by Swanson [42]. Based on the concept of “undiscovered
public knowledge”, LBD seeks to uncover valuable hidden connections between
disparate research literatures, and has been proposed as a potential solution
for the problem of “research silos” (the view that scientific research areas are
largely isolated from one another). The primary LBD paradigm is the so-called
ABC model. In the open discovery form of this model, a relationship between
two concepts A and B is known in one research area and another relationship
4

between concepts B and C is known in another, and a potential relationship
between concepts A and C is proposed. Conversely, in closed discovery, relationship AC is known, and a concept B is proposed as an explanation for
the relationship AC. Extensions to ABC model have also been proposed, such
as discovery browsing model that aims to elucidate more complex relationship
paths between biomedical concepts [43, 44]. Most applications of LBD have
been in the biomedical domain, beginning with Swanson’s discovery of fish oil
as a treatment for Raynaud disease [42], a hypothesis supported subsequently
by clinical studies. While early LBD systems focused primarily on term cooccurrence [45, 46], semantic relations have been widely used in later years for
representing scientific content of biomedical publications [27, 47–49]. More recently, distributed vector representations based on term or semantic relation
co-occurrence have been gaining popularity [50–52].
Drug repurposing has been one of the prominent applications of LBD [27,
53–58]. For example, Hristovski et al. [27] used semantic discovery patterns
following the ABC model to identify potential therapeutic uses for drugs. Zhang
et al. [56] used discovery patterns and SemMedDB relations to identify potential
prostate cancer drugs. Cohen et al. [55] used a vector representation approach
based on semantic relations to predict a small number of active agents within a
large library screened for activity against prostate cancer cells.
2.3. Knowledge graph completion
Knowledge graphs are represented as a collection of head entity-relationtail entity triples (h, r, t), where entities correspond to nodes and relations to
edges between them. Knowledge graph completion is the task of predicting unseen relations between two existing entities or to predict the tail entity given
the head entity and the relation (or head entity given the tail entity and the
relation). Recent approaches to knowledge graph completion rely on knowledge graph embedding methods [59], which learn a mapping from nodes and
edges to continuous vector space that preserve the proximity structure of the
knowledge graph and are amenable to application of machine learning methods.
Such methods include translational models, which use distance-based scoring
functions (e.g., TransE [22], TransH [60], RotatE [23]), and semantic matching
models, which use similarity-based scoring functions (e.g., RESCAL [61] , DistMult [24], ComplEx [25], and HolE [62]). Graph convolutional networks [63, 64]
as well as methods that use context-based encoding approach (KG-BERT [65],
STELP [26]) have also been recently proposed. Knowledge graph embedding
techniques based on a network of drug, disease, and gene/protein entities have
been used to support drug repurposing for rare diseases [66]. Graph convolutional networks were used to model drug side effects resulting from drug-drug
interactions [67]. A multimodal graph of protein-protein, drug-protein target,
and drug-drug interactions was constructed from publicly available datasets.
Sang et al. [68] constructed low-dimensional knowledge graph embeddings from
SemMedDB relations and trained a Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) model
using known drug therapies from Therapeutic Target Database [69] to propose
potential drugs using the trained model.
5

3. Materials and Methods
In this section, we first describe our data sources and the preprocessing
steps that were taken to construct a literature knowledge graph from these data
sources. Next, we discuss the knowledge graph completion methods that we
used to predict candidate drugs for COVID-19 as well as the discovery patterns
used for providing mechanistic explanations. Lastly, we detail various evaluation schemes that we used to validate our predictions. A workflow diagram
illustrating our approach is provided in Fig. 1. Our source code and data are
publicly available at https://github.com/kilicogluh/lbd-covid.

Figure 1: Diagram illustrating the workflow of our approach.

3.1. Data
We constructed our biomedical knowledge graph primarily from SemMedDB
[20], a repository of semantic relations automatically extracted from biomedical literature using SemRep natural language processing (NLP) tool [70, 71].
SemRep-extracted relations are in the form of subject-predicate-object triples
(also called semantic predications) and are derived from unstructured text in
PubMed citations (i.e., titles and abstracts). For example, the triples chloroquine-treats-Malaria and hydroxychloroquine-treats-Malaria are extracted from the fragment Chloroquine (CQ) and Hydroxychloroquine (HCQ) have

6

been commonly used for the treatment and prevention of malaria (PMID: 32910933). Subject and object arguments are normalized to concept unique identifiers (CUIs) in the UMLS (Unified Medical Language System) Metathesaurus [72,
73]. Concepts are enriched with UMLS semantic type information (Disease or
Syndrome, Pharmacologic Substance, etc.) and the relations are linked to the
supporting article and sentence. SemMedDB has supported a wide range of computational applications, ranging from gene regulatory network inference [74] to
in silico screening for drug repurposing [55] and medical reasoning [75], and
has also found widespread use for literature-based knowledge discovery and hypothesis generation (e.g., [44, 48, 76–78]). In its most recent release (version
43, dated 8/28/2020)1 , SemMedDB contains more than 107M relations from
more than 31M PubMed citations and 209M sentences. This release also includes COVID-19-related concepts and, thus, can serve as a knowledge graph
for COVID-19 drug repurposing.
COVID-19 literature has grown at an unprecedented rate. LitCovid, NCBI’s
bibliographic database for COVID-19 literature [79] contains over 82K articles
(as of 12/21/2020). An even richer dataset is the COVID-19 Open Research
Dataset (CORD-19), which contains over 200K articles (including historical
research on coronaviruses) [21]. Not all of these articles are included in PubMed.
To ensure that our knowledge graph provides adequate coverage of COVID-19
knowledge, we included CORD-19 articles not included in PubMed, as well, and
used SemRep to extract relations from titles and abstracts of these articles. We
used CORD-19 release dated 09/25/2020.
SemMedDB distribution contains 107 645 218 relations among 339 638 concepts. CORD-19 dataset processed through SemRep contains 505 968 relations
among 41 609 concepts.
3.2. Preprocessing
In this work, we focused on a subset of semantic relations derived from the
combination of PubMed and CORD-19 datasets, predicted to be accurate and
informative for drug repurposing.
First, we eliminated relations involving generic biomedical concepts (i.e., relations in which both subject and object were present in the GENERIC CONCEPT
table of SemMedDB such as Pharmaceutical Preparations) and relations
with identical subject and object arguments. Next, we excluded a subset of
predicate types that were not expected to be useful for drug repurposing, such
as part of and process of. The predicate types we used are affects,
associated with, augments, causes, coexists with, complicates, disrupts, inhibits, interacts with, manifestation of, predisposes, prevents, produces, stimulates, and treats. Lastly, we also excluded the relations in which the subject or the object belongs to one of the following semantic
groups: Activities & Behaviors, Concepts & Ideas, Objects, Occupations, Or1 https://ii.nlm.nih.gov/SemRep

SemMedDB SKR/SemMedDB/SemMedDB download.shtml

7

ganizations, and Phenomena. The combined knowledge graph (SemMedDB +
CORD-19) consists of 331 427 unique nodes and 20 017 236 relations.
In the second step, we eliminated (i) high-degree concepts using network
degree centrality and (ii) uninformative semantic relations using log-likelihood
ratio. The adjacency matrix A of a knowledge graph (i.e., directed network
with multiedges) with n nodes (i.e., concepts) has entries Aij = 1 if there is a
relation from concept i to concept j. The in- and out-degrees of concept i can
then be expressed as [80]:
kiin

=

n
X

Aji

and

kiout

=

j=1

n
X

Aij .

j=1

To filter out uninformative links, we assigned each semantic relation a G2
score indicating how strongly the terms within a triple are associated with each
other [81]. A high G2 score means that the observed and expected frequencies
are significantly different, indicating that the triple is less likely to occur by
chance. For computational purposes, we created two three-dimensional contingency tables with indices i, j, and k. The first table (OT) holds observed
frequencies of a triple from the knowledge graph and the second table (ET)
contains the expected values assuming independence of terms in each triple. G2
was then calculated using the equation
P
P
P


X
nijk
i njk ×
j nik ×
k nij
2
,
, mijk =
G =2×
nijk × log
mijk
T2
i,j,k

P
where nijk is the cell i, j, k in OT, mijk is the cell i, j, k in ET, and T =
nijk .
Next, we normalized all three measures (G2 , kiin , and kiout ) to the range
[0, 1] and summed them up into a final score. The lower the score, the more
specific and informative the relation is. For example, the relation Operative
Surgical Procedures-treats-Woman which has a high score is more general
than relation interleukin-6-affects-Autoimmune Diseases. We also kept
all relations with biomedical concepts that refer to COVID-19 terms in the
UMLS2 :
• C5203670:COVID19 (disease)
• C5203671:Suspected COVID-19
• C5203672:SARS-CoV-2 vaccination
• C5203673:Antigen of SARS-CoV-2
• C5203674:Antibody to SARS-CoV-2
• C5203675:Exposure to SARS-CoV-2
2 https://metamap.nlm.nih.gov/Covid19Terms.shtml

8

• C5203676:SARS-CoV-2
We estimated that approximately 2.5M relations could be processed in reasonable amount of time with out GPU and eliminated relations with high final
scores. At the end of the preprocessing stage, the knowledge graph consists of
131 355 nodes and 2 558 935 relations.
3.2.1. Accuracy Classification
The precision of semantic predications generated by SemRep vary by domain
(e.g., clinical relationships are more precise than molecular interactions). To
improve the precision of the relations used for drug repurposing, we extended
the SemRep accuracy classifiers previously proposed [82, 83]. We fine-tuned a
collection of Transformer-based pretrained language models to classify semantic
predications as correct vs. incorrect. We used the following models: vanilla
BERT (base size, cased and uncased) [84], BioBERT [85], BioClinicalBERT [86],
BlueBERT [87], and PubMedBERT [88].
To extend the coverage of our existing classifiers, we used 6492 predications
annotated as correct vs. incorrect with respect to their source sentences. We
leveraged 6000 annotations from a previous study [83] (Cohen’s κ = 0.80) and
annotated 492 new predications. Annotation guidelines generated in the previous study was used. Two of the authors (HK and MF) and two health informatics graduate students annotated predications containing predicates of interest
absent in the prior study (Fleiss’ κ = 0.41, indicating moderate agreement).
Fleiss’ κ was used in this case, as more than two annotators were involved in
annotation [89].
The resulting annotated set was split into 80/10/10 training/validation/test
sets. Hyperparameters were determined empirically and the learning rate was
set to 1 × 10−5 , the batch size was 16, the maximum number of epochs was
set to 10 but early stopping was employed. Optimization was done using the
Adam optimizer [90] with decoupled weight decay regularization using betas
(0.9, 0.999) and decay 0.01. The pooled output from the BERT model was
fed through a linear layer to produce logits that then underwent a softmax
transformation to return class probabilities. A single Tesla V100 GPU was used
to train the models. We compared the performance of various above-mentioned
transformers. The best classifier was then used to filter incorrect semantic
predications. This resulted in 1 016 124 relations being kept for the knowledge
graph completion methods.
3.3. Knowledge Graph Completion
Consider a knowledge graph G = (E, R, E), where E refers to a set of entities,
R denotes a set of possible relations, and T stands for a set of triples in the form
(h)ead-(r)elation-(t)ail, formally denoted as {(h, r, t)} ⊂ E × R × E. The aim of
knowledge graph completion is to infer new triples (h0 , r0 , t0 ) such that h0 , t0 ∈ E
and r0 ∈ R. In this setting, the knowledge graph completion problem could be
represented as a ranking task in which a prediction function ψ(h, r, t) : E × R ×

9

E 7→ R which generates higher scores for true triples and lower scores for false
triples is learned.
We explored three classes of knowledge graph completion methods: TransE
[22] and RotatE [23] for translational models, DistMult [24] and ComplEx [25]
for semantic matching models, and STELP [26] for context-based encoding.
These methods differ in the way that they encode entities and relations in a
knowledge graph into a low-dimensional vector space (i.e., knowledge graph embedding). Such distributed vector representations can be used for downstream
reasoning and machine learning tasks.
3.3.1. Translational models (TransE and RotatE)
TransE [22] describes a triplet (h, r, t) as a translation between head entity
h and tail entity t through relation r in a continuous vector space, i.e., h +
r ≈ t, where h, r, t ∈ Rd is the embedding of h, r, and t, respectively. To
measure plausibility of relations TransE employs a distance-based score function
s(h, r, t) = kh + r − tk. Either L1 or L2 norm can be employed. Figure 2
illustrates TransE model with two-dimensional embedding.

Figure 2: TransE models relations as translations on a low-dimensional embedding of the entities.
If (h, r, t) is true, the embedding of the tail entity t (i.e., COVID-19) should be close to the embedding
of the head entity h (i.e., Metoclopramide) plus vector that depends on the relationship r (i.e.,
TREATS).

We choose TransE because of its simplicity and good prediction performance.
However, TransE is able to model only one-to-one relations and fails to embed
one-to-many, many-to-one, and many-to-many relations. To solve this problem,
several other solutions have been proposed including RotatE [23]. RotatE treats
each relation in a complex vector space as a rotation from the head entity to

10

the tail entity, i.e., s(h, r, t) = |h ◦ r − t|l1 , where ◦ is a Hadamard product.
We selected RotatE as a counterpart to TransE, as TransE reportedly does not
perform well on some data sets (e.g., FB15k benchmark data set [22], commonly used in knowledge graph completion), which require symmetric pattern
modeling.
3.3.2. Semantic matching models (DistMult and ComplEx)
DistMult [24] is the simplest approach among semantic matching models.
Its scoring function is defined as s(h, r, t) = hh, r, ti. However, DistMult is
limited only to symmetric relations, generating same scores for triples (h, r, t)
and (t, r, h). ComplEx [25] extends DistMult to the complex domain. Head
and tail embeddings for the same entity are complex conjugates, enabling ComplEx to model asymmetric relations. Its score function is defined as s(h, r, t) =
Re(hh, r, t̄i), where h, r, t ∈ Ck , Re(·) is a real part of a complex vector, and k
is dimension of an embedding.
Hyperparameters for both sets of models were tuned using the grid search
on the validation set for each prediction model. We tuned the learning rate
η ∈ {0.001, 0.01, 0.1}, number of hidden dimensions k ∈ {50, 100, 250, 400},
regularization coefficient λ ∈ {2×10−6 , 2×10−8 }, negative adversarial sampling
∈ {True, False}, fixed margin γ ∈ {1, 5, 10, 20} for RotatE and norm d ∈
{L1 , L2 } for TransE model.
3.3.3. Context-encoding models (STELP)
Semantic Triple Encoder for Link Prediction (STELP) [26], is a contextbased encoding approach to knowledge graph completion. At its core is a
Siamese BERT model that leverages sharing one set of weights across two models
to produce encoded, contextual representations of the relations that are then
fed to either a multi-layer perceptron (MLP) for classification or a similarity
function for contrasting. The STELP architecture uses two learning objectives
for training: triple classification and triple contrasting. The final learning objective is a linear combination of the two. During training, STELP takes a
single positive relation (h, r, t), and produces five negative relations (h, r, t0 ) by
corrupting the tail. The head context, (h, r), term is sent into one BERT model
while each tail, (t) or (t0 ), are each sent to the other BERT model that shares
weights with the other. The classification objective seeks to classify (h, r, t) as
1 and each (h, r, t0 ) as 0 while the contrastive objective seeks to measure the
distance between the contextual embedding of the head and tail portions in a
learned semantic space. Formally, the classification loss and constrastive loss
functions are as follows:


X
X
0
1
−1
log sc +
log (1 − sc )
Lc =
|D|
1 + |N (tp)|
0
tp∈D

1 X
1
Ld =
|D|
|N (tp)|
tp∈D

tp ∈N (tp)

X
tp0 ∈N (tp)

11

0

max(0, λ − sd + sd )

Figure 3: Diagram for the high-level architecture of STELP.

where D is the set of correct triples, N (tp) is the set of corrupted triples for
0
given positive triple tp, sc and (1 − sc ) are the positive class probability for tp
and negative class probability for tp0 , respectively, λ is the margin size, sd and
0
sd are the negative Euclidean distances between the contextual embeddings
for the head and tail portions of the triple. The complete multi-objective loss
function then is:
L = Lc + γLd
where γ is a scaling factor for the contribution of the contrastive loss.
At inference, STELP considers every entity-context combination for a given
partial relation, (h, r) to find (t) or (r, t) to find (h), and ranks every pair using
the sum of the positive class probability and the scaled negative Euclidean
distance.
We replaced the vanilla base BERT model proposed in the STELP paper
with BioBERT, trained on biomedical literature corpora. The 1 016 124 unique
relations remaining after preprocessing were each corrupted to produce five negative relations for a total of 5 080 620 negative relations and a grand total of
6 096 744 relations. The hyperparameters were set to the same values as in the
original STELP paper and the learning rate was set to 1 × 10−5 , the batch size
was 16, the contrastive loss scaling factor was 1.0. Optimization was done using Adam with decoupled weight decay with betas (0.9, 0.999) and decay 0.01.
Training was run for 190 523 training iterations. Ranking was done by adding

12

the scaled contrast score to the positive class probability and entities ordered
in descending rank order.
3.3.4. Implementation of neural network models
All preprocessing was done using custom Bash and Python scripts. TransE,
RotatE, DistMult, and ComplEx link prediction models were implemented in
PyTorch using the DGL-KE package [91] for learning large-scale knowledge
graph embeddings. The BERT models were based on HuggingFace BERT implementations using PyTorch. Pre-trained weights for BioBERT (BioBERT-Base
v1.1 (+ PubMed 1M))3 , BioClinicalBERT4 , PubMedBERT5 and BlueBERT
(BlueBERT-Base, Uncased, PubMed+MIMIC-III)6 came from various sources
associated with each paper. We implemented STELP ourselves using a combination of a HuggingFace BERT model and PyTorch.
3.4. Discovery patterns
Discovery patterns are defined as a set of constraints that need to be satisfied for the discovery of new relations between concepts [27]. Herein, we used
discovery patterns for two purposes. First, we explored an open discovery pattern to identify drugs that can be repurposed for COVID-19. Second, we used
the same pattern in closed discovery to propose plausible mechanisms for drugs
identified via knowledge graph completion methods described above. Discovery
patterns are expressed in terms of predication pairs (or predication chains). In
particular, we focused on the following discovery pattern:
DrugA-inhibits|interacts with-ConceptB and
ConceptB-affects|causes|predisposes|associated with-COVIDConcept and
not (DrugA-treats-COVIDConcept)
where DrugA is a drug concept with the semantic type Pharmacologic Substance
and COVIDConcept refers to one of the following UMLS concepts (C5203670:
COVID-19, C5203676: 2019 novel coronavirus, C5203671: suspected covid
19). ConceptB can be any concept, and | indicates logical or. When DrugA is
unknown, this corresponds to an open discovery pattern. We used a Neo4j graph
database of semantic relations and browser front-end for our exploration.
3.5. Evaluation
3.5.1. Ground truth generation
We semi-automatically generated a ground truth drug list, similar to the
approach in other computational drug repurposing studies for COVID-19 [16].
3 https://github.com/naver/biobert-pretrained
4 https://huggingface.co/emilyalsentzer/Bio

ClinicalBERT

5 https://huggingface.co/microsoft/BiomedNLP-PubMedBERT-base-uncased-abstract
6 https://github.com/ncbi-nlp/bluebert

13

We downloaded the interventions used in COVID-19 drug trials from clinicaltrials.gov using the following query: https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/res
ults?cond=COVID-19&term=EXPAND[Term]+COVER[FullMatch]+AREA[Interv
entionType]+%22Drug%22.
This search yielded a set of 1167 clinical trials. We extracted all the interventions used in these studies and mapped the intervention terms to UMLS CUIs
using MetaMap (v2016) [92] and filtered the resulting concepts by their semantic groups [93], keeping only those concepts with the semantic group Chemicals
& Drugs. Additionally, we considered the semantic types Therapeutic Procedure and Gene or Genome, which also appeared for some concepts in intervention lists. We removed the duplicates from the resulting concept list and some
general concepts (e.g., Therapeutic procedure, Placebo) as well as incorrect
mappings. Drug concepts that only differ in their dosage or mode of administration were grouped together and considered a single element in the ground
truth. For example, concepts ruxolitinib, ruxolitinib Oral Tablet, and
ruxolitinib 5 MG were clustered together. This pruning and clustering process resulted in a final list of 283 concept clusters. The automatic evaluation
described below was performed against this set.
3.5.2. Time slicing
Time slicing is an evaluation technique often used in LBD and link prediction
tasks [18]. The idea is to train models on data prior to a specific date and
test them on data after that date and evaluate whether links that formed only
after the cutoff date can be predicted from the trained model. In this study,
we trained our models on semantic relations extracted from publications dated
03/11/2020 or earlier and tested whether they can predict the drugs that have
been proposed for COVID-19 since then or have been evaluated in clinical trials.
This date was selected as cutoff, as it is the date on which WHO declared
COVID-19 a pandemic. It is also a date by which enough biological knowledge
about SARS-CoV-2 had accumulated, although COVID-19 therapies were still
in their infancy, making it a suitable cutoff for time slicing experiments.
All five knowledge graph completion models were automatically assessed
using an evaluation protocol proposed by Bordes et al. [22]. Suppose that X is
a set of triples, ΘE be the embeddings of entities E, and ΘR be the embeddings
of relations R. In the first, corruption step, we go through a set of triples and
for each triple x = (h, r, t) ∈ X replace its head and tail with all other entities
in E. Each triple is corrupted exactly 2|E| − 1 times. Formally, the corrupted
triple is defined as:
[
[
e=
x
(h0 , r, t) ∪
(h, r, t0 ),
t0 ∈E

h0 ∈E
0

0

where h 6= h and t 6= t. We employ the filtered setting protocol not taking
into account any corrupted triple that already appears in the knowledge graph.
In the second, scoring phase, original and corrupted triples are tested using the
constructed classifier ψ. Intuition behind this is that the model will assign a
higher score to the original triple and a lower score to the corrupted triple. In the

14

third, evaluation phase, the proposed models are assessed using three measures:
mean rank (MR), mean reciprocal rank (MRR), and Hits@k measure. MR is
an average rank assigned to the true relation, over all relations in a test set:
|T |


1 X
rankhi + rankti
2|T | i=1

MR =

where rankhi and rankti denote the rank position:
X


rankhi = 1 +
I ψ(xi ) < ψ(e
xi )
ei ∈C h (xi )\G
x

X

rankti = 1 +



I ψ(xi ) < ψ(e
xi ) ,

ei ∈C h (xi )\G
x

where the indicator function I[P ] is 1 iff P is true, and 0 otherwise.
MRR is the average inverse rank for all test triples and is formally computed
as:
1 X 1
1
MRR =
+
h
2|T |
rankti
ranki
x ∈T
i

Hits@k measures the percentage of relations in which the true triple appears
in the top k ranked triples, where k ∈ {1, 3, 10}; formally:
Hits@k =

i
h
i
100 X h
I rankhi ≤ k + I rankti ≤ k
2|T |
xi ∈T

Our aim was to achieve low MR and high MRR and Hits@k.
3.5.3. Qualitative evaluation
In addition, we also performed a qualitative evaluation. One of the authors
(MF, MD with a PhD in medical informatics) used Neo4j browser to assess the
plausibility of some of the drugs highly ranked by the knowledge completion
models, guided by literature search and review, using closed discovery. We also
evaluated discovery patterns directly using open discovery. For this purpose, we
issued a query for fifty drugs ranked on the number of intermediate ConceptB
concepts between the drug and COVIDConcept. Then, MF assessed a subset of
the candidate drugs for plausibility.
3.5.4. Comparison of candidate drug lists
We compared the drug lists proposed by our methods to each other, as
well as to drug lists reported in three prior studies [14, 16, 94]. For TransE,
which performed best, we identified a subset of plausible drugs from its top 150
candidate drug predictions. We used top 50 predictions from other knowledge
graph completion methods as well as the top 50 drugs generated using the
discovery pattern in open discovery mode.

15

4. Results
We report the performance of the semantic relation accuracy classifier as well
as the knowledge graph completion methods in this section. We also provide a
comparison of the drug lists proposed in previous studies and identified by our
methods.
4.1. Accuracy classifier
The full table of results for the comparison of various BERT models for the
accuracy classifier is included below (Table 1). The chosen model, PubMedBERT, obtained an F1 score of 0.854 (recall = 0.895; precision = 0.816).
Table 1: Results of SemMedDB semantic relation classification using biomedical BERT variants

Cased

Cased

BioClinical
BERT
Cased

Validation set
Rec
0.815
Pre
0.695
F1
0.743

0.767
0.723
0.744

0.861
0.762
0.808

0.822
0.685
0.748

0.896
0.693
0.781

0.822
0.700
0.756

Test set
Rec
0.815
Pre
0.795
F1
0.805

0.782
0.815
0.798

0.842
0.838
0.840

0.832
0.804
0.818

0.895
0.816
0.854

0.845
0.782
0.812

Vanilla BERT
Uncased

BioBERT

a

PubMed
BERTb
Uncased

BlueBERTc
Uncased

Note: Rec = recall, Pre = precision. Results highlighted in bold are the best for each method.
a Trained on PubMed 1M
b Trained on Abstracts + Full text
c Trained on PubMed + MIMIC

The best model (i.e., PubMedBERT) was then applied to the 2 558 935 predications. Of those, 1 907 717 (74.9%) were classified as correct predications and
retained for use in the training of the downstream models.
This preprocessing yielded 115 451 unique biomedical concepts and 1 907 717
relations among them. The distribution of these predications are listed in Table 2.
4.2. Knowledge graph completion
The knowledge graph completion results for all employed models are presented in Table 3. For MR a lower score is considered better, for all others a
higher score is considered better. The score for each method is the mean value
over all triplets in the testing set.
On average, TransE outperforms all counterparts on all performance measures. Optimal TransE configuration was achieved with k = 400 hidden dimensions, L1 norm, learning rate η = 0.01 and regularization coefficient λ = 2×10−8 .

16

Table 2: Distribution of semantic predications after filtering

Predicate

Count (%)

Predicate

Count (%)

treats
coexists with
interacts with
causes
affects
associated with
inhibits
disrupts

518,267 (27.2%)
420,633 (22.1%)
224,809 (11.8%)
205,441 (10.8%)
192,092 (10.1%)
106,418 (5.6%)
52,518 (2.8%)
39,960 (2.1%)

produces
augments
prevents
stimulates
predisposes
complicates
manifestation of

38,602 (2.0%)
37,887 (2.0%)
25,103 (1.3%)
24,734 (1.3%)
18,613 (1.0%)
1,479 (0.1%)
1,156 (0.1%)

Table 3: Knowledge graph completion results on combined knowledge graph (SemMedDB +
CORD-19)

TransE
DistMult
ComplEx
RotatE
STELP

MR

MRR

Hits@1

Hits@3

Hits@10

9.223
11.639
11.045
10.864
22.960

0.525
0.325
0.332
0.377
0.073

0.417
0.216
0.216
0.246
0.000

0.585
0.340
0.352
0.428
0.027

0.699
0.515
0.553
0.633
0.234

Note: MR = mean rank, MRR = mean reciprocal rank. Results highlighted
in bold are the best for each method.

Model training was limited to 20 000 epochs. Relatively small number of relations (15) ensure that all entities and relations can be smoothly embedded into
the same vector space.
4.3. Embedding representation of knowledge graph
Next, we use t-SNE (t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding) [95] algorithm to graphically represent embeddings of computed concepts in a twodimensional space (Figure 4). t-SNE algorithm enables reduction of highdimensional data into a low-dimensional space such that similar concepts are
presented by nearby points. The plot demonstrates relatively good co-localization
of selected concepts, especially for Suspected COVID-19 and paclitaxel.
4.4. Comparison of proposed drug lists
33 drugs (out of top 150) identified by TransE were deemed plausible after
manual analysis (Table 4). Comparing this set to the repurposing proposals
from three recently published papers [14, 16, 94], we find that there is one drug
in common (estradiol) with the list in Zeng et al. [16]. On the other hand, Singh
et al. [94] and Zeng et al. [16] have eight drugs in common and Zhou et al. [14]
and Zeng et al. [16] have three. TransE predictions tended to contain more
general drug classes (e.g., anthelmintics, antiplatelet agents), which were not

17

Figure 4: Visualization of biomedical concepts learned by t-SNE (t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding) algorithm and embedded in a two-dimensional space. We highlighted five drugs
identified as potential new drugs to treat COVID-19. Color refers to semantic type of a particular
concept; note that only the eight most frequent semantic types are presented. aapp: Amino Acid,
Peptide, or Protein; dsyn: Disease or Syndrome; fndg: Finding, gngm: Gene or Genome; neop:
Neoplastic Process; orch: Organic Chemical; phsu: Pharmacologic Substance; topp: Therapeutic
or Preventive Procedure.

18

specifically excluded, in contrast to previous methods. On the other hand, it
is worth noting that specific drugs in some of these classes have been proposed
in other studies. For example, TransE predicted anthelmintics as a candidate,
while some of the drugs in this class (e.g., ivermectin, levamisole, nitazoxanide)
have been proposed by others and tested in clinical studies. The same can
be said about other drug classes, such as mTOR inhibitors and neuraminidase
inhibitors.
Table 4: 33 candidate drugs highly ranked by TransE and deemed plausible in manual analysis.

Metoclopramide
Oxymatrine
Mitogen-ActivatedProtein Kinase Inhibitor
Oxophenylarsine
5-Alpha reductase inhibitor
Folic acid
Anthelmintics
Sildenafil
Furosemide
Beclomethasone
Cangrelor
Gymnemic acid
Estradiol
mTOR Inhibitor
Clobetasol propionate
Carbenoxolone
Anti-Retroviral Agents

Trilostane
Cyproterone Acetate
Nucleoside ReverseTranscriptase Inhibitors
Methyltrienolone
Bosentan
Estramustine
Allicin
Proteasome inhibitors
Antiplatelet Agents
Fibrinolytic Agents
Contraceptive Agents
Neuraminidase inhibitor
Vitamin D Analogue
Tyrosine kinase inhibitor
Mometasone furoate
Vasopressin Antagonist

Comparison of the 33 plausible drugs from TransE with the top 50 predictions from the other knowledge graph completion methods revealed one common
drug class between TransE and STELP (5-alpha reductase inhibitors) and five
drugs between RotatE and STELP. DistMult and ComplEx did not share any
predictions with the other methods.
Interestingly, using the discovery pattern in open discovery mode, we identified several drugs common with other methods: estradiol with TransE, paclitaxel
with RotatE, as well as hydrocortisone and indomethacin with Zeng et al. [16].
Table 5 lists the overlapping candidate drugs for different methods.
5. Discussion
5.1. Knowledge graph completion models
Thus far, the following classes of drugs have been used for the management
of COVID-19: antivirals, monoclonal antibodies, anti-inflammatory agents, immunomodulators, anticoagulants, and adjuvants [96, 97]. In addition, several
trials have studied antimalarials and antiparasites.
19

Table 5: Comparison of drug overlap between methods and studies

Methods
Zeng et al. [16]
TransE
Discovery Patterns
Zeng et al. [16]
Singh et al. [94]
RotatE
Zeng et al. [16]
Discovery Patterns
Zeng et al. [16]
STELP
TransE
STELP

Common Drugs
Estradiol

Dexamethasone
Hydrocortisone
Indomethacin
Zidovudine
5-alpha Reductase Inhibitors

RotatE
STELP

Pibrentasvir
Anti-ILDR2 MonoclonalAntibody BAY 1905254
Mood Stabilizer
Opium alkaloids andderivative combinationcough suppressants
Valoctocogene roxaparvovec

RotatE
Discovery Patterns

Paclitaxel

Note: Drugs are from the top 50 ranked drugs from RotatE, STELP,
the 33 drugs from TransE identified by MF as plausible, and the
drugs specified in Zeng et al. [16], Zhou et al. [14], and Singh et al.
[94]. We also use top 50 drugs identified using the discovery pattern
in open discovery mode.

The knowledge graph completion models predicted drugs in all these classes,
although they did not always rank them highly. For example, TransE predicted ribavirin (antiviral), trastuzumab (monoclonal antibody), indomethacin
(anti-inflammatory), interferon beta-1b (immunomodulator), heparin (anticoagulant), vitamin D (adjuvant), metronidazole (antiparasite), and artemisone
(antimalarial). Dexamethasone, one of the drugs considered most effective for
reducing mortality in patients receiving oxygen, was the highest ranking drug
from the RotatE model. Results from TransE and RotatE were a mix of individual drugs and drug classes (with little overlap), whereas STELP predictions
were largely limited to very specific drugs and also included natural substances
such as bioflavonoid quercetin and riboflavin (vitamin B2). While the quantitative evaluation against clinical trial data suggests TransE as the best-performing
model, it is worth noting that this only measures how well a method predicts
drugs that are currently being trialed. It is difficult to assess the ultimate clin20

ical effectiveness of the proposed drugs, and it is possible that models that do
not perform as well quantitatively yield results that prove more promising (as
in the case of RotatE and dexamethasone). Despite these issues, qualitative assessment of knowledge graph completion models showed that all methods could
identify useful repurposing candidates.
The results indicate that more complex knowledge graph completion models might not be very efficient in drug repurposing tasks. Due to its relative
simplicity, it might be expected that TransE be outperformed by its successors [23–25]. However, it showed efficiency in embedding a large-scale complex
biomedical knowledge graph, such as the extended SemMedDB used here. On
the other hand, differences in performances among DistMult, ComplEx, and RotatE were relatively small. All three models achieved low performance on MRR,
Hits@1, and Hits@3 measures, and moderate score on Hits@10. Empirical evidence shows that DistMult and ComplEx usually perform well for high-degree
entities, but fails with low-degree entities [98]. Because we eliminated highly
frequent concepts due to their lack of informativeness, it is possible that this is
reflected in lower performance of both models.
The context-encoding model, STELP, showed rather poor performance in
evaluation. One possibility is that the model was only able to learn high-level
groupings for the predicates. This is likely the case as it was observed the model
produced much higher scores (MR = 3.740, MRR = 0.867, Hits@1 = 0.792,
Hits@10 = 0.969) when evaluating a mix of corrupted triples containing other
predicates in addition to treats. Thus, it may be the case that while the
model can discriminate between what subjects are feasible for treats-COVID-19
versus affects-COVID-19 etc., it did not learn more granular features that allow
it to differentiate between subjects within the context of treats-COVID-19.
However, analysis of the t-SNE embedding and the qualitative evaluation show
that the model mostly clustered the ground truth drugs into a couple of large
clusters.
To further compare the drug rankings between TransE and STELP, we performed the Wilcoxon signed-rank test, which shows no correlation between how
the two models were ranking novel relations (p = 0.846). Spearman’s rank correlation between the novel relation rankings for both models was found to be
−0.004, which further supports the results of the Wilcoxon test. Table 6 and
Table 7 show that there is very little agreement between TransE and STELP,
particularly in the top 1000 rankings for each model. It is worth noting that
there were 47 items in common in the top 1000 rankings for both models.
5.1.1. Computational efficiency
The TransE and RotatE are much faster to train than the STELP model
(approximately 15 minutes vs. 5 days on our dataset). Due to the size of
BERT, which lies at the core of the architecture, STELP is a computationally
expensive model which makes hyperparameter tuning difficult. This difficulty
is compounded on the link prediction task which requires STELP to perform,
just for inference, O((L/2)2 |V|(1 + |E|)) steps, where L is the sequence length,
V the number of vertices, and E the number of edges. As the base BERT
21

Table 6: Statistics for absolute differences of TransE and STELP rankings

Top 1000 TransE Rankings
Top 1000 STELP Rankings
All Rankings

Median

Mean

Standard
Deviation

10789.0
10224.0
6342.0

10567.140
10420.0
7207.910

6128.881
6002.522
5070.927

Note: The values for the first two rows are calculated by taking the top 1000
ranked triples for the specified model, calculating the absolute difference between the rankings from the two models for each of those triples, and calculating the statistics. For example, the triples that TransE ranked as the
top 1000 triples were gathered, the absolute differences of rankings between
TransE and STELP for those 1000 triples were calculated, and the statistics
were calculated from those differences.
Table 7: Summary of absolute differences for TransE and STELP rankings. Semantic types are aapp: Amino Acid, Peptide, or Protein; gngm:
Gene or Genome; orch: Organic Chemical; sosy: Sign or Symptom; topp:
Therapeutic or Preventive Procedure.

Max Absolute
Difference

Count (%)

Top 3 Most Common
Semantic Types

0
1
3
10
100
500
1000

1 (0.005%)
1 (0.005%)
5 (0.023%)
15 (0.070%)
189 (0.877%)
973 (4.516%)
1937 (8.990%)

aapp
aapp
orch, topp, aapp
gngm, aapp, orch
gngm, aapp, orch
gngm, aapp, orch
gngm, aapp, orch

Note: Count column represents the number of triples where the two
models rankings differed by at most the corresponding value in the
Max Absolute Difference column. For example, there were 4 triples
where both models rankings for those triples differed by at most 3.

model contains 110 million parameters, adding in the scale of the link prediction
may make the STELP and similar context-encoding based models infeasible
for limited resource settings. TransE and RotatE demonstrate good results
at a small fraction of the required computing power and time compared to
the STELP model. Due to their reduced required computation time, it can
be possible to explore larger graphs than that explored in this work. On the
other hand, with adequately large computational resources, it may be possible
to optimize STELP hyperparameters and train over multiple random seeds to
generate a model that obtains better results than TransE or RotatE, which are
limited by their smaller representational capacity.

22

5.2. Discovery patterns
Discovery patterns based on semantic relations provide an intuitive way
of exploring potential mechanistic links between biological phenomena. Neo4j
and its query language, Cypher, are powerful tools that complement semantic
relations nicely in quickly pinpointing promising research directions, although
massive graphs present some challenges for effective query and retrieval. In
addition, a human expert is needed to sort out the noise in semantic relations
(some of it obvious) due to NLP errors. However, given that predictions made
by the knowledge completion models above are largely opaque, a human-inthe-loop discovery browsing approach based on patterns [43, 44] remains an
effective alternative to these more complex approaches, and also complements
them by providing potential explanations. Given the size of the graph and
time constraints, we limited ourselves to a single discovery pattern in this study
and were able to both identify promising drugs (open discovery) and generate
potential explanations for drugs predicted by the knowledge graph completion
methods (closed discovery).
Using the open discovery pattern approach, we identified five promising
drugs that were ranked highly and were not, to our knowledge, discussed in
the literature (paclitaxel, SB 203580, alpha 2-antiplasmin, pyrrolidine dithiocarbamate, and butylated hydroxytoluene). The same approach also ranked
highly some drugs and substances evaluated in clinical trials (e.g., quercetin,
melatonin, vitamin D, estradiol, and simvastatin). We discuss three that have
not been proposed for COVID-19 in more detail below (paclitaxel, SB 203580,
and alpha 2-antiplasmin). Notably, paclitaxel as well as quercetin, melatonin,
vitamin D, estradiol, and simvastatin were predicted by the knowledge graph
completion models. Figure 5 shows a network resulting from the aforementioned
discovery pattern generated by Neo4j browser.
We also used discovery patterns to generate mechanistic explanations for
two other drugs ranked highly by TransE and deemed plausible. These drugs
are metoclopramide and oxymatrine, which are also discussed in more detail
below.
5.2.1. Paclitaxel
Paclitaxel is used to treat several cancer types, including ovarian cancer,
breast cancer, lung cancer, cervical cancer, and pancreatic cancer. It stabilizes
the microtubule polymer and protects it from disassembly, rendering chromosomes unable to achieve a metaphase spindle configuration. This blocks the
progression of mitosis and prolonged activation of the mitotic checkpoint triggers apoptosis or reversion to the G0-phase of the cell cycle without cell division
[99]. The following patterns support the paclitaxel discovery:
1.
2.
3.
4.

paclitaxel-inhibits-interleukin-6-causes-COVID-19
paclitaxel-inhibits-NF-kappa B-associated with-COVID-19
paclitaxel-inhibits-interleukin-1, beta-associated with-COVID-19
paclitaxel-inhibits-Granulocyte Colony-Stimulating Factorassociated with-COVID-19
23

Figure 5:
Drug repurposing for COVID-19 with the open discovery pattern DrugAinhibits|interacts with-ConceptB
and
ConceptB-affects|associated with|causes|predisposesCOVID-19. The directionality is from the periphery (the predicted drugs) through the intermediate
concepts to COVID-19 in the center.

24

5.
6.
7.
8.

paclitaxel-inhibits-interleukin-10-predisposes-COVID-19
paclitaxel-inhibits-interleukin-8-predisposes-COVID-19
paclitaxel-inhibits-Thromboplastin-associated with-COVID-19
paclitaxel-interacts with-TLR4-causes-COVID-19

The first six patterns support a role for paclitaxel in alleviating the cytokine
storm of COVID-19, triggered by dysfunctional immune response and mediating
widespread lung inflammation. Paclitaxel may plausibly help as an immunosuppressive therapy to immunomediated damage in COVID-19 [100]. Thromboplastin (pattern 7) is a complex enzyme found in brain, lung, and other tissues
and especially in blood platelets and functions in the conversion of prothrombin to thrombin in the clotting of blood and may be elevated in patients with
COVID-19. As pulmonary microvascular thrombosis plays an important role
in progressive lung failure in COVID-19 patients, paclitaxel may reduce the
state of hypercoagulability by acting as an inhibitor of thromboplastin [101].
The final pattern involves the interaction of paclitaxel with TLR4. Paclitaxel
is known to have high affinity for TLR4 receptors. SARS-CoV-2 Spike protein
binds with human innate immune receptors, mainly TLR4, increasing secretion
of IL-6 and TNF-α and neuroimmune response. This suggests that paclitaxel
may dislocate SARS-CoV-2 Spike proteins [102, 103].
We note that paclitaxel, as a chemotherapy drug, is associated with adverse effects, some serious, such as neutropenia, leukopenia, alopecia, arthralgia,
myalgia, and peripheral neuropathy [104].
5.2.2. SB 203580
SB 203580 is a specific inhibitor of p38α, which suppresses downstream
activation of MAPKAP kinase-2, involved in many cellular processes including
stress and inflammatory responses and cell proliferation. The following patterns
support the SB 203580 discovery:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.

SB 203580-inhibits-interleukin-6 -causes-COVID-19
SB 203580-inhibits-TNF protein, human-associated with-COVID-19
SB 203580-inhibits-interleukin-1, beta-associated with-COVID-19
SB 203580-inhibits-interleukin-8-predisposes-COVID-19
SB 203580-inhibits-NF-kappa B-associated with-COVID-19
SB 203580-inhibits-Interleukin-1-causes-COVID-19
SB 203580-inhibits-Granulocyte-Macrophage Colony-Stimulating Factor
-associated with-COVID-19
8. SB 203580-inhibits-Interleukin-17-associated with-COVID-19
9. SB 203580-inhibits-Macrophage Colony-Stimulating Factorassociated with-COVID-19
Similarly to paclixatel, all patterns involving SB 203580 point to a potential inhibition of the hyperinflammatory response in COVID-19. According to
Gaestel [105], “the role of the protein kinases p38α in inflammation and innate
immunity was found when the compound SB 203580 suppressed tumor necrosis
factor (TNF) production in monocytes, and this resulted in inhibition of septic
(infammatory) shock.”
25

5.2.3. Alpha 2-antiplasmin
Alpha 2-antiplasmin is a serine protease inhibitor responsible for inactivating
plasmin. Elevated plasmin is a common risk factor for COVID-19 susceptibility, especially in patients with comorbidities such as hypertension, diabetes,
and coronary heart disease [106]. The following patterns support the alpha
2-antiplasmin discovery:
1. Alpha 2-antiplasmin-inhibits-plasmin-predisposes-COVID-19
2. Alpha 2-antiplasmin-inhibits-fibrinogen-associated with-COVID-19
3. Alpha 2-antiplasmin-interacts with-IgY-associated with-COVID-19
More specifically, plasmin may cleave a newly inserted furin site in the S protein of SARS-CoV-2, which increases its infectivity and virulence in COVID-19.
In addition, fibrinogen levels are higher in COVID-19 patients and may contribute to hypercoagulability [106]. By inhibiting plasmin and fibrinogen (first
two patterns), Alpha 2-antiplasmin may confer protection to COVID-19. In
addition, pattern 3 suggests a mechanism of protection via immunoglobulin
Y (IgY). In the immunology field, IgY against acute respiratory tract infection has been developed for more than 20 years. Several IgY applications have
been effectively confirmed in both human and animal health. IgY antibodies
extracted from chicken eggs have been used in bacterial and viral infection therapy. IgY production has been proposed as immunization as an adjuvant therapy
in viral respiratory infection caused by COVID-19 infection [107]. Chicken immunized with Alpha 2-antiplasmin and the peptide-specific antibody (IgY) was
isolated from the egg yolks of hens that could be used as potential protections
for COVID-19 patients [108].
5.2.4. Metoclopramide
Metoclopramide is used to relieve symptoms such as nausea, vomiting, and
heartburn, caused by gastroesophageal reflux disease or diabetic gastroparesis.
Metoclopramide is, mostly, a dopamine D2 antagonist but acts on many other
neurotransmitters and proteins. Using our discovery pattern, we identified two
pathways through which metoclopramide may protect against COVID-19.
1. metoclopramide-interacts with-cholinergic systemassociated with-COVID-19
2. metoclopramide-inhibits-TNF protein, humanassociated with-COVID-19
The first pattern suggests a cholinergic pathway for the protective effect of
metoclopramide. The first relation of this pattern is extracted from a study
which suggests that metoclopramide activates the sympathetic nervous system by mediating the central cholinergic system in humans [109]. The second
piece of the evidence is based on a paper that explains how a cholinergic antiinflammatory pathway acting through acetylcholine receptors can inhibit the
production of pro-inflammatory cytokines [110]. Therefore, by activating the
cholinergic pathway, metaclopropamide may prevent the inflammatory cytokine
storm associated with COVID-19.
26

The second potential link is via tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α), a cytokine
used by the immune system for cell signaling. The inhibitory effect of metoclopramide on TNF-α is suggested by a study on anti-inflammatory properties of
benzamides, a class of drugs to which metoclopramide belongs (“Our data have
shown that metoclopramide . . . gave dose dependent inhibition of TNFα” [111]).
The second piece of the link comes from a paper that studies the role of TNF-α
as a key driver of inflammatory macrophage response in severe COVID-19 and
proposes anti-cytokine (especially, anti-TNF) treatment for COVID-19 [112].
5.2.5. Oxymatrine
Oxymatrine is a quinazine alkaloid with organ- and tissue-protective effects,
primarily related to its anti-inflammatory, anti-oxidative stress, anti- or proapoptotic, anti-fibrotic, metabolism-regulating, and anti-nociceptive functions
[113]. In addition, a variety of signal pathways, cells, and molecules are influenced by oxymatrine.
The following patterns support the repurposing of oxymatrine:
1. oxymatrine-inhibits-interleukin-6predisposes-COVID-19
2. oxymatrine-inhibits-TNF protein, human-associated with-COVID-19
3. oxymatrine-inhibits-interleukin-1, betaassociated with-COVID-19
4. oxymatrine-inhibits-NF-kappa Bassociated with-COVID-19
5. oxymatrine-interacts with-interleukin-10-predisposes-COVID-19
6. oxymatrine-inhibits-TLR4 geneassociated with-COVID-19
The first five patterns illustrate the effect of oxymatrine on proinflammatory
cytokine and chemokine production induced by SARS-CoV-2. The first piece of
the evidence is often an inhibitory relationship, as stated in Huang et al. [114]:
“Oxymatrine at 120mg/kg significantly suppressed gene expressions of TLR-4
and NF-κB, decreased levels of TNF-α, interleukin-1beta and interleukin-6”.
The relationship between cytokine response and COVID-19 is well-established,
for example as stated in Chi et al. [115]: “IL-6, IL-7, IL-10, . . . were found to
be associated with the severity of COVID-19”. Furthermore, the authors of
the latter article propose that immunomodulatory treatment to regulate the
cytokine responses could be an effective therapeutic strategy for SARS-CoV-2
infection. Oxymatrine could be one such candidate.
The relevance of TLR4 (Toll-like receptor 4) (pattern 6) for COVID-19, on
the other hand, can be gleaned from Choudhury et al. [116], which states that
“TLR4 may have a crucial role in the virus-induced inflammatory consequences
associated with COVID-19.” The authors further make the point that TLR4
antagonists (such as oxymatrine) could pave the way for COVID-19 treatment.

27

5.3. Error analysis
As error analysis, we manually examined the top 150 predictions by the
best-performing model, TransE, for plausibility. 99 of these were deemed implausible, as they were drug classes that were considered too general. Examples of such classes include C0003205: Anti-Infective Agents, C0003367:
Antilipemic Agents, and C0010858: Cytostatic Agents. As noted above,
some members of these classes may indeed be plausible; however, the classes
themselves were considered errors. A more systematic approach to exclude
drug classes (e.g., by using MeSH concept hierarchy) could help reduce such errors. A more fine-grained evaluation could also consider such cases as partially
correct, although this is unlikely to be useful for drug repurposing.
The other 18 candidates in the list that were deemed implausible are those
that were classified as pharmacologic substances in UMLS, but were not drugs.
These include C0279328: hyperbaric oxygen, C1618233: husk and C1443923:
Oral rehydration, among others. It may be possible to leverage drug knowledge resources, such as DrugBank, to exclude such concepts and reduce errors.
5.4. Limitations and future work
Our approach relies on accuracy of the predications extracted by SemRep.
SemRep precision is about 0.70 and its recall around 0.42 [71]. While the accuracy classifier helped us improve the accuracy of the predications used, the
remaining errors were still significant, impacting the knowledge graph completion task.
In addition, despite aggressive filtering, the graph formed by the relations
in extended SemMedDB is very large, making it difficult to apply computationally intensive models like STELP. In this study, we examined a sub-graph
which, inevitably, results in a loss of information available to knowledge graph
completion techniques. While we were still able to apply modeling techniques
to a fairly large sub-graph focusing on drug repurposing, there exists a larger,
complementary sub-graph that may provide further drug candidates.
As noted above, the TransE model benefited from hyperparameter tuning
using a grid search method to find an optimal configuration. Similarly, STELP
would likely benefit from a similar tuning to find an optimal configuration. For
example, a single linear layer was used on the pooled output from the BioBERT
model to produce the logits when increasing the representational capacity of the
linear layer, by depth or width, might allow for STELP to develop a richer model
of the underlying space formed by the BioBERT contextualized embeddings.
Our methods were limited to knowledge from the literature. Other types
of biological data (e.g., protein-protein interactions, drug-target interactions,
gene/protein sequences, pharmacogenomic and pharmacokinetic data) are likely
to benefit identification of drug candidates, as shown to some extent by other
studies [12], as well as our prior work [53]. However, the computational resources needed for training models based on such massive data can be prohibitive. TransE and similar methods seem more promising in that respect.
Lastly, with our in silico approach, we can of course only propose drug
candidates for repurposing. To evaluate whether these drugs could indeed act
28

as effective treatments for COVID-19, wet lab experiments and clinical studies
are needed. However, the fact that we were able to identify drugs known to
have some benefit for COVID-19 (e.g., dexamethasone) via purely computational methods that rely only on automatically extracted literature knowledge
is encouraging. Moreover, the use of discovery patterns to explain why a particular drug or substance could be beneficial in prioritizing the most promising
candidates for such studies.
6. Conclusion
In this study, we proposed an approach that combines literature-based discovery and knowledge graph completion for COVID-19 drug repurposing. Unlike similar efforts that largely focused on COVID-19-specific knowledge, we
incorporated knowledge from a wider range of biomedical literature. We used
state-of-the-art knowledge graph completion models as well as simple but effective discovery patterns to identify candidate drugs. We also demonstrated the
use of these patterns for generating plausible mechanistic explanations, showing
the complementary nature of both methods.
The approach proposed here is not specific to COVID-19 and can be used to
repurpose drugs for other diseases. It can also be generalized to answer other
clinical questions, such as discovering drug-drug interactions or identifying drug
adverse effects.
As COVID-19 pandemic continues its spread and disruption around the
globe, we are reminded how the spread of infectious diseases is increasingly common and future pandemics ever more likely. Innovative computational methods
leveraging existing biomedical knowledge and infrastructure could help us plan
for, respond to, and mitigate the effects of such global health crises. Drug repurposing is a key piece of this response, and our approach provides an efficient
computational method to facilitate this goal.
Acknowledgments
We thank François-Michel Lang, Leif Neve, and Jim Mork for their assistance
with processing the CORD-19 dataset with SemRep and providing updates to
SemMedDB. We acknowledge Tom Rindflesch for his encouragement with the
project.
Funding
RZ and DS were supported by the U.S. National Institutes of Health’s National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health (Grant No. R01AT009457).
DH was supported by Slovenian Research Agency (Grant No. J5-1780, J5-2552,
and P3-0154). AK was supported by the Slovenian Research Agency (Grant
No. P3-0154, Z5-9352, and J5-2552).

29

References
[1] Coronavirus disease (COVID-19), https://www.who.int/emergencie
s/diseases/novel-coronavirus-2019, [Online; accessed 12/13/2020]
(2020).
[2] Home - Johns Hopkins Coronavirus Resource Center, https://coronavi
rus.jhu.edu/, [Online; accessed 12/13/2020] (2020).
[3] FDA Approves First Treatment for COVID-19 , https://www.fda.gov/
news-events/press-announcements/fda-approves-first-treatment
-covid-19, [Online; accessed 12/21/2020] (2020).
[4] FDA Takes Key Action in Fight Against COVID-19 By Issuing Emergency
Use Authorization for First COVID-19 Vaccine, https://www.fda.gov/
news-events/press-announcements/fda-takes-key-action-fight-a
gainst-covid-19-issuing-emergency-use-authorization-first-co
vid-19, [Online; accessed 12/21/2020] (2020).
[5] FFDA Takes Additional Action in Fight Against COVID-19 By Issuing
Emergency Use Authorization for Second COVID-19 Vaccine, https:
//www.fda.gov/news-events/press-announcements/fda-takes-addi
tional-action-fight-against-covid-19-issuing-emergency-use
-authorization-second-covid, [Online; accessed 12/21/2020] (2020).
[6] R. C. Group, Dexamethasone in hospitalized patients with covid19—preliminary report, New England Journal of Medicine.
[7] P. Horby, M. Mafham, L. Linsell, J. L. Bell, N. Staplin, J. R. Emberson, M. Wiselka, A. Ustianowski, E. Elmahi, B. Prudon, et al., Effect of Hydroxychloroquine in Hospitalized Patients with COVID-19:
Preliminary results from a multi-centre, randomized, controlled trial.,
MedRxivdoi:10.1101/2020.07.15.20151852.
[8] J. H. Beigel, K. M. Tomashek, L. E. Dodd, A. K. Mehta, B. S. Zingman,
A. C. Kalil, E. Hohmann, H. Y. Chu, A. Luetkemeyer, S. Kline, et al.,
Remdesivir for the treatment of Covid-19—preliminary report, The New
England Journal of Medicine.
[9] O. Altay, E. Mohammadi, S. Lam, H. Turkez, J. Boren, J. Nielsen,
M. Uhlen, A. Mardinoglu, Current status of COVID-19 therapies and
drug repositioning applications, Iscience (2020) 101303.
[10] X. Wang, Y. Guan, COVID-19 drug repurposing: A review of computational screening methods, clinical trials, and protein interaction assays,
Medicinal Research Reviews.
[11] S. Pushpakom, F. Iorio, P. A. Eyers, K. J. Escott, S. Hopper, A. Wells,
A. Doig, T. Guilliams, J. Latimer, C. McNamee, et al., Drug repurposing:
progress, challenges and recommendations, Nature reviews Drug discovery
18 (1) (2019) 41–58.
30

[12] Y. Zhou, F. Wang, J. Tang, R. Nussinov, F. Cheng, Artificial intelligence
in COVID-19 drug repurposing, The Lancet Digital Health.
[13] Y. Ge, T. Tian, S. Huang, F. Wan, J. Li, S. Li, H. Yang, L. Hong, N. Wu,
E. Yuan, L. Cheng, Y. Lei, H. Shu, X. Feng, Z. Jiang, Y. Chi, X. Guo,
L. Cui, L. Xiao, Z. Li, C. Yang, Z. Miao, H. Tang, L. Chen, H. Zeng,
D. Zhao, F. Zhu, X. Shen, J. Zeng, A data-driven drug repositioning
framework discovered a potential therapeutic agent targeting COVID-19,
bioRxivdoi:10.1101/2020.03.11.986836.
[14] Y. Zhou, Y. Hou, J. Shen, Y. Huang, W. Martin, F. Cheng, Networkbased drug repurposing for novel coronavirus 2019-ncov/sars-cov-2, Cell
discovery 6 (1) (2020) 1–18.
[15] Y. Zhou, Y. Hou, J. Shen, A. Kallianpur, J. Zein, D. A. Culver, S. Farha,
S. Comhair, C. Fiocchi, M. U. Gack, et al., A network medicine approach
to investigation and population-based validation of disease manifestations
and drug repurposing for covid-19, ChemRxivdoi:10.26434/chemrxiv.
12579137.v1.
[16] X. Zeng, X. Song, T. Ma, X. Pan, Y. Zhou, Y. Hou, Z. Zhang, K. Li,
G. Karypis, F. Cheng, Repurpose open data to discover therapeutics for
covid-19 using deep learning, Journal of proteome research.
[17] A.-L. Barabási, N. Gulbahce, J. Loscalzo, Network medicine: a networkbased approach to human disease, Nature reviews genetics 12 (1) (2011)
56–68.
[18] S. Henry, B. T. McInnes, Literature based discovery: models, methods,
and trends, Journal of biomedical informatics 74 (2017) 20–32.
[19] Y. Sebastian, E.-G. Siew, S. O. Orimaye, Emerging approaches in
literature-based discovery: techniques and performance review, The
Knowledge Engineering Review 32.
[20] H. Kilicoglu, D. Shin, M. Fiszman, G. Rosemblat, T. C. Rindflesch,
SemMedDB: a PubMed-scale repository of biomedical semantic predications., Bioinformatics 28 (23) (2012) 3158–3160.
[21] L. L. Wang, K. Lo, Y. Chandrasekhar, R. Reas, J. Yang, D. Burdick,
D. Eide, K. Funk, Y. Katsis, R. M. Kinney, Y. Li, Z. Liu, W. Merrill,
P. Mooney, D. A. Murdick, D. Rishi, J. Sheehan, Z. Shen, B. Stilson, A. D.
Wade, K. Wang, N. X. R. Wang, C. Wilhelm, B. Xie, D. M. Raymond,
D. S. Weld, O. Etzioni, S. Kohlmeier, CORD-19: The COVID-19 open
research dataset, in: Proceedings of the 1st Workshop on NLP for COVID19 at ACL 2020, Association for Computational Linguistics, 2020.
[22] A. Bordes, N. Usunier, A. Garcia-Duran, J. Weston, O. Yakhnenko, Translating embeddings for modeling multi-relational data, in: C. J. C. Burges,

31

L. Bottou, M. Welling, Z. Ghahramani, K. Q. Weinberger (Eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 26, Curran Associates,
Inc., 2013, pp. 2787–2795.
[23] Z. Sun, Z. Deng, J. Nie, J. Tang, RotatE: Knowledge Graph Embedding
by Relational Rotation in Complex sSpace, arXiv abs/1902.10197.
URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1902.10197
[24] B. Yang, W.-t. Yih, X. He, J. Gao, L. Deng, Embedding entities and
relations for learning and inference in knowledge bases, arXiv preprint
arXiv:1412.6575.
[25] T. Trouillon, J. Welbl, S. Riedel, É. Gaussier, G. Bouchard, Complex embeddings for simple link prediction, International Conference on Machine
Learning (ICML), 2016.
[26] B. Wang, T. Shen, G. Long, T. Zhou, Y. Chang, Semantic triple encoder
for fast open-set link prediction, arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.14781.
[27] D. Hristovski, C. Friedman, T. C. Rindflesch, B. Peterlin, Exploiting semantic relations for literature-based discovery., AMIA Annual Symposium
proceedings (2006) 349–353.
[28] D. E. Gordon, G. M. Jang, M. Bouhaddou, J. Xu, K. Obernier, K. M.
White, M. J. O’Meara, V. V. Rezelj, J. Z. Guo, D. L. Swaney, et al., A
sars-cov-2 protein interaction map reveals targets for drug repurposing,
Nature (2020) 1–13.
[29] L. Riva, S. Yuan, X. Yin, L. Martin-Sancho, N. Matsunaga, L. Pache,
S. Burgstaller-Muehlbacher, P. D. De Jesus, P. Teriete, M. V. Hull, et al.,
Discovery of sars-cov-2 antiviral drugs through large-scale compound repurposing, Nature (2020) 1–11.
[30] C. Wu, Y. Liu, Y. Yang, P. Zhang, W. Zhong, Y. Wang, Q. Wang, Y. Xu,
M. Li, X. Li, et al., Analysis of therapeutic targets for sars-cov-2 and discovery of potential drugs by computational methods, Acta Pharmaceutica
Sinica B.
[31] A. A. Elfiky, Anti-hcv, nucleotide inhibitors, repurposing against covid-19,
Life sciences (2020) 117477.
[32] M. Kandeel, M. Al-Nazawi, Virtual screening and repurposing of fda approved drugs against covid-19 main protease, Life sciences (2020) 117627.
[33] K. Al-Khafaji, D. AL-Duhaidahawi, T. Taskin Tok, Using integrated computational approaches to identify safe and rapid treatment for sars-cov-2,
Journal of Biomolecular Structure and Dynamics (0) (2020) 1–11.
[34] J. Wang, Fast identification of possible drug treatment of coronavirus
disease-19 (covid-19) through computational drug repurposing study,
Journal of Chemical Information and Modeling.
32

[35] A. A. Elfiky, Ribavirin, remdesivir, sofosbuvir, galidesivir, and tenofovir
against sars-cov-2 rna dependent rna polymerase (rdrp): A molecular
docking study, Life sciences (2020) 117592.
[36] D. S. Wishart, C. Knox, A. C. Guo, D. Cheng, S. Shrivastava, D. Tzur,
B. Gautam, M. Hassanali, Drugbank: a knowledgebase for drugs, drug
actions and drug targets, Nucleic acids research 36 (suppl 1) (2008) D901–
D906.
[37] A. Gaulton, L. J. Bellis, A. P. Bento, J. Chambers, M. Davies, A. Hersey,
Y. Light, S. McGlinchey, D. Michalovich, B. Al-Lazikani, et al., Chembl: a
large-scale bioactivity database for drug discovery, Nucleic acids research
40 (D1) (2012) D1100–D1107.
[38] C. Stark, B.-J. Breitkreutz, T. Reguly, L. Boucher, A. Breitkreutz, M. Tyers, Biogrid: a general repository for interaction datasets, Nucleic acids
research 34 (suppl 1) (2006) D535–D539.
[39] C. Cava, G. Bertoli, I. Castiglioni, In silico discovery of candidate drugs
against covid-19, Viruses 12 (4) (2020) 404.
[40] S. Ray, S. Lall, A. Mukhopadhyay, S. Bandyopadhyay, A. Schönhuth,
Predicting potential drug targets and repurposable drugs for covid-19 via
a deep generative model for graphs, arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.02338.
[41] D. M. Gysi, Í. D. Valle, M. Zitnik, A. Ameli, X. Gan, O. Varol, H. Sanchez,
R. M. Baron, D. Ghiassian, J. Loscalzo, et al., Network medicine framework for identifying drug repurposing opportunities for covid-19, arXiv
preprint arXiv:2004.07229.
[42] D. R. Swanson, Fish oil, Raynaud’s syndrome, and undiscovered public
knowledge., Perspectives in biology and medicine 30 (1) (1986) 7–18.
[43] B. Wilkowski, M. Fiszman, C. M. Miller, D. Hristovski, S. Arabandi,
G. Rosemblat, T. C. Rindflesch, Graph-based methods for discovery
browsing with semantic predications, in: AMIA annual symposium proceedings, Vol. 2011, American Medical Informatics Association, 2011, p.
1514.
[44] M. J. Cairelli, C. M. Miller, M. Fiszman, T. E. Workman, T. C. Rindflesch,
Semantic MEDLINE for discovery browsing: using semantic predications
and the literature-based discovery paradigm to elucidate a mechanism for
the obesity paradox., in: AMIA Annual Symposium Proceedings, 2013,
pp. 164–173.
[45] D. R. Swanson, N. R. Smalheiser, An interactive system for finding complementary literatures: a stimulus to scientific discovery, Artificial intelligence 91 (2) (1997) 183–203.

33

[46] M. Weeber, H. Klein, L. T. de Jong-van den Berg, R. Vos, Using concepts in literature-based discovery: Simulating swanson’s raynaud–fish oil
and migraine–magnesium discoveries, Journal of the american society for
information science and technology 52 (7) (2001) 548–557.
[47] C. B. Ahlers, D. Hristovski, H. Kilicoglu, T. C. Rindflesch, Using the
literature-based discovery paradigm to investigate drug mechanisms, in:
AMIA Annual Symposium Proceedings, Vol. 2007, American Medical Informatics Association, 2007, p. 6.
[48] J. Preiss, M. Stevenson, R. Gaizauskas, Exploring relation types for
literature-based discovery, Journal of the American Medical Informatics
Association 22 (5) (2015) 987–992.
[49] D. Cameron, R. Kavuluru, T. C. Rindflesch, A. P. Sheth,
K. Thirunarayan, O. Bodenreider, Context-driven automatic subgraph
creation for literature-based discovery, Journal of biomedical informatics
54 (2015) 141–157.
[50] T. Cohen, R. Schvaneveldt, D. Widdows, Reflective random indexing and
indirect inference: A scalable method for discovery of implicit connections,
Journal of biomedical informatics 43 (2) (2010) 240–256.
[51] T. Cohen, D. Widdows, R. Schvaneveldt, T. C. Rindflesch, Finding
schizophrenia’s prozac emergent relational similarity in predication space,
in: International Symposium on Quantum Interaction, Springer, 2011, pp.
48–59.
[52] T. Cohen, D. Widdows, Embedding of semantic predications, Journal of
biomedical informatics 68 (2017) 150–166.
[53] D. Hristovski, A. Kastrin, B. Peterlin, T. C. Rindflesch, Combining semantic relations and dna microarray data for novel hypotheses generation,
in: Linking literature, information, and knowledge for biology, Springer,
Berlin, Heidelberg, 2010, pp. 53–61.
[54] D. Hristovski, T. Rindflesch, B. Peterlin, Using literature-based discovery
to identify novel therapeutic approaches, Cardiovascular & Hematological
Agents in Medicinal Chemistry (Formerly Current Medicinal ChemistryCardiovascular & Hematological Agents) 11 (1) (2013) 14–24.
[55] T. Cohen, D. Widdows, C. Stephan, R. Zinner, J. Kim, T. Rindflesch,
P. Davies, Predicting high-throughput screening results with scalable
literature-based discovery methods, CPT: pharmacometrics & systems
pharmacology 3 (10) (2014) 1–9.
[56] R. Zhang, M. J. Cairelli, M. Fiszman, H. Kilicoglu, T. C. Rindflesch, S. V.
Pakhomov, G. B. Melton, Exploiting literature-derived knowledge and
semantics to identify potential prostate cancer drugs, Cancer informatics
13 (2014) CIN–S13889.
34

[57] M. Rastegar-Mojarad, K. E. Ravikumar, D. Li, R. Prasad, H. Liu, A
new method for prioritizing drug repositioning candidates extracted by
literature-based discovery, 2015 IEEE International Conference on Bioinformatics and Biomedicine (BIBM) (2015) 669–674.
[58] H.-T. Yang, J.-H. Ju, Y.-T. Wong, I. Shmulevich, J.-H. Chiang,
Literature-based discovery of new candidates for drug repurposing, Briefings in bioinformatics 18 (3) (2017) 488–497.
[59] Q. Wang, Z. Mao, B. Wang, L. Guo, Knowledge graph embedding: A
survey of approaches and applications, IEEE Transactions on Knowledge
and Data Engineering 29 (12) (2017) 2724–2743.
[60] Z. Wang, J. Zhang, J. Feng, Z. Chen, Knowledge graph embedding by
translating on hyperplanes., in: AAAI, Vol. 14, Citeseer, 2014, pp. 1112–
1119.
[61] M. Nickel, V. Tresp, H.-P. Kriegel, A three-way model for collective learning on multi-relational data., in: ICML, Vol. 11, 2011, pp. 809–816.
[62] M. Nickel, L. Rosasco, T. Poggio, Holographic embeddings of knowledge
graphs, in: Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial
Intelligence, 2016, pp. 1955–1961.
[63] T. Dettmers, P. Minervini, P. Stenetorp, S. Riedel, Convolutional 2d
knowledge graph embeddings, arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.01476.
[64] M. Schlichtkrull, T. N. Kipf, P. Bloem, R. Van Den Berg, I. Titov,
M. Welling, Modeling relational data with graph convolutional networks,
in: European Semantic Web Conference, Springer, 2018, pp. 593–607.
[65] L. Yao, C. Mao, Y. Luo, Kg-bert: Bert for knowledge graph completion,
arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.03193.
[66] D. Sosa, A. Derry, M. Guo, E. Wei, C. Brinton, R. Altman, A literaturebased knowledge graph embedding method for identifying drug repurposing opportunities in rare diseases., in: Pacific Symposium on Biocomputing. Pacific Symposium on Biocomputing, Vol. 25, 2020, pp. 463–474.
[67] M. Zitnik, M. Agrawal, J. Leskovec, Modeling polypharmacy side effects
with graph convolutional networks, Bioinformatics 34 (13) (2018) i457–
i466.
[68] S. Sang, Z. Yang, X. Liu, L. Wang, H. Lin, J. Wang, M. Dumontier,
Gredel: A knowledge graph embedding based method for drug discovery
from biomedical literatures, IEEE Access 7 (2018) 8404–8415.
[69] X. Chen, Z. L. Ji, Y. Z. Chen, Ttd: therapeutic target database, Nucleic
acids research 30 (1) (2002) 412–415.

35

[70] T. C. Rindflesch, M. Fiszman, The interaction of domain knowledge and
linguistic structure in natural language processing: interpreting hypernymic propositions in biomedical text., Journal of Biomedical Informatics
36 (6) (2003) 462–477.
[71] H. Kilicoglu, G. Rosemblat, M. Fiszman, D. Shin, Broad-coverage biomedical relation extraction with semrep, BMC bioinformatics 21 (2020) 1–28.
[72] D. A. B. Lindberg, B. L. Humphreys, A. T. McCray, The Unified Medical
Language System, Methods of Information in Medicine 32 (1993) 281–291.
[73] O. Bodenreider, The Unified Medical Language System (UMLS): integrating biomedical terminology, Nucleic Acids Research 32 (Database issue)
(2004) 267–270.
[74] G. Chen, M. J. Cairelli, H. Kilicoglu, D. Shin, T. C. Rindflesch, Augmenting microarray data with literature-based knowledge to enhance gene
regulatory network inference, PLOS Computational Biology 10 (6) (2014)
1–16. doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003666.
[75] S. R. Sukumar, L. W. Roberts, J. A. Graves, A Reasoning And
Hypothesis-Generation Framework Based On Scalable Graph Analytics
Enabling Discoveries In Medicine Using Cray Urika-XA And Urika-GD,
2016.
[76] A. Kastrin, T. C. Rindflesch, D. Hristovski, Link prediction on the semantic medline network, in: International Conference on Discovery Science,
Springer, 2014, pp. 135–143.
[77] J. Sybrandt, A. Carrabba, A. Herzog, I. Safro, Are abstracts enough for
hypothesis generation?, in: 2018 IEEE International Conference on Big
Data (Big Data), IEEE, 2018, pp. 1504–1513.
[78] T. C. Rindflesch, C. L. Blake, M. J. Cairelli, M. Fiszman, C. J. Zeiss,
H. Kilicoglu, Investigating the role of interleukin-1 beta and glutamate in
inflammatory bowel disease and epilepsy using discovery browsing, Journal of biomedical semantics 9 (1) (2018) 25.
[79] Q. Chen, A. Allot, Z. Lu, Keep up with the latest coronavirus research,
Natur 579 (7798) (2020) 193–193.
[80] S. Boccaletti, V. Latora, Y. Moreno, M. Chavez, D.-U. Hwang, Complex
networks: Structure and dynamics, Physics Reports 424 (4-5) (2006) 175–
308.
[81] B. T. McInnes, Extending the log-likelihood measure to improve collocation identification, Master’s thesis, Univerity of Minnesota, Minneapolis,
MN (Dec. 2004).

36

[82] R. Zhang, T. J. Adam, G. Simon, M. J. Cairelli, T. Rindflesch, S. Pakhomov, G. B. Melton, Mining biomedical literature to explore interactions
between cancer drugs and dietary supplements, AMIA Summits on Translational Science Proceedings 2015 (2015) 69.
[83] J. Vasilakes, R. Rizvi, G. B. Melton, S. Pakhomov, R. Zhang, Evaluating active learning methods for annotating semantic predications, JAMIA
open 1 (2) (2018) 275–282.
[84] J. Devlin, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, K. Toutanova, Bert: Pre-training of deep
bidirectional transformers for language understanding, in: NAACL-HLT
(1), 2019.
[85] J. Lee, W. Yoon, S. Kim, D. Kim, S. Kim, C. H. So, J. Kang, Biobert: a
pre-trained biomedical language representation model for biomedical text
mining, Bioinformatics 36 (4) (2020) 1234–1240.
[86] E. Alsentzer, J. Murphy, W. Boag, W.-H. Weng, D. Jindi, T. Naumann,
M. McDermott, Publicly available clinical bert embeddings, in: Proceedings of the 2nd Clinical Natural Language Processing Workshop, 2019,
pp. 72–78.
[87] Y. Peng, S. Yan, Z. Lu, Transfer learning in biomedical natural language
processing: An evaluation of bert and elmo on ten benchmarking datasets,
in: Proceedings of the 18th BioNLP Workshop and Shared Task, 2019,
pp. 58–65.
[88] Y. Gu, R. Tinn, H. Cheng, M. Lucas, N. Usuyama, X. Liu, T. Naumann,
J. Gao, H. Poon, Domain-specific language model pretraining for biomedical natural language processing, arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.15779.
[89] J. L. Fleiss, Measuring nominal scale agreement among many raters., Psychological Bulletin 76 (5) (1971) 378–382.
[90] D. P. Kingma, J. Ba, Adam: A method for stochastic optimization, arXiv
preprint arXiv:1412.6980.
[91] D. Zheng, X. Song, C. Ma, Z. Tan, Z. Ye, J. Dong, H. Xiong, Z. Zhang,
G. Karypis, DGL-KE: Training knowledge graph embeddings at scale,
arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.08532.
[92] A. R. Aronson, F.-M. Lang, An overview of MetaMap: historical perspective and recent advances, Journal of the American Medical Informatics
Association (JAMIA) 17 (3) (2010) 229–236.
[93] A. T. McCray, A. Burgun, O. Bodenreider, Aggregating UMLS semantic
types for reducing conceptual complexity., Proceedings of Medinfo 10 (pt
1) (2001) 216–20.

37

[94] T. U. Singh, S. Parida, M. C. Lingaraju, M. Kesavan, D. Kumar, R. K.
Singh, Drug repurposing approach to fight COVID-19, Pharmacological
Reports 72 (6) (2020) 1479–1508. doi:10.1007/s43440-020-00155-6.
URL http://link.springer.com/10.1007/s43440-020-00155-6
[95] L. v. d. Maaten, G. Hinton, Visualizing data using t-SNE, Journal of
Machine Learning Research 9 (Nov) (2008) 2579–2605.
[96] J. M. Sanders, M. L. Monogue, T. Z. Jodlowski, J. B. Cutrell, Pharmacologic treatments for coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19): a review, Jama
323 (18) (2020) 1824–1836.
[97] W. J. Wiersinga, A. Rhodes, A. C. Cheng, S. J. Peacock, H. C. Prescott,
Pathophysiology, transmission, diagnosis, and treatment of coronavirus
disease 2019 (COVID-19): a review, JAMA 324 (8) (2020) 782–793.
[98] D. Q. Nguyen, T. Vu, T. D. Nguyen, D. Q. Nguyen, D. Phung, A capsule network-based embedding model for knowledge graph completion and
search personalization, arXiv preprint arXiv:1808.04122.
[99] B. A. Weaver, How taxol/paclitaxel kills cancer cells, Molecular biology
of the cell 25 (18) (2014) 2677–2681.
[100] M. Z. Tay, C. M. Poh, L. Rénia, P. A. MacAry, L. F. Ng, The trinity
of COVID-19: immunity, inflammation and intervention, Nature Reviews
Immunology (2020) 1–12.
[101] W. Miesbach, M. Makris, COVID-19: coagulopathy, risk of thrombosis, and the rationale for anticoagulation, Clinical and Applied Thrombosis/Hemostasis 26 (2020) 1076029620938149.
[102] S. Ran, The role of TLR4 in chemotherapy-driven metastasis, Cancer
research 75 (12) (2015) 2405–2410.
[103] S. C. S. Brandão, J. d. O. X. Ramos, L. T. Dompieri, E. T. A. M. Godoi,
J. L. Figueiredo, E. S. C. Sarinho, S. Chelvanambi, M. Aikawa, Is Tolllike receptor 4 involved in the severity of COVID-19 pathology in patients
with cardiometabolic comorbidities?, Cytokine & Growth Factor Reviews.
[104] DailyMed: Paclitaxel injection, https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/daily
med/drugInfo.cfm?setid=9ffd3e34-537f-4f65-b00e-57c25bab3b01,
[Online; accessed 12/21/2020] (2020).
[105] M. Gaestel, What goes up must come down: molecular basis of MAPKAP kinase 2/3-dependent regulation of the inflammatory response and
its inhibition, Biological chemistry 394 (10) (2013) 1301–1315.
[106] H.-L. Ji, R. Zhao, S. Matalon, M. A. Matthay, Elevated plasmin (ogen) as
a common risk factor for COVID-19 susceptibility, Physiological reviews.

38

[107] C. Constantin, M. Neagu, T. D. Supeanu, V. Chiurciu, D. A. Spandidos,
IgY-turning the page toward passive immunization in COVID-19 infection,
Experimental and Therapeutic Medicine 20 (1) (2020) 151–158.
[108] S. C. Lee, K. N. Lee, D. G. Schwartzott, K. Jackson, W.-C. Tae, P. McKee, Purification of human α2-antiplasmin with chicken IgY specific to
its carboxy-terminal peptide, Preparative biochemistry & biotechnology
27 (4) (1997) 227–237.
[109] Y. Takeuchi, T. Ikeda, S. Takeuchi, H. Ito, Y. Sugiyama, T. Matsukawa,
S. Iwase, T. Mano, Effect of metoclopramide on muscle sympathetic nerve
activity in humans., Environmental medicine: annual report of the Research Institute of Environmental Medicine, Nagoya University 37 (1)
(1993) 95.
[110] Y. Tizabi, B. Getachew, R. L. Copeland, M. Aschner, Nicotine and the
nicotinic cholinergic system in COVID-19, The FEBS journal 287 (17)
(2020) 3656–3663.
[111] R. W. Pero, B. Axelsson, D. Siemann, D. Chaplin, G. Dougherty, Newly
discovered anti-inflammatory properties of the benzamides and nicotinamides, in: ADP-Ribosylation Reactions: From Bacterial Pathogenesis
to Cancer, Springer, 1999, pp. 119–125.
[112] F. Zhang, J. R. Mears, L. Shakib, J. I. Beynor, S. Shanaj, I. Korsunsky, A. Nathan, A. M. P. R. Arthritis, et al., IFN-γ and TNF-α drive a
CXCL10+ CCL2+ macrophage phenotype expanded in severe COVID-19
and other diseases with tissue inflammation, bioRxiv.
[113] X. Lan, J. Zhao, Y. Zhang, Y. Chen, Y. Liu, F. Xu, Oxymatrine exerts
organ-and tissue-protective effects by regulating inflammation, oxidative
stress, apoptosis, and fibrosis: From bench to bedside, Pharmacological
Research 151 (2020) 104541.
[114] M. Huang, Y.-Y. Hu, X.-Q. Dong, Q.-P. Xu, W.-H. Yu, Z.-Y. Zhang, The
protective role of oxymatrine on neuronal cell apoptosis in the hemorrhagic
rat brain, Journal of ethnopharmacology 143 (1) (2012) 228–235.
[115] Y. Chi, Y. Ge, B. Wu, W. Zhang, T. Wu, T. Wen, J. Liu, X. Guo,
C. Huang, Y. Jiao, et al., Serum cytokine and chemokine profile in relation to the severity of coronavirus disease 2019 in China, The Journal
of infectious diseases 222 (5) (2020) 746–754.
[116] A. Choudhury, S. Mukherjee, In silico studies on the comparative characterization of the interactions of SARS-CoV-2 spike glycoprotein with
ACE-2 receptor homologs and human TLRs, Journal of medical virology.

39

