Using NLP to Analyze Political Polarization
During National Crises with Twitter
Parth D. Shisode
Portola High School, IUSD
Irvine, CA 92618
parth.shisode@gmail.com

Abstract
Democrats and Republicans have seemed to grow apart in the past three
decades. Since the United States as we know it today is undeniably bipartisan,
this phenomenon would not appear as a surprise to most. However, there are
triggers which can cause spikes in disagreements between Democrats and
Republicans at a higher rate than how the two parties have been growing apart
gradually over time. This study has analyzed the idea that national events which
generally are detrimental to all individuals can be one of those triggers. By
testing polarization before and after three events (Hurricane Sandy [2012], N.
Korea Missile Test Surge [2019], COVID-19 [2020]) using Twitter data, we
show that a measurable spike in polarization occurs between the Democrat and
Republican party. In order to measure polarization, sentiments of Twitter users
aligned to the Democrat and Republican parties are compared on identical
entities (events, people, locations, etc.). Using hundreds of thousands of data
samples, a 2.8% increase in polarization was measured during times of crisis
compared to times where no crises were occurring. Regardless of the reasoning
that the gap between political parties can increase so much during times of
suffering and stress, it is definitely alarming to see that among other aspects of
life, the partisan gap worsens during detrimental national events.

1

I n trod u ct i on

Currently, the COVID-19 pandemic is posing a danger to the welfare of virtually every single
nation. However, as noted in Bol et al. 2020 [1], one thing generally measured to be improved is a
population’s relationship with its government, given that it is a democracy. In the context of
COVID-19, they also found a general trend of increased approval for the current governmentaffiliated political party, as well as government authorities in general. It should be stated that on
average, the majority of a population also approves of a government’s response to the COVID-19
epidemic.
However according to the Pew Research Center [2], this has not been the case for the
United States, where 65% of Americans President Trump was too slow in the initial national
COVID-19 response. Attitudes regarding restriction different significantly between political
parties: 81% of Dem./Dem.-Leaning Americans are concerned about public restrictions being
lifted too quickly, while the same figure is 51% for Rep./Rep.-Leaning Americans.
The purpose of this research study is to explore the degree to which levels of
bipartisanship in the US have changed during times of crisis, beyond background change which
has already been occurring. Our hypothesis is that during times of crisis, levels of partisanship in
the United States will increase, with both Democrats and Republicans becoming more polarized
on average in the messages they send via Twitter. Partisanship is defined in this study using
sentiment differences around a singular, concrete set of entities; if the perception of a single set of
facts still leads to different interpretations and opinions, then bias and polarization are responsible
for those differing sentiments. As to how polarization and partisanship will be measured, Twitter

has proved to be a resourceful tool in scraping sentiment of the public on entities such as popular
organizations, trending celebrities or political figures, geographic regions, and even Twitter
handles (Ringsquandl et al., 2016 [3]). The crises tested will be non-acute, in that they did not
occur during one singular day or moment: 2012 Hurricane Sandy, 2019 North Korean Missile
Test, and lastly, 2020 COVID-19 pandemic. Non-acute events were chosen because it would be
more likely to see bias develop over time, once information regarding the event is widespread over
a considerable time length. Additionally, these events were chosen due to the fact that the Twitter
data surrounding these time periods was accessible relative to other events. Prior research has
shown that there is often a uniform sense of grief after trauma and tragedy, typically resulting in
solidarity throughout nations (Kropf et al. 2014 [4]). It is interesting that we didn't see this reaction
from the American public during the U.S. government’s response to the COVID-19 pandemic,
given the difference between how Democrats and Republicans still disagree on governmentmandated restriction due to COVID-19 [1].
We classify political perspectives of a Twitter user by comparing the number of
Democrat political figureheads with the number of Republican political figureheads that they
follow. From Demszky et al. 2019 [5], we have received a “follower list” of Democrat and
Republican figureheads, used to classify the political perspective of a tweet based on its user.
Using CoreNLP, entities were then extracted from tweets into a dataset alongside entity metadata
including corresponding sentiments from the users. Then, polarity for every individual entity with
sentiments from both Democrats and Republicans is calculated by analyzing the difference in
sentiment between the two political parties. The polarity across all entities as a single value is then
calculated by taking a weighted average of the polarities for every individual entity. As a result, it
is possible to examine how a single set of events and facts can be seen through a different lens
based on political party. This process is further touched upon in the “Methodology” section of this
study.1
After analysis of the results, it was determined that polarization during a national
detrimental event can be greater than the polarization between political parties that has already
been expected to occur. It was also very interesting to note that for the majority of measured
sentiments, Republicans tended to have a lower sentiment on average than Democrats. The
“baseline” tweets were taken for a period of 3 weeks before the event started, while the “crisis”
tweets were taken for a period of 3 weeks after the event started; the goal here was to provide an
equal timeframe to account for the fact events may take time in order to for the effect of changing
sentiment to take place.

2

Rel ated Wo rk

The hypothesis of the “partisanship perceptual screen” plays a critical role in how this study
chooses to structure its methodology, as well as its overall goal. According to Mary McGrath, a
perceptual screen is capable of “causing adherents of opposing parties to perceive different
information from the same set of facts” (McGrath 2016 [6]). This has been based on the research
of Gerber and Huber, analyzing the effect of the partisanship perceptual screen on real-world
economic behavior (Gerber et al., 2009 [7]). These papers served to aid in understanding how to
analyze the set of tweets and define partisanship; in this study, the same specific entities only with
measurable sentiment from both the Democrat and Republican are considered.
This study is also examining the effect of “unity after tragedy” a social phenomenon
where during/after a tragic event, the victims and those surrounding victims are able to display
social solidarity (Hawdon, J., & Ryan, J. 2008 [8], Sweet 1998 [9]). The hypothesis surrounding
our study states that this phenomenon may not occur in the United States between members of the
Democrat and Republican Party. Therefore, this phenomenon is undergoing validation through
this study. According to the Pew Research Center [10], a further gap of political ideology occurred
between Democrats and Republicans once Donald Trump initiated his response to the COVID-19
pandemic. This raises the question: does the “unity after tragedy” phenomenon still occur when
1

The program code and information necessary for this project can be found at the following web
address: https://github.com/21ShisodeParth/partisanship

the differences between individuals are in political values?
A research study with a similar purpose was that of Demszky et al. [4], analyzing
political polarization regarding mass shootings, with data being fed from Twitter. While this study
does take a more complex approach to understand the intricacies of how Democrats and
Republicans react differently to a significant tragic event, the goals of this study are aligned with
that of this paper. While this paper chooses to examine topic choice, framing, affect, and
illocutionary force, this study focuses almost solely on identifying whether a partisan perceptual
screen continues to exist and affect how Americans view the same set of facts surrounding tragic
incidents. Additionally, the way the Demszky et al., chooses to calculate partisanship (derived
from the leave-out estimator in Gentzkow et al. forthcoming [11]), has a large influence on the
calculation method in this study. Partisanship is measured here based on existing values of
polarization calculated for sets of entities which contains measurable sentiment from both political
parties. Additionally, partisan assignment is performed using the same method. A list of Twitter
handles of Democrat and Republican figureheads was supplied by Demszky et al., along with a list
of IDs of every single follower the political figureheads have. Analyzing whether an individual
follows more Democrat or Republican political figureheads led to a corresponding party
assignment.

3

Meth od ol ogy

The hypothesis of this study is that partisanship will increase in times of crises. A sub hypothesis
is that the difference in partisanship of different parties will be even greater than background
differences due to an ever-growing gap in political values between Democrats and Republicans,
according to a study by the Pew Research Center.
3.1

Core Definitions

The definition of partisanship in this study is based on the partisan “perceptual screen”, the idea
that surrounding a single entity or set of facts are multiple sets of opinions, as a result of different
interpretations based on different political parties (McGrath 2016 [6]). As a result, the definition of
partisanship in this study will be a measurement of disagreement based around the differing
sentiment of concrete entities.
The definition of crisis in this study will be based on a definition from IGI Global: “A
situation or time at which a nation faces intense difficulty, uncertainty, danger or serious threat to
people and national systems and organizations and a need for non-routine rules and procedures
emerge accompanied with urgency”. The crises in this study as listed will be the 2012 Hurricane
Sandy, 2019 North Korean Missile Test Surge, and the 2020 COVID-19 pandemic. These crises
were chosen because they were not “acute tragedies”, but rather long-term events; the response to
Hurricane Sandy lasted multiple months, North Korea had several tests over the span of many
days, and COVID-19 has been infecting individuals from March 2020 to present, over many
months.
3.2

Assumptions

For this research study, it is necessary for every tweet to hold a political party assignment of
Democrat, Republican, or neither. This is crucial in understanding the perspective and background
that comes alongside every sentiment of a tweet. An assumption being made is that a person has a
binary party affiliation, not taking into consideration that a person could identify as a moderate or
party-leaning individual. In order to assign a party, we simply reference the accounts they are
following and based on whether a user follows more Democrat or Republican politicians or
figureheads, we are able to assign a class. This is a technique alike that of Volkova et al. 2014
[12], and Demszky et al. (2019), with the latter stating that this method or party assignment “takes
advantage of homophily in the following behavior of users on Twitter” (Halberstam and Knight,
2016 [13]).

Additionally, it is assumed that external national political events during the period being
studied would not skew partisanship significantly. Examples of these would be state elections or
national elections as well as any national presidential debates. The timeframes here are only in
respect to the events tested (Hurricane Sandy, N.K. Missile Testing, COVID-19) and do not take
any other events in the same time period into account.
Lastly, it is assumed that in the statistical definition, the automated sentiment classifier
being used (Stanford CoreNLP) is not biased, and will be able to yield accurate results. This
sentiment classifier has been previously trained on movie reviews, able to classify between “very
negative”, “negative”, “neutral”, “positive”, and “very positive.” There is an assumption that this
model will be unbiased in this study, where it is required to predict sentiment on text in a political
context. It is also assumed that the sentiment of an entire sentence applies to every sentiment
located in the sentence; this is how sentiments are assigned to entities.
3.3

Data Pipeline

From Dora et al. 2019, we’ve received a list of Twitter handles of Republican and Democrat
political figureheads. Additionally, Dora et al. has supplied us with a list of Twitter User IDs that
follow every single one of these political figureheads. Every single event chosen has two
timeframes we’ve selected— a baseline period and a crisis period. The baseline period is 3 weeks
prior to the point where the event gains large amounts of traction, both in terms of the public (via
social media, online posts, etc.) and the government’s acknowledgement of the respective event.
For every single event, the specific chosen time frames are displayed in the table below. In order
to clarify the role of how entities are utilizes in the data pipeline and computation, information
about entity types, instances, and mentions need to be elaborated upon. The following entity types
were accepted by the CoreNLP annotator to be classified as tweets: [‘LOCATION’, ‘MISC’,
‘PERSON’]. An example of an entity instance would be “Donald Trump”, or additional instances
of the previously mentioned entity types.
The overarching goal of this study is to assess the polarization surrounding entities from
the Democrat and Republican political parties; single entities with opposing sentiment between the
two political parties represent partisanship. The input data itself is structured as a tweet object, a
dictionary-style data structure which contains information about the user’s account, text of the
tweet, and time posted surrounding the tweet. In order to transform these objects into a data form
that can be analyzed to create a single polarization value, the tweet objects will need to be
converted into CSV files which contain a collection of entities alongside its associated Democrat
and Republican sentiments. In order to perform this data transformation, 4 steps are taken. Steps 2
- 4 are completed separately for all tweets with a “Democrat” standpoint and all tweets with a
“Republican” standpoint.
3.3.1

Tw e e t A n n o t a t i o n w i t h C o re N L P

CoreNLP is a linguistic annotator able to provide information on a text regarding sentiment,
named entities, dependency, and parts of speech, as well as other aspects not utilized within this
study. The input required for this step is the tweet’s text, while the result is a dictionary style
object with information on the aspects of the text we’d like to examine or could possibly reference
in the future (sentiment, NER, dependency, POS for this study) for every entity instance. It should
be noted that past deleted tweets were included in the dataset alongside current tweets; deleted
tweets were not annotated and used in the study at all.
3.3.2

P a r t i s a n A s s i g n m e n t t o Tw e e t

From the information regarding the names of figurehead Twitter handles and respective follower
IDs provided by Dora et al., we are able to assign a political party to each tweet based on the user
that posted it. For each ID, we search the number of times it appears in a list of followers for each
Democrat figurehead, labeled value 𝑓 . This process is replicated for each Republican figurehead,
yielding 𝑓 . If 𝑓 = 𝑓 (including 𝑓 = 𝑓 = 0), then the tweet will not be used, as only tweets

with a partisan bias are useful in this study.
3.3.3

D a t a C re a t i o n f o r E n t i t y R e f e r e n c e d i n Tw e e t

After each named entity e is identified inside the tweet’s text, a new datum is created. It should be
noted that in order to use to most relevant input data, entities tagged by CoreNLP as the following
types were discarded and not used to create data: (“EMAIL”, “DATE”, “NUMBER”,
“PERCENT”, “TIME”, “MONEY”, “URL”). There is an assumption that entity types that are
events, locations, organizations, and people are more likely to create any meaningful measurement
of polarization. For the list of tags of entities not used, it does not seem plausible that these types
of entities create any meaningful difference of opinion between Democrats and Republicans. A
single datum is then created which contains the following elements: the name of the entity, the
user ID of the entity’s original tweet, the entity sentiment (calculated using the general sentiment
of the entity’s original sentence), and the associated political party of the tweet. This is repeated
for every entity derived from the source of tweets. Each datum is then compiled as a single row of
one CSV file, with the primary key being the entity name.
3.3.4

Tr a n s f o r m a t i o n o f E n t i t y D a t a C S V i n t o D i c t i o n a r y

Entities that appear in multiple tweets will inevitably appear in multiple rows of the CSV
containing the data of the entities compiled from the input of tweets. Having entities in multiple
rows does not allow for calculation of average sentiment, which is why this CSV has to be
transformed into a new dictionary format. The keys are the of name of each entity 𝑒 , while the
values are a list of two elements (average sentiment 𝑠, number of mentions from original CSV n).
In order to ensure that entity names that differ only because of capitalization (ex. “Donald Trump”
vs “donald trump”) are considered, all entity names are made lowercase. If two entities from the
CSV are found to be identical, the dictionary value for this entity is recalculated to take the
average sentiment s of both entities, and the number of mentions n is updated to represent the
number of repeats. An entity mention would be a version of an entity instance that has been
repeated; for example, “Donald Trump” was to be found in several different tweets. Essentially,
the multiple entity mentions are being reduced to entity instances as a result of this step.
3.4

Computation

3.4.1

P o l a r i z a t i o n A c ro s s a S i n g l e E n t i t y

Once the two dictionaries, one for each political party, are compiled containing the average
sentiments on entities and the number of times it appeared throughout the data input, we can then
calculate polarization using the formula below. This calculates the amount of polarization p across
a single entity.

𝑝=

|

|

(1)

While 𝑠 represents the average sentiment across an entity from users identified as Democrats,
𝑠 represents the counterpart for users identified as Republicans. In order to normalize the value of
polarization to be between 0 and 1, the difference of 𝑠 and 𝑠 is divided by 5. The scale for
sentiment analysis used by CoreNLP ranges from 0 (very negative) to 4 (very positive), allowing 5
possible options for sentiment value.

3.4.2

P o l a r i z a t i o n A c ro s s M u l t i p l e E n t i t i e s

In order to calculate polarization across all entities for the time frame of an event, we can utilize
𝑝 . The value 𝑝
will be utilized later to measure the presence of partisanship. It is calculated
using a weighted average of the 𝑝 values and the number of mentions the entity itself has had in
total, summing 𝑛 and 𝑛 .

𝑝

=

| ∑ [ ×(
(

)]|
)

(2)

Event Response

Volume of
Tweets Tested Baseline

Volume of
Tweets Tested
- Crisis

Time Period
– Baseline

Time Period
– Crisis

Total Number
of Entities Baseline

Total Number
of Entities Crisis

Hurricane Sandy - 2012

203,409

203,462

9/24/12 10/15/12

10/22/12 11/12/12

4920

4963

N. Korea Missile Test Surge - 2019

210,612

209,981

10/3/19 10/24/19

10/31/19 11/21/19

4795

4680

COVID-19 Pandemic - 2020

264,054

263,503

1/31/20 2/21/20

2/28/20 3/20/20

5216

5191

Table 1: Volume of tweets and entities, time period of baseline and crisis per national crisis

4

Res u l ts

Event Response

Avg. Dem.
Baseline
Sentiment

Avg. Dem.
Crisis
Sentiment

Avg. Rep.
Baseline
Sentiment

Avg. Rep.
Crisis
Sentiment

Polarization Baseline

Polarization Crisis

Hurricane Sandy - 2012

1.87

1.82

1.84

1.82

1.8%

2.5%

N. Korea Missile Test Surge - 2019

1.72

1.70

1.71

1.67

2.0%

4.9%

COVID-19 Pandemic
2020

1.86

1.79

1.84

1.77

2.1%

6.9%

Table 2: Democrat/Republican baseline and crisis sentiment and polarization per crisis

It can be observed from the table that in all three events which were observed, the polarization
from the crisis time period to the baseline time period increased. This seems to be strong evidence
that in times of crisis, the average polarization between the two parties increases. On average
between the three events, the polarization between baseline and crisis increased by 2.8%, from
2.0% to 4.8%. It is possible that the slight increase in baseline polarization from 2012 to 2019
represents the ever-growing gap between the Democrat and Republican parties. Additionally, it is
interesting to note that on average, the Republicans held a slightly more negative sentiment than
Democrats when referring to entities for baseline and crisis periods of all events. The single
exception to this is the average Democrat and Republican sentiments during hurricane Sandy. An
unexpected outcome from this data was the slightly lower sentiment in regard to the N. Korea
Missile Test Surge. In terms of pure consequence and resources lost as a result of a detrimental
event, the North Korea Missile Test Surge is significantly lower than that or Hurricane Sandy and
COVID-19. In the U.S. Hurricane Sandy caused destruction of infrastructure, a $70 billion dollar
loss, and 125 deaths. The COVID-19 pandemic has caused 213,000 deaths at the time of the
writing of this paper, and multiple trillions of dollars of loss for the U.S. government and citizens.
Meanwhile, the N. Korea Missile Test Surge hasn’t had nearly as significant an effect on the
Americans population. Yet, the overall sentiment is lowest for this time period.
4.1

Discussion

During the course of this study, there were limitations which may have an effect on the data
collection, leading to potential slight inaccuracies in the polarity value calculations.
When entities were being collected, alongside their respective sentiments, they were
simply selected if the CoreNLP tool was able to classify it as a location, organization, or person.
However, there was no implementation of a method to ensure that each entity was relevant to the
political world or political ideologies. To account for this, there is an assumption that all entities
mentioned in a tweet are being chosen based on the viewpoint of a political party. For example,
the entity keywords “Trump” and “Bernie” are politically relevant terms, and are likely to garner
opposing sentiment. However, the entity “Arnold Schwarzenegger” may lead to differences in
sentiment that may not be directly apparent. The assumption, for example, would be that Arnold
Schwarzenegger is a Democrat, or that another confounding variable leads him to receive a higher
sentiment from users labeled as a Republican.
Due to the fact that in terms of percentage-points, the polarity between Democrats and
Republicans here appears to be less than that listed by the Pew Research Center, it may be
possible that individuals are less likely to express a political bias on social media. Compared to the
data collection method Pew Research Center employs (individually-completed surveys), there
simply is not the same amount of opportunity to express one’s political opinion through bias. For
example, adults are specifically asked about issues such as gun control legislation, while directly
indicating their political preference. This would directly lead to this data specifically existing for
the purpose of understanding differences in political preference. Twitter data, however, does not
fulfill this purpose due to the fact that it is a social media platform.
4.2

F u t u re Wo r k

In the future, it would be beneficial to examine the differences in sentiment within the same party.
In this study, two data sets of entity sentiments were used, with one set coming from Democrat
users and the other from Republican users. However, it would be very valuable to assess the
validity of this study by replicating it using two data sets from the same political party. If the
difference in polarities from the study compared to the altered study is statistically significant,
then this study’s methodology will need to be revised in order to account for this. Additionally, as
mentioned as a limitation, it would be useful to include an algorithm that is capable of detecting
the amount of relevance of an entity to the topic which is being assessed. For example, in this
study the topic would be the Democrat and Republican parties, as well as any entities that have
significance in the political world.
Understanding how the sentiment surrounding a single entity changes over time is also
valuable. Analyzing how the amount of time that an event has an effect on the population’s
general change in sentiment is very valuable, and a good future research question. Filtering the
popularity of entity changes more heavily can lead to ultimately more accurate predictions; for the

sake of low data availability during this study, this aspect was not emphasized. However, with the
presence of more data, only testing data with a high number of mentions from both parties can be
useful. When taking a look at the entities, it will be useful to analyze what the study would look
like if only a ‘PERSON” entity was recognized, and whether it truly is different from the data
obtained during this study.
Although this study was conducted with the Democrat and Republican parties based in
the United States, these results should be applicable to other nations that follow a multi-party
political culture. Applying this study and analyzing how a foreign population’s polarization can
change after an event in another country may further validate the results of this study and show
that the results can be applied on a broader scale. In addition, citizens of other countries may not
necessarily use Twitter and may use other social media. Even in the United States, it would be
very useful to analyze data which may come from different sources such as a political forum,
which may even aid in making the data more politically relevant. Changing the country or the
social media source of this study’s data may change the way polarization occurs, because of a
potential change in user demographics such a region and average age. Even in the United States,
for example, understanding user demographics would be important. On average, more rural and
older citizens tend to align with the Republican party, while younger voters in urban areas tend to
align with the Democrat party.

5

Con cl u s i o n

After collecting data both before and after the start of a national detrimental event, it’s been
deduced that such an event can increase polarization between political parties, such as the
Democrat and Republican parties, beyond any background polarization which has already been
occurring. By the scale used in this study, the increase in polarization increased at a rate of 2.8%
on average between political parties during time periods of national crisis. By utilizing Twitter
data of users that identify as Democrats and Republicans and analyzing their sentiment on
common entities, polarization can be analyzed. If the sentiment towards common entities differs
significantly between Democrats and Republicans, a high polarization exists. Political parties for
individuals are deduced in this study based on whether they are following more Democrat or
Republican politicians/figureheads on Twitter. Polarization data was collected on Democrat and
Republican users for the following three events (Hurricane Sandy [2012], N. Korea Missile Test
Surge [2019], COVID-19 [2020]). Sentiment/polarization data was calculated using the Stanford
CoreNLP tool, accessed through Python. Due to the fact that this data was in fact taken through
Twitter, political relevance of the entities tested could possibly be improved in future studies,
where an alternative could be through a politically-based social media or forum. Significant future
work could also include a replication of this on multi-party systems outside of the United States. If
the results still hold true, then this study’s results would be validated for applicability outside the
United States.
Acknowledgments
This paper was written under the mentorship of Gabor Angeli. I would like to thank him for
his helpful guidance during the research process. Additionally, I would like to thank Dora
Demszky for aid in handling Twitter data for this project.
R e f e re n c e s
[1] Bol, D., Giani, M., Blais, A., Loewen, P.J. (2020). The effect on COVID-19 lockdowns on
political support: Some good news for democracy?. European Consortium for Political Research.
https://doi.org/10.1111/1475-6765.12401
[2] NW, 1615 L. St, Suite 800 Washington, & Inquiries, D. 20036USA202-419-4300 | M.-8578562 | F.-419-4372 | M. (2020, April 16). Most Americans Say Trump Was Too Slow in Initial
Response to Coronavirus Threat. Pew Research Center - U.S. Politics & Policy.

https://www.pewresearch.org/politics/2020/04/16/most-americans-say-trump-was-too-slow-ininitial-response-to-coronavirus-threat/
[3] Ringsquandl, M. & Petkovic, Dusan. (2013). Analyzing political sentiment on twitter. AAAI
Spring Symposium - Technical Report. 40-47.
[4] Kropf, Nancy P., and Barbara L. Jones. “When Public Tragedies Happen: Community Practice
Approaches in Grief, Loss, and Recovery.” Journal of Community Practice, vol. 22, no. 3, July
2014, pp. 281–98. DOI.org (Crossref), doi:10.1080/10705422.2014.929539.
[5] Demszky, D., Garg, N., Voigt, R., Zou, J., Shapiro, J., Gentzkow, M., & Jurafsky, D. (2019).
Analyzing Polarization in Social Media: Method and Application toTweets on 21 Mass Shootings.
Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North, 2970–3005. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/N191304
[6] McGrath, M. C. (2017). Economic behavior and the partisan perceptual screen. Quarterly
Journal of Political Science, 11(4), 363–383. https://doi.org/10.1561/100.00015100
[7] Gerber, A. S., & Huber, G. A. (2009). Partisanship and economic behavior: Do partisan
differences in economic forecasts predict real economic behavior?. American Political Science
Review, 407-426.
[8] Ryan, J., & Hawdon, J. (2008). From individual to community: The “framing” of 4-16 and the
display of social solidarity. Traumatology, 14(1), 43–51.
https://doi.org/10.1177/1534765607312686
[9] Sweet, S. (1998). The effect of a natural disaster on social cohesion: A longitudinal study.’
International Journal of Mass Emergencies and Disasters, 16, 321-331.
[10] NW, 1615 L. St, Suite 800Washington, & Inquiries, D. 20036USA202-419-4300 | M.-8578562 | F.-419-4372 | M. (n.d.). Americans’ growing partisan divide: 8 key findings. Pew Research
Center. Retrieved October 10, 2020, from https://www.pewresearch.org/facttank/2017/10/05/takeaways-on-americans-growing-partisan-divide-over-political-values/
[11] Gentzkow, M., Shapiro, J.M., and Taddy, M. (forthcoming). Measuring polarization in
highdimensional data: Method and application to congressional speech. Technical report
[12] Volkova, S., Coppersmith, G., and Van Durme, B. (2014). Inferring User Political
Preferences from Streaming Communications. In Proceedings of the 52nd Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), volume 1, pages 186–196.
[13] Halberstam, Y., and Knight, B. (2016). Homophily, Group Size, and the Diffusion of Political
Information in Social Networks: Evidence from Twitter. Journal of Public Economics, 143:73–88.

