Lessons from Pandemics – Computational agent-based
model approach for estimation of downstream and
upstream measures to achieve requisite societal behavioural changes

arXiv:2010.04833v1 [cs.CY] 9 Oct 2020

Pradipta Banerjee1 & Subhrabrata Choudhury2

1

National Institute of Technology Durgapur, India

Pandemics such as COVID-19 have lethal potential for inflicting long-lasting cyclic devastations if required preventive, curative and reformative steps are not taken up in time which
puts forth mammoth multi-dimensional challenges for survival before mankind. Scientists
and policymakers all around are striving to achieve R ≤ 1 alongside having less number
of CoVID-19 patients. Lockdowns all across the globe have been implemented for the sake
of social physical distancing. However, even if the desired R value status is achieved it becomes nowhere near safe. As normal social activity and inter-regional travel resumes, danger of contraction of the virus from undetected asymptomatic carriers and reactivation of
the virus in previously affected patients looms over. The virus poses further threat due to
its chances of resurgence, its mutative and adaptive nature thereby giving limited medical
respite. The problems intensify with increasing population density whilst varying with several socio-economic-geo-cultural and human activity parameters. Such zoonotic pandemics
unravel the primary challenges of all countries in securing the general wellbeing of the society. Ensuring a mechanism for policy designs envisaging crisis scenarios through continuous analysis of real-time region-specific data about societal activities and disease/health
1

indicators can be the only solution. An approach perspective is discussed for addressing
the tightly-coupled UN Sustainable goals (2, 3, 6, 12 and 13) for developing a general-scale
computational agent-based model to estimate the downstream and upstream measures for
achieving requisite societal behavioural changes with the prognostic knowledge concerning
the conditions and options for future scenarios of stable sustainability.

Introduction

The exponential growth of CoVID-19 with limited medical respite has uncovered underpinnings
for several facets of the societal structure and functioning which calls for ample patient rethinking
and proactive response to fight with such adversities. The response to such pandemic scenarios
maybe be categorised into Confrontative and Tactical measures. Confontative measures comprise
of medical treatment, provisioning of medico-logistics for maintenance and efforts for curable
drugs and vaccines. Surely these measures have to be expedited but it has its own limitations in
terms of established healthcare infrastructure to population ratio, access and distribution of such
immobile facilities and minimum timespan required for the related treatment or development of
vaccines. Tactical measures become the key in such scenarios. These measures can be perceived
in terms of Downstream and Upstream measures 1 .

Background

In the works by Australian National University 2 , they modelled to predict the mortality and macroeconomic effects of this pandemic whereas it has been aptly highlighted 3 that such predictions,
2

in several related model works, are highly susceptible to severe variations as much is dependent
on the pandemic management policies that are implemented and the societal behavioural patterns
deciding to what extent they are followed. In context of CoVID-19 the observations that we have
penetrated deeper into ecozones we’ve not occupied before are perhaps true since long which may
have been realized lately

4, 5

which also points that future such outbreaks seem more likely

6

if

requisite societal behavioural changes don’t take place in time. There is a two pronged need i) to
analyse the root underpinnings of why the sufferings in such pandemics get aggravated so fast and
implement judicious downstream measures which can rapidly mitigate the crisis scenario and ii)
what downstream measures, capable of changing population behaviours and addressing complex
social problems 7 , can free us from any pandemic be it of contagious CoVID-19, hunger or scarcity
of water.

Exhaustive human actions unleash natural calamities unevenly distributed all across the globe
by dint of the simple fact that we all share the same five spheres of the tightly coupled Planet Earth
System. The following self-explanatory ironies shall help in focussing the intent for effective upstream measure designs. Presently one out of every three persons worldwide doesn’t have access
to drinking water 8 while on the other hand the whole world is advocating for stricter hygiene, sanitisation and washing practices. Studies 9–11 have linked higher Covid-19 morbidity and mortality
to air pollution in the affected regions. Interestingly even a short-haul flight produces carbon emission content more than that of a person from developing nations does in a whole year 12 . Respite
from pollution with usage of electric vehicles also seems to be a paradoxical hope apart from its
viability and battery waste management concerns, as it can be severely more carbon emission con3

tributor and hazardous to the environment compared to fossil fuels due to several critical issues
being yet unanswered 13 . The enthusiasts, may argue that a new technology would evolve that may
not require such fuels for travel and other industry purposes or produce only one thousands of the
present polluting levels, but the prime question is to think feasibly that would we reach that state
ever given the continuous overexploitation of mother nature. Policymakers also cannot afford to label local temperature “hot- spots” as normal for developing countries hoping that it would naturally
subside since even the damages inflicted by disruptions in rainfall patterns are globally precarious
14–16

. The adverse economic impacts of natural calamities are also loud and clear 17–19 . The present

agricultural yield, responsible for 70% of the freshwater usage 20 , is much more than sufficient for
the calorie intake of the existing human population if cultivated only for human intake 21 . Further
studies show that not only calorie requirements but also protein and micronutrient requirements
can be easily achieved 22, 23 if conscious incentivised efforts towards change in cultivation patterns
and food habits are made. Essentially no argument 24, 25 justifies not bringing such changes in such
paradoxical crises amidst real abundance of food barring that of mere convenience and a failure of
the distribution system. A serious concerning question arises that why then there is the need for
expanding farmlands, manmade forest-fires and deforestations.

While on the brighter contemplating side with just reduced human activity mother nature
had been recuperating

26

within one-month inasmuch as the pollution levels have gone down to

that of much desired few decades back levels with sea and river waters getting radically clean rejuvenating wildlife giving much food for thought. We need to analyse these to realise that infinite
development cannot be done on fixed resources as every unit rise in GDP accounts for increas4

ing exhaustion of a substantial share of limited non-renewable natural resources which in turn
also makes such zoonotic pandemics more likely making policies for “planetary health” of utmost
importance now for human sustenance and egalitarian sustainability. Clearly there is gross misbalance of production of goods/services, its needs and its distribution systems resulting in wastage of
precious resources. A societal network model framework that would be able to stabilize and optimize the flow of resources ascertaining the downstream interventions and tune them along with
effectively formulating customised upstream measures with help of integration of region-specific
socio-economic activity and disease/health indicators input data, can not only become a potent
pandemic fighting tool but also let achieve the desired UN Sustainable goals for LMICs.

A Tentative Way-out

An approach to design the adaptive measures in line with the ten central capabilities towards human development

27

such that for an example the initiatives planned would steadily transfer the

emphasis from downstream measures of trying to reduce pollution due to vehicles towards holistic
upstream measures through any deterrents/incentivisations and achieve the target of reduction in
the amount of vehicular traffic in its first place itself. The work can be planned to be carried out
as per the following sequence of actions. Societal entities such as individual members like humans or collective members like institutional bodies of different categories shall be represented as
agent-nodes. The sequence of actions shall co-relate to -

5

Theory development for integrational analytics to simulate testbeds of small-region specific
data - A theoretical framework needs to be developed that can provide insights into the regionwise real-time socio-economic activities correlating with the disease/health indicators and the environmental parameters.

Design On-Demand Downstream measures - Categorisation of input data of disease/health parameters, economic activities, population clusters and available medical resources on the corresponding small-region specific map, along with a combination of computational social science,
e-humanities and information science approaches to form a weighted societal network model with
agent-nodes and their mutual connection edge weights bearing positive or negative attribute values
depending on the node types and their mutual probability of interactions. The agent-node interactions with each other can be simulated as per the prevalent policy at that time instance, based on
real-time input data from volunteers and administrative resources, would continuously evolve their
edge weights depending on the changing interaction probabilities. This shall help in monitoring a
pandemic scenario and design suitable socio- economic tactical downstream interventions so that
the flow of agent-node interactions gets modulated such that no edge weight remains negative,
thereby overcoming the adverse effects of crises such as pandemic scenarios.

Estimating Upstream interventions for requisite societal behavioural changes - A super-network
can then be created interlinking the several small-region specific networks generated in the previous step wherein central level annual data for inter-region socio-economic parameters from migration to agricultural/industrial developments, population concentrations, water availability, amount

6

of forestlands, wetlands, variations of supply/demand of basic need commodities, pollution levels
would be integrated. The same evaluating policy would continue, estimating a societally detrimental behaviour link attribute value to be negative and that of a sustainably constructive attribute
link to be positive. An activity/behaviour may get marked positive from negative and vice versa
for example, industrial development would account for negative as soon as pollution levels, population concentrations increase above the set feasible mark or farming would account for negative
attribute as soon as more than the maximum desirable surplus yield is produced and water levels
start getting stressed or transport systems (personal and public) becomes negative when it results
in carbon emissions and traffic congestions rise above tolerable marks. The simulation of the artificial society framework in such setting would then facilitate design upstream interventions of deterrents/incentivisations depending upon each scenario, after generous observation time intervals,
so that the flows between the edges of the connected small-region specific networks get balanced
such that no individual small-network and the super-network as a whole would bear a nett negative
attribute value with the aim to achieve the tightly-coupled UN Sustainable goals (2, 3, 6, 12 and
13) having goal-3 in focus.

References -

1. Coote, Anna. ”Growing the core economy: Gender, time and sustainable development.” Local
Economy 27, no. 8 (2012): 788-795.
2. McKibbin, Warwick J., and Roshen Fernando. ”The global macroeconomic impacts of COVID19: Seven scenarios.” (2020).
7

3. Adam, David. ”The simulations driving the world’s response to COVID-19: How epidemiologists rushed to model the coronavirus pandemic.” Nature 2 (2020).
4. The

Man

now

wake

Who
up

Saw
to

the

the
global

Pandemic
threat

Coming
of

Will

zoonotic

the

world

diseases?

-

http://nautil.us/issue/83/intelligence/the-man-who-saw-the-pandemic-coming
5. Human

society

under

urgent

threat

from

loss

of

Earth’s

natural

life

-

https://amp.theguardian.com/environment/2019/may/06/human-society-under-urgent-threatloss-earth-natural-life-un-report
6. Destroyed Habitat Creates the Perfect Conditions for Coronavirus to EmergeCOVID-19 may be
just the beginning of mass pandemics - https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/destroyedhabitat-creates-the-perfect-conditions-for-coronavirus-to- emerge/
7. Raine, Kim D. ”Addressing poor nutrition to promote heart health: moving upstream.” Canadian Journal of Card iology 26 (2010): 21C-24C.
8. 1 in 3 people globally do not have access to safe drinking water – UNICEF, WHO https://www.who.int/news-room/detail/18-06-2019-1-in-3-people-globally-do-not-haveaccess-to-safe-drinking-water- unicef-who
9. Xiao Wu, M. S., R. C. Nethery, M. Benjamin Sabath, D. Braun, and F. Dominici. ”COVID-19
PM2. 5, A national study on long-term exposure to air pollution and COVID-19 mortality in
the United-States.” (2020).

8

10. Ogen, Yaron. ”Assessing nitrogen dioxide (NO2) levels as a contributing factor to the coronavirus (COVID-19) fatality rate.” Science of the Total Environment (2020): 138605.
11. Setti, Leonardo, Fabrizio Passarini, Gianluigi De Gennaro, Pierluigi Baribieri, Maria Grazia
Perrone, Massimo Borelli, Jolanda Palmisani et al. ”SARS-Cov-2 RNA Found on Particulate
Matter of Bergamo in Northern Italy: First Preliminary Evidence.” medRxiv (2020).
12. How

your

flight

emits

as

much

CO2

https://www.theguardian.com/environment/ng-

as

many

people

do

in

a

year

-

interactive/2019/jul/19/carbon-calculator-

how-taking-one-flight-emits-as-much-as-many-people-do-in-a-year
13. Batteries can be part of the fight against climate change - if we do these five things
- https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2017/11/battery-batteries-electric-cars-carbon-sustainablepower-energy/
14. Roxy, M., Ritika, K., Terray, P. et al. Drying of Indian subcontinent by rapid Indian
Ocean warming and a weakening land- sea thermal gradient. Nat Commun 6, 7423 (2015).
https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms8423
15. Roxy, M.K., Ghosh, S., Pathak, A. et al. A threefold rise in widespread extreme rain events
over central India. Nat Commun 8, 708 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-017-00744-9
16. Roxy, M.K., Dasgupta, P., McPhaden, M.J. et al. Twofold expansion of the Indo-Pacific warm
pool warps the MJO life cycle. Nature 575, 647–651 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586019-1764-4

9

17. Economic

losses,

poverty

&

disasters:

1998-2017,

UNDRR

https://www.undrr.org/publication/economic-losses-poverty-disasters-1998-2017
18. Whitmee, Sarah, Andy Haines, Chris Beyrer, Frederick Boltz, Anthony G. Capon, Braulio
Ferreira de Souza Dias, Alex Ezeh et al. ”Safeguarding human health in the Anthropocene
epoch: report of The Rockefeller Foundation–Lancet Commission on planetary health.” The
Lancet 386, no. 10007 (2015): 1973-2028.
19. The

Anthropocene

epoch:

scientists

declare

dawn

of

human-influenced

age

https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/29/declare-anthropocene-epoch-expertsurge-geological-congress- human-impact-earth
20. Water in Agriculture - https://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/water-in-agriculture
21. Cassidy, Emily S., Paul C. West, James S. Gerber, and Jonathan A. Foley. ”Redefining agricultural yields: from tonnes to people nourished per hectare.” Environmental Research Letters
8, no. 3 (2013): 034015.
22. Mariotti, François, and Christopher D. Gardner. ”Dietary Protein and Amino Acids in Vegetarian Diets—A Review.” Nutrients 11, no. 11 (2019): 2661.
23. Deckers J. Animal (De)liberation: Should the Consumption of Animal Products Be Banned?
London: Ubiquity Press; 2016. Might a Vegan Diet Be Healthy, or Even Healthier?
24. Adams, Matthew. ANTHROPOCENE PSYCHOLOGY: Being Human in a More-than-human
World. Routledge, 2020.

10

25. 9 Reasons Your Canine Teeth Don’t Make You a Meat-Eater -https://freefromharm.org/photogalleries/9-reasons-your- canine-teeth-dont-make-you-a-meat-eater/
26. Climate crisis: in coronavirus lockdown, nature bounces back – but for how long?
- https://www.theguardian.com/world/2020/apr/09/climate-crisis-amid-coronavirus-lockdownnature-bounces-back-but-for- how-long
27. Martha, Nussbaum, and M. C. Nussbaum. ”Creating Capabilities: The Human Development
Approach.” (2011).

Correspondence

Correspondence should be addressed to Pradipta Banerjee (email: pradiptapb@gmail.com).

11

