Preventing COVID-19 Fatalities: State versus Federal Policies
J.-P. Renne, G. Roussellet, and G. Schwenkler∗

arXiv:2010.15263v4 [econ.GN] 14 Dec 2020

First version: October 27, 2020
Current version: December 16, 2020†

Abstract
Are COVID-19 fatalities large when a federal government does not enforce containment
policies and instead allow states to implement their own policies? We answer this question by
developing a stochastic extension of a SIRD epidemiological model for a country composed
of multiple states. Our model allows for interstate mobility. We consider three policies: mask
mandates, stay-at-home orders, and interstate travel bans. We fit our model to daily U.S.
state-level COVID-19 death counts and exploit our estimates to produce various policy counterfactuals. While the restrictions imposed by some states inhibited a significant number of
virus deaths, we find that more than two-thirds of U.S. COVID-19 deaths could have been
prevented by late November 2020 had the federal government enforced federal mandates as
early as some of the earliest states did. Our results quantify the benefits of early actions by
a federal government for the containment of a pandemic.

∗

Renne is at the Department of Economics of the University of Lausanne. Roussellet is at the Desautels School

of Management of McGill University. Schwenkler is at the Leavey School of Business of Santa Clara University.
Schwenkler is the corresponding author. Address: Leavey School of Business, Santa Clara University, 500 El
Camino Real, Santa Clara, CA 95053, United States. Email: gschwenkler@scu.edu.
†
We are grateful to Patrick Augustin, Vadim Elenev, Christian Gouriéroux, Andrea Vedolin, Charles Wyplosz,
and seminar participants at Santa Clara University and at HEC-Unisanté COVID Seminar for useful comments and
suggestions. The latest version of the codes used in this paper can be found at https://github.com/guillaumeroussellet/RRS_Covid_2020.

1

Introduction

COVID-19 is a rampant disease that has affected the world population to an unprecedented scale.
This experience has pushed governments to implement drastic regulatory policies to contain the
disease. In many countries, such as the United States, tensions have arisen between federal
and state regulators because they can implement policies independently of each other. But are
policies implemented in individual states effective to prevent COVID-19 fatalities in a country?
And can a country’s defense against COVID-19 benefit from unified containment policies at the
federal level? The answer to these questions have important implications for policy making until
the end of the pandemic.
We answer these questions by developing an extension of the standard SIRD model of
Kermack et al. (1927) that allows for travel and commuting across states within a country.1 In
our model, the government of a state can enforce three types of regulations. It can enforce a
mask mandate that shrinks the transmission rate in the state. It can enforce a stay-at-home order
that shrinks the transmission rate in the state as well as the inflow of out-of-state commuters
and travelers. Or it can also issue a travel ban that shrinks the inflow of out-of-state travelers.
The federal government can force all states to implement the same policies or do nothing. We
assume that infections take on average 14 days to resolve and that the fatality rate of the
disease is 0.6%.2 To incorporate uncertainty about the contagiousness of COVID-19, we assume
that the transmission rates in individual states vary randomly over time and are not directly
observable. They fluctuate around a natural mean rate but can be substantially higher or lower
at times.3 We fit our model to data on state-level COVID-19 fatalities from the United States
between February 12 and November 30, 2020. We then run counterfactual experiments using the
estimated model under the assumption that states implemented policies different than the ones
they adopted. We measure the effectiveness of the different policies by looking at the difference
between the observed and counterfactual numbers of virus deaths on November 30, 2020.4 Our
1

We are inspired by mean-field models that are commonly used in the financial economics literature to model

credit risk contagion across financial institutions; see Cvitanic et al. (2012), Giesecke et al. (2015), Giesecke et al.
(2020), and others. Our model can be viewed as an extension of a global epidemic and mobility model (GLEAM,
see Balcan et al., 2009) with stochastic transmission rates.
2
These assumptions are consistent with Fernández-Villaverde and Jones (2020), Perez-Saez et al. (2020), and
Stringhini et al. (2020), and are benchmarked against alternatives in a sensitivity study.
3
Many different variations of the SIRD model have been used to study the COVID-19 pandemic; see Li and
Linton (2021) for a recent overview.
4
Our counterfactuals do not consider that changes in policies may have triggered different strategies in the

2

results are replicable by using our codes and data that are available on Github.
We show that a lack of unified policies results in significantly elevated virus deaths nationally. We estimate that more than 180,000 deaths could have been prevented by November
30, 2020 – over two-thirds of all death cases recorded in the U.S. by that date – if the federal
government had adopted policies that mirrored those of the earliest and strictest states. Our
results also show that containment policies implemented by individual states are effective. We
find that the U.S. would have recorded more than 1 million additional virus deaths if states had
not implemented any containment policies at all.
We find that a large number of COVID-19 deaths could have been prevented if the federal
government had enacted policies that followed the leads taken by the different states.5 We
estimate that close to 130,000 deaths could have been prevented if a federal stay-at-home order
had been active between March 19 and June 9, 2020. This period corresponds to the time
between the day when the first stay-at-home order went into effect in California and the day
when Virginia began to reopen its economy as the last state in the country. More than 140,000
virus deaths could have been prevented with a federal mask mandate that became active on
April 17 and remained active through the end of our sample, mirroring Connecticut’s policy as
the earliest state to adopt a mask mandate. Only around 8,000 U.S. virus death could have been
prevented if all interstate travel had been banned beginning on March 17, reflecting the travel
restrictions adopted by Hawaii.
Our results suggest that a similar number of COVID-19 deaths could have been prevented
in the United States if the federal government had followed the early states’ leads on mask
mandates or lockdowns. However, this conclusion ignores the distinct timing of both policies:
state stay-at-home policies were enacted earlier and for a shorter periods of time than state
mask mandates. We run an additional counterfactual to understand how an early federal mask
mandate could have boosted the early stay-at-home orders adopted by the different states.
Our counterfactuals indicate that up to 235,000 virus deaths could have been prevented if
the federal government had enacted a federal mask mandate by March 19, on top of the stay-athome and travel ban policies adopted by the different states. This finding suggests that over 90%
states and different reactions by the U.S. population. A novel approach to account for this endogeneity problem
has been proposed by Chernozhukov et al. (2021).
5
In our model, a federal mandate is equivalent to all states voluntarily adopting that mandate. As a result,
our paper equally implies that a significant number of deaths could have been prevented if the federal government
had convinced all states to adopt policies that mirrored those of the earliest states.

3

of all COVID-19 fatalities in the U.S. could have been prevented if the federal government had
enforced an early federal mask mandate and allowed states to implement lockdowns and travel
restrictions as they chose to. This is a surprising result that holds because an early federal mask
mandate would have contributed to slowing down transmission of the virus early in the Spring
of 2020, when we estimate the virus reproduction numbers in the different states to have been
the highest.6 These results provide an important policy lesson for federal regulators: a federal
mask mandate that complements state-level lockdowns and travel restriction during periods of
accelerated virus transmission can prevent a significant number of COVID-19 deaths.7
We find that interstate travel bans do not accomplish significant virus death prevention,
mostly for two reasons. First, travel bans are often imposed once a regulator becomes aware of
the virus, at which point the virus has already spread in the states. We find that an additional
1,300 deaths could have been prevented if all interstate travel had been banned by February 12,
the first day of our sample, rather than by March 17, the day in which Hawaii adopted the first
interstate travel restrictions in the United States.
Second, there exists a mechanism that can reduce the effectiveness of travel restrictions
in some states. Our model highlights that restrictions on interstate mobility can increase the
concentration of infected individuals in states that are normally net exporters of individuals.
This can lead to an accelerated virus transmission and elevated virus fatalities in those states.
Our counterfactuals suggest that such contrary effects are only minor, nonetheless. We find that
only around 1,700 of the close to 130,000 virus deaths that could have been prevented in the
U.S. with a federal stay-at-home order by March 19 are explained by the fact that the order
discourages individuals from commuting and traveling across states. Our results suggest that
policies that restrict cross-border mobility accomplish little in preventing COVID-19 deaths
unless they are adopted so early and for so long that they prevent the virus from initially taking
hold in a population.8
Finally, we focus on individual states and find that the states that adopted some of the
6

By matching death counts only, we estimate that the effective reproduction numbers of the virus in the

different states during the Spring of 2020 must have been up to two-times higher than prevailing estimates that
are based on infection cases, which are likely under-measured due to the large number of undetected infections
and asymptomatic individuals.
7
Our results highlight one effective policy strategy for federal regulators but they do not say anything about
the optimality of such a strategy. Furthermore, we do not consider the legality of any federal mandate.
8
Kortessis et al. (2020) also document the advantages of early travel bans. For the U.S. in specific, an early
interstate travel ban could have prevented the urban flight phenomenon highlighted by Coven et al. (2020).

4

strictest containment policies were able to reduce the spread of the disease. Our counterfactuals
suggest that New York would have only recorded 20% fewer death cases if all states had adopted
strict containment policies, while California would have recorded close to 145,000 additional
deaths if the state government had not enforced any containment policies at all. These results
suggest that strict-policy states, such as New York and California, were protected by their
policies even when other states implemented weaker policies. On other end of the spectrum, we
find that states that adopted weak or no containment policies could have prevented a significant
number of COVID-19 deaths by adopting stricter policies. Our results indicate that over 38,000
deaths could have been prevented if Florida and Texas had adopted strict containment policies.
We also find that the twelve states that never adopted a mask mandate over our sample – Alaska,
Arizona, Florida, Georgia, Idaho, Missouri, Nebraska, Oklahoma, South Carolina, South Dakota,
Tennessee, and Wyoming – could have prevented more than 76% of their death cases if they
had followed Connecticut’s lead and adopted a mask mandate by April 17, 2020. These results
highlight an important takeaway for state regulators: state mask mandates are highly effective
even in the absence of federal policies.
Our results hinge on modeling choices and assumed parameter values. To understand how
sensitive our findings are to our choices, we carry out several sensitivity analyses that assume
alternative parametric values and provide a reasonable set of bounds for our results. We find, for
example, that the number of preventable deaths is higher if we assume that it takes less times
for a virus infection to resolve; i.e., if the virus is less severe. This is because, if a virus infection
is less severe, there must have been many more infections early on in the sample to match the
observed death data. Therefore, early action by the federal regulator would have been even more
impactful. The sensitivity analyses highlight a key benefit of our approach. By relying on death
counts only, we allow our methodology to infer how many infections there must have been to
justify the death data. This enables us to make data-driven inferences on how many infections
and ultimate deaths could have been prevented through regulatory actions.
Our contributions are methodological and normative. On the methodological front, we develop a novel model for infectious disease transmission within a country composed of multiple
states and propose an associated estimation methodology. Our model incorporates the effects of
interstate traveling and commuting, as well as uncertain transmission rates.9 It also allows for
9

Stochastic SIRD models of COVID-19 have recently been used by Fernández-Villaverde and Jones (2020) and

Hong et al. (2020). Interstate SIRD models without stochastic transmission rates have been proposed by Read

5

independent regulatory policies across states.10 Our methodology delivers daily estimates of the
transmission rates and effective reproduction numbers; these objects are jointly estimated for 51
U.S. states based solely on death cases.11 On the normative side, we show that a federal mask
mandate that complements state-level lockdowns and travel restrictions can prevent a significant
number of COVID-19 fatalities in a country. Our results hint that close to 180,000 coronavirus
deaths could have been prevented if the federal government in the United States had followed
the lead of some of the states that took early actions to contain the virus.12 We also show that
state mask mandates are highly effective, while travel restrictions have small effects at the federal level.13 Our results highlight the benefits of early actions by federal and state regulators for
containing pandemics.

2

Model description

We assume that a country is composed of several states. We model the number of people in each
state that are (i) susceptible to the virus (i.e., have never been infected), (ii) infected by the
virus, (iii) recovered from the virus (and immune to subsequent infections), and (iv) deceased
due to the virus.14 Because of this, our model can be viewed as a multi-region SIRD model.
Extending the standard SIRD formulation of Kermack et al. (1927), we allow for stochastic and
correlated transmission rates in each state. We also explicitly take into account the impact of
and Keeling (2003), Balcan et al. (2009), Balcan et al. (2010), and others.
10
Brady et al. (2020) study an SIRD model with spatial interactions and independent stay-at-home policies
across states, without considering mask mandates and travel restrictions.
11
For single-state models, a related methodology is discussed in Gouriéroux and Jasiak (2020) and implemented
in Arroyo Marioli et al. (2020), Hasan et al. (2020), and Hasan and Nasution (2020) using infections data.
Fernández-Villaverde and Jones (2020) develop an alternative filtering-based methodology to obtain time-varying
estimates of the effective reproduction number Rt using death counts only for a model without traveling or
commuting.
12
Redlener et al. (2020) establish a similar number of preventable deaths through a comparison of international
policy responses. As Shefrin (2020) argues, however, cultural and ideological differences may have prevented the
U.S. government from adopting international policies. We show that a large number of COVID-19 deaths could
have been prevented by following policies that were already implemented domestically in the states.
13
Our results are consistent with the findings of Chernozhukov et al. (2021), Karaivanov et al. (2020), Ngonghala
et al. (2020), and Stutt et al. (2020), who highlight the benefits of a federal mask mandate in single-state models.
Other studies that consider the impact of different federal containment policies include Alfaro et al. (2020), Alvarez
et al. (2020), Ferguson et al. (2020), Flaxman et al. (2020), and Fowler et al. (2020), among others.
14
Our assumption on immunity post-infection is merely a simplification given that current evidence on reinfections from COVID-19 is thin and mixed (see, e.g. Iwasaki, 2020).

6

different containment policies on the transmission of the disease. We consider three different
types of containment policies: mask mandates, travel bans, and stay-at-home orders. Our model
also accounts for the effects of traveling and commuting across state lines. We give a brief
description of our model below and provide details in Appendix A.
Each state is endowed with a certain number of inhabitants. On any given day in a given
state, the number of people that are contaminated by an infected person is assumed to be a random draw from a Poisson distribution whose rate is the product of the policy-adjusted stochastic
transmission rate in the state and the fraction of the state’s population that is susceptible to
the virus.15 Recovering and dying from a virus infection are modeled as complementary random
events for each infected individual. We assume that it takes on average 14 days for an infection
to resolve and that the fatality rate by the end of this time period is 0.6%. On aggregate at
the state level, it follows that the net number of new infections in a day is Poisson distributed
with rate equal to the product of the policy-adjusted transmission rate, the ratio of susceptible
population, and the number of infected inhabitants of the state, after subtracting the number
of infected individuals that recover or die from the disease.
The transmission rates in the different states are unobservable and evolve stochastically
from day to day. They are positively correlated across states and time.
We account for interstate commuting and traveling as follows. Each day, an inhabitant of
a state can commute to another state, travel to another state, or remain in the home state
with given probabilities. Inhabitants that stay in their home states contribute to the disease
transmission in their home states. Commuters travel during parts of the day and return to their
home states at the end of a day. They contribute to the transmission of the disease in their
home states and the visited states. Travelers spend several days in the visited state. They only
contribute to the transmission of the disease in the state they visit.
The transmission rates in each state, as well as the travel and commuting probabilities
across states, are adjusted to reflect the containment policies adopted by the different states.
The effects of the different policies are modeled by shrinking the transmission rates or the inflows
15

It is our assumption that there are two sources of randomness driving infections in a state. First, the transmis-

sion rate is stochastic. Second, the number of infections given the level of the transmission rate is also stochastic
and governed by a Poisson distribution. Such doubly-stochasticity improves the capacity of our model to capture
the early period of the COVID-19 pandemic during which the transmission rate of the virus may have been high
but the number of infections and fatalities in the data were low. A similar point for the avian influenza pandemic
was made by Germann et al. (2006).

7

of travelers and commuters when the policies are active. We assume that a mask mandate in a
given state shrinks the transmission rate in that state by 42% but does not affect the inflow or
outflow of travelers and commuters.16 A travel ban in a given state shrinks the inflow of travelers
by 90%, but does not affect the transmission rate or the inflow of commuters in that state.17
Finally, a stay-at-home order shrinks both the transmission rate and the inflow of commuters
and travelers in that state by 36%.18 Appendix E considers variations of these parameters and
measures the sensitivity of our results to our assumptions.
We use mobility, travel, and state-level policy data from the United States to calibrate most
of the parameters of our model. We develop a filtering-based maximum likelihood methodology
to estimate some of the parameters governing the transmission rates of the different states. We
rely on daily state-level death counts from The COVID Tracking Project since they are the
least likely to be contaminated with substantial measurement issues (compared to the number
of infections, for instance).19 The sample period is February 12 through November 30, 2020.
Appendix B provides details of the approach we take to fit our model to the data. Figure 6
in Appendix B shows the death counts in the data as well as the posterior mean of the death
counts in our model. The figure shows that our model performs well at matching state-level and
aggregate death counts.
16

We justify this value as follows. Based on the estimates of Fischer et al. (2020), we assume that a typical mask

worn in the U.S. filters out particles by a median value of 85%. We assume that only half of the population wears
masks as suggested by data from the Institute of Health Metrics and Evaluation, justifying a reduction factor of
approximately 42%.
17
We estimate the 90% impact of travel bans as the reduction factor in the average number of daily trips of more
than 100 miles that were taken in the U.S. between March 15 and April 30, 2020, compared to 2019. We assume
that travel bans do not reduce the inflow of commuters into a state because travel bans were often accompanied
by exemptions for commuters.
18
We estimate the impact of stay-at-home orders on transmission rates as the reduction factor in the average
number of daily trips of less than 10 miles taken in 2019 versus those taken between March 15 and April 30, 2020,
which is the period in which most stay-at-home orders were active in the United States. Because stay-at-home
orders were often accompanied by lockdowns which closed out office buildings, we assume that stay-at-home orders
also reduce the inflow of commuters into a state. Finally, because stay-at-home orders were also associated with
closed out tourist attractions, we also assume that stay-at-home orders reduce the inflow of travelers into a state.
19
The fact that our estimation approach relies on death counts data only, as in Flaxman et al. (2020), is an
advantage over standard approaches to estimate time-varying reproduction numbers (e.g. Bettencourt and Ribeiro
(2008), Cori et al. (2013), Thompson et al. (2019)), as these approaches require data on infection cases. We also
escape the identification problem noted by Korolev (2021) since we calibrate the parameters associated with the
standard SIR model (recovery and death probability).

8

Figure 1 shows that, in order to match the levels of fatalities we observed over the sample
period in U.S. states, our model estimates that the effective reproduction numbers of the disease
in the U.S. must have been substantially higher than one through May 2020 (we break down the
effective reproduction rate per state in Appendix B). The figure also shows that the effective
reproduction rate grew larger than one several times over the summer and has remained consistently above 1 since October, 2020. Our estimates suggest that the number of infections required
to match the history of COVID-19 fatalities in U.S. states must have been substantially higher
than recorded in the data. We estimate that there must have been close to 48 million infections
in the U.S. by November 30, almost four-times as many infections as in our data sources. Our
estimates imply that many infected people remained undiagnosed in the U.S. and contributed to
the spread of the disease, especially early during our sample (see Bajema et al. (2020), Hortaçsu
et al. (2021), and others).

3

Results

We run counterfactual experiments in our model to study the effectiveness of the different
containment policies. The underlying assumption of our counterfactuals is that states deviate
from the policies they enacted by imposing stricter or looser restrictions in a hypothetical world.
We ask: what would have happened to the death count of a state if it had enacted a stricter
containment policy than it actually did? What would have happened if it had adopted a policy
that it did not enact? And how would these deviations have impacted the aggregate death
count in the U.S. by the end of our sample? We answer these questions for mask mandates,
stay-at-home orders, and travel ban policies.
We assume that a state adopts a loose policy if it does not impose that policy at all over
our sample period. In contrast, we assume that a state adopts a strict policy if it adopts that
policy as early as the earliest state adopted the policy in the data, and keeps the policy active
until the last state in our sample shuts off that policy. Our strict policy scenario therefore avoids
forward-looking biases. Any regulator could have adopted a strict policy scenario in real life by
moving along with the first state that adopted a policy and ending the policy as soon as no
other state had the policy in place.20 The strict scenarios for the different policies are:
• Stay-at-Home: Start on March 19 (the day the first stay-at-home order in a state went
20

The legality of such federal mandates are outside of the scope of this paper.

9

into effect in California) and end on June 9, 2020 (the day the last stay-at-home order in
a state ended in Virginia).
• Travel ban: Start on March 17, 2020 (the day the first interstate travel restrictions in
the U.S. went into effect in Hawaii) and keep it active through November 30, 2020 (when
several states had travel restrictions in place).
• Mask mandate: Start on April 17, 2020 (the day the first mask mandate in the U.S. went
into effect in Connecticut) and keep it active through November 30, 2020 (when several
states had mask mandates in place).
We consider two variations of our counterfactual experiments. One in which only one state
at a time deviates from its actual policies at a time, and another one in which all states take on
the same policy jointly at the same time. With the first set of experiments we seek to answer
how impactful deviations at the state level would have been. The second set of counterfactuals
studies how impactful federally mandated polices would have been. To evaluate the effectiveness
of the different policies, we compare the number of deaths at the state and federal levels in
the different counterfactual experiments to the baseline levels in the data. Appendix C provides
details of our approach to computing counterfactual results.
Table 1 shows the results of the counterfactual experiments in which we assume that all
states deviate jointly. Figure 2 breaks down the number of deaths that could have been prevented
through federal mandates by states and displays these in proportion to the number of death in
the data of the individual states. Figure 3 shows the number of deaths that could have been
prevented in the different states if individual states had deviated from their implemented policies
while all other states kept their policies untouched.
We carry out several robustness checks that re-evaluate the number of preventable deaths
in the different scenarios under alternative assumptions of the impact of the different policies on
transmission rates and traveler and commuter flows, as well as the fatality rate of the disease and
the number of days it takes for an infection to resolve. The results of these sensitivity analyses
are summarized in Table 1 and further elaborated in Appendix E. The additional sensitivity
analyses are consistent with our main conclusions and provide validity for our results.

10

3.1

Federal mandates

Table 1 suggests that 180,595 virus deaths could have been prevented if the U.S. government
had mandated federal containment policies as early as the earliest state did and maintained the
policies for as long as the strictest states did. Our results indicate that 129,202 deaths could
have been prevented had the federal government moved along with California and mandated
a federal stay-at-home order on March 19 that ended on June 9 when the last state, Virginia,
reopened its economy. The results also indicate that 141,048 deaths could have been prevented
if the federal government had issued a federal mask mandate as early as Connecticut did on
April 17, 2020, and kept the mandate active through November 30. In contrast, we find that
only 8,149 deaths could have been prevented had the federal government banned all interstate
travel by March 17, 2020 – the day in which Hawaii banned inbound interstate travel.
Figure 2 hints that strict federal mandates could have been highly effective at preventing
virus deaths in states that adopted weak containment policies. Over 95% of all death cases
in Arkansa, Arizona, Florida, Iowa, Nebraska, North Dakota, South Carolina, South Dakota,
Tennessee, Texas, Utah, and Wyoming – corresponding to close to 63,000 fatalities – could
have been prevented if the federal government had adopted strict stay-at-home orders, mask
mandates, and interstate travel bans. These states adopted some of the weakest containment
policies during our sample period.
Table 1 suggests that a similar number of virus deaths could have been prevented with
a federal mask mandate as with a federal lockdown. Such a conclusion, however, ignores the
fact that we assume that a federal lockdown would become active earlier than a federal mask
mandate. It also ignores the large economic costs that are associated with shutting down the
national economy through a federal lockdown.21 Imposing an early federal mask mandate could
have been a cost-effective alternative. We ask: how many deaths could have been prevented if
the federal government had enacted a federal mask mandate sometime between March 19 and
April 17 and allowed states to adopt localized stay-at-home orders and travel restrictions as they
chose to do in reality? We run an additional counterfactual experiment to answer this question;
Figure 4 summarizes our findings.
Our results indicate that between 141,048 and 236,551 deaths could have been prevented if
a federal mask mandate that complemented the state-level stay-at-home and travel ban policies
went into effect sometime between mid March and mid April. What drives our findings is that
21

Coibion et al. (2020) measure the economic costs associated with lockdown policies.

11

an early federal mask mandate could have provided a significant boost in reducing the potential
for infections across U.S. states. As Figure 1 shows, the effective reproduction number of the
virus was particularly high – much higher than one – in the U.S. through May 2020 even while
stay-at-home orders were in place in the different states. By imposing an early mask mandate,
the federal regulator could have contributed to drastically reducing the effective reproduction
rate of the virus early in the sample; see the solid red line on the right-hand plot of Figure 1.
This would have contributed to slowing down new infections over time even while some statelevel policies were relaxed; see the solid red line in the left-hand plot of Figure 1. Our results
suggest that an effective tool for federal regulators is to issue an early federal mask mandate
that complements, but does not replace, state-level stay-at-home and travel ban policies.
The number of deaths that could have been prevented with early federal policies depends on
our assumptions on how fatal COVID-19 is and how long it takes for an infection to resolve. We
run sensitivity analyses in Appendix E to benchmark our results against different calibrations.
The results of Appendix E are generally consistent with Table 1 and Figures 2 through 4. They
also highlight an important benefit of our methodology. Appendix E establishes that the number
of preventable deaths is higher if we assume that it takes only 10 days for an infection to resolve.22
We find that this is the case because, in order to match the number of deaths observed in the
data if the virus were less severe, the methodology infers that there must have been many more
infected individuals early in the sample so that early federal action would have been even more
impactful. We obtain these results because we rely only on death counts to make our inferences
and allow the methodology to estimate how many infections there must have been to match the
data. This highlights a fundamental benefit of of our approach relative to alternative approaches
that rely on infection cases, which may be under-counted in the data due to the large number
of asymptomatic cases or undetected infections.

3.2

State mandates

Our counterfactual experiments indicate that the actions taken by individual states benefited
both the states that implemented the policies and the U.S. as a nation. We find that the U.S.
would have been much worse off if no state had adopted any containment policies. In a hypothetical scenario in which no state had adopted any policies, Table 1 indicates that the U.S. would
22

We find that the fatality rate has little impact on the number of preventable deaths, and instead mostly

affects the number of deaths that would have been observed if no state adopted any policy.

12

have observed 1,044,270 additional deaths due to COVID-19. Our results show that states that
implemented strict containment policies were able to contain the spread of the disease. Figure 2
shows that a state like New York, which had one of the longest running stay-at-home and mask
mandates, would have experienced only 20% fewer death cases if all states had enforced all three
strict policies simultaneously. Figure 3 also shows that a state like California, which adopted the
earliest stay-at-home policy in the country, would have recorded 142,596 additional virus deaths
– more than 7-times the state’s end-of-November toll – if it had not adopted any containment
policies at all. These results suggest that the measures adopted by individual states to contain
the disease were highly effective and shielded states from inaction from other states.
Figure 3 also shows that states that adopted weak containment policies could have prevented a substantial number of COVID-19 fatalities by imposing stricter policies. Two states in
particular stand out: Florida and Texas. These states could have prevented 18,165 deaths (96%
of all death cases in Florida) and 20,385 (95% of all death cases in Texas), respectively, if they
had implemented strict versions of the containment policies we consider in this paper.
It is unrealistic to expect that most states would have enacted strict lockdowns and travel
restrictions because these policies carry heavy economic burdens. Mask mandates, on the other
hand, offer an effective alternative without significant economic costs. We find that Texas could
have prevented 80% of its COVID-19 fatalities if the state had adopted a mask mandate as
early as Connecticut did on April 17, 2020. We find that the twelve states that did not adopt
a mask mandate over our sample period could have also significantly benefited from following
Connecticut’s lead on an early mask mandate. Figure 3 suggests that adopting early mask
mandates could have prevented as many COVID-19 deaths as 110 in Alaska (80% of all COVID19 deaths in the state), 5.827 in Arizona (87%), 16,373 in Florida (87%), 7,616 in Georgia (78%),
809 in Idaho (86%), 3,096 in Missouri (78%), 834 in Nebraska (81%), 1,368 in Oklahoma (78%),
3,862 in South Carolina (88%), 872 in South Dakota (91%), 4,108 in Tennessee (88%), and 191
in Wyoming (76%). Even states that otherwise had strict policies in place could have benefitted
from adopting earlier mask mandates. Our counterfactuals suggest that California, whose mask
mandate went into effect on June 19, could have prevented 13,078 virus deaths (68% of the
state’s end-of-November death toll) if it had adopted a mask mandate as early as Connecticut
did on April 17. The effectiveness of state mask mandates is further demonstrated by the dashed
red lines of Figure 1 that show that the United States would have experienced accelerated virus
transmission beginning in July 2020, with the national effective reproduction rate consistently

13

above one, if no state had adopted mask mandates. Our results show that state mask mandates
can be highly effective even in the absence of federal policies.

3.3

Interstate mobility

The results of Table 1 and Figures 2–3 suggest that interstate travel bans are not very effective
in preventing COVID-19 deaths. We find that there are two reasons driving the low effectiveness
of interstate travel bans.
First, interstate travel bans were often imposed late, only once the state regulator became
aware of the virus and the virus had already taken hold in the state’s population. Table 1 shows
that 8,149 deaths could have been prevented in the U.S. if all interstate travel had been banned
by March 17, 2020. At that point, however, Figure 8 in Appendix B shows that most states
must have had several infected individuals so that the virus was already spreading in the states.
Banning interstate travel at that point would not have prevented the spread of the virus. It may
may be different, however, if interstate travel were banned earlier. Early enough to prevent the
virus from entering certain states. We run an additional counterfactual in which we ask how
many virus deaths could have been prevented if the federal regulator banned all interstate travel
on the first day of our sample, February 12. The results, summarized in Table 1, show that
an additional 1,338 deaths could have been prevented with an early interstate travel ban. This
result indicates that travel bans are more effective if they are implemented early on.
Second, some externalities arise when individuals can move across state lines and these
externalities reduce the effectiveness of travel bans. In our model, interstate travel allows for
the transfer of infected population across states. Consider South Carolina, for example. On an
average day, our estimates suggest that 96,242 South Carolinians travel or commute out-ofstate while 83,572 out-of-state residents travel or commute into South Carolina. As a result,
South Carolina is a net exporter of individuals in our model. Now, Figure 2 suggests that South
Carolina would have recorded 4% more virus death cases if all interstate travel had been banned
on March 17. Why is this the case? We find that this is driven by the fact that, when population
is not allowed to cross state borders, infected individuals are forced to stay within the home
state. The higher concentration of infected population in those state leads to an accelerated
spread of the disease and therefore also to higher infections and death cases. This is showcased
in Figure 9 of Appendix D, in which we plot the estimated cumulative number of infections
in South Carolina both under the baseline and in the counterfactual in which a strict federal

14

interstate travel ban is imposed.
Consider Wyoming, on the other hand. Wyoming is a net importer of travelers and commuters, receiving on an average day a net inflow of around 8,750 out-of-state individuals. Figure
3 indicates that Wyoming would have recorded 56% fewer death cases if the state had banned inbound travelers and commuters from out-of-state on March 17. Figure 9 of Appendix D suggests
a similar mechanism in this case. Without a travel ban, Wyoming received infected population
from other states and this resulted in a higher number of infections in the state.
Our experiments indicate that interstate mobility enables that those states that are net
receivers of out-of-state travelers and commuters record higher numbers of death cases than
they would in the absence of interstate mobility, while states that are net exporters of travelers
and commuters record lower number of virus fatalities. Policies that restrict interstate mobility
do not resolve this externality because they only redistribute infection cases among states. Our
results suggest that late restrictions of interstate mobility can be counterproductive because they
allow for the virus to spread in an accelerated fashion in some states rather than allowing for a
balanced distribution of the virus across states. However, we find this is only a minor adverse
consequence of policies that restrict interstate mobility. In additional unreported experiments, we
find that only around 1,700 of the close to 130,000 virus deaths that could have been prevented
with a federal stay-at-home order by March 19 are explained by the fact that the order would
discourage individuals from commuting and traveling across states.
All in one, our study shows that interstate travel restrictions can be effective for states that
normally receive a large number of travelers or commuters, or at the federal level if all interstate
travel is banned early enough to prevent the virus from taking hold in different states.

4

Conclusion

We show that more than two-thirds of all COVID-19 death cases is the U.S. were preventable
had the federal government followed the leads of several states that took early actions to contain
the virus. Our results indicate that, in the absence of a unified federal approach, the policies
enacted in individual states were effective and resulted in reduced virus fatalities. This benefited
both the individual states and the U.S. as a whole. As a lesson for state and federal regulators
in handling the COVID-19 pandemic going forward, our results show that mask mandates are
highly effective policy tools, especially at times when the virus reproduction numbers are large.

15

References
Alfaro, Laura, Ester Faia, Nora Lamersdorf and Farzad Saidi (2020), Social Interactions in
Pandemics: Fear, Altruism, and Reciprocity. NBER Working Paper No. 27134.
Alvarez, Fernando E., David Argente and Francesco Lippi (2020), ‘A Simple Planning Problem
for COVID-19 Lockdown’, Covid Economics 14, 1–32.
Arroyo Marioli, Francisco, Francisco Bullano, Simas Kucinskas and Carlos Rondón-Moreno
(2020), ‘Tracking R of COVID-19: A New Real-Time Estimation Using the Kalman Filter’,
medRxiv .
Bajema, Kristina L., Ryan E. Wiegand, Kendra Cuffe, Sadhna V. Patel, Ronaldo Iachan, Travis
Lim, Adam Lee, Davia Moyse, Fiona P. Havers, Lee Harding, Alicia M. Fry, Aron J. Hall,
Kelly Martin, Marjorie Biel, Yangyang Deng, III Meyer, William A., Mohit Mathur, Tonja
Kyle, Adi V. Gundlapalli, Natalie J. Thornburg, Lyle R. Petersen and Chris Edens (2020),
‘Estimated SARS-CoV-2 Seroprevalence in the US as of September 2020’, JAMA Internal
Medicine .
Balcan, Duygu, Bruno Gonçalves, Hao Hu, José J. Ramasco, Vittoria Colizza and Alessandro
Vespignani (2010), ‘Modeling the Spatial Spread of Infectious Diseases: The GLobal Epidemic
and Mobility Computational Model’, Journal of Computational Science 1(3), 132 – 145.
Balcan, Duygu, Vittoria Colizza, Bruno Gonçalves, Hao Hu, José J. Ramasco and Alessandro
Vespignani (2009), ‘Multiscale Mobility Networks and the Spatial Spreading of Infectious
Diseases’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 106(51), 21484–21489.
Bettencourt, Luis M. A. and Ruy M. Ribeiro (2008), ‘Real Time Bayesian Estimation of the
Epidemic Potential of Emerging Infectious Diseases’, Plos One 5(1), 1–9.
Brady, Ryan, Michael Insler and Jacek Rothert (2020), ‘The Fragmented United States of
America: The Impact of Scattered Lock-down Policies on Country-wide Infections’, Covid
Economics, 43.
Chernozhukov, Victor, Hiroyuki Kasahara and Paul Schrimpf (2021), ‘Causal impact of masks,
policies, behavior on early covid-19 pandemic in the u.s.’, Journal of Econometrics 220(1), 23
– 62.

16

Coibion, O., Y. Gorodnichenko and M. Weber (2020), The Cost of the Covid-19 Crisis: Lockdowns, Macroeconomic Expectations, and Consumer Spending. NBER Working Papers 27141.
Cori, Anne, Neil M. Ferguson, Christophe Fraser and Simon Cauchemez (2013), ‘A New Framework and Software to Estimate Time-Varying Reproduction Numbers During Epidemics’,
American Journal of Epidemiology 178(9), 1505–1512.
Coven, Joshua, Arpit Gupta and Iris Yao (2020), ‘Urban Flight Seeded the COVID-19 Pandemic
Across the United States’, Covid Economics 54.
Cvitanic, Jaksa, Jin Ma and Jianfeng Zhang (2012), ‘The Law of Large Numbers for Self-exciting
Correlated Defaults’, Stochastic Processes and their Applications 122(8), 2781–2810.
Ferguson, Neil M, Daniel Laydon, Gemma Nedjati-Gilani, Natsuko Imai, Kylie Ainslie et al.
(2020), Impact of Non-pharmaceutical Interventions (NPIs) to Reduce COVID-19 Mortality
and Healthcare Demand. Technical Report, Imperial College London.
Fernández-Villaverde, Jesús and Charles I. Jones (2020), Estimating and Simulating a SIRD
Model of COVID-19 for Many Countries, States, and Cities, NBER Working Papers 27128,
National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Fischer, Emma P., Martin C. Fischer, David Grass, Isaac Henrion, Warren S. Warren et al.
(2020), ‘Low-cost Measurement of Face Mask Efficacy for Filtering Expelled Droplets During
Speech’, Science Advances 6(36).
Flaxman, Seth, Swapnil Mishra, Axel Gandy, H. Juliette T. Unwin, Thomas A. Mellan et al.
(2020), ‘Estimating the Effects of Non-pharmaceutical Interventions on COVID-19 in Europe’,
Nature 584(7820), 257–261.
Fowler, James H., Seth J. Hill, Nick Obradovich and Remy Levin (2020), ‘The Effect of Stayat-Home Orders on COVID-19 Cases and Fatalities in the United States’, medRxiv .
Germann, Timothy C., Kai Kadau, Ira M. Longini and Catherine A. Macken (2006), ‘Mitigation
Strategies for Pandemic Influenza in the United States’, Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences 103(15), 5935–5940.
Giesecke, K., K. Spiliopoulos, R.B. Sowers and J.A. Sirignano (2015), ‘Large Portfolio Asymptotics for Loss from Default’, Mathematical Finance 25(1), 77–114.
17

Giesecke, Kay, Gustavo Schwenkler and Justin A. Sirignano (2020), ‘Inference for Large Financial
Systems’, Mathematical Finance 30(1), 3–46.
Gouriéroux, C. and J. Jasiak (2020), Analysis of Virus Propagation: A Transition Model Representation of Stochastic Epidemiological Models. Working Paper.
Hasan, Agus, Hadi Susanto, Venansius Tjahjono, Rudy Kusdiantara, Endah Putri et al. (2020),
‘A New Estimation Method for COVID19 Time-varying Reproduction Number Using Active
Cases’, medRxiv .
Hasan, Agus and Yuki Nasution (2020), ‘A Compartmental Epidemic Model Incorporating Probable Cases to Model COVID19 Outbreak in Regions with Limited Testing Capacity’, medRxiv
.
Hong, Harrison, Neng Wang and Jinqiang Yang (2020), Implications of Stochastic Transmission
Rates for Managing Pandemic Risks. NBER Working Paper 27218.
Hortaçsu, Ali, Jiarui Liu and Timothy Schwieg (2021), ‘Estimating the Fraction of Unreported
Infections in Epidemics with a Known Epicenter: An Application to COVID-19’, Journal of
Econometrics 220(1), 106 – 129.
Iwasaki, Akiko (2020), ‘What Reinfections Mean for COVID-19’, The Lancet Infectious Diseases
in press.
Karaivanov, Alexander, Shih En Lu, Hitoshi Shigeoka, Cong Chen and Stephanie Pamplona
(2020), ‘Face Masks, Public Policies and Slowing the Spread of COVID-19: Evidence from
Canada’, medRxiv .
Kermack, William Ogilvy, A. G. McKendrick and Gilbert Thomas Walker (1927), ‘A Contribution to the Mathematical Theory of Epidemics’, Proceedings of the Royal Society of London.
Series A, Containing Papers of a Mathematical and Physical Character 115(772), 700–721.
Korolev, Ivan (2021), ‘Identification and Estimation of the SEIRD Epidemic Model for COVID19’, Journal of Econometrics 220(1), 63–85.
Kortessis, Nicholas, Margaret W. Simon, Michael Barfield, Gregory E. Glass, Burton H. Singer
and Robert D. Holt (2020), ‘The Interplay of Movement and Spatiotemporal Variation in
Transmission Degrades Pandemic Control’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
. Forthcoming.
18

Li, Shaoran and Oliver Linton (2021), ‘When will the Covid-19 Pandemic Peak?’, Journal of
Econometrics 220(1), 130 – 157.
Ngonghala, Calistus N., Enahoro A. Iboi and Abba B. Gumel (2020), ‘Could Masks Curtail the
Post-lockdown Resurgence of COVID-19 in the US?’, Mathematical Biosciences 329, 108452.
Perez-Saez, Javier, Stephen A Lauer, Laurent Kaiser, Simon Regard, Elisabeth Delaporte et al.
(2020), ‘Serology-Informed Estimates of SARS-CoV-2 Infection Fatality Risk in Geneva,
Switzerland’, The Lancet Infectious Diseases .
Read, Jonathan M. and Matt J. Keeling (2003), ‘Disease Evolution on Networks: the Role of
Contact Structure’, Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series B: Biological Sciences
270(1516), 699–708.
Redlener, Irwin, Jeffrey D. Sachs, Sean Hansen and Nathaniel Hupert (2020), 130,000 – 210,000
Avoidable COVID-19 Deaths – And Counting – In The U.S. Working Paper, Columbia
University.
Shefrin, Hersh (2020), ‘The Psychology Underlying Biased Forecasts of COVID-19 Cases and
Deaths in the United States’, Frontiers in Psychology . Forthcoming.
Stringhini, Silvia, Ania Wisniak, Giovanni Piumatti, Andrew S Azman, Stephen A Lauer
et al. (2020), ‘Seroprevalence of Anti-SARS-CoV-2 IgG Antibodies in Geneva, Switzerland
(SEROCoV-POP): a Population-based Study’, The Lancet 396(10247), 313 – 319.
Stutt, Richard O. J. H., Renata Retkute, Michael Bradley, Christopher A. Gilligan and John
Colvin (2020), ‘A Modelling Framework to Assess the Likely Effectiveness of Facemasks in
Combination with ‘Lock-down’ in Managing the COVID-19 Pandemic’, Proceedings of the
Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences 476(2238), 20200376.
Thompson, R.N., J.E. Stockwin, R.D. van Gaalen, J.A. Polonsky, Z.N. Kamvar et al. (2019),
‘Improved Inference of Time-varying Reproduction Numbers During Infectious Disease Outbreaks’, Epidemics 29, 1–11.

19

—Online Appendix –

Preventing COVID-19 Fatalities: State versus Federal Policies
Jean-Paul Renne, Guillaume Roussellet, and Gustavo Schwenkler

A

Model

A.1

Single-state model

We first introduce a single-state model to provide an overview of the assumptions underlying
the stochastic evolution of the COVID-19 disease. This provides a basis that we extend in the
following section to account for a network of N states.
A.1.1

From micro assumptions to aggregate dynamic equations

Consider individual j that was infected on date t − 1 (i.e., j ∈ {1, . . . , It−1 }). We assume
that the number of people infected by this individual between dates t − 1 and t follows a


Poisson distribution: ij,t ∼ i.i.d. P St−1
β
t−1 . Using the fact that a sum of independent PoissonN
distributed variables is Poisson, the total number of people infected between dates t − 1 and t


is it ∼ i.i.d. P St−1
I
β
t−1 t−1 .
N
If j is infected on date t, then the probability that she dies between dates t and t + 1 is δ
(i.i.d. Bernoulli) and, if she does not die, the probability she recovers between dates t and t + 1
is γ/(1 − δ). (In such a way that the probability she recovers if γ.)
The cumulated number of dead people on date t (Dt ) is given by Dt = Dt−1 + dt , where dt
is the number of deaths taking place on date t. Under the assumptions stated above, dt follows
a binomial distribution: dt ∼ B(It−1 , δ). Moreover, the number of people who recover between


γ
dates t − 1 and t is rt ∼ B It−1 − dt , 1−δ
.
We have St = St−1 − it , It = It−1 + it − dt − rt , and Rt = Rt−1 + rt , where St and Rt
respectively denote the number of susceptible and recovered persons as of date t. (It is easily
checked that St + It + Rt + Dt = St−1 + It−1 + Rt−1 + Dt−1 .)

A.1.2

Transmission rate dynamics

The transmission rate βt is assumed to follow a non-negative square root process whose Euler
discretization reads:
βt = Et−1 (βt ) + σ

p
∆tEt−1 (βt )εβ,t ,

(1)

where εβ,t ∼ N (0, 1) and Et−1 (βt ) = βt−1 + κ(β − βt−1 ). While the approximate specification (1)
does not preclude negative βt s, the probability associated to such an event remain extremely low,
especially at high (daily) frequency. (In practice, at each iteration—i.e. date t—of the filtering
approaches presented in A.1.3 and A.3.1, negative predicted βt ’s are replaced by zero.)
A.1.3

State-space model

Let us now write the state-space representation of the model in a context where only Dt is
observed. The vector of latent variables is [βt , St , It , Rt ]0 .
The measurement equation is ∆Dt = δIt−1 + εD,t . The transition equations are:


St





1

0

0

0



St−1













 It 
 0 1−δ−γ 0
0   It−1 


 = 
+





 Rt 
 0
γ
1
0   Rt−1 





0
0
0 1−κ
βt
βt−1

 

− St−1
β
I
ε
t−1 t−1
S,t
N

 

 St−1
 

 + N βt−1 It−1  

εI,t

+
,

 


 

0
εR,t

  p

κβ
σ βt−1 ∆tεβ,t
with εβ,t ∼ i.i.d. N (0, 1) and


ε
 D,t

 εS,t


 εI,t

εR,t





dt − δIt−1
 
 
 
−it + St−1
N It−1 βt−1
=
 
St−1
  it − dt − rt − N It−1 βt−1 + (δ + γ)It−1
 
rt − γIt−1

2





.




(2)

Appendix F.1 shows that Vart−1 ([εD,t , εS,t , εI,t , εR,t , εβ,t ]) is equal to

δ(1 − δ)
0
−δ(1 − δ − γ)
−δγ


St−1

0
− St−1
0
N βt−1
N βt−1


S
S
t−1
It−1  −δ(1 − δ − γ) − t−1
−γ(1 − γ − δ)
N βt−1
N βt−1 + ν



−δγ
0
−γ(1 − γ − δ)
γ − γ2

0
0
0
0
where ν =

A.2

0





0 


0 ,


0 

1

(3)

(1−δ−γ)2 δ+γ(1−δ−γ)
.
1−δ

Multi-state model

We now consider a N -state model. Inhabitants may travel across states for commuting or other
reasons – we refer to the latter as “traveling.” In terms of notations, superscript j refers to a
given state. Variables without superscripts denote N -dimensional vectors. We denote by p =
[p1 , . . . , pN ]0 the vector of the state population sizes. St , It , Rt and Dt are N -dimensional vectors
gathering the number of susceptible, infected, recovered, and deceased people in each state.
A.2.1

Policy restrictions

The transmission rates βj,t and the flow probabilities are impacted by the containment policies
implemented in the different states. We consider three containment policies: mask mandates,
stay-at-home orders, and travel bans. The effect of each policy is captured through the binary
j
j
j
low , 1}, {θ low , 1}, and {θ low , 1}. The param, respectively valued in {θM
variables θt,M
, θt,S
and θt,T
T
S
low , θ low , and θ low are strictly lower than one; they reflect the effects of the containment
eters θM
S
T

policies. More precisely:
• The transmission rate βj,t is reduced when mask mandates or stay-at-home policies are
0 θ j θ j , where β 0 is an exogenous transmisimplemented. Formally, it is of the form βj,t
j,t
t,M t,S

sion rate following the dynamics depicted by (1). Given that the θ variables are equal to
0 coincides with the effective transone when the policies are not in place, it follows that βj,t

mission rate (βj,t ) when mask mandates and stay-at-home policies are not implemented.
com , is of
• The probability that a given inhabitant of State j commutes to State k, that is wj,k,t
com θ k . Similarly, the travel probability is given by w trav = w trav θ k θ k . These
the form wj,k
S,t
j,k,t
j,k S,t T,t

probabilities are therefore lower when (i) stay-at-home orders are in place or (ii) when
travel bans are enforced in the visited state.
3

A.2.2

Traveler flows

The variables Flowjtrav,S,t , Flowjtrav,I,t , and Flowjtrav,R,t are net travel inflows of susceptible,
infected, and recovered populations, respectively.
k,j
We denote by wtrav,t
the average fractions of the date-t population of State k that travels
j,•
to State j; ej is the j th column of the N × N identity matrix; 1 is a N × 1 vector of ones; wtrav,t
•,j
and wtrav,t
respectively denote the j th row vector and column vector of Wtrav,t . Consistent with

the assumptions made in A.2.1, we have:
Wtrav,t = τtrav Wtrav d(θT,t ) d(θS,t ).

(4)

Here, τtrav measures the average number of days that a traveler spends in the visited states.
Using the Poisson approximation of the binomial distribution, we consider that the number of
outward travelers is drawn from Poisson distributions. For example, the number of susceptible
individuals traveling from State k to State j between dates t and t + 1 is:
k,j
k
Flowk,j
trav,S,t ∼ i.i.d. P(wtrav,t St ).

(5)

This implies in particular that the net number of inhabitants traveling into State j between
dates t and t + 1 (denoted by Flowjtrav,S,t ) is such that:
φjtrav,S,t


 

X
X
k,j
j,k  j
:= E(Flowjtrav,S,t |St ) = 
wtrav,t
Stk  − 
wtrav,t
St
k6=j

=



j6=k

•,j
j,•
wtrav,t
− (wtrav,t
1)ej

0

St .

j,j
Using the convention wtrav,t
= 0, it follows that the N -dimensional vector φtrav,S,t is given by

φtrav,S,t = Ωtrav,t St , where
0
Ωtrav,t = Wtrav,t
− d(Wtrav,t 1).

(6)

By the same token, and with obvious notations for φtrav,I,t and φtrav,R,t : φtrav,I,t = Ωtrav,t It and
φtrav,R,t = Ωtrav,t Rt .
A.2.3

Commuter flows

Interstate commuters are people who spend a fraction τ of each day in another state. Consider the infected inhabitants of State k working in State j. They contaminate less people in
State k because they spend less time in that state. But they may also contaminate people in
4

State j because they spend some time in that state while commuting. We respectively denote
j←
j←
by Flowj←
com,S,t , Flowcom,I,t , and Flowcom,R,t the commuting inflows of susceptible, infected and
j→
j→
recovered people in State j. Outflows are given by Flowj→
com,S,t , Flowcom,I,t and Flowcom,R,t .

Let us denote by Wcom,t the “commute” matrix; that is, the matrix whose component (i, j),
i,j
denoted by wcom,t
, is the fraction of the date-t population of State k that commutes to State j.

On date t, the number of susceptible people commuting from State k to State j is:
k,j
k
Flowk,j
com,S,t ∼ i.i.d. P(wcom,t St ).

(7)

This implies in particular, with obvious vectorial notations, that:
←
0
φ←
com,S,t := E(Flowcom,S,t |St ) = Wcom,t St ,

(8)

with (consistently with the assumptions made in A.2.1):
Wcom,t = Wcom d(θS,t ).

(9)

where Wcom is the commute matrix that would prevail under no containment policies.
By the same token:
→
φ→
com,S,t := E(Flowcom,S,t |St ) = d(Wcom,t 1)St .

(10)

All in all, if we denote by Flowcom,S,t the vector of time-weighted commuters net inflows,
we have:
E(Flowcom,S,t |St ) = Ωcom,t St ,

(11)

0
Ωcom,t = τcom Wcom,t
− τcom d(Wcom,t 1).

(12)

with

A.2.4

Transmission rate dynamics

0 process (see A.2.1). These variables, gathered in vector
Each state j features an autonomous βj,t

βt0 , follow non-negative square-root processes whose dynamics is approximated by:
0
0
0
βj,t
≈ βj,t−1
+ κ(β − βj,t−1
)∆t + σ

q
0
∆tβj,t−1
εjt ,

with εt ∼ i.i.d. N (0, Σ), where the diagonal elements of Σ are ones and the extra-diagonal entries
are set to ρ.

5

A.3

Effective reproduction number

The effective reproduction number is defined as the average number of persons contaminated by
an infected person. It is computed as:
j
j
Rj,t = θt,M
θt,S

0
βj,t
Sj,t
,
δ + γ pj
| {z }

(13)

=R0,t

where R0,t is usually called basic reproduction number. The latter, in turn, is defined as the
average number of people the first infected individual of a population infects when (i) no containment policies are in place and (ii) all individual (except the first case) is susceptible.
A.3.1

State-space model

The state-space model is characterized by


Dt




 St 




Et−1  It 




 Rt 


0
βt



Dt







 St 




and Vart−1  It  .




 Rt 


0
βt

We have:


Dt





0


 

 
 St   0

 

 
Et−1  It  =  0

 

 
 Rt   0

 
βt0
κβ1


0




 −Id  




 +Id  θS,t−1 θM,t−1




 0 


0





Id

 
 
  0
 
 
+ 0
 
 
  0
 
0

0
βt−1

0

δId

0



Dt−1



  St−1


  It−1
(1 − δ − γ)Id 0
0


  Rt−1
γId
Id
0

0
0
0 (1 − κ)Id
βt−1

Id

0

0
0
0

1
p

0
0

0







+






([Id + Ωt−1 ]It−1 )

([Id + Ωt−1 ]St−1 ) ,

(14)

where Ωt−1 = Ωcom,t−1 + Ωtrav,t−1 , where the latter two matrices are respectively defined in
equations (6) and (12). Notice that the state-space ends up being of size 5 × N , where N is the
number of states, so 255 in our application.
6

Appendix F.2 details the computation of the conditional variance of [Dt , St , It , Rt , βt0 ] (see
equation 29 in F.2.4).
The previous equations constitute the set of transition equations of the state-space. We
complete the formulation with the measurement equations being only the (seasonally adjusted)
time series of fatalities per day, for each state, which we denote by Dtobs . We assume that the
number of deaths per day is measured nearly perfectly, such that:
Dtobs = Dt + ηt ,

where

ηt ∼ N (0, 0.0012 Id) .

(15)

Since the state-space is non-linear, we resort to the extended Kalman filter for estimation.
This requires the computation of the Jacobian matrix of Et−1 [Dt , St , It , Rt , βt0 ] with respect to
0 ], which is closed-form and detailed in Appendix F.3. We then apply
[Dt−1 , St−1 , It−1 , Rt−1 , βt−1

a fixed-interval Rauch-Tung-Striebel smoother (backward filter) with the estimated trajectories
produced by the filter.

B

Data & estimates

Our model features several parameters that we need to fix: The death rate δ, the recovery rate
γ, the parameters β, κ, σ, and ρ governing the dynamics of transmission rates in the states, the
low , θ low , and θ low of the different containment policies, and the average traveling and
effects θM
S
T

commuting flows across states. We proceed as follows to select parameter values. We summarize
our parameter estimates in Table 2.
We follow Fernández-Villaverde and Jones (2020), Perez-Saez et al. (2020), and Stringhini
et al. (2020) and assume that it takes on average 14 days for an infection to resolve. We assume
that after this period, an infected person either recovers and becomes immune, or dies with a
probability of 0.6%. These assumptions imply that γ =

1
14

and δ =

0.06%
14

= 0.0004.

We estimate average interstate travel flows from travel and mobility data in the United
States. We collect data on interstate travels from the Traveler Analysis Framework published
by the Federal Highway Administration (https://www.fhwa.dot.gov/policyinformation/
analysisframework/01.cfm). We also collect data on state-level mobility and staying-at-home
from the Trips by Distance database of the Bureau of Transportation Statistics (https://www.
bts.gov/distribution-trips-distance-national-state-and-county-level). We combine
these two databases to compute the percentage of a state’s population that stays home before
and during the pandemic, as well as the percentage of a state’s population that traveled across
7

state boundaries before and during the pandemic. We use these data to determine the travel
matrix Wtrav of Appendix A.2.2. We illustrate the estimated interstate travel network in Figure
5(a). The size of a node is proportional to the percentage of a state’s population that travels
outwards and the width of a link is proportional to the percentage of a state’s population that
travel to the linked state. We assume that an average traveler spends 4 days on vacation. This
implies that τtrav = 4.
We measure commuting flows from the 2011-2015 5-Year ACS Commuting Flows table of the
U.S. Census (https://www.census.gov/data/tables/2015/demo/metro-micro/commutingflows-2015.html). We use these data to estimate the commuter matrix Wcom of Appendix
A.2.3. Figure 5(b) shows the implied commuting travel network. In this figure, however, the
size of a node is proportional to the logarithm of the percentage of a state’s population that
commutes outwards. We assume that out-of-state commuters spend 8 hours each business day
and no time during a weekend in the visited state. We also assume that commuters sleep 8 hours
a day and during that time infections are not possible. As a result, we set τtrav = 0.36 ≈

8×5
16×7 .

low , θ low , and θ low to match mobility and mask usage data
We calibrate the parameters θM
S
T

from the United States. We collect data on when the different policies were active in the
different states from the National Academy for State Health Policy (https://www.nashp.
org/governors-prioritize-health-for-all/) and the Steptoe COVID-19 State Regulatory
Tracker (https://www.steptoe.com/en/news-publications/covid-19-state-regulatorytracker.html). Figure 7 showcases the time periods in which policies were active in the different states. We also collect data on average mask adoption across U.S. states from the Institute of Health Metrics and Evaluation (https://covid19.healthdata.org/united-statesof-america). We assume that a stay-at-home policy is in place for the time period that covers
any order for staying at home, sheltering at home, or being safer at home issued by a state
governor. We neglect any stay-at-home advisories that are not strictly enforced by law officials.
We estimate θSlow = 0.64 as the reduction factor in the number of short trips taken during the
pandemic versus before the pandemic.23 We consider a travel ban to be active when a state
requires inbound travelers to self-quarantine for an extended period of time. Travel bans are
active in our model only if they apply for all states. That is, we neglect any travel ban that
23

More precisely, for each state we evaluate the average number of daily trips of less than 10 miles taken in

2019 and compare that number to the average number of daily trips of less than 10 miles taken during the time
frame March 15 through April 30, 2020. We compute θSlow as the average reduction factor across states.

8

only applies for travelers from selected states. We estimate θTlow = 0.10 as the reduction factor
in the number of long trips taken during the pandemic versus before the pandemic.24 Finally,
we assume that a mask mandate is active if a state requires the use of masks indoors in public
places. We do not consider mask mandates to be active if mask wearing is only recommended or
low = 0.58 by assuming that only half of the population
only required outdoors. We estimate θM

adopts mask usage (as suggested by the Institute of Health Metrics and Evaluation) and that an
average mask used in the U.S. reduces COVID-19 transmission by 85% (as suggested by Fischer
et al. (2020)).
We develop a quasi maximum likelihood methodology to estimate the parameters governing the dynamics of the transmission rates βj,t from daily data on state-level deaths in the
United States for the time period between February 12 through November 30, 2020. We remove
weekly seasonality patterns observed in COVID-19 fatality records using an STL approach. Our
methodology assumes that daily death counts at the state-level are measures with small measurement errors. We take into account all state-level containment policies that were observed
over the sample period. We write a non-linear state-space representation of the model, gathering
Stj , Itj , Rtj , Dtj , and βj,t for all states simultaneously (255 variables). Filtering is easily performed
through the first order extended Kalman filter algorithm. While we could estimate the speed
of reversion κ with our methodology, we find that the data prefers to set κ arbitrarily close to
zero, implying an extremely high persistence for the βj,t . This results in numerical instabilities.
To avoid these issues, we fix κ = 0.001 so that the first-order autocorrelation of the βj,t is 0.999.
We then estimate the remaining parameters β, σ, and ρ using our quasi maximum likelihood
methodology. The estimates are provided in Table 2. We find that our parameter estimates are
not very sensitive to alternative choices for the value of κ.
Figure 6 shows the data-implied death counts in each state as well as the smoothed modelimplied death counts. We see that our model performs well at fitting the state-level data. The
estimated measurement errors are fairly small. Figures 7 and 8 show the smoothed modelimplied effective Rt and cumulated infections for each state. The data pushes our model to
showcase high Rt in the different states. The highest Rt were observed in New Jersey, New
York, and Washington in February and March, reaching levels of more than 8.25 Indeed, we
24

We evaluate the average number of daily trips of more than 100 miles taken in 2019 and compare that number

to the average number of daily trips of more than 100 miles taken during the time frame March 15 through April
30, 2020. We compute θTlow as the average reduction factor across states.
25
Our estimates of the effective reproduction numbers are one-and-a-half to two-times larger than prevailing

9

find that the state-level Rt must have been substantially higher than 1 for most states through
April 2020. Several states, like Delaware, Hawaii, Idaho, Montana, Oklahoma, South Carolina,
Texas, and West Virginia, experienced significant upticks in their Coronavirus Rt in the summer.
There have also been upticks in the Rt in September in states like Arkansas, Florida, Kansas,
Michigan, Missouri, North Dakota, Rhode Island, South Dakota, and Virginia. Some states
have been successful at maintaining their Rt values consistently at or below 1. The list of states
that have accomplished this task include California, D. C., Illinois, Indiana, Maine, Maryland,
Massachusetts, Minnesota, New Hampshire, New Mexico, New York, Oregon, and Vermont.
Overall, our findings suggest that the virus spread drastically in the U.S. through the Fall of
2020. In fitting the data, our model estimates that the number of infections in the different states
must have been significantly higher than recorded in the data. These observations suggest that
there must have been many undiagnosed infections that facilitated the spread of the disease
throughout our sample period. Note that we never use infections data for the estimation or
calibration of our model parameters.

C

Counterfactual experiments

This section details how our counterfactual experiments are conducted.

C.1

Baseline scenario

The estimated dynamics constitutes our baseline scenario. All of our results are presented as a
difference with respect to this baseline scenario. We compare the outcomes in terms of fatalities.

C.2

“Strict” and “loose” counterfactuals

We consider two types of experiments, which we call strict and loose, respectively:
• In the strict scenario, we assume that the states start adopting the same policy as that
implemented by the earliest state during the sample period and relax it when the latest
state does so. The scenarios are as follows:
estimates in Fernández-Villaverde and Jones (2020). We find that this is driven by a key difference in our models.
Fernández-Villaverde and Jones (2020) assume that, while it take two weeks for an infection to resolve, an infected
individual is only contagious for the first 5 days of an infection. We, instead, assume that an infected individual
is contagious during the whole infection period. We run several experiments in Appendix E in which we study
whether are results are sensitive to this assumption, and we find that this is not the case.

10

– Stay-at-Home: Start on March 19 (the day the first stay-at-home order in a state
went into effect in California) and end on June 9, 2020 (the day the last stay-at-home
order in a state ended in Virginia).
– Travel ban: Start on March 17, 2020 (the day the first interstate travel ban in the
U.S. went into effect in Hawaii) and keep it active through November 30, 2020 (the
last day in our sample when several states had travel restrictions in place).
– Mask mandate: Start on April 17, 2020 (the day the first mask mandate in the U.S.
went into effect in Connecticut) and keep it active through November 30, 2020 (the
last day in our sample when several states had mask mandates in place).
• For the loose scenario, we assume that states do not implement a specific policy at all. We
then re-propagate the model with these counterfactual policies according to the methodology described below.
We conduct these two types of experiments one policy at a time, and one last time all together.

C.3

Joint and state-by-state counterfactuals

Our analysis is split into joint and state-by-state experiments. For the former, we assume that
the federal government imposes on all states the counterfactual policy (strict federal mandate),
i.e. to be as strict as the strictest or to do nothing (loose federal mandate). For the latter, we
take each state one at a time and assume that only this state follows the strict or loose scenario
and compute the counterfactual outcomes one state at a time.

C.4

Computation of counterfactual scenarios

Recall that the model parameters and the latent variables (St , It , Rt and βt0 ) are estimated by
employing the extended Kalman filter. The observed variables are the numbers of deaths Dtobs. ,
as well as the observed implemented policies θobs. .
In order to derive our counterfactual outcomes, we also extend our filtering approach. The
broad idea is the following: We augment the state vector used at the estimation step – i.e.
Xt = [Dt , St , It , Rt , βt0 ] – with a similar state vector for a fictitious country (f ict.), with the
same number of states, where the counterfactual policies would be implemented. Critically, we
assume that the basic, standardized, shocks affecting the two countries are almost perfectly

11

correlated, implying in particular that the βt0 ’s are the same for the baseline and fictitious
countries.
Specifically, let us denote by Xt∗ the state vector corresponding to the fictitious country.
The transition equation of the augmented state-space model are:

 
 

Xt
E(Xt−1 , θobs. )
V 1/2 (St−1 , It−1 , θobs. )εT rue,t

=
+
,
∗ ,θ
1/2 (S ∗ , I ∗ , θ
Xt∗
E(Xt−1
)
V
)ε
f ict.
t−1 t−1 f ict. f ict.,t

(16)

where θobs. and θf ict. contain the full trajectories of observed and fictitious policies, respectively;
where εT rue,t and εf ict.,t denote differences of martingale sequence; and where V 1/2 (S, I, θ) is

0
such that V 1/2 (S, I, θ) V 1/2 (S, I, θ) = V(S, I, θ), with the function V defined in (29). To
capture the idea that the two countries are affected by very similar standardized shocks, which
are the εT rue,t ’s and the εf ict.,t ’s, we further assume that:

Vart 

εT rue,t
εf ict.,t





 ≈ 

Id Id
Id Id


.

On top of the transition equation (16), the state-space model comprehends the following measurement equation:
Dtobs. = Dt ,

(17)

where Dtobs. is the observed vector of numbers of deaths (in the “observed” country). By
construction, the filtered variables Xt resulting from this augmented state-space framework
are exactly equal the the ones of the regular state-space. Indeed, it produces the moment
obs , . . . ), which is the same in both state-space models. However, X ∗ will be differE(Xt |Dtobs , Dt−1
t

ent from Xt since the implemented policies are different, and their impacts are non-trivial since
they are non-linearly propagated in the state-space.
As a last step, we provide backward path estimates using the Bryson-Frazier smoother and
compare the paths of Dt and Dt∗ produced by the smoother. We used Bryson-Frazier rather than
Rauch-Tung-Striebel because the latter requires to invert the conditional variance-covariance
matrices of the transition equations, which are of size (9N × 9N ). In our empirical application
(51 states), this results in matrices of size (459 × 459) that have to be inverted for each day
of data. This results in a large numerical instability. Instead, the Bryson-Frasier smoother only
requires the inversion of the variance-covariance matrix of the observables, that is of matrices
of size (N × N ).

12

D

Infected populations in travel ban counterfactual

Figure 9 showcases the posterior (smoothed) mean of the cumulative number of infected individuals in the baseline scenario for some select states. The figure also shows the smoothed mean of
the cumulative number of infected individuals in the counterfactual in which a federal interstate
travel ban goes into effect on March 17, 2020.

E

Sensitivity analysis

We run several analyses to understand how sensitive our results are with respect to changes in
our parameter values. Table 1 shows confidence bands that are derived from re-estimating the
number of preventable deaths if the policy that deviated from the data was either twice or half
as impactful. What we mean in precise terms by this is that if, for example, we assume that a
counterfactual is carried out with respect to changes in a mask mandate, we would evaluate the
low is either half or twice as large as indicated
number of preventable deaths by assuming that θM

in Table 2. This sensitivity analysis provides confidence bands for our estimates of the number
of deaths that could have been prevented by adopting policies different than the ones that were
adopted in reality by considering that the policies may have a different impact on reducing
transmission rates and traveler and commuter inflows than what we assume in our study.
We also carry out additional sensitivity analyses with respect to two key parameters in our
model: the number of days that it takes for an infection to resolve, and the fatality rate of the
disease. Tables 3 through 6 repeat the experiments of Table 1 by assuming that it either takes
10 or 20 days for an infection to resolve, or that the fatality rate of the disease is 0.4% or 1%.
To obtain the results, we re-estimate the parameters β, σ, and ρ that would be necessary under
the new assumptions for the fatality rate or the number of days for infection resolution. The
sensitivity analyses are carried out one-by-one.
We find that adopting early federal containment policies would have been less impactful and
prevented less deaths if an infection took longer time to resolve. Vice versa, we find that early
federal action would have been more impactful if an infection took less time to resolve. This is
primarily because, if the disease were less severe than we assumed and it took less time to resolve
an infection, then the methodology estimates that there must have been many more infections
early on in the sample to match the number of deaths observed throughout the sample. That
means that early action would have been more impactful if the disease is less severe than we
13

assumed. Note that this is always a conclusion based on matching the amount of death cases
that we observe in the data. If the disease were less severe and we still observed as many deaths
as in the data, then the only possible explanation is that there must have been more infections
early on in the sample. As a result, early action would have been the more impactful.
We find that the number of preventable deaths would not be much different if the virus
were less lethal. However, we find that the costs of inaction at the state level would be much
higher if the virus were more lethal. We find that close to 2,000,000 additional deaths would
have been observed if no state enacted any policy and if the lethality rate of the virus were 1%.
These observations further corroborate our findings of the success of the policies enacted by the
individual states to prevent COVID-19 deaths both at the state and federal levels.

F

Computational details

F.1

Conditional covariances for the single-state model

We have:
Et−1 (rt + dt ) = Et−1 (dt + Et−1 (rt |dt )) − (γ + δ)It−1

(18)

Vart−1 (rt + dt ) = Vart−1 (dt + Et−1 (rt |dt )) + Et−1 (Vart−1 (dt + rt |dt ))




1−δ−γ
γ(1 − δ − γ)
= Vart−1
dt + Et−1 (It−1 − dt )
1−δ
(1 − δ)2




1−δ−γ 2
γ(1 − δ − γ)
=
It−1 δ(1 − δ) + Et−1 (It−1 − dt )
1−δ
(1 − δ)2
=

(1 − δ − γ)2 δ + γ(1 − δ − γ)
It−1 .
1 {z
−δ
|
}

(19)

=:ν

Because dt + rt , on the one hand, and it , on the other hand, are independent conditional
on the information available on date t − 1, it follows that:
Et−1 (∆It ) =
Vart−1 (∆It ) =

St−1
It−1 βt−1 − (γ + δ)It−1
N
St−1
It−1 βt−1 + νIt−1 .
N

(20)
(21)

Remark: Let us introduce Zt ≡ ∆It − Et−1 (∆It ). By construction, Et−1 (Zt ) = 0. It can be
seen that Zt is the sum of It−1 i.i.d. random variables. Hence, if It−1 is large, we approximately
have:


St−1
Zt ∼ N 0,
It−1 βt−1 + νIt−1 ,
N
14

conditional on the information available on t − 1. This is also true for it , rt and dt + rt . Because
2 ), it follows that, when
the conditional variances of these variables are in It−1 (and not in It−1

It−1 is large, the deterministic version of the SIR model provides a good approximation of the
dynamics of (S, I, R, D) – at least up to potential stochastic variation of βt .

In the remaining of this appendix, we detail the computation of some of the covariances
appearing in equation (3)
Covt−1 (εD,t , εR,t ) = Covt−1 (rt , dt ) = Covt−1 (Et−1 (rt |dt ), dt )


(It−1 − dt )γ
= Covt−1
, dt
1−δ
γ
= −
Vart−1 (dt ) = −γδIt−1 .
1−δ

Covt−1 (εD,t , εI,t ) = −Covt−1 (dt , dt + rt ) = − (Et−1 (dt (dt + rt )) − Et−1 (dt )Et−1 (dt + rt ))
= −Vart−1 (dt ) − Covt−1 (rt , dt )
= −δ(1 − δ)It−1 + γδIt−1
= −δ(1 − δ − γ)It−1 .

Vart−1 (rt ) = Vart−1 (Et−1 (rt |dt )) + Et−1 (Vart−1 (rt |dt ))




(It−1 − dt )γ
γ(1 − δ − γ)
= Vart−1
+ Et−1 (It−1 − dt )
1−δ
(1 − δ)2
=

γ2δ
γ(1 − δ − γ)
It−1 +
It−1 = (γ − γ 2 )It−1 .
1−δ
1−δ

Covt−1 (εR,t , εI,t ) = −Covt−1 (rt , dt + rt ) = − (Et−1 (rt (dt + rt )) − Et−1 (rt )Et−1 (dt + rt ))
= −Vart−1 (rt ) − Covt−1 (rt , dt )
= −(γ − γ 2 )It−1 + γδIt−1
= −γ(1 − γ − δ)It−1 .

15

F.2
F.2.1

Conditional means and variances in the multi-state model
Conditional variance of commute and travel flows

Let us denote by Flowcom,I,t the vector whose ith component is the time-weighted net inflow of
infected commuters in state i. (Remember that τ is the fraction of time spent by commuters in
the state where they work.) We have:
→
Flowcom,I,t = τ Flow←
com,I,t−1 − τ Flowcom,I,t−1 .

Using equations (8) to (12), we have, in particular:
→
E(Flowcom,I,t |It ) = τ φ←
com,I,t − τ φcom,I,t = Ωcom,t It .

We also have

 −τ 2 wk,j I k − τ 2 wj,k I j
t
Pcom,t
com,t tP

Cov(Flowcom,I,k,t , Flowcom,I,j,t |It ) =
k,j
j
j,k
k
2
 τ2
k6=j wcom,t It + τ
j6=k wcom,t It

if j 6= k
if j = k,

that is, in vectorial form:
Var(Flowcom,I,t |It ) =
−τ 2 Wcom,t

0
(It 10 ) − τ 2 Wcom,t

0
(1It 0 ) + d(τ 2 Wcom,t
It + τ 2 (Wcom,t 1)

It ),

which we denote by
Var(Flowcom,I,t |It ) = C(Wcom,t , It , τ ),

(22)

where function C is defined by

C(W, Z, τ ) = τ 2 −W

(Z10 ) − W 0

(1Z 0 ) + d(W 0 Z + (W 1)

Z) .

(23)

The same type of computation leads to
Var(Flowcom,S,t |St ) = C(Wcom,t , St , τ )

(24)

Var(Flowtrav,I,t |It ) = C(Wtrav,t , It , 1)

(25)

Var(Flowtrav,S,t |St ) = C(Wtrav,t , St , 1).

(26)

16

F.2.2

Conditional variance of new infections

For any pair of independent random vectors X and Y , we have
Var(X

Y ) = E(XX 0 )
= Var(X)

E(Y Y 0 ) − E(X)E(X)0
Var(Y ) + Var(X)

E(Y )E(Y )0

E(Y )E(Y )0 + Var(Y )

E(X)E(X)0 .

Therefore:


Var (It−1 + Flowcom,I,t−1 + Flowtrav,I,t−1 ) (St−1 + Flowcom,S,t−1 + Flowtrav,S,t−1 ) It−1 , St−1




Var Flowcom,S,t−1 + Flowtrav,S,t−1 St−1 +
Var Flowcom,I,t−1 + Flowtrav,I,t−1 It−1
 


0
(Id + Ωt−1 )St−1 St−1
(Id + Ωt−1 )0 +
Var Flowcom,I,t−1 + Flowtrav,I,t−1 It−1

 

0
Var Flowcom,S,t−1 + Flowtrav,S,t−1 St−1
(Id + Ωt−1 )It−1 It−1
(Id + Ωt−1 )0

 

C(Wcom,t−1 , It−1 , τ ) + C(Wtrav,t−1 , It−1 , 1)
C(Wcom,t−1 , St−1 , τ ) + C(Wtrav,t−1 , St−1 , 1) +


 
0
C(Wcom,t−1 , It−1 , τ ) + C(Wtrav,t−1 , It−1 , 1)
(Id + Ωt−1 )St−1 St−1
(Id + Ωt−1 )0 +


 
0
C(Wcom,t−1 , St−1 , τ ) + C(Wtrav,t−1 , St−1 , 1)
(Id + Ωt−1 )It−1 It−1
(Id + Ωt−1 )0

=

=

=: D(Wcom,t−1 , Wtrav,t−1 , St−1 , It−1 , τ, Ωt−1 ),
where Ωt−1 = Ωtrav,t−1 + Ωcom,t−1 and where
D(W1 , W2 , S, I, τ, Ω) =




C(W1 , I, τ ) + C(W2 , I, 1)


C(W1 , I, τ ) + C(W2 , I, 1)


C(W1 , S, τ ) + C(W2 , S, 1)




C(W1 , S, τ ) + C(W2 , S, 1) +


(Id + Ω)SS 0 (Id + Ω)0 +


(Id + Ω)II 0 (Id + Ω)0 ,
(27)

function C being defined in (23).

F.2.3

Conditional variance of susceptibles

Let us use the notation:
It∗ = It + Flowcom,I,t + Flowtrav,I,t

and St∗ = St + Flowcom,S,t + Flowtrav,S,t .

Using the law of total variance:
Vart−1 (St )
17

= Vart−1 (Et−1 (St |It−1 , St−1 , Flowcom,I,t−1 , Flowcom,S,t−1 , Flowtrav,I,t−1 , Flowtrav,S,t−1 )) +
Et−1 (Vart−1 (St |It−1 , St−1 , Flowcom,I,t−1 , Flowcom,S,t−1 , Flowtrav,I,t−1 , Flowtrav,S,t−1 ))

 


1
1
∗
∗
∗
∗
= Vart−1 θβ,t−1 βt−1
It−1
St−1
+ Et−1 d θβ,t−1 βt−1
It−1
St−1
p
p



1 0
1
θβ,t−1 βt−1
D(Wcom,t−1 , Wtrav,t−1 , St−1 , It−1 , τ, Ωt−1 ) +
=
θβ,t−1 βt−1
p
p


1
d θβ,t−1 βt−1
[(Id + Ωt−1 )It−1 ] [(Id + Ωt−1 )St−1 ] ,
p
Let’s denote the previous conditional variance by Θt−1 . We have:
Θt−1

=

Vart−1 (St )

:=
θβ,t−1 βt−1

d θβ,t−1

βt−1

1
p


θβ,t−1

1
p

βt−1

1
p

0 

[(Id + Ωt−1 )It−1 ]

D(Wcom,t−1 , Wtrav,t−1 , St−1 , It−1 , τ, Ωt−1 ) +

[(Id + Ωt−1 )St−1 ] ,

where Ωt−1 = Ωcom,t−1 + Ωtrav,t−1 and function D is defined by (27).
F.2.4

Conditional variance of the state vector

What precedes implies that:


Dt







 St 




V(St−1 , It−1 ) := Vart−1  It  =
(29)




 Rt 


βt


δ(1 − δ)d(It−1 )
0
−δ(1 − δ − γ)d(It−1 )
−δγd(It−1 )
0






0
Θt−1
−Θt−1
0
0




 −δ(1 − δ − γ)d(It−1 ) −Θt−1
,
Θt−1 + νd(It−1 )
−γ(1 − γ − δ)d(It−1 )
0




2


−δγd(It−1 )
0
−γ(1 − γ − δ)d(It−1 )
(γ − γ )d(It−1 )
0


0
0
0
0
Ωβ,t−1
with
p
p
Ωβ,t−1 = σ 2 ∆td( βt−1 ) · Σ · d( βt−1 ),
and where Θt is defined by equations (28), and ν is defined in equation (19).
18

(28)

F.3

Jacobian matrix for extended Kalman filter implementation

We hereby provide the formulas for the Jacobian computation in the extended Kalman filter
0 ], we have:
recursions. Denoting by J = ∂Et−1 [Dt , St , It , Rt , βt0 ]/∂[Dt−1 , St−1 , It−1 , Rt−1 , βt−1



Id



 0


J = 0


 0

0

0


 −Id


 +Id


 0

0



0

δId

0

0

Id

0

0

0

0

(1 − δ − γ)Id

0

0

0

γId

Id

0

0

0

0

(1 − κ)Id






+







 

 ∂ θS,t−1







0
βt−1

θM,t−1

1
p

([Id + Ωt−1 ]It−1 )


([Id + Ωt−1 ]St−1 )
.(30)

0 ]
∂ [Dt−1 , St−1 , It−1 , Rt−1 , βt−1

The matrix of partial derivatives is given by:

1
0
([Id + Ωt−1 ]It−1 )
∂ θS,t−1 θM,t−1 βt−1
p


([Id + Ωt−1 ]St−1 )

0 ]
∂ [Dt−1 , St−1 , It−1 , Rt−1 , βt−1





 (Id + Ωt−1 ) × d θS,t−1



= 
(Id
+
Ω
)
×
d
θS,t−1
t−1






d θS,t−1 θM,t−1 p1

0

0
θM,t−1

0
βt−1

1
p

θM,t−1

0
βt−1

1
p

0
([Id + Ωt−1 ]It−1 )

19

 

([Id + Ωt−1 ]It−1 ) 
 

([Id + Ωt−1 ]St−1 ) 
 .



 
([Id + Ωt−1 ]St−1 )

(31)

20

3/20
4/17

2/12

3/17

Federal mandate active on:
Stay-at-home Mask Travel ban
3/20
4/17
3/17

[-10,186; -4,788]

-9,487

[+1,511; +3,596]

+3,346

[+264,408; +1,342,444]

+922,910

[+229,183; +1,429,593]

+615,569

[+458,475; +1,521,927]

+1,044,270

[-8,773; -4,121]

-8,149

[-116,362; -167,026]

-141,048

[-181,352; -77,566]

-129,202

[-215,046; -137,288]

Deaths in excess
of baseline
-180,595

Table 1: Results of the counterfactual experiments in which we assume that all states jointly deviate from their enacted policies and adopt either strict or loose versions of the
policies instead. The reported values are excess deaths relative to the number of U.S. deaths recorded in our data on November 30, 2020. In the counterfactuals, we compute the
trajectories of death counts per state under the alternative policy scenarios that are consistent with the transmission rates filtered from the observed data. The values in brackets
give confidence bounds based on a sensitivity analysis of the estimates of the impact of the different policies on transmission rates and traveler and commuter inflow. The lower
bounds assume that any policy that deviates from what it was in the data is half as impactful, while the upper bound assumes that any policy that deviates is twice as impactful.
Table 2 in Appendix E provides the parameter values used for the sensitivity analyses. In the sensitivity analysis, we proceed in a similar way as for the counterfactuals and first
compute posterior means of the state-level transmission rates that would explain the observed death counts under the assumption of alternative effectiveness for the different
policies. We then compute the number of death that would have been observed if the policies had changed while keeping the recomputed trajectories of the transmission rates
fixed.

Strict stay-at-home orders, mask mandates, and
travel bans for all states.
Strict stay-at-home orders in all states, and all other
state-level policies remain as in the data.
Strict mask mandates in all states, and all other state-level
policies remain as in the data.
Strict travel bans in all states, and all other state-level
policies remain as in the data.
No stay-at-home order, mask mandate, or travel ban
in any state.
No stay-at-home order in any state, but all other
policies remain as in the data.
No mask mandate in any states, but all other
policies remain as in the data.
No travel ban in any states, but all other
policies remain as in the data.
Strict travel bans in all states by February 12, 2020, while
all other state-level policies remain as in the data.

Counterfactual assumption

γ
β
θSlow
τcom

0.07
[0.05, 0.1]
0.16
0.64
[0.32, 0.82]
0.36

δ
σ
θTlow

0.0004
[0.0003, 0.0007]
0.05
0.10
[0.05, 0.55]

κ
ρ
low
θM
τtrav

0.001
0.49
0.58
[0.29, 0.79]
4.00

Table 2: Parameter values. The values in bracket give alternative parametrizations used for a sensitivity analysis of our
results in Appendix E.

21

22

3/20

3/20

4/17

2/12

3/17

Federal mandate active on:
Stay-at-home Mask Travel ban
3/20
4/17
3/17

-9,610

-235,479

+3,647

+991,286

+662,202

+1,024,136

-8,456

-156,990

-137,919

Deaths in excess
of baseline
-190,481

Table 3: Results of the counterfactual experiments in which we assume that all states jointly deviate from their enacted policies and adopt either strict or loose versions of the
policies instead. Here, we assume that it takes on average 10 days for an infection to resolve, while keeping the fatality rate of the disease fixed at 0.6%. The reported values are
excess deaths relative to the number of U.S. deaths recorded in our data on November 30, 2020. In the counterfactuals, we compute the trajectories of death counts per state
under the alternative policy scenarios that are consistent with the transmission rates filtered from the observed data. The values in brackets give confidence bounds based on a
sensitivity analysis of the estimates of the impact of the different policies on transmission rates and traveler and commuter inflow. The lower bounds assume that any policy that
deviates from what it was in the data is half as impactful, while the upper bound assumes that any policy that deviates is twice as impactful. Table 2 in Appendix E provides
the parameter values used for the sensitivity analyses. In the sensitivity analysis, we proceed in a similar way as for the counterfactuals and first compute posterior means of
the state-level transmission rates that would explain the observed death counts under the assumption of alternative effectiveness for the different policies. We then compute the
number of death that would have been observed if the policies had changed while keeping the recomputed trajectories of the transmission rates fixed.

Strict stay-at-home orders, mask mandates, and
travel bans for all states.
Strict stay-at-home orders in all states, and all other
state-level policies remain as in the data.
Strict mask mandates in all states, and all other state-level
policies remain as in the data.
Strict travel bans in all states, and all other state-level
policies remain as in the data.
No stay-at-home order, mask mandate, or travel ban
in any state.
No stay-at-home order in any state, but all other
policies remain as in the data.
No mask mandate in any states, but all other
policies remain as in the data.
No travel ban in any states, but all other
policies remain as in the data.
Mask mandate in all states on March 19, 2020, and all other
state-level policies remain as in the data.
Strict travel bans in all states by February 12, 2020, while
all other state-level policies remain as in the data.

Counterfactual assumption (γ = 0.1)

23

3/20
4/17

2/12

3/17

Federal mandate active on:
Stay-at-home Mask Travel ban
3/20
4/17
3/17

-5,610

+2,943

+717,271

+648,965

+1,096,115

-8,136

-114,864

-119,630

Deaths in excess
of baseline
-165,664

Table 4: Results of the counterfactual experiments in which we assume that all states jointly deviate from their enacted policies and adopt either strict or loose versions of the
policies instead. Here, we assume that it takes on average 20 days for an infection to resolve, while keeping the fatality rate of the disease fixed at 0.6%. The reported values are
excess deaths relative to the number of U.S. deaths recorded in our data on November 30, 2020. In the counterfactuals, we compute the trajectories of death counts per state
under the alternative policy scenarios that are consistent with the transmission rates filtered from the observed data. The values in brackets give confidence bounds based on a
sensitivity analysis of the estimates of the impact of the different policies on transmission rates and traveler and commuter inflow. The lower bounds assume that any policy that
deviates from what it was in the data is half as impactful, while the upper bound assumes that any policy that deviates is twice as impactful. Table 2 in Appendix E provides
the parameter values used for the sensitivity analyses. In the sensitivity analysis, we proceed in a similar way as for the counterfactuals and first compute posterior means of
the state-level transmission rates that would explain the observed death counts under the assumption of alternative effectiveness for the different policies. We then compute the
number of death that would have been observed if the policies had changed while keeping the recomputed trajectories of the transmission rates fixed.

Strict stay-at-home orders, mask mandates, and
travel bans for all states.
Strict stay-at-home orders in all states, and all other
state-level policies remain as in the data.
Strict mask mandates in all states, and all other state-level
policies remain as in the data.
Strict travel bans in all states, and all other state-level
policies remain as in the data.
No stay-at-home order, mask mandate, or travel ban
in any state.
No stay-at-home order in any state, but all other
policies remain as in the data.
No mask mandate in any states, but all other
policies remain as in the data.
No travel ban in any states, but all other
policies remain as in the data.
Strict travel bans in all states by February 12, 2020, while
all other state-level policies remain as in the data.

Counterfactual assumption (γ = 0.05)

24

3/20
4/17

2/12

3/17

Federal mandate active on:
Stay-at-home Mask Travel ban
3/20
4/17
3/17

-5,057

+2,791

+594,679

+424,480

+660,986

-8,450

-136,004

-116,363

Deaths in excess
of baseline
-171,375

Table 5: Results of the counterfactual experiments in which we assume that all states jointly deviate from their enacted policies and adopt either strict or loose versions of the
policies instead. Here, we assume that the fatality rate of the disease is 0.4% instead of 0.6%, and keep the number of days that it take for an infection to resolve at 14 days. The
reported values are excess deaths relative to the number of U.S. deaths recorded in our data on November 30, 2020. In the counterfactuals, we compute the trajectories of death
counts per state under the alternative policy scenarios that are consistent with the transmission rates filtered from the observed data. The values in brackets give confidence
bounds based on a sensitivity analysis of the estimates of the impact of the different policies on transmission rates and traveler and commuter inflow. The lower bounds assume
that any policy that deviates from what it was in the data is half as impactful, while the upper bound assumes that any policy that deviates is twice as impactful. Table 2 in
Appendix E provides the parameter values used for the sensitivity analyses. In the sensitivity analysis, we proceed in a similar way as for the counterfactuals and first compute
posterior means of the state-level transmission rates that would explain the observed death counts under the assumption of alternative effectiveness for the different policies. We
then compute the number of death that would have been observed if the policies had changed while keeping the recomputed trajectories of the transmission rates fixed.

Strict stay-at-home orders, mask mandates, and
travel bans for all states.
Strict stay-at-home orders in all states, and all other
state-level policies remain as in the data.
Strict mask mandates in all states, and all other state-level
policies remain as in the data.
Strict travel bans in all states, and all other state-level
policies remain as in the data.
No stay-at-home order, mask mandate, or travel ban
in any state.
No stay-at-home order in any state, but all other
policies remain as in the data.
No mask mandate in any states, but all other
policies remain as in the data.
No travel ban in any states, but all other
policies remain as in the data.
Strict travel bans in all states by February 12, 2020, while
all other state-level policies remain as in the data.

Counterfactual assumption (δ = 0.0003)

25

3/20
4/17

2/12

3/17

Federal mandate active on:
Stay-at-home Mask Travel ban
3/20
4/17
3/17

-8,033

+3,788

+1,530,444

+910,766

+1,803,895

-8,936

-140,718

-138,178

Deaths in excess
of baseline
-185,874

Table 6: Results of the counterfactual experiments in which we assume that all states jointly deviate from their enacted policies and adopt either strict or loose versions of the
policies instead. Here, we assume that the fatality rate of the disease is 1% instead of 0.6%, and keep the number of days that it take for an infection to resolve at 14 days. The
reported values are excess deaths relative to the number of U.S. deaths recorded in our data on November 30, 2020. In the counterfactuals, we compute the trajectories of death
counts per state under the alternative policy scenarios that are consistent with the transmission rates filtered from the observed data. The values in brackets give confidence
bounds based on a sensitivity analysis of the estimates of the impact of the different policies on transmission rates and traveler and commuter inflow. The lower bounds assume
that any policy that deviates from what it was in the data is half as impactful, while the upper bound assumes that any policy that deviates is twice as impactful. Table 2 in
Appendix E provides the parameter values used for the sensitivity analyses. In the sensitivity analysis, we proceed in a similar way as for the counterfactuals and first compute
posterior means of the state-level transmission rates that would explain the observed death counts under the assumption of alternative effectiveness for the different policies. We
then compute the number of death that would have been observed if the policies had changed while keeping the recomputed trajectories of the transmission rates fixed.

Strict stay-at-home orders, mask mandates, and
travel bans for all states.
Strict stay-at-home orders in all states, and all other
state-level policies remain as in the data.
Strict mask mandates in all states, and all other state-level
policies remain as in the data.
Strict travel bans in all states, and all other state-level
policies remain as in the data.
No stay-at-home order, mask mandate, or travel ban
in any state.
No stay-at-home order in any state, but all other
policies remain as in the data.
No mask mandate in any states, but all other
policies remain as in the data.
No travel ban in any states, but all other
policies remain as in the data.
Strict travel bans in all states by February 12, 2020, while
all other state-level policies remain as in the data.

Counterfactual assumption (δ = 0.0007)

U.S. infections (log scale)

U.S. effective reproduction rate

Baseline
Counterfactual, federal mask
mandate, 3/19 − 11/30
Counterfactual, no mask
mandates in any state
R0 = 1

6

1e+08

5

1e+07

4

1e+06

3

1e+05

2

10000

1000

Mar

May

Jul

Sep

0

100

1

Baseline
Counterfactual, federal mask
mandate, 3/19 − 11/30
Counterfactual, no mask
mandates in any state
Data
Nov

Mar

May

Jul

Sep

Nov

Figure 1: Cumulated infections implied by the model and the data, together with the estimated effective reproduction
rate for the United States. The effective reproduction rate measure the number of susceptible individuals that an infected
individual infects on average (see Appendix A.3). The rate varies over time in our model. The red lines correspond to the
results a counterfactual analysis in which we assume that a federal mask mandate went into effect on March 19 and remained
active through November 30, 2020; see Section 3.1.

26

27

All states adopt the three policies simultaneously

−0.8

−0.6

−0.4

−0.2

−1.2

0.0

0

5

10

15

West Virginia
Washington
Kansas
Kentucky
Pennsylvania
Virginia
North Carolina
California
New Hampshire
Montana
Wisconsin
Colorado
Texas
Nevada
Alaska
Ohio
Arkansas
Delaware
New Mexico
Minnesota
Vermont
Alabama
Illinois
D. C.
Maryland
Indiana
Connecticut
Michigan
Rhode Island
Wyoming
New York
Massachusetts
Arizona
Missouri
Utah
New Jersey
Idaho
Louisiana
Mississippi
South Carolina
Florida
Oklahoma
Tennessee
Nebraska
North Dakota
Georgia
South Dakota
Iowa

20

Oregon

Strict scenario

−0.8

−0.6

−0.4

−0.2

0.0

0

5

10

15

20

Vermont
Oregon

25

(c) All states impose strict or loose mask mandates.

−1.0

West Virginia
Washington
Kentucky
Kansas
Colorado
North Carolina
Wisconsin
Montana
California
Minnesota
Ohio
Virginia
Arkansas
Texas
Nevada
Delaware
New Mexico
Indiana
Alabama
Pennsylvania
Maryland
Michigan
Illinois
D. C.
Wyoming
Rhode Island
New York
Connecticut
Louisiana
Massachusetts
New Jersey
Utah
Mississippi
Missouri
New Hampshire
Alaska
Oklahoma
Nebraska
North Dakota
Iowa
Idaho
South Dakota
Tennessee
Georgia
Arizona
South Carolina
Florida

Loose scenario

25

Maine

Loose scenario

(a) All states impose strict or loose policies.

−1.0

Connecticut
New York
Vermont
Massachusetts
Pennsylvania
Maine
Rhode Island
Hawaii
New Jersey
Illinois
Delaware
Michigan
D. C.
Colorado
Maryland
Louisiana
Washington
New Mexico
Virginia
Nevada
Indiana
New Hampshire
Ohio
West Virginia
California
Kansas
Oregon
Kentucky
North Carolina
Minnesota
Wisconsin
Alabama
Georgia
Oklahoma
Missouri
Mississippi
Montana
Texas
Alaska
Nebraska
Iowa
Wyoming
Arkansas
Florida
Utah
Arizona
Idaho
South Carolina
Tennessee
North Dakota
South Dakota

−1.2

New York
Connecticut
Vermont
New Jersey
Illinois
Massachusetts
Delaware
Hawaii
Michigan
New Mexico
Washington
Louisiana
Rhode Island
Pennsylvania
Maine
Colorado
California
Indiana
Ohio
D. C.
Oregon
New Hampshire
Virginia
Maryland
Nevada
Kentucky
Minnesota
West Virginia
Wisconsin
Kansas
Alaska
Georgia
North Carolina
Idaho
Missouri
Montana
Alabama
Oklahoma
Mississippi
Arizona
South Carolina
Texas
Utah
Florida
Arkansas
Tennessee
Nebraska
Iowa
Wyoming
South Dakota
North Dakota

35

35

Hawaii
Maine

30

30

Hawaii

−0.8

−0.6

−0.4

−0.2

0.0

0

2

4

6

Ohio
Virginia
California
Minnesota
D. C.
Delaware
New Mexico
Maine
Oregon
Illinois
Maryland
Indiana
North Carolina
West Virginia
Connecticut
Kentucky
Rhode Island
Colorado
New York
Washington
Massachusetts
Arizona
New Jersey
Hawaii
Wisconsin
Missouri
Michigan
Nevada
Texas
Idaho
Louisiana
Alaska
Wyoming
Kansas
Alabama
South Carolina
Tennessee
Utah
Florida
Vermont
Montana
Georgia
Mississippi
South Dakota
Nebraska
North Dakota
Iowa
Arkansas
Oklahoma

8

−0.4

−0.2

0.0

0.2

0.4

−0.5

0.0

Michigan
Washington
Wisconsin
Oregon
Indiana
California
Iowa
Minnesota
Illinois
Maryland
Ohio
South Dakota
New Hampshire
Louisiana
Missouri
Virginia
Colorado
Nevada
Alabama
Tennessee
Mississippi
Nebraska
North Carolina
Pennsylvania
Utah
Georgia

0.5

Vermont
Maine
New Mexico
Montana
West Virginia
Florida
Arkansas
Texas
Delaware
Rhode Island
Kansas
Wyoming
South Carolina
Kentucky
Massachusetts
North Dakota
Oklahoma
Connecticut
New York
Arizona
Idaho
New Jersey

1.0

Alaska

Loose scenario

(d) All states impose strict or loose interstate travel bans.

−0.6

Delaware
Connecticut
Vermont
Michigan
Rhode Island
Arizona
Georgia
Washington
California
Mississippi
Indiana
Colorado
Nevada
Texas
Kansas
Ohio
Minnesota
Tennessee
D. C.
Iowa
Alabama
Maryland
Arkansas
Oregon
Idaho
Oklahoma
Kentucky
Wisconsin
Maine
Missouri
New Hampshire
Pennsylvania
North Carolina
Virginia
South Dakota
Utah
Nebraska
Montana
West Virginia
Wyoming

New Mexico
North Dakota
Alaska
Florida
South Carolina
Illinois
New Jersey
Louisiana
New York
Massachusetts
Hawaii

Strict scenario

1.5

Hawaii

10

Pennsylvania
New Hampshire

Loose scenario

(b) All states impose strict or loose stay-at-home orders.

−1.0

New Jersey
Illinois
Vermont
Connecticut
New York
Massachusetts
Louisiana
Delaware
Ohio
Washington
New Mexico
Michigan
New Hampshire
California
Indiana
Minnesota
Hawaii
Oregon
Virginia
Rhode Island
Wisconsin
Colorado
Pennsylvania
West Virginia
Maine
Kentucky
Nevada
Idaho
D. C.
Maryland
Alaska
Montana
Wyoming
Arizona
Kansas
Missouri
North Carolina
Mississippi
Georgia
North Dakota
South Carolina
Alabama
South Dakota
Florida
Tennessee
Oklahoma
Utah
Texas
Iowa
Arkansas
Nebraska

Strict scenario

Figure 2: State-by-state breakdown of excess deaths relative to the baseline in the different counterfactual scenarios in which all states jointly deviate from their implemented
policies. The excess death values are measured as proportions of the death cases in the data for each state. Policies are divided into stay-at-home order (b), mask mandates (c),
travel bans (d), and all three policies together (a). Counterfactual policies are divided into a strict scenario in which all states implement a policy as long as at least one state
decides to do so, and a loose scenario in which no state implements a particular policy. Counterfactual death counts are computed through the methodology detailed in Appendix
C.

All states adopt a mask mandate simultaneously

Strict scenario
All states adopt a stay−at−home order simultaneously
All states ban border crossings simultaneously

28

A state adopts all three policies

California

0

50000

−15000

California

−10000

−5000

Connecticut
Hawaii
Vermont
Maine
Alaska
New York
Wyoming
Delaware
D. C.
West Virginia
Rhode Island
New Hampshire
Montana
Oregon
Utah
New Mexico
Idaho
Kansas
Nebraska
North Dakota
South Dakota
Kentucky
Nevada
Colorado
Washington
Oklahoma
Pennsylvania
Massachusetts
Arkansas
Virginia
Iowa
Maryland
Minnesota
Wisconsin
Alabama
Illinois
Michigan
Louisiana
Missouri
Mississippi
Indiana
North Carolina
South Carolina
Tennessee
Ohio
New Jersey
Arizona
Georgia

Strict scenario

0

0

50000

100000

New York
Pennsylvania
Illinois
North Carolina
Michigan
Ohio
Indiana
Washington
Wisconsin
Colorado
New Jersey
Minnesota
Maryland
Massachusetts
Alabama
Kentucky
Virginia
Oregon
Kansas
Arkansas
Louisiana
Connecticut
Nevada
New Mexico
Hawaii
West Virginia
Maine
Montana
Mississippi
Delaware
Rhode Island
D. C.
Utah
Iowa
Vermont
North Dakota
New Hampshire
Wyoming
Tennessee
South Dakota
South Carolina
Oklahoma
Nebraska
Missouri
Idaho
Georgia
Florida
Arizona
Alaska

Texas

Loose scenario

100000

(c) A state imposes a strict or loose mask mandate.

Florida
Texas

−5000

Pennsylvania
New York
Illinois
North Carolina
Virginia
Ohio
New Jersey
Washington
Michigan
Wisconsin
Massachusetts
Florida
Colorado
Indiana
Kentucky
Oregon
Alabama
Minnesota
Maryland
Connecticut
Kansas
Arizona
Arkansas
Nevada
Louisiana
West Virginia
Hawaii
New Mexico
Georgia
Maine
Mississippi
Montana
South Carolina
Delaware
Missouri
Rhode Island
New Hampshire
Tennessee
D. C.
Idaho
Vermont
Utah
Iowa
North Dakota
Alaska
Oklahoma
Wyoming
South Dakota
Nebraska

Loose scenario

(a) A state imposes strict or loose policies.

−20000 −15000 −10000

Florida
Texas

Vermont
Hawaii
Alaska
Maine
Wyoming
Delaware
D. C.
New Hampshire
West Virginia
Montana
Oregon
Utah
Rhode Island
Idaho
North Dakota
South Dakota
Nebraska
New Mexico
Connecticut
Kansas
Kentucky
Oklahoma
Nevada
Washington
Colorado
Iowa
Arkansas
Minnesota
Wisconsin
Virginia
Alabama
Missouri
Mississippi
Maryland
Louisiana
South Carolina
Massachusetts
Tennessee
Indiana
North Carolina
Ohio
Illinois
New York
Michigan
New Jersey
Arizona
Pennsylvania
Georgia

150000

California

150000

California
Texas

−15000

−10000

−5000

New York

Pennsylvania
California

−2000

−1000

0

0

500

1000

New York
Massachusetts
New Mexico
Hawaii
South Carolina
Arizona
Arkansas
New Jersey
Connecticut
Alaska
West Virginia
Kansas
Montana
Rhode Island
Kentucky
Maine
Oklahoma
Delaware
North Dakota
Vermont
Idaho
D. C.
Wyoming
Washington
Wisconsin
Virginia
Utah
Tennessee
South Dakota
Pennsylvania
Oregon
Ohio
Nevada
New Hampshire
Nebraska
North Carolina
Mississippi
Missouri
Minnesota
Michigan
Maryland
Louisiana
Indiana
Illinois
Iowa
Georgia
Colorado
California
Alabama

1500

Texas

Loose scenario

(d) A state imposes a strict or loose interstate travel ban.

−3000

Pennsylvania
Texas

Hawaii
Vermont
Alaska
Maine
New Mexico
Delaware
D. C.
Rhode Island
New Hampshire
Wyoming
Massachusetts
North Dakota
Oregon
Washington
Connecticut
Montana
Idaho
West Virginia
Utah
New Jersey
Kansas
South Dakota
Louisiana
Nebraska
Oklahoma
Colorado
Kentucky
New York
Florida
South Carolina
Nevada
Iowa
Maryland
Arkansas
Minnesota
Mississippi
Alabama
Michigan
Arizona
Indiana
Wisconsin
Missouri
Virginia
Ohio
Tennessee
Illinois
California
Georgia
North Carolina

Strict scenario

2000

Florida

0e+00 2e+04 4e+04 6e+04 8e+04 1e+05

Illinois
New Jersey
Ohio
Texas
Massachusetts
Florida
Indiana
Virginia
Michigan
Minnesota
Connecticut
Maryland
Arizona
North Carolina
Louisiana
Colorado
Washington
Georgia
New Mexico
Wisconsin
Missouri
Kentucky
South Carolina
Alabama
Rhode Island
New Hampshire
Delaware
Nevada
Oregon
Tennessee
D. C.
Mississippi
West Virginia
Kansas
Idaho
Maine
Vermont
Montana
Hawaii
Alaska
Wyoming
Utah
South Dakota
Oklahoma
Nebraska
North Dakota
Iowa
Arkansas

Loose scenario

(b) A state imposes a strict or loose stay-at-home order.

−20000

Florida
Texas

Vermont
Alaska
Hawaii
Wyoming
Maine
New Hampshire
Delaware
West Virginia
D. C.
Montana
Oregon
Idaho
New Mexico
North Dakota
South Dakota
Utah
Nebraska
Rhode Island
Washington
Kentucky
Kansas
Connecticut
Nevada
Oklahoma
New Jersey
Colorado
Minnesota
Virginia
Wisconsin
Ohio
Louisiana
Iowa
Arkansas
Illinois
Indiana
Missouri
Alabama
Maryland
Mississippi
Michigan
Massachusetts
Tennessee
South Carolina
North Carolina
Arizona
New York
Pennsylvania
Georgia
California

Strict scenario

Figure 3: State-by-state breakdown of excess deaths relative to the baseline in the data in the different counterfactual scenarios in which states deviate individually from their
implemented policies. Policies are divided into stay-at-home order (b), mask mandates (c), travel bans (d), and all three policies together (a). Counterfactual policies are divided
into a strict scenario in which a particular state implements a policy as long as at least one state decides to do so, and a loose scenario in which a state does not implement a
particular policy. Counterfactual death counts are computed through the methodology detailed in Appendix C.

A state adopts a mask mandate

Strict scenario

A state adopts a stay−at−home order
A state bans crossings of its borders

200000
180000
140000

160000

April 17

March 19

Preventable deaths

220000

Number of preventable deaths with an early federal mask mandate

Mar 23

Mar 30

Apr 06

Apr 13

Date mandate goes into effect

Figure 4: Number of deaths that could have been prevented through an early federal mask mandate. The x-axis indicates
the date in which we assume a federal mask mandate had gone into effect, while the y-axis gives the number of deaths
that could have been prevented had a federal mask mandate gone into effect on that date. We assume that state-level
stay-at-home and travel ban policies remain as in the data, and that a federal mask mandate supersedes the state-level
mask policies.

29

30

SD

ND

NE

UT

NM

CO

WA

●

KS

MN

IA

AZ

NV

CA
●

OK

WI

TX

●

HI
●

MO

AR

IL

MI

LA

IN

DC

●
FL

MA

MS

TN

KY

OH

●
NY

●

PA

AL

VA

NJ

CT

●

GA

VT

NC

MD

●

NH

●
RI

SC

●

WV

DE

MA

NY

AL

MS

NJ

LA

TN

KY

OH

PA

MD

MI

AR

IN

GA

DE

FL

TX

OK

NC

MO

IL

SC

KS

WI

NM

IA

CA

●

AZ

HI

●

NE

CO

MN

NV

SD

UT

WY

ND

AK
●

WA

OR

MT

ID

(b) Interstate commuting network. The size of a node is proportional to the
logarithm of the percentage of a state that commutes out-of-state.

ME

VT

NH

RI

CT

WV

VA

DC

Figure 5: Estimated interstate travel and commuting flows. For both networks, the width of a link is proportional to the percentage of a state’s travel or commuting that takes
place between the linked states.

(a) Interstate travel network. The size of a node is proportional to the
percentage of a state that commutes out-of-state.

WY

MT

ID

AK

OR

ME

●

Jul

Jul

VERMONT

Jul

OKLAHOMA

Jul

NEBRASKA

Jul

LOUISIANA

Jul

FLORIDA

Nov

Nov

Nov

Nov

Nov

Nov

Mar

Mar

Mar

Mar

Mar

Mar

Jul

VIRGINIA

Jul

OREGON

Jul

NEVADA

Jul

MAINE

Jul

GEORGIA

Jul

ALASKA

Nov

Nov

Nov

Nov

Nov

Nov

Jul

Jul

MARYLAND

Jul

HAWAII

Nov

Nov

Nov

Mar

Mar

Mar

Nov

Jul

WASHINGTON

Jul

Nov

PENNSYLVANIA

Jul

NEW HAMPSHIRE

Mar

Mar

Mar

ARIZONA

Nov

Jul

Jul

IDAHO

Nov

Nov

Mar

Mar

Mar

Mar

Nov

Nov

Nov

Jul

Nov

WEST VIRGINIA

Jul

RHODE ISLAND

Jul

NEW JERSEY

Jul

MASSACHUSETTS

Mar

Mar

ARKANSAS

per day

120
80

Jul

Jul

NEW MEXICO

Jul

MICHIGAN

Jul

ILLINOIS

Nov

Nov

Nov

Nov

Mar

Mar

Jul

WISCONSIN

Jul

Nov

SOUTH CAROLINA

Mar

Mar

Mar

Mar

CALIFORNIA

Nov

Mar

Mar

Mar

Mar

Mar

Mar

Nov

Nov

Nov

Nov

Jul

WYOMING

Jul

Nov

SOUTH DAKOTA

Jul

NEW YORK

Jul

MINNESOTA

Jul

INDIANA

Jul

COLORADO

Nov

Jul

Jul

MISSISSIPPI

Jul

IOWA

Nov

Nov

Nov

Mar

Mar

Mar

Jul

U.S. Total

Jul

TENNESSEE

Jul

Nov

NORTH CAROLINA

Mar

Mar

Mar

CONNECTICUT

Nov

Nov

Mar

Mar

Mar

Mar

Mar

Nov

Nov

Nov

Data
Model

Jul

TEXAS

Jul

Nov

NORTH DAKOTA

Jul

MISSOURI

Jul

KANSAS

Jul

DELAWARE

Nov

Mar

Mar

Mar

Mar

Mar

Jul

UTAH

Jul

OHIO

Jul

MONTANA

Jul

KENTUCKY

Jul

Nov

Nov

Nov

Nov

Nov

DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA

Figure 6: Data and model-implied death counts across states. The model-implied death counts correspond to the number of fatalities that needed to have been recorded in our
model to match the total number of deaths in a state at the end of the sample period (i.e., the smoother). Estimation is performed through forward/backward extended Kalman
filtering, using the time series of death counts per state from February 12 to November 30, 2020. Our estimation methodology is detailed in Appendix B.

Mar

Mar

Mar

Mar

Mar

Mar

ALABAMA
30
20

60

40

20

0

150

50

0

100

60

0 20

30

20

10

0

20

10

5

0

3

2

1

0

15
10

8

6

4

2

0

300

per day

per day

per day

100

0

8

6

4

2

0

25

15

5

0

15

10

per day

per day

per day

5

0

60

40

20

0

per day
per day

40
0
8 10
6
4
2
0
60
40
20
0
12
8
4
0

per day
per day
per day
per day

300
0 100
60
40
20
0

80
40
0
25
15
5

per day
per day
per day

0
200
50 100
0
300
100
0
20

per day
per day
per day

5 10
0
25
15
5
0

100 150
50
0
200
50 100
0
100 150

per day
per day
per day

50
0
30
20
10
0
60
40
20
0
60
40

60

20

per day
per day

per day

0

150
50
0

20
0
120
80
40
0
80
60
40

per day
per day
per day

20
0
600
200
0
40
30
20
10
0
20
10

per day
per day

5
0

per day
per day
per day

10 20 30 40
0
40
20
0
60
40
20
0
80
60
40

per day
per day
per day

20
0
2000
1000
0

per day
per day

10
0
50
30
0 10
80
40
0
30
20

per day
per day
per day

10
0
600
400
200
0

per day
per day

5
0
25
15
5
0
20
10
5
0
80

per day
per day
per day

40
0
20
10
5
0

31

8

6

4

2

0

8

6

4

2

0

8

6

4

2

0

6

4

2

0

8

6

4

2

0

8

6

Mar

Mar

Mar

Mar

Mar

Mar

Jul

VERMONT

Jul

OKLAHOMA

Jul

NEBRASKA

Jul

LOUISIANA

Jul

FLORIDA

Jul

ALABAMA

Nov

Nov

Nov

Nov

Nov

Mar

Mar

Mar

Mar

Mar

Mar

Jul

VIRGINIA

Jul

OREGON

Jul

NEVADA

Jul

MAINE

Jul

GEORGIA

Jul

ALASKA

Nov

Nov

Nov

Nov

Nov

Nov

Jul

Jul

MARYLAND

Jul

HAWAII

Nov

Nov

Nov

Mar

Mar

Mar

Nov

Jul

WASHINGTON

Jul

Nov

PENNSYLVANIA

Jul

NEW HAMPSHIRE

Mar

Mar

Mar

ARIZONA

total
Nov

Jul

Jul

IDAHO

Nov

Nov

Mar

Mar

Mar

Mar

Nov

Nov

Nov

Jul

WEST VIRGINIA

Jul

RHODE ISLAND

Jul

NEW JERSEY

Jul

MASSACHUSETTS

Mar

Mar

ARKANSAS

Jul

Jul

NEW MEXICO

Jul

MICHIGAN

Jul

ILLINOIS

Nov

Nov

Nov

Nov

Mar

Mar

Jul

WISCONSIN

Jul

Nov

SOUTH CAROLINA

Mar

Mar

Mar

Mar

CALIFORNIA

Nov

Nov

Mar

Mar

Mar

Mar

Mar

Mar

Nov

Nov

Nov

Nov

Jul

WYOMING

Jul

Nov

SOUTH DAKOTA

Jul

NEW YORK

Jul

MINNESOTA

Jul

INDIANA

Jul

COLORADO

Nov

Jul

Jul

MISSISSIPPI

Jul

IOWA

Nov

Nov

Nov

Mar

Mar

Mar

Jul

U.S. Total

Jul

TENNESSEE

Jul

Nov

NORTH CAROLINA

Mar

Mar

Mar

CONNECTICUT

Nov

Nov

Mar

Mar

Mar

Mar

Mar

Nov

Nov

Nov

Jul

TEXAS

Jul

Nov

NORTH DAKOTA

Jul

MISSOURI

Jul

KANSAS

Jul

DELAWARE

Nov

Model
R0 = 1
Active stay−at−home
Active mask mandate
Active travel ban

Mar

Mar

Mar

Mar

Mar

Jul

UTAH

Jul

OHIO

Jul

MONTANA

Jul

KENTUCKY

Jul

Nov

Nov

Nov

Nov

Nov

DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA

Figure 7: Smoothed means of the model-implied effective reproduction numbers Rt of COVID-19 in U.S. states (see Appendix A.3 for details). The shaded red areas denote
2-standard-deviation confidence bands. Estimation is performed through forward/backward extended Kalman filtering, using the time series of death counts per state from
February 12 to November 30, 2020. Our estimation methodology is detailed in Appendix B. The effective reproduction rate estimates correspond to the ratios of estimated βt0
multiplied by the policy dummies and divided by the sum of the daily fatality and recovery rates (γ + δ), scaled by the fraction of a state’s population that remains susceptible.
The figure also shows the periods of time in which the different containment policies were active. Green shaded areas correspond to active stay-at-home policies, purple areas
to active mask mandates, and yellow areas to active travel bans. Horizontal blue lines correspond the standard value of Rt = 1, below which the virus does not reproduce itself
explosively.

Nov

8

2

4

total

0

8
6
4

6

4

2

0

12

8

4

0

8

6

4

total

total

total

2

0

8

6

4

2

0

8

6

4

2

0

8

6

4

total

total

2

0

total
total

2
0
8
6
4
2
0
8
6
4
2
0
8
6
4
2
0

total
total
total
total

12
0 2 4 6 8
8 10
6
4
2
0

8
6
4
2
0
6
4
2
0
8
6
4

total
total
total

2
0
8 10
6
4
2
0
8
6
4
2
0
8
6
2
0

4

total
2

total
total

8
6
4
2
0
8
6
4
2
0
8 10
6
4

total
total
total

2
0
6
4
2
0
8
6
4
2
0
8
6

total

0

4

total
total

8
6
4
2
0
8
6
4
2
0
8
6
4

total
total
total

2
0
12
0 2 4 6 8
8
6
4
2
0
6
4

total
total

2
0

8
6
4
2
0
8
6
4

total
total
total

2
0
8
6
4
2
0
8
6
4
2
0
8
6
4

total
total
total

2
0
8
6
4
2
0

6
4
2
0
8
6
4

total
total
total

2
0
8
6
4
2
0
8
6
4
2
0
8
6
4
2
0

total
total

8
6
4
2
0
8
6
4

total
total
total

2
0
6
4
2
0
8
6
4
2
0
8
6
4

total
total

2
0

32

6e+05

3e+05

0e+00

3500000

1500000

0

6e+05

0e+00

200000

100000

0

150000

0

15000

5000

Mar

Mar

Mar

Mar

Mar

Mar

Jul

VERMONT

Jul

OKLAHOMA

Jul

NEBRASKA

Jul

LOUISIANA

Jul

FLORIDA

Jul

ALABAMA

Nov

Nov

Nov

Nov

Nov

Nov

Mar

Mar

Mar

Mar

Mar

Mar

Jul

VIRGINIA

Jul

OREGON

Jul

NEVADA

Jul

MAINE

Jul

GEORGIA

Jul

ALASKA

Nov

Nov

Nov

Nov

Nov

Nov

Jul

Jul

MARYLAND

Jul

HAWAII

Nov

Nov

Nov

Mar

Mar

Mar

Nov

Jul

WASHINGTON

Jul

Nov

PENNSYLVANIA

Jul

NEW HAMPSHIRE

Mar

Mar

Mar

ARIZONA

Nov

Jul

Jul

IDAHO

Nov

Nov

Mar

Mar

Mar

Mar

Nov

Nov

Nov

Jul

Nov

WEST VIRGINIA

Jul

RHODE ISLAND

Jul

NEW JERSEY

Jul

MASSACHUSETTS

Mar

Mar

ARKANSAS

Jul

Jul

NEW MEXICO

Jul

MICHIGAN

Jul

ILLINOIS

Nov

Nov

Nov

Nov

Mar

Mar

Jul

WISCONSIN

Jul

Nov

SOUTH CAROLINA

Mar

Mar

Mar

Mar

CALIFORNIA

Nov

Mar

Mar

Mar

Mar

Mar

Mar

Jul

Jul

WYOMING

total
Nov

Nov

Nov

Nov

Nov

Nov

SOUTH DAKOTA

Jul

NEW YORK

Jul

MINNESOTA

Jul

INDIANA

Jul

COLORADO

Jul

Jul

MISSISSIPPI

Jul

IOWA

Nov

Nov

Nov

Mar

Mar

Data
Model

Jul

TENNESSEE

Jul

Nov

NORTH CAROLINA

Mar

Mar

Mar

CONNECTICUT

Nov

Mar

Mar

Mar

Mar

Mar

Nov

Nov

Nov

Jul

TEXAS

Jul

Nov

NORTH DAKOTA

Jul

MISSOURI

Jul

KANSAS

Jul

DELAWARE

total

6e+05

1200000

25000

Nov

Mar

Mar

Mar

Mar

Mar

Jul

UTAH

Jul

OHIO

Jul

MONTANA

Jul

KENTUCKY

Jul

Nov

Nov

Nov

Nov

Nov

DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA

Figure 8: Smoothed means of the model-implied cumulative number of COVID-19 infections in U.S. states. The figures also shows the number of infections that are recorded
in state-level data from JHU. We obtain the cumulative number of infections by summing all populations per states except the susceptible. Estimation is performed through
forward/backward extended Kalman filtering, using the time series of death counts per state from February 12 to November 30, 2020. Our estimation methodology is detailed
in Appendix B.

0

total

total

4e+05
2e+05
0e+00

10000

0

1000000

0

40000

20000

0

4e+05

2e+05

0e+00

total

total

total

total

100000

0

0e+00 3e+05 6e+05

total
total

400000
0
40000
20000
0
8e+05
4e+05
0e+00
0e+00 4e+04 8e+04

total
total
total
total

1000000
0
3e+05
0e+00

total
total
total

100000
0
1000000
0
3000000
0 1000000
250000
100000

total
total
total

0
150000
50000
0

1500000
0
2500000

total
total
total

1000000
0
1000000
0
150000
0
8e+05

total
total
total

4e+05
0e+00
0e+00 3e+05 6e+05

total
total

3e+05
0e+00
6e+05
0e+00
4e+05
0e+00
4e+06
2e+06
0e+00

total
total
total
total

100000
0
50000
20000
0

8e+05
4e+05
0e+00
0e+00 2e+05 4e+05
6e+05
3e+05

total
total
total
total

0e+00
0e+00 4e+05 8e+05
8e+05
4e+05
0e+00

total
total

120000
0 40000
0 100000 250000
4e+05
0e+00
200000

total
total
total

100000
0
2e+06
0e+00

100000
40000
0
2e+05
0e+00
0 40000 100000

total
total
total
total

1200000
0 400000
150000
0 50000

33

Data
Counterfactual

0e+00

2e+05

4e+05

6e+05

8e+05

Estimated number of infections (SC)

May

Jul

Sep

Nov

(a) South Carolina.

Data
Counterfactual

0

10000

30000

50000

70000

Estimated number of infections (WY)

May

Jul

Sep

Nov

(b) Wyoming.

Figure 9: Time series of estimated number of infected individuals in select states. The grey line marks the posterior
(smoothed) mean of the cumulative number of infections in the baseline. The red line denotes the posterior (smoothed)
mean of the cumulative number of infections in the counterfactual in which a federal interstate travel ban goes into effect
on March 17, 2020. Estimation is performed through forward/backward extended Kalman filtering, using the time series of
death counts per state from February 12 to November 30, 2020. Our estimation methodology is detailed in Appendix B.

34

