Kids Today: Remote Education in the time of COVID-19
Adriana Mejia Castaño, Javier E Hernandez, Angie Mendez Llanos
ABSTRACT. With the recent COVID-19 breakup, it became necessary to
implement remote classes in schools and universities to safeguard health and
life. However, many students (teachers and parents, also) face great difficulties
accessing and staying in class due to technology limitations, affecting their
education. Using several nationally representative datasets in Colombia, this
article documents how the academic performance of students in their final
high school year is affected due to technologies, aggregated by municipalities.
We conclude that internet access strongly affects these results, and little
improvement on the internet/computer access will reflect better academic
performance. Under these conditions, belonging to an ethnic group or high
rurality (non-geographic centralized municipalities) has a negative impact.
Policy implications are discussed.
KEYWORDS. descriptive analysis, learning experience, random forest,
educational gap, internet usage, academic performance.

INTRODUCTORY PARAGRAPH. Governments across the world ordered
measures for management, control, and prevention of Covid-19, especially
how to proceed for a remote academic continuity program. UNESCO on its
website has several resources for distance learning solutions, as resources to
provide psychosocial support, digital learning management systems, Massive
Open Online Course (MOOC) Platforms and self-directed learning content,
and so on (UNESCO, 2020). According to Hartley and Bendixen (2010), there
is strong evidence that learning has become more accessible due to the internet
and helps students by improving their academic achievement (Sazili &
Khafidhah, 2017). However, implementation of these policies or platforms
requires (Zhao, Lu, Huang & Wang, 2010):
● Learning skills, self-regulatory skills, epistemological beliefs,
motivation, self-efficacy, ability, physical challenges, and learning
disabilities.
● The autonomy of use, since the use of the internet is not properly
controlled, could have a negative impact (Sazili & Khafidhah, 2017).
● Social and parental support.
● Hypermedia learning material as videos, music, images, and e-books.
● Access and quality of access to the internet, computer, mobile
telephone, or tablet for each student.

In particular, these implementations could increment the gap in access to
quality education in low-income or geographically remote populations, which
keeps countries from achieving sustainable development goals from the
United Nation Development Programme (Zhao, Lu, Huang & Wang, 2010).
Despite the need to establish these remote programs, there is little empirical
evidence on how technologies in the last years affect their performance (Zhao,
Lu, Huang & Wang, 2010) and what is the effect of its absence. This is a
critical question given that in pandemic times almost all academic activities
require internet access and all economic activities resulted affected (presented
reductions) due to the pandemic (Chetty, Friedman, Hendren & Stepner,
2020).
In Colombia, data sets like those provided by the ICFES (Colombian Institute
for the Evaluation of Education) have long comparisons over time about the
academic achievement of students in all stages. Most of the studies over these
data indicate that the covariables that most affect the academic performance
(have a good score), according to Chica, Galvis, and Ramirez (2011) are
socioeconomic status, parents scholarship, the number of hours in the school,
school type (private or public) and gender; but there is little work on how
technologies affect it.

The current article aims to fill this gap. Using nationally representative
samples of children in their final high school year from 2014 to 2019, this
article addresses two related research questions:
! Which municipalities have the most difficulty in implementing the
remote academic continuity program?
! What should be the municipalities’ prioritization (in each state) for
information technology programs investment?
We decide to proceed using three classification algorithms and compare them
to predict academic performance. Solving these questions will help decisionmakers focus on certain geographical areas to develop specific intervention
programs to improve the learning experience and results of high school and
middle school students.
BACKGROUND. In this era of high internet connectivity, which brings
positive and negative impacts in our lives, many facets are linked to its access;
and education is not an exception. Since the early 2000s, it has been noticed
(Pereira, Pleguezuelos, Meri, 2007; Greenhow, Robelia, Hughes, 2009) that
there were necessary changes to take advantage of the online resources.
Parents and teachers know the importance and necessity of computer usage
and internet access in all stages of academic formation (Bassok, Latham,
2017).

In kindergarten students in the United States, Bassok, and Latham (2017),
found that computer access increases academic children skills. The results of
Amorim, Jeon, Abel, Felisberto, Barbosa, and Martins (2020), in Brazil, show
that technologies, specifically using games, improves reading scores.
In high school students, specifically in China, the relation between internet
self-efficacy, internet accessibility, behavior, academic performance between
others was investigated (Zhao, Lu, Huang & Wang, 2010; Penaranda, AragonMuriel, Micolta, 2014). There is strong evidence that digital inequality exists
on the internet, and students with internet access at home had a better
academic performance. In the United States, Rickles, Heppen, Allensworth,
Sorensen, and Walters (2018), found no statistically significant differences in
longer-term outcomes between students taking online and face-to-face
courses; this could indicate that online courses have the same benefits in some
populations (a majority of Hispanic and African American students).
In college students, Junco and Cotten (2012), and Sazili and Khafidhah (2017)
found a negative correlation between academic performance and internet
usage, and a weak relationship with computer ownership.
In university students, Sushma, Draus, Goreva, Leone, and Caputo (2014)
pointed out that time spent on the internet could be a measure of academic
achievement under certain conditions, however, some online media could have
a negative effect on university students (Junco, 2012; Asemah, Okpanachi &

Edegoh, 2013). According to Paulsen and Mccormick (2020), student
engagement is necessary to have positive benefits. In countries like Malaysia
and Taiwan, the use of the internet is apparently a distractor. Indeed, the
results of Xu, Wang, Peng, and Wu (2019) indicate that discipline plays a vital
role in the academic success of undergraduate students; in particular, the
results show that the use of Internet data could differentiate and predict
student academic performance.
Therefore, the evidence suggests that in any stage of learning, technology
strongly affects academic performance across the world (Donald, Foehr, 2008)
and it is most notorious in pandemic times since all economic activities were
seriously affected (Chetty, Friedman, Hendren & Stepner, 2020) and internet
access became a necessity (Chiou and Tucker, 2020). Going deeper, it looks
like there is a way to predict academic performance based on some
covariables (Hellas et.al, 2018), and technologies could be one of them.
In Colombia there is an academic test provided by ICFES, proctors on
standardized tests, called SABER11, that scores students in their final high
school year, and also has self-reported socio-demographic information.
Analyzing data from 2009, Chica, Galvis, and Ramirez (2011) found that high
school graduates who own a computer are more likely to obtain a high grade
on SABER11, although internet possession was not statistically significant.
However, analyzing more recent data, internet access became an interest

covariable (see Appendix). In particular, family-related variables are the best
to predict academic performance (Garcia-Gonzalez, Skryta, 2019). The dataset
from ICFES also includes information of undergraduate students, and an
analysis of academic efficiency about these students shows that social
covariables play an important role (Rojas 2019; Delahoz-Dominguez,
Zuluaga, Fontalvo-Herrera, 2020).
During pandemic times it is necessary to understand how the internet or
computer access affects the score of SABER11 since that can offer a way to
comprehend the effect of these technologies in each municipality and which
are the best improvements according to each necessity. The actual existing
evidence, while limited, does support the notion that internet/computer access
strongly affects the academic performance of SABER11. The findings suggest
that, as we notice in literature, technologies strongly affect academic
performance. However, in this scenario, there are two covariables that need to
be in consideration: rurality and belonging to an ethnic group. Then upgrades
in technology could improve academic performance, but it is not enough:
teachers, parents, and the social environment play an important role. There are
necessary policies about technologies and, like Zhao, Lu, Huang, and Wang
(2010) and Sazili and Khafidhah (2017) pointed out, about increasing learning
skills in remote environments.

METHOD.
Data.
SABER11 tests have been modified during the last 20 years, we have chosen
the period from 2014 onwards since it has the same standardized content,
taking tests on 5 different subjects: critical reading, citizenship skill, English,
written communication, and quantitative reasoning; score from 0 to 100. Their
sum gives a global score from 0 to 500 (ICFES, 2020). This is the independent
variable that we consider in this study. This data also has socio-demographic
information such as internet accessibility, computer, family income,
habitability conditions, belonging to an ethnic group, among others. There are
8 municipalities that in this period did not take the SABER11 test, which are
not included in this work. This data was aggregated by municipality into
numerical covariables.
Given that data about internet ownership is self-reported by students, we also
decided to use the data reported by the Ministry of information technologies
and communications MINTIC, about the total number of internet subscribers,
the type of subscription and technology, indicators of internet reach by region,
information on internet providers by demand and participation statistics
(MINTIC, 2020).
Additionally, there is relevant information by region reported by the DANE
(National Administrative Department of Statistics), including accurate

population values (2018 Census). With this information it is possible to know
how rural a municipality is, to compare if this rurality is correlated with
scores, internet access, and other important covariables (DANE, 2020).
In the Appendix, we collect descriptive statistics from a consolidated data
frame aggregate by municipalities. From this exploratory data analysis and
since we need covariables that allows governmental investments, we conclude
that the main numerical covariables to use in this study are:
● CODE: numeric code that identifies the municipality,
● YEAR: year of the proctored test,
● INTERNET: percentage of students with self-reported internet,
● COMPUTER: percentage of students with self-reported computers,
● ETHNIC: percentage of students self-reported as belonging to an
ethnic group,
● SCHOOL: percentage of public schools,
● GLOBAL_SCORE: student global score average on SABER11,
● POPULATION: censused population during the test year,
● CONNECTIVITY: access to the internet per 1000 inhabitants,
● RURAL_INDEX: percentage of the population that lives in rural
sectors.
Analysis.

A first finding of the exploratory data analysis, see Appendix, is that if the
family owns a computer, the average score is higher but RURAL INDEX
decreases, coinciding with the findings of Chica, Galvis, and Ramirez (2011).
The results showed that scores have a mainly rural composition. Comparing
this with geographical location (Figure 1), we obtain that good scores are
geographically centralized, there are many families without the internet, and it
looks like these two variables are correlated.
In this kind of study, the variables are commonly analyzed via correlation
(Sazili & Khafidhah, 2017; Sushma et.al., 2014). In Figure 2, we can see a
heat map with the correlations of the initial set of covariables. We see a
positive correlation between INTERNET, COMPUTER, and
CONNECTIVITY. ETHNIC has a negative correlation with GLOBAL

GLOBAL SCORES IN 2018

CONNECTIVITY IN 2018

Figure 1. Global scores and connectivity in 2018 from the aggregated data
frame. Dark indicates better score/connectivity.

Figure 2. Correlation heat map for the initial set of variables.
SCORE, and finally, CONNECTIVITY also has a negative correlation with
RURAL INDEX. It is important to highlight that we continue considering
COMPUTER/CONNECTIVITY and INTERNET as covariables, even though
they are highly correlated since the goal of this work is to give indications/
policies about if it is better to invest on computers, on the internet, or in other
issues.
Classification. There are many algorithms, from linear and logistic regressions
to neural networks, to help identify and classify covariables/results. However,

we wanted to choose interpretative models, this is, models that classify but
also give us a statistically significant set of covariables. In the literature, it is
common to use linear or logistic regression (Bassok & Latham, 2017; Zhao,
Lu, Huang & Wang, 2010; Chica, Galvis, Ramírez, 2011; Paulsen and
Mccormick, 2020; Rickles, Heppen, Allensworth, Sorensen and Walters, 2018;
Riegle-Crumb, King, and Irizarry, 2019) but not common the use of complex
algorithms of machine learning (Amorim, Jeon, Abel, Felisberto, Barbosa and
Martins, 2020; Kelly, Olney, Donnelly, Nystrand and D’mello, 2018; Xu,
Wang, Peng and Wu, 2019; Garcia-Gonzalez, Skryta, 2019). As Hellas et.al
(2018) pointed out, outside of classification, there are also clustering, mining
and statistical methods in the literature to predict academic performance
across the world. Linear modeling is one of the most selected methods,
followed by probabilistic graphical models and decision trees.

In particular, in the work of Xu, Wang, Peng, and Wu (2019), they have
covariables as online duration, Internet traffic volume, connection frequency,
among others. And using decision trees, neural networks, and support vector
machines predict academic performance from these features. In this work, we

want to do something similar using another set of covariables with logistic
regression, decision forest, and regression forest.
Therefore, the initial model is a logistic regression given that this model shows
statistically significant covariables and how they affect (positive or negative)
the independent variable. Going deeper into the list of models, we found the
random forests, which is an ensemble learning method for classification,
regression, and other tasks that operates by constructing a multitude of
decision trees at training time and outputting the class that is the mode of the
classes (classification) or mean prediction (regression) of the individual trees.
Random decision forests correct for decision trees' habit of overfitting on the
training set.
We construct a classification algorithm over the municipalities considering the
initial set of covariables, which gives a list of municipalities at different
vulnerability levels and a few actionable features on which governments
(national, state, and/or municipal) can act upon. To use these algorithms, we
need a risk threshold that we define for each year as the global score average
minus k times the global score standard deviation (where k can be any real
number between 0 and 2; for optimal purposes we choose k=1). Also, we split
the data frame into training data (from 2014 to 2018) and validation data

(2019), to decide about the accuracy. The main results of the logistic
regression are:
● Considering the p-value for each covariable (less than 0.05), we
conclude that the relevant variables are INTERNET, COMPUTER,
ETHNIC, CONNECTIVITY, and RURAL INDEX.
● ETHNIC and INTERNET have positive coefficients which imply these
covariables have a positive impact on the global score.
● COMPUTER and RURAL INDEX have negative coefficients which
imply these covariables have a negative impact on the global score.
With this new set of covariables, we perform a regression random forest with
depth m (with m>2; we choose m=3) and a classifier random forest of depth l.
We compare the three models using the AUC, see Table 1 (Area under the
curve ROC): The ROC curve is a performance measurement for classification
problems at various thresholds settings. ROC is a probability curve and AUC
represents a degree or measure of separability. It tells how much a model is
capable of distinguishing between classes. The higher the AUC, the better the
model is at predicting 0’s as 0’s and 1’s as 1’s. The choice of parameters k, m,
l was made looking for AUC between 0.7 and 0.87 since lower AUC implies
that the model is underfitting and bigger implies that it is overfitting. Notice

that logistic regression, according to AUC, is the best classificatory up to these
conditions. If we increase the depth to any random forest, we get greater AUC,
Table 1.
AUC for each classification algorithm.
MODEL

AUC

Logistic regression

0.8684

Regression random forest (depth 3)

0.8653

Classifier random forest (depth 3)

0.7032

but the complexity of the algorithm increases. Each one predicts over each
municipality if it will be at risk or not, that is, if the average global score of the
municipality is greater or not than the risk threshold. To compare and use at
the same time the results of the three algorithms, we construct a vulnerability
level called TOTAL_RISK as the sum of the predicted risk of these three
models. This analysis allows to define 4 levels of vulnerability:
1. No vulnerability if TOTAL_RISK=0: none of the models marked it as
a municipality at vulnerability,
2. Low vulnerability if TOTAL_RISK=1: one of the models marked it as
vulnerable,
3. Medium vulnerability if TOTAL_RISK=2: two of the models marked
it as vulnerable,

4. Serious vulnerability if TOTAL_RISK=3: all the models marked it as
vulnerable.
In Figure 3, we can see a map of Colombia with all levels of TOTAL_RISK.
To determine how good the estimations are, we can compute a confusion
matrix, which is a specific table layout that allows visualization of the
performance of the algorithm. Each column of the matrix represents the
instances in a predicted vulnerability while each row represents the instances
in actual risk, and determines if the algorithm is confusing classes. In this
case, the first row of the matrix is (914, 21, 5, 8) and the second row is (83,
14, 9, 58). For example, the last column (8, 58) implies that 66 municipalities
are at serious vulnerability (8 of them are false positives, that is, 8
municipalities are labeled as ‘at vulnerability’ but they are not). We notice that
the quantity of false positives and false negatives (83) is little; therefore, the
predictions are accurate.
Beyond classification. In Figure 3, we also notice some interesting
municipalities in the center of the country, in high vulnerability, contradicting
the commonly believed that remote locations are always vulnerable. This
implies that not necessarily being surrounded by no vulnerability affects
completely this covariable.

One of the findings was Coyaima in Tolima, in the center of the country. In
Tolima, during the last years, the percentage of the population belonging to an
ethnic group is near to 5%, and the percentage of rurality is around 50%, but

Figure 3. Vulnerability levels in Colombia. Dark indicates high TOTAL_RISK.

when we choose Coyaima, those numbers dramatically scale; the percentage
of belonging to an ethnic group is over 70% in the last years and rurality is
84%. Reflecting one of the main conclusions: belonging to an ethnic group
highly affects vulnerability, controlling access to technologies.

Changing to Altos del Rosario in Bolivar, in the north of the country, we
notice the same pattern: a high percentage of ethnic population and rurality but
few internet connections and little computer ownership. However, we can also
have some municipalities as Leticia in Amazonas (the last point at the south)
without vulnerability. Taking a look at the state as a whole, the percentage of
ETHNIC and RURAL INDEX are over 80%, and COMPUTER and
INTERNET below to 20%; but in Leticia, we get different values, it is
important to note that Leticia is the capital of this state.
We can also evaluate the percentage of municipalities at each vulnerability
level by state, this is an interesting point of view because it can be seen that
states with a large number of municipalities with high vulnerability have some
municipalities with no vulnerability, for example, Choco and Amazonas.
These zones can be a reference to improve on their neighbors. Listing states
with the count of municipalities in each vulnerability we found that Vaupés,
Chocó, Guainía, and Amazonas are states that need serious intervention as
soon as possible since almost 67% of its municipalities are in serious
vulnerability.
Running a Bonferroni to understand each vulnerability level, we notice that
low and no vulnerability have significant differences in self-reported internet,
computer ownership, belonging to an ethnic group, and connectivity. Low and
medium vulnerability in connectivity; and medium and serious vulnerability in

ethnic group and connectivity. Since connectivity and belonging to an ethnic
group are common variables, in Table 2, we analyze the average number of
connections per 1000 habitants and percentage of students belonging to an
ethnic group, in each vulnerability level, obtaining that municipalities at
serious vulnerability have a high percentage of students belonging to an ethnic
group, opposite to no vulnerability municipalities.
Table 2.
Average in two covariables according to vulnerability.
Vulnerability

Average CONNECTIVITY

Average ETHNIC

No

42.92

4%

Low

12.94

38%

Medium

2.73

51%

Serious

7.54

89%

Improvements. Next, we can use the vulnerability model to determine if an
improvement on the internet and/or computer ownership estimates that the
municipality/state is no longer vulnerable. Considering Santa Lucia in
Atlántico, in recent years this municipality has been the focus of attention due
to a flood when the dam channel broke. Because of this, there are many social
initiatives in this municipality. In 2019, was reported a percentage of 6.7% on
INTERNET, 24.6 % on COMPUTERS, 77.5% on ETHNIC,
CONNECTIVITY of 15%, RURAL INDEX of 14%, and an average global

score of 201.26. According to this model, this municipality is highly
vulnerable. With this model, if we improve 23% on computers we get low
vulnerability, showing how better conditions in the house to study (such that,
having a computer) could improve academic performance.
Now, consider a State as Amazonas, in the south of the country. As we notice
before, more than 70% of its municipalities are in serious vulnerability. Doing
a 47% improvement on computer ownership we get medium vulnerability,
however, no other improvement gets low or no vulnerability. Adding 144
internet connections vulnerability changes to medium. Then state policies also
could reflect better academic performance.
RESULTS.
With COVID isolation measures banning students from classrooms, most
learning has moved online, but even those pupils who can successfully
connect are likely to fall behind if not possessed of the self-direction and
motivation needed for remote education. Moreover, research has shown that
poorer students perform worse in online courses (Chetty, Friedman, Hendren
& Stepner, 2020) than face-to-face ones.
Our analysis found that the most relevant covariables related to an increased
academic vulnerability in Colombia, related to technologies, are Connectivity
per 1000 inhabitants (as a measure of reliable broadband internet access) and

belonging to an ethnic group (associated with low income). Amazonas,
Vaupés, Guainía, and Chocó need serious intervention, given the high values
shown for the vulnerability factors measured. Geographic centralization
(associated with increased urbanization, as measured by the Rural Index), is
also a strong predictor of better scores for students.
We found some centralized municipalities with high vulnerability as Coyaima
in Tolima and Altos del Rosario in Bolívar, surrounded by municipalities of
zero vulnerability. In particular, these municipalities have low access to the
internet and computer and high rurality and percentage of belonging to an
ethnic group, showing an interesting feature of Colombia.
According to Hartley and Bendixen (2010), improving the academic results
and reducing the large gap in academic achievement requires the interventions
to focus on maintaining the students’ interactions (among themselves and with
their teachers), also learning skills in the students are necessary as selfregulatory skills, epistemological beliefs, motivation, self-efficacy, ability,
physical challenges, and learning disabilities. For this scenario to be realized,
a series of factors have to line up: schools need to have the resources to
implement remote learning, students need to have access to computers and
reliable internet connections, and parents need to have the ability, time,
energy, and patience to turn into home-school instructors.

A concerted effort between the state government and parents seems to be the
most effective strategy. Complementary projects might include:
● Optimizing accessible solutions to mobile devices given that students
have some access to them.
● Offering limited data plans (access granted only to academic sites, to
avoid misuse).
● Focused policies on the rural ethnic minorities, the communities with
higher vulnerability.
● Lending computers to families.
● Delivering financial stimulus to the municipalities most at
vulnerability, conditional on the improvement of academic results
compared with the previous year.
● Support to parents so they can step up as temporary teachers.
The challenges are related to providing students at vulnerability the necessary
tools for success, not only laptops and reliable broadband internet access but
also to motivate parents to help their children succeed academically.
NOTES. Interested readers can refer to the original data set to see how
covariables were precisely coded https://github.com/team63/
remote_education.git. Also, at https://public.tableau.com/profile/
sergio.daniel.segura#!/vizhome/shared/69CQ6C95X and https://

public.tableau.com/profile/sergio.daniel.segura#!/vizhome/Descrip_Modelo/
Departamento, the authors developed two interactive dashboards on Tableau
public. The first one, with statistics by municipalities, states, and years over
the covariables GLOBAL SCORE, CONNECTIVITY, RURAL INDEX,
ETHNIC, INTERNET, and COMPUTER; the other one we add the new
variable TOTAL_RISK.
REFERENCES.
Amorim, Americo N, Lieny Jeon, Yolanda Abel, Eduardo F Felisberto,
Leopoldo N. F Barbosa, and Natália Martins Dias. "Using Escribo Play Video
Games to Improve Phonological Awareness, Early Reading, and Writing in
Preschool." Educational Researcher 49.3 (2020): 188-97.
Asemah, Ezekiel, Ruth Okpanachi, & Leo Edegoh. “Influence of Social Media
on the Academic Performance of the Undergraduate Students of Kogi State
University, Anyigba, Nigeria”. Research on Humanities and Social Sciences
3.12 (2013). https://www.iiste.org/Journals/index.php/RHSS/article/view/
7118/7350
Bassok, Daphna, & Scott Latham. "Kids Today: The Rise in Children’s
Academic Skills at Kindergarten Entry." Educational Researcher 46.1 (2017):
7-20. https://doi.org/10.3102/0013189X17694161

Chetty, Raj, John N. Friedman, Nathaniel Hendren, & Michael Stepner. 2020.
“How Did COVID-19 and Stabilization Policies Affect Spend and
Employment? A New Real-Time Economic Tracker Based on Private Sector
Data”. NBER Working Paper 27431 (2020). https://www.nber.org/papers/
w27431
Chica, Sandra, Diana Galvis & Andrés Ramírez. “Determinantes del
rendimiento académico en Colombia: Pruebas ICFES SABER11-2009”.
Documentos de trabajo Economía y Finanzas EAFIT (2011).
Chiou, Lesley, and Catherine Tucker. “Social Distancing, Internet Access and
Inequality.” NBER Working Paper 26982 (2020). doi:10.3386/w26982.
DANE. “Censo nacional de población y vivienda 2018”. (2020). https://
www.dane.gov.co/index.php/estadisticas-por-tema/demografia-y-poblacion/
censo-nacional-de-poblacion-y-vivenda-2018
Delahoz-Dominguez, Enrique, Rohemi Zuluaga, Tomas Fontalvo-Herrera.
“Dataset of academic performance evolution for engineering students”. Data
in brief 30 (2020)
Donald, Roberts, Ulla Foehr. ”Trends in media use”. Future of children 18.1
(2008): 11-37.

Garcia-Gonzalez, Juan, Anastasija Skrita. “Predicting Academic Performance
Based on Students' Family Environment: Evidence for Colombia Using
Classification Trees”. Psychology society & education 11.3 (2019): 299-311
Greenhow, Christine, Beth Robelia, and Joan E Hughes. "Learning, Teaching,
and Scholarship in a Digital Age: Web 2.0 and Classroom Research: What
Path Should We Take Now?" Educational Researcher 38.4 (2009): 246-59.
Hartley, Kendall, and Lisa D Bendixen. "Educational Research in the Internet
Age: Examining the Role of Individual Characteristics." Educational
Researcher 30.9 (2001): 22-26. https://doi.org/10.3102/0013189X030009022
Hellas, Arto, Petri Ihantola, Andrew Petersen, Vangel V. Ajanovski, Mirela
Gutica, Timo Hynninen, Antti Knutas, Juho Leinonen, Chris Messom, and
Soohyun Nam Liao. “Predicting Academic Performance: A Systematic
Literature Review”. Proceedings Companion of the 23rd Annual ACM
Conference on Innovation and Technology in Computer Science Education
(ITiCSE ’18 Companion), July 2–4, 2018, Larnaca, Cyprus. ACM, New York,
NY, USA, 25 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3293881.3295783
ICFES. “Transparencia y acceso a la información pública, resultados pruebas
de estado en Colombia”. (2020). https://www2.icfes.gov.co/web/guest/
resultados-saber

Junco, Reynol, Shelia Cotten. “No A 4 U: The relationship between
multitasking and academic performance”. Computers & Education 59.2
(2012): 505-514.
Junco, Reynol. “In-class multitasking and academic performance“. Computers
in human behavior 28.6 (2012): 2236-2243
Kelly, Sean, Andrew M Olney, Patrick Donnelly, Martin Nystrand, and Sidney
K D’mello. "Automatically Measuring Question Authenticity in Real-World
Classrooms." Educational Researcher 47.7 (2018): 451-64. Web.
MINTIC. “Internet dedicado, accesos fijos a nivel nacional”. (2020). https://
colombiatic.mintic.gov.co/679/w3-propertyvalue-47271.html
Paulsen, Justin, and Alexander C Mccormick. "Reassessing Disparities in
Online Learner Student Engagement in Higher Education." Educational
Researcher 49.1 (2020): 20-29.
Penaranda Armbrecht, Jose, Alberto Aragon-Muriel, Germania Micolta.
“Description and Preliminary Evaluation of a Program for Improving
Chemistry Learning in High School Students”. Journal of chemical education
91.9 (2014): 1439-1445
Pereira, Jose, Eulogio Pleguezuelos, Alex Meri. ”Effectiveness of using
blended learning strategies for teaching and learning human anatomy”.
Medical Education 41.2 (2007): 189-195.

Rickles, Jordan, Jessica B Heppen, Elaine Allensworth, Nicholas Sorensen,
and Kirk Walters. "Online Credit Recovery and the Path to On-Time High
School Graduation." Educational Researcher 47.8 (2018): 481-91.
Riegle-Crumb, Catherine, Barbara King, and Yasmiyn Irizarry. "Does STEM
Stand Out? Examining Racial/Ethnic Gaps in Persistence Across
Postsecondary Fields." Educational Researcher 48.3 (2019): 133-44.
Rojas Ospina, David Esteban. “Class Relations in the Higher Educational
System and its Effects in Academic Performance: the Case of Bogota”.
REMIE-MULTIDISCIPLINARY JOURNAL OF EDUCATIONAL RESEARCH
9.1(2019): 1-24
Sazili, Mohd, and Ku Nur Khafidhah Ku Rusli. “The Influence of Internet
Usage on Student’s Academic Performance”, International Journal of
Academic Research in Business and Social Sciences 7 (2017): 873-887.
doi.org/10.6007/IJARBSS/v7-i8/3301
Sushma, Mishra, Peter Draus, Natalya Goreva, Gregory Leone & Donald
Caputo. “The Impact Of Internet Addiction On University Students And Its
Effect On Subsequent Academic Success: A Survey Based Study”, Issues in
Information Systems 15.1 (2014): 344-352. http://iacis.org/iis/
2014/67_iis_2014_344-352.pdf

UNESCO. “Distance learning solutions. More on UNESCO's COVID-19
Education Response”. (2020). https://en.unesco.org/covid19/
educationresponse/solutions
Zhao, Ling, Yaobin Lu, Wayne Huang & Qiuhong Wang. “Internet inequality:
The relationship between high school students’ Internet use in different
locations and their Internet self-efficacy”, Computers & Education 55.4
(2010): 1405-1423.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2010.05.010.
Xu, Xing, Jianzhong Wang, Hao Peng, Ruilin Wu. “Prediction of academic
performance associated with internet usage behaviors using machine learning
algorithms”, Computers in Human Behavior 98 (2019): 166-173. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2019.04.015
AUTHORS.
ADRIANA MEJIA CASTAÑO, PhD, is an adjoint professor of mathematics
and statistics at Universidad del Norte, km 5 via Puerto Colombia,
Barranquilla - Colombia, mejiala@uninorte.edu.co, +57 3058134462.
Corresponding author.
JAVIER E. HERNANDEZ, Mg. Management, Independent Researcher, Cra
15 #110 18, Bogotá - Colombia, jeheca85@yahoo.com, +57 3229488884.

ANGIE MENDEZ LLANOS, Mathematician, Independent Researcher , Calle
128 F # 104 05, Bogotá - Colombia, almendezl@unal.edu.co, +57
3213474300.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS. This work was realized under the support of
Correlation One, MINTIC, and the program DS4A, the second version in
Colombia. We thank the other members of team 63: DIEGO AVILA, DIEGO
SEGURA, JUAN CARREÑO, and SERGIO SEGURA.
APPENDIX
Here we collect descriptive statistics over the aggregated data frame.
Analyzing the main covariables across time (COMPUTER, INTERNET,
ETHNIC and RURAL INDEX), we notice that the percentage of students
belonging to an ethnic group, access to computers, and rurality are almost the
same in recent years, however, access to the internet appears to grow, from a
global coverage of 20% to 33% (Figure I-a). Analyzing only the main states
(Cundinamarca, Antioquia, Valle del Cauca, Atlántico and Magdalena, see
Figure I-b) we notice a similar behavior but comparing with Figure I-a, the
percentage belonging to an ethnic group and rurality decrease (from 11% to
3% and from 56% to 51%, respectively), access to computer and internet
increase; showing, as we expected, large differences in these demographic

aspects. Analyzing the main municipalities (Bogotá, Medellín, Cali,
Barranquilla, and Cartagena), the variations are remarkable (Figure I-c) over
COMPUTER and INTERNET ACCESS (highly increased) and RURAL
INDEX (almost disappeared).
Focusing on the global score in the main states in 2019 we notice that good
scores (in dark blue) are usually near to the capital (Figure II), showing that
investment in quality education is performed mainly in big cities, except in
Bolivar (capital Cartagena) where the academic performance is low. However,
Cundinamarca has good scores in almost every municipality, we assume that
this happens because Bogotá (the country capital) is in this State.
We now analyze the levels of vulnerability predicted by our algorithm,
remember that the choice of the threshold was made to detect the
municipalities most at risk. We found that 90% of municipalities in the
country obtain no risk. This could be an indicator that, for future works, the
threshold risk could be the average in every year. At low risk is 1%, in

Figure I-a. Main covariables across time in the entire country.

Figure I-b. Main covariables across time in the largest states.

Figure I-c. Main covariables across time in the main municipalities.

Figure II. Global scores
(high scores in dark) in
SABER11-2019 in the
largest states.
medium risk 3%, and in high risk 6%.
As mentioned before, the municipalities in high vulnerability are mainly in
remote locations, the percentage of computers across time is stable, the
percentage of internet access has increased since 2017, but the percentage of
students belonging to an ethnic group and rurality are high (near 70%). In
medium vulnerability municipalities, ETHNIC is around 52% and RURAL
INDEX 67%, showing that belonging to an ethnic group is decisive for this
classification. In low vulnerability, ETHNIC values are around 39% and
RURAL INDEX 50%; and in no vulnerability, the values are 4% for ETHNIC
and 55% for RURALITY. Showing that at this level ETHNIC is too decisive.
Finally, we want to analyze the relation of connectivity (access to internet
reported by MINTIC), RURAL INDEX, GLOBAL SCORE, and
TOTAL_RISK (Figure III): The municipalities in high risk (dark blue) have

poor connectivity, showing that it is really necessary to improve internet
connection across the country as a technology measure to improve academic
performance.

Figure III. Comparison between RURAL INDEX, GLOBAL SCORE,
CONNECTIVITY (y-axis), AND TOTAL_RISK. Dark circles show high
vulnerability.

