Apps Against the Spread: Privacy Implications and User
Acceptance of COVID-19-Related Smartphone Apps on Three
Continents
Christine Utz

arXiv:2010.14245v2 [cs.HC] 1 Feb 2021

Ruhr University Bochum
Bochum, Germany
christine.utz@rub.de

Florian M. Farke

Ruhr University Bochum
Bochum, Germany
florian.farke@rub.de

Steffen Becker

Ruhr University Bochum
Bochum, Germany
Max Planck Institute for Security and
Privacy
Bochum, Germany
steffen.becker@rub.de

Franziska Herbert

Ruhr University Bochum
Bochum, Germany
franziska.herbert@rub.de

Martin Degeling

Ruhr University Bochum
Bochum, Germany
martin.degeling@rub.de

ABSTRACT
The COVID-19 pandemic has fueled the development of smartphone
applications to assist disease management. Many “corona apps” require widespread adoption to be effective, which has sparked public
debates about the privacy, security, and societal implications of
government-backed health applications. We conducted a representative online study in Germany (n = 1003), the US (n = 1003), and
China (n = 1019) to investigate user acceptance of corona apps, using a vignette design based on the contextual integrity framework.
We explored apps for contact tracing, symptom checks, quarantine
enforcement, health certificates, and mere information. Our results
provide insights into data processing practices that foster adoption and reveal significant differences between countries, with user
acceptance being highest in China and lowest in the US. Chinese
participants prefer the collection of personalized data, while German and US participants favor anonymity. Across countries, contact
tracing is viewed more positively than quarantine enforcement, and
technical malfunctions negatively impact user acceptance.

CCS CONCEPTS
• Security and privacy → Social aspects of security and privacy; Domain-specific security and privacy architectures; • Humancentered computing → Empirical studies in HCI .

KEYWORDS
digital contact tracing, COVID-19, privacy

1

INTRODUCTION

In early 2020, the global pandemic of coronavirus disease 2019
(COVID-19), caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), has driven the development of digital tools

Theodor Schnitzler

Ruhr University Bochum
Bochum, Germany
theodor.schnitzler@rub.de

Leonie Schaewitz

Ruhr University Bochum
Bochum, Germany
leonie.schaewitz@rub.de

Markus Dürmuth

Ruhr University Bochum
Bochum, Germany
markus.duermuth@rub.de
to assist traditional disease management methods in limiting the
spread of the novel coronavirus and future pathogens. Since then,
numerous software projects, especially involving smartphone applications, have been launched by public and private entities around
the world, with specific purposes that greatly vary, but all with the
common goal to help contain the spread of the pandemic.
These include smartphone apps for digital contact tracing, which
was identified to be an effective method to assist health authorities
in breaking chains of infection [21]. It uses proximity information
from smartphones to determine which other users of compatible
systems a person has been in recent close contact with, and if a
user tests positive for coronavirus, these contacts can be notified to
encourage timely isolation and testing. Among the first smartphone
apps released for this purpose was Singapore’s TraceTogether app,
launched on March 20, 2020 [26], and multiple countries around
the globe have since followed suit. Other regions developed digital
health certificate systems, first introduced in February 2020 in the
eastern Chinese city of Hangzhou [39]. Checkpoints could require
people to present their personal QR code displayed in the associated
app and only let them pass if the system considered them low-risk.
The travel industry has expressed an interest in similar systems to
reestablish international travel for people with a recent negative
test result [38]. Hong Kong issued a smartphone app, combined
with a QR code wristband, to ensure that people do not break
the government-mandated quarantine for new arrivals [60]. Other
countries including South Korea and Australia issued symptom
check apps that allow users to monitor their health for possible
symptoms of COVID-19 [8, 57]. The Australian app also serves as
an example for countless apps issued by both public and private
organizations to provide information about the virus, its spread,
rules of hygiene, and local regulations.

Utz, Becker, Schnitzler, Farke, Herbert, Schaewitz, Degeling, and Dürmuth

The use of smartphone applications in the fight against the pandemic has sparked intense public debates about the privacy, security,
and societal implications of government-recommended health apps
and specific aspects of their implementations. In Europe, the debate
mainly focused on the selection of a centralized or a decentralized
architecture for digital contact tracing [18], which involves questions of data transmission and the data recipient and ultimately
led to multiple countries adopting a decentralized approach due
to privacy concerns. The Chinese health code system has raised
questions about the consequences of technical issues and long-term
societal implications of apps used to regulate movement for the
sake of disease prevention [32]. The quarantine enforcement app
issued by the Polish government was subject to criticism due to the
collected data, technical malfunctions, and data retention of up to
six years [54].
The public interest in the organizational and technical details of
these “corona apps” is no surprise: Since their efficiency may depend
on widespread voluntary adoption [21], many were recommended
for general adoption by governments and health authorities. User
acceptance and their willingness to use these apps can thus be
critical for the overall success of smartphone apps in the efforts
to fight the pandemic. Many of the publicly discussed and criticized aspects are well-known elements in the theory of “privacy
as contextual integrity”, which acknowledges that factors beyond
the technical implementation, like social norms and expectations,
influence perceptions of privacy violations [44].
People’s willingness to share personal data from or with their
personal devices to benefit their healthcare has previously been
studied in a wide range of different contexts, including mental
health [36, 43], HIV [66], recovery from surgery [1] and rheumatic
diseases [41], but these studies are typically confined to specific
locations or populations. The COVID-19 pandemic offers the unique
opportunity to study on a large scale, in the context of a virus that
could infect anyone at any given time, which individual and privacyrelated factors influence people’s willingness to use an app that
not only serves individual goals but also has a societal purpose.
Research in this area thus not only informs the debate around
corona apps but can aid the design of health-related apps that would
benefit from widespread adoption outside the specific context of
the pandemic. As early as spring 2020, when the first smartphone
apps for digital contact tracing were rolled out, the HCI community
has taken this opportunity to investigate people’s willingness to
use mobile apps to help fight the COVID-19 pandemic, focusing on
apps for digital contact tracing [4, 31, 33, 56, 61, 69]. With countries
around the world also having issued apps for different purposes in
the pandemic, it is interesting to study factors for the adoption of
corona apps for purposes beyond contact tracing and how these
factors differ between app types. Public debates can lead to different
outcomes in different countries, influenced by cultural differences,
trust in technology and institutions, and regional developments of
the pandemic. It is therefore insightful to study user acceptance of
corona apps in different regions.
In this work, we present the results of an online survey conducted in Germany, the US, and China between June and August
2020 to investigate user acceptance of corona apps and the factors
that influence people’s willingness to use them. These countries
were chosen because they differ with respect to their perception

of privacy and the state of the COVID-19 pandemic. Our study is
based on a vignette design of hypothetical corona apps and inspired
by existing apps from around the world and the contextual integrity
framework.
Our research makes the following contributions to the HCI community:
• We expand existing knowledge about user perception and
acceptance of COVID-19-related smartphone apps beyond
the purpose of digital contact tracing and investigate people’s willingness to use them for other purposes found in
government-issued corona apps, i. e., quarantine enforcement, symptom checks, health certificates, and information.
Our data shows that contact tracing apps have the highest
public support across all countries.
• We extend existing research on the acceptability of corona
apps beyond the Western world and conduct the study in
China, where the pandemic first started and the use of smartphone apps for health screening and movement control is
widespread. While in all surveyed countries the most widely
discussed and used apps see more support, acceptance in
China is higher and not related to individual concerns or the
expected benefits.
• Our results show that there is skepticism towards apps provided by the government that results in 15 to 21 % of participants not willing to use any app in Germany and the US,
while in China users are more concerned that apps might
raise stress levels through continued awareness.

2

CONTEXTUAL INTEGRITY

Previous studies have found that privacy is often not the main concern of users when deciding whether to adopt a certain technology
or not. While this behavior is frequently attributed to the privacy
paradox [24, 45] – participants express high privacy concern but
rarely act accordingly – researchers increasingly argue that the
trade-off is more complex. According to Nissenbaum’s theory of
privacy as contextual integrity (CI), individual privacy preferences
and decisions can be described with respect to the appropriateness
of information flows [44]. What constitutes an appropriate flow
is determined by different factors, such as actors (Whose data is
involved? Who will send and receive it?), information types (What
types of data are concerned?), and transmission principles (What
are the technical and organizational means of the data transmission?). The examples of public debates in Section 1, such as the
Polish quarantine app or the discussion about a (de)centralized
infrastructure, illustrate that public debates about the privacy implications of new technology often implicitly refer to these factors.
The understanding of privacy as contextual integrity is based
on philosophical privacy theories that go beyond the famous “right
to be let alone” [67] and frames privacy not as an individual right
with fixed boundaries (e. g., the private home vs. the public square)
but as a concept that focuses on the role of information in relations. This focus on informational privacy is useful in the context
of the digital technologies we consider in this study, but it is worth
noting that other dimensions of privacy like decisional and locational privacy [52] as well as physical, social, and psychological

Privacy Implications and User Acceptance of COVID-19-Related Smartphone Apps

privacy [15] are discussed in the literature. The idea of “appropriateness” in CI highlights that privacy is a contested problem [40]
and that our understanding of privacy and norms associated with
it are continuously changing. Because of this, privacy as contextual integrity has seen wide adoption in computer science [13] and
HCI research [10] and has also been used in the context of health
data [43, 47]. Moreover, it was recently suggested as an appropriate research framework to evaluate potential long-term risks of
COVID-19-related surveillance technologies [64]. For this research,
the contextual integrity framework allows us to operationalize factors influencing privacy perceptions and norms so that we are able
to construct relevant app scenarios for our study (see Section 4.1.1).
Our study then shows whether this operationalization in factors
can actually help to better understand the importance of each factor
for privacy decision making.

participants. For advocates, all three dimensions played a subordinate role. Between late April and early May, 2020, Li et al. [33]
surveyed 208 US citizens on privacy-utility trade-offs on the basis
of six contact tracing app scenarios in two dimensions: centralized
vs. decentralized architecture and location collection of infected
users (in public places) vs. no location collection. Their preliminary
findings show that a majority of participants preferred to install
apps that use centralized servers and share diagnosed users’ recent
locations in public places to reveal hot spots of infection. Kaptchuk
et al. [31] conducted a survey with 789 US participants to study
the influence of accuracy and privacy on the intention to install
contact tracing apps. They found that 70–80 % of participants were
willing to install an app that is perfectly private, accurate, or both,
and that false negatives had a significantly stronger influence than
false positives or privacy risks.

3 RELATED WORK
3.1 User Perceptions of Digital Contact Tracing
Apps in the COVID-19 Pandemic
Since the emergence of the COVID-19 pandemic in early 2020, multiple research groups have investigated people’s privacy perceptions
of smartphone apps for digital contact tracing.
One of the earliest studies was conducted by Zhang et al. [69],
who explored US Americans’ perceptions of privacy and surveillance in the COVID-19 pandemic in an online survey with 2612
participants, administered between March 30 and April 1, 2020.
Their preliminary results indicate that Americans favor traditional
contact tracing and health screenings over app-based digital contact tracing. In a conjoint analysis the researchers identified two
attributes of contact tracing apps with statistically significant effects
on the reported likelihood of downloading the app: participants
preferred decentralized data storage and Bluetooth proximity technology over location tracking. Between late March and early April,
2020, Altmann et al. [4] conducted several representative online
surveys in France, Germany, Italy, the UK, and the US to study
the acceptance of app-based contact tracing. When shown the description of a hypothetical contact tracing app, 75 % of participants
indicated their willingness to install the app, with a significantly
lower acceptance in Germany and the US than in the other three
countries. The study found lower acceptance for participants who
have less trust in their national government, and the main reasons
against app installation were identified to be fear of government
surveillance after the pandemic and the phone being hacked. In
early April, Simko et al. [56] started a longitudinal study on contact
tracing and privacy with a sequence of online surveys, each with
around 100 participants from around the world. Their preliminary
results indicate that 72 % of participants would be at least somewhat likely to download a contact tracing app if it provides “perfect
data protection”. In April 2020, Trang et al. [61] conducted a survey
with 518 participants in Germany to examine app specifications
for mass acceptance of contact tracing apps in three dimensions:
benefit appeal, privacy design, and convenience design. Participants
were categorized into three groups based on their willingness to
install a contact tracing app: critics, undecided, and advocates. For
critics, self-benefit and high privacy were most important, while
high convenience design had the strongest effect for undecided

3.2

Sharing of Health Information

A related, broad field of research are users’ privacy perceptions and
sharing behavior of health data [9, 25, 36, 43, 48, 49]. A study investigating individuals’ views of sharing sensor data [43] revealed that
users were more comfortable sharing activity data such as sleep,
mood, and physical activity as opposed to communication logs,
location, and social activity. Users were more comfortable with
sharing the mentioned data with their doctors than with family
members or electronic health record systems [43]. Patients of a
clinic for mood and anxiety disorders were asked about a hypothetical app to better diagnose and treat their health disorder [36]. Most
of the patients stated to be willing to install such an app. Patients
were reluctant to share personal communication data (audio and
SMS) but more willing to share less personal data, such as when
their phone screen was turned on and off.
Relevant factors for non-disclosure of HIV health information
in the context of sex-social apps were stigmatization and the fear
for discrimination and disadvantages [49]. People using at-home
DNA testing feared surveillance by the government, saw the misuse
of a third party as potential risk of sharing health DNA data and
expressed the desire for transparency and some level of control
over their health DNA data. Participants also showed resignation
towards privacy as they felt a lack of control over their data [9].
In an interview study on the perception and use of mobile health
apps, “lack of need,” “lack of app literacy” and “lack of awareness”
were mentioned as barriers for the usage of health apps [48]. Users
reported aspects such as “lack of time and effort” and too much
storage space or high battery consumption as barriers to a continued
usage of health apps [48].
In the context of a workplace health promotion campaign involving the use of step-counting technology, participants had only
little concerns to share their activity data with organizational entities, such as their employer or technology companies, but were
more concerned regarding disclosure to other individuals [25].The
positive rhetoric of the campaign also had a positive influence on
the willingness to share activity data.

Utz, Becker, Schnitzler, Farke, Herbert, Schaewitz, Degeling, and Dürmuth

3.3

User Acceptance of Information
Technology

The most common and widely applied theoretical frameworks for
investigating factors that can explain usage intention and acceptance of information technology include the theory of planned
behavior [2] and the technology acceptance model (TAM [19]);
Venkatesh et al. [63] provide an overview.
Factors that have been identified to directly or indirectly influence the intention to use and accept technologies (e. g., apps, social
network sites, blogs) are perceived usefulness and perceived ease of
use [12, 19], social influence [29, 63], facilitating conditions, demographic factors like gender, age and experience [63], and trusting
the party behind the technologies [11].
Another investigated factor is privacy. Gu et al. [27] studied privacy concern for mobile applications in relation to the permissions
they request. They found that an app’s popularity had a positive
and the overall privacy concern a negative effect on download intention. Following this research, Wottrich et al. [68] studied the
trade-off between privacy and the value an app has for the user.
They found that perceived intrusiveness and privacy concern have
a negative impact on the decision whether or not to install an app,
though the positive effect of the perceived value of the app is more
important in the privacy calculus. Focusing on health-related apps,
Zhou et al. [70] surveyed and interviewed 117 smartphone users,
the majority of whom had already used mobile health apps. The
study found that privacy and security issues can be barriers to
adoption regardless of demographic factors.

4

METHOD

To understand which data processing factors influence people’s
willingness to use corona apps, we conducted an online survey in
Germany, the USA, and China between June and August 2020. At
the core of our study, we presented participants with ten scenarios
in the form of vignettes, each describing a hypothetical corona app,
and asked them to assess each app according to a set of criteria. In
the following, we describe our vignette design and the rest of our
questionnaire, the data collection process including the corresponding state of the pandemic in each country, and the methods used
for data analysis.

4.1

Vignette Design

Vignettes are “short stories about hypothetical characters in specified circumstances, to whose situation the interviewee is invited
to respond” [22] and have been used in previous work studying
contextual privacy [7, 20, 35]. The vignettes at the heart of our
study are composed of different factors of data processing practices,
inspired by the contextual integrity framework. Each factor can be
assigned one of multiple factor levels we determined by examining
existing corona apps.
4.1.1 Analyzing Existing Corona Apps for Data Processing Factors.
To ensure our study is firmly rooted in existing corona apps from
around the world, three researchers investigated the space of apps
and their data processing practices by systematically examining 43
apps from Wikipedia’s list of government-endorsed corona apps

as of April 27, 20201 . For each app, we analyzed publicly available
resources: listings in app stores, the app’s official website, terms of
service, privacy policies, and official press announcements. The
retrieved information focused on the concept of data flows in the
contextual integrity (CI) theory: actors (primary and secondary data
recipients), information types (collected data), and transmission
principles (what triggered a data transmission process, retention).
We also noted potential technical and societal implications of using an app as they were discussed in app reviews and the public
debate and could influence people’s willingness to install and use
an app. For systematization and documentation purposes we collected the following app metadata: name and country of the app,
its development process and status, and the underlying technical
mechanism(s) or protocol(s). We also identified the core purpose of
each app and grouped apps with similar functionalities to categorize
the landscape of government-backed corona apps.
To reduce complexity for our study, we streamlined the CI-based
aspects as follows: We did not differentiate between primary and
secondary data receivers (respectively, the organization responsible
for the data processing and third parties the data could possibly
be shared with). Similarly, we chose not to consider multi-stage
data transmissions (e. g., encounter information initially being sent
to no one and only stored on the phone but transmitted to health
authorities’ servers after a positive test result had been registered).
To reduce cognitive load for our participants, we differentiated between payload data and to what degree it allowed for identification
of the app user. This left us with five CI-based data collection factors
(2.–6. in the list below), to which we added the app’s purpose and
the aforementioned societal and technical implications.
For each factor, we determined a set of concrete factor levels
which we would later combine into scenarios of hypothetical yet
realistic corona apps for our survey. The factor levels were derived
from the respective information collected from real-world corona
apps, with the goal of reflecting the range of real-world practices
while keeping the number of factor levels as small as possible.
For example, the observed data retention times could be classified
as fixed short-term intervals (between 14 days, i. e., the typical
duration of quarantine for COVID-19 patients, and several weeks),
unspecified but identifiable points in time (“when the need for
contact tracing is over”), and unspecified / indefinite. This spectrum
is reflected in the final set of factor levels: one month (fixed shortterm interval), until the end of the current coronavirus regulations
(unspecified but identifiable), unspecified.
The final sets of factors and factor levels are as follows:
(1) Purpose (5 levels): contact tracing, symptom check, quarantine enforcement, information, health certificate.
(2) Data Collected (16 levels): encounter data, location data,
health or activity data (excluding COVID-19 infection status), COVID-19 infection status, all combinations of two or
three of the aforementioned items2 , unspecified data (“data
from your smartphone”), no data. For this factor we allowed
combinations of factor levels to occur because otherwise
certain app functionalities would not have made sense (e. g.,
1 https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=COVID-19_apps&oldid=953499862#

List_of_apps_by_country.
2 We omitted the combination of all four items because this would have made the
scenario descriptions too long.

Privacy Implications and User Acceptance of COVID-19-Related Smartphone Apps

(3)

(4)
(5)

(6)
(7)
(8)

digital contact tracing can only work if a person’s encounter
data and infection status are provided).
User Anonymity (3 levels): whether the app collects personal data that allows for unique identification of the individual, collects only demographic data, or collects only data
that cannot be used to uniquely identify the user.
Data Receiver (6 levels): health authorities, law enforcement, research institutions, private companies, the public,
none.
Data Transmission (3 levels): automatically, manually (apptype-specific wording, e. g., for symptom check: “when a
symptom check is requested”), none (in case no data is collected).
Retention (3 levels): one month, until end of current coronavirus regulations, unspecified.
Technical Implications (3 levels): impact on battery life,
app malfunctioning (app-type-specific wording, e. g., false
positive for breaking quarantine), none.
Soci(et)al Implications (4 levels): possible additional benefits in the future, more timely adjustment of local coronavirus regulations, extended personal freedom of movement
or travel, none.

4.1.2 Vignette Composition. In our survey a vignette, as shown in
Figure 1, is a short description of a hypothetical smartphone app,
consisting of an immutable text template (the non-highlighted black
text) with placeholders for the eight factors (colored boxes), each
of which was assigned one out of multiple different factor levels
(the text in the colored boxes) to create a specific scenario. Across
different scenarios and participants, we systematically altered the
factor levels in order to measure how the individual factors and factor levels affected our participants’ assessment of the hypothetical
apps.
Starting from the set of all 15 5520 possible combinations of
factor levels that could theoretically compose a scenario, we carefully defined dependencies between specific factor levels in order to
exclude scenarios whose combinations of factor levels would not
make sense. The specification of dependencies was the outcome of
thorough discussions between three researchers and each feature
dependency in the set required joint agreement.
The following list describes the dependencies between different
factor levels for the composition of vignettes.
• Symptom check apps always required health or activity data.
• Contact tracing apps always required the infection status
and either encounter data, location data, or both.
• Quarantine enforcement apps always required location data
and unique identification of the individual user.
• Health certificate apps always required the COVID-19 infection status and the societal implication of extended personal
freedom of movement or travel.
• Whenever the use of an app implied as societal implication
extended personal freedom of movement or travel, it was
required that the data collected by the app allowed for unique
identification of the individual.
• For data made available to the public, data retention was set
to “unspecified”.

Applying these dependencies to our initial set of possible scenarios resulted in a final set of 50 625 unique vignettes, which were
distributed across the 5 app purposes as follows: 14 850 for contact
tracing, 9450 for symptom check, 3780 for quarantine enforcement,
21 600 for information, and 945 for health certificate.
From this main set of unique vignettes, we composed individual
sets of 10 vignettes for each questionnaire. For each participant,
we (i) randomly selected two vignettes per app purpose under
the condition that (ii) these two vignettes were different in every
factor level (as long as this condition could be fulfilled). Within a
participant’s set, vignettes were always shown in random order.

4.2

Questionnaire

The vignettes constituted the core of our questionnaire, which we
outline in the following. The full version can be found in Appendix A.
4.2.1 Introduction. At the beginning of the questionnaire, we introduced the purpose of the study, provided information about data
collection and processing, and asked for the participants’ consent to
proceed. Section 4.4 provides further information how we protected
participants’ privacy.
4.2.2 Smartphone Use. Possessing a smartphone is crucial to determine how the use of mobile apps is perceived by participants.
Therefore, we asked if participants owned a smartphone (Q1) and,
if yes, what operating system they used (Q2) and how satisfied
they were with certain aspects (e. g., battery life) of their smartphone (Q3).
4.2.3 Context: Coronavirus. Personal experience with the coronavirus was found to be a significant factor in the adoption of
(hypothetical) contact tracing apps [69]. Hence, after defining key
terms, we asked whether participants (Q4) or people in their social
circles (Q5) had tested positive for coronavirus and if participants
had been quarantined or quarantined themselves because of the
virus (Q6). We further asked if they lived with a person at higher
risk (Q7) and how concerned they were about someone close to
them becoming infected with the coronavirus (Q8).
4.2.4 App Scenarios. As described in Section 4.1.2, we presented
each participant with a unique set of ten (hypothetical) apps. For
each app, we asked participants how likely they were to use the
described app (Q9) and to estimate the expected amount of app
users in their country (Q10). We further asked them about the
perceived normative pressure Ajzen [3] in their social circles to use
the app (Q11) and to assess the usefulness of the app to fight the
global pandemic (Q12).
4.2.5 Experience with Corona Apps. Next, we asked participants if
they were aware of existing corona apps in their country for any
of the five purposes covered in this study (Q13). We further asked
them to indicate if they were actively using such an app (Q14) and,
if yes, which one (Q14a), or why they did not do so in the opposite
case (Q14b). At the end of this section, participants were asked the
open-ended questions of potential positive (Q15) and negative (Q16)
aspects of corona apps.

Utz, Becker, Schnitzler, Farke, Herbert, Schaewitz, Degeling, and Dürmuth

Purpose

Imagine an app that provides information about your health and needs to be shown if you want to visit a certain place.
Data

• e app uses health or activity data, your COVID-19 infection status, and your current or past location(s).
User Anonymity

• In addition, the app collects data that could be used to uniquely identify you.
Receiver

Transmission

Retention

• is data is sent to research institutions when you request your health report and it will be stored until the current
coronavirus regulations end.
Technical Implication

• e app decreases your phone’s baery life.
Societal Implication

• Using this app may increase your personal freedom of movement or travel.
Figure 1: Example of a vignette that combines different factor levels into a specific scenario.
4.2.6 Attitudes Towards Governmental Actions. To assess participants’ general attitude towards the institutions tasked with fighting
the pandemic, we asked three questions: First, we asked participants to rate the measures applied in their region to counter the
pandemic (Q17). We further asked them about their opinion of six
public institutions: health authorities, law enforcement, research
institutions, private companies, and federal and regional governments (Q18). This part concluded with a question about the acceptance of private companies’ practice to share anonymized data,
such as aggregated phone location data, with public authorities to
help limit the spread of the pandemic (Q19), which is a practice
used in several countries such as the US and Germany [14].
4.2.7 Individual Privacy Concerns. Finally, we measured participants’ individual privacy concerns using the Internet Users’ Information Privacy Concerns (IUIPC) constructs for Control, Awareness
(of privacy practices), and Collection [34].

4.3

as a full service from Lightspeed Research (Kantar), including survey implementation and translation, participant recruitment, and
data quality assurance (cost was EUR 2500 per online panel plus
EUR 4000 for implementation and translation). Representativity
quotas were matched with an average discrepancy of 2.5 % (US),
2 % (Germany), and 2.9 % (China). Respondents faster than 40% of
the median response time were directly discarded by Kantar.
We created the German and English versions of the questionnaire ourselves. The translation of the English questionnaire into
Mandarin and the translation of the Chinese open-ended answers
into English were commissioned to a translation agency. With the
help of a native speaker from our social circles, we followed the
quality control process of back translation for the questionnaire
and corrected a few minor errors. Back translation of the openended questions (Q14a, Q14b, Q15, Q16) was carried out on several
random samples as the cost of a complete back translation did not
seem to justify the expected benefit.

Data Collection

We implemented an English-language preliminary version of our
survey to ensure comprehensibility and estimate timings. The prestudy survey was distributed to experienced researchers and within
our own social circles via snowball sampling. 33 participants completed the survey between June 1 and June 5, 2020. Based on participants’ feedback, we changed the presentation of the scenarios to
improve readability and highlight differences between the different
apps.
In the period from June to August 2020, the online survey was
distributed in three different countries: Germany, the United States,
and China. These three countries were selected for their different
approaches to corona apps and for their important roles in the
global pandemic: China as the country which was struck first, the
USA, which quickly became the most affected country in terms of
confirmed cases, and Germany as a representative for a European
country that handled the first wave of the pandemic relatively well.
At the time of the survey all countries were in different states of
the pandemic, which we outline in the following subsections to
provide context for our results. We purchased the online panels

4.3.1 Germany. The study was conducted surveying a sample of
1003 participants representative for the German adult population
by gender, age, region, and education from June 9 to June 11, shortly
before the launch of the national contact tracing app, “CoronaWarn-App” [53], on June 16. This app uses the Exposure Notification API [6], which is influenced by the Decentralized PrivacyPreserving Proximity Tracing (DP-3T) [62] and the Temporary
Contact Number (TCN) [59] protocols. At the time of the study,
two other corona apps supported by the federal government were
already available in Germany: “NINA” is the government’s general
emergency information app currently used to provide information about regional coronavirus regulations and about the state of
and recommended behavior during the pandemic (available since
June 1, 2015; coronavirus reports since March 2020). The “CoronaDatenspende” [50] app is a research project by the Robert Koch
Institute (RKI, German federal government agency responsible for
disease control and prevention), which collects and analyzes vital data recorded by fitness trackers to help assess the number of
people with COVID-19 (available since April 7, 2020).

Privacy Implications and User Acceptance of COVID-19-Related Smartphone Apps

Germany reported its first SARS-CoV-2 cases in February, with
the highest number of new cases in late March and early April.
The spread of the virus was primarily fought through strict contact restrictions, which were in effect from March 22 to early May.
Public debate about apps for digital contact tracing started in April
and received media attention over the following weeks including
discussions about data protection and the underlying protocols. As
of June 9, 2020, when the survey was distributed, Germany had
18 4543 confirmed cases of infected people, thereof 17 0200 estimated recoveries, 5632 estimated active cases, and 8711 deaths [51].
The national 7-day rolling average of daily new cases per 10 0000
residents was very low at 3.0, with thresholds of 35 and 50 on
county level for tightening the measures to fight the pandemic.
4.3.2 United States. In the US, we surveyed a sample of 1003 participants representative for the US adult population by gender, age,
region, and education from July 6 to July 14. At the time of the
study, one corona app supported by the federal government was
already available: The “COVID-19 Screening Tool” [5] is an app and
web application made available on March 27, which recommends
actions based on user-provided information such as symptoms, contacts, and travel. It was developed by Apple and the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). While several public and
private initiatives had been developing digital contact tracing apps
for the US, no nation-wide rollout was expected for the near future.
At the time of writing, six US states and Guam had released apps
based on Apple’s and Google’s Exposure Notification API [55].
The United States were hit by the pandemic in mid-March and
soon became the country with the highest number of officially
confirmed cases worldwide. Stay-at-home orders came into effect
in 44 states between March 20 and April 7, 2020 and were lifted
between April 26 and June 11, 2020. However, the number of cases
increased again during July and August. As of July 6, 2020, when the
survey was distributed, the US had 2893083 officially confirmed
cases of infections, thereof 13 24947 estimated recoveries, 14 48438
estimated active cases, and 11 9698 deaths [16]. The national 7-day
rolling average of daily new cases per 10 0000 residents was at
103.5.
4.3.3 China. In China, we surveyed a sample of 1019 participants
representative for the Chinese adult online population3 by gender
and age from July 27 to August 6. In February, China was the first
country to introduce various mandatory health code systems at
the local and regional level. These systems use QR codes that need
to be scanned with mobile applications to track and ultimately
prevent the movement of potentially infected individuals based
on basic health information and travel history [39]. The existing
health code systems serve multiple purposes, such as providing
general information about the coronavirus, calculating the risk of
infection, contact tracing, and quarantine enforcement. In contrast
to Germany and the US, most Chinese “corona apps” are integrated
into widely used platform economies, e. g., WeChat or Alipay, which
fostered their quick adoption.

3 Due

to the nature of this online study certain predominantly rural population groups
could not be surveyed.

China’s Hubei province was the epicenter of the worldwide
SARS-CoV-2 outbreak in January and February 2020. The central government reacted with several strict regional lockdowns,
effectively quarantining more than 60 million people (e. g., Wuhan,
Hubei, January 23 to April 8). The exponential growth of officially
confirmed cases in China ended in early March. As of July 27, 2020,
China had 83 891 officially confirmed cases of infected people,
thereof 78 918 estimated recoveries, 339 estimated active cases,
and 4634 deaths [42]. The national 7-day rolling average of daily
new cases per 10 0000 residents was at 0.02 with only 209 new
cases all over China between July 21 and July 27.

4.4

Research Ethics

Our department does not have an institutional review board. Instead, our study followed best practices of human subject research
and data protection guidelines, including the rules of the European GDPR. All data protection measures were reviewed and approved by our institution’s data protection office. Kantar, our panel
provider, has commited itself to follow the ICC/ESOMAR code of
conduct [30].

4.5

Data Analysis

4.5.1 Statistical Analysis. To understand which factors influence
participants’ decisions to use an app (Q9 = outcome variable), we
performed a regression analysis for the data utilizing the cumulative link models module of the ordinal R package [17]. In line
with best practice [71], we first calculated a model containing all
factors available in our data set and successively removed nonsignificant factors based on the Akaike information criterion (AIC)
of the resulting model to determine the model that best fit the data.
We conducted this analysis for each country individually as the
circumstances and timing of the data collection in each country
varied (see Section 4.3).
For each factor we chose as a baseline the level that we expected
to have the least effect (e. g., the “information” purpose or the
middle choice for Likert-scale questions). For some of the Likertscale questions we grouped the answers to reduce the number of
factor levels in the model, e. g., the assessments of the government
response (Q17) “too lenient” and “way too lenient” were combined
into ”too lenient”. We also excluded all responses that chose “prefer
not to answer”.
4.5.2 Qualitative Analysis. To analyze the open-ended answers to
the questions why participants did not use a corona app (Q14a) and
what they perceived to be positive (Q15) and negative (Q16) aspects
of corona apps, we used an iterative open coding procedure. We
used a mixed-methods approach with qualitative and quantitative
elements, as suggested by Mayring [37]. We first assigned codes to
the text (inductive categorization) and analyzed the frequency of
the codes afterwards. Coding was performed by two researchers
with interdisciplinary backgrounds in psychology and information
security. In a first step, the two coders independently coded the first
300 open responses from each country to derive common themes
and create an initial coding frame for each question. This process
consisted of closely examining participants’ answers to identify
and conceptualize categories. Each item could be assigned one or
multiple codes.

Utz, Becker, Schnitzler, Farke, Herbert, Schaewitz, Degeling, and Dürmuth

The coders then discussed their codes and agreed on a final coding frame for each question. The frame was validated by both coders
coding answers 301–500 for each question (20 % of the data, which
is in the typical 10–25 % range to determine coder agreement [46]).
As a measure for inter-coder reliability, ReCal2 [23] was used to
compute Krippendorff’s alpha for each code, of which we report a
weighted mean that takes into account the frequency of each code.
Finally, the remaining sets of 500 answers for each question and
country were coded by a single coder.

5

RESULTS

In this section, we first describe our samples based on demographic
data and participants’ survey responses. We then compare the responses to the four questions asked for each scenario and analyze
the effect sizes of several factors that impact users’ willingness to
use corona apps across the three countries. Finally, we look in detail
at participants’ individual perceptions of corona apps.

5.1

Sample Description

In Table 1, we provide demographic information (gender, age, and
education) about our participants as delivered by our panel provider
and additional information collected in our survey.
For all three countries, we observe higher smartphone prevalence
than reported in recent data [58], but our numbers are comparable
to those of smartphones and feature phones combined. The high
prevalence (99 %) of smartphone use in China reflects that our
sample is representative for the more technophile online population
(see Section 4.3.3).
Although participants seemed to be rather satisfied with their
current phones, they were, across all countries, significantly less
satisfied with their phones’ battery life than with other properties.
Between 1.3 % and 2.2 % of participants reported that they had
tested positive for coronavirus. While these numbers are higher
than those of officially confirmed cases for each country (see Section 4.3), they fall within the margin of error of 3 %. In all countries,
about 10 % of participants reported that a person in their social
circles had been infected with the virus. Between countries, we
observe differences in the number of participants who had been
under quarantine since the beginning of the pandemic, with the US
reaching the highest rate (37 %) and Germany the lowest (15 %).
Despite different states of the pandemic in the surveyed countries,
similar numbers of participants (about 10 %) were concerned about
becoming infected with coronavirus.
Table 1 also provides information about participants’ opinions
of institutions tasked with measures to counter the pandemic, what
types of corona apps participants already knew to exist, and their
attitude towards online privacy using three IUIPC dimensions.

5.2

Cross-Country Assessment of App
Scenarios

Next, we compare the responses to the four questions asked for each
hypothetical app scenario (Q9 to Q12) across the three countries.
Table 2 shows mean response values per country along with standard deviations across all app scenarios. Questions were answered
on numeric 7-point scales with a higher number representing a
more positive response, i. e., in the case of Q9, higher willingness to

use the presented app. Participants in China were generally more
willing to use the apps presented in the scenarios, with Germany
ranked in the middle and US participants expressing the lowest average willingness to use an app. With a one-way analysis of variance
(ANOVA) we found statistically significant differences (𝑝 < .05)
for Q9 between all three countries. Post-hoc 𝑡-tests of independence also showed that individual differences between all pairs of
countries were significant (𝑝 < .05 equivalent, values Bonferronicorrected for multiple testing). Expected adoption (Q10), perceived
pressure (Q11), and perceived utility (Q12) of corona apps were
significantly higher in China than in Germany and the US. We
found no significant differences for Q10, Q11, and Q12 between
Germany and the US.
Table 3 takes a closer look at participants’ willingness to use
corona apps (Q9) by country and app purpose. The figures indicate
how many participants tended towards a positive answer (above
the medium response value, i. e., 4) regarding their willingness to
use the presented app. Within countries, we observe only small
differences in the numbers for different app purposes, while a crosscountry comparison yields the general willingness to use corona
apps for any purpose to be much higher in China compared to
Germany and the US. Across all countries, we observe the highest
willingness to use for contact tracing apps and the lowest for quarantine enforcement. However, these values can only provide a first
impression since they represent averages per app type and country
and contain interfering effects between all factors that constitute a
scenario. Section 5.3 studies the individual effects in more detail.

5.3

Factors Impacting the Willingness to Use a
Corona App

Table 4 lists the data collection factors and factor levels in our app
scenarios that influence participants’ reported willingness to use a
corona app, along with their respective effect sizes and 𝑝-values.
Responses collected in the non-scenario parts of our survey that we
found to impact participants’ willingness to use a corona app are
listed in Appendix B, Tables 5 and 6. Statistically significant factor
levels and answers (𝑝 < .05) are printed in bold in all tables. Positive
estimate values indicate a positive influence on the willingness to
use an app, negative estimates indicate tendencies to not use an
app. During the model optimization process several factors were
excluded in some countries while remaining in the model for the
other countries (see Section 4.5.1 and B). For example, the societal
benefit on the regional level (see Table 4) is a significant predicting
factor in the US and Germany but did not make it into the final
model for China. In the following, we report for each country which
factor levels and non-scenario answers positively or negatively
influenced participants’ decision to use an app and touch upon the
differences between the three countries.
5.3.1 Germany. In Germany, being male was the only demographic
factor with a significant positive influence on participants’ willingness to use a corona app, while education level and age were
excluded from the model for not helping explain the decision to
use an app.
Higher privacy concern with regard to data collection practices
(IUIPC: Collection) had a significant negative influence on the decision to use an app.

Privacy Implications and User Acceptance of COVID-19-Related Smartphone Apps

Table 1: Participant Demographics. Data for gender, age, and education as delivered by our panel provider. Information about
participants’ smartphone use, previous coronavirus experience, and general privacy attitudes was collected in the questionnaire. For satisfaction with certain aspects of their smartphones and privacy attitudes we provide average response values
(mean and sd) [smartphone satisfaction measured with response scales from 1 (very satisfied) to 5; privacy attitudes measured
with Likert agreement scales from 1 (strongly disagree) to 7, trust in institutions measured with Likert scales from 1 (very
comfortable) to 5].

Gen.

18–35
36–50
51–65
66–80
Less than high school
High school or associate degree
Undergraduate degreea
Postgraduate degreea
No data
Phone owners
Corona app users

Virus
Experience

Tested positively
Infection in social circles
Quarantine experience
Risk person in household
Infection concerns

Opinion of

Health authorities
Law enforcement
Research institutions
Private companies
Federal government
State government

Known
Apps

Battery satisfaction
Location satisfaction
Camera satisfaction
Speed satisfaction

Info
Symptom check
Quarantine enforcement
Contact tracing
Health certificate

IUIPC

Smartphone
Use

Education

Female
Male

Age

Germany
(n = 1003)

Control
Awareness
Collection
a No

United States
(n = 1003)

n
508
495
n
262
246
374
121
n
162
602

%
50.7
49.4
%
26.1
24.5
37.3
12.0
%
16.2
60.0

239
0
n
934
42
mean
2.12
1.91
1.89
1.92
n
13
101
147
478
112
mean
2.45
2.57
2.31
2.89
2.56
2.61
n
199
158
122
208
124
mean
6.16
5.43
5.68

China
(n = 1019)

23.8
0.0
%
93.1
4.2

n
532
471
n
199
297
302
205
n
74
407
425
97
0
n
873
66

%
53.0
47.0
%
19.8
29.6
30.1
20.4
%
7.4
40.6
42.4
9.7
0.0
%
87.0
6.6

n
495
524
n
506
312
165
36
n
16
99
470
103
331
n
1009
614

%
48.6
51.4
%
49.7
30.6
16.2
3.5
%
1.6
9.7
46.1
10.1
32.5
%
99.0
60.3

sd
0.92
0.72
0.85
0.77
%
1.3
10.1
14.7
47.7
11.2
sd
0.89
0.92
0.95
0.80
1.14
1.11
%
19.8
15.8
12.2
20.7
12.4
sd
1.20
1.32
1.17

mean
2.11
1.84
1.88
1.93
n
22
135
367
450
124
mean
2.40
2.62
2.38
2.82
3.28
2.77
n
154
150
98
127
122
mean
5.51
6.04
5.64

sd
1.00
0.76
0.87
0.82
%
2.2
13.5
36.6
44.9
12.4
sd
1.01
1.05
0.98
0.92
1.27
1.19
%
15.4
15.0
9.8
12.7
12.2
sd
1.24
1.18
1.29

mean
2.10
1.82
1.85
1.97
n
18
100
293
375
91
mean
1.75
1.83
1.86
2.27
1.52
1.73
n
723
448
443
527
783
mean
5.46
5.69
5.32

sd
0.98
0.74
0.77
0.86
%
1.8
9.8
28.8
36.8
8.9
sd
0.76
0.91
0.90
0.88
0.80
0.80
%
71.0
44.0
43.5
51.7
76.8
sd
0.93
0.97
1.05

distinction between undergraduate and (post)graduate degrees in Germany as this was only introduced in the 2000s.

Strong opinions on the location accuracy of the phone (Q3), both
positive and negative, had a significant positive influence on the
willingness to use any of the apps. Previous use of corona apps
and knowing apps for symptom checks or health certificates had
a significant positive impact on the willingness to use a corona

app (Q13). Conversely, knowing apps for contact tracing had a significant negative impact (Q14). Additionally, rating the practice of
companies sharing customers’ data with authorities to help fight the
pandemic as acceptable (Q19) had a significant positive impact on
the willingness to use an app in any scenario. The level of concern
about becoming infected with coronavirus (Q8) had a significant

Utz, Becker, Schnitzler, Farke, Herbert, Schaewitz, Degeling, and Dürmuth

Table 2: Average response values (mean and sd) for the four scenario questions (Q9 to Q12), 7-point scales with higher numbers
indicating a more positive response.
Germany
Q9
Q10
Q11
Q12

mean
3.25
3.43
3.38
3.69

Willingness to use
Expected adoption
Perceived pressure
Perceived utility

United States
sd
2.04
1.52
1.86
1.89

mean
3.12
3.43
3.32
3.62

China
sd
2.10
1.72
1.96
1.98

mean
5.27
5.06
5.19
5.37

sd
1.55
1.38
1.50
1.44

Table 3: Percentages of participants that are (very) likely to use an app for the given purpose, regardless of the specifics.

Germany
United States
China

Symptom Check

Contact Tracing

Quarantine Enf.

Information

Health Certificate

32 %
29 %
74 %

37 %
32 %
80 %

27 %
25 %
72 %

30 %
26 %
77 %

26 %
27 %
76 %

impact, with less concerned participants being less likely to use any
app. Rating the measures taken to fight the COVID-19 pandemic
as too lenient (Q17) had a significant positive impact on the willingness to use an app. The results further suggest that a favorable
rating of institutions (health authorities and state government) had
a significant and positive impact on the decision to use any of the
apps, whereas rating them unfavorably (federal government) had a
negative impact (Q18).
Within the app scenarios, contact tracing was the only app purpose with a significant positive influence on participants’ willingness to use a corona app. Technical implications often negatively
impacted participants’ willingness to use the described app, and
did so significantly in the case of increased battery consumption as
well as malfunctions in contact tracing, quarantine enforcement,
and health certificate apps. This supports our descriptive results
of participants being least satisfied with their smartphones’ battery life. Scenarios with the societal implication of a more timely
adjustment of local coronavirus regulations also had a significant
positive impact on the willingness to use an app. Regarding the
specific types of data used by the fictitious apps, encounter data
significantly positively influenced participants’ decisions to use an
app while the collection of demographic data and data that could
be used to uniquely identify the user was opposed. German participants also had a strong opinion about who should be the data
receiver. When scenarios described data transfers to private companies, law enforcement, or the general public, participants were
significantly less likely to use the app.
5.3.2 United States. In the United States, male gender had a significant positive influence on the willingness to use any of the
presented apps, as did higher age, although to a lesser degree. Similar to the German data, participants’ education level had little to
no impact.
Participants with higher privacy concern regarding control of
their personal information (IUIPC: Control) were significantly less
likely to use an app. In contrast to the model for the German data
set, the suspected coronavirus infection had a significant positive
impact on the decision to use any of the apps (Q4) in the US. As

for the German sample, rating as acceptable the practice of companies sharing customers’ data with authorities to help fight the
pandemic (Q19) had a significant positive impact on the willingness
to use an app. Similarly, the results show that favorably rating some
institutions (research institutions and state governments) had a significant and positive impact on app adoption, while, interestingly,
unfavorable ratings of law enforcement also had a significant positive impact on the willingness to use an app (Q18). Concern about
becoming infected with coronavirus (Q8) was a significant influence on the decision to use any of the presented apps: Higher levels
of concern about an infection positively influenced the willingness
to use an app while lower levels had a significant negative impact.
Similar to the German model, prior use of any corona app, as well
as knowledge of health certificate apps, had a significantly positive
impact on the willingness to use the apps (Q13, 14). Regarding the
attitude towards certain properties of one’s phone, satisfaction with
the phone’s location accuracy and dissatisfaction with its battery
life had significant positive and negative impacts, respectively, on
US participants’ willingness to use an app, the former being similar
to the German sample.
Looking at the influence of the factor levels in the app scenarios,
we found the app purpose of contact tracing to have a significant
positive influence on US participants’ willingness to use an app, as
in the German sample. However, in the US a positive influence, to
a lesser degree but still significant, was also found for the app purposes of symptom checks and health certificates. When scenarios
described manual data transmission, participants were slightly but
significantly more willing to use the app compared to scenarios with
automatic data transmission. The societal implication of a more
timely adjustment of local coronavirus regulations also had a significant positive influence on the willingness to use the app, while
the other societal implications did not have any impact. Compared
to scenarios that did not mention the retention period, if an app’s
data storage was limited to the end of the coronavirus pandemic,
participants were significantly more willing to use it. Similar to
the German model, malfunctions in contact tracing, quarantine enforcement, and health certificate apps, as well as increased battery

Privacy Implications and User Acceptance of COVID-19-Related Smartphone Apps

Table 4: Cumulative link mixed model for participants’ willingness to use corona apps. A positive estimate (effect size) indicates participants’ willingness to use the app being higher compared to the factor’s baseline variable. All factor levels in this
table were incorporated into the app scenarios (vignettes). Only factors present in the final model are presented here. The
colored bars represent the effect sizes per country (yellow: Germany, blue: United States, red: China).
Factors and Levels

+/-

Germany
Estimate
Pr(>|z|)

United States
Estimate
Pr(>|z|)

China
Estimate
Pr(>|z|)

Purpose (baseline: information)
Symptom check
Contact tracing
Quarantine enforcement
Health certificate

0.06
0.38
-0.08
-0.11

0.21
< 0.01
0.19
0.09

0.19
0.42
-0.03
0.21

< 0.01
< 0.01
0.58
< 0.01

-0.12
0.09
-0.28
-0.07

0.03
0.08
< 0.01
0.19

Technical implications (baseline: none)
Reduced battery life
Malfunction contact tracing
Malfunction information
Malfunction quarantine enforcement
Malfunction symptom check
Malfunction health certificate

-0.15
-0.19
-0.03
-0.20
-0.04
-0.16

< 0.01
< 0.01
0.64
< 0.01
0.56
0.01

-0.14
-0.20
-0.12
-0.25
-0.09
-0.32

< 0.01
< 0.01
0.07
< 0.01
0.18
< 0.01

-0.04
-0.09
-0.09
-0.24
-0.13
-0.15

0.19
0.19
0.20
< 0.01
0.05
0.02

Societal implications (baseline: none)
Personal advantages
Faster update of regional rules
Future use cases

0.00
0.14
-0.00

0.97
< 0.01
0.95

-0.05
0.09
-0.01

0.40
0.03
0.72

0.06
-0.04
0.04

0.04
0.16
0.22

0.05
0.03

0.21
0.33

0.04

0.22

-0.04
-0.34

0.18
0.01

Identification data (baseline: none)
Demographic data
Unique identification of individual

-0.28
-0.30

< 0.01
< 0.01

-0.20
-0.16

< 0.01
< 0.01

0.09
0.10

0.05
0.02

Data receiver (baseline: unspecified)
Health authorities
Research institutes
Private companies
Law enforcement
Public

-0.02
-0.02
-0.29
-0.32
-0.30

0.70
0.66
< 0.01
< 0.01
< 0.01

-0.00
0.03
-0.17
-0.26
-0.05

0.92
0.48
< 0.01
< 0.01
0.45

0.08
0.01
-0.17
0.06
-0.07

0.08
0.76
< 0.01
0.21
0.30

0.04

0.15

0.08

< 0.01

0.06
0.09

0.09
0.01

0.08
0.03

0.02
0.35

Payload data (baseline: none)
Encounters
Location
Infection Status
Health Information
Unspecified

Data transmission (baseline: automatically)
Manual
Retention period (baseline: unspecified)
One month
End of COVID-19 pandemic

consumption, had a significant negative impact on the willingness
to use a corona app. US participants had a similar opinion as Germans about who should be the data receiver: Scenarios with data
being sent to private companies or law enforcement significantly
negatively influenced the willingness to use an app compared to
scenarios that did not mention who would receive the data. In contrast to the model for the German data set, specific types of payload
data did not significantly impact participants’ willingness to use

an app, while participants from both countries share the negative
attitude towards corona apps that collect demographic data or data
that allows for the unique identification of the individual.
5.3.3 China. In China, demographic information was no good
predictor for participants’ willingness to use any type of corona
app: Age and gender were not part of the final model, and similar
to the US model, education had no significant impact.

Utz, Becker, Schnitzler, Farke, Herbert, Schaewitz, Degeling, and Dürmuth

Table 5: Cumulative link mixed model regression for participants’ willingness to use corona apps. A positive estimate (effect
size) indicates the willingness to use being higher compared to the factor’s baseline variable. All factors were collected as
responses in the non-scenario parts of the questionnaire. Only factors present in the final model are presented here The
colored bars represent the effect sizes per country (yellow: Germany, blue: United States, red: China).
Factors and Levels

+/-

Germany
Estimate
Pr(>|z|)

[Q2]: Phone OS (baseline: Android)
iOS

0.25

0.07

United States
Estimate
Pr(>|z|)
0.13

0.30

-0.25
-0.57

0.19
0.02

0.54
0.64

< 0.01
0.23

[Q4]: Infected participant (baseline: not tested, no infection suspected)
Tested negative only
Not tested, infection suspected
Tested positive

0.21
0.58
0.77

0.26
0.02
0.09

[Q5]: Infection in social circles (baseline: no)
Yes

-0.32

0.09

[Q3r1]: Satisfied with battery life (baseline: neutral)
satisfied
dissatisfied

China
Estimate
Pr(>|z|)

0.13
-0.61

0.41
< 0.01

[Q6]: Quarantine experience (baseline: no)
Yes

-0.21

0.11

[Q7]: Risk person in household (baseline: no)
Yes

0.24

0.04

[Q3r2]: Satisfied with location accuracy (baseline: neutral)
satisfied
0.44
dissatisfied
1.21

< 0.01
0.01

[Q8]: Infection concerns (baseline: somewhat concerned)
-0.62
Slightly or not concerned
Moderately or exteremly concerned
0.26

< 0.01
0.05

-0.55
0.54

< 0.01
< 0.01

-0.08
0.19

0.57
0.17

[Q13r2]: Knows app for symptom check (baseline: yes)
No
-0.36

0.04

-0.37

0.09

-0.35

0.01

[Q13r3]: Knows app for quarantine enforcement (baseline: yes)
No
-0.42

0.05

-0.42

< 0.01

[Q13r4]: Knows app for contact tracing (baseline: yes)
No

0.44

0.01

-0.46

0.06

-0.57

< 0.01

[Q13r5]: Knows app for health certificate (baseline: yes)
-0.66
No

< 0.01

-0.80

< 0.01

Participants with higher privacy concern (IUIPC: Control and
Awareness) were found to be significantly more likely to use corona
apps. An individual’s infection status was not part of the final model
for the Chinese data. Individual infection concerns (Q8) did not
have any significant impact on app use. However, living with a
person at higher risk (Q7) significantly positively influenced the
willingness to use an app. Similar to the other models, prior usage
of any corona app (Q14), as well as knowledge of apps for symptom checks, quarantine enforcement, and contact tracing (Q13),
positively influenced the willingness to use an app. As in the US,
dissatisfaction with the battery life of one’s phone (Q3) had a significant negative impact on the willingness to use any of the presented
apps. Additionally, as for the German and the US samples, rating as
acceptable that companies share customers’ data with authorities

to help fight the pandemic (Q19) had a significant positive impact
on the willingness to use the app in any of the scenarios, as did a
favorable opinion of private companies (Q18).
Scenario-based factors were also influential: In the Chinese model,
the app purposes of quarantine enforcement and symptom check
had a significant negative influence on the willingness to use an
app. The effect size for quarantine enforcement was larger than in
the other countries, where it was also not significant. Regarding the
types of payload data only scenarios where the data type was not
specified had a significant negative influence on the decision to use
the app. In stark contrast to the results from the US and Germany,
Chinese participants were significantly more willing to use the
presented app if it collected data that could be used to uniquely
identify the person. Regarding potential receivers of the data we

Privacy Implications and User Acceptance of COVID-19-Related Smartphone Apps

Table 6: Cumulative link mixed model regression for participants’ willingness to use corona apps (continued from Table 5).
Factors and Levels

+/-

Germany
Estimate
Pr(>|z|)

[Q14]: Uses any corona app (baseline: yes)
No

-0.83

< 0.01

[Q17]: Rate measures (baseline: too strict)
About right
Too lenient

0.24
0.71

0.12
< 0.01

[Q18r1]: Opinion of health authorities (baseline: neutral)
Favorable
0.40
Unfavorable
0.02

< 0.01
0.94

United States
Estimate
Pr(>|z|)
-0.99

China
Estimate
Pr(>|z|)

< 0.01

-0.30

0.02

0.13
0.21

0.50
0.56

[Q18r2]: Opinion of law enforcement (baseline: neutral)
Favorable
Unfavorable

0.15
0.44

0.31
0.03

0.07
0.50

0.70
0.07

[Q18r3]: Opinion of research institutions (baseline: neutral)
Favorable
Unfavorable

0.44
-0.10

0.01
0.66

0.50
0.50

0.07
0.07

0.27
-0.22

0.03
0.33

[Q18r4]: Opinion of private companies (baseline: neutral)
Favorable
0.22
Unfavorable
-0.13

0.08
0.43

[Q18r5]: Opinion of federal government (baseline: neutral)
Favorable
-0.20
Unfavorable
-0.49

0.27
0.02

0.35
0.15

0.04
0.43

[Q18r6]: Opinion of state government (baseline: neutral)
Favorable
0.49
0.20
Unfavorable

< 0.01
0.31

0.35
0.16

0.04
0.40

[Q19]: Acceptability of sharing network data (baseline: neutral)
Acceptable
0.57
Unacceptable
-0.59

< 0.01
< 0.01

0.72
-0.76

< 0.01
< 0.01

0.36
-0.07

0.01
0.76

-0.11

0.05

0.46
0.18
-0.10

< 0.01
0.02
0.10

0.26

0.05

Age

-0.02

< 0.01

Education (baseline: Less than high school)
High school or associate degree
Bachelor’s degree
Postgraduate Education

-0.33
-0.49
-0.37

0.19
0.05
0.23

0.17
-0.24
0.02

0.65
0.51
0.96

[Q20]: IUIPC
Control
Awareness
Collection
Gender (baseline: Female)
Male

-0.16

< 0.01

0.23

0.03

computed a significant negative effect size for private companies,
and participants slightly favored shorter retention times. Similar
to the results of the models for the German and the US samples,
malfunctions of quarantine enforcement and health certificate apps
significantly negatively influenced Chinese participants’ willingness to use them.

5.4

Perception of Corona Apps

5.4.1 Use of Corona Apps. As depicted in Table 1, the number
of participants who reported to already use a corona app (DE:
42 / 4.2 %, US: 66 / 6.6 %, CN: 614 / 60.3 %) reflects whether
government-recommended apps already existed at the time of the
study. Those who reported to use an app were asked in Q14b which
app they used. In Germany, 25 participants provided insightful answers. Two mentioned using a specific app but could not remember

Utz, Becker, Schnitzler, Farke, Herbert, Schaewitz, Degeling, and Dürmuth

Table 7: Reported reasons not to use a corona app (Q14a) and negative aspects of corona apps (Q16). Q14a was only shown to
participants who had indicated not to use a corona app in Q14 (“non-users of app”).

Code

Examples

CN

961
685

937
702

405
276

–
726

–
760

–
738

“Big Brother”, “used for more than just corona”

53

20

1

174

70

1

privacy

“leak information”, “invasive”

72

96

12

292

337

179

security

“too insecure”, “could be hacked”

21

5

1

18

15

1

no app
no suitable app
lack of information
no phone

“didn’t know there’s such an app”, “no app yet”
“don’t know a good one”, “no approved [...] app”
“don’t know how to use it”, “not familiar”
“I do not have a smartphone”

214
61
31
5

222
18
27
13

73
13
19
0

–
–
–
–

–
–
–
–

–
–
–
–

user base
discrimination
disinformation
anxiety
false sense of protection
autonomy
not mandatory

“not enough users”, “need to be used correctly”
“division into good and evil", “stigmatization”
“more fake news”, “government may hide the truth”
“would make me more nervous”, “freaks people out”
“blind faith in the [...] app”
“loss of freedom”, “civil rights”, “unconstitutional”
“because I don’t need to install it”, “not compulsory”

11
2
0
8
0
7
0

4
2
0
6
0
14
1

4
0
0
4
0
0
5

48
9
1
12
4
36
0

54
9
7
20
4
38
0

28
2
39
69
1
5
3

phone use
not supported
technical side effects
malfunctions
inconvenient

“do not carry phone all the time”, “no mobile data”
“my phone is too old”, “does not support new apps”
“drains battery too much”, “use[s] up the memory”
“not reliable”, “not [...] accurate”, “false positives”
“too complicated”, “need to sign in every day”

21
5
9
12
3

29
5
22
12
2

1
0
4
5
7

–
–
21
32
2

–
–
37
64
1

–
–
12
48
13

state of the pandemic
personal behavior
plugin
other information sources
other measures
coronaskeptic
unnecessary (general)

“too late”, “low risk region”
“I rarely go out”, “my range of activities is small”
“there [are] similar functions in WeChat”
“I watch TV”, “I go to websites for information”
“social distancing”, “I wear a mask”
“corona is fake”, “just a flu”, “conspiracy”
“useless”, “a waste of time”, “I don’t need it”

8
11
0
15
14
12
96

5
34
0
24
32
16
103

18
13
32
3
4
0
56

2
–
0
1
2
7
9

0
–
0
0
2
5
18

1
–
1
0
0
0
12

don’t want
generic negative
other
none

“I just don’t want to”, “no”, “stupid”
“everything”, “yes”, “many”
“too much information”, “I do not trust them”
“I don’t see any”, “nothing really”

23
–
14
–

36
–
20
–

5
–
3
–

–
6
17
87

–
21
24
72

–
4
25
232

don’t know
positive
unclear
no answer

“don’t know”, “not sure”, “hard to tell”
“help[s] keep people safe”, “practical”, “very good”
“data problem”, “Facebook”, “more abundant”
“./.”, “-”, “vwedv”, “Don’t answer at the present time”

10
–
13
8

12
–
16
2

8
–
10
0

20
5
18
11

33
14
22
19

28
45
32
3

Nonanswers

Privacy /
Security

(govt.) surveillance

Availability

Q16
US

Psychological /
Societal

DE

Technical

CN

Unnecessary

Q14a
US

Other

Non-users of app
Non-empty answers

DE

the name, one mentioned an app for general news, five a non-app
news source, another five Germany’s official disaster information
app, NINA, that has been extended to provide coronavirus-related
news (see Section 4.3.1), one a non-corona-specific health app, and
11 named coronavirus-related apps, 9 of which we could map to
“Corona-Datenspende”, the data donation app launched by German
health authorities [50]. In the US, we received 21 answers. Seven
participants named COVID-19-specific apps (Apple’s COVID-19
app, C Spire Health, Healthy Together, and How We Feel), two

disaster information apps, four general health apps, another four
a non-health-related app or service (such as “Facebook”), and two
non-app news sources. In China, 153 participants reported to use
health QR code apps issued by various local or regional authorities,
which are often WeChat or Alipay plugins, and 108 specifically
stated using (plugins for) WeChat or Alipay. 15 participants mentioned to use other platform economies, e. g., Weibo or Tencent, in
a COVID-19-related context. An additional 49 participants named

Privacy Implications and User Acceptance of COVID-19-Related Smartphone Apps

Table 8: Reported positive aspects of corona apps (Q15)
Code

Examples

Nonanswers

Other

Pandemic
Control

Psycho- Availalogical bility

App Purposes

Non-empty answers

DE

US

CN

738

759

780

106
8
5
60
0
2

103
22
9
91
1
12

19
13
10
213
40
87

27

31

22

contact tracing
symptom check
quarantine
information
health certificate
movement

“to trace affected people”
“help identify symptoms”
“enforcing quarantine”
“know the situation around”
“health QR code”, “you can show your status”
“record movement tracks”, “travel route”

availability

“everyone has a smartphone”, “convenient”

sense of protection

“makes one feel safer”, “relieve stress”

8

3

12

awareness

“remind us”, “take it more seriously”

5

15

35

measures
infection detection
infection prevention
generic pandemic

“assess the risk levels [...] and act accordingly”
“knowledge of hot spots”, “identify infected people”
“reduce the risk of infection”, “keep people safe”
“limit the spread”, “control the outbreak”

28
42
41
74

4
72
19
61

13
84
70
55

generic positive
other
none

“very good”, “it helps”, “many”
“big data”, “publicity”, “no more home office”
“none”, “not really”, “nothing”

57
18
212

56
10
170

100
35
16

don’t know
negative
unclear
no answer

“don’t know”, “hard to say”, “not sure”
“virus gets on phone”, “invasion of privacy”
“Ues it impacts”, “Japanese style”, “ccorona”
“jhgfkjfkuz”, “Tv”, “na”, “??”

27
63
25
14

64
69
32
17

13
17
49
4

further COVID-specific apps, and 27 reported using non-coronaspecific health apps.
5.4.2 Reasons not to Use Corona Apps / Perceived Negative Aspects
of Corona Apps. During the coding process of the open-ended answers, we observed a large overlap between the reasons not to
use a corona app (Q14a) and perceived negative aspects of such
apps (Q16). This led us to devise a common coding frame for both
questions. Our combined codebook for Q14a and Q16 contained 34
codes. Inter-coder reliability as determined by Krippendorff’s alpha was in the (0.66, 1) range for individual codes, with the rather
generic “unclear” code scoring lowest and a weighted mean of 0.91.
Q14a was only displayed to participants who had indicated in Q14
that they did not use a corona app, numbers shown in the first data
row of Table 7, while Q16 was displayed to all participants.
Across all three countries, the most popular reason not to use a
corona app (Q14a) was that one was (presumed) not to be available
(yet) (“no app”, DE: 214, US: 222, CN: 73) or that there were only
ones that did not suit participants’ particular needs (“no suitable
app”, DE: 61, US: 18, CN: 13), such as not having been thoroughly
tested or officially recommended by authorities. Another common
sentiment was that the app was simply perceived as unnecessary,
either in a general way (DE: 96, US: 103, CN: 56) or for more specific
reasons, such as the worst phase of the pandemic being over (“state
of the pandemic”, DE: 8, US: 5, CN: 18). Unique to China (32) was

the observation that there was no need for a standalone app since
coronavirus-related functionality was already offered by plugins for
widespread multi-purpose apps like Alipay or WeChat. A similarly
distinct reason for Chinese participants not to use a corona app
was the fact that the use of such an app was not mandated by the
government (“not mandatory”, DE: 0, US: 1, CN: 5), while only
participants in Germany and the US questioned the severity of the
COVID-19 pandemic in general (“coronaskeptic”, DE: 12, US: 16,
CN: 0). Reasons related to personal phone use, such as not carrying
the phone at all times, were more frequently mentioned in Germany
and the US (“phone use”, DE: 21, US: 29, US: 1). The latter could
be rooted in the Chinese sample being only representative for the
Chinese online population.
When we more broadly asked for negative aspects of corona
apps (Q16), participants in all countries prominently voiced privacy concerns (DE: 292, US: 337, CN: 179), but German and US
participants much more prominently worried about government
surveillance (DE: 174, US: 70, CN: 1), their personal autonomy or
rights being infringed (DE: 36, US: 38, CN: 5), or discrimination
rooted in (non-) use of an app (DE: 9, US: 9, CN: 2). In turn, in the
Chinese sample, in which a majority reported to use coronavirusrelated functionality on their smartphones, one prominent negative
sentiment was anxiety that the phone could potentially display
coronavirus-related warnings at any given time (DE: 12, US: 20,

Utz, Becker, Schnitzler, Farke, Herbert, Schaewitz, Degeling, and Dürmuth

CN: 69). Still, overall satisfaction with these apps was reported to
be high, with 232 of Chinese participants stating that there were
no negative aspects at all and 45 even mentioning positive aspects
as an answer to this question.
5.4.3 Perceived Positive Aspects of Corona Apps. Our coding frame
for perceived positive aspects of corona apps consisted of 20 codes
(Krippendorff’s alpha: range (0.45, 1), weighted mean 0.82) as
depicted in Table 8. The three lowest-performing codes, all in
the (0.45, 0.47) range, originate from rather unspecific categories
(“other”, “unclear”) and the fact that one code (“symptom check”)
was rather rare in the dual-coded segment of the data.
The answers provide additional hints that people seem to prefer
what they are already familiar with, either through public debates
or actual use of an app: 40 Chinese participants perceived the health
certificate functionality to be a positive aspect of corona apps, compared to none in Germany and only one in the US. Another 87
responses from China specifically pointed out the use of apps to
keep track of people’s travel history. While we had not identified
this as a separate app purpose in our analysis of existing apps,
which included the Chinese health QR code system, the frequency
of answers referring to this aspect of the system (rather than the
“health certificate” part) prompted us to introduce “movement” as
a distinct code. In Germany and the US, where public discussions
of smartphone apps against the pandemic had centered on contact
tracing, this purpose was the second most often named positive
aspect of corona apps (DE: 106, US: 103) – directly after “none”
(DE: 212, US: 170), which was only stated 16 times in China. In
contrast, almost twice as many Chinese participants (100) voiced
an unspecific but positive opinion of coronavirus-related apps as
participants from Germany (57) or the US (56). This provides another hint that corona apps being in actual use has a positive impact
on how people perceive them.

6

DISCUSSION

Our research identified factors that impact people’s willingness
to adopt mobile apps designed to help fight the COVID-19 pandemic and provides insights into how these apps are perceived. The
results have implications not only for the design of mobile apps
developed to help fight the COVID-19 pandemic but also for the
design of health-related mobile apps and for apps released in the
public interest whose efficiency relies on widespread voluntary
adoption.

6.1

Contextual Factors are Important for
Privacy Decisions

The theory of privacy as contextual integrity states that the appropriateness of information flows depends on contextual informational norms governed by actors, transmission principles, and
information types. Our study confirms that these factors – although
not all different levels – play a role in people’s decisions to use a
corona app. We measured the importance of each factor as the effect
on the willingness to use an app and found that different combinations of these factors in fact violate informational norms that differ
between countries. For example, sharing any corona-related app
data with law enforcement agencies violates informational norms
in Germany and the US. Moreover, when the collected data and data

sharing are limited and purposes are less invasive, the willingness
to use apps increases. Quite contrary to the idea of CI we also find
that the specific information types and transmission principles –
at least in the way they were modeled in our survey – only play a
subordinate role.
Contrary to theories that see informational privacy primarily
as a means to limit disclosure [28], our data supports findings
from IoT- [20] and health-related privacy research [9]: participants
are willing to share data when it supports a common good (i. e.,
“regional releases of lockdown measures”) over individual benefits,
although participants still expect that informational norms are
upheld.

6.2

People Favor the Familiar, and What is
Familiar is Subject to Change

Our analyses indicate that people favor data processing practices
and are more willing to adopt technologies they are already familiar
with, such as apps for digital contact tracing in the US and Germany,
where the use of smartphone apps for this purpose has been subject of the public debate. In China, a prominently reported positive
aspect of corona apps was movement control (Table 8), which had
already been put in place there at the time of the survey via the
Health Code systems. Chinese participants also favored apps that
allowed for unique identification of the individual, reflecting that
it is “standard practice in China” [65] to send personal data linked
to one’s national ID to government servers. This supports prior
research that found people to be more comfortable with allowing
data collection in IoT scenarios they perceived to be realistic and
“happen today” rather than at a later point in the future, and they
were more likely to allow data collection for specific “greater goods”
such as video surveillance for crime prevention [20]. German and
US participants’ favorable stance towards corona apps that had been
positively discussed in the media backs up previous findings that
a positive rhetoric around the associated technology can increase
people’s willingness to share personal data [25]. This reaffirms that
privacy norms evolve [40] and raises the question how people’s
stance towards corona apps – and apps that collect data for a common cause in general – will change once the COVID-19 pandemic
is over.

6.3

The Future of Apps Against the Spread

In all surveyed countries, aspects regarding pandemic control were
among the most frequently mentioned positive aspects of corona
apps. Thus, many citizens seem to be generally open to the idea of
using mobile apps to help limiting the spread of a virus. Privacy
concerns were the most frequently mentioned negative aspects of
corona apps in all countries. A rigorous approach towards privacyfriendly technologies, which prevent privacy violations a priori,
e. g.privacy-by-design, seems vital for the success of such apps.
Somewhat surprisingly, the type of payload data did not have any
significant negative influence on the willingness to use a corona
app in our study. This implies that users may be willing to share
additional data if other conditions are met. Citizens of Germany and
the US seem to be willing to use apps for contact tracing without
technical malfunctions which ensure anonymity and are administered by the health authorities. Such apps can be further developed

Privacy Implications and User Acceptance of COVID-19-Related Smartphone Apps

to be ready for deployment in potential future pandemics. In China,
apps facilitating individual contact tracing seem to be less relevant.
This might be due to the strict regional measures implemented by
the authorities as soon as infections are detected and due to the
fact that authorities in China already have access to data enabling
the tracking of individuals. Instead, Chinese participants expressed
an increased need for apps informing about the current (regional
or local) regulations and the state of the pandemic as indicated by
our results.

6.4

Implications for the Design of Mobile
Health Apps

Our study was conducted under the impression of a global pandemic and the necessity for apps specifically designed to mitigate
a pandemic in the future is unclear. However, we believe that our
results also offer insights for health-related apps outside the specific
context of a pandemic. First, designers and developers of apps that
collect sensitive health data should keep in mind the factor levels that positively influence user acceptance (e. g., avoid technical
malfunctions, provide data only to health authorities or research institutions, do not collect data that could be used to uniquely identify
the user (US and DE)). Second, many factors (e. g., purpose, identification data, data receiver) showed significant estimates when
compared to the baseline, indicating that users would like to be informed about these aspects. They should be clearly communicated
to enable informed decisions for or against installation and use of
a health-related mobile app.

6.5

Apps for a Greater Good

Our findings also provide insights into the question whether people
are willing to share personal data with mobile apps developed to
serve public interest. In our study the prospect of regional corona
restrictions being lifted positively influenced people’s willingness
to use an app in Germany and the US. This was even valued higher
than individual freedoms, as represented by the factor level “the
freedom of personal movement or travel,” and confirms prior findings about people willing to share data if they believe it benefits a
good cause [9].
However, our findings also imply that many participants will
not support extended use of corona apps beyond the pandemic. In
China, many participants expressed worries that prolonged use
of corona apps may increase anxiety due to being in a constant
state of alert. In the US and Germany, where we saw more skepticism towards the governments, almost one third of participants
voiced privacy and security concerns (see Table 7) and many of
them were especially worried about surveillance, confirming previous work about apps for COVID-19 contact tracing [4]. These
comments are supported by the negative estimate in our model
for scenarios where the data was sent to law enforcement. These
negative sentiments can be alleviated via privacy-preserving approaches in the implementation of “apps for a greater good” and
transparency about their data processing practices that were found
to foster people’s trust and increase adoption of COVID-19 contact
tracing apps [4, 31, 56, 69]. Still, in all countries, we observed a
base of participants who reported that they would never use any
kind of corona app, regardless of its data processing practices. This

group may contain people who think that apps are unnecessary to
combat the pandemic, fear surveillance, or do not take the threats of
coronavirus seriously. While previous work [61] has found a group
of critics to be open to arguments especially about privacy, our data
shows that a non-negligible number of participants, when prompted
to indicate their willingness to use an app, always responded with
“very unlikely”. This group is largest in the US (𝑛 = 212), followed
by Germany (151), and is rather small in China (8). In the case of
contact tracing apps, whose efficiency requires a large adoption
rate, this base of 15 to 21 % of non-users needs to be taken into
consideration when estimating the potential user base of an app, in
addition to people who are not able to use any app for other reasons.
Similarly, the development process for future apps collecting data
to support a public cause needs to take into account that there will
always be a base of users unwilling to support any given cause.

7

LIMITATIONS

In this work we present qualitative and quantitative data allowing
detailed insight into the privacy implications and user acceptance
of COVID-19-related smartphone apps in three countries. Our approach has the following limitations.
In our survey, we only collect self-reported data, which does
not necessarily reflect actual behavior. This phenomenon (referred
to as “privacy paradox” [45]) may have been further amplified
because all scenarios were hypothetical and participants were asked
to imagine themselves in the situation to decide whether or not
to use the described app. By deriving the factor levels used in
the scenarios from real-world apps, we aimed to represent the
realistic design space for both existing and potential future apps.
Future work may complement ours by conducting field studies that
observe participants’ actual behavior regarding apps designed to
help contain a pandemic.
Four out of five factor levels for the factor “app purpose” required
specific factor levels for payload data (see Section 4.1.2). This led to a
high correlation between app purpose and payload data, which blurs
the boundaries between both factors and may have contributed to
less relevant and significant results regarding payload data.7
For representativity, we focused on age, gender, region, and
education. Ethnicity representation in our US sample is skewed
towards the white population (Distribution: 77.7 % White, 8.9 %
Black or African American, 6.4 % Hispanic or Latino, 4.3 % Asian,
2.7 % Other or no answer). However, our analysis did not indicate
significant effects of ethnicity on the willingness to use a corona
app (see Appendix B).
It is a general problem to reach older, more rural populations in
China via online surveys; thus, our panel provider could only provide us with a sample representative for the online rather than the
general population. This leads to the Chinese sample being skewed
towards younger age and higher urbanization, which explains the
very high rate of smartphone users.
We commissioned the translation of the Chinese questionnaire
and Chinese open-ended answers to a translation agency and followed the quality assurance process of back translation to minimize
errors. However, we cannot completely exclude the possibility that
the translations from and into Chinese may contain small inaccuracies.

Utz, Becker, Schnitzler, Farke, Herbert, Schaewitz, Degeling, and Dürmuth

Questions asking for already known corona apps (Q13) and individual use of corona apps (Q14) may have been misleading in
China as coronavirus-related functionality has been integrated into
the established platform economies. This is indicated by participants responding that they did not use a (dedicated) corona app
because there were “mini programs on WeChat or Alipay” (participant CN-19). While integration into existing platforms can further
contribute to app acceptance, we do not expect this potential misunderstanding to have influenced our vignette study as the scenarios
for standalone apps were hypothetical.

8

CONCLUSION

The COVID-19 pandemic continues to pose significant challenges
to societies around the world. As measures are developed to slow
and eventually contain the spread, governments, private companies,
and individuals have turned to technology and smartphone apps
specifically developed to support these measures. To unfold the
potential of technological strategies, the population has to support
and voluntarily use them instead of rejecting or purposefully work
around them because they disagree with the underlying regulations or data collection practices. We conducted a study to better
understand how privacy factors impact the adoption of coronavirusrelated smartphone apps. Based on a vignette design describing
various app use cases and scenarios we show that many aspects
of the “contextual privacy” approach have an actual influence on
people’s willingness to use a corona app. While in general the willingness to use an already known type of app is high, we found
evidence that developers should take additional steps to ensure that
apps work correctly, collect as few personal data as possible, and
make it transparent when the data will be deleted. Policymakers
need to ensure that apps do not share data with private companies,
the police, or the public. Our study identified widespread concerns
that corona apps could be the start of a new era of government
surveillance – to counter these concerns, strong privacy and security paradigms should be adopted. We hope that our results can
inform the development of novel technology that can help limit the
negative impact of COVID-19 and future diseases while respecting
users’ privacy and autonomy.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank Kangning Zhan for her help with
the Chinese translations. This research is funded by the Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research Foundation) under Germany’s Excellence Strategy – EXC 2092 CASA – 390781972
and the MKW-NRW Research Training Groups SecHuman and
NERD.NRW.

REFERENCES
[1] Jonathan S. Abelson, Matthew Symer, Alex Peters, Mary Charlson, and Heather
Yeo. 2017. Mobile health apps and recovery after surgery: What are patients
willing to do? The American Journal of Surgery 214, 4 (Oct. 2017), 616–622.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.amjsurg.2017.06.009
[2] Icek Ajzen. 1991. The Theory of Planned Behavior. Organizational Behavior and
Human Decision Processes 50, 2 (Dec. 1991), 179–211. https://doi.org/10.1016/07495978(91)90020-T
[3] Icek Ajzen. 2019. Constructing a Theory of Planned Behavior Questionnaire.
University of Massachusetts Amherst. Retrieved September 2, 2020 from
https://people.umass.edu/aizen/pdf/tpb.measurement.pdf

[4] Samuel Altmann, Luke Milsom, Hannah Zillessen, Raffaele Blasone, Frederic
Gerdon, Ruben Bach, Frauke Kreuter, Daniele Nosenzo, Séverine Toussaert, and
Johannes Abeler. 2020. Acceptability of App-Based Contact Tracing for COVID19: Cross-Country Survey Study. JMIR mHealth and uHealth 8, 8 (Aug. 2020),
e19857. https://doi.org/10.2196/19857
[5] Apple Inc. and Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2020. COVID-19
Screening Tool. Apple Inc. and Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
Retrieved September 3, 2020 from https://covid19.apple.com/screening/
[6] Apple Inc. and Google Inc. 2020. Privacy-Preserving Contact Tracing. Apple Inc.
and Google Inc. Retrieved September 1, 2020 from https://covid19.apple.com/
contacttracing
[7] Noah Apthorpe, Sarah Varghese, and Nick Feamster. 2019. Evaluating the Contextual Integrity of Privacy Regulation: Parents’ IoT Toy Privacy Norms Versus
COPPA. In Proceedings of the 28th USENIX Security Symposium (Santa Clara,
CA, USA) (USENIX 2019). USENIX Association, Berkeley, CA, USA, 123–140.
https://www.usenix.org/conference/usenixsecurity19/presentation/apthorpe
[8] Australian Government Department of Health. 2020. Coronavirus Australia
app. Australian Government Department of Health. Retrieved September
3, 2020 from https://www.health.gov.au/resources/apps-and-tools/coronavirusaustralia-app
[9] Khadija Baig, Reham Mohamed, Anna-Lena Theus, and Sonia Chiasson. 2020.
“I’m hoping they’re an ethical company that won’t do anything that I’ll regret”:
Users Perceptions of At-home DNA Testing Companies. In Proceedings of the 2020
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Honolulu, HI, USA) (CHI
2020). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 1–13. https://doi.org/10.1145/3313831.3376800
[10] Louise Barkhuus. 2012. The Mismeasurement of Privacy: Using Contextual
Integrity to Reconsider Privacy in HCI. In Proceedings of the 2012 CHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Austin, TX, USA) (CHI 2012). ACM,
New York, NY, USA, 367–376. https://doi.org/10.1145/2207676.2207727
[11] Ardion D. Beldad and Margareta Citra Kusumadewi. 2015. Here’s my location, for
your information: The impact of trust, benefits, and social influence on location
sharing application use among Indonesian university students. Computers in
Human Behavior 49 (Aug. 2015), 102–110. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2015.02.
047
[12] Ardion D. Beldad and Sabrina M. Hegner. 2018. Expanding the Technology
Acceptance Model with the Inclusion of Trust, Social Influence, and Health
Valuation to Determine the Predictors of German Users’ Willingness to Continue
using a Fitness App: A Structural Equation Modeling Approach. International
Journal of Human-Computer Interaction 34, 9 (Nov. 2018), 882–893. https://doi.
org/10.1080/10447318.2017.1403220
[13] Sebastian Benthall, Seda Gürses, and Helen Nissenbaum. 2017. Contextual Integrity through the Lens of Computer Science. Foundations and Trends in Privacy
and Security 2, 1 (2017), 1–69. https://doi.org/10.1561/3300000016
[14] Stephan Broszio. 2020. Corona prediction: Telekom supports RKI. Deutsche Telekom
AG. Retrieved October 7, 2020 from https://www.telekom.com/en/company/
details/corona-prediction-telekom-supports-rki-597114
[15] Judee K. Burgoon. 1982. Privacy and Communication. Annals of the International
Communication Association 6, 1 (1982), 206–249. https://doi.org/10.1080/23808985.
1982.11678499
[16] Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2020. CDC COVID Data Tracker.
CDC. Retrieved September 3, 2020 from https://covid.cdc.gov/covid-data-tracker
[17] Rune Haubo B. Christensen. 2018. Cumulative Link Models for Ordinal Regression
with the R Package ordinal. Journal of Statistical Softwar (2018). https://cran.rproject.org/web/packages/ordinal/vignettes/clm_article.pdf
[18] Cristina Criddle and Leo Kelion. 2020. Coronavirus contact-tracing: World split
between two types of app. BBC. Retrieved September 17, 2020 from https:
//www.bbc.com/news/technology-52355028
[19] Fred D. Davis. 1989. Perceived Usefulness, Perceived Ease of Use, and User
Acceptance of Information Technology. MIS Quarterly 13, 3 (Sept. 1989), 319–340.
https://doi.org/10.2307/249008
[20] Pardis Emami Naeini, Sruti Bhagavatula, Hana Habib, Martin Degeling, Lujo
Bauer, Lorrie Cranor, and Norman Sadeh. 2017. Privacy Expectations and Preferences in an IoT World. In Proceedings of the Thirteenth Symposium on Usable
Privacy and Security (SOUPS 2017) (Santa Clara, CA, USA). USENIX Association,
Berkeley, CA, USA, 399–412. https://www.usenix.org/conference/soups2017/
technical-sessions/presentation/naeini
[21] Luca Ferretti, Chris Wymant, Michelle Kendall, Lele Zhao, Anel Nurtay, Lucie
Abeler-Dörner, Michael Parker, David Bonsall, and Christophe Fraser. 2020. Quantifying SARS-CoV-2 transmission suggests epidemic control with digital contact
tracing. Science 368, 6491 (May 2020). https://doi.org/10.1126/science.abb6936
[22] Janet Finch. 1987. The Vignette Technique in Survey Research. Sociology 21, 1
(Feb. 1987), 105–114. https://doi.org/10.1177/0038038587021001008
[23] Deen G. Freelon. 2010. ReCal: Intercoder Reliability Calculation as a Web Service.
International Journal of Internet Science 5, 1 (2010), 20–33. https://www.ijis.net/
ijis5_1/ijis5_1_freelon.pdf
[24] Nina Gerber, Paul Gerber, and Melanie Volkamer. 2018. Explaining the privacy
paradox: A systematic review of literature investigating privacy attitude and
behavior. Computers & Security 77 (Aug. 2018), 226–261. https://doi.org/10.1016/

Privacy Implications and User Acceptance of COVID-19-Related Smartphone Apps

j.cose.2018.04.002
[25] Nanna Gorm and Irina Shklovski. 2016. Sharing Steps in the Workplace: Changing
Privacy Concerns Over Time. In Proceedings of the 34th Annual CHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems (San Jose, CA, USA) (CHI 2016). ACM,
New York, NY, USA, 4315––4319. https://doi.org/10.1145/2858036.2858352
[26] Government of Singapore. 2020. TraceTogether. Government of Singapore. Retrieved September 9, 2020 from https://www.tracetogether.gov.sg/
[27] Jie Gu, Yunjie (Calvin) Xu, Heng Xu, Cheng Zhang, and Hong Ling. 2017. Privacy
concerns for mobile app download: An elaboration likelihood model perspective.
Decision Support Systems 94 (Feb. 2017), 19–28. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dss.2016.
10.002
[28] Seda Gürses, Bart Preneel, and Bettina Berendt. 2009. PETs under Surveillance: A
critical review of the potentials and limitations of the privacy as confidentiality
paradigm. In Hot Topics in Privacy Enhancing Technologies (Seattle, WA, USA)
(HotPETs 2009). De Gruyter, 22.
[29] Chin-Lung Hsu and Judy Chuan-Chuan Lin. 2008. Acceptance of blog usage:
The roles of technology acceptance, social influence and knowledge sharing
motivation. Information & Management 45, 1 (Jan. 2008), 65–74. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.im.2007.11.001
[30] International Chamber of Commerce and European Society for Opinion and
Marketing Research. 2007. International Code on Market and Social Research.
ICC/ESOMAR. Retrieved January 7, 2021 from https://iccwbo.org/publication/
iccesomar-international-code-on-market-and-social-research/
[31] Gabriel Kaptchuk, Daniel G. Goldstein, Eszter Hargittai, Jake Hofman, and
Elissa M. Redmiles. 2020. How good is good enough for COVID19 apps? The
influence of benefits, accuracy, and privacy on willingness to adopt. (May 2020),
12 pages. arXiv:2005.04343 [cs.CY] https://arxiv.org/abs/2005.04343
[32] Lily Kuo. 2020. ‘The new normal’: China’s excessive coronavirus public monitoring could be here to stay. The Guardian. Retrieved September 17, 2020
from https://www.theguardian.com/world/2020/mar/09/the-new-normal-chinasexcessive-coronavirus-public-monitoring-could-be-here-to-stay
[33] Tianshi Li, Jackie (Junrui) Yang, Cori Faklakis, Jennifer King, Yuvraj Agarwal, Laura Dabbish, and Jason I. Hong. 2020. Decentralized is not risk-free:
Understanding public perceptions of privacy-utility trade-offs in COVID-19
contact-tracing apps. (May 2020), 21 pages. arXiv:2005.11957 [cs.HC] https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2005.11957
[34] Naresh K. Malhotra, Sung S. Kim, and James Agarwal. 2010. Internet Users’
Information Privacy Concerns (IUIPC): The Construct, the Scale, and a Causal
Model. Information Systems Research 15, 4 (Dec. 2010), 336–355. https://doi.org/
10.1287/isre.1040.0032
[35] Kirsten Martin and Helen Nissenbaum. 2017. Privacy Interests in Public Records:
An Empirical Investigation. Harvard Journal of Law & Technology 31, 1 (2017),
111–144. https://heinonline.org/HOL/Page?handle=hein.journals/hjlt31&id=
117&div=&collection=
[36] Daniel Di Matteo, Alexa Fine, Kathryn Fotinos, Jonathan Rose, and Martin Katzman. 2020. Patient Willingness to Consent to Mobile Phone Data Collection for
Mental Health Apps: Structured Questionnaire. JMIR mHealth and uHealth 8, 8
(Aug. 2020), e19857. https://doi.org/10.2196/19857
[37] Philipp Mayring. 2014. Qualitative Content Analysis: Theoretical Foundation, Basic
Procedures and Software Solution. Gesis. https://nbn-resolving.org/urn:nbn:de:
0168-ssoar-395173
[38] Justin Meneguzzi. 2020. Will you need an ‘immunity passport’ to travel? BBC.
Retrieved September 9, 2020 from http://www.bbc.com/travel/story/20200831coronavirus-will-you-need-an-immunity-passport-to-travel
[39] Paul Mozur, Raymond Zhong, and Aaron Krolik. 2020. In Coronavirus Fight, China
Gives Citizens a Color Code, With Red Flags. The New York Times. Retrieved
September 1, 2020 from https://www.nytimes.com/2020/03/01/business/chinacoronavirus-surveillance.html
[40] Deirdre K. Mulligan, Colin Koopman, and Nick Doty. 2016. Privacy is an essentially contested concept: a multi-dimensional analytic for mapping privacy.
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A 374, 2083 (Dec. 2016), 1–17.
https://doi.org/10.1098/rsta.2016.0118
[41] Aurélie Najm, Laure Gossec, Catherine Weill, David Benoist, Francis Berenbaum,
and Elena Nikiphorou. November 2020. Mobile Health Apps for Self-Management
of Rheumatic and Musculoskeletal Diseases: Systematic Literature Review. JMIR
mHealth and uHealth 7, 11 (Nov. November 2020), e14730. https://doi.org/10.
2196/14730
[42] National Health Commission of the People’s Republic of China. 2020. July 26:
Daily briefing on novel coronavirus cases in China. National Health Commission
of the People’s Republic of China. Retrieved September 3, 2020 from http:
//en.nhc.gov.cn/2020-07/27/c_81199.htm
[43] Jennifer Nicholas, Katie Shilton, Stephen M. Schueller, Elizabeth L. Gray, Mary J.
Kwasny, and David C. Mohr. 2019. The Role of Data Type and Recipient in
Individuals’ Perspectives on Sharing Passively Collected Smartphone Data for
Mental Health: Cross-Sectional Questionnaire Study. JMIR mHealth and uHealth
7, 4 (April 2019), e12578. https://doi.org/10.2196/12578
[44] Helen Nissenbaum. 2004. Privacy as Contextual Integrity. Washington Law Review
79, 1 (Feb. 2004), 119–157. https://nyuscholars.nyu.edu/en/publications/privacy-

as-contextual-integrity
[45] Patricia A. Norberg, Daniel R. Horne, and David A. Horne. 2007. The Privacy
Paradox: Personal Information Disclosure Intentions versus Behaviors. Journal
of Consumer Affairs 41, 1 (March 2007), 100–126. https://doi.org/10.1111/J.17456606.2006.00070.X
[46] Cliodhna O’Connor and Helene Joffe. 2020. Intercoder Reliability in Qualitative
Research: Debates and Practical Guidelines. International Journal of Qualitative
Methods 19 (Jan. 2020), 1–13. https://doi.org/10.1177/1609406919899220
[47] Heather Patterson. [n.d.]. Contextual Expectations of Privacy in Self-Generated
Health Information Flows.
[48] Wei Peng, Shaheen Kanthawala, Shupei Yuan, and Syed Ali Hussain. 2016. A
qualitative study of user perceptions of mobile health apps. BMC Public Health
16, 1158 (Nov. 2016), 1–11. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12889-016-3808-0
[49] Justin Petelka, Lucy Van Kleunen, Liam Albright, Elizabeth Murnane, Stephen
Voida, and Jaime Snyder. 2020. Being (In)Visible: Privacy, Transparency, and
Disclosure in the Self-Management of Bipolar Disorder. In Proceedings of the 2020
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Honolulu, HI, USA) (CHI
2020). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 1–14. https://doi.org/10.1145/3313831.3376573
[50] Robert Koch Institute. 2020. Corona Data Donation – Scientific Analysis. Robert
Koch Institute. Retrieved September 1, 2020 from https://corona-datenspende.
de/science/en/
[51] Robert Koch Institute. 2020. COVID-19 Dashboard. Robert Koch Institute.
Retrieved September 1, 2020 from https://experience.arcgis.com/experience/
478220a4c454480e823b17327b2bf1d4
[52] Beate Roessler. 2006. New Ways of Thinking about Privacy. In Oxford Handbook
of Political Theory, Anne Philips Bonnie Honig and John Dryzek (Eds.). Oxford
University Press, 694–713. https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199548439.003.
0038
[53] SAP Germany. 2020. Open-Source Project Corona-Warn-App. SAP Germany.
Retrieved June 30, 2020 from https://www.coronawarn.app/en/
[54] Mark Scott and Zosia Wanat. 2020. Poland’s coronavirus app offers playbook for other governments. Politico.
Retrieved September 17, 2020
from https://www.politico.eu/article/poland-coronavirus-app-offers-playbookfor-other-governments/
[55] Matthew Sholtz. 2020. COVID tracing app roundup: All of the countries and US
states that currently offer exposure notification apps. Android Police. Retrieved September 17, 2020 from https://www.androidpolice.com/2020/09/14/covid-tracingapps-ens-android/
[56] Lucy Simko, Ryan Calo, Franziska Roesner, and Tadayoshi Kohno. 2020. COVID19 Contact Tracing and Privacy: Studying Opinion and Preferences. (2020),
32 pages. arXiv:2005.06056 https://arxiv.org/abs/2005.06056
[57] South Korea Ministry of Health and Welfare. 2020. Mobile Self-Diagnosis Guide.
South Korea Ministry of Health and Welfare. Retrieved September 3, 2020 from
http://ncov.mohw.go.kr/selfcheck
[58] Statista Inc. 2019. Smartphone ownership rate by country 2018. Statista Inc.
Retrieved September 17, 2020 from https://www.statista.com/statistics/539395/
smartphone-penetration-worldwide-by-country/
[59] TCN Coalition. 2020. Temporary Contact Numbers Protocol. TCN Coalition.
Retrieved September 1, 2020 from https://github.com/TCNCoalition/TCN
[60] The Government of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region. 2020. “StayHomeSafe” Mobile App User Guide. Retrieved September 3, 2020 from https:
//www.coronavirus.gov.hk/eng/stay-home-safe.html
[61] Simon Trang, Manuel Trenz, Welf H. Weiger, Monideepa Tarafdar, and Christy
M. K. Cheung. 2020. One app to trace them all? Examining app specifications
for mass acceptance of contact-tracing apps. European Journal of Information
Systems 29, 3 (July 2020), 1–14. https://doi.org/10.1080/0960085X.2020.1784046
[62] Carmela Troncoso, Mathias Payer, Jean-Pierre Hubaux, Marcel Salathé, James
Larus, Edouard Bugnion, Wouter Lueks, Theresa Stadler, Apostolos Pyrgelis,
Daniele Antonioli, et al. 2020. DP3T: Decentralized Privacy-Preserving Proximity
Tracing. École polytechnique fédérale de Lausanne and ETH Zurich. Retrieved
September 1, 2020 from https://github.com/DP-3T/documents
[63] Viswanath Venkatesh, Michael G. Morris, Gordon B. Davis, and Fred D. Davis.
2003. User Acceptance of Information Technology: Toward a Unified View. MIS
Quarterly 27, 3 (Sept. 2003), 425–478. https://doi.org/10.2307/30036540
[64] Jessica Vitak and Michael Zimmer. 2020. More Than Just Privacy: Using Contextual Integrity to Evaluate the Long-Term Risks from COVID-19 Surveillance
Technologies. Social Media + Society 6, 3 (July 2020), 1–4. https://doi.org/10.
1177/2056305120948250
[65] Kai von Carnap, Katja Drinhausen, and Kristin Shi-Kupfer. 2020. Tracing. Testing.
Tweaking. Approaches to data-driven Covid-19 management in China. MERICS
– Mercator Institute for China Studies. Retrieved January 11, 2021 from https:
//merics.org/en/report/tracing-testing-tweaking
[66] Mark Warner, Juan F. Maestre, Jo Gibbs, Chia-Fang Chung, and Ann Blandford.
2019. Signal Appropriation of Explicit HIV Status Disclosure Fields in Sex-Social
Apps used by Gay and Bisexual Men. In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems (Glasgow, Scotland, UK) (CHI 2019). ACM,
New York, NY, USA, 1—-15. https://doi.org/10.1145/3290605.3300922

Utz, Becker, Schnitzler, Farke, Herbert, Schaewitz, Degeling, and Dürmuth

[67] Samuel D. Warren and Louis D. Brandeis. 1890. The Right to Privacy. Harvard
Law Review 4, 5 (Dec. 1890), 193–220. https://doi.org/10.2307/1321160
[68] Verena M. Wottrich, Eva A. van Reijmersdal, and Edith G. Smit. 2018. The
privacy trade-off for mobile app downloads: The roles of app value, intrusiveness,
and privacy concerns. Decision Support Systems 106 (Feb. 2018), 44–52. https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.dss.2017.12.003
[69] Baobao Zhang, Sarah Kreps, and Nina McMurry. 2020. Americans’ Perceptions
of Privacy and Surveillance in the COVID-19 Pandemic. (2020), 28 pages. https:
//doi.org/10.31219/osf.io/9wz3y
[70] Leming Zhou, Jie Bao, Valerie Watzlaf, and Bambang Parmanto. 2019. Barriers
to and Facilitators of the Use of Mobile Health Apps From a Security Perspective:
Mixed-Methods Study. JMIR mHealth and uHealth 7, 4 (April 2019), e11223.
https://doi.org/10.2196/11223
[71] Alain F. Zuur, Elena N. Ieno, Neil J. Walker, Anatoly A. Saveliev, and Graham M.
Smith. 2009. Mixed Effects Modelling for Nested Data. In Mixed effects models
and extensions in ecology with R. Springer, New York, NY, 101–142. https://doi.
org/10.1007/978-0-387-87458-6_5 Series Title: Statistics for Biology and Health.

A

QUESTIONNAIRE

[Title] Corona App Study

Welcome Text
The current situation with the novel coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2) and
the disease it causes (COVID-19) has sparked an intense debate
about the use of smartphone apps to better understand and contain
the spread of the virus. This study investigates how people perceive
apps that promise to help fight the COVID-19 pandemic and what
they expect from them.

Phone Use
First we would like to ask you a few questions about the smartphone
you mainly use.
Q1: Do you own a smartphone? [single choice]
• Yes
• No
• Prefer not to answer
Q2: What is your phone’s operating system? [single choice]
• Android/Google
• iOS/Apple
• Other (please specify:)
• Don’t know
• Prefer not to answer
Q3: How satisfied are you with the following aspects of your
smartphone? [array of single-choice questions; answer options for each: Very satisfied, Satisfied, Neither satisfied nor
dissatisfied, Dissatisfied, Prefer not to answer]
• Battery life
• Location accuracy (GPS)
• Camera quality
• Speed (of apps)

Coronavirus Experience
Now we would like to ask you some questions about your experience with the novel coronavirus.
This study uses the following terminology:
• “coronavirus”: the novel coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2) that has
caused a global pandemic in early 2020;

• “COVID-19”: coronavirus disease 19, the respiratory disease
caused by this virus;
• “corona apps”: smartphone apps specifically developed to
help limit the spread of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Q4: Are you or have you been infected with the novel coronavirus? [single choice]
• I was tested for coronavirus and at least one of the results
was positive.
• I was tested for coronavirus and all results were negative.
• I was not tested for coronavirus and I do not think I have
been infected.
• I was not tested for coronavirus, but I suspect that I might
have been infected.
• Prefer not to answer
Q5: Is there a person in your social circle who is or has been
infected with the novel coronavirus? [single choice]
• Yes
• No
• Prefer not to answer
Q6: Have you been quarantined or did you quarantine yourself
because of coronavirus? [single choice]
• Yes
• No
• Prefer not to answer
Q7: To the best of your knowledge, is there a person at higher
risk in your household, i. e., an older adult or a person of any
age who has a serious underlying medical condition? [single
choice]
• Yes
• No
• Prefer not to answer
Q8: How concerned are you that you or someone you are close to
will become infected with the coronavirus? [single choice]
• Not at all concerned
• Slightly concerned
• Somewhat concerned
• Moderately concerned
• Extremely concerned
• Prefer not to answer

Introduction to App Scenarios
In the following, you will be shown different apps to find out what
kind of corona apps you would prefer to use. The presented apps are
fictional and have different purposes and implement different functionalities. For each app, you will be asked a few questions. Please
consider the app’s purpose and functionalities while answering the
questions. Always assume that you are free to choose whether or
not you install and use the app.

App Scenario
[This question group was displayed 10 times, only with different
scenarios.]

Privacy Implications and User Acceptance of COVID-19-Related Smartphone Apps

Sample scenario. Imagine an app that provides information about
your health and needs to be shown if you want to visit a certain
place.
• The app uses health or activity data, your COVID-19 infection status, and your current or past location(s).
• In addition, the app collects data that could be used to uniquely
identify you.
• This data is sent to research institutions when you request
your health report and it will be stored until the current
coronavirus regulations end.
• The app decreases your phone’s battery life. Using this app
may increase your personal freedom of movement or travel.
Q9: How likely are you to use this app on your smartphone?
[7-point scale with end points “Very unlikely” and “Very
likely”, plus “Prefer not to answer”]
Q10: How many people in {Germany, the United States, China} do
you expect to use this app on their smartphones? [7-point
scale with end points “No one” and “Everyone”, plus “Prefer
not to answer”]
Q11: Please complete the following statement: Most people who
are important to me think that I ... [7-point scale with end
points “should not use this app” and “should use this app”,
plus “Prefer not to answer”]
Q12: How useful do you rate this app in helping contain the spread
of the COVID-19 pandemic? [7-point scale with end points
“Not at all useful” and “Very useful”, plus “Prefer not to answer”]

Use of Corona Apps
Q13: Do you know of any app recommended by the public authorities in the United States that can be used to ... [array of
single-choice questions; answer options for each: Yes, No,
Unsure, Prefer not to answer]
• ... get information about the novel coronavirus and its
spread?
• ... check if you have coronavirus-related symptoms?
• ... enforce quarantine?
• ... identify people you have been in close contact with and
alert them in case you tested positive for coronavirus?
• ... provide information about your health and needs to be
shown if you want to visit a certain place?
Q14: Do you use any kind of corona app on your smartphone?
[single choice]
• Yes
• No
• Don’t know
• Prefer not to answer
Q14a: If no: Why do you not use a corona app? [free text]
Q14b: If yes: Which corona app(s) do you use? [free text]

Q15: In general, what do you consider positive aspects of smartphone apps to help limit the spread of the COVID-19 pandemic? [free text]
Q16: In general, what do you consider negative aspects of smartphone apps to help limit the spread of the COVID-19 pandemic? [free text]

Trust in Institutions
Q17: How do you rate the measures taken in your area to fight
the COVID-19 pandemic? [single choice]
• Way too strict
• Too strict
• About right
• Too lenient
• Way too lenient
• Prefer not to answer
Q18: What is your overall opinion of the following institutions in
the COVID-19 pandemic? [array of single-choice questions;
answer options for each: Very favorable, Mostly favorable,
Neither favorable nor unfavorable, Mostly unfavorable, Very
unfavorable, Prefer not to answer]
• Health authorities
• Law enforcement
• Research institutions
• Private companies
• Federal government
• State government
Q19: In the past private companies have shared their customers’
data, such as phone location data, with public authorities to
help limit the spread of the COVID-19 pandemic. How do
you rate this practice? [single choice]
• Totally unacceptable
• Unacceptable
• Neither unacceptable nor acceptable
• Acceptable
• Perfectly acceptable
• Prefer not to answer

Individual Privacy Concerns
Q20: Please indicate to what extent you agree with each of following statements.
[IUIPC constructs for Control, Awareness (of Privacy Practices), and Collection [34]]

Utz, Becker, Schnitzler, Farke, Herbert, Schaewitz, Degeling, and Dürmuth

B

DETAILS OF REGRESSION MODELS

Tables 4, 5, and 6 were computed using the following cumulative
link mixed model fitted with the Laplace approximation using following call in R:
Listing 1: Function call in R used to fit the cumulative link
mixed model. Note that the “Ethnicity” variable was only
available for the US responses.
clmm ( Q9 ~ p u r p o s e + t e c h n i c a l + s o c i e t a l +
d1 _ e n c o u n t e r + d1 _ l o c a t i o n + d1 _ h e a l t h +
d1 _ i n f e c t i o n + d1 _ u n s p e c + d1 _ none + d2
+ receiver + retention + transmission +
Q2 + Q3r1 + Q3r2 + Q3r3 + Q3r4 + Q4 +
Q5 + Q6 + Q7 + Q8 + Q13r1 + Q13r2 +
Q13r3 + Q13r4 + Q13r5 + Q14 + Q17 +
Q18r1 + Q18r2 + Q18r3 + Q18r4 + Q18r5 +
Q18r6 + Q19 + Gender + MainRegionName +
E d u c a t i o n _ G e n e r a l + Age + E t h n i c i t y +
i u i p c _ c o l + i u i p c _awa + i u i p c _ con + ( 1 |
s c e n a r i o _ i n d e x ) , l i n k = " p r o b i t " , data
= r e s p o n s e s , Hess = TRUE)
Each round 𝑅 we compared the current best model (𝑀𝑅 ) with
models were each factor (F) was individually removed (𝑀𝑅𝑤𝑖𝑡ℎ𝑜𝑢𝑡 𝐹 )
and compared the AIC of these models to decide which factor to

remove for the next 𝑀𝑅 Factors were removed in the following
order:
Listing 2: Factors removed of the final model from US responses in order of removal
E t h n i c i t y , Q18r4 , Q17 , Q13r3 , Q3r4 , Q3r3 ,
Q13r1 , d1 _ l o c a t i o n , d1 _ unspec , d1 _ none ,
Q18r5 , Q7 , Q6 , d1 _ e n c o u n t e r , Q2 , i u i p c _
awa , d1 _ h e a l t h , i u i p c _ c o l , E d u c a t i o n _
G e n e r a l , d1 _ i n f e c t i o n
Listing 3: Factors removed of the final model from Chinese
responses in order of removal
Q3r4 , Age , s o c i e t a l , Q18r6 , Q18r5 , Q13r5 ,
Q17 , Q13r1 , Q4 , Q3r2 , d1 _ none , Q2 ,
Gender , Q5 , MainRegionName , Q3r3 , d1 _
e n c o u n t e r , t r a n s m i s s i o n , d1 _ i n f e c t i o n
Listing 4: Factors removed of the final model from German
responses in order of removal
MainRegionName , Q3r3 , Age , Q13r1 , Q3r1 , Q6 ,
Q3r4 , d1 _ none , i u i p c _ con , Q7 , r e t e n t i o n ,
d1 _ unspec , Q18r2 , Q4 , Age , Q5 , d1 _
h e a l t h , i u i p c _awa , E d u c a t i o n _ G e n e r a l

