Image-based Social Sensing: Combining AI and the Crowd to
Mine Policy-Adherence Indicators from Twitter
Virginia Negri
Dario Scuratti
Stefano Agresti
Donya Rooein

Amudha Ravi Shankar
Jose Luis Fernandez Marquez
University of Geneva
Geneva, Switzerland

arXiv:2010.03021v1 [cs.CY] 6 Oct 2020

Politecnico di Milano
Milano, Italy

ABSTRACT
Social Media provides a trove of information that, if aggregated
and analysed appropriately can provide important statistical indicators to policy makers. In some situations these indicators are
not available through other mechanisms. For example, given the
ongoing COVID-19 outbreak, it is essential for governments to have
access to reliable data on policy-adherence with regards to mask
wearing, social distancing, and other hard-to-measure quantities. In
this paper we investigate whether it is possible to obtain such data
by aggregating information from images posted to social media.
Combining recent advances in image recognition technology with
geocoding and crowdsourcing techniques to build a pipeline for
image-based social sensing. Our aim is to discover in which countries, and to what extent, people are following COVID-19 related
policy directives. We compared the results with the indicators produced within the Covid-19 behavior tracker initiative by ICL and
YouGov [14]. Preliminary results shows that social media images
can produce reliable indicators for policy makers.
ACM Reference Format:
Virginia Negri, Dario Scuratti, Stefano Agresti, Donya Rooein, Amudha Ravi
Shankar, Jose Luis Fernandez Marquez, Mark James Carman, and Barbara
Pernici. xxxx. Image-based Social Sensing: Combining AI and the Crowd to
Mine Policy-Adherence Indicators from Twitter. In ,. ACM, New York, NY,
USA, 9 pages. https://doi.org/xxxx

1

INTRODUCTION

The massive number of images posted to social media each day1
represents a relatively untapped resource for mining useful social
indicators and policy information. Providing better and more timely
information to policy makers could provide widespread benefit by
allowing for more reliable evidence-based decision making [8].
While text in social media has been mined extensively in the past,
images have seen less interest, likely due to the difficulty to extract
1 Five

hundred million tweets are posted to Twitter each day in 2020 according to:
https://www.webfx.com/internet-real-time/

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
submitted for publication, xxxx
© xxxx Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-x-xxxx-xxxx-x/YY/MM. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/xxxx

Mark James Carman
Barbara Pernici

mark.carman@polimi.it
barbara.pernici@polimi.it
Politecnico di Milano
Milano, Italy

semantic information from them. Indeed according to a recent
survey on social sensing [27], one current research challenge is
that of analysing the interdependent relationship between sensing
measurements with different data modalities, such as text, sound,
images, and video, in order to obtain more accurate sensing results.
In our paper we focus on jointly analysing text and images from
social media posts.
Recent advances in deep-learning based image-processing techniques mean that the salient information contained within images
is becoming easier to extract [16]. Moreover, since each picture can
contain a wealth of information (particularly compared to the limited amount of text that often accompanies it in platforms such as
Twitter), we believe that image-based pipelines could substantially
increase the breadth and depth of questions that can be answered
using social media data.
The goal of this paper is thus to propose a methodology for
machine-learning enabled image-based social sensing of social indicators. The methodology makes use of visual (and also textual)
information from social media and processes it with both AI and
crowdsourcing to discover and validate observations of social behaviour, which are then aggregated in now-casting fashion [1] to
estimate statistical indicators of social behaviour that are useful
to policy makers. In our work, a semi-automated social sensing
pipeline is developed that combines automated image classification
techniques with crowd based validation techniques, which then
allows for reliable estimation of social indicators.
The specific application we tackle in this paper is that of monitoring indicators related to COVID-19 related policy directives such
as the requirements to social distance and to wear masks. Images on
Twitter, such as those shown in Figure 1 provide useful information
to an analyst tasked with the problem of determining the amount of
policy-adherence in different locations. Obviously a single analyst
cannot alone monitor the massive flow of images on Twitter to
determine the amount of adherence, but by leveraging the image
classification techniques we can automatically extract only the relevant images from that massive stream. The resulting stream of
relevant images may still be too large for a single analyst to deal
with, but by recruiting a team of analysts through crowdsourcing,
the capacity of the analysts can scale to fit the data need.
In this work we combine the strengths of automated Machine
Learning based image filtering techniques, namely its speed and
scalability, with those of crowdsourcing, in particular its accuracy
and flexibility, to present a new methodology for estimating policy

submitted for publication,
Virginia Negri,
xxxx Dario Scuratti, Stefano Agresti, Donya Rooein, Amudha Ravi Shankar, Jose Luis Fernandez Marquez, Mark James Carman, and Barbara Pernici

2.1

Figure 1: Examples of images posted to Twitter that could be
useful for determining the level of COVID-19 related mask
usage in different locations.

indicators using an image-based social sensing framework to mine
images from Twitter.
The main contributions of this work are as follows:
• We introduce a framework for image-based social sensing
that allows for image-based evidence of certain COVID-19
related social behaviour (mask wearing, social distancing,
etc.) to be aggregated into indicators.
• We develop and test a series of image filters based on deep
learning techniques to automatically select with high accuracy only those images which are photos depicting a certain
type of event (e.g., 2 or more people meeting in a public
place).
• We build a crowdsourcing application that leverages the
crowd to extract the necessary information from the selected
pictures for calculating the desired indicators.
• We derive indicators about COVID-related behaviors from
the crowdsourcing results and compare them with data from
other external sources, obtained through surveys [14].
The paper is structured as follows. We first discuss related work
in Section 2, presenting the state-of-the-art on several aspects relevant for developing an image-based social sensing pipeline. In
Section 3 we present our approach for extracting information from
social media regarding the social impact of COVID-19. Specifically
we develop a pipeline of tools to derive information from Twitter
with an approach based on the combination of AI and crowdsourcing. Finally, in Section 4 we illustrate an experimental dataset and
evaluate the performance of step in the pipeline before comparing the resulting indicators with an external data source based on
surveys.

2

RELATED WORK

In this section we discuss the different branches of research that we
bring together in this paper, namely social sensing, citizen science,
and deep learning.

Social Sensing versus Traditional Surveys

Social sensing has been proposed in the literature [26] as a term2
for describing the gathering of information from humans – using
crowdsourcing, human-connected devices (mobiles, etc.) and/or by
extracting information from social media – with the goal of mining
social signals to gather situation awareness and support decision
making.
The use of social media to gain timely evidence of ongoing emergency events (such of pictures of flooded towns, earthquake devastated buildings, or burnt forest, etc.) has been widely studied [10].
Recent approaches propose to retrieve visual evidence on the events
by combining both textual data mining and automated image classification, in order to reduce the information overload needed to
inspect images manually [12, 13]. To the best of our knowledge,
however, no previous work has looked to perform social sensing
based on the visual information available in social media, i.e. to aggregate evidence from observations of social behaviour to compute
near real-time social indicators that are useful for policy makers.
The traditional approach to collect policy adherence information
is through surveys. In the context of the COVID-19 emergency,
surveys regarding face mask usage have been performed3 and thematic maps have been produced based on survey results to study
the evolution of mask use over time4 . Another group collecting surveys based data on COVID-19 behavioural aspects is the Covid-19
Behavior Tracker initiative (CovidDataHub project) by the Institute
of Global Health Innovation (IGHI) at Imperial College London and
YouGov. Weekly survey data is available online for a selection of
countries. In order to generate the data, each week around 1,000
people from each country are interviewed, and summary data is
made available for the countries in which the target number of
respondents is reached. While the total number of countries being
surveyed is 30, the reports usually present data for a subset of countries, depending on the availability of data (e.g., only four countries
were reported in the first week of August, 2020). This survey data
is used as an external data source for validating the results of our
pipeline.
The limitation of survey-based social indicator estimation is,
of course, the need to reach a sufficient number of representative
individuals on a regular basis. In this paper we propose a completely
different approach based on social media and crowdsourcing that
avoids altogether the need to find representative individuals and
entice them to respond to online surveys.

2.2

Crowdsourcing and Citizen Science

The involvement of citizens in the solution of social science problems has been proposed and discussed in the literature. In the context of critical societal challenges, the authors of a recent roadmap
paper [8] discuss the difficulty of collecting data to measure the
232 indicators related to the Sustainable Development Goals (SDG)
defined by the United Nations. Citizen-generated data is considered
a possible non-traditional data source, that could be used to complement the official data sources which are often costly to produce
2A

related term is crowd-sensing [5].

3 https://www.statista.com/statistics/1114375/wearing-a-face-mask-outside-in-

european-countries/

4 http://www.healthdata.org/sites/default/files/files/Projects/COVID/Mask_use_

infographic_2020-1.pdf

Image-based Social Sensing: Combining AI and the Crowd to Mine Policy-Adherence Indicators from Twitter

in terms of both time and resources. The citizen-generated data
often allows for wider coverage, both spatial and temporal. The
collection process may different from traditional methods with the
involvements of citizens at different expertise levels, actively or
passively (through social media) collecting data to support scientists, or even fostering co-creation initiatives. The main issue in
this case is the quality of the collected data. In addition to general
data quality metrics, as the ones proposed by ISO 25012 for data
quality in general and ISO 19157 for the quality of spatial data, the
quality issue has been studied in depth in the context of crowdsourcing, with several strategies for ensuring data quality for this
type of data [3, 15]. In this paper we make use of simple majorityvote based crowdsourcing quality control techniques, deferring the
implementation of more sophisticated techniques to future work.
Another important issue which arises when citizens are involved
in the collection and/or assessment of data to support scientific
projects is the size of the data to be analysed. In this case the task is
to present the citizens with a manageable amount of data to analyse,
and to select only the data that is relevant for the problem being
studied. As noted in the previous section, AI techniques such as the
use of automated classifiers can be employed to reduce the amount
of information provided to the citizen scientists. We follow this
approach in the development of our pipeline.
We note that there are emerging examples in the health care
domain of even more collaborative approaches between AI and
crowdsourcing, targeted in particular at helping communities at
risk, where health-care providers and experts involved through
crowdsourcing are actively supported by AI techniques (e.g., [22]).

2.3

Deep Learning for Image Filtering

A focus of our work is on automatically analysing the visual evidence emerging from social media before involving crowd workers
and experts. Thus in this section we provide a brief overview of technology developments in deep learning based image processing that
allow for implementing the large-scale filtering of images needed
in this project. Later in Section 3 we will illustrate our specific
approach and the specific types of filters we have developed.
As noted above, deep learning and in particular deep Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) architectures have massively improved the state-of-the-art performance in image recognition tasks
(such as image classification, object recognition, segmentation, etc.)
over the last few years [16]. Models like VGG [24], ResNet [11] and
EfficientNet [25] come pre-trained on the massive image datasets,
such as ImageNet [23], and can then be fine-tuned on specific classification tasks for excellent performance, provided sufficient training
data is available. In this paper, we make use of several pre-trained
models. Moreover, in order to leverage task-specific training on
large external collections, we often make use of models that have
been fine-tuned and extended (in terms of the network architecture) for certain image processing tasks, for which we require a
particular filter. In all cases, performance of these models could be
further improved by trained on task specific data gathered during
the crowdsourcing phase of our pipeline.
The functionality required for building an image filtering pipeline
for social sensing can be summarised in three key questions:
(1) What type of objects does the image contain?

submitted for publication, xxxx

(2) Where was the photo taken?
(3) Was the photo seen before?
To answer the first question, it is important not only to look
at which objects are displayed, but most importantly, whether the
displayed content is safe to show to crowdworkers. For this purpose, specialised Not Safe For Work (NSFW) classifiers exist, such
as Yahoo’s OpenNSFW5 . This model uses a convolutional neural
network based on ResNet-50 [11].
To identify specific objects in images, a number of techniques
exist, with the most famous among them being YOLO [20], a realtime object detector pre-trained on the COCO [17] dataset. YOLO
is fast and accurate, outperforming Faster-RNN [21], the previous
state-of-the-art, both in terms of accuracy and speed (100 times
faster). YOLO is a convolutional model that with a single pass
is able to simultaneously predict multiple bounding boxes and
class probabilities for each box. Thus, it can be trained end-to-end,
differently from traditional region proposal networks, and as such is
much faster and more accurate. The COCO dataset, on which YOLO
is trained, provides a large number of object categories, allowing
a filter based on it to be used in a wide variety of scenarios. Since
our study focuses on COVID-related social behaviour, an object
detector can be used to filter out images containing less than two
people.
Where the photo was taken? The second criterion for filtering
the image content is to look at where the depicted event occurred.
Scene classifiers can be used for this purpose, since we can select
the types of locations of our interest. This approach allows us to be
flexible in the choice of the scene and select the ones pertinent to
the goal of the study. An open source repository containing various
convolutional neural networks (CNNs) pre-trained on Places365
dataset [30] is available6 . This dataset gathers images belonging to
365 scene categories, which are sufficiently specific to be used in a
wide range of tasks, (including in our case to detect whether the
location is public or private).

2.4

Geolocating Observations

In the context on many social sensing projects that make use of
data from social media, one of the important issues is the ability to
associate a location to the information been extracted. Considering
Twitter as the most common social network from which social
media information is extracted, one problem is that only a small
percentage of tweets are natively geolocated and all images are
stripped of metadata for privacy issues. As a result, many authors
have studied the problem of geolocating tweets from the available
information (e.g., [19, 29]).
In this paper we adopt the CIME geolocation algorithm proposed
in the E2mC project [6, 7], which for non-geolocated tweets extracts
a possible location from the text and metadata of the post, using
the Stanford Core Named Entity Extraction algorithm [18] and
OpenStreetMap [9] with the Nominatim API7 as a gazeteer and a
context-based approach for disambiguation [7].

5 https://github.com/yahoo/open_nsfw

6 https://github.com/AMANVerma28/Indoor-Outdoor-scene-classification

7 https://wiki.openstreetmap.org/wiki/Nominatim

submitted for publication,
Virginia Negri,
xxxx Dario Scuratti, Stefano Agresti, Donya Rooein, Amudha Ravi Shankar, Jose Luis Fernandez Marquez, Mark James Carman, and Barbara Pernici

• ask the crowd to validate and annotate the candidate observations, such that they can be aggregated into estimates of
the indicator.

Twitter keyword Crawl
Duplicate URL Filter
Similar Image Filter
Photo Detector
NSFW Detector
Scene Detector
Person Detector
Geocoding
Crowdsourcing
Aggregate Statistics
Visualisation on Map

Figure 2: Components of the social sensing pipeline.

2.5

Preventing Duplicate Observations

It is important in our framework to have filters than can automatically detect and remove identical or similar images, since they
would increase the workload for the crowd, and more importantly
could bias and distort the estimates of social indicators through the
double counting of individual observations.
Detecting similar images that come from the same original photo
source is non-trivial, since intermediate processing might in different spatial resolutions or the enhancement with various image
filters or event cropping of the source image. It is possible to train
Deep Convolutional Neural Networks in a so-called Siamese Architecture for detecting near duplicates [2]. Simpler techniques that
require no training, but instead make use of similarity preserving
hash functions on images are also available, such as the well-known
Perceptual Hash (P-hash) functions [28]. Modifications to an image,
such as the rescaling and enhancement mentioned above, can easily
be detected by comparing the images’ P-hash with previously seen
values.

3

APPROACH

Our approach to image-based social sensing from Twitter leverages
the respective strengths of machine learning based automated image classification techniques and human user based crowdsourcing.
Figure 2 provides a depiction of the workflow developed. We now
describe each of the components in the pipeline, focusing on the
approach being followed to achieve the main goals:
• automatically extract and select images from Twitter posts
that likely provide evidence for estimating a social indicator
(e.g. images of people meeting in a public space),
• determine whether the candidate observations can be located
automatically (at the country level), and

In the following subsections we illustrate the important steps in
the pipeline.8

3.1

Keyword-based Crawling

The Twitter crawls analysed in this paper (see Section 4) were
performed using the Tweepy library9 to access the Twitter API10 .
During the crawl only tweets containing images were retrieved and
retweets were excluded.

3.2

Removing Duplicate Images

Since each image represents a different observation for the purpose
of estimating a indicator statistic (such as the amount of mask usage
in a particular country), it is important that the same image does
not pass multiple times through the pipeline. The same image of an
event may be posted (or retweeted) by different people on social
media, and thus may appear multiple times in our crawl. Thus at
the very beginning of the pipeline we implement a check to remove
duplicate image URLs from the crawl.
Checking for duplicate URLs does not guarantee the complete
absence of duplicate images however, since the same image content could be available from different locations. One could remove
duplicate images by computing their cryptographic hashes and discarding those already seen. However, this approach cannot detect
if two images are the different but both come from the same original source image. The same image, for example, may have been
uploaded with different spatial resolutions or been modified with
colour filters. One way to allow for such transformations is to use a
similarity-preserving hash function for comparing images. Similar
images will have a same similarity hash and can thus be discarded.
In our framework we adopt the perceptual hash (P-hash) [28] function. The P-hash algorithm extracts transformation-invariant features from the multimedia object and computes their hash. As a
result, similar images will have the same features, and thus also the
same hash, as shown for instance in Figure 3.

3.3

Filtering Irrelevant Images

In order to fulfil our goal of gathering significant statistical information for policy makers, we must provide our crowd with only
relevant data for the task. Thus we perform a set of filtering operations to extract only those images that are likely relevant. For this
purpose, we built an image filtering pipeline based on deep learning
techniques, including both state-of-the-art models pre-trained on
large public datasets, and custom filters built according to our needs.
The pipeline performs the following filter operations:
•
•
•
•
8A

Removing non-photos
Removing NSFW content
Detecting the scene
Detecting people

github repository with the pipeline code along with a dataset containing tweet ids
and the corresponding validated annotations will be posted once the paper is accepted.
9 https://www.tweepy.org/
10 https://developer.twitter.com/en

Image-based Social Sensing: Combining AI and the Crowd to Mine Policy-Adherence Indicators from Twitter

(a) Original image

submitted for publication, xxxx

(b) Rescaled image

Figure 4: YOLO object detector used to detect people

(c) Saturated image

(d) Blurred image

Figure 3: Transformations on an image that do not affect its
P-hash value
Filter
person detector
photo detector
NSFW detector
public/private scene

images removed
78.6%
65.3%
7.7%
20.3%

time / image
0.99s
0.58s
0.33s
0.34s

Table 1: Selectivity and execution time for image filters on
1,000 randomly chosen images

In principle, the four classifiers can be applied in any order, however,
we ordered them on the basis of their performance characteristics,
considering both speed of execution and selectivity. The characteristics of the image classification filters applied separately on 1,000
randomly selected images is reported in Table 1. The geocoding algorithm requires more than a second per tweet, so it was performed
after the image filtering.
3.3.1 Removing non-photos. In order to efficiently remove from
the crawled images those that do not represent photos, a photo
detector was implemented. Crawled images contained a significant
percentage of irrelevant images corresponding to internet memes
or modified photos with text. To tackle this problem, a VGG19
model, pre-trained on the ImageNet dataset [4], was fine-tuned
on a data set containing 3376 images labelled as memes / non
acceptable photos (taken from the Reddit Memes Dataset11 , and
2448 images considered acceptable (taken from the Multi-SalientObject (MSO) Dataset12 ). To fine-tune the algorithm, VGG19’s last
layer was substituted to adapt the model for the new classification
task, and all layers inherited from the original architecture are held
frozen during training. In this way, the model achieved excellent
performance on the filtering task.

crowd workers. To ensure this, we made use of Yahoo’s implementation of a NSFW classifier, OpenNSFW13 . Deciding what type of
content is safe or not is subjective and context-specific. Yahoo’s
model specifically filters out pornographic content, while it does
not address non-photos or offensive text, which we will both target
by using a photo filter. It also does not address images depicting
violence, which however we might want to include to investigate
people’s behaviour to help policy makers. We use this model as
a preliminary filter, knowing that it provides a limited guarantee
on the accuracy of the output. We will thus necessarily warn our
crowd on the probability of facing explicit content and ask to alert
us in such a case.
3.3.3 Detecting the scene. Selecting the right scene in images allows extracting a more meaningful subset of data for our task. For
this purpose we introduced a scene detector in our pipeline. This
component consists in a convolutional neural network able to classify an image as belonging to one of a set of scene categories. In
our framework we introduced an open-source model14 pre-trained
on Places365 [30], a public dataset of images corresponding to 365
scene categories. For our specific task we thought a more meaningful distinction was between public and private scenes. Thus,
we aggregated the original 365 scenes in these two subsets. Policy
makers will surely be more interested in observing how people are
behaving in public scenes such as streets or supermarkets, where
they must conform to security regulations, rather than in private
spaces.
3.3.4 Detecting People. We can greatly benefit from detecting required objects in a scene to narrow down the most relevant images
for our purpose. For this purpose we introduced in our pipeline
the YOLO [20] object detector, pre-trained on the COCO dataset
[17]. In the specific scenario of gathering relevant images for policy makers during the COVID-19 outbreak, we extracted images
containing people. In addition, filtering images with at least two
people showed a significant increase of the quality of the result, for
example discarding all selfies.

3.4

Geocoding Images

3.3.2 Removing NSFW content. It is critical to discard all Not Safe
For Work (NSFW) content from our data before feeding it to the

In order to evaluate the social impact of COVID-19 in different
countries, it is necessary to associate a location to each post. The
geolocation was performed using the CIME service [6, 7] described
in Section 2, applying it on the textual part of the tweet, combined
with the textual user location, if present. The geolocation was not

11 https://www.kaggle.com/sayangoswami/reddit-memes-dataset

13 https://github.com/yahoo/open_nsfw

12 https://www.kaggle.com/jessicali9530/mso-dataset

14 https://github.com/AMANVerma28/Indoor-Outdoor-scene-classification

submitted for publication,
Virginia Negri,
xxxx Dario Scuratti, Stefano Agresti, Donya Rooein, Amudha Ravi Shankar, Jose Luis Fernandez Marquez, Mark James Carman, and Barbara Pernici

performed whenever already available from Twitter itself, in which
case we preferred to use the original one.
With the goal of creating thematic maps, we located each post
with CIME and then extracted the country or territory it refers to.
When multiple candidate locations were available, one has been
chosen randomly to be shown to the crowd. The CIME function
we used returns the coordinates of the centroid for each candidate
location. We used this location to extract the corresponding contry
or territory code. Only tweets with an associated location are sent
to the crowd workers for the analysis, showing the name of the
location as text.

stage of pipeline
crawled tweets with images
after all image filtering
after automated geolocating
annotated via crowdsourcing
with location validated by crowd

# tweets
470,255
42,978
25,541
2,461
2,061

Table 2: Number of tweets after each phase of the socialsensing pipeline

crowd was composed by 38 volunteers from social networks and
working students.

3.6

Figure 5: Crowdsourcing interface with the questions posed
on the left and the text of the tweet, the proposed country
and the image from the tweet on the right.

3.5

Crowdsourcing

In our project we use a citizen science approach to complement
the collection of information asking the crowd to evaluate the
behaviour of people in the extracted images. A series of questions
is posed to the crowd workers, to assess the visible behaviour of
the people. In particular we focused on social distancing and the
use of face masks, as this data is difficult to extract automatically15
and in many cases requires human judgement.
The open source PyBossa16 platform for human data mining
has been adopted in this project, with the extension of the Project
Builder realised at the Citizen Science Center Zurich for an easier
creation and management of crowdsourcing projects. Each post
is shown to the crowd worker with the image and a proposed
geolocation for it (see Fig. 5). A series of questions concerning the
image contents related to the Covid-19 pandemic are proposed to
the crowd worker, concerning social distance and face mask usage.
The full list of questions are listed in the Appendix 5. Some of the
queries are conditioned on the previous question.17
For each Tweet, a separate task is created, and redundancy is set
to 3 such that three independent crowd workers have to analyse
the tweet for the task to complete. This is done in order to ensure
and be able to assess the quality of the crowdsourcing results. The
15 See

for example existing challenges on mask detection, e.g. https://www.aicrowd.
com/challenges/mask-detection-challenge
16 https://pybossa.com/
17 For instance, if the crowd worker’s response to the first question: “Is this a photo
(rather than a cartoon, graph, meme, etc.)?” is “No”, then no further questions are asked
of that image.

Result Aggregation and Visualisation

For the completed tasks, the most frequent response is selected using a majority mechanism to proceed with the analysis. In addition
all posts for which a “surely not” answer was given for the question
“Do you think the picture was likely taken in this location?” were
discarded as they are not useful for the mapping purpose as their
geolocation is not correct.
After the crowd assessment and aggregation, a thematic map is
produced presenting the resulting indicators, i.e. percentages for
the various questions across the countries for which sufficient data
has be retrieved. The maps are generated using the Python plotly
library with Mapbox choropleth polygon maps and are interactive,
allowing the user to select different questions for display and by
hovering on a country to see the count statistics for each from
which the percentage indicator has been computed.

4

EXPERIMENTS

We now discuss an actual execution of the pipeline and analyse the
results it produced.
A Twitter crawl was performed on May 13, 2020 using the keywords: {coronavirus, corona, virus, covid, covid19, covid-19, flu, wuhan,
Coronaviridae, N95}. The crawl was limited to tweets containing
images and produced a total of 470,255 tweets, all posted within a
37-hour time period from May 12, 2020 02:02:06 to May 13, 2020
14:58:27 (GMT). After filtering the crawled images through the
de-duplication + photo/NSFW/person/scene detection pipeline, a
total of 42,978 tweets remained. Of those, only 3% were natively
geolocated, (which is in line with percentages often reported in the
literature). Using the CIME algorithm we were able to geolocate
25,541 tweets (59%), which were used for the crowdsourcing phase.
In Table 2 we show the number of tweets after each phase of
the pipeline. We note that the number of tweets emerging from the
geocoding step was too large to be evaluated in its entirety by the
crowd available, and only around 10% of the tasks were completed
by at least three crowd workers. Possible remedies for this scaling
issue will be discussed later, but we note that even with a limited
crowd resource, we are able to produce reasonable predictions (as
noted in Section 4.2) based on the completed tasks for which the
crowd confirmed the geolocation of the image.
After the crowd evaluation phase, the thematic map was produced as shown in Figure 6, where the responses to the question
"Are people wearing masks?" i.e. the percentage of images in which

Image-based Social Sensing: Combining AI and the Crowd to Mine Policy-Adherence Indicators from Twitter

Figure 6: "Are people wearing masks?" The map shows the
percentage of images in which people are in a public place
and wearing a mask, using tweets crawled on May 13, 2020.
individual are seen to be wearing masks is shown. In order to make
sure the statistics shown are believable, only countries with at least
5 labelled posts are shown. For instance, by hovering the cursor
over the United States in Fig. 6 we see that there were 139 validated
tweets, with yes=51%, some of them=17% and no=32%.
Finally, to show variations in time for the indicators being estimated, we generated second map in Figure 7 using data from a
second crawl of Twitter performed in August 2020.

4.1

Evaluating Individual Components

We now discuss the validity of the approach. In this section we
analyse the performance of each component of the pipeline (namely
the image filters and the geocoding), and then in Section 4.2 we
compare the obtained country-wise indicators with those derived
from an external survey-based data source.
4.1.1 Filter Evaluation. Each filter described in Section 3.3 was
evaluated by computing its Precision, Recall and 𝐹 1 measure as
shown in Table 3. Precision in this case measures the percentage
of relevant images amongst those retrieved (accepted) by the filter,
while Recall is the fraction of relevant images retrieved. Metrics
were computed on a random sample of 700 images from the crawl,
with ground truth annotations provided by three independent annotators and aggregated using majority-vote. Test images for the
NSFW, people, and photo detectors were selected from the entire
crawl, while for the scene classifier, they were chosen from those
filtered by the photo detector, since the scene detector expects to
see only photos (rather than cartoons, etc.).
4.1.2 Geocoding evaluation. One of the questions in the crowdsourcing task was evaluating the correctness of the geolocation. We
excluded the posts locations which the crowd marked as “surely
wrong”. From the data reported in Table 2, it can be seen that 84% of

submitted for publication, xxxx

Figure 7: Are people still wearing masks on the 1st of August? An updated map from a more recent crawl of Twitter
shows changes in the usage of masks across countries.
Filter
photo detector
people detector
NSFW detector
public-private scene

Precision
99.77%
95.81%
99.38%
91.81%

Recall
94.67%
98.77%
99.85%
96.91%

F1
97.15%
97.26%
99.61%
94.29%

Table 3: Evaluation of the various image filters in pipeline.
Each filter is evaluated on 700 randomly chosen images with
the ground truth labelled by 3 independent annotators.

the posts with automatically extracted locations could be retained
for further analysis.

4.2

External Validation

We evaluated the accuracy of the overall pipeline by comparing the
statistics generated from the annotated images with an external
online-survey dataset. In particular, we compare with the CovidDataHub survey dataset18 produced by Imperial College London
(ICL), since it provides information on a weekly basis on COVID-19
related social impact information. The particular aspect on which
we focus for the validation concerns the use of masks in different
countries, with the specific survey question being whether the respondent has “Worn a face mask outside my home”, with possible
answers: Not at all, rarely, sometimes, frequently, always. For the
period considered (May 11-17, 2020), the CovidDataHub portal provides data about 25 countries (out of 30 in which surveys are run).
The corresponding question from the crowdsourcing stage of our
image-based social sensing pipeline asked: “Are the people wearing
18 http://www.coviddatahub.com/

submitted for publication,
Virginia Negri,
xxxx Dario Scuratti, Stefano Agresti, Donya Rooein, Amudha Ravi Shankar, Jose Luis Fernandez Marquez, Mark James Carman, and Barbara Pernici

Figure 8: Are people wearing masks? Comparison of results from manual surveys (left) and our social media based
pipeline (right). Here we include only countries with at least
20 labelled images as of mid May, 2020.
masks?” with reference to an image of people in a public location,
where the possible answers were: Yes, Some of them, No, Cannot
tell. Images assigned the ’Cannot tell’ response were excluded from
further analysis, and to enable the comparison with the survey data,
we map the survey responses down to three categories as follows:
{Not at all, rarely} => No, {Sometimes} => Sometimes, {Frequently,
Always} => Yes.
For our image-based pipeline, we include only countries and
territories for which we have collected at least 5 annotated images.
This corresponded to 40 countries in total as shown in Figure 6. It
should to be noted that the map includes a number of countries for
which performing online surveys might be complicated for various
reasons.
In Figure 8, we compare charts of the survey results (CovidDataHub data) and the pipeline for 9 countries with a large representation in our data (more than 20 annotated images each). The
visual correspondence between the two charts, which are based on
completely independent data sources, lends a great deal of support
to our approach. To further investigate the correspondence, we
computed Pearson’s correlation between the survey responses and
the results of our social sensing pipeline, as shown in Figure 9. If
we treat the survey and crowdsourcing responses as binary (by
removing the response category ‘Sometimes’/‘Some of them’), the
resulting Pearson’s correlation across the 19 common countries for
the two data sources is 0.89, indicating that the indicators vary in a
very similar way across those countries.
In conclusion, even with a limited number of annotations from
the crowd we see that the indicators produced are well correlated
with external survey data. It should be noted that the information
gathered through surveys can themselves be variable. For instance,
in the last available period at the moment of writing this paper, for
the week July 27-August 2, 2020, the CovidDataHub shows data
only for four countries. With our method the number of covered
countries should be less dependent on the period and crowd workers
can help providing some useful indications to decision makers (see
Fig. 7, showing all countries with at least 5 posts).

5

CONCLUSIONS

In this paper we have demonstrated that it is possible to build a social sensing pipeline with humans in-the-loop for collecting important policy indicators from social media images posted on Twitter.
The method is scalable since it combines both machine learning

Figure 9: Correlation between our social-media based frequency estimates (rows) and survey responses (columns)
across 16 countries for a question about mask wearing. If
question responses are instead treated as binary (by removing the category ‘sometimes’/‘some of them’) the correlation
between the estimates increases to 0.89.

based automated filters to reduce the amount of social media data to
be manually analysed and crowdsourcing based annotation for deriving indicators for the problem at hand. The presented approach
is general and can be extended to other contexts of investigation,
selecting the appropriate filters and questions to the crowd.
There are a number of directions for improving the image-based
social sensing pipeline, including:
• Multi-linguality: extend the crawl to languages such as Arabic, Russian, Spanish, Portuguese, Indonesian, etc.
• Evaluate the approach for new indicators, such as monitoring climate events (such as floods, hurricanes, etc.) or
engagement in social movements (such as the "Black Lives
Matter" protest movement).
• Study feedback mechanisms and non-monetary incentives
to increase crowd involvement and overcome scaling issues.
• Make use of the crowd responses to fine-tune specific filters
and improve their performance over time.
• Incorporate more sophisticated crowdsourcing quality control mechanisms, such as worker vetting.
• Investigate time series aspects of the indicators produced,
and the ability to now-cast and pre-empt survey results.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was partially funded by the European Commission H2020
project (anonymized) Crowd4SDG “Citizen Science for Monitoring
Climate Impacts and Achieving Climate Resilience”, project no.
872944.
This work expresses the opinions of the authors and not necessarily those of the European Commission. The European Commission
is not liable for any use that may be made of the information contained in this work.
The authors thank all students working as crowd workers and
all other anonymous contributors to the crowdsourcing phase.
The proof-of-concept prototype for this research was started
during the VersusVirus and EUvsVirus online hackathons run in
April and May 2020.

Image-based Social Sensing: Combining AI and the Crowd to Mine Policy-Adherence Indicators from Twitter

APPENDIX A: CROWDSOURCING QUESTIONS
Questions asked during the crowdsourcing step were the following, with
some questions contingent on the answer to the previous question.
(1) Is this a photo (rather than a cartoon, graph, meme, etc.)?
- Yes, No, Not Sure
(2) Does it look like it has been taken recently (in the last three months)?
- Yes, No, Cannot tell
(3) Are there people in this image?
- Yes, No, Not Sure
(4) Are the people wearing masks?
- Yes, Some of them, No, Cannot tell
(5) If so, which type?
- Scarf, Cloth, Surgical, FP2, FP3, Gas mask, Other, Cannot tell
(6) Are the people wearing the mask correctly?
- Yes, No, Only some of them, Cannot tell, Not sure
(7) How many people are there in the image?
- 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 or more
(8) Are they respecting social distance?
- Yes, No, Cannot tell.
(9) Are they in a public place (shops, outdoors, ...)?
- Yes, No, Not sure
(10) If they are in a public place, what type? - street/square, park, shop,
hospital, outdoors, other, cannot tell
(11) What are the people doing?
- socializing, exercizing, shopping, queuing, volunteering, protesting,
working, other, cannot tell
(12) We have associated a country or territory with this image. Do you
think the picture was likely taken in this location?
- Yes, Maybe, Surely not, Cannot tell.

[12]
[13]

[14]
[15]
[16]
[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]

[21]

REFERENCES
[1] Marta Bańbura, Domenico Giannone, Michele Modugno, and Lucrezia Reichlin.
2013. Chapter 4 - Now-Casting and the Real-Time Data Flow. In Handbook of
Economic Forecasting, Graham Elliott and Allan Timmermann (Eds.). Handbook
of Economic Forecasting, Vol. 2. Elsevier, 195 – 237. http://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/B9780444536839000049
[2] S. Chopra, R. Hadsell, and Y. LeCun. 2005. Learning a similarity metric discriminatively, with application to face verification. In 2005 IEEE Computer Society
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR’05), Vol. 1. 539–546
vol. 1.
[3] Florian Daniel, Pavel Kucherbaev, Cinzia Cappiello, Boualem Benatallah, and
Mohammad Allahbakhsh. 2018. Quality control in crowdsourcing: A survey of
quality attributes, assessment techniques, and assurance actions. ACM Computing
Surveys (CSUR) 51, 1 (2018), 1–40.
[4] J. Deng, W. Dong, R. Socher, L.-J. Li, K. Li, and L. Fei-Fei. 2009. ImageNet: A
Large-Scale Hierarchical Image Database. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition. IEEE, 248–255.
[5] Adriana Draghici and Maarten Van Steen. 2018. A Survey of Techniques for
Automatically Sensing the Behavior of a Crowd. ACM Comput. Surv. 51, 1, Article
21 (Feb. 2018), 40 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3129343
[6] Chiara Francalanci, Barbara Pernici, and Gabriele Scalia. 2017. Exploratory spatiotemporal queries in evolving information. In International Workshop on Mobility
Analytics for Spatio-temporal and Social Data. Springer, 138–156.
[7] Chiara Francalanci, Barbara Pernici, Gabriele Scalia, and Gunter Zeug. 2018.
Talking about places: considering context in geolocation of images extracted
from tweets. GI_Forum 2018, 6 (2018), 243–250.
[8] Steffen Fritz, Linda See, Tyler Carlson, Mordechai Muki Haklay, Jessie L Oliver,
Dilek Fraisl, Rosy Mondardini, Martin Brocklehurst, Lea A Shanley, Sven Schade,
et al. 2019. Citizen science and the United Nations sustainable development goals.
Nature Sustainability 2, 10 (2019), 922–930.
[9] Mordechai (Muki) Haklay and Patrick Weber. 2008. OpenStreetMap: UserGenerated Street Maps. IEEE Pervasive Computing 7, 4 (2008), 12–18.
[10] Clemens Havas, Bernd Resch, Chiara Francalanci, Barbara Pernici, Gabriele Scalia,
Jose Luis Fernandez-Marquez, Tim Van Achte, Gunter Zeug, Maria Rosa Rosy
Mondardini, Domenico Grandoni, et al. 2017. E2mc: Improving emergency
management service practice through social media and crowdsourcing analysis
in near real time. Sensors 17, 12 (2017), 2766.
[11] Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. 2016. Deep Residual
Learning for Image Recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer

[22]

[23]

[24]

[25]

[26]
[27]
[28]
[29]
[30]

submitted for publication, xxxx

Vision and Pattern Recognition. IEEE, 770–778. arXiv:1512.03385 http://arxiv.org/
abs/1512.03385
Xiao Huang, Cuizhen Wang, Zhenlong Li, and Huan Ning. 2019. A visual–textual
fused approach to automated tagging of flood-related tweets during a flood event.
International Journal of Digital Earth 12, 11 (2019), 1248–1264.
Muhammad Imran, Ferda Ofli, Doina Caragea, and Antonio Torralba. 2020. Using
AI and Social Media Multimodal Content for Disaster Response and Management:
Opportunities, Challenges, and Future Directions. Information Processing &
Management 57, 5 (2020), 102261.
Institute of Global Health Innovation Imperial College London and YouGov. 2020.
COVID-19 Behavior Tracker. http://www.coviddatahub.com/
Yuan Jin, Mark Carman, Ye Zhu, and Yong Xiang. 2020. A technical survey
on statistical modelling and design methods for crowdsourcing quality control.
Artificial Intelligence 287 (2020), 103351.
Yann Lecun, Yoshua Bengio, and Geoffrey Hinton. 2015. Deep learning. Nature Cell Biology 521, 7553 (27 May 2015), 436–444. https://doi.org/10.1038/
nature14539
Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge J. Belongie, Lubomir D. Bourdev, Ross B. Girshick, James Hays, Pietro Perona, Deva Ramanan, Piotr Dollár, and C. Lawrence
Zitnick. 2014. Microsoft COCO: Common Objects in Context. In European
Conference on Computer Vision (Cham). Springer, 740–755. http://dblp.unitrier.de/db/journals/corr/corr1405.html#LinMBHPRDZ14
Christopher D. Manning, Mihai Surdeanu, John Bauer, Jenny Rose Finkel, Steven
Bethard, and David McClosky. 2014. The Stanford CoreNLP Natural Language
Processing Toolkit. In Proceedings of the 52nd Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics, ACL 2014, June 22-27, 2014, Baltimore, MD, USA,
System Demonstrations. 55–60.
Stuart E. Middleton, Giorgos Kordopatis-Zilos, Symeon Papadopoulos, and Yiannis Kompatsiaris. 2018. Location Extraction from Social Media: Geoparsing,
Location Disambiguation, and Geotagging. ACM Trans. Inf. Syst. 36, 4 (2018),
40:1–40:27. https://doi.org/10.1145/3202662
Joseph Redmon, Santosh Kumar Divvala, Ross B. Girshick, and Ali Farhadi. 2015.
You Only Look Once: Unified, Real-Time Object Detection. In Proceedings of
the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. IEEE, 779–788.
arXiv:1506.02640 http://arxiv.org/abs/1506.02640
Shaoqing Ren, Kaiming He, Ross B. Girshick, and Jian Sun. 2015. Faster R-CNN:
Towards Real-Time Object Detection with Region Proposal Networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 28, C. Cortes, N. D. Lawrence,
D. D. Lee, M. Sugiyama, and R. Garnett (Eds.). Curran Associates, Inc., 91–
99. http://papers.nips.cc/paper/5638-faster-r-cnn-towards-real-time-objectdetection-with-region-proposal-networks.pdf
Rafael Luis Ruiz De Castaneda, Andréw Michaël Durso, Nicolas Ray, Jose Luis
Fernandez Marquez, David J Williams, Gabriel Alcoba, François Chappuis, Marcel
Salathé, and Isabelle Bolon. 2019. Snakebite and snake identification: empowering
neglected communities and health-care providers with AI. THe Lancet Digital
Health 1, 5 (2019), e202–e203.
Olga Russakovsky, Jia Deng, Hao Su, Jonathan Krause, Sanjeev Satheesh, Sean Ma,
Zhiheng Huang, Andrej Karpathy, Aditya Khosla, Michael Bernstein, Alexander C.
Berg, and Li Fei-Fei. 2015. ImageNet Large Scale Visual Recognition Challenge.
International Journal of Computer Vision (IJCV) 115, 3 (2015), 211–252. https:
//doi.org/10.1007/s11263-015-0816-y
Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman. 2015. Very Deep Convolutional Networks for Large-Scale Image Recognition. In 3rd International Conference on
Learning Representations, ICLR 2015, San Diego, CA, USA, May 7-9, 2015, Conference Track Proceedings.
Mingxing Tan and Quoc V. Le. 2019. EfficientNet: Rethinking Model Scaling
for Convolutional Neural Networks. In Proceedings of the 36th International
Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2019, 9-15 June 2019, Long Beach, California,
USA (Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, Vol. 97). PMLR, 6105–6114.
Dong Wang, Tarek Abdelzaher, and Lance Kaplan (Eds.). 2015. Social Sensing.
Morgan Kaufmann, Boston.
Dong Wang, Boleslaw K Szymanski, Tarek Abdelzaher, Heng Ji, and Lance Kaplan.
2019. The age of social sensing. Computer 52, 1 (2019), 36–45.
Christoph Zauner. 2010. Implementation and Benchmarking of Perceptual Image
Hash Functions. Master’s thesis. University of Applied Sciences Hagenberg.
Xin Zheng, Jialong Han, and Aixin Sun. 2018. A Survey of Location Prediction
on Twitter. IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng. 30, 9 (2018), 1652–1671. https://doi.org/
10.1109/TKDE.2018.2807840
Bolei Zhou, Àgata Lapedriza, Aditya Khosla, Aude Oliva, and Antonio Torralba.
2017. Places: A 10 Million Image Database for Scene Recognition. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 40, 6 (7 2017), 1452–1464.
https://doi.org/10.1109/TPAMI.2017.2723009

