1

Centrality-Based Traffic Restriction in Delayed
Epidemic Networks

arXiv:2010.00398v2 [eess.SY] 15 Nov 2020

Atefe Darabi1 and Milad Siami1

Abstract
During an epidemic, infectious individuals might not be detectable until some time after becoming
infected. The studies show that carriers with mild or no symptoms are the main contributors to the
transmission of a virus within the population. The average time it takes to develop the symptoms causes
a delay in the spread dynamics of the disease. When considering the influence of delay on the disease
propagation in epidemic networks, depending on the value of the time-delay and the network topology,
the peak of epidemic could be considerably different in time, duration, and intensity. Motivated by
the recent worldwide outbreak of the COVID-19 virus and the topological extent in which this virus
has spread over the course of a few months, this study aims to highlight the effect of time-delay
in the progress of such infectious diseases in the meta-population networks rather than individuals
or a single population. In this regard, the notions of epidemic network centrality in terms of the
underlying interaction graph of the network, structure of the uncertainties, and symptom development
duration are investigated to establish a centrality-based analysis of the disease evolution. A convex traffic
volume optimization method is then developed to control the outbreak. The control process is done by
identifying the sub-populations with the highest centrality and then isolating them while maintaining the
same overall traffic volume (motivated by economic considerations) in the meta-population level. The
numerical results, along with the theoretical expectations, highlight the impact of time-delay as well as
the importance of considering the worst-case scenarios in investigating the most effective methods of
epidemic containment.

I.

I NTRODUCTION

The large-scale spread of an infectious disease occurs every few years and leads into serious
crises before it eventually dies out [1]. The extent through which a high-speed epidemic continues
depends mostly on first, the government interventions, and second, the existence of an effective
1 Department

of Electrical & Computer Engineering, Northeastern University, Boston, MA 02115 USA (e-mails:

{darabi.a, m.siami}@northeastern.edu).

2

treatment against the disease. In this regard, the study of epidemic propagation by network
models has been theoretically proven to be useful in determining the most effective methods of
epidemic management and control as well as allocating treatment and immunization resources
[2], [3].
The macro-modeling (or meta-population) representation of the epidemic networks is studied
in [4], where the author introduces the general form of the spread dynamics in a community of
sub-populations. Many studies have been using meta-population network of Susceptible-InfectedSusceptible (SIS) [5], Susceptible-Infected-Removed (SIR) [6], [7], and Susceptible-ExposedInfected-Removed (SEIR) [7] models to develop the dynamics of the epidemic in macro scale.
The centrality analysis of a time-delayed consensus network has been studied in [8] and a
closed form of the node and link centralities in the presence of different noises in the network is
offered. In [9], the authors have studied the convergence analysis of the time-delayed networks
with linear dynamics. It is shown that the convergence rate of delayed networks with linear
dynamics has a correlation with time-delay and the largest eigenvalue of the graph. The stochastic
delayed SIS model has been exploited in [10] to find the threshold behavior of the systems with
vaccination and double diseases.
Significant work has been done in the area of epidemic elimination, disease spread control,
and designing public health control measures against the epidemics [11]–[13]. Some suggest that
an optimized alternation in the disease network structure could hinder the disease effectively.
Node or edge removal is the direct way of modifying the network structure which is also called
spectral control, as it aims to minimize the largest eigenvalue of the network to locally stabilize
it around the disease-free equilibrium [5], [14]. However, the spectral radius minimization has
been proven to be an NP-hard problem [15]. Network metric-based node or edge removal is
another common approach in spectral control. A removal strategy based on the number of the
closed walks and assortativity effect has been proposed in [15].
On the other hand, vaccination and traffic flow restriction modify the epidemic recovery and
infection rates, which in turn, affect the disease progress pattern. Various control strategies have
been proposed in this area. A geometric programming-based approach has been presented in
[5] for the optimal resource allocation in a meta-population network. In this study, the infection
and recovery rates are assumed to be the optimization variables. The intercity traffic restriction
of an SIS mate-population model has also been studied in [16]. Optimal and heuristic local

3

solutions are proposed to completely eradicate the disease, where the cost of the second solution
is shown to be higher than the cost of the first one. In terms of social awareness effect on the
epidemic evolution, [17] has proposed a semidefinite programming-based optimization to control
a network that follows the Susceptible-Alert-Infected-Susceptible (SAIS) epidemic model.
In the real world cases, node removal happens by social distancing, quarantining, vaccinating
individuals, or complete shut down of certain areas in the city [18]. In this regard, [19] has
introduced PageRank-based vaccination strategy for realistic social networks. The authors in
[20] have also proposed a network attack strategy based on degree and betweenness centrality
for both passive and online node and edge removal approaches. A Pulse vaccination strategy has
been offered in [6] which can eradicate the disease in all the sub-populations.
In 2020, many network scientists have established their study on the modeling and control
of COVID-19, as it has turned into a global crisis. In the recent research study [21], the
optimal intervention starting time and duration that will reduce the epidemic peak and length
in an SIR epidemic model has been proposed. The effect of a complete suppression, mistimed
interventions, and sustained interventions have also been investigated in this study [21]. The
effect of social distancing start time, period, and duration on the infection peak of COVID-19 in
epidemic models has also been investigated in [22]. It is shown that a well-timed intervention
improves flattening the infection curve in various epidemic models, such as SIR, feedback-SIR
(fSIR), Susceptible-Infected-Quarantined-Susceptible (SIQR), Susceptible-Infected-DiagnosedAiling-Recognized-Threatened-Healed-Extinct (SIDARTHE), and 6 compartment SIR [22].
A more generalized SEIR model of COVID-19 nationwide spread in China including selfprotection and quarantine compartments has been established to predict the disease propagation
pattern and to find a possible extinction time for some of the provinces [23]. An SIRD model
has been developed to estimate the COVID-19 epidemic parameters in Italy, using real-data
and a non-convex parameter identification approach [24]. An agent-based model of COVID-19
dynamics is utilized to simulate the multi-wave behavior of the spread while applying different
possible government interventions such as testing and tracing, and travel restriction on it [25].
Our contributions. Inspired by the recent COVID-19 outbreak, this study is dedicated to the
epidemiological investigation of the infectious diseases with the following main contributions:
i.

Modeling the time-delayed epidemic dynamics of meta-populations using the network SIS
model (Section II).

4

ii.

Investigating the effect of time-delay and different sources of uncertainty on the modeled
network dynamics (Sections II and III).

iii.

Developing the explicit centrality measure of sub-populations with respect to time-delay
and transportation network structure (Section III).

iv.

Designing optimal and robust methods of traffic restriction based on the steady-state
performance of the network (Section IV).

The simulation results for a core-periphery network and also the network of United States
busiest airports are presented in Section V.
II.

D ELAYED EPIDEMIC NETWORK OF META - POPULATION MODELS

The proportion of pre-symptomatic individuals in the population could play an important rule
in the disease propagation pattern. In the case of COVID-19 for instance, studies indicate that
a significant proportion of positive tests belongs to the pre-symptomatic individuals who are
just the carriers [26] and might not develop any symptoms up to 14 days [27]. The effect of
pre-symptomatic individuals in the spread of the disease can be modeled as a time-delay in the
network dynamics. In this study, the average time of symptom development for all the individuals
is assumed to be identical and equal to a non-negative constant τ.
A. Deterministic meta-population SIS model with time-delay
Let the undirected and weighted graph G = (V , E ,w) represent a meta-population in the
epidemic network. V = {1, 2, . . . , n} shows the set of nodes in the graph or the group of cities,
states, countries, or in general, sub-populations in the epidemic network. E denotes the edge set
which shows the connection between every two member of V with the corresponding weight
of we = ai j for all e = {i, j} ∈ E for i 6= j. The counterpart of weighted edges in the epidemic
network would be the transportation capacity or traffic volume between every two sub-population
in V . In addition to its neighbors, the infection state of a sub-population depends on the progress
of disease within the sub-population as well, which itself is a function of various factors such
as social distancing. Let us project the final effect of social distancing in the sub-population
i on parameter aii , where aii = 0 belongs to a sub-population which follows social distancing
and as aii increases, the social distancing rules become less strict. The adjacency matrix of the

5

corresponding graph is then defined as,


a11 a12 · · · a1n




a
a
·
·
·
a
 21 22
2n 


A=  .
.. . .
..  .
.
 .
. . 
.


an1 an2 · · · ann

(1)

The state of the epidemic network at time t ≥ 0 is represented by the vector p(t) = [p1 (t), . . . , pn (t)]T ,
where pi ∈ [0, 1] is the marginal probability of sub-population i being infected at time t such that
pi (t) = 1 if the sub-population i is infected and pi (t) = 0 if it is susceptible. Assuming that every
sub-population is experiencing a delay τ due to the reasons explained earlier, the approximated
spread dynamics of sub-population i can then be described using the mean-field approximation
model with time-delay as below,
n

ṗi (t) = −δi pi (t − τ) + βi ∑ ai j p j (t − τ) 1 − pi (t − τ) + bTi ξ (t),

(2)

j=1

where βi is the infection rate at which sub-population j will contaminate sub-population i
and also the rate in which the infected individuals in sub-population i will contaminate its
susceptible individuals. δi is the recovery rate of sub-population i. ξ = [ξ1 , . . . , ξl ]T is the effect
of an uncertainty in the disease spread dynamics modeled as the vector of independent Gaussian
white noise with zero mean and b as the uncertainty coefficient vector. ai j is the i jth component
of the adjacency matrix of the coupling graph. The compact form of meta-population SIS model
can be expressed as below,
ṗ(t) = A p(t − τ) − P(t − τ)BAp(t − τ) + Bξ (t),

(3)

where P(t − τ) = diag (p(t − τ)), and infection and recovery matrices are
B = diag ([β1 , . . . , βn ]) , and
∆ = diag ([δ1 , . . . , δn ]) .

(4)

6

Matrix A = BA − ∆ determines the stability and performance of network dynamics.


β1 a11 − δ1
β1 a12
···
β1 a1n




β
a
β
a
−
δ
·
·
·
β
a

2 21
2 22
2
2 2n 

.
A =
..
..
..

..


.
.
.
.


βn an1

βn an2

(5)

· · · βn ann − δn

In spread dynamics (2), B = [b1 , . . . , bn ]T ∈ Rn×l is the noise coefficient matrix and pi (t) is
the infected proportion of sub-population i at time t. For every sub-population in the selected
community, it can be assumed that pi (t) is a value close to zero. For instance, this is a valid
assumption for the recent COVID-19 pandemic, because even though there were a substantial
number of infected individuals from the beginning, the proportion of the infected population
between January 19 (The day that first case was reported) through February 28 within the US
was still close to zero1 . It therefore makes sense to linearize the epidemic model around the
zero state. Assuming pi (t)  1, equation (2) can be linearized as follows:
n

ṗi (t) = −δi pi (t − τ) + βi ∑ ai j p j (t − τ) + bTi ξ (t).

(6)

j=1

The compact version of this network is in the following form.
ṗ(t) = A p(t − τ) + Bξ (t),

(7)

It should be noted that the following assumptions apply throughout the rest of this paper.
Assumption 1: The infection rate of all the sub-populations is equal. Therefore, βi = β for all
i∈V.
Assumption 2: The network graph is assumed to be undirected, i.e., ai j = a ji .
B. Stability analysis
For the undirected network (3), the initial infection p(0) ∈ [0, 1]n will exponentially die out if

λmax (A ) ≤ −ε.
1 https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/cases-updates/cases-in-us.html

(8)

7

where λmax (.) provides the maximum real eigenvalue and ε → 0+ . In other words, an α > 0
could be found to satisfy kpi (t)k ≤ αkpi (0)ke−εt and as a result, the disease-free equilibrium
of the system is globally exponentially stable with rate ε [5].
The minimum eigenvalue of A is also lower-bounded by the time-delay as below,
λmin (A ) ≥ −

π
2τ

(9)

which is the direct result of frequency domain stability analysis of the delayed systems [9]. The
network is globally asymptotically stable if and only if this condition is satisfied. Therefore, the
stability of the network depends not only on the maximum but also the minimum eigenvalue of
A.
Combining conditions (8) and (9) results in the following matrix inequality with respect to
the positive semi-definite cone Sn+ ,
εIn  −A 

π
In .
2τ

(10)

The reproductive characteristics of a disease determine if it will result in an epidemic or not.
The basic reproduction number, R0M , of the epidemic meta-population (3) can be defined as
below,
R0M :=

β
λmax (A)
δ

(11)

The initial infection will converge to zero if R0M < 1 [28]. The reproduction number of every
sub-population i on the other hand, determines the progress of disease within a single population,
R0S (i) :=

βi aii
δi

(12)

where for R0S < 1 the infection size will converge to zero.
C. Performance analysis
The steady-state performance, ρss , of network (7) can be expressed as,


ρss (A ; B; τ) = lim E y(t)T y(t)
t→∞

(13)

where y(t) = [p1 (t), . . . , pn (t)]T is the vector of infection probability at time t which is required
to monitor and update the network performance measure. y(t) is a function of A ; therefore, the

8

bounds on the eigenvalues of A determine the range in which the long-run performance of the
network will change. More details on the performance measure of a class of consensus networks
under the influence of exogenous white noises can be found in the reference papers [29]–[32].
According to [33], the performance of a network can also be found by the frequency domain
definition of its H 2 -norm as below,
1
Tr
ρss (A ; B; τ) =
2π

Z

+∞



H

G ( jω)G( jω)dω ,

(14)

−∞

where G( jω) is the transfer function of the network and GH ( jω) corresponds to the complex
conjugate transpose of G( jω).
Lemma 1: For the undirected network (7), the closed form solution of (14) is,
n

ρss (A ; B; τ) = ∑ −
i=1

Φi cos (λi τ)
,
2λi 1 + sin (λi τ)

(15)

in which Φi is the ith diagonal element of the matrix QT BB T Q, where Q = [q1 , . . . , qn ] ∈ Rn×n
is the orthonormal matrix of eigenvectors of A . λi (A ) for i = 1, 2, . . . , n is the ith eigenvalue
of matrix A .
Proof 1: The transfer matrix of (7) is,
−1
B
G(s) = sIn − e−τs A

T !
1
1
= Q diag
,··· ,
QT B.
s − λ1 e−τs
s − λn e−τs

(16)

For this transfer function matrix we have,


Tr GH ( jω)G( jω) =
"

Tr Q BB Q diag
T

"
diag

1

T



−λ1 e jτω − jω

,··· ,

1

T !#

−λn e jτω − jω
T !#

1
1
,··· ,
−
jτω
jω − λ1 e
jω − λn e− jτω

(17)

and by substituting (17) in (14), the performance will be,
1 n
ρss (A ; B; τ) =
∑
2π i=1

Z +∞

Φi dω
jτω
) (λi e− jτω
−∞ ( jω + λi e

A proof follows by simplifying the above integral.

− jω)

.

(18)

9

It should be noted that the smaller values of ρss result in a better performance, therefore, a
lower value of performance is desired.
III.

C ENTRALITY INDICES

The importance of every sub-population in the disease spread can be analysed by various
indices. In this study, the centrality index, ηi , is the basis to rank the sub-populations.
For network (7), let ξi (t) ∼ N (0, σi2 ) be the noise affecting the ith sub-population’s infection
dynamics, which might stem from modeling imperfections, testing error or inaccurate epidemic
rates. The centrality of sub-population i is then defined as the rate of performance with respect
to disturbance variance,
ηi :=

∂ ρss
.
∂ σi2

(19)

The centrality index with respect to two important sources of disturbance will be established
in the following sections.
A. Modeling error
Model simplifications implemented on the epidemic dynamics affect the state of the infected
sub-populations as below,
n

ṗi (t) = −δi pi (t − τ) + βi ∑ ai j p j (t − τ) + ξi (t),

(20)

j=1

where ξi (t) = σi ξˆi . The compact form of (20) would be,
ṗ(t) = A p(t − τ) + B1 ξˆ (t),
in which B1 = diag ([σ1 , . . . , σn ]) ∈ Rn×n .
Corollary 1: For the network (21), the centrality index of the ith sub-population is,
ηi (A ; τ) = −
for all i ∈ V .

i
1 h −1
A cos(τA ) (In + sin(τA ))−1 ,
2
ii

(21)

10

Proof 2: In the case of having modeling noise, the network dynamics is the same as (7) with
B = B1 . Hence, the performance will be in the following matrix operator form,
ρss (A ; B1 ; τ) =

i
T  −1
1 h
− Tr diag σ12 , . . . , σn2
A cos(τA ) (In + sin(τA ))−1 .
2

(22)

On the other hand, the value of centrality measure ρss is a linear function of variance of elements
of noise input. For the centrality index (19) the performance is defined as below,
ρss =

∑ ηiσi2.

(23)

i∈V

Substituting equation (22) in the above definition, the centrality will be obtained.
B. Testing error
In many cases of epidemic, especially when an infectious disease like COVID-19 first emerges,
the testing methods are not completely accurate in terms of identifying the infected individuals.
The incorrect results generate inaccurate statistics regarding the population of the confirmed
cases which triggers impaired judgment and inappropriate containment methods.
In theory, the testing error affects every sub-population’s state in the following way,
n

ṗi (t) = −δi (pi (t − τ) + ξi (t)) + βi ∑ ai j (p j (t − τ) + ξ j (t)) ,

(24)

j=1

where ξi ∼ N (0, σi2 ) for i ∈ V . The state of the infected population in this case will be the
same as (7) with B = B2 = A diag ([σ1 , . . . , σn ]) ∈ Rn×n as below,
ṗ(t) = A p(t − τ) + B2 ξˆ (t).

(25)

Corollary 2: For the network (25), the centrality index is,
i
1h
−1
,
ηi (A ; τ) = − A cos(τA ) (In + sin(τA ))
2
ii

(26)

for all i ∈ V .
Proof 3: With the testing error noise, the network dynamics is the same as (7) with B = B2

11

. Therefore, the compact form of ρss is,
ρss (A ; B2 ; τ) =
i

T 
1 h
A cos(τA ) (In + sin(τA ))−1 .
Tr − diag σ12 , . . . , σn2
2

(27)

A proof follows by using the definition (23) and above equation to find centrality.
IV.

E PIDEMIC CONTAINMENT BY TRAFFIC VOLUME OPTIMIZATION AT COMMUNITY
LEVELS

A. Optimal traffic restriction
Monitoring and regulation of the traffic volume is one of the potential government interventions to mitigate the epidemic threat. Regarding the underlying epidemiological network, traffic
restriction between two sub-populations directly changes the corresponding edge weight, we , of
those sub-populations in the network. Therefore, the stability around disease-free state could
be obtained by monitoring and management of the transportation network and restriction of
the traffic volume between the highly infected and highly susceptible candidates. Although the
complete isolation of the sub-populations seems to be the easiest and safest prevention method,
especially in the case of COVID-19 which has now lasted for several months, it is not a permanent
solution mostly because of the economic considerations. Therefore, a proper balance must be
found in the decision-making process. In this study, a convex optimization method is offered
to determine the proper volume of the transportation by minimizing the value of corresponding
network performance, and consequently improving the performance, with respect to the graph
weights.
This optimal traffic control problem for the network with modeling error noise can be expressed
as below,
ρss (A ; B1 ; τ)

minimize
we ,∀e∈E

subject to: we ≤ we ≤ we

∑ we

= c

e∈E

A = B ∑ we Ae + B diag ([a11 , . . . , ann ]) − ∆
e∈E

(28)

12

−

π
In  A  − εIn .
2τ

Here, the first constraint determines lower and upper bounds for every the network weight. we
and we are the minimum and maximum traffic flow in edge e which are arbitrary values selected
by economic considerations or traffic management methods to avoid decreasing traffic volume
less than a minimum threshold or increasing it more than the maximum capacity. The second
constraint determines the total weight of the network edges or overall traffic volume, which could
acquire any desired value c depending on the intensity of isolation. The third constraint in which
Ae is the adjacency matrix of link e gives the definition of A with respect to edge weights. The
last constraint imposes another limitation on the edge weights to respect the domain of stable
solutions. B and ∆ are the infection and recovery rate matrices defined in equation (4). Consider
an optimization problem with the following general form,
minimize
x

subject to:

f0 (x)

(29)

fi (x) ≤ bi ,

i = 1, . . . , q

hi (x) = 0,

i = 1, . . . , r.

This problem is considered a convex problem if all the functions f0 , . . . , fq are convex and
all the equality constraints h1 , . . . , hr are affine [34]. According to this definition, the problem
(28) does not fall into the category of convex problems. Hence, some modifications need to
be implemented on the original optimal problem (29). In this regard, an approximation of the
performance has been offered by [32] which converts the product of non-convex trigonometric
functions to a linear function of A and its inverse. Using this approximation, the network
performance will be,

π
−1
4τ
1
−1
In + τA
ρss (A ; B1 ; τ) ' Tr −Ao A + Ao
2
π
2
i
c0
−c1 τ 2 Ao A + τAo ,
2

(30)

where Ao = B1 B1T and the constant parameters c0 = 0.1873 and c1 = −0.01 are estimated to
minimize the mean squared error of the approximated performance. This approximation is still
−1
not a convex function, as it includes the non-convex inverse functions A −1 and π2 In + τA
.

13

Substituting the epigraph variables X1 = A −1 and X2 =

−1
π
2 In + τA

will turn a convex

function. The optimization problem (28) can now be cast as the following approximate form,
which is a convex optimization problem as the objective function as well as all the inequality
constraints are convex and the equality constraints are affine with respect to the only optimization
variable we .


4τ
2
Tr Ao X1 + Ao X2 − c1 τ Ao A
π

minimize

X1 ;X2 ;we ,∀e∈E

(31)

subject to: we ≤ we ≤ we

∑ we

= c

e∈E

A = B ∑ we Ae + B diag ([a11 , . . . , ann ]) − ∆
e∈E

π
A + In  0
2τ
− A − εIn  0


X
In
 1
0
In −A


X
In
 2
  0.
In π2 In + τA

B. Robust traffic restriction
While the target of proposed optimal approach is to improve the overall network performance
with a uniform uncertainty distribution, i.e. σi = 1 for i = 1, . . . , n, there are cases in which
the sub-populations with highest centrality experience higher levels of disturbance. Worst case
noise distribution highlights the role of high centrality sub-populations in epidemic growth which
requires us to design a robust containment approach.
In this section, the traffic restriction problem is investigated as a robust design optimization
where the worst-case scenario is the optimization target. Such a case can be expressed as a
min-max optimization presented in problem 32. The first constraint limits the sum of squared
noise variances and the rest of the constraints are the same as explained for problem (28). The

14

inner optimization loop is to find the highest performance of the network with respect to the
uncertainty σi in order to improve the robustness against the disease spread.
minimize maximize ρss (A ; B1 ; τ)
we ,∀e∈E

σi ,∀i∈V

subject to:

∑ σi2 = n
i∈V

we ≤ we ≤ we
(32)

∑ we = c
e∈E

A = B ∑ we Ae + B diag ([a11 , . . . , ann ]) − ∆
e∈E

π
− In  A  − εIn .
2τ
Using the performance definition in (23), the inner optimization problem in (32) can be rewritten
in the following form,
minimize
σi ,∀i∈V

subject to:

∑ ηi(A ; τ)σi2

(33)

i∈V

∑ σi2 = n.
i∈V

Here, the cost function and constraint are only linear functions of the optimization variable
σi . Hence, the maximum performance occurs in the boundary, where for one variable we have
σi2 = n and ηi (A ; τ) has its maximum value, and for the rest σi2 = 0, i.e.,




 n if i = arg max j∈V η j (A ; τ)
σi2 :=

(34)




 0 otherwise
As a result, the maximum objective function of problem (33) is equal to the maximum value
h
i
−1
n
−1
of 2 −A cos(τA ) (In + sin(τA ))
for all i ∈ V . Note that this solution is a non-convex
ii

function of we ; therefore, to use it in the outer minimization loop, its approximated epigraph
version will be used. Problem (32) can now be cast in the following form,
minimize
x;we ,∀e∈E

x

subject to: we ≤ we ≤ we

(35)

15

∑ we

= c

e∈E

A = B ∑ we Ae + B diag ([a11 , . . . , ann ]) − ∆
e∈E

π
A + In  0
2τ
− A − εIn  0


4τ
n
2
Ao X1 + Ao X2 − c1 τ Ao A , ∀i ∈ V
x
2
π
ii


X
In
 1
0
In −A


X2
In

  0.
π
In 2 In + τA
It is worth mentioning that the same methods in the preceding sections can be implemented
on the networks with the described testing error noise as well.
V.

R ESULTS

In this section, the established models and control methods will be implemented on a coreperiphery network, as an academic example, and a US airport network, as a real world example.
It should be noted that most of the presented results are based on the assumption that members
of every sub-population are not completely following social distancing rules, aii 6= 0 for all
i = 1, 2, . . . , n. Therefore, they are free to join other sub-populations through air transportation.
This will allow us to track the disease through the United States.
A. Core-periphery network
To evaluate the performance of the proposed methods, a core-periphery network consisting of
three communities has been simulated as the representative of a meta-population. The simulations
are based on the dynamics (3) over a tree graph with three connected star graphs consisting of
20 nodes and 19 edges weighted in the range of [0, 1] (see Fig. 1(a)). A combination of multiple
star graphs is a good candidate for a meta-population, as in reality some of the sub-populations
are considered as hubs while the others connect to the rest of the sub-populations through these
hubs. In this network, nodes 1, 2, and 15 are the hubs. In Fig. 1(a), all the sub-populations are

16

(a)

(b)

(c)

Fig. 1. (a) Meta-population network of 20 sub-populations and their normal traffic volume. All the sub-populations are
experiencing 5 days lag. The nodes are ranked based on their centrality index, ηi , which is reflected through the size of their
indicating circles. The interconnections are ranked by their corresponding traffic volume which is specified by the color of edges.
(b) Optimal meta-population network of Fig. 1(a) designed by the optimal approach (31), where a uniform noise distribution is
applied. (c) Robust meta-population network of Fig. 1(a) designed by the robust approach (35), where the worst case of applying
the maximum noise input to the sub-population with highest centrality is considered.

experiencing 5 days of delay and they are ranked based on their centrality index, ηi , which is
reflected through the size of their indicating circles. The interconnections are ranked by their
corresponding traffic volume which is specified by the color of edges. Let us assume that the
network shown in Fig. 1(a) is infected by a virus and experiencing 5 days of lag. Using the
convex optimization method (31) with c being the overall traffic volume in the absence of traffic
restrictions, the network structure changes into Fig. 1(b). The result of the robust optimization
approach (35) for the case of 5 days of delay is shown in Fig. 1(c). The robust optimization tends
to consider the worst case scenario where the uneven noise distribution amplifies the effect of
hub node 2 with the highest centrality, which makes it a bigger threat requiring it to be even more
isolated. Hence, the robust optimizer is more conservative in manipulating the traffic volumes
and reducing the centrality of hubs.
The effect of time-delay on the epidemic evolution of the simulated network meta-population
when there is effective social distancing within every sub-population (aii = 0 for i = 1, 2, . . . , n)
has been illustrated in Fig. 2, where the structure of the modeled network is shown in Fig. 1(a).
Based on Fig. 2, it can be concluded that the higher the delays in identifying infected individuals,
the higher the risk of experiencing a more extreme epidemic peak with multiple pulses. The timedelay also shows a correlation with the onset of epidemic peak, which is a decisive factor in
designing the proper government interventions.

17

The average infection size, p̄(t) = 1n ∑i∈V pi (t), of the meta-population network shown in Fig. 1(a) with
different time-delays. 50 percent of the meta-population is initially infected and R0 = 4.7. It is assumed that there
is effective social distancing within every sub-population, aii = 0 for i = 1, 2, . . . , n.
Fig. 2.

The changes in average infection size of network 1(a) when the optimal and robust controls
are applied is shown in Fig. 3. For a meta-population that is initially 10 percent infected, it
is shown that 5 percent of meta-population will always be infected, while for the controlled
network, the infection eventually dies out.
Fig. 4(a) shows the logarithmic scale performance of the original, optimal, and robust networks
with respect to the desired traffic volume of the meta-population when all of the sub-populations,
regardless of their centrality, experience an equal level of disturbance. As it was mentioned in the
preceding sections, the smaller the value of performance, the better the obtained performance.
Hence, the optimal and robust controllers have been successful in improving the performance
of the original network, while the optimal network results in a slightly better performance due
to its less conservative weight distribution.
Additionally, a comparison between the highest performance of both optimization methods
is presented in Fig. 4(b) to put more emphasis on the importance of considering worst cases
while determining the intensity of traffic restriction during the epidemic. The direct correlation

18

Average infection size of the three networks in Figs. 1(a), 1(b), and 1(c)with τ = 17 days, R0 ' 1.12, and
initial infection of 50 percent in 4 nodes.

Fig. 3.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Fig. 4. (a) Performance comparison between the original network Fig. 1(a), the optimal network of Fig. 1(b) and the robust
network of Fig. 1(c) in the case of uniform noise distribution. (b) Performance comparison between the original network Fig. 1(a),
the optimal network of Fig. 1(b) and the robust network of Fig. 1(c) in the case of extreme noise distribution. (c) Logarithmic
performance measure of networks Fig. 1 with respect to time-delay.

between network performance measure, ρss , and time-delay can be found in Fig. 4(c). As was
expected, increasing time-delay impairs the performance.
To make a better comparison between the resulted networks, the bar diagram of the edge
weights, or traffic volumes, is represented in Fig. 5. It can be seen that between the connections

19

Weight (traffic volume) comparison between the original network Fig. 1(a), the optimal network Fig. 1(b),
and the robust network Fig. 1(c).
Fig. 5.

with highest volume, (1, 2), (2, 10), (2, 11), (2, 15), and (15, 18), only the ones connecting two
of three hubs have considerable drop in volume. The centrality diagram of sub-populations can
be found in Fig. 6.
The detailed results of the performance improvement through optimal and robust epidemic
controls are represented in Table. I for Case 1 with uniform noise distribution, i.e. σi = 1 for
i = 1, . . . , n, and Case 2 is the worst case explained in (34).
TABLE I.

T HE VALUES AND PERCENTAGES OF PERFORMANCE ENHANCEMENT FOR THE NETWORKS SHOWN
IN

F IGS . 1( B ) AND 1( C ) COMPARED WITH F IG . 1( A )
Case 1

Case 2

Original network (Fig. 1(a))

283 (0%)

1317 (0%)

Optimal network (Fig. 1(b))

175 (+38%)

250 (+81%)

Robust network (Fig. 1(c))

175 (+38%)

233 (+82%)

20

Fig. 6. Centrality comparison between the hubs of original network Fig. 1(a), optimal network Fig. 1(b), and robust network
Fig. 1(c).

B. Network of United States busiest airports
Air transportation plays an important role in introducing a new disease to a meta-population
and spreading it within its sub-populations. Therefore, in this study a group of United States
airports with the busiest airports is selected as the symbol of a real world epidemic network.
The simulations are based on the dynamics (3) over the network of 15 hubs, see Fig. 7, and their
104 weighted connections through air transportation. The United States air traffic data used in
this study can be found in [35].
Let us assume the a virus first arrives to the United States by one of these airports and
infects this sub-population while spreading through other states by air transportation (Note that
this scenario is just for the purpose of illustration and does not affect the generality of the
studied epidemic problem). The resulting epidemic network is represented in Fig. 7(a), where
the hubs are experiencing 8 days of delay and ranked based on the centrality index, ηi , of their
airport. The scale of circles is correlated with centrality index of its corresponding airport. The
interconnection between every pair of hubs is ranked based on traffic volume between their
airports, which is specified by the color of links. Applying the proposed optimal traffic control

21

(a)

(b)

(c)

Fig. 7. (a) Meta-population network of 15 United States hubs and their normal traffic volume. All the sub-populations are
experiencing 8 days lag. The hubs are ranked based on their centrality index, ηi , which is reflected through the size of their
indicating circles. The interconnections are ranked by their corresponding traffic volume which is specified by the color of edges.
(b) Optimal meta-population network of Fig. 7(a) designed by the optimal approach (31), where a uniform noise distribution is
applied. (c) Robust meta-population network of Fig. 7(a) designed by the robust approach (35), where the worst case of applying
the maximum noise input to the hub with highest centrality, New York, is considered.

method (31) on this network will result in network Fig. 7(b) with a lower range of centrality for
all the hubs. Additionally, implementing the robust optimization approach (35) on the original
network will change the network structure to Fig. 7(c).
Fig. 8 shows a comparison between the infection size of the simulated airport network when
50 percent of the meta-population is initially infected and R0 = 2.3. For the network with no
delay, τ = 0 days, or comparatively small delays, there would be no fluctuations in the epidemic
dynamics but as the delay increases pulses begin to appear. Experiencing 12 days of lag results
in approximately 2 percent (which corresponds to a considerable number of individuals in the
United States population) increase in the average infection size within the first 30 days of
epidemic onset.
The average infection size of the three networks Fig. 7 with τ = 12 days and initial infection
of 5 percent is presented in Fig. 9, which indicates that the proposed methods are successfully
decreasing the infection size.
The logarithmic scale of performance measure and its maximum for the networks in Fig. 7
are presented in Figs. 10(a) and 10(b). In the case of uniform disturbance distribution, both
optimal and robust controllers result in equal levels of performance for lower traffic percentages,
while for high overall traffic volumes, over 70 percent of normal volume, the optimal control
performance decreases with a lower rate than that of robust control. However, in the worst case
of noise distribution, robust controller shows a better performance, as it was expected.

22

The average infection size, p̄(t) = 1n ∑i∈V pi (t), of the meta-population network shown in Fig. 7(a) with
different time-delays. 50 percent of the meta-population is initially infected and R0 = 2.3. It is assumed that there
is effective social distancing within every sub-population, aii = 0 for i = 1, 2, . . . , n..
Fig. 8.

Average infection size of the three networks in Figs. 7 with τ = 12 days, R0 ' 1.03, and initial infection
of 5 percent.

Fig. 9.

23

(a)

(b)

(c)

Fig. 10. (a) Performance comparison between the original network Fig. 7(a), the optimal network of Fig. 7(b) and the robust
network of Fig. 7(c) in the case of uniform noise distribution. (b) Performance comparison between the original network Fig. 7(a),
the optimal network of Fig. 7(b) and the robust network of Fig. 7(c) in the case of extreme noise distribution. (c) Logarithmic
performance measure of networks Fig. 7 with respect to time-delay.
TABLE II.

T HE VALUES AND PERCENTAGES OF PERFORMANCE ENHANCEMENT FOR THE NETWORKS SHOWN IN F IGS .
7( B ) AND 7( C ) COMPARED WITH F IG . 7( A )

Original network (Fig. 7(a))
Optimal network (Fig. 7(b))
Robust network (Fig. 7(c))

Case 1
567 (0%)
413 (+27%)
417 (+26%)

Case 2
966 (0%)
446 (+54%)
414 (+57%)

Figs. 11 and 12 present detailed information about the changes in traffic volume and centrality
index of hubs, respectively. Unlike the core-periphery network, here the difference between
optimal and robust network outputs is visible. The robust control tends to isolate more of the
hubs with high centrality, which results in a better performance in worst cases, as shown in
10(b).
The detailed results of the performance improvement through optimal and robust epidemic
controls are represented in Table. II for Case 1 with uniform noise distribution, i.e. σi = 1 for
i = 1, . . . , n, and Case 2 is the worst case explained in (34).
VI.

D ISCUSSIONS

In this study, the nonlinear and linear dynamics of an SIS network model in epidemic networks
has been investigated. The studied meta-population is assumed to be experiencing delays due to
the considerable proportion of pre-symptomatic population. The explicit centrality indices in the
presence of model simplifications and testing errors have been derived and then used to develop
optimal and robust traffic restriction methods for epidemic containment purposes. The proposed

24

Fig. 11. Weight (traffic volume) comparison between the original network Fig. 7(a), optimal network Fig. 7(b), and robust
network Fig. 7(c).

Fig. 12. Centrality comparison between the hubs of original network Fig. 7(a), optimal network Fig. 7(b), and robust network
Fig. 7(c).

25

methods are implemented on a core-periphery network and a network of United States busiest
airports. The simulation results indicate that the unavoidable delays in symptom development
and infection identification can result in a significant difference in epidemic evolution for both
cases, which requires more attention while designing potential government interventions. The
proposed optimal and robust approaches, both based on the convex control method, shown
to be capable of enhancing the delayed network’s performance, and therefore, decreasing the
infection rate considerably. Although adding more compartments to the network model increases
the complexity of deriving explicit centrality indices, it can provide more realistic results.
Implementing the proposed methods on the directed graphs with time-varying weights is also
an interesting direction for improving the results of the current study.
Another aspect of an epidemic outbreak that requires more attention is vaccine tourism. When
vaccination becomes available for the first time, it motivates traveling to the centers offering it
which results in the vaccine tourism phenomenon. In the case of COVID-19 for instance, it is
predicted that the first successful country in developing the vaccination will attract many tourists,
at least until the vaccination resources are well distributed. With the vaccine distribution facing
several challenges such as keeping vaccines at subzero temperatures, having low efficacy rate,
producing limited dozes, etc, air transportation to the country offering the vaccine will probably
be continued for several months. Therefore, most probably, with the vaccine tourism comes a
new wave of infection raise which requires a near-optimal and fast traffic volume control to
mitigate its adverse consequences. The offered policies in this study can be generalized to meet
the requirements for a safe and robust traffic control in the case of releasing a vaccination.
R EFERENCES
[1]

W. Qiu, S. Rutherford, A. Mao, and C. Chu, “The pandemic and its impacts,” Health, culture and society, vol. 9, pp. 1–11,
2017.

[2]

Z. Xu and D. Z. Sui, “Effect of small-world networks on epidemic propagation and intervention,” Geographical Analysis,
vol. 41, no. 3, pp. 263–282, 2009.

[3]

D. H. Zanette and M. Kuperman, “Effects of immunization in small-world epidemics,” Physica A: Statistical Mechanics
and its Applications, vol. 309, no. 3-4, pp. 445–452, 2002.

[4]

N. T. Bailey, “Macro-modelling and prediction of epidemic spread at community level,” Mathematical Modelling, vol. 7,
no. 5-8, pp. 689–717, 1986.

[5]

V. Preciado, M. Zargham, C. Enyioha, A. Jadbabaie, and G. J. Pappas, “Optimal resource allocation for network protection:
A geometric programming approach,” IEEE Transactions on Control of Network Systems, pp. 99–108, 2014.

26

[6]

A. J. Terry, “Pulse vaccination strategies in a metapopulation sir model,” Mathematical Biosciences and Engineering,
vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 455–477, 2010.

[7]

A. L. Lioyd and V. A. Jansen, “Spatiotemporal dynamics of epidemics: synchrony in metapopulation models,”
Mathematical Biosciences, pp. 1–16, 2004.

[8]

Y. Ghaedsharaf, M. Siami, C. Somarakis, and N. Motee, “Centrality in time-delay consensus networks with structured
uncertainties,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.08514, 2019.

[9]

R. Olfati-Saber and R. M. Murray, “Consensus problems in networks of agents with switching topology and time-delays,”
Automatic Control, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 49, no. 9, pp. 1520–1533, 2004.

[10]

Q. Liu, D. Jiang, T. Hayat, and A. Alsaedi, “Threshold behavior in a stochastic delayed sis epidemic model with vaccination
and double diseases,” Journal of the Franklin Institute, pp. 7466–7485, 2019.

[11]

G. S. Zaric and M. L. Brandeau, “Resource allocation for epidemic control over short time horizons,” Mathematical
Biosciences, vol. 171, no. 1, pp. 33–58, 2001.

[12]

G. S. Zaric and M. L. Brandeau, “Dynamic resource allocation for epidemic control in multiple populations,” Mathematical
Medicine and Biology, vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 235–255, 2002.

[13]

L. Ferretti, C. Wymant, M. Kendall, L. Zhao, A. Nurtay, L. Abeler-Dörner, M. Parker, D. Bonsall, and C. Fraser,
“Quantifying sars-cov-2 transmission suggests epidemic control with digital contact tracing,” Science, vol. 368, no. 6491,
2020.

[14]

V. M. Preciado and A. Jadbabaie, “Spectral analysis of virus spreading in random geometric networks,” IEEE Conference
on Decision and Control, 2010.

[15]

P. Van Mieghem, D. Stevanović, F. Kuipers, C. Li, R. Van De Bovenkamp, D. Liu, and H. Wang, “Decreasing the spectral
radius of a graph by link removals,” Physical Review E, vol. 84, no. 1, p. 016101, 2011.

[16]

V. M. Preciado and M. Zargham, “Traffic optimization to control epidemic outbreaks in metapopulation models,” in 2013
IEEE Global Conference on Signal and Information Processing, pp. 847–850, IEEE, 2013.

[17]

V. M. Preciado, F. D. Sahneh, and C. Scoglio, “A convex framework for optimal investment on disease awareness in
social networks,” in 2013 IEEE Global Conference on Signal and Information Processing, pp. 851–854, IEEE, 2013.

[18]

C. Nowzari, V. M. Preciado, and G. J. Pappas, “Analysis and control of epidemics: A survey of spreading processes on
complex networks,” IEEE CONTROL SYSTEMS MAGAZINE, pp. 26–46, 2016.

[19]
[20]

J. C. Miller and J. M. Hyman, “Effective vaccination strategies for realistic social networks,” Physica, pp. 780–785, 2007.
P. Holme, B. J. Kim, C. N. Yoon, and S. K. Han, “Attack vulnerability of complex networks,” Physical review E, vol. 65,
no. 5, p. 056109, 2002.

[21]

D. H. Morris, F. W. Rossine, J. B. Plotkin, and S. A. Levin, “Optimal, near-optimal, and robust epidemic control,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2004.02209, 2020.

[22]

M. Sadeghi, J. Greene, and E. Sontag, “Universal features of epidemic models under social distancing guidelines,” bioRxiv,
2020.

[23]

L. Peng, W. Yang, D. Zhang, C. Zhuge, and L. Hong, “Epidemic analysis of covid-19 in china by dynamical modeling,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.06563, 2020.

[24]

G. C. Calafiore, C. Novara, and C. Possieri, “A modified sir model for the covid-19 contagion in italy,” arXiv preprint

27

arXiv:2003.14391, 2020.
[25]

A. Rajabi, A. V. Mantzaris, E. C. Mutlu, and I. Garibay, “Investigating dynamics of covid-19 spread and containment
with agent-based modeling,” medRxiv, 2020.

[26]

WHO, “Coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) situation report – 46.” https://rb.gy/4upo9v, 2020 (accessed September 8,
2020).

[27]

WHO, “Coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) situation report – 73.” https://rb.gy/slg50u, 2020 (accessed September 8,
2020).

[28]

V. M. Preciado, M. Zargham, C. Enyioha, A. Jadbabaie, and G. Pappas, “Optimal vaccine allocation to control epidemic
outbreaks in arbitrary networks,” in 52nd IEEE conference on decision and control, pp. 7486–7491, IEEE, 2013.

[29]

B. Bamieh, M. R. Jovanovic, P. Mitra, and S. Patterson, “Coherence in large-scale networks: Dimension-dependent
limitations of local feedback,” IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, vol. 57, pp. 2235–2249, Sept 2012.

[30]

G. F. Young, L. Scardovi, and N. E. Leonard, “Robustness of noisy consensus dynamics with directed communication,”
in American Control Conference (ACC), 2010, pp. 6312–6317, IEEE, 2010.

[31]

M. Siami and N. Motee, “Fundamental limits and tradeoffs on disturbance propagation in linear dynamical networks,”
IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, vol. 61, no. 12, pp. 4055–4062, 2016.

[32]

Y. Ghaedsharaf, M. Siami, C. Somarakis, and N. Motee, “Performance improvement in noisy linear consensus networks
with time-delay,” IEEE Transactions on automatic control, vol. 64, no. 6, pp. 2457–2472, 2018.

[33]

J. Doyle, K. Glover, P. Khargonekar, and B. Francis, “State-space solutions to standard H2 and H∞ control problems,”
Automatic Control, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 34, no. 8, pp. 831–847, 1989.

[34]

S. Boyd and L. Vandenberghe, Convex optimization. Cambridge university press, 2004.

[35]

T. Opsahl, “The network of airports in the united states.” https://toreopsahl.com/datasets/#usairports, 2010 (accessed
October 26, 2020).

