ON SECONDARY ATOMIZATION AND BLOCKAGE OF SURROGATE COUGH
DROPLETS IN SINGLE AND MULTI-LAYER FACE MASKS
Shubham Sharma1, Roven Pinto1, Abhishek Saha2, Swetaprovo Chaudhuri3,
Saptarshi Basu1
1Department

of Mechanical Engineering, Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru, India

2Department

of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, University of California San

Diego, La Jolla, USA
3Institute

for Aerospace Studies, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada

Abstract
By now it is well-understood that the usage of facemasks provides protection from
transmission of viral loads through exhalation and inhalation of respiratory droplets.
Therefore, during the current Covid-19 pandemic the usage of face masks is strongly
recommended by health officials. Although three-layer masks are generally advised for
usage, many commonly available or homemade masks contain only single and double
layers. In this study, we show through detailed physics based analyses and high speed
imaging that high momentum cough droplets on impingement on single- and doublelayer masks can lead to significant partial penetration and more importantly atomization
into numerous much smaller daughter droplets, thereby increasing the total population
of the aerosol, which can remain suspended for a longer time. The possibility of
secondary atomization of high momentum cough droplets due to impingement,
hydrodynamic focusing and extrusion through the microscale pores in the fibrous

1

network of the mask has not been explored before. However, this unique mode of
aerosol generation poses a finite risk of infection as shown in this work. We also
demonstrate that in single layer masks close to 70 % of a given droplet volume is
atomized and only 30 % is trapped within the fibers. The entrapped volume is close to
90 % for double layer masks which still allows some atomization into smaller droplets.
We however found that a triple-layer surgical mask permits negligible penetration and
hence should be effective in preventing disease transmission.

Introduction
The transport of pathogen loaded respiratory droplets from an infected person can
result in the spread of viral loads to a susceptible person triggering global pandemics,
like the ongoing COVID- 19 1–3. Droplets are ejected by an infected person while
breathing, talking, coughing, singing, spitting, or sneezing and can remain airborne for a
long time, depending on its initial size and ambient conditions 4–7. These aerosolized
droplets, when containing viral loading, can further infect a healthy person by their
ingestion through oral or nasal passages into the respiratory tracts 8. The infection
probability of the droplet nuclei or the fomite depends on their initial viral loads 5,9,10, and
their endurance in different ambient conditions7,11–13. Thus, wearing a face mask and
maintaining social distancing in public settings is advised by the scientific and medical
community for restricting the spread of the disease through droplets 14,15.
In particular, face masks are specifically important in both arresting the respiratory
droplets ejected from individuals during respiratory events and limiting their ingestion
during breathing processes. Although all masks are in general effective in reducing

2

these transmissions, the relative effectiveness depends on the type of mask used. Hui
et al. 16 discussed the effectiveness of face masks in confining the distance traveled by
aerosol dispersions during human coughs. They showed that the turbulent flow induced
during coughs without a mask could traverse an average distance of 70 cm from its
initial position, and the use of a surgical mask and N95 mask reduces this distance
approximately by a factor of 2.3 and 4.5, respectively. Although the N95 mask
effectively restricted the forward translation of cough puffs, the sidewise leakage was
still evident for these masks. Fischer et al. 17 discussed a cost-effective optical
measurement method for finding mask efficacy in filtering respiratory droplets generated
during the human speech. The droplet counts and their rate of ejection were compared
for different mask surfaces, and it was found that cotton masks have identical safety as
surgical face masks, while alternatives like neck gaiters or bandanas provide minimal
protection. Dbouk and Drikakis 18 have numerically shown that a few droplets are
transmitted to longer distances even after being obstructed by the face mask, and the
efficiency of a face mask keeps on diminishing with increasing cough cycles. Verma et
al. 19 compared the efficiency of different commercially available face masks in
obstructing respiratory jets. They used a laser sheet illuminating the aerosols and
calculated the distance traveled by the jets for the case of the unmasked and masked
subjects. The use of face-covering significantly reduced the distance traveled by the
jets; however, a minimal amount of aerosol leakage was found from the sides of the
face mask. A similar study was conducted by Kahler and Hain 20 for a much smaller size
of suspended droplets (0.1 - 2 m) which suggested the use of particle filtering units in
masks for increasing their effectiveness.

3

The available literature indicates that N95 masks are effective in limiting the spread of
dispersions during human coughs, but their shortage and high costs in the ongoing
pandemic has forced policy makers to shift to other alternatives like single- or multilayer surgical masks or other homemade substitutes. Previous work on the surgical face
mask has been mainly concentrated on determining the spreading distance of cough
puffs and their leakages from the sidewalls of the mask14,16,18–23, and addresses only the
smaller sized droplets (~ 0.1 to 100 m) which can easily transmit through the porous
network of the mask. These studies lack in presenting the evolution of the impinging
droplet inside the face mask. In particular, the fluid dynamical aspects of cough droplets
impinging on the mask which covers the droplet penetration criteria, atomization
mechanism and the final size distribution of the daughter droplets, remain mostly
unexplored.
In the present investigation, we have focused on these aspects and studied the breakup
mechanism of large cough droplets impacting a single- or multi-layer surgical mask. It is
noted that the respiratory events release a plethora of droplet sizes, spanning from
submicron to few millimeters 4,24,25, with an average velocity of 10 m/s23,24,26,27. Although
the large droplets when ejected without the restriction of masks, travel only a limited
distance before settling on the ground and as such are considered to be less important
in direct transmission, we will show that these large droplets may lead to the
fragmentation and regeneration of numerous tiny daughter droplets with significant
translational velocity in single-layer surgical mask. These small droplets can move to
longer distances and can remain aerosolized in the medium for longer durations
increasing the risk of infections.
4

This paper is organized as follows; first, we describe the experimental setup used,
followed by the results of droplet impact on different layered masks. Next, a scaling
analysis for the criteria of droplet penetration through mask is conducted and compared
with experimental data. This is followed by a theoretical model for predicting the size
distribution of atomized droplets, validated by experimental data. Next, a probability
distribution of the daughter droplet sizes is plotted which shows that atomization through
single- and double-layer masks results in a majority of the daughter droplets falling in
the possible regime of aerosolization. Finally, we discuss the effectiveness of different
masks in trapping virus emulating nanoparticles from the impacting droplet.

Results
Experiments
As mentioned before, the purpose of this work is to simulate impact of large cough
droplets on single-, double-, and triple-layer surgical masks and thereby, evaluate their
relative efficacy in restricting these droplets. Figure 1(a) shows a general schematic of
these impact events during actual usage where droplets ejected during human coughs
land on masks used as face covering. A zoomed-in view shows the droplet impacting on
the inner layer of a single-layer or double layer mask and disintegrating into finer
daughter droplets on the other side of the mask. Now to simulate a cough event in
experiments, a piezo-actuated droplet dispenser (Nordson pico-pulse) is used, which
ejects a DI water droplet of ~ 620 m size with an impact velocity of ~10 m/s. A set of at
least 10 experimental runs is done for each experimental case. It will be shown later
secondary atomization as shown in Fig. 1a happens only for single and double layer

5

masks for a range of impact velocities. Single- and double-layer masks are effective in
blocking droplets with low momentum especially during talking and breathing. A highspeed shadowgraphy setup (see Fig. 1(b)) consisting of a laser source and a highspeed camera is used for visualizing the single droplet impingement on the masked
surface (for further details, see “Methods” section).
Surgical masks from two different companies (locally supplied (mask A) and Novel
mask Aavanzr Pharmaceuticals Pvt. Ltd. (mask B)) and with different numbers of
protection layers (single, double, triple) are used during the experiments. The Scanning
Electron Microscopy (SEM) images of mask A are shown in Fig. 1(c, d) for single- and
double-layer masks, respectively. These images depict the porous network formed by
the threads of the mask layer. A similar structure is found in mask B (see Fig. 1(f, g)). A
single mask layer has a range of pore diameters, and the average effective pore
diameter was found to be  30 m for both mask A and mask B. For the double- and
triple-layer masks, it is derived to be  17 m and  12 m, respectively (see
Supplementary Fig. S1). Thus, overlapping layers of these masks reduce the effective
porosity. The mask material used for a single-layer is hydrophobic (Fig. 1(e, h)), and the
contact angle is measured to be 123 ± 4o and 115 ± 8o for mask A and mask B,
respectively.

6

Figure 1 Droplet atomization through face mask. (a) Schematic diagram of droplets
ejected during human cough. The larger droplet with high momentum get atomized into
numerous tiny droplets after impacting on single and double layer mask surface. Note triple
layer mask surface does not lead to any atomization (b) High-speed shadowgraphy imaging
setup capturing the breakup dynamics of the impacting droplet. (c, f) SEM images showing
the variable pore size in a single-layer of mask A and mask B, respectively. (d, g) SEM
images showing the variable pore size in a double-layer of mask A and mask B, respectively.
(e, h) The contact angle of a droplet on the surfaces of mask A and mask B, respectively.

Droplet impact on different layered masks
The time-sequence images of a droplet impacting on different layered mask A are
shown in Fig. 2. The reference time is taken from the instance of the droplet impact on
the mask layer. The impacting droplet has an initial diameter (Di ) of 617.70 ± 24 m and
impact velocity (i ) of 10.12 ± 0.43 m/s. Figure 2(a) shows the case of a single-layer
mask, in which the impacting droplet is fragmented into multiple liquid ligaments
(see t = 100 - 450 ms), and these ligaments subsequently undergo secondary
atomization into multiple daughter droplets (see t = 450 - 950 s). Figure 2(b) shows the
case of a double-layer mask in which the number of droplets penetrating through the
mask are significantly less compared to a single-layer mask (see t = 250 - 1150 s) due
7

to a reduction in the effective porosity. The cylindrical ligaments are not prominent in
this case due to the presence of the second mask layer. Apart from surgical masks, few
locally sourced cloth masks with single and double layers are also investigated, and

Figure 2 Dynamic images of a droplet impacting on different layered mask A. The water droplet
impacting on the mask surface has a “We ~ 880” and is recorded at 20000 fps. (a - c) Time sequence
images of droplet impingement on a single-, double-, and triple-layer mask, respectively. The total
number count of atomized droplets is significantly higher for the single-layer mask in comparison with
the double-layer mask, while only a single droplet penetrates through the triple-layer mask (see Fig.
2(c) at “t = 600 - 1000 s”). Similar results are obtained for mask B (see Supplementary Fig. S2). Scale
bar description is included in the figures.

results are similar to the surgical mask of the corresponding number of layers (see
Supplementary Fig. S3). Figure 2(c) shows the droplet impacting on the triple-layer
surgical mask. Due to the much smaller effective porosity of triple-layer masks, half of
the total experimental runs produced no droplet penetration and the remaining runs
resulted in the penetration of only a single droplet (see Fig. 2(c) at t = 600 - 1000 s)
through the mask A. Mask B also shows similar results (see Supplementary Fig. S2),
but no penetration was observed in a triple-layer of mask B. Similarly, no penetration is
observed for an N95 face mask. Thus, triple-layer masks and N95 masks are not only
8

useful in restricting larger respiratory droplets, but they also inhibit the further
atomization of droplets that are ejected during the cough of an infected person.
Droplet penetration criteria
Sahu et al.28 found that for any fiber-liquid combination, there exists a threshold impact
velocity above which liquid can penetrate the porous network of fibers irrespective of its
hydrophobicity. The scaling analysis28 for determining the criteria of droplet penetration
is obtained as follows. Since the surface tension effect can be neglected, the initial
kinetic energy (Ek ≈ w (

i Di 2


) D3i ) of the penetrating droplet can be considered to be lost

into dissipation energy (Ed ≈

w i Di
Di 3
(
)

D
(
) tm )
i

ε


as the liquid ligaments pass through

the porous network of the mask. Here,  and tm are the pore size and thickness of the
mask layer, w and w are the density and dynamic viscosity of the droplet, respectively.
If the kinetic energy overcomes the dissipation energy, the impacting droplet penetrates
through to the other side of the mask layer. The ratio of two energies, thus, gives the
scaling argument for this criterion:
Ek
Ed

i Di 2

≈ w (



) D3i .

ε5

w i D4i tm



≈ Re (t )
m

(1)

ρ w i 

Here Re = (

𝑤

) is Reynolds number based on the pore size and droplet impact

velocity. Therefore, for the droplet to penetrate through the mask layer, the above ratio
E

should be much greater than one (Ek ≫ 1), and the droplet penetration criteria is
d

obtained as28:

9



Re (t ) >> 1

(2)

m

Thus, the droplet penetration depends on the impact velocity, thickness and pore size of
the mask, while it is independent of the diameter of impacting droplet

28.

For validating

the applicability of this criteria, experiments are conducted with different droplet impact
velocities of 2 - 10 m/s and keeping same droplet diameters for all cases. The
magnitudes of left and right terms of Eq. (2) for different cases are shown in Table 1. In
single- and double-layer masks, for a droplet impact velocity of 10 m/s, Re (/tm) >> 1
therefore, the impacting droplet can penetrate through the mask layer (see Fig. 2a, b).
Whereas for a triple-layer mask Re (/tm) ~ 1, thus, no, or minimal penetration is
observed for this case (see Fig. 2c). At an impact velocity of 7.5 m/s, the penetration
criteria is satisfied for a single- and double-layer mask and hence we observed droplet
penetration for these cases, and no penetration is observed for a triple-layer mask (see
Fig. 3(a-c)). At lower impact velocity of 3 and 5 m/s on a single-layer mask, Re (/tm) > 1
thus we obtained droplet penetration for this case while no penetration was observed for
multiple layer masks (see Fig. 3(d-f)). At a much lower impact velocity of 2 m/s, no
droplet penetration was observed even through a single-layer mask (see Fig. 3(g)). A
qualitative look at Eq. 2 shows that due to smaller pore size, the Reynolds number
decreases, and the thickness to pore ratio increases for a multi-layer mask. Thus, the
droplet penetration criteria given by Eq. 2 is no longer satisfied for these masks, and we
observed a minimal and no droplet penetration for double- and triple-layer face masks,
respectively. The detailed mechanism of droplet breakup and the size distribution of
ejected droplets is discussed in the following section.

10

Single-layer

Double-layer

Triple-layer

Re (/tm) at i = 10 m/s

27.22

4.37

1.45

Re (/tm) at i = 7.5 m/s

20.42

3.28

1.09

Re (/tm) at i = 5 m/s

13.61

2.19

0.73

Re (/tm) at i = 3 m/s

8.17

1.31

0.44

Re (/tm) at i = 2 m/s

5.45

0.87

0.29

Table 1: Penetration criteria for different layered mask A for different impact velocities and droplet
size of ~ 620 m. The red and green regions indicate the cases of droplet penetration and no penetration
through the mask, respectively.

11

Figure 3 Dynamic images of a droplet impacting at different impact velocities. (a-c) Time sequence
images of droplet impinging at “i = 7.5 m/s” on a single-, double- and triple-layer of mask A, respectively.
Droplet penetration is observed for single- and double-layer masks while no penetration is observed for
triple layer mask. (d, e) Time sequence images of droplet impinging at “i = 5 m/s” on a single- and
double-layer of mask A, respectively. Droplet penetration is only observed for single-layer masks while no
penetration is observed for double- and triple-layer (not shown in figure) mask. (f, g) Time sequence
images of droplet impinging at “i = 3 m/s and 2m/s” on a single layer of mask A, respectively. Impacting
droplet penetrates through the single-layer mask at “i = 3 m/s” while no penetration is observed for “i =2
m/s”. Scale bar description is included in the figure.

12

Droplet atomization mechanism
The zoomed-in images of droplet atomization are shown in Fig. 4. For impacting
droplets, Weber number (We =

Finertia
Fsurface tension

=

w 2i Di


) governs the relative importance of

inertia and surface tension forces acting on the droplet, where  is the surface tension
of water (droplet liquid) in the air (surrounding gas medium). For a higher We as in the
present case (We = 875.9) the inertial forces dominate over the surface tension forces,
resulting in significant deformation of the droplet as it impacts the mask surface. Based
on the penetration criteria discussed in the previous section, the impacting droplet
extrudes through a single-layer mask in the form of cylindrical ligaments (see Fig. 4(a)
at t = 50 s). The length of these ligaments increases over time
(see Fig. 4(a) at t = 50 - 250 s) due to which instabilities in the form of capillary waves
are formed on its surface. Among all the instabilities, few dominant unstable wavelength
amplitudes grow over time and result in thinner and thicker diameter regions along the
length of the ligament (see Fig. 4(a) at t = 300 s). Hence, different surface curvatures
are formed on the ligament, which results in a Laplace pressure gradient along its
length and the formation of high-pressure regions at smaller diameters and lowpressure regions at larger diameters. This pressure difference results in liquid flow
inside the ligament, hence further reducing the thickness at smaller diameters and
increasing it at larger diameters. At later time instances, the smaller diameter regions of
the ligament get pinched off, and droplets of larger ligament diameter are formed. This
manner of the breakup of droplet ligament is known as the Rayleigh-Plateau mode of
instabilities 29,30, as shown in Fig.5(a). The dispersion equation for 1D Rayleigh-plateau
instability is as follows31:
13

2 =


w R3o

kRo

I1 (kRo )
2 2
(1-k Ro )
I0 (kRo )

(3)

Where  is the growth rate of the instability, Ro is the ligament diameter just before the
onset of instability (see Fig. 5(a)), k is the wavenumber, I1 and Io are the modified

Figure 4 Zoomed-in images of droplet atomization through mask A. (a) Impingement on a
single-layer mask A is recorded at 20000 fps and "We ~ 880”. The impacting droplet extrudes
through the mask layer as a cylindrical ligament "(t = 50 s)” whose length increases over time
"(t = 50 - 150 s)”. Unstable waves are formed on the surface of the ligament, which grows in
amplitude "(t = 250 - 300 s)”. and leads to its atomization into tiny droplets "(t = 350 s)” via
the Rayleigh plateau instability. (b) Impingement on a double-layer mask. The total number
count of the daughter droplets is significantly less, and no ligament formation is observed "(t =
100 - 500 s)”. Similar results are observed for mask B (See Supplementary Fig. S4). Scale
bar description is included in the figures.

14

Bessel functions of first and zero-order, respectively. Equation 3 shows that the
instabilities grow over time only if kRo < 1 or /Ro > 2, where  is the instability
wavelength. Thus, we plot the growth rate of instability at 0 < kRo < 1 for different
ligament thicknesses (see Supplementary Fig. S5). The instability with the maximum
growth rate occurs at kRo ≈ 0.697, which leads to the breakup of the ligament. The
breakup time for the ligament can be estimated by inverting it, as follows

b ≈ 1 /max

(4)

The daughter droplet size can be obtained by equating surface energies of the ligament
and daughter droplets.
2πRo L = N(4πR2d ) =

L


(4πR2d )

(5)

Where L is the length of the ligament, and 𝑅𝑑 is the daughter droplet radius. Therefore,
on solving we get
Rd ≈ 2.1Ro

(6)

15

Figure 5 Breakup time and daughter droplet diameters. (a) Schematic diagram displaying different
stages of a ligament undergoing breakup via Rayleigh-Plateau instability. (b, c) Comparison of
experimental and theoretical breakup times and daughter droplet diameters for different ligament sizes.

Due to the hydrodynamic focusing28 of impacting droplet, the penetrating liquid velocity
(~

vi Di



) is several orders higher than the droplet impact velocity as

Di



≫1 and hence

high recording rate is required for capturing the growth rate of instabilities on ligament
surface. Thus, shadowgraphy imaging is done at 60000 fps and pixel resolution of ~ 9
m/pixel. The results of breakup time and daughter droplet diameters are shown in Fig.
5(b, c), respectively. The uncertainty in measuring ligament thickness and breakup time
is of ± 18 m and ± 16.67 s, respectively. We have only compared the results for
daughter droplets with size > 50 m because the ligament sizes corresponding to the
smaller droplets are beyond the spatial or temporal resolution used in this work. As
seen in Fig. 5(b, c), the larger ligament takes a longer time for breakup and vice versa.
The growth rate of instabilities is lower for larger ligaments which results in their longer
breakup time. Also, the daughter droplet diameter is directly proportional to ligament
16

radius (Eq. 6) therefore we get a larger droplet size for larger ligaments. The theoretical
model is found to be in good agreement with experimental data. Figure 4(b) shows a
zoomed-in image for a double-layer mask. As discussed earlier, a minimal amount of
initial droplet volume penetrates through the mask. No ligament formation is observed in
this case due to the presence of the second mask layer.
Size distribution of atomized droplets
The probability distribution for the diameter of atomized droplets in mask A and B is
shown in Fig. 6. The droplets with a diameter smaller than 100 m have higher
aerosolization tendency27,32, and these droplets are mentioned as critical droplets in the
text hereafter. The atomized droplets are distributed over a size range of 13-288 m
among which 58.48 % and 72.28 % of the droplets are of critical size for single- and

Fig. 6 Probability distribution of daughter droplets. A probability distribution is plotted for the
daughter droplets that penetrate through single- and double-layer of mask A and mask B. For an
impacting droplet of size 620 m, the most probable size of daughter droplets for both masks A and B
(single- and double-layer) falls below 100 m, which is the regime for possible aerosolization.

17

double-layer mask A, respectively. Similarly, 64.87 % and 85.82 % of the droplets fall in
the critical range for single- and double-layer of mask B, respectively. Although the total
number counts of atomized droplets can vary, the probability distribution is similar for all
the considered masks indicating that the daughter droplet size range is independent of
the mask type used. The initial volume (Vi ) injected on the mask surface is
123.40 ± 14 nL, out of which 69.88 % and 8.34 % penetrated (Vp ) the mask, 8.43 % and
2.28 % fell in the critical range (Vc ) for single- and double-layer of mask A, respectively.
While for mask B, 64.3 % and 3.7 % of the initial volume penetrated (Vp ) the mask,
13.07 % and 1.87 % of which fell in the critical range (Vc ) for single- and double-layer
masks, respectively. Thus, mask B is relatively more effective than mask A in restricting
cough droplets for the corresponding number of mask layers. It can also be noticed that
the single-layer mask performs poorly not only in restricting the transmission of cough
droplets but also atomizes a higher percentage of the initial volume. The double-layer
masks perform better in restricting the droplet penetration, but among the droplets
which penetrate the mask they are more likely to exist in the critical regime. The
average velocity of all the atomized droplets is ~ 1.5 m/s, while the minimum and
maximum velocities are ~ 0.12 m/s and ~ 4.2 m/s for both single- and double-layer of
mask A and mask B. Thus, these droplets have sufficient momentum (although the
momentum is much less compared to the initially ejected droplets) to transmit the viral
load to significant distances.
Effectiveness of different masks in trapping viral load
While the above discussion amply provides insights into efficacy of single-, double- and
triple-layer surgical masks in preventing the transport of larger droplets, it does not
18

provide much information on the efficacy in filtering the virus. The cough droplets
ejected by an infected person contain virions inside them, and on impacting the mask
surface, some of the viral load gets trapped onto its layers, as schematically shown in
Fig. 7(a). For finding the efficiency of surgical masks in physically obstructing the viral
loads, we prepared a DI water solution loaded with 100 nm fluorescent polymer
microspheres (fluoro-max, Thermo fisher scientific) emulating as viruses

33,34

at a

concentration of 0.001 wt %. These particles mimic the fluid dynamics of virion laden
droplets, although they do not possess the mechanical or chemical properties of
virions33. The nano-particle loaded droplets are then injected on the face mask, and
deposition on the surface is identified from their fluorescent images. Figure 7(b, c)
shows the overlayed brightfield and fluorescent microscopy images on impact side and
penetration side of the mask, respectively, and images for single-, double-, and triple-

Fig. 7 Viral load trapping on a mask. (a) Schematic diagram of viral load getting trapped inside mask
layer (b) Overlayed brightfield and fluorescent microscopy images showing trapped particles on the

19

impact side for a single-, double-, and triple-layer of mask A (left to right in order). (c) Overlayed
brightfield and fluorescent microscopic images show trapped particles on the penetration side for a
single-, double-, and triple-layer of mask A (left to right in order). Similar results are obtained for mask
B (See Supplementary Fig. S7). (d) SEM image of particle lump accumulated on mask surface. (e)
Zoomed-in image showing coagulation of particles as a lump. (f) SEM image of discrete particles on
mask surface (g) Zoomed-in view of particles deposition location. Scale bar description is included in
the figures.

layer masks are arranged from left to right. The procedure for image overlaying is
described in Supplementary Fig. S6. These images clearly show that some
nanoparticles (viruses) get deposited on the mask fibers during the penetration of
ligaments. Their quantity will be proportional to the fluorescent signal coming from them.
The amount of fluorescent signal is more for a triple-layer mask than single- and doublelayer masks, which indicates that it is effective in restricting the viral loads more
effectively. On comparing Fig. 7(b, c), a similar fluorescent signal is observed from
either side of the face mask. The observation of particle trapping is further verified from
the SEM images for a single-layer of mask A (see Fig. 7(d-g)). These images indicate
that particles are deposited as a lump (Fig. 7(d, e)) as well as discrete particles (Fig. 7(f,
g)) on the surface of the mask. The deposited nano-particles on the mask layer
indicates the presence of viruses. This mandates that the user should follow proper
disposal methods for handling face masks after utilization.

Discussion
The atomization mechanism of large cough droplets impinging on different layered
surgical masks is studied in this work. The results of droplet atomization were compared
in terms of droplet penetration, size distribution, and volume transmission. Theoretical
models for the criteria of droplet penetration, breakup time, and droplet size prediction

20

agree with experimental data. The fluorescent images of particle deposition on the mask
layer indicate that some viral loads get trapped onto the mask fibers, thus requiring
proper disposal of face masks after their use. Table 2 shows the effectiveness of
different surgical masks investigated in this study. Although all masks provide some
level of protection, for a droplet of an initial diameter of 620 m, a single-layer of mask A

Mask A

Mask B

Mask type

Initial
volume, 𝑽𝒊
(nL)

Penetrated volume
percentage (𝑽𝒑 /𝑽𝒊 )

Percentage Volume in
critical regime (𝑽𝒄 /𝑽𝒊 )

Number counts of
penetrated
droplets

Single-layer

123.4

69.88%

8.43%

100 - 132

Double-layer

123.4

8.21%

2.28%

15 - 42

Triple- layer

123.4

0.22%

0.22%

0-1

Single-layer

123.4

64.3 %

13.07%

91-109

Double-layer

123.4

3.7 %

1.87%

11-16

Triple- layer

123.4

0%

0%

0

Table 2: Effectiveness of different surgical masks for cough droplets of 620 m

restricts only 30.12 % of the initial droplet volume and is found to be the least effective
among all the tested masks. The double-layer mask performs better comparatively and
restricts 91.79 % of the initial droplet volume, but 27.77 % of transmitted droplets fall in
the critical droplet diameter regime. Negligible droplet ejection was observed for the
triple-layer of mask A. A similar result was obtained for mask B as well. Thus, in the
current pandemic situation in which the N95 mask is not easily accessible for the
general populace, at least a triple-layer face mask is recommended. This not only
restricts the droplet transmission but also prevents the formation of atomized droplets.
However, it should be noted that single- and double-layer masks do provide protection
in blocking droplet volume (table 2) and is far better than not wearing a mask. It also

21

provides protection against low momentum droplets (table 1) emitted during talking and
breathing.
We end the exposition by clarifying that any face covering, even the single-layer face
masks provide some form resistance against exhalation of respiratory droplets and as
such should be used whenever required or mandated by health officials. We also point
out that our current investigation only focused on efficacy of single and multi-layer
masks in restricting exhaled large respiratory droplets. The assessment of the
effectiveness of various masks during the inhalation process requires additional
considerations and as such beyond the scope of this study.

Methods
High-speed shadowgraphy setup
The light from a pulsed laser source (Cavitar Cavilux smart UHS) is collimated into a
parallel beam using a beam collimator (Thorlabs – BE20M-A). The shadow image of the
droplet is captured by a high-speed camera (Photron SA5) coupled with a zoom lens
assembly (NAVITAR 6.5x lens, 1.5x objective lens, and 1x adapter tube) at a recording
rate of 20000 fps and laser pulse width of 10 ns. A pixel resolution of 11.61 m/pixel
and 6.64 m/pixel is used for zoomed-out and zoomed-in images respectively, with an
image resolution of 576 X 624 pixels. The captured images are processed using
MATLAB R2019a and Fiji ImageJ softwares.

References
1.

Liu, Y. et al. Aerodynamic analysis of SARS-CoV-2 in two Wuhan hospitals.
22

Nature 582, 557–560 (2020).
2.

World Health Organization. Transmission of SARS-CoV-2: implications for
infection prevention precautions. Scientific brief, 09 July 2020. 1–10 (2020).

3.

Richard, M. et al. Influenza A viruses are transmitted via the air from the nasal
respiratory epithelium of ferrets. Nat. Commun. 11, 1–11 (2020).

4.

Duguid, J. P. The size and the duration of air-carriage of respiratory droplets and
droplet-nuclei. J. Hyg. (Lond). 44, 471–479 (1946).

5.

Chaudhuri, S., Basu, S., Kabi, P., Unni, V. R. & Saha, A. Modeling the role of
respiratory droplets in Covid-19 type pandemics. Phys. Fluids 32, (2020).

6.

Yan, J. et al. Infectious virus in exhaled breath of symptomatic seasonal influenza
cases from a college community. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 115, 1081–1086
(2018).

7.

Chaudhuri, S., Basu, S. & Saha, A. Analyzing the dominant SARS-CoV-2
transmission routes towards an ab initio SEIR model. arXiv:2007.13596 (2020).

8.

Chao, C. Y. H. et al. Characterization of expiration air jets and droplet size
distributions immediately at the mouth opening. J. Aerosol Sci. 40, 122–133
(2009).

9.

Robert J. Goodlow, Frederick A. L. Viability and infectivity of microorganisms in
experimental airborne infection. Bacteriol. Rev. 25, 182–187 (1961).

10.

Alonso, C., Raynor, P. C., Davies, P. R. & Torremorell, M. Concentration, size
distribution, and infectivity of airborne particles carrying swine viruses. PLoS One
23

10, 1–12 (2015).
11.

Kampf, G., Todt, D., Pfaender, S. & Steinmann, E. Persistence of coronaviruses
on inanimate surfaces and their inactivation with biocidal agents. J. Hosp. Infect.
104, 246–251 (2020).

12.

Casanova, L. M., Jeon, S., Rutala, W. A., Weber, D. J. & Sobsey, M. D. Effects of
air temperature and relative humidity on coronavirus survival on surfaces. Appl.
Environ. Microbiol. 76, 2712–2717 (2010).

13.

van Doremalen, N. et al. Aerosol and Surface Stability of SARS-CoV-2 as
Compared with SARS-CoV-1. N. Engl. J. Med. 382, 1564–1567 (2020).

14.

Leung, N. H. L. et al. Respiratory virus shedding in exhaled breath and efficacy of
face masks. Nat. Med. 26, 676–680 (2020).

15.

Esposito, S., Principi, N., Leung, C. C. & Migliori, G. B. Universal use of face
masks for success against COVID-19: evidence and implications for prevention
policies. Eur. Respir. J. 55, (2020).

16.

Hui, D. S. et al. Exhaled Air Dispersion during Coughing with and without Wearing
a Surgical or N95 Mask. PLoS One 7, 1–7 (2012).

17.

Fischer, E. P. et al. Low-cost measurement of facemask efficacy for filtering
expelled droplets during speech. Sci. Adv. 3083, 1–11 (2020).

18.

Dbouk, T. & Drikakis, D. On respiratory droplets and face masks. Phys. Fluids 32,
(2020).

19.

Verma, S., Dhanak, M. & Frankenfield, J. Visualizing the effectiveness of face
24

masks in obstructing respiratory jets. Phys. Fluids 32, (2020).
20.

Kähler, C. J. & Hain, R. Fundamental protective mechanisms of face masks
against droplet infections. Journal of Aerosol Science vol. 148 (2020).

21.

Maclntyre, C. R. et al. Face mask use and control of respiratory virus transmission
in households. Emerg. Infect. Dis. 15, 233–241 (2009).

22.

Rodriguez-Palacios, A., Cominelli, F., Basson, A. R., Pizarro, T. T. & Ilic, S.
Textile Masks and Surface Covers—A Spray Simulation Method and a “Universal
Droplet Reduction Model” Against Respiratory Pandemics. Front. Med. 7, 1–13
(2020).

23.

Tang, J. W., Liebner, T. J., Craven, B. A. & Settles, G. S. A schlieren optical study
of the human cough with and without wearing masks for aerosol infection control.
J. R. Soc. Interface 6, 727–736 (2009).

24.

Mittal, R., Ni, R. & Seo, J. H. The flow physics of COVID-19. J. Fluid Mech. 894,
1–14 (2020).

25.

Xie, X., Li, Y., Sun, H. & Liu, L. Exhaled droplets due to talking and coughing ( Xie
et al, 2009).pdf. J. R. Soc. Interface 6, 703–714 (2009).

26.

Zhu, S. W., Kato, S. & Yang, J. H. Study on transport characteristics of saliva
droplets produced by coughing in a calm indoor environment. Build. Environ. 41,
1691–1702 (2006).

27.

Xie, Li, Y., Chwang, A. T. Y., Ho, P. L. & Seto, W. H. How far droplets can move
in indoor environments. Indoor Air 17, 211–2256 (2007).
25

28.

Sahu, R. P., Sinha-Ray, S., Yarin, A. L. & Pourdeyhimi, B. Drop impacts on
electrospun nanofiber membranes. Soft Matter 8, 3957–3970 (2012).

29.

Hagedorn, J. G., Martys, N. S. & Douglas, J. F. Breakup of a fluid thread in a
confined geometry: Droplet-plug transition, perturbation sensitivity, and kinetic
stabilization with confinement. Phys. Rev. E - Stat. Physics, Plasmas, Fluids,
Relat. Interdiscip. Top. 69, 18 (2004).

30.

Lin, S. P. & Reitz, R. D. Drop and spray formation from a liquid jet. Annu. Rev.
Fluid Mech. 30, 85–105 (1998).

31.

Drazin, P. G. & Reid, W. H. Hydrodynamic Stability. (Cambridge University Press,
2004). doi:10.1017/CBO9780511616938.

32.

Wells, W. F. On air-borne infection: study II. Droplets and droplet nuclei. Am. J.
Epidemiol. 20, 611–618 (1934).

33.

Kabi, P., Saha, A., Chaudhuri, S. & Basu, S. Insights on drying and precipitation
dynamics of respiratory droplets in the perspective of Covid-19. ARXIV
2008.00934 (2020).

34.

Lustig, S. R. et al. Effectiveness of Common Fabrics to Block Aqueous Aerosols
of Virus-like Nanoparticles. ACS Nano 14, 7651–7658 (2020).

26

