arXiv:2010.14630v2 [physics.soc-ph] 5 Nov 2020

Controlling COVID-19: Labor structure is more
important than lockdown policy
Samuel Heroy1,2∗ , Isabella Loaiza3,4 , Alex Pentland3 , Neave O’Clery1,2 ,
1

The Bartlett Centre for Advanced Spatial Analysis, University College London,
London W1 4TJ, UK
2

Mathematical Institute, University of Oxford,

Radcliffe Observatory Quarter, Woodstock Road, Oxford OX2 6GG, UK
3
MIT Media Laboratory, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
E15–383, 20 Ames Street, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
4

ICTEAM Institute - Pôle en ingénierie mathématique, UCLouvain,
Louvain-la-Neuve 1348, Belgium
∗

Corresponding author; E-mail: s.heroy@ucl.ac.uk.

Countries and cities around the world have resorted to unprecedented mobility restrictions to combat Covid-19 transmission. Here
we exploit a natural experiment whereby Colombian cities implemented varied lockdown policies based on ID number and gender to
analyse the impact of these policies on urban mobility. Using mobile phone data, we find that the severity of local lockdown rules,
measured in the number of days citizens are allowed to go out, does
not correlate with mobility reduction. Instead, we find that larger,
wealthier cities with a more formalized and complex industrial structure experienced greater reductions in mobility. Commuters are
more likely to stay home when their work is located in wealthy or
1

commercially/industrially formalized neighbourhoods. Hence, our
results indicate that cities’ employment characteristics and workfrom-home capabilities are the primary determinants of mobility
reduction.

Introduction
Across the world, governments and scientists alike have struggled immensely with the
question of which policies will most effectively reduce the spread of COVID-19. In a
cross-country analysis of case data, Hsiang et al. find that in six countries various policies
ranging from full lockdown to paid sick leave prevented or delayed an estimated 495
million cases from January-June 2020, but that the effects of specific policies differed
from country to country (1). Evidence from China (2) and across Europe (3) demonstrates
clear evidence that full lockdown is by far the most effective measure in curbing spread.
However, it is not yet clear how local economic conditions affect policy success.
Epidemic mitigation policies are not implemented in a vacuum. For instance, a tech
hub has many jobs that can be performed remotely with relative ease, while a manufacturing center does not. Globally, cities with many teleworkable jobs have been better able
to reduce work commutes (4, 5). More generally, wealthier cities and wealthier neighborhoods have been more adept at reducing urban mobility (6–9), and as well experienced
lower Covid-19 death rates at least in the UK and USA (10, 11). However, the relationship between lockdown severity, city wealth, and observed mobility reduction remains not
well understood. For example, are harsh mobility restrictions as effective in less wealthy
cities? Or does the nature of the local economy outweigh policy severity?
Latin American countries generally had more time to prepare for the in-coming pandemic and develop appropriate policy measures (12). In Colombia, Ecuador, and Panamá,
2

residents were allowed out for essential trips on days of the week corresponding to their
national ID number and/or gender. We can quantify the severity of this type of policy
via, i.e., the share of residents allowed out daily. We specifically focus on Colombian cities
which implemented local variations of these policies. For example, in Bogotá residents
were allowed out every other day based on their gender, whereas Florencia allowed just
10% of residents out daily (Figure 1). Additionally, socioeconomic conditions vary significantly between Colombian cities, with the largest cities having much higher composite
wealth and industry sophistication (13, 14). These variations in policy and wealth represent a natural experiment in which we examine the relationship between policy severity,
city wealth, and observed mobility reduction.
We use mobile phone data (call records) to characterize changes in city residents’
urban mobility in an 11-day period beginning with the introduction of local lockdown
measures. Urban mobility metrics from mobile phones have frequently been used to
quantify mobility reductions in the wake of COVID-19 as well as other infectious diseases,
both to characterize lockdown measures (2, 15), and to predict epidemic spread (16–18).
Our key finding is that more severe mobility restrictions have no significant impact on
local mobility reduction levels. An implication of this finding is that fine-tuned restrictions, which calibrate the share of people allowed out daily, do not lead to a proportional
decrease in mobility. On the other hand, city size is strongly correlated with mobility
reduction, both in terms of trip frequency and daily distance traveled. Hence, cities
with higher labor formality, GDP per capita, and industrial complexity experience more
reduced mobility - irrespective of the policy imposed. Furthermore, within cities, commuters to wealthy and commercial areas are most disrupted. Hence, both high income
and associated service workers are more likely to stay at home. Taken together, these
results have important implications for the design of lockdown policies, the success of
3

which depends critically on local economic conditions.

1

ID and gender-based mobility restrictions

During the early stages of COVID-19 exposure, the Colombian government ordered municipal governments to impose local mobility restrictions. Most municipalities (22 departmental capitals) imposed “pico y cédula” restrictions in which residents were allowed
out on certain days corresponding to the terminating digit of their national ID numbers.
However, the ID numbers allowed out daily varied between municipalities (Fig. 1A).
For example, two of the smallest municipalities only allowed residents out roughly one
weekday per every two weeks (10% of residents allowed out daily). The largest city and
capital, Bogotá, allowed males/females out on alternating days (50% allowed out daily).
In order to quantify the severity of municipal policies, we collected local policy advice
for the principle departmental capitals from government websites and/or social media.
Whereas these ID/gender-based measures were advertised widely, and enforced in certain
venues (e.g. public transit, access to banks/supermarkets), the extent of policy enforcement/adherence is generally unclear across municipalities, especially in the informal labor
sector.
For each departmental capital, we computed the average % of residents allowed out
daily for 11 weekdays (April 13-27) in the pandemic’s early stages (Fig. 1B). This corresponds to an initial ’lockdown’ period in which all municipalities had recently enacted
ID/gender-based restrictions. Interestingly, on average smaller municipalities permitted
fewer people out daily (Pearson’s ρ = .39). Hence, with strong adherence, we would
expect that residents of smaller municipalities traveled less frequently during lockdown.
In the following section we will investigate whether this is observed in practice.

4

A

B

Share of residents allowed out/day
10%

20%

30%

40%

50%

Barranquilla
Cartagena

Medellín
C

Bogotá
Cali

Figure 1: Colombian municipalities administered locally varying policies in
which residents were allowed to go out for essential purposes on days corresponding to their national ID/gender. A: During the study period, Medellı́n
allowed out an average of 3 ID numbers daily (30% of residents). B: The capital municipalities (points, size proportional to population) of the most populous departments in
Colombia, colored by the average share of residents allowed out per weekday from April
13-27. Departments are shaded by GDP per capita. C: Users nationwide reduced their
mobility greatly from March 19 (end of week -1), when the government first announced
national lockdown-related policies. From March 19-April 9 (weeks 0-2), residents nationwide were instructed to stay home unless absolutely necessary, but localized policies took
effect from April 6 (week 2) in all municipalities except Bogotá, which implemented the
pico y género policy on April 13 (week 3).

5

A

B

C

D

E

R2 = .43
t = -14.3

Figure 2: City size, rather than policy severity, is associated with more pronounced reduction in residents’ trip frequency. A: Empirical distributions of trip
frequencies for detected residents in municipalities of interest. D-E: Municipality-level
mean trip frequency (points, size proportional to population, color to policy severity)
during lockdown is not related significantly to policy severity or population. B-C: Increasing population (but not severity) has a strong reducing effect on municipality-level
median reduction in trip frequency (standard error bars and 95% confidence intervals
calculated via bootstrapping).

6

2

Effects of policy severity and city size on lockdown
mobility

In order to evaluate the effects of localized mobility restrictions, we computed mobility
indicators derived from call detail records (CDRs) for 22 out of 23 of Colombia’s departmental capital municipalities (omitting one on account of low sample size). For each
resident we compute trip frequency which is the % of active days (days in which the user
makes or receives a call) in which they travel 1 km from their home cell, and daily distance traveled which is the average distance traveled from their home cell on active days.
In order to assess changes in mobility relative to pre-lockdown, we also compute these
metrics for a baseline period prior to COVID-19.
We find that most users across all municipalities reduced their daily distance traveled
during lockdown (Fig. 1C). However, the extent of the reduction varied greatly across
municipalities. We display municipality-level distributions of trip frequencies before and
after lockdown in Figure 2A, and relative change (from baseline) in daily distance traveled
in Figure 3A. Most municipalities had a mean lockdown trip frequency of 25 − 30% (Fig.
2B-C). This represents a reduction in mobility from baseline levels that were 20 − 45%
higher, with the largest reduction in Bogotá (Fig 2D-E).
To what extent does policy severity impact changes in trip frequency and daily distance
traveled relative to baseline levels? We find no evidence for an effect on daily distance
traveled and very limited evidence (p = .11) for an effect on reduction in trip frequency.
If a municipality reduced the amount of residents allowed out daily by 10%, residents on
average decreased their trip frequency by only a meager additional 0.4% (controlling for
population, see SI 1B).
This finding - that more severe local restrictions do not result in proportional re-

7

A

B

C

D

E

Figure 3: Residents of larger, wealthier municipalities with more formalized labor experienced more pronounced reductions in daily travel distance traveled
during the lockdown period. A. Empirical (kernel density) municipality-level distributions of relative change in daily distance traveled from the basal period to lockdown.
Vertical dashed black (grey) lines represent municipality level median (quartile) estimates.
Municipalities are colored by policy severity (as in Fig. 2). B-E: Municipality population,
as well as economic complexity, GDP per capita, and labor formality are associated with
more pronounced relative change in daily distance traveled.

8

ductions in mobility - is unexpected and important, especially considering the breadth
of findings on the role of mobility restrictions in controlling infection spread (2, 3, 19).
We hypothesise that urban residents are more influenced by their economic capacity to
comply with rules than by the precise measures implemented locally. As a first step, we
investigate the role of urbanization (city size) in mobility reduction. An abundance of previous work has shown that city size is associated with economic prosperity - larger cities
boast higher wages and GDP per capita, and a higher skilled as well as more formalized
labor force working in more sophisticated sectors (13, 14, 20–23). These factors generally
improve residents’ capacity to work remotely and reduce their mobility (6, 8, 9, 17, 24).
We find that city size has a strong bearing on mobility reduction. Residents of larger
municipalities had more pronounced reductions in trip frequency - for every tenfold increase in municipal population, the average resident reduced their trip frequency by an additional 9.1%. Additionally, a tenfold increase in population was associated with a 17.1%
additional reduction in daily distance traveled relative to the basal period. Moreover,
when we aggregate to the municipality level, we find that city size explains substantial
variance in both cases with R2 = .43 for change in trip frequency (Fig. 2E) and R2 = .49
for relative change in daily distance traveled (Fig. 3B).
Hence, there is something about larger cities that enables residents to substantially
reduce mobility despite less severe mobility restrictions. We find that the median relative
change in daily distance traveled is significantly associated (p < .01) with municipalitylevel economic variables including GDP per capita and labor formality rate (Fig 3D-E),
defined as the ratio of formal workers to the working age population (14). We construct
a metric of industrial complexity (14, 25, 26), which is also, as expected, associated with
reduction in daily distance traveled. None, though, are better predictors than city size.

9

3

Intra-city variation by socioeconomic status

City size has a clear effect on mobility reduction, but - especially in Latin America - cities
themselves are characterized by high internal income inequality (27). Here we investigate
how this drives mobility reduction at an intra-city level. Specifically, we ask if wealthier
residents experienced higher levels of mobility reduction.
We use the stratum number assigned to each residential block, as a proxy for residents’
socioeconomic status (28). Stratum is a government-assigned designation corresponding
to local housing conditions and quality, and has been frequently used to characterize
socio-economic status (29,30). The stratum system encompasses 6 strata of progressively
increasing socioeconomic status, with 1 signifying poor quality, often informal housing
and 6 signifying the richest neighborhoods (stratum 6 is only present in select cities).
Most residents countrywide live in medium stratum (2-3) housing.
In order to examine the effects of stratum on mobility reduction, we calculate changes
in trip frequency and relative change in daily distance traveled as a function of stratum
for each municipality (Fig. 4A-D). In general, wealthier residents experienced more pronounced reductions in both daily distance traveled and in trip frequency - in line with similar trends observed in cities across Latin America, Europe, the USA, and Asia (6–9,17,24).
Pooling across municipalities, we find that a one standard deviation increase in stratum
was associated with a −1.82% decrease in ∆trip frequency (1 km) and a −3.82% decrease
in Rel. ∆ daily distance traveled (p < .01 in both cases, estimates represented by dashed
lines in Fig. 4E). The importance of stratum varies across municipalities - the effect of
stratum on ∆ trip frequency is significant (p < .05) in 15 out of 22 municipalities, and
on Rel. ∆ daily distance traveled is significant in 10 out of 22 municipalities (coefficient
estimates displayed in Fig. 4E).

10

A

C

E

-20%

-30%

-40%

-50%
B

D

-30%

-50%

-70%

-90%

Figure 4: Within municipalities, higher socioeconomic status was generally associated with more pronounced mobility reduction. A-B: Boxplot distributions of
residential change in trip frequency and daily distance traveled for varying stratum. C-D:
Municipality-level median estimates of change in trip frequency/daily distance traveled
for varying stratum (municipalities ordered by population). E: Municipality-level coefficient estimates for the effect of stratum on changes in trip frequency and daily distance
traveled (errorbars represent 95% confidence intervals). Dashed lines represent average
effects over all municipalities.

11

We have observed effects of socioeconomic inequality on mobility reduction at both
an inter-city (previous section) and intra-city level. However, we now ask - are intercity effects explained by differences in socioeconomic composition across cities? In other
words, is there some effect of city size that is not simply captured by stratum variation?
In order to disentangle these effects, we split each municipality into low (1 − 2) and high
(4 − 6) stratum subsets and examine the effect of city size on mobility reduction across
these subsets. For both groups, we find that increasing city size is associated with a
greater reduction in trip frequency and daily distance traveled. The effect is comparably
pronounced across low/high stratum groups - a tenfold increase in population is associated
(p < .01) with an additional 7.1%(low)/6.7% (high) reduction in ∆ trip frequency (1 km)
and an additional 14.3/22.5% reduction in Rel. ∆ daily distance traveled.
Overall, these findings underscore role of city size in mobility reduction. We find that
this effect is not limited to any socio-economic class in particular, but is instead consistent
across strata. In other words, both the city in which a person resides and the socioeconomic status of their own neighborhood influence their level of mobility reduction.

4

Disruptions to work commutes

Building on previous findings that show wealthier cities have more jobs that can be performed remotely (5, 31, 32), we investigate how city size and socioeconomic stratum are
linked to work commute disruptions. We examine whether (i) city size is linked to more
commute disruptions; and (ii) whether residents’ home/work stratum is linked to their
tendency to forego their commutes.
As is standard practice, we identify home-work commutes via persistent origin-destination
flows (33). We define the commute disruption rate as the % of flows that cease during
lockdown (see SI Section 1A/2 for details). As with trip frequency and distance traveled,
12

we find, as expected, that more commute flows are disrupted in larger cities (Fig. 5B).
For every tenfold increase in population, the municipality-level commute disruption rate
rises 18.1% (R2 = .47, p < .01), while policy severity has no significant effect.
A

B

C

Figure 5: Increasing effects of city size and socioeconomic stratum on commute
disruption rate. A: Effect of log(population) on estimated commute disruption rate
(errorbars represent standard errors, 95% confidence intervals for the OLS best fit line
are calculated via bootstrapping). B: Point estimates of low/high stratum subsample
estimates of commute disruption rate for the seven largest municipalities. C: Municipalitylevel average marginal effects of home stratum on the likelihood a user has their commute
disrupted, with point estimates/95% confidence intervals estimated via logistic regression.
Dashed vertical lines represent average effects across all municipalities.
Using a similar approach to that of the previous section, we examine whether higher
stratum residents have more disrupted commute patterns (Fig. 5B-C). In the largest 4
municipalities, we find evidence (p < .05) that increasing stratum is associated with higher
commute disruption probability. However, we only find significance at this level in only one
other municipality, suggesting home stratum may play a less significant role in commute
disruptions than on overall mobility reduction, particularly in smaller municipalities (the
pooled marginal effect is 1.6%, p < .01). In these cases, other factors such as the type or

13

location of work may also drive commute disruption.
While our data does not reveal the industry or occupation of commuters, we can distinguish workers according to where they work. Broadly, commuters to wealthier areas fall
into two groups: they might either work at more formalized, sophisticated firms or provide services to wealthier employers or residents. In the latter case, evidence from the US
points to faster and more pronounced drops in spending among wealthier classes during
the pandemic (34), corresponding to reduced demand for services in these areas. Here, we
examine whether the stratum of a commuter’s destination is linked to the likelihood that
they disrupt their commute. Specifically, we ask whether low stratum commuters experienced more commute disruptions when working in high stratum or commercial/industrial
areas.
As expected, we find that the likelihood that a commute is disrupted depends considerably on the destination stratum (Fig. 6). We find a significant (p < .05) effect of
destination stratum on the probability a commute is disrupted in 10 out of 22 municipalities, including 6 of the largest 7 municipalities. These results hold across the general
population as well as for the subset of low stratum (≤ 2) commuters (coefficient estimates
are displayed in Fig. 6A) - pooled marginal effects are quite similar for both cases (6.0%
for all commuters, 5.7% for low stratum residents, p < .01 in both cases). We see this
effect most clearly in Bogotá, where commutes terminating in stratum 5/6 are twice as
likely to be disrupted as commutes to stratum 5/6 (Fig. 4B). These results demonstrate
that both low and high income workers that commuted to high income areas were much
likelier to experience disrupted commutes.
Digging deeper into the characteristics of the commute destination, we use administrative formal employment data to identify commercial/industrial centers in Bogotá (Fig.
6C). These correspond to zones with at least 20, 000 formal jobs/km2 (35). Generally,
14

these centers include a range of socio-economic strata, and include the central business
district (Chico-Lago) and the government (La Candelaria). Controlling for commute distance, we find that commutes to these centers were on average 14.3% (p < .01) more likely
to be disrupted while a 1-stratum increase was associated with a 10.2% (p < .01) increase
in the probability a commute was disrupted (point estimates in Fig. 6D). As above, we
find comparable effects when limiting our commuter sample to low stratum residents.
Hence, we find that higher income workers - with more tele-workable occupations
- were more likely to discontinue their commutes. However, we also observe a sharp
lockdown effect for work in higher income and more commercial locations. While we
would certainly expect high income commuters to stay home, the evidence points towards
a tendency for lower income workers who work in high commercial locations (presumably
in service-oriented occupations) to also stay home. Therefore, we observe a lockdown
“trickle down” effect - cities with higher income and more formalized firms not only have
more commute disruptions for high income workers, but also for low income workers.
This effect culminates in larger cities having higher levels of both commute and mobility
disruption, trends that are consistent throughout our findings.

5

Discussion

Previous work has shown that lockdown policies are successful at reducing mobility and
disease caseloads, using data from Europe (3) and China (2). Here we consider whether
the severity of the policy in terms of the share of people allowed out per day is correlated
with the size of the reduction in mobility. We found, in accordance with the previous
literature, that all cities experienced reductions in urban mobility - but there is no statistical relationship between the severity of local lockdown rules and the degree of mobility
reduction. Larger, wealthier cities reduced mobility the most, even though they generally
15

B

C

Bogotá

80%

60%

Stratum

40%

Commutes interrupted

A

D

Formal
centers

Figure 6: Commutes terminating in wealthier areas and formal labor centers
were more likely to be disrupted. A: Marginal effects of destination stratum on the
likelihood a user has their commute disrupted across all detected commuters/in low stratum commuter subsamples (point estimates/95% confidence intervals estimated via logistic regression). B: Estimates of commute disruption rate in Bogotá for varying home/work
stratum. C: Census-block characterizations of socioeconomic stratum in Bogotá, with the
outlined regions representing formal employment centers - zones with at least 20,000 formal employees/km2 . D: Average marginal effects of commutes destination characteristics
on the likelihood a commute is disrupted in Bogotá.

16

imposed less severe mobility restrictions. Smaller cities, with more informal employment,
did not experience a comparable reduction.
While the signal linking city size and variables capturing local economic structure to
mobility reduction is strong, there are a number of other factors which likely played a
role. These include the degree of enforcement of the policy, the availability of economic
aid to workers and firms, population density, and the number of infections in the city. For
example, on a national level, the government provided cash transfers to informal workers
and families before and during the study period (36), in addition to a host of economic
relief measures (37,38). Future work might investigate further the role and distribution of
aid in policies aimed at mobility restriction. Additionally, residents of cities with a larger
caseloads early in the pandemic are likely to have been more willing to lockdown (39).
Although further investigation is needed, we expect to find that (as with GDP per capita,
formality rate and industrial complexity) these factors correlate with city size and are
thus consistent with our findings.
Our findings highlight the role of labor structure in cities’ ability to reduce mobility.
Less wealthy, often informal firms have less financial capacity to close operations. Workers
at these firms are thus incentivized to continue working despite mobility restrictions. The
example of Bogotá depicts this clearly - residents commuting to high income/formalized
work areas were as much as twice as likely to disrupt their commutes (as compared to
commutes to low income areas). This result is borne out even for workers from low income
residential areas, suggesting that firm closures in these higher income/formalized areas
affect both low and high income workers alike.
Our findings underscore the need for future policy measures to increase aid-based
measures alongside or even in place of mobility restrictions. A large share of workers
particularly in smaller cities - often informally employed and rarely in teleworkable occu17

pations - cannot work from home, and require substantial and sustained support. While
wealthy economies, particularly those in Europe, have developed historically unprecedented wage support schemes, the ability of lower and middle income countries to sustain
such schemes is limited. It may be possible to balance economic constraints under a ’circuit
break’ model (40), an emerging strategy that calls for (potentially repeated) short-term
but severe mobility restrictions in order to manage caseloads within a fixed health system
capacity.

References and Notes
1. S. Hsiang, et al., Nature 584, 262 (2020).
2. H. Fang, L. Wang, Y. Yang, Human mobility restrictions and the spread of the novel
coronavirus (2019-ncov) in china, Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research
(2020).
3. S. Flaxman, et al., Nature 584, 257 (2020).
4. M. Sostero, et al., Teleworkability and the covid-19 crisis: a new digital divide?, Tech.
rep., Joint Research Centre (Seville site) (2020).
5. M. Brussevich, E. Dabla-Norris, S. Khalid (2020).
6. G. Bonaccorsi, et al., Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 117, 15530
(2020).
7. S. P. Fraiberger, et al., arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.15195 (2020).
8. V. M. Carvalho, et al., Tracking the covid-19 crisis with high-resolution transaction
data, Tech. rep. (2020).
18

9. J. Valentino-DeVries, G. Dance, New York Times (2020).
10. S. Caul, Deaths involving covid-19 by local area and socioeconomic deprivation:
deaths occurring between 1 march and 31 july 2020, Tech. rep., UK Office for National
Statistics (2020).
11. C. H. Zhang, G. G. Schwartz, The Journal of Rural Health 36, 433 (2020).
12. T. Lancet, Lancet (London, England) 395, 1461 (2020).
13. G. Duranton, Journal of Regional Science 56, 210 (2016).
14. N. O’Clery, A. Gomez-Lievano, E. Lora, The path to labor formality: Urban agglomeration and the emergence of complex industries, Tech. rep., Center for International
Development at Harvard University (2016).
15. C. M. Peak, et al., International journal of epidemiology 47, 1562 (2018).
16. H. S. Badr, et al., The Lancet Infectious Diseases (2020).
17. N. Gozzi, et al., medRxiv (2020).
18. E. L. Glaeser, C. S. Gorback, S. J. Redding, How much does covid-19 increase with
mobility? evidence from new york and four other us cities, Tech. rep., National Bureau
of Economic Research (2020).
19. M. U. Kraemer, et al., Science 368, 493 (2020).
20. L. M. Bettencourt, J. Lobo, D. Helbing, C. Kühnert, G. B. West, Proceedings of the
national academy of sciences 104, 7301 (2007).
21. L. M. Bettencourt, J. Lobo, D. Strumsky, G. B. West, PloS one 5, e13541 (2010).
19

22. D. R. Davis, J. I. Dingel, Journal of International Economics 123, 103291 (2020).
23. J. Brinkman (2014).
24. J. A. Weill, M. Stigler, O. Deschenes, M. R. Springborn, Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences 117, 19658 (2020).
25. C. A. Hidalgo, R. Hausmann, Proceedings of the national academy of sciences 106,
10570 (2009).
26. C. A. Hidalgo, B. Klinger, A.-L. Barabási, R. Hausmann, Science 317, 482 (2007).
27. B. R. Roberts, International Journal of Urban and Regional Research 29, 110 (2005).
28. Departamento Administrativo Nacional de Estadı́stica (DANE), Censo nacional
de población y vivienda, https://www.dane.gov.co/index.php/en/estadisticas-portema/demografia-y-poblacion/censo-nacional-de-poblacion-y-vivenda-2018 (2020).
29. C. Medina, L. Morales, R. Bernal, M. Torero, Economia 7, 41 (2007).
30. L. Lotero, R. G. Hurtado, L. M. Florı́a, J. Gómez-Gardeñes, Royal Society open
science 3, 150654 (2016).
31. J. I. Dingel, B. Neiman, How many jobs can be done at home?, Tech. rep., National
Bureau of Economic Research (2020).
32. M. Hatayama, M. Viollaz, H. Winkler, World Bank Policy Research Working Paper
(2020).
33. T. Louail, et al., Nature communications 6, 1 (2015).

20

34. R. Chetty, J. N. Friedman, N. Hendren, M. Stepner, et al., How did covid-19 and
stabilization policies affect spending and employment? a new real-time economic
tracker based on private sector data, Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research (2020).
35. L. A. Guzman, D. Oviedo, J. P. Bocarejo, Cities 60, 202 (2017).
36. J. Symmes Cobb, Thomson Reuters Foundation (2020).
37. M. Ravallion, Pandemic policies in poor places, Tech. rep., Center for Global Development (2020).
38. M. Cárdenas, H. Martı́nez Beltrán, Covid-19 in colombia: Impact and policy responses, Tech. rep., Center for Global Development (2020).
39. J. J. Van Bavel, et al., Nature Human Behaviour pp. 1–12 (2020).
40. Summary of the effectiveness and harms of different non-pharmaceutical interventions,
Tech. rep., UK Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (2020).
41. The authors would like to thank in no particular order YY Ahn (Northwestern University), Mohsen Bahrami (MIT Media Lab), Morgan Frank (University of Pittsburgh), Eduardo Lora (Harvard University), Juan Camilo Chaparro (Universidad
EAFIT), Julian Cristia (Inter-American Development Bank), Jaime Alfredo BonetMorón (Banco de la República Colombia), and Carlos Alberto Medina-Durango (Banco
de la República Colombia) for helpful discussion. SH and NO acknowledge support
from the PEAK Urban programme, funded by UKRI’s Global Challenge Research
Fund, Grant Ref: ES/P011055/1.

21

