Virus spread versus contact tracing: two competing contagion processes
A. Reyna-Lara,1, 2 David Soriano-Paños,1, 2 Sergio Gómez,3 Clara Granell,1, 2, 3 Joan T.
Matamalas,4 Benjamin Steinegger,3 Alex Arenas,3, ∗ and Jesús Gómez-Gardeñes1, 2, 5, †

arXiv:2010.01867v2 [physics.soc-ph] 1 Feb 2021

1

Department of Condensed Matter Physics, University of Zaragoza, E-50009 Zaragoza, Spain
2
GOTHAM Lab – BIFI, University of Zaragoza, E-50018 Zaragoza, Spain
3
Departament d’Enginyeria Informàtica i Matemàtiques,
Universitat Rovira i Virgili, E-43007 Tarragona, Spain
4
Harvard Medical School & Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston MA 02115, USA
5
Center for Computational Social Science (CCSS), Kobe University, Kobe 657-8501, Japan
(Dated: February 3, 2021)

After the blockade that many nations suffered to stop the growth of the incidence curve of COVID-19 during
the first half of 2020, they face the challenge of resuming their social and economic activity. The rapid airborne
transmissibility of SARS-CoV-2, and the absence of a vaccine, calls for active containment measures to avoid the
propagation of transmission chains. The best strategy up to date, popularly known as Test-Track-Treat (TTT),
consist in testing the population for diagnosis, track the contacts of those infected, and treat by quarantine all
these cases. The dynamical process that better describes the combined action of the former mechanisms is that
of a contagion process that competes with the spread of the pathogen, cutting off potential contagion pathways.
Here we propose a compartmental model that couples the dynamics of the infection with the contact tracing and
isolation of cases. We develop an analytical expression for the effective case reproduction number Rc (t) that
reveals the role of contact tracing in the mitigation and suppression of the epidemics. We show that there is a
trade off between the infection propagation and the isolation of cases. If the isolation is limited to symptomatic
individuals only, the incidence curve can be flattened but not bended. However, if contact tracing is applied to
asymptomatic individuals too, the strategy can bend the curve and suppress the epidemics. Quantitative results
are dependent on the network topology. We quantify, the most important indicator of the effectiveness of contact
tracing, namely its capacity to reverse the increasing tendency of the epidemic curve, causing its bending.
PACS numbers: 89.20.-a, 89.75.Hc, 89.75.Kd

I.

INTRODUCTION

2020 has been a year marked by the irruption of COVID-19,
the worst pandemic humanity has suffered since the Spanish
Flu in 1918. From the first case reported in Wuhan on December 8 [1], as of February 2021, the disease has left more
than 100 million confirmed cases and more than 2.2 million
deaths worldwide [2]. The lack of antiviral prophylaxis, therapeutics, or vaccines to treat or prevent COVID-19 has put social, economic, and health systems under unprecedented strain
by engaging in prolonged lockdowns all over the world. Although confinement measures have been successful in bending the epidemic trajectory [3–5], countries face the challenge
of keeping the virus transmission under control while maintaining the usual socioeconomic activity [7].
The impact of the different control policies on the spread of
transmissible diseases becomes evident from the expression
of the effective reproductive number, R(t), that measures the
average number of contagions that an agent, infected at time
t, makes during its infectious period [8, 9]. This number depends on diverse epidemiological, demographical and social
aspects of the particular population but, in general grounds, it
can be expressed as the combination of four contributions:
R(t) = τ · k · β · ρS (t) ,

∗ Electronic
† Electronic

address: alexandre.arenas@urv.cat
address: gardenes@unizar.es

(1)

namely; the average duration τ of the infectious period, the
average number of contacts per unit time k, the probability of
infection per contact β, and the fraction of susceptible individuals in the population at time t, ρS (t). When this number takes values larger than 1 the number of new infections
will grow in time, whereas when R(t) < 1 the disease is
on decline and, keeping this trend in time, the number of
new infections will decrease until vanishing. Thus, one of
the major goals when facing an epidemic outbreak is to decrease the initial reproductive number to values below the epidemic threshold R(t) < 1 via either pharmaceutical or nonpharmaceutical interventions.
The existence of pharmaceutical measures such as a vaccine
will reach the goal by reducing the fraction of susceptibles to
a number below (τ · k · β)−1 . However, in the absence of
this possibility, non-pharmaceutical interventions must come
into play. This way, social-distancing [10, 11] and the use of
prophylactic measures [12, 13] (such as face masks and hands
hygiene) aim to reduce, the social contacts k and the disease
transmissibility β , respectively, to reach R(t) < 1. The degree of social distancing, and consequently the reduction of
our social contacts depend on the epidemic scenario. It can
range from strict closures when the incidence threatens the
capacity of health systems, thus requiring R(t)  1 values
to bend the epidemic curve, to moderate restrictions (such as
banning social gatherings) when incidence is small and social
activity coexists with a controlled transmission (R(t) . 1).
The application of social distancing when trying to recover
the usual socioeconomic activity involves a delicate tradeoff between increasing our sociality, k, while controlling the

2

FIG. 1: Flow diagram of the compartmental epidemic Model.
The epidemiological compartments are: susceptible (S), exposed
(E), presyntomatic (P ), infected asymptomatic (IA ), infected symptomatic (IS ), detected (D) and recovered (R). Arrows represent the
possible transitions between the different states.

transmission of a virus that takes advantage of our interactions
to spread. For this reason, pro-active control measures such
as Test-Treat-Track (TTT) are mandatory to reach the former balance and avoid future epidemic waves [14, 15]. This
strategy is based on the detection of symptomatic individuals,
isolating them, and, more importantly, trace the contacts that
these individuals have had in the recent past as they represent
potential infections before the index case has been detected. A
successful contact tracing stops the spread of the virus caused
by these secondary cases and hence reduces the average infectious period, τ , in Eq. (1) leading to a decrease of R(t).
A successful contact tracing requires a personalized and
exhaustive search of the contacts of each detected case, taking into account the complex and heterogeneous nature of
human relationships [16–19]. This arduous task, however,
becomes critical when, as in the case of SARS-CoV-2, presymptomatic and asymptomatic infections are abundant [20–
26]. Under these conditions, the symptomatic cases that are
detected have already infected some of their contacts and, in
addition, it is possible that a large fraction of their known infectees do not present symptoms during the entire infectious
period.

II.

CONTACT-TRACING AS A COMPETITIVE
CONTAGION PROCESS

The essential characteristics of contact tracing (termed CT
hereafter) can be captured by modeling it as a contagion process in which the infectious agents detected spread the possible identification of other positive cases through their social network. This process competes with the spread of the
pathogen itself and aims to suppress the transmission of the
virus by eliminating the active spreaders whose infection is related to the identified case. Unlike other competing processes
in which different viruses spread simultaneously in a population and interfere with the transmission of others [27–34],
here the cascade of CT identifications can only be activated
by the presence of the pathogen.

To incorporate the CT dynamics into a framework capturing the transmission of SARS-CoV-2 we first construct an epidemic model including 7 compartments (states): Susceptible
(S), Exposed (E), Pre-symptomatic (P ), Infectious asymptomatic (IA ), Infectious symptomatic (IS ), Detected (D), and
Removed (R). The transitions between these states are shown
in Fig.1 and explained as follows.
Susceptible (S) agents are healthy individuals who can
be infected by direct contact with Asymptomatic and Symptomatic Infectious agents with probability βA and βS respectively. When an S agent is infected, she converts into Exposed
(E) in which the individual displays no symptoms and is not
contagious. This state lasts for an average period of η −1 days.
After being in E, agents pass to the Pre-symptomatic state
(P ). In this state, no symptoms are observed but the individual
is already contagious, with contagion probability per contact
of βA . At this P stage, and without detection, the individual
lasts an average of α−1 days.
After the P stage, individuals can continue being asymptomatic (IA ) with some probability (1 − p) that is given by the
fraction of fully asymptomatic infections. Individuals in this
compartment share the same characteristics regarding infectivity and detectability as P . Without detection, an individual
lasts an average of µ−1 days in this compartment before entering the Removed state (R). The rest (a fraction p) of P agents
pass to be Symptomatic Infectious (IS ). This compartment is
characterized by an infectivity βS when contacting an S agent
and, as in the case of the IA compartment, and (average) of
µ−1 days before passing to R, if not detected before.
With the former ingredients, the model (SEP IS IA R) can
be viewed as a refined variant of the SEIR class in which
compartment I is split in three infectious states, P , IS and
IA to accommodate the specific contagion forms observed for
the dynamics of SARS-CoV-2 [41, 42]. This model can be
used as a framework for studying the spreading of SARSCoV-2 and to assess the impact of contention measures such
as social-distancing, prophylactic behavior or strict quarantines. However, to study the influence that detection of symptomatic cases has on the transmission dynamics and, more
importantly, to incorporate the possibility of tracing those infectious contacts of symptomatic individuals, a further, and
fundamental, compartment capturing those infectious agents
detected (D) is needed.
As shown in Fig. 1, compartment D can be reached by
agents in P , IS and IA states. First, those symptomatic infectious can be directly detected as they display symptoms,
this happens with probability δ, that is related to the average
time spanned from the onset of symptoms to the availability
of the test (e.g. 2 days would correspond to δ = 0.5). Once a
symptomatic agent is detected, CT is activated. However, the
possibility of tracing recent contacts is subject to the availability of information about the social activity of those detected.
Here we consider that a fraction f of subjects are equipped
with an application that record those acquaintances that have
installed it as well. Thus, those contacts of D individuals that
are in the P , IA , and IS states can transit to state D by means
of an infection-like process in which the infection probability
is equal to f 2 , i.e. the probability that both the detected indi-

3
Value
Description
Reference
Parameter
−1
η
1/2.5 day
Probabilty E → P
[35]
1/2.5 day−1 Probabilty P → IA , IS
[35]
α
p
0.65
Fraction of Symptomatic
[36]
µ
1/7 day−1 Probability IA , IS → R [13, 37]
TABLE I: Epidemiological parameters of the compartmental model.

vidual (in D) and the corresponding infectious contact (either
in P , or IA or IS ) are equipped with the tracking application.
Finally, any individual entering in D transits to Removed (R)
with a probability γ, i.e., the CT contagion-like process has
an effective infectious period of γ −1 days. In the following
we will set γ = 1 considering that, once an agent is detected,
the corresponding infectious contacts are immediately identified.
The complete model has 6 epidemiological parameters
(those of the SEP IS IA R model) and 3 additional ones, δ,
f , and γ, that characterize the CT contagion process triggered

by symptomatic detection. The values of the epidemiological
parameters are presented in Table I with the exception of βS
and βA that are assumed to be equal, βS = βA , and whose
value is taken so that the attack rate in the absence of detection, R∞ , is the same in all the networks analyzed. Having
fixed the epidemiological parameters, those corresponding to
detection are used to analyze the impact of CT on epidemics.

A.

Markovian dynamics

The dynamical evolution of the compartmental model can
be studied under a microscopic Markovian time-discrete formulation [38–40]. In this framework, the dynamical state of
a node i at time t is given by the probability of being suscepP
tible, ρSi (t), exposed, ρE
i (t), pre-symptomatic, ρi (t), infecIA
tious asymptomatic, ρi (t), infectious symptomatic, ρIi S (t),
R
detected, ρD
i (t), and recovered, ρi (t). The evolution of these
probabilities is then given by:

 S→E
R
ρEi (t + 1) = (1 − η)ρEi (t) + 1 − ρEi (t) − ρPi (t) − ρIiA (t) − ρIiS (t) − ρD
(t)
i (t) − ρi (t) Πi
ρPi (t
ρIiA (t
ρIiS (t
ρD
i (t
ρRi (t

+ 1) =
+ 1) =
+ 1) =
+ 1) =
+ 1) =

(1 − ΠP→D
(t))(1 − α)ρPi (t) + ηρEi (t)
i
(1 − ΠIiA →D (t))(1 − µ)ρIiA (t) + (1 − ΠP→D
(t))(1 − p)αρPi (t)
i
(1 − ΠIiS →D (t))(1 − µ)ρIiS (t) + (1 − ΠP→D
(t))pαρPi (t)
i
IS →D IS
(1 − γ)ρD
ρi (t) + ΠIiA →D ρIiA (t) + ΠP→D
(t)ρPi (t)
i (t) + Πi
i
IS →D
ρRi (t) + γρD
(t))ρIiS (t) + µ(1 − ΠIiA →D (t))ρIiA (t)
i (t) + µ(1 − Πi

where we have omitted the equation for ρSi (t) due to the normalization condition:
IA
IS
P
D
R
ρSi (t)+ρE
i (t)+ρi (t)+ρi (t)+ρi (t)+ρi (t)+ρi (t) = 1 .
(8)
In the former equations the quantities ΠS→E
(t), ΠP→D
(t),
i
i
ΠIiA →D (t) and ΠiIS →D (t) account for the probabilities that
an individual passes from Susceptible to Exposed, from Presymptomatic to Detected, from Infectious asymptomatic to
Detected, and from Infectious symptomatic to Detected respectively. Considering the adjacency matrix A capturing the
contacts between the nodes (Aij = 1 if i and j are connected
and Aij = 0 otherwise), these probabilities read:

ΠiS→E (t) = 1−

N
Y



1 − Aij βA

j=1

(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)

,

(7)

Note that in Eqs. (10)-(11) the probabilities of being detected,
ΠP→D
(t), ΠIiA →D (t) and ΠIiS →D (t), are calculated as 1 minus
i
the probability of the complement, i.e., the probability of not
being detected. In the first two cases, ΠP→D
(t) and ΠIiA →D (t),
i
the probability of the complement contains the product of the
probabilities of not being traced from any detected neighbor j,
(1 − Aij f 2 ρD
j (t)). In addition, the probability of the complement in ΠiIS →D (t) also considers the probability of not being
detected through symptomatic detection (1 − δ).

Although the equations above only give information about
the probability that a node i is in the Detected compartment
at each time, it is possible to construct the probability that a
given node i is detected at time t, either after showing symp
 toms, DS (t), or via contact tracing, DCT (t). Thus, the exIA
IS
P
i
i
ρj (t) + ρj (t) + βS ρj (t) ,
pected number of symptomatic detections at time t is:
(9)

ΠiP→D (t) = ΠIiA →D (t) = 1 −

N
Y


1 − Aij f 2 ρD
j (t) , (10)

j=1

ΠIiS →D (t) = 1 − (1 − δ)

N
Y
j=1


1 − Aij f 2 ρD
j (t) .

S

D (t) =

N
X
i=1

(11)

DiS (t)

=δ

N
X

ρIi S (t) ,

(12)

i=1

and the expected number of detections via CT at time t is:

4

DCT (t) =

N
X
i=1





N 
N

X
Y

IA →D
 .
DiCT (t) =
ρPi (t)ΠP→D
(t) + ρA
(t) + ρIi S (t) (1 − δ) 1 −
1 − Aij f 2 ρD
i
i (t)Πi
i (t)


i=1

j=1

(13)
This last expression captures the effects of network topology
on the success of CT strategies. Note that the expressions of
DS (t) and DCT (t) are not used as inputs for the Markovian
equations. On the contrary, they are obtained from the time
evolution of the individual probabilities associated to compartments P , IS , IA and D.
III.

SYMPTOMATIC DETECTION VERSUS CT

The solution of the former Markovian equations allows to
explore the performance of CT on any particular social network characterized by its adjacency matrix A in a fast and
accurate way. In Appendix A, we show the validity of these
equations by comparing with the results obtained through
mechanistic stochastic simulations of the compartmental dynamics. In the following, we will focus on three real proximity networks with different populations and social structures
in which data were obtained by means of face-to-face sensors
that capture interactions with a temporal resolution of 20 s.
In Table II we report the main structural descriptors of these
proximity networks. Although these networks can be represented as time-varying or weighted graphs, we created the
static unweighted network for each case. Particularly, for the
school network, we set a temporal window of 5 minutes as the
minimum interaction time to define a link between individuals
and focus our analysis on its giant component.
Once the contact networks are constructed from proximity
data we implement the compartmental model equipped with
the symptomatic and CT detection to unveil the effects of
these mechanisms on the spreading dynamics. In Fig. 2.ac we show the diagrams R∞ (δ, f ) for the three proximity
networks analyzed. In all the plots it becomes clear that the
sole implementation of symptomatic detection (f = 0) does
not lead to a dramatic decrease of the final attack rate. On
the contrary, even with a poor symptomatic detection (e.g.
δ = 0.2), the addition of CT with a moderate penetration
(e.g. f = 0.5) yields much lower attack rates than the case
with perfect symptomatic detection and no CT (i.e. δ = 1 and
Network
Hospital
Science Gallery
School

N <k>

75
410
784

30
13
60

r
Reference
-0.18076
[43]
0.22575
[44]
0.22814
[45]

TABLE II: Characterictics of the three proximity networks. For
each network we show the number of nodes N , the average degree
of the nodes hki, and the assortatitivity measured as the Pearson correlation between the degrees of adjacent nodes r. We also report the
reference were these networks where presented and analyzed.

f = 0).
We analyze the combined impact of CT and symptomatic
detection in panels (d)-(f) of the same Fig. 2. There we plot
the fraction of cases detected via CT with respect to the total
number of infectious cases identified:
P∞
DCT (t)
CT
P
F (δ, f ) = ∞ t=0
.
(14)
CT (t) + D S (t))
t=0 (D
In these plots we highlight the curve (orange) corresponding
to those values of δ and f that yield F CT = 0.5. Although the
partition between CT and symptomatic detections depends on
the precise network architecture, from the panels it becomes
clear that CT alone is not responsible of the large decrease
in the attack rate produced for large values of δ and f , but is
the combination of both mechanisms what allows the efficient
suppression of transmission chains.
A.

Microscopic differences: CT versus symptomatic detection

The last result is quite expected since CT cannot show up
alone, since it is triggered by symptomatic detections. However, from the panels (a)-(c) in Fig. 2 it is clear that symptomatic detection alone does not allow a significant decrease
of the epidemic impact but it needs the addition of CT policies. It is thus the combination of these two policies what
makes detection effective. However, although the number of
detections made with each of the two mechanisms is roughly
similar when reaching the maximum decrease of the attack
rate R∞ , not all the identified cases are equally useful to stop
the advance of the disease as we show below.
To shed light on the mechanisms behind the effectiveness
of CT we analyze the connectivity pattern of those cases detected by CT and symptomatic detection. To this aim, we construct the probability that a node of degree k has been detected
during the course of an epidemic by symptomatic and CT detection:
1
SD(k) =
Nk
CT (k) =

1
Nk

∞
X X

DiS (t) ,

(15)

DiCT (t) ,

(16)

i;| ki =k t=0
∞
X X
i;| ki =k t=0

where Nk is the total number of nodes with degree k.
In Fig. 3 we plot the functions SD(k) and CT (k) when
δ = 0.5 and f varies in the range f ∈ [0, 1], i.e., from no
CT to a situation in which CT is always possible. From panel
(a) it is clear that when no CT is at work (f = 0) the function SD(k) is an increasing function of the degree, i.e. the

5

FIG. 2: CT versus symptomatic detection in three proximity networks (top). The color and size of the nodes is proportional to their
connectivity, being the small (large) and yellow (blue) ones those vertices with the smallest (largest) degree. Panels (a)-(c) show the attack
rate, R∞ as a function of the quality of symptomatic δ and CT detection f . Panels (d)-(f) show the fraction of detected cases by CT, F CT .
We have highlighted the case F CT = 0.5 (orange line) signalling that symptomatic and CT detections identify the same number of cases. The
infectivity probability per contact (βS = βA = β) is chosen so that the attack rate in the absence of any kind of detection (δ = f = 0) is
R∞ = 0.9 for the three networks.

largest the connectivity of a node the more probable that it is
detected. This is clearly due to the high risk of infections of
those nodes with a large connectivity that, consequently, have
more probability of being at compartment IS and hence being
detected. However, as f increases the probability SD(k) becomes a non-monotonous function of k and displays a maximum at some degree class k ? . The reason behind this behavior
is the action of CT , that shows [see panel (b)] an increasing
pattern for CT (k) for any value of f > 0. As f increases
the identification of those infected nodes with the largest degrees, i.e. the super-spreaders, is progressively replaced by
CT in detriment of symptomatic detection. In fact, by comparing with the function SD(k) for f = 0, we notice that for
f = 0.2 CT already outperforms the ability of symptomatic
detection in the identification of super-spreaders. Moreover,
when f > 0.5 the probability that a super-spreader is detected
via CT is close to 1, pinpointing that the effectiveness of CT

is rooted on the identification and isolation of super-spreaders
that have been in contact with those symptomatic cases previously detected.

B.

Dynamical differences: Flattening vs Bending

An early identification of super-spreaders is key to achieve
an effective control of an outbreak. Super-spreaders can be
identified by symptomatic detection in the first stages of an
epidemic as they are usually exposed to a number of potential infections due to their large connectivity. However, symptomatic detection restricts its identification to those that display symptoms and, moreover, their identification always happens once after they have transited the P compartment, thus
provoking contagions in a number of neighbors prior to detection. On the contrary, CT allows catching super-spreaders at

6
vary f from 0 to 1. The result is that the epidemic curve is no
longer flattened but bent, i.e. CT is able to reverse the increasing tendency of the curve corresponding to f = 0. This bending occurs the sooner the larger the fraction f of individuals
adopting the CT application. To illustrate the bending action
of CT we show (blue impulses) the evolution of the number
of CT detections, DCT (t) [Eq. (12)], for the case f = 1. It is
clear that as soon as CT is triggered the increasing trend of the
epidemic curve is reversed leading to a successful mitigation.

1.

FIG. 3: Symptomatic detection and CT as a function of degree
k of the nodes. The panel shows the probability of being detected
via symptoms (a) and CT (b) as a function of the degree of the nodes
for the School proximity network.The curves correspond (from red
to blue) to f = 0, 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.5 and 1.

any infectious compartment, specially those in P , thus providing with an early suppression of super-spreading events. The
earliness of CT with respect to symptomatic detection is manifested in the progressive replacement in the identification of
large degree nodes as f increases observed in Fig. 3.
The early identification of super-spreaders provided by CT
is more evident when analyzing the time evolution of the epidemic curve when subjected either to symptomatic detection
or to CT. To monitor the effects that both detection mechanisms have on the epidemic trajectory we monitor in panels
(a) and (b) of Fig. 4 the time evolution of the number of new
contagions when symptomatic detection and CT are the only
detection mechanisms respectively. The number of new contagions that occur at a given time t, C(t), can be readily computed from the Markovian dynamics as:
C(t) =

N
X

ρSi (t)ΠS→E
(t) .
i

(17)

i=1

The first set of curves, panel (a), shows how symptomatic
detection changes the epidemic curve as δ varies from 0 to 1.
This plot shows that the sole action of symptomatic detection
causes the so-called flattening of the epidemic curve in which
the peak of the epidemic curve is delayed and decreased. This
flattening becomes more pronounced as δ increases, thus reducing progressively the final attack rate. On the other hand
the effect of CT, see panel (b), yields a qualitative different
scenario. In this case we set a very small degree of symptomatic detection δ = 0.05 to trigger the CT cascade, and

Effective case reproduction number Rc (t)

To shed more light on the qualitative differences between
CT and symptomatic detection, we can monitor the effective
case-reproductive number Rc (t) to analyze their respective
impact on the evolution of the infective power of nodes in
the network. Rc (t) is defined as the average number of secondary cases that a case infected at time step t will eventually
infect during her infectious period [46]. Here, an agent can
transit three infectious states, namely P and IS and IA , thus,
in general, the effective case-reproduction number would be:
Rc (t) = RcP (t) + p · RcIS (t) + (1 − p) · RcIA (t) ,

(18)

where Rc? (t) is the average number of infections made by an
agent infected at time t when staying at compartment ?. However, when CT is active, the time window associated to each
infectious compartment does depend on the instant state of the
system, and the former partition is not straightforward. In this
case, the calculation of Rc? (t) should be performed starting
from its general definition:
Rc (t) =

PN

S
S→E
(t − 1)Ii (t)
i=1 ρi (t − 1)Πi
PN S
S→E (t − 1)
ρ
(t
−
1)Π
i
i=1 i

(19)

where Ii (t) is the number of infections caused by agent i provided she has been infected at precise time t.
To calculate Ii (t) in a general way, we introduce the join
probabilities Pi (τE , τP , τA |t) and Pi (τE , τP , τS |t) that account for the probabilities that an agent i infected at time t
stays a time τE in the exposed compartment, a time τP in the
pre-symptomatic stage, and a time τA or τS in the infectious
asymptomatic or symptomatic stages respectively. Note that
these two probabilities does not depend on t and factorize,
Pi (τE , τP , τ? |t) = P(τE )P(τP )P(τ? ) ,

(20)

when the time interval in each compartment does not depend
on the state of the system, as it is the case when f = 0. The
general form of these conditional probabilities for any value
of δ and f probabilities is derived in Appendix B.
Once known the probabilities Pi (τE , τP , τS |t) and
Pi (τE , τP , τA |t), the average infections made by an individual i can be written as:

7

FIG. 4: Dynamical evolution of the epidemic trajectory under symptomatic detection and CT. Panels (a) and (b) show the evolution of the
new contagions when different degrees of symptomatic detection and CT are implemented, respectively. In panel (b) we also show (impulses)
the evolution for number of detected cases via CT when f = 1. The bottom panels, (c) and (d), show the evolution of Rc (t) corresponding to
the different epidemic curves shown above. The calculations are performed using the School proximity network.

Ii (t) = p

∞
∞ X
∞ X
X

Pi (τE , τP , τS |t)

τE =1 τP =1 τS =0

+ (1 − p)

∞
∞ X
∞ X
X
τE =1 τP =1 τA =0


N
E +τP X
 t+τX


Aij βA ρSj (s) +


+τP +τA X
N
t+τEX


s=t+τE +1

N
X

s=t+τE +τP +1 j=1

s=t+τE +1 j=1

Pi (τE , τP , τA |t)

t+τEX
+τP +τI

Aij βA ρSj (s)






Aij βI ρSj (s)


,

(21)



j=1

and the evolution of Rc (t) can be computed to illustrate the
qualitative differences between symptomatic detection and
CT.

the system in a kind of critical equilibrium that lasts as long
as there is a large enough fraction of susceptible individuals
to be infected.

In the bottom panels, (c) and (d), of Fig. 4 we show the
evolution of Rc (t) for the different epidemic curves shown in
panels (a) and (b). The evolution of Rc (t) when symptomatic
detection is at work shows the fingerprint of the flattening
effect observed in panel (a), i.e., the effective reproduction
number, while being smaller in the beginning of the epidemic,
slows down the decreasing trend as δ increases, thus reaching
Rc (t) = 1 at larger times. On the contrary, from panel (d) we
observe that the action of CT is the opposite: as f increases
the decreasing trend of Rc (t) is accelerated, thus achieving
Rc (t) = 1 much sooner than in the case without detection. It
is also remarkable that, in the case of large values of f , the
long term values of the effective reproductive number remain
Rc (t) . 1. This explains the situation shown in panel (b)
in which an almost-steady small number of new contagions
are observed after the epidemic curve is bent, thus providing
a large and slow discharge of new cases. This way, CT places

To round off, we can use the expression for Rc (t) to monitor the impact on the reproduction number of each degree
class. To this aim, we can define the case effective reproduction number of the nodes of degree k, Rck (t), as:
P
Rck (t)

=

(i |ki =k)

P

ρSi (t − 1)ΠS→E
(t − 1)Ii (t)
i

(i |ki =k)

ρSi (t − 1)ΠS→E
(t − 1)
i

.

(22)

Computing this expression for each degree class, we show in
Fig. 5 the evolution of Rck (t) when symptomatic detection
(δ = 1, f = 0) and CT (δ = 0.05, f = 1) are at work in panels (a) and (b) respectively. From these two plots it becomes
clear the fast drop of the infective potential of super-spreaders
under the action of CT compared to the case of symptomatic
detection.

8
Our results identify the importance of implementing CT in
addition to symptomatic detection. The most important indicator of the effectiveness of CT is its capacity to sharply reverse the increasing tendency of the original epidemic curve,
causing its bending. In contrast, the implementation of symptomatic detection, yields a softer modification to the epidemic
trajectory, known as flattening, in which the epidemic peak is
delayed and lowered.
The qualitative differences in the performance of CT and
symptomatic detection are rooted microscopically. We have
shown that CT allows an early detection of large degree infectious nodes, well before than symptomatic detection does.
This early identification of super-spreaders during their contagious cycle is fundamental to pre-empting the spread of the
virus, cut the newest transmission channels, and cause the
bending of the epidemic trajectory rather than its flattening.
In more general grounds, the advantage of CT to advance the,
often covert, transmission of SARS-CoV-2 lies in the use of
its same strategy: a fast propagation across our social fabric
taking advantage of its heterogeneous nature.
FIG. 5: Evolution of the case reproduction number for the different degree classes. The panels show the evolutions of probability
of Rck (t) for (a) symptomatic detection (δ = 1, f = 0) and (b) CT
(δ = 0.05, f = 1) for all the degree classes present in the School
proximity network. The curve in grey account for the points where
Rck (t) = 1.

IV.

CONCLUSIONS

The recent outbreaks of COVID-19 in many countries that
had already controlled the first epidemic wave during the first
months of 2020 show the need of efficient control measures.
These measures should allow the development of normal socioeconomic activity, while avoiding the deployment of epidemic waves that threaten the sustainability of health systems.
To achieve this former balance, actions aimed at eliminating local transmission chains should be implemented without
jeopardizing the normal functioning of societies. To this purpose, the tracking of suspicious contacts of identified cases is
key.
Here we have analyzed the effectiveness of CT by formulating its functioning as a secondary contagion dynamics that
is triggered by the identification of symptomatic individuals
and propagates as a detection wave. This way CT competes
with the spread of the pathogen eliminating potential transmission chains. This compartmental model has been analyzed
under a Markovian framework that nicely agrees with mechanistic simulations and allows a systematic study of particular
network architectures such as the proximity networks and the
analysis of microscopic dynamical patterns. Under this approach, we have been able to derive the evolution of the effective case reproductive number, an indicator that quantifies the
average number of secondary cases that a case will eventually
infect during her infectious period and, therefore, it allows to
monitor both the spread of diseases and the quality of the contention strategies implemented.

Apart from these findings the formalism presented here allows to understand and quantify the impact of CT strategies
in particular proximity networks that are critical to protect.
Examples of these networks include companies, hospitals and
schools to name a few. It also allows the possibility of designing modifications of these social structures in order to both decrease the impact of potential virus transmission and enhance
the efficiency of CT strategies.
The simple nature of the Markovian model has allowed to
analyze the importance of CT and the qualitative changes with
respect to symptomatic detection. However, the compartmental dynamics and the social structure can be expanded in order
to address the performance of CT on realistic scenarios. For
instance, here we assume that CT is implemented by means
of an application whose penetration is characterized by f .
Instead, direct contacts such as those within the household
or close acquaintances at workplaces can be directly tracked
without the need of digital tracing. This duality can be captured with the use of multiplex social structures in which usual
contacts are distinguished from casual ones. Also, here we
have not considered the waiting times associated to detection.
However, in many practical situations tests cannot be done
immediately and thus the waiting time cooperates with the infectious period of infectious acquaintances, since they are not
identified until the symptomatic case is confirmed. In addition, once confirmed, all the contacts of the detected agent are,
in principle, suspects of being infectious. In those situations
all the individuals are quarantined so that also Susceptible and
Exposed neighbors are also removed from the population together with those Presymptomatic, Asymptomatic and Symptomatic. Another limitation is the absence of directionality of
the model since here traced contacts can correspond to either
secondary (forward CT) or prior (backward CT) infections of
those detected cases, provided the traced cases are infective.
These and other features should be considered as extensions
of the model presented here.

9

FIG. 6: Validation of Markovian dynamics by stochastic simulations. Each panel shows the evolution of the occupation of each compartment as obtained from stochastic simulations (bands and points (median)) and the Markovian equations (lines). The network substrate is the
School proximity network and the detection parameters are set to δ = 0.1 for symptomatic detection, and f = 0.4 for CT.

Acknowledgments

APPENDIX A

A.R.L. acknowledges support from CONACYT. A.R.L.,
D.S.P. and J.G.G. acknowledge financial support from
MINECO and FEDER funds (grant FIS2017-87519-P) and
from the Departamento de Industria e Innovación del Gobierno de Aragón y Fondo Social Europeo (FENOL group E3620R). A.A., B.S. and S.G. acknowledge financial support from
Spanish MINECO (grant PGC2018-094754-B-C21), Generalitat de Catalunya (grant No. 2017SGR-896), and Universitat
Rovira i Virgili (grant No. 2019PFR-URV-B2-41). A.A. also
acknowledges support from Generalitat de Catalunya ICREA
Academia, and the James S. McDonnell Foundation (grant
#220020325). C.G. acknowledges financial support from Juan
de la Cierva-Formación (Ministerio de Ciencia, Innovación y
Universidades). B.S. acknowledges financial support from the
European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation program under the Marie Skłodowska-Curie grant agreement No.
713679 and from the Universitat Rovira i Virgili (URV).

To confirm the validity of the Markovian equations we
have compared the results obtained from these equations with
mechanistic stochastic simulations. In these simulations we
start by assigning the CT application randomly to a fraction
f of the agents. As initial condition we set a small fraction
(1%) of individuals in the E compartment while the rest of
the population is S. Then the stochastic dynamics is iterated
following, at each time step, the transition rules described in
Fig. 1. For each value of f and δ we make 103 realizations to
calculate the corresponding averages.
In Fig. 6 we compare the time evolution of the occupation
of each compartment given by the iteration of the Markovian
equations with the average evolution given by the different
realizations of the stochastic dynamics of the compartmental
model for δ = 0.1 and f = 0.4. We also plot, for each evolution, the 95% CI obtained from the pool of stochastic simulations. In all the cases the Markovian equation reproduces well
the trajectories obtained from mechanistic simulations, showing the accuracy of the Markovian framework used along the
manuscript.

10
APPENDIX B

Here we complete the derivation of the effective reproduction number Rc (t) from the Markovian equations. To this aim
we show the calculation of the probability that an individual i

infected at time t spend times τE , τP , and τS or τA in compartments E, P , and IA or IA respectively. Considering the
Markovian equations the probability for those transiting the
symptomatic phase is:

Pi (τE , τP , τS |t) = (1 − η)τE −1 η
×

+τP −1

 t+τEY


CT
δτS ,0 · ΠCT
(1 − α) 1 − ΠCT
i (t + τE + τP ) + (1 − δτS ,0 ) · α 1 − Πi (t + τE + τP )
i (s)
s=t+τE +1

(
×

δτS ,0 + (1 − δτS ,0 )



 
CT
× δ + (1 − δ) ΠCT
i (t + τT ) + 1 − Πi (t + τT ) µ

t+τE +τ
P +τS −1
Y

)


CT
(1 − µ)(1 − δ) 1 − Πi (s) (23)
,

s=t+τE +τP +1

while for those asymptomatic reads:
Pi (τE , τP , τA |t) = (1 − η)τE −1 η
"t+τ

E +τP −1

Y



CT
× δτA ,0 · ΠCT
i (t + τE + τP ) + (1 − δτA ,0 ) · α 1 − Πi (t + τE + τP )

#


CT
(1 − α) 1 − Πi (s)

s=t+τE +1

(
×

δτA ,0 + (1 − δτA ,0 )



ΠCT
i (t

+ τT ) + 1 −

ΠCT
i (t

 
+ τT ) µ

t+τE +τ
P +τA −1
Y

)


CT
(1 − µ) 1 − Πi (s)
, (24)

s=t+τE +τP +1

pose that CT is absent, so that ΠCT
i (t) = 0 ∀ t and i. Then
the conditional probabilities are identical for all the nodes:

where τT is defined as the total duration of the infectious
period of the infected agent, i.e. τT = τE + τP + τS for
symptomatic individuals and τT = τE + τP + τA for asymptomatic patients. In both expressions ΠCT
i (t) is the probabil→D
ity of being detected through CT and is equal to ΠP
(t) and
i
IA →D
Πi
(t) as written in Eq. (10).
Computing Eqs. (23) and (24) requires to save the time evolution along the epidemic trajectory of the following quantiS
ties: ΠCT
i (t) and ρi (t) for all the nodes (i = 1,...,N ). These
two sets of quantities, together with the evolution of the infection probabilities of each node ΠS→E
(t), allow us to obtain
i
the effective case-reproduction number, Rc (t) in Eq. (22).
To illustrate the validity of the former expressions, lets sup-

and the factorization of the two probabilities and their time
independence becomes clear.

[1] World Health Organization. Novel Coronavirus–China.
https://www.who.int/csr/don/12-january-2020-novelcoronavirus-china/en/ (2020).
[2] World
Health
Organization.
Coronavirus
disease
(COVID-2019)
situation
reports.
https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novel-coronavirus2019/situation-reports (2020).
[3] M. Chinazzi et al. The effect of travel restrictions on the spread
of the 2019 novel coronavirus (COVID-19) outbreak. Science
368, 395–400 (2020).

[4] G. Giordano, F. Blanchini, R. Bruno, P. Colaneri, A. Di Filippo,
A. Di Matteo, M. Colaneri. Modelling the COVID-19 epidemic
and implementation of population-wide interventions in Italy.
Nature Med. 26, 855–860 (2020).
[5] A. Arenas, W. Cota, J. Gómez-Gardeñes, S. Gómez, C. Granell,
J.T. Matamalas, D. Soriano-Paños, and B. Steinegger. A mathematical model for the spatiotemporal epidemic spreading of
COVID19. Phys. Rev. X 10, 041055 (2020).
[6] H.C. Chen, Y. Zhou, L. Hua, J. Yuan, S. He, Y. Guo, S. Zhang,
Q. Jia, C. Zhao C. The effectiveness of quarantine of Wuhan

P(τE , τP , τS |t) = [δ + (1 − δ)µ] (1 − µ)τS −1 (1 − δ)τS −1
× α(1 − α)τP −1 (1 − η)τE −1 η ,
(25)
and
P(τE , τP , τA |t) = µ(1 − µ)τA −1 α(1 − α)τP −1
× (1 − η)τE −1 η ,
(26)

11

[7]

[8]
[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]

[21]

[22]

[23]

city against the Corona Virus Disease 2019 (COVID-19): A
well-mixed SEIR model analysis. J. Med. Virol. 92, 841–848
(2020).
L. López, and X. Rodó. The end of social confinement and
COVID-19 re-emergence risk. Nature Hum. Behav 4, 746–755
(2020).
M. J, Keeling, P. Rohani. Modeling infectious diseases in humans and animals. (Princeton University Press, 2011).
G. Chowell, J.M. Hyman, L.M.A. Bettencourt, and C. CastilloChavez. Mathematical and Statistical Estimation Approaches
in Epidemiology (Springer, Berlin, 2009).
K. Premm, Y. Liu, T.W. Russel, A.J. Kucharski, R.M. Eggo, and
N. Davies. The effect of control strategies to reduce social mixing on outcomes of the COVID-19 epidemic in Wuhan, China:
a modelling study. Lancet Public Health 5, e261 (2020).
P. Block, M. Hoffman, I.J. Raabe, J.B. Dowd, C. Rahal, R.
Kashyap, and M.C. Mills. Social network-based distancing
strategies to flatten the COVID-19 curve in a post-lockdown
world. Nature Hum. Behav. 4, 588–596 (2020).
S.E. Eikenberry, M. Mancuso, E. Iboi, T. Phan, K. Eikenberry,
Y. Kuang, E. Kostelich, and A.B. Gumel. To mask or not to
mask: Modeling the potential for face mask use by the general
public to curtail the COVID-19 pandemic. Infect. Dis. Model.
5, 293–308 (2020).
R.O.J.H. Stutt, R. Retkute, M. Bradley, Ch.A. Gilligan, and
J. Colvin. A modelling framework to assess the likely effectiveness of facemasks in combination with ’lock-down’ in
managingn the COVID-19 pandemic. Proc. Roy. Soc. A 476,
20200376 (2020).
C.M. Peak, L.M. Childs, Y.H. Grad, and C.O. Buckee. Comparing nonpharmaceutical interventions for containing emerging epidemics. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci (USA) 114, 4023 (2017).
J.O. LLoyd-Smith, A.P. Galvani, and W.M. Getz. Curtailing
transmission of severe acute respiratory syndrome within a
community ad its hospital. Proc. Roy. Soc. Lond. B 270,1979
(2003).
M. Serafino et al. Superspreading k-cores at the center of COVID-19 pandemic persistence. medRxiv
2020.08.12.20173476 (2020).
S. Kojaku, L. Hébert-Dufresne, and Y. Y. Ahn. The effectiveness of contact tracing in heterogeneous networks.
arXiv:2005.02362 (2020).
G. Bianconi, H. Sun, G. Rapisardi, and A. Arenas. A messagepassing approach to epidemic tracing and mitigation with apps.
arXiv:2007.05277 (2020).
A. Barrat, C. Cattuto, M. Kivelä, S. Lehmann and J.
Saramäki. Effect of manual and digital contact tracing on
COVID-19 outbreaks: a study on empirical contact data.
medRxiv:2020.07.24.20159947 (2020).
M.J. Keeling, T.D. Hollingsworth, and J.M. Read. The efficacy
of contact tracing for the containment of the 2019 novel coronavirus (COVID-19). J. Epidemiol. Community Health 74, 861–
866 (2020).
J.A. Firth, J. Hellewell, P. Klepac, S. Kissler, CMMID COVID19 Working Group, A.J. Kucharski, and L.G. Spurgin. Using
a real-world network to model localised COVID-19 control
strategies. Nature Medicine 26, 1616–1622 (2020).
J. Helewell, S. Abbott, A. Gimma, N.I. Bosse, C.I. Jarvis, T.W.
Russell, J.D. Munday, A.J. Kucharski, W.J. Edmunds, CMMID
COVID-19 Working Group, S. Funk, and R.M. Eggo. Feasibility of controlling COVID-19 outbreaks by isolation of cases
and contacts. Lancet Global Health 8, e488 (2020).
M.E. Kretzschmar, G. Rozhnova, M.C.J. Bootsma, M. van
Boven, J.H.H.M. van de Wijgert, and M.J.M. Bonten. Impact of

[24]

[25]

[26]

[27]
[28]

[29]
[30]

[31]
[32]
[33]

[34]

[35]

[36]

[37]

[38]

[39]

[40]

[41]
[42]
[43]

delays on effectiveness of contact tracing strategies for COVID19: a modelling studies. Lancet Public Health 5, e452 (2020).
C.M. Peak, R. Kahn, Y.H. Grad, L.M. Childs, R. Li, M. Lipsitch, and C.O. Buckee. Individual quarantine versus active
monitoring of contacts for the mitigation of COVID-19: a modelling study. Lancet Infectious Diseases 20, 1025–1033 (2020).
A. J Kucharski, P. Klepac, A.J.K. Conlan, S.M. Kissler, M.L.
Tang, H. Fry, J.R. Gog, W.J. Edmunds, and CMMID COVID19 working group. Effectiveness of isolation, testing, contact
tracing, and physical distancing on reducing the transmission
of SARS-CoV-2 in different settings: a mathematical modelling
study. Lancet Infectious Diseases 20, 1151–1160 (2020).
A. Aleta, D. Martı́n-Corral, A. Pastore y Piontti, M. Ajelli,
M. Litvinova, M. Chinazzi, N.E. Dean, M.E. Halloran, I.M.
Longini Jr, S. Merler, A. Pentland, A. Vespignani, E. Moro
and Y. Moreno. Modelling the impact of testing, contact tracing
and household quarantine on second waves of COVID-19. Nat.
Hum. Behav. 4, 964–971 (2020).
B. Karrer and M.E.J. Newman. Competing epidemics on complex networks. Phys. Rev. E 84, 036106 (2011).
C. Granell, S. Gómez, and A. Arenas, Dynamical Interplay between Awareness and Epidemic Spreading in Multiplex Networks. Phys. Rev. Lett. 111, 128701 (2013).
J. Sanz, Ch.-Y. Xia, S. Meloni, and Y. Moreno. Dynamics of
Interacting Diseases. Phys. Rev. X 4, 041005 (2014).
F.D. Sahneh, and C. Scoglio. Competitive epidemic spreading
over arbitrary multilayer networks. Phys. Rev. E 89, 062817
(2014).
O. Kogan et al. Two-strain competition in quasineutral stochastic disease dynamics. Phys. Rev. E 90, 042149 (2014).
C. Poletto et al. Characterising two-pathogen competition in
spatially structured environments. Sci. Rep. 5, 7895 (2015).
L. Hébert-Dufresne, and B.M. Althouse. Complex dynamics
of synergistic coinfections on realistically clustered networks.
Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. (USA) 112, 10551–10556 (2015).
D. Soriano-Paños, F. Ghanbarnejad, S. Meloni, J. GómezGardeñes. Markovian approach to tackle the interaction of simultaneous diseases. Phys. Rev. E 100, 062308 (2019).
E.H.Y. Lau and G.M. Leung. Reply to: Is presymptomatic
spread a major contributor to COVID-19 transmission? Nat.
Med. (2020).
COVID-19
Pandemic
Planning
Scenarios,
CDC.
https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/hcp/planningscenarios.html (Accessed on July 1, 2020).
K.K.W. To et al. Temporal profiles of viral load in posterior
oropharyngeal saliva samples and serum antibody responses
during infection by SARS-CoV-2: an observational cohort
study, The Lancet Infectious Diseases 5, 565 (2020).
S. Gómez, A. Arenas, J. Borge-Holthoefer, S. Meloni, and
Y. Moreno. Discrete-time Markov chain approach to contact
based diseases spreading in complex networks. EPL 89, 38009
(2010).
B. Guerra and J. Gómez-Gardeñes. Annealed and mean-field
formulations of disease dynamics on static and adaptive networks. Phys. Rev. E 82, 035101 (2010).
S. Gómez, J. Gómez-Gardeñes, Y. Moreno, and A. Arenas.
Nonperturbative heterogeneous mean-field approach to epidemic spreading in complex networks. Phys. Rev. E 84, 036105
(2011).
E. Estrada. COVID-19 and SARS-CoV-2. Modeling the
present, looking at the future. Phys. Rep. 869, 1–51(2020).
A. Vespignani, H. Tian, C. Dye, et al. Modelling COVID-19.
Nature Rev. Phys. 2, 279–281 (2020).
P. Vanhems, A. Barrat, C. Cattuto, J.F. Pinton, N. Khanafer, C.

12
Règis, B.A. Kim, B. Comte, and N. Voirin. Estimating potential
infection transmission routes in hospital wards using wearable
proximity sensors. PloS One 8, no. 9, e73970 (2013).
[44] L. Isella, J. Stehlé, A. Barrat, C. Cattuto, J.F. Pinton, and W.
Van den Broeck, What’s in a crowd? Analysis of face-to-face
behavioral networks. J. Theo. Biol. 271, 166–180 (2011).
[45] M. Salathé, M. Kazandjieva, J.W. Lee, P. Levis , M.W. Feldman, J.H. Jones. A high-resolution human contact network for
infectious disease transmission. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. (USA)
107, 22020 (2010).
[46] A. Cori, N.M. Ferguson, C. Fraser, and S. Cauchemez, A New
Framework and Software to Estimate Time-Varying Reproduction Numbers During Epidemics Am. J. Epidemiol. 178, 1505–
1512 (2013).

