Multiscale characteristics of the emerging global
cryptocurrency market
Marcin Wątoreka,b,∗, Stanisław Drożdża,b,∗∗, Jarosław Kwapieńa , Ludovico Minatia ,
Paweł Oświęcimkaa,c , Marek Stanuszekb

arXiv:2010.15403v1 [q-fin.ST] 29 Oct 2020

a

Complex Systems Theory Department, Institute of Nuclear Physics, Polish Academy of Sciences,
ul. Radzikowskiego 152, 31-342 Kraków, Poland
b
Faculty of Computer Science and Telecommunication, Cracow University of Technology,
ul. Warszawska 24, 31-155 Kraków, Poland
c
Faculty of Physics, Astronomy and Applied Computer Science, Jagiellonian University, ul.
Łojasiewicza 11, 30-348 Kraków, Poland

Abstract
Modern financial markets are characterized by a rapid flow of information, a
vast number of participants having diversified investment horizons, and multiple
feedback mechanisms, which collectively lead to the emergence of complex phenomena, for example speculative bubbles or crashes. As such, they are considered as
one of the most complex systems known. Numerous studies have illuminated stylized facts, also called complexity characteristics, which are observed across the vast
majority of financial markets. These include the so-called “fat tails” of the returns
distribution, volatility clustering, the “long memory”, strong stochasticity alongside
non-linear correlations, persistence, and the effects resembling fractality and even
multifractality.
The striking development of the cryptocurrency market over the last few years
– from being entirely peripheral to capitalizing at the level of an intermediatesize stock exchange – provides a unique opportunity to observe its evolution in a
short period. The availability of high-frequency data allows conducting advanced
statistical analysis of fluctuations on cryptocurrency exchanges right from their birth
up to the present day. This opens a window that allows quantifying the evolutionary
changes in the complexity characteristics which accompany market emergence and
maturation. The purpose of the present review, then, is to examine the properties
of the cryptocurrency market and the associated phenomena. The aim is to clarify
to what extent, after such an impetuous development, the characteristics of the
complexity of exchange rates on the cryptocurrency market have become similar to
traditional and mature markets, such as stocks, bonds, commodities or currencies.
The review introduces the history of cryptocurrencies, offering a description of
the blockchain technology behind them. Differences between cryptocurrencies and
the exchanges on which they are traded have been consistently shown. The central
part of the review surveys the analysis of cryptocurrency price changes on various
platforms. The statistical properties of the fluctuations in the cryptocurrency market have been compared to the traditional markets. With the help of the latest
statistical physics methods, namely, the multifractal cross-correlation analysis and
∗
∗∗

marcin.watorek@pk.edu.pl
stanislaw.drozdz@ifj.edu.pl

Preprint submitted to Physics Reports

October 30, 2020

the q-dependent detrended cross-correlation coefficient, the non-linear correlations
and multiscale characteristics of the cryptocurrency market are analyzed. In the
last part of this paper, through applying matrix and network formalisms, the coevolution of the correlation structure among the 100 cryptocurrencies having the
largest capitalization is retraced. The detailed topology of cryptocurrency network
on the Binance platform from bitcoin perspective is also considered. Finally, an
interesting observation on the Covid-19 pandemic impact on the cryptocurrency
market is presented and discussed: recently we have witnessed a “phase transition”
of the cryptocurrencies from being a hedge opportunity for the investors fleeing
the traditional markets to become a part of the global market that is substantially
coupled to the traditional financial instruments like the currencies, stocks, and commodities.
The main contribution is an extensive demonstration that, fuelled by the increased transaction frequency, turnover, and the number of participants, structural
self-organization in the cryptocurrency markets has caused the same to attain complexity characteristics that are nearly indistinguishable from the Forex market at the
level of individual time-series. However, the cross-correlations between the exchange
rates on cryptocurrency platforms differ from it. The cryptocurrency market is less
synchronized and the information flows more slowly, which results in more frequent
arbitrage opportunities. The methodology used in the review allows the latter to
be detected, and lead-lag relationships to be discovered. Hypothetically, the methods for describing correlations and hierarchical relationships between exchange rates
presented in this review could be used to construct investment portfolios and reduce
exposure to risk. A new investment asset class appears to be dawning, wherein the
bitcoin assumes the role of the natural base currency to trade.
Keywords: Cryptocurrencies, Complexity measures, Cross-correations, Fractals,
Multiscaling, Complex networks, Lead-lag effect

2

Contents
1 Introduction

1

2 The emergence and technology of cryptocurrencies
3
2.1 History: from barter through the blockchain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
2.2 Core technology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
2.2.1 The network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
2.2.2 Methods for attaining network-wide consensus . . . . . . . . . 11
2.3 Cryptoassets and diversified applications of the blockchain technology 12
2.4 Cryptocurrency trading . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3 Statistical properties of fluctuations
3.1 Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.2 Average inter-transaction time . . .
3.3 Fluctuation distributions . . . . . .
3.4 Temporal autocorrelations . . . . .

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

4 Multiscale correlations
4.1 Detrending based multifractal methodology . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.1.1 MFCCA as a generalization of MFDFA and DCCA . . . . .
4.1.2 Detrended cross-correlation coefficient . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.1.3 Relationship between λ(q) and ρ(q, s) . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.2 Analysis of the Hurst exponent in the cryptocurrency market . . . .
4.3 Multiscaling of the exchange rates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.3.1 Temporal evolution of the multiscale autocorrelations . . . .
4.3.2 Multiscale characteristics for currencies and cryptocurrencies

.
.
.
.

18
18
19
21
25

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

29
30
31
33
34
35
37
37
40

.
.
.
.
.
.

44
44
49
50
58
63
67

5 Multiscale cross-correlations
5.1 Multiscale cross-correlations for the BTC and ETH . . . . . . . . .
5.2 Multiscale cross-correlations on the different trading platforms . . .
5.2.1 Intra-platform multiscale cross-correlations . . . . . . . . . .
5.2.2 Inter-platform multiscale cross-correlations . . . . . . . . . .
5.2.3 Arbitrage on the cryptocurrency market . . . . . . . . . . .
5.3 Multiscale cross-correlations and triangular arbitrage on Forex . . .
5.4 COVID-19 impact on multiscale cross-correlations between the cryptocurrency market and traditional markets . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

. 73

6 Correlation matrix and network analysis of cross-correlations
6.1 Correlation matrix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6.1.1 Correlation matrix elements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6.1.2 Correlation matrix eigenvalues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6.1.3 The largest eigenvalue for various base currencies . . . . . .
6.1.4 Quasi-idempotence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6.1.5 Evolution of the market cross-correlation structure . . . . .
6.2 Minimal spanning tree representation of the cryptocurrency market
6.3 The largest eigenvalue vs. MST maximum node degree . . . . . . .
6.4 Cryptocurrency network topology on Binance . . . . . . . . . . . .

78
79
80
80
82
87
87
90
94
95

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

7 Summary and conclusions

99

A
Full names and statistical properties of cryptocurrencies from Binance and Kraken
103
B
Cap
C

List of 100 cryptocurrency names from CoinMarket110
List of 94 cryptocurrency names from Binance

111

1. Introduction
Modern financial markets are characterized by a rapid flow of information. There
is a huge number of transactions between market participants with different investment horizons. There are pension funds, for those time scale is years, and at the
same time specialized algorithms operating at the level of seconds or even milliseconds (high-frequency trading). The market behaviour is the result of various
influencing factors, ranging from economic data, results of companies, interventions
of central banks, poll and referendum results, individual tweets of high-ranking people, and mutual interactions between participants. Through feedback, this leads to
critical-like phenomena such as speculative bubbles or crashes. This happens often
in hours or even minutes – the so-called “flash crashes”. These features undoubtedly
fit into the characteristics of complex systems, such as a large number of elements,
nonlinear interactions, structural self-organization, and emergent phenomena.
The first quantitative research on financial markets was the subject of Louis
Bachelier’s work [1], in which he derived a formula for option price based on cumulative distribution function (CDF) of a stochastic process now called the Wiener process. Later Benoît Mandelbrot’s works turned out to be a groundbreaking achievement [2]. While examining cotton price fluctuations, he observed that, contrary to
wide belief, their probability distribution function (PDF) is characterized by heavy,
non-Gaussian tails. Mandelbrot was also the first to notice a fractal structure of
stock price fluctuations.
More than a quarter century ago, statistical physicists started their serious research in financial markets, which led to an outburst of a new discipline – econophysics [3, 4]. Numerous studies carried out since then allowed researchers for a
better understanding of the mechanisms governing various phenomena on both the
macroscopic level (like speculative bubble formation, market crashes, asset crosscorrelations, nonlinear autocorrelations, portfolio evolution, etc.) and the microscopic level (order book properties, efficacy of investing strategies, price formation,
etc.). Along with the understanding, new models have been proposed that better
describe and predict market behaviour and practical trading algorithms have been
developed and applied especially in high-frequency trading.
All types of markets have been a subject of research since the beginning of
econophysics: stock markets [5, 6, 7, 8], commodity markets [9, 10, 11], option and
future contract markets [12, 13, 14], bond markets [15, 16, 17], real-estate markets [18, 19, 20], as well as the foreign currency market (Forex) [21, 22, 23]. Unlike
typical complex systems studied by experimental physicists, these markets offer good
quality data with minimum systematic errors, which is one of the reasons why so
much attention they attract. However, there is an important issue that is inherently
associated with all the above mentioned markets: they have already been existing
for a long time before they become a subject of research. Therefore, we cannot
investigate their evolution since their origin. Nevertheless, more or less a decade
ago a brand new market was established – a cryptocurrency market, which offers
precisely what the other markets lack – a possibility of observing their structural
self-organization process from the very beginning to a rather mature form in a short
period of time. A principal question is to what extent, after such dynamic development, complexity characteristics of the cryptocurrency market are similar to those
of traditional markets, especially Forex.
The first cryptocurrency - Bitcoin (BTC) - was proposed in 2008 by a person
1

or group of people under a nickname Satoshi Nakamoto [24]. The date of this new
concept emergence does not seem to be accidental, because it is correlated with an
epicenter of the global financial crisis of 2008-2010. In order to mitigate its effects,
the central banks began to increase the monetary base (“printing money”) massively,
which weakened trust in the traditional fiat currencies. The bitcoin protocol was
based on a peer-to-peer network and the previously known public and private key
cryptographic techniques together with a new consensus mechanism called “Proof
of Work”. The idea behind bitcoin was to provide, for the first time in human
history, a tool that would allow people anywhere to trust each other and carry
out transactions via Internet without a central management institution. Instead
of the current confidence in the state/central banks, confidence in technology was
proposed.
The first widely recognized platform offering BTC-to-fiat-currency exchange was
Mt. Gox founded in Feb 2011. Since then a spectacular development of the cryptocurrency market has occurred. There are already 3,600 different cryptocurrencies
traded on 350 platforms with nearly 30,000 cryptocurrency pairs listed. Current
capitalization of the entire market is about 350 billion USD (Oct 2020 [25]). It increased rapidly in 2017 during a speculative bubble referred to as ICO-mania [26, 27]
reaching over 800 billion USD in the beginning of 2018. BTC valuation on some Korean platforms was even 20 000 USD. Currently, the market is highly decentralized
with the same cryptocurrency pairs listed on many platforms. There is no single
price to refer to unlike that provided by Reuters on Forex. Only for BTC there are
quoted future contracts launched in Dec 2017 on the CME group [28]. Another characteristic property is that cryptocurrency transactions are most often made through
the platforms in contrast to Forex with its over-the-counter market.
Aim of this work is to review the available results on the cryptocurrency market
obtained with various methods of statistical physics with the multifractal formalism and the network approach in particular. Our work sketches briefly history of
the cryptocurrency introduction (Sect. 2.1) and describes the blockchain technology
standing behind them (Sect. 2.2), but its main part presents a review of the most
important properties of the cryptocurrency price fluctuations. Price return distributions, autocorrelations, and inter-transaction times of cryptocurrency exchange
rates are compared with their counterparts in Forex (Sect. 3). Non-linear auto- and
cross-correlations together with multifractal-like characteristics on the cryptocurrency market are then described. Among others, it is shown that PDF/CDF form,
autocorrelation functions, Hurst exponents, and multiscale properties depend on
trading frequency (Sect. 4). Cross-correlations among the cryptocurrency exchange
rate pairs within one trading platform and between two platforms, as well as between the cryptocurrency platforms and Forex are also discussed (Sect. 5). Triangle
arbitrage effects are a subject of Sect. 5.2.3. Latest Covid-19 pandemic impact on
correlations between cryptocurrencies and traditional financial markets is covered
in Sect. 5.4. The last part of this review discusses results of a network approach
(Sect. 6). It is shown that, currently, BTC is a natural base cryptocurrency for other
cryptocurrencies.

2

2. The emergence and technology of cryptocurrencies
2.1. History: from barter through the blockchain
Human history has been paced by discrete events that shaped its course through
discontinuously accelerating development. Without question, one of these events is
the emergence of money in the form of standardized coins, which were introduced in
Lydia around 600 years BC. This first generation of currency shaped Mediterranean
culture in many ways [29], and spearheaded a continuous increase in trade exchanges.
Merchants no longer had to resort to barter, good for good, or service for service.
The second generation was paper money, which appeared in the Renaissance. It was
introduced by Italian banks and subsequently taken over by the established national
banks. The invention of banking and paper money disrupted the status quo of the
feudal systems, by strengthening the nation-states which had the power to issue it.
From this point onwards, the possibility of modulating the money supply upwards
or downwards was easily available, eventually giving rise to modern capitalism [29].
The 20th century brought the appearance of electronic transactions, which further
accelerated the circulation of currency throughout the economy, boosting growth.
Crucially, paper and electronic money caused a total decoupling of fiat currencies
from their fundamental value. After the collapse of the Bretton Woods system in
1971, exchange rates ceased to be linked to gold and based on trust in the state.
From that point onwards, fiat currencies systematically lost their value, as shown
for the example of the US dollar in Fig. 1. Moreover, since breaking with gold as a
reference, the number of USD in circulation has kept increasing systematically, as
visible in Fig. 2.
Currently, central banks can easily increase the supply of currency without any
physical printing. After the financial crisis of the year 2008, all the major central
banks significantly expanded their monetary base through quantitative easing programs (QE), as visualized in Fig. 2. Incidentally, around the same time, a radically
new financial asset appeared. That was the first cryptocurrency, the Bitcoin [24].
The underlying revolutionary idea was to combine existing technologies in a novel
way, namely asymmetric cryptography, together with a distributed database having
a new “Proof of Work” consensus mechanism into a decentralized, secure register
(the distributed ledger technology, DLT) blockchain [31].
The intention is that cryptocurrencies are not subjugated to any institution or
government; rather, they are based on trust in technological infrastructure. They allow sending financial resources anywhere in the world with almost zero latency. The
network users themselves provide the authentication mechanism. The cryptocurrency concept combines the advantages of cash, namely the transaction anonymity,
with the speed and convenience of electronic transactions. Importantly, unlike traditional currencies, the Bitcoin by design has a built-in supply limitation mechanism,
which helps prevent its loss of value.
Initially, the Bitcoin seemed to be only a technological curiosity, and there was
no organized trade. Individual transactions for exchanging real goods via on-line
discussion groups were described, such as buying two pizzas in May 2010 for 10,000
BTC [32]. However, the innovative idea soon began diffusing outside its original
circle of computer geeks, extending towards the broader financial sector and, eventually, by virtue of the anonymity, also to criminal circles. The first widely recognized
exchange, which enabled bitcoins to be traded for traditional currencies, Mt.Gox,
was launched in July 2010. Soon after, the first on-line black market, Silk Road,
3

10
2

×10

Index 1982=100

8

6

4

2

0

1915 1925 1935 1945 1955 1965 1975 1985 1995 2005 2015

Time
Figure 1: Purchasing power index of the US dollar (USD). Source: Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System (US) [30].

was created: it allowed virtually unregulated trading of any goods, bolstered by
bitcoin payment and full anonymity. Perhaps concerningly, this was the first practical application of the Bitcoin. It significantly increased demand and contributed to
the first speculative bubble on bitcoin prices [26], which burst after Silk Road was
shut down by the FBI in October 2013 and trading by the largest cryptocurrency
exchange, Mt.Gox, was halted in February 2014, plausibly after a hack which led to
the disappearance of 850,000 BTC.
As recognition increased, the technology became increasingly widespread. Eventually, it turned out that the blockchain technology on which cryptocurrencies are
based allows using for a decentralized registry not only for financial purposes but
also for the execution of computer code (scripts) in a distributed form. At the end of
2013, the idea of an Ethereum distributed computing network was introduced. The
project started in July 2015 [33]. The Ethereum platform allows anyone to create
decentralized applications operating without the possibility of downtime, censorship,
fraud, or tampering with their code. It also allows one to issue their own tokens
via smart contracts, which consist of computer code performing a prescribed action
under certain conditions on the Ethereum blockchain. This innovation quickly found
application in raising capital via a simplified mechanism for various projects through
the so-called Initial Coin Offer (ICO). In 2017, the ICO underwent a boom, which
contributed to another speculative bubble on the cryptocurrency market, referred
to as the ICO-mania [27]. At that time, the number of cryptocurrencies doubled
from 700 to 1,400 by the end of 2017 (figure 4), and the capitalization of the entire
4

5
12

Monetary base in USA [USD]

×10

4

3

2

1

0
1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

2020

Time
Figure 2: Monetary base in USD. Source: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (US)
[30].

market reached USD 800 billion (figure 5). Unavoidably, the bubble eventually burst
in January 2018.
The current state of the blockchain technology can be compared to the dot-com
bubble at the turn of the century. The considerable potential was already visible in
the then possibilities of the Internet, but it was not known precisely which particular way the technology would develop. At that time, merely mention a company’s
intention to engage in Internet-related activities would cause a sharp increase in
share price [34]. A similar case was verified for the cryptocurrencies. With the first
euphoric phase now well over, the bitcoin from top to bottom in December 2018 lost
over 80 percent of its value (figure 3). Other cryptocurrencies have dropped by as
much as 99 percent, with some unavoidably succumbing. Currently, the first practical applications of the blockchain are emerging; these will be discussed alongside
the mechanics of cryptocurrencies in the next sections.
2.2. Core technology
The most straightforward approach for dispatching “electronic cash” would be
using data files. However, digital data can inherently be replicated unlimitedly,
which engenders a double-spending problem. Therefore, there was a need for a
technology that could form an electronic register covering all transactions: transferring funds would, then, consist of swapping entries in the register. This type of
record is commonplace in the electronic banking system, but central to the notion of
a cryptocurrency was the aim of abandoning their central character, rendering them
5

10000

BTC/USD

100

1

2010

2011 2012

2013 2014

2015 2016

2017

2018 2019

2020

Time
Figure 3: Bitcoin price in USD.

completely public instead. In this way, each user could verify transactions independently, yielding another valuable property, namely the impossibility of corrupting
the registry history. This challenge was resolved through the use of peer-to-peer
(P2P) networks, cryptographic techniques, and connecting transactions in blocks,
and after that in a chain of blocks, the blockchain. In this section, without losing
generality, the underlying technology will be presented, taking as an example the
first cryptocurrency, the Bitcoin.
2.2.1. The network
The Bitcoin is a virtual monetary entity and, as such, is devoid of any physical
form. The minimum unit is 0.00000001 BTC (1 satoshi). Bitcoin blockchains are
data files that contain information about past transactions and about the creation
of new Bitcoins, providing a means of reward for closing a block with transactions.
This is known as the Bitcoin network register. The blockchain consists of a sequence
of blocks, wherein each subsequent block is built upon the previous one and contains
information about new transactions in the network. The first block was created in
2009. Currently, as of October 2020 the chain counts nearly 650,000 blocks. As
said, the Bitcoin blockchain is public: everyone can access all information about
how many BTCs belong to a given address in the network. Further, the registry is
not centralized: all network participants have their own blockchain copies and can
modify them. There is no supervisory unit; however, there is a set of rules that each
user must follow. As a consequence, the participants reciprocally control each other.
To enter the Bitcoin network, a prospective user must use a network client or an
6

The number of cryptocurrencies

35
2
×10
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
2013

2014

2015

2017

2016

2018

2019

2020

Time
Figure 4: The number of actively traded cryptocurrencies. Data from the CoinMarketCap website [25].

external wallet. Enacting a transferring implies sending to the network information
indicating that the recipient address is now the owner of the specified BTC amount.
This information is distributed in a capillary form until all nodes have been informed
about the transfer. Throughout this process, transaction integrity is provided by
asymmetric cryptography, wherein the private key encrypts the transaction by the
sender, and the other network users can read the message via the public key. In other
words, this means that each transaction can be ascribed to a precise actor because
no other has access to their private key. When information circulates through the
network, everyone can read it but not re-encode an altered transaction. The scheme
for sending BTC in the network is represented in figure 6. Each transaction is coded
via the hash function, which for Bitcoin is dSHA256 [35].
For a virtual currency, the fundamental substrate to functioning is a means of
determining how many units are circulating at any time-point and how many will
be created. There must exist a consensus mechanism ensuring that all users agree
to the ownership of the virtual currency. In the Bitcoin network, wherein users
remain anonymous and do not have to entrust each other, proper operation requires
that all nodes maintain consensus regarding the current state of the system among
themselves. Most participants in the distributed network must agree and perform
the same action: the Bitcoin’s key innovation is a mechanism that allows largescale compliance of users on the network, solving the so-called Byzantine generals
problem [36].
For the network to function efficiently, there is a need for entities that col7

8
11

Total market capitalization [USD]

×10

6

4

2

0
2016

2017

2018

2019

2020

Time
Figure 5: Capitalization of the entire cryptocurrency market in USD. Data from CoinMarketCap.com [25].

Figure 6: Transaction scheme in Bitcoin network.

lect transactions, ascertain correctness, and combine into potential blocks: these
are known as miners. As a reward for their activities, they receive an amount in
newly-created Bitcoins alongside a usually small transaction fee, debited after block
approval and inclusion in the primary chain. This happens when most network
8

participants have reached a consensus to add a block candidate in their copy of
the blockchain. Anyone can become a miner. The only requirement is the client
software and the latest copy of the network registry. However, due to the sheer
computational cost of the validating block process, miners arrange themselves into
so-called “Mining pools” and make use of tailored high-performance computing solutions based on graphics processing units (GPU) or application-specific integrated
circuits (ASICs) [37]. To be accepted, a new block must meet specific criteria. The
result of the hash function, namely dSHA256 for the case of the Bitcoin, when
applied to the data contained in the block must have a unique property: it must
begin with a predetermined number of zeros. The number of starting bits resulting
from hashing function which must be zero reflects the difficulty of confirming blocks.
Miners collect transactions from the network (Fig. 8) and search for a number called
“nonce”, given which the hash function will return the result with the specified number of zeros at the beginning. If they succeed, they immediately send their block
to the network, and the other users can easily verify its correctness. The consensus
mechanism among miners is that any miner who receives a new block from the corresponding result of the hash function (hash) includes it in the blockchain. From
game theory, a strategy wherein all miners add correct blocks to their copy of the
blockchain is Nash’s equilibrium state [38]. In other words, insofar as a miner believes that everyone else is acting fairly, their best option is to add a block to their
copy. Operations on a blockchain version that is are not universally accepted are
economically unprofitable because there is no reward for simply creating new blocks
in it. This arrangement results in a consensus regarding the state of ownership of
Bitcoins throughout the network, despite the absence of a centralized manager.

Figure 7: Blockchain scheme in Bitcoin network.

When confirming subsequent blocks, commonly known as “mining Bitcoins”, financial costs are incurred in the form of electricity consumption and the necessity
to have specialized equipment. Nonce, the number required for closing a block, can
be obtained only through an iterative process, i.e., a closed-form equation is prohibited by the formulation. For this reason, the consensus mechanism is referred
to as a proof-of-work (PoW). Finding the correct result of a hash function with a
specific number of zeros at the beginning requires, on average, a huge number of
calculations [37]. Adding incorrect information (e.g., fictitious transactions) to the
candidate for a block would cause his rejection, simply dissipating the energy used
for the calculations. This is the reason finding the correct result from hashing is
proof that a miner helps maintain the Bitcoin network.
9

Figure 8: Diagram of the Bitcoin network.

Because each subsequent block contains the header from the previous one, it
is impossible to alter past transactions without rebuilding the entire chain. Due
to the time, difficulty, and cost of finding the right result of the hash function, it
is economically unviable. The blockchain diagram is shown in Fig. 7. The Bitcoin
protocol was created in such a way that the algorithm adjusts the difficulty in finding
the right result of the hash function to the network computing power, so that a new
block is created on average every 10 minutes [35]. The maximum block size is 1
MByte, determining how many transactions it can contain. As said, for the inclusion
of a new block into the blockchain, miners receive a prize in the form of newly-created
Bitcoins. The reward in halved every 210,000 blocks, up to the limit of 21 million
Bitcoins [35]. It is possible that two miners would simultaneously and independently
produce a new block and include it in their copy of the blockchain, causing multiple
versions to appear. Such occurrences are dealt with applying the longest chain
rule, i.e., the one for computing which the larger amount of power was invested
is retained. This is a fundamental preservation mechanism. The pool rejects the
shorter one during confirmation, and the miner receives no reward. A consequence
is that blockchain technology is susceptible to so-called 51% attacks. When a miner
has control over more than half of the computing power in the given network, they
can confirm blocks faster than anyone else, thus manipulating transactions in the
nearest attached blocks. The cost of carrying out such an attack on the Bitcoin
10

network and other PoW-based networks was obtained in Ref. [39].
A limitation of the Bitcoin protocol is its low efficiency and the high costs of
proof-of-work mechanism, which ensures network security. The primary costs are
the non-recurring investment in computing power and the ongoing cost of electricity, which is currently at the level of that consumed by entire countries, such as
Ireland and Denmark [40]. Another issue is the low network capacity. Bitcoin can
handle, on average, only five transactions per second (TPS) [41]. By comparison,
the Visa circuits handle on average about 1700 TPS [42]. In other words, one of
the foundational advantages of the blockchain technology, namely the inability to
make arbitrary changes to the blockchain, also results in a core rigidity. If one
performs a transaction, this needs to be propagated to the entire network, and the
previous version of the chain needs to be discarded, leading to the so-called “hard
forks”. It should be noted that the Bitcoin protocol is not static, as it is subject
to constant modifications. To date, a mechanism reducing the transaction size has
been introduced, known as the “SegWit” (segregated witness), which packing more
transactions into each lock. Work is currently underway on the introduction of the
“Lightning Network”, which would allow micropayments to take place outside the
main chain and thus which would increase network bandwidth, albeit at the price
of reduced security.
2.2.2. Methods for attaining network-wide consensus
The near totality of cryptocurrencies are predicated, like the Bitcoin, on the
initially-introduced proof-of-work (PoW) consensus algorithm. It protects against
external attacks, however, it is inefficient. For this reason, faster algorithms have
been developed and are being trialled. The second most popular algorithm after
proof-of-work is the proof-of-stake (PoS) alongside its various modifications. Unlike
with PoW, no miners are competing for calculating as soon as possible the right
hash function value closing a block. Instead, the next block’s validator is a pseudorandom node from the network, the precise choice being based upon a combination
of factors potentially including randomness and how many cryptocurrency units a
given node has.
According to the PoS algorithm, blocks are “forged” and not mined as in the
case with the PoW mechanism. Blockchain networks based on proof-of-stake also
make use of transaction fees as rewards for “forgers”. However, whereas in the case
of networks based on proof-of-work the reward for miners reward is a newly created
cryptocurrency unit, in proof-of-stake networks the users who want to take part in
the forging process must block for some time the number of cryptocurrency units
in the network as a “stake”. The assumed rate’s size determines the chances of
choosing a given node as the next validator, which will check the next block. The
higher the stake, the higher their chances are. For the selection process not to favor
only the richest, additional selection methods are added to the network. The two
most commonly used are randomized block selection and coin age selection.
Every cryptocurrency using the proof-of-stake approach has its own set of rules
determining who will become the validator of the next block. Security in the PoS
algorithm is implemented via the built-in possibility of losing a blocked stake and the
right to participate in future transactions as a punishment of passing a fraudulent
transaction. As long as the stake remains higher than the reward, the validator will
lose more cryptocurrency units than they would have gained when attempting to
11

commit fraud. As for the PoW protocol, the PoS algorithm is vulnerable to 51%
attack [43]. Such an attack can be perpetrated when a network node possesses
more than half of the supply of a given cryptocurrency. In that case, they can then
approve fraudulent transactions. The main advantage of the PoS algorithm is its
efficiency. As the need for computationally-demanding calculations is relieved, no
specialized user groups are needed to confirm blocks, enabling it be done faster than
as compared to PoW.
A variation of the PoS algorithm is known as the delegated proof-of-stake (DPoS) [44].
It is based on the notion that the owners of a given cryptocurrency outsource block
processing work to a third party. The latter are known as the so-called delegates,
for whom the network users can cast votes, and who secure the network if they
win the election. Their task is attaining consensus during the generation and approval of new blocks in the network. The weight with which each network user
decides about its future during voting is proportional to the number of the units
of a given cryptocurrency that they possess. The voting system varies depending
on the project, but usually, each delegate presents an individual proposal related to
their plan for the development of the network and then asks for votes. As a rule,
rewards received by delegates for creating and confirming blocks are proportionally
shared with their voters. Therefore, the DPoS algorithm is based on a voting system
directly dependent on the reputation of delegates. If a selected node (delegate) does
not work efficiently or breaks the rules, it is removed, and another one is selected
in its place. In terms of performance, networks using DPoS are more scalable. As
the number of users increases, they can process more transactions per second compared to networks using PoW and PoS algorithms. The next section surveys the
Bitcoin protocol modifications and other possible blockchain technology applications
in further detail.
2.3. Cryptoassets and diversified applications of the blockchain technology
A core aspect of the Bitcoin protocol is its open-source form: consequently, anyone can review, analyze, and copy the specifications, resulting in a rapid spread of
the new technology. At first, mere Bitcoin clones were created, sharing the same
network structure with minor modifications such as block size, hash function, mining limit, and creation time for new blocks. However, as the blockchain technology
developed, novel projects expanding its use cases rapidly emerged. For instance,
they allowed not only saving the transaction register but also executing code computer code in the form of a script. Throughout the impetuous development of the
cryptocurrency market and all possible uses of blockchain technology, the original
concept of a cryptocurrency began blurring. A more general concept was introduced: cryptoassets, which could be classified in three categories as a function of
the applications: cryptocurrencies, cryptocommodities, and tokens [45].
Cryptocurrencies denote the first use of the blockchain technology and are intended to transfer funds. Modifications of the Bitcoin protocol are the most common.
The first to maintain a significant position today is Litecoin (LTC), created in 2011.
It is a clone embedding two changes. The first consists of reduced time between
block extractions by a factor of four times and an increased maximum limit to 84
million, allowing a substantial increase in the speed of transaction confirmation [42].
The second is the use of another hash function, known as scrypt, which is more
appropriate for implementing on standard processors for confirming blocks in the
Litecoin network instead of requiring ASIC as in the case of Bitcoin.
12

The first cryptocurrency not based on the Bitcoin protocol was the Ripple [46],
created in 2012. It does not implement the PoW consensus mechanism, implying
that there are no miners in the network. Instead, it relies on a partially-centralized
system called trusted nodes, which are responsible for confirming transactions. The
idea behind Ripple is to provide connections between banks and stock exchanges to
send money in real-time, which would entail using Ripple instead of fiat currencies
for transfers outside national borders. Ripple tokens (XRP) were released by Ripple
Labs. It currently owns most of this cryptocurrency. Currently1 , XRP is the fourth
cryptocurrency in terms of capitalization. Its main competitor is Stellar (XLM),
which also supports transactions between financial institutions. Unlike Ripple, the
protocol is open source type and based on an own token. Both XRP and XLM
tokens do not have a fixed supply limit and are, therefore, subject to inflation.
Since the Bitcoin blockchain is public and one can trace the transaction history
of each mined coin, it is not entirely anonymous. The answer to this “drawback” was
the emergence of cryptocurrencies ensuring complete undetectability to their users,
the so-called “private coins”. This group of such cryptocurrencies includes: Dash,
Monero, and Zcash. Dash (DASH) has a hybrid architecture based on two network
layers: the first involves miners using the PoW mechanism, as in the case of Bitcoin,
the second comprises the so-called “masternodes” using the PoS technique. Monero
(XMR) ensures anonymity thanks to a RingCT, by which the addresses (public keys)
of those who make transactions are hidden in the blockchain. It is considered the
cryptocurrency providing the most significant anonymity and, as such, is regrettably
in widespread use by criminals, for example, for demand ransom payments [47].
Zcash (ZEC) is based on a “zero-knowledge” protocol called ZK-Snarks. It is a
cryptographic solution that allows confirming whether the information is correct
without having to disclose it, thus ensuring the anonymity of both the sender and
recipient of a transaction to be preserved, while concealing its entity. Anonymous
addresses are called shielded addresses and are compatible with public addresses,
such that one can perform a transaction from a public wallet to a protected one and
vice versa. Zero-knowledge is also used by cryptocurrencies such as ZClassic (ZCL),
Bitcoin Private (BTCP), PIVX, and Komodo (KMD). In the cryptocurrency group
protecting anonymity, Dash and Zcash have a built-in maximum supply mechanism,
whereas Monero does not.
The so-called cryptocurrency group also includes several Bitcoin hard forks. The
Bitcoin Cash (BCH) represents the first Bitcoin division, wherein part of the community decided to disconnect and develop the project on a new blockchain. It entails
increasing the block size from 1 to 8 MBytes, and then to 32MB. In the next division, Bitcoin Gold, the hash function was changed to Zhash, allowing efficient block
confirmation on non-specialized hardware. Another variation, Bitcoin SV, stems
from Bitcoin Cash and features a block size of 128 MBytes.
The second category of cryptoassets, cryptocommodities, serve as the basis for
applications of the blockchain technology. They are “material” enabling the creation of decentralized applications and smart contracts. These are automatically
executed computer codes that perform specific actions when certain conditions are
met. Cryptocommodities operate as “fuel”, allowing one to pay for using a decentralized computing network.
1

The data presented in this section are from October 2020.

13

Ethereum [33] was the first realization of such an idea. It was proposed in 2013
and launched in 2015 as an open-source computing platform based on the blockchain.
It has been equipped with its own programming language, known as Solidity, through
which one can program smart contracts and decentralized applications. It has its
cryptocurrency called ether or ethereum (ETH), which serves as a payment unit
for carrying out computational operations. Their price is expressed in the so-called
units of “Gas” and depends on the computational complexity necessary to complete
an operation. Ethereum, like Bitcoin, is based on blockchain technology and the
PoW consensus mechanism. However, it uses another hash function, Ethash, that
supports the efficient use of GPU hardware in the mining process. It does not have
a fixed block size. Instead, each block requires a specific number of Gas units, which
determines the computing power needed to complete the transactions it contains.
The average time between blocks is about 15 seconds, and the maximum number
of transactions per second is around 25. Unlike for Bitcoin, there is no upper limit
on mining. In the future, the developers predict a transition to a PoS consensus
mechanism, which would increase network bandwidth.
The Ethereum concept gained considerable popularity among the cryptocurrency
community from the outset. In 2014, 18.5 million USD were collected from pre-sale,
hallmarking the highest result of crowdfunding at that time. This result was beaten
by a venture capital fund, the DAO, which aimed to raise capital for the development
of blockchain startups and non-profit organizations. The fund took the form of a
decentralized, autonomous organization built on the Ethereum blockchain in an
intelligent contract. In 2016, it collected 11.5 million ethereum worth nearly 168
million USD. On this occasion, one of the pros/cons of blockchain was revealed,
namely code unchangeability. It turned out that the DAO smart contract code had
gaps that allow unauthorized funds to be transferred. A hacker attack took place
in June 2016, during which 3.6 million ethereum were stolen. To reverse the effects
and change the DAO code, the Ethereum blockchain had to be split. On the new,
the withdrawal of funds was canceled, whereas on the old, now called Ethereum
Classic (ETC), everything remained unchanged. Currently, the ethereum remains
the second cryptocurrency in terms of capitalization.
The considerable success of the concept of smart contract, in particular the possibility of collecting funds under the Initial Coin Offer (see Fig. 9) on the Ethereum
platform, spearheaded competition also offering the possibility of creating applications in a decentralized computing network. Major projects of this type include EOS
and Cardano. The EOS [49] platform is based on the delegated proof-of-stake algorithm (DPoS). As there is no mining process, unlike with Bitcoin or Ethereum, the
network can process up to 15,000 transactions per second. However, this is attained
at the expense of security. Only 21 selected block producers are responsible for
verifying transactions, who receive awards in the form of newly created EOS units
for their activities. The maximum number of EOS tokens is set to one billion units.
The programming language used on the platform is known as WebAssembly. The
leading EOS network was launched in June 2018, hallmarking the most substantial
ICO offer in history. In year-long offer, ended in June 2018, it raised 4.2 billion
USD eclipsing the world’s biggest initial public offerings of the year and more than
doubling the next biggest offering of that type (see Fig. 9).
On the other hand, Cardano [50] uses the PoS algorithm, known as Ouroboros.
There are two independent layers of the network: billing and computational. The
14

200
10

×10
5

150
4

3

100

2
50

ICO’s size per month [USD]

Number of ICO’s per month

EOS

1
DAO

ETH
0
2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

2019

2020

0

Time
Figure 9: Number and size of ICO’s per month. Data from ICOBench.com [48]. The largest ICO
offers are marked with arrows.

accounting layer is built upon the blockchain network. The Haskell programming
language is used to create intelligent contracts. The maximum supply of ADA cryptocurrency is 45 billion units. Other platforms offering similar services as Ethereum
are the Tron – TRX, Lisk – LSK, ICON – ICX. They are similarly based on the DPoS
algorithm. PoS-based platforms are Tezos, NEO (called the Chinese equivalent of
Ethereum), NEM (based on Proof of Importance - a variety of PoS), and Waves.
As one can see, it is typical for cryptocommodities to move from the original PoW
consensus mechanism towards PoS, since this allows faster processing of network
operations, which is required for additional than transaction-register functions.
The third group are tokens, which are the youngest cryptoassets and can be referred to as direct applications of blockchain technology. They are most often used
as means of payment in decentralized applications (dApps) built on cryptocommodities such as Ethereum or are issued in the ICO offers for the development of
a blockchain venture. Typically, they don’t have their own blockchain. Blockchain
technology, thanks to eliminating a central intermediary who earn on commissions
can be used wherever there is possibility to connect sellers and buyers directly (for
example Uber and Airbnb).
The combination of token and cryptocurrency categories denotes the so-called
“stable coins”. Their exchange rate is usually related to fiat currency. The most
popular is tether [51] (USDT), which linked to the US dollar in a one-to-one relationship. It relies on Bitcoin blockchain via the Omni Layer platform and is issued by
the private company Tether Limited, which declares that its supply is fully covered
15

in US dollars. Other notable stable coins are the DAI, PAX, TUSD, and USDC.
The latest applications of blockchain technology are so called decentralized finance (DeFi). This term refers to an ecosystem of financial applications that are
built on blockchain networks. Most DeFi platforms take the form of decentralized
apps (dApps). They use smart contracts to automate financial transactions. The
idea behind DeFi is to create decentralized cryptocurrency borrowing and lending
system and to provide monetary banking services [52]. The largest projects of this
type are: Chainlink, Wrapped Bitcoin, Uniswap, Maker and Compound.
2.4. Cryptocurrency trading
Cryptocurrencies, as a new concept, would not have much value in the early
stages of their existence if they could not be exchanged for traditional currencies.
One of the first exchanges that offered such opportunities was the Mt.Gox, as mentioned earlier, but the present cryptocurrency market is profoundly divided and decentralized. Nowadays2 there are 350 cryptocurrency exchanges around the world.
Most of them are platforms trading only cryptocurrencies with each other, with
transactions performed around the clock. This is a key feature distinguishing the
cryptocurrency market from the Forex, wherein trading occurs only from Monday
to Friday. The second fundamental difference lies in the form and participants of
the trade: in the case of cryptocurrencies, it takes place mostly between individual
investors [53], whereas on the Forex, trading takes place on the OTC (Over-TheCounter) market and its participants are mainly banks. The third difference is
the lack of a reference price, which in the case of the Forex market is provided by
Reuters. Only in the case of the bitcoin, there is a futures contract quoted on the
CME Group [28].
The decentralization of the cryptocurrency market means that the same cryptocurrency pairs are traded on different exchanges. Historically, significant valuation
differences could be observed between exchanges [54]. For the stocks, this issue has
been investigated and is called “dual-listed companies” [55, 56]. However, in the case
of cryptocurrencies, which can be sent almost immediately between anywhere in the
world, it represents a different kind of issue. The topic of trade comparison between
cryptocurrency exchanges and arbitrage opportunities is covered in Sections 3.2
and 5.2.3. A common feature between the Forex and the cryptocurrency market
is the possibility of triangular arbitrage [57, 58]. This will be discussed in detail
in Section 5.2.3. A separate category not found in traditional financial markets is
the so-called decentralized exchanges (DEX), where cryptocurrencies, through smart
contracts, can be traded automatically, without any reliance on a central exchange
server [59].
The statistical properties of the exchange rates of major cryptocurrencies will be
analyzed in this review, considering the Binance, Bitstamp, and Kraken exchange
rates. Binance [60] is currently the largest cryptocurrency exchange in terms of
volume value. It was founded in July 2017 in China. After the regulation regarding trading in cryptocurrencies was tightened, the head office was moved to Malta
in March 2018. At its inception, only cryptocurrency trade was conducted on it.
Binance offers the ability to make transactions using approximately 800 different
cryptocurrency pairs and additionally owns a cryptocurrency called the binance
2

The data presented in this section are from October 2020.

16

coin, which is used for paying commissions on the exchange. The exchange also
offers the opportunity of carrying out ICO offers on it. Furthermore, daughter
companies allowing exchanging cryptocurrencies for fiat currency. The Kraken exchange [61] was launched in September 2013, with headquarters in San Francisco and
branches in Canada and Europe. It is the largest exchange in terms of volume value
on cryptocurrency pairs expressed in Euro and currently offers 185 cryptocurrency
pairs. The Bitstamp exchange [62] is one of the longest-running cryptocurrency exchanges. It was established in August 2011, and its head office of the exchange is in
Luxembourg. The platform offers trading only on the most liquid cryptocurrencies,
currently supporting 38 exchange rates.

"cryptocurrencies"
"bitcoin"

Number of publications per year

1500

1250

1000

750

500

250

0

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

2019

Time
Figure 10: The number of scientific publications containing the word “bitcoin” (in red) or “cryptocurrencies” (in black) in the title or abstract that was published during the year. Data from the
website dimensions.ai [63].

There was a sharp increase in the number of actively traded cryptocurrencies in
2017 (Fig. 4). Since then, the number of ICO offers has kept increased systematically (Fig. 9). The market capitalization also increased spectacularly, heralding
the speculative bubble phase [26]. At the time of writing, approximately 3600 cryptocurrencies and nearly 30,000 exchange rates are present on the market [25]. The
capitalization of the entire cryptocurrency market is on the order of 350 billion
USD, and therefore comparable to middle-size stock exchange and largest American
companies [64]. The spectacular development of the cryptocurrency market has attracted worldwide interest in the new asset, including the scientific community. The
first works on the Bitcoin were published already in the period 2013-2015 [65, 66],
but the real boom has only occurred since 2017 (figure 10). At first, scholars mainly
17

examined the characteristics of the first cryptocurrency, the bitcoin [67, 68, 69].
Next, the community developed an interest in comparing it to other cryptocurrencies [70, 71, 72], which was followed by studies revealing correlations within the
cryptocurrency market [73, 74, 75, 76, 77, 78, 79, 80] and its relationships to mature markets [81, 82, 83, 84, 85]. In particular, the possible uses of the bitcoin as a
means of diversifying an investment portfolio and as a hedging instrument for the
currency market [86], gold and commodities [87] and stock markets [88, 89, 90] were
considered. A more detailed review of existing literature devoted to research on
cryptocurrencies in the context of financial markets is available in Refs. [91, 92].
3. Statistical properties of fluctuations
3.1. Data
The presentation of results begins with the statistical properties of cryptocurrency price fluctuations from a brief description of the empirical data sets. Three
issues are of interest here: (1) the cryptocurrency prices expressed in regular (fiat)
currencies: US dollar and euro, with particular focus on bitcoin (BTC) as the
most liquid and the most frequently traded cryptocurrency, (2) the cryptocurrencycryptocurrency exchange rates, and (3) result comparison for two independent trading platforms.
The data were collected from the following sources. For BTC, the oldest cryptocurrency, the longest series of historical data was obtained from the Bitstamp exchange platform [62], offering the BTC price tick-by-tick quotes covering the interval
2012-2018 and expressed in USD. While the cryptocurrency market was expanding,
more and more exchanges were created over time. They allowed trading not only
BTC with USD, but also other cryptocurrencies with regular currencies, and even
cryptocurrencies among themselves. A comparison between the properties of bitcoin
and ethereum (ETH) was possible based on tick-by-tick quotes obtained from the
Kraken platform [61]. The quotes covered an interval from mid-2016 to the end of
2018. A data set with quotes representing some less liquid cryptocurrencies, like
litecoin (LTC) and ripple (XRP), unavoidably has to be smaller and covers only the
entire year 2018, during which their trading frequency was sufficient to construct
time-series without excessive constant-value intervals. To compare the properties of
data from the different trading platforms, there is also consider a parallel set of the
cryptocurrency quotes from Binance, the largest platform of this type. However,
the sampling frequency of this set is 1 min, which provides us with 463,000 quotes
for each exchange rate.
As a benchmark representing the regular currencies from the Forex, the EUR/USD
exchange rate was considered, with quotes obtained from a broker, Dukascopy [93].
However, there is a significant difference between this dataset and the cryptocurrency datasets: the former excludes weekends and holidays, whereas the latter are
recorded continuously.
In the following, three principal characteristics are reported: the average intertransaction time (when available), which is denote by δ¯t , the probability distribution
function (PDF), and the autocorrelation function for the returns, defined as logarithmic exchange rate change over a fixed time interval ∆t: R∆t (t) = log P (t+∆t)−
log P (t), where P (t) is an exchange rate of two distinct currencies or cryptocurrencies at time t. The autocorrelations of both the signed returns and absolute returns
(volatility) are of interest.
18

3.2. Average inter-transaction time

Figure 11: BTC/USD exchange rate logarithm (Bitstamp exchange platform) from January 2012
to December 2018 (top panel), volume in USD (middle panel), and average inter-transaction time
in monthly windows (bottom panel).

The analysis starts with the tick-by-tick quotes of the BTC/USD exchange rate
as it is the most liquid and frequently traded cryptocurrency asset (Bitstamp quotes).
Figure 11 shows the BTC/USD exchange rate, the BTC volume (in USD) traded during hour-long intervals, and average inter-transaction time calculated over monthly
windows. There is an upward trend of BTC/USD throughout the years until the
turn of 2017 and 2018. The trend was accompanied by a volume increase and a reduction in the average inter-transaction time. In 2012 and the first half of 2013, the
trade volume was negligible. Subsequently, the peak of the first bull phase, at the
turn of 2013 and 2014, was accompanied by an increase in volume and a reduction
in the inter-transaction times. A side trend dominated the BTC/USD rate over the
next three years and was associated with a volume decline and less frequent trading.
A resume of the bull market towards the end of 2016, with spectacular growth in
2017 in particular, brought a further substantial increase in volume accompanied
by a decrease in the average inter-transaction times. At the peak of the speculative
bubble, at the turn of 2017 and 2018, the time between transactions became as
short as around a second. A subsequent bear market caused a decrease in volume,
which, however, remains above the pre-crash level observed in 2017. The average
inter-transaction time δ¯t was also affected but remains below 10 seconds.
The mutual exchange rates (logarithms, top panel) and the inter-transaction intervals averaged over monthly windows (bottom panel) for the BTC, ETH, USD,
19

Figure 12: Logarithm of the exchange rates BTC/EUR, BTC/USD, ETH/EUR, ETH/USD and
BTC/ETH on the Kraken exchange and EUR/USD, multiplied by a factor 100 for better visibility,
from July 2016 to December 2018 alongside the average inter-transaction times in monthly window.

and EUR based on the Kraken and Dukascopy data are shown in Figure 12. In
parallel with Figure 11, one observes a gradual shortening of δ¯t for the cryptocurrencies down to below 10 seconds in the bull-market phase (between mid-2017 and
a trend reversal in early 2018). On the contrary, in the bear-market phase of 2018,
a decrease in the BTC and ETH valuation in regular currencies was accompanied
by an increase in δ¯t . Only for BTC/EUR one still observed δ¯t < 10 s. By looking
at the exchange rate fluctuations over time, one can notice the considerably lower
volatility of EUR/USD, almost resembling a flat line in the scale of Figure 12, as
compared to the cryptocurrency-involving rates.
No strictly analogous result could be shown for the Binance dataset since it does
not contain tick-by-tick quotes. Instead, the trading frequency can be related to the
average length of intervals without trade (zero-return sequences) and the number of
periods without trading. In Figure 13, the volume time-series from both exchanges
were compared for 12 exchange rates involving both the most liquid cryptocurrencies
(BTC, ETH) and the least liquid ones (DASH, XMR, LTC, XRP, BCH). Since on
the Binance platform, the cryptocurrency value may only be expressed in terms of
other cryptocurrencies, to facilitate the inter-platform comparison, the USD has to
be replaced by a proxy – Tether (USDT), whose USD-based exchange rate fluctuates
closely around 1. Therefore, the ETH/USD on Kraken corresponds to ETH/USDT
on Binance. Figure 13 shows that a higher 1-min volume is seen on Binance for all
exchange rates under consideration, which implies that the average inter-transaction
20

Figure 13: Volume value in USD for the exchange rates listed simultaneously on Binance and
Kraken (USD instead of USDT), per minute.

time on Binance is shorter than on Kraken (see Table 1 in Sect. 3.3). The volume
accumulates principally in BTC/USD and BTC/USDT, and then on ETH/USDT,
BTC/ETH, and XRP/ETH.
3.3. Fluctuation distributions
At the dawn of scientific interest in the financial markets, it was believed that
a normal distribution [1] could approximate the PDF of the stock market returns.
Later, it was discovered by Benoît Mandelbrot that such distributions have significantly heavier tails and comply with the stable Lévy regime [2]. Consequently, the
truncated Lévy distributions began to be used in this context [94]. Currently, it is
accepted that, in mature financial markets, the CDFs of the absolute normalized
returns in the bulk part develop fat tails of the form
P (X > r∆t ) ∼ |r∆t |−γ ,

(1)

where r∆t = (R∆t − µ)/σ with µ and σ denote, respectively, sample mean and
standard deviation. This relationship with different values of γ has been reported
for many different asset types, including shares, currencies, commodities, and cryptocurrencies [5, 6, 95, 23, 96, 97, 68, 58, 98].
In particular, high-frequency stock-market data is frequently described by an
inverse cubic dependence [99, 6, 100], i.e., the one with γ ≈ 3. A well-known fact
is that the tail thickness of the return PDFs/CDFs decreases as ∆t increases from
second to minute, hour, and longer scales [101, 102, 71]. A normal or exponential
21

∝|r∆t |
10

2012 γ=1.71±0.3, δt =425s

-3

2013 γ=2.35±0.2, δt =14.6s

-3

2014 γ=3.54±0.1, δt =8.8s
2015 γ=3.29±0.1, δt =11.4s

P(X>|r∆t |)

2016 γ=3.61±0.1, δt =18.7s
10

2018 γ=4.48±0.1, δt =2.9s

P∆t (r)~|r∆t |

10

10

2017 γ=3.87±0.1, δt =3.9s

-4

-γ

-5

BTC/USD

-6

(Bistamp exchange)
∆t=10s
10

100

|r∆t |
Figure 14: Cumulative distribution of normalized absolute log-returns r∆t=10s for the bitcoin on
the Bitstamp exchange. In the inset, the estimated γ exponent is shown, with the average intertransaction time over a given year.

distribution can already approximate the return distributions for daily data. On
the other hand, the return distributions for ∆t over the range of a few seconds are
closely matched by the power-type functions [101]. This can easily be explained by
the central limit theorem, provided the returns are independent: as ∆t increases,
the distribution should converge to a normal distribution [103].
In general, it often happens that the fluctuations of a power-law type are associated with some critical phenomenon that occurs in the dynamics of a given system.
However, in the financial market case, it was pointed out [104] that such behaviour
of the return distributions might be related solely to the finite-size effects in the
number of active agents and, therefore, any particular form of a power-law PDF
may be viewed as accidental and non-universal [105, 106], opposite to what was
believed earlier [100].
In order to calculate the cumulative probability distribution function (CDF),
the tick-by-tick datasets from Bitstamp and Kraken were transformed to time-series
of normalized returns r∆t (ti ), i = 1, ..., T at a sampling frequency ∆t = 10s. For
the Bitstamp BTC/USD rate, it provides one with T = 21 × 106 returns. As the
analyzed period of 2012-2018 features diversified dynamics, the statistical properties
of the returns have to be considered separately for each year. Figure 14 presents the
CDFs of the absolute normalized returns. A power-type relation of the distribution
tail (Eq.(1)) is observed for each year, at least over a part of the available return
magnitudes, with the widest scaling range apparent in 2012. However, one has
22

Figure 15: Cumulative distribution of the normalized absolute log-returns r∆t=10s for the exchange rates BTC/EUR, BTC/USD, ETH/EUR, ETH/USD and BTC/ETH on Kraken, alongside
EUR/USD, from July 2016 to December 2018. In the inset, the estimated exponent γ is shown.

to notice that even in this latter case the power-law scale range does not exceed
1.5 decade, while its width gradually decreases each year and it falls well below
one decade in 2018. This suggests that it is safer to consider these CDFs as only
carrying some signatures of the power-law distributions and not being precisely the
power-law ones.
There is evolution of the exponent γ from lower (γ2012 = 1.7±0.3) towards higher
values (γ2018 = 4.5 ± 0.1), and the opposite trend for the estimation error. Furthermore, there is a relation between the shortening of the average inter-transaction
time and the growing tail index γ, hallmarking a phenomenon observed in other
financial markets as well. This relation can be interpreted as defining the internal
time-flow of the market: the faster the trading and the shorter the inter-transaction
intervals, the faster is the time-flow experienced by the assets and, consequently,
the shorter are time-scales over which particular effects are observed [101]. The
acceleration of market evolution is, therefore, a natural consequence of both the
technological advances and the increasing market-participant influx that conjointly
lead to higher transaction frequency. For example, for ∆t = 10s, the return CDF
tails for the BTC/USD, which were initially in the Lévy-stable regime with γ < 2,
became gradually thinner with γ ≈ 3.5 in 2014 and γ ≈ 4.5 in 2018 (figure 14). At
present, the inverse-cubic scaling has to be addressed for a sampling frequency of
∆t < 10s.
A comparison between the CDFs obtained for different exchange rates is pre23

sented in Figure 15 based on five return time-series from Kraken, namely BTC/USD,
BTC/EUR, ETH/USD, ETH/EUR, and BTC/ETH (∆t = 10s, T = 7.6 × 106 ),
alongside the EUR/USD return time-series from Dukascopy (∆t = 10s, T = 5.6 ×
106 ). Here, the data covers the entire available interval, from mid-2016 through end2018. Except for BTC/ETH, the distributions show a near power-law decay over
about one decade, with the scaling exponent dwelling around γ ≈ 3. The values are
slightly below this level for the BTC/USD and ETH/USD; these are the rates that,
in a first part of the period under consideration, experienced the smallest trading
frequency, with δ¯t > 100s. The BTC/EUR and ETH/EUR returns are characterized by γ that is the closest to 3, in parallel with the much more liquid Forex pair,
EUR/USD, while the BTC/ETH crypto-crypto rate shows a slightly faster decay
with γ ≈ 3.2.
-3

∝|r∆t |
-3

P(X>|r∆t |)

10

BTC/USD*
ETH/USD*
ETH/BTC
XRP/BTC
BCH/BTC
BCH/USD*
LTC/BTC
LTC/USD*
ETC/BTC
XMR/BTC
DASH/BTC
ETC/ETH

-3

∝|r∆t |

-4

10

-5

10

Binance
∆t=1 min
10

Kraken
∆t=1 min
100

10

100

|r∆t |
Figure 16: Comparison of the cumulative distributions of normalized absolute log-returns r∆t=1min
for the exchange rates listed simultaneously on Binance and Kraken (USD∗ means USD in the case
of Kraken, and USDT in the case of Binance).

The results for the two different platforms, Kraken and Binance, are collated
in Figure 16 and Table 1. By decreasing the sampling frequency to ∆t = 1 min
(Jan-Dec 2018, T = 463, 000), the fluctuations of BTC and ETH can be compared
with those of a few among the least-liquid cryptocurrencies, namely, XRP, BCH,
LTC, XMR, DASH, ETC (all cryptocurrencies alongside their tickers are listed in
the Appendix A). The exchange rates on Binance are characterized by a higher
trading frequency (i.e., shorter average length ht0 i and lower average number N0 of
non-trading periods, Table 1) compared to their counterparts on Kraken (see also
Fig. 13). This affects the values of the γ exponent: while on both platforms, the
24

exchange rate returns form CDFs with γ ≈ 3, the CDF tails for the exchange rate
returns on Binance tend to decay faster than their counterparts on Kraken. This
pattern is also discernible in Figure 16 and is in line with the observation that the
trading frequency is related to the inner time-pace of a market. The less liquid
exchange rates from Kraken have a slower internal time and, consequently, their
rates of return distributions are characterized by thicker tails and poorer scaling
(i.e., larger estimation error). By contrast, the CDFs for the rates with a higher
trading frequency and volume resemble those characterizing the mature financial
markets.
Table 1: Estimated γ exponent, average length of non-trading periods ht0 i (i.e., zero-returns sequences), number of non-trading periods N0 , average volume-per-minute in USD, for the cryptocurrency pairs listed simultaneously on Binance and Kraken in 2018 (USD∗ means USD in the
case of Kraken, and USDT in the case of Binance).

γ
Name
BTC/USD∗
ETH/USD∗
BTC/ETH
XRP/BTC
BCH/BTC
BCH/USD∗
LTC/BTC
LTC/USD∗
ETC/BTC
XMR/BTC
DASH/BTC
ETC/ETH
Average

Bi
3.45±0.1
3.39±0.1
3.30±0.1
2.91±0.1
3.36±0.1
3.36±0.1
3.42±0.1
3.23±0.15
3.02±0.1
3.68±0.15
4.04±0.15
3.34±0.1
3.38±0.11

Kr
3.63±0.15
3.4±0.1
3.18±0.2
2.99±0.15
2.35±0.15
2.61±0.15
3.34±0.15
3.41±0.1
2.31±0.2
3.21±0.15
2.52±0.2
2.18±0.2
2.93±0.16

ht0 i
Bi
Kr
1.07 1.61
1.10 1.78
1.09 2.62
1.20 3.50
1.25 4.39
1.40 3.83
1.17 5.09
1.29 3.48
1.56 6.34
1.37 6.58
1.46 7.58
2.30 9.15
1.35 4.66

N0
Bi
8559
16184
12134
41043
29973
40922
34360
45208
76691
47852
55684
82458
40922

Kr
55360
67807
82074
72556
68059
75427
62675
79983
55647
54832
49134
41861
63785

hW i [USD]
Bi
Kr
196331 33998
61430 19711
60824
5250
31510
2763
16299
1251
15893
2151
13110
940
11793
1725
10164
709
4176
614
2777
416
1333
266
35470
5816

Summarizing, it can be argued that, for a given exchange rate, in order to meet
the characteristics typical of mature financial markets like the inverse-cubic dependence, a sufficiently high trading frequency is required. From the vantage point of
the ∆t = 10s, for the most liquid BTC/USD exchange rate on the Bitstamp platform, this was achieved in 2014; by contrast, on the Kraken the exchange the rates
involving some of the least-liquid cryptocurrencies appear to be still in a “pre-cubic”
immature phase.
3.4. Temporal autocorrelations
Another standard characteristic used to describe the financial returns is the
autocorrelation function
C(τ ) = hr∆t (t)r∆t (t − τ )it ,

(2)

where h·it denotes the time-average. A typical behaviour of C(τ ) for the financial
returns is its immediate decay either to zero or to below zero [107, 6, 108, 109, 23].
However, the autocorrelation function of volatility (i.e., absolute value of the returns)
decays with an increasing τ according to a power law [110, 6, 111, 112, 113, 23].
The decay range corresponds to the average width of the volatility clusters [114].
This phenomenon, which can be observed across all markets, is a manifestation of
25

long-term memory [96]: large fluctuations are statistically followed by large ones
and small fluctuations by small ones [2]. The long-range autocorrelation, which is
a linear effect in volatility, becomes a nonlinear correlation from the perspective
of returns. Importantly, this implies that the returns can reveal multiscaling (see
Section4).

Figure 17: Autocorrelation function of the normalized absolute log-returns r∆t=10s for bitcoin on
the Bitstamp exchange over subsequent years.

It should be borne in mind that the autocorrelation function is a well-defined
quantity only insofar as the data are drawn from a stationary process. Thus, if there
is a trend in the data, it has to be removed beforehand. This also includes trivial
periodic patterns. In the high-frequency financial data, one observes, for example,
significant seasonal trends in volatility, including daily trends, weekly trends, and
some longer-period trends. It is well-established that a satisfactory method of trend
removal entails dividing each return corresponding to a time-point tj by the standard
deviation of the returns calculated for the same moment over a sufficient number of
trading days, i.e., r∆t (tj ) = R∆t (tj )/σR (tj ), where j indexes the intervals ∆t starting
from the market opening.
Figure 17 shows the autocorrelation function calculated for the BTC/USD volatility time-series split into annual parts. The quotes from the Bitstamp platform were
first converted to absolute logarithmic returns, then detrended to remove seasonality.
Similar to the CDF tails, a significant shift in the autocorrelation is observed between
2012 and the subsequent years. In the former, C(τ ) is only short-range correlated,
with memory disappearing after a few minutes. However, long-range memory has
26

1

BTC/USD (Bistamp exchange)

2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018

0.8

C(τ)

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

-0.2
0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

τ [10s]
Figure 18: Autocorrelation function of the normalized log-returns r∆t=10s for bitcoin on the Bitstamp exchange over subsequent years.

a power-law form: accordingly, C(τ ) ∼ τ −β started to emerge already in 2013 and
was systematically built up to reach substantial strength even for intervals as long
as τ > 104 min by 2018. The effect of increasing the volatility autocorrelation time
can be explained in terms of the increasing number of transactions carried out in a
time unit.
The long-range, linear autocorrelation in volatility corresponds to non-linear correlations on the level of signed returns. In turn, non-linear correlations are responsible for the multifractal effects (see Sect. 4).
On the other hand, the autocorrelation function calculated for the original, signed
returns does not indicate any linear memory effects for ∆t = 10s (Figure 18). A negative value of C(1) is a statistical artifact related to isolated price jumps followed by
price regression to a former level; these events are frequent on sampling frequencies
comparable to the average inter-transaction interval. The observed autocorrelation
function behavior for both returns and volatility resembles their counterparts on the
other mature markets.
The volatility autocorrelations function for the BTC and ETH expressed in USD
and EUR, as well as for BTC/ETH (Kraken), are displayed in Figure 19. For all
cryptocurrency exchange rates under consideration, it decays with τ approximately
according to a power-law up to about a week. However, in the case of EUR/USD
(Dukascopy) the power-law regime breaks after already about one day, which can
be accounted for by a shorter volatility-cluster length. This effect can be seen in
Figure 20, where |R∆t (ti )| with ∆t = 10s are shown for six exchange rates over
27

Figure 19: Autocorrelation function of the normalized absolute log-returns r∆t=10s and normalized
log-returns r∆t=10s (inset) for exchange rates BTC/EUR, BTC/USD, ETH/EUR, ETH/USD,
BTC/ETH on Kraken exchange, and for EUR/USD from July 2016 to December 2018.

the analyzed period. For the rates involving cryptocurrencies, the cluster length is
an order of magnitude larger than for EUR/USD. Five cycles of high/low volatility
during a week can be distinguished for the EUR/USD, while only three cycles per
month are visible for the cryptocurrencies (insets in Fig. 20). Again, this can be
explained by a higher trading frequency on the Forex than on Kraken. The average
inter-transaction time is a few seconds on Kraken, whereas Forex transactions take
place at least an order of magnitude faster.
Similarly to Bitstamp BTC/USD data, and indeed to all mature financial markets, the autocorrelation function for the returns (inset in Fig. 19) drops immediately to zero for the EUR/USD and even below zero for the cryptocurrency rates,
indicating that no linear correlation exist for the signed returns.
The difference in average trading frequency between Binance and Kraken affects
not only the return CDFs but also the volatility autocorrelation function. In both
cases, one observes its power-law decay (Figure 21), but on Binance, it is faster:
it breaks down already after about 1,000 minutes as opposed to about 10,000 on
Kraken. In the case of signed returns, the autocorrelation function exhibits a typical
behavior: it immediately drops to negative values and then oscillates around zero
(not shown).

28

Figure 20: Absolute values of log-returns R∆t=10s for the exchange rates BTC/EUR, BTC/USD,
ETH/EUR, ETH/USD and EUR/USD from July 2016 to December 2018. The insets show magnified selected periods.

4. Multiscale correlations
The commonly used correlation measures in time-series analysis, such as the
autocorrelation function, the spectral density [115] and the Pearson correlation coefficient [116], only provide information about linear interdependencies in the data.
However, a typical feature of financial markets is the occurrence of nonlinear correlations [96, 117], which are the primary source of multifractality in their temporal
dynamics (an additional factor reinforcing multifractality is related to the “fat tails”
of the probability density function) [118, 119, 120, 121, 122, 117]. Multifractality is an attribute of many complex systems wherein a sufficiently large number of
elements interact according to nonlinear laws [123]. This kind of system organization is a well-evident characteristic of the financial markets, which in this study are
represented by the cryptocurrency market.
In Section 3.4, it was demonstrated that the power-law decay of the autocorrelation function estimated for absolute values of the log-returns reveals nonlinear
correlations. Therefore, signatures of multiscaling can also be anticipated in the
cryptocurrency market. In the following section, advanced methods for the quantitative description of nonlinear correlations based on the multifractal methodology will
be presented: namely, the multifractal detrended fluctuation analysis (MFDFA), its
generalization for the cross-correlation case, known as multifractal cross-correlation
analysis (MFCCA), and the q-dependent detrended cross-correlation coefficient ρ(q, s).
29

Figure 21: Comparison of the autocorrelation functions of normalized absolute log-returns r∆t=1min
for exchange rates listed simultaneously on Binance and Kraken (USD∗ means USD in the case of
Kraken, and USDT in the case of Binance).

The analyses of the time-series data from the cryptocurrency market were carried
out through these methods.
4.1. Detrending based multifractal methodology
Historically, the first method for analyzing fractal time-series is the rescaled
range analysis (R/S), proposed by the British hydrologist Harold Edwin Hurst [124].
In his original work, Hurst introduced and applied the R/S algorithm to study
the recurrent flooding on the river Nile. In the case of nonstationary data, to
correctly quantify correlations in a signal, it is necessary to identify and remove
trends, which is impossible to attain using the R/S algorithm. To address this
fundamental shortcoming, in 1995, Peng et al. proposed the detrended fluctuation
analysis (DFA), which can be applied to nonstationary data [125, 126]. Within the
DFA method, the trend represented by the n-th degree polynomial is subtracted.
This procedure leads to the removal of nonstationarity from the data. However, the
choice of the polynomial degree is crucial to obtain reliable results. If the polynomial
degree is too high, the procedure could destroy the fluctuation structure. On the
other hand, with too low a degree, the polynomial may not remove nonstationarity
effectively [126, 127]. In most cases, a second-order polynomial is used for the
analysis of financial data. Alternatives have been discussed in Ref. [127].
Multifractal detrended fluctuation analysis (MFDFA) is a more recent development of the DFA algorithm, covering the case of nonlinear correlations case [128].
30

Using the MFDFA, the nonlinear organization in a time-series is quantitatively described within a fractal formalism. In recent years, cross-correlation versions of the
DFA and MFDFA methods have also been proposed. The generalization of the
DFA to the cross-correlation case is known as the detrended cross-correlation analysis (DCCA) method [129], whereas multifractal detrended cross-correlation analysis
(MF-DXA) is an extension of the MFDFA [119].
In the latter case, since the cross-correlation fluctuation function may assume
positive and negative values, proposed formulas, related to calculation of the moments, lead to erroneous conclusions. To avoid this effect, many authors resort to
taking the absolute values of the cross-correlation fluctuations functions, which, in
turn, risks leading to the artifactual detection of multifractal cross-correlations even
for uncorrelated signals [130]. A solution to this problem is offered by the multifractal cross-correlation analysis (MFCCA) algorithm, which has been proposed in Ref.
[130].
An alternative to the DFA-based methods of quantifying multiscale correlations
is provided by the algorithms using wavelet transforms like, e.g., the wavelet transform modulus maxima (WTMM) [131, 132, 133] and the multifractal cross-wavelet
transform (MFXWT) [134] for the auto- and cross-correlation cases, respectively.
However, this is MFCCA that is currently deemed to be the most reliable method
for studying the multiscale correlations in the time series [135, 114].
The robustness of the time-series analysis carried out by means of the multifractal methodology has fuelled considerable popularity of the corresponding methods,
and their application throughout highly diversified scientific fields [123] such as
biology [136, 137], chemistry [138, 139], physics [140, 141], geophysics [142, 143],
hydrology [144, 145], quantitative linguistics [146, 147], medicine [148, 149], meteorology [150, 151], music [152, 153], psychology [154, 155] and especially finance [156,
157, 158, 159, 160, 161, 162, 117].
Notwithstanding the broad application of the multifractal methodology, it must
be noted that their proper application and drawing conclusions require certain experience, otherwise some serious misinterpretation of results might occur. One needs
to realize that not all indications of multiscaling found in data may be considered
an actual manifestation of multifractality in the strict mathematical sense. It was
shown in literature that multiscaling can also be a finite-sample effect especially if
the analyzed data has a fat-tail PDF [114]. In many instances of empirical data,
including the financial data, multiscaling is observed over rather a moderate range
of available scales like, e.g., one decade, while at the remaining scales other effects
can be seen, like an exponential cut-off of the PDF tails or the outlier events, which
do not fit into any fractal organization of the data. The multifractal methodology
allows one for a reliable and convenient quantitative description of the temporal
organization of nonstationary signals, including the heterogeneity of their singularities, while only sometimes it also allows for undoubted identification of a genuine
multifractal structure.
4.1.1. MFCCA as a generalization of MFDFA and DCCA
The multifractal cross-correlation analysis (MFCCA) [130] allows for quantitative description of both the scaling properties of data and the degree of multiscale
detrended cross-correlation between two time series. Given two time-series xi , yi ,

31

where i = 1, 2...T , corresponding profiles are calculated according to
X(j) =

j
X

[xi − hxi],

Y (j) =

j
X

(3)

[yi − hyi],

i=1

i=1

where hxi and hyi denote the means of the xi and yi time-series, respectively.
Then, the profiles X(j) and Y (j) are divided into 2Ms separate segments ν
with length s, starting at the beginning and at the end of the time-series, where
Ms = bT /sc. In each segment ν, a trend is identified by fitting a polynomial of
(m)
(m)
degree m, separately for the series X – PX,ν i Y – PY,ν . As said, for financial timeseries a typical choice is m = 2 [135]. After removing the trend, cross-covariance is
calculated
s

2
Fxy
(ν, s)

1X
(m)
=
{(X((ν − 1)s + k) − PX,ν (k))
s k=1
(m)

× (Y ((ν − 1)s + k) − PY,ν (k))}, (4)
for segment ν = 1, ..., Ms and
s

2
Fxy
(ν, s)

1X
(m)
{(X(T − (ν − Ms )s + k) − PX,ν (k))
=
s k=1
(m)

× (Y (T − (ν − Ms )s + k) − PY,ν (k))}, (5)
for ν = Ms + 1, ..., 2Ms , and subsequently it is used to calculate the q-th order
covariance function [130]
q
Fxy
(s)

2M
1 Xs
2
2
sign(Fxy
(ν, s))|Fxy
(ν, s)|q/2 ,
=
2Ms ν=1

(6)

2
2
where sign(Fxy
(ν, s)) denotes the sign of Fxy
(ν, s). Fractal detrended cross-correlation
between two time-series xi i yi is manifested in the scaling relationship
q
Fxy
(s)1/q = Fxy (q, s) ∼ sλ(q) ,

(7)

where q 6= 0 and λ(q) are the scaling exponents. The parameter q acts as a filter
which strengthens or suppresses the covariance calculated on segments having length
s. For positive q, segments containing large fluctuations have a predominant impact
on the sum in Eq.(6), whereas for negative q, segments with small fluctuations
q
dominate in Fxy
(s). In the presence of multifractal cross-correlation, a dependence
of λ(q) on q is observed, whereas for the monofractal case, λ(q) is independent of q.
Multifractal analysis of a single time-series by means of MFDFA [128] corresponds to a special case of the MFCCA procedure, wherein xi = yi . Then Eq.(6) is
reduced to
2Ms
i1
h 1 X
q q
F (q, s) =
[F 2 (ν, s)] 2 .
(8)
2Ms ν=1
As in Eq.(7), fractality manifests itself in a power-law relation
F (q, s) ∼ sh(q) ,
32

(9)

where h(q) is the generalized Hurst exponent, which for q = 2 corresponds to standard Hurst exponent [163]. In the case of a monofractal time series, h(q) is constant,
whereas for a multifractal one, h(q) depends on q. In the latter case, the time series
reveals a sort of hierarchical organization of the returns [164].
The singularity spectrum f (α) can be calculated by a Legendre transform:
α = h(q) + qh0 (q),

f (α) = q[α − h(q)] + 1,

(10)

where α is the Hölder exponent, and f (α) is fractal dimension of the time series
points with singularities α. In the case of multifractals, the shape of the singularity
spectrum characteristically resembles an inverted parabola.
Width of the singularity spectrum
∆α = αmax − αmin ,

(11)

where αmin and αmax are the minimum and maximum values of α, is a quantity
intended to measure the diversity of singularities present in time series. Even if the
scaling range in s of the fluctuation functions F (q, s) is limited to a decade or so and,
thus, no actual multifractal structure exists in correlation of the time series, f (α)
remains a convenient quantity to assess the detrended correlation heterogeneity.
Another important feature of the f (α) spectrum is its asymmetry (skewness),
which can be measured by the asymmetry coefficient [164]
Aα =

∆αL − ∆αR
,
∆αL + ∆αR

(12)

where ∆αL = α0 − αmin , ∆αR = αmax − α0 , and α0 corresponds to the maximum
value f (α) observed for q = 0. A positive coefficient Aα denotes a left-sided asymmetry of the spectrum. This corresponds to a more developed multiscaling (stronger
correlations) at the level of large fluctuations. In turn, a negative value of Aα denotes
a right-sided asymmetry, implicating small fluctuations as the dominant source of
multiscaling.
To assess the strength of multifractal cross-correlation, the scaling exponent
λ(q) and the average of generalized Hurst exponents calculated for each time series
separately
hxy (q) = (hx (q) + hy (q))/2
(13)
have to be compared. Thus, the difference between λ(q) and hxy (q) is calculated
dxy (q) = λ(q) − hxy (q).

(14)

For perfect multiscale cross-correlation, dxy (q) = 0, whereas for desynchronization
between the time-series, dxy (q) 6= 0 [71, 98]. Additional notions about dxy (q) are
given in Subsect. 4.1.3.
4.1.2. Detrended cross-correlation coefficient
The fluctuation functions as defined by Eq.(7) can also be used as a basis for
determining the q-dependent detrended correlation coefficient (qDCCA) [123]
q
Fxy
(s)
,
ρ(q, s) = p q
q
Fxx (s)Fyy
(s)

33

(15)

where Fxx and Fyy are calculated from Eq.(8). This measure allows one for describing quantitatively the cross-correlations between two time-series xi and yi after
removal of a polynomial trend at different time scales s. Besides, the parameter q
allows the detrended fluctuation magnitude range for which the signals xi and yi
are the most strongly correlated. Such two-dimensional decomposition of the overall correlations into the components corresponding to particular magnitudes and
scales provides a significant advantage over standard correlation measures since correlations between empirical time-series are usually not uniformly distributed over
fluctuations of different size and different time scales [165]. ρ(q, s) can be used for
investigating non-stationary time series that are not necessarily fractal [123]. For
q > 0 the coefficient ρ(q, s) assumes values from −1 to 1 [123] and their interpretation is the same as the Pearson correlation coefficient [116]. For q < 0 small
fluctuations have the dominant contribution to ρ(q, s) and vice-versa for q > 0. In
the case of q = 2, the coefficient ρ(q, s) is reduced to ρDCCA [166].
4.1.3. Relationship between λ(q) and ρ(q, s)
In the previous section, it was shown that the coefficient ρ(q, s) quantifies the
correlations with respect to a time scale s. Throughout the literature on financial
cross-correlations, the Epps effect [167, 168, 169, 23], which involves an increasing
level of correlation as the time-interval ∆t between the returns R∆t increases (a
higher correlation level for hourly returns compared to the minute returns), is wellevident. Similarly, for the coefficient ρDCCA and its more general version ρ(q, s),
different correlation levels appear across scales [170, 171, 172, 173, 123, 174, 175,
176, 177, 161, 178].
Since λ(q) and ρ(q, s) are derived from the same fluctuation function given by
Eq.(7), they are linked by a meaningful relationship. If the condition of the scaling of
the fluctuation functions for both cross-correlation Fxy (q, s) = axy (q)sλ(q) and single
time-series Fxx (q, s) = ax (q)shx (q) and Fyy (q, s) = ay (q)shy (q) is fulfilled, proportionality coefficients axy (q), ax (q), ay (q) can be determined. Based on the relation (15)
and the properties of ρ(q, s) (for q ≥ 0, −1 ≤ ρ(q, s) ≤ 1), the following relation can
be written [123]:
p q
q
q
(s)Fyy
(s),
(16)
Fxy
(s) ≤ Fxx
and after substitution:
(axy (q))q sqλ(q) ≤ (ax (q)ay (q))q/2 sq(hx (q)+hy (q))/2 .

(17)

For q > 0 this leads to:
p
ax (q)ay (q)
hx (q) + hy (q)
λ(q) ≤ logs (
)+
.
axy (q)
2

(18)

To satisfy Eqs.(16) and (17), for q > 0 the proportionality
coefficients must fulfill
√
p
ax (q)ay (q)
the relation axy (q) ≤ ax (q)ay (q) [130]. Hence, logs ( axy (q) ) is positive whereas
dxy (q), which is the difference between λ(q) and hxy (q), can be either positive or negative [130]. For positivep
dxy (q), i.e., λ(q) > (hx (q) + hy (q))/2, Fxy (q, s) grows faster
q
q
with increasing s than Fxx
(s)Fyy
(s). Thus, ρ(q, s) also increases with increasing
s. The reverse situation occurs when dxy (q) is negative [98]. In that case, ρ(q, s)
decreases with increasing s. For dxy (q) = 0, ρ(q, s) does not change with increasing
s.
34

The above result holds true under a condition that both time series have finite
length. For s → ∞ only λ(q) ≤ hxy (q)) is allowed [179, 180]. These relationships
will be studied for empirical data in the following sections.
4.2. Analysis of the Hurst exponent in the cryptocurrency market
In section 3.4, it was shown that the autocorrelation function for absolute returns (volatility) decays according to a power-law relation (“long memory”) [181]. A
well-known measure that describes long memory quantitatively is the Hurst exponent [124]. It quantifies the kind of self-similarity in the time-series alongside the
associated degree of persistence. H = 0.5 denotes the absence of autocorrelation,
that is, the successive fluctuations are uncorrelated. 0.5 ≤ H ≤ 1 imply a persistent
time-series with positive autocorrelation: a price change in the same direction as the
previous one is more probable than in the opposite direction. On the other hand,
H < 0.5 denotes an antipersistent time series with negative autocorrelation: a price
change in the opposite direction is more likely than in the same direction as the
previous one.
Mature financial markets typically feature Hurst exponents dwelling around
0.5 [21, 182], which effectively implies the impossibility of predicting the direction
of the next price change at any time point. Contrariwise, significant deviations
from this level are often fount in emerging markets [182, 183], hallmarking market
inefficiency [184]. H → 0.5 can, therefore, be taken as an indication of market
maturation [185, 68]. Furthermore, a drop below 0.5 over a short time-interval may
be a predictor of an upcoming trend change [186, 187]. Throughout this study, the
Hurst exponent is calculated using the MFDFA method for q = 2 (Eq.(9)).
The temporal evolution of the Hurst exponents over the 10-seconds log-returns of
BTC/USD exchange rate (R∆t=10s ) from the Bitstamp exchange, from March 2013 to
December 2018, is shown in Fig. 22 (top panel). Earlier periods (see Fig. 11) were
characterized by considerably longer inter-transaction times and, hence, a larger
number of zero returns. The Hurst exponent was calculated for separate monthly
windows, each containing about 260,000 observations, and the results are shown
in Fig. 22 (top panel). By the end of 2016, the exponent had attained values
indicating antipersistence (H < 0.5), which is typical for risky, growing markets.
Alongside increased trade frequency (i.e., shortening of the inter-transaction times),
H approached 0.5 in 2018. This is in line with the results obtained for the return
PDFs and autocorrelation functions in Sect. 3, wherein 2018 was also indicated as
the year during which the BTC/USD exchange rate attained characteristics closest
to those typically observed for Forex.
The Hurst exponent evolution for more exchange rates: BTC/EUR, BTC/USD,
ETH/EUR, ETH/USD, and BTC/ETH can be shown based on data from the
Kraken platform. This is done, however, in expense of a shorter interval available: July 2016–December 2018. The returns were constructed with ∆t = 10s and
H was calculated over monthly windows – Fig. 22 (bottom panel). Like in the
case of BTC/USD from Bitstamp, the exchange rates from Kraken were associated
with H < 0.5 until mid-2017. Then from 2018 the Hurst exponents increased to
a 0.5 level for all the exchange rates involving USD and EUR, while BTC/ETH
remained in the antipersistent regime until mid-2018. This shift of H is parallel to
the shortening of the inter-transaction times on Kraken that started in April 2017.
For comparison, H for the EUR/USD exchange rate is also shown – Fig. 22 (bottom
panel). This demonstrates clearly the cryptocurrency market development [71].
35

0.5

0.45

H

0.4

0.35

BTC/USD

0.3

0.25
2014

2015

2017

2016

2018

2019

Time
0.5

H

0.45

0.4

0.35

BTC/EUR
BTC/USD
ETH/EUR
ETH/USD
BTC/ETH
EUR/USD

0.3

Jul 2016

Jan 2017

Jan 2018

Jul 2017

Jul 2018

Jan 2019

Time
Figure 22: Hurst exponent for the ∆t = 10s returns calculated over monthly windows for different exchange rates. (Top) The BTC/USD exchange rate from Bitstamp (March 2013–December
2018). (Bottom) BTC/EUR, BTC/USD, ETH/EUR, ETH/USD, and BTC/ETH from Kraken
(July 2016–December 2018), together with EUR/USD, for comparison. In both panels error bars
indicate the standard error of linear regression.

Table 2 shows values of the Hurst exponent calculated for the returns (∆t = 1
36

Table 2: The Hurst exponents derived for the exchange rates listed on Binance and Kraken in
2018. The estimated errors are of the order of the third decimal place, therefore, they are not
reported. (USD∗ means US dollar in the case of Kraken and USDT in the case of Binance).

Name
BTC/USD∗
ETH/USD∗
ETH/BTC
XRP/BTC
BCH/BTC
BCH/USD∗
LTC/BTC
LTC/USD∗
ETC/BTC
XMR/BTC
DASH/BTC
ETC/ETH
Average

H
Binance Kraken
0.47
0.48
0.48
0.49
0.51
0.48
0.46
0.45
0.48
0.43
0.48
0.48
0.47
0.45
0.47
0.47
0.47
0.45
0.46
0.43
0.46
0.44
0.42
0.41
0.47
0.45

min) of a few equivalent exchange rates that were obtained independently from two
platforms: Binance and Kraken. The time series cover the whole year 2018. On
average, larger exponents can be observed for the cryptocurrency pairs listed on
Binance, where H is closer to 0.5. This goes in parallel with a higher trading frequency on this platform than on Kraken (see Sect. 3). The smallest Hurst exponent
was obtained on both platforms for ETC/ETH, which is characterized by the lowest
trading frequency correlating also with relatively small Hurst exponents for Kraken’s
BCH/BTC, XMR/BTC, and DASH/BTC (in each case H < 0.5).
4.3. Multiscaling of the exchange rates
The Hurst exponent discussed in the previous subsection can account for linear
correlations only. A more subtle characteristics of the time series complexity is the
occurrence of multiscale autocorrelations. They can be described by the generalized
Hurst exponent family h(q) with q that belongs to some predefined range related to
the properties of the return PDF tails. h(q) can be calculated with help of MFDFA
according to Eq.(9). A complementary information can be found in the singularity
spectrum f (α), whose width given by Eq.(11) can be considered as a measure of the
time series complexity or diversity of its internal structure [114, 188, 117].
4.3.1. Temporal evolution of the multiscale autocorrelations
Figure 23 presents the fluctuation functions F (q, s) defined by Eq. 8 and the
generalized Hurst exponents h(q) calculated for the ∆t = 10s return time series of
the BTC/USD exchange rate divided into annual intervals 2012-2018 (the Bitstamp
data). A systematic improvement of the F (q, s) scaling quality can be observed each
subsequent year, especially for q < 0 (small returns). This improvement is closely
related to the gradual shortening of the inter-transaction times on this exchange
rate, thus shortening also the zero-return sequences that influence the algorithm
output. In 2012 such intervals without trading reached 600 minutes, thus the range
of satisfactory scaling F (q, s) is very short in this case. There was no dependence of
37

q=2
q=-2

0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3

h(q)

2012

q=3
q=-3

2014

0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3

h(q)

2013

-4

-2

q0

2

4

-4

-2

q0

2

4

-4

-2

q

0

2

4

-4

-2

q

0

2

4

-4

-2

q

0

2

4

-4

-2

q

0

2

4

-4

-2

q

0

2

4

q=-4

h(q)

q=4
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3

q=-4

2016

h(q)

q=4

2015

0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3

q=-4

h(q)

q=4
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3

q=4

2017

2018

h(q)

q=-4

0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3

q=4
h(q)

F (q,s)

-1

10
-2
10
-3
10
-4
10
-1
10
-2
10
-3
10
-4
10
-1
10
-2
10
-3
10
-4
10
-1
10
-2
10
-3
10
-4
10
-1
10
-2
10
-3
10
-4
10
-1
10
-2
10
-3
10
-4
10
-1
10
-2
10
-3
10
-4
10

q=-4
2

Scale s [min] 10

10

0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3

3

10

4

Figure 23: Fluctuation functions F (q, s) (∆q = 0.2) calculated for the BTC/USD exchange rate on
Bitstamp over subsequent annual intervals from 2012 to 2018. The range of scales selected for the
calculation of h(q) is indicated by the dashed lines. Inset presents the generalized Hurst exponent
h(q) calculated from the scale range marked with dashed lines. Error bars represent the standard
error of linear regression.

38

h(q) on negative qs until 2017 (see insets in Fig. 23). Thus, a power-law dependence
of F (q, s) on s during earlier years reflects solely the organization of the larger
fluctuations. It can also be recalled that the CDF tail for BTC/USD increased
from γ ≈ 2 in 2012 to over 3 from 2014 on (Sect. 3). This result led to limiting
the q range in h(q) from [-2,2] for 2012, through [-3,3] for 2013, to [-4,4] for 2014
and the subsequent years (because of the non-existent higher-order moments of the
corresponding PDFs).
Figure 24 presents the singularity spectra f (α) for the same individual years
as Fig. 23. From 2013 until 2017 the spectra are asymmetric with strong dominance of the left wing corresponding to large returns and only in 2018 the right
wing corresponding to small returns becomes significant. In the years 2013-2016 the
asymmetry coefficient Aα assumed values between 0.7 and 0.8. The spectrum was
widest in 2017 attaining width ∆α ≈ 0.5 with Aα ≈ 0.34, while in 2018 it became
symmetric with Aα ≈ −0.03 and ∆α ≈ 0.41. Based on these values, f (α) in 2018
can be categorized as multifractal with well-developed hierarchical organization for
both the small and large returns. This means that, along with increasing transaction frequency on BTC/USD, the small returns ceased to behave like noise and
the nonlinear correlations eventually built up also in this case. Such a symmetry
between the fluctuations of different magnitude is a well-grounded observation on
Forex [23, 189] and other mature markets [117, 98]. The results for 2012 and 2013
are characterized by the largest error, which is related to a short range of scaling in
s that may be used to assess the scaling exponents h(q) and f (α). Moreover, taking
into account the lack of long-range nonlinear correlations in 2012 (see Sect. 3.4), the
time-series for this period can be considered as monofractal (if fractal at all).
The observed multiscale characteristics disappear when considering the Fourier
surrogates of the data [190] or the shuffled time series. In the former case, nonlinear
correlations are destroyed through the Fourier-phase randomization of the original
data and only linear correlations survive. Their singularity spectra are narrow and
located at the values of α that match the Hurst exponent H of the original time series
(see Fig. 24). In the latter case, shuffling destroys all correlations (i.e., linear and
nonlinear) but preserves the return distributions. The spectra f (α) are also narrow
and located roughly at α = 0.5. It should be pointed out that the slightly wider
spectra featured for 2012 and 2013 are a numerical artifact caused by the heavy tails
of the corresponding PDFs (see Refs. [114, 191, 121, 122] for more details).
In order to look at a broader picture, one may also compare the multiscale properties of BTC/USD with other exchange rates or even the same exchange rates from
different trading platforms. Fig. 25 exhibits the fluctuation functions F (q, s) calculated from the ∆t = 1 min returns of the most liquid exchange rates listed on
Binance and Kraken: BTC/USD∗ , ETH/USD∗ , BTC/ETH, and XRP/BTC, where
USD∗ means either US dollar (Kraken) or USDT (Binance). The data covers 2018.
Since the related PDFs are heavy-tailed with γ ≈ 3, a range of q was restricted to
[-4,4] [192]. The functions F (q, s) are indefinite for small s and negative q because
the considered exchange rates were traded with a moderate frequency, especially on
Kraken, where non-trading intervals could be as long as 100 min. Fortunately, the
scaling quality for s > 100 min is comparable between both exchanges. The dotted lines in Figure 25 mark the range of scales s, for which the singularity spectra
presented in Fig. 26 were estimated. These spectra are characterized by a left-sided
asymmetry on both platforms. For Binance they are slightly wider and more sym39

1

f(α)

0.8

2018
2017
2016
2015
2014
2013
2012

0.6
1

f(α)

0.8

0.4

0.6
0.4
0.2

0.2
0.2

0.2

0.3

0.3

0.4

α
0.5

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.6

0.7

0.7

α
Figure 24: Singularity spectra f (α) calculated for the BTC/USD exchange rate returns over subsequent annual periods with q ∈ [−4, 4], except for 2012 (q ∈ [−2, 2]) and 2013 (q ∈ [−3, 3]). Inset
shows f (α) for the Fourier surrogates (dotted line) and the shuffled surrogates (dashed line).

metric than for Kraken, which suggests that the nonlinear organization of the small
fluctuations is better developed on the former platform, owing to a higher trading frequency there. Like in the case of BTC/USD from Bitstamp, the observed
multiscale effects disappear here when the Fourier and the shuffled surrogates are
considered. Other exchange rates listed in Tab. 1 (Sect. 3.4), which are quoted simultaneously on Binance and Kraken, cannot be compared between the two because
of a low trading frequency on Kraken and the PDF heavy tails of the corresponding
time series. However, in general the returns for these exchange rates are monofractal
and they have already been characterized by the Hurst exponent (Tab. 2).
4.3.2. Multiscale characteristics for currencies and cryptocurrencies
Figure 27 shows F (q, s) and h(q) calculated or five the most liquid cryptocurrency
pairs: BTC/EUR, BTC/USD, ETH/EUR, ETH/USD, and BTC/ETH from Kraken
and, for a benchmark, the fiat currency pair EUR/USD from Forex. The returns
with ∆t = 10s cover an interval from July 2016 to December 2018. The scale range
used to calculate h(q) is denoted by vertical dashed lines in each case. A maximum
s used to estimate h(q) should not be longer than the length of the average cluster of
volatility assessed with the help of autocorrelation function (Sect. 3.4), otherwise the
estimated h(q) is not credible [114]. Similar to BTC/US from Bitstamp discussed
in Sect. 4.3.1, on Kraken the long periods without transactions lead to F (q, s) with
undefined values for the negative qs and for the small scales s. This effect does not
occur in the case of EUR/USD, because Forex is a much more liquid market.
40

BTC/USD*

10

q=4

q=4

F(q,s)

10

q=-4

q=-4

q=-4

-4

q=4

q=4

-2

10

10

q=4

q=4

-3

q=-4
10

XRP/BTC

Binance

-2

ETH/BTC

q=-4

q=-4

q=-4

q=-4

-3

q=4

q=4

Kraken

10

ETH/USD*

-4

10

2

10

3

10

4

10

2

10

3

10

4

2

10

10

Scale s [min]

3

10

4

10

2

10

3

10

4

Figure 25: Fluctuation functions F (q, s) (∆q = 0.2) calculated for the exchange rates BTC/USDT,
ETH/USDT, BTC/ETH and XRP/BTC on Binance (upper panel) and Kraken (lower panel) in
2018 (USD∗ means USD in the case of Kraken, and USDT in the case of Binance).

A lack of dependence of h(q) on q for the negative qs and a clear dependence
for q > 0 (insets of Fig. 27) indicates that a heterogeneous hierarchical organization
can only be seen for the medium and large returns, while the small returns are
rather homogeneous. In contrast, h(q) for EUR/USD is symmetric, proving that the
fluctuations of all magnitudes are responsible for the multiscale organization of the
data. It appears noteworthy that a symmetric f (α) characterized also BTC/USD
in 2018.
The multiscale properties characterizing the cryptocurrency exchange rates from
Kraken and EUR/USD from Forex are illustrated in Figure 28, where their singularity spectra are compared. The spectrum for EUR/USD is the widest with
∆α ≈ 0.75 and the most symmetric with Aα ≈ −0.02. The widest spectrum for
Kraken, representing the crypto-crypto pair BTC/ETH, is a result of the longest
right-side wing of f (α) with ∆α ≈ 0.42. This spectrum is still considerably narrower if compared to that for EUR/USD, however. The other cryptocurrency/fiat
exchange rates are also characterized by the left-sided asymmetry: Aα ∈ [0.7, 0.9]
and ∆α ≈ 0.35 in each case. As a consequence, the small returns quantified by the
right wing of f (α) behave as if they were monofractal noise. This results confirms
that the Forex exchange rates show more complex dynamics than the cryptocurrency
exchange rates.
The observed multiscale effects disappear entirely if the non-linear correlations
41

1

BTC/USD*
BTC/ETH
ETH/USD*
XRP/BTC

Kraken

Binance

1

0.8

0.8

f(α)

0.6

1

0.4

0.2

0.3

f(α)

f(α)

0.8

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6
α
0.4
0.6
0.5

α

0.2

0.3

0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6
α
0.4
0.6
0.5

α

Figure 26: Singularity spectra calculated for the exchange rates BTC/USD∗ , ETH/USD∗ ,
BTC/ETH and XRP/BTC on Binance (left panel) and Kraken (right panel) in 2018 for q ∈
[−4, 4](USD∗ means USD in the case of Kraken, and USDT in the case of Binance). In the inset,
returns spectra for the Fourier surrogates (dotted line) and the random shuffling surrogates (dashed
line) are shown.

are selectively destroyed via the Fourier surrogates or if the returns are shuffled. In
the latter case, the impact of the heavy tails on the singularity spectra is evident
(inset of Fig. 28). The spectra for the shuffled data are a little broader if compared
to the case of the Fourier surrogates. However, they are narrower than their counterparts derived for BTC/USD from Bitstamp in 2012 and 2013, which stems from
the thinner return PDF tails on Kraken.
Summing up, complexity of the BTC/USD exchange rate returns has evolved in
time and, by 2017, it approached the complexity observed typically on Forex and
even attained that level in 2018. Similar conclusion could be drawn for the exchange
rates listed on Kraken, where ETH/USD shows the multiscale properties similar to
BTC/USD. An exchange rate without any fiat currency involved – BTC/ETH – also
reveals complexity typical for Forex. The exception that allows for distinguishing
between the cryptocurrency exchange rates and the Forex ones is a less evident
hierarchical organization of the small fluctuations in the former case. This is because
a high trading frequency is needed to develop multiscaling at the level of small
fluctuations. The impact of trading frequency is also seen when comparing the
same exchange rates listed on different trading platforms. On Binance, where the
frequency is larger, the return time-series show the multiscale properties that are
closer to those typically observed on Forex than their counterparts listed on Kraken.

42

-3

10
10

q=4

BTC/EUR

q=-4

-4
-5

10

BTC/USD

0.6

q=-4

0.5
0.4

-3

10

0.4

-3

10

10

-2 q 0

2

-2 q 0

2

4

-4

-2 q 0

2

EUR/USD
q=4
0.6

-5

0.6

0.5

q=-4

0.4
-4

10

-4

0.5

4

q=-4

-4

4

0.4

q=4

h(q)

10

BTC/ETH

2

0.6

0.5

h(q)

-2

-2 q 0

q=-4
0.6

-4

10

-4

q=4

q=-4

-5

10

0.5

4

ETH/USD

-4

10

2

q=4

h(q)

F (q,s)

ETH/EUR

-2 q 0

h(q)

-2

0.6

0.4
-4

10

q=4

h(q)

-2

h(q)

10

2

-2 q 0

3

10

2

10

0.5
0.4

4

4

Scale s [min]

10

2

10

3

10

4

4

Figure 27: Fluctuation functions F (q, s) (∆q = 0.2) calculated for returns of the exchange rates
BTC/EUR, BTC/USD, ETH/EUR, ETH/USD and BTC/ETH from the Kraken exchange, and
EUR/USD from the Forex market. The calculations include returns recorded from July 2016 to
December 2018. Insets present the generalized Hurst exponent h(q) estimated from the range of
scales indicated by the dashed lines. Error bars represent the standard error for linear regression.

BTC/EUR
BTC/USD
ETH/EUR
ETH/USD
BTC/ETH
EUR/USD

1

0.8

f(α)

0.6
1
0.8

f(α)

0.4
0.6
0.4

0.2

0.2
0

0

0.2

0.3

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.4

0.5

α
0.5

0.6

0.7

0.6

0.8

0.7

0.8

α
Figure 28: Singularity spectrum calculated for the exchange rates BTC/EUR, BTC/USD,
ETH/EUR, ETH/USD and BTC/ETH on the Kraken exchange and EUR/USD, from July 2016
to December 2018, for q ∈ [−4, 4]. In the inset, spectra for Fourier surrogates (dotted line) and
random shuffling surrogates (dashed line) are given for the returns.

43

5. Multiscale cross-correlations
Throughout the two preceding sections, it was shown that the cryptocurrency
exchange rate fluctuations are characterized by heavy tails of the return probability
distributions and by volatility clustering related to nonlinear temporal correlations
in the returns and responsible for multifractality. Additional properties are revealed
when one considers multivariate data consisting of two or more exchange rates. In
Sec. 5.1, cross-correlations among the cryptocurrencies and fiat currencies will be
analyzed using the previously-presented methods based on detrending, namely the
MFCCA (Sect. 4.1.1) and ρ(q, s) (4.1.2). These allow for a quantitative description of
nonlinear cross-dependencies over different time-scales and fluctuation magnitudes,
conferring a significant advantage over classical linear correlation [116]. As for linear cross-correlations, the multifractal characteristics of individual time-series does
not imply that such the same are also multifractally cross-correlated. Multifractal
cross-correlations of the triangular arbitrage opportunity data will be discussed in
Sect. 5.2.3. The results reported in this section are based on three data sets:
• Kraken-2 : BTC and ETH quotations expressed in USD and EUR taken from
Kraken and covering from Jul. 2016 to Dec. 2018, transformed to return
time-series with ∆t = 10s,
• Kraken-11 : Quotations of BCH, BTC, DASH, ETC, ETH, LTC, REP, USDT,
XMR, XRP, ZEC expressed in USD and EUR, taken from Kraken and covering
the interval Jan. 2018 to Dec. 2018, transformed to return time-series with
∆t = 1 min (here, only the most liquid pairs were considered), and
• Binance-12 : Crypto-crypto exchange rates obtained from BAT, BCH, BNB,
BTC, ETH, ICX, IOTA, LTC, LSK, NEO, USDT, XLM taken from Binance
and covering the same interval, also transformed to return time-series with
∆t = 1 min.
See Appendix A for the full names and statistical properties of all cryptocurrencies considered in this section.
5.1. Multiscale cross-correlations for the BTC and ETH
The bivariate fluctuation functions Fxy (q, s) calculated (Eq.(6)) for the exchange
rates involving cryptocurrencies show scaling behaviour over a range of scales. Figure 29 (main panels) illustrates this observation by showing Fxy (q, s) for ten pairs of
the exchange rate return time-series, representing the most liquid cryptocurrencies
BTC and ETH (the Kraken-2 dataset), ordered from top to bottom with decreasing
scaling quality. In this case, scaling signifies that the considered exchange rates
are cross-correlated at various levels of their hierarchical organization. The most
convincing scaling is seen for the bitcoin expressed in EUR and USD, as well as for
the ethereum in the same fiat currencies (top panels). Contrariwise, the weakest
scaling is associated with correlations for the exchange rates involving BTC and a
fiat currency, or only cryptocurrencies, namely BTC/ETH (two bottom panels).
However, the scaling of Fxy (q, s) can only be observed for medium and large
returns (q > 0) whereas, for small returns (q < 0), the function becomes negative
and there is no multiscale cross-correlation. This finding agrees with the multifractal properties of the individual exchange rates reported in Sec.4, for which similar
44

10
10

-2

BTC/EUR-BTC/USD q=4

-4

10

-6

0.6
0.5
0.4

q=0.2

Fxy (q,s)

10
10

-2

10
10
10
10
10
10

2

q

3

4

hxy
2

q

3

4

0.6
0.5
0.4

2

-4

q

3

q=0.4
1

10

10

2

q

3

2

q

3

4

3

4

3

4

λ

hxy
1

0.6
0.5
0.4

q=0.2

4

2

q

λ

hxy
1

2

q

BTC/ETH-BTC/USD q=4

q=4

0.6
0.5
0.4

λ

hxy
1

2

4

λ

0.6
0.5
0.4

q=0.2

4

hxy

0.6
0.5
0.4

-6

3

hxy
1

λ
1

-2 BTC/ETH-BTC/EUR

q

ETH/BTC-ETH/USD q=4
0.6
0.5
0.4

q=0.2

q=0.2

hxy

-2 ETH/BTC-ETH/EUR q=4

-6

0.6
0.5
0.4

λ
1

-4

2

BTC/USD-ETH/EUR q=4

BTC/EUR-ETH/USD q=4

q=0.2

λ

hxy
1

λ
1

-6

q=0.2
BTC/USD-ETH/USD q=4

0.6
0.5
0.4

-4

10

hxy

q=4

q=0.2

0.6
0.5
0.4

λ
1

-2 BTC/EUR-ETH/EUR

10
-4
10
-6
10

ETH/EUR-ETH/USD q=4

3

10

2

q

3

q=0.4

4

4

10

1

10

Scale s [min]

λ

hxy
1

2

10

3

10

2

q

3

4

4

10

Figure 29: (Main) Bivariate fluctuation function Fxy (q, s) for q > 0 (∆q = 0.2) calculated for
the exchange rates BTC/EUR, BTC/USD, ETH/EUR, ETH/USD, and BTC/ETH covering the
interval from Jul. 2016 to Dec. 2018 on Kraken. Inset shows the scaling exponent λ(q) and the
average generalized Hurst exponent hxy (q) calculated over the scale range marked with the dashed
lines. Error bars represent the standard error of linear regression.

properties were also observed for medium and large returns, with their spectra accordingly featuring a strong left-side asymmetry. Indeed, this effect is typical for
mature financial markets [189, 161, 58, 98].
The dependencies of the scaling exponent λ(q) and average generalized Hurst
exponent hxy (q) defined, respectively, by Eq.(7) and Eq.(13) in Sect.4.1, are shown
in Fig. 29. Through varying q, λ(q) reflects the multifractal character of crosscorrelations between all 10 exchange rates, at least for q > 1. The weakest dependence on q and, thus, the least-developed multifractality could be seen for
BTC/ETH–BTC/EUR and BTC/ETH–BTC/USD, which are also characterized by
the weakest scaling. The cross-correlations between these exchange rate pairs are
also characterized by a negative difference dxy (q) = λ(q) − hxy (q); this is in contrast
with the other pairs, for which this is positive and depends appreciably on q (Figure 30). The significant magnitude of dxy (q) observed for some exchange rate pairs
implies a strong dependence of the cross-correlation on the scale s (see Sect. 4.1.3).
Indeed, since dxy (q) > 0 for the majority of pairs, the detrended cross-correlation
coefficient ρ(q, s) increases substantially with s for both medium and large returns,
with this effect being stronger for q = 1 than for q = 4 (Figure 31). The same can
be explained by the occurrence of large returns in the individual exchange rates,
significantly contributing variance on small scales and counteracting the build-up
45

dxy (q)= λ(q) - hxy (q)

BTC/EUR-BTC/USD
ETH/EUR-ETH/USD
BTC/EUR-ETH/EUR
BTC/USD-ETH/USD
BTC/EUR-ETH/USD
BTC/USD-ETH/EUR
ETH/BTC-ETH/EUR
ETH/BTC-ETH/USD
BTC/ETH-BTC/EUR
BTC/ETH-BTC/USD

0.1

0.05

0

-0.05

1

2

1.5

2.5

q

3

3.5

4

Figure 30: Difference between the scaling exponent λ(q) and the average generalized Hurst exponent hxy (q) for the exchange rates shown in Fig. 29.

of cross-correlations (i.e., on longer scales these are averaged out). Since for q = 4
such returns are amplified more intensely than for q = 1, it becomes obvious that
ρ(q, s) for small s is closer to zero in the former case. However, this q-dependence is
less evident here than on mature financial markets [123, 161, 98], in particular the
Forex, for which ρ(q = 1, s)/ρ(q = 4, s) ≈ 2 [58] (see Sect. 5.3 for further details).
The maximum level of ρ(q, s) depends on the exchange rate pair; for the dataset
considered here, high values are attained by the pairs such that the same cryptocurrency is expressed in terms of the fiat currencies, USD and EUR, for which
ρ(q, s) → 1. This situation can be explained by the considerably lower volatility of
EUR/USD as compared to the cryptocurrencies (Fig. 12). By contrast, the lowest
level of ρ(q, s) is found for the pairs involving the same cryptocurrency expressed
in a fiat currency and another cryptocurrency, namely BTC/ETH–BTC/EUR and
BTC/ETH–BTC/USD. The remaining pairs are associated with intermediate levels of ρ(q, s). Moreover, BTC/ETH–BTC/EUR and BTC/ETH–BTC/USD together with ETH/BTC–ETH/EUR and ETH/BTC–ETH/USD show a sign change
of dxy (q) (Fig. 30) when transitioning from q = 1 to q = 4, which hallmarks a change
in the monotonic behaviour of ρ(q, s) for s > 300.
The Kraken-2 dataset covers the period Jul. 2016 through Dec. 2018, over
which the cryptocurrency trading steadily accelerated, leading to a consistent reduction in the inter-transaction times. The coefficients ρ(q = 1, s) calculated over a
half-year periods are presented in Figure 32. During the interval from Jul. 2016 to
Dec. 2017, the correlations on the smallest time-scales remained close to zero, and
46

1

q=1

0.8
0.6
0.4

ρ(q,s)

0.2
0
1

q=4

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0

10
BTC/EUR-BTC/USD
ETH/EUR-ETH/USD
BTC/EUR-ETH/EUR
BTC/USD-ETH/USD
BTC/EUR-ETH/USD

100

1000

Scale s [min]

10000
BTC/USD-ETH/EUR
ETH/BTC-ETH/EUR
ETH/BTC-ETH/USD
BTC/ETH-BTC/EUR
BTC/ETH-BTC/USD

Figure 31: Detrended cross-correlation coefficient ρ(q, s) calculated for the exchange rate pairs
from Fig. 29, for q = 1 (top) and q = 4 (bottom).

ρ(q = 1, s) increased markedly with s. This markedly changed during 2018, when
ρ(q, s) became higher than before for small s, and its maximum value was attained
faster. The weakest correlations between BTC/ETH–BTC/EUR and BTC/ETH–
BTC/USD observed in Fig. 31 can be accounted for the fact that, following the crash
of the cryptocurrency market in Jan 2018, ρ(q = 1, s) flipped sign because both the
BTC and ETH decreased with respect to the EUR and USD (Fig. 13). However, the
decrease observed for the ETH is larger and faster than for the BTC, so BTC/ETH
rate can be seen to rise, weakening the global (i.e., whole-period) correlations between BTC/ETH and BTC/EUR, and between BTC/ETH and BTC/USD. For
comparison, it should be noted that ρ(q = 1, s) does not depend on s in the case
of a Forex exchange rate cross-correlation, such as EUR/USD–EUR/JPY (bottom
right panel of Fig. 32), which is typical in low-volatility periods wherein no extraordinary event affects the Forex systematically [58].
Until the end of 2017, insofar as two exchange rates hinged around a common
base currency (e.g., BTC/EUR–ETH/EUR and BTC/USD–ETH/USD), one would
observe a stronger cross-correlation compared to the situation of different base currencies (e.g., BTC/EUR–ETH/USD and BTC/USD–ETH/EUR); an example is visible in Fig. 32. In 2018, however, similar cross-correlation levels could already be
seen between the two cases. This observation can be explained in terms of the market synchronization that takes place over longer time-scales; it is also related to a
significant slowing in the frequency and size of the triangular arbitrage opportunities
over the period from Mar. 2018 to Dec. 2018, as visible in Figure 33.
47

2017_1

ρ(q=1,s)

1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
-0.2 2016_2
-0.4
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
-0.2 2017_2
-0.4
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
-0.2
-0.4 2018_2
100
1000
Scale s 10
[min]
BTC/EUR-BTC/USD

2018_1

EUR/USD-EUR/JPY

07.2016-12.2018
10000

10

100

1000

10000

ETH/EUR-ETH/USD

BTC/EUR-ETH/EUR
BTC/USD-ETH/USD

BTC/EUR-ETH/USD
BTC/USD-ETH/EUR

ETH/BTC-ETH/EUR
ETH/BTC-ETH/USD

BTC/EUR-BTC/ETH
BTC/USD-BTC/ETH

EUR/USD-EUR/JPY

Figure 32: Detrended cross-correlation coefficient ρ(q = 1, s) calculated for the exchange rate pairs
shown in Fig. 29 in semi-annual windows from Jul. 2016 to Dec. 2018, shown alongside together
the pair EUR/USD–EUR/JPY from the Forex.

Three (crypto)currencies are deemed to be in a triangle relationship if it is possible to make a transaction cycle through three exchange rates and return to the
initial (crypto)currency [57, 58]. Given the five exchange rates from Kraken-2, two
triangles are available: EUR  BTC  ETH  EUR and USD  BTC  ETH
 USD, where the double arrows indicate the two possible exchange directions [57].
The arbitrage opportunity occurs at a time t if

or

1
· BTC/ETHbid (t) · ETH/EURbid (t) > 1
BTC/EURask (t)

(19)

1
1
·
· BTC/EURbid (t) > 1.
ETH/EURask (t) BTC/ETHask (t)

(20)

The formulas are, evidently, unchanged when considering the USD in place of the
EUR. Because the bid price for the same exchange rate needs to be lower than the
ask price, such arbitrage opportunities are rather rare. For example, on Forex they
occur only during events that elevate the volatility [58].
In the case of a dataset without the bid and ask prices, it is impossible to calculate
the exact arbitrage opportunity as one has to replace the exchange rates in Eq.(19)
and Eq.(20) with logarithmic prices at the end of each interval of length ∆t:
R∆t (A/B, t) = log(A(t + ∆t)/B(t + ∆t)) − log(A(t)/B(t)),
48

(21)

Figure 33: Arbitrage opportunity time-series for the exchange rates that form a triangle relation,
including the BTC/EUR, BTC/ETH, ETH/EUR and BTC/USD, BTC/ETH, ETH/USD.

where A/B is the exchange rate between the (crypto)currencies A and B, and ∆t =
10s. For the above-mentioned triangles, the following arbitrage cases are possible:
Arb∆t (EUR-BTC-ETH, t) = − R∆t (BTC/EUR, t) + R∆t (BTC/ETH, t)
+ R∆t (ETH/EUR, t),

(22)

Arb∆t (USD-BTC-ETH, t) = − R∆t (BTC/USD, t) + R∆t (BTC/ETH, t)
+ R∆t (ETH/USD, t).

(23)

If Arb(EUR-BTC-ETH) 6= 0 or Arb(USD-BTC-ETH) 6= 0, there exists a possibility
of carrying out the arbitrage. Time-series of the arbitrage opportunity are shown in
Fig. 33. Towards the end of 2018, their frequency and size decreased, which could be
associated with a more intense synchronization of the exchange rates engendered by
the inter-transaction time shortening on Kraken. This situation also translates into
an increased cross-correlation level over the shortest time-scales during the same
period.
5.2. Multiscale cross-correlations on the different trading platforms
This section reports the primary results concerning the exchange-rate crosscorrelations of liquid cryptocurrencies on the two trading platforms, Kraken (the
Kraken-11 dataset) and Binance (the Binance-12 dataset). More specifically, both
the cross-correlations within one platform and the inter-platform ones were considered. Only BTC and ETH (Kraken) and BTC, ETH, USDT, and BNB (Binance)
49

were liquid enough to serve as bases. For each platform, a symmetric q-correlation
(q,s)
matrix Cij , where 1 6 i, j 6 N , can be created for each scale s, whose entries
correspond to ρ(q, s) calculated for two exchange rates, with N = 31.
5.2.1. Intra-platform multiscale cross-correlations
The representative behavior of ρ(q, s) in four typical cases for each platform is
shown in Fig. 34 (Kraken) and Fig. 35 (Binance).
1

b)

a)

0.8

q=1
q=2
q=3
q=4

0.6
0.4

ρ(q,s)

0.2
0
1

BTC/EUR-ETH/EUR

BTC/EUR-BTC/USD

c)

BTC/USD-ETH/EUR

d)

ETH/EUR-BTC/LTC

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0

10

100

1000

10000 10

Scale s [min]

100

1000

10000

Figure 34: Detrended cross-correlation coefficient ρ(q, s) for q > 0 calculated for the exchange rate
pairs listed on Binance. Situations when the exchange rates do not have a common base currency
are marked in red. (a) The same cryptocurrency in EUR and USD, (b) two cryptocurrencies
expressed in the same base one, i.e., EUR or USD, (c) two cryptocurrencies expressed in EUR and
USD, (d) no common base currency. Panels (a)-(d) are ordered according to decreasing correlation
strength.

Among the exchange rates considered for Kraken, the strongest correlation, approaching unity for large s, is seen for BTC/EUR–BTC/USD (Fig. 34(a)); this
indicates that, on such scales, it is largely irrelevant whether the BTC is expressed
in EUR or USD, since the traditional currencies are markedly less volatile than the
cryptocurrencies. Over shorter scales, however, the cross-correlations are weaker for
any setting of q, because the market is incompletely synchronized and there occur
arbitrage opportunities. Meanwhile, for a given s, ρ(q, s) is larger for shorter average
inter-transaction intervals. The cross-correlation strength for the cryptocurrencies
expressed in the same fiat currency, EUR or USD, ranks second, with the largest
value of ρ(q, s) ≈ 0.8 (s > 200 min) observed for the most liquid pair, namely BTC
and ETH (Fig. 34(b)).
50

a)

b)

0.8

q=1
q=2
q=3
q=4

0.6

ρ(q,s)

0.4
0.2

ICX/BTC-ICX/ETH

BTC/USDT-ETH/USDT
0

c)

ETH/USDT-NEO/BTC

d)

ETH/USDT-ICX/BNB

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0

10

100

1000

10000 10

Scale s [min]

100

1000

10000

Figure 35: Detrended cross-correlation coefficient ρ(q, s) for q > 0 on Binance calculated for
exchange rate pairs delineating a triangle relation (top panels) and not being in such a relation
(bottom panels).

The third case is a situation that characterizes Kraken in particular: a pair of
exchange rates does not form a triangle relation (i.e., four (crypto)currencies are
involved), but one cryptocurrency is expressed in USD whereas the other in EUR. If
the cryptocurrencies are BTC and ETH (Fig. 34(c)), the cross-correlation strength
is only slightly lower than that in Fig. 34(b), and it is only for the smallest s. Again,
this is connected to the small volatility of the fiat currencies. Finally, there is the
case of exchange rates that also do not form a triangle, but involve only one fiat
currency. Here, a maximum ρ(q, s) is considerably smaller than in the previous cases;
the most strongly correlated pair is ETH/EUR–BTC/LTC, with ρ(q = 1, s) < 0.6
and ρ(q = 4, s) < 0.4 even for the longest scales (Fig. 34(d)). For the shortest scales
considered (s ≈ 10 min), such exchange rates are largely independent of each other.
A notable feature is the significant dependence of the cross-correlation strength on
q.
Since on Binance cryptocurrencies are only traded among themselves, one cannot
calculate ρ(q, s) for BTC/X–BTC/Y, where X, Y are fiat currencies, and one cannot
create a plot equivalent to Fig. 34(a). Nevertheless, it is possible to use Tether
(USDT) as a proxy for the US dollar, and thus create a plot equivalent to Fig. 34(b).
Indeed, Fig. 35(a) shows that the cross-correlation between the exchange rates that
involve the same “fiat” base, i.e., BTC/USDT–ETH/USDT, is the strongest among
all the rates considered on Binance. By replacing the USDT with ICX, a less liquid
cryptocurrency, the cross-correlations decrease for small s, while remaining on a
51

level similar to that for USDT for s > 200 min (Fig. 35(b)).
If the exchange rates do not share the same base, they do not form a triangle,
and ρ(q, s) is substantially smaller than in panels (a) and (b) over all q and all scales
(Fig. 35(c)-(d)). Since, over small s, trading on different exchange rates does not
happen to be synchronized, especially for the exchange rates that do not form any
triangle (no arbitrage possibility), the cross-correlations are much weaker than over
large s, from the perspective of which trading is more synchronous. The liquidity of
a cryptocurrency liquidity plays a key role here: for the more liquid exchange rates,
e.g., BTC/NEO in Fig. 35(c), the maximum level of ρ(q, s) is higher compared to
the less liquid ones, e.g., ICX/BNB in Fig. 35(d).
Ki /EUR-Ki /USD in Tr

Ki /EUR-Kj /USD

outside Tr q=1

0.8
0.6
0.4

ρ(q)

0.2
0
Ki /EUR-Ki /USD

0.8

Ki /EUR-Kj /USD

q=4

0.6
0.4
0.2
0

Exchange rate

Figure 36: Absolute detrended cross-correlation coefficient ρ(q) averaged over all the scales s,
calculated for the exchange rate pairs from Kraken. The exchange rates related by a triangle
relationship (in Tr) are shown on the left (black), while the exchange rate pairs that do not form
any triangle (outside Tr) are shown on the right (red). The coefficients ρ(q) are sorted in descending
order for the top panel, and this order is preserved for q = 4 in the bottom panel. Horizontal lines
indicate the average value of ρ(q) for a group of exchange rates in a triangle relationship, i.e.,
Ki /USD–Ki /EUR, and without such a relation, i.e., Ki /EUR–Kj /USD, where Ki , Kj = BCH,
BTC, DASH, ETC, ETH, LTC, XMR, XRP, and ZEC, Ki 6= Kj ).

Cross-correlations between the exchange rates of the form Ki /EUR–Kj /USD,
where Ki , Kj (1 6 i, j 6 N ) denote cryptocurrencies, are on average stronger
than those involving only a single fiat currency X, i.e., Ki /X–Kj /Kl , or no fiat
currency at all, i.e., Ki /Kl –Kj /Km , where 1 6 l, m 6 N, i 6= l, j 6= m. This is
shown in Fig. 36 for all possible exchange rate pairs from Kraken-11, split into the
triangle-related (black) and triangle-unrelated (red) ones. Each vertical bar represents the absolute detrended cross-correlation coefficient averaged over all scales:
52

P max
ρ(q) = 1s | ss=s
ρ(q, s)|, and in descending order. By comparing the triangle crossmin
correlations with the non-triangle ones, it becomes apparent that a primary factor
responsible for the magnitude of ρ(q) is the number of exchange rates that revolve
around a fiat currency: the exchange rates of two cryptocurrencies tend to be less
correlated with the other exchange rates than those involving the USD or EUR.
Notably, this property is largely preserved if a different value of q is selected (e.g.,
compare the top and bottom panels of Fig. 36).
Fig. 37 shows |ρ(q, s)| calculated for representative individual scales (i.e., s =
10 min, s = 1 h, s = 1 day, and s = 7 days) instead of ρ(q), and arranged in
the same manner as Fig. 36, for q = 1 (top panel) and q = 4 (bottom panel).
Typically, the magnitude of ρ(q, s) increases with raising s for a given exchange rate
pair with the largest cross-correlation, close to unity, being reached for Ki /EUR–
Ki /USD in accordance with Fig. 34(a). Thus, on long temporal scales, it becomes
inconsequential whether a cryptocurrency is expressed in EUR or USD. This effect
is visible not only for the most liquid cryptocurrencies, e.g., the BTC and ETH, but
also for the less liquid ones. However, for s = 10 min, only the most liquid exchange
rates feature ρ(q, s)  0. By increasing q and focusing on the larger returns, one
observes that only the exchange rates having the form Ki /EUR–Kj /USD differ from
0 significantly on the shortest scale s = 10 min; these exchange rates also increase
most markedly in s.
The same key factor, namely the average number of transactions in a time interval, determines the cross-correlation strength on the Binance platform (the Binance12 dataset). Given the absence of any exchange rate involving fiat currency, for q = 1
the strongest cross-correlations are those observed for the exchange rate pairs involving two different cryptocurrencies alongside a common base, USDT: Ki /USDT–
Kj /USDT (the triangle-relation case with Ki , Kj =BCH, BNB, BTC, ETH, LTC,
NEO, Ki 6= Kj ), and those involving two cryptocurrencies, USDT and the most liquid BTC: Kl /BTC–Kj /USDT (the non-triangle-relation case with Kl =BAT, BCH,
BNB, ETH, ICX, IOTA, LTC, LSK, NEO, XLM, Kl 6= Kj ); see Fig. 38. However,
the agreement between the magnitude of ρ(q) for q = 1 and q = 4 is less clear
on Binance than on Kraken, because of higher volatility of the cryptocurrencies as
compared to USD and EUR.
On the level of individual scales, the average cross-correlations among the Binance exchange rates increase with s (see Fig. 39), which is in agreement with Fig. 35
and points to the analogous result obtained for the Kraken data (Fig. 36). In contrast with Kraken, however, the largest values of ρ(q, s) do not change with s in
the case of the triangle-forming exchange rates Ki /USDT–Kj /USDT (for q = 1)
and BTC/Km –ETH/Km , where Ki and Kj denote the same cryptocurrencies as in
the preceding paragraph, and Km denotes any cryptocurrency denoted by Kl and
additionally USDT (for q = 4). On the other hand, the pairs Kl /BTC–Kj /USDT
are the strongest cross-correlated ones among the triangle-unrelated exchange rates.
On Binance, there is a considerably larger difference in ρ(q, s) between the trianglerelated and the triangle-unrelated rates on the short scale of s = 10 min. In the
former case (i.e., with a common base cryptocurrency), market synchronization occurs on shorter scales because of the triangular arbitrage possibility. In contrast, in
the latter case (i.e., lack of a common base), there is no direct arbitrage possible,
and a longer time is needed to synchronize the exchange rates.
Remarkably, since the cross-correlations among the exchange rates differ in mag53

1
0.8

BTC/EUR-BTC/USD
ETH/EUR-ETH/USD

s=10min
in Tr

BTC/EUR-BTC/USD
ETH/EUR-ETH/USD

BTC/USD-ETH/EUR
BTC/EUR-ETH/USD

BTC/USD-ETH/EUR

0.6

s=1h
outside Tr

BTC/EUR-ETH/USD

ρ(q=1,s)

0.4
0.2
0 K /EUR-K /USD K /EUR-K /USD
i
i
j
s=1week Ki /EUR-Ki /USD Ki /EUR-Kj /USD
1 i

s=24h

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
1
0.8

BTC/EUR-BTC/USD
ETH/EUR-ETH/USD

Exchange rate
s=10min
in Tr

ZEC/EUR-ZEC/USD

s=1h
outside Tr

BTC/USD-ETH/EUR

0.6

BTC/USD-ETH/EUR

BTC/EUR-ETH/USD

BTC/EUR-ETH/USD

ρ(q=4,s)

0.4
0.2
0 K /EUR-K /USD
i
1 i

Ki /EUR-Kj /USD

s=1week

Ki /EUR-Ki /USD

Ki /EUR-Kj /USD

s=24h

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0

Exchange rate

Figure 37: Absolute detrended cross-correlation coefficient ρ(q, s) for sample time-scales s, with
q = 1 (medium returns) and q = 4 (large returns) calculated for the exchange rate pairs from
Kraken connected by a triangle relationship (in Tr) and without any triangle relation (outside
Tr). The coefficients ρ(q, s) are sorted in descending order for the s =10 min, and this order is
preserved for the remaining scales. Horizontal lines indicate the average value of ρ(q, s) for a group
of exchange rates forming a triangle, i.e., Ki /EUR–Ki /USD, and without such a relation, i.e.,
Ki /EUR–Kj /USD (Ki , Kj like in Fig. 36, Ki 6= Kj ).

54

in Tr
0.8

outside Tr

q=1

Ki /USDT-Kj /USDT

0.6

Kn /BTC-Kj /USDT

0.4

ρ(q)

0.2
0

0.8

q=4

BNB/BTC-BNB/ETH

0.6
0.4
0.2
0

Exchange rate

Figure 38: Absolute detrended cross-correlation coefficient ρ(q) averaged over all scales s, calculated
for the exchange rate pairs from Binance. The exchange rates related by a triangle relationship
(in Tr) are shown on the left (black), while the exchange rate pairs that do not form any triangle
(outside Tr) are shown on the right (red). The coefficients ρ(q) are sorted in descending order in
the top panel, and this order is preserved for q = 4 in bottom panel. Horizontal lines indicate the
average value of ρ(q) for a group of exchange rates with a common base currency (i.e., in a triangle
relationship): Ki /USDT–Kj /USDT (where Ki , Kj = BCH, BNB, BTC, ETH, LTC, and NEO,
Ki 6= Kj ) and without such a relation: Kl /BTC–Kj /USDT (where Kl = BAT, BCH, BNB, ETH,
ICX, IOTA, LTC, LSK, NEO, and XLM, Kl 6= Kj ).

nitude, a cross-correlation hierarchy is formed, which can be expressed as a dendrogram by applying a hierarchical clustering algorithm [7, 22, 193]. As this is defined
over a metric space, each average q-coefficient ρij (q) for the exchange rates i and j
must be transformed to a respective distance δij (q), defined as follows
q

q > 0,
(24)
δij (q) = 2 1 − |ρij (q)| ,
where the absolute value is taken to eliminate
the impact of exchange direction. This
√
definition of δij implies that 0 6 δij 6 2 with
√ δij = 0 for perfect cross-correlation
between the exchange rates i and j, and δij = 2 for statistically independent pairs.
The so-constructed dendrograms are presented in Fig. 40 for the exchange rates
from Kraken (except for USDT/USD, which is independent of the rest of the market), and in Fig. 41 for the exchange rates from Binance (except for the least correlated one, LSK/BNB). On both platforms, the distances increase with q (i.e.,
substantial returns are less cross-correlated than typical ones) but, for a given q,
they are typically larger on Binance; actually, this could already be observed in
Fig. 36 and Fig. 38 based on ρ(q). On Kraken, clusters for q = 1 and q = 4 appear
55

s=10min

in Tr
0.8

Ki /USDT-Kj /USDT outside Tr

s=1h

Ki /USDT-Kj /USDT

0.6

Kn /BTC-Kj /USDT

Kn /BTC-Kj /USDT

0.4

ρ(q=1,s)

0.2
0

s=1week

s=24h

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0

0.8
0.6

Exchange rate
BTC/Kz -ETH/Kz

in Tr s=10min

BTC/Kz -ETH/Kz

Kn /BTC-Kj /USDT

outside Tr s=1h
Kn /BTC-Kj /USDT

0.4

ρ(q=4,s)

0.2
0

s=1week

s=24h

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0

Exchange rate

Figure 39: Absolute detrended cross-correlation coefficient ρ(q, s) for representative time-scales s
and for q = 1 (medium returns) and q = 4 (large returns) calculated for the exchange rate pairs
from Kraken connected by a triangle relationship (in Tr), and without any triangle relation (outside
Tr). The coefficients ρ(q, s) are sorted in descending order for the s =10 min, and this order is
preserved for the remaining scales. Horizontal lines indicate the average value of ρ(q, s) for a group
of exchange rates forming a triangle: Ki /USDT–Kj /USDT for q = 1 (where Ki , Kj = BCH, BNB,
BTC, ETH, LTC, and NEO, Ki 6= Kj ) and BTC/Km –ETH/Km for q = 4 (where Km = BAT,
BCH, BNB, ICX, IOTA, LTC, LSK, NEO, USDT, and XLM) and without such a relationship:
Kl /BTC–Kj /USDT for q = 1 and q = 4 (where Kl = BAT, BCH, BNB, ETH, ICX, IOTA, LTC,
LSK, NEO, and XLM, Kl 6= Kj ).

56

1.1
1

ij

(q=1)

0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5

ETHBTC

LTCBTC

DASHBTC

REPEUR

REPBTC

REPETH

ZECBTC

ZECBTC

ZECUSD

BCHBTC

XMRBTC

ZECEUR

BCHUSD

ZECEUR

DASHEUR

BCHEUR

ZECUSD

XMRUSD

DASHUSD

DASHEUR

ETCEUR

XMREUR

ETCUSD
XRPUSD

XRPBTC

XRPUSD
XRPEUR

DASHUSD

ETHEUR

XRPEUR

ETHUSD
ETHUSD

LTCEUR

BTCUSD
ETHEUR

LTCUSD

LTCEUR

BTCEUR

LTCUSD

BTCEUR

BCHUSD

XMRUSD

BTCUSD

BCHEUR
ETCEUR

BCHBTC
ETCUSD

XMREUR

ETCBTC

ETCETH
LTCBTC

XRPBTC

REPETH
ETHBTC

ETCBTC

REPBTC
XMRBTC

ETCETH

REPEUR
DASHBTC

0.4

1.1
1

ij

(q=4)

0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4

Figure 40: Dendrograms for Kraken, presenting a hierarchy of cross-correlated exchange rates
obtained by agglomerative clustering based on metric distances calculated from the average crosscorrelation coefficients |ρ(q)| for q = 1 (top) and q = 4 (bottom).

similar to each other, with the most liquid cryptocurrencies (i.e., BTC, ETH, LTC,
and XRP) being separated the least if expressed in fiat currencies (the red cluster).
The other exchange rates form clusters insofar as the same cryptocurrency is expressed in EUR and USD; hence, they essentially elucidate a correlated movement
of USD and EUR viewed from a perspective of less liquid cryptocurrencies.
On Binance, two large clusters, based on USDT and BNB, can be distinguished
for q = 4. On the other hand, a cluster of cryptocurrencies expressed in BNB does
not exist for q = 1, and the exchange rates involving USDT merge with those involving the BTC, BNB, and ETH, as well as a few other rates, including BNB/USDT
and NEO/BTC. Less liquid cryptocurrencies, such as LSK, ICX, BAT, XLM, and
IOTA expressed in BTC, BNB, and ETH, form their own clusters. This arrangement signifies that, while the most liquid cryptocurrencies are strongly correlated
within their group, the less liquid ones are more independent. For q = 4, the main
clustering factor is a common base. A significant fluctuation of the base cryptocurrency price implies that all other assets become correlated if they are expressed in
57

1.2
1.1

ij

(q=1)

1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6

ICXBNB

ICXBTC

XLMBNB

XLMBTC

XLMETH

BATBTC

XLMBNB

BATETH

BATBNB

XLMBTC

BATBTC

LSKETH

XLMETH

BATBNB

LSKBTC

IOTAETH

ICXBNB

ICXETH

IOTABTC

NEOBNB

BATETH

IOTABNB

IOTABNB

IOTABTC

NEOBNB

LTCBNB

IOTAETH

BCHBTC

NEOETH

BNBETH

LTCUSDT

BCHUSDT
BNBBTC

BTCUSDT
NEOETH

ETHUSDT
NEOBTC

BNBUSDT

NEOBTC

NEOUSDT

ETHUSDT

NEOUSDT

BNBBTC

BNBUSDT

LTCUSDT

BNBETH
BCHUSDT

BTCUSDT

LTCBTC

LTCBNB

LTCBTC

LTCETH

ETHBTC
LTCETH

BCHBTC

LSKETH
ICXBTC

ETHBTC

LSKBTC

0.5

1.2
1.1

ij

(q=4)

1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6

ICXETH

0.5

Figure 41: Dendrograms for Binance, mirroring Fig. 40).

this particular cryptocurrency. This effect is also observed on the Forex when some
currency experiences a high volatility period (see Ref. [58] for examples about the
Swiss franc during the Swiss National Bank interventions in 2011 and 2015 British
pound after the Brexit referendum result was announced in 2016).
5.2.2. Inter-platform multiscale cross-correlations
In this subsection, cross-correlations for the selected exchange rate pairs listed
simultaneously on both Kraken and Binance are directly compared. In this context,
the USD and USDT are treated as the same currency and denoted by USD∗ .
Figure 42 shows the bivariate fluctuation function Fxy (q, s) for the most correlated exchange rates in a triangle relationship, namely the BTC/USD∗ –ETH/USD∗
(top panel), and without a triangle relationship, namely the ETH/USD∗ –XRP/BTC
(bottom panel). As in Sect. 5.1, Fxy (q, s) is also presented here only for q > 0, and
shows a consistent power-law dependence on scale. By contrast, for negative q corresponding to small returns, Fxy (q, s) fluctuates around zero, denoting the absence
of cross-correlation among such returns (not shown because of the log-log plot). A
58

difference between the platforms can be appreciated in insets of Figure 42, which
present hxy (q) and λ(q) as defined by Eq.(7) and Eq.(13) in Sect. 4.1. The difference dxy (q) between these quantities is considerably larger on Kraken than on
Binance, which suggests that, on the latter, the exchange rates synchronize over
shorter time-scales. Nevertheless, on both platforms the exchange rates without a
triangle relation show a later synchronization onset (larger dxy (q)) compared to the
exchange rates in a triangle relationship, especially for q ∈ [1, 3].
Given that dxy (q) corresponds directly to the functional behavior of ρ(q, s),
this quantity is shown in Fig. 43 for the same exchange rate pairs as in Fig. 42.
Over the shortest scales, on the order of s = 10 min, and for both BTC/USD∗ –
ETH/USD∗ and ETH/USD∗ –XRP/BTC, ρ(q, s) is smaller in the case of Kraken:
for ETH/USD∗ –XRP/BTC, the cross-correlation even approaches zero. Moreover,
ρ(q, s) substantially increases with s (however, only in terms of its overall behavior, as dxy (q) is not sensitive to scale) on Kraken, which corresponds to positive
dxy (q) (insets in Fig. 42). Differently, ρ(q, s) practically does not depend on s for
BTC/USD∗ –ETH/USD∗ on Binance, which goes in parallel with dxy (q) ≈ 0 in this
case. On the other hand, in the case of the exchange rates that do not form a triangle (ETH/USDT–XRP/BTC) on Binance, dxy (q) ≈ 0 for q > 3, which agrees with
a weak average dependence of ρ(q, s) on s in Fig. 43. The correlation strength on
both platforms converges to a common level at the scale s ≈ 300 min, which defines
the time needed to attain full synchronization of different exchange rates.
Table 3: Detrended cross-correlation coefficient hρ(q, s)i averaged over the 66 exchange rate pairs
listed simultaneously on Binance and Kraken for representative values of q and s. Both the rates
forming a triangle (Tr, white rows) and those not related in this manner (P, red rows) are included.

Time scale s
Tr s=10min
P s=10min
Tr s=1h
P s=1h
Tr s=24h
P s=24h
Tr s=1 week
P s=1 week

hρ(q = 1, s)i
Binance Kraken
0.163
0.092
0.045
0.029
0.309
0.229
0.120
0.086
0.490
0.479
0.299
0.287
0.573
0.570
0.381
0.380

hρ(q = 4, s)i
Binance Kraken
0.117
0.029
0.021
0.005
0.208
0.162
0.061
0.070
0.262
0.259
0.120
0.123
0.276
0.276
0.139
0.137

Table 3 presents hρ(q, s)i averaged over all possible exchange rate pairs listed
on both platforms for sample values of q and s. In almost every case, the trianglerelated pairs produce larger hρ(q, s)i than the unrelated ones. While for shorter
time-scales (i.e., s = 10 min and s = 1 hour) the cross-correlations are stronger on
Binance than Kraken, for longer time-scales (i.e., s = 1 day and s = 1 week) the
correlation levels converge, as was already been pointed out above (Fig. 43).
Since there are exchange rates listed on both platforms, pairs may be formed not
only within the same platform but also across them, for example, drawing the first
from Binance and the second from Kraken. As events on Binance may occur ahead
of Kraken or vice versa, an additional parameter has to be introduced, namely a
delay τ , whose sign denotes which exchange rate is delayed: here, τ > 0 signifies that
an exchange rate representing Binance leads, whereas τ < 0 means this exchange
59

-2

Binance BTC/USD*-ETH/USD*

10

q=4
0.55

-3

10

λ

0.5

q=0.2
-4

hxy

0.45

10

Fxy (q,s)

0.4
1

-5

q

2

3

4

3

4

10

Kraken BTC/USD*-ETH/USD*
-2

10

q=4
0.55

-3

10

λ
0.5

q=0.4

-4

hxy

0.45

10

0.4
1

-5

10 10
-2

100

Binance

2

q

Scale s [min] 1000

10000

ETH/USD*-XRP/BTC

10

q=4
-3

10

0.7
0.6

-4

0.5

10

Fxy (q,s)

λ

hxy

0.4

q=0.6

1

-5

2

q

3

4

q

3

4

10

Kraken

ETH/USD*-XRP/BTC

-2

10

q=4
-3

10

0.7

λ

0.6
-4

0.5

10

1

-5

10 10

hxy

0.4

q=0.8
100

Scale s [min] 1000

2

10000

Figure 42: Bivariate fluctuation function Fxy (q, s) for q > 0 (∆q = 0.2), calculated for the exchange
rate pairs BTC/USD∗ –ETH/USD∗ (a triangle relationship, black) and ETH/USD∗ –XRP/BTC
(without a triangle relationship, red) listed simultaneously on Binance and Kraken. Insets present
scaling exponent λ(q) and the average generalized Hurst exponents hxy (q) = (hx (q) + hy (q))/2
estimated from the scale range marked with dashed lines in main panels.

60

0.8

q=1
q=2
q=3
q=4

0.6
0.4

ρ(q,s)

0.2
Binance

BTC/USD*-ETH/USD*

Kraken

BTC/USD*-ETH/USD*

Binance

ETH/USD*-XRP/BTC

Kraken

ETH/USD*-XRP/BTC

0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0

10

100

1000

10000 10

100

1000

10000

Scale s [min]
Figure 43: Comparison of the detrended correlation coefficient ρ(q, s) calculated for selected exchange rate pairs that listed simultaneously on Binance and Kraken. Top panels: representative
exchange rates forming a triangle relationship; bottom panels: representative exchange rates that
do not fulfill this condition.

rate is lagged with respect to Kraken. Figure 44 displays the fluctuation function
Fxy (q, s, τ ) for a sample exchange rate involving the most liquid cryptocurrencies
BTC/ETH. Different temporal relations between the time-series are considered: τ =
0 (top), τ = 1 min (middle), and τ = −1 min (bottom). The scaling quality of
Fxy (q, s, τ ) is maximized and the difference dxy (q) is minimized if Binance leads by
a minute (middle panel). The weakest scaling and the largest dxy (q) can be seen in
the opposite case when Kraken leads by a minute (bottom panel). The equal-time
case (τ = 0) is located in between these extremes.
The cross-correlation strength for the pair BTC/ETH(B) –BTC/ETH(K) , expressed
in terms of ρ(q, s, τ ) for τ = ±1 min, τ = ±2 min, and τ = ±5 min, is shown in
Fig. 45 (left). While, for all considered lags τ , the function ρ(q, s, τ ) converges
to unity over sufficiently long scale s, which is a desired effect in the case of the
equivalent exchange rates, the strongest cross-correlation at the shortest scales of
s ≈ 10 min is observed for τ = 1 min and τ = 2 min. This finding implies that
the BTC/ETH movements on Binance are, on average, advanced by 1-2 min with
respect to Kraken. For τ = 0, the cross-correlation is weaker as well as for τ < 0
and τ = 5 min. This picture is stable across different positive values of q (top left
and bottom left), suggesting that the effect is present on both typical and large
returns. A leading position of Binance is by no means surprising, as the BTC/ETH
volume traded and associated trading frequency are higher than on Kraken. These
61

10

-2

q=4

Fxy (q,s) BTC/ETH -BTC/ETH

K

10
10

0.5

1

B

2

q

3

4

3

4

3

4

Binance leads τ=1 min
q=4
λ

-3

0.5

-4

hxy

q=0.2

0.4
1

-5

-2

10
10

0.4

-5

-2

10

10

hxy

q=0.4

10

10

λ

-3

-4

10

10

original positions in time τ=0

2

q

Kraken leads τ=-1 min
q=4
λ

-3

-4

0.5

q=0.6

hxy
0.4
1

-5

10 10

100 Scale s [min] 1000

2

q

10000

Figure 44: Bivariate fluctuation function Fxy (q, s) for q > 0 (∆q = 0.2) calculated for
BTC/ETH(B) –BTC/ETH(K) (τ ), where τ denotes time lag, B labels the exchange rate listed on
Binance and K labels the exchange rate listed on Kraken. Three sample situations are shown:
synchronous time-series from both platforms (τ = 0, top), Binance ahead of Kraken by τ = 1
min (middle), and Kraken ahead of Binance by τ = 1 min (bottom). Insets present the scaling
exponent λ(q) and the average generalized Hurst exponent hxy (q) calculated over the scale range
marked with dashed lines; error bars represent the standard error of linear regression.

results, based on ρ(q, s, τ ), are supported by the characteristics of dxy (q), which is
the smallest for τ = 1 min and τ = 2 min, as visible in Fig. 45 (right).
The leading role of Binance is also visible for the remaining 11 cross-platform
exchange rate pairs by means of ρ(q, s, τ ) calculated for τ = −1 min, τ = 0, and
τ = 1 min (Fig. 46). While, in each case with q = 1, Binance is advanced by
1 min (the largest value of ρ(q, s, τ )), the exact cross-correlation strength depends
on the exchange rate liquidity, with the most liquid rates being BTC/USD∗ and
ETH/USD∗ . Like for BTC/ETH, the cross-correlation strength increases with s
and converges to unity, more slowly for q = 4 than for q = 1. Furthermore, for
q = 4 (large returns), not all exchange rates synchronize more markedly when τ = 1
min is used; in this regard, it is possible that, for the less liquid exchange rates, the
market needs a longer lag to sense synchronization of large fluctuations. This effect
could be accounted for by the higher trading frequency on Binance. In other words,
when a transaction is completed on it, and there is no parallel trade on Kraken, the
next transaction on Kraken will take into account what already has happened on
Binance.
Another platform specialized in cryptocurrency trading is Bitstamp. The detrended cross-correlation coefficient ρ(q, s, τ ) calculated from the BTC/USD∗ re62

1

K

τ=0
τ=1 min
τ=-1 min
τ=2 min
τ=-2 min
τ=5 min
τ=-5 min

q=1

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

0.1

ρ(q,s)

0
-0.2
1

q=4

0.8

dxy (q)= λ(q) - hxy (q)

B

BTC/ETH -BTC/ETH

0.05

0.6
0.4
0.2
0
-0.2
10

100

1000

10000 0

Scale s [min]

1

2

q

3

4

0

Figure 45: Three synchronization situations: (1) original positions in time, (2) Binance ahead
of Kraken by τ , (3) Kraken ahead of Binance by τ Left: correlations ρ(q, s) between BTC/ETH
exchange rate on the Binance and Kraken exchanges. Left: corresponding differences dxy (q).

turns (USD∗ stands for USD on Bitstamp) with ∆t = 1 min traded simultaneously
on two out of three platforms: Binance, Kraken, and Bitstamp, is plotted in Fig. 47
for data spanning the entire year 2018. For Bitstamp vs. Kraken data, the effect
of the asymmetric information spreading is absent, and for any q > 0, the crosscorrelations are strongest for τ = 0. On the other hand, comparing Binance and
Bitstamp data, the situation resembles that of Binance vs. Kraken, i.e., Binance
advances by 1 min. This can be explained in terms of the trading frequency, which
is comparable between Bitstamp and Kraken, but lower than on Binance.
5.2.3. Arbitrage on the cryptocurrency market
Exchange rates on the Binance platform are characterized by higher volume and
trading frequency compared to their counterparts on Kraken (see Tab. 1) in Sect. 3.3.
Due to the less frequent trade, information needs more time to diffuse, directly
translating into triangular arbitrage opportunities. In an analogy with Eq.(23),
these are defined as an exchange rate return sum
Arb∆t (A-B-C, t) = R∆t (A/B, t) + R∆t (B/C, t) + R∆t (C/A, t),

(25)

where R(A/B, t) is calculated according to Eq.(21) and A, B, C are cryptocurrencies
(in the case of Kraken, additionally including the USD). Time-series of the arbitrage
opportunities at the return time sampling frequency ∆t = 1 min on Binance and
Kraken (independently) for BTC/USD∗ , BTC/ETH, and ETH/USD∗ are presented
63

ρ(q=1,s) Binance-Kraken

1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0

BCH/BTC

DASH/BTC

ETC/BTC

ETC/ETH

1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0

BTC/ETH

LTC/BTC

XMR/BTC

XRP/BTC

1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0

BCH/USD*

BTC/USD*

ETH/USD*

LTC/USD*

ρ(q=4,s) Binance-Kraken

10

100 1000 1000010 100 1000 1000010 100 1000 10000 10
original synchronization τ=0
Scale s [min]
Binance leads τ=1 min
Kraken leads τ=-1 min

100 1000 10000

1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0

BCH/BTC

DASH/BTC

ETC/BTC

ETC/ETH

1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0

BTC/ETH

LTC/BTC

XMR/BTC

XRP/BTC

1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0

BCH/USD*

BTC/USD*

ETH/USD*

LTC/USD*

100 1000 1000010

100 1000 1000010

100 1000 1000010

10

original synchronization τ= 0
Binance leads τ=1 min
Kraken leads τ=-1 min

100 1000 10000

Scale s [min]

Figure 46: Correlations ρ(q, s) between the exchange rates listed simultaneously on Binance and
Kraken in three synchronization situations: (1) original positions in time, (2) Binance ahead of
Kraken, τ = 1 min, (3) Kraken ahead of Binance, τ = −1 min; USD∗ stands for USDT on Binance
and USD on Kraken.

64

Binance-Kraken

Binance-Bitstamp

Bitstamp-Kraken

1

q=1

0.8
0.6

ρ(q,s) BTC/USD*

0.4
0.2
0

-0.2
1
0.8
0.6

q=4

0.4
0.2
0
-0.2
10

100

1000 10000 10

Kraken leads by τ=1 min
Binance leads by τ=1 min

100

1000 10000 10

Scale s [min]

100

1000 10000

original synchronization τ=0
Bitstamp leads by τ=1 min

Figure 47: Detrended cross-correlation coefficient ρ(q, s, τ ) for the BTC/USD exchange rate listed
on Binance, Kraken, and Bitstamp. All exchange rate pairs are shown, namely Binance vs. Kraken
(left), Binance vs. Bitstamp (middle), Bitstamp vs. Kraken (right) for τ = −1 min (the second
platform leads), τ = 0 (both platforms are synchronous), and τ = 1 min (the first platform leads).

in Fig. 48. The largest arbitrage opportunities occurred in parallel on both exchanges at the beginning of 2018, i.e., during a period of highest volatility, which
accompanied the cryptocurrency market crash. Their magnitudes, however, were
systematically larger on Kraken.
Tab. 4 lists the average hArb∆t i and the maximum Arbmax
∆t values of the arbitrage opportunity for all triangles that can be created simultaneously on both platforms based on the available data (the Kraken-11 and Binance-12 datasets). Both
hArb∆t i and Arbmax
∆t are markedly lower on Binance. The smallest values of these
quantities occur for a triangle including the most-traded exchange rates, namely,
the BTC/USD∗ , BTC/ETH, and ETH/USD∗ . Triangular arbitrage opportunities
for the exchange rates listed separately on Binance and Kraken are provided in the
Appendix A in Tables A.8 and A.9.
The leading role of Binance results in the cross-platform correlations that was
discussed in Sect. 5.2.2, and is also identifiable in the arbitrage opportunity data
comprising 12 exchange rates listed simultaneously on it and Kraken. In this context,
time-series are defined by
(BK)

Arb∆t (A/B, t) = R∆t (A/B(B) , t) − R∆t (A/B(K) , t),

(26)

where R∆t (A/B, t) is given by Eq.(21), B stands for Binance, and K for Kraken.
As expected, the largest opportunities occur on the least liquid rates, namely,
65

Figure 48: Arbitrage opportunity time-series for sample exchange rates forming a triangle relationship: BTC/USD∗ , BTC/ETH, ETH/USD∗ from Binance (top) and Kraken (bottom). USD∗
stands for USDT on Binance and USD on Kraken.
Table 4: Average and maximum triangular arbitrage opportunity on Binance and Kraken in 2018;
USD∗ stands for USDT on Binance and USD on Kraken.

Triangle
BTC-USD∗ -ETH
BTC-USD∗ -BCH
BTC-USD∗ -LTC
ETC-ETH-BTC

Kraken
Average Max
0.0017
0.1147
0.0028
0.4701
0.0019
0.2016
0.0019
0.246

Binance
Average Max
0.0006
0.0367
0.003
0.0793
0.0009
0.093
0.0014
0.063

DASH/BTC, ETC/BTC, and ETC/ETH (Fig. 49). Conversely, on the most liquid rates such as BTC/USD∗ , ETH/USD∗ , and BTC/ETH, arbitrage is a rare event
at the sampling frequency of ∆t = 1 min, and its magnitude is considerably lower.
It appears as though the effect of the synchronization delays experienced by the
different trading platforms occurs over time-scales that are unique for the cryptocurrency market and vastly longer than the other markets, like the Forex or the stock
market. This is due to the decentralization, slower information spreading, and lower
liquidity of the cryptocurrency market. It translates into numerous arbitrage opportunities, both for exchange rate pairs and triangles. Also, there is no reference
price of a cryptocurrency, unlike in the Forex where Reuters offers the reference
rates. Similar effects were analyzed by applying the same methodology to the stock
markets [130] and oil markets [98], but the results were not as conclusive as for the
66

Figure 49: Arbitrage opportunity time-series for the same exchange rates listed independently on
Binance (B) and Kraken (K). USD∗ stands for USDT on Binance and USD on Kraken.

cryptocurrency market.
To summarize this part, it can be stated that (1) the more frequently traded cryptocurrencies are, the faster is the synchronization of their fluctuations. This leads to
high cross-correlation values over short time-scales and their weak dependence on s,
which translates into a small difference in dxy (q). (2) The cross-correlations between
the exchange rates forming a triangle are more robust, especially over time-scales on
the order of a minute, compared to those not related in this way. (3) Large fluctuations are more weakly cross-correlated than medium ones. However, this difference
is smaller than in the Forex, which will be addressed in Sect. 5.3. (4) The arbitrage opportunities in a triangle relationship are sparser on the frequently-traded
exchange rates, and their magnitude is smaller.
5.3. Multiscale cross-correlations and triangular arbitrage on Forex
The Forex differs from the cryptocurrency markets in the volume traded, transaction frequency, liquidity, and factors related to its external connections with economy
and politics. Predictably, its multiscale properties are therefore different. To illustrate this, a selection of the eight most liquid major currencies are considered in this
section, namely the Australian dollar (AUD), Canadian dollar (CAD), Swiss franc
(CHF), Euro (EUR), British pound (GBP), Japanese yen (JPY), New Zealand dollar (NZD), and US dollar (USD). Each currency can be expressed in the remaining
ones, giving a total of 28 exchange rates (all of them are explicitly listed in Figure 50). The representative data were drawn from the Forex broker Dukascopy [93],
67

and cover the year 2018. As for the cryptocurrencies, the returns R∆t (A/B, t) are

Figure 50: Cumulative distributions of the absolute normalized returns r∆t with ∆t = 1 min
representing the main currency exchange rates on the Forex in 2018. The inverse cubic law is
shown as a slanted line.

calculated with ∆t = 1 min. For most of the exchange rates, the inverse cubic law is
met by the return CDFs when γ > 2.5 (Fig. 50). Therefore, the bivariate fluctuation
function Fxy (q, s) may be calculated for q ∈ [−4, 4] without concerns about moment
divergence.
The bivariate fluctuation function Fxy (q, s) reveals better scaling for the trianglerelated exchange rates (i.e., a common base currency, top panel), which translates
into a smaller distance between λ(q) and hxy (q) compared to the exchange rates
without a triangle relation; Fig. 51 illustrates this based on two sample cases (i.e.,
a triangle relation - top, without triangle - bottom). In both cases, the difference
dxy (q) is maximal for q = 4, unlike the cryptocurrencies, for which the largest dxy (q)
arises for q = 1 (Fig. 30). In general, this difference is smaller on the Forex than
the cryptocurrency markets, since the cross-correlation strength ρ(q, s) depends less
markedly on s (Fig. 52). This effect can be attributed to the larger liquidity of
the Forex exchange rates because, on the cryptocurrency platforms, ρ(q, s) does not
depend on the scale for the most liquid pair, BTC and ETH, expressed in a common
base currency. The most pronounced difference between cryptocurrencies and fiat
currencies is the much higher values of ρ(q, s) for the Forex exchange rates without a
triangle relationship. In the case of cryptocurrencies, ρ(q, s) approaches zero on the
shortest scales for the out-of-a-triangle rates. On the Forex, ρ(q, s) is also lower in
this case than for triangle-related exchange rates (Fig 52), but not as substantially
68

10

-3

EUR/JPY-GBP/JPY

q=4
10

-4

0.55

λ

q=0.2

hxy

0.45

-5

Fxy (q,s)

10

0.5

0.4

1

10

-3

2

q

3

4

q

3

4

EUR/JPY-GBP/USD

q=4
10

-4

0.55

λ

0.5

10

-5

q=0.4

hxy

0.45
0.4

1

10

100 Scale s [min] 1000

2

10000

Figure 51: (Main) Bivariate fluctuation function Fxy (q, s) for q > 0 (∆q = 0.2) calculated for the
exchange rate pairs EUR/JPY–GBP/JPY (a triangle relation, top) and EUR/JPY–GBP/USD
(no triangle, bottom). The inset shows the scaling exponent λ(q) and average generalized Hurst
exponent hxy (q) calculated over the scale range marked with dashed lines.

as in the cryptocurrency market. Large returns are, in general, considerably less
cross-correlated on the Forex than on the cryptocurrency market: namely, there is
a substantial dependence of ρ(q, s) on q for both the in-triangle and out-of-triangle
exchange rates (Fig. 52).
Fig. 53 shows |ρ(q, s)| for all exchange rates under consideration over four scales,
namely s = 10 min, s = 1 h, s = 1 day, and s = 1 week. For q = 1, the coefficient
|ρ(q, s)| only weakly depends on scale, while such a dependence is more pronounced
for q = 4. The exchange rates in a triangle relation are considerably more strongly
cross-correlated than those not related in this way (black vs. red plots). Since
the AUD and NZD represent countries whose economies are greatly coupled, the
exchange rate pairs of the form Wi /AUD–Wj /NZD, where Wi , Wj denote all the
other currencies, behave effectively as if Wi and Wj were expressed in a common
base currency, which significantly amplifies the corresponding |ρ(q, s)|.
For q = 4, there is a large difference in the cross-correlation strength between the
in-triangle and the outside-triangle exchange rate pairs, at both the individual and
average levels; |ρ(q = 4, s)| is also smaller than for q = 1. Furthermore, a moderate
scale dependence can be appreciated for the outside-of-triangle exchange rates. The
shifts in the ranked positions of |ρ(q, s)| with increasing s are substantial, but this
does not lead to an increase in the average cross-correlation levels (horizontal lines
in Fig. 53), unlike the cryptocurrencies showing ρ(q, s) ≈ 0 for s = 10 min (see
69

0.8
0.6

q=1
q=2
q=3
q=4

ρ(q,s)

0.4
0.2

EUR/JPY-GBP/JPY

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

EUR/JPY-GBP/USD
10

100

Scale s [min] 1000

10000

Figure 52: Detrended cross-correlation coefficient ρ(q, s) for the exchange rate pairs connected
by a triangle relation (EUR/JPY–GBP/JPY, top) and those not forming a triangle (EUR/JPY–
GBP/USD, bottom). Compare ρ(q, s) in the cryptocurrency market in Fig. 34 and Fig. 35.

Fig. 37 and Fig. 39 in Sect. 5.2.1). A difference in trading frequency between the
cryptocurrencies and the fiat currencies can plausibly account for this observation.
A cross-correlation hierarchy of the 28 exchange
Psmax rates calculated with the hi1
erarchical clustering algorithm from ρ(q) = s | s=smin ρ(q, s)| shows that the large
fluctuation cross-correlations (q = 4) form more pronounced clusters consisting of
the exchange rates involving a common base currency, namely CAD, GBP, AUD,
and NZD (Fig. 54). This arises because each independent movement of a base currency with respect to the other currencies contributes to their evolution, which can
be viewed as their cross-correlation insofar as they are expressed in this particular
base currency. The effect is most influential during the extreme volatility periods
that typically accompany important economic and political events [58]. For typical
fluctuations (q = 1), the subdivision into clusters is weaker. The most numerous cluster encompasses exchange rates not related by a triangle relation, namely,
EUR/AUD–NZD/CHF and AUD/JPY–NZD/USD. This indicates that, for a sampling interval of ∆t = 1 min, the Forex is largely synchronized, and information is
transmitted quickly, even outside triangle relations.
Together with the higher cross-correlation levels over the shortest scales s, this is
associated with a higher liquidity and trading frequency on the Forex. An associated
effect is a much rarer occurrence of the triangular arbitrage opportunities. In Fig. 55,
deviations from a triangle relation calculated for the bid and ask prices in analogy
to Eq.(19) and Eq.(20) are shown for three triangles: CHF-EUR-USD, GBP-JPY70

0.8

in Tr

s=10min
Wi /AUD-Wj /NZD

outside Tr

s=1h

Wi /AUD-Wj /NZD

0.6
0.4

ρ(q=1,s)

0.2
0
0.8

s=1week

s=24h

0.6
0.4
0.2
0
0.8
0.6

in Tr

Exchange rate
s=10min
Wi /AUD-Wj /NZD

outside Tr

s=1h

Wi /AUD-Wj /NZD

0.4

ρ(q=4,s)

0.2
0
0.8

s=1week

s=24h

0.6
0.4
0.2
0

Exchange rate

Figure 53: Absolute detrended cross-correlation coefficient |ρ(q, s)| calculated for over exchange rate
pairs for q = 1 (top 4 panels) and q = 4 (bottom 4 panels). Sample time-scales are shown: s = 10
min, s = 1 h, s = 1 day, and s = 1 week. Exchange rate pairs connected by a triangle relationship
(in Tr, black) and without such a relation (outside Tr, red) are distinguished. Horizontal line in
each panel indicate the average value of |ρ(q, s)| calculated for each group separately. Values of
|ρ(q, s)| are sorted descending for s = 10 min and these locations are preserved in the remaining 3
panels. The following pairs are distinguished: Wi /AUD–Wj /NZD, where Wi , Wj = CAD, CHF,
EUR, GBP, JPY, and USD, Wi 6= Wj .

71

1

0.8

ij

(q=1)

0.9

0.7
0.6

GBPJPY

GBPUSD

EURUSD

USDCHF

USDJPY

AUDCAD

NZDCAD

AUDNZD

AUDNZD

CHFJPY

EURJPY

EURUSD

USDCHF

USDJPY

EURJPY
NZDCHF

NZDUSD

CHFJPY
EURNZD

NZDJPY

NZDJPY

CADJPY

AUDCHF

AUDJPY
AUDJPY

EURAUD

NZDUSD

AUDUSD
AUDUSD

NZDCHF

GBPAUD

AUDCHF
GBPCHF

EURGBP

EURNZD

EURAUD
GBPJPY

GBPNZD

GBPNZD

GBPCHF
USDCAD

GBPAUD

EURGBP
CADJPY

GBPUSD

GBPCAD
CADCHF

GBPCAD

CADCHF

EURCAD
EURCAD

NZDCAD

AUDCAD

EURCHF

USDCAD

EURCHF

0.5

1

0.8

ij

(q=4)

0.9

0.7
0.6
0.5

Figure 54: Dendrograms for 28 exchange rates created with the hierarchical clustering algorithm
from the average detrended cross-correlation coefficient |ρ(q)| for q = 1 (top) and q = 4 (bottom).

USD, and EUR-JPY-GBP during time-intervals of particular market instability,
namely, stemming from the Swiss National Bank’s policy change on EUR/CHF,
and the Brexit referendum (on the Forex, an arbitrage opportunity can occur only
during elevated volatility periods [58]). Periods of maximum volatility are presented
in detail in Fig. 56 (insets). During them, the individual exchange rates involving
the CHF and GBP changed so rapidly that the others could not keep up, allowing
the formation of arbitrage possibilities on the triangle-related exchange rates. For
comparison, a day without any volatility-amplifying event from 2018 is also shown
in Fig. 55. The main plots in Fig. 56 display ρ(q, s) calculated for the abovementioned exchange rate pairs with q = 1 and q = 4. The latter case shows that large
returns during the turmoil periods are responsible for significant decorrelation of the
exchange rates, whereas the average returns remain cross-correlated as customary.
If these periods are removed, the arbitrage opportunities disappear, and the crosscorrelation strength increases.
These properties of the Forex, including the paucity of arbitrage opportunities,
72

0.1

Triangular arbitrage opportunities

0

15.01.2015

CHF-EUR-USD

-0.1
9:00

10:00

11:00

12:00

13:00

14:00

0.001
0
-0.001
-0.002
-0.003

23.06.2016-24.06.2016
22:00

23:00

00:00

01:00

GBP-JPY-USD
02:00

03:00

04:00

0

-5e-005
-0.0001

-0.00015
-0.0002

01.10.2018

-0.00025
-0.0003
10:00

11:00

12:00

13:00

14:00

15:00

16:00 17:00

EUR-JPY-GBP
18:00

19:00

20:00

Time
Figure 55: Triangular arbitrage opportunity time-series for CHF-EUR-USD on Jan 15, 2015 (the
CHF/EUR fluctuation limit lifted, top), GBP-JPY-USD on Jun 23-24, 2016 (the Brexit referendum, middle), and EUR-JPY-GBP on Oct 1, 2018 (a sample day without turmoil, bottom). Unity
was subtracted from each signal. Because of the bid and ask price spread, an arbitrage opportunity
arises when one of two relations (black or red) is above zero.

more frequent trading, and shorter time-scales at which market synchronization
occurs, motivate the view that the cryptocurrency market remains a markedly less
mature market by comparison. Among the cryptocurrencies, only the BTC and
ETH, when expressed in USD (or its equivalent USDT) on the most significant
trading platforms, reveal signatures similar to those typical of exchange rates on the
Forex.
5.4. COVID-19 impact on multiscale cross-correlations between the cryptocurrency
market and traditional markets
Till beginning of 2020, it was generally believed that, viewed by many as a ”safe
haven”, the cryptocurrency market was rather detached from the other financial
markets and exhibited its individual dynamics [83, 86, 87, 88, 89, 90]. Whether this
is still a valid hypothesis can be verified by calculating the generalized detrended
cross-correlation coefficient ρ(q, s) given by Eq.(15) for time series of 1-min logreturns of BTC/USD and ETH/USD and 20 conventional assets, among which are 13
traditional currencies: Australian dollar (AUD), euro (EUR), British pound (GBP),
New Zealand dollar (NZD), Canadian dollar (CAD), Swiss franc (CHF), Chinese
offshore yuan (CNH), Japanese yen (JPY), Mexican peso (MXN), Norwegian krone
(NOK), Polish zloty (PLN), Turkish lira (TRY), and South African rand (ZAR), 3
stock market indices: Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJIA), NASDAQ100, S&P500,
73

1

EUR/CHF-USD/CHF 2015

0.8
0.6
q=1
q=4

1

0.2

USD/CHF
EUR/CHF

ρ(q,s)

15.01.2015

0

9:30

9:40

9:50

Time 10:00

10:10

0.8

Σ R(t)

0.4

10:20

GBP/USD-GBP/JPY 2016

0.8
0.6
1

q=1
q=4

0

GBP/JPY
GBP/USD

23.06.2016-24.06.2016

0.2
23:00

10

00:00

01:00

100 Scale

Time

02:00

s [min] 1000

0.9

Σ R(t)

0.4

03:00

10000

Figure 56: (Main) Detrended cross-correlation coefficient ρ(q, s) (solid line) calculated for
EUR/CHF–USD/CHF in 2015 (top) and GBP/USD–GBP/JPY in 2016 (bottom). Dashed lines
mark ρ(q, s) calculated after removing the volatile periods shown in insets. (Inset) Triangle-related
exchange rates expressed as cumulative returns R∆t for ∆t = 1 min (starting from unity) on
days of extreme volatility: Jan 15, 2015 (the SNB intervention) and Jun 23-24, 2016 (the Brexit
referendum).

and 4 commodities: gold (XAU), crude oil (CL), silver (XAG), and copper (HG),
all expressed in US dollar. Fig. 57 shows temporal evolution of their standardized
prices or values
P (t) − hP (t)i
Pstd (t) =
+4
(27)
σP
between Jan 2018 and Sep 2020 (Monday-Friday). This interval includes a market panic related to the Covid-19 pandemic outburst [194]. The data comes from
Dukascopy [93].
The analysis was carried out for several different time scales s but, for the sake
of clarity, only two scales are considered here: the shortest available scale s = 10
min and the scale corresponding roughly to a trading day in the NYSE stock market
s = 360 min (an actual trading day lasts for 390 min). For the return-magnitude
filtering parameter q also two values are discussed here: q = 1, which does not
favor any specific magnitude range, and q = 4, which amplifies the large return
contribution.
Figs. 58 and 59 display ρ(q, s) for a combination of the s and q values described
above. In each panel ρ(q, s) for BTC/USD (Fig. 58) or ETH/USD (Fig. 59) and
each of 8 other assets: CAD, CHF, CL, EUR, HG, JPY, S&P500, and XAU are
74

Figure 57: Standardized price/value of BTC and ETH (top), AUD, CAD, GBP, CL, CNH, HG,
MXN, NOK, NZD, PLN, TRY, ZAR, and S&P500 (“risky” assets, middle), CHF, EUR, JPY,
XAG, and XAU (“safe” assets, bottom) since Jan 1, 2020. For comparison, the daily new cases
of Covid-19 in US are also shown (red line, top). Vertical dashed lines mark the events related
to Covid-19 that caused significant detrended cross-correlations between the cryptocurrencies and
other financial instruments: (1) the first identified case of Covid-19 in the United States (Jan 21,
2020), (2) global market panic (March 2020), (3) the 2nd wave of the US pandemic (June 2020),
(4) the pandemic slowdown in the United States, all time highs on S&P500 and Nasdaq (Aug
2020).

shown. Some of the assets listed in the beginning of this section have been omitted
since their cross-correlation with other assets is similar to one of the assets that are
shown: NASDAQ100 and DJIA are similar to S&P500, XAG is similar to XAU, the
currencies: AUD, NZD, ZAR, CHN, MXN, EUR, GBP, NOK, and PLN are similar
to CAD. On the other hand, TRY has been omitted because for almost all the time
it was uncorrelated with BTC and ETH.
In accordance with the initial hypothesis, the cryptocurrency market and the
traditional assets used to reveal no significant cross-correlation in 2018 and 2019.
However, this situation altered in 2020 with 4 specific periods of the statistically
significant cross-correlations that can be distinguished. All these periods are related to the Covid-19 pandemic. The first one (see the corresponding number in in
Figs. 57–59) was associated with a drop of S&P500 and the other US stock market indices triggered by the first identified local case of Covid-19 on Jan 21, 2020.
During this time BTC continued its upward trend, which led to negative ρ(q, s) for
BTC and S&P500 for ρ(q = 4, s = 360min). At that time, BTC was also positively
correlated with some other financial instruments considered safe: JPY, CHF, and
75

ρ(q=4,s)

ρ(q=1,s)

0.6
0.4
0.2
0
-0.2
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
-0.2
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
-0.2
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
-0.2

s=10 min

s=360 min

s=10 min

BTC vs

s=360 min

1

6
44

×10

CAD
CHF
CL
EUR
HG
JPY
S&P500
XAU

2

Number of new COVID-19 cases in US per day

3

4

2
0
01.2018 04.2018 07.2018 10.2018 01.2019 04.2019 07.2019 10.2019 01.2020 04.2020 07.2020 10.2020

Date
Figure 58: Evolution of the generalized detrended cross-correlation coefficient ρ(q, s) calculated in
10-day-wide moving windows with a 1-day step for the returns of the BTC/USD exchange rate
and the selected conventional assets expressed in US dollar: CAD, CHF, CL, EUR, HG, JPY,
S&P500, and XAU. q = 1 does not favour any specific magnitude range (top and upper middle),
while q = 4 amplifies the large return contribution (middle-middle and lower middle). s = 10 min
is the shortest available time scale in this analysis (top and middle-middle), while s = 360 min is
approx. a trading day in the NYSE stock market (upper middle and lower middle). Periods with
the statistically significant values of ρ(q, s) are marked with dashed ellipses (see Fig. 57 for their
description.

gold. Interestingly, the cross-correlation between ETH and the other assets were still
insignificant. One could argue that, at that initial Covid-19 phase, BTC fulfilled its
planned role as a hedge for risky assets.
This statement is no longer true since the Covid-19-related market panic of March
2020, when almost all financial assets expressed in USD, including the cryptocurrencies, sharply lost their value. The positive cross-correlation between BTC and
the traditional assets were the most evident during that time. ρ(q, s) was larger for
s = 360 min than for s = 10 min, but nevertheless both were significant. Typical
for the cryptocurrency market as it has been reported in Sect. 5.2, such behaviour
can be explained by the fact that the cross-correlations need time to build up. In
the case of large returns (q = 4), BTC was positively cross-correlated with S&P500
mainly, while it was more independent in respect to the other assets. However, generally (q = 1) BTC is positively cross-correlated also with copper, crude oil, gold,
and CAD. There was no substantial cross-correlation between BTC and CHF or
EUR, and ρ(q, s) was negative for BTC vs. JPY. From this point of view, BTC
became a risky asset. In March 2020 one could observe similar behaviour of ρ(q, s)
76

ρ(q=4,s)

ρ(q=1,s)

0.6
s=10 min
0.4
0.2
0
-0.2
0.6
s=360 min
0.4
0.2
0
-0.2
0.6
CAD
s=10 min
0.4
ETH vs
CHF
CL
0.2
EUR
0
HG
JPY
-0.2
0.6
S&P500
s=360 min
XAU
0.4
0.2
0
-0.2
6
1 2
3
4
4
Number
of
new
COVID-19
cases
in
US
per day
×10 4
2
0
01.2018 04.2018 07.2018 10.2018 01.2019 04.2019 07.2019 10.2019 01.2020 04.2020 07.2020 10.2020
Date

Figure 59: Evolution of the generalized detrended cross-correlation coefficient ρ(q, s) calculated in
10-day-wide moving windows with a 1-day step for the returns of the ETH/USD exchange rate and
the selected conventional assets expressed in US dollar: CAD, CHF, CL, EUR, HG, JPY, S&P500,
and XAU. See caption to Fig. 58 for more details.

also in the case of ETH, because the global financial market panic did not spare any
cryptocurrency.
After transient restoration of the financial markets in April and May, the fear
returned in June 2020 with the beginning of the 2nd Covid-19 wave (period 3 in
Figs. 57–59). It was accompanied by strong positive cross-correlation of BTC and
ETH with the traditional assets except JPY that was observed mostly for s = 360
min. ρ(q, s) was smaller for s = 10 min, but still positive and significant for q = 1.
What is even more interesting is the behaviour of the detrended cross-correlations in
the 4th considered period that started in late Aug 2020 after Covid-19 slowing down
in the United States. Since that point BTC and ETH have been positively correlated
with all the considered traditional assets, even with JPY, on all considered time
scales. BTC, ETH, and the other assets expressed in USD gained value; S&P500
and NASDAQ100 even reached their all-time highs. This surprisingly collective
behaviour of the considered financial instruments may be connected with weakness
of USD, in which they are expressed. This is visible especially for EUR, which is
now one of the most strongly correlated assets with BTC and ETH for s = 360 min,
while it was rather weakly correlated before.
It seems that the events connected with Covid-19 triggered the emergence of
cross-correlations between the major cryptocurrencies and the traditional markets.
These cross-correlations occurred not only during the sharp market falls earlier in
77

2020, but also during the still lasting recovery phase. Therefore it may be concluded
that the cryptocurrencies have ceased to be an island detached from the traditional
markets and become a connected part of the world’s financial markets. This can be a
sign of positive verification of the cryptocurrencies during one of the most turbulent
periods in the recent years. However, this observation is still fresh, therefore a
question of whether it is transient or stable remains open. Especially in the context
of a highly inflationary policy adopted by the Federal Reserve and other central
banks, which is about substantial increasing of the monetary base (Fig. 2).
6. Correlation matrix and network analysis of cross-correlations

Price logarithm [USD]

10
5
0
-5

-10
10

%

0.6
0.4

40
20
10
5

BTC
ETH
XRP
LTC
Rest

2
1

0.2
0

Oct 2015 Apr 2016 Oct 2016 Apr 2017 Oct 2017 Apr 2018 Oct 2018 Apr 2019

Time

Market capitalization [USD]

TEK ×10
Total market cap. 80

1
×100
0.8

Figure 60: (Top) Cryptocurrency price evolution over the period 10/2015–03/2019; 100 cryptocurrencies with the largest market capitalization are shown. (Bottom) Total market capitalization
share of BTC, ETH, XRP, LTC, and the remaining cryptocurrencies.

This section discuss a multivariate approach to cross-correlations among the
cryptocurrency prices. A data set consists of N = 100 cryptocurrency daily quotes
expressed in USD covering the period 10/2015-03/2019. They form a set of time
series of length T = 1278. A complete list of cryptocurrency tickers and names
can be found in the Appendix B. Tha data source is CoinMarketCap website [25]
that collects quotations from all active cryptocurrency trading platforms (273 in
March 2019) and evaluates the cryptocurrency prices on an ongoing basis. Prices
of the same cryptocurrency from different trading platforms are weighted by their
transaction volume with a larger volume corresponding to a larger weight. Fig. 60
shows the individual cryptocurrency price logarithm time series (top panel) and
78

cryptocurrency capitalization (bottom panel), defined as a product of price and the
number of issued cryptocurrency units.
By the turn of 2017 and 2018, a systematic increase in the entire market capitalization can be observed. It was followed by a bear market continuing throughout
2018. There were also changes in the individual cryptocurrency market share: by
March 2017, BTC capitalization accounted for over 80% of the total cryptocurrency
market value, then it fell to around 40% in May 2017, only to rise again to 80% in
December 2017. The next two cryptocurrencies in terms of their capitalization, ETH
and XRP, moved in the opposite direction. The market share of ETH increased in
the first half of 2017, which was related to the ICO-mania discussed earlier. The
ICO offers at that time were released on the Ethereum platform mainly and that
raised the ETH valuation. In May 2017, the shares of BTC and ETH in the entire
market capitalization differed by just a few per cent. The second period of growing
ETH importance fell on tip of the ICO-bull market: ETH peaked in January 2018,
almost a month after the BTC peak. Fig. 60 presents also a market share of the
4th largest cryptocurrency: LTC. The remaining cryptocurrencies did not account
for more than 10% of the entire market capitalization. All the cryptocurrencies
considered here account for 95% of the market capitalization.
6.1. Correlation matrix
The analysis start from a set of time series of logarithmic returns R∆t (Kj /X, tl ) =
log P (Kj /X, tl + ∆t) − log P (Kj /X, tl ), with Kj denoting cryptocurrencies (j =
1, ..., N ), X denoting either a fiat currency (USD) or a cryptocurrency, ∆t being
sampling interval, and l = 1, ..., T indexing consecutive sampling moments. The
log-returns can be normalized
r∆t (Kj /X, tl ) =

R∆t (Kj /X, tl ) − hR∆t (Kj /X, tl )il
,
σ(R∆t (Kj /X))

(28)

where σ(·) is standard deviation of R∆t (Kj /X, tl ). Correlation matrix for a base
(crypto)currency X is given by
C(X) =

1 (X) (X)
M M̃ ,
T

(29)

where M(X) is a data matrix of size (N − 1) × T and ∼ denotes matrix transpose. A
separate matrix can be constructed for each of N available base (crypto)currencies
X. Each element of C(X) is a Pearson correlation coefficient for a pair of exchange
rates Kj1 /X–Kj2 /X with j1 6= j2 . As a real symmetric matrix, C(X) has N − 1 real
(X)
(X)
eigenvalues λi and the same number of the associated eigenvectors vi :
(X)

C(X) vi

(X) (X)

(30)

= λi vi ,
(X)

(X)

where the eigenvalues are numbered in the ascending order: 0 ≤ λ1 ≤ λ2 ≤...≤
(X)
(X)
λ(N −1) and TrC(X) = N − 1. Through their components vij , the eigenvectors
(X)

(X)

vi can be associated with eigensignals zi (t) that are linear combinations of the
original return time series:
(X)
zi (t)

=

N
−1
X

(X)

vij r∆t (Kj /X, t).

j=1

79

(31)

These eigensignals may be associated with respective orthogonal portfolios [195].
A convenient reference for the empirical correlation matrices C(X) is the Wishart
ensemble of random matrices [196], whose universal properties describe uncorrelated
data. Matrices W of the Wishart ensemble are constructed as the correlation matrices from time series of i.i.d. random variables with the Gaussian distribution
N (0, σ) [197]. Analytical form of p.d.f. describing an eigenvalue distribution of W
is known:
p
N
(λ+ − λ)(λ − λ− )
Q
1 X
δ(λ − λi ) =
,
(32)
φW (λ) =
2
N i=1
2πσW
λ
r
1
2
λ± = σW (1 + 1/Q ± 2
),
(33)
Q
where λ ∈ [λ− , λ+ ] and Q = T /N , T id the length of the time series and N is
the number of time series. The above relationship is called the Marchenko-Pastur
distribution that is strictly valid in the infinite limit T, N → ∞ [198]. A comparison
between the Marchenko-Pastur distribution and the empirical matrix eigenvalue
distribution can show how noise and collectivity impacts the cryptocurrency market.
A typical feature of mature financial markets is a dominant share of noise effects
in the cross-correlations among financial instruments. In this case an eigenvalue
distribution of C(X) can be approximated by the Marchenko-Pastur distribution for
a majority of the eigenvalues [198]. At the same time, there is usually at least
one eigenvalue outside the Marchenko-Pastur distribution [199, 200, 201, 202, 203,
204, 205, 206]. This eigenvalue or these eigenvalues, together with their associated
eigenvectors, reflect how collective are the price movements on a given market [8, 96].
6.1.1. Correlation matrix elements
In a generic case of uncorrelated signals, the off-diagonal entries of C(X) are
Gaussian-distributed with zero mean [196]. However, in the case of empirical correlation matrices, there may be a shift in this distribution (positive or negative mean)
and presence of heavy tails [8, 201]. On the cryptocurrency market, the off-diagonal
matrix entry distribution largely depends on a base currency as Fig. 61 documents
for several representative cases. For all base currencies, this distribution differs from
a random case. The smallest deviation is noticeable for X=BTC, which means that
the market observed from a BTC perspective is the least correlated. The more peripheral (lower capitalization) a base cryptocurrency is chosen, the more the C(X)
distribution is shifted to the right with an extreme case of TEK. In this case, all the
exchange rate pairs involving TEK as the base give CijTEK > 0.5 and the distribution
mean is located close to 0.9. For such a peripheral cryptocurrency, the market is
the most collective. This is even more evident for an artificial cryptocurrency (fict
in Fig. 61), whose each exchange rate Kj /fict = Kj /USD · USD/fict is driven by
a geometric Brownian motion (µ = 0, σ = 1) of USD/fict. In this situation the
distribution is closer to the random matrix case than any other one. The fictitious
cryptocurrency volatility σ is responsible for this behavior: when it increases, the
off-diagonal elements are shifted to the right. For σ = 10 the distribution for X=fict
looks similar to that obtained for X=TEK.
6.1.2. Correlation matrix eigenvalues
PDFs describing the eigenvalue distribution φC (λ) for three base currencies: USD
and the two extreme case cryptocurrencies: BTC and TEK are shown in Fig. 62.
80

10
5

p(Cij)

0

Basce currency X=
fict(σ=10)
TEK
PXI
XRP
fict(σ=1)
ETH
LTC
USD
BTC
random
-0.2

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

Cij
(X)

0.8

1

Figure 61: PDFs calculated from the off-diagonal elements Cij for six selected cryptocurrencies
and USD as base currencies. Additionally, the random matrix case and the fictitious base currency
are shown (for σ = 1 and σ = 10). For better visualization, the consecutive cases are shifted
upwards.

81

The following characteristics describing the market cross-correlation structure can
(X)
be observed: (1) a market factor λmax [205, 206], which shows the average level of
cross-correlations (2) a distance between λmax and the rest of eigenvalues, which
determines a share of the genuine cross-correlations, and (3) the eigenvalue bulk
(X)
location in the Wishart region φW (λ) [77]. Value of λmax corresponds to a right-side
(X)
shift of the average off-diagonal element of C
in Fig. 61. The smallest shift of
(X)
λmax ≈ 9.7 occurs for X=BTC. Most of the remaining eigenvalues in this case are
located within the limits [λ− , λ+ ] set by Eq.(33). For X=USD a value of λUSD
max ≈ 19 is
higher, which means that the cryptocurrency market is more collective if expressed in
USD than in BTC. The largest value of λTEK
max is obtained when the cryptocurrencies
TEK
are expressed in TEK. λmax is responsible for more than 90% of the matrix trace,
which effectively “squeezes” the other eigenvalues to around zero. This leads them
to “push out” the noise-related eigenvalues even though they still specify random
cross-correlations [207].
(X)
A complementary indicator of collectivity is the eigenvector components vmax
(X)
corresponding to λmax (Fig. 63). Through a significant contribution of the same
sign from all time series (all eigenvector components), they reflect the collective
nature of the respective eigenvector. Here, the “squeezing” effect is also visible while
(X)
preserving the eigenvector vmax-1 corresponding to the second largest eigenvalue
(X)
λmax-1 . They are shown in Fig. 63 (bottom panels). For X=BTC and X=USD, the
eigenvector components have a distribution close to a normal one, while for X=TEK
the distribution is dominated by a few components only.
In order to eliminate the “squeezing” effect, the influence of the largest eigenvalue
(X)
λmax has to be subtracted. This can be accomplished by fitting to each time series
(X)
(X)
gi (t) the eigensignal zmax (t) with the least-square method:
(X)

gi

(X)

(X)
= ai + bi zmax
(t) + i (t),

(34)

where ai and bi are parameters. A residual correlation matrix R(X) that no longer
(X)
(X)
contains a market factor zmax is constructed from the residual time series i (t) [206].
(X)
The eigenvalue PDFs after eliminating λmax are presented in the lower panels of
Fig. 62. In all the cases, the outlying eigenvalue has disappeared and the vast
majority of eigenvalues fall within [λ− , λ+ ]. This observation also applies to the
extreme case of X=TEK. The eigenvectors of R(X) are different in general from
the eigenvectors of C(X) (see Fig. 64). For each X their component distribution is
approximated well by the normal distribution, exactly as the eigenvector component
distribution for the random matrices W.
6.1.3. The largest eigenvalue for various base currencies
(X)
Fig. 65 displays λmax for all the considered cryptocurrencies treated as the base,
together with a fictitious currency created like before (see 6.1.1). This allows one
to see what the entire market structure looks like from each cryptocurrency’s perspective. The extremes X=BTC and X=TEK previously shown in detail are the
(X)
lowermost and the uppermost ladder rungs here. A value of λmax corresponding to
a given base currency X should be interpreted as the relative importance of a given
cryptocurrency.
A sharp change in the valuation of a peripheral cryptocurrency that is not correlated with the other cryptocurrencies and has its individual dynamics does not affect
their behaviour, but nevertheless it does change values of all the cryptocurrencies
82

Base currency X=USD
2
φC(λ)

1

1.5

λmax

0.5

1
0

0

10

5

φC(λ)

15

λ

0.5
0

2

without λmax influence
1.5

φW(λ)

1
0.5
0

0.5

1

2

1.5

3

2.5

λ
Base currency X=BTC

2
φC(λ)

1

1.5

λmax

0.5

1
0

0

φC(λ)

10

5

λ

0.5
0

2

without λmax influence

φW(λ)

1.5
1
0.5
0

0.5

1

2

1.5

3

2.5

λ
Base currency X=TEK

2
φC(λ)

1

1.5

0.5

λmax

1
0

0

20

40

φC(λ)

60

80

λ

0.5
0
2

without λmaxinfluence

φW(λ)

1.5
1
0.5
0

1

λ

2

3

Figure 62: PDFs φC (λ) for X=USD (top), X=BTC (middle), and X=TEK (bottom). In each case,
the bulk of eigenvalues is shown in the upper graph, the entire eigenvalue distribution is shown in
inset, and the residual eigenvalue distribution after removing λmax is shown in the lower graph.
Dashed line denotes a fitted Marchenko-Pastur distribution φW (λ).

83

Base currency X=USD

0.2

v of vmax for λmax

v

0.15
0.1

0.05
0

v of vmax-1 for λmax-1

0.4

v

0.2
0

-0.2
p(v)

6

-0.4

4
2
0
-0.4

0.2

v

-0.2

0

0.2

v

0.4

Base currency X=BTC
v of vmax for λmax

0.1

0

v of vmax-1 for λmax-1

0.4

v

0.2
0
p(v)

6

-0.2

4
2

-0.4
0.2

0
-0.4

-0.2

0

v

0.2

0.4

Base currency X=TEK
v of vmax for λmax

v

0.15
0.1

0.05
0
0.6

v of vmax-1 for λmax-1

v

0.3
0
10

p(v)

-0.3

5

-0.6
0
-0.8 -0.6 -0.4 -0.2

(X)

0

v

0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8

(X)

Figure 63: Eigenvector components corresponding to λmax (top) and λmax-1 (bottom panel) from
(X)
the correlation matrix Cij for X=USD, BTC and TEK. Insets presents the distribution of the
eigenvector components.

84

Base currency X=USD

4
3
2
1

p(v)

0
4

Base currency X=BTC

3
2
1
0
4

Base currency X=TEK

3
2
1
0

-0.4

-0.2

0

0.2

0.4

Components v of all eigenvectors v without λmax influence
(X)

Figure 64: Eigenvector component PDFs for all eigenvectors vi of the residual correlation matrix
R(X) for X=USD (top), X=BTC (middle), and X=TEK (bottom). In order to obtain R(X) , the
(X)
market factor related to λmax has been removed from the eigensignals of C(X) . Dotted line shows
a fitted normal distribution.

expressed in it. As a result, the entire market’s valuation shifts and the cryptocur(X)
rencies appear strongly cross-correlated and synchronous. In this case λmax is large.
On the other hand, a similar change in the valuation of an important cryptocurrency
that have a number of other cryptocurrencies following it results in that the other
cryptocurrencies can have their dynamics affected, too. Consequently, any valuation
change when the other cryptocurrencies are expressed in this cryptocurrency turns
out to be relatively small and the market appears less cross-correlated.
(X)
For the fictitious currency (fict(σ = 1)) and USD, λmax is relatively low, because
despite having their dynamics independent from the cryptocurrency market, they are
characterized by a low volatility level if compared to the cryptocurrencies. Therefore,
their small, uncorrelated changes do not affect much the market valuation if they
are this valuation base. A situation is completely different when volatility of the
fictitious currency is raised to σ = 10 (fict(σ = 10)). Then the largest eigenvalue
reaches a high level above 80. A significant change of the fictitious currency value
causes shifting of the cryptocurrency valuations expressed in it. Therefore, from an
independent, highly volatile currency’s perspective, the market seems substantially
collective. The “dragging” effect of a rapid change in a base currency value is shown
in section 5.3 and in Ref. [58]. Large volatility of CHF and GBP caused on long
time scales a cross-correlation increase among the exchange rates with one of these
currencies being the base.
85

Base currency X=
TEK

fict(σ=10)

80

FJC, XAUR
MINT, PURA
BTA, COVAL, NTRN
DEM, PXI
DGC, TRC

40

λmax

60

QRK, CDN, BSD
ADC, EXP, XVG, ZET
SHIFT, AUR, MUE, BCY
NEOS, GLD, CLOAK
FAIR, BITB, FLDC
XST, GRS, BLOCK
RDD, PTC, OK, ORB
XWC, GCR, NAV, WDC
BCN, HUC, CPC, AEON
CANN, XMY, SLR, PINK
LEO, EFL, NXS, RBY
XMG, NVC, OMNI
FLO, CURE, BAY, FTC
VRC, ABY, START
DGB, SIB, XDN, VIA
SYS, POT, SC, NMC
BURST, IOC, EMC, VTC
GAME, NLG, XCP, UNO
MONA, XPM, XEM, GRC
XLM, CLAM, DMD, BLK
XRP USNBT
NXT
BTS
PPC, XMR

ETH fict(σ=1)

20

MAID
DOGE, DASH

LTC, USD, USDT

BTC

0

λ+
λ- Wishart region
(X)

Figure 65: The largest eigenvalue λmax of C(X) for each of N = 100 cryptocurrencies selected for
the base (full names are listed in the Appendix B), as well as for USD and a fictitious currency
(fict) with two different volatility levels σ = 1 and σ = 10. The limiting values λ− and λ+ of
the Wishart eigenvalue distribution φW (λ) given by Eq. (33) with σW = 1 are denoted by dashed
fict
lines. λUSD
max and λmax have been multiplied by 0.99 so that they can be comparable directly with
the other eigenvalues.

86

(X)

The above interpretation of λmax – the lower its value, the more important the
base cryptocurrency X – is also supported by capitalization volume. TEK, for
which λTEK
max is the largest, has one of the smallest capitalizations, while BTC has
the largest one. In addition, TEK/USD shows a trend that differs from the other
cryptocurrencies’ trends (Fig. 60).
6.1.4. Quasi-idempotence
Another measure that can be applied to rank the importance of cryptocurrencies is quasi-idempotence [208]. The underlying notion is to assess how close an
experimentally-obtained connectivity, synchronization, or correlation matrix is to
the same squared infinitely many times. Considering a weighted network, the corresponding matrix is the least sensitive to squaring (closest to equilibrium) whenever
the edge weights are simply reflections of the corresponding node strengths; in other
words, when the connectivity between any two nodes is a reflection of their common
participation in global connectivity. Quasi-idempotence, therefore, can be deemed
an index at the same time of self-similarity and collectivity. Here, it was calculated
according to
(X)
ι(X) (∞) = r(Ξ(C0 ), Ξ(C(X)
(35)
∞ ))
(X)

(X)

where C0 and C∞ denote the initial correlation matrix for a base (crypto)currency
X and the same squared infinitely many times, practically obtained according to
a truncation criterion while maintaining unit norm at each step to avoid divergence. Ξ(C(X) ) yields a vector c containing the rearranged off-diagonal elements
(X)
(X)
Cij = Cji of C(X) with i > j and r(x, y) denotes the element-wise Pearson correlation between the two vectors. As the measure is ill-defined in the presence of
negative entries (due to possible non-convergence), anticorrelations were clipped to
zero. While related to the largest eigenvalue analysis, this approach is mathematically distinct and entails a more complex dependency on the entire spectrum. Consequentially, as visible in Fig. 66, it not only confirmed but demonstrated even more
markedly the centrality of the Bitcoin, such as that the lowest values of ιBTC (∞)
were consistently observed when this was taken as the base currency: such a finding
underlines that the “collective dynamics” which endow the correlation matrix with
a non-random structure largely stem from the influence of this currency. Similar
dependencies can be detected in maturing culture neurons, physical networks of
chaotic oscillators as well as simulations of stochastic Kuramoto networks [208].
6.1.5. Evolution of the market cross-correlation structure
As characteristics of the individual cryptocurrency exchange rates evolve over
time, a cross-correlation structure of the market can also change as the market
(X)
develops. Top panel in Fig. 67 presents λmax (t) of C(X) (t) for X=BTC, X=ETH,
X=XRP, X=TEK, X=USD, and X=fict (constructed from a geometric Brownian
motion with σ = 1) calculated for various base currencies in a half-year (182 days)
rolling window with a one-day step. Bottom panel of Fig. 67 presents evolution of
a market capitalization share of the most important cryptocurrencies calculated in
the same way.
The extreme cases (X=BTC and X=TEK) do not change significantly over time.
(X)
However, the increase in λmax and, consequently, in the market cross-correlation
strength is particularly strong for X=USD and X=fict(σ = 1), whose dynamics
are independent of the cryptocurrency market. The largest growth can be seen
87

1

Base currency X=
TEK
fict(σ=10)

0.95

XRP
NXT
BTS
XMR
ETH PPC
fict(σ=1)

MAID DOGE
DASH

0.9

LTC

0.85

ι(∞)

USDT
USD

BTC
Figure 66: Quasi-idempotence ι(X) (∞) of C(X) for each of N = 100 cryptocurrencies, USD, and a
fictitious currency (fict) selected to be the base – X. For USD and fict, ι(X) (∞) has been multiplied
by 0.99 so that it can be compared directly with ι(X) (∞) for the other base cryptocurrencies.

88

100

80

λmax

Base currency X=

60

USD
BTC
ETH
XRP
TEK
fict(σ=1)
Wishart

40

20

0

80
40
20
10
5

%

0.8
×100
0.6
0.4

Total market cap.

2
1

0.2
0

Apr 2016

Oct 2016 Apr 2017

Oct 2017 Apr 2018

Oct 2018 Apr 2019

10

Market cap.[USD]

×10

Time
(X)

Figure 67: Top: λmax (t) calculated from C(X) (t) in a 182-day rolling window with a step of 1 day for
X=BTC, X=ETH, X=XRP, X=TEK, and X=USD. A fictitious currency fict(σ = 1) is also shown.
fict(σ=1)
λUSD
have been multiplied by 0.99 so that they can be compared directly with the
max and λmax
other eigenvalues. A dashed line marks λ+ for the Wishart case. Bottom: market capitalization
as a function of time (dashed line) and a market share of BTC, ETH, and XRP, calculated in a
semi-annual rolling window.

in the semi-annual windows ending from January to August 2018 – this interval
includes a period of a strong bull market followed by a crash. This behaviour is
consistent with an observation that stock markets are strongly collective during
sharp declines [8, 209, 210]. After the cryptocurrency market calmed down in the
(X)
second half of 2018, λmax for USD and fict(σ = 1) decreased, but they still remain
above the 2017 level.
If X=ETH one can see a systematic drop in λETH
max that is due to a capitalization
increase of this cryptocurrency (Fig. 67). In the windows ending from December
BTC
2017 to June 2018 λETH
max was lower than λmax , which was a temporary takeover of
the dominant role on the cryptocurrency market by ETH. At that time ETH’s share
in the market capitalization increased while the BTC’s share dropped, which was
related to the ICO-mania mentioned earlier. The number of ICO offers was released
mainly on the Ethereum platform which shot up a demand for ETH, rose its importance, and strengthened links with other cryptocurrencies. An additional factor
that caused BTC to decline at the turn of 2017 and 2018 was that BTC experienced
its valuation peak in December 2017, while the other major cryptocurrencies, including ETH, about a month later. From January 2018 a bear phase spread across
the market, with BTC losing relatively less value, which translated into an increase
89

in its market capitalization share. This was accompanied by a systematic decline in
λBTC
max , which can be interpreted as a return of the bitcoin’s dominant position.
If X=XRP one can see jumps in λXRP
max (Fig. 67) that were associated with a 102%
increase in the XRP/USD rate valuation on 04/02/2017. Such a big change implied
valuation change of all the cryptocurrencies expressed in XRP, leading to a collective
behaviour of the entire market if observed from the XRP perspective. Inclusion of
that day in a semi-annual rolling window translates directly into a sharp increase in
XRP
λXRP
max . In contrast, a decline in λmax half a year later was caused by falling out of that
day from the rolling window. This confirms the previously presented interpretation
of the largest eigenvalue magnitude.
6.2. Minimal spanning tree representation of the cryptocurrency market
Based on the correlation matrix C(X) , one can also construct a network representation of the market. Nodes can represent the exchange rates and edges can be
(X)
the cross-correlations between two exchange rates with weights equal to Cij .
Minimal spanning tree (MST) is a connected subset of a weighted network that
spans this network and minimizes a sum of the metric edge lengths. It was first
applied to a cross-correlation analysis of a stock market in Ref. [7] and, since then,
it has been successfully used to analyze cross-correlation topology of various markets such as: Forex [211, 212, 213, 193, 214, 215], the stock market [216, 217, 218,
219, 220, 221, 222, 223, 165], the commodity market [11], and the cryptocurrency
market [73]. For the mature markets, a node degree PDF for MST can be approximated by a power-law tails [96]. In the case of the stock and Forex markets, the
tail scaling exponents assume values that are similar to the hierarchical models of
complex networks [224].
Because the off-diagonal elements of C(X) do not meet the metric conditions, it
is necessary to transform edge weights into internode distances defined by
r 

(X)

di,j =

(X)

2 1 − Cij

(36)

that already fulfill these conditions [7]. Since the Pearson correlation coefficient
(X)
takes values in [−1, 1], the distance di,j is confined to [0, 2]. With this measure, the
MST graphs that represent market structure can be constructed by following the
Prim’s algorithm [225].
Fig. 68 presents a strongly centralized MST for X=USD, constructed from a set
of N = 100 X/USD exchange rates recorded daily over the period 10/2015–03/2019.
USD
kBTC
= 51 is multiplicity (degree) of a node corresponding to BTC/USD, while
other nodes have multiplicity not exceeding 10. The node degree can be interpreted
as a centrality measure expressing a relative importance of the exchange rate. The
larger degree of a node corresponding to a given cryptocurrency, the more it affects
the remaining cryptocurrencies [214]. Dominance of BTC in the structure of MST
for USD as the base currency is consistent with the already-discussed results of the
largest eigenvalue analysis (Fig. 6.1.3).
MST for X=USD, whose dynamics is not directly related to the cryptocurrency
market, seems to best describe the market topology. However, as shown in Sect. 6.1,
the cross-correlation structure depends heavily on the base currency choice. Fig. 69
shows MST for X=BTC, which looks profoundly different. It is much more decenBTC
tralized and there is no dominant node. The largest degree kmax
= 12 is observed
90

Figure 68: MST representing the cryptocurrency market constructed for USD playing the role of
the base currency.

for BTS/BTC and MAID/BTC. For the entire period under consideration, MSTs
created for the base cryptocurrencies less important than BTC are even more centralized than that for X=USD: most nodes have a unit degree and they are connected
to BTC. Results for all the cryptocurrencies used as the base ones are presented in
Sect. 6.3.
On Forex, the node degree distributions are in agreement with the power-law
model, which means that these trees are scale-free for some base currencies [193, 214].
Scaling of the node degree CDF can be parameterized by an exponent γ (X) :
P (X ≥ k) ∼ k −γ

(X)

,

(37)

where k is the MST node degree and X base cryptocurrency. Fig. 70 presents a
node degree CDF k (X) for three base cryptocurrencies with the largest capitalization:
X=BTC, X=ETH, and X=XRP together with X=USD. Due to the changing market
cross-correlation structure observed in Sect. 6.1.5, the results were also shown in
semi-annual windows, apart from the entire-period case from 10/2015 to 03/2019.
For the whole considered period (bottom right panel in Fig. 70) some trace of
scaling can be identified only for X=BTC. In other cases a node with the largest
degree, that is BTC, disrupts scaling, because the corresponding MSTs are highly
centralized. In a majority of the semi-annual intervals, there is no satisfactory scaling
quality, either. Only for X=BTC in some intervals, γ BTC oscillates around 2, which
is a value associated with a decentralized network topology. A significant scaling
quality improvement occurs in the interval 10/2017 to 3/2018. A related event is the
BTC significance decline described in Sect. 6.1.5 with the associated maximum node
(X)
degree kmax decreasing for X 6=BTC. This made it possible to develop a hierarchical
structure of the nodes with the scaling tails of the node degree CDFs. An example of
such a situation is X=XRP with γ XRP = 1.43 ± 0.07 and a well-developed scale-free
tail. Slightly worse scaling is seen for a subsequent window 04/2018–09/2018, where
γ USD = 1.5±0.08. In that interval a CDF scaling is also noticeable for X=USD. The
last semi-annual window 10/2018–03/2019 displays a return of the BTC domination
91

Figure 69: MST representing the cryptocurrency market constructed for BTC as the base currency.

1

USD

γ

BTC

γ
-1

ETH

10

γ

XRP

γ
-2

10

1

γ

=1.26±0.12

γ

=1.38±0.14

γ

-1

ETH

10

γ

XRP

P(X≥k)

γ

γ

=1.83±0.28

γ

=1.28±0.15

γ

=1.37±0.21

γ

USD

-1

ETH

10

γ

XRP

γ

=1.65±0.12

=2.11±0.17
=1.45±0.18
=1.22±0.17

USD

=2.04±0.15

γ

=1.94±0.15

γ

=1.43±0.07

γ

BTC
ETH
XRP

=1.5±0.08

=1.93±0.16
=1.53±0.16
=1.34±0.18

Apr 2018 - Sep 2018

Oct 2017 - Mar 2018
USD

γ
-1

ETH

10

γ

XRP

γ

1

XRP

γ

BTC

-2

ETH

=1.94±0.17

γ

10

=1.47±0.14

Apr 2017 - Sep 2017
γ

1

=1.33±0.14

BTC

Oct 2016 - Mar 2017
BTC

-2

=2.4±0.42

USD

=1.65±0.16

γ

10

XRP

==1.86±0.17

Apr 2016 - Sep 2016
USD

γ

1

ETH

Oct 2015 - Mar 2016
BTC

10

BTC

=2.33±0.29

γ

-2

USD

γ

=1.75±0.17

USD

γ

=1.20±0.31

BTC

=2.08±0.22

γ

=1.35±0.22

γ

=1.33±0.21

γ

ETH
XRP

Oct 2018 - Mar 2019

=1.17±0.20

=1.75±0.17
=0.96±0.3
=0.87±0.35

Oct 2015 - Mar 2019

10

1

10

k
Figure 70: Node degree CDFs with the estimated scaling exponent γ (X) for different choices of the
base currency X=USD, X=BTC, X=ETH, and X=XRP in semi-annual windows and in the whole
period 10/2015–03/2019 (bottom right).

and, thus, a transition of the MST structure to a centralized form.
Evolution of the scaling exponent γ (X) (t) for the above-mentioned base currencies
X is presented in Fig. 71 (top panel). A semi-annual rolling window with a step of 1
92

Base currency X=

2.4

(X)

2.2

γ

2

USD
BTC
ETH
XRP

1.8
1.6
1.4

SE

1.2
0.4
0.2
0

k

USD

40

kmax
kBTC

30
20
10

Apr 2016 Oct 2016 Apr 2017 Oct 2017 Apr 2018 Oct 2018 Apr 2019

Time
Figure 71: Top: scaling exponent of the node degree CDF γ (X) (t) for X=USD, X=BTC, X=ETH,
and X=XRP. Middle: standard error of a linear-regression-fitted γ (X) . Bottom: maximum node
USD
USD
for X=USD (black) and the BTC/USD node degree kBTC
(red).
degree kmax

day is applied. A scaling quality improvement measured by a power-law fit standard
error can be observed in the rolling windows that end between 10/2017 and 5/2018
(middle panel) and it corresponds to the period of the interim BTC/USD market
capitalization share and node degree decline (bottom panels of Fig. 71 and Fig. 71).
On contrary, in the windows that end between 8/2017 and 4/2018, there are nodes
with a larger degree than BTC/USD. This is related to a strong bull market that
started on all cryptocurrencies. During that time, the market was increasingly
collective from the X=USD perspective as shown in Fig. 67. Between 11/2017 and
3/2018, γ ETH increased above 2, which corresponded to a dominant role takeover
(X)
by ETH (see also Fig. 67 for λmax behaviour). This change was associated with the
ICO-mania and the increasing capitalization and the ETH significance. Between
5/2018 and 7/2018, which was the final phase of the bull market, the market became
decentralized and γ ETH , γ BTC , and γ USD were above 1.8. However, γ XRP was equal
to around 1.6 at that time, which is close to the theoretically derived value for a
hierarchical network model: γ hier ≈ 1.6 [226, 227].
The CDF tails lose their scale-free form when BTC dominance returns. This
USD
can be seen in the windows that end in 07/2018 in a form of a sharp jump in kmax
,
which is the BTC/USD node (bottom panel of Fig. 71). The BTC/USD node degree
increased by a factor of 5 when 1/7/2018 fell out of the corresponding semi-annual
window. On that day BTC’s valuation dropped down by 5%, while ETH’s valuation
increased by 10%. Other large-capitalization cryptocurrencies also rallied on that
93

day. The market MST returned to its centralized topology.
6.3. The largest eigenvalue vs. MST maximum node degree
(X)
Interpretations of λmax and γ (X) are mutually related. Expressing cryptocurrency
values in a base currency X of large capitalization takes some cross-correlation contribution that is associated with the dynamics of X. From the perspective of a
dominant cryptocurrency, the market seems to be rather weakly collective and the
corresponding network representation is decentralized. On the other hand, if one expresses other cryptocurrencies in a base currency with its own dynamics, the market
is collective and the network is strongly centralized.

80
60
40
20

kmax

80
60
40
20

Apr 2016 - Sep 2016

Oct 2015 - Mar 2016
R

X
L
B

ME

U
T

T
U
BL

Oct 2016 - Mar 2017

Apr 2017 - Sep 2017

EX

U
T
B

80
60
40
20

M

L R

X

R
E
UT L

M
B

Oct 2017 - Mar 2018

M
E B R LU
T

80
60
40
20

04.2018 - 09.2018
X
E R M U
T
LB

X

Oct 2018 - Mar 2019
E L
R

E

L
T
U

TU

Oct 2015 - Mar 2019

B

B

0

M
E

X

20

Base
currency
X=
B BTC
E ETH
L LTC
M MAID
U USD
T USDT
R XMR
X XRP

40

80

60

0

λmax

(X)

20

40

60

80
(X)

Figure 72: The largest eigenvalue λmax and the MST maximum node degree kmax ) over the whole
interval 10/2015–03/2019 (bottom right) and in semi-annual windows. Each circle represents a
base currency X, but some characteristic cases are marked with letters.
(X)

(X)

Fig. 72 shows λmax vs. kmax for all the N possible choices of the base currency
X calculated in fixed semi-annual windows and over the whole interval 10/2015–
3/2019 (bottom left). Each circle or letter denotes different X. (Instead of γ (X)
that describes the CDF tail scaling property, the maximum node degree is used
here. This replacement is necessary because for the most choices of X, the scaling
quality was not sufficient. It does not alter the interpretation, however.) If a base
cryptocurrency is located in the bottom left corner of a plot, its hierarchical position
in the market structure is dominant. In all the periods, except for 10/2017–3/2018,
BTC holds a dominant position. During 10/2017–2/2018 one could also observe the
(X)
(X)
lowest value of λmax , located below the level of kmax = 40. This allowed for the
formation of a hierarchical structure with the power-law node degree CDF, which
94

disappeared after the bull market ended in 1/2018 and BTC’s dominance returned
(Fig. 72).
(X)
While considering the whole interval, one can observe the highest kmax ≈ 80 for
a vast majority of the base cryptocurrencies (bottom right panel of Fig. 72). This is
consistent with the fact that the most nodes are connected to the BTC/USD node
and have unit degree, which gives the overall centralized structure of MST. BTC
seems to dominate the cryptocurrency market in a way much more significant than
USD does [22, 193, 214], which makes it the most natural base for this market.
6.4. Cryptocurrency network topology on Binance
In order to extend sensitivity of the network approach, the qMST formalism is
a method at hand [165]. It allows one to unveil the network properties on various
time scales s and from a perspective of different fluctuation amplitudes (selected by
means of a q parameter). A construction scheme for qMST is parallel to the original
MST except for a distance δij (q, s) that has to be calculated from the detrended
cross-correlation coefficient ρ(q, s) defined by Eq.(15) in Sect. 4.1.2. It inherits ρ’s
dependence on the parameters s and q:
q

(X)
(X)
q > 0.
(38)
δij (q, s) = 2 1 − ρij (q, s) ,
Only positive values of q are considered (q = 1 and q = 4), which guarantees that
(X)
δij (q, s) is a metric [165].
MST are formed from N = 94 cryptocurrency exchange rate quotes from the
Binance platform (a detailed list is given in the Appendix C). Time series of returns
were sampled with 1 min resolution and cover the whole year 2018. Trading on
Binance occurs predominantly on the exchange rates where BTC is the base. In
2018 there were 93 such exchange rates. The second most frequently traded cryptocurrency was ETH (90 exchange rates). It was also possible to obtain 30 exchange
rates expressed in Binance coin (BNB) and 8 exchange rates expressed in USDT,
but here there are only considered those involving BTC. This choice preserves dynamics of the individual cryptocurrencies without being distorted by evolution of
the strongest one (see Sect. 6.1.3). Because of fixing X=BTC, the BTC superscript
is dropped in all quantity symbols for clarity.
Mean distance hδ(q, s)i decreases with increasing s (middle panel in Fig. 73),
which is a natural consequence of the increased cross-correlation strength on longer
time scales (Sect. 5.2). In contrast, it increases with q. The average shortest path
length hL(q, s)i calculated for binary edges (i.e., the qMST edges are considered as
unweighted here) increases with s and it is larger for q = 4 than for q = 1, which indicates that MST becomes less centralized for large returns (top panel in Fig. 73). The
MST topology shows a kind of “phase transition” for s ≈ 120 min. Below this scale
it is almost perfectly centralized for q = 1 with hL(q, s)i ≈ 2 and kmax (q, s) ≈ 90 and
significantly centralized for q = 4 with hL(q, s)i ≈ 3 and kmax (q, s) ≈ 60. The central node represents always ETH or, more precisely, the exchange rate ETH/BTC
(Fig. 74), because for short time scales the information flow enters the market principally through the most actively traded cryptocurrency – ETH. The situation looks
different for the time scales longer than 120 min, because for such scales the ETH
hub loses centrality and MST becomes decentralized gradually (Fig. 73). For the
longest considered time scale of 2 weeks kmax (q, s) drops below 20 for both q = 1
and q = 4. The corresponding qMSTs are distributed (Fig. 75).
95

<δ(q,s)>

<L(q,s)>

8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1.4
q=1
q=4

1.2
1

0.8

kmax(q,s)

80
60
40
20
0

10

100 Scale s [min]

1000

10000

Figure 73: Topological properties of qMST with X=BTC: the average shortest binary path length
hL(q, s)i (top), the mean inter-node metric distance hδ(q, s)i (middle), and the maximum node
degree kmax (q, s) (bottom) for q = 1 and q = 4.

√
Despite the fact that δij (q, s) ≈ 2 for the shortest scales s = 10 min, the
results are statistically significant. This was checked by calculating δij (q, s) and
their standard deviation for 100 realizations of surrogate data (randomly shuffled
returns of 93 exchange rates). Only in a few cases δij (q, s) exceeded 3σ threshold.
The above observations are supported by the scaling properties of the qMST node
degree CDFs. For each s and q, the corresponding CDF tails were approximated
by a power-law function with the exponent γ(q, s) (Eq.(37)). Fig. 76 shows values
of this exponent together with the standard error of a linear regression fit. Up to
s ≈ 120 min, one does not observe any power-law scaling (large error bars) with a
dominant role of the ETH node being responsible for this behaviour (see Fig. 75).
However, for s & 500 min the maximum node degree kmax (q, s) decreases and the
node degree CDF reveal a scaling tail (a smaller γ(q, s) error, Fig. 76). The exponent
γ(q, s) increases with increasing s reaching values higher than 1.8 for s = 1 week,
which are characteristic for decentralized networks.
The qMSTs reach topology of the hierarchical network model [226, 227] corresponding to γ(q, s) ≈ 1.6 later for q = 1 (s ≈ 7, 000 min) than for q = 4 (s ≈ 1, 000
min). This is because for large returns the cryptocurrency exchange rates are globally less correlated than for medium returns, which opens more space for the formation of sub-clusters in qMSTs for q = 4. This result shows that a standard MST
construction (q = 1) offers too little sensitivity and it is thus inferior to the qMST
96

Figure 74: qMST with nodes representing cryptocurrencies expressed in BTC for s = 60 min and
q = 1 (top) and q = 4 (bottom). The data comes from Binance.

97

Figure 75: qMST with nodes representing cryptocurrencies expressed in BTC for s = 10, 080 min
(1 week) and q = 1 (top) and q = 4 (bottom). The data comes from Binance.

98

γ(q,s)

2
1.8
1.6
1.4
1.2
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
2
1.8
1.6
1.4
1.2
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

q=1

q=4

10

100 Scale s [min]

1000

10000

Figure 76: Tail scaling exponent γ(q, s) estimated for the node degree CDFs describing topology
of qMST for different values of s and for q = 1 (top) and q = 4 (bottom). Standard error of γ(q, s)
obtained from a linear regression fit is given by the error bars. γ(q, s) = 1.6 corresponds to the
hierarchical network model, while γ(q, s) > 1.8 corresponds to distributed networks.

approach.
The network approach presented here for X=BTC confirms the results reviewed
in earlier sections according to which the cross-correlation between the cryptocurrency exchange rates tend to increase with increasing time scales because of the
fact that less frequently traded exchange rate pairs need time to synchronize. With
increasing scale, the MST structure becomes more diverse and decentralized. A
dominant position of ETH observed for short scales disappears and a hierarchical
structure develops. This happens faster for large returns than for medium ones
because the cross-correlations are weaker for the former.
7. Summary and conclusions
A striking development of the cryptocurrency market in the last several years
– from a small and peripheral market to a market at the level of a middle-size
stock exchange capitalization – provides a unique opportunity to observe its quick
structural self-organization. Availability of the high frequency data allows one to
conduct advanced statistical studies of the processes governing the market evolution
from its birth to the present.
In this review we presented the most important results derived from a few studies
carried out based on available high-frequency data from the cryptocurrency exchange
99

platforms. A main stress was put on methods known well from statistical physics
like the detrended fluctuation analysis with its multifractal extensions quantifying
nonlinear dependencies in data and the cross-correlation matrix analysis exploiting
universal predictions of the random matrix theory and the complex network theory.
A principal conclusion that can be inferred from the presented results is that the
cryptocurrency market has gradually been pursuing its way to maturity. It is still not
a fully developed market unlike, for example, Forex, since there are still significant
differences between both as regards liquidity and the number of transactions, among
others. The following characteristics of the market were also discussed in detail: the
leptokurtic tails of the return probability distribution functions, the long memory
in volatility, the antipersistent dynamics of the returns, the multiscale auto- and
cross-correlations between the cryptocurrency exchange rate returns in respect to
other cryptocurrencies and the fiat currencies like USD and EUR. Behaviour of the
exchange rates on different trading platforms was also a subject of interest.
All these properties, known together as the financial stylized facts, characterize
mature financial markets with the stock markets, the commodity markets, and the
foreign currency market, among others. In contrast, on developing/emerging markets some or all these properties may not be observed at all. Thus, their existence
(or lack thereof) can determine a development stage of a particular market. On the
cryptocurrency market one observes a gradual shift from an early, immature stage
prior to 2014 towards more developed stages after that year with some parts of the
market reaching even a stage of the almost-complete maturity. These parts consist
predominantly of the exchange rates involving bitcoin (BTC), ethereum (ETH), a
and several other the most liquid cryptocurrencies like ripple (XRP) and litecoin
(LTC). That shift was caused by a significant increase of the trading volume and
frequency that was seen on the market over the years. This observation points out
to these quantities as the principal driving factors of market development.
More specifically, as regards the most mature and long-traded part of the market, i.e., the exchange rates BTC/USD and ETH/USD, the return autocorrelation
function was changing its form from short-term memory to long-term one with a
power-law decay. In parallel, the return CDF tails lost their initial Lévy-stable form
with the exponent γ 6 2 form and became inverse cubic power law (γ ≈ 3 or even
less). As mentioned above, these shifts took place around 2013-2014 and after that
both characteristics do not differ from mature markets. An analogous change of dynamics happened in 2017, when the Hurst exponent rose from ∼ 0.4 to ∼ 0.5, i.e.,
from the antipersistent regime typical for developing markets to the neutral regime
proper to mature markets. The same was visible for the multiscale autocorrelations
– the singularity spectra f (α) change shape from a strong left-side asymmetry seen
till 2017 to a mature, symmetric form in 2018. As in other markets, multiscaling is
observed for large returns, but, contrary to that, the smaller returns are monofractal
here unlike the corresponding returns on Forex and other mature markets.
One of the key features of Forex is possibility of expressing any currency in any
other currency. On cryptocurrency market such a possibility emerged gradually as
new trading platforms became available. Initially, only the exchange rates involving
main fiat currencies were traded, but after a few years the cryptocurrencies could
also be expressed in each other without participation of the traditional currencies. In
this case the most liquid exchange rate – BTC/ETH – reveal autocorrelation that
resembles the autocorrelation of EUR/USD. However, like in immature markets,
100

f (α) was still left-side asymmetric even in the second half of 2018. Multiscaling and
other stylized facts might be viewed as indicators of market complexity. Therefore,
a process of market maturing is inevitably associated with complexity increase. A
feature that can also be considered in this context is multiscale cross-correlations
among the exchange rates. Such cross-correlations were found at the level of medium
and large returns and their strength increases with increasing scale (unlike Forex,
where such dependence is much weaker). Moreover, for a fixed scale, the detrended
cross-correlations were getting stronger over the years, which is especially evident
for small scales. This is associated with reduction in the triangular arbitrage opportunities. The less opportunities are detectable, the more liquid and mature the
market is, because lack of liquidity slows a rate of information spreading. Since the
cryptocurrency market is decentralized and since liquidity varies among the trading platforms, different platforms display different stage of the market maturity – a
feature unique for this market.
The strength of the multiscale detrended cross-correlations among the exchange
rates depends crucially on whether the two exchange rates involve a common base
(crypto)currency – if this is the case, they are substantially stronger. There is a hierarchical structure of cross-correlations in the market: one can identify the exchange
rate clusters consisting of stronger-than-average correlated rates – typically those
that remain in a triangle relation with each other. Because of a slower information
flow, the clusters do not comprise the exchange rates without triangle relationship,
which is a feature distinct from Forex, where there are other factors that correlated
currencies, like the geographic proximity.
At present it is still too early to discuss whether the cryptocurrency market will
survive for a substantial period of time or in which direction it may evolve except
for that it is very likely that its liquidity can improve constantly in the following
years. One of the key reasons is that despite its high volatility level at present,
this market offers new investment opportunities, thus actually facilitating portfolio
diversification. Here an important role is played by the most liquid cryptocurrencies,
ETH and BTC, which, if chosen for the exchange rate base, decollectify the market
and, in turn, allow one for further portfolio diversification within the cryptocurrency
market itself. These cryptocurrencies seem to be also the most mature ones and thus
the most credible.
In this context the results that is among the most important is a kind of “phase
transition” that has been noticed recently in 2020 during the Covid-19 pandemic.
The cryptocurrency market evolution used to show no cross-correlation with the evolution of the traditional markets: the prices of BTC or ETH and other financial instruments like the fiat currencies, stock indices, and commodities were uncorrelated
on average. However, this suddenly changed during this year’s turmoil observed on
the markets that was related to the Covid-19 outburst: the major cryptocurrency
prices became cross-correlated. First, the positive cross-correlations were seen with
the instruments considered safe, like Japanese yen, but later such cross-correlations
appeared also with rather the risky instruments like S&P500, typical currencies, and
commodities. Interestingly, this occurred not only during the market panic at the 1st
pandemic wave in early Spring 2020, but also during the recovery phase experienced
by the traditional markets in late Spring and even during the pandemic slowdown
in Summer 2020. It seems that the cryptocurrency market ceased to be viewed as
a “safe haven” by the investors and become a part of the network constituting the
101

global market. It is an important question whether this coupling is a transient feature only or, maybe, it is another manifestation of the market’s maturation and it
will continue to be observed in future.

102

A. Full names and statistical properties of cryptocurrencies from Binance
and Kraken

Table A.5: List of symbols and full names of cryptocurrencies listed on both Binance and Kraken.

Ticker
BAT
BCH
BTC
BNB
DASH
ETC
ETH
ICX
LSK
LTC
MIOTA
NEO
REP
USDT
XLM
XMR
XRP
ZEC

Full name
Basic Attention Token
Bitcoin Cash
Bitcoin
Binance coin
Dash
Ethereum Classic
Ethereum
ICON
Lisk
Litecoin
IOTA
NEO
Augur
Tether
Stellar
Monero
Ripple
Zcash

103

-3

-3

P(X>|r∆t |)

10

∝|r∆t |

10

-4

10

-5

Binance
∆t=1min
10

100

BAT/BNB
BAT/BTC
BAT/ETH
BCH/BTC
BCH/USDT
BNB/BTC
BNB/ETH
BNB/USDT
BTC/ETH
BTC/USDT
ETH/USDT
ICX/BNB
ICX/BTC
ICX/ETH
IOTA/BNB
IOTA/BTC
IOTA/ETH
LSK/BNB
LSK/BTC
LSK/ETH
LTC/BNB
LTC/BTC
LTC/ETH
LTC/USDT
NEO/BNB
NEO/BTC
NEO/ETH
NEO/USDT
XLM/BNB
XLM/BTC
XLM/ETH

|r∆t |
Figure A.77: Cumulative distributions of absolute normalized log-returns r∆t=1min representing
cryptocurrency exchange rates on Binance in 2018.

104

Table A.6: Estimated γ exponent, average length of non-trading periods ht0 i (i.e., zero-returns
sequences), number of non-trading periods N0 , average volume-per-minute in USD and Hurst
exponent, for the cryptocurrency pairs listed on Binance in 2018.

Name
BTC/USDT
ETH/USDT
BTC/ETH
BNB/BTC
BCH/BTC
BNB/USDT
BCH/USDT
ICX/BTC
NEO/USDT
XLM/BTC
NEO/BTC
LTC/BTC
LTC/USDT
IOTA/BTC
NEO/ETH
ICX/ETH
BNB/ETH
XLM/ETH
LSK/BTC
BAT/BTC
LTC/ETH
LSK/BNB
IOTA/ETH
NEO/BNB
LTC/BNB
BAT/ETH
LSK/ETH
ICX/BNB
IOTA/BNB
BAT/BNB
XLM/BNB

γ
3,45±0,1
3,39±0,1
3,30±0,1
2,67±0,2
3,36±0,1
3,08±0,15
3,36±0,1
3,15±0,1
3,29±0,1
2,71±0,15
3,17±0,15
3,42±0,1
3,23±0,15
3,26±0,15
3,54±0,1
3,24±0,15
2,74±0,2
2,96±0,2
2,72±0,15
3,12±0,15
3,61±0,15
2,39±0,35
3,52±0,15
2,54±0,2
2,32±0,25
3,48±0,15
2,75±0,15
2,51±0,2
2,88±0,25
2,70±0,3
2,59±0,3

hN0 i
1,07
1,10
1,09
1,26
1,25
1,20
1,40
1,58
1,27
1,33
1,34
1,17
1,29
1,30
1,94
2,20
1,47
1,95
1,94
1,85
2,18
10,27
2,29
3,66
3,86
2,93
4,19
4,80
4,35
6,84
3,65

105

N0
8559
16184
12134
40098
29973
31320
40922
77707
42709
67637
61330
34360
45208
52793
80537
87489
65950
85581
92975
88702
93044
44317
91798
87796
88053
95765
81720
76597
81816
61754
90019

hW i
196331
61430
60824
18634
16299
16268
15893
15336
14830
14556
14445
13110
11793
7928
3765
3496
2755
2580
2489
2166
1825
1595
1495
1294
830
516
451
260
130
72
12

H
0,47
0,48
0,51
0,43
0,48
0,46
0,48
0,45
0,47
0,46
0,46
0,47
0,47
0,45
0,42
0,42
0,45
0,43
0,44
0,45
0,42
0,41
0,43
0,40
0,41
0,41
0,39
0,36
0,39
0,36
0,37

-3

∝|r∆t |
-3

P(X>|r∆t |)

10

10

-4

10

-5

Kraken
∆t=1min
10

100

BCH/BTC
BCH/EUR
BCH/USD
BTC/EUR
BTC/USD
DASH/BTC
DASH/EUR
DASH/USD
ETC/BTC
ETC/ETH
ETC/EUR
ETC/USD
BTC/ETH
ETH/EUR
ETH/USD
LTC/BTC
LTC/EUR
LTC/USD
REP/BTC
REP/ETH
REP/EUR
USDT/USD
XMR/BTC
XMR/EUR
XMR/USD
XRP/BTC
XRP/EUR
XRP/USD
ZEC/BTC
ZEC/EUR
ZEC/USD

|r∆t |
Figure A.78: Cumulative distributions of absolute normalized log-returns r∆t=1min representing
cryptocurrency exchange rates on Kraken in 2018.

106

Table A.7: Estimated γ exponent, average length of non-trading periods ht0 i (i.e., zero-returns
sequences), number of non-trading periods N0 , average volume-per-minute in USD and Hurst
exponent, for the cryptocurrency pairs listed on Binance in 2018.

Name
BTC/EUR
BTC/USD
ETH/USD
ETH/EUR
XRP/EUR
XRP/USD
BTC/ETH
XRP/BTC
BCH/USD
BCH/EUR
USDT/USD
LTC/EUR
LTC/USD
BCH/BTC
ETC/USD
ETC/EUR
LTC/BTC
XMR/EUR
XMR/USD
ETC/BTC
XMR/BTC
DASH/EUR
DASH/BTC
ZEC/USD
DASH/USD
REP/EUR
ZEC/EUR
ZEC/BTC
ETC/ETH
REP/BTC
REP/ETH

γ
3,61±0,1
3,63±0,15
3,4±0,1
3,37±0,15
3,14±0,15
2,86±0,2
3,18±0,2
2,99±0,15
2,61±0,15
2,28±0,3
2,37±0,3
3,61±0,1
3,41±0,1
2,35±0,15
3,16±0,15
3,53±0,15
3,34±0,15
3,77±0,15
3,73±0,2
2,31±0,2
3,21±0,15
3,59±0,15
2,52±0,2
3,18±0,2
2,81±0,3
3,09±0,25
3,25±0,25
2,29±0,25
2,18±0,2
2,05±0,25
2,00±0,3

hN0 i
1,49
1,61
1,78
1,65
2,28
2,69
2,62
3,50
3,83
3,31
8,97
3,11
3,48
4,39
4,18
4,01
5,09
4,16
5,58
6,34
6,58
6,47
7,58
7,45
9,36
6,79
6,20
7,51
9,15
8,43
11,57

107

N0
44310
55360
67807
61097
77480
80418
82074
72556
75427
82295
43821
84104
79983
68059
74681
75596
62675
76277
63385
55647
54832
57268
49134
51105
42727
54740
59369
51170
41861
46419
35701

hW i
35599
33998
19711
18171
7321
6259
5250
2763
2151
2036
1747
1732
1722
1251
1114
973
940
865
864
709
614
526
416
354
394
374
345
345
266
247
158

H
0,48
0,48
0,49
0,49
0,46
0,46
0,48
0,45
0,48
0,47
0,31
0,48
0,47
0,43
0,47
0,47
0,45
0,49
0,49
0,45
0,43
0,48
0,44
0,48
0,47
0,45
0,47
0,42
0,41
0,41
0,40

Table A.8: Average and maximum triangular arbitrage opportunity on Binance in 2018.

Triangle
BTC-USDT-BNB
BTC-USDT-ETH
BTC-USDT-LTC
BTC-USDT-NEO
BTC-USDT-BCH
BNB-ETH-USDT
LTC-ETH-USDT
NEO-ETH-USDT
LTC-BNB-USDT
NEO-BNB-USDT
ETH-BAT-BTC
ETH-BNB-BTC
ETH-BNT-BTC
ETH-ETC-BTC
ETH-ICX-BTC
ETH-IOTA-BTC
ETH-LSK-BTC
ETH-LTC-BTC
ETH-NEO-BTC
ETH-XLM-BTC
BTC-BAT-BNB
BTC-ICX-BNB
BTC-IOTA-BNB
BTC-LSK-BNB
BTC-LTC-BNB
BTC-NEO-BNB
BTC-XLM-BNB
ETH-BAT-BNB
ETH-ICX-BNB
ETH-IOTA-BNB
ETH-LSK-BNB
ETH-NEO-BNB
ETH-XLM-BNB

Mean
0,00096
0,00059
0,00087
0,00097
0,00129
0,00126
0,00127
0,00131
0,00203
0,00222
0,00255
0,00108
0,00286
0,00139
0,00148
0,00159
0,00243
0,00115
0,00115
0,00138
0,00447
0,00343
0,00266
0,00486
0,00185
0,00204
0,00228
0,00483
0,00355
0,00292
0,00519
0,00227
0,00258

108

Max
0,0465
0,0367
0,0931
0,1029
0,0793
0,0582
0,0955
0,0435
0,2517
0,2924
0,1249
0,0631
0,0889
0,0630
0,0823
0,0699
0,2139
0,05458
0,09129
0,71637
0,57722
0,2256
0,23356
1,16489
0,24864
0,284
0,7974
0,5747
0,2288
0,24176
1,16722
0,28951
0,79693

Table A.9: Average and maximum triangular arbitrage opportunity on Kraken in 2018.

Triangle
BTC-EUR-ETH
BTC-EUR-BCH
BTC-EUR-DASH
ETC-EUR-ETH
ETC-EUR-BTC
BTC-EUR-XMR
BTC-EUR-LTC
BTC-EUR-XRP
BTC-EUR-REP
ETH-EUR-REP
BTC-EUR-ZEC
BTC-USD-ETH
BTC-USD-BCH
BTC-USD-DASH
ETC-USD-ETH
ETC-USD-BTC
BTC-USD-XMR
BTC-USD-LTC
BTC-USD-XRP
BTC-USD-ZEC
ETC-ETH-BTC
REP-ETH-BTC

109

Mean
0,00112
0,00186
0,00131
0,00160
0,00149
0,00146
0,00129
0,00156
0,00176
0,00184
0,00139
0,00121
0,00179
0,00126
0,00159
0,00145
0,00138
0,00124
0,00155
0,00133
0,00119
0,00139

Max
0,0776
0,2003
0,2087
0,1586
0,2449
0,1258
0,1359
0,1919
0,2080
0,2920
0,2408
0,1147
0,1852
0,2179
0,1671
0,2415
0,1187
0,1336
0,2269
0,2203
0,2459
0,3511

B. List of 100 cryptocurrency names from CoinMarketCap

Table B.10: Full names of the cryptocurrencies from section 6.
Ticker
BTC
ETH
XRP
LTC
XLM
USDT
DASH
XMR
XEM
BCN
BTS
DGB
XVG
DOGE
SC
MAID
MONA
EMC
RDD
NXT
SYS
NXS
GRS
VTC
PPC
UNO
XPM
XWC
BAY
VIA
AEON
ABY
BITB
BCY
BSD
BLK
BURST
BLOCK
CLAM
COVAL
CLOAK
XCP
DMD
XDN
EMC2
EXP
FAIR
FTC
FLO
FLDC

Full name
Bitcoin
Ethereum
Ripple
Litecoin
Stellar
Tether
Dash
Monero
NEM
Bytecoin
BitShares
DigiByte
Verge
Dogecoin
Siacoin
MaidSafeCoin
Monacoin
Emercoin
ReddCoin
Nxt
SysCoin
Nexus
Groestlcoin
Vertcoin
Polishcoin
Unobtanium
Primecoin
Whitecoin
BitBay
Viacoin
Aeon
ArtByte
Bean Cash
Bitcrystals
Bitsend
Blackcoin
Burst
Blocknet
Clams
Circuits of Value
Cloakcoin
Counterparty
Diamond
DigitalNote
Einsteinium
Expanse
Faircoin
Feathercoin
Flo
Foldigcoin

Ticker
GAME
GCR
GRC
NLG
LEO
MINT
NMC
MUE
XMY
NAV
NTRN
OK
OMNI
PINK
POT
PURA
RBY
SHIFT
SIB
SLR
XST
VRC
XAUR
NEOS
IOC
AUR
CURE
NVC
USNBT
PTC
GLD
CANN
TRC
QRK
EFL
ADC
CPC
XMG
HUC
ORB
CDN
DEM
ZET
BTA
WDC
FJC
START
DGC
TEK
PXI

110

Full name
GameCredits
Global Currency Reserve
GridCoin
Gulden
LEOcoin
MintCoin
Namecoin
MonetaryUnit
Myriad
NavCoin
Neutron
OKCash
Omni
Pinkcoin
PotCoin
Pura
Rubycoin
Shift
SIBCoin
SolarCoin
Stealth
VeriCoin
Xaurum
NeosCoin
I/O Coin
Auroracoin
Curecoin
Novacoin
NuBits
Pesetacoin
GoldCoin
CannabisCoin
Terracoin
Quark
e-Gulden
AudioCoin
CPChain
Magi
HunterCoin
Orbitcoin
Canada eCoin
Deutsche eMark
Zetacoin
Bata
WorldCoin
FujiCoin
Stratcoin
Digitalcoin
TEKcoin
Prime-XI

C. List of 94 cryptocurrency names from Binance

Table C.11: Full names of the cryptocurrencies from section 6.4.
Ticker
ADA
ADX
AION
AMB
ARK
ARN
AST
BAT
BCD
BCH
BCPT
BNB
BNT
BQX
BRD
BTC
BTG
BTS
CDT
CMT
CND
DASH
DGD
DLT
DNT
EDO
ELF
ENG
ENJ
EOS
ETC
ETH
EVX
FUEL
FUN
GAS
GTO
GVT
GXS
ICX
IOTA
KMD
KNC
LEND
LINK
LRC
LSK

Full name
Cardano
AdEx
Aion
Ambrosus
Ark
Aeron
AirSwap
Basic Attention Token
Bitcoin Diamond
Bitcoin Cash
Blockmason Credit Protocol
Binance coin
Bancor
Ethos
Bread
Bitcoin
Bitcoin Gold
BitShares
Blox
CyberMiles
Cindicator
Dash
DigixDAO
Agrello
District0x
Eidoo
Aelf
Enigma
Enjin Coin
EOS
Ethereum Classic
Ethereum
Everex
Etherparty
FunFair
Gas
Gifto
Genesis Vision
GXChain
ICON
MIOTA
Komodo
Kyber Network
Aave
Chainlink
Loopring
Lisk

111

Ticker
LTC
LUN
MANA
MCO
MDA
MOD
MTH
MTL
NAV
NEBL
NEO
NULS
OAX
OMG
OST
POE
POWR
PPT
QSP
QTUM
RCN
RDN
REQ
SALT
SNGLS
SNM
SNT
STORJ
STRAT
SUB
TNB
TNT
TRX
USDT
VIB
WABI
WAVES
WINGS
WTC
XLM
XMR
XRP
XVG
XZC
YOYO
ZEC
ZRX

Full name
Litecoin
Lunyr
Decentraland
MCO
Moeda Loyalty Points
Modum
Monetha
Metal
NavCoin
Neblio
NEO
NULS
OAX
OmiseGO
OST
Po.et
Power Ledger
Populous
Quantstamp
QTUM
Ripio Credit Network
Raiden Network Token
Request
SALT
SingularDTV
SONM
Status
Storj
Stratis
Substratum
Time New Bank
Tierion
Tron
Tether
Viberate
Tael
Waves
Wings
Waltonchain
Stellar
Monero
Ripple
Verge
Zcoin
Yoyow
Zcash
0x

References
[1] L. Bachelier, Théorie de la spéculation, Annales scientifiques de l’École Normale Supérieure
3e série, 17 (1900) 21–86. doi:10.24033/asens.476.
[2] B. Mandelbrot, The variation of certain speculative prices, The Journal of Business 36 (1963)
394–394. doi:10.1086/294632.
[3] C. Schinckus, 1996–2016: Two decades of econophysics: Between methodological diversification and conceptual coherence, The European Physical Journal Special Topics 225 (17)
(2016) 3299–3311. doi:10.1140/epjst/e2016-60099-y.
[4] R. Kutner, M. Ausloos, D. Grech, T. D. Matteo, C. Schinckus, H. E. Stanley, Econophysics
and sociophysics: Their milestones & challenges, Physica A 516 (2019) 240–253. doi:10.
1016/j.physa.2018.10.019.
[5] T. Lux, The stable Paretian hypothesis and the frequency of large returns: an examination
of major German stocks, Applied Financial Economics 6 (6) (1996) 463–475. doi:10.1080/
096031096333917.
[6] P. Gopikrishnan, V. Plerou, L. A. Nunes Amaral, M. Meyer, H. E. Stanley, Scaling of the
distribution of fluctuations of financial market indices, Physical Review E 60 (1999) 5305–
5316. doi:10.1103/PhysRevE.60.5305.
[7] R. N. Mantegna, Hierarchical structure in financial markets, The European Physical Journal
B 11 (1999) 193–197. doi:10.1007/s100510050929.
[8] S. Drożdż, F. Gümmer, A. Z. Górski, F. Ruf, J. Speth, Dynamics of competition between
collectivity and noise in the stock market, Physica A 287 (3) (2000) 440–449. doi:10.1016/
S0378-4371(00)00383-6.
[9] F. Westerhoff, S. Reitz, Commodity price dynamics and the nonlinear market impact of
technical traders: empirical evidence for the US corn market, Physica A 349 (3) (2005)
641–648. doi:10.1016/j.physa.2004.11.015.
[10] S. Drożdż, J. Kwapień, P. Oświęcimka, Criticality characteristics of current oil price dynamic,
Acta Physica Polonica A 114 (4) (2008) 699–702. doi:10.12693/APhysPolA.114.699.
[11] P. Sieczka, J. A. Hołyst, Correlations in commodity markets, Physica A 388 (8) (2009)
1621–1630. doi:10.1016/j.physa.2009.01.004.
[12] J. Perello, J. Masoliver, The effect of non-ideal market conditions on option pricing, Physica
A 308 (1) (2002) 420–442. doi:10.1016/S0378-4371(02)00627-1.
[13] D. D. Thomakos, T. Wang, L. T. Wille, Modeling daily realized futures volatility with singular spectrum analysis, Physica A 312 (3) (2002) 505–519. doi:10.1016/S0378-4371(02)
00845-2.
[14] J. L. McCauley, G. H. Gunaratne, An empirical model of volatility of returns and option
pricing, Physica A 329 (1) (2003) 178–198. doi:10.1016/S0378-4371(03)00589-2.
[15] G. Cuniberti, M. Raberto, E. Scalas, Correlations in the bond-future market, Physica A
269 (1) (1999) 90–97. doi:10.1016/S0378-4371(99)00083-7.
[16] A. Bershadskii, Invasion-percolation and statistics of US Treasury bonds, Physica A 300 (3)
(2001) 539–550. doi:10.1016/S0378-4371(01)00374-0.
[17] W.-X. Zhou, D. Sornette, Causal slaving of the US treasury bond yield antibubble by the
stock market antibubble of August 2000, Physica A 337 (3) (2004) 586 – 608. doi:10.1016/
j.physa.2004.02.009.

112

[18] T. Kaizoji, M. Kaizoji, A mechanism leading from bubbles to crashes: the case of Japan’s
land market, Physica A 344 (1) (2004) 138–141. doi:10.1016/j.physa.2004.06.104.
[19] W.-X. Zhou, D. Sornette, Is there a real-estate bubble in the US?, Physica A 361 (1) (2006)
297–308. doi:10.1016/j.physa.2005.06.098.
[20] P. Richmond, A roof over your head; house price peaks in the UK and Ireland, Physica A
375 (1) (2007) 281–287. doi:10.1016/j.physa.2006.09.003.
[21] M. Ausloos, Statistical physics in foreign exchange currency and stock markets, Physica A
285 (1) (2000) 48–65. doi:10.1016/S0378-4371(00)00271-5.
[22] S. Drożdż, A. Z. Górski, J. Kwapień, World currency exchange rate cross-correlations, The
European Physical Journal B 58 (4) (2007) 499–502. doi:10.1140/epjb/e2007-00246-8.
[23] S. Drożdż, J. Kwapień, P. Oświęcimka, R. Rak, The foreign exchange market: return distributions, multifractality, anomalous multifractality and the Epps effect, New Journal of
Physics 12 (10) (2010) 105003. doi:10.1088/1367-2630/12/10/105003.
[24] S. Nakamoto, Bitcoin:
bitcoin.pdf (2008).

A peer-to-peer electronic cash system, http://bitcoin.org/

[25] CoinMarketCap, https://coinmarketcap.com.
[26] J.-C. Gerlach, G. Demos, D. Sornette, Dissection of Bitcoin’s multiscale bubble history
from January 2012 to February 2018, Royal Society Open Science 6 (2019) 180643. doi:
10.1098/rsos.180643.
[27] T. Aste, Cryptocurrency market structure: connecting emotions and economics, Digital
Finance 1 (1) (2019) 5–21. doi:10.1007/s42521-019-00008-9.
[28] CME Group, https://www.cmegroup.com/.
[29] J. Weatherford, The History of Money, Currency, 1998.
[30] Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (US), https://fred.stlouisfed.org.
[31] R. Wattenhofer, The Science of the Blockchain, CreateSpace Independent Publishing Platform, 2016.
[32] Bitcoin pizzaday, https://www.investopedia.com/news/bitcoin-pizza-day-celebrating-20million-pizza-order/.
[33] Ethereum, https://www.ethereum.org/.
[34] R. Shiller, Irrational Exuberance, Princeton University Press, 2000.
[35] Bitcoin, https://bitcoin.org/en/how-it-works.
[36] Byzantine fault, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Byzantine_fault.
[37] Bitcoin mining, https://academy.binance.com/blockchain/mining-pools-explained.
[38] M. J. Osborne, A. Roubinstein, A Course in Game Theory, 1st Edition, Vol. 1, The MIT
Press, 1994.
[39] 51 percent attack cost, https://www.crypto51.app/.
[40] Cambridge Bitcoin Electricity Consumption Index, https://www.cbeci.org/.
[41] Bitcoin
transaction
rate
transactions-per-second.

per

second,

113

https://www.blockchain.com/charts/

[42] C. Wu, L. Zhou, C. Xie, Y. Zheng, J. Yu, Data quality transaction on different distributed
ledger technologies, in: J. Li, X. Meng, Y. Zhang, W. Cui, Z. Du (Eds.), Big Scientific Data
Management, Springer International Publishing, Cham, 2019, pp. 301–318. doi:10.1007/
978-3-030-28061-1-30.
[43] Proof
of
stake
description,
proof-of-stake-explained.

https://academy.binance.com/blockchain/

[44] Delegated proof of stake description,
delegated-proof-of-stake-explained.

https://academy.binance.com/blockchain/

[45] J. Tatar, C. Burniske, Cryptoassets: The Innovative Investor’s Guide to Bitcoin and Beyond,
McGraw-Hill Education, 2017.
[46] Ripple, https://ripple.com/.
[47] Monero
ransom,
https://www.nytimes.com/2019/01/10/world/europe/
norway-kidnapping-monero.html.
[48] Icobench.com, https://ICOBench.com.
[49] EOS, https://eos.io/.
[50] Cardano, https://www.cardano.org/.
[51] Tether, https://tether.to/.
[52] L. Gudgeon, S. M. Werner, D. Perez, W. J. Knottenbelt, DeFi protocols for loanable funds:
Interest rates, liquidity and market efficiency, arXiv:2006.13922 (2020).
[53] A. Yelowitz, M. Wilson, Characteristics of Bitcoin users: an analysis of Google search
data, Applied Economics Letters 22 (13) (2015) 1030–1036. doi:10.1080/13504851.2014.
995359.
[54] I. Makarov, A. Schoar, Trading and arbitrage in cryptocurrency markets, Journal of Financial
Economics 135 (2) (2020) 293–319. doi:10.1016/j.jfineco.2019.07.001.
[55] K. A. Froot, E. M. Dabora, How are stock prices affected by the location of trade?, Journal
of Financial Economics 53 (2) (1999) 189–216. doi:10.1016/S0304-405X(99)00020-3.
[56] A. De Jong, L. Rosenthal, M. A. Van Dijk, The risk and return of arbitrage in dual-listed
companies, Review of Finance 13 (3) (2009) 495–520. doi:10.1093/rof/rfn031.
[57] D. J. Fenn, S. D. Howison, M. Mcdonald, S. Williams, N. F. Johnson, The mirage of triangular arbitrage in the spot foreign exchange market, International Journal of Theoretical
and Applied Finance 12 (08) (2009) 1105–1123. doi:10.1142/S0219024909005609.
[58] R. Gębarowski, P. Oświęcimka, M. Wątorek, S. Drożdż, Detecting correlations and triangular arbitrage opportunities in the Forex by means of multifractal detrended crosscorrelations analysis, Nonlinear Dynamics 98 (2019) 2349–2364.
doi:doi:10.1007/
s11071-019-05335-5.
[59] P. Daian, S. Goldfeder, T. Kell, Y. Li, X. Zhao, I. Bentov, L. Breidenbach, A. Juels, Flash
boys 2.0: Frontrunning, transaction reordering, and consensus instability in decentralized
exchanges, arXiv:1904.05234 (2019).
[60] Binance, https://www.binance.com/.
[61] Kraken, https://www.kraken.com/.
[62] Bitstamp, https://www.bitstamp.net/.

114

[63] Dimensions, https://app.dimensions.ai/.
[64] Cryptocurrency
market
size,
worlds-money-in-perspective-2018.

https://howmuch.net/articles/

[65] L. Kristoufek, BitCoin meets Google Trends and Wikipedia: Quantifying the relationship
between phenomena of the Internet era, Scientific Reports 3 (2013) 3415. doi:doi:10.1038/
srep03415.
[66] L. Kristoufek, What are the main drivers of the Bitcoin price? Evidence from wavelet
coherence analysis, Plos One 10 (4) (2015) 1–15. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0123923.
[67] A. F. Bariviera, M. J. Basgall, W. Hasperué, M. Naiouf, Some stylized facts of the Bitcoin
market, Physica A 484 (2017) 82–90. doi:10.1016/j.physa.2017.04.159.
[68] S. Drożdż, R. Gębarowski, L. Minati, P. Oświęcimka, M. Wątorek, Bitcoin market route to
maturity? Evidence from return fluctuations, temporal correlations and multiscaling effects,
Chaos 28 (7) (2018) 071101. doi:10.1063/1.5036517.
[69] J. Garnier, K. Solna, Chaos and order in the bitcoin market, Physica A 524 (2019) 708–721.
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physa.2019.04.164.
[70] K. Wu, S. Wheatley, D. Sornette, Classification of cryptocurrency coins and tokens by the
dynamics of their market capitalizations, Royal Society Open Science 5 (9) (2018) 180381.
doi:10.1098/rsos.180381.
[71] S. Drożdż, L. Minati, P. Oświęcimka, M. Stanuszek, M. Wątorek, Signatures of the
crypto-currency market decoupling from the Forex, Future Internet 11 (7). doi:10.3390/
fi11070154.
[72] L. Kristoufek, M. Vosvrda, Cryptocurrencies market efficiency ranking: Not so straightforward, Physica A 531 (2019) 120853. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physa.2019.04.
089.
[73] D. Stosic, D. Stosic, T. B. Ludermir, T. Stosic, Collective behavior of cryptocurrency price
changes, Physica A 507 (2018) 499–509. doi:10.1016/j.physa.2018.05.050.
[74] A. F. Bariviera, L. Zunino, O. A. Rosso, An analysis of high-frequency cryptocurrencies prices
dynamics using permutation-information-theory quantifiers, Chaos 28 (7) (2018) 075511.
doi:10.1063/1.5027153.
[75] E. Bouri, R. Gupta, D. Roubaud, Herding behaviour in cryptocurrencies, Finance Research
Letters 29 (2019) 216–221. doi:10.1016/j.frl.2018.07.008.
[76] D. Zięba, R. Kokoszczyński, K. Śledziewska, Shock transmission in the cryptocurrency market. is Bitcoin the most influential?, International Review of Financial Analysis 64 (2019)
102–125. doi:10.1016/j.irfa.2019.04.009.
[77] S. Drożdż, L. Minati, P. Oświęcimka, M. Stanuszek, M. Wątorek, Competition of noise and
collectivity in global cryptocurrency trading: Route to a self-contained market, Chaos 30 (2)
(2020) 023122. doi:10.1063/1.5139634.
[78] P. Ferreira, L. Kristoufek, E. J. de Area Leao Pereira, DCCA and DMCA correlations of
cryptocurrency markets, Physica A 545 (2020) 123803. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
physa.2019.123803.
[79] T. Papadimitriou, P. Gogas, F. Gkatzoglou, The evolution of the cryptocurrencies market: A
complex networks approach, Journal of Computational and Applied Mathematics 376 (2020)
112831. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cam.2020.112831.

115

[80] K. Polovnikov, V. Kazakov, S. Syntulsky, Core-periphery organization of the cryptocurrency
market inferred by the modularity operator, Physica A 540 (2020) 123075. doi:10.1016/j.
physa.2019.123075.
[81] S. Corbet, A. Meegan, C. Larkin, B. Lucey, L. Yarovaya, Exploring the dynamic relationships
between cryptocurrencies and other financial assets, Economics Letters 165 (2018) 28–34.
doi:10.1016/j.econlet.2018.01.004.
[82] A. Corelli, Cryptocurrencies and exchange rates: A relationship and causality analysis, Risks
6 (4). doi:10.3390/risks6040111.
[83] Q. Ji, E. Bouri, R. Gupta, D. Roubaud, Network causality structures among Bitcoin and
other financial assets: A directed acyclic graph approach, The Quarterly Review of Economics and Finance 70 (2018) 203–213. doi:10.1016/j.qref.2018.05.016.
[84] W. Kristjanpoller, E. Bouri, Asymmetric multifractal cross-correlations between the main
world currencies and the main cryptocurrencies, Physica A 523 (2019) 1057–1071. doi:
10.1016/j.physa.2019.04.115.
[85] S. Drożdż, J. Kwapień, P. Oświęcimka, T. Stanisz, M. Wątorek, Complexity in economic and
social systems: cryptocurrency market at around COVID-19, Entropy 22 (9) (2020) 1043.
doi:10.3390/e22091043.
[86] A. Urquhart, H. Zhang, Is Bitcoin a hedge or safe haven for currencies? An intraday analysis,
International Review of Financial Analysis 63 (2019) 49–57. doi:10.1016/j.irfa.2019.
02.009.
[87] S. J. H. Shahzad, E. Bouri, D. Roubaud, L. Kristoufek, B. Lucey, Is Bitcoin a better safehaven investment than gold and commodities?, International Review of Financial Analysis
63 (2019) 322–330. doi:10.1016/j.irfa.2019.01.002.
[88] P. Wang, W. Zhang, X. Li, D. Shen, Is cryptocurrency a hedge or a safe haven for international indices? A comprehensive and dynamic perspective, Finance Research Letters 31
(2019) 1–18. doi:10.1016/j.frl.2019.04.031.
[89] T. Conlon, S. Corbet, R. J. McGee, Are cryptocurrencies a safe haven for equity markets? an
international perspective from the COVID-19 pandemic, Research in International Business
and Finance 54 (2020) 101248. doi:10.1016/j.ribaf.2020.101248.
[90] S. J. H. Shahzad, E. Bouri, D. Roubaud, L. Kristoufek, Safe haven, hedge and diversification
for G7 stock markets: Gold versus bitcoin, Economic Modelling 87 (2020) 212–224. doi:
10.1016/j.econmod.2019.07.023.
[91] S. Corbet, B. Lucey, A. Urquhart, L. Yarovaya, Cryptocurrencies as a financial asset: A
systematic analysis, International Review of Financial Analysis 62 (2019) 182–199. doi:
10.1016/j.irfa.2018.09.003.
[92] F. Fang, C. Ventre, M. Basios, H. Kong, L. Kanthan, L. Li, D. Martinez-Regoband, F. Wu,
Cryptocurrency trading: A comprehensive survey (2020). arXiv:2003.11352.
[93] Dukascopy, https://www.dukascopy.com.
[94] R. N. Mantegna, H. E. Stanley, Stochastic process with ultraslow convergence to a gaussian:
The truncated Lévy flight, Physical Review Letters 73 (1994) 2946–2949. doi:10.1103/
PhysRevLett.73.2946.
[95] V. Plerou, P. Gopikrishnan, L. A. Nunes Amaral, M. Meyer, H. E. Stanley, Scaling of the
distribution of price fluctuations of individual companies, Physical Review E 60 (1999) 6519–
6529. doi:10.1103/PhysRevE.60.6519.
[96] J. Kwapień, S. Drożdż, Physical approach to complex systems, Physics Reports 515 (3)
(2012) 115–226. doi:10.1016/j.physrep.2012.01.007.

116

[97] S. Begusic, Z. Kostanjcar, H. E. Stanley, B. Podobnik, Scaling properties of extreme price
fluctuations in Bitcoin markets, Physica A 510 (2018) 400–406. doi:10.1016/j.physa.
2018.06.131.
[98] M. Wątorek, S. Drożdż, P. Oświęcimka, M. Stanuszek, Multifractal cross-correlations between the world oil and other financial markets in 2012–2017, Energy Economics 81 (2019)
874–885. doi:10.1016/j.eneco.2019.05.015.
[99] P. Gopikrishnan, M. Meyer, L. A. Amaral, H. E. Stanley, Inverse cubic law for the distribution
of stock price variations, European Physical Journal B 3 (2) (1998) 139–140. doi:10.1007/
s100510050292.
[100] X. Gabaix, P. Gopikrishnan, V. Plerou, H. E. Stanley, A theory of power-law distributions
in financial market fluctuations, Nature 423 (2003) 267–270. doi:10.1038/nature01624.
[101] S. Drożdż, M. Forczek, J. Kwapień, P. Oświęcimka, R. Rak, Stock market return distributions: From past to present, Physica A 383 (1) (2007) 59–64. doi:10.1016/j.physa.2007.
04.130.
[102] R. Rak, S. Drożdż, J. Kwapień, P. Oświęcimka, Stock returns versus trading volume: is
the correspondence more general?, Acta Physica Polonica B 44 (2013) 2035–2050. doi:
10.5506/APhysPolB.44.2035.
[103] S. Drożdż, J. Kwapień, F. Gümmer, F. Ruf, J. Speth, Are the contemporary financial fluctuations sooner converging to normal?, Acta Physica Polonica B 34 (8) (2002) 4293–4306.
URL www.actaphys.uj.edu.pl/R/34/8/4293/pdf
[104] M. Cristelli, L. Pietronero, A. Zaccaria, Critical overview of agent-based models for economics, arXiv:1101.1847 (2011).
[105] Alfi, V., Pietronero, L., Zaccaria, A., Self-organization for the stylized facts and finite-size
effects in a financial-market model, EPL 86 (5) (2009) 58003. doi:10.1209/0295-5075/86/
58003.
[106] Alfi, V., Cristelli, M., Pietronero, L., Zaccaria, A., Minimal agent based model for financial
markets II - Statistical properties of the linear and multiplicative dynamics, Eur. Phys. J. B
67 (3) (2009) 399–417. doi:10.1140/epjb/e2009-00029-3.
[107] E. Fama, The behavior of stock-market prices, The Journal of Business 38 (1965) 34–105.
[108] Z. Palagyi, R. N. Mantegna, Empirical investigation of stock price dynamics in an emerging
market, Physica A 269 (1) (1999) 132–139. doi:10.1016/S0378-4371(99)00087-4.
[109] Z. Xu, R. Gencay, Scaling, self-similarity and multifractality in FX markets, Physica A 323
(2003) 578–590. doi:10.1016/S0378-4371(03)00030-X.
[110] Z. Ding, C. W. Granger, R. F. Engle, A long memory property of stock market returns and a
new model, Journal of Empirical Finance 1 (1) (1993) 83–106. doi:10.1016/0927-5398(93)
90006-D.
[111] R. Mantegna, H. E. Stanley, Introduction to Econophysics: Correlations and Complexity in
Finance, Cambridge University Press, 1999.
[112] R. Cont, Empirical properties of asset returns: stylized facts and statistical issues, Quantitative Finance 1 (2001) 223–236. doi:10.1080/713665670.
[113] R. Kutner, F. Świtała, Remarks on the possible universal mechanism of the non-linear longterm autocorrelations in financial time-series, Physica A 344 (1) (2004) 244–251. doi:10.
1016/j.physa.2004.06.126.

117

[114] S. Drożdż, J. Kwapień, P. Oświęcimka, R. Rak, Quantitative features of multifractal subtleties in time-series, EPL (Europhysics Letters) 88 (6) (2010) 60003. doi:10.1209/
0295-5075/88/60003.
[115] P. Stoica, Spectral Analysis of Signals, Prentice Hall, 2005.
[116] K. Pearson, Note on regression and inheritance in the case of two parents, Proceedings of
the Royal Society of London 58 (1895) 240–242. doi:10.1098/rspl.1895.0041.
[117] Z.-Q. Jiang, W.-J. Xie, W.-X. Zhou, D. Sornette, Multifractal analysis of financial markets:
a review, Reports on Progress in Physics 82 (12) (2019) 125901. doi:10.1088/1361-6633/
ab42fb.
[118] J. Kwapień, P. Oświęcimka, S. Drożdż, Components of multifractality in high-frequency
stock returns, Physica A 350 (2) (2005) 466–474. doi:10.1016/j.physa.2004.11.019.
[119] W.-X. Zhou, The components of empirical multifractality in financial returns, EPL (Europhysics Letters) 88 (2) (2009) 28004. doi:10.1209/0295-5075/88/28004.
[120] J. Baruník, T. Aste, T. di Matteo, R. Liu, Understanding the source of multifractality in
financial markets, Physica A 391 (17) (2012) 4234–4251. doi:10.1016/j.physa.2012.03.
037.
[121] D. Grech, G. Pamuła, On the multifractal effects generated by monofractal signals, Physica
A 392 (23) (2013) 5845–5864. doi:10.1016/j.physa.2013.07.045.
[122] R. Rak, D. Grech, Quantitative approach to multifractality induced by correlations and broad
distribution of data, Physica A 508 (2018) 48–66. doi:10.1016/j.physa.2018.05.059.
[123] J. Kwapień, P. Oświęcimka, S. Drożdż, Detrended fluctuation analysis made flexible to detect
range of cross-correlated fluctuations, Physical Review E 92 (2015) 052815. doi:10.1103/
PhysRevE.92.052815.
[124] H. Hurst, Long-term storage capacity of reservoirs, Transactions of American Society of Civil
Engineers 116 (1951) 770.
[125] C.-K. Peng, S. V. Buldyrev, S. Havlin, M. Simons, H. E. Stanley, A. L. Goldberger, Mosaic
organization of DNA nucleotides, Physical Review E 49 (1994) 1685–1689. doi:10.1103/
PhysRevE.49.1685.
[126] J. W. Kantelhardt, E. Koscielny-Bunde, H. H. Rego, S. Havlin, A. Bunde, Detecting longrange correlations with detrended fluctuation analysis, Physica A 295 (3) (2001) 441–454.
doi:10.1016/S0378-4371(01)00144-3.
[127] P. Oświęcimka, S. Drożdż, J. Kwapień, A. Górski, Effect of detrending on multifractal characteristics, Acta Physica Polonica A 123 (3) (2013) 597–603. doi:10.12693/APhysPolA.
123.597.
[128] J. W. Kantelhardt, S. A. Zschiegner, E. Koscielny-Bunde, S. Havlin, A. Bunde, H. E. Stanley,
Multifractal detrended fluctuation analysis of nonstationary time series, Physica A 316 (1)
(2002) 87–114. doi:10.1016/S0378-4371(02)01383-3.
[129] B. Podobnik, H. E. Stanley, Detrended cross-correlation analysis: A new method for analyzing two nonstationary time series, Physical Review Letters 100 (2008) 1–4. doi:
10.1103/PhysRevLett.100.084102.
[130] P. Oświęcimka, S. Drożdż, M. Forczek, S. Jadach, J. Kwapień, Detrended cross-correlation
analysis consistently extended to multifractality, Physical Review E 89 (2014) 023305. doi:
10.1103/PhysRevE.89.023305.

118

[131] J. F. Muzy, E. Bacry, A. Arneodo, Wavelets and multifractal formalism for singular signals:
Application to turbulence data, Physical Review Letters 67 (1991) 3515–3518. doi:10.1103/
PhysRevLett.67.3515.
[132] J. F. Muzy, E. Bacry, A. Arneodo, The multifractal formalism revisited with wavelets,
International Journal of Bifurcation and Chaos 04 (02) (1994) 245–302. doi:10.1142/
S0218127494000204.
[133] A. Arneodo, E. Bacry, J. Muzy, The thermodynamics of fractals revisited with wavelets,
Physica A 213 (1) (1995) 232–275. doi:10.1016/0378-4371(94)00163-N.
[134] Z.-Q. Jiang, X.-L. Gao, W.-X. Zhou, H. E. Stanley, Multifractal cross wavelet analysis,
Fractals 25 (06) (2017) 1750054. doi:10.1142/S0218348X17500542.
[135] P. Oświęcimka, J. Kwapień, S. Drożdż, Wavelet versus detrended fluctuation analysis of
multifractal structures, Physical Review E 74 (2006) 016103. doi:10.1103/PhysRevE.74.
016103.
[136] A. Eke, P. Herman, B. Sanganahalli, F. Hyder, P. Mukli, Z. Nagy, Pitfalls in fractal time
series analysis: fMRI BOLD as an exemplary case, Frontiers in Physiology 3 (2012) 417.
doi:10.3389/fphys.2012.00417.
[137] E. Maiorino, L. Livi, A. Giuliani, A. Sadeghian, A. Rizzi, Multifractal characterization of
protein contact networks, Physica A 428 (2015) 302–313. doi:10.1016/j.physa.2015.02.
026.
[138] G. Helene, A. M. Tarquis, M. R. Wiesner, Multifractal analysis of particle size distributions in soil, Environmental Science & Technology 32 (9) (1998) 1176–1182. doi:
10.1021/es9704343.
[139] V. V. Udovichenko, P. E. Strizhak, Multifractal properties of copper sulfide film formed
in self-organizing chemical system, Theoretical and Experimental Chemistry 38 (4) (2002)
259–262. doi:10.1023/A:1020572016637.
[140] M. Lafouti, M. Ghoranneviss, S. Meshkani, A. S. Elahi, The MDF technique for the analysis
of tokamak edge plasma fluctuations, Journal of Plasma Physics 80 (1) (2014) 43–58. doi:
10.1017/S0022377813000895.
[141] P. Mali, S. Sarkar, S. Ghosh, A. Mukhopadhyay, G. Singh, Multifractal detrended fluctuation
analysis of particle density fluctuations in high-energy nuclear collisions, Physica A 424
(2015) 25–33. doi:10.1016/j.physa.2014.12.037.
[142] L. Telesca, V. Lapenna, M. Macchiato, Multifractal fluctuations in earthquake-related geoelectrical signals, New Journal of Physics 7 (2005) 214–214. doi:10.1088/1367-2630/7/1/
214.
[143] A. Witt, B. D. Malamud, Quantification of long-range persistence in geophysical time series: Conventional and benchmark-based improvement techniques, Surveys in Geophysics 34
(2013) 541–651. doi:10.1007/s10712-012-9217-8.
[144] E. Koscielny-Bunde, J. W. Kantelhardt, P. Braun, A. Bunde, S. Havlin, Long-term persistence and multifractality of river runoff records: Detrended fluctuation studies, Journal of
Hydrology 322 (1) (2006) 120–137. doi:10.1016/j.jhydrol.2005.03.004.
[145] Q. Zhang, C.-Y. Xu, Z. Yu, C.-L. Liu, Y. D. Chen, Multifractal analysis of streamflow
records of the East River basin (Pearl River), China, Physica A 388 (6) (2009) 927–934.
doi:10.1016/j.physa.2008.11.025.
[146] M. Ausloos, Generalized hurst exponent and multifractal function of original and translated
texts mapped into frequency and length time series., Physical Review E 86 (2012) 031108.
doi:10.1103/PhysRevE.86.031108.

119

[147] S. Drożdż, P. Oświęcimka, A. Kulig, J. Kwapień, K. Bazarnik, I. Grabska-Gradzińska, J. Rybicki, M. Stanuszek, Quantifying origin and character of long-range correlations in narrative
texts, Information Sciences 331 (2016) 32–44. doi:10.1016/j.ins.2015.10.023.
[148] J. C. Echeverria, M. S. Woolfson, J. A. Crowe, B. R. Hayes-Gill, G. D. H. Croaker, H. Vyas,
Interpretation of heart rate variability via detrended fluctuation analysis and αβ filter, Chaos
13 (2) (2003) 467–475. doi:10.1063/1.1562051.
[149] Y. Chen, L. Cai, R. Wang, Z. Song, B. Deng, J. Wang, H. Yu, DCCA cross-correlation
coefficients reveals the change of both synchronization and oscillation in EEG of Alzheimer
disease patients, Physica A 490 (2018) 171–184. doi:10.1016/j.physa.2017.08.009.
[150] R. Rak, S. Bwanakare, Quantitative characteristics of correlations of meteorological data,
Acta Physica Polonica A 129 (5). doi:10.12693/APhysPolA.129.922.
[151] S. Adarsh, D. S. Dharan, A. R. Nandhu, B. Anand Vishnu, V. K. Mohan, M. Wątorek, Multifractal description of streamflow and suspended sediment concentration data from Indian
river basins, Acta Geophysica 68 (2020) 519–535. doi:10.1007/s11600-020-00407-2.
[152] Z.-Y. Su, T. Wu, Multifractal analyses of music sequences, Physica D 221 (2) (2006) 188–194.
doi:10.1016/j.physd.2006.08.001.
[153] T. C. Roeske, D. Kelty-Stephen, S. Wallot, Multifractal analysis reveals music-like dynamic structure in songbird rhythms, Scientific Reports 8 (2018) 4570. doi:10.1038/
s41598-018-22933-2.
[154] A. Garas, D. Garcia, M. Skowron, F. Schweitzer, Emotional persistence in online chatting
communities, Scientific Reports 2 (1). doi:10.1038/srep00402.
[155] E. A. Ihlen, B. Vereijken, Multifractal formalisms of human behavior, Human Movement
Science 32 (4) (2013) 633–651. doi:10.1016/j.humov.2013.01.008.
[156] M. Ausloos, K. Ivanova, Multifractal nature of stock exchange prices, Computer Physics
Communications 147 (1) (2002) 582–585. doi:10.1016/S0010-4655(02)00372-7.
[157] L. Calvet, A. Fisher, Multifractality in asset returns: Theory and evidence, The Review of
Economics and Statistics 84 (3) (2002) 381–406. doi:10.1162/003465302320259420.
[158] A. Turiel, C. J. Perez-Vicente, Role of multifractal sources in the analysis of stock market
time series, Physica A 355 (2) (2005) 475–496. doi:0.1016/j.physa.2005.04.002.
[159] S. Dutta, D. Ghosh, S. Chatterjee, Multifractal detrended Cross Correlation Analysis of
Foreign Exchange and SENSEX fluctuation in Indian perspective, Physica A 463 (2016)
188–201. doi:10.1016/j.physa.2016.07.027.
[160] D. Grech, Alternative measure of multifractal content and its application in finance, Chaos,
Solitons & Fractals 88 (2016) 183–195. doi:10.1016/j.chaos.2016.02.017.
[161] L. Zhao, W. Li, A. Fenu, B. Podobnik, Y. Wang, H. E. Stanley, The q-dependent detrended
cross-correlation analysis of stock market, Journal of Statistical Mechanics 2018 (2) (2018)
023402. doi:10.1088/1742-5468/aa9db0.
[162] J. Klamut, R. Kutner, T. Gubiec, Z. R. Struzik, Multibranch multifractality and the phase
transitions in time series of mean interevent times, Phys. Rev. E 101 (2020) 063303. doi:
10.1103/PhysRevE.101.063303.
[163] T. C. Halsey, M. H. Jensen, L. P. Kadanoff, I. Procaccia, B. I. Shraiman, Fractal measures
and their singularities: The characterization of strange sets, Physical Review A 33 (1986)
1141–1151. doi:10.1103/PhysRevA.33.1141.

120

[164] S. Drożdż, P. Oświęcimka, Detecting and interpreting distortions in hierarchical organization
of complex time series, Physical Review E 91 (2015) 030902. doi:10.1103/PhysRevE.91.
030902.
[165] J. Kwapień, P. Oświęcimka, M. Forczek, S. Drożdż, Minimum spanning tree filtering of
correlations for varying time scales and size of fluctuations, Physical Review E 95 (2017)
052313. doi:10.1103/PhysRevE.95.052313.
[166] G. Zebende, DCCA cross-correlation coefficient: Quantifying level of cross-correlation, Physica A 390 (4) (2011) 614–618. doi:10.1016/j.physa.2010.10.022.
[167] T. W. Epps, Comovements in stock prices in the very short run, Journal of the American
Statistical Association 74 (366) (1979) 291–298.
URL http://www.jstor.org/stable/2286325
[168] J. Kwapień, S. Drożdż, J. Speth, Time scales involved in emergent market coherence, Physica
A 337 (1) (2004) 231–242. doi:10.1016/j.physa.2004.01.050.
[169] B. Toth, J. Kertesz, The Epps effect revisited, Quantitative Finance 9 (7) (2009) 793–802.
doi:10.1080/14697680802595668.
[170] F. Ma, Y. Wei, D. Huang, L. Zhao, Cross-correlations between West Texas Intermediate
crude oil and the stock markets of the BRIC, Physica A 392 (21) (2013) 5356–5368. doi:
10.1016/j.physa.2013.06.061.
[171] F. Ma, Q. Zhang, C. Peng, Y. Wei, Multifractal detrended cross-correlation analysis of the
oil-dependent economies: Evidence from the West Texas intermediate crude oil and the GCC
stock markets, Physica A 410 (2014) 154–166. doi:10.1016/j.physa.2014.05.023.
[172] M. Pal, P. M. Rao, P. Manimaran, Multifractal detrended cross-correlation analysis on gold,
crude oil and foreign exchange rate time series, Physica A 416 (2014) 452–460. doi:10.
1016/j.physa.2014.09.004.
[173] J. C. Reboredo, M. A. Rivera-Castro, G. F. Zebende, Oil and US dollar exchange rate
dependence: A detrended cross-correlation approach, Energy Economics 42 (2014) 132–139.
doi:10.1016/j.eneco.2013.12.008.
[174] J. Baruník, E. Kocenda, L. Vacha, Gold, oil, and stocks: Dynamic correlations, International
Review of Economics & Finance 42 (C) (2016) 186–201. doi:10.1016/j.iref.2015.08.
0065.
[175] J. Li, X. Lu, Y. Zhou, Cross-correlations between crude oil and exchange markets for selected
oil rich economies, Physica A 453 (2016) 131–143. doi:10.1016/j.physa.2016.02.039.
[176] L. Yang, Y. Zhu, Y. Wang, Y. Wang, Multifractal detrended cross-correlations between
crude oil market and Chinese ten sector stock markets, Physica A 462 (2016) 255–265.
doi:10.1016/j.physa.2016.06.040.
[177] M. Hussain, G. F. Zebende, U. Bashir, D. Donghong, Oil price and exchange rate comovements in Asian countries: Detrended cross-correlation approach, Physica A 465 (2017)
338–346. doi:10.1016/j.physa.2016.08.056.
[178] P. Ferreira, E. J. de Area Leao Pereira, M. F. da Silva, H. B. Pereira, Detrended correlation
coefficients between oil and stock markets: The effect of the 2008 crisis, Physica A 517 (2019)
86–96. doi:10.1016/j.physa.2018.11.021.
[179] L.-Y. He, S.-P. Chen, Nonlinear bivariate dependency of price-volume relationships in agricultural commodity futures markets: A perspective from Multifractal Detrended CrossCorrelation Analysis, Physica A 390 (2) (2011) 297–308. doi:10.1016/j.physa.2010.09.
018.

121

[180] L. Kristoufek, Can the bivariate Hurst exponent be higher than an average of the separate
Hurst exponents?, Physica A 431 (2015) 124–127. doi:10.1016/j.physa.2015.02.086.
[181] F. Lillo, J. Farmer, The long memory of the efficient market, Studies in Nonlinear Dynamics
& Econometrics 8 (3) (2004) 1–35. doi:10.2202/1558-3708.1226.
[182] T. D. Matteo, T. Aste, M. M. Dacorogna, Long-term memories of developed and emerging
markets: Using the scaling analysis to characterize their stage of development, Journal of
Banking & Finance 29 (4) (2005) 827–851. doi:10.1016/j.jbankfin.2004.08.004.
[183] D. O. Cajueiro, B. M. Tabak, Testing for predictability in equity returns for European
transition markets, Economic Systems 30 (1) (2006) 56–78. doi:0.1016/j.ecosys.2005.
09.003.
[184] B. M. Tabak, D. O. Cajueiro, Assessing inefficiency in euro bilateral exchange rates, Physica
A 367 (2006) 319–327. doi:10.1016/j.physa.2005.12.007.
[185] T. D. Matteo, T. Aste, M. Dacorogna, Scaling behaviors in differently developed markets,
Physica A 324 (1) (2003) 183–188. doi:10.1016/S0378-4371(02)01996-9.
[186] D. Grech, Z. Mazur, Can one make any crash prediction in finance using the local Hurst
exponent idea?, Physica A 336 (1) (2004) 133–145. doi:10.1016/j.physa.2004.01.018.
[187] M. Wątorek, B.Stawiarski, Log-periodic power law and generalized hurst exponent analysis
in estimating an asset bubble bursting time, e-Finanse 12 (3) (2016) 49–58. doi:10.1515/
fiqf-2016-0001.
[188] S. Drożdż, R. Kowalski, P. Oświęcimka, R. Rak, R. Gębarowski, Dynamical variety of shapes
in financial multifractality, Complexity 2018 (2018) 7015721. doi:10.1155/2018/7015721.
[189] R. Rak, S. Drożdż, J. Kwapień, P. Oświęcimka, Detrended cross-correlations between returns, volatility, trading activity, and volume traded for the stock market companies, EPL
(Europhysics Letters) 112 (4) (2015) 48001. doi:10.1209/0295-5075/112/48001.
[190] T. Schreiber, A. Schmitz, Surrogate time series, Physica D 142 (3) (2000) 346–382. doi:
10.1016/S0167-2789(00)00043-9.
[191] W.-X. Zhou, Finite-size effect and the components of multifractality in financial volatility,
Chaos, Solitons & Fractals 45 (2) (2012) 147–155. doi:10.1016/j.chaos.2011.11.004.
[192] P. Oświęcimka, J. Kwapień, S. Drożdż, Multifractality in the stock market: price increments
versus waiting times, Physica A 347 (2005) 626–638. doi:10.1016/j.physa.2004.08.025.
[193] A. Z. Górski, S. Drożdż, J. Kwapień, Scale free effects in world currency exchange network,
The European Physical Journal B 66 (2008) 91–96. doi:10.1140/epjb/e2008-00376-5.
[194] E. Estrada, COVID-19 and SARS-CoV-2. Modeling the present, looking at the future,
Physics Reports 869 (2020) 1–51. doi:10.1016/j.physrep.2020.07.005.
[195] H. Markowitz, Portfolio selection, The Journal of Finance 7 (1) (1952) 77–91. doi:10.1111/
j.1540-6261.1952.tb01525.x.
[196] M. L. Mehta, Random Matrices, Elsevier, 2004.
[197] J. Wishart, The generalised product moment distribution in samples from a normal multivariate population, Biometrika 20A (1/2) (1928) 32–52.
[198] V. A. Marčenko, L. A. Pastur, Distribution of eigenvalues for some sets of random
matrices, Mathematics of the USSR-Sbornik 1 (4) (1967) 457–483.
doi:10.1070/
sm1967v001n04abeh001994.

122

[199] L. Laloux, P. Cizeau, J.-P. Bouchaud, M. Potters, Noise dressing of financial correlation
matrices, Physical Review Letters 83 (1999) 1467–1470. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.83.
1467.
[200] V. Plerou, P. Gopikrishnan, B. Rosenow, L. A. Nunes Amaral, H. E. Stanley, Universal and
nonuniversal properties of cross correlations in financial time series, Physical Review Letters
83 (1999) 1471–1474. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.83.1471.
[201] S. Drożdż, J. Kwapień, F. Gümmer, F. Ruf, J. Speth, Quantifying the dynamics of financial
correlations, Physica A 299 (1) (2001) 144–153. doi:10.1016/S0378-4371(01)00289-8.
[202] S. Drożdż, F. Grümmer, F. Ruf, J. Speth, Dynamics of correlations in the stock market,
in: H. Takayasu (Ed.), Empirical Science of Financial Fluctuations, Springer Japan, Tokyo,
2002, pp. 41–50. doi:10.1007/978-4-431-66993-7-6.
[203] A. Utsugi, K. Ino, M. Oshikawa, Random matrix theory analysis of cross correlations in
financial markets, Physical Review E 70 (2004) 026110. doi:10.1103/PhysRevE.70.026110.
[204] S. Drożdż, J. Kwapień, J. Speth, M. Wójcik, Identifying complexity by means of matrices,
Physica A 314 (1) (2002) 355–361. doi:10.1016/S0378-4371(02)01066-X.
[205] V. Plerou, P. Gopikrishnan, B. Rosenow, L. A. N. Amaral, T. Guhr, H. E. Stanley, Random
matrix approach to cross correlations in financial data, Physical Review E 65 (2002) 066126.
doi:10.1103/PhysRevE.65.066126.
[206] J. Kwapień, S. Drożdż, P. Oświęcimka, The bulk of the stock market correlation matrix is
not pure noise, Physica A 359 (2006) 589–606. doi:10.1016/j.physa.2005.05.090.
[207] H. Haken, Advanced Synergetics, Springer, Berlin, 1987.
[208] L. Minati, J. Winkel, A. Bifone, P. Oświęcimka, J. Jovicich, Self-similarity and quasiidempotence in neural networks and related dynamical systems, Chaos 27 (4) (2017) 043115.
doi:10.1063/1.4981908.
[209] T. Preis, D. Y. Kenett, H. E. Stanley, D. Helbing, E. Ben-Jacob, Quantifying the behavior
of stock correlations under market stress, Scientific Reports 2 (2012) 752. doi:10.1038/
srep00752.
[210] L. Sandoval, I. D. P. Franca, Correlation of financial markets in times of crisis, Physica A
391 (1) (2012) 187–208. doi:10.1016/j.physa.2011.07.023.
[211] M. McDonald, O. Suleman, S. Williams, S. Howison, N. F. Johnson, Detecting a currency’s
dominance or dependence using foreign exchange network trees, Physical Review E 72 (2005)
046106. doi:10.1103/PhysRevE.72.046106.
[212] T. Mizuno, H. Takayasu, M. Takayasu, Correlation networks among currencies, Physica A
364 (2006) 336–342. doi:10.1016/j.physa.2005.08.079.
[213] M. J. Naylor, L. C. Rose, B. J. Moyle, Topology of foreign exchange markets using hierarchical structure methods, Physica A 382 (1) (2007) 199–208. doi:10.1016/j.physa.2007.
02.019.
[214] J. Kwapień, S. Gworek, S. Drożdż, A. Górski, Analysis of a network structure of the foreign
currency exchange market, Journal of Economic Interaction and Coordination 4 (2009) 55–
72. doi:10.1007/s11403-009-0047-9.
[215] W. Jang, J. Lee, W. Chang, Currency crises and the evolution of foreign exchange market:
Evidence from minimum spanning tree, Physica A 390 (4) (2011) 707–718. doi:10.1016/
j.physa.2010.10.028.
[216] G. Bonanno, N. Vandewalle, R. Mantegna, Taxonomy of stock market indices, Physical
Review E 62 (2000) R7615–8. doi:10.1103/PhysRevE.62.R7615.

123

[217] S. Micciché, G. Bonanno, F. Lillo, R. N. Mantegna, Degree stability of a minimum spanning tree of price return and volatility, Physica A 324 (1) (2003) 66–73. doi:10.1016/
S0378-4371(03)00002-5.
[218] J.-P. Onnela, A. Chakraborti, K. Kaski, J. Kertész, A. Kanto, Dynamics of market correlations: Taxonomy and portfolio analysis, Physical Review E 68 (2003) 056110. doi:
10.1103/PhysRevE.68.056110.
[219] G. Bonanno, G. Caldarelli, F. Lillo, S. Micciché, N. Vandewalle, R. Mantegna, Networks
of equities in financial markets, The European Physical Journal B 38 (2) (2004) 363–371.
doi:10.1140/epjb/e2004-00129-6.
[220] C. Eom, G. Oh, W.-S. Jung, H. Jeong, S. Kim, Topological properties of stock networks
based on minimal spanning tree and random matrix theory in financial time series, Physica
A 388 (6) (2009) 900–906. doi:10.1016/j.physa.2008.12.006.
[221] B. M. Tabak, T. R. Serra, D. O. Cajueiro, Topological properties of stock market networks:
The case of brazil, Physica A 389 (16) (2010) 3240–3249. doi:10.1016/j.physa.2010.04.
002.
[222] M. Wiliński, A. Sienkiewicz, T. Gubiec, R. Kutner, Z. Struzik, Structural and topological
phase transitions on the German Stock Exchange, Physica A 392 (23) (2013) 5963–5973.
doi:10.1016/j.physa.2013.07.0.
[223] A. Sensoy, B. M. Tabak, Dynamic spanning trees in stock market networks: The case of
asia-pacific, Physica A 414 (2014) 387–402. doi:10.1016/j.physa.2014.07.067.
[224] S. Boccaletti, V. Latora, Y. Moreno, M. Chavez, D.-U. Hwang, Complex networks: Structure
and dynamics, Physics Reports 424 (4) (2006) 175–308. doi:10.1016/j.physrep.2005.10.
009.
[225] R. C. Prim, Shortest connection networks and some generalizations, The Bell System Technical Journal 36 (6) (1957) 1389–1401. doi:10.1002/j.1538-7305.1957.tb01515.x.
[226] J. D. Noh, Exact scaling properties of a hierarchical network model, Physical Review E 67
(2003) 045103. doi:10.1103/PhysRevE.67.045103.
[227] E. Ravasz, A.-L. Barabási, Hierarchical organization in complex networks, Physical Review
E 67 (2003) 026112. doi:10.1103/PhysRevE.67.026112.

124

