Centre for Technology Management working paper series
ISSN: 2058-8887
No. 1
October 2020

Identifying Crisis-Critical Intellectual Property
Challenges during the Covid-19 Pandemic:
A scenario analysis and conceptual
extrapolation of innovation ecosystem
dynamics using a visual mapping approach
doi: 10.17863/CAM.58372

Alexander Moerchel1, 2, *, Frank Tietze1, Leonidas Aristodemou1, Pratheeba
Vimalnath1
1.

Innovation and IP Management (IIPM) Lab, Centre for Technology
Management (CTM), Institute for Manufacturing (IfM), Department of
Engineering, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom

2.

Lufthansa Technik, Hamburg, Germany
* Please contact the corresponding author: amm21@cam.ac.uk

Centre for Technology Management Working Paper Series

© A. Moerchel et al. 2020

Identifying Crisis-Critical Intellectual Property (IP)
Challenges during the Covid-19 Pandemic: A scenario
analysis and conceptual extrapolation of innovation
ecosystem dynamics using a visual mapping approach

Alexander Moerchel1,2,*, Frank Tietze1, Leonidas Aristodemou1, Pratheeba Vimalnath1

Abstract
The Covid-19 pandemic exposed firms, organisations and their respective supply chains which
are directly involved in the manufacturing of products that are critical to alleviating the effects
of the health crisis, collectively referred to as the Crisis-Critical Sector, to unprecedented
challenges. Firms from other sectors, such as automotive, luxury and home appliances, have
rushed into the Crisis-Critical Sector in order to support the effort to upscale incumbent
manufacturing capacities, thereby introducing Intellectual Property (IP) related dynamics and
challenges. We apply an innovation ecosystem perspective on the Crisis-Critical Sector and
adopt a novel visual mapping approach to identify IP associated challenges and IP specific
dynamic developments during and potentially beyond the crisis. In this paper, we add
methodologically by devising and testing a visual approach to capturing IP related dynamics
in evolving innovation ecosystems and contribute to literature on IP management in the open
innovation context by proposing paraground IP as a novel IP type. Finally, we also deduce
managerial implications for IP management practitioners at both incumbent firms and new
entrants for navigating innovation ecosystems subject to crisis-induced dynamic shifts.

Keywords:
Intellectual Property, Innovation Ecosystem, Open Innovation, Covid-19 Pandemic, Visual
Language

Affiliations:
1 Innovation and IP Management (IIPM) Lab, Centre for Technology Management (CTM),
Institute for Manufacturing (IfM), Department of Engineering, University of Cambridge
2 Lufthansa Technik, Hamburg, Germany
* Corresponding author
Emails:
Alexander Moerchel (amm21@cam.ac.uk), Frank Tietze (frank.tietze@cam.ac.uk), Leonidas
Aristodemou (la324@cam.ac.uk), Pratheeba Vimalnath (pv302@cam.ac.uk)
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17863/CAM.58372 -- Version 1 (October 2020)

Centre for Technology Management Working Paper Series

© A. Moerchel et al. 2020

Table of Contents
1.0

Introduction ......................................................................................................... 2

2.0

Research Approach ............................................................................................... 5

2.1

Nominal Group Technique (NGT) research methodology ............................................... 5

2.2

Innovation Ecosystem and Visual Mapping ................................................................... 7

2.3

Standardised Visual Ecosystem Language ..................................................................... 8

2.3.1
2.3.2
2.3.3

3.0

Structural Elements ..........................................................................................................................8
Structural Changes ...........................................................................................................................9
Dynamic Forces and Effects. ............................................................................................................9

Results and Discussion .......................................................................................... 9

3.1

SVEL Adaptation and Extension for Innovation Ecosystem Visualisation ........................ 9

3.1.1
3.1.2

3.2

SVEL Extension - Mapping IP in ecosystem dynamics................................................................... 11
SVEL Adaptations – Proof of its Versatility ................................................................................... 12

Visualisations and Discussion of the CC-Sector Innovation Ecosystem.......................... 12

3.2.1
3.2.2
3.2.3
3.2.4

Pre-pandemic View of CC-Sector Innovation Ecosystem.............................................................. 16
Entry Strategy A – Insouciantly Adopting ..................................................................................... 20
Entry Strategy B – Designing from Scratch ................................................................................... 23
Entry Strategy C – Teaming Up ..................................................................................................... 33

4.0

Conclusions, Limitations and Future Research ......................................................47

1.0

Introduction

The Covid-19 pandemic has dramatically affected the global economy since its outbreak in
the Hubei province in China in December 2019 (Sohrabi et al., 2020) and during the
subsequent spread throughout the Western Pacific, Europe, the Americas and the Eastern
Mediterranean (World Health Organisation, 2020b). Particularly those firms and
organisations appeared to be under enormous pressure, which are directly involved in the
research, development and the production of crisis-critical products that are relevant to
managing the crisis of the Covid-19 pandemic through prevention, diagnosis and treatment,
such as Personal Protection Equipment (PPE), diagnostic test kits, drugs potentially relevant
for treating Covid-19 patients, ventilators, vaccines, and so on.1
Not only are incumbent firms in the CC-Sector under particular pressure to provision the
required capacities for the manufacturing of CC-Products, but also face enormous challenges
to deal with changes to their ecosystem as suddenly new entrants rush in to support capacity
1 The incumbent firms and organisation are, together with their respective supply chains, henceforth collectively

denoted as the Crisis-Critical Sector or CC-Sector (Tietze et al., 2020), while products are referred to in the
remainder of this paper as Crisis-Critical Products or CC-Products (Elsen et al., 2020).

2

Centre for Technology Management Working Paper Series

© A. Moerchel et al. 2020

building. To succeed, new entrants, incumbents or all of them together have been witnessed
to be innovative during this pandemic (Tietze et al., 2020). While Intellectual Property (IP)
often does not feature prominently in discussions related to the current Covid-19 induced
crisis, various papers indicate that IP has a role to play for ending the pandemic (Azoulay and
Jones, 2020; Contreras et al., 2020; Tietze et al., 2020). Adopting a visual mapping approach
in this paper, we attempt to clarify some of the industrial dynamics induced by the pandemic
and uncover IP associated challenges that affect CC-Sector actors, particularly incumbents CCProduct manufactures and new entrants, which then helps us to understand how different
actors can use IP to react to current dynamics and position themselves for a time after the
pandemic.
When the pandemic struck, on one side, incumbent CC-Sector firms and organisations faced
a positive demand shock for CC-Products by the exponentially growing number of patients
(Phua et al., 2020), doctors and hospitals treating them, public health systems, and nongovernmental organisations (NGOs), exceeding their inherent manufacturing capacities. On
the other hand, these firms have to cope with global supply networks that are disrupted by
heterogenous government responses and national shutdowns caused by measures reducing
contact rates in general populations (Ferguson et al., 2020; Nicola et al., 2020). For instance,
India, which is the biggest producer of generics effective in the treatment of milder symptoms
of Covid-19, such as Paracetamol, experienced a disruption in the supply of necessary active
pharmaceutical ingredients from China during its industrial shutdown induced by the Covid19 pandemic (Oxford Business Group, 2020).
In a recent analysis of research, development and manufacturing upscaling activities during
the initial phases of the Covid-19 pandemic, Tietze et al. (2020) summarise current dynamics
in the CC-Sector, which they argue would lead to changes of industrial organisation and
highlight the importance of IP related challenges. More specifically, they conclude that new
entrants being called into the CC-Sector to support incumbent firms alleviating manufacturing
capacity bottlenecks for CC-Products raises questions with regards to the handling of IP
underlying CC-Products, henceforth denoted as Crisis-Critical IP or CC-IP, that need to be
addressed sooner rather than later during an unfolding global health crisis in order to avoid
them becoming hold-ups in the effort to meet the positive demand shock for CC-Products.
In this study, we build on Tietze et al. (2020) and answer to their call for a more detailed
understanding of IP-related challenges in the CC-Sector during the Covid-19 pandemic. In this
paper, we visually represent changes in the CC-Sector that take place during the pandemic
and discuss and visualise those that can be expected after the pandemic. For this exercise, we
conceptualise the CC-Sector as an innovation ecosystem with incumbents at its centre and
capture dynamics that emerge when new entrants join incumbents from outside the CCSector to build manufacturing capacity for CC-Products. We further identify potential IP
associated challenges from the incumbents’ perspective for each phase of the pandemic. In
so doing, we explore how loci of innovation, as well as IP ownership and usage, can be
graphically represented in order to visually capture the inherent dynamics in an innovation
ecosystem and changing IP arrangements specifically.
For visually representing the scenarios described by Tietze et al. (2020), we apply and extend
a visual language for depicting ecosystem dynamics proposed by Moerchel et al. (2021) by

3

Centre for Technology Management Working Paper Series

© A. Moerchel et al. 2020

introducing visual representations to capture IP arrangements. Furthermore, we model Tietze
et al.’s (2020) scenario in which industrial manufacturers enter CC-Sector from outside,
therein considered as Type 1 New Entrants. These are either called in or voluntarily enter the
CC-Sector to help incumbent firms with increasing manufacturing capacities for CC-Products
in response to the Covid-19 pandemic crisis situation. These Type 1 New Entrants can be
classified in four groups: (1) manufacturers with spare valuable resources and capabilities, (2)
tech giants with diverse capabilities and rich resources, (3) firms with relevant expertise,
resources and competence, or (4) agile firms with a particular set of skills. Tietze et al. (2020)
furthermore identify three distinct strategies, which Type 1 New Entrants follow to enter the
CC-Sector, that is to access the necessary CC-IP typically owned by incumbent firms in the CCSector for the production of CC-Products. These entry strategies include (A) insouciantly
adapting features of incumbent CC-Products by copying or reverse-engineering without
conducting freedom-to-operate analysis, (B) designing CC-Products from the ground up using
own competence and expert advice, thereby potentially developing their own CC-IP, but
without ensuring proper freedom-to-operate also risking infringement claims, or (C) teaming
up with incumbent CC-Product manufacturer thereby licensing in CC-IP. Table 1 below
summarises and aligns the Type 1 New Entrant groups to entry strategies into the CC-Sector
and provides empirical examples for each.
Table 1: Alignment of Type 1 New Entrant group to entry strategy (synthesised from Ambrosio, 2020; Tietze
et al., 2020)
Strategy

Type 1 New Entrant
Group

(A) Insouciantly
Adopting

(4) Agile
manufacturers
with particular
and
complementary
skills to the CCSector

Example New
Entrants
Formula 1 Teams

(B) Designing
from
Scratch

(3) Firms with
relevant
expertise,
resources and
competence

(C) Teaming Up

(1) Manufacturers
with spare
valuable
resources and
capabilities
(2) Tech giants with
diverse
capabilities and
rich resources

LVHM, Estee Lauder
and L’Oréal
BrewDog and Old
Forth Distillery
Parkdale Mills Inc
Prusa3D, Formlabs
and Stratasys

Example CCProduct
Ventilator

(Richards, 2020)
(Pays, 2020)

Hand Sanitizer
PPE (e.g. face
shields, masks,
hospital gowns)

Dyson in co-operation
with The Technology
Partnership

Dyson CoVent
Ventilator

Roche

Roche’s cobas SarsCoV-2 test

GM in collaboration
with Ventec Life
Systems

Reference

Ventilator

(Ma, 2020)
(Manero et al.,
2020)
(Jack, 2020)
(F. Hoffmann-La
Roche AG, 2020)

(Brooks and
Flores, 2020)

With this paper we first contribute methodologically by extending and adapting a newly
developed visual approach, namely the Standardised Visual Ecosystem Language, to
4

Centre for Technology Management Working Paper Series

© A. Moerchel et al. 2020

innovation ecosystem analysis in the crisis use case, thereby expanding the toolbox of IP
strategy practitioners navigating dynamically evolving innovation ecosystems. Subsequently,
we apply the adapted and extended standardised visual approach, which results in proposing
paraground IP as a new type of IP that plays a role in the open innovation paradigm. Finally,
this paper contributes a set of managerial implications and recommendations for IP
strategists, practitioners and decision-makers at both incumbent and new entrant firms
experiencing crisis-induced dynamic shifts in their innovation ecosystem.
The remainder of this paper introduces the research approach including a description of the
standardised visual language for mapping innovation ecosystems (Chapter 2), summarises
and discusses the results from mapping the CC-Sector innovation ecosystem for each of the
three new entrant strategies during the pre-pandemic, pandemic and post-pandemic phases
(Chapter 3) before closing with a conclusion, listing limitations of this study and
recommending directions for future work (Chapter 4).

2.0

Research Approach

In order to delineate IP-related challenges, risks and uncertainties in the CC-Sector innovation
ecosystem during and after the Covid-19 induced crisis, we adopt a qualitative exploratory
research strategy. We perform an empirically informed, detailed analysis of past and current
events coupled with a conceptually guided extrapolation into the future of each of the three
entry strategies empirically identified by Tietze et al. (2020). The three entry strategies (see
Table 1) for large manufacturing firms called in or voluntarily joining the CC-Sector to help the
effort of upscaling the production of CC-Products during the crisis are: (A) Insouciantly
Adopting, (B) Designing from Scratch and (C) Teaming up. Specifically, we apply the Nominal
Group Technique (NGT) to: (i) adapt an existing ecosystem mapping procedure and visual
language, referred to as the Standardised Visual Language (SVEL), to empirically analyse past
and current events related to the Covid-19 pandemic; and (ii) synthesise future developments
in the CC-Sector innovation ecosystem for each entry strategy scenario guided by received
concepts in competitive dynamics. NGT2 represents a structured, direct interaction procedure
involving a group of subject matter experts (Van De Ven and Delbecq, 1974; Robson and
McCartan, 2017). The composition of the supporting expert panel is summarised in Table 2,
along with the areas of expertise and affiliation of each NGT member.

2.1 Nominal Group Technique (NGT) research methodology
The NGT procedure is implemented iteratively in several steps3 (Van De Ven and Delbecq,
1974). Figure 1 summarises the NGT-based research method described below. Firstly, using
the previously developed SVEL, the NGT expert panel coordinator prepares maps of the CC-

2

The Nominal Group Technique (NGT) is chosen because of its proven capability to achieve more accurate
judgement about future outcomes in the face of uncertainty, compared to statistically aggregated independent
judgement, such as questionnaires (Woudenberg, 1991).
3 We adjust the Nominal Group Technique (NGT) to account for the Covid-19 induced NPIs, such as travel
restrictions and widespread closures of research facilities. This requires the NGT experts to meet remotely via
digital means.

5

Centre for Technology Management Working Paper Series

© A. Moerchel et al. 2020

Sector innovation ecosystem, for each of the three entry strategies described in Table 1,
during the pre-pandemic, pandemic and post-pandemic phases of the Covid-19 induced crisis.
Table 2: Composition of NGT expert panel, areas of expertise and affiliation

NGT Member

Affiliation

NGT Member 1
(Leader/Coordinator)

Academic
and Industry

NGT Member 2

NGT Member 3

NGT Member 4

NGT Member 5

NGT Member 6

Academic

Academic

Academic

Academic

Academic

Areas of Expertise
x Negotiation of Purchasing and
Licensing Contracts
x Innovation and IP Management

x Innovation and IP Management
x Open IP Strategies & IP Pledges
x Technology Licensing

Sector
x
x

Manufacturing and
Management
Aerospace MRO

x Biotechnology and
Bioeconomy
x Economics
x Manufacturing and
Management

x Economics of IP
x Corporate Strategy
x Technology and Innovation
Management

x Economics
x Manufacturing and
Management

x Open IP Approaches
x Economics of Patents and Patent
Transactions
x Technology Management

x Biotechnology and
Bioeconomy
x Manufacturing and
Management

x IP Analytics and IP Intelligence
x Strategic Decision-making
x Artificial Intelligence

x Manufacturing and
Management

x Open Approaches to IP
x Biotechnology and bioeconomic
policy

x Biotechnology and
Bioeconomy

Subsequently, the digitally transcribed innovation ecosystem maps are circulated to the NGT
expert panel for individual review to accurately capture IP dynamics in the CC-Sector
innovation ecosystem as the Covid-19 crisis progresses from the pre-pandemic through the
pandemic to the post-pandemic phase. During the collective group review follow-up, the
coordinator goes through each entry strategy scenario and every NGT member has the
opportunity to request clarifications, present their feedback and discuss their view. The
coordinator carefully records the feedback and views of each NGT member and summarises
them for subsequent circulation to the expert panel with a final request for confirmation. On
the basis of this consolidated feedback, the coordinator revises the innovation ecosystem
maps and resubmits them to the NGT expert panel. This procedure is repeated until the NGT
expert panel is unanimously satisfied that the ecosystem maps accurately represent IP
dynamics in the CC-Sector innovation ecosystem and group consensus and theoretical
saturation is reached (Bryman and Bell, 2015; Robson and McCartan, 2017).

6

Centre for Technology Management Working Paper Series

© A. Moerchel et al. 2020

In order to ensure internal validity of the NGT results, innovation ecosystem maps and expert
panel feedback is correlated to empirical evidence, namely actual case examples of Type 1
New Entrants and their respective strategies to enter the CC-Sector, and theoretical concepts
in the IP management and strategy literature. The following two subsections explain why we
choose to apply visual ecosystem mapping to capture IP dynamics in the CC-Sector and
describe the previously developed SVEL used in this process.

Figure 1 Overview of NGT-based research methodology

2.2 Innovation Ecosystem and Visual Mapping
We choose to represent the CC-Sector as an innovation ecosystem because it is highly
appropriate for conceptually capturing dynamic processes involving multiple independent
actors, artefacts and activities that evolve over time. The concept of the innovation ecosystem
has developed from Moore’s (1993) analogy between the biological concepts of natural
ecosystems and co-evolution of species, on one hand, and the organisation of business
activities across industries and co-evolution of companies’ capabilities around new
innovations, on the other hand. In a more recent innovation ecosystem conceptualisation,
Granstrand and Holgersson (2020) established the link between an actor’s innovative
performance and the evolving set of actors, activities and artefacts surrounding it, as well as
the institutions and both complementary and substitute relations among them. Viewing the
CC-Sector as an innovation ecosystem thus provides an effective conceptual basis for the
identification of actors, the investigation of relationships among these actors, the localisation
of innovation and hence ownership of resulting CC-IP and the usage of such CC-IP.
Moreover, Auerswald and Dani (2017) conceptually derived the adaptive cycle of economic
ecosystems following their biological role models established by Holling (1992), in which an
ecosystem’s inherent ability to absorb strong stochastic shocks and rapid disturbances by
structural reorganisation is highlighted. Observing the CC-Sector through the innovation
ecosystem lens thus also allows the observation of how actor roles, relationships and CC-IP
ownership, as well as its usage, change dynamically as the Covid-19 pandemic unfolds, which
is considered to represent the agent of disturbance (Holling, 1992) at this juncture.

7

Centre for Technology Management Working Paper Series

© A. Moerchel et al. 2020

Network visualisations have rarely been used in the context of the management sciences and
ecosystem research, despite their ability to uncover information in empirical data that was
previously not apparent (Basole, 2009), thereby offering opportunities for expanding the
theoretical body of knowledge and gaining valuable insights for practitioners. Examples that
nevertheless highlight the feasibility and benefits of ecosystem visualisations include Phillips
and Srai’s (2018) qualitative ecosystem mapping for the purpose of determining boundaries
in emerging innovation ecosystems and Basole et al.’s (2018) web-based, easy-to-use and
adaptable tool providing triangulated insight into temporal ecosystem dynamics for
corporate executives. Furthermore, Urmetzer, Gill and Reed (2018) conducted ecosystem
value mapping to visualise value creation and capture and to understand a case company’s
external complexity.
Due to the lack of standardisation in the emerging ecosystem visualisation methods,
Moerchel et al. (2021) extended Urmetzer, Gill and Reed’s ecosystem value mapping by
developing a systematic approach to mapping structural elements, structural changes and
dynamic forces and effects in business and innovation ecosystems, which they call the
Standardised Visual Ecosystem Language. In this study, we take advantage of the benefits of
a standardised ecosystem visualisation technique by applying this systematic approach for
the purpose of understanding the IP-related risks and uncertainties in the CC-Sector during
and after the Covid-19 pandemic induced crisis.

2.3 Standardised Visual Ecosystem Language
We adopt the novel Standardised Visual Ecosystem Language (SVEL) developed by Moerchel
et al. (2021) to map the CC-Sector as an innovation ecosystem and capture the IP-related
challenges, risks and uncertainties as the Covid-19 pandemic unfolds starting from the prepandemic phase through the pandemic to the post-pandemic phase. Based on the work of
Urmetzer, Gill and Reed (2018), Moerchel et al. (2021) developed the SVEL to address the
methodological gap of visually capturing and externally representing structural changes and
their dynamic effects in an evolving ecosystem in a standardised fashion. This novel SVEL
consists of three clusters of standardised external representations (see Table 3): (i) structural
elements, (ii) structural changes and (iii) dynamic forces and effect.
2.3.1 Structural Elements
The formulation and representation of structural elements in the ecosystem was informed by
Adner and Kapoor’s (2010) generic ecosystem framework and to a larger extent by
Granstrand and Holgersson’s (2020) recent innovation ecosystem conceptualisation, which
list actors, artefacts, and relationships among them as essential ingredients. These are
effectively represented by the actor, goods flow and value proposition symbols in the SVEL,
respectively, whereas colour coding is used to distinguish among actor roles. Particularly
inspired by Adner and Kapoor (2010), SVEL is designed to focus only on those actors, artefacts
and relationships that are essential for the formulation and delivery of a value proposition to
customers, namely the focal firm, suppliers and complementors along with their respective
products, component inputs and complementing offers. In addition, during SVEL
development Moerchel et al. (2021) determined that ecosystem actors often occupy dual
roles, such as the supplier-complementor or customer-complementor combinatorial roles.

8

Centre for Technology Management Working Paper Series

© A. Moerchel et al. 2020

2.3.2 Structural Changes
The external representations of ecosystem structural changes was inspired by Auerswald and
Dani’s (2017) notion of the ecosystem adaptive cycle and particularly the phases of release
and reorganisation that are typically triggered by some form of ecosystem external
disturbance. Moerchel et al. (2021) identified that these are best expressed by the evolution
of actor roles, the diversion of or emergence of alternative goods flows, and the partial
restriction or even full suspension of goods flows in an ecosystem.
2.3.3 Dynamic Forces and Effects.
These external representations were devised by Moerchel et al. (2021) in order to either
capture effects on the relationship among actors that result from the ecosystem’s evolution
or to capture the external forces triggering phase changes in an ecosystem’s adaptive life
cycle (Auerswald and Dani, 2017). The standardised SVEL representations in the dynamic
forces and effects cluster contain exertion of leverage or power by one ecosystem actor on
another, the growth and shrinkage of goods flows, and changes in value capture by one
ecosystem actor from the relationship with another actor.

3.0

Results and Discussion

In this section we present our results from the iterative NGT procedure, namely the
empirically informed SVEL extension and adaptation and the CC-Sector innovation ecosystem
visualisations for each of the three entry strategies during the empirically analysed prepandemic and pandemic phase of the Covid-19 induced crisis, as well as the conceptually
extrapolated post-pandemic phase. Both the adapted and extended SVEL and the CC-Sector
innovation ecosystem maps were generated iteratively and concurrently during the NGT
structured process. The SVEL adoption and extension is presented first and followed by a
description and discussion of the entry strategy scenarios and respective innovation
ecosystem maps.

3.1 SVEL Adaptation and Extension for Innovation Ecosystem Visualisation
Moerchel et al. (2021) developed the SVEL for the purposes of visualising structural elements
in an ecosystem, as well as capturing structural changes and dynamic effects and forces as
the ecosystem evolves throughout its adaptive cycle. Starting with the first iteration of the
NGT procedure it became clear, however, that SVEL needed both an extension with new
external representations and an adaptation of the existing external representations in order
to address the research goals of this study, namely capturing IP-related dynamics, risks and
uncertainties in the evolving CC-Sector innovation ecosystem. The following two subsections
provide further details and include tables showing the adapted and extended external
representations. We believe that our extensions and adaptations enhance the Moerchel et
al.’s (2021) methodological contribution in the field of ecosystem visualisation by increasing
its scope of application, versatility and generalisability

9

Centre for Technology Management Working Paper Series

© A. Moerchel et al. 2020

Table 3: Summary of the SVEL including external representations and nomenclature (Moerchel et al., Forthcoming)

10

Centre for Technology Management Working Paper Series

© A. Moerchel et al. 2020

3.1.1 SVEL Extension - Mapping IP in ecosystem dynamics
As the primary purpose of this study is to delineate the IP-related challenges, risks and
uncertainties in the evolving CC-Sector innovation ecosystem, Moerchel et al.’s (2021) SVEL
needed to be extended by devising additional external representations for (i) the various
types of CC-IP, (ii) IP ownership and usage, and most importantly (iii) dynamic development
of IP during pandemic phase-changes. This CC-IP specific extension is shown in Table 4 and
described in further detail below:
(i) CC-IP Types. In order to externally represent CC-IP in the innovation ecosystem, first
and foremost a distinction between two forms of IP is introduced to the SVEL, namely
formal CC-IP represented as octagons and informal CC-IP depicted as triangles (see
top section of Table 4). While formal CC-IP is typically registered with governmental
agencies and therefore public, legally protected and exclusive to the innovator,
informal CC-IP tends to be unobservable by other actors and protected by alternative
means (Bonakdar et al., 2017). Examples of formal CC-IP typically comprise patents,
trademarks, design rights and copyrights, whereas informal CC-IP typically consists of
trade-secrets, complexity and lead-time (Hall et al., 2014). While Hall et. al (2014)
uncovered empirically that firms prefer informal IP over formal IP to protect their
innovations, Holgersson and Granstrand (2017) determined using surveys that
technology firms seek formal protection, and patents in particular, to protect their
innovation, prevent competitors’ access and to secure a freedom-to-operate.
(ii) CC-IP Ownership and access: In order to visually capture the spatial developments of
CC-IP in the innovation ecosystem, namely CC-IP ownership and access, the four edges
of the ecosystem actor symbol were classified into five sections (as shown in the
centre section of Table 4). CC-IP that is used by the ecosystem actor, but owned by
another (3rd party), is located along the bottom edge of its actor symbol, whereas the
colour-coded frames of the CC-IP symbols indicate whether access to this CC-IP is
authorised via licensing (green), unauthorised due to lack of licensing (red) or publicly
accessible due to an expired exclusive right, such as an expired patent (orange). The
remaining three edges house CC-IP that is owned by the ecosystem actor to which it
is attached and classified according to the temporal and spatial origin of the
innovation underlying the respective CC-IP. This approach was a result of the close
collaboration of the NGT expert panel and inspired by key concepts of IP management
in open innovation (Granstrand and Holgersson, 2013, 2014). More specifically, the
left edge of the ecosystem actor symbol houses background CC-IP , which is CC-IP
developed and existing prior to the Covid-19 pandemic, while the right edge holds
foreground CC-IP , which is CC-IP jointly developed in collaboration of two ecosystem
actors and typically owned by and accessible to both actors. Finally, the top edge is
home to two classifications of CC-IP, namely sideground CC-IP and paraground CC-IP,
both of which denote CC-IP that is independently developed by the ecosystem actor.
The major difference between these two CC-IP classifications, however, is that
sideground CC-IP is developed by an ecosystem actor which has a collaboration
agreement, such as a license, with another ecosystem actor, thereby ensuring
authorised access to 3rd party’s background CC-IP, on which the independently
developed sideground CC-IP is based. Paraground CC-IP, on the other hand, is

11

Centre for Technology Management Working Paper Series

© A. Moerchel et al. 2020

independently conceived by an ecosystem actor outside of any collaboration and,
thus, potentially based on unauthorised access to 3rd party background CC-IP
(background) if freedom-to-operate is not established. In addition, two arrows were
added, one indicating the provision of access to CC-IP owned by one actor to another,
and the other to highlight the transformation of CC-IP during pandemic phase
transitions.
(iii) CC-IP Dynamic Developments: In order to map the dynamic developments of CC-IP in
the innovation ecosystem as the phases change during the Covid-19 induced crisis, it
turned out to be highly beneficial to equip each IP symbol on the map with spatial and
temporal identifiers. The spatial identifier is unique to each IP symbol and helps to
trace its origin to type of IP owner and collaboration project, whereas the temporal
identifier counts the phases during which the IP existed, effectively measuring its age.
The three example spatial identifiers ADP, DES, and COL in Table 4 represent the entry
strategy in which the respective Type 1 New Entrants conceived the new CC-IP, namely
(A) Insouciantly Adopting, (B) Designing from Scratch and (C) Teaming up, respectively.
The three temporal identifiers used are T0, T+1 and T+2 to represent the pre-, during
and post-pandemic phases during which incumbent firms’ background CC-IP for
example existed, respectively.
3.1.2 SVEL Adaptations Proof of its Versatility
The majority of SVEL adaptations consist of customisations of the nomenclature for the
purposes of the CC-Sector innovation ecosystem. More specifically, the ecosystem structural
element called “Ecosystem Focal Firm” in the SVEL by Moerchel et al. (2021) is renamed to
“Incumbent CC-Products Manufacturer” and the “Tangible Goods Flow” is renamed as “CCProduct”. Thus, we initially adopt the perspective of the incumbent firm in the pre-pandemic
phase, which is sensible due to the fact that the incumbent effectively acts as the integrator
of component inputs to the CC-Product and is the owner of the relevant CC-IP during this
phase. However, as Type 1 New Entrants enter the CC-Sector innovation ecosystem in the
pandemic phase, our perspective also includes that of the new entrant in addition to the
incumbent. This effectively leads to the adaptation of the ecosystem structural change
element called “Actor Role Change” in the SVEL by Moerchel et al. (2021) to the respective
“Type 1 New Entrant”. Furthermore, other changes to SVEL’s structural elements and
structural changes were minor and consisted of adding a “Crisis-Critical” or “CC”-prefix in the
respective nomenclature for suppliers and their component inputs, complementors and their
complement offers, as well as matching goods flows and goods flow diversions. The
nomenclature for the external representations of dynamic forces and effects remained
unchanged. Table 5,6 and 7 below contain the SVEL adaptations devised by the NGT expert
panel for the purposes of visualising the CC-Sector innovation ecosystem maps.

3.2 Visualisations and Discussion of the CC-Sector Innovation Ecosystem
We examine each of the 3 entry strategies empirically derived by Tietze et al. (2020) namely
(A) insouciantly adopting, (B) designing from scratch and (C) teaming up, separately for each
of the 3 pandemic phases, namely pre-pandemic, pandemic and post-pandemic.

12

Centre for Technology Management Working Paper Series

© A. Moerchel et al. 2020

Table 4: SVEL Extension with IP specific external representations

13

Centre for Technology Management Working Paper Series

© A. Moerchel et al. 2020

Table 5: Adaptation of SVEL Structural Elements

14

Centre for Technology Management Working Paper Series

© A. Moerchel et al. 2020

Table 6: Adaptation of SVEL Structural Changes

Table 7: Adaptation of SVEL Dynamic Effects

15

Centre for Technology Management Working Paper Series

© A. Moerchel et al. 2020

Table 8 supplements these three entry strategies, which were deduced by Tietze et al. (2020)
and previously aligned to Type 1 New Entrant groups, with empirically identified motives to
enter the CC-Sector innovation ecosystem and expected behaviour in the post-pandemic
phase. While the pandemic and post-pandemic phases are different for each of the entry
strategy scenarios, they all start from the same initial condition in the pre-pandemic phase,
meaning that the latter is considered only once. Furthermore, the phase changes are
determined on the basis of the crisis definition by Tietze et al. (2020), which stipulates that
both a threat to human species needs to exist and risk criticality needs to be elevated by an
applicable world body 4.
Table 8: Motives to enter CC-Sector and expected behaviour in post-pandemic phase for each alignment
of entry strategy and Type 1 New Entrant group

Entry Strategy
(A) Insouciantly
Adopting

(B) Designing
from
Scratch

(C) Teaming Up

Type 1 New
Entrant group

New Entrant motives

(4) Agile
x Support and give-back to
manufacturers
local/regional community
with particular x Support local/regional effort to
and
mitigate supply chain bottleneck
complementary
for CC-Products and alleviate
skills to the CCcrisis situation, also known as the
Sector
citizen supply chain (Larrañeta,
Dominguez-Robles and Lamprou,
2020)
(3) Firms with
x Entrepreneurship: motivated by
relevant
confidence that relevant
expertise,
expertise leads to
resources and
substitute/improved/ competitive
competence
CC-Products
x For complex CC-Products (e.g.
ventilator), independent CCProduct development costs are
high (Bottomley, 2020) and time
to achieve satisfactory return-oninvest may extend beyond the
termination of the crisis
(1) Manufacturers x Utilisation of idle manufacturing
with spare,
capacities to cover fixed costs and
valuable
to preserve workforce though
resources and
crisis (López-Gómez et al., 2020)
capabilities
x Motivated to recover sunk costs
(2) Tech giants
in repurposing manufacturing
with diverse
capabilities and x Create positive image in the
rich resources
public

Expected behaviour of
New Entrant in postpandemic phase
Likely to exit CC-Sector
after crisis situation is
terminated

Likely to remain in CCSector after crisis
situation is terminated

Likely to remain in CCSector until non-CCSector picks up to prepandemic levels

4 Accordingly, the phase change from pre-pandemic to pandemic, or the onset of the Covid-19 pandemic induced

crisis, is determined by the WHO Director General’s declaration of Covid-19 as a pandemic on 11 March 2020
(World Health Organisation, 2020c), which followed a dramatic surge in demand for CC-Products worldwide.
The phase change from pandemic to post-pandemic, or the termination of the Covid-19 pandemic induced crisis,
will probably be heralded by a continuous drop in demand for CC-Products due to decreasing numbers of
patients and officially declared by the WHO in a similar fashion as the containment of the SARS outbreak in 2003
(World Health Organisation, 2003).

16

Centre for Technology Management Working Paper Series

© A. Moerchel et al. 2020

Before mapping the CC-Sector innovation ecosystem for each of the entry strategy scenarios
and during each of the pandemic phases, we found it to be useful to synthesise archetypical
intentions of new entrants to stay in the post-pandemic CC-Sector because it provides
guidance on strategic behaviour as the Covid-19 induced crisis advances through the
pandemic into the post-pandemic phase. As shown in Table 8, group 4 Type 1 New Entrants
insouciantly adopting incumbent firms’ CC-Products form a citizen supply chain (Larrañeta,
Dominguez-Robles and Lamprou, 2020) with a focus on supporting the local/regional effort
to alleviate CC-Product supply chain bottlenecks during the crisis situation and are therefore
likely to exit the CC-Sector after the crisis situation is terminated.
Furthermore, group 3 Type 1 New Entrants designing CC-Products from scratch follow an
entrepreneurial approach and have a tendency towards staying in the CC-Sector after the
crisis situation is terminated in order to recover their substantial CC-Product development
cost (Bottomley, 2020). Finally, group 1 and 2 Type 1 New Entrants teaming up with
incumbent firms are concerned with retaining utilisation of their idle manufacturing
capacities by repurposing (López-Gómez et al., 2020) and are hence likely to remain in the
CC-Sector as long as demand for their non-CC-Products remains below pre-pandemic levels.
In the following subsections, we describe and discuss the CC-Sector innovation ecosystem
maps that result from applying the adapted and extended SVEL to each of the three Type 1
New Entrant group to entry strategy alignments during the iterative NGT procedure. We find
these to be very helpful for deriving an understanding of IP-related risks, uncertainties and
challenges from both the incumbent firms’ and Type 1 New Entrant group’s perspectives.
3.2.1 Pre-pandemic View of CC-Sector Innovation Ecosystem
Figure 2 depicts the CC-Sector innovation ecosystem using the adapted and extended SVEL
before the Covid-19 pandemic started to unfold, including the relevant actors, activities,
artefacts and relations among them in line with Granstrand and Holgersson’s (2020) definition
of the innovation ecosystem. The Incumbent CC-Product Manufacturers (representing a
group of such firms) are positioned as focal firms at the centre of the CC-Sector innovation
ecosystem because they are bundling all necessary components into the CC-Products (Adner
and Kapoor, 2010). The CC-Products, such as PPE, ventilators or drugs (Tietze et al., 2020),
are, in turn, offered by the Incumbent CC-Product Manufacturer as a customised value
proposition to diverse customer groups, namely Patients, Publicly Funded Healthcare Systems
or Private Hospitals and Doctors 5.
During the process of CC-Product development in the pre-pandemic phase, incumbent firms
endogenously develop innovations and thus intellectual assets covering both product
specification and manufacturing process information, for which they seek legal protection
thus building a portfolio of formal and informal IP. More specifically, as part of this CC-Product
development process, Governmental and Intergovernmental Agencies, such as the Federal
5

While Patients primarily purchase PPE for the individual prevention of contracting the disease (World Health
Organisation, 2020a) and drugs for the treatment of milder symptoms caused by Covid-19, Publicly Funded
Healthcare Systems and Private Hospitals and Doctors purchase drugs, ventilators and PPE from Incumbent CCProduct Manufacturers both to treat Patients in critical condition who require intensive care and to protect their
staff when diagnosing and treating infected persons with severe symptoms (Phua et al., 2020), respectively.

17

Centre for Technology Management Working Paper Series

© A. Moerchel et al. 2020

Drug Administration, grant Certifications and Approvals following clinical trials of CC-Products
that are common and necessary in the CC-Sector (López-Gómez et al., 2020).
Furthermore, other Government Agencies, such as the European Patent Office, issue formal
IP rights, such as patents, registered designs and trademarks (Nicholson Price II, Rai and
Minssen, 2020), thus enabling incumbent firms to exploit their innovations and earning a
return on their investments in CC-Product related research and development (Contreras et
al., 2020). When moving on into the pandemic phase, this IP will form the background CrisisCritical IP, namely CC-IP (background), that is owned by the Incumbent CC-Product
Manufacturer since the development of the underlying innovation prior to the start of a
Covid-19 induced crisis (Tietze et al., 2020).
Furthermore, Incumbent CC-Product Manufacturers rely on tangible and intangible
component inputs from Component Suppliers, Universities or Research Institutes and other
Manufacturers with CC-Product Relevant Expertise in order to deliver integrated and bundled
CC-Products and offer customised value propositions to various customer groups. Tangible
component inputs typically include CC-Product Subassemblies manufactured by Component
Suppliers, such as air compressors, control valves and electronic control circuitry typically
found in mechanical ventilators (Chatburn, 1991). Intangible component inputs, on the other
hand, can entail licenses to use formal and informal CC-IP (background), such as specialised
manufacturing methods for biologic products previously developed and owned by University
or Research Institute laboratories (Nicholson Price II, Rai and Minssen, 2020). Furthermore,
as CC-Product complexity increases, the supplier landscape is likely to become more diverse
in both component inputs and number of suppliers (Hobday, Davies and Prencipe, 2005).
Another essential concept in the innovation ecosystem paradigm is complementarity both as
a source of additional value of the focal offering (Adner and Kapoor, 2010) and as the
counterpart relationship to competition (Granstrand and Holgersson, 2020). In the prepandemic CC-Sector innovation ecosystem this concept is expressed by crisis-critical offerings
that are supplied by complementors directly to customer groups for downstream bundling
with incumbent firms’ CC-Products, thus enhancing the combined value proposition. More
specifically, other Manufacturers with CC-Product Relevant Expertise offer Intensive Care
Equipment and PPE directly to Private Hospitals and Doctors, which require these
complementing offers in order to provide Intensive Care and Special Treatment using
incumbent firms’ CC-Products, such as Ventilators and Covid-19 specific Drugs, effectively and
safely (World Health Organisation, 2020a). The CC-Sector innovation ecosystem visualisation
in Figure 2 also shows that the concept of complementarity in the CC-Sector means that some
actors occupy dual roles, namely either both as supplier and complementor as in the case of
Manufacturers with CC-Product Relevant Expertise or both as customer and complementor
as in the case of Private Hospitals or Doctors.
Finally, the pre-pandemic CC-Sector innovation ecosystem shown in Figure 2 is assumed to
be in an equilibrium state that is historically resilient to small displacements in demand for
CC-Products. In the context of comparative statics, such an equilibrium state is said to exhibit
stability of the first kind in the small (Samuelson, 1941).

18

Centre for Technology Management Working Paper Series

© A. Moerchel et al. 2020

Figure 2: Visualisation of pre-pandemic CC-Sector Innovation Ecosystem

19

Centre for Technology Management Working Paper Series

© A. Moerchel et al. 2020

The Covid-19 pandemic induced crisis situation, however, manifests itself in a sudden and
unprecedented surge in demand for the CC-Products (Contreras et al., 2020; Phua et al., 2020)
representing a stochastic demand shock that forces the CC-Sector innovation ecosystem to
enter into a release and reorganisation phase of its adaptive lifecycle (Auerswald and Dani,
2017). This evolution of the CC-Sector innovation ecosystem is further analysed in the
following subsections which describe and discuss the application of the adapted and
extended SVEL to visualise the pandemic and post-pandemic phases for each of the three
entry strategies.
3.2.2 Entry Strategy A Insouciantly Adopting
Entry strategy A is characterised by Type 1 New Entrants designing and manufacturing a CCProduct while insouciantly adopting features of incumbent’s CC-Products through copying or
reverse engineering without clearing IP that might be owned by incumbent firms, such as by
conducting a freedom-to-operate analysis (Tietze et al., 2020). Type 1 New Entrants following
this strategy typically are agile manufacturers with particular and complementary skills to the
CC-Sector, which are herein denoted as group 4 Type 1 New Entrants 6. By not conducting due
diligence and thereby accepting the risk of infringing formal CC-IP (background) that is owned
by the Incumbent CC-Product Manufacturer, these Type 1 New Entrants may face
infringement claims by the incumbent or injunctions against their CC-Product, even though
incumbents might not exercise their rights due to potential reputational damages during the
pandemic or because they are simply busy with scaling up production (Tietze et al., 2020).
As shown in Figure 3 visualising entry strategy A in the pandemic CC-Sector innovation
ecosystem, Type 1 New Entrants from group 4 tend to only adopt essential features of
incumbent firms’ CC-Product due to their relative small size and limited resources (Tietze et
al., 2020), nevertheless meeting minimally clinically acceptable specifications (López-Gómez
et al., 2020). This minimal viable CC-Product is then offered to Patients, as well as Private
Hospitals and Doctors, concurrently to the original CC-Product by incumbent manufacturers
in order to alleviate the surge in demand during the pandemic phase of the crisis on a local or
regional scale (Manero et al., 2020).
During the process of developing and manufacturing a minimal viable CC-Product, Type 1 New
Entrants from group 4 typically focus on essential functionalities, thus omitting more
advanced features of incumbent’s CC-Products. More specifically, the urgency and volume of
demand dictated by the Covid-19 pandemic induced crisis (Contreras et al., 2020; Phua et al.,
2020) coupled with endogenous limitations in manufacturing resources and capabilities
(Manero et al., 2020; Tietze et al., 2020) require firms in this Type 1 New Entrant group to
realise substantial lead-time and cost reductions and to focus on an optimised performance

6

Examples are Formula 1 teams joining forces to launch Project Pitlane and reverse-engineering and rapidly
manufacturing a continuous positive airway pressure device (Richards, 2020), luxury brand manufacturers, such
as LVMH, L’Oreal and Estee Lauder, switching their production facilities to making hand sanitisers (Pays, 2020),
cloth manufacturers, such as Parkdale Mills, repurposing production lines to making PPE (Ma, 2020), and 3D
printer manufacturers, such as Prusa3D, Formlabs and Stratasys, enabling their widely distributed customer base
to produce standardised and validated PPE designs for their respective communities (Manero et al., 2020).

20

Centre for Technology Management Working Paper Series

© A. Moerchel et al. 2020

level for the local and regional customer groups 7. Group 4 Type 1 New Entrants essentially
satisfy the criteria for conducting frugal innovation (Weyrauch and Herstatt, 2017), thereby
introducing micro level technological discontinuities (Garcia and Calantone, 2002) that are
likely to be new to incumbent firms. These frugal innovations materialise as newly developed
informal CC-IP that is based on both group 4 firms’ complementary background IP and
incumbent firms’ CC-IP (background). As exemplified by the coalition of 3D printer
manufacturers (Larrañeta, Dominguez-Robles and Lamprou, 2020; Manero et al., 2020), this
newly developed informal CC-IP could relate to the use of substitute materials that are
available to group 4 firms from their existing suppliers, thus realising lead-time and costreductions, and are necessary in order to manufacture the minimal viable CC-Products with
equipment and process technology available to them.
As this novel informal CC-IP is developed by group 4 Type 1 New Entrants neither in
collaboration with the Incumbent CC-Product Manufacturers nor on the basis of authorised
access to the incumbent firms’ CC-IP (background), it does not qualify as foreground or
sideground IP (Granstrand and Holgersson, 2014). It is thus herein newly defined as
paraground CC-IP. While group 4 firms typically fail to conduct a freedom-to-operate analysis
prior to insouciantly adopting features in its minimal viable CC-Product, to which incumbent
firms have an exclusive right through formal ownership of CC-IP (background), the Incumbent
CC-Product Manufacturer tends to avoid legal action against group 4 Type 1 New Entrants
during the pandemic because of potential reputational damage (Tietze et al., 2020) and due
to demand for CC-Products anyway exceeding the incumbent firms’ production capacities
(Ambrosio, 2020). Nevertheless, this novel CC-IP (paraground) developed by group 4 firms
following this entry strategy is potentially still of interest to incumbent firms. After the Covid19 pandemic terminates and the demand for CC-Products decreases towards pre-pandemic
levels and below incumbent firms’ production capacity, as shown in Figure 4, the Incumbent
CC-Product Manufacturer may however choose to respond to group 4 Type 1 New Entrants,
for example, by filing infringement claims against them for unauthorised usage of its formal
CC-IP (background) 8, to which the latter gained access through copying and reverse
engineering (Tietze et al., 2020). Without having conducted a freedom-to-operate analysis
prior to entering the CC-Sector with its minimal viable CC-Product, group 4 Type 1 New
Entrants now face the risk of having to compensate the incumbent for lost profits or at least
a reasonable royalty (Poltorak and Lerner, 2011, p. 120). Furthermore, infringement claims
by incumbent firms could also aim for an injunction against the group 4 Type 1 New Entrant
barring any further infringement (Poltorak and Lerner, 2011, p. 123), thus fully suspending
the supply of minimal viable CC-Products to Patients and Hospitals or Doctors. This postpandemic scenario and the IP-related dynamics are captured in Figure 4.
7

For instance, Manero et al. (2020) reported that a coalition of 3D printer manufacturers in the U.S. along with
their international customer base succeeded in optimising face shield visor designs for distributed additive
manufacturing using 3D printers. Designs applicable for 3D printing typically consist of adapted shapes and raw
material specifications that realise short manufacturing lead-times and material waste reduction (Larrañeta,
Dominguez-Robles and Lamprou, 2020). Despite inferior material properties, such as higher porosity, and higher
variability in the production process, 3D printed visors manufactured by the coalition were cleared for use under
the Federal Drug Administration’s Emergency Use Authorization in the U.S. (Manero et al., 2020).
8 A precedent was set by Allele Pharmaceuticals Inc., who sued Regeneron in White Plains, New York, and filed
complaints against Pfizer Inc. and BioNTech SE in a federal court in San Diego, California, for applying its
patented fluorescent protein called mNeonGreen while developing treatments of Covid-19 without a license
(Yasiejko, 2020).

21

Centre for Technology Management Working Paper Series

© A. Moerchel et al. 2020

Figure 3: Visualisation of pandemic CC-Sector innovation ecosystem with group Type 1 New Entrants insouciantly adopting incumbent firms’ CC-product

22

Centre for Technology Management Working Paper Series

© A. Moerchel et al. 2020

Ultimately, Incumbent CC-Product Manufacturers need to decide whether the anticipated
commercial benefit of compensation and injunction exceeds the cost of litigation (Poltorak
and Lerner, 2011, p. 113f), which may not necessarily be the case with group 4 firms, namely
Agile Manufacturers with Particular Skills due to their small scale operation (Tietze et al.,
2020). In addition, the incumbent may contemplate the strategic relevance of gaining access
to the newly developed informal CC-IP (paraground) developed by group 4 Type 1 New
Entrants during the pandemic phase.
As determined above, group 4 firms’ informal CC-IP (paraground) could effectively represent
frugal innovation bearing the potential for minimised resource requirements and cost
reductions while still satisfying quality and performance (Tiwari and Herstatt, 2012). These
characteristics may become relevant features of the CC-Product value chain in the ‘new
normal’ of the post-pandemic phase due to an emerging general consensus on voluntary
simplicity and affordability (Herstatt and Tiwari, 2020).
Thus, when deciding how to respond to the competitive threat posed by group 4 Type 1 New
Entrants in the post-pandemic phase, Incumbent CC-Product Manufacturers need to reflect
whether either the prospect of damage compensation by the infringing new entrant or the
potential value of the frugal innovation captured in its CC-IP (paraground) outweigh the costs
of litigation.
Group 4 Type 1 New Entrants, on the other hand, also face a strategic decision as the Covid19 pandemic comes to an end and the CC-Sector transitions into the post-pandemic phase,
namely whether to cease from the manufacturing of CC-Products or to continue, thus
remaining in the CC-Sector. In the latter case, it would be prudent for the group 4 Type 1 New
Entrants to negotiate licenses with the Incumbent CC-Product Manufacturer, thereby finally
ensuring authorised access to its CC-IP (background). Offering the incumbent cross-licensing
of its own CC-IP (paraground) may be a sensible approach by group 4 Type 1 New Entrants to
build leverage, but incumbent firms would probably be inclined to pursue litigation in order
to force the group 4 firms out from the contracting CC-Sector and nevertheless seek access
to CC-IP (paraground) as part of the sought compensation.
In essence, considering the small scale of group 4 Type 1 New Entrants and their local to
regional focus, it would be more realistic for these firms in this scenario to proactively cease
manufacturing of CC-Products and follow and inside-out open innovation approach
(Chesbrough, 2012) by out-licensing its CC-IP (paraground) to other actors in the CC-Sector,
including incumbent firms. This strategic path avoids any IP infringement claims and
potentially allows monetisation of its false-negative IP (Chesbrough, 2012).
3.2.3 Entry Strategy B Designing from Scratch
When following entry strategy B, Type 1 New Entrants use their inherent technical
competence and, if necessary, outside expert advice to design a CC-Product from scratch
(Tietze et al., 2020) with the goal to match the value proposition of incumbent firms’ CCProducts.

23

Centre for Technology Management Working Paper Series

© A. Moerchel et al. 2020

Figure 4: Visualisation of post-pandemic CC-Sector innovation ecosystem with Incumbent CC-Product Manufacturers filing an infringement claim against group 4
Type 1 New Entrant

24

Centre for Technology Management Working Paper Series

© A. Moerchel et al. 2020

These manufacturing firms entering the CC-Sector by newly developing CC-Products are
herein denoted as group 3 Type 1 New Entrants 9. Dictated by the dynamic upsurge in demand
for CC-Products at the start of the pandemic, group 3 Type 1 New Entrants following entry
strategy B may not have sufficient time to conduct thorough freedom-to-operate analyses,
thus potentially infringing CC-IP (background) owned by Incumbent CC-Product
Manufacturers (Tietze et al., 2020) in a similar fashion as in the entry strategy A scenario.
Group 3 Type 1 New Entrants choosing entry strategy B typically realise that they possess
capabilities and resources to potentially design, develop and produce a substitute CC-Product
with enhanced features that is equivalent to the incumbent firms’ CC-Product, thereby
representing an additional source during the pandemic phase when CC-Product demand
substantially exceeds incumbent firms’ manufacturing capacities.
Furthermore, being larger firms, Type 1 New Entrants of group 3 typically own formal and
informal background IP that may be complementary, but new to the CC-Sector allowing them
to introduce macro-level technological discontinuities to the sector (Garcia and Calantone,
2002). For example, Group 3 Type 1 New Entrants essentially have expertise and
competences captured in complementary background IP to design and develop enhanced CCProducts from scratch10, as well as the resources and scale to offer it to all customer groups
in the CC-Sector innovation ecosystem, namely Patients, Publicly Funded Healthcare Systems
and Private Hospitals or Doctors, on a national level, whose demand cannot be met by
incumbent firms. Figure 5 below depicts group 3 Type 1 New Entrants designing CC-Products
from scratch and introducing enhancements to the CC-Sector that are based on their
complementary formal and informal background IP from outside the CC-Sector.
As group 3 Type 1 New Entrants design and develop CC-Products from scratch, thereby
applying their complementary background IP to applications in the CC-Sector, as well as
deviating from existing CC-Product designs in order to accommodate their existing
manufacturing processes and equipment and supplier network, they potentially come up with
innovative solutions to solve design problems or manufacturing challenges11. This does not
only potentially lead to a CC-Product enhancement as discussed above, but also essentially
represents novel CC-IP (Tietze et al., 2020). The development of this novel CC-IP, however,
9

Dyson, which designed and built the CoVent ventilator (Jack, 2020), and Roche, which developed the Sars-CoVtesting kit extending its cobas 00/ 00 systems’ capabilities to become Covid-19 relevant (F. Hoffmann-La
Roche AG, 2020), are both examples for this new entrant group following entry strategy B. Dyson relied on its
expertise with managing air flows, robotics, electronics and software (The James Dyson Foundation, 2020), as
well as the expert advice from The Technology Partnership (Jack, 2020), to rapidly design and manufacture a
fully functional ventilator ready for regulatory approval. Roche used its experience with developing rapid clinical
diagnostics equipment to develop a PT/PCR test specifically for diagnosing Sars-CoV-2.
10 Dyson has accumulated a considerable amount of expertise related to the efficient management of internal
air flow in devices captured in both formal and informal IP (4iP Council, 2016; Justia, 2020). This complementary
background IP enabled Dyson to develop a ventilator design, namely CoVent, which potentially surpasses the
efficiency and performance of incumbent ventilator designs. Furthermore, Roche’s knowledge base with rapid
diagnostics equipment meant that it possessed complementary background IP on which basis it was able to
develop a rapid Sars-CoV-2 testing solution for clinical use in the CC-Sector. With a capacity exceeding 4,000 test
results in 24 hours (F. Hoffmann-La Roche AG, 2020), Roche’s enhanced testing equipment for Sars-CoV-2
potentially beats the testing capabilities of Incumbent CC-Product Manufacturers and service providers.
11 Returning to the Dyson CoVent example, the design team consciously decided to avoid traditional ventilator
components in order to avoid supply chain bottlenecks that were encountered by incumbent firms (Bottomley,
2020).

25

Centre for Technology Management Working Paper Series

© A. Moerchel et al. 2020

comes at a cost as shown by the Dyson CoVent example, which reportedly required an
investment of 20 million pounds (Bottomley, 2020). The magnitude of such investment
combined with economic pressures during the crisis and entrepreneurial spirit dictate that
group 3 Type 1 New Entrants seek options to realise a return on their investment (4iP Council,
2016). Next to seeking expedited regulatory approval of their enhanced CC-Products, which
is typically a stringent requirement in the CC-Sector (López-Gómez et al., 2020), it would be
prudent for group 3 firms to also apply for formal protection of their newly developed CC-IP
by registering patents, designs or trademarks at the applicable Government /
Intergovernmental Agencies (Tietze et al., 2020).
Similarly to the novel informal CC-IP developed by group 4 Type 1 New Entrants in the entry
strategy A scenario, the formal and informal CC-IP devised by group 3 firms in this scenario
does also not qualify as either foreground or sideground IP due to the absence of any
collaboration between new entrants and incumbents and the omission of any freedom-tooperate analysis by the new entrants (Granstrand and Holgersson, 2014).
As shown in Figure 5, we apply the new definition of CC-IP (paraground) here again to capture
the innovation behind CC-Product enhancements introduced by group 3 Type 1 New Entrants.
The pandemic CC-Sector innovation ecosystem map also captures the possibility that group 3
firms rely on tangible and intangible component inputs, such as Subassemblies from
Suppliers, if dictated by the inherent complexity of the Enhanced CC-Product (Hobday, Davies
and Prencipe, 2005). In this scenario, Incumbent CC-Product Manufacturers do not merely
have to cope with a limited matching copy of their CC-Products in regionally limited markets
as in the entry strategy A scenario but face the potent risk of a new entrant effectively
becoming a potent competitor with an innovatively enhanced CC-Product, thus remaining in
the CC-Sector permanently (Tietze et al., 2020)
Discussed from the entry strategy A scenario, it is unlikely and of little value to Incumbent CCProduct Manufacturers to respond to group 3 Type 1 New Entrants pursuing entry strategy B
during the pandemic phase due to potential reputational backlash, such as being viewed as
overly exploitative during times of crisis, and because the crisis-dependent upsurge in
demand for CC-Products overwhelms incumbent firms’ production capacities (Tietze et al.,
2020). However, when the pandemic phase terminates and demand for CC-Products declines,
incumbent firms may need to react to the then appearing competitive threat posed by group
3 Type 1 New Entrants in order to at least conserve their pre-pandemic market share and
sales figures for CC-Products in the face of a contracting CC-Sector.
In this paper, we consider two extreme perspectives of competitive dynamics (Chen and
Miller, 2015), namely the rivalrous view manifested in a defensive counter strategy on one
side and the relational view represented by an open innovation strategy on the other side, to
visualise how IP dynamics change in the CC-Sector innovation ecosystem after the Covid-19
pandemic terminates and group 3 Type 1 New Entrants decide to remain in the CC-Sector.

26

Centre for Technology Management Working Paper Series

© A. Moerchel et al. 2020

Figure 5: Visualisation of pandemic CC-Sector innovation ecosystem with group 3 Type 1 New Entrants designing CC-Products from scratch

27

Centre for Technology Management Working Paper Series

© A. Moerchel et al. 2020

3.2.3.1 Post-pandemic response option (1) - Rivalrous Perspective: Inc mben
Defensive Counter Strategy
Incumbent CC-Product Manufacturers with a rivalrous perspective on competitive dynamics
would exhibit a tendency towards short-term economically targeted tactics (Chen and Miller,
2015). As shown in our visualisation of the post-pandemic CC-Sector innovation ecosystem in
Figure 6, these incumbent firms would directly attack group 3 Type 1 New Entrants for using
their CC-IP (background) without authorisation by filing an infringement claim and seeking an
injunction against Enhanced CC-Products as well as damage compensation, thus stimulating
IP-related dynamics in the innovation ecosystem.
As stated previously, group 3 Type 1 New Entrants would typically not have conducted a
freedom-to-operate analysis while designing their Enhanced CC-Products from scratch due to
the urgency of meeting the positive demand shock at the start of the pandemic phase (Tietze
et al., 2020), which means that the likelihood of incumbents’ infringement claims being
successful is high. If indeed successful, group 3 Type 1 New Entrants face the prospect of
having to stop selling its Enhanced CC-Products to any customer group, compensating the
claiming Incumbent CC-Product Manufacturer for lost profits or at least a reasonable royalty,
and losing any formal CC-IP (paraground), particularly patents due to the incumbents’ CC-IP
(background) effectively representing prior art (Poltorak and Lerner, 2011). Here, the legal
concept of doctrine of equivalents may become particularly relevant because it stipulates that
an infringement has occurred if the Enhanced CC-Product designed from scratch performs the
same function, in the same way, with similar results as the incumbents’ CC-Product (Poltorak
and Lerner, 2011, p. 108).
Discussed from the entry strategy A scenario, Incumbent CC-Product Manufacturers need to
balance the risk of high litigation costs versus the potential economic benefit of damage
compensation and injunction (Poltorak and Lerner, 2011, p. 113). Contrary to Agile
Manufacturers with Particular Skills in the entry strategy A scenario, group 3 Type 1 New
Entrants following entry strategy B have the resources to manufacture enhanced CC-Products
on a larger scale meaning that pursuing litigation may be an economically viable solution for
incumbents due to damage compensation scaling with Enhanced CC-Product sales by group
3 firms (Poltorak and Lerner, 2011, p. 119).
However, there is more to consider for Incumbent CC-Product Manufacturers: access to the
potentially valuable CC-IP (paraground) and complementary background IP underlying CCProduct enhancements introduced by group 3 Type 1 New Entrants. More specifically,
incumbents’ defensive counter strategy may prevent them from accessing background
knowledge necessary to implement CC-Product enhancements developed by group 3 firms
because the latter are unlikely to offer incumbent firms authorised access to its
complementary background IP and remaining informal CC-IP (paraground) after being
prosecuted by them. Essentially, following a defensive counter strategy has the potential to
lead to short-term economic benefits for Incumbent CC-Product Manufacturers, but is
unlikely to enable them to access the IP underlying CC-Product enhancements introduced by
group 3 Type 1 New Entrants during the pandemic phase.

28

Centre for Technology Management Working Paper Series

© A. Moerchel et al. 2020

Figure 6: Visualisation of post-pandemic CC-Sector innovation ecosystem with Incumbent CC-Product Manufacturers pursuing a defensive counter strategy against
group 3 firms

29

Centre for Technology Management Working Paper Series

© A. Moerchel et al. 2020

Group 3 Type 1 New Entrants face considerable economic risk when confronted by Incumbent
CC-Product Manufacturers pursuing a defensive counter strategy. As stated above, the
financial repercussions are likely to entail the costs of litigation, compensation of the
incumbent for lost profits or a reasonable royalty and the potentially high development costs
sunk in designing the Enhanced CC-Product from scratch due to an injunction. The group 3
Type 1 New Entrants should therefore prudently conduct a freedom-to-operate analysis as
early as practicably reasonable during the crisis (Tietze et al., 2020) in order to identify
features of its Enhanced CC-Products and relevant formal CC-IP (paraground) potentially
infringing incumbents’ formal CC-IP (background)12. Ultimately, this would allow group 3 firms
following entry strategy B to take corrective action if necessary and to design around
incumbents’ CC-IP (background), thereby proactively avoiding an infringement claim and
litigation, as well as conserving its potential to market and sell its Enhanced CC-Product.
3.2.3.2 Post-pandemic response option (2) - Relational Perspective: Inc mben
Innovation Strategy

O en

Incumbent CC-Product Manufacturers with a relational perspective on competitive dynamics
would focus on long-term success and appreciate that this can only be achieved if needs,
preferences and interdependencies of other stakeholders in an innovation ecosystem are
taken into account (Chen and Miller, 2015). In the context of the post-pandemic CC-Sector,
incumbents with a relational perspective appreciate the value of macro-level technological
discontinuities brought into the CC-Sector by group 3 Type 1 New Entrants and accept that
access to innovations captured in CC-IP (paraground) could benefit themselves as well as the
various customer groups by improving the CC-Product’s value proposition. As depicted in our
visualisation of the post-pandemic CC-Sector innovation ecosystem in Figure 7, incumbents
with a relational perspective would be more inclined towards pursuing a collaborative, that
is open innovation, approach with group 3 firms, instead of pursuing an infringement claim
and compensation for lost profits or royalties.
More specifically, Incumbent CC-Product Manufacturers could proactively and restrictively
(for the duration of the pandemic) license its formal CC-IP (background) to group 3 Type 1
New Entrants, thereby granting them authorised access and a limited freedom-to-operate
under the terms and conditions of a license. In trade for that, group 3 Type 1 New Entrants
would cross-license its formal CC-IP (paraground) to Incumbent CC-Product Manufacturers,
thereby granting reciprocal authorised access under certain terms and conditions of a license.
Here, Figure 7 highlights unfolding IP-related dynamics induced by the reciprocal crosslicensing between the actors, namely both the complementary background IP which group 3
firms already owned prior to the pandemic and the CC-IP (paraground) which it developed
during the pandemic phase now becoming its cumulative portfolio of background CC-IP.
Typical license restrictions limiting the usage of IP are captured in change-of-technology,
change-of-control, no-challenge and termination clauses (Granstrand and Holgersson, 2014),
as well as scope-restriction clauses limiting the scope of usage of licensed IP to certain
12

Dyson’s group IP director, Gill Smith, stated that the company takes formal IP and patents in particular
seriously, and expects other companies to respect its IP portfolio in the same way it honours IP ownership of
others (4iP Council, 2016). From this statement, it is reasonable to assume that Dyson has internal IP processes
in place enabling it to ensure proper freedom-to-operate prior to bringing the CoVent ventilator to market.

30

Centre for Technology Management Working Paper Series

© A. Moerchel et al. 2020

markets, products and customer groups. How each of these clauses are formulated and how
the added value of the CC-Product enhancement is shared between the Incumbent CCProduct Manufacturers and group 3 Type 1 New Entrants is subject to IP contracting and
licensing negotiations between the actors. Ahead of these negotiations, it is worthwhile for
incumbent firms to remember that they can create leverage over new entrants by
emphasising the alternative option of switching to a defensive counter strategy as previously
described if a cross-licensing agreement under agreeable terms and conditions cannot be
reached.
When negotiating cross-licensing agreements, Incumbent CC-Product Manufacturers could
use their bargaining power, which results from the alternative option to switch to a defensive
counter strategy, to assert scope-restriction clauses that limit group Type 1 New Entrants’
usage of its CC-IP (background). For instance, this could limit the range of customer groups to
which group 3 firms may sell Enhanced CC-Products or preclude them from independently
developing any further CC-Product enhancements thereby effectively prohibiting the
generation of novel CC-IP (sideground). While it would be sensible for Incumbent CC-Product
Manufacturers to limit group Type 1 New Entrants’ access to customer groups, thereby
effectively controlling their market share in the post-pandemic CC-Sector, it could potentially
be beneficial not to overly restrict group firms’ usage of its CC-IP (background) for the
development of further CC-Product enhancements in order to conserve the innovativeness
of the collaboration. Instead, Incumbent CC-Product Manufacturers should use their
bargaining power to assert more advantageous change-of-technology terms and conditions.
For example, incumbents could insist on assign-back clauses, which force group 3 Type 1 New
Entrants to transfer ownership of novel CC-IP (sideground) underlying further CC-Product
enhancements during the post-pandemic phase to Incumbent CC-Product Manufacturers
(Granstrand and Holgersson, 2014). Equipped with a strong negotiation mandate, Incumbent
CC-Product Manufacturers can dictate favourable cross-licensing terms and conditions,
whereas caution should be practiced by incumbent firms not to stifle the innovativeness of
the collaboration by asserting clauses disincentivising any further CC-Product enhancements
by group 3 Type 1 New Entrants.
Group 3 Type 1 New Entrants, on the other hand, may need to compromise heavily in the face
of incumbents’ bargaining power and to avoid the economic risk that may result from their
defensive counter strategy. Considering incumbent firms’ focus on scope-restriction and
change-of-technology terms and conditions in cross-licensing negotiations as discussed
above, group 3 firms may need to compromise between access to customer groups in the CCSector innovation ecosystem and ownership of novel CC-IP (sideground) underlying CCProduct enhancements that it introduces during the post-pandemic phase. If group 3 Type 1
New Entrants decide that access to a wide range of customer groups represents a more
promising path to achieving their return on investment objectives, they could accept any
assign-back clauses required by Incumbent CC-Product Manufacturers, thereby trading
ownership of all novel CC-IP (sideground) underlying future CC-Product improvements in for
access to a wider scope of customer groups. Otherwise, group 3 firms would be advised to
trade access to customer groups in the CC-Sector innovation ecosystem in for replacing any
assign-back clauses with grant-back clauses, retaining ownership of all novel CC-IP
(sideground), but having to license it to Incumbent CC-Product Manufacturers (Granstrand
and Holgersson, 2014).

31

Centre for Technology Management Working Paper Series

© A. Moerchel et al. 2020

Figure 7: Visualisation of post-pandemic CC-Sector innovation ecosystem with Incumbent CC-Product Manufacturers pursuing an open innovation strategy with
group 3 firms

32

Centre for Technology Management Working Paper Series

© A. Moerchel et al. 2020

Ultimately, group 3 Type 1 New Entrants need to decide whether they are more likely to
maximise their earning potential as competitors to the Incumbent CC-Product Manufacturer
by continuing to sell Enhanced CC-Products in the CC-Sector, or as a supplier of intangible
goods and services, namely its cumulative portfolio of background CC-IP and novel CC-IP
(sideground).
3.2.4 Entry Strategy C Teaming Up
By pursuing entry strategy C, Type 1 New Entrants repurpose their spare and complementary
manufacturing resources and collaborate with Incumbent CC-Product Manufacturers that are
willing to share their CC-IP (background) (Tietze et al., 2020) in order to rapidly respond to
the overwhelming surge in demand for CC-Products during the pandemic phase of the Covid19 induced crisis (López-Gómez et al., 2020). Type 1 New Entrants following this teaming-up
approach can be characterised as either being firms with spare manufacturing capacity with
related resources and capabilities, hereinafter denoted as group 1 Type 1 New Entrants, or
tech giants possessing a diverse and rich set of capabilities that allows them to manufacture
any product provided that access to the relevant IP is available, from now on referred to as
group 2 Type 1 New Entrants (Tietze et al., 2020)13. As exemplified by our visualisation of
post-pandemic CC-Sector innovation ecosystem in Figure 8, incumbent manufacturers in this
scenario typically facilitate the upscaling effort by pragmatically granting access to its CC-IP
(background) to group 1 and 2 Type 1 New Entrants willing to repurpose underutilised and
related manufacturing capacities due to the urgency of meeting the rapidly increasing
demand for CC-Products. During the pandemic phase, group 1 and 2 Type 1 New Entrants
typically experience a rapid drop in demand for their non-CC-Products14, which they have
been producing in large numbers during the pre-pandemic phase (Tietze et al., 2020). Joining
the CC-Sector by teaming up with incumbent firms allows group 1 and 2 firms to retain some
degree of utilisation of its workforce and facilities by manufacturing CC-Products, thereby at
least partially covering fixed costs and bridging the demand gap during the Covid-19 induced
crisis. However, the degree of complementarity between group 1 and firms’ capabilities and
CC-Product manufacturing requirements, as well as their skills gap relative to CC-Sector
standards, must be within reasonable limits 15 in order to allow group 1 and 2 firms to recover
the cost of manufacturing repurposing (López-Gómez et al., 2020).

13

An illustrative example for entry strategy C and group 1 and 2 Type 1 New Entrants teaming up with an
Incumbent CC-Product Manufacturer is the partnership between General Motors (GM) (as Type 2 New Entrant)
and Ventec Life Systems (Ventec) (as Incumbent), in which GE’s former’s Kokomo facility in Indiana, which is
specialised in the production of precision electrical components for automobiles, was repurposed to rapidly
scale manufacturing of the latter’s VOCSN critical care ventilator that was jointly developed by both companies
for clinical use (Brooks and Flores, 2020).
14

Non-CC-Sectors that are affected most by the Covid-19 induced crisis and who experienced a rapid drop in
demand for non-CC-Products include commercial aerospace (Bruno, 2020), automotive (BusinessWire, 2020)
and luxury (Girod, 2020).
15 GM chose its Kokomo, Indiana, facility for manufacturing the VOCSN critical care ventilator because it was
idled since the start of the Covid-19 induced crisis due to the massive drop in demand for cars, thus offering the
capacity, and is specialised in manufacturing electrical components for cars and offers a clean room
environment, thereby providing the complementary capabilities required by the CC-Sector (Boudette and
Jacobs, 2020).

33

Centre for Technology Management Working Paper Series

© A. Moerchel et al. 2020

Figure 8: Visualisation of pandemic CC-Sector innovation ecosystem with group 1 (firms with spare manufacturing resources) and group 2 (tech giants) Type 1 New
Entrants teaming-up with Incumbent CC-Product Manufacturers

34

Centre for Technology Management Working Paper Series

© A. Moerchel et al. 2020

The entry strategy C scenario represents a win-win situation for all actors involved in the
collaboration because Incumbent CC-Product Manufacturers gain access to additional
manufacturing capacity that helps responding to the positive demand shock for CC-Products
and group 1 and 2 Type 1 New Entrants can bridge the demand gap for their non-CC-Products
and utilise idle manufacturing capacities (while gaining some reputational benefits by
contributing to ending the pandemic). In addition, the cross-licensing shown in Figure 8,
allows group 1 and 2 Type 1 New Entrants to gain authorised access to CC-IP (background)
underlying CC-Products developed and owned by incumbent firms, while also enabling group
1 and 2 firms to diffuse their complementary background knowledge into the CC-Sector16.
Ultimately, group 1 and 2 Type New Entrants and Incumbent CC-Product Manufacturers face
an IP assembly problem at the start of the collaboration (Granstrand and Holgersson, 2013),
namely the challenge of integrating the necessary knowledge, technologies and skills, as well
as the underlying formal and informal background IP through respective licensing
agreements, in order to ensure the joint freedom-to-operate for effective scale-up of CCProduct manufacturing.
Before the collaboration effectively starts and Incumbent CC-Product Manufacturers solve
the IP assembly problem together with group 1 and 2 Type 1 New Entrants, the actors need
to agree on the terms and conditions of the collaboration and capture these in the
aforementioned agreements, such as a reciprocal cross-licensing contracts. As already
described above incumbent firms in the entry strategy C scenario provide access to their CCIP (background) by offering some form of licenses, probably for a limited term (Tietze et al.,
2020), and typically expect the same from group 1 and 2 firms with respect to their
complementary background IP as shown in Figure 8. While the implementation of fair and
reasonable royalties rather simplifies negotiations of licensing agreements in innovation
ecosystems (Granstrand, Holgersson and Opedal, 2020), defining termination and scoperestriction clauses is not as trivial due to the challenge of designing contractual mechanisms
and limits ex-ante that anticipate the end of the pandemic phase and magnitude of CCProduct demand during the Covid-19 crisis, respectively. Regarding the termination clause,
defining a fixed term with options to extend the collaboration upon mutual agreement or
linking the term to total sales figures for CC-Products are potential solutions 17, whereas the
latter may raise issues from a competition and antitrust law perspective (Nicholson Price II,
Rai and Minssen, 2020). Regarding scope-restrictions, limiting usage of licensed IP to certain
markets, products and customer groups could be an option as already highlighted in the entry
strategy B scenario18. In the end, termination and scope-restriction clauses remain
contentious subjects in cross-licensing negotiations because, on one hand, group 1 and 2 Type
1 New Entrants are motivated to maximise both until the cost of repurposing spare
16

In the example of the scaling up manufacturing of the VOCSN critical care ventilator, GM brings its global
supplier base, vast logistics network, manufacturing, engineering, purchasing and legal prowess, all of which
hold GM’s complementary formal and informal background IP, into the collaboration in order to meet the
challenging goal to source the more than 700 individual parts according to Ventec’s specifications, which
represents its CC-IP (background), necessary to assemble each of the planned two hundred thousand VOCSN
ventilators (Brooks and Flores, 2020).
17 This was raised by an NGT expert based upon several years of experience with negotiating licensing
agreements with large OEMs in the commercial aerospace sector.
18 Ventec, for instance, took an extreme stance towards scope-restriction and insisted on remaining the primary
point of sale and distribution for VOCSN critical care ventilators manufactured through the collaboration with
GM, despite its small size compared to its partner (Boudette and Jacobs, 2020).

35

Centre for Technology Management Working Paper Series

© A. Moerchel et al. 2020

manufacturing capacities is recovered, while, on the other hand, Incumbent CC-Product
Manufacturers tend to be as restrictive as possible in order to curtail potential competition
in the post-pandemic phase. This certainly calls for some involvement of experienced
negotiators, who can act quick, agile to strike some potentially unconventional deal.
As the term of the cross-licensing agreements and hence the collaboration is likely to be time
limited (Tietze et al., 2020), Incumbent CC-Product Manufacturers and group 1 and 2 Type 1
New Entrants will analogously face an IP disassembly problem (Granstrand and Holgersson,
2013), namely the challenge of disentangling jointly developed knowledge, technologies and
skills, as well as the underlying formal and informal IP, through appropriate contingency
clauses towards the end of the pandemic phase. More specifically, the transfer and
recombination of CC-IP (background) owned by Incumbent CC-Product Manufacturers and
complementary background IP held by group 1 and 2 Type 1 New Entrants potentially leads
to macro-level technological discontinuities and, ultimately, to really new innovations (Garcia
and Calantone, 2002) and CC-Product enhancements, such as reduced manufacturing costs
(Tietze et al., 2020), reduced lead-time or improved CC-Product quality enabled by new
standardized best practices (Nicholson Price II, Rai and Minssen, 2020). These CC-Product
enhancements could be captured either as CC-IP (foreground) if it is developed collaboratively
by incumbents and group 1 and 2 firms, or as CC-IP (sideground) if it is developed by either
actor individually outside of the collaboration (Granstrand and Holgersson, 2014). Discussed
from the entry strategy B scenario, change-of-technology clauses represent an effective
contractual mechanism for solving the IP disassembly problem (Granstrand and Holgersson,
2013) by regulating the allocation of ownership and usage of both jointly developed CC-IP
(foreground) and independently developed CC-IP (sideground) after cross-licensing
agreements are terminated at the end of the pandemic phase. In the following two subsections, two choices of change-of-technology clauses that were already discussed in the
entry strategy B post-pandemic context are reconsidered in order to identify their respective
effects on the pandemic CC-Sector innovation ecosystem in which group 1 and 2 Type 1 New
Entrants team-up with Incumbent CC-Product Manufacturers . These options are (i) grantback and (ii) assign-back clauses.
3.2.4.1 Pandemic Change-of-Technology: Grant-back Clause
If Incumbent CC-Product Manufacturers and group 1 and 2 Type 1 New Entrants agree on a
grant-back clause, ownership of newly developed CC-IP that is based on the CC-IP
(background) of incumbents and/or complementary background IP of group 1 and 2 firms
would remain with the innovator, but under the obligation of having to license it back to the
collaboration partner (Granstrand and Holgersson, 2014). As shown in our visualisation of the
pandemic CC-Sector innovation ecosystem governed by a grant-back clause in Figure 9, any
CC-IP (foreground) that is jointly developed by Incumbent CC-Product Manufacturers and
group 1 and 2 Type 1 New Entrants on the basis of the former’s CC-IP (background) and the
latter’s complementary background IP is jointly owned. Furthermore shown in Figure 9, any
CC-IP (sideground) that is independently developed by group 1 and 2 Type 1 New Entrants on
the basis of both their complementary background IP and incumbents’ CC-IP (background)
remains in the ownership of group 1 and 2 firms under the explicit contractual condition that
a license to such CC-IP (sideground) is granted to incumbent firms under the general terms
and conditions of the cross-licensing agreement.

36

Centre for Technology Management Working Paper Series

© A. Moerchel et al. 2020

Figure 9: Visualisation of pandemic CC-Sector innovation ecosystem with group 1 and 2 Type 1 New Entrants and Incumbent CC-Product Manufacturers agreeing on
a grant-back clause

37

Centre for Technology Management Working Paper Series

© A. Moerchel et al. 2020

Agreeing on a grant back clause ultimately allows the collaboration partners to hold on to
ownership of the IP underlying their respective endogenously or collaboratively developed
innovation, as the case may be, while at the same time conserving the reciprocal authorised
access to background and novel CC-IP, hence the freedom-to-operate, that is necessary for
both collaboration partners to supply jointly enhanced CC-Products to all customer groups.
3.2.4.2 Pandemic Change-of-Technology: Assign-back Clause
If Incumbent CC-Product Manufacturers and group 1 and 2 Type 1 New Entrants agree on an
assign-back clause, ownership of newly developed CC-IP is transferred back from the
innovator to the collaboration partner owning the respective CC-IP (background) or
complementary background IP on whose basis the newly developed CC-IP is based
(Granstrand and Holgersson, 2014). Our visualisation of the pandemic CC-Sector innovation
ecosystem in Figure 10 shows the IP-related dynamics induced by the assign-back clause,
namely full ownership of CC-IP (sideground) and joint ownership of CC-IP (foreground) is fully
transferred by group 1 and 2 Type 1 New Entrants to Incumbent CC-Product Manufacturer,
while the former retains the right to license back the newly developed CC-IP under the terms
of the cross-licensing agreement. While newly developed CC-IP that is based on both CC-IP
(background) and complementary background IP is generally eligible to shared ownership by
both incumbent and group 1 and 2 firms, Incumbent CC-Product Manufacturers might want
to claim exclusive ownership of any newly developed CC-IP by new entrants because they
consider it to be of core importance to its activities in the CC-Sector and consider it non-core
to group 1 and 2 Type 1 New Entrants in the pandemic phase. The assign-back clause thus
effectively leads to an automatic transfer of ownership of both CC-IP (foreground), which is
jointly developed by incumbent and group 1 and 2 firms, and CC-IP (sideground), which is
individually developed by group 1 and 2 firms, to the Incumbent CC-Product Manufacturers
regardless of whether it was developed on the basis of CC-IP (background) alone or both CCIP (background) and complementary background IP. Figure 10 below also shows that despite
having to transfer ownership of all newly developed CC-IP back to the incumbent firm, the
licensing back of CC-IP (foreground) and CC-IP (sideground) by incumbent firms conserves
group 1 and
firms’ full freedom-to-operate for the continued manufacturing and
distribution of enhanced CC-Products to all customer groups during the pandemic phase.
As long as the cross-licensing agreement is effective during the pandemic phase, it makes
little difference to either collaboration partner whether ownership of newly developed IP is
governed by a grant-back or an assign-back clause because back licensing terms and
conditions ensure that both group 1 and 2 Type 1 New Entrants and Incumbent CC-Product
Manufacturers have freedom-to-operate, thus to manufacture and sell the jointly developed
CC-Products to all customer groups as discussed above and shown in Figure 9 and Figure 10.
Only as the pandemic terminates and demand for jointly developed CC-Products declines
towards pre-pandemic levels, the termination clause agreed upon by the collaboration
partners takes effect and ends the cross-licensing agreement. Group 1 and 2 and incumbent
firms then need to decide whether to continue the collaboration and agree on post-pandemic
(cross-) licensing terms and conditions or whether to end the collaboration. At this point the
consequences of the choice between the two change-of-technology options become
important.

38

Centre for Technology Management Working Paper Series

© A. Moerchel et al. 2020

Figure 10: Visualisation of pandemic CC-Sector innovation ecosystem with group 1 and 2 Type 1 New Entrants and Incumbent CC-Product Manufacturers agreeing
on an assign-back clause

39

Centre for Technology Management Working Paper Series

© A. Moerchel et al. 2020

In the following, we consider one post-pandemic CC-Sector innovation ecosystem in which
the collaboration is terminated and another in which the collaboration is renewed in order to
delineate the consequences of the change-of-technology option chosen at the start of the
pandemic phase for each collaboration partner.
3.2.4.3 Post-pandemic response option (3) Rivalrous Perspective: Incumbents ending
collaboration
As the pandemic phase ends, demand for CC-Products is likely to decrease to pre-pandemic
levels, but contractual mechanisms defined in the termination clause of the cross-licensing
agreement may stipulate a continuation beyond the end of the Covid-19 induced crisis. In
order to defend their pre-pandemic market share and level of sales in this contracting CCSector, Incumbent CC-Product Manufacturers may choose to adopt a rivalrous perspective on
competitive dynamics (Chen and Miller, 2015) similarly to the post-pandemic response option
(1) in the entry strategy B scenario. This means that incumbent firms stop viewing group 1
and 2 Type 1 New Entrants as collaboration partners, but as competition instead that needs
to be effectively forced out of the CC-Sector in the post-pandemic phase19. The obvious choice
for incumbent firms therefore is to end the collaboration by expediting the termination
clause, which is herein referred to the post-pandemic response option (3). From Figure 11,
we can see that the end of the collaboration and hence the termination of the cross-licensing
terms and conditions at the start of post-pandemic phase mean that established links for
authorised IP access between former collaboration partners are undone. More specifically, as
depicted in Figure 11, if IP ownership and usage during the pandemic phase was governed by
a grant-back clause, the end of the licensing arrangement leads to group 1 and 2 Type 1 New
Entrants losing authorised access to incumbent firms’ CC-IP (background) and Incumbent CCProduct Manufacturers having to forfeit authorised access to group 1 and 2 firms’
complementary background IP and CC-IP (sideground). Furthermore, co-ownership of jointly
developed CC-IP (foreground) is conserved. Ultimately, both group 1 and 2 Type 1 New
Entrants and Incumbent CC-Product Manufacturers lose their respective previously held
freedom-to-operate with respect to manufacturing jointly Enhanced CC-Products. While
incumbent firms potentially need to return to manufacturing and selling the original, prepandemic version of the CC-Product but potentially with selected enhanced features,
depending on which features of the jointly developed Enhanced CC-Product are embedded in
jointly owned CC-IP (foreground), group 1 and 2 Type 1 New Entrants have to stop
manufacturing and selling jointly enhanced CC-Products altogether.
If IP ownership and usage during the pandemic phase was governed by an assign-back
clause, our respective visualisation of the post-pandemic CC-Sector innovation ecosystem in
Figure 12 shows that the end of the cross-licensing arrangement leads to group 1 and 2 Type
1 New Entrants basically losing authorised access to any CC-IP namely CC-IP (background)
owned by incumbent firms, jointly developed CC-IP (foreground), and even endogenously
developed CC-IP (sideground).
19

Group 1 and 2 Type 1 New Entrants’ interests in the post-pandemic phase may be aligned because their origin
non-CC-Sector recovers and demand for their non-CC-Products, which they have been producing in large
numbers prior to the Covid-19 induced crisis, increases. In addition, group 1 and 2 firms may have succeeded in
recovering their investment in repurposing their complementary manufacturing capacities during the pandemic
phase.

40

Centre for Technology Management Working Paper Series

© A. Moerchel et al. 2020

Figure 11: Visualisation of post-pandemic CC-Sector innovation ecosystem with incumbent firms ending cross-licensing agreements governed by a grant-back changeof-technology clause

41

Centre for Technology Management Working Paper Series

© A. Moerchel et al. 2020

Figure 12: Visualisation of post-pandemic CC-Sector innovation ecosystem with incumbent firms ending cross-licensing agreements governed by an assign-back
change-of-technology clause

42

Centre for Technology Management Working Paper Series

© A. Moerchel et al. 2020

Incumbent CC-Product Manufacturers, on the other hand, only forfeit authorised access to
complementary background IP owned by group 1 and 2 firms. Ultimately, group 1 and 2 Type
1 New Entrants again lose their freedom-to-operate necessary to continue manufacturing
jointly enhanced CC-Products, while incumbent firms would potentially be able to continue
manufacturing and selling CC-Products with enhanced features resulting from joint
developments during the collaboration depending on which features are captured by backassigned CC-IP (sideground) and CC-IP (foreground).
Asserting an assign-back clause in the cross-licensing agreement during the pandemic phase
might appear to be strategically advantageous from the perspective of the Incumbent CCProduct Manufacturer because it maximises the potential freedom-to-operate and allows
the continuation of exclusive enhanced CC-Product manufacturing by the incumbent firm in
the post-pandemic phase20. Furthermore, an assign-back clause avoids the co-ownership of
jointly developed CC-IP (foreground) resulting from the grant-back clause as exemplified by
the respective CC-Sector innovation ecosystem in
Figure 12, thus mitigating risks associated with limited control over collaboration partners’
usage of such novel CC-IP (Granstrand and Holgersson, 2014). For example, there is a viable
risk that a group 1 and 2 Type 1 New Entrant may license jointly owned CC-IP (foreground) to
other incumbent firms in the CC-Sector in an effort to continue monetising its non-core IP
portfolio, which cannot be in the interest of its former collaboration partner. From the
perspective of group 1 and 2 Type 1 New entrants, agreeing on a grant-back clause during the
pandemic phase appears more beneficial as it allows group 1 and 2 firms to appropriate
further value from its collaboration with Incumbent CC-Product manufacturers during the
pandemic phase. More specifically, as exclusively owned CC-IP (sideground) and jointly
owned CC-IP (foreground) would typically capture technologies of non-core importance to
group 1 and firms’ activities in the non-CC-Sector, continued monetisation through sublicensing to other incumbent firms may be a viable option. Alternatively, transfer of the novel
CC-IP into the non-CC-Sector could be conducted if the technology is deemed complementary
to group 1 and firms’ core activities.
3.2.4.4 Post-pandemic response option (4) Relational Perspective: Continuation of
Collaboration
As an alternative to the response option 3, incumbent CC-Product Manufacturers can adopt
a relational approach to managing the post-pandemic phase in the CC-Sector and view group
1 and 2 Type 1 New Entrants as a sustainable source of further innovation resulting from the
recombination of complementary background IP, CC-IP (background) and novel CC-IP
developed during the pandemic phase. Similarly to the post-pandemic response option (2) in
the context of the entry strategy B scenario, this perspective leads incumbent firms to
continuing or renewing the collaboration with group 1 and 2 firms in the post-pandemic
phase, which is hereinafter denoted as the post-pandemic response option (4)21. The licensing
20

In the context of the collaboration example of GM and Ventec quoted earlier, an assign-back clause could
potentially enable the latter to continuously benefit from the collaboration, for instance, by adopting newly
devised VOCSN production and assembly processes implemented by GM in its repurposed Kokoma facility.
21 While the actors’ motivation to collaborate during the pandemic phase was primarily driven by the urgent call
to respond to a crisis situation with a strict focus on covering costs as shown in the GM and Ventec example

43

Centre for Technology Management Working Paper Series

© A. Moerchel et al. 2020

terms governing authorised usage of background and novel CC-IP during the pandemic phase
are, however, likely to be succeeded by different agreements, such as containing elevated
royalty fees in exchange for authorised CC-IP usage in the post-pandemic phase (Tietze et al.,
2020). Furthermore, Incumbent CC-Product Manufacturers and group 1 and 2 Type 1 New
Entrants will need to engage into an IP reassembly process, which is the recurring cycle of
sequentially solving the IP disassembly and assembly problem between two temporally
distinct collaboration projects (Granstrand and Holgersson, 2014), when transitioning from
the ad hoc developed collaboration during the pandemic to the post-pandemic collaboration,
during which the objectives of collaboration partners are likely to be different.
Our visualisation of the post-pandemic CC-Sector innovation ecosystem in Figure 13 shows
the IP-related dynamics stimulated by a grant-back change-of-technology clause during the
IP reassembly process at the start of the post-pandemic phase. Both collaboration partners
start accumulating portfolios of background CC-IP. More specifically, group 1 and 2 Type 1
New Entrants integrate CC-IP (foreground) and CC-IP (sideground) with its complementary
background IP to form its cumulative portfolio of background CC-IP, which becomes subject
to royalty-based licensing terms and conditions to Incumbent CC-Product Manufacturers.
Conversely, Incumbent CC-Product Manufacturers consider the jointly owned CC-IP
(foreground) to become part of its cumulative portfolio of background CC-IP, to which it offers
authorised access under royalty-based licensing terms and conditions to group 1 and 2 firms.
The post-pandemic CC-Sector innovation ecosystem map in Figure 13 also highlights the
restricted freedom-to-operate that may result from scope-restriction clauses, on which the
continuing collaboration partners may agree.
If collaboration partners agreed on an assign-back clause during the pandemic phase, the IPrelated dynamics during the IP reassembly process at the start of the post-pandemic phase
would differ considerably as shown in our depiction of the respective post-pandemic CCSector innovation ecosystem in Figure 14. More specifically, group 1 and firms’ cumulative
portfolio of background CC-IP would only consist of its complementary background IP from
before the pandemic. Incumbent CC-Product Manufacturers, on the other hand, would amass
a background CC-IP portfolio consisting of its endogenously developed CC-IP (background),
jointly developed CC-IP (foreground) and exogenously developed CC-IP (sideground). From
observing Figure 14, it becomes evident that an assign-back clause agreed in the pandemic
phase effectively leads to unevenly distributed background CC-IP portfolios in the postpandemic CC-Sector innovation ecosystem. But nevertheless, a royalty-based cross-licensing
arrangement would conserve sufficient freedom-to-operate allowing both collaboration
partners to continue to manufacture and sell jointly developed CC-Products.
From the perspective of Incumbent CC-Product Manufacturers, asserting an assign-back
clause in the cross-licensing agreement during the pandemic phase is again more beneficial
than a grant-back clause primarily because it enables incumbent firms to quickly accumulate
a sizeable and exclusively owned background CC-IP portfolio22.

(Boudette and Jacobs, 2020), competitive considerations with a focus on longer term value creation and winwin exchanges (Chen and Miller, 2015) become dominant in a post-pandemic setting.
22 Furthermore, the cost and burden of research and development that formed the basis of jointly developed
CC-Product enhancements was shared with group 1 and 2 Type 1 New Entrants during the pandemic phase.

44

Centre for Technology Management Working Paper Series

© A. Moerchel et al. 2020

Figure 13: Visualisation of post-pandemic CC-Sector innovation ecosystem with incumbent and group 1 and 2 firms continuing cross-licensing agreements on the
basis of a grant-back change-of-technology clause during the pandemic phase

45

Centre for Technology Management Working Paper Series

© A. Moerchel et al. 2020

Figure 14: Visualisation of post-pandemic CC-Sector innovation ecosystem with incumbent and group 1 and 2 firms continuing cross-licensing agreements on the
basis of a grant-back change-of-technology clause during the pandemic phase

46

Centre for Technology Management Working Paper Series

© A. Moerchel et al. 2020

The larger background CC-IP portfolio, in turn, allows incumbent firms to build bargaining
power in subsequent cross-licensing negotiations with group 1 and 2 firms, particularly when
asserting favourable scope-restriction clauses and royalty fees for the post-pandemic phase.
As already discussed in the context of the post-pandemic response option (2) of the entry
strategy B scenario, however, building and using this bargaining power can become a doubleedged sword because it may irritate group 1 and 2 Type 1 New Entrants and stimulate them
to disengage from negotiations of a post-pandemic licensing agreement, thus voluntarily
exiting the CC-Sector innovation ecosystem. Ultimately, if incumbent firms intend to continue
the collaboration with group 1 and 2 firms in the post-pandemic phase, they may need to
incentivise their former and hopefully continuing collaboration partner to remain in the CCSector by creating a win-win situation either through less restrictive scope-restriction clauses
or preferential royalty fees for authorised access to its background CC-IP portfolio.
Thus, maintaining a grant-back clause in the cross-licensing agreement during the pandemic
phase appears the more advantageous strategic choice for group 1 and 2 Type 1 New Entrants
because it enables them to hold on to a considerable background CC-IP portfolio. This, in turn,
may even be necessary for group 1 and 2 firms in order to recoup the investment in
repurposing its complementary manufacturing capacities at the start of the pandemic phase
by continued monetisation of its background CC-IP portfolio in the post-pandemic phase.
More importantly, however, the grant-back clause and resulting background CC-IP portfolio
may create a more level playing field for the cross-licensing negotiations with Incumbent CCProduct Manufacturers. On the other hand, group 1 and firms’ motivation to monetise its
background CC-IP portfolio combined with the aforementioned ambiguity around jointly
owned CC-IP (foreground) resulting from the grant-back clause during the pandemic phase,
may attract the scrutiny of incumbent firms, particularly if group 1 and 2 firms offer access to
jointly developed CC-IP (foreground) to incumbents’ competitors in the post-pandemic CCSector innovation ecosystem23.

4.0

Conclusions, Limitations and Future Research

The goal of this study is to help further the understanding of IP related dynamics, risks and
uncertainties in the CC-Sector as the Covid-19 induced crisis unfolds and new entrants are
called into or voluntarily join incumbents in the CC-sector to help out in the effort to mitigate
the crisis situation. We accomplished this by taking an innovation ecosystem perspective and
adapting, as well as extending a previously developed standardised visual approach, namely
the SVEL proposed by Moerchel et al. (2021), to map the CC-Sector for each of Tietze et al.’s
(2020) three proposed entry strategies, namely (A) insouciantly adopting, (B) designing from
scratch and (C) teaming up.
The results indicate that the threat of Type 1 New Entrants permanently establishing
themselves as competing actors in the CC-Sector is particularly high in the entry strategy (B)
scenario and exists to some extent also in entry strategy (C). In any case, following a defensive
counter strategy by filing an infringement claim against Type 1 New Entrants, thus enforcing
23

Granstrand and Holgersson (2014) document a case, in which a collaboration partner sued its counterpart for
breaching post-contractual loyalty, infringing its patents and misappropriating its trade secrets after being
denied to search for an alternative (3rd party) collaboration partner by showing jointly developed facilities.

47

Centre for Technology Management Working Paper Series

© A. Moerchel et al. 2020

an injunction and seeking compensation, exposes Incumbent CC-Product Manufacturers to
the risk of high litigation costs not being recouped or even failing altogether. Furthermore,
this defensive approach typically implicates that incumbent firms’ access to potentially
valuable complementary background IP and newly developed CC-IP owned by Type 1 New
Entrants is denied permanently, thus blocking the way to CC-Product innovations. On the
other hand, when pursuing a collaborative approach, incumbent firms might consider to
assert assign-back clauses in cross-licensing agreements in order to quickly accumulate a
sizeable portfolio of CC-IP (background) while sharing the cost of its development, to avoid
risks of shared CC-IP ownership, and to build up leverage for the next round of cross-licensing
negotiations.
The study also shows that Type 1 New Entrants typically make considerable investments to
enter the CC-Sector in order to help in the effort to meet the positive demand shock for CCProducts at the start of the pandemic. In order to recover these costs, new entrant firms
ought to conduct a freedom-to-operate analysis as early as possible, particularly when
following entry strategies (A) and (B), in order to mitigate the risk of infringement claims by
incumbent firms pursuing a defensive counter strategy. Furthermore, when entering into
cross-licensing agreements with Incumbent CC-Product Manufacturers, particularly in entry
strategies (B) and (C), it would be prudent for Type 1 New Entrants to insist on a grant-back
clause because it would allow them to retain ownership of their endogenously and newly
developed CC-IP that potentially underlie valuable CC-Product enhancements that are
desirable to incumbent firms. This, in turn, leaves new entrant firms enough leverage over
incumbent firms to potentially negotiate lower royalties and less confining scope restriction
clauses during the next round of cross-licensing negotiations.
This study comprises several contributions. We contribute theoretically to the IP
management literature by offering a definition for a new IP-type that is relevant for the open
innovation context, namely paraground IP. It is herein defined as IP that underlies innovations
which are independently developed by an actor outside of a collaboration context on the
basis of another (3rd party) actor’s IP without authorised access or having established
freedom-to-operate. Furthermore, we add methodologically by further enhancing and
broadening the SVEL’s scope of application to capturing IP dynamics in evolving innovation
ecosystems. Finally, this study comprises managerial implications for decision makers and
negotiators who represent incumbent and new entrant firms in CC-sectors as the crisis
situation evolves.
The nature of the research methodology and the scarcity of publicly available data, however,
add some limitations to our approach and resulting findings. As the future evolution of the
Covid-19 pandemic and the resulting crisis-situation were unknown at the time this study was
conducted, most of the managerial implications are based on consensus-reaching
extrapolations from current events by subject matter experts. Nevertheless, we believe that
our conclusions merit being empirically confirmed once the Covid-19 pandemic terminates
and empirical data covering its entire evolution from onset to termination will be available.
Finally, as the study is focused on the Covid-19 pandemic, the generalisability of our findings
to other crisis situations remains to be tested. Future studies might want to apply the
enhanced SVEL to other crisis settings, such as health or economic crises in order to either
proof its versatility or to enhance and develop it further.

48

Centre for Technology Management Working Paper Series

© A. Moerchel et al. 2020

References
4iP Council (2016) Patents and inventive spirit at Dyson. Available at:
https://www.4ipcouncil.com/features/dyson-company-founded-inventor (Accessed: 10
October 2020).
Adner, R. and Kapoor, R. ( 010) ‘Value Creation in Innovation Ecosystems: How the
Structure of Technological Interdependence Affects Firm Performance in New Technology
Generations’, Strategic Management Journal, 31, pp. 306–333.
Ambrosio, N. (2020) Responding to the COVID-19 Crisis: Can Industry Help?, Four Twenty
Seven. Available at: http://427mgt.com/2020/03/26/responding-to-the-covid-19-crisis-canindustry-help/ (Accessed: 7 July 2020).
Auerswald, P. E. and Dani, L. ( 01 ) ‘The adaptive life cycle of entrepreneurial ecosystems:
the biotechnology cluster’, Small Business Economics. Small Business Economics, 49(1), pp.
97–117. doi: 10.1007/s11187-017-9869-3.
Azoulay, P. and Jones, B. ( 0 0) ‘Beat COVID-1 through innovation’, Science, 368(6491), p.
553. doi: 10.1126/science.abc5792.
Basole, R. C. (200 ) ‘Visualization of interfirm relations in a converging mobile ecosystem’,
Journal of Information Technology, 24(2), pp. 144–159. doi: 10.1057/jit.2008.34.
Basole, R. C. et al. ( 01 ) ‘Ecoxight: Discovery, exploration, and analysis of business
ecosystems using interactive visualization’, ACM Transactions on Management Information
Systems, 9(2). doi: 10.1145/3185047.
Bonakdar, A. et al. ( 01 ) ‘Capturing value from business models: the role of formal and
informal protection strategies’, International Journal of Technology Management, 73(4), p.
151. doi: 10.1504/IJTM.2017.10004002.
Bottomley, V. (2020) D son s corona ir s response Sir James Dyson on COVID-19 and
developing the CoVent ventilator in 30 days, Odgers Berndtson Insights. Available at:
https://www.odgersberndtson.com/en-ch/insights/dysons-coronavirus-response-sir-jamesdyson-on-covid-19-and-developing-the-covent-ventilator-in-30-days (Accessed: 14 August
2020).
Boudette, N. and Jacobs, A. (2020) Inside G M s Race to B ild Ventilators Before Tr mp s
Attack, The New York Times. Available at:
https://www.nytimes.com/2020/03/30/business/gm-ventilators-coronavirus-trump.html
(Accessed: 3 September 2020).
Brooks, C. and Flores, D. (2020) Ventec Life Systems and GM Partner to Mass Produce
Critical Care Ventilators in Response to COVID-19 Pandemic, GM Corporate Newsroom.
Available at:
https://media.gm.com/media/us/en/gm/home.detail.html/content/Pages/news/us/en/202
0/mar/0327-coronavirus-update-6-kokomo.html (Accessed: 3 September 2020).
Bruno, M. (2020) Supply Chain Due For Overhaul After COVID-19, One Way Or Another,
Aviationweek.com. Available at:
https://www.businesswire.com/news/home/20200724005112/en/Impact-of-COVID-19-onthe-Worlds-Automotive-Industry-2020---Strategies-Key-Market-Participants-are-Currently-

49

Centre for Technology Management Working Paper Series

© A. Moerchel et al. 2020

Employing---ResearchAndMarkets.com (Accessed: 11 June 2020).
Bryman, A. and Bell, E. (2015) Business Research Methods. 4th edn. Oxford, UK: Oxford
University Press.
BusinessWire (2020) Impact of COVID- on the World s A tomoti e Ind str ,
ResearchAndMarkets.com. Available at:
https://www.businesswire.com/news/home/20200724005112/en/Impact-of-COVID-19-onthe-Worlds-Automotive-Industry-2020---Strategies-Key-Market-Participants-are-CurrentlyEmploying---ResearchAndMarkets.com (Accessed: 11 October 2020).
Chatburn, R. L. (1 1) ‘A New System for Understanding Mechanical Ventilators’,
Respiratory Care1, 36(10), pp. 1123–1155.
Chen, M.-J. and Miller, D. ( 01 ) ‘Reconceptualizing competitive dynamics: A
multidimensional framework’, Strategic Management Journal, 36(5), pp. 758–775. doi:
10.1002/smj.2245.
Chesbrough, H. ( 01 ) ‘Open innovation: Where we’ve been and where we’re going’,
Research Technology Management, 55(4), pp. 20–27. doi: 10.5437/08956308X5504085.
Contreras, J. L. et al. ( 0 0) ‘Pledging Intellectual Property for Covid-1 ’, Nature
Biotechnology, 38(October), pp. 1146–1150. doi: 10.1038/s41587-020-0682-1.
Elsen, M. et al. (2020) Unpacking the innovation landscape for crisis-critical products,
services and technologies in the Covid-19 pandemic, Innovation and Intellectual Property
Management (IIPM) Lab. Available at: https://www.iipm.eng.cam.ac.uk/news/unpackinginnovation-landscape-crisis-critical-products-services-and-technologies-covid-19 (Accessed:
13 October 2020).
F. Hoffmann-La Roche AG (2020) Roche s cobas SARS-CoV-2 Test to detect novel coronavirus
receives FDA Emergency Use Authorization, analytica-world.com. Available at:
https://www.analytica-world.com/en/news/1165398/roches-cobas-sars-cov-2-test-todetect-novel-coronavirus-receives-fda-emergency-use-authorization.html (Accessed: 13
August 2020).
Ferguson, N. M. et al. (2020) Impact of non-pharmaceutical interventions (NPIs) to reduce
COVID-19 mortality and healthcare demand, Imperial College London. doi: 10.25561/77482.
Garcia, R. and Calantone, R. ( 00 ) ‘A critical look at technological innovation typology and
innovativeness terminology: a literature review’, The Journal of Product Innovation
Management, 19, pp. 110–132.
Girod, S. (2020) How Luxury Brands Can Emerge Stronger From The Coronavirus Crisis,
Forbes.com. Available at: https://www.forbes.com/sites/stephanegirod/2020/07/31/howluxury-brands-can-emerge-stronger-from-the-coronavirus-crisis/ (Accessed: 11 October
2020).
Granstrand, O. and Holgersson, M. ( 01 ) ‘Managing the intellectual property disassembly
problem’, California Management Review, 55(4), pp. 184–210. doi:
10.1525/cmr.2013.55.4.184.
Granstrand, O. and Holgersson, M. ( 01 ) ‘The challenge of closing open innovation: The
intellectual property disassembly problem’, Research Technology Management, 57(5), pp.
19–25. doi: 10.5437/08956308X5705258.
50

Centre for Technology Management Working Paper Series

© A. Moerchel et al. 2020

Granstrand, O. and Holgersson, M. ( 0 0) ‘Innovation ecosystems: A conceptual review and
a new definition’, Technovation, 90–91(May), p. 102098. doi:
10.1016/j.technovation.2019.102098.
Granstrand, O., Holgersson, M. and Opedal, A. ( 0 0) ‘Towards fair pricing in technology
trade and licensing’, Stockholm Intellectual Property Law Review, 3(1), pp. 6–15.
Hall, B. et al. ( 01 ) ‘The Choice between Formal and Informal Intellectual Property: A
Review’, Journal of Economic Literature, 52(2), pp. 375–423. doi: 10.1257/jel.52.2.375.
Herstatt, C. and Tiwari, R. ( 0 0) ‘Opportunities of frugality in the post-corona era’,
International Journal of Technology Management, 83(Nos. 1/2/3), pp. 15–33.
Hobday, M., Davies, A. and Prencipe, A. ( 00 ) ‘Systems integration: A core capability of the
modern corporation’, Industrial and Corporate Change, 14(6), pp. 1109–1143. doi:
10.1093/icc/dth080.
Holgersson, M. and Granstrand, O. ( 01 ) ‘Patenting motives, technology strategies, and
open innovation’, Management Decision, 55(6), pp. 1265–1284. doi: 10.1108/MD-04-20160233.
Holling, C. S. (1 ) ‘Cross-Scale Morphology, Geometry, and Dynamics of Ecosystems’,
Ecological Monographs, 62(4), pp. 447–502.
Jack, S. (2020) Coronavirus: Government orders 10,000 ventilators from Dyson, BBC News.
Available at: https://www.bbc.com/news/business-52043767 (Accessed: 13 August 2020).
Justia (2020) Patents by Inventor James Dyson. Available at:
https://patents.justia.com/inventor/james-dyson (Accessed: 10 October 2020).
Larrañeta, E., Dominguez-Robles, J. and Lamprou, D. A. ( 0 0) ‘Additive Manufacturing Can
Assist in the Fight against COVID-19 and Other Pandemics and Impact on the Global Supply
Chain’, 3D Printing and Additive Manufacturing, 7(3), pp. 100–103. doi:
10.1089/3dp.2020.0106.
López-Gómez, C. et al. (2020) COVID-19 Critical Supplies: The Manufacturing Repurposing
Challenge, United Nations Industrial Development Organization. Available at:
https://www.unido.org/news/covid-19-critical-supplies-manufacturing-repurposingchallenge (Accessed: 7 July 2020).
Ma, A. (2020) NC te tile mill heeds call of nation gears p to make million face masks
per week, The Charlotte Observer. Available at:
https://www.charlotteobserver.com/news/coronavirus/article241413386.html (Accessed:
13 August 2020).
Manero, A. et al. ( 0 0) ‘Leveraging D printing capacity in times of crisis:
Recommendations for COVID-19 distributed manufacturing for medical equipment rapid
response’, International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 17(13), pp. 1–
17. doi: 10.3390/ijerph17134634.
Moerchel, A., Tietze, F. and Urmetzer, F. (2021) [Forthcoming]. Mapping Competitive
Dynamics in Business Ecosystems - A Case Study from the Aerospace Industry. Cambridge,
UK.
Moore, J. F. (1

) ‘Predators and prey: a new ecology of competition.’, Harvard Business

51

Centre for Technology Management Working Paper Series

© A. Moerchel et al. 2020

Review, 71(3), pp. 75–86.
Nicholson Price II, W., Rai, A. K. and Minssen, T. ( 0 0) ‘Knowledge transfer for large-scale
vaccine manufacturing’, Science, 369(6506), pp. 912–914.
Nicola, M. et al. ( 0 0) ‘The Socio-Economic Implications of the Coronavirus and COVID-19
Pandemic: A Review’, International Journal of Surgery. Elsevier, 78(March), pp. 185–193.
doi: 10.1016/j.ijsu.2020.04.018.
Oxford Business Group (2020) The impact of Covid-19 on global supply chains, Covid-19
Economic Assessments. Available at: https://oxfordbusinessgroup.com/news/impact-covid19-global-supply-chains (Accessed: 11 June 2020).
Pays, C. (2020) The beauty industry is rallying to fight Covid-19, Vogue. Available at:
https://www.vogue.fr/beauty-tips/article/lvmh-loreal-beauty-companies-producing-handsanitizer-to-help-hospitals (Accessed: 13 August 2020).
Phillips, M. A. and Srai, J. S. ( 01 ) ‘Exploring emerging ecosystem boundaries: Defining “the
game”’, International Journal of Innovation Management, 22(8), pp. 1–21. doi:
10.1142/S1363919618400121.
Phua, J. et al. ( 0 0) ‘Intensive care management of coronavirus disease 01 (COVID-19):
challenges and recommendations’, The Lancet Respiratory Medicine. Elsevier Ltd, 8(5), pp.
506–517. doi: 10.1016/S2213-2600(20)30161-2.
Poltorak, A. and Lerner, P. (2011) Essential of Intellectual Property. 2nd Editio, Development.
2nd Editio. Hoboken, New Jersey: John Wiley & Sons.
Richards, G. (2020) Project Pitlane: how rival F1 teams united in battle against Covid-19, The
Guardian. Available at: https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2020/may/24/project-pitlanehow-rival-f1-teams-united-in-battle-against-covid-19 (Accessed: 13 August 2020).
Robson, C. and McCartan, K. (2017) Real World Research. 4th edn. Chichester, UK: John
Wiley & Sons Ltd.
Samuelson, P. (1 1) ‘The Stability of Equilibrium: Comparative Statics and Dynamics’,
Econometrica, 9(2), pp. 97–120.
Sohrabi, C. et al. ( 0 0) ‘World Health Organization declares global emergency: A review of
the 2019 novel coronavirus (COVID-1 )’, International Journal of Surgery. Elsevier,
76(February), pp. 71–76. doi: 10.1016/j.ijsu.2020.02.034.
The James Dyson Foundation (2020) Our Story: The accidental engineer, The James Dyson
Foundation,. Available at: https://www.jamesdysonfoundation.com/who-we-are/ourstory.html (Accessed: 13 August 2020).
Tietze, F. et al. ( 0 0) ‘Crisis-Critical Intellectual Property: Findings From the COVID-19
Pandemic’, IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management, pp. 1–18. doi:
10.1109/TEM.2020.2996982.
Tiwari, R. and Herstatt, C. ( 01 ) ‘Assessing India’s lead market potential for cost-effective
innovations’, Journal of Indian Business Research, 4(2), pp. 97–115. doi:
10.1108/17554191211228029.
Urmetzer, F., Gill, A. and Reed, N. ( 01 ) ‘Using Business Ecosystem Mapping to Generate
New Competitive Value Propositions’, in CIE48. Auckland: Computers and Industrial

52

Centre for Technology Management Working Paper Series

© A. Moerchel et al. 2020

Engineering.
Van De Ven, A. H. and Delbecq, A. L. (1 ) ‘The Effectiveness of Nominal, Delphi, and
Interacting Group Decision Making Processes’, Academy of Management Journal, 17(4), pp.
605–621. doi: 10.5465/255641.
Weyrauch, T. and Herstatt, C. ( 01 ) ‘What is frugal innovation? Three defining criteria’,
Journal of Frugal Innovation. Journal of Frugal Innovation, 2(1), pp. 1–17. doi:
10.1186/s40669-016-0005-y.
World Health Organisation (2003) SARS outbreak contained worldwide, Media centre.
Available at: http://www.who.int/mediacentre/news/releases/2003/pr56/en/ (Accessed: 16
June 2020).
World Health Organisation (2020a) Rational use of personal protective equipment for
coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) and considerations during severe shortages. Available
at: https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/rational-use-of-personal-protectiveequipment-for-coronavirus-disease-(covid-19)-and-considerations-during-severe-shortages.
World Health Organisation (2020b) Situation Report, Coronavirus disease COVID-2019.
Available at: https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novel-coronavirus-2019/situationreports/.
World Health Organisation (2020c) WHO Director-General s opening remarks at the media
briefing on COVID-19, World Health Organization. Available at:
https://www.who.int/dg/speeches/detail/who-director-general-s-opening-remarks-at-themedia-briefing-on-covid-19---11-march-2020 (Accessed: 28 July 2020).
Woudenberg, F. (1 1) ‘An evaluation of Delphi’, Technological Forecasting and Social
Change, 40(2), pp. 131–150. doi: 10.1016/0040-1625(91)90002-W.
Yasiejko, B. C. (2020) Regeneron Antibody Cocktail Used by Trump Faces Patent Suit,
Bloomberg Law. Available at: https://news.bloomberglaw.com/pharma-and-lifesciences/regeneron-antibody-cocktail-used-by-trump-faces-patent-suit (Accessed: 9
October 2020).

53

