Heuristic assessment of the economic effects of pandemic control
Xiang Niu∗†

Christopher Brissette†
Gyorgy Korniss∗‡

Chunheng Jiang∗†

Jianxi Gao∗†

Boleslaw K. Szymanski∗†‡§

arXiv:2010.14452v1 [eess.SY] 27 Oct 2020

October 28, 2020

1

Abstract

Data-driven risk networks describe many complex system dynamics arising in fields such as epidemiology
and ecology. They lack explicit dynamics and have multiple sources of cost, both of which are beyond the
current scope of traditional control theory. We construct the global risk network by combining the consensus
of experts from the World Economic Forum with risk activation data to define its topology and interactions.
Many of these risks, including extreme weather, pose significant economic costs when active. We introduce a
method for converting network interaction data into continuous dynamics to which we apply optimal control.
We contribute the first method for constructing and controlling risk network dynamics based on empirically
collected data. We identify seven risks commonly used by governments to control COVID-19 spread and
show that many alternative driver risk sets exist with potentially lower cost of control.

2

Introduction

Network dynamics define a plethora of real world systems and describe the evolution of various spreading
processes ranging from epidemiology to economic shocks. In recent years ideas from control theory have
been adapted to network science with some success in understanding structural linear control of static
networks [19, 48, 49, 28, 39], temporal networks [15, 37, 32], and multilayer networks [36]. Current work also
focuses on networks with nonlinear dynamics [51, 7]. Comparatively little work studies the evolution and
control of risk networks where active risks incur additional cost to the controller beyond the cost of the input
signal [11]. A differentiating factor of risk networks in the context of control is that the activity of a single

∗ Network

Science and Technology Center, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute (RPI), Troy, NY 12180, USA
of Computer Science, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute (RPI), Troy, NY 12180, USA
‡ Department of Physics, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute (RPI), Troy, NY 12180, USA
§ Corresponding author: boleslaw.szymanski@gmail.com
† Department

1

risk has the capability of activating others in a potentially catastrophic cascade that makes componentoriented analysis of individual risks inadequate for understanding their consequences. To fully understand
the prevailing risks around us, we must understand the ways in which those risks interact and the ways
those interactions evolve yielding risk dynamics. Despite a large body of literature on risk management and
mitigation [42, 10, 46], the fundamental questions of networked risk control are rarely discussed [11, 41] as
they are beyond the state of the art in both control engineering and network science.
Two problems facing the study of networked risk control are the need for explicit dynamics and optimizing
over multiple cost types. The former arises from the fact most real-world dynamics are informally defined by
data as opposed to the formal differential equations required for control theory. We address this problem by
defining a stochastic process that transitions each risk among a finite set of states such as active, non-active,
or recovering. Collectively these stochastic processes define our dynamics. In Figure 1 we show how activity
in a subnetwork of the larger global risk network changes over time when nodes take a binary state and are
allowed to be either active or inactive.

Figure 1: An example of continuous risk dynamics on a subnetwork from the World Economic Forum’s
Global Risk Network consisting of inflation, failure of climate change mitigation, interstate conflict, large
scale migration, and cyberattacks. No control is applied and we can see that all nodes are inactive at the
beginning of the simulation except for inflation. The activity from inflation can be seen to disperse over the
network until all nodes are at a low level of activity at the end of the simulation.

We adapt these states to represent a continuous dynamical analogue of the discrete dynamics in order to
apply optimal control theory [43, 40, 16]. The equations we consider controlling take the following general
form:
~x(k + 1) = F [~x(k)] + G[~x(k), E] + B~u(k)
2

(1)

where xi (k) is the expected value of risk i at time step k, F [~x(k)] and G[~x(k), E] are nonlinear functions
depending on the endogenous and exogenous probabilities of activation for risks respectively, E is the adjacency matrix defining interactions between pairs of risks, and B~u(k) defines our input control signals. Using
the above continuous equation, we apply an altered version of the linear-quadratic regulator to account for
multiple cost types and ensure optimal control. We apply these methods to the annually published global
risk network from the World Economic Forum in order to obtain the dynamic global risk network and control
it. The 2017 WEF global risk network can be seen in Figure 2.
Globalization has provided extensive quality of life improvements for billions of people worldwide, including increased life expectancy, poverty reduction, and far reaching medical advances. Also due to globalization,
risks are now more connected through the avenues of technology, business, and individuals than ever. As
both the global economy and the technology defining our interactions become more connected, they are also
becoming more vulnerable [2, 11]. The annually reported global risk network from the World Economic Forum [11] currently represents the best understanding of the ways systemic risks are connected to each other.
This network distills the immeasurably complex and constantly evolving network of global economic factors
based on a consensus of expert opinions, and instead includes various transitions to catastrophic states such
as unmanageable inflation [34], climate change [20], interstate conflict [14], involuntary migration [24], and
large-scale cyber attacks [6], a subnetwork of these risks can be seen in Figure 1.
While active, corresponding risks induce tremendous damages to resources, economies, and most importantly human lives. As examples consider the 2014 Ebola virus outbreak in Africa [35, 1, 9] and the 2008
financial meltdown triggered by a crisis in the subprime mortgage market [26, 38, 13, 5]. Neither the viral
outbreak nor the financial meltdown were confined to where they erupted nor limited to initially triggered
risks, but continued to grow and affect other risks, often causing enormous losses. An even more contemporary example of networked risk dynamics comes from the 2019 breakout of COVID-19. In response to the
epidemic, nations around the world enacted a plethora of control measures to mitigate the virus’s effects.
While policies deviated between countries, control measures generally included the temporary closure of businesses, stimulus packages, and travel limitations. It is still unknown what the long term fallout of COVID-19
will be, and understanding the risks associated with the disease is going to be important in addressing long
term effects. According to the Global Bank COVID-19 could lead to widespread school closings, increased
dropout rates, and decreased development in human capital in Europe and Central Asia [4]. In South America, the Caribbean, and South Africa the Global Bank suspects social unrest may arise due to food shortages
related to COVID-19 [4]. In addition to this analysis, the World Economic Forum also released a report
on risks associated to COVID-19 based on the risks outlined in their yearly Global Risk Report [3]. They
listed prolonged recession of the global economy, high levels of structural unemployment, tighter restriction
3

(A)

(C)

(B)

Figure 2: Incurred cost from optimal control for random samples of 7 driver nodes on the 2017 dynamic
risk network with the ”rapid and massive spread of infectious diseases” risk held constant at one. The
network itself is dense and near regular with mean vertex degree of 18.27 and standard deviation of 4.60.
We compare the 7 node costs with that of the nodal set consisting of deflation, failure of major financial
institutions, unemployment, failure of national governance, failure of global governance, failure of urban
planning, and profound social instability. These risks relate closely with observed government action in
response to COVID-19. In the above network we have highlighted the nodes within the 2017 global risk
network these drivers consist of by making them square. This driver set performs better than average by a
reasonable margin, but we also see that many other driver sets performed better.
on cross-border movement of people and goods, and economic collapse of emerging markets and developing
economies as the most prevalent risks.

4

3

Results

3.1

The dynamic global risk network

The simplified abstraction of the dynamic global risk network [30] indicates connections between major risks
that are prone to cascading failures. These risks are active or inactive and evolve as a Markov process
depending on the network’s current state. This poses a significant challenge to control theory, since applying
theory from control analysis requires continuously defined dynamics for the risk variables. Therefore, we
introduce a continuous dynamical model describing how risk activation propagates through the underlying
network. We model the network activity dynamics with an adaptation of a stochastic process that is based
on an alternating renewal process [8, 41, 50, 21] and is continuous. Instead of each risk transitioning to a
discrete state indicating activity, we have the state of each node represent the expected value of risk i being
active at time step k + 1, xi (k + 1) using the following model [41, 18, 29, 27, 30].

~x(k + 1) = F [~x(k), p~int , p~con ] + G[~x(k), p~ext , E] + B~u(k)

(2)

where B is the diagonal binary matrix representing the family of nodes being driven by the control signal
vector ~u(k). Both F [~x(k), p~int , p~con ] and G[~x(k), p~ext , E] are nonlinear dynamical functions depending on
the state vector ~x(k). Here the probabilities p~int , p~ext , and p~con represent the internal and external probabilities of activation, and the probability nodes retain their state, respectively. Each of these probabilities is
calculated according to a maximum likelihood estimation as discussed in previous work [18]. The function
G is additionally dependent on the underlying network defined by the possibly weighted adjacency matrix
E.
Since the individual states xi (k) at the given time k vary in meaning for different applications, so too
do the signal costs, ui (k). For example in the case of a Lotka Volterra network an individual control signal
ui (k) may represent additional population added or removed at time k, where the state xi (k) represents the
population of a given species at that time. Alternatively in a mechanical system xi (k) may represent quantities such as velocity, or force of moving components, while ui (k) represents energy applied to the system.
In the case of the Lotka Volterra network the nonlinear dynamics F [~x(k), p~int , p~con ] and G[~x(k), p~ext , A] may
instead represent the growth rate of a node’s population based on its current population and its neighbor’s
populations respectively. Similarly, for a mechanical system the equations may represent the resistance of a
component and the force being applied to it by other components respectively.
We note that while this model is convenient and provides accurate risk activity estimates, real risk
networks are constantly evolving. Risks can be added to the network as they arise and they may also

5

be removed due to factors such as government and industries intervention. Consequently the underlying
network changes and as such, the probabilities associated with each risk change to accommodate fluctuations
in network interactions. This implies the risk network and its underlying dynamics should be regularly
revisited and redefined.

3.2

Controlling risk networks

When applying control theory to nonlinear problems, we require a linearization of the underlying nonlinear
dynamics. Assume that when uncontrolled, the system in equation (2) approaches a natural steady state ~xs .
Also assume fx = F + G and A =

∂fx
x=~
xs ,~
u=~
us
∂~
x |~

is the adjacency matrix defining the underlying probability

of activation between links. Then we linearize (1) as follows.

∆~x(k + 1) ≈ A∆~x(k) + B∆~u(k)

(3)

Here ∆~x(k) = ~x(k) − ~xs and ∆~u(k) = ~u(k) − ~us .
If the linearized system (3) is locally controllable along a specific trajectory then the associated non-linear
system is controllable along the same trajectory. Therefore the linearized system is sufficient for several parts
of control analysis including determination of driver nodes and determination of instanaeous optimal control.
In traditional control, the control energy after τ time steps is expressed as a sum over our control signal at
τP
−1
each time step given by J =
||~u(k)||2 . J depends only on the control signal, whereas we require a cost
k=0

function additionally depending on risk activity. For this purpose, we alter the cost function of the linear
quadratic regulator to obtain the following control cost which includes the cost of active risks.

Jt (Qf , Q, R) = ~xT (τ )Qf ~x(τ ) +

τ
−1
X

[~xT (k)Q~x(k) + ~uT (k)R~u(k)]

(4)

k=k0

Here Qf denotes the cost matrix at the final state, Q is the cost matrix for intermediate states, and R
is the cost matrix for our control signals. Examining this equation we see that the right most term is a sum
over the costs associated with the state of each risk and the control cost being applied to each risk. For our
tests we assume all of these matrices to be the identity for simplicity. As such, we have expressed the cost of
controlling our risk network in a form where we may apply an optimal control strategy to reduce the overall
incurred cost.
In the case of networked risks, system dynamics have a natural steady state we will refer to as ~xs . This
is the state that the system will approach in the absence of a control signal. Because of this, when trying to
drive the entire network towards an alternate state ~x∗ 6= ~xs it is necessary to continuously apply a control

6

signal. Therefore, we introduce a distinction between reactive and proactive control. It is important to
note that this is common in risk reduction literature [42], however it lacks theoretical or heuristic tools
for assessment. To motivate the need for heuristic cost estimates we examine the case of controlling the
activity of COVID-19 within the 2017 dynamic risk network. In order to better understand the hidden costs
associated with control measures related to COVID-19 we construct a set of seven control nodes within
the 2017 risk network associated with observed government intervention and use optimal energy control to
attempt driving the dynamic global risk network towards inactivity. The nodal set consists of deflation, failure
of major financial institutions, unemployment, failure of national governance, failure of global governance,
failure of urban planning, and profound social instability. The cost of control measures on this driver set is
compared with the cost of controlling the network using seven randomly sampled control nodes. The results
of this simulation are demonstrated in Figure 2. We find that while the seven nodes chosen incur relatively
low cost among the sample, there are many more efficient sets of control nodes one could pick. This suggests
that the policy decisions made in response to COVID-19 were reasonable ones, but not optimal. It should
be noted that the costs associated with each risk are taken to be unit while in reality they would likely vary
and require expert opinion to deduce. Because the costs are all unit, this method is giving us a qualitative
understanding of how topologically important our chosen control set is within the dynamic risk network. This
highlights the combinatorial nature of finding optimal risk driver sets and the need for heuristic assessment
tools in choosing them. Unfortunately such heuristics are not widespread and the current understanding of
risk assessment is often limited to individual, or narrow groups of risks [47, 31, 12, 45, 22, 44, 33, 25, 23, 17].

3.3

Assessing control methods

We suggest two heuristics to help inform driver node choice when applying reactive and proactive control
phases respectively on risk networks. Call ND the total number of driver nodes, NDa the number of driver
nodes that are initially active, and NDp the number of driver nodes that are among the most active at the
system’s natural steady state ~xs . In Figure 3, we see how NDa affects both the control cost and total cost
in the reactive control phase. For the reactive phase we see a strong negative relation between the control
cost and the total cost.
Once the system has been driven to inactivity, the dynamics will continue to evolve towards the natural
steady state of the system ~xs . To combat this, we use proactive control in which we apply a control signal
to our driver nodes based on their activation probabilities at the natural steady state ~xs . The cost of this
control phase depends on ND just as the reactive phase did. We also find that the number of driver nodes
with high activation probabilities at the natural steady state ~xs , NDp has a drastic effect on the control

7

(B)

(A)

(C)

(D)

Figure 3: We show the relationships between the number of ”high impact” nodes in our control set NDa and
NDp and the effects on costs incurred during the reactive and proactive control phases respectively. There
were 12 total control nodes in all tests and for each associated NDa and NDp 100 driver node sets were
sampled. In the proactive phase the network was controlled for 50 time steps, and in the reactive phase the
network was controlled for 500 time steps. We can see that control costs went up with an increase in NDa or
NDp in both the reactive and proactive control phases respectively. Alternatively we see the opposite trend
in total costs. Total costs appear to decline far more with NDp in the proactive phase than they do with
NDa in the reactive phase.
cost. In Figure 3, we plot the control costs and total costs against each other for collections of driver nodes
with different NDp in the proactive control phase. We can see that the trends are broadly similar to those
seen in the reactive phase with respect to NDa . We see that a high number of NDp among our driver nodes
generally reduces our total cost and increases our control cost. However, the control cost and total cost here
have far smaller quartiles than in the reactive phase seen in Figure 3.

8

It should be noted that applying this control to real-world networks is not a trivial problem in and of
itself. In the case of the Global Risk Network, the control signal must be designed by experts and may take
the form of strategies such as enacting legal policy, investing, or quarantining infections. In practice, it may
require iterations of design to force risks towards inactivity, and in that time, the underlying network and
probabilities defining its dynamics may change. Despite this, knowing which set of risks forms an optimal
set of drivers is valuable in its own right and can minimize control costs.

4

Discussion

Networked risks provide a theoretical foundation for defining complex interactions between factors that are
consistently prone to cascading failures. To avoid the damages of inevitable steady states that arise from the
interactions of these networks, we require an optimal method to them. The dynamics resulting from these
networks are difficult to analytically define for use in control theory since they must be constructed from
probabilities and extensive data collection. Our method presents a pipeline for constructing dynamic risk
networks from extensive data and how to control them. This requires using a massive amount of collected
data and applying maximum likelihood estimation in order to predict transition probabilities. Using these
transition probabilities, we can construct continuous dynamics from the alternating renewal process [8] that
defines the network’s underlying discrete dynamics. In these new continuous dynamics, the state of each
node represents its probability of activity over the current time step as opposed to the initially defined
discrete dynamics. These continuous dynamics allow for the application of control methods for driving the
system into inactivity. We adapt the linear quadratic regulator to account for risk networks in which control
cost and risk activity cost are simultaneously considered. We also show that by altering the control strategy
before and after driving the network to inactivity we can drastically reduce the total cost of controlling the
system.
The tools proposed in this paper are very general and widely applicable. It should be noted that a
trade-off between proactive and reactive control arises not only in risk networks but in any system in which
the desired final state of control is not stable. Most of the control designs for such systems make a salient
assumption that the cost of the system being out of the desired final state is negligible. Certainly, there
are other systems than risk networks, in which this assumption is not true. Our approach to control such
systems in two phases, reactive and proactive, can be applied to such cases. Hence the usefulness of our
approach reaches beyond risk networks.

9

5

Limitations of the Study

We first note that this model requires consistent reevaluation from experts. Both the connectivity and the
weighting of the links in the dynamic risk network are subject to change as experts reevaluate and add new
risks. Additionally the cost matrices used in our model are subject to change with expert evaluation as well.
Furthermore, applying the linear quadratic regular as an explicit control method to the dynamic global risk
network is difficult in practice. The control signal being added to nodes in our control set varies over many
professional domains and would realistically require the fine tuning of many distinct policy decisions. For
this reason, in many real world applications we suggest that this method be used as a heuristic for evaluating
comparative costs between driver node sets as opposed to an explicit method for generating real-world control
strategies.

6

Methods

6.1

Experimental Design

This study aims to develop a heuristic understanding of which nodes are optimal for controlling risk networks.
We specifically study this on the dynamic global risk network derived from the World Economic Forum’s
global risk network. Our study takes random samples of driver nodes and simulates the networked dynamics
while assess the control costs of forcing the network to inactivity.

6.2

CARP Model

In the Cascading Alternating Renewal Processes (CARP) model, a node i has binary state xi (k) at each step
k, either active (1), or inactive (0). In the global risk networks, an active node state represents a materialized
risk. The model is Markovian, so at each time step, a node computes for each node its state for the next
time step based on states of nodes at the current time step. There are three transitions:
• Internal activation: an inactive node i is activated internally with probability pint
i .
• External activation: an inactive node i is activated externally by an active node j with probability
ext
pext
ji = pi .

• Internal recovery: an active node i is inactivated internally with probability prec
= 1 − pcon
i
i .

10

The dynamics of CARP model is defined by the following transitions:

~x(k + 1) = fxCARP [~x(k)]
= ~x(k + 1) = {~
pint + [E | ~x(k) ◦ p~ext ]} ◦ [1 − ~x(k)] + p~con ◦ ~x(k)

where Eij ∈ {0, 1} and Eij is 1 if and only if edge (i, j) exists. It should be noted that both risks themselves
and their probabilities of transitions between states constantly change; new risks arise and are added to the
network, while existing active risks either continue to be a threat and remain in the network but with modified
parameters, or, thanks to the response of threatened governments and industry, decline in importance and
are removed. This evolution causes continuous changes in the global risks and their probabilities, and leads
to the need for annual revisions of the list of risks present in the network and their parameters by the expert.
However, if left unabated, the global risk network would approach the steady state, in which some risk will
be active much more frequently making their threats much more pronounced than in the initial state.

6.3

Statistical analysis

The The histograms in Figure 2 (B) and (C) come from simulations run on a random sample of 767 7-node
driver sets driving the dynamic global risk network. In these experiments the node associated with the
spread of infectious disease was held constant and the control method being used is optimal energy control.
The subfigures in Figure 3 each come from a sample of 1200 driver node sets. Each driver set consists of
12 nodes. For subfigures (A) and (B) these 1200 diver node sets were divided into 12 groups of 100 random
driver sets with each group having a consistent number of high activity driver nodes (NDp ) ranging between
1 and 12 across the 12 groups. Subfigures (C) and (D) each consist of 1200 diver node sets were divided into
12 groups of 100 random driver sets with each group having a consistent number of initially active driver
nodes (NDa ) ranging between 1 and 12 across the 12 groups.

References
[1] World Health Organization. http://www.who.int/ebola/, 2018. Accessed: 2018-10-15.
[2] World Economic Forum Global Risks Report. http://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_Global_Risks_
Report_2020.pdf, 2020. Accessed: 2020-26-8.
[3] COVID-19 Risks Outlook A Preliminary Mapping and Its Implications. http://www3.weforum.org/
docs/WEF_COVID_19_Risks_Outlook_Special_Edition_Pages.pdf, 2020. Accessed: 2020-07-28.

11

[4] Pandemic,Recession:

The Global Economy in Crisis.

https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/

bitstream/handle/10986/33748/9781464815539.pdf, 2020. Accessed: 2020-07-28.
[5] Stefano Battiston, J Doyne Farmer, Andreas Flache, Diego Garlaschelli, Andrew G Haldane, Hans
Heesterbeek, Cars Hommes, Carlo Jaeger, Robert May, and Marten Scheffer. Complexity theory and
financial regulation. Science, 351(6275):818–819, 2016.
[6] Brian Cashell, William D Jackson, Mark Jickling, and Baird Webel. The economic impact of cyberattacks. Congressional Research Service Documents, CRS RL32331 (Washington DC), 2004.
[7] Sean P Cornelius, William L Kath, and Adilson E Motter. Realistic control of network dynamics. Nature
communications, 4:1942, 2013.
[8] DR Cox and HD Miller. The theory of stochastic processes. 1965.
[9] Simon Dellicour, Guy Baele, Gytis Dudas, Nuno R Faria, Oliver G Pybus, Marc A Suchard, Andrew
Rambaut, and Philippe Lemey. Phylodynamic assessment of intervention strategies for the West African
Ebola virus outbreak. Nature communications, 9(1):2222, 2018.
[10] Jan Willem Erisman, Guy Brasseur, Philippe Ciais, Nick van Eekeren, and Thomas L Theis. Global
change: Put people at the centre of global risk management. Nature News, 519(7542):151, 2015.
[11] Dirk Helbing. Globally networked risks and how to respond. Nature, 497(7447):51, 2013.
[12] Arjen Y Hoekstra. Water scarcity challenges to business. Nature climate change, 4(5):318, 2014.
[13] Victoria Ivashina and David Scharfstein. Bank lending during the financial crisis of 2008. Journal of
Financial economics, 97(3):319–338, 2010.
[14] James Lee Ray. Explaining interstate conflict and war: What should be controlled for?

Conflict

Management and Peace Science, 20(2):1–31, 2003.
[15] Aming Li, Sean P Cornelius, Y-Y Liu, Long Wang, and A-L Barabási. The fundamental advantages of
temporal networks. Science, 358(6366):1042–1046, 2017.
[16] Fangfei Li and Jitao Sun. Controllability and optimal control of a temporal boolean network. Neural
Networks, 34:10–17, 2012.
[17] Bryan A Liang and Tim K Mackey. Sexual medicine: online risks to health – the problem of counterfeit
drugs. Nature Reviews Urology, 9(9):480, 2012.

12

[18] Xin Lin, Alaa Moussawi, Gyorgy Korniss, Jonathan Z Bakdash, and Boleslaw K Szymanski. Limits of
risk predictability in a cascading alternating renewal process model. Scientific reports, 7(1):6699, 2017.
[19] Yang-Yu Liu, Jean-Jacques Slotine, and Albert-László Barabási. Controllability of complex networks.
Nature, 473(7346):167, 2011.
[20] David B Lobell, Marshall B Burke, Claudia Tebaldi, Michael D Mastrandrea, Walter P Falcon, and
Rosamond L Naylor. Prioritizing climate change adaptation needs for food security in 2030. Science,
319(5863):607–610, 2008.
[21] Antonio Majdandzic, Boris Podobnik, Sergey V. Buldyrev, Dror Y. Kenett, Shlomo Havlin, and H. Eugene) Stanley. Spontaneous recovery in dynamical networks. Nature Physics, 10(1):34–38, 2014.
[22] Martin R Manning, J Edmonds, Seita Emori, Arnulf Grubler, K Hibbard, Fortunat Joos, Mikiko
Kainuma, Ralph F Keeling, Tom Kram, Andrew C Manning, M. Meinshausen, R. Moss, N. Nakicenovic, K. Riahi, S. K. Rose, S. Smith, R. Swart, and D. P. van Vuuren. Misrepresentation of the
IPCC CO2 emission scenarios. Nature Geoscience, 3(6):376, 2010.
[23] Andrew D Maynard. The (nano) entrepreneur’s dilemma. Nature nanotechnology, 10(3):199, 2015.
[24] JoAnn McGregor. Climate change and involuntary migration: Implications for food security. Food
Policy, 19(2):120–132, 1994.
[25] Mesfin M Mekonnen and Arjen Y Hoekstra. Four billion people facing severe water scarcity. Science
advances, 2(2):e1500323, 2016.
[26] Stephen Morris and Hyun Song Shin. Financial regulation in a system context. Brookings papers on
economic activity, 2008(2):229–274, 2008.
[27] Alaa Moussawi, Xiang Niu, Noemi Derzsy, Xin Lin, Gyorgy Korniss, and Boleslaw Szymanski. Carp
model for multi-risk dynamics. Bulletin of the American Physical Society, 2018.
[28] Tamás Nepusz and Tamás Vicsek. Controlling edge dynamics in complex networks. Nature Physics,
8(7):568, 2012.
[29] Xiang Niu, Alaa Moussawi, Noemi Derzsy, Xin Lin, Gyorgy Korniss, and Boleslaw K Szymanski. Evolution of the global risk network mean-field stability point. In International Workshop on Complex
Networks and their Applications, pages 1124–1134. Springer, 2017.
[30] Xiang Niu, Alaa Moussawi, Gyorgy Korniss, and Boleslaw K Szymanski. Evolution of threats in the
global risk network. Applied Network Science, 3(1):24, 2018.
13

[31] Brian C O’Neill, Michael Oppenheimer, Rachel Warren, Stephane Hallegatte, Robert E Kopp, Hans O
Pörtner, Robert Scholes, Joern Birkmann, Wendy Foden, Rachel Licker, Katharine J. Mach, Phillippe
Marbaix, Michael D. Mastrandrea, Jeff Price, Kiyoshi Takahashi, Jean-Pascal van Ypersele, and Gary
Yohe. IPCC reasons for concern regarding climate change risks. Nature Climate Change, 7(1):28, 2017.
[32] Ashwin Paranjape, Austin R Benson, and Jure Leskovec. Motifs in temporal networks. In Proceedings
of the Tenth ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining, pages 601–610. ACM,
2017.
[33] Jean-François Pekel, Andrew Cottam, Noel Gorelick, and Alan S Belward. High-resolution mapping of
global surface water and its long-term changes. Nature, 540(7633):418, 2016.
[34] Carren Pindiriri. Monetary reforms and inflation dynamics in Zimbabwe. International Research Journal
of Finance and Economics, 90:207–222, 2012.
[35] Peter Piot, Jean-Jacques Muyembe, and W John Edmunds. Ebola in West Africa: from disease outbreak
to humanitarian crisis. The Lancet Infectious Diseases, 14(11):1034–1035, 2014.
[36] Márton Pósfai, Jianxi Gao, Sean P Cornelius, Albert-László Barabási, and Raissa M D’Souza. Controllability of multiplex, multi-time-scale networks. Physical Review E, 94(3):032316, 2016.
[37] Márton Pósfai and Philipp Hövel. Structural controllability of temporal networks. New Journal of
Physics, 16(12):123055, 2014.
[38] Carmen M Reinhart and Kenneth S Rogoff. Is the 2007 US sub-prime financial crisis so different? An
international historical comparison. American Economic Review, 98(2):339–44, 2008.
[39] Justin Ruths and Derek Ruths. Control profiles of complex networks. Science, 343(6177):1373–1376,
2014.
[40] Athanasios Sideris and James E Bobrow. An efficient sequential linear quadratic algorithm for solving
nonlinear optimal control problems. In Proceedings of the 2005, American Control Conference, 2005.,
pages 2275–2280. IEEE, 2005.
[41] Boleslaw K Szymanski, Xin Lin, Andrea Asztalos, and Sameet Sreenivasan. Failure dynamics of the
global risk network. Scientific reports, 5(10998), 2015.
[42] Joyce Tait and Les Levidow. Proactive and reactive approaches to risk regulation: the case of biotechnology. Futures, 24(3):219–231, 1992.

14

[43] Emanuel Todorov and Michael I Jordan. Optimal feedback control as a theory of motor coordination.
Nature neuroscience, 5(11):1226, 2002.
[44] CJ Vörösmarty, AY Hoekstra, SE Bunn, D Conway, and J Gupta. What scale for water governance.
Science, 349(6247):478–479, 2015.
[45] Yoshihide Wada, Tom Gleeson, and Laurent Esnault. Wedge approach to water stress. Nature Geoscience, 7(9):615, 2014.
[46] WHO Ebola Response Team. After Ebola in West Africa - unpredictable risks, preventable epidemics.
New England Journal of Medicine, 375(6):587–596, 2016.
[47] Hessel C Winsemius, Jeroen C J H Aerts, Ludovicus P H van Beek, Marc F P Bierkens, Arno Bouwman,
Brenden Jongman, Jaap C J Kwadijk, Willem Ligtvoet, Paul L Lucas, Detlef P van Vuuren, and Philip J
Ward. Global drivers of future river flood risk. Nature Climate Change, 6(4):381, 2016.
[48] Gang Yan, Georgios Tsekenis, Baruch Barzel, Jean-Jacques Slotine, Yang-Yu Liu, and Albert-László
Barabási. Spectrum of controlling and observing complex networks. Nature Physics, 11(9):779, 2015.
[49] Gang Yan, Petra E Vértes, Emma K Towlson, Yee Lian Chew, Denise S Walker, William R Schafer,
and Albert-László Barabási. Network control principles predict neuron function in the Caenorhabditis
elegans connectome. Nature, 550(7677):519, 2017.
[50] Kai Yao and Xiang Li. Uncertain alternating renewal process and its application. IEEE Transactions
on Fuzzy Systems, 20(6):1154–1160, 2012.
[51] Jorge Gomez Tejeda Zañudo, Gang Yang, and Réka Albert. Structure-based control of complex networks
with nonlinear dynamics. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 114(28):7234–7239, 2017.

15

