1

Who Are the ‘Silent Spreaders’?:
Contact Tracing in Spatio-Temporal Memory
Models

arXiv:2010.00187v2 [cs.SI] 6 Oct 2020

Yue Hu, Budhitama Subagdja, Ah-Hwee Tan, Senior Member, IEEE, and Quanjun Yin

Abstract—The novel coronavirus SARS-CoV-2 has been posing
severe threat to public health around the world by causing the
infectious coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19). A key challenge
of controlling COVID-19 is the large proportion of asymptomatic
COVID-19 cases (ACCs) that makes breaking the transmission
chains even harder. Unfortunately, till now there is still a lack
of cost-effective approaches to detect ACCs except doing a
medical screening of the entire population. This paper presents a
neural network model called Spatio-Temporal Episodic Memory
for COVID-19 tracing (STEM-COVID) for identifying ACCs
from contact tracing data. Based on fusion Adaptive Resonance
Theory (fusion ART), STEM-COVID provides a mechanism to
encode the collective spatio-temporal episodic memory traces
of individuals, based on which parallel searches of ACCs can
be performed in a computationally efficient manner by pooling
together the episodic traces of the identified positive cases. To
illustrate the effectiveness of STEM-COVID, a simulation model
of the COVID-19 spreading is implemented based on recent
epidemiological findings on ACCs. The experimental results
based on multiple simulation scenarios show that the STEMCOVID model is able to identify ACCs with a reasonably high
level of accuracy and efficiency.

I NTRODUCTION
The outbreak of the novel coronavirus, severe acute respiratory
syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), has caused more than
twenty million confirmed cases in the world. In stark contrast
to SARS and MERS, two previously coronaviruses caused
respiratory diseases, a much larger proportion of COVID-19
patients never develop symptoms like fever and cough but can
be contagious while shedding the coronavirus [1], [2], [3].
While presentation of symptoms facilitates case detection, the
asymptomatic COVID-19 cases, or ACCs, are usually unaware
of having been infected and proceed with their normal life
while carrying the virus. Therefore, many researchers call such
cases as ‘silent spreaders’ of SARS-CoV-2 [4]. Many countries with their current control measures only isolate patients
since the onset of symptoms and potential post-symptomatic
transmissions can be interrupted [2]. However, such efforts are
Manuscript received xx xx, 2020; revised xx xx, 2020.
Y. Hu and Q. Yin are with the College of Systems Engineering, National
University of Defense Technology, Changsha, Hunan, 410073 China (e-mails:
huyue.cse@gmail.com; yin quanjun@163.com). This work was done during
a visit by the first author to Nanyang Technological University, Singapore.
B. Subagdja is with the School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, 639798 Singapore (email:budhitama@ntu.edu.sg.
A.-H. Tan is with the School of Information Systems, Singapore Management University, while on leave from the School of Computer Science
and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore (email: ahtan@smu.edu.sg).

ineffective if ACCs still have continual contacts with others,
thereby causing transmissions.
To understand the characteristics of asymptomatic transmissions, many researchers have recently focused on issues
such as the proportion of ACCs over all infected cases, the
duration of virus shedding and the temporal dynamics of
infectiousness [5], [4], [6], [7], [8], [9], [10]. These works
also suggest a prolongation of public health interventions.
Nonetheless, given that quick population screening for all
positive cases is technically hard and financially expensive to
implement, alternative proactive and cost-effective approaches
are in an urgent need to recognize those silent spreaders out
of the whole population.
To address the above issues, this paper proposes a collective
episodic memory based computational model to identify ACCs
by learning and reasoning over the spatio-temporal trajectories
of a population. The basic consideration is that people sharing
the same space at the same time have a chance of infecting
each other. Therefore, if one has appeared at the same places at
the same periods as many others who are later tested positive
with the coronavirus, he/she could be considered as a possible
source of transmissions.
Episodic memory, as a form of long-term memory, is a
record of sequential events associated with contextual information, e.g., observations, activities, emotions, times and places.
It enables a cognitive system to develop adaptive behaviors
by recalling past experiences. For an efficient encoding and
recalling mechanism, this work extends a Spatio-Temporal
Episodic Memory (STEM) model [11] to encode the spatiotemporal traces and the tested positivity of SARS-CoV-2 of
different individuals. The building block of the model is a class
of biologically-inspired self-organized neural networks, known
as fusion Adaptive Resonance Theory (ART) networks [12],
[13]. With the inherited ART properties [14], STEM-COVID is
designed to learn different types of cognitive nodes, generalize
across events experienced by different individuals and aggregate the events of an individual into a higher-level cognitive
code.
Based on the encoded collective episodic traces of a population, the STEM-COVID model can be applied in a two-step
algorithm for ACC search. The first step is to pool the episodic
traces of all tested positive and symptomatic COVID-19 cases
(t-SCCs) and use the pooled memory trace to search among
the untested cases for individuals having similar episodic
memory trace. Those cases with higher similarities are thus
considered to have a higher likelihood to be asymptomatic

2

spreaders of the SARS-CoV-2 virus. Owing to the incremental
and real-time learning dynamics of the fusion ART networks,
both the encoding and retrieval operations can be efficiently
performed.
It is important to note that contact tracing for ACCs is a
new problem, different from other contact tracing applications.
While there have been seemingly similar systems proposed for
contact tracing, they serve to provide warnings to individuals
who share the same time and space with positively identified
COVID-19 cases so they can be wary of the possibility of
being infected [15]. In contrast, the task studied in this paper is
to identify hidden asymptomatic cases who may have infected
those positively identified cases in the first place.
In summary, the main novelties and technical contributions
of this paper include: (a) a spatio-temporal data simulation
model of COVID-19 spreading designed based on recent
epidemiological findings; (b) an extended spatio-temporal
episodic memory model based on self-organizing neural networks for encoding and associating the collective episodic
traces of individuals with association to their respective current
status of COVID-19 positivity; (c) an efficient search process
for ACCs by pooling the episodic traces of positive COVID-19
cases and searching over untested cases in parallel.
For performance evaluation, empirical experiments are conducted by running the simulation model under multiple scenarios with different degrees of infection and population sizes.
Our experimental results show that STEM-COVID is able to
identify ACCs with a reasonably high level of accuracy and
efficiency.
P ROBLEM F ORMULATION
This paper aims to provide a solution to ACC identification
from a perspective of cognitive computation. The approach
taken is to model the spatio-temporal trajectories of different
individuals in a collective manner.
Consider a population size of N individuals, each spatiotemporal data point of an individual can be represented by
an event in the form of ε = (t, p), where t is a time
stamp in the unit of hours and p is the ID of one place.
We only consider a limited spatial and temporal scale, i.e.
0 ≤ t < T and 0 ≤ p < P where T is the the whole
duration during which our data is collected and P is the
number of all places. The episodic trace of an individual is
then given by a sequence of events as e =< ε0 , ε1 , ..., εT 0 >.
Among all the individuals, some are symptomatic COVID19 patients who are diagnosed positive with the virus and
isolated after the symptom onset, i.e. t-SCCs. The lengths
of traces of such individuals could be shorter than T due
to potential halfway isolation. Others remain untested given
no occurrence of symptoms, among whom some are ACCs,
some are SCCs at their pre-symptomatic stage and the rest
are healthy people. Therefore, the COVID-19 positivity of
an individual with index i can be CPi ∈ {0, 1} where 1
indicates a positive and symptomatic patient while an untested
individual is labeled as CPi = 0.
Given the episodic traces of all individuals and their respective CPi labels, the task is to identify that how possible each
untested individual is an ACC.

Category field
y3

y2

y1

ym
...

F2

w 2j

w1j
F11

w nj

F12

F1

F1n

...

x

x1

xn

2

In

I2
Input fields

I1

Fig. 1: The architecture of fusion ART.

P ROPOSED A PPROACH : S PATIO -T EMPORAL DATA
M ODELING AND R EASONING
In this section, we first review the basics of fusion ART
and the STEM model. Next, the architecture of the STEMCOVID model is presented, followed by the algorithms for
collective episodic memory encoding and ACC search. Finally,
an analysis of computation complexity is provided.
Fusion ART Networks
Adaptive Resonance Theory (ART) is a neural network
architecture that conducts bi-directional bottom-up and topdown pattern matching to continuously categorize the input patterns [14]. Fusion ART is a form of multi-channel
ART [12], [13], as shown in Fig. 1.
k
Let Ik = (I1k , I2k , ..., Ink
) and I = (I1 , I2 , ..., In ) be an
input vector and the concatenation of input vectors of all
channels, respectively, where Iik ∈ [0, 1]. Let F1k , xk , y,
and wjk be the kth input field in F1 , the activity vector after
receiving Ik , the activity vector of F2 , and the weight vector
of the jth node in F2 for learning the input in F1k , respectively.
Parameters: Each field’s dynamics is determined by its
choice parameter αk ≥ 0, learning rate β k , contribution
parameter γ k and vigilance ρk , where β k , γ k , ρk ∈ [0, 1].
The operations for fusion ART dynamics are briefly described as follows. A more detailed description can be found
in [13].
The Code Activation process on the jth node in F2 is
controlled by the choice function:
Tj =

n
X

γk

k=1

|xk ∧ wjk |
αk + |wjk |

.

(1)

A Code Competition process selects an F2 node J with
the highest Tj followed by a Template Matching to check if
resonance occurs so that:
mkJ =

|xk ∧ wJk |
≥ ρk , 1 ≤ k ≤ n.
|xk |

(2)

If no selected node in F2 meets the vigilance, an uncommitted node is recruited in F2 as a new category node.
A Template Learning process is applied to the connection
weights once resonance occurs.
k(new)

wJ

k(old)

= (1 − β k )wJ

k(old)

+ β k (xk ∧ wJ

).

(3)

The selected node J can be readout to the the corresponding
F1k field by xk(new) = wJk as the output.

3

F2 :
Event Layer

...

F1 :
Context Layer

object

...

time

activity

place

(a) STEM
F3 :
Individual Layer
F2 :
Property Layer

……

……

...

...
episode

F1 :
Context Layer

time

+/untested
COVID-19
positivity

place

(b) STEM-COVID

Fig. 2: The architectures of STEM and STEM-COVID.

The STEM Architecture
Previous models of episodic memory include Episodic
Memory-ART (EM-ART) [16], [17] and STEM [11]. While
EM-ART learns a hierarchical encoding scheme of sequential
events and episodes, STEM explicitly represents the time and
space of individual events without an episode layer.
As shown in Fig. 2(a), the original STEM architecture
includes four input fields to represent the context of an event
including the time and place. The place property of an event
in STEM is characterized by the real-world coordinate and
landmark specification. Each category node in the F2 layer
represents an event in response to the contextual information
presented in the F1 layer.

The STEM-COVID Architecture
This paper combines the structures of EM-ART and STEM
by adding an individual layer on top of STEM to collect the
properties of different individuals. Fig. 2(b) shows the overall
architecture of this new STEM-COVID network. The structure
can be viewed as two two-channel fusion ART networks
stacked in a hierarchical manner, similar to EM-ART [16],
[17]. In the application of contact tracing, only the time and
place fields are needed in the context layer.
As an intermediate representation, the episode field serves
as both a category field of the bottom fusion ART network
and an input filed of the top one. After the events experienced
by an individual are all learned from the bottom network, our
encoding mechanism will form an episode vector E with a
length equal to the number of all currently existing event
nodes in the episode field. In this binary vector, values of
1s correspond to events experienced by the individual while
the rest are zeros. Besides the episode field, another field
indicates the COVID-19 positivity of the individual i by a
vector c = (CPi ). Based on E and c, the top network learns
a unique code for each individual in the F3 layer.

Algorithm 1: Incremental construction of collective
spatio-temporal episodic memory.
Input: episodes of all N individuals {ei |0 ≤ i < N }
Input: positivity of all individuals: {CPi }
Output: learned episodic memory in STEM-COVID
1 foreach ei =< ε0 , ε1 , ..., εT 0 > do
2
initialize a set of activated codes Js ← ∅
// learning in bottom network
3
foreach εl = (tl , pl ) do
4
initialize a code flag: J ← −1
5
normalize: t0 ← tl /T, p0 ← pl /P
6
present I = ((t0 ), (p0 )) to F1
7
foreach code J 0 in episode field in F2 do
8
if a top-down matching between J 0 and I
succeeds then
9
J ← J0
10
break
11
if J == −1 then
12
create a new code J for this new pattern
13
expand the field as an input to F3
14
Js ← Js ∪ {J}
// learning in top network
15
form a binary vector E: Ej = 1, if j ∈ Js
16
form a positivity vector: c = (CPi )
17
present the input vectors (E, c) in F2
18
recruit an uncomitted code J in F3
19
do an overwrite learning: wJe = E and wJc = c

Collective Episodic Memory Encoding
As mentioned, episodic memory considers an individual
episode as a sequence of events as e =< ε0 , ε1 , ..., εT 0 >,
where an event is formalized as εl = (tl , pl ). We present
a hierarchical scheme for constructing collective episodic
memory based on STEM-COVID in Alg. 1.
The algorithm consists of a loop through episodic traces of
all individuals in the considered population (Line 1-19). After
an episode vector E is formed for each trajectory through
learning in the interaction between the F1 and F2 layers
(Line 3-14), the top network creates a unique cognitive code in
the F3 layer for each individual based on E and the positivity
vector c presented in F2 (Line 15-19). In this application, it
suffices to set E as a binary vector to indicate the events of one
individual (Line 15), since we will not exploit the temporal
ordering of events within an episode. In contrast, EM-ART
encodes the ordering in a sequence by a gradient encoding
method [17].
To encode an event, the algorithm first normalizes the time
and place attributes into real values t0 , p0 ∈ [0, 1) (Line 5)
and then present the input to the input fields in the F1 layer
(Line 6). A standard learning process in fusion ART networks
involves resonance search wherein nodes in F2 are visited
through some iterations of code competition and template
matching. However, since an event can be considered unique
with a distinct time step and place ID, the resonance search
can be simplified by employing template matching only once
(Line 7-10). A new uncommitted event code will be recruited

4

Algorithm 2: Evidence pooling and ACC search.
Input: episodic memory learned in STEM-COVID
Input: a threshold of activation value δc
Output: a set of identified individuals
// Step 1: Evidence activity pooling
1 reset F3 layer
e
c
2 set contribution parameters: γ ← 0, γ ← 1
3 present a positivity vector in F2 : c ← (1)
4 activate F3 using choice function
5 reset episode field in F2
6 initialize evidence vector E ← 0
7 foreach code 0 < Tj ≤ 1 in F3 do
8
readout node j to episode field: xe ← wje
9
update the evidence vector: E ← xe ∨ E
// Step 2: ACC Search
e
c
10 set contribution parameters: γ ← 1, γ ← 1
11 set a positivity vector: c ← (0)
12 present E and c in F2
13 activate F3 using choice function
14 return IDs of identified individuals {j|Tj > δc }

for encoding the novel input, once the template matching fails
(Line 12).
As the entire trajectory and positivity status are formed as
E and c in F2 , the information about the individual can be
encoded and stored as a node in the F3 layer (Line 15-19).
ACC Identification based on STEM-COVID
Based on the collective episodic memory in the STEMCOVID model, a two-step process is proposed to identify
ACCs based on the episodic traces of the known SCCs.
Evidence pooling: The ACC identification process begins
with pooling the episodic traces of all t-SCCs into an evidence
vector E, as shown in Alg. 2 (Line 1-9). All nodes representing
t-SCCs can be activated by choice function wherein the
positivity vector c is set to (1) while setting the contribution
parameters γ c = 1 and γ e = 0 ignoring the episodic trace
(Line 2-4). For codes with positive activation values in F3 ,
the values are readout to the episode field in F2 and integrated
using a fuzzy OR operation (Line 6-9).
ACC search: Searching for ACCs can be done by computing the similarities between this combined trace and the
traces of untested individuals. Accordingly, the contribution
parameters are set to γ e = γ c = 1 and the positivity vector c
is set (0) to search for untested individuals (Line 10-11). With
the input vectors E and c, every single node in the F3 layer
will be activated by the choice function which is in essence
an evaluation of the similarity between the input pattern and
the cognitive code (Line 12-13).
A higher activation value obtained in this step indicates that
the corresponding untested individual has experienced more
events overlapped with those of all t-SCCs. The potential
ACCs can be identified by selecting the nodes in F3 with
activation values greater than a threshold δc (Line 14). Another
strategy is to select top k individual nodes based on the
activation values where k is a user-defined parameter.

Complexity Analysis
This subsection presents an analysis of the space and time
complexity of the episodic memory construction and ACC
search algorithm. For space complexity, we are only concerned
about the number of event nodes learned in the episode field,
given that the number of nodes in the F3 layer is equivalent to
a constant N . The time complexity of learning an event is also
worth an analysis. Moreover, we compare the time complexity
of ACC detection between STEM-COVID and a baseline.
Space complexity of STEM-COVID: The worst-case space
complexity occurs when all individuals share no common
events so that the number of event nodes can be T · N .
However, there can only be T · P combinations of time and
place values. Therefore, the worst-case space complexity for
episode field is T · min(N, P ).
Time complexity of STEM-COVID: In the standard fusion
ART model, the worst-case time complexity for learning a
category node is O(mn2 ) if no matched node is found, where
m is the number of attributes in the input fields and n is the
number of existing category nodes [11]. The quadratic component is incurred by the repeated code competition and template
matching for resonance search. However, we substitutes a loop
of top-down match through all existing event nodes for such
iterations (Line 7-10 in Alg. 1). In virtue of this simplification,
the worst-case time complexity is reduced to O(mnε ) where
nε is the number of existing event nodes and m = 2 given the
two single-attribute fields in F1 . With no matching required,
the time complexity of learning in the top network is just
O(nε ) where nε serves as the number of input attributes.
As for the time complexity for ACC identification, while
the evidence pooling involves N times of calling the choice
function (Line 4 in Alg. 2) and at most N times of activity
readout and fuzzy OR operations (Line 6-9), the similarity
computation only requires activating N nodes in the F3 layer
(Line 13). Summed over all these steps, the time complexity
is O(N ) or linear.
Algorithm 3: A baseline of computing trace similarities.
Input: merged events {εt } of Nt t-SCCs
Input: episodes of Nu untested individuals
Output: similarity of each untested individual
1 foreach untested individual ai=0,1,...,Nu −1 do
2
intialize a counter c ← 0
3
retrieve the episode ei =< ε0 , ε1 , ..., εT −1 >
4
foreach εj in ei do
5
foreach εl ∈ {εt } do
6
if εj == εl then
7
c←c+1
8
break
9
calculate the trace similarity si ← c/T
Time complexity of baseline algorithm: To show the efficiency of our algorithm for ACC detection, we present a naive
algorithm as a baseline for computing the similarity between
the unified events of t-SCCs and the trace experienced by
each untested individual. As shown in Alg. 3, the baseline

5

Places with high
infection risks

Places with middle
infection risks
Places with low
infection risks

Fig. 3: A graphic representation of the spatial model.

Inferred
infectiousness
profile

Density (%)

Places with very
high infection risks

0d

Infection

Time axis

Viral
shedding

Symptom
onset/
isolated

Infection/viral
shedding

Incubation
period
Symptomatic
period
Asymptomatic
period

Symptomatic
case
Asymptomatic
case

Fig. 4: The temporal dynamics of SCCs and ACCs.
simply counts the number of events commonly experienced
by one untested individual and any t-SCC and considers the
ratio of this count to the number of all events experienced by
the untested individual as a metric of similarity (Line 4-9).
The whole process applies three nested loops, thus involving
Nu · T · nt times of event matching where nt = |{εt }| and at
most equals to Nt · T . Hence the worst-case time complexity
of this baseline is O(N 2 T 2 ) where N = Nt + Nu , which is
quadratic compared to STEM-COVID.
COVID-19 DATA S IMULATION
For empirical performance evaluation, a simplified simulation model of the real world, where no public health interventions are exerted, is designed to emulate the spreading of
coronavirus in communities. This section will briefly introduce
the spatial representation, the life cycle of individual agents,
the temporal dynamics of virus transmissibility and the key
parameter settings in order.
Spatial Representation
We discretize the simulated environment into a network
of places that are reachable from each other. As shown in
Fig. 3, the neighboring places can be connected by walkways
or roads, and the whole space can be seen as a graph.
People undergo different levels of risks to be infected by
a coronavirus carrier at different kinds of places, typically
influenced by the crowd density, the degree of ventilation and
other factors. This is the reason why lots of transmission chains
are found in family clusters [7], [18]. In view of such findings,
we categorize the places into different groups. Places with
very high infection risks are mainly homes, nursing rooms,
etc. Places such as cafes, restaurants and shopping malls are
highly risky for consumers to be infected. Workplaces like
offices and factories can be considered with middle risks and
open spaces like playgrounds and parks carry low risks to
people.
Life Cycle of Agents
To simulate the dynamic activities of individuals between
different places, we model each individual as an agent who
is assigned a daily life cycle, whereby they stay at various
kinds of places for different times. For example, the agents
stay at homes (very high-risk places) for about 10 hours, work
at offices (middle-risk) for 8 hours, go shopping or socialize

(high-risk) for 3 hours and do outdoor activities (low-risk) for
3 hours. The durations vary from day to day and from person
to person. Though more possibilities of life styles exist in
reality, our assumption makes sense because it represents a
typical mode for many people.
Along with the transformations between locations, a simulation of virus spreading requires some additional consideration
for the temporal dynamics in clinic features of the infected
people. As many studies reported [7], [2], [4], SCCs are
infectious not only after symptom onset, but also at their
pre-symptomatic stage. We illustrate the dynamics in Fig. 4,
which is adapted from [2]. SCCs have low infectiousness
at the start of their incubation period (time from infection
to symptom onset), which climbs quickly to a highest level
around symptom onset. Based on the clinic researches, this
paper simplifies the infectiousness profile of SCCs by a step
function, whereby they are not contagious from infection until
substantial viral shedding begins, and then keep consistent
infectiousness until the onset of symptoms and isolation.
In contrast, some investigations found significantly longer
duration of viral shedding in ACCs than SCCs, e.g., an
interquartile range of 15-26 days, even longer than the total
time in our simulation [4]. Therefore, we assume that ACCs
are constantly contagious throughout the simulation once they
are infected with the virus.
Parameter Settings
Incubation period: A number of researches have reported
different estimations of the duration of incubation periods of
SCCs [19], [20], [21], [22]. Most of them agree that the median
duration is around 5 days and the durations of most cases fall
into the range of 3-7 days. In view of the estimations, we use a
Gaussian distribution Tin = (T1 + T2 ) ∼ N (120h, (12h)2 ) to
sample a duration Tin of incubation period for each SCC. As
mentioned, the duration consists of two parts, i.e. T1 = 0.2·Tin
for time from infection to viral shedding when the patient is
not infectious, and T2 from viral shedding to symptom onset.
Proportion of ACCs: The existing estimations of the proportion of asymptomatic cases over all infections can be varied
from 5% to 80% [23], [24]. But a large number of them
fall into the range from 10% to 30%, such as studies on
cases in Zhejiang, China, the Diamond Princess cruise ship
and Singapore [8], [9], [25]. In view of these epidemiological

6

S200N
S200H
S1000N

N

Pvh Ph Pm Pl Nu

200 50 2
200 50 2
1000 250 10

10
10
50

0

2 1(N)
2 1(H)
10 5(N)

TABLE I: Summary of settings in the three scenarios.
findings, this paper sets a percentage 20% of all infections as
ACCs.
Infection rates: We set infection rates in a unit of hours
for the mentioned four kinds of places as rvh = 0.01, rh =
0.005, rm = 0.001 and rl = 0.0001 respectively. Note that
these rates keep the same no matter the source of transmissions
is symptomatic or asymptomatic, in view of the similar viral
load found in the different kinds of cases [5]. As such, if an
individual in a household is infectious, other families would
be infected during the 10 hours of stay with a probability
of p(infected|vh) = 1 − (1 − rvh )10 ≈ 9.6%. Similarly, the
infection probabilities at other places are p(infected|h) = 1 −
(1−rh )3 = 1.5%, p(infected|m) = 1−(1−rm )8 = 0.8% and
p(infected|l) = 1−(1−rl )3 = 0.03%. With k > 1 coronavirus
carriers at the same space, we simply increase the infection
probabilities to min{1.0, p(infected) · k}. We will verify these
settings through comparing the results of simulation and recent
epidemiological findings.
E XPERIMENTS
This section will report the performance of our approach in
terms of the effectiveness and efficiency for identifying ACCs.
The settings of three different scenarios and performance
measures will be first described, before the quantitative results
and discussion are presented.
Simulation Scenarios
All simulations run for twenty days, i.e. T = 480 hours. For
simplicity, every four agents are clustered in one household
while extension to more complex family structures is easily
applied in the model. The simulation model is run under three
different scenarios, whose key parameters are listed in Table. I.
Besides the population sizes N and the numbers of different
kinds of places, Nu 0 agents are randomly selected as the index cases who are asymptomatic and infectious from the very
beginning of the simulation, also called as ‘patient zero’. The
scenario S200H differs from S200N by an index case whose
life cycle is modified, so that the agent will everyday stay
about ten hours at high-risk places, marked by ‘H’. We design
such a scenario to simulate superspreading events where a
patient infects many others in crowed indoor gatherings [26].
The scenario S1000N, with a population size and spatial scale
fivefold as those in S200N, is used to investigate the effect of
population size on performance. The simulation model runs
15 times under each scenario with different random seeds to
generate multiple simulation instances for statistical results.
Performance Measures
A detection is considered successful if one of the k agents
identified with the largest trace similarities is a true ACC. The

cumulative number of cases

scenarios

80
70

S200N: ACCs

60

S200N: SCCs

50

S200N: t-SCCs

40
30

S200H: ACCs

20

S200H: SCCs

10

S200H: t-SCCs

0
0

80

160

240

320

400

480

time (h)

Fig. 5: Growth of COVID-19 cases in S200N and S200H
scenarios.

ratio of the number of successful simulation instances to the
total, as a top-k success rate, is then used to demonstrate
the detection accuracy. Beyond normal ACCs, it will help
more if the index cases can be identified, since they could
be superspreaders who infected many others.
Recall that we have theoretically compared the time complexity of STEM-COVID and the baseline for ACC search.
More practically, we will present the time costs required by
them to complete the computation of trace similarities in the
simulations. All the experiments are run on a laptop with
Intel(R) Core(TM) i7-9750H CPU @ 2.60GHz.
Results and Discussion
Before looking into the performance on ACC detection, we
first summarize the results of simulations. Finally, we will
compare the time costs of STEM-COVID and the baseline.
Summary of simulations: Fig. 5 shows the growth of ACCs,
t-SCCs and all SCCs over the simulation period, averaged
over all 15 simulations. The exponential curves imply a rapid
increase of cases. Notice that the S200N and S200H scenarios
take about 160 hours to increase the numbers of SCCs from
20 to 40 and from 35 to 70 respectively. The numbers tally
very well with many epidemiological investigations on early
transmissions of COVID-19 that its basic reproductive number
(R0 ) is over 2 and the doubling time of the cases is around 7
days [19], [27], [28].
Moreover, even though we change the life cycle of only one
agent in S200H, the striking contrast of case numbers between
S200H and S200N manifests that indoor gatherings of large
numbers of people can easily drive the epidemic out of control.
Besides, the average cumulative numbers of ACCs, t-SCCs
and SCCs in S1000N, reach 63, 121 and 225 respectively,
roughly five times of those in S200N.
Effectiveness for ACC identification: Fig. 6 shows the topk identification success rates of STEM-COVID in different
scenarios, where the mean numbers of untested cases, ACCs
and index cases averaged over all simulation instances are
reported in corresponding brackets. Overall, our approach
reaches a reasonably high level of success rates in all scenarios
to detect ACCs even with the top-3 measure, given that there
are only 11.8 ACCs out of all 178.9 untested cases on average
in S200N. Even with a smaller proportion of ACCs, the
success rates are higher in S200N than S200H when k < 5
individuals are identified. A plausible explanation is that fewer

7

S200N (Nu: 178.9)

S200H (Nu: 155.6)

S1000N (Nu: 878.5)

success rates

100%
80%
60%
40%
20%
0%

k=1

3

5

15

25

ACC (11.8 vs.20.4 vs.63.3)

k=1

3

5

15

25

index case (1 vs. 1 vs. 5)

Fig. 6: Top-k success rates of the STEM-COVID model.

time (s)
Min
Mean
Max

S200N
S200H
S1000N
ours baseline ours baseline ours baseline
3.1
3.3
4.4

7.3
18.5
29.4

3.1
3.2
3.4

11.3
24.7
33.1

76.8
81.3
94.0

100.0
565.8
784.8

TABLE II: Time costs for computing trace similarities.

times of contacts are required to cause the same number of
infections in S200H than required in S200N, so it seems more
difficult for contact count based approach to detect the sources
of infections. This speculation can be verified by the fact that
the index cases in S200H infected 12.8 persons on average,
in contrast to only 5.0 in S200N in the same duration of
simulations. Furthermore, the performance of the algorithm
in S1000N is very close to that in S200N, implying that
our approach can scale up to larger scenarios without loss
of effectiveness.
Among ACCs, index cases are extremely difficult to be
screened because of their small proportion over the whole
population. Nevertheless, the top-3 and top-5 success rates for
the only one index case in S200N are over 20%, even higher
with k = 15 and 25. Comparatively, the unique life cycle of
the patient zero in S200H incurs significantly lower success
rates when k ≤ 5. However, its results improve significantly
with larger values of k. Furthermore, the algorithm scales up
well with a larger population, considering that the top-5, 15
and 25 success rates for S1000N are much higher than the
top-1, 3 and 5 success rates for S200N.
Time efficiency on ACC identification: Note that the baseline
algorithm can be considered as a brute force approach to
realizing the ACC identification algorithm in STEM-COVID.
Therefore they have similar performance in terms of the identification accuracy. To illustrate their difference in efficiency, we
report the time costs (in seconds) of running STEM-COVID
and the baseline to compute the trace similarities between
untested and t-SCCs in Table. II. The results are obtained
by executing the algorithms once on each simulation instance.
No matter which scenario the algorithms are performed in, our
approach requires much less time to complete the computation.
While under each scenario, the time costs of the baseline vary
much in different simulations, the results of our approach
keep relatively consistent. The comparison demonstrates the
superiority of our algorithm on computation efficiency.

C ONCLUSION
This paper has presented an episodic memory based neural
model called STEM-COVID, which is able to encode the
collective spatio-temporal data of a population and support an
efficient search algorithm to identify asymptomatic COVID19 cases. With the disease sweeping the world, we hope that
this novel and cost-effective way can help the authorities trace
and control the epidemic, in addition to traditional symptombased strategies. Simulation based experiments have proved
the effectiveness and efficiency of this episodic memory based
approach. Serving as a starting point, this work can hopefully inspire more efforts on containing the disease through
advanced techniques of computational intelligence.
Nevertheless, there remain several limitations in our work
that require further research. First, the demographic and geographic models used are still too simple and small-scale
compared with the real world. Second, the complexity of the
data simulation model can be expanded in several dimensions.
For example, we currently assume a consistent infectiousness
profile throughout the whole duration of viral shedding. Third,
a fairly simple fuzzy OR operation is used to integrate the
spatio-temporal episodic traces of multiple t-SCCs. For future
work, we would like to expand the simulation of the world
model to make it more realistic and incorporate more practical
models of temporal dynamics of COVID-19 transmissions.
Moreover, to deal with the modeling of super large-scale scenarios, like epidemic prevention in a metropolis of millions of
people, multi-resolution and hierarchical modeling of spatiotemporal data would be helpful.

R EFERENCES
[1] Y. Wang, J. Tong, Y. Qin, T. Xie, J. Li, J. Li, J. Xiang, Y. Cui, E. S.
Higgs, J. Xiang et al., “Characterization of an asymptomatic cohort of
SARS-CoV-2 infected individuals outside of Wuhan, China,” Clinical
Infectious Diseases, pp. 1–7, 2020.
[2] X. He, E. H. Lau, P. Wu, X. Deng, J. Wang, X. Hao, Y. C. Lau, J. Y.
Wong, Y. Guan, X. Tan et al., “Temporal dynamics in viral shedding
and transmissibility of COVID-19,” Nature Medicine, vol. 26, no. 5, pp.
672–675, 2020.
[3] N. W. Furukawa, J. T. Brooks, and J. Sobel, “Evidence supporting transmission of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2
while presymptomatic or asymptomatic,” Emerging Infectious Diseases,
vol. 26, no. 7, pp. e1–e6, 2020.
[4] Q.-X. Long, X.-J. Tang, Q.-L. Shi, Q. Li, H.-J. Deng, J. Yuan, J.-L. Hu,
W. Xu, Y. Zhang, F.-J. Lv et al., “Clinical and immunological assessment
of asymptomatic SARS-CoV-2 infections,” Nature Medicine, vol. 26,
no. 8, pp. 1200–1204, 2020.
[5] S. Lee, T. Kim, E. Lee, C. Lee, H. Kim, H. Rhee, S. Y. Park, H.J. Son, S. Yu, J. W. Park et al., “Clinical course and molecular viral
shedding among asymptomatic and symptomatic patients with sars-cov2 infection in a community treatment center in the republic of korea,”
JAMA Internal Medicine, pp. E1–E6, 2020.
[6] Z. Hu, C. Song, C. Xu, G. Jin, Y. Chen, X. Xu, H. Ma, W. Chen,
Y. Lin, Y. Zheng et al., “Clinical characteristics of 24 asymptomatic
infections with COVID-19 screened among close contacts in Nanjing,
China,” Science China Life Sciences, vol. 63, no. 5, pp. 706–711, 2020.
[7] Y. Bai, L. Yao, T. Wei, F. Tian, D.-Y. Jin, L. Chen, and M. Wang,
“Presumed asymptomatic carrier transmission of covid-19,” JAMA, vol.
323, no. 14, pp. 1406–1407, 2020.
[8] H. Qiu, J. Wu, L. Hong, Y. Luo, Q. Song, and D. Chen, “Clinical and
epidemiological features of 36 children with coronavirus disease 2019
(COVID-19) in Zhejiang, China: an observational cohort study,” The
Lancet Infectious Diseases, pp. 689–696, 2020.

8

[9] K. Mizumoto, K. Kagaya, A. Zarebski, and G. Chowell, “Estimating the
asymptomatic proportion of coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) cases
on board the diamond princess cruise ship, yokohama, japan, 2020,”
Eurosurveillance, vol. 25, no. 10, p. 2000180, 2020.
[10] S. Tian, N. Hu, J. Lou, K. Chen, X. Kang, Z. Xiang, H. Chen, D. Wang,
N. Liu, D. Liu et al., “Characteristics of COVID-19 infection in Beijing,”
Journal of Infection, pp. 401–406, 2020.
[11] P.-H. Chang and A.-H. Tan, “Encoding and recall of spatio-temporal
episodic memory in real time.” in International Joint Conference on
Artificial Intelligence, 2017, pp. 1490–1496.
[12] A.-H. Tan, G. A. Carpenter, and S. Grossberg, “Intelligence through
interaction: Towards a unified theory for learning,” in International
Symposium on Neural Networks. Springer, 2007, pp. 1094–1103.
[13] A.-H. Tan, B. Subagdja, D. Wang, and L. Meng, “Self-organizing neural
networks for universal learning and multimodal memory encoding,”
Neural Networks, vol. 120, pp. 58–73, 2019.
[14] G. A. Carpenter and S. Grossberg, “A massively parallel architecture for
a self-organizing neural pattern recognition machine,” Computer Vision,
Graphics, and Image Processing, vol. 37, no. 1, pp. 54–115, 1987.
[15] H. Cho, D. Ippolito, and Y. W. Yu, “Contact tracing mobile apps for
covid-19: Privacy considerations and related trade-offs,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2003.11511, 2020.
[16] W. Wang, B. Subagdja, A.-H. Tan, and J. A. Starzyk, “Neural modeling
of episodic memory: Encoding, retrieval, and forgetting,” IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems, vol. 23, no. 10, pp.
1574–1586, 2012.
[17] B. Subagdja and A.-H. Tan, “Neural modeling of sequential inferences
and learning over episodic memory,” Neurocomputing, vol. 161, pp. 229–
242, 2015.
[18] Z.-D. Tong, A. Tang, K.-F. Li, P. Li, H.-L. Wang, J.-P. Yi, Y.-L. Zhang,
and J.-B. Yan, “Potential presymptomatic transmission of sars-cov-2,
zhejiang province, china, 2020,” Emerging Infectious Diseases, vol. 26,
no. 5, p. 1052, 2020.
[19] Q. Li, X. Guan, P. Wu, X. Wang, L. Zhou, Y. Tong, R. Ren, K. S.
Leung, E. H. Lau, J. Y. Wong et al., “Early transmission dynamics in
wuhan, china, of novel coronavirus–infected pneumonia,” New England
Journal of Medicine, vol. 382, no. 13, pp. 1199–1207, 2020.
[20] J. A. Backer, D. Klinkenberg, and J. Wallinga, “Incubation period of
2019 novel coronavirus (2019-ncov) infections among travellers from
wuhan, china, 20–28 january 2020,” Eurosurveillance, vol. 25, no. 5, p.
2000062, 2020.
[21] S. A. Lauer, K. H. Grantz, Q. Bi, F. K. Jones, Q. Zheng, H. R. Meredith,
A. S. Azman, N. G. Reich, and J. Lessler, “The incubation period of
coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) from publicly reported confirmed
cases: estimation and application,” Annals of Internal Medicine, vol.
172, no. 9, pp. 577–582, 2020.
[22] N. M. Linton, T. Kobayashi, Y. Yang, K. Hayashi, A. R. Akhmetzhanov,
S.-m. Jung, B. Yuan, R. Kinoshita, and H. Nishiura, “Incubation period
and other epidemiological characteristics of 2019 novel coronavirus
infections with right truncation: a statistical analysis of publicly available
case data,” Journal of Clinical Medicine, vol. 9, no. 2, p. 538, 2020.
[23] T. J. Carl Heneghan, Jon Brassey, “COVID-19: What proportion are asymptomatic?” https://www.cebm.net/covid-19/covid-19-whatproportion-are-asymptomatic/, Apr. 2020, 6 April 2020.
[24] World Health Organization, “Q&A: Influenza and COVID-19 - similarities and differences,” https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novelcoronavirus-2019/question-and-answers-hub/q-a-detail/q-a-similaritiesand-differences-covid-19-and-influenza, Mar. 2020, 17 March 2020.
[25] C. H. Min, “Almost a quarter of infected household members
of covid-19 patients were asymptomatic, singapore study finds,”
https://www.channelnewsasia.com/news/singapore/infected-householdmembers-covid-19-asymptomatic-12803192, Jun. 2020, 04 June
2020.
[26] A. Woodward, “Coronavirus super-spreader events all have notable
similarities — and they reveal the types of gatherings we should avoid
for years,” https://www.businessinsider.com/coronavirus-super-spreaderevents-reveal-gatherings-to-avoid-2020-5, May 2020.
[27] J. T. Wu, K. Leung, and G. M. Leung, “Nowcasting and forecasting the
potential domestic and international spread of the 2019-nCoV outbreak
originating in Wuhan, China: a modelling study,” The Lancet, vol. 395,
no. 10225, pp. 689–697, 2020.
[28] E. Volz, M. Baguelin, S. Bhatia, A. Boonyasiri, A. Cori, Z. Cucunubá,
G. Cuomo-Dannenburg, C. A. Donnelly, I. Dorigatti, R. FitzJohn et al.,
“Report 5: phylogenetic analysis of SARS-CoV-2,” Imperial College
London COVID-19 Response Team, 2020.

