A Characterization of the COVID-19 Pandemic
Impact on a Mobile Network Operator Traffic
Andra Lutu

Diego Perino

Marcelo Bagnulo

Telefonica Research

Telefonica Research

Universidad Carlos III de Madrid

Enrique Frias-Martinez

Javad Khangosstar

Telefonica Research

Telefonica UK

arXiv:2010.02781v1 [cs.NI] 6 Oct 2020

ABSTRACT
During early 2020, the SARS-CoV-2 virus rapidly spread
worldwide, forcing many governments to impose strict lockdown measures to tackle the pandemic. This significantly
changed people’s mobility and habits, subsequently impacting how they use telecommunication networks. In this paper, we investigate the effects of the COVID-19 emergency
on a UK Mobile Network Operator (MNO). We quantify the
changes in users’ mobility and investigate how this impacted
the cellular network usage and performance. Our analysis
spans from the entire country to specific regions, and geodemographic area clusters. We also provide a detailed analysis
for London. Our findings bring insights at different geotemporal granularity on the status of the cellular network,
from the decrease in data traffic volume in the cellular network and lower load on the radio network, counterposed to
a surge in the conversational voice traffic volume.
ACM Reference Format:
Andra Lutu, Diego Perino, Marcelo Bagnulo, Enrique Frias-Martinez,
and Javad Khangosstar. 2020. A Characterization of the COVID19 Pandemic Impact on a Mobile Network Operator Traffic. In
ACM Internet Measurement Conference (IMC ’20), October 27–29,
2020, Virtual Event, USA. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 15 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3419394.3423655

1

INTRODUCTION

After the emergence of SARS-CoV-2 in the province of Wuhan
(China) in December 2019, the virus rapidly spread to neighboring countries and to the rest of the world. It was declared by the World Health Organization a Public Health
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not
made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear
this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components
of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with
credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to
redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request
permissions from permissions@acm.org.
IMC ’20, October 27–29, 2020, Virtual Event, USA
© 2020 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-8138-3/20/10. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3419394.3423655

Emergency on January 30th, 2020 and a pandemic on March
11th, 2020 (week 11 of 2020). As a result, different countries
have implemented a variety of interventions to contain the
virus. These included forced or recommended confinement,
intended to reduce transmission by reducing contact rates between individuals[24]. These policies resulted in a dramatic
change in human mobility, which in turn affected the traffic
patterns and operations in telecommunication networks.
In this paper, we focus on the cellular network of O2 UK,
and evaluate how the changes in people’s mobility impacted
this Mobile Network Operator (MNO) traffic patterns. The
coronavirus outbreak reached the UK on January 31st 2020,
when the first two (imported) cases with the respiratory
disease COVID-19 were confirmed in York. On March 16th
2020 (week 12 of 2020), the government recommended all
citizens to work from home, and on March 20th (also week
12), it implemented the closure of sporting events, schools,
restaurants, bars and gyms.1 On the 23rd of March (week 13),
the government imposed a lockdown on the whole population, banning all non-essential travel and contact with people
outside the home. London was particularly affected by the
outbreak, with 27,000 positive cases at the end of May[18].
We collect and analyze statistics on the operational status
of the MNO network, and our main findings are as follow.
By analyzing cellular network signalling information regarding users’ device mobility activity, we observe a decrease
of 50% in mobility (according to different mobility metrics)
in the UK during the lockdown period. We find no correlation between this reduction in mobility and the number of
confirmed COVID-19 cases, showing that only the enforced
government order was effective in significantly reducing
mobility. We observe this reduction is more significant in
densely populated urban areas than in rural areas. We further
note regional differences in how people relax the mobility
restrictions, with an increase in mobility in London and West

1 We

indicate the weeks of the year 2020 for the different relevant dates
because our analysis in the following sections refers to them in the different
graphs. Subsequent weeks also refer to the year 2020, but we omit to mention
the year for brevity.

Radio Access Network

Yorkshire in weeks 18-19. For London, specifically, we observe that approximately 10% of the residents temporarily
relocated during the lockdown.
We find that these mobility changes have immediate implications in traffic patterns of the cellular network. The
downlink data traffic volume aggregated for all bearers (including conversational voice) decreased for all UK by up to
25% during the lockdown period. This correlates with the reduction in mobility we observe country-wide, which results
in people likely relying more on the broadband residential
Internet access to run download intensive applications such
as video streaming. We also note a decrease in the radio cell
load, with a reduction of approximately 15% across the UK
after the stay-at-home order, which further corroborates the
drop in cellular connectivity usage. This effect is consistent
with the reported surge in traffic for residential ISPs. This
decrease rewound the traffic load on the MNO infrastructure
by one year, to levels similar to those of March 2019.
The total uplink data traffic volume, on the other hand,
experienced little changes (between -7% and +1,5%) during
lockdown. This is mainly due to the increase of 4G voice
traffic (i.e., VoLTE) across the UK that peaked at 150% after
lockdown compared to the national medial value before the
pandemic, thus compensating the decrease in data traffic
in the uplink. At the same time, we observe an increase of
more than 100% in the downlink packet loss error rate for
voice traffic on week 10 and 11. This was caused by excess
of congestion in the interconnection infrastructure MNOs
use to exchange voice traffic, whose capacity was exceeded
during the steep surge of voice traffic. The error rate reverted
its previous levels during the following weeks thanks to rapid
response of the network operations.
Finally, we observe mobility changes have different impact on network usage in geodemographic area clusters. In
densely populated urban areas, we observe a significantly
higher decrease of mobile network usage (i.e., downlink and
uplink traffic volumes, radio load and active users) than in rural areas. By looking into the case of London, we observe that
this is likely due to geodemographics of the central districts
(e.g., Eastern-Central(EC) and Western-Central (WC)), which
include many seasonal residents (e.g., tourists), business and
commercial areas.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2
we describe the measurement infrastructure, as well as the
data feeds and the metrics used. In Section 3, we describe
the evolution in mobility observed throughout the lockdown
imposed in March and April. Then, in Section 4, we describe
the changes observed in different parameters representative
of the MNO’s network performance in the UK and specifically for the case of London. Next, we present the related
work and conclude the paper.

Core Network

MSC
BTS
(2G)

BSC

nodeB
(3G)

RNC

A

lu-CS
UE

eNodeB
(4G)

BTS - Base Transceiver Station
BSC - Base Station Controller
RNC - Radio Network Controller

network passive
measurements

S1-MME
MME

VLR

Gb

SGSN

GMSC

Phone
network

GGSN

lu-PS

IP packet
network

SGW

MSC - Mobile Switching Center
VLR - Visitor Location Register
MME - Mobility Management Entity

PGW

GMSC
SGSN
GGSN
SGW
PGW

-

Gateway Mobile Switching Center
Serving GPRS Support Node
Gateway GPRS Support Node
Serving Gateway
Packet Data Network Gateway

Figure 1: High-level architecture of the measurement
infrastructure integrated in the cellular network.

2

DATASET

In this section, we describe the measurement infrastructure
we leverage for collecting network data from a large commercial MNO in the UK (with more than 25% market share
in the UK in 2019) . We detail the dataset we built and the
metrics we use to capture the activity of smartphone devices.

2.1

Measurement Infrastructure

The cellular network we study supports 2G, 3G and 4G mobile communication technologies. In Figure 1, we illustrate a
high-level schema of the MNO architecture. Such a network
can be simplified to consist of three main domains: (i) the
cellular device (in our case, the smartphone used as primary
device by end-users), (ii) the Radio Access Network (RAN)
and (iii) the Core Network (CN).
Our passive measurement approach relies on commercial
solutions the MNO integrates within its infrastructure. The
red pins in Figure 1 mark the network elements that we monitor, namely the Mobility Management Entity (MME), the
Message Sequence Chart (MSC), the Serving GPRS Support
Node (SGSN)/Serving Gateway (SGW), and the Cell Sites.
We collect control plane information for both voice and data
traffic from the total population of devices connected to the
MNO’s radio network, as well as Key Performance Indicators (KPI) of cell sites.
Cell Sites. Cell sites (also called cell towers) are the sites
where antennas and equipment of the RAN are placed. Every
cell site hosts one or multiple antennas for one or more
technologies (i.e., 2G, 3G, 4G), and includes multiple cells
and sectors. For every cell site we have detailed information
including location, radio technologies available, number of
cells and radio sectors. We collect KPI for every radio sectors
(e.g., radio load, average user throughput, traffic volume)
that we aggregate at postcode level or larger granularity.
2

Radio Interfaces. We capture and process logs reporting
on activities on the lu-PS (for 3G) and Gb (for 2G) interfaces,
which carry events related to data packet transmissions and
mobility management. Similarly, for the LTE networks, we
capture the logs at the MME nodes on the S1 interface, reporting on mobility management events and bearer management, and user plane S1-UP interface for data and voice (over
data) events. We also capture and process logs that report
on events on the lu-CS (for 3G) and A (for 2G) interfaces,
for 2G and 3G voice events. Note that the A interfaces also
carries mobility management information. For the complete
detailed specifications, we direct the reader to [1].

2.2

Radio Network Performance. We rely on a commercial solution the MNO deploys to collect the radio network performance dataset. This dataset includes various KPI, including
average cell throughout, average user throughput, average
percentage of resources occupied, average number of users,
total volume of data traffic uplink/downlink and total volume
of conversational voice traffic. We collect this data hourly,
and aggregate at postcode level or larger granularity.
UK Administrative and Geo-demographic Datasets. We use
the National Statistics Postcode Lookup (NSPL) dataset for
the UK as at February 2020 to group the postcode areas into
Upper Tier Local Authority (UTLA). The NSPL is produced
by ONS Geography, providing geographic support to the
Office for National Statistics (ONS) and geographic services
used by other organisations. Furthermore, we use the latest
available Area Classification for Output Areas (2011 OAC) released in 2011, which represents a widely used public domain
census-only geodemographic classifications in the UK [15].
The 2011 OAC dataset summarizes the social and physical
structure of postcode areas using data from the 2011 UK Census, and is updated every 10 years when census is performed
(the next one will be available in 2021).

Data Feeds

From our measurement infrastructure, we capture various
data feeds from the mobile network that we describe next.
Note that these feeds are aggregated at postcode level or
larger granularity.
General Signaling Dataset. As described in the previous
section, we capture the activity of the users in the control
plane for the different Radio Access Technologys (RATs) supported by the cellular provider. Specifically, for every RAT,
the signalling dataset we collect includes the (control plane)
signaling messages related to events triggered by the MNO’s
subscribers, including Attach, Authentication, Session establishment, Dedicated bearer establishment and deletion,
Tracking Area Update (TAU), ECM-IDLE mode transition,
Service request, Handover and Detach. Each event we capture carries the anonymized user ID, Subscriber Identity
Module (SIM) Mobile Country Code (MCC) and Mobile Network Code (MNC), Type Allocation Code (TAC) (the first 8
digits of the device IMEI, which are statically allocated to
device vendors), the radio sector ID handling the communication, timestamp, and event result code (success / failure).
Further, we aggregate this information at postcode level or
larger granularity.

2.3

Mobility Statistics

Since we are interested in analyzing mobility of people, we
focus on their primary devices. We use the TAC database
to filter only the devices that are smartphones (i.e., we drop
M2M devices such as smart sensors). We are also able to
separate the native users of the MNO, and drop the international inbound roamers from further analysis. Using the
signalling data-set described above, we then associate each
(anonymized) user to a radio tower throughout the time they
are connected to the MNO’s network. Based on the radio
network topology, we further attach to each radio tower its
geographic location (postal code and approximate coordinates). With this, we then generate aggregated mobility statistics over six disjoint 4-hour bins of the day (e.g., 04:00AM 08:00AM, 08:00AM - 12:00PM, 12:00PM - 04:00PM), and also
over the entire day (i.e., 24 hours time window).
For each user, we determine the total duration of time
they spend connected to every cell tower and select the top
20 towers. This allows us to identify all relevant places, as
previous studies have shown than more than three quarters
of people have between 3 to 6 important places, and in general no more than 8 [17, 20]. After doing this initial filtering,
we obtain information regarding roughly 22 million native
users aggregated at postcode level or larger granularity (e.g.,
UTLA or geodemographic cluster).

Devices Catalog. We consider a commercial database provided by Global System for Mobile communications (GSM)
Association (GSMA). This catalog maps the device TAC to a
set of device properties such as device manufacturer, brand
and model name, operating system, radio bands supported,
etc. With this information we are able to distinguish between
smartphones (likely used as primary devices by the mobile
users) and Machine-to-Machine (M2M) devices.
Radio Network Topology. To account for potential structural changes in the radio access network (e.g., new site
deployments), we rely on a daily snapshot of the network
topology. This includes metadata (location and configuration) and the status (active/inactive) of each cell tower.

Mobility Metrics. From the aggregated mobility statistics,
we focus on two metrics: entropy and radius of gyration. The
3

combination of both metrics gives a wide view of changes in
mobility: while entropy measures the repeatability of movements, radius of gyration is an indication of the distance
travelled. The two metrics are independent, one could have
a high entropy with a reduced gyration, implying someone
that moves in a reduced physical space almost randomly; or,
on the contrary, have a low entropy with a large value of
gyration, implying someone that moves over a large area but
repeating the trajectories done. These metrics are computed
over a day for each individual and aggregated to obtain an
average value per day. Even if we compute these metrics per
user at cell tower level, we aggregated them at postcode or
larger granularity.
Entropy is a measure of the randomness of the movements
of an individual, and as such, a metric for the predictability of movements[29]. From the variety of ways to calculate entropy in mobility [29], we implemented a temporaluncorrelated entropy, that characterizes the heterogeneity
of visitation patterns. Formally:
𝑒=−

𝑁
∑︁

(𝑝 ( 𝑗) log(𝑝 ( 𝑗))

Figure 2: Comparison between inferred residential
Local Authority District (LAD) population and the actual LAD population from census data.
least 14 days (not necessarily consecutive) during February
2020. With that filtering, we were able to determine the home
postal code for approximately 16 million users.
An inherent limitation with our inference is that the estimation of the home location distribution is influenced by
the market share of the MNO, and how it reflects the general
population. In order to validate its reliability, we assigned all
subjects to a Local Authority District LAD [12] according to
our home estimations, and compared with values of population estimation from the Office for National Statistics (see
Figure 2). The result shows a linear relationship(𝑟 2 = .955),
thus validating the representativity of the dataset. The values
obtained are in line with the literature [28].

(1)

𝑗=1

with 𝑝 ( 𝑗) is the fraction of the time spent in the j𝑡ℎ visited
cell tower (being a proxy for the probability for the user to
be in that cell tower).
Radius of gyration is a key characteristic to model travelled
distance [17], and measures how far from the center of mass
the mass is located [2]. It is defined as the root mean squared
distance between the set of cell towers and its center of
masses. Formally:
v
u
t
𝑔=

1
𝑁

𝑁
∑︁

(𝑡 𝑗 l 𝑗 − l𝑐𝑚 ) 2

2.4

Network Performance Statistics

Using the general signalling dataset, we evaluate the average
time the users spend connected to the different RAT cells. We
find that 4G is the most popular RAT, with users spending
on average 75% of the time per day connected to 4G cells.
Thus, for the network performance statistics, we focus on
4G cells as they have the highest load out of the three RATs.
Based on the Radio Network Performance data feed, we
generate network performance statistics at the 4G radio cell
level. For each cell, we separate the following hourly performance metrics: the Uplink (UL) and the downlink (DL) data
volume (the sum of all data transferred on all cell bearers
corresponding to QoS Class Identifier (QCI) from 1 to 8 in
each direction, UL and DL), average number of active DL
users (users with active data transmission in the DL buffer),
average radio load (as Transmission Time Interval (TTI)
utilization, representing the number of active User Equipments (UEs) the LTE scheduler assigns per TTI), average
user DL throughput (as the average throughput over all users
active in the cell in one hour, considering all bearers corresponding to QCI from 1 to 8), and time (number of seconds)

(2)

𝑗=1

where l 𝑗 represents the location of the j𝑡ℎ visited cell tower,
𝑡 𝑗 represents the time spent in the j𝑡ℎ visited cell tower and
l𝑐𝑚 represents the location of the center of mass of the user’s
Í
trajectory, calculated as l𝑐𝑚 = 𝑁1 𝑁𝑗=1 {𝑡 𝑗 l 𝑗 } and 𝑁 the total
number of towers visited.
Home Detection. For our analysis, locating the home postcode of the end-users is important when capturing their
mobility patterns. Home Detection algorithms are a specific
kind of a wider group of algorithms used to identify meaningful places from mobility information. The main idea consists
in using some criteria to define time slots for home, work
and other activities and then use the mobility information
to identify these places [3, 14, 20, 26]. We estimate home
location for each user at postcode granularity. For this, we
use the cell tower to which the user connects more time
during nighttime hours (12:00 PM through 8:00 AM) for at
4

with active data per cell. We also extract hourly metrics per
cell specifically for conversational voice (separating only the
bearers corresponding to QCI value 1), namely: voice traffic
volume (total traffic with QCI equal to 1), average number of
simultaneous voice active users, and the UL and DL average
packet loss error rates.
For all the hourly metrics, we further aggregate them per
day and extract the (hourly) median value per cell. This allows to capture one single value per metric per day, enabling
further analysis with the daily mobility metrics For each
of the radio cell, we attach the location metadata information from the Radio Network Topology data feed. We further
merge this (at the postcode level) with the UK Administrative
and Geodemographic Datasets to append extra information
such as the geodemographic cluster for each radio cell.

3

(a) Average gyration variation per user per day.

MOBILITY

(b) Average entropy variation per user per day.

In this section we present how the evolution of the pandemic
and the social distancing measures impacted mobility by analyzing the change of the metrics detailed in Section 2.3. We
capture the mobility metrics of users for 10 weeks (from
week 10 to week 19 of 2020), which includes time before the
SARS-CoV-2 pandemic was declared in the UK on March
11th 2020 (week 11), as well as during the government imposed measures to tackle the emergency. The total number
of end-users whose data we aggregate for this study is approximately 16 million, and, unless otherwise specified, for
all metrics we report for every day the percentage of change
in the average daily value compared to average weekly value
in week 9 (23 February - 1 March 2020).

3.1

Figure 3: Percentage of change in the average value per user
for radius of gyration and entropy, compared to their average value in week 9. Shaded bars correspond to weekends.

National Mobility

We start our analysis by investigating the nation-wide time
series for radius of gyration and the mobility entropy in Fig 3.
The average gyration evolution (Figure 3a) shows the reduction in the total area that users cover in their daily routines in reference to the average value over week 92 . We
note that people started implementing social distancing recommendations even before lockdown was enforced, with a
decrease of 20% in gyration in week 12. With the government imposing the nation-wide lockdown in week 13, we
also observe a steep decrease in gyration, with a drop of 50%
towards the end of week 13 compared to the usual value
from week 9. Mobility entropy per user follows a similar
trend (Figure 3b). All metrics show a steep decrease in weeks
13-14, following the "stay-at-home" being enforced. In the
following weeks, we note a slight relaxation, with mobility
marginally increasing. It is worth noticing that, the reduction
of entropy is smaller than the reduction of gyration. This

Figure 4: Entropy variation (from week 9 to week 18) vs
cumulative number SARS-CoV-2 infections per day. Each
point represents a different day. Colors encode the different
days of the week (yellow shows week-end).

indicates that people, besides moving significantly less, tend
to move close to their home location.
Figure 4 captures the correlation between the average
mobility entropy per user and the nation-wide cumulative
number of lab-confirmed SARS-CoV-2 cases, as reported
by Public Health England[18]. Each point in the scatterplot
represent a different day; we capture the interval between
February 23rd until May 4th, 2020. We note that the mobility reduction is not impacted by the number of reported
cases, i.e., there is not a correlation between number of cases

2 Note

that during the weekdays of week 9, the gyration is larger while
during the weekend is smaller, yielding the aforementioned average.
5

and mobility, but rather mobility is impacted by public announcement and lockdown measures. The decrease in the
entropy starts only after the pandemic is declared (vertical
red line in Figure 4, coinciding with 1,000 confirmed cases),
and becomes significant after the lockdown.
Takeaway: Mobility metrics (gyration and entropy) show
a steep decrease in people’s mobility in weeks 13-14, following the "stay-at-home" order being enforced. We find
no correlation between this reduction in mobility and the
number of confimed COVID-19 cases, showing that only
the enforced government order was effective in significantly
reducing mobility. We also notice mobility slightly increases
from week 15 despite the lockdown still being enforced.

3.2

(a) Gyration.

Regional Mobility

We now focus our analysis on five different regions in order
to observe potential geo-spatial difference in the mobility
pattern changes. We select the regions that are best represented in our dataset with more than 500,000 users, namely
Inner London (700k users), Outer London (1,1 million users),
Greater Manchester (700k users), West Midland (600k users)
and West Yorkshire (500k users). For each region, we capture
the variation of the two mobility metrics (Figure 5) in reference to the nation-wide average value of the metric. The
evolution of the metrics shows clearly the impact of the stayat-home measures in every region, with a sharp decrease in
weeks 13-14 in the values of all metrics. We note that for
London (both Inner and Outer London), reference values for
gyration are below national average (20% below the average for each corresponding week– see Figure 5a), while the
reference value for mobility entropy is higher (20% above
the average, see Figure 5b). This shows that within London,
in general, people move more randomly and with less predictable mobility pattern, but cover smaller areas than the
national average. This analysis also bring to our attention
the regional differences in how people relax the mobility restrictions, with an increase in mobility in London and West
Yorkshire in weeks 18-19. This is not the case for the regions
of Greater Manchester and West Midlands, where mobility is
consistently low after week 13. Finally, metrics distributions
have little variance in all regions, and all percentiles are close
to the median, following similar trends.
Takeaway: The impact of the lockdown is consistent over
different regions in the UK, showing that people respected
the lockdown, regardless where they live. We do, however,
find regional differences in how people relax the mobility
restrictions, with an increase in mobility in London and West
Yorkshire in weeks 18-19. This is not the case for the regions
of Greater Manchester and West Midlands, where mobility
is consistently low after week 13.

(b) Mobility entropy.

Figure 5: Variation in the average gyration and entropy per
region, compared to the national average during week 9.

3.3

Geodemographic Mobility

To capture the changes in users’ mobility in correlation with
different social and demographic characteristics of their residence area, we study the variation of mobility metrics across
different geo-spacial clusters as defined by the UK Office for
National Statistics (ONS)[13]. This consists of eight groups
meant to be illustrative of the characteristics of areas in
terms of their demographic structure, household composition, housing, socio-economic characteristics and employment patterns. Each of the eight categories provides the most
generic descriptions of the corresponding population group
in the UK (Table 1).
We break down the mobility metrics variations per week
in each of the above-mentioned area groups (Figure 6). We
find that mobility in rural areas is normally higher than the
nation average and people usually cover wider areas in their
daily movement (weeks 9-11 in Figure 6a). Contrariwise, in
highly populated urban areas (such as Cosmopolitans or Ethnicity central), the population covers smaller areas (weeks
9-11 in Figure 6a), but the predictability of their mobility
patterns is lower (higher entropy in weeks 9-11 in Figure 6b).
All the different socio-economic groups present the same
significant drop in mobility, with a transition period in week
12 and a steep drop from week 13. Gyration decreases across
all groups by more than 50% of the national average in week
9. As it was observed in the previous section, the ethnicity
6

Table 1: Geodemographic clusters (2011 OAC).
Name
Rural Residents
Cosmopolitans
Ethnicity Central
Multicultural Metropolitans
Urbanites
Suburbanites
Constrained City Dwellers
Hard-pressed Living

Definition
Rural areas, low density, older and educated population
Densely populated urban areas, high ethnic integration, young adults and students
Denser central areas of London, non-white ethnic groups, young adults
Urban areas in transition between centres and suburbia, high ethnic mix
Urban areas mainly in southern England, average ethnic mix, low unemployment
Population above retirement age and parents with school age children, low unemployment
Densely populated areas, single/divorced population, higher level of unemployment
Urban surroundings (northern England/southern Wales), higher rates of unemployment
frame. To evaluate the temporary relocation of Inner London
residents to secondary locations, we generate its mobility
matrix at a county level (see Figure 7). For each Inner London
resident (obtained using the method described in 2.3), we
check the top 20 locations (at county level) that they visit
during each day (cf. Section 2.3). If none of the visited locations during a day matches their home county (Inner London
in this case) we are able to identify relocations, i.e. people
with residence in London that are elsewhere. Figure 7 shows
the variation in the number of Inner London residents who
are present in the different counties (we capture a different
county per row) per day, compared to the average number
we identified in week 9, before the lockdown.
By looking at the Inner London line we observe a permanent 10% decrease in the number of Inner London residents
who actually are present in their area of residence from week
13 onward (after the lockdown is imposed). Contributions to
the decrease in the number of Inner London residents who
remain in their inferred homes during the lockdown period
may include, for example, students who left campuses in
London after schools closing on the 19th of March, or longterm tourist leaving Inner London center areas, or London
residents who decided to spend the lockdown in their second
residences. In particular, we observe an increase in the number of people from London who relocated to the Hampshire
area during most of the duration of the lockdown.
Further, we note that mobility patterns of Inner London
residents changed significantly after the stay-at-home order
was imposed. Specifically, before the stay-at-home recommendations, we observe an increase of Londoners spending
the weekend in other counties in the UK. This pattern disappears starting from weeks 11 and 12, concurrent with the
recommendation of social distancing. We capture a large
variation in the number of people travelling from Inner London to outside areas such as East Sussex on the 21st-22nd of
March, just prior to the stay-at-home order. We also observe
an additional increase of Londoners going to Hampshire for
the weekend by the end of April (also in Kent but less so),
consistent with the overall (slight) increase observed at the
end of the period in the overall mobility metrics.

(a) Gyration.

(b) Mobility entropy.

Figure 6: Variation in average gyration and entropy per
geodemographic cluster, compared to the national average
in week 9.

central group (which would basically correspond to Inner
London), the reduction of gyration is the highest of all the
groups but their reduction in entropy is the smallest, implying that they have reduced they area of mobility the most,
but within that area their movement is more random. This is
probably related to the high density of commercial services
in central London. Finally, we observe that metrics’ distribution has little variance in all geodemographic clusters.
Takeaway: All users in different geodemographic clusters present the same significant drop in mobility, with a
transition period in week 12 and a steep drop from week 13.

3.4

Temporary Relocation from London

In this section, we measure how many people from London
decided to move elsewhere during (part of) the analyzed time
7

Figure 7: Mobility matrix of users with residence in Inner London towards other counties in the UK. Each cell shows the
variation per day (on the x axis) in the number of resident from Inner London active in the county marked in the y axis
compared to the median value over week 9. We include in our mobility matrix the top 10 counties in terms of receiving
inbound residents from Inner London according to the average in week 9.
Takeaway: We find a sustained 10% decrease in the number of Inner London residents who actually are present in
their area of residence from week 13 onward (after the lockdown is imposed). We capture a large variation in the number
of people travelling from Inner London to outside areas such
as East Sussex on the 21st-22nd of March, just prior to the
stay-at-home order being enforced.

4

MOBILE NETWORK PERFORMANCE

In this section, we analyze mobile network performance indicators to investigate how changes in people’s mobility induce
shifts in the usual traffic patterns we observe in the radio
network, and further impact the mobile network operations.

4.1

Data Traffic Evolution

We investigate the dynamics of the network performance
metrics we defined in Section 2.4 across the UK, aggregating
all bearers per cell, including voice and data traffic (i.e., we
aggregate all bearers for QCI 1 to 8). Our analysis spans a
period of 10 weeks, from 23rd of February until the 10th of
May. Unless otherwise stated, for all metrics we present the
delta variation percentage of each metric from its median
value over week 9.
Figure 8: Downlink Data Volume captures the variation of
the downlink data volume during the weeks we mark on the
x-axis. Throughout the UK, we note an increase of 8% in the
average data volume per cell in week 10. This is followed by
a steady decrease, with the lowest registered volume in week
17 (-24% compared to week 9). Our observation is consistent
with people’s mobility decrease after the stay-at-home order
(Section 3). We conjecture that after lockdown people relied
less on the cellular network for data connectivity (e.g., using
home WiFi connectivity instead), thus contributing to the
surge of traffic reported by residential ISPs.3
Indeed, we observe in Figure 8: Uplink Data Volume a significant reduction of active downlink users per hour per cell
compared to week 9 throughout the entire UK (all regions),
with a minimum number of active users in week 19 (-28.6%

Figure 8: MNO performance characterization, using metrics for all data traffic. Each plot corresponds to a metric, as
we indicate in the title of the plot. We show the median values for the delta variation percentage for each metric over
one week week (each point on the x-axis corresponds to a
week #), using as a baseline for comparison the median value
in week 9. Each line corresponds to different geo-regions
within the UK, including "UK - all regions", which accounts
for the entire country.

users compared to week 9). Note that, despite we observe a
slight recovery of mobility in week 14 (cf. Section 3), this is
not sufficient to have an impact on the downlink data volume, the number of active users, or the radio load per cell,
which do not increase.
We find a small reduction in the downlink user throughput in the 10 weeks we analyze (Figure 8: User Downlink
Throughput)), with the lowest value being a 10% drop compared to week 9. This follows the same trend as the decrease
in downlink traffic volume. This is unexpected, as in presence of less traffic (cf. Figure 8: Downlink Data Volume) and

3 See

https://www.cnbc.com/2020/03/27/coronavirus-can-the-internet-h
andle-unprecedented-surge-in-traffic.html for instance.
8

overall lower active downlink users per cell (cf. Figure 8:
Downlink Active Users), the per user throughput should increase. We also observe that congestion in the radio network
is not the cause of this decrease because the radio load also
decreases ( Figure 8: Cell Resource Utilization shows a 15.1%
radio load decrease in week 16 compared to week 9). We
conjecture the per-user throughput is application limited
and not network limited during the weeks of the analysis.
This is in line with the choice of many content providers to
reduce content quality during the pandemic and by the shift
of more data-intensive applications to wifi access. 4
We also investigate the variation of the total uplink data
volume per cell in the UK (Figure 8: Uplink Data Volume). We
find overall modest changes for this metric, with, less than 5%
decrease in the median daily volumes in week 18. This suggests that applications making intensive use of the downlink
(e.g., video streaming) suffered a significantly higher traffic
reduction than applications with symmetric uplink/downlink
usage (e.g., audio/video conferences, or voice traffic). In particular, as we present in the next section, we observe that
voice traffic (corresponding to QCI=1) has significantly increased during the lockdown period.
Altogether, because the downlink data volume is one order
of magnitude larger than the uplink data volume, the volume
of data traffic carried by the network experienced an overall
reduction of roughly 20%, reverting to 2019 traffic volume
(when the MNO had less customers and applications were
less bandwidth hungry).
Finally, we note that metrics’ distribution across cells does
not significantly change across weeks with respect to the
reference week 9. A wide distribution is common in large operational environments, where cells support different RATs
types across the country (e.g, LTE, LTE-A), different number
of customers each cell serves, different radio coverage, etc.
The only exception we note is in the 90th percentile in the
downlink active user per hour per cell (not picture for readability reasons), which slightly reduces during the lockdown
phase, thus showing the nation-wide impact on the users
connectivity habits.
Takeaway: We find an overall reduction (-24% in week
17 compared to week 9) in downlink data traffic volume
throughput the UK during lockdown. Unintuitively, we also
note a decrease in the average user throughput. Though a
decrease in radio cell resource utilization and in overall traffic
may have hinted to the opposite, we find the throughput to
drop by at most 10%, likely due to application throttling. We
also observe uplink traffic volume has little variation.

Figure 9: Analysis of 4G voice traffic (corresponding to
QCI=1) patterns in the UK. We show the median values for
the delta variation percentage, which we generate compared
to the national average during week 9 for all the UK, over
a period of 10 weeks (each point corresponds to a week #
we mark on the x-axis), from the end of February until midMay. Each line corresponds to different metric.

4.2

Voice Traffic

We now analyze the changes in voice traffic patterns, to
further drill down on the potential dynamics that impact the
total volumes of data traffic we observe. We filter 4G traffic
marked with QCI equal to 1 (conversational traffic), and
analyze the performance metrics we previously explained
in Section 2.4. Figure 9 shows the evolution of these metric
over the period of 10 weeks we analyze in March - May 2020,
for all the UK compared to the average of week 9.
We note that in week 12 there is a spike of 140% in the median value of voice traffic volume (Figure 9: Traffic Volume)
and a significant increase of its top 90 percentile value. This
corresponds to a predicted seven years of growth in voice
traffic in the operator’s network, which the MNO had to
accommodate in the space of few days (week 12 in Figure 9:
Traffic Volume). Though striking, we find that the increase
in voice traffic is not enough to compensate the decrease in
other traffic classes, resulting in the overall decrease in traffic
presented in the previous section. The surge in voice traffic
volume is consistent with a spike in the average number
of simultaneous voice users per cell (Figure 9: Simultaneous Users). This aligns with the time when the pandemic
was declared (11th of March), and the lockdown restrictions
started in the UK (23rd of March, week 13). This is an anticipated result of the lockdown and the subsequent changes
in people’s mobility, since more are likely to carry on voice
conversations in these circumstances.
We report in Figure 9: Uplink Packet Error Loss Rate and
Figure 9: Downlink Packet Error Loss Rate the daily average
uplink and downlink packet loss error rate per cell respectively. While the uplink packet loss decreases during the

4 https://www.theverge.com/2020/3/20/21187930/youtube-reduces-stream

ing-quality-european-union-coronavirus-bandwidth-internet-traffic
9

pandemic period, we observe a significant increase in the
downlink packet loss during weeks 10-11-12, after which it
decreases below normal values. This is again unexpected, as
the radio network is less congested and there is less downlink traffic (see previous section). The issue during these
weeks was, in fact, that the unexpected surge in the amount
of voice traffic exceeded the capacity of the inter-MNO interconnection infrastructure. The rapid response of the network
operators and service providers quickly restored the DL error
below the normal values.
Takeaway: We observe a spike of 140% in the median
value of voice traffic volume around lockdown. Although
the MNO was dimensioned to accommodate the traffic, this
unexpected surge exceeded the capacity of the interconnection infrastructure between MNOs. The rapid response of
the network operators and service providers restored the
network status back to normal quickly after week 13.

4.3

15), while it is almost constant and even slightly higher
in Outer London. These different trends between commercial/business and residential areas are also visible for other
regions as well (i.e., West Midlands/Greater Manchester more
business compared to Yorkshire more residential).
An additional contributing factor to the decrease of traffic
and users in Inner London is the temporary relocation of
people living in Inner London to other counties outside the
city. In Section 3 we saw that approximately 10% of inferred
residents were not signalling against radio cells covering
London after lockdonw, thus hinting a potential relocation
and partially explaining the reduction in the data traffic
volume. We make a detailed analysis of the different districts
within Inner London in Section 5.
Regarding the uplink data volume (Figure 8: Uplink Data
Volume), we observe different trends across regions. The
uplink traffic volume grows for all regions in week 10. This
growth is followed by a decrease in Inner London and West
Midlands, and by a slight increase or steadier behavior in
Outer London and West Yorkshire. The highest contrast is
again in Inner/Outer London. In week 14, in Inner London,
the UL data traffic volume decreased -22%; while in the Outer
London region it increased by 17%. In the other regions, the
effects are similar, but with a lower intensity.
We conjecture these differences correlate with the different geodemographic dynamics within these regions. For
example, Inner London includes many business, touristic,
commercial and recreational areas, which remained largely
empty during lockdown, potentially explaining the steep
decrease in the downlink data volume in the area. To capture
these correlations, in the following section we further study
the network performance on areas with the same geodemographic profiles (Table 1). Thus, we change from the current
perspective of network performance within administrative
boundaries, to capturing performance metrics across clusters
of areas with the different geodemographic profiles.
Takeaway: We observe that while the overall trends in
five counties are similar to those in the entire UK, their
intensity varies significantly from one region to another.
We conjecture these differences correlate with the different
geodemographic dynamics within these regions.

High Density Areas

To capture regional traffic dynamics, we now zoom into the
network performance of five counties with high density of
users in our dataset. Specifically, we analyse the network
performance in Outer London, Inner London, Greater Manchester, West Midlands and West Yorkshire.
We analyze four performance metrics, namely the daily
uplink/downlink data traffic volume per cell, the number of
active downlink users per cell, and the downlink average
user throughput. We compleent this analysis by also showing the total number of users connected (both active and
idle), and the cell resource utilization. We report on the delta
variation percentages of each metric per week with respect
to the nation-wide average for each metric observed in week
9 (Figure 8, plot lines marked with the region names we
mention above). We capture in our analysis 10 weeks, from
the 23rd of February until the 10th of May 2020. We observe
that while the overall trends in the five counties are similar
to those over the entire UK (Figure 8, plot lines marked UK),
the intensity of the different trends varies significantly from
one region to another.
Regarding the downlink data traffic volume (Figure 8:
Downlink Data Volume), we observe in all regions a mild
increase in week 10 (ranging between 9% and 17% depending on the region), followed by a decrease in the following
weeks reaching the minimum in weeks 17 and 18. However,
the decrease is much larger in Inner London (with a 41%
decrease) than in the other regions, which decrease by about
20%. Further, in outer London, there is the smallest decrease,
with only 15%.
We also see in Figure 8: Downlink Active Users that during lockdown the number of active downlink users per cell
significantly decreases in Inner London (e.g., -40% in week

4.4

Geodemographic Clusters

In this section, we incorporate into our analysis of network
performance during COVID-19 demographic dynamics. Geodemographic classifications provide summary indicators of the
social, economic, demographic, and built characteristics of
small areas. To this end, we use the geodemographic clusters
10

centers for business, commercial, recreational, educational
activities throughout the country. The pattern we observe
is different from the rest of the areas. This is likely to be
caused by a dramatic reduction of people in these places,
since are areas with a lower number of residents but with a
lot of people visiting them due to work and recreational purposes. This is consistent with the observations we made in
the previous section for Inner London, where approximately
45% of postcode areas cluster within the "Cosmopolitans"
geodemographic group, while 50% of postcode cluster in the
"Ethnicity Central" group.
To further verify this correlation, in Figure 10 we show
the total number of users connected to the network, and
observe a sharp decrease of up to -50% in the "Cosmopolitan"
areas. We calculate the correlation between the total number
of users (both idle and active users) and the downlink data
volume for the geodemographic clusters. We find a high
correlation for the "Cosmopolitan" (+0.973) and for "Ethnicity
central" (+0.816) areas, low correlation for "Rural residents"
areas (0.299), and a negative correlation for "Suburbanites"
(-0.466), where the increase of users resulted in a decrease
of downlink data volume (Figure 8). In these areas, the drop
in downlink data volume is likely impacted by other factors
(e.g., offloading to WiFi, changes in applications used).
Takeaway: Areas within "Rural residents" and "Cosmopolitan" geodemographic clusters deviate from the trends we
observed in UK nation wide. In the former, the average volume of downlink data traffic per cell remains largely stable
after the lockdown. Conversely, in the latter we observe a
sharp decrease of up to -50% in the total number of users
connected after lockdown, which led to a dramatic decrease
in the downlink data traffic volume.

Figure 10: Focused analysis of network performance metrics on geodemographic clusters (OAC 2011 dataset). We
show the median variation per cluster (see Table 1), where
each line corresponds to a different cluster.
(Table 1) that the ONS labeled to each postcode.5 We group
the postcode areas in the corresponding geodemographic
clusters and extract the network performance statistics (Section 2.4) per cluster. This analysis allows us to understand
potential network performance differences between groups
of areas with distinct mobility patterns across the entire UK
(e.g., rural residents areas vs. cosmopolitan areas, see Figure 6), as we already observed different behavior for different
areas in the previous section.
We find that the behaviour for most areas, with the exception of "Rural residents" and "Cosmopolitan" areas, exhibits
similar trends than the ones observed in UK nation wide,
with a decrease in downlink traffic and a stable uplink traffic volume. In areas within the "Rural residents" cluster, the
average volume of downlink data traffic per cell remains
largely stable after the lockdown period.
Figure 10 shows that the average volume of downlink data
traffic per cell in areas with majority of "Cosmopolitan" residents decreased dramatically after week 13, coinciding with
the stay-at-home order. The areas within the "Cosmopolitans" cluster correspond to densely populated urban areas,
with high ethnic integration, where young adults and students reside (see Table 1). These areas include the neuralgic

5

LONDON-CENTRIC ANALYSIS

In this section, we focus our analysis on the London area (i.e.,
the Inner London county). London is particularly interesting
because of the large concentration of users in a single area,
high mobility, diversity in user’s profiles, and also because,
unfortunately, the pandemic was particularly severe in the
city. Our goal is to dissect how the changes in the mobility
patterns of the population residing in this region (approximately 700,000 users in our dataset) resulted in changes in
their habits of using the mobile network service.

5.1

Network Performance

Figure 11 shows the network performance evolution based
on data volume metrics, compared to median values over
week 9 within London. We break down the analysis for each
of the Postcode Districts within London, and we only depict
the median values over each week (for readability reasons).
We note a general decrease in the total volume of downlink

5 National

Statistics Postcode Lookup (NSPL) for the United Kingdom as at
February 2020. https://geoportal.statistics.gov.uk/datasets/national-statisti
cs-postcode-lookup-february-2020
11

traffic (Figure 11: Downlink Data Volume), as well as in the
volume of uplink traffic (Figure 11: Uplink Data Volume). The
decrease is particularly large for Eastern Central (EC) and
Western Central (WC). In the WC district, the uplink and the
downlink traffic volumes exhibited a decrease of over 80%
between weeks 14 and 19, while the EC district experienced a
similar trend, with a decrease of more than 70% compared to
week 9. These two districts cover the central area of London,
where the density of population is also lower (i.e., approximately 30,000 residents in EC compared to 400,000 residents
in SW) and includes many seasonal residents (e.g., tourists),
business and commercial areas. The decreasing volume of
data is likely due to a major reduction of people in the area,
which is consistent with the decrease we observed in the
average number of radio users per sector (see Figure 11: Total Number of Users). We note a similar trend both in the
percentage of cell resources occupancy (Figure 11: Cell Resource Utilization) and in the average number of users per
cell (Figure 11: Downlink Active Users).
We find that the trends in the Northern (N) district detach
from the rest of the districts. In particular, we note an increase
in the number of downlink users (varying between 10% and
23% in weeks 10 to 14), while the volume of downlink traffic
keeps stable (unlike the other postcodes, where we note
a decrease). This hints towards potential hot spots in the
mobile network moving within London from central areas
(EC, WC) to the north (N).
Takeaway: Performance in the central postal districts of
London (EC and WC) differ from the rest, with decreases of
over 70% in the downlink data traffic. This is due to a major
reduction of people in the area, which is consistent with the
decrease we observed in the average number of total radio
users in those sectors.

Figure 11: Network performance metrics for Inner London.
Each line corresponds to a Postal District within London. We
show the median variation percentage (on the y axis) per
postal district, over a period of 10 weeks (on the x axis).

5.2

Geodemographic Clusters

We further dissect the performance in London in relation
to the geodemographic clusters. We find that only three
clusters map to the area of London, each with different patterns. Figure 12 shows the evolution of four performance
metric over the period of analysis (median values of delta
variation percentage per week compared to corresponding
median values in week 9 in London). We find again a sharper
decrease in the areas marked as "Cosmopolitans", largely
matching the behaviour we observed in the EC and WC districts, due to the severe reduction of users in these areas.
We find that all areas follow the same trends for the user
downlink throughput, which is consistent with the UK-wide
observation (Figure 8: User Downlink Throughput). However,
for the uplink/downlink traffic volume, we note distinct patterns for the three clusters, showing distinct usage patterns
across the different areas. We observe a sharp decrease in the

Figure 12: Network performance metrics per geodemographic clusters. We show the median variation percentage
(on the y axis) per cluster (see Table 1), where each line corresponds to a different cluster, over a period of 10 weeks (on
the x axis).
12

traffic volumes in the radio cells in Cosmopolitans cluster areas (decrease of more than 50% in week 13 in the uplink and
the downlink data volume), while cells in the "Multicultural
clusters" cluster areas show an increase the mobile traffic
volume (e.g., 40% increase in the uplink data volume). These
correlate with the patterns we observe for the number of
active downlink users in the same areas (i.e., a more than
20% increase in week 13).
Takeaway: We find again a sharper decrease in the uplink/downlink data volume in the areas that cluster as "Cosmopolitans", largely matching the behaviour we observed in
the EC and WC districts, due to the severe reduction of users
in these areas. Cells in the "Multicultural clusters" cluster
areas show an increase the mobile traffic volume largely due
to an increase in the number of active users.

6

relevance during COVID-19, the work by Favale at al. [10]
found that incoming traffic drastically decreased, while outgoing traffic more than doubled to support online learning.
By combining datasets from one ISP, three IXPs, and one metropolitan educational network, Feldmann et. al. [11] show
that the fixed internet infrastructure was able to sustain the
15-20% increase in traffic that happened rapidly during a
short window of one week. Taking the point of view from
Facebook’s edge, Böttger et.al. [7] show that that different regions of the world saw different magnitudes of impact, with
predominantly less developed regions exhibiting larger performance degradations. The Cellular Telecommunications
Industry Association (CTIA) provides daily reports on the
variations of voice and data minutes observed by AT&T, TMobile, U.S. Cellular and Verizon. With respect to the period
between the 23 of February and the 16 of March, it was observed a surge of the upper range of voice minutes used of
up to +24% in the last week of march (week 13) and an increase of about +20% in the upper range of data minutes[5].
While the surge reported in voice traffic is within the ranges
observed in this paper, we do not observe the surge in data
traffic reported by the main MNOs in the U.S. This may be
due to different prevalence of flat fee contracts in the U.S.
operators and the U.K. MNO we study. Similarly, BT in the
U.K., on March the 20th 2020 [6], reported a decrease of 5%
in mobile data traffic which is consistent with the decrease
described in this paper for week 12. It was also observed a
surge in voice traffic, and as a result BT encouraged users to
use landline services, especially for long conference calls.

RELATED WORK

Even though the spread of SARS-CoV-2 started only a few
months ago, there are already in the literature different
studies that present efforts for understanding human mobility during the interventions. Apart from cell phone traces,
as used in our study and in others [22], there are other
datasets that other studies investigate. Google has available
anonymized and aggregated private counts of visits to places
in different categories [31][19][23]; also, Facebook trough
its Disease Prevention maps has provided aggregated data
of spatial distribution of individuals [25][16]; Cuebiq has
provided GDPR-compliant information to model mobility
in Boston [4] and Italy [27]; and Baidu has provided in-flow
and out-flow indexes for Chinese cities [8]. In general, all the
previous studies highlight the drastic changes in mobility
and evaluate the impact of the interventions in the spread
of the virus. In the particular case of the UK, TomTom [30]
observed a reduction between 60% and 80% in the number of
trips during lockdown, which is consistent with the reduction we observe from the MNO. Also, [21], by combining cell
phone traces and Facebook data to identify number of journeys, concluded that mobility began to decrease around one
week before lockdown was enforced, but that the sharpest
drop was after the closure, similarly to our findings using
different metrics.
The overall topic of the impact of COVID-19 in network
traffic has also been subject to numerous reports. For example, Comcast, which provides mobile connectivity using WiFi
while at home but leverages on Verizon LTE while away, has
observed and increase of 39% in wifi and a decrease of 17%
of mobile LTE traffic. Regarding the increase of the different
types of applications, there was a 215-285% increase in VoIP
and videoconferencing traffic, 30-40% in VPN traffic and a
20-40% in streaming and web video consumption.[9]. In the
context of network traffic and distance learning, of critical

7

CONCLUSIONS

The lockdown measures implemented by the UK government
to limit the spread of SARS-CoV-2 virus drastically changed
user mobility patterns and network traffic. The results of
this paper present an analysis of the changes in mobility
and their impact on the cellular network traffic. Regarding
mobility, we observed an overall decrease of 50%, with nonuniform changes across different geographical areas and social backgrounds, which confirm previous findings [30][21].
These variations translated into a surge of voice traffic (up
to 150%) accompanied by an overall decrease of download
traffic (20%), especially in densely populate urban areas (60%), and an increase of uplink traffic in suburbanities (10%).
Despite significant pattern changes, the MNO was able to
provide service maintaining quality standards: the radio load
was below common values and per user throughput was
likely application limited. We identified one issue in voice
traffic packet loss due to exceeded capacity in the interconnection infrastructure MNOs use to exchange voice traffic,
which was was fixed by network operation teams.
13

A

REFERENCES

ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONS

[1] 3GPP. [n. d.]. 3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP). ([n. d.]).
Retrieved May 14, 2020 from https://www.3gpp.org
[2] MA Abramowicz, JC Miller, and Z Stuchlík. 1993. Concept of radius of
gyration in general relativity. Physical Review D 47, 4 (1993), 1440.
[3] Rein Ahas, Siiri Silm, Olle Järv, Erki Saluveer, and Margus Tiru. 2010.
Using mobile positioning data to model locations meaningful to users
of mobile phones. Journal of urban technology 17, 1 (2010), 3–27.
[4] Alberto Aleta, David Martin-Corral, Ana Pastore y Piontti, Marco
Ajelli, Maria Litvinova, Matteo Chinazzi, Natalie E Dean, M Elizabeth Halloran, Ira M Longini, Stefano Merler, et al. 2020. Modeling
the impact of social distancing, testing, contact tracing and household quarantine on second-wave scenarios of the COVID-19 epidemic.
medRxiv (2020).
[5] Cellular Telecommunications Industry Association. 2020. The Wireless
Industry responds to COVID-19. (2020). https://www.ctia.org/homep
age/covid-19#network-performance
[6] BT.com. 2020. The facts about our network and Coronavirus. (2020).
https://newsroom.bt.com/the-facts-about-our-network-and-corona
virus/
[7] Timm Böttger, Ghida Ibrahim, and Ben Vallis. 2020. How the Internet
reacted to Covid-19 – A perspective from Facebook’s Edge Network.
ACM Internet Measurement Conference (IMC) (October 2020).
[8] Matteo Chinazzi, Jessica T Davis, Marco Ajelli, Corrado Gioannini,
Maria Litvinova, Stefano Merler, Ana Pastore y Piontti, Kunpeng Mu,
Luca Rossi, Kaiyuan Sun, et al. 2020. The effect of travel restrictions
on the spread of the 2019 novel coronavirus (COVID-19) outbreak.
Science 368, 6489 (2020), 395–400.
[9] COMCAST. 2020. COVID-19 Network Update. (2020). https://corpor
ate.comcast.com/covid-19/network
[10] Thomas Favale, Francesca Soro, Martino Trevisan, Idilio Drago, and
Marco Mellia. 2020. Campus Traffic and e-Learning during COVID-19
Pandemic. Computer Networks (2020), 107290.
[11] Anja Feldmann, Oliver Gasser, Franziska Lichtblau, Enric Pujol, Ingmar
Poese, Christoph Dietzel, Daniel Wagner, Matthias Wichtlhuber, Juan
Tapidor, Narseo Vallina-Rodriguez, et al. 2020. The Lockdown Effect:
Implications of the COVID-19 Pandemic on Internet Traffic. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2008.10959 (2020).
[12] Office for National Statistics. 2019. Local Authority Districts (April
2019) Names and Codes in the United Kingdom. (2019). http://geopor
tal.statistics.gov.uk/datasets/local-authority-districts-april-2019-na
mes-and-codes-in-the-united-kingdom
[13] Office for National Statistics. 2020. Pen portraits and radial plots.
(2020). https://www.ons.gov.uk/methodology/geography/geographica
lproducts/areaclassifications/2011areaclassifications/penportraitsa
ndradialplots
[14] Vanessa Frias-Martinez, Jesus Virseda, Alberto Rubio, and Enrique
Frias-Martinez. 2010. Towards large scale technology impact analyses:
Automatic residential localization from mobile phone-call data. In
Proceedings of the 4th ACM/IEEE international conference on information
and communication technologies and development. 1–10.
[15] Christopher G Gale, Alexander D Singleton, Andrew G Bates, and
Paul A Longley. 2016. Creating the 2011 area classification for output
areas (2011 OAC). Journal of Spatial Information Science 2016, 12 (2016),
1–27.
[16] Alessandro Galeazzi, Matteo Cinelli, Giovanni Bonaccorsi, Francesco
Pierri, Ana Lucia Schmidt, Antonio Scala, Fabio Pammolli, and Walter
Quattrociocchi. 2020. Human Mobility in Response to COVID-19 in
France, Italy and UK. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.06341 (2020).
[17] Marta C Gonzalez, Cesar A Hidalgo, and Albert-Laszlo Barabasi. 2008.
Understanding individual human mobility patterns. Nature 453, 7196

The data collection and retention at network middle-boxes
and elements are in accordance with the terms and conditions
of the MNO and the local regulations. All datasets used in this
work are covered by NDAs prohibiting any re-sharing with
3rd parties even for research purposes. Further, raw data has
been reviewed and validated by the operator with respect
to GPDR compliance (e.g., no identifier can be associated to
person), and data processing only extracts aggregated user
information at postcode level. No personal and/or contract
information was available for this study and none of the
authors of this paper participated in the extraction and/or
encryption of the raw data.

B

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We thank the IMC anonymous reviewers and our shepherd,
Anja Feldmann, for their helpful comments and guidance.
The work of Andra Lutu was supported by the EC H2020
Marie Curie Individual Fellowship 841315 (DICE).

14

(2008), 779–782.
[18] Health and GOV.UK Social Care. 2020. COVID-19: track coronavirus
cases. (2020). https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/covid-19track-coronavirus-cases
[19] Google Inc. 2020. Google COVID-19 Community Mobility Reporst.
(2020). https://www.google.com/covid19/mobility
[20] Sibren Isaacman, Richard Becker, Ramón Cáceres, Stephen Kobourov,
Margaret Martonosi, James Rowland, and Alexander Varshavsky. 2011.
Identifying important places in people’s lives from cellular network
data. In International Conference on Pervasive Computing. Springer,
133–151.
[21] Benjamin Jeffrey, Caroline E Walters, Kylie E C Ainslie, Oliver Eales,
Constanze Ciavarella, Sangeeta Bhatia, Sarah Hayes, Marc Baguelin,
Adhiratha Boonyasiri, Nicholas F. Brazeau, Gina Cuomo-Dannenburg,
Richard G FitzJohn, Katy Gaythorpe, William Green, Natsuko Imai,
Thomas A Mellan, Swapnil Mishra, Pierre Nouvellet, H Juliette T
Unwin, Robert Verity, Michaela Vollmer, Charles Whittaker, Neil
Ferguson, Christl A. Donnelly, and Steven Riley. 2020. Report 24 Anonymised & aggregated crowd level mobility data from mobile
phones suggests initial compliance with COVID19 social distancing
interventions was high & geographically consistent across UK. (2020).
https://www.imperial.ac.uk/media/imperial-college/medicine/mrc-g
ida/2020-05-29-COVID19-Report-24.pdf
[22] Jayson S Jia, Xin Lu, Yun Yuan, Ge Xu, Jianmin Jia, and Nicholas A
Christakis. 2020. Population flow drives spatio-temporal distribution
of COVID-19 in China. Nature (2020), 1–5.
[23] Moritz UG Kraemer, Adam Sadilek, Qian Zhang, Nahema A Marchal,
Gaurav Tuli, Emily L Cohn, Yulin Hswen, T Alex Perkins, David L
Smith, Robert C Reiner, et al. 2020. Mapping global variation in human
mobility. Nature Human Behaviour (2020), 1–11.
[24] Moritz UG Kraemer, Chia-Hung Yang, Bernardo Gutierrez, Chieh-Hsi
Wu, Brennan Klein, David M Pigott, Louis Du Plessis, Nuno R Faria,

[25]

[26]

[27]

[28]

[29]

[30]
[31]

15

Ruoran Li, William P Hanage, et al. 2020. The effect of human mobility
and control measures on the COVID-19 epidemic in China. Science
368, 6490 (2020), 493–497.
Paige Maas, Shankar Iyer, Andreas Gros, Wonhee Park, Laura McGorman, Chaya Nayak, and P Alex Dow. 2019. Facebook Disaster Maps:
Aggregate Insights for Crisis Response and Recovery. In Proceedings
of the 16th International Conference on Information Systems for Crisis
Response and Management (ISCRAM), Valencia, Spain. 19–22.
Raul Montoliu and Daniel Gatica-Perez. 2010. Discovering human
places of interest from multimodal mobile phone data. In Proceedings of
the 9th International Conference on Mobile and Ubiquitous Multimedia.
1–10.
Emanuele Pepe, Paolo Bajardi, Laetitia Gauvin, Filippo Privitera, Ciro
Cattuto, and Michele Tizzoni. 2020. COVID-19 outbreak response: first
assessment of mobility changes in Italy following lockdown. (2020).
https://covid19mm.github.io/in-progress/2020/03/13/first-report-as
sessment.html
Santi Phithakkitnukoon, Zbigniew Smoreda, and Patrick Olivier. 2012.
Socio-geography of human mobility: A study using longitudinal mobile
phone data. PloS one 7, 6 (2012).
Chaoming Song, Zehui Qu, Nicholas Blumm, and Albert-László
Barabási. 2010. Limits of predictability in human mobility. Science 327,
5968 (2010), 1018–1021.
TomTom.com. 2020. The effect of the COVID-19 measures on mobility
in the UK. (2020). https://www.tomtom.com/covid-19/country/uk/
Gregory A Wellenius, Swapnil Vispute, Valeria Espinosa, Alex Fabrikant, Thomas C Tsai, Jonathan Hennessy, Brian Williams, Krishna
Gadepalli, Adam Boulange, Adam Pearce, et al. 2020. Impacts of statelevel policies on social distancing in the united states using aggregated mobility data during the covid-19 pandemic. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2004.10172 (2020).

