Rapid and sensitive detection of SARS-CoV-2 with functionalized
magnetic nanoparticles

Jing Zhong*, Enja Laureen Rösch, Thilo Viereck, Meinhard Schilling and Frank Ludwig

Institute for Electrical Measurement Science and Fundamental Electrical Engineering
and Laboratory for Emerging Nanometrology (LENA), TU Braunschweig,
Hans-Sommer-Str. 66, Braunschweig D-38106, Germany
*Corresponding author: j.zhong@tu-braunschweig.de

Abstract
The outbreak of the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2)
threatens global medical systems and economies, and rules our daily living life. Controlling
the outbreak of SARS-CoV-2 has become one of the most important and urgent strategies
throughout the whole world. As of October, 2020, there have not yet been any medicines or
therapies to be effective against SARS-CoV-2. Thus, rapid and sensitive diagnostics is the most
important measures to control the outbreak of SARS-CoV-2. Homogeneous biosensing based
on magnetic nanoparticles (MNPs) is one of the most promising approaches for rapid and
highly sensitive detection of biomolecules. This paper proposes an approach for rapid and
sensitive detection of SARS-CoV-2 with functionalized MNPs via the measurement of their
magnetic response in an ac magnetic field. Experimental results demonstrate that the proposed
approach allows the rapid detection of mimic SARS-CoV-2 with a limit of detection of 0.084
nM (5.9 fmole). The proposed approach has great potential for designing a low-cost and pointof-care device for rapid and sensitive diagnostics of SARS-CoV-2.

Keywords: SARS-CoV-2, magnetic nanoparticles, magnetic particle spectroscopy, limit of
detection
Page 1 of 21

1. Introduction
Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) is an RNA based virus
that causes coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) [1]. SARS-CoV-2 with a dimeter ranging
from about 60 to 140 nm has spike, envelope, membrane and nucleocapsid proteins [2, 3].
Spike protein is the one for allowing the virus to bind to the receptor ACE2 of a host cell and
to enter the host cell [4-8]. A patient infected with SARS-CoV-2 may suffer from severe
pneumonia and acute respiratory distress syndrome [3, 9, 10]. Since the first infection case of
SARS-CoV-2 reported in December, 2019 [10, 11], SARS-CoV-2 has spread across the whole
world, which causes severe problems in medical systems, economics and other social issues.
Till early October 2020, World Health Organization (WHO) has reported more than 35 million
cases of infection and 1 million deaths in the world [12]. In addition to other control measures,
e.g. social distance and hand washing, WHO has strongly recommended a large amount of
testing not only of symptomatic persons and their contacts but also of asymptomatic contacts.
Therefore, large amounts of tests are one of the most important measures to control the outbreak
of SARS-CoV-2.
To date, polymerase chain reaction (PCR) based tests with high sensitivity and specificity
are the gold standard for the diagnostics of SARS-CoV-2 infection [13, 14]. PCR tests include
several complex experimental procedures, which costs at least a few hours to get the test results.
In a PCR test, most experimental procedures require sophisticated and very expensive
instrumentation and should be handled by experienced experts. Otherwise, there is a high
chance for a false positive/negative result. It leads to huge efforts for medical staffs in the
clinics, especially during the exponential increase in infection cases. In developing and
underdeveloped countries, the situation for the diagnostics of SARS-CoV-2 with PCR is even
worse due to the lack of equipped labs, instrumentation and experienced experts. Therefore, it
is of extreme importance and necessity to develop new methods and/or instrumentation for
rapid diagnostics of SARS-CoV-2 with reasonable costs. WHO highly encourages researches
on the performance of rapid diagnostics approaches and potential diagnostic utilities. However,

Page 2 of 21

the development of new approaches for rapid diagnostics, in addition to PCR-based tests, is
still a challenging research topic.
Homogeneous biosensing based on magnetic nanoparticles (MNPs) is one of the most
promising approaches for rapid and sensitive detection of specific biomolecules, e.g. protein,
DNA/RNA and virus. It employs the change in the magnetization dynamics and consequent
magnetic response of the MNPs exposed to time-varying magnetic fields [15]. The binding
behavior of the biomolecules to functionalized MNPs, dominated by Brownian relaxation,
increases their hydrodynamic size or forms cross-linking structures, which significantly
changes the Brownian relaxation time of the MNPs and their dynamic magnetization in timevarying magnetic fields [16-18]. For instance, for MNPs bound with biomolecules, the
harmonics in magnetic particle spectroscopy (MPS) dominated by Brownian relaxation
decrease when exposed to a sufficiently strong ac magnetic field. Especially, higher harmonics
decrease faster than the fundamental harmonic, thus showing a decrease in the harmonic ratio
that is independent of the MNP concentration [16, 19]. Thus, the measurement of the MNP
magnetization and its susceptibility/spectra in ac magnetic fields can be used to detect the
quantity of specific biomolecules. An MPS system has been demonstrated to be a low-cost,
versatile and sensitive tool to measure MNP magnetization and dynamics for biomolecule
detection [16, 20]. For instance, a mixing-frequency MPS system was designed to measure the
mixing components of protein G-functionalized MNP magnetization for antibody detection
[21]. Zhang et al. reported on the measurement of the harmonic ratio of anti-thrombin DNA
aptamers-functionalized MNPs for the detection of thrombin [22]. Zhong et al. investigated the
effect of binding behavior on MNP relaxation time and harmonic ratio for the detection and
imaging of biotinylated IgG using streptavidin functionalized MNPs [16, 19]. Yang et al.
demonstrated the feasibility of wash-free, sensitive and specific assays for the detection of
different viruses, e.g. orchid and influenza viruses, with antibody-functionalized MNPs by
measuring the reduction in the ac susceptibility in mixed-frequency ac magnetic fields [23-25].
Tian et al. reported on homogeneous detection of SARS-CoV-2 utilizing an opto-magnetic
measurement system for the detection of the RND-dependent RNA polymerase coding

Page 3 of 21

sequence of SARS-CoV-2 [26]. All these approaches have demonstrated that MNP-based
homogeneous biosensing is a wash-free and mix-and-measure approach for rapid and sensitive
detection of specific biomolecules. Therefore, it is of great interest and importance to
investigate MNP-based biosensing for rapid and sensitive detection of SARS-CoV-2.
In this paper, we propose the detection of SARS-CoV-2 via the measurement of the MPS
signal of SARS-CoV-2 spike protein antibody-functionalized MNPs. For the proof-of-concept,
SARS-CoV-2 spike protein antibody-functionalized MNPs are used as sensors to detect mimic
SARS-CoV-2 that is 100 nm polystyrene bead conjugated with SARS-CoV-2 spike protein. A
custom-built MPS system is used to measure the MPS signal of the functionalized MNPs. In
addition, the ac susceptibility (ACS) spectra are measured with a rotating magnetic field (RMF)
system for the evaluation of the Brownian relaxation time. Experiments on samples with
different mimic virus concentrations are performed to evaluate the measurement sensitivity and
limit of detection (LOD) of the present approach.

2. Materials and Methods
In this paper, functionalized MNPs dominated by Brownian relaxation are used to detect
a mimic SARS-CoV-2. The functionalized MNPs consist of BNF-80 nanoparticles coated with
protein A, purchased from micromod Partikeltechnologie GmbH (Rostock, Germany), and
SARS-CoV-2 spike protein monoclonal antibodies (anti-SARS-CoV-2 spike), purchased from
Biomol GmbH (Hamburg, Germany), as show in Fig. 1a. Due to the high binding affinity
between protein A and the antibody Fc fragment, SARS-CoV-2 spike protein antibodies are
easily conjugated onto the surface of protein A-coated BNF-80 nanoparticles. BNF-80
nanoparticles with protein A have an original iron concentration of 5.5 mg/ml and molar
particle concentration of 20 pmole/mL (20 nM). The stock BNF-80 nanoparticle sample is
diluted to 2 nM for experiments. The mimic SARS-CoV-2 consists of streptavidin-coated
polystyrene beads (purchased from micromod Partikeltechnologie GmbH) and biotinylated
SARS-CoV-2 spike proteins (RBD-SD1, Avi-His Tag, from Biomol GmbH), as show in Fig.
1b. Due to the high binding affinity between streptavidin and biotin, the biotinylated SARSCoV-2 spike proteins are conjugated onto the surface of streptavidin-functionalized
Page 4 of 21

polystyrene beads. The polystyrene beads have a nominal size of 100 nm, which is similar to
the size of SARS-CoV-2 [27].
The functionalized MNPs and mimic SARS-CoV-2 are prepared and incubated for more
than 12 hours prior to experiments. To make sure the conjugation between the antigen and
antibody is finished, experiments on the measurements of ACS spectra and MPS signal are
performed more than 1 hour after mixing the functionalized MNPs and the mimic SARS-CoV2. Totally, five experimental samples with different mimic virus concentrations from 0 to 3.38
nM are prepared. Note that in this paper all the mole quantity/concentration of mimic virus is
given by that of polystyrene beads. Table I lists all the details regarding the amounts of BNF80 nanoparticles, antibody, spike protein and polystyrene beads for sample preparation. Each
sample contains the same-concentration (2 nM) of functionalized MNPs. For the functionalized
MNPs, the quantity of the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein antibody is 4 pmole, which is –
according to preliminary tests – a balance between the binding affinity of the functionalized
MNPs and an increase in their hydrodynamic sizes. For control experiments, the protein Acoated BNF-80 nanoparticles without SARS-CoV-2 spike protein antibody are used to study
the non-specific binding between the unfunctionalized MNPs and the mimic SARS-CoV-2 as
well as an increase in viscosity due to the presence of the mimic SARS-CoV-2. The samples
for control experiments are prepared in the same way as that for measurements, except the
absence of the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein antibodies.

Fig. 1. (a) Schematic of functionalized MNPs, (b) schematic of mimic SARS-CoV-2, (c) Schematic of
MPS signal with and without mimic virus.

Page 5 of 21

Table I. Sample preparation for rapid detection of mimic SARS-CoV-2.

S1
S2
S3
S4
S5

Functionalized MNPs
BNF-80
SARS-CoV-2
with
spike protein
protein A
antibody
0.18 pmole
4 pmole
0.18 pmole
4 pmole
0.18 pmole
4 pmole
0.18 pmole
4 pmole
0.18 pmole
4 pmole

Mimic SARS-CoV-2
Total SARS-CoV-2
Polystyrene Biotinylated volume concentration
beads
spike
protein
0.000 pmole
0.0 pmole
0.00 nM
90 l
0.076 pmole
7.6 pmole
0.84 nM
90 l
0.152 pmole 15.2 pmole
1.68 nM
90 l
0.228 pmole 22.8 pmole
2.53 nM
90 l
0.304 pmole 30.4 pmole
3.38 nM
90 l

Exposed to a sufficiently strong ac magnetic field with excitation frequency f0, the MPS
signal consists of not only the fundamental harmonic at frequency f0 but also higher harmonics
at frequency i×f0. Fig. 1c shows the schematic of the MPS signal of the MNPs dominated by
Brownian relaxation. In absence of mimic SARS-CoV-2, the functionalized MNPs can freely
rotate, thus resulting in rich harmonic spectra. With the presence of mimic SARS-CoV-2, the
functionalized MNPs bind with the mimic SARS-CoV-2 due to the specific binding behavior
between antibody and antigen. This leads to an increase in effective hydrodynamic size of the
MNPs. Consequently, the functionalized MNPs cannot freely rotate or rotate slowly in
response to the excitation magnetic field, which causes a significant decrease in the MPS signal.
Therefore, the quantity of mimic SARS-CoV-2 can be measured and quantified by the
measurement of MPS signal of the functionalized MNPs. In this paper, a detection coil-based
scanning MPS system is used to measure the MPS signal of the functionalized MNPs for rapid
detection of mimic SARS-CoV-2 in 10 mT-excitation magnetic field in the frequency range
from 140 Hz to 1.4 kHz [28]. The measurement time for MPS amounts to about 9 seconds,
including 1 second for sample measurement, 1 second for blank measurement and 7 seconds
for mechanical movement. In addition, a fluxgate sensor-based RMF system is used to measure
the ACS spectra in a 0.5 mT-excitation magnetic field in the frequency range from 1 Hz to 3
kHz [29]. The sample volumes for the measurements of ACS spectra and MPS are 90 L and
70 L, respectively.

Page 6 of 21

3. Results
3.1 AC Susceptibility
Figure 2 shows the measured ACS spectra of functionalized and unfunctionalized MNPs
with different mimic virus concentrations. Fig. 2a shows the measured imaginary parts of the
ACS spectra on the functionalized MNPs. With increasing mimic virus concentration, the
shape of the ACS spectra gets broader and the peak frequency shifts to a lower frequency. This
indicates an increase in the effective Brownian relaxation time B [16]. Fig. 2b shows the
measured imaginary parts of the ACS spectra for the unfunctionalized MNPs. The shape of the
imaginary parts shown in Fig. 2b slightly shifts to lower frequencies with increasing mimic
virus concentration. It may be caused by non-specific binding between the mimic virus and the
unfunctionalized MNPs, as well as an increase in the solution viscosity due to the presence of
the mimic virus. The changes in the ACS spectra of the functionalized MNPs are much more
significant than those of the unfunctionalized MNPs, indicating that the specific binding
behaviors between the SARS-CoV-2 antigen and antibody dominate.

Page 7 of 21

Fig. 2. Experimental results of ac susceptibility spectra of functionalized (a) and unfunctionalized (b) MNPs
with different mimic virus concentration. Symbols are experimental data whereas solid lines are fitting with a
generalized Debye model with bi-lognormal size distribution.

To quantitatively investigate the dependence of the effective Brownian relaxation time B
on the mimic virus concentration, B was estimated from the peak frequency of the ac
susceptibility imaginary part. To precisely determine the peak frequency despite the limited
number of data points, the imaginary parts of the ACS spectra were fitted with a generalized
Debye model with a bimodal lognormal size distribution. The solid lines in Fig. 2 shows that
the generalized Debye model fits the experimental data very well. Then, B was calculated via
the peak frequency fpeak of the maximum in the fitted imaginary parts applying B =
1/(2××fpeak). Fig. 3 shows the dependence of the effective Brownian relaxation time B on the
mimic virus concentration of functionalized and unfunctionalized MNPs. For the
unfunctionalized MNPs, B increases by a factor of about 1.05 (from 0.687 to 0.719 ms)
whereas for functionalized MNPs B significantly increases by a factor of about 1.74 (from
Page 8 of 21

0.742 to 1.292 ms). Additional control experiments on ACS spectra were also performed with
BNF-80 nanoparticles functionalized with some other antibodies (not specific to SARS-CoV2 spike protein) and the mimic virus (data not shown), which also show minor changes in the
effective Brownian relaxation time. This indicates that the specific binding between SARSCoV-2 antigen and antibody significantly increases the effective Brownian relaxation time B.
Note that, for a mimic virus concentration cmv = 0 nM, B for the functionalized MNPs is greater
than that for the unfunctionalized MNPs, which is caused by a larger hydrodynamic size of the
functionalized MNPs due to the conjugation of SARS-CoV-2 spike protein antibodies onto the
surface of the protein A-coated BNF-80 nanoparticles. Therefore, our experimental results
demonstrate that the specific binding of the mimic SARS-CoV-2 onto the surface of the
functionalized MNPs significantly increases the effective Brownian relaxation time.

Fig. 3. Experimental results of effective Brownian relaxation time vs. mimic SARS-CoV-2 concentration.
Symbols are experimental data whereas solid lines are guides to the eyes.

Page 9 of 21

3.2 Magnetic Particle Spectroscopy
The custom-built SMPS was used to measure the 1st and 3rd harmonics (M1 and M3) of the
output voltage from the gradiometric detection coils on experimental samples in ac magnetic
fields with different excitation frequencies f0, where the harmonic at frequency i×f0 is defined
as ith harmonic Mi. Figure 4 shows the experimental results of the harmonic ratio R3rd/1st =
M3/M1 vs. frequency curves on samples with different mimic virus concentrations cmv. Note
that the harmonic ratio is independent of the MNP concentration, but only dependent on the
mimic virus concentration cmv in a given-frequency ac magnetic field. Figures 4a and 4b show
the experimental results of functionalized and unfunctionalized MNPs, respectively. Without
SARS-CoV-2 spike protein antibody functionalization, the harmonic ratio R3rd/1st of the MNPs
coated with protein A slightly decreases with increasing mimic virus concentration cmv, which
might be caused by non-specific binding and viscosity changes due to the presence of the mimic
virus. On the other hand, with SARS-CoV-2 spike protein antibody functionalization, the
harmonic ratio R3rd/1st of the functionalized MNPs decreases significantly with an increase in
the mimic virus concentration cmv. Moreover, the changes in the R3rd/1st decrease with
increasing excitation frequency, which agrees well with published results [16]. By comparing
Figs. 4a and 4b, the amounts of mimic SARS-CoV-2 can be quantified with the harmonic ratio
R3rd/1st at each single excitation frequency.

Page 10 of 21

Fig. 4. Experimental results of measured harmonic ratio R3rd/1st vs. excitation frequency of functionalized (a) and
unfunctionalized (b) MNPs with different mimic virus concentration cmv. Experimental results are averaged for
4 independent repeat measurements. Symbols are experimental results whereas solid lines are guides to the eyes.

To quantitatively evaluate the changes in R3rd/1st vs. mimic SARS-CoV-2 concentration
cmv, the absolute change R3rd/1st = R3rd/1st(cmv = 0 nM) - R3rd/1st(cmv) was calculated and
presented in Fig. 5. Figure 5a and 5b show R3rd/1st vs. mimic SARS-CoV-2 concentration cmv
curves of functionalized and unfunctionalized MNPs at different excitation frequencies,
respectively. It clearly shows that the changes in R3rd/1st vs. cmv on the functionalized MNPs
are much more significant than those on the unfunctionalized MNPs. With decreasing mimic
virus concentration cmv, the R3rd/1st values of the unfunctionalized MNPs decrease as well,
indicating that the non-specific binding or change in viscosity becomes less relevant at a low
mimic virus concentration. The percentage of R3rd/1st for unfunctionalized MNPs to that for
functionalized MNPs is less than 30%. In addition, it decreases to less than 20% with cmv =

Page 11 of 21

0.84 nM. Additional control experiments on the MPS signal were also performed with BNF80 nanoparticles functionalized with some other antibodies (not specific to SARS-CoV-2 spike
protein) and the mimic virus (data not shown), which also show minor changes in R3rd/1st. It
means that the change in R3rd/1st is dominated by the specific binding between the antibody
and antigen. Our experimental results demonstrate that the harmonic ratio R3rd/1st can be used
for the detection of mimic SARS-CoV-2.

Fig. 5. Absolute variation in measured harmonic ratio R3rd/1st vs. mimic SARS-CoV-2 concentration of
functionalized (a) and unfunctionalized (b) MNPs at different excitation frequencies. Symbols are experimental
results whereas solid lines are guides to the eyes.

3.3 Limit of Detection
The limit of detection (LOD) is one of the most important measures for sensitive detection.
To evaluate the LOD, the measurement sensitivity  and noise level on the harmonic ratio are
calculated. The measurement sensitivity, defined as the relative change in R3rd/1st to cmv
Page 12 of 21

dR3rd/1st/dcmv, is calculated by a linear fitting of the R3rd/1st vs. cmv curves shown in Fig. 5.
Figure 6a shows the measurement sensitivity vs. frequency curve for different excitation
frequencies. It indicates that with increasing frequency from 140 to 1418 Hz the measurement
sensitivity  decreases from 0.017 nM-1 to 0.004 nM-1, which quantitatively fits well with
published results [16]. The noise level is calculated with the standard deviation  of 10-repeated
measurements on the harmonic ratio of an MNP sample with cmv = 0 nM. In principle, with
increasing the excitation frequency, the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of the measured harmonic
gets improved, which would improve the standard deviation in measured harmonic ratio due
to Faraday’s law. However, the data in frequencies of 299 Hz and 459 Hz show higher noise
levels than that in 180 Hz, which may be caused by instabilities of the measurement system.
Figure 6b shows the LOD , estimated from the measurement sensitivity  and standard
deviation  by  = [30, 31]. It indicates that the LOD is in the range from about 0.10 to
0.37 nM. Note that the estimated LOD is obtained for a single measurement. With n-time
repeated measurements, the LOD can be further improved by a factor of √n.

Fig. 6. (a) shows the measurement sensitivity of mimic SARS-CoV-2 (left axis) and standard deviation (right
axis) vs. frequency curves. (b) shows the calculated limit of detection.
Page 13 of 21

To experimentally investigate the LOD of mimic SARS-CoV-2 with the present approach,
several samples with low mimic virus concentrations are prepared. Figure 7 shows the R3rd/1st
vs. cmv curves measured at different frequencies. The experimental data were averaged from 4
repeated measurements with a total measurement time of about 36 seconds (note that each of
the 4 cycles includes 1 s measurement on the MNP sample, 7 s mechanical movement of the
robot and 1 s background measurement). It clearly shows that for all the frequencies the lowest
mimic virus concentration of about 0.084 nM is detectable, which is slightly better than the
estimated LOD from 0.05 to 0.18 nM with 4 repeated measurements. It might be caused by the
underestimation of the measurement sensitivity since the measurement sensitivity is not
obtained at very low concentration of mimic virus. The present approach allows an LOD in
terms of mimic virus concentration of about 0.084 nM with a sample volume of about 70 l
and an LOD in terms of mole quantity of about 5.9 fmole.

Fig. 7. Experimental results of R3rd/1st vs. mimic SARS-CoV-2 concentration at different frequencies.
Experimental results are the average of 4-repeated measurements. Symbols are experimental data whereas solid
lines are guides to the eye.

Page 14 of 21

4. Discussion
Rapid and highly sensitive detection of SARS-CoV-2 is of great importance to control the
outbreak of SARS-CoV-2, thus improving the pandemic situation. This paper proposed the
detection of SARS-CoV-2 with functionalized MNPs via the measurements of MPS signal,
specifically the ratio of the 3rd to 1st harmonics. For a proof-of-concept, we used 100 nm-size
polystyrene beads conjugated with SARS-CoV-2 spike protein to mimic SARS-CoV-2 while
SARS-CoV-2 spike protein-functionalized MNPs are used as sensors. Our experimental results
show that the present approach allows a highly sensitive detection of mimic SARS-CoV-2 with
a LOD of about 0.084 nM (5.9 fmole) with 4-repeated measurements in about 36 seconds,
including 4 seconds for measurement on an MNP sample, 28 seconds for mechanical
movement and 4 seconds for background measurement. Note that the MPS system was built
for two-dimensional imaging. With a tailored measurement system, we believe that the LOD
can be further improved without any significant costs. For instance, a tailored MPS system can
measure 36 averages of the MPS signal within a total measurement time of 36 s if a blank
measurement is performed in advance. In this case, the LOD can be improved by a factor of
√n with n repeated measurements.
WHO has developed the ASSURED criteria as a benchmark to evaluate if tests address
disease control needs: Affordable, Sensitive, Specific, User-friendly (simple to perform in a
few steps with minimal training), Rapid and robust (results available in less than 30 min),
Equipment-free and Deliverable to end-users [32, 33]. However, rare test methods can fit all
the criteria in practice. MNP-based homogenous biosensing only requires the mixture of the
functionalized MNPs and the sample to be test without any additional washing steps. The test
results can be available in some seconds without taking into account the time required for
antigen and antibody conjugation. Finally, the consuming time for the test results with the
approach of MNP-based homogenous biosensing mainly depends on the kinetic of SARSCoV-2 antigen and antibody, which is in the order of about 10 min. It means that the present
approach is sensitive, specific, and rapid and robust. The required materials – functionalized
MNPs – are affordable, harmless and deliverable to end-users. Thus, it fits all the ASSURED

Page 15 of 21

criteria except Equipment-free. However, the measurement setup – an MPS system, which
consists of Helmholtz/solenoid coils for the generation of magnetic fields, pick-up coils for the
detection of MNP magnetization, some basic electronics for power amplifiers, pre-amplifiers
and analog-to-digital/digital-to-analog converters, can be built as a point-of-care (POC) device
with a low cost. For ultra-sensitive detection of the analyte with the absolute signal from the
magnetic response of functionalized MNPs, e.g. susceptibility and harmonic amplitude, the
LOD may be dominated by the preparation error in the MNP concentration for measurements.
The current approach employs the harmonic ratio of the 3rd to the 1st harmonics for bio-sensing,
which is independent of MNP concentration but only dependent on the analyte concentration,
thus eliminating the preparation error in the MNP concentration. Therefore, we believe that the
present approach is one of the most promising approaches for rapid diagnostic of SARS-CoV2 in terms of the ASSURED criteria.
For SARS-CoV-2 – this new virus, there have been still a lot of open questions to be
investigated. For instance, it is still an open question that how many living viruses there are in
a saliva sample and how the infectious possibility is for asymptomatic infection cases. Current
approaches for RNA detection only give the information on the RNA concentration in a saliva
sample. It means that they can only distinguish that some patients have been infected or not,
but not the infection status. For instance, RNA-based test may not distinguish some infected
patients with self-recovery who may just have some left virus RNA but no living viruses. An
approach of living virus detection will give some further information on the quantity of living
viruses in a saliva sample, which is of great importance for medical doctors to evaluate the
infectiousness. We believe that the present approach allows highly sensitive, rapid and
quantitative detection of living virus, which allows the evaluation of infection status. Especially,
combination of RNA and living virus detection will significantly contribute to the
understanding of the infection status and infectiousness. In addition, for the functionalized
MNPs bound with 100 nm viruses, the change in the hydrodynamic size is much more
significant than that for the functionalized MNPs bound with spike proteins. Thus, the direct
detection of the virus, in principle, is more sensitive than that of the spike protein. Furthermore,

Page 16 of 21

the current approach employs the measurement of magnetic signal of the functionalized MNPs,
which does not have depth limitation. When combining with multi-color magnetic particle
imaging [33-35], the present approach can be extended to visualize the spatial distribution of
SARS-CoV-2 in vivo, which is of great significance and interest not only to control the
outbreak of SARS-CoV-2 but also to fundamental researches, e.g. understanding the
underlying mechanisms of the infection process and virus proliferation.

5. Conclusion
This paper investigated rapid and sensitive detection of SARS-CoV-2 with functionalized
MNPs. For a proof-of-concept, functionalized MNPs were used as sensors to detect a mimic
virus consisting of 100 nm-polystyrene beads conjugated with SARS-CoV-2 spike proteins.
Experiments on ACS spectra and MPS signal of samples with different mimic virus
concentrations were performed. Experimental results showed that the binding behavior
between mimic SARS-CoV-2 and functionalized MNPs increases the effective Brownian
relaxation time and changing the MPS signal. The change in the ratio of the 3rd to 1st harmonics
with the mimic virus concentration was used to analyze the measurement sensitivity and limit
of detection. We believe that the proposed approach is of great promise to highly sensitive and
rapid detection with a low cost, easy handling of the sample to be detected (mix-and-measure).
We envisage that the present work is of great interest and significance to develop new methods
and design point-of-care devices for rapid diagnostics of SARS-CoV-2 to control its outbreak,
as well as fundamental researches on the virus infection.

Acknowledgements
Financial supports from the German Research Foundation DFG (Project no.: ZH 782/1-1) and
the DFG Research Training Group 1952 Metrology for Complex Nanosystems are gratefully
acknowledged. Furthermore, we thank Dr. Esther Wezel, Dr. Giulio Russo and Dr. Wei He
from TU Braunschweig, and Dr. Juhao Yang from Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research
for very interesting and helpful discussions.

Page 17 of 21

Conflicts of Interest
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

References
[1]

Coronaviridae Study Group of the International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses,
The species Severe acute respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus: classifying 2019nCoV and naming it SARS-CoV-2, Nature Microbiology, 5 536 (2020).

[2]

Kumar S, Nyodu R, Maurya V K and Saxena S K 2020 Coronavirus Disease 2019
(COVID-19): Springer) pp 23-31

[3]

Zhu N, Zhang D, Wang W, Li X, Yang B, Song J, Zhao X, Huang B, Shi W and Lu R,
A novel coronavirus from patients with pneumonia in China, 2019, New England
Journal of Medicine, (2020).

[4]

Wrapp D, Wang N, Corbett K S, Goldsmith J A, Hsieh C-L, Abiona O, Graham B S
and McLellan J S, Cryo-EM structure of the 2019-nCoV spike in the prefusion
conformation, Science, 367 1260-3 (2020).

[5]

Xu X, Chen P, Wang J, Feng J, Zhou H, Li X, Zhong W and Hao P, Evolution of the
novel coronavirus from the ongoing Wuhan outbreak and modeling of its spike protein
for risk of human transmission, Science China Life Sciences, 63 457-60 (2020).

[6]

Wang Q, Zhang Y, Wu L, Niu S, Song C, Zhang Z, Lu G, Qiao C, Hu Y and Yuen KY, Structural and functional basis of SARS-CoV-2 entry by using human ACE2, Cell,
(2020).

[7]

Ou X, Liu Y, Lei X, Li P, Mi D, Ren L, Guo L, Guo R, Chen T and Hu J,
Characterization of spike glycoprotein of SARS-CoV-2 on virus entry and its immune
cross-reactivity with SARS-CoV, Nature communications, 11 1-12 (2020).

[8]

Lan J, Ge J, Yu J, Shan S, Zhou H, Fan S, Zhang Q, Shi X, Wang Q and Zhang L,
Structure of the SARS-CoV-2 spike receptor-binding domain bound to the ACE2
receptor, Nature, 581 215-20 (2020).

[9]

Yang X, Yu Y, Xu J, Shu H, Liu H, Wu Y, Zhang L, Yu Z, Fang M and Yu T, Clinical
course and outcomes of critically ill patients with SARS-CoV-2 pneumonia in Wuhan,
Page 18 of 21

China: a single-centered, retrospective, observational study, The Lancet Respiratory
Medicine, (2020).
[10]

Wu F, Zhao S, Yu B, Chen Y-M, Wang W, Song Z-G, Hu Y, Tao Z-W, Tian J-H and
Pei Y-Y, A new coronavirus associated with human respiratory disease in China,
Nature, 579 265-9 (2020).

[11]

Lu H, Stratton C W and Tang Y W, Outbreak of pneumonia of unknown etiology in
Wuhan, China: The mystery and the miracle, Journal of medical virology, 92 401-2
(2020).

[12]

https://covid19.who.int/.

[13]

Long C, Xu H, Shen Q, Zhang X, Fan B, Wang C, Zeng B, Li Z, Li X and Li H,
Diagnosis of the Coronavirus disease (COVID-19): rRT-PCR or CT?, European
journal of radiology,

[14]

108961 (2020).

Corman V M, Landt O, Kaiser M, Molenkamp R, Meijer A, Chu D K, Bleicker T,
Brünink S, Schneider J and Schmidt M L, Detection of 2019 novel coronavirus (2019nCoV) by real-time RT-PCR, Eurosurveillance, 25 2000045 (2020).

[15]

Schrittwieser S, Pelaz B, Parak W J, Lentijo-Mozo S, Soulantica K, Dieckhoff J,
Ludwig F, Guenther A, Tschöpe A and Schotter J, Homogeneous biosensing based on
magnetic particle labels, Sensors, 16 828 (2016).

[16]

Zhong J, Schilling M and Ludwig F, Magnetic nanoparticle-based biomolecule imaging
with a scanning magnetic particle spectrometer, Nanotechnology, 31 225101 (2020).

[17]

Heim E, Ludwig F and Schilling M, Binding assays with streptavidin-functionalized
superparamagnetic

nanoparticles

and

biotinylated

analytes

using

fluxgate

magnetorelaxometry, Journal of magnetism and magnetic materials, 321 1628-31
(2009).
[18]

Hong C-Y, Wu C, Chiu Y, Yang S-Y, Horng H-E and Yang H-C, Magnetic
susceptibility reduction method for magnetically labeled immunoassay, Applied
Physics Letters, 88 212512 (2006).

Page 19 of 21

[19]

Zhong J, Janssen K-J, Draack S, Viereck T, Schilling M and Ludwig F, Dependence of
biomolecule detection on magnetic nanoparticle concentration, Journal of Magnetism
and Magnetic Materials,

[20]

167408 (2020).

Wu K, Liu J, Su D, Saha R and Wang J-P, Magnetic Nanoparticle Relaxation
Dynamics-Based Magnetic Particle Spectroscopy for Rapid and Wash-Free Molecular
Sensing, ACS applied materials & interfaces, 11 22979-86 (2019).

[21]

Tu L, Jing Y Jing, Li Y, and Wang J-P, Real-time measurement of Brownian relaxation
of magnetic nanoparticles by a mixing-frequency method, Applied Physics Letters, 98,
213702 (2011).

[22]

Zhang X, Reeves D-B, Perreard I-M, Kett W-C, Griswold K-E, Gimi B, Weaver J-B,
Molecular sensing with magnetic nanoparticles using magnetic spectroscopy of
nanoparticle Brownian motion, Biosensors and Bioelectronics, 50, 441(2013).

[23]

Yang S-Y, Chieh J-J, Wang W, Yu C, Lan C, Chen J, Horng H-E, Hong C-Y, Yang HC and Huang W, Ultra-highly sensitive and wash-free bio-detection of H5N1 virus by
immunomagnetic reduction assays, Journal of virological methods, 153 250-2 (2008).

[24]

Yang S-Y, Jian Z, Chieh J-J, Horng H-E, Yang H-C, Huang I and Hong C-Y, Washfree, antibody-assisted magnetoreduction assays of orchid viruses, Journal of
virological methods, 149 334-7 (2008).

[25]

Yang S-Y, Wang W, Lan C, Chen C, Chieh J-J, Horng H-E, Hong C-Y, Yang H-C,
Tsai C and Yang C, Magnetically enhanced high-specificity virus detection using bioactivated magnetic nanoparticles with antibodies as labeling markers, Journal of
virological methods, 164 14-8 (2010).

[26]

Tian B, Gao F, Fock J, Dufva M and Hansen M F, Homogeneous circle-to-circle
amplification for real-time optomagnetic detection of SARS-CoV-2 RdRp coding
sequence, Biosensors and Bioelectronics, 112356 (2020).

[27]

Bar-On Y M, Flamholz A, Phillips R and Milo R, Science Forum: SARS-CoV-2
(COVID-19) by the numbers, Elife, 9 e57309 (2020).

Page 20 of 21

[28]

Zhong J, Schilling M and Ludwig F, Magnetic nanoparticle temperature imaging with
a scanning magnetic particle spectrometer, Measurement Science and Technology, 29
115903 (2018).

[29]

Dieckhoff J, Schilling M and Ludwig F, Fluxgate based detection of magnetic
nanoparticle dynamics in a rotating magnetic field, Applied Physics Letters, 99 112501
(2011).

[30]

Shrivastava A and Gupta V B, Methods for the determination of limit of detection and
limit of quantitation of the analytical methods, Chronicles of young scientists, 2 21
(2011).

[31]

Thompson M, Ellison S L and Wood R, Harmonized guidelines for single-laboratory
validation of methods of analysis (IUPAC Technical Report), Pure and Applied
Chemistry, 74 835-55 (2002).

[32]

Peeling R W, Holmes K K, Mabey D and Ronald A, Rapid tests for sexually transmitted
infections (STIs): the way forward, Sexually transmitted infections, 82 v1-v6 (2006).

[33]

Pokhrel P, Hu C, and Mao H, Detecting the Coronavirus (COVID-19), ACS Sensors, 5,
2283 (2020).

[34]

Gleich B and Weizenecker J, Tomographic imaging using the nonlinear response of
magnetic particles, Nature, 435 1214-7 (2005).

[35]

Rahmer J, Halkola A, Gleich B, Schmale I and Borgert J, First experimental evidence
of the feasibility of multi-color magnetic particle imaging, Physics in Medicine &
Biology, 60 1775 (2015).

[36]

Viereck T, Kuhlmann C, Draack S, Schilling M and Ludwig F, Dual-frequency
magnetic particle imaging of the Brownian particle contribution, Journal of Magnetism
and Magnetic Materials, 427 156-61 (2017).

Page 21 of 21

