Cough droplet dispersion behind a walking person

Effects of space sizes on the dispersion of cough-generated droplets from
a walking person
Zhaobin Li,1, 2 Hongping Wang,1, 2 Xinlei Zhang,1, 2 Ting Wu,1, 2 and Xiaolei Yang1, 2, a)
1) The

State Key Laboratory of Nonlinear Mechanics, Institute of Mechanics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190,
China
2) School of Engineering Sciences, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049,
China

arXiv:2010.13348v1 [physics.flu-dyn] 26 Oct 2020

(Dated: 27 October 2020)

The dispersion of viral droplets plays a key role in the transmission of COVID-19. In this work, we analyze the dispersion of cough-generated droplets in the wake of a walking person for different space sizes. The air flow is simulated
by solving the Reynolds-Averaged Navier-Stokes equations, and the droplets are modelled as passive Lagrangian particles. Simulation results show that the cloud of droplets locates around and below the waist height of the manikin
after two seconds from coughing, which indicates that kids walking behind an infectious patient are exposed to higher
transmission risk than adults. More importantly, two distinct droplet dispersion modes occupying significantly different contamination regions are discovered. A slight change of space size is found being able to trigger the transition of
dispersion modes even though the flow patterns are still similar. This shows the importance of accurately simulating the
air flow in predicting the dispersion of viral droplets and implies the necessity to set different safe-distancing guidelines
for different environments.
COVID-19 can be transmitted via respiratory droplets when
a person is close to a patient who is coughing or sneezing1 .
The recommended safe social distance is two meters. However, it may not be enough for different conditions2,3 , as the
dispersion of viral droplets is significantly affected by the
surrounding air flows, which depend on indoor and outdoor
environments, the motion of the person, and other factors.
For this reason, accurately predicting the air flow and understanding its influence on dispersion of droplets are essential for predicting the spread range of the virus and thus to
further provide guidelines for social-distancing for different
environments. Various efforts have been reported since the
epidemic of COVID-19, including the study on the cough
droplet dispersion by wind2 , the enhancement of droplet transmission distance by walking/running/cycling in the outdoor
environment3 , and the effectiveness of face mask on preventing the droplets transmission4 , among others.
In this work, we analyze the dispersion of cough droplets
behind a walking person using Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD), focusing on the influence of the indoor space constraints on the droplet dispersion by conducting simulations
with different space sizes. The results reveal that the pattern of
droplet dispersion can be significantly altered by only a slight
change of the air flow, which demonstrates the importance of
accurately predicting the air flow in predicting virus transmission for different environments.
The numerical investigation consists of two-steps, i.e., 1)
solve the flow around the walking person, 2) simulate the
transient evolution of the cough droplets using the air flow
obtained from step 1 by assuming that the one-way coupling
is valid i.e., the air flow is not affected by the motion of the
droplets. The air flow is simulated by solving the incompressible Reynolds-Averaged Navier-Stokes (RANS) equations, as
follows:

a) Electronic

mail: xyang@imech.ac.cn

∇ · u = 0,
u · (∇u) = −

(1)
∇p
+ νeff ∇2 u,
ρ

(2)

where u denotes the velocity vector, p is the pressure, ρ is the
density of air and νeff is the effective viscosity, including both
the molecular viscosity and the turbulent eddy viscosity computed with the k − ω SST turbulence model5 . The equations
are solved with simpleFoam solver of OpenFOAM6 .
The respiratory droplets are modelled as passive particles
with three translational degrees of freedom. The rotation and
evaporation of the droplets and interactions between droplets
are excluded. The dispersion of the droplets is simulated using the Lagrangian method with their motion governed by the
following equations:
dx
= vc + vt ,
dt
dvc
m
= mg + F,
dt

(3)
(4)

where x is the instantaneous position of the particle, vc is the
computed particle velocity and vt is the stochastic velocity due
to turbulence, m is the particle mass, g is the gravity, and F is
the flow force acting on the particle, including the buoyancy
and the drag computed with the air flow. The perturbation velocity vt is computed with the stochastic dispersion model of
Gosman et al.7 , where the fluctuation in direction i is computed as
r
2k
i
vt = σ
,
(5)
3
with σ ∼ N(0, 1) following the standard normal distribution
and k is the turbulence kinematic energy obtained from the

Cough droplet dispersion behind a walking person

0.45 m
1.8 m

FIG. 1. The manikin used in the simulations.
L2
L1

H

B/2

FIG. 2. Computational domain and mesh configuration.

simulation of the air flow. The equations are solved with
icoUncoupledKinematicParcelFoam of OpenFOAM.
A human-shape manikin is employed in the simulation,
which contains details of the human body and clothes to represents a medium-built male with the height of 1.8 m and the
shoulder breadth of 0.45 m, as shown in Fig. 1. To simplify
the problem, the manikin is assumed as a rigid body without
considering the motion of arms, legs, and other body parts
relative to the overall movement.
The computational domain is rectangular with a central
symmetric plane (see Fig. 2). The domain height is H =
2.8 m, the length in front of the manikin is L1 = 2.0 m, and
the length behind the manikin is L2 = 10.0 m. Different domain breadths from B = 1.2 m to B = 6.0 m are considered to
analyze the influence of space sizes. In the flow simulation,
the reference frame is fixed to the manikin with air blowing
from the inlet. Free-slip condition is imposed on the lateral,
top, and bottom boundaries. Non-slip condition is imposed on
the manikin with wall function8 . The simulations represent a
daily scenario where a man walks at a constant speed in the
range of U ∈ [1.2, 1.8] m/s and coughs. The Reynolds number
based on the shoulder
breadth and the

 walking speed is in the
range of Re ∈ 3.6 × 104 , 5.4 × 104 .
In this work, the droplets are modelled as a cloud of
spheroid particles and are injected into the computational domain from the mouth of the manikin within 0.12 s at the beginning. The droplet diameter distribution follows the Weibull
distribution. The diameter range is d ∈ [1.0, 300.0] µm and
the mean diameter is 80.0 µm. All particles are emitted with

2
a horizontal velocity of vxc = 5.0 m/s. These characteristics
follow a recent CFD analysis of cough droplet dispersion2 . In
the simulation of the droplet dispersion, the ground fixed reference frame is employed and the manikin moves from the
right to the left.
Figure 3 shows the flow field around the manikin for B =
1.2 m and 6.0 m with walking speed U = 1.5 m/s. In Figs.
3 (a) and (e), the vertical dashed lines are two meters away
from the manikin. The small panels represent the flow field on
horizontal planes and are clipped at two meters downstream
from the manikin, to indicate the commonly practiced socialdistancing. Panels on the left are for the case with B = 1.2 m,
and those on the right are for the case with B = 6.0 m, respectively. In general, the manikin decelerates the flow around it
as bluff-body. But the flow patterns are found being strongly
related to the shape of the human body. As seen in Fig. 3 (a),
a reverse flow region exists behind the head and the torso with
the maximum reverse velocity locating approximately at the
waist-height (z = 1.0 m, marked by c). Behind the legs, the
flow is slightly faster than the ambient flow. Figures 3 (b) (c)
and (d) show the wake behind the mouth, the waist, and the
legs. As seen, the manikin’s torso part (Fig. 3 (c)) induces
the strongest wake. Special wake patterns, such as the jets
through the gaps between the hands and the torso (in Fig. 3
(c)) and the gap between the legs (in Fig. 3 (d)) are also remarkable, in which the latter one explains the high speed flow
below the waist shown in Fig. 3 (a). At two meters downstream, the wake is almost negligible at the mouth height and
the leg height as shown in Fig. 3 (b) and (d), respectively,
while it is still visible at the waist height as shown in Fig. 3
(c). For the case with B = 6.0 m, similar flow patterns are observed in Figs. 3 (e) (f) (g) and (h), but with a slightly larger
re-circulation region behind the torso and a slightly stronger
velocity deficit as compared with the case with B = 1.2 m.
Figures 4 (a) (b) and (c) compare the transverse profiles of
the streamwise velocity in the wake between the cases with
B = 1.2 m and 6.0 m at U = 1.5 m/s on the waist height. As
seen, the differences manifest mostly in the near wake. At
one meter behind the manikin (Fig. 4 (a)), the major difference exists in the velocity overshoot region outside the wake,
where the streamwise velocity of the case with B = 1.2 m is
approximately 10% larger than that of the case with B = 6.0
m. In Fig. 4 (d), the vertical profiles of the streamwise velocity are compared. As seen, the two vertical profiles are similar
with each other with complex variations and the largest velocity deficit located around the waist height. In both cases, the
upper boundary of the wake region is approximately at 1.5 m
above the ground at x = 1 m downstream of the manikin and
gradually decreases at further downstream locations. Outside
the wake in the vertical direction, the streamwise velocity is
also higher for the case with B = 1.2 m because of the higher
blockage effect due to the narrower space. Traveling downstream, the wake recovers with momentum exchange with the
free stream in both cases, and the differences between the two
cases become smaller, especially for the profiles in the transverse direction as shown in Fig. 4 (c).
After showing the flow field, we examine the dispersion of
droplets in Fig. 5 for five different instants. At t = 0.1 s, a

Cough droplet dispersion behind a walking person

3

FIG. 3. Patterns of air flow around the manikin for the cases with B = 1.2 m (left) and B = 6.0 m (right) and walking speed 1.5 m/s. Figures
on the top: contours of streamwise velocity and streamlines on the symmetrical plane; figures on the bottom: contours of streamwise velocity
on horizontal planes located at different vertical locations.

B = 1.2 m

x=1m

B = 6.0 m

x=2m

x=3m

0.6
(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f )

0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5
ux (m/s)

0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5
ux (m/s)

0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5
ux (m/s)

y (m)

0.3
0.0
−0.3
−0.6
2.5

z (m)

2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0

FIG. 4. Comparison of streamwise velocity profile behind the
manikin for the cases with B = 1.2 and 6.0 m and manikin’s walking
speed 1.5 m/s with (a) (b) (c) for transverse profiles of the streamwise
velocity ux at the waist height z = 1.0 m, and (d) (e) (f) for vertical
profiles of ux on the symmetry plane.

small cloud of droplets, marked as red dots, releases from the
manikin’s mouth. At t = 1.0 s, the cloud of droplets expands
in size and advances at a velocity smaller than the manikin.
For both cases, the cloud is of oval shape at t = 1.0 s from the
side view, which is similar to the simulation result of cough
droplets carried by mild wind without wake effect in the work

of Dbouk and Drikakis2 . This similarity of the shape of the
droplet cloud between the present work and that in the reference, in which the head is not considered, implies that the
head-induced wake has very limited effects on the droplet motion. The oval shape deformation of the droplet cloud can be
explained as the result of different advancing and settling velocities of droplets of different sizes9 . At t = 2.0 s, the cloud
drops approximately to the waist height and deforms into an
elongated shape that expands horizontally for both cases. Significant differences between the two cases are observed starting from this instant. For the case with B = 1.2 m, the cloud
is left further behind the manikin, and at t = 5.0 s the cloud
locates in the range of x ∈ [2, 4] m, leaving the region just behind the manikin (x ∈ [4, 7.5] m) nearly unaffected. In the case
with B = 6.0 m, on the other hand, a part of the droplet cloud
moves towards the manikin from t = 1.0 s to t = 2.0 s. From
t = 3.0 to 5.0 s, the left limit of the cloud catches up with
the manikin and the droplet cloud extends in a region much
broader than the case with B = 1.2 m.
These two significantly different patterns are referred to as
the attached mode and the detached mode hereafter. In the
case with B = 6.0 m, the attached mode is formed because a
large portion of the droplets falls into the re-circulation bubble
as shown by Fig. 5 (b) in the snapshots at t = 1.0 s and 2.0
s. In the case with B = 1.2 m, on the other hand, the slightly
larger overshoot velocity above the wake and the smaller recirculation bubble help the droplets escape from the reverse
flow region, forming the detached mode. A mode map for different space sizes (different B values) and different walking
speed (U) is shown in Fig. 6. As seen, the attached mode exists for most cases, while the detached mode is only observed
for cases with narrower space and higher walking speed.
In summary, we investigated the effects of space sizes on
the dispersion of cough droplets behind a walking manikin of

Cough droplet dispersion behind a walking person

4

FIG. 5. Patterns of droplet dispersion in the wake of the walking manikin for : (a) B = 1.2 m case, (b) B = 6.0 m case, with walking speed 1.5
m/s. Droplets are plotted as red dots of the same size regardless of their real diameter. At t = 1.0 s and 2.0 s, the black streamlines are added
to illustrate the range of the re-circulation bubbles.

FIG. 6. The mode map in the two-dimensional space of the domain
breadth B and the walking speed U.

coughing patient when following the current social-distancing
guideline. More importantly, two distinct particle dispersion
modes, i.e., the attached mode and the detached mode, are discovered for different space sizes. The detached mode only occurs for cases with small space and high walking speed, while
the attached mode happens for other cases. When the attached
mode happens, the cloud of droplets is observed starting from
the rear of the manikin with elongated shape in the streamwise direction. For the detached mode, on the other hand, the
cloud of droplets is separated from the manikin and convected
at much lower speed, with its size in the streamwise direction
much smaller and the droplet concentration remarkably higher
than that of the attached mode at five seconds after coughing.
This poses a great challenge on determining the safe distance
for places with high space constraint, e.g., in a very narrow
corridor, as a person may still inhale viral droplets even the
patient is far in front of him/her.

realistic shape using the RANS method. Similar flow patterns
are observed for cases with different space constraints. For all
the considered cases, suspension of droplets is observed below
the waist height of the manikin for distance larger than two
meters, indicating higher risks for kids who walk behind an

In this work, only the steady-state part of the air flow is explicitly taken into account for the dispersion of droplets without considering the flow unsteadiness, and with the effect of
turbulent fluctuations approximated with a kinematic model.
Methods of higher fidelity, such as Large-Eddy Simulation
or Direct Numerical Simulation10 , with the capacity to predict the unsteady, turbulent motion of the wake flow and the

Detached mode

Attached mode

1.8

U (m/s)

1.7
1.6
1.5
1.4
1.3
1.2
1

2

3

4

5

6

B (m)

Cough droplet dispersion behind a walking person
droplet dispersion, could be employed in the future to study
the present cases in more detail.
This work is partially supported by NSFC Basic Science
Center Program for “Multiscale Problems in Nonlinear Mechanics" (NO. 11988102).
The data that support the findings of this study are available
from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.

1 W.

H. Organization, “Modes of transmission of virus causing COVID19: implications for IPC precaution recommendations: Scientific Brief, 27
March 2020,” Tech. Rep. (World Health Organization, 2020).
2 T. Dbouk and D. Drikakis, “On coughing and airborne droplet transmission
to humans,” Physics of Fluids 32, 053310 (2020).
3 B. Blocken, F. Malizia, T. Druenen, and T. Marchal, “Towards aerody-

5
namically equivalent COVID-19 1.5 m social distancing for walking and
running,” (2020) preprint.
4 T. Dbouk and D. Drikakis, “On respiratory droplets and face masks,”
Physics of Fluids 32, 63303 (2020).
5 F. R. Menter, “Two-equation eddy-viscosity turbulence models for engineering applications,” AIAA Journal 32, 1598–1605 (1994).
6 OpenCFD, “OpenFOAM User Guide,” https://www.openfoam.com/
(2020), accessed: 2020-10-13.
7 A. Gosman and E. Loannides, “Aspects of computer simulation of liquidfueled combustors,” Journal of energy 7, 482–490 (1983).
8 D. Spalding, “A single formula for the law of the wall,” Trans. ASME., J.
Appl. Mech. 28, 444–458 (1961).
9 H. Wang, Z. Li, X. Zhang, L. Zhu, Y. Liu, and S. Wang, “The motion
of respiratory droplets produced by coughing,” Physics of Fluids (2020),
(Submitted).
10 Z. Zhou, S. Wang, and G. Jin, “A structural subgrid-scale model for relative
dispersion in large-eddy simulation of isotropic turbulent flows by coupling
kinematic simulation with approximate deconvolution method,” Physics of
Fluids 30, 105110 (2018).

