ARXIV.ORG

2020

Quantum Simulations of SARS-CoV-2 Main Protease Mpro
Enable Accurate Scoring of Diverse Ligands
Yuhang Wang1, Sruthi Murlidaran1, and David A. Pearlman1*
1

Quantum Simulation Technologies, Inc., 625 Massachusetts Ave, Floor 2, Cambridge, MA 02139

ARTICLE INFO

ABSTRACT

Article history:

The COVID-19 pandemic has led to unprecedented efforts to identify drugs that can reduce its associated

Received 15 October 2020

morbidity/mortality rate. Computational chemistry approaches hold the potential for triaging potential

Latest revision 29 October 2020

candidates far more quickly than their experimental counterparts. These methods have been widely used to
search for small molecules that can inhibit critical proteins involved in the SARS-CoV-2 replication cycle.

Keywords:

An important target is the SARS-CoV-2 main protease Mpro, an enzyme that cleaves the viral polyproteins

COVID-19, Quantum Mechanics, Drug

into individual proteins required for viral replication and transcription. Unfortunately, standard

Discovery, Drug Triage, Density

computational screening methods face difficulties in ranking diverse ligands to a receptor due to disparate

Functional Theory, SARS-CoV-2

Mpro

ligand scaffolds and varying charge states. Here, we describe full density functional quantum mechanical
(DFT/QM) simulations of Mpro in complex with various ligands to obtain absolute ligand binding energies.
Our calculations are enabled by a new cloud-native parallel DFT/QM implementation running on
computational resources from Amazon Web Services (AWS). The results we obtain are promising: the
approach is quite capable of scoring a very diverse set of existing drug compounds for their affinities to Mpro
and suggest the DFT/QM approach is potentially more broadly applicable to repurpose screening against
this target. In addition, each DFT/QM simulation required only ~1 hour (wall clock time) per ligand. The
fast turnaround time raises the practical possibility of a broad application of large-scale quantum mechanics
in the drug discovery pipeline at stages where ligand diversity is essential.

1. Introduction
Computational chemistry has made significant progress in the past
several decades, addressing bottlenecks in the drug discovery
process. The improvement is particularly visible in the ligand triage
step during the initial virtual screening phases (e.g., via molecular
docking). The increased use of computational chemistry techniques
is also seen in binary decision making near the end of a drug
discovery project when the molecular scaffold has been established,
and one seeks only to compare congeneric compounds (e.g., via
free energy calculations). However, there is a significant
computational gap in the middle of the discovery process, where
more diverse compounds are encountered. There is an urgent need
for computational approaches that can rank order dozens, or
hundreds, of unrelated compounds, with sufficiently high
accuracy1.

* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: pearlman@qsimulate.com

The technical requirements of such an approach are that it should
be able to (1) score ligands with diverse scaffolds; (2) deal with
variances in formal charge and polarization; (3) be applicable to
realistic models of ligand/protein interactions; and (4) perform
these calculations sufficiently quickly to be compatible with
modern drug discovery, all while retaining good accuracy. Existing,
widely used methods, such as those based on free energy
perturbation and classical force fields2, 3, usually satisfy criteria 34 but fail 1-2. In principle, high-level quantum mechanical
calculations, at the level of modern density functional theory
(DFT/QM), can address both 1-2, but, until recently, could not be
performed on large enough systems with sufficient throughput to
address points 3-44, 5. In a recent publication6, we described an
implementation of a new algorithm for quantum calculations
(“high-efficiency distributed QM” (hedQM)). This implementation
allows quantum determinations at the DFT/QM level to be
performed with reasonable throughput (~1 hour) on systems much
larger than ever before possible - for example, full proteins -

2

WANG, MURLIDARAN & PEARLMAN (2020) ARXIV

enabled by easily accessible commercial cloud compute resources,
such as those offered by Amazon Web Services (AWS).
Here, we apply this method to a data set germane to identifying
new drugs that might help battle the COVID-19 virus. The dataset
originates from a recent publication7, and we briefly describe its
construction here. A set of more than 2,500 drug molecules
previously approved for various applications were subjected to a
computational screen against Mpro, the SARS-CoV-2 main
protease8. This enzyme cleaves viral polyproteins into individual
proteins required for viral replications and transcription, and it is

hypothesized that inhibiting this protein would inhibit replication
of the COVID-19 virus9. From this computational screen, 100
molecules were identified as having the potential to bind to Mpro
using a combination of molecular docking and absolute binding
free energy calculations. Subsequently, this set of ligands was
screened experimentally, leading to a set of 16 molecules with
measurable binding to the Mpro receptor. With experimentally
determined binding affinity values for Mpro, this set of ligands
serves as the validation set for this study. The chemical structures
of these drug molecules are shown in Figure 1.

Figure 1. Drug molecules examined in this study. Each has been experimentally determined7 to bind with measurable affinity to SARSCoV-2 Mpro. For each ligand, several isomers were considered, leading to a range of charge states.
Two observations can immediately be made about this set of
molecules. First, they are extremely diverse and reflect a highly
divergent set of scaffold classes. Second, they also reflect a
diversity of charge states across the potential isomers. These
challenges are precisely those raised in points 1-2 above. In

particular, the diversity of charge states makes it an extremely
challenging data set to model by standard force-fields and
associated molecular mechanics methods10. The multiple scaffold
classes render the set difficult or impossible to address with relative
difference methods like FEP, which typically require that the

WANG, MURLIDARAN & PEARLMAN (2020) ARXIV

ligands being studied be fairly similar to one another11. For these
reasons, this is a data set that has the potential to demonstrate the
value that a high-level quantum approach –-capable of determining
absolute energies of binding -- can bring to such an investigation.

3

solvent model22 (igb=5), the Amber 14 force field23, and the GAFF
force field24 for ligands, assigned using Antechamber from
AmberTools.
To determine the lowest energy conformation of the unbound
ligand, we used a combination of conformers generated from the
classical mechanics search method RDKit25 and the semi-empirical

2. Methods
The set of 16 drug compounds with experimentally measured
binding to Mpro is taken from a recent study7, as are the
experimental ligand binding free energies. One compound
(disulfiram) reported in that publication is omitted because it is
believed to be covalently bound12. For the remaining 15
compounds, we applied our cloud-native parallel hedQM approach
to determine the absolute energy of binding at the DFT/QM level.
We used the revPBE functional13 with the D3(BJ) dispersion
correction14, the def2-SVP basis15 in a 9.1 A sphere around the
ligand within the binding site, and a minimal basis (MINAO)16 for
atoms outside this sphere. Details of the DFT/QM calculations are
provided in the supplemental information.
Since experimental structures of the bound ligand/protein
complexes were not available, it was necessary to generate them
using structure-based docking. A crystallographic structure of the
Mpro protein (Mpro-x3080) was obtained from the Diamond Light
Source (UK) synchrotron facility’s Fragalysis web application 17.
These crystal structures of Mpro were determined as part of the
COVID Moonshot project18. AutoDock Bias method19 was then
used for docking. The Mpro protein structure consists of a domain
including the binding site and a second alpha-helical domain
located far from the binding site. In solution, the protein forms a
homodimer. To optimize computational cost, we truncated the
beginning of the unstructured N-terminal region (SER1 to LYS5)
and the alpha-helical domain (residue ASP197 to THR304). The
new terminal residues (MET6 and THR196) were capped with
ACE and NME terminal patches, respectively. The protein
structure is shown in Figure 2. The truncated protein, which retains
the active site, contains 2900 atoms. The atoms shown in gray are
those truncated off for the calculations.
For each ligand, we included several isomers, and each isomer was
processed independently during the docking process, then all poses
for the same parent molecule were aggregated for the subsequent
scoring process. A total of 100 docked complexes were generated
for each ligand. To rank the docked poses, we first evaluated the
total energies of the docked structures at the molecular mechanics
level. Then we selected the top-50 docked poses and tightly
minimized the structures using molecular mechanics (see
supplemental information). From the resulting set of 50 MMminimized docked structures, the ten lowest energy ligand/protein
poses were further optimized using the semi-empirical GFN1-xTB
method20. The two lowest-energy GFN1-xTB ligand/protein poses
for each ligand were then selected for full DFT/QM calculation.
The post-docking classical mechanics calculations were carried out
using AmberTools2021, using the Generalized Born implicit

Figure 2. Mpro protein with a ligand (dipyridamole) bound to its
active site. The region in gray was excluded from all calculations.
The ligand is shown in licorice representation (image generated
using PyMOL26).
conformational search protocol in CREST27. From the set of
resultant conformers, the energies of the ten lowest energy
structures were recalculated using DFT/QM using the C-PCM
implicit solvent model28.
The net energy of binding is determined from the relationship:
ΔE (P+L → P•L) = E(P•L) – E(Pcomplex) –E(Lmin)

(1)

where E(P•L) is the energy of the complex, E(P complex) is the energy
of the protein alone, in the same conformation as the complex, and
E(Lmin) is the minimum energy of unbound ligand conformer,
determined using the search approach described above. To reflect
conformational sampling, we used Boltzmann averaging for the
two most favorable docked poses for each ligand isomer, and linear
averaging for the ligand isomers (this avoids difficulties in
reweighting energies of isomers with different numbers of atoms).

3. Results
The net binding energies calculated using full DFT/QM are
presented in Figure 3. We use this as a ranking score and plot it
against the experimental binding free energies in a correlation plot.
For comparison, the same plot is presented for the semi-empirical
GFN1-xTB quantum method in Figure 4.

4

WANG, MURLIDARAN & PEARLMAN (2020) ARXIV

Figure 3: Binding energies predicted using DFT/QM. The trend line is calculated excluding the outlier indinavir. The overall R 2 value for
all points (including indinavir) is 0.55. The R2 value excluding indinavir is 0.77. The Predictive Indices with and without indinavir are 0.74
and 0.88, respectively.

Figure 4: Binding energies predicted using GFN1-xTB. The trend line is plotted is calculated excluding the outlier indinavir. Overall R2
value for all points (including indinavir) is 0.07. The R2 value excluding indinavir is 0.09. The Predictive Indices with and without indinavir
are 0.08 and 0.15, respectively.
As can be seen, the correlation obtained using DFT/QM
calculations of the COVID binding domain is very good, with an
R2 value of 0.55, and a Predictive Index29 (a weighted measure of

the ability of a predictor to properly rank order) of 0.74. Only one
ligand (indinavir) falls far off the correlation line for reasons that
are not clear. It is particularly satisfying to observe that DFT/QM

ARXIV.ORG

2020

Figure 5. The computed ROC curves for the GFN1-xTB and DFT/QM data are shown in Figure 4, with 7 ligands that experimentally best
bind (Ki < 800 nM) designated as true positives. The AUC for GFN1-xTB (left) is 0.71, while the AUC for DFT/QM (right) is 0.89.
very clearly differentiates the two ligands that bind best
experimentally (dipyridamole and candesartan cilexetil) from the
remaining ligands. In contrast, the simpler semi-empirical QM
approximation fails to capture the correlation for this ligand set,
with an R2 of 0.07 and a Predictive Index of 0.08.
Evaluation of the DFT/QM results using ROC analysis30 further
corroborates this analysis. If we take the best half of the binders
(top 7) and designate them as the “hits” (equivalent to designating
all binders that bind better than 800nM as hits), we get the curves
shown in Figure 5. The area under the curve for DFT/QM is 0.89,
reflecting an excellent ability to differentiate the better binders
from the remaining ligands in this set.
In addition to the QM-based approaches we have applied, the
publication that identified this data set7 described the application
of a classical mechanics FEP-based approach to the determination
of absolute binding free energies for this set. They obtained some
signal with their approach, with an R2 of 0.31 and a Predictive
Index of 0.66, although the results we obtained with DFT/QM
significantly improve on this. Given the diversity in formal charges
among the ligands, which is better addressed with QM, this is not
surprising.
To further understand the origins of the differing predictions using
semi-empirical GFN1-xTB and full DFT/QM, in Fig. 6 we plot the
binding energies computed using the two methods against each

* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: pearlman@qsimulate.com

other. We color code the ligands by their charges, and we plot the
energies of the different isomers considered for each ligand
separately (as they may have different charges). Points in the plot
are colored black for neutral, orange for positively charged, and
green for negatively charged. As can be seen from the plot, the
correlation between the semi-empirical and DFT/QM binding
energies is moderate when limited to either the neutral or positively
charged ligands but is very poor when multiple charge types are
considered. For the negatively charged ligands, the correlation is
even worse. This is consistent with the fact that charged systems,
and especially anions, are more challenging for semi-empirical
methods because the corresponding wavefunctions and charge
densities are parametrized by atomic minimal bases that cannot
fully respond to large polarization effects.
As noted earlier, comparing multiple ligands with varying net
charges is well-known to be challenging in comparative analysis.
It is thus reassuring to observe that the charge of the ligand does
not bias the DFT/QM-based binding affinity predictions. This is,
of course, a fundamental advantage of QM when compared to
force-fields, and of full DFT/QM calculations that use realistic
bases when compared to semi-empirical quantum approximations.
The predictive power of DFT/QM on this set is particularly
noteworthy because of the uncertainties associated with the
conformations for both the bound ligand/complex and the unbound
ligand and because the energy determinations are single-point
energies, effectively at 0º K with no entropic contribution

ARXIV.ORG

2020

Figure 6: A comparison of the scores calculated using the semi-empirical approach (GFN1-xTB) and DFT/QM. Many of the 15 ligands
are represented by multiple data points, corresponding to multiple isomers of that ligand. Black: neutral ligand isomers. Orange: positively
charged ligand isomers. Green: negatively charged ligand isomers.

4. Discussion
We have demonstrated that high-level quantum mechanics (density
functional theory with dispersion corrections, using a realistic
basis) can be successfully applied to rank order a scaffold-diverse
set of ligands to a realistic protein receptor model—focusing on a
set of existing drugs that are known to bind to the COVID-19
relevant protein Mpro. The full density functional treatment
provides results that are substantially better than those obtained
using a semi-empirical quantum approximation (which show
almost no correlation for this dataset). Despite a quantum
mechanical domain of nearly 3000 atoms, these calculations were
carried out with realistic turnaround times and modest, accessible
cloud-based computational resources using our recently described
parallel implementation of DFT/QM quantum mechanics. Each
ligand isomer calculation required ~1 hour in wall clock time with
14 AWS r5.24xlarge instances, with a compute cost of less than
$90 (On-Demand instances) or $15 (Spot Instances).
In light of this performance, scope of applicability, and throughput,
one could envision running a fully quantum-based screening
campaign on hundreds, or even thousands, of compounds, with

* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: pearlman@qsimulate.com

diverse scaffolds, charges, and chemical structures—an endeavour
that would be extremely difficult or impossible using current
methods based on force-fields. The flexibility of the quantum
mechanical approach thus offers potentially new ways to use
computation to advance drug discovery.
The idea that QM can be applied to drug discovery is not a new one.
But earlier efforts have had to make a variety of compromises, e.g.,
via semi-empirical energy functions, fragment or linear-scaling
approximations that introduce substantial cutoffs31 or else have
restricted QM to a small nucleus in QM/MM treatments5. In
addition, the observed turnaround time using these approaches has
typically been unrealistically long, on the timescale of days or
weeks. These compromises have been an obstacle to realizing the
predictive potential of QM in the context of drug discovery. For
example, we see that semi-empirical parameterizations, even in
their modern incarnations such as GFN1-xTB, lead to substantial
errors in evaluating interactions such as charge transfer that are
required to suitably assess diverse ligands. Similarly, QM/MM or
fragmentation methods introduce errors caused by artificial
boundaries and inaccurate treatment of long-range charge
polarization31-33. What we have now demonstrated is that it is
practical to treat a substantial region of a ligand/protein system –
several thousand atoms - with full DFT/QM without introducing

WANG, MURLIDARAN & PEARLMAN (2020) ARXIV

compromises and on a realistic computational timescale, a
significant practical advance over previous applications of QM to
drug discovery.
It is important to note that although the DFT/QM calculations
described herein performed quite well, these calculations only
predict the 0º K enthalpy of binding. Entropic contributions,
including desolvation of the binding pocket, as well as the entropic
changes arising from conformational variability of the ligand and
protein, have not been included. The quality of results for this set
suggests that these contributions may be of minor importance for
this protein target and ligand set, but looking more broadly, there
will assuredly be systems where that is not the case. To address
these issues, we are currently working on integrating corrections to
the approach we have used to account for the desolvation entropy
and for the entropic contributions of the ligand and protein. We will
report on these improvements in a future publication.

5. Acknowledgements
We thank Garnet Chan for his continual and extensive advice and
discussion as this work was carried out and Toru Shiozaki for his
assistance with the quantum calculations and his constant
encouragement of this work. We also thank Satish Gandhi at
Amazon Web Services (AWS), Simone Severini, Eric Kessler, and
other members of the AWS Quantum Technologies team, and the
AWS organization for the very generous computational support
that made this work possible.

6. References
1.
Cournia, Z.; Allen, B. K.; Beuming, T.; Pearlman, D. A.; Radak,
B. K.; Sherman, W., Rigorous Free Energy Simulations in Virtual
Screening. J. Chem. Inf. Model. 2020, 60, 4153-4169.
2.
Pearlman, D. A.; Rao, B. G., Free energy calculations: methods
and applications. John Wiley & Sons: New York, 1998; p 1036-1061.
3.
Mobley, D. L.; Gilson, M. K., Predicting Binding Free Energies.
Annu. Rev. Biophys. 2016, 46, 1-28.
4.
Merz, K. M., Using Quantum Mechanical Approaches to Study
Biological Systems. Accounts of Chemical Research 2014, 47, 2804-2811.
5.
Ryde, U.; Söderhjelm, P., Ligand-Binding Affinity Estimates
Supported by Quantum-Mechanical Methods. Chem. Rev. 2016, 116, 55205566.
6.
Mardirossian, N.; Wang, Y.; Pearlman, D. A.; Chan, G. K.-L.;
Shiozaki, T., Novel algorithms and high-performance cloud computing
enable efficient fully quantum mechanical protein-ligand scoring. Arxiv
2020.
7.
Li, Z.; Li, X.; Huang, Y.-Y.; Wu, Y.; Liu, R.; Zhou, L.; Lin, Y.;
Wu, D.; Zhang, L.; Liu, H.; Xu, X.; Yu, K.; Zhang, Y.; Cui, J.; Zhan, C.G.; Wang, X.; Luo, H.-B., Identify potent SARS-CoV-2 main protease
inhibitors via accelerated free energy perturbation-based virtual screening
of existing drugs. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 2020,
202010470.
8.
Anand, K.; Palm, G. J.; Mesters, J. R.; Siddell, S. G.; Ziebuhr,
J.; Hilgenfeld, R., Structure of coronavirus main proteinase reveals
combination of a chymotrypsin fold with an extra α-helical domain. The

7

EMBO Journal 2002, 21, 3213-3224.
9.
Dai, W.; Zhang, B.; Jiang, X.-M.; Su, H.; Li, J.; Zhao, Y.; Xie,
X.; Jin, Z.; Peng, J.; Liu, F.; Li, C.; Li, Y.; Bai, F.; Wang, H.; Cheng, X.;
Cen, X.; Hu, S.; Yang, X.; Wang, J.; Liu, X.; Xiao, G.; Jiang, H.; Rao, Z.;
Zhang, L.-K.; Xu, Y.; Yang, H.; Liu, H., Structure-based design of antiviral
drug candidates targeting the SARS-CoV-2 main protease. Science 2020,
368, 1331-1335.
10.
Rocklin, G. J.; D, M.; Dill, K. A.; Hünenberger, P. H.,
Calculating the binding free energies of charged species based on explicitsolvent simulations employing lattice-sum methods: an accurate correction
scheme for electrostatic finite-size effects. J Phys Chem 2013, 139, 184103.
11.
Lee, T.-S.; Allen, B. K.; Giese, T. J.; Guo, Z.; Li, P.; Lin, C.;
McGee, T. D.; Pearlman, D. A.; Radak, B. K.; Tao, Y.; Tsai, H.-C.; Xu, H.;
Sherman, W.; York, D. M., Alchemical Binding Free Energy Calculations
in AMBER20: Advances and Best Practices for Drug Discovery. J. Chem.
Inf. Model. 2020.
12.
Lin, M.-H.; Moses, D. C.; Hsieh, C.-H.; Cheng, S.-C.; Chen, Y.H.; Sun, C.-Y.; Chou, C.-Y., Disulfiram can inhibit MERS and SARS
coronavirus papain-like proteases via different modes. Antivir Res 2018,
150, 155-163.
13.
Zhang, Y.; Yang, W., Comment on “Generalized Gradient
Approximation Made Simple”. Physical Review Letters 1998, 80, 890-890.
14.
Grimme, S.; Ehrlich, S.; Goerigk, L., Effect of the damping
function in dispersion corrected density functional theory. Journal of
computational chemistry 2011, 32, 1456-1465.
15.
Weigend, F.; Ahlrichs, R., Balanced basis sets of split valence,
triple zeta valence and quadruple zeta valence quality for H to Rn: Design
and assessment of accuracy. Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics 2005, 7,
3297-3305.
16.
Knizia, G., Intrinsic Atomic Orbitals: An Unbiased Bridge
between Quantum Theory and Chemical Concepts. J. Chem. Theory
Comput. 2013, 9, 4834-4843.
17.
Fragalysis Mpro crystal structures provided by the Fragalysis
web
application
(Diamond
Light
Source/UK).
https://fragalysis.diamond.ac.uk/viewer/react/preview/target/Mpro
18.
Chodera, J.; Lee, A. A.; London, N.; Delft, F. v., Crowdsourcing
drug discovery for pandemics. Nat Chem 2020, 12, 581-581.
19.
Arcon, J. P.; Modenutti, C. P.; Avendaño, D.; Lopez, E. D.;
Defelipe, L. A.; Ambrosio, F. A.; Turjanski, A. G.; Forli, S.; Marti, M. A.,
AutoDock Bias: improving binding mode prediction and virtual screening
using known protein–ligand interactions. Bioinformatics 2019, 35, 38363838.
20.
Grimme, S.; Bannwarth, C.; Shushkov, P., A Robust and
Accurate Tight-Binding Quantum Chemical Method for Structures,
Vibrational Frequencies, and Noncovalent Interactions of Large Molecular
Systems Parametrized for All spd-Block Elements (Z = 1–86). J. Chem.
Theory Comput. 2017, 13, 1989-2009.
21.
Case, D. A.; Belfon, K.; Ben-Shalom, I. Y.; Brozell, S. R.;
Cerutti, D. S.; Cheatham, T. E. I.; Cruzeiro, V. W. D.; Darden, T. A.; Duke,
R. E.; Giambasu, G.; Gilson, M. K.; Gohlke, H.; Goetz, A. W.; Harris, R.;
Izadi, S.; Izmailov, S. A.; Kasavajhala, K.; Kovalenko, A.; Krasny, R.;
Kurtzman, T.; Lee, T. S.; LeGrand, S.; Li, P.; Lin, C.; Liu, J.; Luchko, T.;
Luo, R.; Man, V.; Merz, K. M.; Miao, Y.; Mikhailovskii, O.; Monard, G.;
Nguyen, H.; Onufriev, A.; F.Pan; Pantano, S.; Qi, R.; Roe, D. R.; Roitberg,
A.; Sagui, C.; Schott-Verdugo, S.; Shen, J.; Simmerling, C. L.; Skrynnikov,

8

WANG, MURLIDARAN & PEARLMAN (2020) ARXIV

N. R.; Smith, J.; Swails, J.; Walker, R. C.; Wang, J.; Wilson, L.; Wolf, R.
M.; Wu, X.; Xiong, Y.; Xue, Y.; York, D. M.; Kollman, P. A. Amber 20,
University of California, San Francisco: 2020.
22.
Onufriev, A.; Bashford, D.; Case, D. A., Exploring protein
native states and large‐scale conformational changes with a modified
generalized born model. Proteins: Structure, Function, and Bioinformatics
2004, 55, 383-394.
23.
Maier, J. A.; Martinez, C.; Kasavajhala, K.; Wickstrom, L.;
Hauser, K. E.; Simmerling, C., ff14SB: Improving the Accuracy of Protein
Side Chain and Backbone Parameters from ff99SB. J. Chem. Theory
Comput. 2015, 11, 3696-3713.
24.
Wang, J.; Wolf, R. M.; Caldwell, J. W.; Kollman, P. A.; Case,
D. A., Development and testing of a general amber force field. Journal of
computational chemistry 2004, 25, 1157-1174.
25.
Rdkit RDKit version 2020.03.1 https://www.rdkit.org,
2020.03.1; 2020.
26.
DeLano, W. L. The PyMOL Molecular Graphics System,
Version 2.0 Schrödinger, LLC, 2020.
27.
Pracht, P.; Bohle, F.; Grimme, S., Automated exploration of the
low-energy chemical space with fast quantum chemical methods. Physical
Chemistry Chemical Physics 2020, 22, 7169-7192.
28.
Mennucci, B., Polarizable continuum model. Wiley Interdiscip
Rev Comput Mol Sci 2012, 2, 386-404.
29.
Pearlman, D. A.; Charifson, P. S., Are free energy calculations
useful in practice? A comparison with rapid scoring functions for the p38
MAP kinase protein system. J Med Chem 2001, 44, 3417-23.
30.
Goksuluk, D.; Selcuk, K.; Zararsiz, G.; Karaagaoglu, A. E.,
easyROC: An Interactive Web-tool for ROC Curve Analysis Using R
Language Environment The R Journal 2016, 8:2, 213-230.
31.
Antony, J.; Grimme, S., Fully ab initio protein-ligand
interaction energies with dispersion corrected density functional theory.
Journal of computational chemistry 2012, 33, 1730-1739.
32.
Fox, S. J.; Dziedzic, J.; Fox, T.; Tautermann, C. S.; Skylaris, C.K., Density functional theory calculations on entire proteins for free
energies of binding: Application to a model polar binding site. Proteins:
Structure, Function, and Bioinformatics 2014, 82, 3335-3346.
33.
Cole, D. J.; Skylaris, C. K.; Rajendra, E.; Venkitaraman, A. R.;
Payne, M. C., Protein-protein interactions from linear-scaling firstprinciples quantum-mechanical calculations. EPL (Europhysics Letters)
2010, 91, 37004.

