Global Sentiment Analysis Of COVID-19 Tweets Over Time*

arXiv:2010.14234v2 [cs.CL] 10 Nov 2020

Muvazima Mansoor1 , Kirthika Gurumurthy2 , Anantharam R U3 , and V R Badri Prasad4

Abstract—The Coronavirus pandemic has affected the normal
course of life. People around the world have taken to social media
to express their opinions and general emotions regarding this
phenomenon that has taken over the world by storm. The social
networking site, Twitter showed an unprecedented increase in
tweets related to the novel Coronavirus in a very short span
of time. This paper presents the global sentiment analysis of
tweets related to Coronavirus and how the sentiment of people
in different countries has changed over time. Furthermore,
to determine the impact of Coronavirus on daily aspects of
life, tweets related to Work From Home (WFH) and Online
Learning were scraped and the change in sentiment over time
was observed. In addition, various Machine Learning models
such as Long Short Term Memory (LSTM) and Artificial Neural
Networks (ANN) were implemented for sentiment classification
and their accuracies were determined. Exploratory data analysis
was also performed for a dataset providing information about
the number of confirmed cases on a per-day basis in a few of the
worst-hit countries to provide a comparison between the change
in sentiment with the change in cases since the start of this
pandemic till June 2020.

an inconvenience due to the lack of high-speed internet or
smart devices. This paper presents how some daily aspects
of life have been affected by analyzing people’s sentiment
towards online learning and WFH scenarios. To gauge the
sentimental content of the tweets, a technique called sentiment
analysis was used to label the tweets as Positive, Negative, or
Neutral. A dataset created from scraping tweets and labeling
the sentiment using the sentiment lexicon VADER was then
used to train classification models such as LSTM and ANN.
While Sentiment Analysis of the tweets can reflect the general
opinion of people, it does not convey the actual impact of the
virus that is seen in the number of cases and deaths that are
exponentially increasing every day. Therefore, exploratory data
analysis of a dataset containing the daily number of cases and
deaths in a few of the worst-hit countries was performed as
well to provide a comparison between the public sentiment
and the rise or fall in cases globally.

Index Terms—Coronavirus, Twitter, Sentiment Analysis, Work
From Home, Online Learning, Long Short Term Memory,
Artificial Neural Networks

II. LITERATURE REVIEW

I. INTRODUCTION
The pandemic has had a pronounced effect on the lives
of human beings across the world. The outbreak has not
only created havoc in physical health, economic conditions,
working conditions, and the manufacturing sector to name a
few but has also created a niche in the minds of the people
around the world. It has had serious repercussions on the
psychological state of the humans that is most evident now
[1]. Social Media platforms like Twitter are a great resource
to capture human emotions and thoughts. During these trying
times, people have taken to social media to discuss their
fears, opinions, and insights on the global pandemic. This
paper is an effort towards the analysis of tweets and the
change in sentiments of the people globally from January
2020 to June 2020. Due to government-imposed lock-downs
to contain the spread of the virus, people were forced to adapt
to Work From Home scenarios, and educational institutions
were asked to implement online learning. Some people might
regard WFH as a necessary step, while others regard it as
*This work was not supported by any organization
1 Muvazima
Mansoor is with the Department of Electronics
and Communication, PES University, Bengaluru, Karnataka, India

muvazima99@gmail.com
2 Kirthika
Gurumurthy is with
puter
Science,
PES
University,

the Department of
Bengaluru,
Karnataka,

ComIndia

kirthikagurumurthy@gmail.com
3 Anantharam R U is with the Department of Computer Science, PES University, Bengaluru, Karnataka, India anantharamru99@gmail.com
4 Badri Prasad is with the Faculty of Department of Computer Science, PES
University, Bengaluru, Karnataka, India badriprasad@pes.edu

This study was informed by multiple research articles from
various disciplines and therefore, in this section literature
review on sentiment analysis, Vader, LSTM, and ANN are
covered.
A. Sentiment Analysis
Munikar et al [2] describe Sentiment analysis as a supervised machine learning problem. There are different types of
sentiment analysis including fine-grained sentiment analysis,
aspect-based sentiment analysis, and emotion detection. In
binary sentiment classification, the possible classifications are
positive and negative. In fine-grained sentiment classification,
there are five groups- positive, very positive, neutral, negative,
and very negative. In this paper, we have performed binary
sentiment classification and emotion detection, primarily fear
and trust.
B. Vader
Gilbert [3] developed VADER, which is a rule-based model
for general sentiment analysis, and compared its effectiveness
to 11 typical benchmarks, including Word Count (LIWC),
Affective Norms for English Words(ANEW), the General
Inquirer, Linguistic Inquiry, Senti WordNet, and machine
learning techniques that rely on Support Vector Machine
(SVM) algorithms, Naive Bayes and, Maximum Entropy. The
study described the validation, evaluation, and development
of VADER. The author used a combination of qualitative and
quantitative methods to produce a sentiment lexicon that is
used in the social media domain. VADER uses a parsimonious
rule-based model to gauge the sentiment of tweets.

C. LSTM Neural Networks
Hochreiter et al.[4] analyze the vanishing gradient problem
in detail. When the gradient of the error function of the neural
network is propagated back through a unit of a neural network,
it gets scaled by a factor smaller than one or greater than one.
Due to this, the gradient blows up or decays exponentially
over time in a recurrent neural network. Therefore, the gradient
either gets lost or dominates the next weight adaptation step.
To overcome this shortcoming, the authors re-designed the unit
of a neural network in such a way that the scaling factor
is always one. To overcome the limitation in the learning
capabilities due to the new unit, it was enriched by gating
units. The gating units add the activations of the current layer
and the activations of the previously hidden layer from the
previous time step and the inner activation of the LSTM unit.
The LSTM unit along with the gating units can be interpreted
as a differentiable version of computer memory. Thus, LSTM
units are also known as LSTM memory cells. Sundermeyer et
al.[5] mention that the LSTM architecture solves the vanishing
gradient problem at small computational extra-costs. It also has
the desirable property of including standard recurrent neural
network units as a special case.
D. Artificial Neural Networks
James [6] describes the Artificial Neural Network as a
collection of processing elements that are interconnected and
transform a set of inputs into a set of desired outputs. The
result of the transformation is determined by the characteristics
of the elements and the weights associated with the interconnections among them. By modifying the connections between
the nodes the network is able to adapt to the desired outputs.
A neural network analyzes the information and provides a
probability estimate that the data matches the characteristics
which it has been trained to recognize. The accuracy decisions
by the neural network rely totally on the experience the system
gains in analyzing instances of the stated problem. The neural
network gains experience by training the system to correctly
identify the preselected instances of the problem. The response
of the neural network is analyzed and the configuration of the
system is corrected until the neural network’s analysis of the
training data reaches a satisfactory level. The neural network
gains experience over time as it performs analyses on data
related to the problem.
E. Related Works
Rajput et al.[1] present a statistical analysis of the twitter
messages related to Coronavirus posted since January 2020.
They performed two types of empirical studies. The first on
word frequency and the second on sentiments of the individual
tweet messages. Unigram, bigram, and trigram frequencies
were modeled by a power-law distribution. The results were
validated by the Sum of Square Error (SSE), R2, and Root
Mean Square Error (RMSE). High values of R2 and low values
of SSE and RMSE lay the grounds for the goodness of fit of
the model. The results showed that the majority of the tweets
had a positive polarity and only about 15% were negative.

Samuel, Jim, et al.[7] identify the general public sentiment
related to the pandemic using Coronavirus specific Tweets using R statistical software and its sentiment analysis packages.
The authors demonstrate an insight into the progress of fearsentiment over time as COVID-19 approached peak levels in
the US, using descriptive textual analytics. In addition, they
provide an overview of two essential machine learning (ML)
classification methods-Naive Bayes and Logistic Regression,
and compare their effectiveness in classifying tweets of varying lengths. Naive Bayes gave an accuracy of 0.9143 for
shorter tweets and an accuracy of 0.5714 for longer tweets.
Whereas, Logistic Regression gave an accuracy of 0.7429 for
shorter tweets and an accuracy of 0.52 for longer tweets.
Barkur et al. [8], analyze sentiments of Indians regarding
lockdown announcements. The authors extracted Tweets using
two prominent hashtags namely: #IndiaLockdown and #IndiafightsCorona from March 25th to March 28th, 2020. A
total of 24,000 tweets were considered for the analysis done
using R statistical software. The prominent sentiment was
positive, followed by the trust. Overall, the results show that
Indians have taken the fight against Covid19 positively and the
majority are in agreement with the government for announcing
the lockdown to flatten the curve.
Li, Sijia, et al[9] explore the impacts of COVID-19 on people’s mental health, assist policymakers to develop actionable
policies, and help clinical practitioners provide timely services
to affected populations. The authors analyze and sample
Weibo posts from 17,865 active users using the approach
of Online Ecological Recognition based on several machinelearning predictive models. They calculated word frequency,
scores of emotional indicators, and cognitive indicators from
the collected data. The paired sample t-test and sentiment
analysis were performed to examine the differences in the
same group before and after the declaration of COVID-19
on 20 January 2020. The results showed that sensitivity and
negative emotions towards social risks increased, while the
scores of life satisfaction and positive emotions decreased.
Jang, Hyeju, et al.[10] investigate people’s reactions and concerns about COVID-19 in North America, especially focusing
on Canada. They analyze COVID-19 related tweets using topic
modeling and aspect-based sentiment analysis and interpret the
results with public health experts. They compare the timeline
of topics discussed with the timing of implementation of
public health interventions for COVID-19. They also examine
people’s sentiment about COVID-19 related issues. Finally,
they discuss how the results can be helpful for public health
agencies when designing a policy for new interventions.
Zhou, Jianlong, et al.[11] used tweets to analyze the sentiment
dynamics of people living in the state of New South Wales
(NSW) in Australia during the pandemic period. In addition,
this study analyzed the sentimental dynamics delivered by the
trending topics on Twitter such as government policies (e.g.
lock-down, social-distancing, Australia’s JobKeeper program)
as well as the focused social events like the Ruby Princess
Cruise.

III. DATASETS
A. Coronavirus Tweets Dataset
165116 tweets were scraped based on the keywords “coronavirus” using TwitterScraper[12] which uses the python package requests to retrieve the content and Beautifulsoup4 to parse
the retrieved content. Unlike the traditionally used twitter API,
it is not limited to scraping tweets for only a duration of 7 days.
These tweets have been fetched from all around the world from
Jan 1st, 2020 to Jun 29th, 2020. To extract the countries from
which the tweets originated, a geolocation filter was specified.
However, since most Twitter users do not have geotagging
enabled for tweets, the location was extracted from the profile
of the username of the tweet using the Tweepy Python library.
To extract the country from the location, a world city dataset
[13] from datahub.io was used which consisted of the mapping
of cities all around the world to their corresponding country,
sub country, geoname ID, and abbreviation. If the location
extracted from the user’s profile matched any of the country,
sub country, geoname ID, city, or abbreviation columns, the
tweet was assigned to the corresponding country. Next, to
obtain the sentiment of these tweets the rule-based sentiment
analysis tool VADER [14] was used, which is specifically
attuned to sentiments expressed in social media. The tweets
were assigned positive, neutral, and negative sentiments based
on their VADER compound score. The columns present in
this created dataset include the tweet text, date, country, and
sentiment.

IV. M ETHODOLOGY
A. Exploratory Data Analysis
1) Binary Sentiment: The process of exploratory data analysis started with the visualization of the sentiments of the
people around the world towards coronavirus, work from home
and online learning. To plot the world map, a new dataset
containing the count of positive and negative tweets for each
country was created. The count of positive and negative tweets
were normalized and plotly was used to map the country and
the sentiment count on the graphs shown below. (fig.1-fig.6).

Fig. 1. Positive sentiment towards coronavirus

B. Online Learning Dataset (Tweets)
40756 tweets were scraped using the keywords “online
learning“ and “online classes” with the help of Twitterscraper[12] from 19th Feb 2020 to 26th Jun 2020.The method
employed to extract the countries and the sentiments of tweets
were the same as that of the coronavirus tweets dataset. The
columns present in this dataset include the tweet text, date,
country, and sentiment.

C. Work from Home Dataset (Tweets)

Fig. 2. Negative sentiment towards coronavirus

41349 tweets were scraped using the queries “work from
home” and "WFH” with the aid of TwitterScraper[12] for
the duration 22nd Feb 2020 to 3rd May. The countries were
extracted using the world cities dataset as described previously
and the tweets were assigned sentiments with the help of the
VADER sentiment lexicon. The columns present in this dataset
include the tweet text, date, country, and sentiment.

D. Existing dataset usage : Covid19 Dataset
A Covid-19 dataset [15] obtained from Kaggle was used
which consists of information pertaining to the number of
confirmed, death, and recovered cases every day across the
globe. It contains data from 22-01-2020 to 22-06-2020.

Fig. 3. Positive sentiment towards Work From Home

Fig. 4. Negative sentiment towards Work From Home

Fig. 5. Positive sentiment towards Online Learning

[16] aka EmoLex was used, which is a list of words and their
associations with eight basic emotions (anger, fear, anticipation, trust and surprise, sadness, joy, and disgust). Using the
python NRCLex library raw emotion scores were found, which
provide the count of the number of words in the text associated
with each particular emotion. The final emotion score was then
calculated by dividing the count of each emotion by the total
count of all the emotions. The predominant emotion of the
tweet was then retrieved by finding the emotion having the
maximum score. For this study, we take into consideration
only the emotions of fear and trust exhibited by the tweets.
A bar graph was plotted to visualize the percentage of tweets
denoting fear and trust as their primary emotion for each
month. A time series was also plotted on a day-wise basis
to see the trend in the change in these emotions. This was
also done separately for the countries that have been worst
hit by the pandemic such as the US, India, and Brazil.
Finally, the countries having the highest fear and trust scores
were obtained for a comparison between the emotion and the
number of cases in those countries (the analysis of which is
described in the following section).
3) Visualisation of the number of confirmed cases : An
exploratory data analysis on the number of confirmed cases
was carried out as per the data provided in the Kaggle covid19
cases dataset to provide a comparison of the same with the
public sentiment and emotions. A time series was plotted to
visualize the change in the number of cases from January
22nd, 2020 to June 22nd, 2020. The number of cases per
month was plotted as a bar graph. The same visualizations
were obtained for the countries - US, India, and Brazil.
B. Machine Learning with Classification Methods

Fig. 6. Negative sentiment towards Online Learning

For a better understanding of the change in sentiment over
time, the tweets were grouped by month and the percentage of
positive and negative tweets in these months were plotted. In
addition to plotting the general sentiment around the world,
the analysis was also done on the worst hit countries likeUnited States of America, Brazil and India. To obtain a more
fine grained analysis, a time series graph of the sentiment vs
time was also plotted for the entire world and the countries
mentioned above. Since the sentiment of the people is not
necessarily related to the number of cases, the countries with
the most positive and negative sentiments towards coronavirus,
work from home and online learning were found.
2) Emotion Analysis: The analysis was done for the Coronavirus tweets dataset with respect to the fear and trust emotions
exhibited by the tweets. For this, the NRC emotion lexicon

Recently, deep learning-based methods for sentiment classification (such as LSTM, ANN, etc) have been gaining
popularity due to impressive results depicted by the same.
The polarity of the opinions expressed by the tweets has been
determined using two deep learning models - Artificial Neural
Network (ANN) and Long Short Term Memory (LSTM).
1) ANN: A multi-layer perceptron (MLP) classifier was
trained on the dataset. MLPClassifier implements an MLP
algorithm that trains using Backpropagation. It is part of the
sklearn estimator class in the scikit-learn module of Python.
The input to the classifier was word vectors of each review
which was created using the bag of words model. The activation function used was Relu and the Weight optimization
was done using a stochastic gradient-based optimizer called
’adam’ proposed by Kingma, Diederik, and Jimmy Ba[17].
This solver is more suitable for large datasets. A total of 2000
neurons were given in the hidden layer and a standard learning
rate of 0.001 was used.
2) LSTM: After performing the basic preprocessing of
the tweets (such as removing punctuations, converting to
lowercase), a vocabulary size was defined to convert the
words into vectors. The labels were encoded as well and
padding/truncating was done to bring all the vectors to a
specific length. The LSTM network architecture included the
following layers - the Embedding layer (used to create word

vectors for the incoming words), the LSTM layer, the Dropout
layers for avoiding overfitting, the Conv1D layer to summarize
the vector along one dimension, the MaxPooling1D layer that
calculates the maximum, or largest, the value in each patch of
each feature map and finally the last layer as a fully connected
layer with a ‘softmax’ activation function and neurons equal
to the number of unique categories (in this case : 3 ) to obtain
a one-hot encoded result.
V. R ESULTS
Time-series graphs of the number of cases, binary sentiment
(positive and negative), fear and trust emotions with respect
to coronavirus, work from home, and online learning were
plotted and analyzed for the entire world as well as the worsthit countries like the USA, India, and Brazil. The accuracies
of the two deep learning models employed for sentiment
classification were obtained.
A. Accuracy of Machine Learning models
On the coronavirus tweets dataset labeled using VADER, an
accuracy of 84.5% was obtained using LSTM and an accuracy
of 76% was obtained using ANN.

Fig. 9. Fear and Trust sentiment vs time

Fig. 9 illustrates that the Fear emotion has been significantly
greater than the trust emotion throughout the pandemic. Some
of the countries with a greater proportion of positive sentiment
are Bangladesh, Pakistan, Mali, and South Africa. Whereas,
Australia, India, Canada, the USA, Turkey, UK, and Brazil are
some of the countries where the proportion of negative sentiment is higher. The emotions score calculated using the NRC
lexicon (as described in the Methodology section) showed the
following results - Thailand, Vietnam, and Poland were found
to have the highest fear score. Meanwhile, the highest trust
scores were exhibited by Oman, Syria, and Kazakhstan.

B. Worldwide

C. Worst Hit Countries
1) USA: The number of cases in US saw an exponential
increase in the months after March as seen in Fig 10.

Fig. 7. Number of cases vs time

The number of cases saw an exponential increase in the
months after March as seen in Fig 7.

Fig. 10. Number of cases in US vs time

Fig. 8. Binary sentiment vs time

In Fig 8., it is observed that the gap between the percentage
of negative and positive sentiments was much greater in
February and March as compared to the subsequent months.

Fig. 11. Percentage of positive and negative sentiment in US per month

Fig. 12. Percentage of Fear and Trust emotion in US per month

Fig. 15. Percentage of Trust and Fear emotion in India per month

The greater percentage of trust emotion in the month of
March as seen in Fig 12. could be attributed to the introduction
of lockdowns imposed by the government to contain the virus.
The greater percentage of fear emotion in the month of April
could be a result of the exponential growth in the number of
cases in April.

Fig. 15 shows that the percentage of trust tweets are greater
in May with the lockdown being imposed multiple times in
this month, stricter restrictions, and division of cities into red,
orange, and green zones. The trust percentage has reduced
from May to June which might be the result of lockdown
restrictions being lifted in this period.
3) Brazil: The number of cases in Brazil saw an exponential increase in the months after April as seen in Fig 16.

2) India: The number of cases in India saw an exponential
increase in the months after April as seen in Fig 13.

Fig. 16. Number of cases in Brazil vs time

Fig. 13. Number of cases in India vs time

Fig. 17. Percentage of positive and negative sentiment in Brazil per month

Fig. 14. Percentage of positive and negative sentiment in India per month

An increase in positive and negative tweets in May as shown
in Fig. 14 can be attributed to the exponential increase in the
number of cases in May in India.

Fig. 18. Percentage of Trust and Fear emotion in Brazil per month

The government of Brazil began providing financial assistance to the people in April, which could possibly explain
the high percentage of trust emotion in April as shown in
Fig. 18. In addition to financial assistance, 14000 people
were discharged from a COVID ward after being declared as
recovered[18]. On 23rd May, Brazil is declared as the 2nd
worst-hit country, surpassing Russia.
D. Work From Home (WFH) and Online Learning (OL)

Fig. 19. WFH sentiment vs time

The general positive sentiment towards Work From Home
has consistently been higher than negative sentiment as shown
in Fig. 19.

Fig. 20. OL sentiment vs time

The proportion of positive tweets have been greater for
online learning. However, there have been instances where the
proportion of negative sentiment has been greater than or equal
to the proportion of positive sentiment as evidenced by Fig.
20.
E. Conclusions
Three datasets were created (covid19 tweets, WFH tweets,
OL tweets) and exploratory data analysis was performed. This
data was visualized in contrast to the Kaggle dataset having
the number of confirmed cases in each country from the
onset of the pandemic till June. The analysis of the created
datasets was done with respect to the positive and negative
sentiments, fear, and trust emotions exhibited by the tweets.
These results were observed for countries that are worst hit
by the pandemic and some interesting inferences were drawn.
Two deep learning methods(LSTM and ANN) were used on
the datasets for Sentiment Classification.

Future work would involve the analysis of the sentiment
of people towards other topics such as healthcare facilities,
government response to the pandemic, offline examinations,
mental health, etc.
R EFERENCES
[1] Rajput, Nikhil Kumar, Bhavya Ahuja Grover, and Vipin Kumar Rathi.
"Word frequency and sentiment analysis of twitter messages during
Coronavirus pandemic." arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.03925 (2020).
[2] M. Munikar, S. Shakya and A. Shrestha, "Fine-grained Sentiment
Classification using BERT," ArXiv, 2019
[3] C. J. H. E. Gilbert, “Vader: A parsimonious rule-based model for sentiment analysis of social media text,” in Eighth International Conference
on Weblogs and Social Media (ICWSM-14). Available at (20/04/16)
http://comp.social.gatech.edu/papers/icwsm14.vader.hutto.pdf, 2014
[4] Hochreiter, S., Schmidhuber, J., “Long Short-Term Memory”, Neural
Computation 9 (8), 1997, pp. 1735–1780
[5] Sundermeyer, Martin, Ralf Schlüter, and Hermann Ney. "LSTM neural
networks for language modeling." Thirteenth annual conference of the
international speech communication association. 2012.
[6] Cannady, James. "Artificial neural networks for misuse detection."
National information systems security conference. Vol. 26. 1998.
[7] Samuel, Jim, et al. "Covid-19 public sentiment insights and machine
learning for tweets classification." Information 11.6 (2020): 314.
[8] Barkur, Gopalkrishna, and Giridhar B. Kamath Vibha. "Sentiment analysis of nationwide lockdown due to COVID 19 outbreak: Evidence from
India." Asian journal of psychiatry (2020).
[9] Li, Sijia, et al. "The impact of COVID-19 epidemic declaration on psychological consequences: a study on active Weibo users." International
journal of environmental research and public health 17.6 (2020): 2032.
[10] Jang, Hyeju, et al. "Exploratory analysis of covid-19 related tweets
in north america to inform public health institutes." arXiv preprint
arXiv:2007.02452 (2020).
[11] Zhou, Jianlong, et al. "Examination of community sentiment dynamics
due to covid-19 pandemic: a case study from Australia." arXiv preprint
arXiv:2006.12185 (2020).
[12] Taspinar, GitHub repository, https://github.com/taspinar/twitterscraper
[13] World Cities Dataset - https://datahub.io/core/world-cities
[14] WHutto, C.J. & Gilbert, Eric. (2015). VADER: A Parsimonious Rulebased Model for Sentiment Analysis of Social Media Text. Proceedings
of the 8th International Conference on Weblogs and Social Media,
ICWSM 2014.
[15] Covid19 Kaggle Dataset https://www.kaggle.com/imdevskp/coronavirus-report
[16] Mohammad, Saif & Turney, Peter. (2013). NRC emotion lexicon.
10.4224/21270984.
[17] Kingma, Diederik P., and J. Adam Ba. "A method for stochastic
optimization. arXiv 2014." arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980 434 (2019).
[18] Wikipedia.
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/COVID19_pandemic_in_Brazil

