Identifying the optimal parameters for sprayed and inhaled drug particulates for
intranasal targeting of SARS-CoV-2 infection sites
Yueying Lao1, Diane Joseph-McCarthy1, Arijit Chakravarty2, Pallavi A. Balivada1,
Phoebe Ato1, Nogaye K. Ka1, Saikat Basu3 *
1

Department of Biomedical Engineering, Boston University, Boston, MA
2
Fractal Therapeutics, Cambridge, MA
3
Department of Mechanical Engineering, South Dakota State University, Brookings, SD

Abstract
Efficacy for COVID-19 treatments can be enhanced significantly through targeting the
nasopharynx, which has been shown to be the dominant preliminary infection site for
SARS-CoV-2. Although intranasal drugs can be administered easily through drops or
sprays, it is difficult to test whether current protocols will deliver the right amount of
the drug to this location consistently. We are interested in developing an in silico
prototyping tool to rapidly identify optimal parameters for intranasal delivery. In this
study, we have applied computational fluid dynamics to simulate fluid flow through the
nasal cavity and examined particle deposition for a drug formulation, mimicking
different delivery methods. The nasal geometry models were derived using digitized
and meshed computed tomography (CT) scans of human patients. Using the nasal
geometries, we simulated two different airflows: a laminar model at 15 LPM
(Liters/min) that simulated resting breathing rate and a Large Eddy Simulation (LES)
model used to achieve a higher flow rate of 30 LPM. We were able to run particle
tracking simulations for these two airflow schemes to test different drug properties
such as particle size. The different injection methods used include surface injection
which best replicates an inhaler-based release of particle droplets into the nostril and
the cone injection method which best replicates a spray into the nostril. The results of
the study suggest that the most optimal drug particle size for targeting the intranasal
infection sites is around 6-14 µm.
* Corresponding author; Email: Saikat.Basu@sdstate.edu; saikat25@vt.edu

1. Introduction
There is an urgent and immediate need for an alternate treatment of the SARS-CoV-2
infection. This deadly virus has claimed the lives of more than one million people
worldwide1,2. For infected patients that are symptomatic, the conditions are often
1

unbearable and difficult to live with. Researchers have taken unprecedented steps to
quickly find a safe and effective treatment3. Even with the current limited scale of vaccines
in development, it should be noted that a wide range of approaches are being employed
such as inactivated virus, protein subunits, live attenuated virus and gene-editing
technology, each with its associated risks of vaccine failure4. Additionally, researchers
working on vaccines typically go through the tasking process of making the vaccine,
testing it in animals, going through the three phases of clinical trials to establish it,
completing safety and efficacy testing and finally regulatory approval and registration of
vaccine in countries where it would be used. The uncertainty surrounding high-risk efforts
such as vaccine development and IV-administered antivirals points to a critical need for
an effective and easily deployable therapeutic or prophylaxis agent5.
Since studies have found that the viral load in the nasopharynx peaks on or before the
onset of symptoms, an early intervention method targeting the nasopharynx is imperative
for limiting asymptomatic transmission of the disease as well as preventing progression
of the disease towards severe illness6,7. A second concern is that the mutation rate of
SARS-CoV-2 and the nature of the fitness landscape makes the virus comfortable with
evolving, potentially resulting in more virulent strains8. In this context, exposure to a drug
can act as a selection mechanism for resistant strains, reducing the efficacy of a
previously successful treatment9. A nasal spray would address this concern by targeting
the virus in the early stages of the disease and by reducing the risk of mutation within the
host. A device localization as well as the drug combination precludes the odds of the virus
symptoms getting a foothold on the infected person.

2

Our proposed computational prototyping tool will assist in identifying optimal
parameters of the drug formulation and the delivery device. Developing the drug into a
final product will require significant time-cost due to testing delivery methods. However,
computational screening significantly reduces the burden of experimental testing and
validation, allowing faster development.

2. Methods
Anatomic Nasal Cavity Reconstruction
Medical Imaging
The nasal cavity models used in this study were reconstructed from the de-identified
computed tomography (CT) scans of two healthy test subjects. Subject 1 is a 37 year-old
female (UNC003_Basu) and subject 2 is a 61 year-old female (UNC071_Basu)10. The
use of these medical scans for computational research was authorized by the Institutional
Review Board at University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.

Development of in Silico Models and Meshing Procedure
Digital models of nasal airways were constructed from the medical scans using a
delineation range of -1024 to -300 Hounsfield units. Additionally, pixels were manually
adjusted to improve anatomic accuracy of the model. These initial processing steps were
performed using Mimics 18.0 (Materialise, Plymouth, Michigan). The cavities were then
meshed into small volume elements using ICEM-CFD 15.0 (ANSYS Inc., Canonsburg,
Pennsylvania). To ensure grid-independent solutions, mesh-refinement protocols were
used such that each computational grid contained more than 4 million unstructured,
3

tetrahedral elements11,12. Further refinement involved adding three prism layers with 0.1
mm thickness with a height ratio of 1 at the nasal airway walls.
A.

B.

Figure 1. Panel A: Image of nasal cavity computational model from subject 1
(UNC003_Basu); Panel B: Image of nasal cavity computational model from subject 2
(UNC071_Basu)

4

Inspiratory Airflow Simulation
After digitization and meshing, the nasal geometry models were imported into Ansys
FLUENT for inspiratory airflow simulations. We simulated two different airflow rates: 15
LPM (L/min) and 30 LPM. At the resting breathing rate, 15 LPM, a viscous laminar model
was used to simulate airflow13. This scheme assumes that the fluid flows in smooth paths,
with no swirling. The laminar model is not a good approximation for higher flow rates in
the nasal cavity, due to effects of turbulence caused by the geometry of the airway. Since
higher flow rates in the nasal cavity are better modeled by taking turbulence into account,
the Large Eddy Simulation (LES) scheme was used to achieve the target output airflow
rate of 30 LPM. LES often cannot resolve behavior at small length scales; instead, subgrid scale models are used to compensate for these fluctuations. The Kinetic Energy
Transport model was used as the LES sub-grid scale model14.
The inspiratory airflow simulation was based on the principles of conservation of
mass and conservation of momentum under the assumptions of steady state conditions
and constant airflow density (incompressible flow). ANSYS Fluent numerically solves
these equations for the chosen nasal geometry model, taking into account the specified
laminar or turbulence scheme. The solver uses a SIMPLEC scheme, least squares cell
based gradient, bounded central differencing momentum, and second order upwind for
spatial discretization.
The flow is pressure driven, with the pressure at the outlet (the nasopharyngeal
outlet plane) set to -50 Pa compared to atmospheric pressure at the inlets (the nostrils).
The inlets were set to reflect particles back through the airway, simulating the effects of
inhalation. The surfaces of the nasal cavity are categorized as walls with zero velocity,

5

causing the air near these walls to similarly have zero velocity (no slip condition). This
condition also implies that particles can get trapped at the walls.
Air density and viscosity were set as 1.204 kg/m^3 and 1.825e-05 kg/m-s
respectively. Based on existing protocol, the time step for the 30 LPM LES simulation was
0.0002 second15. The final result is a velocity or pressure field at every point in the airflow;
the solution converges based on residuals for mass continuity and velocity. Additionally,
the mass flow rate and pressure at the outlet were monitored for stability.

Drug Particle Tracking Simulation
The airflow simulation for each nasal cavity model was evaluated in terms of its
receptiveness to the simulated drug release. This trace of the drug particle trajectories
confirmed whether or not the drug reached the nasopharynx, the first site of infection. The
trajectories of the drug particles were tracked under the conditions of the aforementioned
ambient airflow and followed the “discrete second phase model in a Lagrangian frame of
reference”

16.

Using the modeling capabilities of FLUENT, spherical particles depict the

nasal spray droplets that are disseminated in continuous airflow phase17 as modeled by
the particle force balance equation. This equation as shown below captures the behavior
of a single particle under the equalization of particle inertia and its acting forces and is
later numerically integrated to account for the aggregate of drug particles released16,17.

(1)
The parameters that comprise this equation includes the airflow phase velocity,
particle velocity, gravitational acceleration, all other relevant body forces (such as
6

Saffman lift force which will push the particles transverse to the airflow direction as
attributable to shear force) applied on the particle, densities of the particle, and air as
indicated by the respective terms/variables: u, ud, g, FB, ρd, ρ 16,17.For further clarity, the
relation between the particle inertia and its acting forces is computed as the sum of the
drag force per unit particle mass (where Cd is the drag force coefficient, d is the diameter
of the particle, and Re is the Reynolds number) , force of gravity on the particle, and any
other additional forces applied on the particle.
For the purposes of this study, the drug particles were simulated and tracked using
two different types of injections: surface injection and solid cone injection. It was
incumbent on the simulations to best replicate the deposition of droplets in various pattern
configurations. Surface injection emulates a release of droplets from each selected
surface, consequently creating a particle stream of droplets17. Comparably, the solid cone
injection would mimic the behavior of a nasal spray injection with particles being released
from a single point and ejecting in a hollow-cone spray type fashion. To maintain
uniformity within simulated model properties, the particle velocity and the total flow rate
was set to 10 m/s and 1 x 10-20 kg/s for all simulations respectively.
The Valois VP7, a commercial nasal spray pump currently in the market was used as
the basis for all simulations. The device is specifically designed for the use of ethical drug
products so consequently its performance was analyzed on whether it would be
conducive to the needs of the project in terms of drug release 18. The plume angle of the
nasal spray ranged from 20°- 60° and the angle chosen was contingent on the droplet
size. The plume angle utilized was 55.86° (half-cone angle of 27.93° in Fluent). Under
these parameters, the particle tracking of two different cone positions (current use and

7

perturbed direction) in addition to different particle sizes was simulated. All particle
tracking was set up under laminar conditions with a flow rate of 15 LPM and turbulent
airflow conditions with a flow rate of 30 LPM in its respective simulations.

Surface Injection
Surface injection was one of the types of injections used to evaluate the release of drug
particles from selected surfaces. This injection use added a level of control as the number
of particles injected was dependent on the number of points on the planes. As a means
of standardization within computations nostril (inlets) planes were selected as the
injection surface and particle sizes with uniform distribution of 1-24 µm were employed.
The particle type selected was inert (with its medium of material being anthracite) as that
choice accounted for a discrete phase element that followed the conventions of the force
balance equation.
Following the numerical properties as prepared by Saikat Basu in the protocol for
inert particle - DPM-based tracking, the tracking element was set to a maximum number
of steps equal to 1x106 and a step length factor of 20. The numerical features of the
discrete phase model incorporated a tolerance of 1x10-8, maximum number of
refinements of 20 and a tracking scheme of a higher order state/scheme as Runge-Kutta
and a lower order state/scheme as implicit. The boundary conditions acted in accordance
with those described earlier as a stationary wall (reflect type for nostrils; trap type for
walls; escape type for outlet), and no slip for shear condition. The x-vel, y-vel, z-vel was
set as 0 m/s across all terms and the simulation was performed with a density of 1500
kg/m3.

8

Solid Cone Injection
The solid cone injections encompassed the release of particles from a single point and
as a result mirrored a nasal spray like spray deposition. To assess the robustness of
particle release, different spay directions were used and their corresponding spray
deposition were tracked and analyzed. Two simulations were conducted to demonstrate
the extent to which the nasal spray can release the drug particles. The first simulation
involved tracking particles undergoing two different cone positions with uniform distributed
particle size from 1-24 µm similar to the procedure done for surface injection.
The two cone positions implemented was the current use (CU) and the perturbed
direction (PD). These injection point positions were identified by first locating the center
point of the nostril plane and then applying the insertion depth and angle of the nasal
spray so that the new coordinate values for the injection point can be calculated (under
the assumption of changes only in the y and z direction). The measurement of the
positional injection point is exemplified as shown in figure 2.
For further explanation, the injection point and the center point of the nostril plane
matched in x-coordinate value as per the premises of no change in the x-direction. The
change in the y-direction was set as the product of the known insert depth and the sine
of the insert angle. The designated insert depth and angle were 5 mm and 22.5° for the
purpose of this study. In a consistent manner, the change in the z-direction was set as
the product of the insert depth and the cosine of the insert angle. This resulted in a newly
established point of reference for the injection point, center point on the nostril plane, as
well as its change in direction. The two positions only differed in their cone direction. The

9

cone of CU positions aligned directly to the direction of the insert angle (22.5°) and had
lacked a vertical angle. Conversely, the PD position was set toward the direction of the
airway with the intention of improving delivery efficiency. This difference in orientation is
demonstrated in figures 3-6.
The second simulation involved tracking particles undergoing two different cone
positions with the varying range of particle sizing. This measurement was run with the
Rosin-Rammler diameter distribution of the following ranges of particle size: 1 - 10 µm,
10-20 μm, 20-30 μm, 1-20 μm, 1-30 μm, 1-80 μm, 10-90 μm, 20-100 μm, 30-110 μm.
Following the numerical properties as prepared by Saikat Basu in the protocol for
inert particle - DPM-based tracking, the tracking element was set to a maximum number
of steps equal to 1 X 106 and a step length factor of 20. As reflectant in the conditions of
the particle force balance equation, the physical model permitted the Saffman Lift Force
term accordingly. The numerical features of the discrete phase model incorporated a
tolerance of 1x10-8, maximum number of refinements of 20 and a tracking scheme of a
higher order state/scheme as Runge-Kutta and a lower order state/scheme as implicit.
The particle type selected was inert (with its medium of material being anthracite)
as that choice accounted for a discrete phase element that followed the conventions of
the force balance equation. In addition to this, the variable for the x-position, y-position,
and z-position was set in relation to the model being used for both the CU and PD cone
position (these values would differ between positions as desired). Like the surface
injection, this simulation was performed with a density of 1500 kg/m3.

10

Figure 2. Calculation of the position of the injection point

Figure 3. Cone Injection of Current Use Position Setup (A: Side, B: Front, C: Top) for
Nasal Geometric Model UNC003_Basu

11

Figure 4. Cone Injection of Perturbed Direction Position Setup (A: Side, B: Front, C:
Top) for Nasal Geometric Model UNC003_Basu

Figure 5. Cone Injection of Current Use Position Setup (A: Side, B: Front, C: Top) for
Nasal Geometric Model UNC071_Basu

Figure 6. Cone Injection of Perturbed Direction Position Setup (A: Side, B: Front, C:
Top) for Nasal Geometric Model UNC071_Basu

12

3. Results
Surface Injection

Figure 7: Graphical representation of the percentage of particles trapped in the
nasopharynx vs. particle size for nasal cavity UNC003_Basu done using Laminar 15 LPM
and LES 30 LPM flow rate. The distribution for laminar 15 LPM simulation is observed to
have a bell curve shape. The distribution for LES 30 LPM simulation is skewed to the
right.

13

Figure 8: Graphical representation of the percentage of particles trapped in the
nasopharynx vs. particle size for nasal cavity UNC071_Basu done using Laminar 15 LPM
and LES 30 LPM flow rate. The distribution for laminar 15 LPM simulation is observed to
have a bell curve shape. The distribution for LES 30 LPM simulation is skewed to the
right.

14

Cone Injection with Ranged Size

Figure 9: Graphical representation of the percentage of particles trapped in the
nasopharynx vs. particle size for nasal cavity UNC003_Basu done using Laminar 15 LPM
flow rate. It’s observed that with the parameters of VP7 (the current commercial nasal
spray product on the market), no particle can be delivered to nasopharynx. The maximum
percentage of particles trapped in the nasopharynx occurs at 10-20um. There is no major
difference observed between the current cone injection method and the perturbed
direction method.

15

Figure 10: Graphical representation of the percentage of particles trapped in the
nasopharynx vs. particle size for nasal cavity UNC003_Basu done using LES 30 LPM
flow rate. It’s observed that with the parameters of VP7 (the current commercial nasal
spray product on the market), no particle can be delivered to nasopharynx. The maximum
percentage of particles trapped in the nasopharynx occurs at 1-10um. There is no major
difference observed between the current cone injection method and the perturbed
direction method.

16

Figure 11: Graphical representation of the percentage of particles trapped in the
nasopharynx vs. particle size for nasal cavity UNC071_Basu done using Laminar 15 LPM
flow rate. It’s observed that with the parameters of VP7 (the current commercial nasal
spray product on the market), no particle can be delivered to nasopharynx. The maximum
percentage of particles trapped in the nasopharynx occurs at 10-20um. There is no major
difference observed between the current cone injection method and the perturbed
direction method.

17

Figure 12: Graphical representation of the percentage of particles trapped in the
nasopharynx vs. particle size for nasal cavity UNC071_Basu done using LES 30 LPM
flow rate. It’s observed that with the parameters of VP7 (the current commercial nasal
spray product on the market), no particle can be delivered to nasopharynx. The maximum
percentage of particles trapped in the nasopharynx occurs at 1-10um. There is no major
difference observed between the current cone injection method and the perturbed
direction method.

18

Cone Injection with Particle Size Distribution

Figure 13: Graphical representation of the percentage of particles trapped in the
nasopharynx vs. particle size for nasal cavity UNC003_Basu done using Laminar 15 LPM
flow rate. The distribution is similar to that of the surface injection. There is no major
difference observed between the current cone injection method and the perturbed
direction method.

19

Figure 14: Graphical representation of the percentage of particles trapped in the
nasopharynx vs. particle size for nasal cavity UNC003_Basu done using LES 30 LPM
flow rate. The distribution is similar to that of the surface injection. There is no major
difference observed between the current cone injection method and the perturbed
direction method.

20

Figure 15: Graphical representation of the percentage of particles trapped in the
nasopharynx vs. particle size for nasal cavity UNC071_Basu done using Laminar 15 LPM
flow rate. The distribution is similar to that of the surface injection. There is no major
difference observed between the current cone injection method and the perturbed
direction method.

21

Figure 16: Graphical representation of the percentage of particles trapped in the
nasopharynx vs. particle size for nasal cavity UNC071_Basu done using LES 30 LPM
flow rate. The distribution is similar to that of the surface injection. There is no major
difference observed between the current cone injection method and the perturbed
direction method.

4. Discussion
The goal of this project was to begin developing an in silico prototyping tool that would
allow identification of optimal parameters for nasal delivery of drug combinations targeting
COVID-19. It was deduced from the results that for the surface injection model, the
distribution of the percentage of particles trapped in the nasopharynx in relation to the
particle size (for the laminar airflow condition with flow rate of 15 LPM) resembled a
22

pattern close to a bell shape as depicted in figures 7 and 8. This implies that there is a
normal distribution of percent particles being trapped in the nasopharynx amongst the
varying particle sizes and that the data is symmetrical. The curve, thereby, allows for
reasonable expectations towards the prospect of using different particle sizes and its
corresponding spray reach in the nasopharynx.

As presented in figures 7 and 8, at large the distribution for simulations (LES) at
30 LPM flow are skewed right. This pattern was shared amongst both models
(UNC003_Basu & UNC071_Basu). When measuring the differences between the particle
size at which the maximum percentage of particles successfully trapped in the
nasopharynx, it was determined that it occurred at a smaller particle size from the higher
flow rate of 30 LPM (LES) than the lower flow rate of 15 LPM (laminar). Specifically, as
exemplified in the data representing model UNC003_Basu in figure 7, the maximum
percentage occurred at 12 µm, and 8 µm for the simulations under conditions of Laminar
15 LPM and LES 30 LPM respectively. Whereas for the data representing model
UNC071_Basu in figure 8, the maximum percentage occurred at 14 µm and 8 µm for the
simulations under conditions of Laminar LPM and LES 30 LPM. This range of particle
size conveys the impression that optimal particle sizes for the most successfully displaced
droplets would be around the values described earlier. Now, with all different simulations
considered, the LES simulation under the conditions of 30 LPM flow rate held the largest
percentages of particles (11.24%) trapped in the nasopharynx for model UNC003_Basu.
This information is to be acknowledged when optimizing the drug release approach in the
nasal spray.

23

The simulations falling under the cone injections with ranged sizing had no
particles delivered to the nasopharynx regardless of cone position. This lack of spray
deposition adds uncertainty to the effectiveness of the Valois VP7, the nasal spray pump
currently in the market. As for the distribution of the data, it was found that generally a
smaller range of particle size would elicit a higher percentage of particles successfully
reaching the nasopharynx as reflected in figures 9 - 12. It can also be noted that the
modified cone direction (perturbed) was not significantly superior to the current use cone
direction, thus implying that the disparate cone positions were not substantially effective
in increasing the number of particles trapped in the nasopharynx. This outcome persisted
in the analysis of the cone injections with distributed sizing as well as shown in figures
13-16.

It was also identified for the cone injection with ranged sizing that the maximum
percentage of particles successfully trapped in the nasopharynx occurred at a lower range
scale (1-10 µm) for the larger flow rate of 30 LPM (LES) than the lower flow rate of 15
LPM (laminar) which occurred at the size range of 10-20 µm. The trend presented itself
once again in the cone injection simulation with distributed sizing as shown in figure 1316. This behavior matches our results from the surface injection simulation, thus
indicating that the optimal particle sizes should be within 6-14µm (amongst all simulation
types) in order to attain relatively large particle deposition.

24

Despite the consistent distribution patterns amongst the simulations, it is still
incumbent to improve the results in order to significantly enhance the topical delivery
release within the nasopharynx. One limitation of the simulation was centered around the
nasal spray device in that the Valois VP7 was inapt at meeting the study desired results.
To have a more effective delivery of drugs, it is imperative to have a nasal spray device
that can produce droplets of smaller sizing. To account for this inefficiency, future
improvements aimed at increasing the maximum percentage of particles trapped in the
nasopharynx can be implemented. In conjunction with the CFD-based simulations, the
numerical modeling of release parameters can be enhanced to ameliorate the
performance of the drug release. Additionally, a more advanced method needs to be
developed to determine the perturbed direction of the cone position. These future
improvements of the delivery release and device alongside with additional testing on
different models would promote efficiency in deposition patterns and optimal spray
release points.

References
1.

Mega, E. R. COVID has killed more than one million people. How many more will
die? Nature News (2020). Web link (accessed 01-October-2020).

2.

Johns-Hopkins-University. Coronavirus Resource Center. Web link (accessed 28October-2020).

3.

Alexander, G. C., Kesselheim, A. S. & Moore, T. J. Searching for an effective Covid19 treatment: promise and peril. Stat News (2020). Web link (accessed 01-October2020).
25

4.

Freeman, M. Survival of the Most: Why Multiple Vaccines May Be the Best Way to
Stop the COVID-19 Pandemic. Massachusetts General Hospital News (2020). Web
link (accessed 01-October-2020).

5.

McHugh, K. J. Employing drug delivery strategies to create safe and effective
pharmaceuticals for COVID-19. Bioeng. Transl. Med. 5, e10163–e10163 (2020).

6.

He, X. et al. Temporal dynamics in viral shedding and transmissibility of COVID-19.
Nat. Med. 26, 672–675 (2020).

7.

Sungnak, W., Huang, N., Bécavin, C., Berg, M. & Network, H. C. A. L. B. SARSCoV-2 Entry Genes Are Most Highly Expressed in Nasal Goblet and Ciliated Cells
within Human Airways. ArXiv arXiv:2003.06122v1 (2020).

8.

Pachetti, M. et al. Emerging SARS-CoV-2 mutation hot spots include a novel RNAdependent-RNA polymerase variant. J. Transl. Med. 18, 1–9 (2020).

9.

Strasfeld, L. & Chou, S. Antiviral drug resistance: mechanisms and clinical
implications. Infect. Dis. Clin. North Am. 24, 413–437 (2010).

10.

Basu, S. Computational characterization of inhaled droplet transport in the upper
airway leading to SARS-CoV-2 infection. medRxiv 2020.07.27.20162362 (2020).

11.

Frank-Ito, D. O., Wofford, M., Schroeter, J. D. & Kimbell, J. S. Influence of mesh
density on airflow and particle deposition in sinonasal airway modeling. J. Aerosol
Med. Pulm. Drug Deliv. 29, 46–56 (2016).

12.

Basu, S., Frank-ito, D. O. & Kimbell, J. S. On computational fluid dynamics models
for sinonasal drug transport : Relevance of nozzle subtraction and nasal vestibular
dilation. 1–21 (2018).

13.

Hahn, I., Scherer, P. W. & Mozell, M. M. Velocity profiles measured for airflow

26

through a large-scale model of the human nasal cavity. J. Appl. Physiol. 75, 2273–
2287 (1993).
14.

Baghernezhad, N. & Abouali, O. Different SGS models in Large Eddy Simulation of
90° square cross-section bends. J. Turbul. N50 (2010).

15.

Ghahramani, E., Abouali, O., Emdad, H. & Ahmadi, G. Numerical investigation of
turbulent airflow and microparticle deposition in a realistic model of human upper
airway using LES. Comput. Fluids 157, 43–54 (2017).

16.

Basu, S. et al. Numerical evaluation of spray position for improved nasal drug
delivery. Sci. Rep. 1–18 (2020) doi:10.1038/s41598-020-66716-0.

17.

ANSYS Fluent Theory Guide version 14.5. ANSYS Inc, Southpointe, 275.

18.

Valois VP7. Valois Pharmaceutical Division
http://wwwtest.valois.com/pharma/en/products/vp7.php.

27

