AN INVESTIGATION OF MODERN FOREIGN
LANGUAGE (MFL) TEACHERS AND THEIR
ATTITUDES TO COMPUTER ASSISTED LANGUAGE
LEARNING (CALL) AMID THE COVID-19 HEALTH
PANDEMIC
Louise Hanna
School of Education, Ulster University
Hanna-l18@ulster.ac.uk

Dr. David Barr, Dr. Helen Hou, Mrs. Shauna McGill
School of Education, Ulster University

ABSTRACT
A study was performed with 33 Modern Foreign Language (MFL) teachers to afford insight into how
classroom practitioners interact with Computer Assisted Language Learning (CALL) in Second
Language (L2) pedagogy. A questionnaire with CALL specific statements was completed by MFL
teachers who were recruited via UK based Facebook groups. Significantly, participants acknowledged a
gap in practice from the expectation of CALL in the MFL classroom. Overall, respondents were shown to
be interested and regular consumers of CALL who perceived its ease and importance in L2 teaching and
learning.

KEYWORDS
Computer Assisted Language Learning (CALL), Modern Foreign Languages (MFL), teacher attitudes,
digital technologies, Second Language (L2) pedagogy.

1. INTRODUCTION
The role of Computer Assisted Language Learning (CALL) has been area of interest for
researchers for more than forty years (Zou & Thomas, 20191). Significantly, the global
Coronavirus pandemic has reinforced the importance of digital technologies in Second
Language Acquisition (SLA). This study was undertaken in the summer of 2020 with 33
Modern Foreign Language (MFL) teachers in the UK as a means to comprehend their
relationship with CALL at this time of a health crisis and considerable challenges in education.
Overall, the investigation sought to gain an insight into MFL teachers perceive the importance,
value and ease of CALL in their own teaching and learning.
Simply speaking, ‘CALL refers to the application of a variety of technologies for language
learning including computer, internet, online reference materials, online exercises and quizzes’
(Rahimi, 20152). The interdisciplinary subject of CALL has developed at breakneck speed in

line with the continued evolution of digital tools and computerised technologies in education
and beyond. Nonetheless, the onset of the Coronavirus outbreak heralded the most significant
and radical change to the teaching and learning landscape as teachers had to adapt to the
challenges of online education (Dhawan, 20203). ‘However, the extent to which teachers have
successfully mastered these challenges and which factors are most relevant remain unknown’
(König, Jäger-Biela & Glutsch, 20204). Therefore, this provides the rationale to undertake this
small-scale study with MFL in the UK context.

2. RELATED WORK
The massive global shift to online and distance learning in 2020 has been an area of significant
research interest. An investigation of the attitudes of Mathematics teachers during the COVID19 pandemic found that practitioners expressed positive opinions towards the engagement of
digital devices and technological tools for the purpose of teaching and learning (Marpa, 20215).
In fact, a Finnish study revealed that teachers reacted quickly to learn the new technologies and
perceived digital education as problematic, except for the quality of interactions with students
(Niemi & Kousa, 20206). With specific relation to CALL in English as a Foreign Language
(EFL) instruction, teachers had ‘diverse perceptions of online EFL teaching over COVID-19 as
they compared it with traditional classroom language teaching to explore the features of online
EFL teaching’ (Gao & Zhang, 20207). Furthermore, English teachers in Iran displayed positive
perceptions towards the engagement of CALL for students at home whilst in lockdown
(Khatoony & Nezhadmehr, 20208). Overall, this study was motivated to uncover the attitudinal
positions of MFL teachers towards the application of digital technologies within the UK
context. In fact, ‘researching teachers’ beliefs are important for their professional development,
particularly in the midst of a pandemic” (Zhang, 20209).

3. METHODOLOGY
A plea for participation was issued on various MFL teaching Facebook groups. Participation
entailed completing a questionnaire with specific statements relating to CALL adoption in L2
pedagogy. This type of research tool sought to obtain reactions from participants relating to
their attitudes of CALL in their own teaching and learning that could be empirically measured
and statistically analysed. This snapshot of teacher perceptions to the implementation of digital
technologies in MFL was established, therefore, on a positivist methodology. This means that
the findings are unable to account of the depth and diversity of personal and professional
teacher opinion to CALL realisation. Instead, the findings provide an overview of the MFL
teacher alliance with CALL that could be more thoroughly investigated via a large-scale study.

4. FINDINGS
Firstly, 21.1% of research participants reported having had more than twenty-years of MFL
instruction. Interestingly, however, the highest level of participation involved relatively new
MFL teaching practitioners who had between one to five years of MFL classroom experience
(24.2%) (Table 1).
Figure 1: A table exhibiting the number of years’ of MFL teaching by participants.

Years’ of teaching experience

Percentage (%)

Less than 1 year
1-5 years
6-10 years
11- 15 years

6.1
24.2
18.2
15.2

16- 20 years
+20 years

15.2
21.1

In fact, these recent entrants to the teaching profession may still be transitioning from their
teacher education programme to the daily demands and reality shock of the initial years of
teaching. This may be particularly pronounced in the disconnect of CALL instruction in Initial
Teacher Education (ITE) with the possibilities and practicalities of using digital technologies in
the Newly Qualified Teacher (NQT) induction period and beyond (Woolfolk & Margetts,
201210). 78.8% of study respondents agreed to the existence of such a gap between institutional
expectations and implementation of CALL in the MFL classroom setting (Figure 1).

Figure 1: A bar chart highlighting the perception that there is a gap between expectation and
practice of CALL usage by MFL teachers.

This technological lag has been widely documented in CALL literature as the intentions and
realities of classroom innovation are mismatched (Clark-Wilson, Robutt & Sinclair, 201411;
Kobayashi, 2008: 10512). In fact, this divergence in project versus actual technological usage in
pedagogy can be attributed to a number of key factors. These include concerns around the
technological competencies of both teachers and learners, difficulty in accessing digital
resources, issues in achieving pedagogical outcomes with CALL and a lack of comprehensive
training for teaching practitioners (Visvizi, 201913). Moreover, the role of educational policy
can create a wedge between the expectation and the reality of CALL implementation. The
small-scale study has offered a strong confirmation that a bridge between projected and actual
CALL usage is desired by more than three quarters of participants (Vrasidas et al., 200614).

However, this discrepancy in expectancy versus practice in CALL is not necessarily indicative
of a lack of interest in digital technologies in MFL teaching and learning from the perspective of
L2 teachers. This study demonstrated that 24.2% of respondents were extremely interested in
CALL and 33.3% were very interested in the subject. This is presented visually in the pie chart
of Figure 2. Such a claim has been authenticated - though on a higher level - in a research study
by Lytras and Lytras; 70% of teachers reported an enthusiasm and readiness to adopt computer
technologies and mobile innovations in their pedagogical practice (Lytras & Lytras, 201015). In
reality, it has often been the case that teachers have been subject to critical discourse and
presented as ‘outmoded, obstructive or ignorant’ in relation to CALL and digital technologies
(Selwyn, 201616). Therefore, this could be a fruitful area of further investigation to effectively
comprehend the relationship teachers have with CALL in terms of their interest to digital
technologies.

Figure 2: A pie chart showing the level of interest of MFL teacher participants to CALL.

Significantly, the finding that teachers are interested consumers of digital technologies
demonstrates how the detachment between theory and practice in CALL contexts is not
intrinsically bound to a lack of interest or, what is more, a perception that CALL realisation is
strenuous or intellectually demanding (Lin, Zhang & Zheng, 201717). In fact, 67% of
respondents remarked that CALL in MFL instruction was extremely or somewhat easy (Figure
3).

Figure 3: The perceived ease of CALL from the perception of MFL teachers.
This is an alternative perspective to the belief propagated in research literature that CALL is a
complex phenomenon that constantly challenges and frequently frustrates MFL instructors
(Gibson & Baek, 200918; Kidd, 200819). In fact, the engagement of teaching practitioners with
CALL and digital technologies has been depicted as an arduous challenge (Carreira et al.,
201820). However, ‘the products for digital teaching or learning are easier to use than the past
ten years (Haghi & Luppicini, 201021). In the words of one participant, adopting CALL is ‘like
fish in water’. This gives the impression that innovative practice is effortless, natural and
comfortable in L2 pedagogy. The results of this study point to a potentially smaller divergence
in CALL practice from the perspective of the participating 33 MFL teachers. In fact, 33.3% of
respondents reported always using CALL in every lesson. These findings are represented below
in Table 2.

Table 2: A table depicting the frequency of CALL use in the MFL classroom.

Frequency of CALL usage

Percentage (%)

Always (every lesson)
Never (not use)
Often (every other lesson)
Rarely (once a term)
Sometimes (once a month)

33.3
6.1
30.3
6.1
24.2

This sample of contributing teachers are integrating digital innovations everyday into
their daily MFL instruction (Bain & Weston, 201222). This supports the prediction
made years before that CALL would assume a normalised position in L2 pedagogy, like

a pen and paper. Significantly, it was projected that CALL would be ‘used every day
by language students and teachers as an integral part of every lesson’ (Torsani, 201623).
This regular engagement with digital technologies strongly denotes a positive belief to
CALL from the research participants. This is for the reasoning that attitude to
technology is inextricably linked to classroom innovation in MFL (Eshetu, 201524).
Overall, ‘the relationship between teacher beliefs and technology integration has also
surfaced as a critical factor in technology integration’ (Brown & van der Merwe,
201525). With relation to this study, participants championed the importance of CALL
in MFL pedagogy. Figure 4 highlights how 37% of respondents rated CALL as
extremely important and 33% appraised it as very important. This supports the claim
that it is ‘important for teachers to recognize the transformative value of technology for
their own practice, not just for their students’ (Pahomov, 201426). This is particularly
strong in the results of this study, although it is important to acknowledge the evident
limitations of the investigation.

Figure 4: A pie chart presenting how important CALL is in L2 pedagogy for pilot study respondents.

Overall, MFL teachers of this study exhibited a largely positive affect to CALL which is
consistent with their frequent technological practice (Ball et al., 201827). A number of
participants commented that CALL was ‘essential’, ‘enriching, ‘effective’, ‘exciting’,
‘helpful’, ‘invaluable’, ‘beneficial’, ‘necessary’, ‘positive’ and ‘fabulous’. However,
this positive narrative to CALL was not shared by all respondents. Several teachers
noted that CALL was ‘in need of direction’, ‘labour intensive’, ‘frustrating’, ‘extremely
challenging’, ‘time-consuming’, ‘not the be all and end all, especially if the Internet is
down’ and ‘overrated’. Nevertheless, the guidance to use CALL was offered by a third
of study participants in their one piece of advice to aspiring MFL teachers (Figure 5).

ADVICE ON CALL FROM MFL TEACHERS TO STUDENT TEACHERS
12
10
8
6

11

4
4

3

2
e
fo
re

us

s

1

1

1

2

2

1

It
is
a

be

te
ch
n

Pr
ac
tic
e

re
so
ur
ce

Ke
e

p

up

w
ith

Us
e

di
ve
rs
e

CA
LL

It
is
u

w
ise

ly

g
Us
e

No
th
in

Us
e

it

0

se
fu
l

1

tim
ol
es
og
av
ica
er
la
dv
an
ce
m
en
Se
t
ta
sh
om
ew
Pl
or
an
k
/b
e
Be
pr
ep
br
ar
av
ed
e/
do
n'
tb
e
Jo
af
in
ra
on
id
lin
e
ne
tw
or
ks

4

2

Figure 5: A bar chart representing the advice of MFL teachers to student teachers.

Such a recommendation indicates that this sample of MFL teachers were open-minded
and enthusiastic in encouraging the next generation of teaching practitioners to embrace
the opportunities of CALL. This has been supported in research studies investigating
factors and barriers to implementation. The willingness of MFL teachers to capitalise
on CALL has been thwarted externally, financially and situationally by resourcing
problems, funding issues and inequitable access to infrastructure (Schul, 201928;
Underwood & Farrington-Flint 201529). For one MFL teacher participant, CALL is
only possible ‘if laptops/iPads/computers room are available. I would like to be able to
use more CALL as it’s the way forward with technology obsessed children’. This
connects to the political landscape of education and the role of Local Education
Authorities (LEA) in CALL. One participant remarked that ‘as decision-making
stakeholders, they are the ones deciding budgets and priorities for communities’. With
the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, a number of participants remarked on the
importance of General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) and privacy in Zoom video
calls. Therefore, there are wide array of factors to consider in CALL implementation
for MFL teachers. Simply speaking, this study has been only able to offer a snapshot
into how MFL teaching practitioners interact and relate to digital technologies in their
L2 pedagogy. Therefore, the study could be viewed as a springboard from which
additional investigations could be conducted to better appreciate the MFL teacher
alliance to CALL.

5.

LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE RESEARCH

A primary limitation of this study is that it was established on a positivist approach to
data collection. As a consequence, conclusions are restricted by the empirical data
obtained. However, richer, more detailed and in-depth information could have been
acquired by a qualitative or mixed-methods approach. Such an adjustment to research
methodology could have compensated for this limitation. Therefore, this opens up the
possibility of conducting further investigations to better comprehend how MFL teachers
perceive digital technologies. Another issue to note with this research is that it involved
quite a small sample of MFL teachers (33 in total). A larger sample of participants
would have enhanced the researcher’s understanding of how MFL teachers interact with
CALL. Future research could encompass a longitudinal understanding of MFL teachers
and their relationship with computer technologies over the course of the pandemic.
Additional research could be undertaken with pre-service MFL teachers to obtain a
sense of their rapport with CALL while in Initial Teacher Education (ITE) during the
global pandemic

6. CONCLUSIONS
In summary, this study presented the researcher with the occasion to gauge teacher
perceptions to CALL in the L2 classroom. It has showcased that MFL teachers are
daily users of CALL in L2 pedagogy. The attitudinal perspectives of participants
demonstrated that a gap between expectation and practice in CALL exist -a finding that
could form the basis of a follow-on study. In addition, respondents were shown to
recognise the importance of digital technologies in L2 teaching and learning and readily
encouraged new student teachers to adopt CALL in the classroom. In addition,
participants were interested adopters of technology in the MFL classroom who
perceived its usage as being easier than difficult. This, too, could be an additional study
for researcher investigation. It is important to acknowledge that there are evident
limitations with the study as a positivist methodology and sample size of 33
participants. Nonetheless, it has provided a snapshot of MFL teachers and their
cognitions of CALL amid a global health pandemic and widespread disruption to
education.

REFERENCES
[1] Zou, B. & Thomas, M. (2019). Recent Developments In Technology-Enhanced & Computer-Assisted
Language Learning, Hershey: IGI Global, pp. xv.
[2] Rahimi, M., (2015). Handbook of research on individual differences in computer-assisted language
learning, Hershey, PA: Information Science Reference, an imprint of IGI Global, pp. 45.
[3] Dhawan, S. (2020). Online Learning: A Panacea in the Time of COVID-19 Crisis. Journal of
Educational Technology Systems, 49(1), 5–22. Available online:
https://doi.org/10.1177/0047239520934018
[4] König, J. Jäger-Biela, D.J. & Glutsch, N. (2020) Adapting to online teaching during COVID-19
school closure: teacher education and teacher competence effects among early career teachers in
Germany, European Journal of Teacher Education, 43:4, 608-622. Available online:
https://doi.org/10.1080/02619768.2020.1809650
[5] Marpa, E. P. (2021). Technology in the teaching of mathematics: An analysis of teachers’ attitudes
during the COVID-19 pandemic. International Journal on Studies in Education (IJonSE), 3(2),
92-102. Available online: https://doi.org/10.46328/ijonse.36

[6] Niemi, H. M., & Kousa, P. (2020). A case study of students’ and teachers’ perceptions in a Finnish
high school during the COVID pandemic. International Journal of Technology in Education and
Science (IJTES), 4(4), 352-369. Available online: https://doi.org/10.46328/ijtes.v4i4.167
[7] Gao, L..X & Zhang, L.J. (2020). Teacher Learning in Difficult Times: Examining Foreign Language
Teachers’ Cognitions About Online Teaching to Tide Over COVID-19. Front. Psychol.
11:549653. Available online: https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2020.549653
[8] Khatoony, S., & Nezhadmehr, M. (2020). EFL teachers’ challenges in integration of technology for
online classrooms during Coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic in Iran. AJELP: Asian Journal of
English Language and Pedagogy, 8, 1-16. Available online:
https://doi.org/10.37134/ajelp.vol8.sp.1.2020
[9] Zhang, C. (2020). From Face-to-Face to Screen-to-Screen: CFL Teachers' Beliefs about Digital
Teaching Competence during the Pandemic. International Journal of Chinese Language
Teaching, 1(1), 35-52. Available online: https://doi.org/10.46451/ijclt.2020.06.03
[10] Woolfolk, A & Margetts, K. (2012). Educational Psychology, third edition. Frenchs Forest, NSW,
Australia: Pearson Australia, pp. 7.
[11] Clark-Wilson, A. Robutti, O. & Sinclair, N. (2014). The Mathematics Teacher in the Digital Era. An
International Perspective on Technology Focused Professional Development. Dordrecht:
Springer, pp.11.
[12] Kobayashi, R. (2008). New educational technology. New York: Nova Science Publishers, pp.105.
[13] Visvizi, A., (2019). The future of innovation and technology in education policies and practices for
teaching and learning excellence, United Kingdom: Emerald Publishing, pp.116.
[14] Vrasidas, C. et al. (2006). Preparing teachers to teach with technology. Greenwich Conn:
Information Age Publishing, pp.366.
[15] Lytras, M. D. & Lytras, M. D. (2010). Technology Enhanced Learning: Quality of Teaching and
Educational Reform: 1st International Conference, TECH-EDUCATION 2010, Athens, Greece,
May 19-21, 2010. Proceedings. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, pp.462.
[16] Selwyn, N., (2016). Education and technology: key issues and debates, New York: Bloomsbury
Academic, pp.127.
[17] Lin, C.-H. Zhang, D. & Zheng, B. (2017). Preparing foreign language teachers for next-generation
education. Hershey, PA: Information Science Reference (an imprint of IGI Global), pp.32.
[18] Gibson, D. & Baek, Y. (2009). Digital simulations for improving education: learning through
artificial teaching environments, Hershey, PA: Information Science Pub, pp. 428.
[19] Kidd, T. (2008). Handbook of research on instructional systems and technology, Hershey, PA:
Information Science Reference, pp.227.
[20] Carreira, S. et al., (2018). Youngsters Solving Mathematical Problems with Technology #x98;The
Results and Implications of the Problem#x9C;Web Project, Cham: Springer International
Publishing, pp.viii.
[21] Haghi, A.K. & Luppicini, R., (2010). Cases on digital technologies in higher education: issues and
challenges, Hershey, PA: IGI Global, pp.214.
[22] Bain, A. & Weston, M. E. (2012). The learning edge: what technology can do to educate all
children. New York: Teachers College Press, pp.xi.
[23] Torsani, S., (2016). CALL teacher education: language teachers and technology integration,
Rotterdam: Sense Publishers, pp.55.
[24] Eshetu, G. (2015). Factors Affecting Instructional Leaders Perception towards Educational Media
Utilization in Classroom Teaching. Hamburg, Germany: Ancho, pp.25.
[25] Brown, T.H. & van der Merwe, H.J. (2015). The mobile learning voyage - from small ripples to
massive open waters: 14th World Conference on Mobile and Contextual Learning, mLearn
2015, Venice, Italy, October 17-24, 2015, proceedings, Cham: Springer, pp.33/

[26] Pahomov, L., (2014). Authentic learning in the digital age: engaging students through inquiry,
Alexandria, VA: ASCD, pp.9.
[27] Ball, L. Drijvers, P. Ladel, S. Siller, H.-S. Tabach, M. & Vale, C. (2018). Uses of Technology in
Primary and Secondary Mathematics Education: Tools, Topics and Trends. Cham: Springer
International Publishing, pp.416.
[28] Schul, J. E. (2019). Paradoxes of the public school: historical and contemporary foundations of
American public education. Charlotte, NC: Information Age Publishing, Inc, pp.183.
[29] Underwood, J. D. M. & Farrington-Flint, L. (2015). Learning and the E-Generation. Chichester,
West Sussex: John Wiley & Sons Inc, pp.156.

Authors
Louise Hanna is a second year PhD researcher
at Ulster University in Northern Ireland. Her
interests are extensively centred on the usage of
digital technologies in L2 pedagogy. Prior to
undertaking her PhD, Louise was a MFL
teachers in both England and Northern Ireland.

