1

Analyzing Societal Impact of COVID-19: A Study
During the Early Days of the Pandemic

arXiv:2010.15674v1 [cs.SI] 27 Oct 2020

Swaroop Gowdra Shanthakumar, Anand Seetharam, Arti Ramesh
Computer Science Department, SUNY Binghamton
(sgowdra1, aseethar, artir)@binghamton.edu

Abstract—In this paper, we collect and study Twitter communications to understand the societal impact of COVID-19
in the United States during the early days of the pandemic.
With infections soaring rapidly, users took to Twitter asking
people to self isolate and quarantine themselves. Users also
demanded closure of schools, bars, and restaurants as well as
lockdown of cities and states. We methodically collect tweets
by identifying and tracking trending COVID-related hashtags.
We first manually group the hashtags into six main categories,
namely, 1) General COVID, 2) Quarantine, 3) Panic Buying, 4)
School Closures, 5) Lockdowns, and 6) Frustration and Hope, and
study the temporal evolution of tweets in these hashtags. We
conduct a linguistic analysis of words common to all hashtag
groups and specific to each hashtag group and identify the chief
concerns of people as the pandemic gripped the nation (e.g.,
exploring bidets as an alternative to toilet paper). We conduct
sentiment analysis and our investigation reveals that people
reacted positively to school closures and negatively to the lack
of availability of essential goods due to panic buying. We adopt
a state-of-the-art semantic role labeling approach to identify the
action words (e.g., fear, test), which capture the actions people
are referring to in the tweets. We then leverage a LSTM-based
dependency parsing model to analyze the context of the abovementioned action words (e.g., verb deal is accompanied by nouns
such as anxiety, stress, and crisis). Finally, we develop a scalable
seeded topic modeling approach to automatically categorize and
isolate tweets into hashtag groups and experimentally validate
that our topic model provides a grouping similar to our manual
grouping. Our study presents a systematic way to construct
an aggregated picture of peoples’ response to the pandemic
and lays the groundwork for future fine-grained linguistic and
behavioral analysis.

I. I NTRODUCTION
COVID-19 (also known as the novel coronavirus) is a truly
global pandemic and has affected humans in all countries
of the world. While humanity has seen numerous epidemics
including a number of deadly ones over the last two decades
(e.g., SARS, MERS, Ebola), the grief and disruption that
COVID-19 has already inflicted is incomparable. At the time
of writing this paper, COVID-19 is still rapidly spreading
around the world and projections for the next few months
are grim and extremely disconcerting. The learnings from
COVID-19 will also enable humankind to prevent such

epidemics from transforming into global pandemics and
minimize the socio-economic disruption.
In this work, our goal is to analyze the societal impact of
COVID-19 in the United States of America during its early
days, understand the chain of events that occurred during the
spread of the infection, and draw meaningful conclusions so
that similar mistakes can be avoided in the future. Though
Twitter data has previously been shown to be biased [1],
Twitter has emerged as the primary media for people to
express their opinion especially during this time and our
study offers a perspective into the impact as self-disclosed
by people in a form that is easily understandable and can be
acted upon. We summarize our main contributions below.
We collect 530,206 tweets from Twitter between March
14th to March 24th , a time period when the virus made
its first significant inroads into the US and quantitatively
demonstrate the disruption and distress experienced by the
people. We group the hashtags into six main categories,
namely 1) General COVID, 2) Quarantine, 3) School Closures, 4) Panic Buying, 5) Lockdowns, and 6) Frustration and
Hope, to quantitatively and qualitatively understand the chain
of events. We observe that general COVID and quarantinerelated messages remain trending throughout the duration
of our study. In comparison, we observe calls for closing
schools and universities peaking in the middle of March
and then reducing when the closures go into effect (e.g.,
#closenycschools). We also observe a similar trend with panic
buying with essential items particularly toilet paper becoming
unavailable in stores (e.g., #panicbuying, #toiletpapercrisis).
We conduct a linguistic analysis of the tweets in the
different hashtag groups and present the words that are
representative of each group. We observe that words such
as family, life, health, and death are common across hashtag
groups. Additionally, for example, if we consider the School
Closures category, we observe that unigrams (e.g., teacher,
learn) and bigrams (e.g., home school, kid home) reflect the
most discussed issues. We also conduct sentiment analysis to
unearth the overall sentiment of the people. Our investigation
reveals that people reacted positively to school closures and
negatively to the lack of availability of essential goods due to
panic buying. We next adopt a state-of-the-art semantic role

2

labeling approach to identify the action words (e.g., fear, test)
that are uniquely representative in each hashtag group. These
action words help understand peoples’ actions in each group.
We leverage a LSTM dependency parsing model to analyze
the context of the above-mentioned action words (e.g., verb
deal is accompanied by nouns such as anxiety and stress).
Finally, we develop a scalable seeded topic modeling
(seeded LDA) approach to automatically categorize tweets
into specific topics of interest, especially when the topics are
rarer in the dataset. We experimentally validate our seeded
LDA model and observe that it provides a grouping similar
to our manual grouping. Our study summarizes the critical
public responses surrounding COVID-19, paving the way for
future fine-grained linguistic and graph analysis.
II. DATA AND M ETHODS
In this section, we discuss our methodology for data
collection from Twitter to investigate the societal impact
of COVID-19 in the United States during its early days.
We collect data using the Twitter search API. The results
presented in this paper are based on the data collected from
March 14 to March 24, 2020. We track the trending COVID
related hashtags every day and collect the tweets in those
specific hashtags. We repeat this process to collect a total of
530,206 tweets during this time period.

topic in conversations. This grouping is done by accumulating hashtags related to COVID-19.
2. Quarantine: Calls for social distancing and quarantines
flooded Twitter during this outbreak. Communications centered around quarantines, working from home and flattening
the curve to slow the spread of the virus.
3. School Closures: In this category, we collect data related
to school closures. Before states decided to close schools,
users on Twitter demanded the government to shut down
public schools and universities. We collect data from a
number of hashtags centered around this call for action.
4. Panic Buying: The spread of the virus also resulted in
panic buying and hoarding. People rushed to shopping marts
and there was a huge panic buying of sanitizers and toilet
paper. This panic buying resulted in severe shortage of toilet
papers around the middle of March, an issue that remained
unresolved till the end of April.
5. Lockdowns: With COVID-19 spreading unabated, lock
downs of stores, bars, restaurants, and cities began in many
states, resulting in a surge in tweets related to lock downs.
6. Frustration and Hope: Emotions ran high during these
times with people expressing anger and resentment towards
those not abiding by social distancing and quarantine rules.
Alongside, people also rallied to support workers working
hard to keep essential services running. With the beginning
of April approaching, many people started to worry about
their next month’s rent.

A. Hashtag Categories
We group the hashtags into six main categories, namely
1) General COVID, 2) Quarantine, 3) School Closures, 4)
Panic Buying, 5) Lockdowns, and 6) Frustration and Hope
to quantitatively and qualitatively understand the chain of
events. We collect data on per day basis for the different
hashtags as and when they become trending. Table I shows
the number of tweets in each category, while Table II shows
the grouping of some of the representative hashtags by
category. We observe that the total number of tweets as
grouped by hashtags is 664,476, which is higher than the
total number of tweets. This is because tweets can contain
multiple hashtags and thus the same tweet can be grouped
into multiple categories. We present some example tweets in
Table III to illustrate the types of communications occurring
on Twitter during this period.
TABLE I: Number of Tweets by Category
Category
General Covid
Quarantine
Lockdowns
Frustration and Hope
Panic Buying
School Closures

Number of Tweets
4,81,398
142,297
14,709
13,084
10,855
2,133

1. General COVID: In this category, we group hashtags
related to COVID related messages as it is the most discussed

B. Gaps in Data Collection
Due to the data collection limits imposed by Twitter, we
are able to only collect and analyze a portion of the tweets.
Though we started collecting data as quickly as we conceived
of this project, we were unable to collect data during the first
week of March. Though we ran our script to collect data as
far back as March 8, because of the way Twitter provides
data, we obtained a limited number of tweets from March 8 to
March 13. Additionally, due to the rapidly evolving situation,
it is likely that we have inadvertently missed some important
hashtags, despite our best efforts. As is the case with most
studies based on Twitter data, we also acknowledge the
presence of bias in data collection [1]. Having said that, the
goal of this study is to provide a panoramic summarized view
of the impact of the pandemic on people’s lives and aggregate
public opinion as expressed by them. Due to the nature of
this study, we are confident that the results presented here
help in appreciating the sequence of events that transpired
and better prepare ourselves from possible future waves of
COVID-19 or another pandemic.
III. L INGUISTIC A NALYSIS
In this section, we present observations and results based
on our linguistic analysis of the tweets. We study the popularity and temporal evolution of individual hashtags and hashtag

3

TABLE II: Hashtags by Category
Category
General COVID
Quarantine
School Closures
Panic Buying
Lockdowns
Frustration and Hope

Hashtags
#covid19, #COVID19, #Covid19, #covid 19, #covid, #corona, #coronavirus, #Coronavirus,
#QuarantineLife, #quarantined, #staysafestayhome, #staytheFhome, #staythefuckhome,
#schoolclosures, #closenypublicschools, #closenycschools, #closenyschools, #suny, #cuny,
#panicbuying, #PanicBuying, #panicshopping, #PanicShopping, #panicbuyers, #toiletpaper,
#lockdown, #Shutdown, #seattleshutdown, #ShutItDown, #shutdownnyc, #lalockdown, #sflockdown,
#fightback,#saveyourlife, #COVIDIOTS, #COVIDIDIOTS, #WhenThisIsAllOver, #coronafighters,

TABLE III: Example Tweets by Category

160000
140000
120000

#COVID2019

#CoronaVirusUpdate

#CoronavirusPandemic

#StayHome

#coronapocolypse

#workingfromhome

#socialdistancing

#CoronaVirus

#pandemic

#StayTheFHome

#QuaratineLife

0

#Covid19

20000

Hashtags

30000
25000
20000
15000
10000
5000

#covid19
#QuarantineLife
#coronavirus
#COVID19
#coronavirus
#Coronavirus
#COVID19
#QuarantineLife
#coronavirus
#SocialDistancing
#coronapocalypse
#CoronavirusOutbreak
#CoronavirusOutbreak
#covid19
#covid19
#COVID19
#coronavirus
#covid19
#SocialDistancing
#Coronavirus
#coronavirus
#COVID2019
#SocialDistancing
#Coronavirus
#coronavirus
#coronapocolypse
#COVID19
#Coronavirus
#COVID19
#COVID19
#SocialDistancingNow
#coronavirus
#coronavirus
#coronavirus
#SocialDistancing
#StayTheFHome
#QuarantineLife
#COVID19
#Coronavirus
#covid19
#COVID19
#CoronavirusOutbreak
#covid19
#QuaratineLife
#Coronavirus
#coronavirus
#workingfromhome
#SocialDistancing
#StayAtHome
#coronavirus
#coronapocolypse
#COVID19
#Coronavirus
#COVID19
#COVID19

(a) Number of tweets for the different hashtags

Number of Tweets

A. Temporal Evolution of Hashtag Groups
Figure 1a shows the top 20 hashtags observed in our data.
As expected, we see that hashtags corresponding directly
to COVID or coronavirus are the most popular hashtags as
most communications are centered around them. We observe
that hashtags around social isolation, staying at home, and
quarantining are also popular. Figure 1b shows the most
popular hashtags by date. Similar to Figure 1a, we observe
that hashtags related directly to COVID and social distancing
trend most on Twitter. The figures and the number of tweets
highlight how the pandemic gripped the United States with
its rate of spread.
We investigate the evolution of the number of tweets in
various hashtag groups over time. To calculate the number
of tweets in each hashtag group, we count the number of
mentions of hashtags in that group across all the tweets. If
the tweet contains more than one hashtag, it is counted as part
of all the hashtags mentioned in it. As the number of tweets
for hashtag groups vary significantly, we plot the groups that
have similar number of tweets together. Similar to Figure 1,
we observe from Figure 2a that the total number of tweets in
the General COVID and Quarantine categories are relatively
high throughout the time period of the study.
Interestingly, from Figure 2b, we observe that panic buying
and calls for school closures peak around the middle of

#covid19

40000

#StayAtHome

60000

#QuarantineLife

#Coronavirus

80000

#SocialDistancing

100000
#CoronavirusOutbreak

groups. We explore the word-usage (i.e, unigram and bigram)
frequencies for each hashtag group to understand the main
points of discussion. We then conduct a sentiment analysis to
understand the prevailing sentiments in the tweets. We adopt
a semantic role labeling approach to identify the action words
(i.e., verbs) as well as the corresponding contextual analysis
of these action words. Finally, we develop a scalable seeded
LDA based topic model to automatically group tweets and
validate its effectiveness with our manual grouping.

#coronavirus

Panic Buying
Lockdowns
Frustration and Hope

#COVID19

School Closures

Example Tweets
If this wasn’t so f***ing deadly serious I’d be laughing... #COVID19
Extroverts. I get it. You need human interaction to fuel your well being,
but #StayTheFHome and interact on social media
If NYCMayorsOffice NYCMayor won’t #closenycpublicschools to protect students and their families, we
will #sickout #CLOSENYCPUBLICSCHOOLS. Teachers are parents too. We all have family. Keep us all safe.
Stop hoarding toilet paper, you morons! #ToiletPaperPanic
NYC is going to get destroyed. I’m so depressed.#NYCLockdown
When are we going to #CancelRent in this state? Hundreds of thousands are filing for unemployment and
can’t pay rent. Sure, we can’t be evicted, but what’s preventing companies from coming after us after this is over?

Number of Tweets

Category
General COVID
Quarantine

03/14

03/15

03/16

03/17

03/18

03/19

03/20

03/21

03/22

03/23

03/24

Days
(b) Most trending hashtags by day

Fig. 1: Popularity of different hashtags

March and then decrease as school closures and rationing
of many essential goods such as toilet paper, cereal, and
milk take effect. From Figure 2c, we see that calls for
lock downs related to schools, bars, and cities peak in the
middle of March. With the virus spreading unabated, we
observe intense calls for lock downs of cities and entire states

4

General COVID
Quarantine

60000
50000
40000
30000
20000

2500
2000
1500
1000

0 03/14 03/15 03/16 03/17 03/18 03/19 03/20 03/21 03/22 03/23 03/24

0 03/14 03/15 03/16 03/17 03/18 03/19 03/20 03/21 03/22 03/23 03/24

Days

(a) General COVID and Quarantine

2500

Lockdowns
Frustration and Hope

2000
1500
1000
500

500

10000

3000

School Closures
Panic Buying

3000

Number of Tweets

Number of Tweets

70000

Number of Tweets

80000

0 03/14 03/15 03/16 03/17 03/18 03/19 03/20 03/21 03/22 03/23 03/24

Days

Days

(b) School Closures and Panic Buying

(c) Lockdowns and Frustration and Hope

Fig. 2: Temporal Evolution of Tweets in Hashtag Groups

around the beginning of the fourth week of March, resulting
in an increased number of tweets in this category. With
passage of time, we observe people increasingly expressing
their frustration and distress in communications, while some
hashtags attempt to inject a more positive outlook.
B. Linguistic Word-Usage Analysis
In this section, we present results from a linguistic word
usage analysis across the different hashtag groups. Our goal
is to identify the words that are uniquely representative of
the particular group. To accomplish this, first, we identify
and present the most commonly used words across all the
hashtags. To construct the group of common words across
all hashtags, we remove the words that are same or similar
to the hashtags mentioned in Table II as those words are
redundant and tend to also be high in frequency. We also
remove the names of places and governors such as New York,
Massachusetts and Andrew Cuomo. After filtering out these
words, we then rank the words based on their occurrence in
multiple groups and their combined frequency across all the
groups. We observe words such as family, health, death, life,
work, help, thank, need, time, love, crisis. In Table IV, we
present some notable example tweets containing the common
words. While one may think that health refers to the virusrelated health issues, we notice that many people also refer
to mental health in their tweets as a possible consequence
to social distancing and anxiety caused by the virus. We
also observe the usage of words such as death and crisis to
indicate the seriousness of the situation. Supporting workers
and showing gratitude toward them is another common tweet
pattern that is worth mentioning.
Second, we present the most semantically meaningful and
uniquely identifying words in each hashtag group. To do
this, we remove the common words calculated in the above
step from each group. From the obtained list of words after
the filtering, we then select the top 10 words. Due to space
constraints, we only present results for four hashtag groups.
Figure 3 gives us the uniquely identifying and semantically
meaningful words in each hashtag group. In the General

TABLE IV: Number of Tweets by Category
Example of Tweets
It’s more important than ever to prioritize your mental
health. You are not in this alone.
Has 13th century returned back to 20th century? Black
Death. We must act very fast.
First, we take care of the health care and emergency
workers. Then, we take care of whoever is in charge of
keeping Netflix and Hulu running or it’s going to get ugly
#distancesocializing #coronavirus

COVID group, we find words such as impact, response,
resource, and doctor. Similarly, for School Closures, we find
words such as teacher, schedule, educator, book, and class.
The Panic Buying top words mostly resonate the shortages
experienced by people such as roll and tissue (referring to
toilet paper), hoard, bidet (as an alternative to toilet paper),
wipe, and water. Top words in the Lockdown group include
immigration, shelter, safety, court, and petition, signifying
the different issues surrounding lockdown.

C. Word Collocation Analysis
We analyze words that co-occur to understand the contextual information surrounding the words. Co-occurring bigrams capture pairs of words that frequently co-occur in each
group. To do this, we first filter out stop words and perform
stemming and lemmatization. We calculate the overall frequencies of each word and its frequency within each class and
calculate the bigram association using Pearson’s Chi Squared
independence test, which determines if pairs of words occur
together more than they would randomly. We select the top 10
bigrams with the highest collocation statistics that are most
intuitive for the human reader. Figure 4 shows the top 10
bigrams for each group. We can clearly see how bigrams give
better understanding compared to unigrams. Bigrams such as
’toilet paper’, ’panic buy’, ’wash hand’ clearly articulate the
intents of the tweets in the panic buying group. Similarly, in
the lockdown group, we see ’stay home’, ’work home’, and
’minimize spread’ emerging as top bigrams capturing what
people are talking about in that group.

5

response
tested
confirmed
report
patient
total
impact
global
resource
doctor

teacher
resource
lesson
class
math
schedule
activity
educator
book
science
0

1000 2000 3000 4000 5000

Word Frequency

roll
hoard
shelf
stock
wipe
water
bought
found
tissue
bidet
0

20

40

60

Word Frequency

80

(a) General COVID word frequency (b) School Closures word frequency

petition
minimize
trend
safety
mayor
street
late
court
immigration
shelter
0

100

200

300

Word Frequency

400

(c) Panic Buying word frequency

0

25 50 75 100 125 150 175

Word Frequency

(d) Lockdowns word frequency

Fig. 3: Word Frequencies
stay home
social distanc
work home
toilet paper
stay safe
new york
confirmed case
corona virus
wash hand
tested positive

2000

6000

Word Frequency

(a) General COVID

home school
year old
school closed
work home
kid home
school close
close school
public school
school closure
home kid

5

15

25

35

toilet paper
panic buy
wash hand
grocery store
roll toilet
hand sanitizer
toilet roll
buy toilet
stay safe
day toilet

200

Word Frequency

600

1000

stay home
spread coronavirus
minimize spread
governor minimize
massachusetts governor
sign petition
new york
coronavirus sign
social distanc
work home

Word Frequency

(b) School Closures

(c) Panic Buying

50

150

250

Word Frequency
(d) Lockdowns

Fig. 4: Bigram Frequencies

D. Sentiment Analysis

E. Semantic Role Labeling
We use AllenNLP BERT based model [3] to run semantic
role labeling and identify the action words (verbs), which
capture the actions people are referring to in the tweets.
To identify the uniquely representative verbs in each group,
we identify all the verbs in each group and use TF-IDF
vectorization to remove the common verbs across the groups.

100

Strongly Positive
Positive
Negative
Strongly Negative

80
Percentage

60
40
20

Clo

Pa sure
nic s
Bu
y
Lo ing
ckd
ow
Qu ns
ara
nti
Fru
ne
str
ati
on
&H
op
e

Sc

ho

ol

ral

Co

vid

0

Ge
ne

To understand the sentiment across the different hashtag
groups, we perform a comparative sentiment analysis. We
use a pre-trained sentiment analysis model [2], which has
95.11% accuracy on Stanford SST test dataset and apply it
to our dataset. Our model, roBERTa base model, classifies the
data into five sentiment categories: strongly positive, positive,
neutral, negative, and strongly negative.
We present the results in Figure 5. Since the neutral
category is not useful for our analysis, we exclude it and
scale the rest of the categories to 100%, normalizing for
the number of tweets in each category. We notice that the
School Closures group has a significantly higher number of
positive tweets that capture the overall positive sentiment
around the closure of schools. In contrast, the Panic buying
group has a higher number of negative tweets showing the
frustration in relation to panic buying. Overall, we observe
strongly positive tweets when compared to strongly negative
tweets in all categories. This is especially interesting in the
Quarantine and Frustration and Hope groups, where more
tweets are showing support for quarantine and hopefulness.

Fig. 5: Multi-class Classification Sentiment Graph

We then compute the verb frequency of remaining verbs in
each group. Figure 6 shows the verbs and their frequencies.
The results capture the top verbs defining each group. For
example, the School Closures group has close as its top verb
which signifies the closing of schools while learn, read,
and teach emphasize the actions corresponding to learning
online because of the pandemic. In comparison some words
such as mean and post are challenging to understand without
additional context, so we present examples tweets containing
these words to understand the context in which they are used
in Table V. All tweets with mean have a similar context but
post is used in two different contexts. One refers to send and
the other refers to the post pandemic period.
Along the same lines, verbs in other groups also signify
people’s actions during the pandemic. The Panic Buying
group captures actions such as buy, wash, hoard, sell, and

6

test
confirm
infect
relate
deal
hold
impact
offer
demand
slow
rise
change

0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000

close
learn
try
teach
read
thank
face
watch
talk
school
mean
post

Word Frequency

(a) General Covid

0

10 20 30 40 50 60

Word Frequency

(b) School Closures

buy
think
stop
find
wash
hoard
run
sell
tell
remember
thank
survive

0 50 100 150 200 250

Word Frequency

(c) Panic Buying

minimize
leave
turn
believe
understand
begin
guess
drink
sleep
immigration
head
damn

20

60 100 140
Word Frequency

(d) Lockdowns

Fig. 6: Top Verbs in Tweets
TABLE V: Tweets with Mean and Post verbs of School Closures
Group
Example of Tweets
if they #closetheschoolsuknow then that means I can
self-isolate not because I’m feeling ill or showing signs of
the #coronavirus just because there’s no point in going out
the house if it’s not for work everywhere is closed so close
the schools and let me binge watch disney
I don’t have many followers because I just started doing
twitter again but I will post a hands on lesson daily for
#homeschooling and spam all the trending hashtags.
#CoronavirusOutbreak #StayHome TheTodayShow
#COVID19
Free online classes for K-12 students from St. Louis area
company Varsity tutors. St. Louis post dispatch reporting on
the story

survive. Similarly, in the Quarantine group, action words such
as walk, practice, save, and clean are among the top ones.

VERB

VERB

close

need

Link: dep

Link: dep

schools

down

NOUN

ADP

(a) School Closures

Link: xcomp

Link: dep

people

to

know

NOUN

PART

VERB

Link: nsubj

(b) Panic Buying

Fig. 7: Examples of Dependency Parse Subtrees

F. Contextual Analysis of Action Words using Dependency
Parsing
To further analyze the context in which the action words
discussed in Section III-E are used, we analyze the words
associated with them using dependency parsing. Dependency
parsing breaks down each sentence into linguistic dependency
structures organized in the form of a tree. We focus on
identifying the nouns that are connected to the action words.
In the dependency parse, the action words/verbs form the root
of the parse and the dependencies are in the left and right
subtrees. To identify the nouns associated with the verbs, we
traverse the dependency parse to the sub-tree where the action
word of interest is present and then extract the corresponding

noun. We also analyze the link associated with noun and verb
and find that “nsubj” (Nominal Subject), “pobj” (Object of
a preposition) and “dobj” (The Direct Object) are the most
related link tags that contribute to the action words. Figure
7 gives some notable dependency parse subtrees with the
action word and the corresponding noun. We can see that
by decoding the parse structure, we can identify additional
contextual information such as the nouns they refer to.
We use the AllenNLP implementation of a neural model
for dependency parsing using biaffine classifiers on top of a
bidirectional LSTM [4]. We parse the sentences associated
with the top 5 verbs in Figure 6 and find their associated
nouns to understand what the action verbs are used to
signify. Tables VI, VII, VIII, IX represent the different
nouns associated with the most prominent action words in
each group, respectively. General COVID being the diverse
group, it contains a myriad of tweets from offering support
to the fear of getting infected. Apart from the verb-noun
combinations that we expect to see in the group (such as test
virus, confirm case, offer support), the other most notable
verb-noun combinations in this group are: deal stress, deal
anxiety, fear system, and fear safety. And in other groups, the
verb-noun combinations narrow down on the specific actions
relevant to the group. For instance, in School Closures, the
action word close mostly talks about closing the schools
for benefit of students, and action word offer co-occurs
with teaching aids through online sources. In the Panic
Buying group, tweets about the panic experienced by people
is captured by verb-noun pairs such as stop madness, buy
paper, find store. In the Lockdown group, some interesting
combinations surface such as believe information, guess trust,
which captures the possible distrust people have with the
lockdown measures. Nouns such as insanity also help in
capturing peoples’ reaction to the lockdown measures.
TABLE VI: General Covid Action Words
Action words
test
confirm
offer
deal
fear

Linked Nouns
people, president, virus, news, student
case, number, death, people, health
help, advice, support, relief, delivery
anxiety, impact, stress, virus, crisis
people, virus, safety, system, faith

7

TABLE VII: School Closures Action Words
Action words
close
learn
thank
teach
mean

Linked Nouns
school, library, mayor, classroom, times
home, experience, life, art, material
people, community, faculty, school, world
matter, life, education, dad, wrong
solidarity, educator, hunger, brain, city

TABLE VIII: Panic Buying Action Words
Action words
stop
buy
wash
find
tell

Linked Nouns
panic, paper, madness, spread, need
paper, toilet, stock, underwear, vaccine
people, hand, face, plague, soap
toilet, paper, home, store, hand
people, story, calm, deal, twitter

TABLE IX: Lockdowns Action Words
Action words
understand
turn
believe
guess
begin

Linked Nouns
insanity, ration, diarrhea, crisis, situation
chapter, point, downtown, person, thing
information, lesson, territory, reason, motto
target, people, defecation, house, trust
voilence, shop, problem, news

G. Seeded Topic Models
In this section, we use Seeded LDA [5] to categorize the
tweets and check the closeness of these automatically obtained groups with our manual grouping using the hashtags.
As we are specifically interested in isolating the tweets in
specific topics of our interest than general topics identified
by a topic model, we leverage a seeded variant of LDA,
Seeded LDA [5] to guide the topic model to discover them.
Seeded LDA allows seeding of topics by providing a small
set of keywords to guide topic discovery influencing both
the document-topic and the topic-word distributions. The
seed words need not be exhaustive as the model is able to
detect other words in the same category via co-occurrence
in the dataset. Our goal with seeded LDA is to i) present a
way to automatically categorize tweets into specific topics of
interest, especially when the topics are rarer in the dataset, ii)
passively evaluate the effectiveness of our word analysis thus
far, and iii) develop a scalable approach that can be extended
to millions of tweets with minimal manual intervention.
We develop a Seeded LDA model to categorize tweets into
the five hashtag groups: i) General COVID, ii) School Closures, iii) Panic Buying, iv) Lockdowns, and v) Quarantine
by seeding each group with seed words from our analysis in
Section III-B. We leave out the Frustration and Hope topic
due to the inherent polarizing nature of the keywords and the
lack of identifying keywords that are unique for the topic. We
select the top few words from our words in Figure 3 as seed
words for our Seeded LDA model. Table X gives the seed
words for the different COVID categories. We include k unseeded topics in our model to account for messages that do

not fall into these topic categories. After experimenting with
different values of k and manually evaluating the topics, we
find that k = 2 gives us the best separation and categorization.
We use α = 0.01 and β = 0.0001 to give us sparse documenttopic and topic-word distributions where fewer topics and
words with high values emerge, so we can classify the
tweets to the predominant category. We train the seeded
LDA models for 2000 iterations. We first use the documenttopic distribution to get the best topic for each tweet. If the
best topic of the message is one of the seeded topics which
correspond to the categories, then, we classify the tweet into
that category. In the event that a clear best topic does not
emerge, we randomly assign the tweet to one of the topics
that have the same document topic distribution.
TABLE X: Seed List for Topic Modeling
Category
General COVID
School Closures
Panic Buying
Lockdowns
Quarantine

Seed words
pandemic,test,covid,spread
school,teach,read,student,class
roll,shop,panic,toilet,paper,buy,sanitize
city,shutdown,shut,state,close,petition
quarantine,work,stay,social,distance,home

1) Analyzing Effectiveness of Seeded LDA Model: To
check how closely the hashtag groups match with the seeded
LDA groups, we measure the accuracy by comparing the
document topic distribution from the LDA against the grouping determined by the hashtags. We do this by calculating
the confusion matrix which gives us four metrics such
as true positives, true negatives, false positives, and false
negatives to further calculate accuracy, precision, recall, and
f1 scores, which gives the value of correctness. The results
we obtained are shown in the Table XI. This endeavor helps
in determining the effectiveness of our word analysis (seeds)
and our seeded LDA model.
TABLE XI: Model Correctness results
Metric
Accuracy
Precision
Recall
F1 Score

Result(in Percentage)
69.10852
41.04047
38.84685
39.91354

Also, to verify that our model had best results in the
groups that we are interested in, we calculate the precision,
recall, and F1 scores for the School Closures, Panic Buying,
Lockdowns, and Quarantine groups. We exclude General
COVID and Frustration and Hope groups as they are too
general, and we are interested in isolating the more specific
COVID groups. Table XII shows the results of each group.
By examining the result, we observe that the manual
grouping of the hashtags have significant match with the
seeded LDA groups. We also note that the seeded LDA model
is able to correctly isolate the tweets in rarer groups where
there is less data, such the School closures group. This shows
the effectiveness of our model to analyze rarer groups in the

8

TABLE XII: Model correctness on Individual groups
Groups
School Closures
Panic Buying
Lockdowns
Quarantine

Recall
52.38567
52.09513
21.17116
24.17547

Precision
30.37499
30.58002
34.11569
88.51389

F1 Score
38.45340
38.53806
26.12805
37.97811

data. Additionally, from the precision of classification for the
Quarantine group, we observe that the false positives were
significantly low and further adds credibility to our model.
IV. R ELATED W ORK
In this section, we outline existing research related to
modeling and analyzing Twitter and web data to understand
social, political, psychological, and economic impacts of a
variety of different events. Due to the recent nature of the
outbreak, there is little to no published work on COVID19. We primarily focus on discussing work that analyze
Twitter communications. Ahmed et al. focus on the conspiracy theories surrounding the novel coronavirus, especially
in relationship with 5G [6]. The authors analyze Twitter
communications and discuss the possibility of using bots for
propagating misinformation and political conspiracies during
the pandemic [7], [8]. In comparison, the authors in [10]
conduct infodemiology studies on Twitter communications
to understand how information is spreading during this time,
while the the stigma created by referencing the novel coronavirus as “Chinese virus” is investigated in [9]. Twitter has
been used to study political events and related stance [11],
[12], human trafficking [13], and public health [14], [15],
[16], [17], [18]. Several work perform fine-grained linguistic
analysis on social media data [19], [20], [21].
V. D ISCUSSION AND C ONCLUDING R EMARKS
In this paper, we studied Twitter communications in the
United States during the early days of the COVID-19 outbreak. As the disease continued to spread, we observed
panic buying as well as calls for closures of schools, bars,
cities, social distancing and quarantining. We conducted
a linguistic word-usage analysis and identified the most
frequently occurring unigrams and bigrams in each group
that provide us an idea of the main discussion points. We
conducted sentiment analysis to understand the extent of
positive and negative sentiments in the tweets. We then
performed semantic role labeling to identify the key action
words and then obtained the corresponding contextual words
using dependency parsing. Finally, we designed a scalable
seeded topic modeling approach to automatically identify the
key topics in the tweets.
R EFERENCES
[1] F. Morstatter and H. Liu, “Discovering, assessing, and mitigating data
bias in social media,” Journal of Online Social Networks and Media,
vol. 1, pp. 1–13, 2017.

[2] Y. Liu, M. Ott, N. Goyal, J. Du, M. Joshi, D. Chen, O. Levy, M. Lewis,
L. Zettlemoyer, and V. Stoyanov, “Roberta: A robustly optimized bert
pretraining approach,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.11692, 2019.
[3] P. Shi and J. Lin, “Simple bert models for relation extraction and
semantic role labeling,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.05255, 2019.
[4] T. Dozat and C. D. Manning, “Deep biaffine attention for neural
dependency parsing,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.01734, 2016.
[5] J. Jagarlamudi, H. Daumé III, and R. Udupa, “Incorporating lexical
priors into topic models,” in Proceedings of the 13th Conference of the
European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
2012, pp. 204–213.
[6] W. Ahmed, J. Vidal-Alaball, J. Downing, and F. L. Seguı́, “Covid-19
and the 5g conspiracy theory: social network analysis of twitter data,”
Journal of Medical Internet Research, vol. 22, no. 5, p. e19458, 2020.
[7] R. Kouzy, J. Abi Jaoude, A. Kraitem, M. B. El Alam, B. Karam,
E. Adib, J. Zarka, C. Traboulsi, E. W. Akl, and K. Baddour, “Coronavirus goes viral: quantifying the covid-19 misinformation epidemic
on twitter,” Cureus, vol. 12, no. 3, 2020.
[8] E. Ferrara, “What types of covid-19 conspiracies are populated
by twitter bots?” First Monday, May 2020. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.5210/fm.v25i6.10633
[9] H. Budhwani and R. Sun, “Creating covid-19 stigma by referencing
the novel coronavirus as the ?chinese virus? on twitter: Quantitative
analysis of social media data,” Journal of Medical Internet Research,
vol. 22, no. 5, p. e19301, 2020.
[10] H. W. Park, S. Park, and M. Chong, “Conversations and medical news
frames on twitter: Infodemiological study on covid-19 in south korea,”
Journal of Medical Internet Research, vol. 22, no. 5, p. e18897, 2020.
[11] K. Johnson and D. Goldwasser, “All i know about politics is what i
read in twitter: Weakly supervised models for extracting politicians’
stances from twitter,” in International Conference on Computational
Linguistics (COLING), 2016.
[12] H. Le, G. Boynton, Y. Mejova, Z. Shafiq, and P. Srinivasan, “Bumps
and bruises: Mining presidential campaign announcements on twitter,”
in Proceedings of the Conference on Hypertext and Social Media,
2017.
[13] S. Tomkins, G. Farnadi, B. Amanatullah, L. Getoor, and S. Minton,
“The impact of environmental stressors on human trafficking,” in 2018
IEEE International Conference on Data Mining (ICDM), 2018.
[14] M. Pérez-Pérez, G. Pérez-Rodrı́guez, F. Fdez-Riverola, and
A. Lourenço, “Using twitter to understand the human bowel
disease community: Exploratory analysis of key topics,” Journal of
medical Internet research (JMIR), vol. 21, no. 8, p. e12610, 2019.
[15] M. Dredze, “How social media will change public health,” Journal of
IEEE Intelligent Systems, vol. 27, pp. 81–84, 2012.
[16] S. Balani and M. DeChoudhury, “Detecting and characterizing mental
health related self-disclosure in social media,” in Proceedings of the
Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems,
2015.
[17] M. De Choudhury, M. Gamon, S. Counts, and E. Horvitz, “Predicting
depression via social media.” in Proceedings of the International
Conference on Web and Social Media (ICWSM), 2013.
[18] D. J. McIver, J. B. Hawkins, R. Chunara, A. K. Chatterjee, A. Bhandari, T. P. Fitzgerald, S. H. Jain, and J. S. Brownstein, “Characterizing
sleep issues using twitter,” Journal of Medical Internet Research,
vol. 17, 2015.
[19] Y. Zhang and A. Ramesh, “Fine-grained analysis of cyberbullying
using weakly-supervised topic models,” in International Conference
on Data Science and Advanced Analytics (DSAA), 2018.
[20] S. Tomkins, L. Getoor, Y. Chen, and Y. Zhang, “A socio-linguistic
model for cyberbullying detection,” in 2018 IEEE/ACM International
Conference on Advances in Social Networks Analysis and Mining
(ASONAM). IEEE, 2018, pp. 53–60.
[21] E. Raisi and B. Huang, “Weakly supervised cyberbullying detection
using co-trained ensembles of embedding models,” in 2018 IEEE/ACM
International Conference on Advances in Social Networks Analysis and
Mining (ASONAM), 2018.

