NutCracker at WNUT-2020 Task 2: Robustly Identifying Informative
COVID-19 Tweets using Ensembling and Adversarial Training
Priyanshu Kumar and Aadarsh Singh
Indian Institute of Technology (Indian School of Mines) Dhanbad, India
{kpriyanshu256, aadarshsingh191198 }@gmail.com

arXiv:2010.04335v1 [cs.CL] 9 Oct 2020

Abstract
We experiment with COVID-Twitter-BERT
and RoBERTa models to identify informative
COVID-19 tweets. We further experiment
with adversarial training to make our models robust. The ensemble of COVID-TwitterBERT and RoBERTa obtains a F1-score of
0.9096 (on the positive class) on the test
data of WNUT-2020 Task 2 and ranks 1st on
the leaderboard. The ensemble of the models trained using adversarial training also produces similar result.

1

Introduction

Since 2006, Twitter has been a popular social network where people express their thoughts and opinions on various topics. The enforcement of lockdown in various parts of the world, due to COVID19, led to an increased usage of social media. Thus,
the world has witnessed a plethora of tweets since
the beginning of COVID-19. People have tweeted
about many issues regarding the pandemic, mostly
about the increasing infection rate, carelessness
and incapability of governance and authorities to
handle the increasing rate of cases. In addition, various preventive measures have also been conveyed
through tweets.
Although there have been more than 600 million English tweets on COVID-19 (Lamsal, 2020)
, only a few of them are informative enough to be
used by various monitoring systems to update their
databases. Manual identification of these informative tweets can be tedious and erroneous. Hence,
there is a dire need to develop systems in the form
of machine learning models that can help us in
filtering informative tweets.
In this paper, we present our approaches for the
shared task “Identification of informative COVID19 English Tweets” organized under the Workshop on Noisy User-generated Text (W-NUT). Our

method makes use of ensembles consisting of
Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers (BERT) (Devlin et al., 2018) pretrained
on COVID-19 tweets (Müller et al., 2020) and
Robustly Optimized BERT Pretraining Approach
(RoBERTa) (Liu et al., 2019). We also experiment
with adversarial training so as to create models that
generalise well and are robust.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows:
Related work has been discussed in Section 2, followed by a brief description of the data used in
Section 3. The proposed methods and experimental settings 1 have been elaborated in Section 4, 5
and 6. Section 7 and 8 contains the results and
error analysis respectively. Section 9 concludes the
paper and also includes possible future work.

2

Related Work

There has been much research to identify informative tweets during times of emergency and disaster. Neppalli et al. (2018) explored the performance of traditional machine learning algorithms
and deep learning approaches for identifying informative tweets during disaster. They created manual
features using the content of tweets for machine
learning approaches and also tried out features obtained from Convolutional and Recurrent networks
for deep learning approaches. A multi-modal approach for classifying informative tweets during
disaster was proposed by Madichetty and Sridevi
(2020). They combined the features obtained from
text by a Convolutional Neural Network and the
VGG-16 features obtained from the image accompanying the tweet, using late fusion for better performance than models using only text or only image.
1
Source code available at https://github.com/
kpriyanshu256/WNUT-2020-Task-2

Roy et al. (2020) proposed a classification and
summarisation approach to identify informative
tweets during the Fani cyclone (which occurred
in 2019, affecting large parts of South-East Asia).
They trained a Support Vector Machine (SVM) on
linguistic features and Parts of Speech (POS) tags
from tweets to identify informative tweets. To summarise the informative tweets, they experimented
with Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA) and Luhn
summarisation techniques. Zahera et al. (2019)
experimented with the transformer based architecture BERT to classify disaster related tweets into
multi-label information types. They preprocessed
the tweets of TREC-IS dataset before feeding them
into BERT to produce significantly better results
than the median score. In addition, they also experimented with Focal loss instead of binary crossentropy loss.
A new dataset for identifying informative tweet
was released by Aggarwal (2019). The results of
various machine learning algorithms using GloVe
(Pennington et al., 2014) word embeddings, syntactic information in the form of tf-idf vectors and
BERT embeddings were also presented in the work.
Due to the abundance of tweets related to
COVID-19, many works have been done to analyze
the content, intent and effect of such tweets. Singh
et al. (2020) presented an analysis of COVID-19
tweets on the grounds of location, content and misinformation spread. A comprehensive study about
the content of misinformative COVID-19 tweets
and other aspects associated with them have been
done by Shahi et al. (2020).

3

2. Remove unnecessary spaces, tabs and newlines
3. Replacing the the mentioned hyperlinks in the
tweets (depicted as HTTPURL), with URL.
A simple explanation for this could be that
“URL” is a more commonly used expression
of hyperlinks than HTTPURL.
4. Using the Python emoji 2 library to demojise
the emojis i.e. replace them with a short textual description.
The user handles were already replaced by
@USER in the tweets, hence no processing was
required.

5

Models

We experiment with the following models and techniques:
1. COVID-Twitter-BERT: BERT is based on
the Transformer architecture (Vaswani et al.,
2017). It consists of multi-attention heads
which apply a sequence-to-sequence transformation on the input text sequence. For its
training, BERT makes use of the following
objectives: (a) learn to predict a masked token
using the left and right context of the text sequence (Masked Language Model) (b) learn
to predict whether two sentences occur in continuation or not (Next Sentence Prediction)
Müller et al. (2020) pretrain the large version
of BERT (BERT-Large) on COVID-19 related
tweets posted by users between January 12
and April 16, 2020. This version of BERT
has a better understanding of the given data as
compared to BERT-large, which is pretrained
on texts from Wikipedia. Hence, COVIDTwitter-BERT will be even more beneficial
for the task when fine tuned.

Dataset

The dataset (Nguyen et al., 2020) provided to the
participants of the shared task contains 10,000 English COVID-19 tweets, out of which 4719 are
labeled as INFORMATIVE and 5281 are labeled
as UNINFORMATIVE. The tweets were annotated
by 3 independent annotators and an inter-annotator
agreement score of Fleiss’ Kappa at 0.818 was obtained. The dataset contains the tweet ID, the tweet
and the corresponding label.

4

1. Unescape HTML tags

Data Preprocessing

Twitter data contains a lot of noise. Therefore, preprocessing on Twitter data will help the pretrained
models in better performance. We perform the following data preprocessing steps, most of which
have been inspired from Müller et al. (2020) :

2. RoBERTa Large: RoBERTa has the same
architecture as BERT, but is different from
BERT on the grounds of pretraining, which
helps in better optimisation and performance.
RoBERTa is pretrained on a larger dataset as
compared to BERT, uses a larger batch size
and replaces the Next Sentence Prediction objective. It also uses dynamic masking pattern
2

https://pypi.org/project/emoji/

as a better alternative to the static masking pattern used in BERT, i.e. RoBERTa duplicates
the data and masks those differently each time,
whereas BERT will mask the data only once.
3. Adversarial Training: With time, adversarial training is gaining popularity in Natural
Language Processing (NLP) as well. In the
field of Computer Vision, adversarial training
is done by perturbing the input images slightly
and minimising the adversarial loss. In NLP,
the nature of input being discrete, small perturbations are done on the word embeddings.
Adversarial training not only increases the robustness of models but also helps in better
generalisation. Both properties are beneficial
and desirable for identification of informative
tweets.
Although many approaches for adversarial
training in NLP have been developed, we experiment with the approach proposed by Miyato et al. (2016) with a slight modification. In
their approach, first the word embeddings are
normalized. The gradients are then computed
using the data and the required perturbations
are created using the obtained gradients.
Let the sequence of (normalized) word embedding vectors of a text be t. The model
parameters are represented by θ. The probability of the text belonging to class y is given
by p(y|t; θ). The adversarial perturbations
zadv are computed as follows:
g = ∇t log p(y|t; θ)
zadv = −g/ k g k2
where  is a hyper-parameter controlling the
size of the perturbations. The adversarial loss
is defined as :
Ladv (θ) = −

N
1 X
log p(yn |tn + zadv,n ; θ)
N n=1

By using the gradients calculated from the
above loss, the weights of the model are updated (the non-perturbed word embeddings
of the model are updated). The slight modification in our experiments is that we do not
normalize our pretrained word embedding of
the model, since it might change the semantic meaning of the pretrained word embeddings. We perform adversarial training on

both COVID-Twitter-BERT and RoBERTa
Large models using  = 1 .
4. Ensembling: The ensembling of the predictions for our submissions is done at two levels(a) Fold level i.e. the predictions obtained
by the models trained using the different
folds (during cross validation) are averaged.
(b) Model level i.e. the fold level averaged
predictions of the two different models
are ensembled using averaging.

6

Experimental Settings

We concatenate the training and the validation data
and perform a 5-fold stratified cross validation
to train our models. Each fold is trained for 5
epochs using early stopping with patience of 3 and
tolerance of 1e-3. The models are optimised using AdamW (Loshchilov and Hutter, 2017) with
a learning rate of 2e-5 and a batch size of 16.
The models have been implemented using Pytorch
(Paszke et al., 2019) and Huggingface’s Transformers (Wolf et al., 2019) library.

7

Results

We evaluate the performance of the models and
their ensemble using cross-validation (CV). We
also tabulate the models’ performance on the test
set as evaluated by the F1 score on the positive
class.
The ensembling done at two levels increases the
robustness of the results. The out-of-folds predictions were used to find the optimal threshold of the
submissions, 0.498 for the ensemble without adversarial training and 0.487 for the ensemble with
adversarial training. We also compare our results
with the fastText-baseline (Joulin et al., 2016) by
the organizers. Table 1 shows the results of our
experiments.
The ensemble of COVID-Twitter-BERT and
RoBERTa Large performs the best on the test data
and also obtains the 1st rank on the leaderboard.
Owing to its pretraining, COVID-Twitter-BERT
performs better than RoBERTa Large. The adversarial training of the models is also found to boost
the scores. The ensemble of adversarial models
produces results similar to the ensemble of models
trained without adversarial training.

Model
Baseline - fastText
COVID-Twitter-BERT
RoBERTa Large
COVID-Twitter-BERT Adv.
RoBERTa Large Adv.
COVID-Twitter-BERT +
RoBERTa Large
COVID-Twitter-BERT Adv.
+ RoBERTa Large Adv.

CV
0.9622
0.9560
0.9632
0.9578
0.9636

Test
0.7503
0.9096

0.9655

0.9082

Table 1: Comparison of results.

8

Analysis

We perform our analysis on the out-of-folds predictions from our two ensembles - without adversarial
training and with adversarial training.
We calculate the binary cross entropy loss for all
samples and then examine some of the top common
mis-classifications by both the ensembles ( Table
2).
We observe that there are instances where our
models are mistaken. A possible reason might
be the variance in gold-labels of samples from
annotator-to-annotator. This acts as noise in the
labels of the data which is used to train the normal
ensemble models. On the other hand, adversarial
training adds some noise to the samples. Hence,
the models in the adversarial ensemble have been
trained on data which has a combination of existing

noise and externally added noise. We believe that
because of this difference in noise, the models in
the two ensembles must be behaving in different
ways. To inspect this, we examine the number of
samples which have been inferred incorrectly by
one ensemble and correctly by the other.
We observe that the normal ensemble misclassified a total of 277 samples whereas, only 260
samples were misclassified by the adversarial ensemble. Moreover, out of the 277 examples that
were misclassified by the normal ensemble, 102
were correctly predicted by the adversarial ensemble. On the other hand, only 85 out of the 260
samples misclassified by the adversarial ensemble,
were correctly predicted by the normal ensemble.
Thus, it is evident that the models in both the ensembles have learnt different patterns from the data.

9

Conclusion

We explored the performance of COVID-TwitterBERT and RoBERTa-Large at identifying COVID19 English tweets that are informative in nature.
Their ensemble achieves the state-of-the-art performance. Adversarial training is found to improve
our model further. For future work, we can pretrain other Transformer-based models on COVID19 tweets. Data augmentation techniques can help
us generate more data for training models. We can
also experiment with combining models trained
with and without adversarial training.

Tweet
Label
Election Judge Hospitalized After Primary Dies Of Coronavirus #RIP #SemperFi fought for his life while -@USER got her hair done #LetThatSinkIn
UNINFORMATIVE
“face of Chicago” thinks she’s more important than Chicagoans welfare #LightfootLiedPeopleDied HTTPURL
Austin area nursing home residents who test positive for COVID-19 but do not
need to be in the hospital will soon be moving to one of two new “isolation facilities,” one in Travis County, one in Williamson County: HTTPURL @USER

INFORMATIVE

LOCAL NEWS SHOUTOUT: Have a family member or close friend with a
Michigan connection who has died from COVID-19 and would like to share
their story with @USER Please contact Georgea Kovanis at gkovanis@USER

INFORMATIVE

BREAKING: Southern AB #coronavirus case rumored to be Steve Busey, the
younger brother of movie star @USER According to our sources, Steve works
in the oil &amp; gas industry and is a huge @USER fan. #COVID-19
HTTPURL
Table 2: Some common highly misclassified samples.

UNINFORMATIVE

Acknowledgments
We thank Google Colab for providing free GPU
services for experimentation purposes.

References
Piush Aggarwal. 2019. Classification approaches to
identify informative tweets. In Proceedings of the
Student Research Workshop Associated with RANLP
2019, pages 7–15.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and
Kristina Toutanova. 2018. Bert: Pre-training of deep
bidirectional transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805.
Armand Joulin, Edouard Grave, Piotr Bojanowski, and
Tomas Mikolov. 2016. Bag of tricks for efficient text
classification. arXiv preprint arXiv:1607.01759.
R Lamsal. 2020. Corona virus (covid-19) tweets
dataset. IEEE Dataport.
Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Mandar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy, Mike Lewis,
Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. 2019.
Roberta: A robustly optimized bert pretraining approach. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.11692.
Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. 2017.
weight decay regularization in adam.
abs/1711.05101.

Fixing
CoRR,

high-performance deep learning library. In Advances in neural information processing systems,
pages 8026–8037.
Jeffrey Pennington, Richard Socher, and Christopher D
Manning. 2014. Glove: Global vectors for word representation. In Proceedings of the 2014 conference
on empirical methods in natural language processing (EMNLP), pages 1532–1543.
Sujoy Roy, Sumit Mishra, and Rakesh Matam. 2020.
Classification and summarization for informative
tweets. In 2020 IEEE International Students’ Conference on Electrical, Electronics and Computer Science (SCEECS), pages 1–4. IEEE.
Gautam Kishore Shahi, Anne Dirkson, and Tim A
Majchrzak. 2020. An exploratory study of covid19 misinformation on twitter.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2005.05710.
Lisa Singh, Shweta Bansal, Leticia Bode, Ceren Budak,
Guangqing Chi, Kornraphop Kawintiranon, Colton
Padden, Rebecca Vanarsdall, Emily Vraga, and
Yanchen Wang. 2020. A first look at covid-19 information and misinformation sharing on twitter. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2003.13907.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob
Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz
Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is all
you need. In Advances in neural information processing systems, pages 5998–6008.

Sreenivasulu Madichetty and M Sridevi. 2020. Classifying informative and non-informative tweets from
the twitter by adapting image features during disaster. Multimedia Tools and Applications, pages 1–23.

Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien
Chaumond, Clement Delangue, Anthony Moi, Pierric Cistac, Tim Rault, Rémi Louf, Morgan Funtowicz, et al. 2019. Transformers: State-of-theart natural language processing. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1910.03771.

Takeru Miyato, Andrew M Dai, and Ian Goodfellow. 2016. Adversarial training methods for
semi-supervised text classification. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1605.07725.

Hamada M Zahera, Ibrahim A Elgendy, Rricha Jalota,
and Mohamed Ahmed Sherif. 2019. Fine-tuned
bert model for multi-label tweets classification. In
TREC.

Martin Müller, Marcel Salathé, and Per E Kummervold.
2020. Covid-twitter-bert: A natural language processing model to analyse covid-19 content on twitter.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.07503.
Venkata Kishore Neppalli, Cornelia Caragea, and
Doina Caragea. 2018. Deep neural networks versus naive bayes classifiers for identifying informative tweets during disasters. In ISCRAM.
Dat Quoc Nguyen, Thanh Vu, Afshin Rahimi,
Mai Hoang Dao, Linh The Nguyen, and Long Doan.
2020. WNUT-2020 Task 2: Identification of Informative COVID-19 English Tweets. In Proceedings
of the 6th Workshop on Noisy User-generated Text.
Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam
Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor
Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca
Antiga, et al. 2019. Pytorch: An imperative style,

