Date of publication xxxx 00, 0000, date of current version xxxx 00, 0000.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/ACCESS.2020 .Doi Number

An Observational Study of Engineering Online
Education During the COVID-19 Pandemic
Shadnaz Asgari1,2, Jelena Trajkovic2, Mehran Rahmani3, Wenlu Zhang2, Roger C. Lo4, and
Antonella Sciortino3,5
1

Department of Biomedical Engineering, California State University, Long Beach, California, USA
Department of Computer Engineering and Computer Science, California State University, Long Beach, California, USA
3
Department of Civil Engineering and Construction Engineering Management, California State University, Long Beach, California, USA
4
Department of Chemical Engineering, California State University, Long Beach, California, USA
5
College of Engineering, California State University, Long Beach, California, USA
2

Corresponding author: Shadnaz Asgari (e-mail: Shadnaz.Asgari@csulb.edu).

This research is partially supported by CSULB Champions program through Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) act funding.

ABSTRACT Although online education has become a viable and major component of higher education in
many fields, its employment in engineering disciplines has been limited. COVID-19 pandemic compelled the
global and abrupt conversion of conventional face-to-face instruction to the online format. The negative
impact of such sudden change is undeniable. Urgent and careful planning is needed to mitigate pandemic
negative effects on engineering education, especially for vulnerable, disadvantaged, and underrepresented
students who have to deal with additional challenges (e.g. digital equity gap). To enhance engineering online
instruction during the pandemic era, we conducted an observational study at California State University, Long
Beach (a minority-serving institution). 110 faculty and 627 students from six engineering departments
participated in our surveys and answered quantitative and qualitative questions to highlight the challenges
they experienced during the online instruction in Spring 2020. In this work, we present the results of these
surveys in detail and propose solutions to address the identified issues including logistical, technical,
learning/teaching challenges, assessment methods, and hands-on training. As the pandemic continues, sharing
these results with other educators can help with more effective planning and choice of best practices to
improve the online engineering education during COVID-19 and beyond.
INDEX TERMS Engineering Education, COVID-19, Online Learning, Observational Study, Education
Enhancement

I. INTRODUCTION

Engineering education has been traditionally contentcentered, hands-on, design-oriented, and focused on the
development of critical thinking or problem-solving skills
[1]. Various teaching methodologies have shown efficacy in
enhancement of engineering education including active
learning [2], flipped classroom [3] and project-based
learning [4-6].
Over the last decade, online education has become a viable
and major component of higher education in many fields
including business administration and management,
psychology, criminal justice, etc. On the other hand, online
education is not yet widespread throughout all engineering
disciplines [1] but it is limited to few carefully selected
courses in each engineering discipline or mainly at the
master’s and postgraduate levels [7]. Hands-on training to

VOLUME XX, 2020

work with equipment, instruments and materials in
controlled laboratory setting is an inherent and necessary
aspect of a successful engineering education. However,
addressing this essential aspect within a fully online teaching
platform is challenging. Moreover, many students prefer to
learn difficult concepts face-to-face [8] and believe that the
online education might not be the best choice for a deep level
of learning [9]. Converting a course from conventional faceto-face to online format is also time consuming and requires
the instructor’s familiarity with (or willingness to learn
about) online learning or instructional tools including the
learning management system (LMS). Another issue is the
difficulty of designing fair and yet rigorous online
assessments to minimize cheating and plagiarism [10]. A
successful engineering education requires creating and

1

maintaining a reliable and robust infrastructure that supports
both faculty and students [7, 11].
In an unprecedented event, the COVID-19 pandemic
caused the sudden temporarily closure of most educational
institutions around the world and consequently, the
inevitable conversion of their conventional face-to-face
instruction into fully online (or blended/hybrid) format in a
short transitional time. According to UNESCO statistical
data, since the onset of pandemic, more than 1.5 billion
students worldwide (90.1% of total enrolled learners) have
been affected by the COVID-19 closures and subsequent
educational changes [12].
Urgent and careful planning is needed to mitigate the
negative impact of the pandemic changes on engineering
education especially for vulnerable, disadvantaged and
underrepresented students facing substantial challenges
beyond their academic responsibilities including family
obligations, financial burden and additional employments
[13-15]. Additional efforts shall be also taken to guarantee
that the online instruction of engineering courses still meet
the rigorous requirements of the program accreditations, e.g.
ABET.
California State University, Long Beach (CSULB) is one
of the largest four-year and most diverse universities in the
U.S. Approximately 52% of CSULB student body are NSFdefined underrepresented minority including 59.2% female,
46.9% Hispanic, 4.5% African American and 1% Native
American [16]. Also, more than half of our students are lowincome or first-generation college students. As a result,
CSULB is recognized as a minority serving institution:
namely Hispanic, Asian American, Native American, and
Pacific Islander-Serving Institution. Due to COVID-19,
majority of educational programs in CSULB were converted
to fully online format within a transitional period of 10 days
in March 2020. This included all the programs offered by the
College of Engineering (COE) that consists of six
departments, with more than 250 faculty and 5000 students.
The unprecedented circumstances of global pandemic
enforced the swift conversion of the mode of instruction.
Hence, the teaching materials and assessment methods had
to be developed “on the fly”. Both our students and faculty
encountered various challenges during the online instruction
in Spring 2020. By the end of the semester in May 2020,
CSULB announced that Fall 2020 semester was going to be
in the alternative mode of instructions, as well. Thus, the
majority of the courses were scheduled to be offered in
synchronous online format (where faculty and students are
expected to attend the live online sessions). Few classes,
where the face-to-face component is considered essential to
meet the learning outcomes of the course and therefore could
not be conducted fully online, (e.g. laboratories and senior
design capstone projects) were exempted and offered in
hybrid/blended format.
Following this announcement, a team of selected faculty
from six engineering departments started working on
2

identifying teaching/learning obstacles, challenges, and
opportunities for improvement to better plan for the online
instruction in Fall 2020. Sloan’s online learning consortium
has defined the five pillars of high-quality online education
as: learning effectiveness, student satisfaction, faculty
satisfaction, access, scale and cost [1]. Given these factors,
our team decided to take a systematic approach for
improvement of the instruction by first conducting faculty
and student surveys and then proposing interventions to
address the identified issues. This paper presents the results
of our surveys and provides a summary of proposed
solutions. Sharing these results with other educators in
engineering field can facilitate a more robust continuity of
education during ongoing pandemic. It can also aid with
overall improvement of online engineering education in the
post-pandemic era especially for those universities with a
large percentage of minority and first-generation/lowincome students.
II. MATERIALS AND METHODS
A. ENGINEERING EDUCATION AT CSULB

CSULB COE currently serves more than 5000 undergraduate
and graduate students through a total of 11 programs hosted
by six departments: Biomedical Engineering (BME),
Chemical Engineering (CHE), Civil Engineering &
Construction Engineering Management (CECEM), Computer
Engineering & Computer Science (CECS), Electrical
Engineering (EE), and Mechanical & Aerospace Engineering
(MAE). COE offered 349 courses, for a total of 1004 sections
in Spring 2020, and is currently offering 331 courses (5.5%
hybrid and the rest fully online) in Fall 2020.
In 2010, CSULB started using an LMS called BeachBoard
(BB) ̶ developed and supported by the D2L (Desire 2 Learn)
company as a customized version of their "Brightspace"
platform. BB provides various features to facilitate the course
instruction including a robust platform for communication
between the instructor and students, sharing course materials
with students, recording of lectures, discussion forums, design
and management of assessments, assignments and grades.
While some CSULB faculty members have employed (at least
some of) BB features (e.g. gradebook) for their instruction on
a regular basis, others might have opted out as its usage has
not been mandatory.
Following the COVID-19 pandemic and during the short
transitional period to online instruction, CSULB advised
instructors to mainly focus on learning/using BB (and Zoom
videoconferencing) to convert their courses to the online
format. This recommendation seemed reasonable given the
availability and practicality of BB features.
B. SURVEYS

Our goal was to identify and study the magnitude of various
issues that our faculty and students encountered during our six
weeks of online instruction in Spring 2020 (March 23-May 8)

VOLUME XX, 2020

and plan for an enhanced online instruction in Fall 2020. The
faculty and student surveys were designed holistically
considering the overall verbal feedback received from
stakeholders during the Spring 2020 online instruction. The
faculty survey consisted of 10 multiple-choice and 2 freeresponse questions, while student survey included 6 multiplechoice questions with fill-in or additional comment options for
each question.
The faculty survey questions covered a variety of online
teaching issues including, but not limited to, the lack of access
to necessary hardware (e.g. computer/tablet, scanner/printer,
microphone/headset, camera), software and reliable internet
connection. Some questions focused on various learning
assessment methods that instructors used in Spring 2020 (or
the ones they were planning to use in Fall 2020) including
open-book or closed-book exams, synchronous or
asynchronous exams, fully-online exam (using randomized
questions on BB) or semi-online exams (where students solve
the assigned problems on a paper, then scan and upload their
solutions on BB). Some questions focused on proctoring
exams and the instructors’ perceived prevalence of
cheating/plagiarism. We also asked faculty to indicate the
topics that they were interested to enhance their skills on, e.g.,
basic or advanced BB features, Zoom features, automatic
grading, etc. The two open-ended questions provided
instructors additional opportunities to comment about their
online teaching experience and make any suggestion or
request to COE that could help with improvement of online
instruction in Fall 2020.
The students survey was designed to identify the challenges
students confronted during online instruction in Spring 2020,
including lack of access to hardware, software, reliable
internet connection, quiet/private space to study, potential
issues of balancing study with work and family duties, and
stress management. We also asked about difficulties students
had during the synchronous classes on Zoom (e.g., lack of
focus or engagement, instructor’s lack of familiarity with
technology) or during the online exams (e.g., time
management, issues with methods of proctoring using
camera). Copies of faculty and student surveys are enclosed
in the appendix for the readers’ further reference.

Sophomore (14%), Junior (30%), Seniors (35%) and graduate
students (17%). Fig. 1 shows the distribution of survey
participants among various departments within the COE
(question #1 on both surveys). We observe that all
departments have relatively similar representations in terms of
percentage of faculty and student participants (9% BME, 510% CHE, 15-23% CECEM, 19-22% CECS, 18-22% EE, and
21-26% MAE).

FIGURE 1. Distribution of the survey participants among various
departments within the college of Engineering: (A) Faculty participants;
(B) Student participants.

These percentages are consistent with the size of our
departments in terms of number of faculty and students. This
observation shows that our survey sample population could be
a good representative of the general COE populations in terms
of existing majors.
A. LOGISTICAL CHALLENGES FOR BOTH STUDENTS
AND FACULTY

Fig. 2 shows the percentages of survey respondents who
indicated various logistical challenges they had during the
online instruction period of Spring 2020 (question #2 on the
faculty survey and question #3 on the student survey). Close
to 15% of the faculty had issues with software license or no
access to personal computer/tablet. About 20% of the faculty
did not have access to microphone/headset or printer/scanner.
23% of faculty had no reliable internet connection, while 32%
had no access to webcam or camera for the online instruction.
Finally, 47% of the faculty indicated that they had no access
or technical difficulties with online writing tools.

III. RESULTS

The faculty survey was conducted using Qualtrics over a
three-week period (June 20-July 10). Similarly, the student
survey was designed and conducted in Qualtrics afterwards
(July 27-August 12). This later timeframe was decided based
on the assumption that more students (including the incoming
students) might be available to participate in the survey closer
to the beginning of the Fall 2020 semester (August 21).
Participation in both surveys were anonymous.
A total of 110 instructors took the survey where 43% of
them were full-time including tenured/tenure track faculties
and the rest were part-time lecturers. Also, 627 students
participated in the survey: First-year students (4%),
VOLUME XX, 2020

FIGURE 2. Logistical challenges of online instruction from perspectives
of faculty and students. The horizontal access represents the percentage
of survey participants who indicated the corresponding challenge. (A)
Faculty respondents; (B) Student respondents.

3

Among the student respondents, 1% had no access to any
computer/tablet, while close to 5% had only access to a shared
computer at home. 3% had no internet connection, while 26%
had issues with reliability of their internet. 28% indicated
having issues with software access, while 26% had no
printer/scanner at home.
B. STUDENTS CHALLENGES WITH ONLINE
INSTRUCTION

Fig. 3 summarizes the prevalence of challenges students
had with online instruction during Spring 2020 (questions # 36 on the student survey). About 70% of students indicated
difficulty in maintaining their focus or experiencing Zoom
fatigue after attending multiple online sessions. 55% of
students felt social disconnection from their classmates/peers,
while 64% did not feel engaged during the online classes. 60%
of the students felt there was a lack of clear guidance or
communication from the instructors. Also, a quarter of
students had issues with online submission of assignments and
exams, mainly due to the lack of access to printer/scanner as
we learned from students’ optional comments.

FIGURE 3. Prevalence of challenges students encountered during online
instruction in Spring 2020.

About 40% of students had technical difficulty and
ineptness issues with using or navigating through Zoom or
BB. 48% of the students experienced time management issues
during the online exams. In optional comments, some students
expressed their frustration with not being able to go back to
previous questions (a BB feature for the instructors to limit
cheating). 23% of the students indicated that the unavailability
of the instructor during the online exam (in contrast to inperson exam) caused challenges.
48% of the students specified that they either do not have
camera or feel uncomfortable turning the camera/microphone
on during the class or online exams (question #7 on the student
survey). Optional comments revealed that many participants
have privacy concerns with usage of camera/microphone or
being recorded, especially if they were living in a crowded
home or shared space. Furthermore, some students
experienced an increased level of anxiety being watched on
camera that hindered their focus and lowered their
performance during the online exams. 28% of the students
indicated that they had difficulty with balancing work and
study. From the optional comments, we understood that the
latter issue has been escalated for many during pandemic.
Some parents had lost their jobs and consequently the whole
4

family was relying on the part-time jobs of the younger adults
(students) to survive financially.
Our survey also indicated that more than 50% of our
students did not have access to a private or even quiet space to
attend the online classes or to study. 55% of students also
lacked motivation to study (question #3 on the student survey).
The optional comments shed further light onto the lack of
motivation. The uncertainty of the COVID-19 pandemic and
loss of peer interaction/support were identified as the major
contributing factors. Finally, 24% of the students rated their
overall experience of online instruction (question #8 on the
student survey) as satisfying, 37% found it dissatisfying while
the rest (39%) were neutral.
C. ASSESSMENT METHODS USED DURING ONLINE
INSTRUCTION

Table 1 shows the prevalence of various methods that the
faculty used to assess students’ learning during the online
instruction of Spring 2020. Semi-online refers to an exam
where students solve the assigned problems on a paper, then
scan and upload their solutions. Asynchronous exam refers to
a take-home exam while a synchronous exam is the one
conducted during the scheduled class or exam time. The
survey allowed respondents to choose more than one
assessment method per question (because faculty might have
taught multiple classes and held more than one exam during
the semester), thus the sum of the percentages would not equal
to 100.
TABLE I
Learning assessment methods faculty used during the online instruction
in Spring 2020. The respondents could choose more than one option for
each question depending on the number of exams administered during
the semester.
Survey
Question #

Question #3

Question #6

Assessment method

Fully online exam (e.g., BB quiz)
Semi-online Asynchronous exam
Semi-online Synchronous exam
project/term paper
Oral presentation/demo
Open-book/Open-note exam
Closed-book/Closed-note exam

Percentage of
faculty who
employed the
method
63%
28%
40%
50%
33%
70%
33%

We observe that the fully online exams such as the BB
quizzes were used by 63% of the faculty. BB quizzes provides
the faculty with the convenient option of randomizing the
order and/or the parameter values of the questions. The
instructor can also limit the view to one question per page for
students and prevent them from going back to previous
questions. The effectiveness of these options in limiting
cheating/ plagiarism— and consequently the reduced need for
further proctoring —might have contributed to the high
popularity of this assessment method among the faculty. The
remaining assessment methods in the decreasing order of their
prevalence were project/term paper (50%), semi-online
synchronous exam (40%), oral presentation/exam (33%), and
semi-online asynchronous exam (28%). Our survey also
VOLUME XX, 2020

revealed that 70% of the faculty used the open-book/open-note
exam while 33% tried closed-book/closed note exams. The
preference of open-book/open-note exam among faculty could
be also justified by the decreased need for proctoring tools. In
fact, our data (faculty survey question #7) revealed that among
those faculty who employed open-book/open-note exam, only
27% used Zoom camera and microphone for proctoring of the
exam. 21% used lockdown browsers (e.g. respondus), while
61% did not have any proctoring. However, when the exams
were closed-book/closed-note, 56% of the faculty decided to
proctor the exam using Zoom camera and microphone, 18%
chose to use the lockdown browsers and 35% did not proctor.
We also evaluated the association of cheating/plagiarism with
various assessment methods by calculating the Pearson
correlation of faculty’s assessment methods with their
trichotomized perception of online cheating (less cheating, the
same, more cheating) relative to that of face-to-face (faculty
survey question #8). The results revealed no statistically
significant correlation between cheating and assessment
methods except for the following: Fully online exam
(correlation=
-0.40,
p-value<0.0001),
Semi-online
asynchronous exam (correlation= 0.26, p-value=0.005),
Open-book/Closed-book (correlation= -0.30, p-value=0.002).
This data analysis shows that while semi-online asynchronous
exams were associated with an increase in the perceived
cheating, a fully online or open-book/open-note exams had an
association with a decrease in instructor’s perception of
cheating.
D. PERCEIVED FACULTY SKILLS THAT NEEDED
ENHANCEMENT

Faculty indicated various topics that they were interested to
enhance their skills in, as summarized in Table 2.
TABLE II
A list of topics identified by faculty for further skill enhancement.
Respondents could choose as many topics as they were interested to
learn.
Survey
Question #

Question #9

VOLUME XX, 2020

Topics
What are the major requirements of
syllabus for an online course?
Basic
BB
features:
How
to
create/modify/improve BB for my course
More advanced BB features: How to
create online surveys /discussion
groups/quizzes that reduce the potential
of cheating, how to automatically export
grades to BB gradebook, how to use
Master Shell in BB, etc.
Zoom features (basic and advanced):
How to schedule/record a meeting, how
to use Zoom’s Whiteboard or OneNote,
how to do breakout rooms, etc.
Multimedia skills: How to create
interactive multimedia files using Kaltura
Capture, Camtasia or Snagit, how to use
Alt captions in media you generate
(Word, PPT, page in BB) to facilitate
accessibility
Assessment: How to use automatic
grading tools (e.g. Gradescope)

Percentage
of faculty
interested
38%
26%
58%

39%

39%

54%

About 60% of the faculty needed to learn about the
advanced features of BB (e.g. how to create online surveys or
make quizzes with randomized questions/personalized
parameter values). Also, more than half of the faculty were
interested in learning about automatic grading tools (e.g.
Gradescope).
Close to 40% of the faculty needed to learn how to create a
syllabus for an online class or become more competent with
using Zoom features. A similar percentage of participants
indicated interest in enhancing their multimedia skills (e.g.
working with Kaltura Capture, Camtasia or Snagit).
Finally, 26% of the faculty needed more training to become
familiar with basic features of BB. In the optional comments
(faculty survey questions #10-11), some faculty members
expressed their concerns about the delivery of the hands-on
components of their courses and requested some general
guideline on how to address this issue for an online instruction.
IV. DISCUSSION

Online learning during COVID-19 pandemic has shown to be
challenging especially for vulnerable, disadvantaged, and
underrepresented students whose difficulties have been
magnified.
As the pandemic continues, a small body of literature on
educational impact of COVID-19 is starting to emerge. A
group of investigators conducted a U.S. nationwide survey
study among faculty and students of STEM fields in June
2020. Their results highlighted the gender disparities in online
learning during pandemic: female faculty and students
reported more challenges in technological issues and adapting
to remote learning compared with their male peers [15]. They
also found out that 35.5% of doctoral students, 18.0% of
master’s students and 7.6% of undergraduate students would
have a delayed graduation due to pandemic [14]. Hispanic and
Black undergraduates were two times and 1.7 times more
likely, respectively, to delay graduation relative to Whites.
Our survey focused on identifying various challenges that
engineering faculty and student confronted during the online
instruction in Spring 2020. In this section, we will discuss the
challenges and propose relevant interventions to improve the
online delivery of engineering courses.
A. STUDENT CHALLENGES

Our results revealed that a quarter of our students did not have
access to reliable internet connection, triggering a concern
about widening of the digital equity gap among students
during COVID-19 pandemic. A successful online education
without a reliable and robust technical infrastructure is not
possible [17].
With COVID-19 and the abrupt transition to online
teaching, access to reliable internet connection and personal
computer/tablet have become major factors affecting the
learning/teaching outcomes for students and faculty. To
address this issue, institution can provide WiFi access on
campus’s open areas and well-ventilated buildings while
5

monitoring for social distancing and sanitizing the surfaces
frequently. For those who require computing devices, a loaner
program can be implemented where students can borrow
laptops for a certain period of time to access the course
materials and complete the course requirements. The
institution can also provide a virtual desktop environment for
students to access all necessary software. Using free scanning
applications on smartphones or tablets can address the lack of
access to scanners.
Our survey also indicated that about 30% of engineering
students had work-life balance issues, while more than half of
students lacked motivation or did not have access to a private
space to attend classes. These results are consistent with those
reported in a recent study conducted at Biomedical and
Chemical Engineering departments of a Hispanic-serving
institution [13]. While the percentage of our students who had
issues with lack of motivation or private space seemed to be
higher, both studies highlight the necessity of providing more
socio-emotional support for students during the difficult times
of pandemic. Despite some similarities, there are several
differences between our study and [13] that need to be pointed
out: while their study is based on a qualitative surveying from
170 students within two Engineering departments, our study
uses qualitative and quantitative surveying from 627 students
and 110 faculty from six Engineering departments. So, our
study has a larger cohort size of students from more
engineering disciplines. Furthermore, our survey questions
were qualitative and quantitative. In addition to students, we
also included another important education stakeholder
(faculty) in our survey. Finally, while the study of [13] focused
on asynchronous online classes, our classes at CSULB were
synchronous live.
Students identified various challenges they experienced in
online synchronous instruction of courses through Zoom
including lack of peer-support/interaction, focus, engagement,
and clear guideline from instructors. They also indicated
difficulties with time management and Zoom fatigue. Peersupport/interaction has shown to improve the success rate of
students especially those from underrepresented groups [18].
Lack of peer-support during the online instruction in the
COVID-19 era negatively affects the motivation and learning
outcomes of the students. However, the remaining raised
issues could be addressed in part by employing appropriate
teaching techniques by faculty as follows: breaking down a
long lecture into shorter segments with more frequent breaks,
encouraging group discussion among students, making
themselves available during the exams, providing students
with a clear roadmap for the online course, making the
recordings of the live lectures available after the lecture is
over. The latest would help struggling students to learn at their
own pace [13]. To assist with the time management issue,
faculty can design practice exams to allow students to
familiarize themselves with the questions’ setup and adapt
with the exam’s style before the actual exam.

6

B. FACULTY CHALLENGES

Establishment of institutional quality standards related to
online education is of paramount importance in online
education. Effective communication is the key factor in
bridging the divide and reconciling administrator and faculty
for an enhanced online education [19]. A considerable number
of our faculty reported lack of access to hardware, software
and necessary tools for online instruction. Especially, in the
absence of traditional in-class whiteboard, many faculty
members indicated lacking an online writing tool. This issue
can be addressed by institution’s budget allocation to acquire
necessary hardware and tools (e.g. personal computer/tablet
with web camera, active pen for touch screen devices, digital
clipboard, document camera).
Development of online learning assessment methods as
rigorous as in conventional face-to-face setting to prevent
cheating/plagiarism does not seem straightforward [10, 20].
Some of our faculty have used camera/microphone to proctor
exams during Spring 2020. However, as our student survey
indicated, the use of camera/microphone can raise equity
concerns (for those who do not have access to camera and
cannot afford it) and privacy concern (for monitoring students’
private space). To address these valid concerns, faculty are
advised to choose alternative methods for reducing cheating
during online exams. Randomizing the exam questions by
shuffling both the problem statements and the multiple choices
or randomly selecting a subset of questions in a question
library with individualized input variables could be practical
solutions. Fortunately, most LMS provide these options.
However, although 99% of postsecondary US institutions
have an LMS in use, only approximately half of faculty at
those institutions have been using it on a regular basis [21]. As
a result, many faculty members are not familiar with the basic
or advances features of their LMS or other tools for effective
online instruction. Our survey result confirmed this
observation. In fact, our faculty identified a broad range of
topics related to BB or other online teaching tools that they felt
the need to enhance their skills in. Institutions could address
this issue by organizing training workshops, webinars, shortcourses, and discussion panels for their faculty to enhance
their online teaching skills. At CSULB, stipends were offered
in summer 2020 to further incentivize faculty participation in
these professional development programs.
Hands-on training is an integral component of engineering
education. Following the abrupt conversion of classes to the
online format in Spring 2020, many instructors adopted
simulations or processing of already acquired data for
engineering students to complete their course projects. Our
survey indicated the faculty’s need to learn about additional
effective ways for providing hands-on training/experience.
Depending on the content of the course, employment of “home
lab kits” and recording of the lab experiments could partially
help. However, design, preparation, distribution/collection of
the lab kits or recording of the experiments can be extremely
time consuming for faculty especially given all the access
VOLUME XX, 2020

restrictions to on-campus labs and additional safety
precautions imposed by COVID-19 pandemic. Virtual labs
might be a more effective solution. Additionally, remotely
accessible labs where the experiment setup is on campus and
students use tools for remote control and managing of the
setup can be employed, whenever possible [13].

Most of the proposed solutions were implemented at the
CSULB college of Engineering before the beginning of Fall
2020 semester. Our future work will include evaluation of the
efficacy of the implemented interventions by conducting a
post-intervention survey at the end of Fall 2020 semester.
V. CONCLUSION

C. SUMMARY OF PROPOSED INTERVENTIONS

From the analysis of the survey results we propose several
intervention strategies that can be employed by stakeholders
at different levels to improve the online instruction of
engineering courses. The proposed strategies are summarized
as follows:
➢ Strategies for institution/engineering administration
• Budget allocation to provide basic equipment for the
online instruction (e.g., personal computer/tablet
preferably with webcam/camera, reliable internet
connection) to both faculty and students in need
• Creating a virtual desktop environment and allowing
faculty and students to access necessary software
• Organizing training workshops for faculty/students
to further familiarize with online teaching/learning
technology and tools
• Providing a syllabus template for online courses
including all the important information
• Development and organization of systematic
repository of resources pertinent to engineering
online instruction
➢ Strategies for engineering faculty
• Leveraging on the institution’s LMS to manage the
course, grades, forum discussions and exams
• Breaking down a long lecture into shorter segments
with more frequent breaks
• Encouraging group discussion or problem-solving
activities among students (e.g. Zoom breakout
rooms)
• Being available during the exams (e.g. on Zoom) to
answer students’ questions
• Providing students with a clear roadmap and
instruction for the online course.
• Making the recordings of the live lectures available
after the lecture.
• Administering practice exams for students
• Using open-book/open-note and synchronous
assessment methods (e.g. randomized questions/
restricted time/ question pools on LMS).
• Avoiding using camera/microphone to proctor
exams
• Employment of “home lab kits”, recording of the
hands-on experiments and virtual labs to partially
address the hands-on training aspect of the course
➢ Strategies foe engineering Students
• Using free scanning applications on their
smartphones

VOLUME XX, 2020

We conducted an observational study to improve the online
instruction of engineering courses during the COVID-19
pandemic by surveying students and faculty at our minorityserving institution. Our surveys identified various logistical,
technical, learning/teaching challenges and we proposed
strategies to address them. Our future work would focus on
evaluating the efficacy of each proposed strategy. We believe
that sharing the current results with other engineering
educators can aid with further enhancement of online
education during the COVID-19 pandemic.
VI. APPENDIX

Appendix includes copies of both faculty and student
surveys.
A. FACULTY SURVEY

1. What is your home department? Select all that apply
a. BME
b. CHE
c. CECEM
d. CECS
e. EE
f. MAE
2. Check all that you had challenges with (e.g. lack of access
or difficulty in operations) in transitioning to online
instruction in Spring 2020?
a. Computer and tablet
b. Mic or headset
c.Webcam/camera
d. Scanner
e. Document camera
f. Online writing tools (e.g., digital pen)
g. Printer or cartridge
h. Access to reliable internet (at least 3 Mbps down,
1- 3 Mbps up)
i. Software license
j. VPN and remote access
k. ATS helpdesk and online support
l. Others: Please fill in
3. Which of the following did you primarily use to assess
your students’ learning in Spring 2020? Check all that
apply.
a. Completely online exams (e.g., BeachBoard Quiz)
b. Asynchronous semi-online exam (download, pen
and paper, scan, upload)
c. Synchronous (live) semi-online exam (download,
pen and paper, scan, upload)
d. Project/term paper
7

e. Oral presentation or demonstration
f. Others: Please fill in
4. What kind of classes will you be teaching in Summer/Fall
2020? Select all that apply.
a. Lecture only
b. Lecture with Non-hands-on lab or activity, e.g.,
simulation, problem solving, etc.
c. Lecture with hands-on lab or activity
d. Others (a type of class not listed above, or being
the course coordinator): fill in
5. Which of the following will you primarily use to assess
your students’ learning in Summer/Fall 2020? Check all
that apply.
a. Completely online exams (e.g., BeachBoard Quiz)
b. Asynchronous semi-online exam (download, pen
and paper, scan, upload)
c. Synchronous (live) semi-online exam (download,
pen and paper, scan, upload)
d. Project/term paper
e. Oral presentation or demonstration
f. Others: Please fill in
6. If you had an online exam (semi- or completely), which
type was it? Check all that apply.
a. Open book/notes
b. Closed book/notes
c. Exam that requires the use of specific software
d. Other (fill in)
7. If you had an online exam, how did you proctor it? Check
all that apply.
a. Using Zoom camera and mic on
b. Using Lockdown browser and Respondus monitor
c. Used online exams, but did not proctor it
d. Other (fill in)
8. What is your perception of the extent of
cheating/plagiarism in Spring 2020 relative to prior
semesters?
a. Way less
b. Less
c. About the same
d. More
e. Way more
f. I do not know/ Did not use online exam
g. Other (fill in)
9. Indicate all your topics of interest to enhance your skills
(by either attending a workshop or watching a webcast).
a. Online course syllabus: What are the requirements
of an online course syllabus
b. Basic BeachBoard (BB) features: How to
create/modify/improve BB for my course
c. More advanced BB features: How to create online
surveys /discussion groups/quizzes that reduces the
potential of cheating, how to automatically export
grades to BB Grades, how to use Master Shell in BB,
etc.
d. Zoom features (basic and advanced): How to
8

schedule/record a meeting, how to use Zoom’s
Whiteboard or OneNote, how to do breakout rooms,
etc.
e. Multimedia skills: How to create interactive
multimedia files using Kaltura Capture, Camtasia or
Snagit, how to use Alt captions in media you generate
(Word, PPT, page in BB) to facilitate accessibility
f. Assessment: How to do automatic grading using
software that helps grading (e.g. Gradescope)
g. Learning Objective (LO): What are student LOs
and module LOs? How to align them?
h. Other: to be filled
10. If you were to be provided with a personal trainer, what
are your top two online teaching challenges that you
would like the trainer to help you with for teaching your
class more effectively in Summer/Fall 2020?
11. Please provide any additional comments here on the
challenges you have faced regarding teaching and issues
that we might be able to help you resolve in Summer/Fall
2020.
B. STUDENT SURVEY

1. What is your major? (select all that apply)
a. Biomedical Engineering
b. Chemical Engineering
c. Civil Engineering
d. Construction Management Engineering
e. Computer Engineering
f. Computer Science
g. Electrical Engineering
h. Mechanical Engineering
i. Aerospace Engineering
j. Engineering Technology
2. What’s your academic level?
a. Freshman (mainly taking 100-level courses within
your department)
b. Sophomore (mainly taking 200-level courses
within your department)
c. Junior (mainly taking 300-level courses within
your department)
d. Senior (mainly taking 400-level courses within
your department)
e. Graduate level
f. Other: please fill in
3. Which of the following will be a challenge for you when
taking classes in a fully online environment? Check all
that apply
a. No access to a computer
b. Sharing computer with others
c. No access to a computer with camera/ webcam
d. No internet access
e. No reliable/high speed internet access
f. No private/quiet space to work in
g. Working to support myself or my family, therefore
not enough time to study
VOLUME XX, 2020

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

h. Time management, Lack of motivation
i. Others: Please fill in
Which of the following challenges did you experience
with Zoom synchronous (live) classes in Spring or
Summer 2020?
a. Did not have reliable internet connection
b. Was not able to focus and follow lectures
c.Felt socially disconnected from peers
d. Felt Zoom fatigues (overwhelmed with multiple
online sessions)
e. Did not feel engaged
f. Others: Please fill in
Which of the following challenges did you experience
with classes taught in online instruction mode in Spring or
Summer 2020? Select all that apply
a. No clear instructions
b. Lack of communication
c. Issues with accessing course material
d. Issues with using technology/software
e. Navigating BeachBoard to access
assignments/exams
f. Issues with submitting assignments
g. Others: Please fill in
Which of the following challenges did you experience
with online exams? Select all that apply
a.Time management
b. No access to a quiet space to take the exam
c. No access to a printer/scanner to print out or submit
the exam
d. No access to a reliable internet
e. No access to instructors during exams
f. Exams were more difficult than in-class exams
g. Issues with methods of proctoring exams, such as:
Respondus Lockdown Browser, Zoom, etc
h. Noticed more cheating among classmates
i. Others: Please fill in
Do you feel comfortable using a cell phone or computer
camera and showing your face, only for the purpose of
identification during demos, presentations, or exams?
a. Yes
b. No
c. I cannot because I don’t have a camera
d. Other concerns: Please fill in
How would you rate your overall experience with taking
classes in an online mode of instruction in Spring 2020?
a. Very satisfied
b. Satisfied
c. Neither satisfied nor dissatisfied
d. Dissatisfied
e. Very dissatisfied

VII. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

This research is partially supported by CSULB Champions
program through Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic
Security (CARES) Act funding. The authors would like to
VOLUME XX, 2020

thank Dr. Daniel Whisler, Dr. Shabnam Sodagari and Ms.
Asieh Jalali-Farahani for their help with designing the surveys.
REFERENCES

[1] J. Bourne, D. Harris, and F. Mayadas, "Online engineering
education: Learning anywhere, anytime," Journal of
Engineering Education, vol. 94, pp. 131-146, 2005.
[2] R. M. Lima, P. H. Andersson, and E. Saalman, "Active
Learning in Engineering Education: a (re)introduction,"
European Journal of Engineering Education, vol. 42, pp.
1-4, 2017.
[3] J. L. Bishop and M. A. Verleger, "The flipped classroom:
A survey of the research," in ASEE national conference
proceedings, Atlanta, GA, 2013, pp. 1-18.
[4] J. E. Mills and D. F. Treagust, "Engineering education—Is
problem-based or project-based learning the answer,"
Australasian journal of engineering education, vol. 3, pp.
2-16, 2003.
[5] S. Asgari, B. Penzenstadler, A. Monge, and D. Richardson,
"Computing to Change the World for the Better: A
Research-Focused Workshop for Women," in Research
on Equity & Sustained Participation in Engineering,
Computing, and Technology (RESPECT) Conference,
Portland, Oregon, USA, 2020.
[6] S. Asgari and B. Englert, "Teaching Pattern Recognition:
A Multidisciplinary Experience," presented at the
American Society of Engineering Education (ASEE)
Conference- Zone IV, Long Beach, CA, 2014.
[7] P. J. Martínez, F. J. Aguilar, and M. Ortiz, "Transitioning
from face-to-face to blended and full online learning
engineering master’s program," IEEE Transactions on
Education, vol. 63, pp. 2-9, 2019.
[8] S. S. Jaggars, "Choosing between online and face-to-face
courses: Community college student voices," American
Journal of Distance Education, vol. 28, pp. 27-38, 2014.
[9] P. C. Holzweiss, S. A. Joyner, M. B. Fuller, S. Henderson,
and R. Young, "Online graduate students’ perceptions of
best learning experiences," Distance education, vol. 35,
pp. 311-323, 2014.
[10] A. Lee-Post and H. Hapke, "Online learning integrity
approaches: Current practices and future solutions,"
Online Learning, vol. 21, pp. 135-145, 2017.
[11] P. Moskal, C. Dziuban, and J. Hartman, "Blended
learning: A dangerous idea?, The Internet and Higher
Education, vol. 18, pp. 15-23, 2013.
[12] COVID-19 Impact on Education, United Nations
Education, Scientific and Cultural Organization
(UNESCO),https://en.unesco.org/covid19/educationres
ponse (Accessed on September 22, 2020).
[13] K. Vielma and E. M. Brey, "Using Evaluative Data to
Assess Virtual Learning Experiences for Students
9

During
COVID-19,"
Education, pp. 1-6, 2020.

Biomedical

Engineering

[14] G. K. Saw, C. Chang, U. Lomelí, and M. Zhi, "Fall
Enrollment and Delayed Graduation Among STEM
Students during the COVID-19 Pandemic," Network for
Research and Evaluation in Education (NREED) Data
brief, https://nreeducation.wordpress.com June 2020.
[15] G. K. Saw, C. Chang, U. Lomelí, and M. Zhi, "Gender
Disparities in Remote Learning during the COVID-19
Pandemic: A National Survey of STEM Faculty and
Students," Network for Research and Evaluation in
Education
(NREED)
Data
brief,
https://nreeducation.wordpress.com, August 2020.
[16] 2019 CSULB Institutional Data, California State
University,
Long
Beach,
https://www.csulb.edu/institutional-research-analytics
(Accessed on September 22, 2020).
[17] S. Gold, "A constructivist approach to online training for
online teachers," Journal of Asynchronous Learning
Networks, vol. 5, pp. 35-57, 2001.
[18] S. N. Williams, B. K. Thakore, and R. McGee, "Providing
social support for underrepresented racial and ethnic
minority PhD students in the biomedical sciences: a
career coaching model," CBE—Life Sciences
Education, vol. 16, p. ar64, 2017.
[19] L. E. Wickersham and J. A. McElhany, "Bridging the
divide: Reconciling administrator and faculty concerns
regarding online education," Quarterly Review of
Distance Education, vol. 11, p. 1, 2010.
[20] J. Baron and S. M. Crooks, "Academic integrity in webbased distance education," TechTrends, vol. 49, pp. 4045, 2005.
[21] T. Dahlberg, T. Barnes, K. Buch, and A. Rorrer, "The
STARS alliance: Viable strategies for broadening
participation in computing," ACM Transactions on
Computing Education (TOCE), vol. 11, p. 18, 2011.
Shadnaz Asgari received her Ph.D. in
electrical engineering with emphasis on
telecommunication and signal processing from
University of California (UCLA) in 2008. She
was a postdoctoral researcher (2008-2010) and a
research faculty (2010-2012) at UCLA
Neurosurgery
department
conducting
biomedical signal processing and machine
learning for clinical decision support. She joined
the faculty of Computer Engineering and Computer Science at California
State University, Long Beach (CSULB) in 2012. She is also the Founding
faculty and Chair of Biomedical Engineering department at CSULB. Dr.
Asgari has been extensively involved with the curriculum development of
Biomedical Engineering program at CSULB. Her current research area is
computational physiology. Prof. Asgari has more than 80 peer-reviewed
research publications. She is also the recipients of several awards including
2010 UCLA Brain Injury Young Investigator Award, 2015 CSULB Early
Excellence in Academic Career Award, 2018 Google exploreCSR Award,
2019 Google Faculty in Residence Award and 2020 CSU Faculty
Innovation and Leadership Award.
10

Jelena Trajkovic received her PhD (2009) and
MS (2003) in information and computer science
from the University of California, Irvine, and a
Dipl. Ing. degree in electrical engineering from
University of Belgrade, Serbia (2000). She was a
ReSMiQ
postdoctoral
scholar
at
Ecole
Polytechnique de Montreal (2010-2012) and an
Assistant Professor (2012-2018) and an Affiliate
Assistant Professor appointment (2018-2020) in the
Electrical and Computer Engineering Department at
Concordia University in Montreal. She joined Computer Engineering and
Computer Science department at California State University, Long Beach
as an Assistant Professor in 2018. Dr. Trajkovic has extensive research
experience in the domains of network-on-chip, silicon photonics, multicore
systems, parallel applications, and avionics systems. Her research has been
recognized by three Best Paper conference Awards, and the Graduate
Dean’s Dissertation Fellowship at UC Irvine. She is also the recipient of the
Teaching Excellence Award at Concordia University (2017).
Mehran Rahmani received his PhD in structural
and earthquake engineering from the University of
Southern California (USC) in 2014, MS in
electrical engineering from USC in 2013, and MS
in structural engineering from Sharif University of
Technology (Iran) in 2009. He joined the CSULB
Civil Engineering and Construction Management
Department as an Assistant Professor in 2017.
Prior to joining CSULB, Dr. Rahmani worked as
a structural engineer between 2014 and 2017. He
is a licensed Professional Engineer (PE) in the state of California. His
research focuses on structural system identification, structural health
monitoring and earthquake damage detection of buildings using sensory
data. His current research is on developing a wave-based methodology for
remote post-earthquake damage detection in full-scale buildings and
bridges. Dr. Rahmani has authored and co-authored several peer-reviewed
technical papers and is an active member of professional societies including
ASCE, EERI, and ACI.
Wenlu Zhang received her Ph.D. in Computer Science from Old
Dominion University in 2016. She was a postdoctoral researcher (20162017) in Washington State University. She joined the faculty of Computer
Engineering and Computer Science at
California State University, Long Beach
(CSULB) in 2017. Dr. Zhang’s research
interests include machine learning, data
mining,
computational
biology
and
computational neuroscience. Dr. Zhang
received an Outstanding Research Assistant
Award in Old Dominion University. She and
her team participated in the MICCAI
Challenge on Circuit Reconstruction from
Electron Microscopy Images (CREMI). Her
team ranked first on synaptic cleft detection and second on neuron
segmentation tasks. She also serves as a program committee for the ACM
SIGKDD, ICML, ICLR, MICCAI, CIKM and ICDM.
Roger C. Lo received his Ph.D. and M.E. from
Texas A&M University in 2008 and 2002,
respectively, and B.S. from National Chung Hsing
University in Taiwan in 1997, all in chemical
engineering. He worked as a postdoctoral
researcher between 2008 and 2009 in the
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at
California State University, Los Angeles. He
joined the faculty of the Chemical Engineering
Department at California State University, Lo ng
Beach in Fall 2009. Dr. Lo’s research interest focuses on microfluidics and
its applications at the interface of biology, chemistry, and engineering, such
as high-throughput detection and separation of chemical/biological species
and modular chemical/biological reactions. His work has been published in
various peer-reviewed journals, such as Lab on a Chip, Electrophoresis,
VOLUME XX, 2020

Analytical Chemistry, Soft Matter, and Nature Microsystems &
Nanoengineering. Dr. Lo is an active member of AIChE and ASEE.
Antonella Sciortino received her BS in civil
engineering from the Politecnico di Bari, Italy,
and her MS and PhD in civil engineering from the
University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA).
She was a 1996 Fulbright scholar. Dr. Sciortino is
a Professor in the Civil Engineering and
Construction
Engineering
Management
Department at California State University, Long
Beach (CSULB). Currently, she is serving as the
Interim Associate Dean for Academic Program
for the College of Engineering. Prior to joining CSULB, Dr. Sciortino
worked as a visiting researcher at the U.S. Salinity Laboratory in Riverside,
California; as a postdoctoral fellow and lecturer at UCLA; and as a visiting
researcher and project engineer for Italian government agencies. She holds
the Italian Professional Engineering license. Her research focuses on
numerical modeling of groundwater and vadose zone flow and contaminant
transport processes. Dr. Sciortino is the recipient of numerous recognitions,
including the 2006 AESB Faculty of the Year Award, 2009 Northrop
Grumman Excellence in Teaching Award, 2010 CSULB Alumni
Association Most Inspirational Professor Award, ASCE Orange County
Branch 2010 Distinguished Engineering Educator Award, and the 2011
CSULB Distinguished Faculty Teaching Award.

VOLUME XX, 2020

11

