Dynamics of Droplet Generation from Corneal
Tear Film during Non-contact Eye Procedure in
the Context of COVID-19
arXiv:2011.01228v2 [physics.med-ph] 10 Nov 2020

Durbar Roya , Sophia Ma , Abdur Rasheeda , Prasenjit Kabib , Abhijit Sinha Royc , Rohit Shettyd , and Saptarshi Basua,1
a
Department of Mechanical Engineering, Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru, 560012, India; b Interdisciplinary Centre for Energy Research, Indian Institute of Science,
Bengaluru, 560012, India; c Imaging, Biomechanics and Mathematical Modelling Solutions lab, Narayana Nethralaya Foundation, Bangalore, India; d Narayana Nethralaya Eye
Hospital, Bangalore, India

medical procedure called non-contact tonometry. Tonometry
is a technique used by ophthalmologists to measure intraocular pressure that gives a good idea of whether any patient is
suffering from glaucoma or not. Further intraocular pressure
also helps to diagnose various other eye-related conditions
that may be helpful to the specialist(4). The first most accurate IOP measuring device was the Maklakoff applanation
tonometer(5). These early tonometers were the contact type
tonometer. Medical practitioners and researchers modified
and developed the tonometer through several generations increasing the reliability and accuracy of the device. The new
breed of tonometers like McKay-Marg tonometer, Tono-Pen,
pneumatonometer, and air puff tonometer to name a few have
gained popularity among medical practitioners (6). This work
uses an air-puff type tonometer, which is a non-contact type.
Many studies have been conducted on the working principle
and the development of non-contact tonometers. Ophthalmologists have conducted many clinical studies about IOP, its
variation with time, its effect on different eye-related medical
conditions like glaucoma, corneal stiffness, and thickness, to
mention a few. Some work related to the corneal deflection in
response to an air puff tonometry has also been studied using
experimental and computational techniques(7). The complicated structure of the human eye makes theoretical modeling
quite challenging(8). Scientists have conducted preliminary
clinical studies decades ago and showed that droplets maybe
generated during non-contact tonometry(9). Some clinical
studies shows that the SARS-CoV-2 virus can be present in
human tears like the work of Sadhu et al.(10). Such aerosols,
may lead to the transmission of the virus undetected. The
literature on the fluid mechanics of tonometry is quite sparse.
The spatiotemporal scales involved are quite small, and hence
resolving the phenomena is quite challenging. The air puff
emanating of a non contact tonometer is essentially a vortex
ring. There have been some studies on vortex ring impact
on thin liquid films (11), but the resulting fluid mechanics
due to vortex ring interaction with a human eye tear film
has never been probed in detail. Previously we have carried
out some preliminary studies related to non-contact tonometry (12). This work provides some rigorous comprehensive
insights into non-contact tonometry using experimental and
theoretical investigations performed on real human subjects.
High-speed imaging and visualizations were carried out to
decipher the underlying fluid dynamics in sufficient details for
dry and watery eye conditions. Fig. 1 provides an overview of
the entire time series of events during non-contact tonometry.
Different phases have been identified on the basis of the order
of events (according to temporal history.) The phenomenon
starts with an air puff (a leading vortex with a trailing jet)

Non-invasive medical diagnostics demonstrate a propensity for
droplet generation and should be studied to devise risk mitigation
strategies against the spread of the SARS-CoV-2 virus. We investigate the air-puff tonometry, which uses a short-timed air-puff to
applanate the human eye in a bid to detect the early onset of glaucoma by measuring the intraocular pressure. The air-puff consists
of a vortex trailed by a high-speed jet. High-speed imaging of the
eye during a typical tonometry measurement reveals a sequence of
events starting with the interaction between the tear layer and the
air puff leading to an initial sheet ejection. It is immediately followed
by the trailing jet applanating the central corneal section, causing
capillary waves to form and interact with the highly 3D transient expanding sheet. Such interaction with the capillary waves and the surrounding airfield due to the trailing jet causes the expanding sheet to
undergo bag breakup, finger formation by Rayleigh Taylor instability
and further break up into subsequent droplets by Rayleigh Plateau instability, which eventually splashes onto nearby objects, potentially
forming fomites or aerosols which can lead to infections. The complex spatiotemporal phenomenon is carefully documented by rigorous experiments and corroborated using comprehensive theoretical
analysis.
SARS-CoV-2 | COVID-19 | Tonometry | Human Eye | Fluid Dynamics
| Droplets

C

ovid-19 is the current global health pandemic. Mostly
the virus SARS-CoV-2 proliferates through droplets of
saliva and discharge of the nose. It happens through coughing, talking, breathing and sneezing of a COVID-infected
person. Many studies related to coughs and sneezing in both
the clinical/medical community and the scientific/engineering
community like the works of Scharfman et al. , Bourouiba
et al., to name a few (1, 2) studied the mechanisms involved.
Scharfman et al., for the first time, showed that the breakup
of droplets happens outside the respiratory tracts in violent
exhalation processes. They further showed various kinds of
droplet breakup mechanisms like sheet breakup, bag breakup,
and ligament breakup during such processes. Bourouiba et al.
also studied the fluid dynamics of violent expiratory events like
coughing and sneezing using high-speed scattering imaging
techniques. They discovered that the flow is highly turbulent
and multiphase. Further, a theoretical analysis of pathogen
bearing droplets interacting with the turbulent momentum
puff was conducted. The effect of respiratory droplets on the
spread of Covid-19 was modelled by Chaudhari et al (3). The
virus transmission can be minimized by adequately understanding and studying the various causes of droplet generation
from an infected individual and finding solutions to protect everyone from such droplets. This work deals with a non-evasive
1

Initial sheet expansion
and no capillary waves (B)

Air puﬀ ejection and traveling (A)

Droplets Ejection(F)
Corneal deﬂection (C)

Capillary waves (D)

Sheet Expansion (E)

ejected from the nozzle head of the tonometer. The leading
vortex travels towards the eye, increasing the local air velocity
field adjacent to the eye, which reduces the local pressure
outside the tear layer. The transient pressure reduction causes
the tear film accumulated at the bottom portion of the eye
to be ejected as a sheet especially in the case of watery eye.
Meanwhile, the trailing jet impacts the cornea causing a detectable deformation of the eye. The deformation leads to
detectable capillary waves on the eye surface, which travel
outwards in the form of concentric rings (13). The initial sheet
is reinforced by the capillary waves, expand and undergoes bag
breakup (14) and Rayleigh Taylor instabilities (15–18). The
Rayleigh Taylor instability causes finger-like structure to form
and grow, which further undergoes Rayleigh Plateau breakup
(16–18) into droplets. The bag breakup and Rayleigh Plateau
breakup produces droplets of various sizes and velocity. These
droplets can then travel in various directions under the effect
of its linear momentum, acceleration due to gravity, and air
resistance. The details of each phase have been described
in the results and discussion sections and also illustrated in
Fig. 1. The main aim of this work is on the fluid dynamics
rather than on the corneal deflection since a lot of literature
is already available (7, 8). We study the interaction between
the air puff and the human eye and the associated fluid dynamics at different Spatio-temporal scales in sufficient detail.
Further, to assess the spread of the COVID-19 virus, the size
distribution and the velocity distribution of the droplets that
are generated during the non-contact tonometry procedure
are reported, which may help the opthalmologist and eye care
practitioners to follow safety protocols while undertaking these
procedures.

1

Fig. 1. Different Phases involved during the non-contact
tonometry from a fluid dynamical perspective has been
shown. Phase A represents the air puff generation from the
nozzle and its propagation. Phase B consists of the initial
sheet expansion due to sudden pressure reduction due to
the approaching leading vortex. Phase C denotes the central corneal deflection due to the trailing jet. Phase D shows
the detection and propagation of capillary waves on the tear
film surface. Phase E shows the later sheet expansion, and
Phase F shows the droplet breakup regime due to Rayleigh
Plateau and its propagation under the influence of its linear
momentum, gravity, and air resistance.

5
3

2
6
1

4

Fig. 2. Schematic of the experimental setup. The different components of the setup
are 1: Non Contact Tonometer, 2: High Speed Camera, 3: Light Source, 4: Computer,
5: Tonometer Operator, 6: Human Subject

To whom correspondence should be addressed. E-mail: sbasu@iisc.ac.in

2

Materials and Methods

seen on the surface of the eye and this phase lasts up to
3ms. Phase E consists of all the interesting fluid mechanical
phenomena related to sheet expansion, Rayleigh Taylor waves,
bag formation, finger like structure formation. This phase
lasts for approximately 5ms. The last phase F consists of
the disintegration into the droplets due to Rayleigh plateau
breakup. This phase lasts for approximately 3.5ms. This
phase and beyond deals with the droplets of various size and
velocity propagating under the combined effect of the initial
linear momentum of the droplet, the acceleration due to gravity
and effects of air-resistance. All the phases are discussed below
in their respective subsections.

The schematic of the experimental setup is shown in Fig.
2. The experiments were conducted on four different human
subjects of various age groups and gender (one female and
three males). High-speed images were acquired using Photron
Mini UX100 and a high-intensity light source Veritas Mini
Constellation at 2000 frames per second with a spatial resolution of 512 pixels × 320 pixels. The images were taken
from different views like side view, orthographic views, oblique
views, inclined views, and back views to capture as much
information as possible since the fluid dynamics involved are
highly transient and three-dimensional in nature. The tonometer’s nozzle was kept at a working distance of approximately
11mm from the human eye, which is the standard protocol
for NCT200 to give a correct reading of intraocular pressure.
The high-intensity light source was placed in different strategic locations to give the desired lighting for different views.
The initial vortex and jet were observed by smoke flow visualization and scattering techniques. The trailing jet was also
visualized using alumina particles at various frames per second
using scattering techniques. However, a dead goat eye was
placed in the place of the real human subject for smoke flow
visualization in order to characterize the air puff coming out
of the tonometer and to understand the roles of the leading
vortex and the trailing jet. Experiments were conducted on
two different eye conditions: dry and wet. Dry eye conditions
were studied so that we have a comprehensive understanding
of the corneal deflection and observe whether any droplets
are ejected in dry conditions. The wet eye conditions were
simulated using eye drops that were prescribed by an ophthalmologist. Some industrial brands of eye drops that were used
are Refresh Tears, Lubrex, Trehalube, Systrane Ultra. The
drops were used on the human subjects just before the tonometry measurement to mimic watery eye condition. The images
were acquired with the Photron FastCam Viewer (software
package 4.0.3.4.) and the raw images were processed using
a combination of open-source tools, ImageJ (19) and python
programming language (20). Preprocessing of the raw images
were performed using FFT Bandpass Filter (21) and by using
CLAHE (Contrast Limited Adaptive Histogram Equalization)
(22). The significant structures were filtered down to 40 pixels,
and small structures up to 3 pixels were used for the FFT
Bandpass Filter. For the CLAHE, the block size used was 127
pixels, histogram bins of 256, and a maximum slope of 3 were
used. The various kinematic parameters involved were then
tracked, and the results were post-processed using Python
programming language(20). The raw data of the kinematic
parameters were converted into probability density function
using kernel density estimation.

Vortex ring approaches the eye (Phase A). The non-contact

tonometry procedure starts with the ejection of an air puff,
which is essentially a leading vortex followed by a trailing jet
from the tonometer nozzle. The position of the leading vortex
was tracked from the smoke flow visualization images. The
leading vortex propagates before it interacts with the tear film
of the human eye. Fig. 3 depicts the air puff characteristics.
Fig. 3(a) shows the smoke flow visualization of the leading
propagating vortex and the trailing jet. The vortex propagation was tracked by measuring the horizontal position x
of the vortex core (shown as a green dot), from a predefined
reference line (shown as a red dotted line) which is the exit
plane of the tonometer nozzle, as a function of time. Two other
parameters, r1 and r2 were also tracked to understand the
vortex’s radial dynamics. r1 gives an estimate of the vortex’s
outer envelope, and r2 gives us an idea of the internal length
scale of the propagating vortex. Fig. 4(a) shows the vortex’s
propagation characteristics as it approaches an obstacle, which
was essentially a goat’s eye. Fig. 4(b) shows the temporal
evolution of r1 and r2 . r1 and r2 increases linearly with time,
showing a small expansion of the leading vortex. Both r1 and
r2 are increasing at the same rate since the slope is approximately identical, as can be observed from Fig. 4(b). The
sudden jumps at approximately 2ms in both Fig. 4(a) and 4(b)
denote the time at which the leading vortex starts interacting
with the eye. The leading vortex takes approximately 3ms
to cover a working distance of approximately 11mm for the
human subjects. The leading vortex average velocity scale is
approximately Vvortex ∼5m/s.
Initial sheet ejection (Phase B). As the leading vortex ap-

proaches the human eye, the velocity field locally adjacent to
the eye increases with time, which causes a sudden reduction
in the local pressure. The effect of this reduced pressure is
different for dry and wet eye conditions. For dry eye, the tear
distribution is uniform across the entire corneal surface, and
the interaction adhesive force between the tear film and the
cornea is quite strong. Hence no sheet-like structures are seen
in the dry eye condition, and hence no droplets are ejected out.
However, for a teary eye condition as simulated using eye drops
for the experiments, the excess tear is located in the lower part
of the cornea. Hence the tear film thickness is not uniform,
as was the case for dry eye. The tear film has a distribution
that is thicker at the bottom. Due to the higher thickness
of the film, the adhesive force between the cornea and the
film is smaller compared to the dry eye conditions. Hence the
reduced outer field pressure causes fluid sheet ejection in the
case of a wet eye. Fig. 5 shows the temporal evolution of the
sheet, along with the corresponding time scale. The sheet’s

Results and Discussions
Fig. 1. demarcates the various phases of the tonometry process
from a fluid dynamical perspective based on timescale. Phase
A consists of the leading vortex approaching the human eye,
and covering a working distance of approximately 11mm in
approximately 2.6ms. Phase B starts with the initial sheet
ejection and ends till the the effect of capillary waves is felt
on the initial sheet. This phase lasts for approximately 3ms.
Phase C begins with the corneal deflection due to the trailing
jet impinging the cornea and this phase lasts up to 7.5ms.
Phase D starts when the first detectable capillary waves are
3

t=0.5ms t=1.0ms t=1.5ms

t=2.0ms t=2.5ms t=3.0ms
t=0

r1 r2
X

Fig. 5. Initial sheet expansion and its temporal evolution shown as a series of
snapshots 0.5ms apart. The scale bar denotes 3mm.

(a)

initial sheet ejection velocity can be modeled using an in-viscid
analysis because the effect of viscosity can be neglected. The
theoretical analysis of the sheet expansion is provided in Phase
E.
Corneal deflection (Phase C). The leading vortex is followed

by a trailing jet. The trailing jet upon impact causes a central
corneal deflection. Fig. 6 shows the entire image sequence of
the corneal deflection process. The entire deformation process
has an overall time scale of approximately 7.5ms. Fig. 7 shows
the central corneal deflection curve as a function of time. The
corneal deflection increases to a maximum and then returns to
the undeformed state. The curve peaks at approximately 4ms,
and the maximum corneal deflection varies from 0.6mm to
0.9mm. The scatter present in the displacement curve is due
to the different intraocular pressure of the eye. The intraocular
pressure is like the blood pressure of an individual, which is
biological in origin and is dependent on many factors and
varies within a band for an individual. Some of the factors are
the time of the day, conditions before and after drinking water,
to name a few (23). To exactly model the corneal deflection,
the anatomy of the cornea has to be understood adequately
(8). Some literature is available to model the deflection of
the cornea in extensive detail (7). This work focuses on the
corneal deflection qualitatively only.

(b)
Fig. 3. Air puff characterization. (a) shows the smoke flow visualization of the leading
vortex and the trailing jet along with the tracking parameters. The scale bar denotes
3mm in actual length, (b) depicts the propagation of the leading vortex towards a goat
eye. The scale bar denotes 6mm in actual length.

10

x[mm]

8
6

Capillary waves (Phase D). The impact of the trailing jet

4
2

(a)
0

15
r[mm]

causes a central corneal deflection along with the detectable
capillary waves. Capillary waves are caused due to pressure
variation on the top surface of the tear film. The pressure
variations form ripples on the free surface of the liquid, which
travels outwards. These ripples produce film thickness variation of the corneal tear film. The ripples, also known as
capillary waves, are an outcome of the interplay between the
external pressure (due to the trailing jet and its associated
airflow field) and the air-water surface tension, which acts as a
restoring force. The waves/ripples generated on the tear film
are approximately symmetrical about the central spot where
the trailing jet impacted the cornea. A radial symmetry exists
at least on a local small Spatio-temporal scale, and hence a
one-dimensional model is a good enough approximation to
decipher the relevant velocity scales involved. The dispersion
relations for a pure capillary waves (1-D relation)is given by

r1
r2

2

4

time[ms]

10
5

(b)
0

2

4

time[ms]
Fig. 4. Air puff characterization. (a) displacement of the leading vortex vs time in ms,
(b) radial expansion of the leading vortex vs time in ms, showing both outer diameter
and inner diameter of the leading vortex.

r
ω=

σaw
k3/2
ρa + ρw

[1]

Where ω is the growth rate of a disturbance, σaw is the airwater surface tension, ρa is the density of air, ρw is the density
4

t=0

t=0.5ms t=1.0ms t=1.5ms
x1

x0

x2

x3

t=0 t=0.5 t=1.0 t=1.5
0<x0<x1<x2<x3

(a)

t=2.0 t=2.5 t=3.0 t=3.5

t=0

t=0.5 t=1.0 t=1.5 t=2.0 t=2.5

t= 4.0 t=4.5 t=5.0 t=5.5

(b)

t=6.0 t=6.5 t=7.0 t=7.5

Fig. 8. (a) Capillary waves travelling on the surface of a human eye. The scale bar
denotes 3mm. (b) Capillary waves seen on a cadaver goat eye.

of water, k = 2π
is the wavenumber which is inversely proλ
portional to the wavelength of the capillary waves. A pure
capillary wave’s growth rate is directly proportional to the
wavenumber raised to three-half powers. This implies that
smaller wavelengths have higher growth rates compared to
larger ones. The growth rate also depends on the material
properties. ω is directly proportional to the square root of the
air-water surface tension. This implies that higher surface tension liquids will have higher growth rates. ω is also inversely
proportional to the square root of the sum of air density and
water density. The phase velocity is the velocity with which
capillary waves of a given wavenumber/wavelength propagates
and is given as the ratio of the growth rate of the disturbance
to the wavenumber of the ripples.

cornea displacement [mm]

Fig. 6. Closeup high speed snapshots of the entire corneal deflection process. All
time are in milliseconds (ms). The scale bar denotes 3mm.

0.8

vphase =

0.6

ω
=
k

r

σaw
k1/2
ρa + ρw

[2]

and the group velocity is given as the first derivative of the
growth rate with respect to wavenumber.

0.4
vgroup

0.2

2

4

6

8

r

σaw
k1/2
ρ a + ρw

[3]

The group velocity helps to calculate the velocity of an envelope which contains waves of various wavelengths. Equation
[2] and [3] have the same variation with wavenumber and
the dependence is square root of wavenumber. This implies
that short wavelengths have higher velocity of propagation
compared to long wavelengths.
Fig. 8(a) depicts the timeline of the propagation of the
capillary waves. The peak of a capillary wave was tracked from
a fixed reference datum and the average velocity of propagation
was calculated using the forward difference approximation of
the first derivative of position from displacement time relation.
We did some experiments to verify the generality of the idea

0.0
0

dω
3
=
=
dk
2

10

time [ms]
Fig. 7. Corneal deflection curve in mm as a function of time in ms.

5

1
σaw
2
+ ρair Vair
r
2
Substituting equation [7] in equation [5] we have,

Vphase

10
]

Observed

1

V[ms

Vgroup

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

[mm]

of capillary waves on cadaver goat eye. The time sequence of
the resulting capillary waves on the goat eye is shown in Fig.
8(b). The phase velocities and group velocities are plotted as
a function of wavelength as depicted in Fig. 9, respectively,
using equation [2] and [3], respectively. The experimentally
measured values are shown in Fig. 9, which are of the same
order of magnitude as that obtained theoretically. The order
of magnitude is approx V ∼1.1m/s, which corroborates well
with the theoretical framework.

Ẋ2 =

X1 (t = 0) = F0

X2 (t = 0) = 0

[12]

[13]

aw
where a = 2σρw
which is a constant and is twice the ratio of
2
air-water surface tension to the density of water , b = ρρwa Vair
which is also a constant , F0 = initial film thickness, r = X1
and ṙ = Vsheet = X2 .
Figure 10(b) shows the numerical solution of equation [8]
and the experimental comparison of the sheet expansion. The
constants used for the numerical solution are σ∼0.072N/m,
∆t∼ = 2×10−6 s, ρw ∼103 kg/m3 , ρair ∼1kg/m3 Vair ∼1m/s
The theoretical estimates corroborates well with the experimental data. Phase E consists of a lot of exciting fluid dynamical events, as is shown in Figure 11. Fig. 12(a) represents the
sheet expansion in millimeters as a function of time in milliseconds. The experimental data are marked with red dots, the
experimental fit with a dashed-dotted line, and the theoretical
curves predicted by the numerical solution of equation [8] by
solid lines. The theoretical model predicts the sheet expansion
within 1 percent accuracy. The red shaded region shows a wide
variation of initial expansion velocity due to different amount
of tear layer thickness. The blue shaded region represents the
later sheet expansion due to the effect of the trailing jet and
its corresponding air velocity field. The initial sheet ejection
leads to a more complex sheet expansion due to the trailing
jet, corneal deflection, and the related capillary waves. This
expansion of the sheet is shown by the blue curves. This rapid
sheet expansion and acceleration cause small disturbances in
the flow field to amplify and grow. The disturbances are in the

[4]

[5]

Assuming pin 'p∗ , which is the initial pressure inside the static
tear layer before the interaction with the air-puff. A pressure
difference exists across the interface due to air-water surface
tension and the tear film’s curvature at the lower part of the
eye in the static condition. However, due to an increasing
outer velocity field in the air medium, the outer pressure pout
in the airfield reduces by an amount given by the Bernoulli’s
equation kinetic energy per unit volume term
σaw
1
2
− ρair Vair
r
2

[11]

where F0 denotes the initial film thickness.
The velocity initial condition is given by

where ρw denotes the density of water, Vsheet is the sheet ejection velocity, dt denotes the elementary timescale, p denotes
pressure and r is an characteristic length scale characterizing the outer envelope of the sheet. Figure 10(a) shows the
schematic of the sheet expansion. pin is the initial pressure
inside the tear film at static condition. The initial tear film
thickness is r(t = 0) = F0 . Applying scaling analysis on the
Eulers equation we have

pout 'p∗ −

b
a
+
2X1
2X12

[10]

The initial conditions are the position initial condition X1 (t =
0) and the velocity initial condition X2 (t = 0).
The position initial condition is given as

Dynamics of Sheet Expansion. As the leading vortex approaches
the eye, the local velocity field just outside of the tear film
increases. This leads to a very thin boundary layer during the
first 2ms, which is of the order of approximately 0.0242mm.
Outside this length scale, viscous effects can be neglected,
and hence the sheet expansion can be modeled using inviscid
theory. Hence using Eulers equation we have:

dVsheet 1 pin − pout
∼
dt
ρw
∆r

[8]

Ẋ1 = X2

Expansion of the sheet/ RT Waves/ Bag formation (Phase E).

dVsheet
∂p
=−
dt
∂r

2
dVsheet
σaw
1 ρa Vair
=
+
dt
ρw r 2
2 ρw r

d2 r
a
b
[9]
= 2 +
dt2
2r
2r
The above equation has been converted into two first order
equations and are solved numerically. The first order derivatives were discretized using backward euler method.

Fig. 9. Theoretical phase velocity and group velocity as a function of wavelength
along with the experimental velocities.

ρw

[7]

Equation [8] depicts the sheet’s acceleration and is essentially
a form of Newtons’ second law of motion. This equation is one
of the central results of the current work. The first term on
the right-hand side is the acceleration due to surface tension
and the curvatur of the interface. The second term is the
acceleration due to the air velocity field. The sheet velocity
is given by the first derivative of r, Vsheet = dr
. Substituting
dt
the value of Vsheet in terms of first derivative of r, we have

5

0
0.0

pin − pout '

[6]
6

pout

pin

r [mm]

1.5

F0

t=1.0

t=1.5

t=2.0

t=2.5

t=3.0

(a)

r(t)
theoretical
observation

1.0

t=0.5

t=3.5

t=4.0

(a)
t=4.5

t=5.0

t=5.5

t=6.0

0.5
0.0
0

1

2

3

(b)

time [ms]
Fig. 10. (a) Schematic of the sheet expansion process due to leading vortex, (b)
Experimental and theoretical comparison of the sheet expansion dynamics

azimuthal direction since each part of the sheet expands in a
plane locally but in all directions. So while the sheet expands,
the lighter fluid pushes the heavier fluid, and a Rayleigh Taylor
instability is triggered, which amplifies small perturbations
to grow into finger like structures. The disturbances that
are triggered would have a predominant azimuthal symmetry
if the flow field was less vigorous. However, due to other
transient structures, the symmetry is broken in many places.
However, the local symmetry is preserved like the distance
between the fingers right λ at the point of initial growth. This
can be measured in a statistical sense. Fig. 11(b) shows the
sheet expansion and the associated timescale as a sequence
of snapshots. Simultaneously due to the highly transient and
3D nature of the relative flow with respect to the expanding
sheet, bag-like structures are formed in the expanding sheet,
which undergoes breakup into daughter droplets.

(b)
Fig. 11. Time sequence of the sheet expansion (a) denotes the initial sheet ejection,
(b) denotes later sheet expansion. The scale bar is 3mm.

experimental data
theoretical limits

Rayleigh Taylor Instability of the sheet. The initial perturbations

1
ω= i
2



ρw − ρa
ρw + ρa



kV ±(I + II − III)1/2

r [mm]

are mostly in the azimuthal direction. The wave propagation
and the fluid flow is in the radial direction. The initial perturbations are due to small fluctuations in the velocity and
pressure field. Therefore we can apply linear stability analysis
in the azimuthal direction (1D) to get an idea of the distance
between the fingers and the growth rate of the initial disturbance into the formation of fingers. The general Rayleigh
Taylor dispersion (16, 17) relation for 1D and assuming wave
propagation direction to be same as fluid flow direction which
is radial in our case we have

standard deviations

4

ion er
ct
t
e
j
la
te
e
he
ls
a
i
it
in

2

ee
sh

t

e

on
si
n
a
xp

0
0

2

4

6

time [ms]

[14]

Fig. 12. Sheet expansion as a function of time. Red region denotes initial sheet
ejection and blue region denotes later sheet expansion.

Equation [14] depicts that the disturbance growth rate is a
complex valued function. The real part of the growth rate
has contributions from three terms I, II, III. The first term
I signifies the kinetic energy of one fluid with respect to the
other.
ρa ρw
I=
k2 V 2
[15]
(ρa + ρw )2
7

The second term II signifies the apparent gravity felt by the
expanding sheet.

800
]

[16]
1

(ρw − ρa )
gef f k
II =
(ρw + ρa )

Re( )[s

The third term III is the contribution due to the surface
tension.
σaw
III =
k3
[17]
(ρw + ρa )
where V is the absolute value of the relative flow velocity of
air with respect to the sheet and gef f is the apparent gravity
experienced by the sheet.
Re(ω) = (I + II − III)1/2

The solution of equation [20] will give us the wavenumber
whose real part of the growth rate is the maximum. This
solution will provide the wavenumber of the fastest growing
wave.

k − Bk − C = 0
where B =

2ρa ρw V 2
3(ρa +ρw )σaw

kmax

and C =
B
=
+
2

ing and successively undergoes tip breakup. This stretching
mechanism essentially happens in 1D locally, which approximately coincides with the sheet expansion in the radial direction. The dispersion relation from 1D Rayleigh Plateau
stability analysis is given by (16, 17)

[24]

B2
+C
4

I1 (kt0 )
σaw
(1 − k2 t20 )
kt0
I0 (kt0 )
ρw t30

[26]

Where I0 is the Modified Bessel function of the first kind (0th
order), I1 is the Modified Bessel function of the first kind (1st
1
order), t0 is the initial thickness of the ligament, τRP = ωmax
L
is the timescale associated with the growth rate. t0 > π is
the ligament breakup criterion where L is the length of the
ligament, and t0 is the thickness of the ligament. All the
ligament that pinches off into droplets satisfies the length
to width aspect ratio condition, i.e., the aspect ratio of the
ligament has to be greater than π for the ligament that breakup.
This is shown in Fig. 15(b). This figure shows a complete set
of 60 runs. If the aspect ratio of the ligament is greater than π,
it breakups into droplets. On the contrary, if the aspect ratio
is less than π, the ligament would stretch without breakup.

(ρw −ρa )gef f
3σaw

r

3000

]

Rayleigh Plateau Instability. The ligament undergoes a stretch-

ω2 =

2

2000
1

final phase of all the successive events is the disintegration of
the finger-like structures into droplets by Rayleigh Plateau
instability. The finger/ligament-like structures formed by
the Rayleigh Taylor mechanism undergoes ligament breakup
forming droplets at the tip. Fig. 15(a) depicts the ligament
breakup mechanism showing how the ligament disintegrates
into droplets.

[21]

[23]

1

Disintegration into droplets by RP Instability (Phase F). The

[20]

(ρw − ρa )gef f
2ρa ρw V 2
k−
=0
3(ρa + ρw )σaw
3σaw

1

is generated from equation [25], and the peaks of the two
distribution are very close to each other and hence corroborates
the experimental and theoretical data to very high accuracy.
Fig. 14(b) shows the probability density function for the finger
formation timescale τRT in ms. The Rayleigh-Taylor time
scale τRT is the reciprocal of Re(ω). The green shaded region
denotes the theoretical estimates of the density function, which
predicts the scale correctly. The theoretical density function
for τRT is calculated by using equation [25] in equation [18].
Equation [25] gives us the wavenumber at which the dispersion
curve peaks.

For extremum conditions (in this case it is a maxima) we have
the derivative of the real part of the square of the growth rate
with respect to the wavenumber to be zero.

k2 −

1000

1

Fig. 13. Rayleigh Taylor dispersion curves for different relative velocities

(ρw − ρa )gef f
d
ρa ρw V 2 2k
3σaw k2
(Re(ω)2 ) =
+
−
dk
(ρa + ρw )2
ρa + ρ w
(ρa + ρw )

[22]

200

k[m

d
d
(Re(ω)2 ) =
(I + II − III)
dk
dk

2ρa ρw V 2
3σaw k −
k − (ρw − ρa )gef f = 0
(ρa + ρw )

V = 1ms
V = 4ms
V = 8ms

0

[18]

Equation [19] shows that the kinetic energy and the apparent
gravity contribute positively to the growth of the disturbance
whereas surface tension has a negative effect on the growth of
the disturbance and tries to suppress the growing disturbance.

2

400

0

where Re(ω) denotes the real part of the complex valued
function which is physically the initial perturbations growth
rate.
Re(ω)2 = (I + II − III)
[19]

d
(Re(ω)2 ) = 0
dk
(ρw − ρa )gef f
ρa ρw V 2 2k
3σaw k2
=0
+
−
(ρa + ρw )2
ρa + ρw
(ρa + ρw )

600

[25]

Fig. 13 shows the Rayleigh-Taylor dispersion curves for three
different relative velocities of the air field with respect to
the sheet (1m/s, 4m/s and 8m/s). Fig. 14 compares the
experimentally observed data of distance between fingers and
the finger formation time scale as the probability density
function. Fig. 14(a) depicts the probability density functions
of the experimental data for the distance between the fingers,
which is denoted by λ in mm. The theoretical density function
8

800

[s

2

f( )

600

1

]

Observational
Theoretical

3

400
200

1

0
0.00

(a)

0
0.0

2.5

5.0

7.5

0.50

0.75

RP )

Observational
Theoretical

f(

0.3

0.2

0.2
0.0

0.1
0.0

(b)
0

2

4

(a)

1.00

Theoretical
Experimental

10.0
0.4

0.4

RT )

0.25

kt0

[mm]

f(

t0 = 0.43mm
t0 = 0.22mm

(b)
0

2

4

6

RP

6

Fig. 16. (a) Dispersion curve for the Rayleigh Plateau linear stability theory for different
ligament thickness, (b) The probability density function for ligament breakup timescale

RT [ms]

Fig. 14. (a) Probability density function for the distance between the fingers. (b) The
probability density function for the finger formation timescale.

t=0

t=0.5

t=1.0

t=1.5

Fig. 16(a) shows the theoretical dispersion curve obtained
from the linear stability theory using the ligament thickness
obtained from the probability density function experimentally.
The distribution was experimentally obtained by assuming
that the rim surrounding the expanding sheet has the same
thickness as the ligament on an order of magnitude scale. This
gives us an upper limit on the ligament thickness. The black
curve represents a thickness of approximately 0.22mm, and
the red curve represents a thickness of 0.43mm. Both curves
peak at the same value of wavenumber, and the corresponding
wavelength is approximately 3.93mm. However, the growth
rate and the associated time scales are different. τRP is greater
for the thicker ligament than the thinner ones. Fig. 16(b) depicts the experimental and theoretical probability distribution
function. The theoretical and the experimental curves peak
at the same value of τRP corroborating the linear stability
analysis. The droplets from ligament breakups have a multitude of size distribution and velocity distribution. A bounding
rectangle is used to calculate the shape of the droplet. The
major axis and minor axis of the droplets were calculated from
the bounding rectangle’s width and height. The droplets were
tracked, and the velocities were calculated from the derivatives
of the position. Fig. 17 summarizes the shape and the velocity
of the droplets. Fig. 17(a) characterizes the shape of the
droplets. The droplets ejected out have a wide range of size
distribution ranging from 0.2mm − 3mm. The droplets, in
general, are elliptical in nature. The minor-axis to the majoraxis ratio of the droplets are approximately 0.8 on average.
The droplets, on average, are elongated along the horizontal
axis. The droplet velocities are also distributed over a range.
The components of the droplet velocities are shown in Figure
17(b). On average, the droplets x component and y component
of the velocity are approximate 0.1m/s approximately.

(a)
l/d >
l/d <
l/d =

l/d

15
10
5
0

20

40

60

(b)

runs

Fig. 15. (a) Sequence of images showing the Rayleigh Plateau breakup and the corresponding time scale. (b) The ligament aspect ratio plotted for different experimental
runs depicting the Rayleigh Plateau breakup criterion.

9

lead to finger like structure to form, which undergo Rayleigh
Plateau break up into droplets. The droplet’s size distribution
and velocity were experimentally determined from the highspeed images. A complete theoretical framework relevant to
the current case was developed and was compared with the
corresponding experimental data.

b[mm]

2
1

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS.

We would like to acknowledge Narayana
Nethralaya Eye Hospital, Bangalore, India for providing us with the
Non-Contact Tonometer (NCT200) for conducting the experiments.

(a)

0
0

1

2

3

a[mm]

1. B Scharfman, A Techet, J Bush, L Bourouiba, Visualization of sneeze ejecta: steps of fluid
fragmentation leading to respiratory droplets. Exp. Fluids 57, 24 (2016).
2. L Bourouiba, E Dehandschoewercker, JW Bush, Violent expiratory events: on coughing and
sneezing. J. Fluid Mech. 745, 537–563 (2014).
3. S Chaudhuri, S Basu, P Kabi, VR Unni, A Saha, Modeling the role of respiratory droplets in
covid-19 type pandemics. Phys. Fluids 32, 063309 (2020).
4. JD Brandt, Central corneal thickness, tonometry, and glaucoma risk—a guide for the perplexed. Can. J. Ophthalmol. 42, 562–566 (2007).
5. J Draeger, Principle and clinical application of a portable applanation tonometer. Investig.
Ophthalmol. & Vis. Sci. 6, 132–134 (1967).
6. RL Stamper, A history of intraocular pressure and its measurement. Optom. Vis. Sci. 88,
E16–E28 (2011).
7. I Simonini, A Pandolfi, The influence of intraocular pressure and air jet pressure on corneal
contactless tonometry tests. J. mechanical behavior biomedical materials 58, 75–89 (2016).
8. DW DelMonte, T Kim, Anatomy and physiology of the cornea. J. Cataract. & Refract. Surg.
37, 588–598 (2011).
9. JM Britt, BC Clifton, HS Barnebey, RP Mills, Microaerosol formation in noncontact’airpuff’tonometry. Arch. ophthalmology 109, 225–228 (1991).
10. S Sadhu, et al., Covid-19: Limiting the risks for eye care professionals. Ocular Immunol.
Inflamm., 1–7 (2020).
11. C Gendrich, et al., Whole-field measurements of unsteady separation in a vortex ring/wall
interaction in 28th Fluid Dynamics Conference. p. 1780 (1997).
12. R Shetty, et al., Quantitative high-speed assessment of droplet and aerosol from an eye after
impact with an air-puff amid covid-19 scenario. J. Glaucoma (2020).
13. HD Ceniceros, TY Hou, Dynamic generation of capillary waves. Phys. fluids 11, 1042–1050
(1999).
14. M Jain, RS Prakash, G Tomar, R Ravikrishna, Secondary breakup of a drop at moderate
weber numbers. Proc. Royal Soc. A: Math. Phys. Eng. Sci. 471, 20140930 (2015).
15. M Bussmann, S Chandra, J Mostaghimi, Modeling the splash of a droplet impacting a solid
surface. Phys. fluids 12, 3121–3132 (2000).
16. P Drazin, W Reid, Hydrodynamic stability. NASA STI/Recon Tech. Rep. A 82, 17950 (1981).
17. PG Drazin, Introduction to hydrodynamic stability. (Cambridge university press) Vol. 32,
(2002).
18. S Chandrasekhar, Hydrodynamic and hydromagnetic stability. (Courier Corporation), (2013).
19. CA Schneider, WS Rasband, KW Eliceiri, Nih image to imagej: 25 years of image analysis.
Nat. methods 9, 671–675 (2012).
20. G Van Rossum, FL Drake, Python 3 Reference Manual. (CreateSpace, Scotts Valley, CA),
(2009).
21. K Baker, G Sullivan, Multiple bandpass filters in image processing. IEE Proc. E-Computers
Digit. Tech. 127, 173–184 (1980).
22. AW Setiawan, TR Mengko, OS Santoso, AB Suksmono, Color retinal image enhancement
using clahe in International Conference on ICT for Smart Society. (IEEE), pp. 1–3 (2013).
23. R Buddle, A day in the life of iop. Rev. Optom. 151, 26–32 (2014).

8

Vy[m/s]

6
4
2
0
2

(b)
2

0

2

Vx[m/s]
Fig. 17. (a) Droplet size characterization where a is the major-axis and b is the minoraxis of the droplet respectively in mm (b) Droplet velocity characterization showing
both the x component velocity and the y component velocity.

Conclusion
This work addresses the fluid dynamics involved during an
ophthalmologic measurement technique called tonometry used
to measure the intraocular pressure (IOP) of the human eye.
The mechanisms involved during tonometry were studied experimentally and theoretically in sufficient detail for dry eye
and watery eye conditions using real human subjects. The
experimental observations were supported by a comprehensive
theoretical understanding of all the mechanisms that are involved. High-speed imaging was used to capture the intricate
transient three-dimensional fluid mechanical processes that
are involved. The images were acquired from different views
like side, orthographic, to name a few, for a better understanding of the three-dimensional nature of the flow features. The
tonometer ejects an air puff from the nozzle, which is kept
at approximately 11mm from the eye. The air puff has been
characterized using high-speed scattering and shadowgraphy
techniques. It has been found that the air puff has two essential features, a leading vortex followed by a trailing jet. The
leading vortex initially approaches the eye, which causes an
increase in the air velocity field locally, which leads to a local
pressure reduction causing an initial sheet ejection in the case
of a wet eye. The wet eye is simulated by using eye drops before undergoing the tonometry measurement technique. While
the sheet ejects out of the eye, the trailing jet hits the cornea
causing a deflection, which in turn creates capillary waves
on the surface of the eye. The sheet expands in two phases,
first the ejection due to the leading vortex. Then it receives a
secondary kick from the effect of the trailing jet. During the
first phase of the sheet expansion, small disturbances lead to
Rayleigh Taylor waves to form and grow. Due to the highly
transient and three-dimensional nature of the flow field bag
like structures begin to appear, it undergoes the bag breakup
mode of disintegration. Further, the Rayleigh Taylor modes
10

