SUBMITTED FOR JOURNAL PUBLICATION

1

Molecular Communications in Viral Infections
Research: Modelling, Experimental Data and Future
Directions

arXiv:2011.00002v1 [q-bio.OT] 30 Oct 2020

Michael Taynnan Barros∗ , Mladen Veletić∗ , Masamitsu Kanada, Massimiliano Pierobon, Seppo Vainio, Ilangko
Balasingham, Sasitharan Balasubramaniam

Abstract—Hundreds of millions of people worldwide are affected by viral infections each year, and yet, several of them
neither have vaccines nor effective treatment during and postinfection. This challenge has been highlighted by the COVID19 pandemic, showing how viruses can quickly spread and
how they can impact society as a whole. Novel techniques that
bring in different disciplines must emerge to provide forwardlooking strategies to combat viral infections, as well as possible
future pandemics. In the past decade, an interdisciplinary area
involving bioengineering, nanotechnology and information and
communication technology (ICT) has been developing, known
as Molecular Communications. This new emerging area uses
elements of classical communication systems, and maps it to
molecular signalling and communication found inside and outside
the body, where the aim is to develop new tools that can serve
future medicine. One of these tools is the ability to characterise
the signalling processes between cells and infectious disease
locations at various levels of the human body. In this paper, we
provide an extensive and detailed discussion on how Molecular
Communications can be integrated into the research on viral
infectious diseases modelling, and how possible treatment and
vaccines can be developed considering molecules as information
carriers. We provide a literature review on the existing models
of Molecular Communications for viral infection (in-body and
out-body), a deep analysis on their effects on the host and
subsequent communication process for other systems within the
body (e.g., immune response), sources of experimental data on
known viral infections and how it can be used by the Molecular
Communications community, as well as open issues and future
directions. Since the development of therapeutics/vaccines needs
an interdisciplinary approach centred around ICT, we are confident that Molecular Communications can play a central role
here by providing a detail characterisation and manipulation of
the propagation of molecules in different media.
Index Terms—Communicable Diseases, Infection, Molecular
Communications, Virions, Virus.
Authors with ∗ contributed equally to the manuscript.
M. T Barros is with the School of Computer Science and Electronic
Engineering, University of Essex, Colchester, UK, and also with the
CBIG/BioMediTech, Tampere University, Tampere, Finland.
M. Veletić is with the Intervention Centre, Oslo University Hospital,
Oslo, Norway, and also with Department of Electronic Systems, Norwegian
University of Science and Technology, Trondheim, Norway.
M. Kanada is with the Institute for Quantitative Health Science and
Engineering, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI, USA.
M. Pierobon is with the Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, NE, USA.
S. Vainio is with the Biocenter Oulu, Laboratory of Developmental Biology,
Oulu University, Oulu, Finland.
I. Balasingham is with the Intervention Centre, Oslo University Hospital,
Oslo, Norway, and also with Department of Electronic Systems, Norwegian
University of Science and Technology, Trondheim, Norway.
S. Balasubramaniam is with the Telecommunications Software and Systems
Group, Waterford Institute of Technology, Waterford City, Ireland.

I. I NTRODUCTION
The COVID-19 pandemic shocked the world by demonstrating the severity of the viral infection and how it can
disrupt society by impacting human health as well as global
economies. As of September 2020, more than 34 million people has contracted the disease resulting in just over a million
deaths. Therefore, this particular virus has a mortality rate of
approximately 4%. During the first months of the pandemic,
global stock markets experienced their worst crash since 1987,
in the first three months of 2020 the G20 economies fell by
3.4% year-on-year, an estimation of 400 million full-time jobs
were lost across the world, and income earned by workers
globally fell 10%, where all of this effects is equivalent to
a loss of over US$3.5 trillion [1]. As a result, governments
around the world have quickly formulated new recovery plans,
where for example in the EU, an investment of 750 billion
euros is set to bring the continent back to normality within
the first half of the decade ((this also includes funding for
research on COVID-19)) [2]. Despite these investments, the
world must prepare for not only coping with this new disease
and its various effects on the human health, but seeking for
novel technologies that can help minimise, or even block,
future pandemics.
The SARS-CoV-2 virus itself is likely to remain a challenge
for the next couple of years despite the development of
vaccines [3]. First, it is challenging to develop a vaccine
that is effective for different virus strains and their mutations.
Besides, for patients that are infected, the detrimental effect of
the virus in the human body can leave lifelong consequences
to tissues and organs. To give an example of the difficulty
of eradicating viruses, historic virus such as influenza had its
first pandemic in the 16th century and is still considered a
global health challenge till this present day [4]. Therefore,
constant efforts in new robust vaccines, as well as drugs, are
continuously being sought and this requires the development of
new technologies that focus on the mechanisms of infections,
and in particular the virus molecular relationships with the
host cells [5].
In the past 10 years, an interdisciplinary research area
known as Molecular Communications has been developing,
and it bridges the areas of communication engineering and
networking, molecular biology, as well as bioengineering [6],
[7]. This area focuses on realising radical new technology for a
society that holds the promise for subtle sensing and actuation

SUBMITTED FOR JOURNAL PUBLICATION

capabilities inside the human body through a network of
micro- and nano-sized devices [8], [9]. These devices can use
the existing natural signalling of cells and tissues to interact,
as well as communication with the human body. The main
advantage is the ability to increase the biocompatibility of implantable systems, and to achieve this through the integration
of synthetic biology [8], [9]. This novel research area can have
a central role to combat current and future pandemics, not
only for understanding new insights into the viral properties
and characteristics, but also for novel treatments [10], [11],
[12], [13]. Molecular Communications can contribute (a) to
the characterisation of the virus propagation within the body,
(b) to understand the mechanism used by the virus to enter the
human body, or mechanism of expulsion, and (c) to understand
how the airborne virus propagates in the air. Additionally,
although not covered in this survey, is the paradigm of Internet
of Bio-Nano Things [8], where Molecular Communications
can facilitate the communication between engineered cells for
viral infection detection/therapy, and Bio-Cyber Interfaces that
can transmit the data to cloud-based digital healthcare services
[14].
However, the literature in Molecular Communications does
not provide a wide range of work that tackles the issue of
viral infection as a whole. Even though there are models
for Molecular Communications for bacterial infection [15],
[16], there have not been any surveys proposed for Molecular Communications models of viral infections. To date,
Molecular Communications models for viral infection includes
multi-hop transfer of genetic content through diffusion over
extracellular channels [17], viral propagation in the air [18],
[19], propagation within the respiratory tract [20], as well as
interactions with host cells [21]. Even though these models
are very interesting and provide a formidable representation of
biology through the glasses of a Molecular Communications
researcher, the issue of virus propagation and the infection
itself are much more complex. First, models must gather all
necessary information about the infection process, which comprises of the replication of viruses and in-body propagation,
going down to the interaction of genes and host cells, as
well as the virus spike proteins effects to binding host cell
receptors. Secondly, virology is a very active research area
and has collected many resources over the years (data and
tools) that can benefit Molecular Communications research.
In order to develop research work with a strong societal
impact in order to tackle viral infectious diseases, Molecular
Communications researchers are required to bridge the gap
between communication theory and experimental biology, and
in particular the use of available data.
This paper presents a literature review and analysis of existing models and data for Molecular Communications. The goals
of this paper are as follows: 1) to provide how the infectious
disease is currently modelled using Molecular Communications; 2) to provide a deep analysis on the existing models to
provide a direction on how they should be improved, looking
from a biological standpoint; 3) to provide initial guidelines
on what experimental data can be used and how they should
be integrated to Molecular Communications models, and 4)
to identify the main challenges and issues that the community

2

should focus on moving forward. We recognise that Molecular
Communications can support not only the understanding of
infectious diseases, but it can also elicit the development of
novel technologies for both sensing and actuation in the body
based on how viruses propagate, are transmitted and received
by host cells.
The paper has the following contributions:
• A literature survey on models of infectious diseases for
in-body and out-body Molecular Communications: We
present a deep analysis on existing Molecular Communications models looking at how to address the issue of
bridging these models closer to the existing biological
literature and data on infectious disease. For the in-body
models, we investigate the virus entry mechanism, the
virus spread and the immune system response. For the
out-body models, we look into the transmitter, channel
and receiver processes for human-human propagation of
infection.
• Analysis of existing open data on viral infections that can
be utilised by Molecular Communications researchers:
We collect a variety of data from a number of sources
that we believe can be used by the community to gain a
better understanding of viral infections. These data vary
from the genetic information of a variety of viruses to
the molecular structure and the effects on the hosts, e.g.,
the immune markers and host infection impact. We focus
on a selection of viruses that includes the SARS-CoV (12), MERS-CoV, Ebola (EBOV), Dengue (DENV), Zika
(ZIKV) and hepatitis C (HCV).
• Overview on open issues and challenges: Based on the
many opportunities for research in Molecular Communications and infectious diseases, we provide five different
points where we present a deep analysis aiming to highlight what are the main topics to drive future research
on Molecular Communications. We include discussion
about: 1) linking experimental data to Molecular Communications models, 2) novel in-body viral intervention
techniques, 3) emerging technologies for infection theranostics (therapy and diagnostics), 4) bridging Molecular
Communications and bioinformatics tools, and 5) novel
Molecular Communications models.
The paper structure is as follows. Section II presents the
background information on infectious disease. Section III
presents a literature survey on viral models for infections
in in-body and out-body settings. Section IV presents a set
of experimental data that can be exploited in Molecular
Communications. Section V presents the open issues and challenges for the future of Molecular Communications research
on communicable disease. Finally, Section VI concludes the
study.
II. BACKGROUND I NFORMATION ON I NFECTIOUS
D ISEASES
In this section, we go through several known communicable
viral disease and provide examples of devastating outbreaks
in the 21st century. We select seven viruses that do not have
a licensed vaccine for treatment or where the intervention

SUBMITTED FOR JOURNAL PUBLICATION

mechanisms are only used to alleviate symptoms of the hosts.
Our survey focuses on three families of viruses, and this
includes Coronavirus, Filovirus, and Flavivirus.
A. Coronavirus
Coronaviridae is a family of viruses that includes SARSCoV-1, MERS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2, and contains singlestranded positive-sense RNA of the size of 31 kilobases (kb).
The most severe virus in this family is the SARS-CoV-2.
Example properties of SARS-CoV-2 include asymptomatic
infection to severe pneumonia and replicates through a variety
of cells that exhibit Angiotensin Converting Enzyme 2 (ACE2)
expression (a number of these cells are found in the respiratory
tract, and in particular deep in the alveolar regions). SARSCoV-1 and MERS-CoV are known to cause severe pneumonia with high replications rates in the respiratory tracts.
The immune response of the three different viruses is also
very different. In the case of SARS-CoV-1 and MERS-CoV,
antibodies response are at an early stage of the infection
process. However, this is not the case for SARS-CoV-2, where
the symptoms from the infection process can take up to two
weeks.
There are several differences between the SARS-CoV-1,
MERS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2 in the spreading process. While
SARS-CoV-1 and MERS-CoV are known to develop severe pneumonia, they have exhibited limited person-to-person
spreading, which is very different from SARS-CoV-2 [22].
Even though promising solutions for vaccines targeting SARSCoV-2 are in the testing phase, their efficacy is yet unknown
or unpredictable. Besides vaccines, the existing immune-based
treatment (e.g., plasma transfusion) is only found to have
temporary effects [23]. On top of that, there are other several
unknowns about how SARS-CoV-2 affects different organs,
indicated by clinical data [24], [25].
B. Filovirus
Filoviridae family of viruses comes from the thread-like
structure of the virus that also contains many curvy branches
[26]. The most common, or well known, is the EBOV (zaire
ebolavirus). The size of the EBOV is approximately 970 nm–
1200 nm, and has a diameter of 80 nm. The virus contains
seven genes that encode for nucleoprotein, glycoprotein, RNA
dependent RNA polymerase, and VP24, VP30, VP35 and
VP40, which are the structural proteins. In the structure, the
virus contains an outer envelope, and this covers the middle
layers of VP40 and VP24 that protect the virus genome. This
enables the virus to enter the cells in order to conduct replication. Currently, there is only one FDA approved Ebola vaccine
(approved in 2019 [27]) that has a successful performance
around 70% to 100% efficiency, and this is the rVSV-ZEBOV
vaccine [28]. This vaccine acts as the glycoprotein duplicate,
where once expressed in the host, it will activate the immune
system response. The vaccine was used for clinical trials in
West-Africa, to cope with the local 2016 pandemic. However,
research is still on-going to analyse the vaccine response for
virus genome mutation.

3

C. Flavivirus
Flaviviridae is a family of viruses that is mainly characterised by the yellow complexion found on the hosts after infection (hence yellow fever), and by the transmission mode of
arthropod vectors (mainly ticks and mosquitoes). We analyse
three types of virus in this family, and they include DENV,
ZIKV and HCV.
The single positive-stranded RNA DENV is mosquito-borne
and mostly found in countries in the centre global hemisphere,
where the warm temperature is an ideal location for mosquito’s
habitation. The virus has not always been found to transmit
through mosquitoes. Many years ago, the transmission mode
was sylvatic, meaning contraction from wild animal contacts.
Over the past 20 years, dengue fever has increased dramatically, affecting more than 390 million people each year. The
main molecular characteristic of this virus is the genomic
RNA surrounded by numerous protein layers. There are three,
so-called, structural proteins: capsid protein C, membrane
protein M , and envelope protein E. This is one of the leading
causes in the difficulty of discovering an appropriate vaccine,
alongside the five different serotypes, which remains a medical
challenge [29]. The virus also contains seven non-structural
proteins (NS1, NS2a, NS2b, NS3, NS4a, NS4b, NS5). The
non-structural proteins create a strong response within the
host immune system, with some studies pointing to an actual
increase in transmission and infection worsening when it tries
to fight the virus off [30].
ZIKV is transmitted and similarly affects the host cells
to the DENV since both share a distinct genetic component.
However, the fever from ZIKV infection is more potent and
is found to impact developing fetus in pregnant women, and
can lead to microcephaly. This virus is relatively new. Hence
no vaccine is available. Similar to the DENV, there are seven
non-structural proteins, three structural proteins and a positive
single-stranded RNA genome. However, the main difference
is the mechanism that the host cells reacts to the genome upon
infection, where the infected cells are found to progress into
the swollen stages, and this leads to cell death. This is only
possible through the virus gene expression and the inability of
the host cell to protect itself against virus binding through the
concentration of the IFITM3 protein.
Lastly, HCV is also a single-stranded RNA virus that
primarily affects the liver and its functions. Infected hosts
can have symptoms that include occasional fever, dark urine,
abdominal pain and yellow-tinged skin. To date, the virus
has infected nearly 71 million people worldwide. The virus
itself is simpler than the other virus in the family, but still
have more than one structural proteins, which are the E1 and
E2 glycoproteins. They are not as effective as more complex
structural proteins, but they can be considered efficient in
shielding the virus against the host immune system. They
also have six non-structural proteins (NS2, NS3, NS4a, NS4b,
NS5a, NS5b). Even though simpler in structure due to its
numerous genotypes derived from their protein structure, there
is still no vaccine for HCV, or even proper medical intervention
techniques. These efforts would help minimise damaging
effects to the liver, the organ most damaged by this virus in

SUBMITTED FOR JOURNAL PUBLICATION

a

Virus translocation across
the epithelium with infection

Apical membrane

4

b

Virus spread via
bloodstream

c

Virus spread via
neurons
Trans-synaptic
virus spread

Tx

Extracellular vesicles
carry viral components

Tx
Basal membrane

Virus spread via
extracellular vesicles

d

Rx

Rx

Virus host-cell
translocation
and infection
Interstitial fluid

viral
components

Tx cell

Rx cell

Tx cell

Rx cell

Fig. 1. Molecular Communications channels of viral in-body spread. After (a) translocation across the epithelium, the virus spread throughout the body
utilising (b) the circulatory system, (c) nervous network, and (d) cell-released EVs that carry viral components as their cargo and deliver to other cells,
eventually causing systemic infection.

infected patients [31].
III. M OLECULAR C OMMUNICATIONS FOR V IRAL
I NFECTIONS
In this section, we present the literature review on the inbody- and out-body Molecular Communications models.
A. In-body Molecular Communications Models
1) Virus Entry Mechanisms: The Molecular Communications paradigm gives us a clear understanding of how the virus
acts and distributes within the body over time. In the context of
communications, the virions are considered as information carriers, which propagate messages (genome) from the location
of transmission until the location of the reception, which can
be the host cells in specific organs or tissues. The information
conveyed by the virions is the infection action.
In theory, a single virion is enough to enter the body
and initiate a viral infection, provided that the host cells are
accessible to the viral binding process. Besides the accessible
cells being susceptible to infection – they must also express the
receptors to which the virus binds, and permissive to infection
– which means they must contain protein and machinery
necessary for virus replication [32].
If the virus enters the host through the respiratory tract,
gastrointestinal tract, genital tract or optical tract, the main
barrier between the virus and internal environment of the body
is the epithelial cells – the layer of cells that line the outer
surfaces of organs and blood vessels and the inner surfaces
of cavities (Fig. 1a). The epithelial cells of the respiratory
tract are targeted by SARS-CoV (1-2) and MERS-CoV viruses
as the most common portal of entry. Unlike SARS-CoV (12), which exclusively infects and releases through the apical
route1 , MERS-CoV can spread through either side of human
bronchial epithelial cells. SARS-CoV (1-2) and MERS-CoV
viruses contained in larger droplets are deposited in the upper
1 The apical membrane faces the external (luminal) compartment and contains proteins that determine secretion and absorption, whereas the basolateral
domain faces the internal (systemic) compartment (tissues and blood).

respiratory tract (the nose, nasal passages, sinuses, pharynx,
and larynx), while smaller aerosolised particles or liquids
are transferred into the lower respiratory tract (the trachea,
bronchi, and lungs). EBOV targets the epithelial cells as a
final attack though, after infecting fibroblasts of any type
(especially fibroblastic reticular cells), mononuclear phagocytes (with dendritic cells more affected than monocytes or
macrophages) and endothelial cells. On the other hand, if
the virus is delivered through penetration of the skin (e.g.,
DENV- or ZIKV infection from a mosquito bite), wounds
or transplantation of an infected organ (e.g., HCV infected
organ), the epithelium is bypassed.
Viruses have evolved strategies to translocate across the
epithelial barrier and act as pathogens. They can enter and
infect or cross epithelial cells through the following three
modes [33]: 1) Endocytosis and transcytosis (without infection), 2) Polarised surface entry and infection by fusion, and
3) Endocytosis and endosomal fusion with infection.
Endocytosis and transcytosis (without infection) are, respectively, entry- and intracellular transport mechanisms for
specific viruses, such as poliovirus, reovirus and human immunodeficiency virus 1 (HIV-1), performed by specific lymphoid areas of the gastrointestinal tract covered by specialised
epithelial cells known as M cells. During endocytosis, which
is initiated at clathrin- and caveolin-coated pits and vesicles,
or lipid raft microdomains, the host cell engulfs the virus.
During transcytosis, the host cell transports the virus through
its cytosol and eventually eject the virus at the opposite side of
the membrane. Polarised surface entry and infection by fusion
is an entry mechanism for enveloped viruses, including SARSCoV (1-2) and MERS-CoV, whose genome is surrounded by
a capsid and a membrane [34]. The virus fuses either to the
apical membrane or the basal membrane of the epithelial
cell and transfers the genome into the cytoplasm. Lastly,
endocytosis and endosomal fusion with infection is an entry
mechanism for both enveloped and naked (the genome is
surrounded only by a capsid) viruses, including EBOV. Other
examples include influenza virus types A and C, bovine coronavirus, hepatitis A (HAV), vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV),

SUBMITTED FOR JOURNAL PUBLICATION

primary herpes simplex virus (HSV), human cytomegalovirus
(HCMV), adeno-associated virus (AAV)-2, simian virus 40
(SV40), measles virus, Semliki Forest virus (SFV), Sindbis
virus, Jamestown Canyon (JC) polyomavirus, parvovirus, and
the minor group of human rhinoviruses (HRV). These viruses
internalise and retain in transport vesicles. To gain access to
the cytoplasm, their genome has to leave the vesicle by which
it was taken up, usually by penetrating the host cell cytosol
through fusion from an endosome.
We refer to modelling viral translocation across the epithelial barrier as M ODEL 1. Despite all differences in the mechanisms involved in this model, the transfer process always starts
with the virions binding to the target receptors. Upon binding,
the virions become fused with- or internalised into the host cell
cytosol. Recycling/negative feedback mechanisms regulate the
number of surface bonds between the virions and the receptors.
This leads to the following chemical kinetic model representing the viral load/concentration at the extracellular space Vo (t),
the viral load at the epithelial host cell membrane (host cellbound virions) Vb (t), and the viral load in the host cell cytosol
(fused or internalised virions) Vi (t), respectively [35]:
β

dVo (t)
=β [Vin − cVo (t)] −
dt
−aVo (t) [nv N (t) + nv N0 (t) − Vb (t)]
(1)
dVb (t)
=aVo (t) [nv N (t) + nv N0 (t) − Vb (t)] − ki Vb (t)
dt
(2)
dVi (t)
=ki Vb (t),
(3)
dt

where β is the ratio of the volume of the considered medium
containing Vo (t) and the host cell volume, Vin is the initial
viral load at the extracellular space, c is a constant rate of viral
clearance per virion by mechanisms such as immune elimination (corresponding to a virion half-life tV1/2 = ln(2)/c), nv
is the total number of the viruses that can be bound, N (t)
is the total number of occupied receptors per unit volume
at the membrane, N0 (t) is the total number of unoccupied
receptors per unit volume at the membrane, a = a0 /nv is the
rate defined through the maximal binding rate a0 measured
when none of the viruses is bound to the membrane, and ki
is the virus fusion or internalisation rate [35].
The presented model can be considered accurate if the data
of the concentration of viral ligands interaction with the host
cell receptors are available.
2) Virus Spread: After translocation across the epithelial
barrier, the virus infects and replicates at the site of infection,
causing localised infections, and/or initiates infection through
one organ and then spreads to other sites, causing systemic
infections [32].
A straightforward way to describe the viral load (V (l) (t))
dynamics in a localised infection is to use the target celllimited model [36]. This model neglects intracellular processes
and takes into account uninfected susceptible target cells (T )
and infected virus-producing cells (I) within an observed
organ. The basic model is formulated by the following system

5

of nonlinear ordinary differential equations (ODEs) [37]:
dV (l) (t)
= pI(t) − cV (l) (t),
dt

(4)

where
dI(t)
dt
dT (t)
dt

=

kV (l) (t)T (t) − δI(t),

(5)

=

λ − dT (t) − kV (l) (t)T (t).

(6)

The target cells become infected cells which produce virus
with production rate p, k is a constant infectivity rate, δ is a
constant rate of death in infected cells (corresponding to an
infected cell half-life of tI1/2 = ln(2)/δ), λ is a constant rate
of uninfected target cells production, and d is a constant rate
of uninfected target cells death (corresponding to a target cell
half-life of tT1/2 = ln(2)/d). This model can be applied to
analytically describe the local spread of any family of viruses.
Apart from the viruses considered in Section II, rhinovirus
and papillomavirus are examples of viruses that cause only
a localised infection. Rhinovirus infects the epithelial cells
of the upper respiratory tract and replicates there, whereas
papillomavirus infects the skin and replicates in the epidermis.
Describing the viral load dynamics in a systemic infection is
more challenging since the virus spreads to other organs using
mechanisms like the bloodstream (hematogeneous spread),
neurons (neurotropic spread), or extracellular vesicles.
Viruses can enter the bloodstream either directly through
inoculation into an animal or insect bites (e.g., DENV and
ZIKV), or through the release of virions produced at the
entry site into the interstitial fluid (e.g., coronaviruses) [32].
This fluid can be taken up by lymphatic vessels that lead
back to lymph nodes. Although immune system cells filter
the interstitial fluid within the lymph nodes, some virions
escape immune cells and continue within the interstitial fluid,
which is eventually returned to the bloodstream. The virus
takes advantage of the blood distribution network for the
propagation of the virions from a location they are injected
into the blood flow to a targeted site within reach of the
cardiovascular system. Advection and diffusion are the mass
transport phenomena in the cardiovascular system [38]. As a
result of advection, the virions are transported by the flow of
the blood at different velocities in different locations of the
cardiovascular system. As a result of diffusion, the virions
are transported from a region of higher concentration to a
region of lower concentration. This pattern of motion follows
the Brownian motion spread in the blood.
To leave the circulatory system and infect other sites in
the body, the virions need to penetrate the blood vessel walls
made of the endothelial cells (Fig. 1b). We refer to modelling
viral translocation across the endothelial barrier as M ODEL
2. Viruses enter and then infect or cross endothelial cells by
endocytosis at the apical (luminal) membrane. When infecting
the endothelial cell, the virions penetrate the host cell cytosol
by fusion from endosomes. However, if the virus crosses the
endothelial cell, the virions are transported via intracellular
trafficking and ejected from the basolateral (abluminal) mem-

SUBMITTED FOR JOURNAL PUBLICATION

6

brane into the extracellular space. This leads to the following
chemical kinetic model [39]:
∂V (b) (r̄, t)
∂t
(b)
∂VBV (r̄, t)
∂t

(b)

= −(c + kf1 )V (b) (r̄, t) + kb1 VBV (r̄, t)

(7)

(b)

= kf1 V (b) (r̄, t) − (kb1 + kf2 )VBV (r̄, t) +
(b)

+ kb2 VEV (r̄, t)
(b)
∂VEV (r̄, t)

(8)

(b)

(b)

= kf2 VBV (r̄, t) − kb2 VEV (r̄, t) −

∂t

(b)

− (kf3 + kp )VEV (r̄, t)
(b)
∂VV̄ (r̄, t)

(b)

(10)

(b)

(11)

= kp VEV (r̄, t)

∂t
(b)
∂VV̂ (r̄, t)

= kf3 VEV (r̄, t),

∂t
(b)

(b)

(9)

(b)

(b)

where V (b) , VBV , VEV , VV̄ and VV̂ represent the viral load
at the extracellular space (luminal side), the viral load at the
endothelial host cell membrane (host cell-bound virions), the
viral load in the host cell endosomes, the viral load in the
host cell cytosol that penetrated the endosomes, and the viral
load at the extracellular space (abluminal side), at point r̄ and
time t, r̄ ∈ ∂D (∂D is the set of points over the endothelial
host cell membrane). kfi and kbi , i = 1, 2, 3 are forward and
backward reaction rates in ms−1 and s−1 , respectively, and kp
is the endosome penetration rate in s−1 .
The virion transport mechanism across the blood vessel
walls imposes a boundary condition for advection-diffusion
in the vessel. This mechanism is modelled by a continuoustime Markov chain framework leading to the following general
homogeneous boundary condition [39]:

 2
∂
1
2
0 ∂
2 3
2
1 0
+
(k
+
k
+
k
)
+
k
k
+
k
k
+
k
k
D
p
b
f
f f
f
b
∂t2
∂t
∇V (b) (r̄, t) · n̂
(12)
 2

∂
∂
= kf1
+ (kf2 + k 0 ) + kf2 kf3 + kf2 kp V (b) (r̄, t),
∂t2
∂t

×

where D is the diffusion coefficient in m2 s−1 of the virions in
the blood, k 0 = kb2 + kf3 + kp , ∇ is the gradient operator, (·) is
the inner multiplication operator, and n̂ is the surface normal
at r̄ ∈ ∂D pointing towards the vessel luminal side. The virion
advection-diffusion in the observed blood vessel can then be
modelled by the Fick’s second law:
D∇2 V (b) (r̄, t) − cb V (b) (r̄, t) − v̄(r̄) · ∇V (b) (r̄, t)
∂V (b) (r̄, t)
,
(13)
+S(r̄, t) =
∂t
subject to the boundary condition (12). The release rate of the
virus at point r̄ is given by the source term S(r̄, t) (virion
s−1 m−1 ), ∇2 is the Laplace operator, and cb is a constant
rate of viral clearance in the blood. The blood is assumed
to have a laminar flow in the axial direction with uniform
velocity profile v̄(r̄) = v aˆz ms−1 , where aˆz is the axial unit
vector. The fundamental characteristic function for advectiondiffusion called the concentration Green’s function is analytically derived in terms of a convergent infinite series [39].

The obtained concentration Green’s function is coupled to the
boundary condition given in (12) and provides a useful tool
for prediction of the viral load in blood vessels.
Viruses rarely enter into neurons directly to evoke the
neurotropic viral spread (Fig. 1c). We refer to modelling
neurotropic viral spread as M ODEL 3. Viruses first replicate
locally and then infect nerves associated with the tissue [32].
Thus, viruses first infect neurons of the peripheral nervous
system, and then gain access to the central nervous system.
There is emerging speculations that the central nervous system
may be involved during SARS-CoV-2 infection, where neuronto-neuron transmission route is used to spread the virus [40].
Other examples of neuroinvasive viruses include several herpes
viruses (e.g., herpes simplex virus) and poliovirus, which is
weakly neuroinvasive, and rabies virus, which requires tissue
trauma to become neuroinvasive. The literature is, however,
very sparse concerning biological models on the neurotropic
viral spread. Therefore, we advocate for the consideration
of detailed biological models where the characterisation of
viral spread throughout the nervous system is considered in
more details. This includes addressing secondary mechanisms
evolved by some viruses to help them replicate and spread
(e.g., binding to a host cell protein called dynein which then
transports viral capsid to the neural nucleus for replication).
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are exchanged between all
cells and emerge as the novel, yet obscure cell-to-cell communication mediators. EVs vary in size (50–5000 nm) and
contain and transport transmembrane proteins in their lipid
bilayer, as well as the cytosol molecular components from the
parental cell. The latter includes functional proteins, lipids,
and genetic materials [e.g., messenger RNA (mRNA), noncoding RNA (ncRNA), and DNA] [41]. EVs can also transfer
functionally active cargo and have the ability to participate in
biological reactions associated with viral dissemination – the
evidence exists for HCV, HIV, and Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)
– and immune response (Fig. 1d) [42].
EVs and viruses share common features in their size,
structure, biogenesis and uptake [43]. EVs either favour viral
infections or limit them, by prompting viral spread or modulating the immune response, respectively. When leveraging viral
infection, virus-associated EVs deploy mechanisms such as the
delivery of (a) proteins that make the cell more susceptible
to infection, (b) viral receptors to cells that are devoid of
these receptors thus allowing cells to be infected, (c) nucleic
acids that improve and sustain the production of a virus, and
(d) molecules that eliminate the host protein relevant for an
antiviral response [43], [42]. On the other hand, different
mechanisms can be activated by the EVs released by infected
cells to prompt an immune response against viruses. The most
important mechanisms are the spreading of viral antigens via
EVs, and the transfer of cytosolic proteins and nucleic acids
involved in antiviral responses. Nonetheless, it is still unclear
what cell conditions and virus types release EVs that favour
or fight infection.
For initial Molecular Communications system modelling, it
seems that viral components hijack the EV secretory routes
to exit infected cells and use EV endocytic routes to enter
uninfected and immune system cells [42]. We refer to mod-

SUBMITTED FOR JOURNAL PUBLICATION

a

Virus translocation
across the epithelium

7

b

Innate immune
system activation

c

Adaptive immune
system activation

d

Adaptive immune
system reaction

Lymph node

Antibodies and T cells
attack viruses and
virus-infected cells

Inflammed
tissue

Activated
dendritic cell

B cell

Plasma B cell

Dendritic cell

Macrophage (uptake and
elimination of pathogen)

Dendritic cells transmit viruses
to the lymph node

Cytokines

Activated
T cell

Fig. 2. Activation of innate and adaptive immune systems. The cytokine-based- and antibody-based Molecular Communications systems are shown in Phase
(c) and (d), respectively.

elling EV-based viral spread as M ODEL 4. Each infected cell
in this model serves as the transmitter, actively interacting
with other cells [44]. The transmitting cell either 1) produces EVs (specifically, exosomes) through its intracellular
machinery and releases them upon the fusion of intermediate vesicle-containing endosome compartments, referred to
as multivesicular bodies, with the plasma membrane, or 2)
involves vertical trafficking of molecular cargo to the plasma
membrane, a redistribution of membrane lipids, and the use
of contractile machinery at the surface to allow for vesicle
pinching (specifically, microvesicles) [45]. This corresponds to
EVs moving from the intracellular space to the extracellular
space (the propagation medium). The aspects of EV release
yet need to be theoretically investigated addressing infection
factors.
The extracellular matrix (ECM) is the interstitial channel
through which EVs are exchanged between the infected virusproducing transmitting cells and the target uninfected receiving
cells. The ECM is a 3D molecular network composed of
macromolecules. To reach the targeted cell, both the virions
and virus-associated EVs should navigate around these macromolecules and diffuse inside and outside other cells in the
ECM. The Langevin stochastic differential equation (SDE)
can potentially be utilised as a channel modelling tool [6].
Since EVs propagate within the ECM based on a drifted
random walk, the Langevin SDE needs to contain contributions
from the Brownian stochastic force and the drift velocity of
the interstitial fluid. Besides, the Langevin SDE needs to be
modified to address (a) the losses or clearances of EVs via
uptake from other cells and/or degradation through enzymatic
attacks, and (b) the anisotropic EV diffusion affected by the
ECM properties, i.e., volume fraction and tortuosity. The volume fraction defines the percentage of the total ECM volume
accessible to the virus-bearing EVs. The tortuosity describes

the average hindrance of a medium relative to an obstaclefree medium. Hindrance results in an effective diffusion that
is decreased compared with the free diffusion coefficient of
EVs.
The receiving cell takes up EVs once they bind to the
cell-membrane utilising one of the three mechanisms: 1)
juxtacrine signalling – where EVs elicit transduction via
intracellular signalling pathways, 2) fusion – where EVs fuse
with the cellular membrane and transfer cargo (i.e., virusassociated components) into the cytoplasm, and 3) endocytosis
– where EVs internalise and retain in transport vesicles. Nonlinear EV-uptake associated with these various mechanisms
have been initially investigated in terms of EV-based drug
delivery, utilising the Volterra series and multi-dimensional
Fourier analysis [35]. The ability to receive viral loads and
react accordingly can serve as the performance indicator to
reconstruct the information sent by the transmitting cell.

3) Immune System Response: The immune system is a
complex network of cells and proteins that defends the body
against pathogen infection. Two subsystems compose the
immune system: the innate immune system and the adaptive
immune system. The innate immune system is referred to as
non-specific as it provides a general defence against harmful
germs and substances. The adaptive immune system is referred
to as specific as it makes and uses antibodies to fight certain
germs that the body has been previously exposed to.
The immune system thus works to eradicate the virus.
Considering a detailed role of the immune system, i.e., the
additional mechanisms in fighting a viral infection V (l) from
the innate immune response (IIR) and adaptive immune re-

SUBMITTED FOR JOURNAL PUBLICATION

8

sponse (AIR), ODEs (4)-(6) can be extended [46]:
dV (l) (t)
dt

=

p
I2 (t) − cV (l) (t) −
1 + p RIIP (t)

−

kV (l) (t)T (t) − hV (l) (t)RAIR (t) (14)

dI1 (t)
= kV (l) (t)T (t) − ωI1 (t)
(15)
dt
dI2 (t)
= ωI1 (t) − δI2 (t)
(16)
dt
dT (t)
= rD(t) − kV (l) (t)T (t)
(17)
dt
dRIIR (t)
= ψV (l) (t) − bRIIP (t)
(18)
dt
dRAIR (t)
= f V (l) (t) + βRAIP (t).
(19)
dt
Additional effects are also included: two populations of infected cells – infected but not yet virus-producing cells (I1 )
with the duration of latent eclipse phase of 1/ω, and infected
and virus-producing cells (I2 ), as well as dead cell (D)
replacement by new susceptible cells at a constant rate r. The
IIR (RIIR ) frees the virus at a constant rate ψ and dies at
a constant rate b; p is the strength of innate response. The
AIR (RAIR ) is activated proportional to the free viral load at a
constant rate f . Activation is followed by clonal expansion at a
constant rate β. The AIR neutralises the virus with a constant
rate h.
RIIR and RAIR in (18) and (19) represent concentrations
of cytokines and antibodies, respectively. Cytokines are peptides secreted by immune cells (predominantly macrophages,
dendritic cell and T-helper cells) to orchestrate an immune
response or an attack on the invading pathogen (Fig. 2c).
Cytokines spread through the body and attach to surface
receptors of other immune cells. The receptors then signal the
cell to help fight the infection. Cytokines are divided into four
categories – interleukins, interferons, chemokines and tumour
necrosis factors – which can be pro-inflammatory or antiinflammatory, thus promoting or inhibiting the proliferation
and functions of other immune cells. Antibodies are unique
proteins encoded by millions of genes which are made and
mutated in the human body. They are secreted by immune cells
(predominantly plasma B cells differentiated from B cells) to
neutralise the pathogen (Fig. 2d). The antibody neutralises the
pathogen by recognising a unique molecule of the pathogen,
called an antigen, via the fragment antigen-binding (Fab)
variable region.
Similar to the virus analysis, the Molecular Communications
paradigm can give us a clear understanding of how the immune
system acts and develops within the body over time. Without
going into detailed elaboration, we identify the following two
systems:
• The Cytokines-based Molecular Communications system,
which represents cells like macrophages, T-helper cells,
natural killer cells, neutrophils, dendritic cells, mast cells,
monocytes, B cells and T cells, all serving as transceivers;
we refer to modelling cytokines-based Molecular Communications system as M ODEL 5, and
• The Antibody-based Molecular Communications system,
which represents cells like plasma B cells and T cells

Sneeze (D=50 m/s)
Cough (D=10 m/s)

Breath (D<1
m/s)

1.5 m
Virus
replication

Lung-mouth
propagation

>2 m

Virus
excretion

6+ m

Airborne
channel

Human transmitter

Fig. 3. Molecular Communications model of a human transmitter of airborne viruses. The system is comprised of the virus replication, lung-mouth
propagation and virus excretion phases. They dictate the rate and strength by
which the virus is released to the environment that leads to different range
in propagation distance. The sneeze, cough and breath are three different
transmission modes for virus excretion.

serving as transmitters, and the virus serving as the
receiver; we refer to modelling antibody-based Molecular
Communications system as M ODEL 6.
In the context of communications, the cytokines and antibodies
are thus considered as information carriers, which propagate
messages from the location of transmission until the location
of the reception. The information conveyed by the cytokines
and antibodies is infection reaction, as a response to infection
action.
B. Out-body Molecular Communications Models
The airborne spread of infection is the main mechanism
of human-human transmission of viruses. Once viruses are
excreted into the air, they propagate towards another person
that inhales them into its lungs. This mechanism allows the
virus infection spreading to local or pandemic levels, which
can occur in a matter of days. There are other modes of humanhuman transmission of viruses, including human contact transmission, or sexual transmission, but we do not explore these
modes of transmission in this paper. Our objective in this
section is to explore and analyse the airborne virus Molecular Communications system. It is comprised of the human
excretion system as the virus transmitter, the propagation of
the virus in the air as the channel, and the human respiratory
system as the receiver.
1) Transmitter: We consider the human as the source of
virus transmission in the air. The infected humans excrete the
virus with a particular concentration rate and velocity via the
respiratory system. The respiratory system is composed of the
nasal/oral cavity, pharynx, larynx, trachea and lungs, which
are comprised of the bronchus and alveolus. Excretion of the
virus starts from the alveolus, and propagation to the bronchus
towards the nasal/oral cavity.
Recent works in the literature have been reporting several
models that describe the release of particles or droplets in

SUBMITTED FOR JOURNAL PUBLICATION

9

the air by the respiratory system. For example, the model
presented in [19] explores the release of droplets by breath,
sneeze and cough. The authors consider a rate model together
with an event profiler to condition the rates of droplet release
based on the three modes of transmission. The authors are
interested in the steady-state derivations where these three
modes converge to an averaged exhalation process. We believe
that steady-state models do provide attractive mathematical
solutions; however, they do not consider the generation process
of the droplets and phenomena that influence the fate of the
droplets apart from diffusion properties. In a similar goal but
with a different approach, another initial transmitter model
that analyses the air cloud produced by events driven by
exhalation processes was proposed [47]. It withstands the same
issues with the previous model, where the release rates neglect
different phenomena that influence the droplets, and in this
particular case, the cloud and its characteristics. The work
developed in [48] showed that the droplets evolve inside a
turbulent jet transitioning shortly to a puff. Ejected droplets
are surrounded by a dynamically evolving air volume that is
coupled to the droplet trajectory. While the major interest has
been paid to static or averaged conditions of droplets, we argue
that the literature fails to address (a) how the generation of
droplets by the human body is coupled with existing modelling
efforts and (b) how the conditions of the human body of
the infected person impact the exhalation of the droplets
in the air. Therefore, we advocate for the consideration of
biological models, or variables adjusted from them, where the
characterisation of the droplets is thoroughly considered while
having a more detail process of how they are generated.
In this paper, we concentrate on the analysis of three
different modes of transmission models for the virus excretion
processes, which include breathing, coughing and sneezing, as
depicted in Fig. 3. These modes dictate the initial properties of
the virus propagation in the air, which alters the outcome of its
range of propagation and the velocity that the virus diffuses.
In [18], the authors compiled these modes of virus excretion
under one umbrella and referred to them as exhaled breathing.
However, more details should be provided as to how these
different modes of transmission impact virus propagation. We
explain more in the following, where we provide an initial
Molecular Communications model of this transmission process
which we refer to as M ODEL 7.
We consider that the concentration of droplets Di released
by the human transmitter is modelled as a convection process
of virus concentration Vi in the lungs and enters the nasal/oral
cavity with rate kc , representing the virus excretion process.
We define this process as follows:
dDi
= ∇Dd kc Vi (∇Di ),
dt

(20)

and,
dVi
= ∇V0 Dd (∇Vi ) + (Vr (t) ~ Pv (t))
(21)
dt
where V0 is the initial concentration of virus in the nasal/oral
cavity, Vr (t), is the rate of virus replication in the lungs, Pv (t)
is the propagation of virus from the lungs to the nasal/oral
cavity, and ~ is the convolution operator. We do not explore

this model in detail, since the detailed version can be found in
[48], [19]. However, we acknowledge that kc is directly linked
with the transmission modes that we discussed earlier (breathing, coughing and sneezing). Typically, these modes are always
considered to affect the velocity of propagation of droplets. We
argue that they are fundamental in the characterisation of virus
conversion to droplets as well as the rate of released droplets
themselves. Many approaches do consider kc in the steadystate, but we like to draw attention by the community that it
can have non-linear relationships with the infected humans,
so it should also be associated with different disease stages
over time that is bounded by transition probabilities of stage
changes (severe stage to mild, and vice versa). Moreover, as
shown in both (20) and (21), that non-linearities do exist, for
example, the relationship Vr (t) ~ Pv (t) is added to the model
but is currently non-existing in the literature.
2) Channel: Droplets travel in the air following diffusion
properties bounded by airflow properties. For example, the
modes of transmission discussed above can impact on different
types of turbulent flows that lead to a puff scenario, further
resulting in airflow forces that are weakened and gravitational
forces on the droplet to get stronger. These droplets tend to
travel a few meters away from the human excretion point
(transmitter), which takes around several seconds, and can
reach the human receiving points (e.g., nose or mouth) up to 6
meters of distance. Molecular Communications channel models can be used to model these effects of droplet concentration
release in the air, and possibly be used to characterise the
number of delivered droplets to the human receiving points. In
this section, we review existing models and analyse a general
channel model.
We summarise the literature on existing droplet propagation
models with certain properties of the droplet and airborne
viral particles in Table I. Even though they are not entirely
classified as pure Molecular Communications channels, they
present not only the physical modelling of droplet propagation
but also the effects of droplet propagation and thus can be
considered by the community for characterising Molecular
Communication Systems. We analyse the literature in terms
of the completeness of the physics that govern the droplet
propagation. First, we look at their modes of propagation,
either air-based or molecular-based. These modes dictate the
way these models are constructed. Then, we classify each type
of medium that can be utilised for modelling these Molecular
Communications approaches. The types of species include
airflow behaviour with average droplet concentration (transient
air, air cloud) to more focused on the characterisation of
the number of droplets (single, distribution, concentration and
concentration/rate). We also analyse the airflow properties
that are mostly secreted from a person as the transmitting
point, this includes turbulent flow and puff flow. Turbulent
flow accounts for the advection-diffusion of particles that are
influenced by a force, in this case, the air turbulence and
flow created from the transmitting point. The puff flow can
be regarded as the Brownian diffusion in the air and can be
influenced by gravity. Lastly, we analyse the properties of
the environment that affects the state of droplets once they
are excreted and this includes evaporation and crystallisation.

SUBMITTED FOR JOURNAL PUBLICATION

10

TABLE I
L ITERATURE REVIEW SUMMARY ON CHANNEL MODELS FOR VIRUS AIR PROPAGATION
Propagation mode

Ref.

Medium

Airbased

[49]
[47]

Transient Air
Air Cloud

Molecularbased

[50]
[51]
[52]
[19]

Single Droplet
Particle Dist.
Concentration
Concentration/Rate

Turbulent Flow

Since the majority of the droplets is comprised of water, it
is subject to effects from temperature change that can result
in evaporation, as well as the quantity of salt in the droplet
that lead to its crystallisation. From Table I, we observe that
all species comply with the puff and turbulent flow ([49],
[51], [52], [19]). However, we do recognise that environmental
effects on the droplets are not fully explored for Molecular
Communications models. The environmental effects have a
significant impact on the propagation of the droplets, as it
can either impact (a) on the flow behaviour in space, or (b)
on the rate of virus reception by the receiving organ (e.g.,
nose or lung). Besides future investigation in environmental
effects on the droplet propagation, there are also needs for
further investigation on the effects of jet streams that affect
the viral propagation behaviour. This includes understanding
the aerodynamic airflow within confined and open areas and
how this affects the flow of the viral particle propagation.
We now describe the propagation model of airborne
droplets, which we refer to as M ODEL 8. We assume the
source is located at ~r = [x, y, z] and emits droplets with
rate S(~r, t). Based on the Fick’s second law of diffusion, we
consider a droplet concentration varying over time with
∂S
∂Di
=
− ∇F~ − σ,
∂t
∂t

(22)

where F~ is the mass, and σ is the droplet degradation loss derived from environmental effects. There are many approaches
to derive F~ , and this largely depends on the environment. For
example, the authors in [19] focus on expanding the term to
include Fick’s advection and diffusion effects on the flow.
We understand that those terms represent the turbulent flow
and puff flow, respectively. On the other hand, [49] presents a
more complex model based on the aerodynamics of the airflow,
which precisely addresses the turbulent and jet flows that drive
droplet propagation. The authors present the validation of their
model using experimental data.
We show in (22) that σ influences directly the propagation
of droplets from environmental effects such as evaporation
or crystallisation. This is an interesting effect where the
temperature, water content, and the salt crystals concentration in the droplet jointly impact diffusion and the rates or
concentration when it reaches the receiver. Even though this
phenomenon has been explored before [50], [51], the authors
of [49] investigated this effect, where they derived a model
that couples aerodynamic properties and environmental effects
on the droplet propagation behaviour. Their model was also

Puff Flow

Droplet Evaporation

Droplet Crystallisation

validated based on imaging experiments using an ultrasonic
levitator to capture transient dynamics of evaporation and
precipitation of the evaporating droplet.
One of the main advantages of modelling virus propagation using the Molecular Communications paradigm is the
derivation of particle propagation rates, which can be used
to study the viral entry mechanism into a human receiver.
In [19], the authors utilised the solution in (22), by breaking
down diffusion components into three dimensions (x, y, z),
and algebraically developing the diffusive and mass matrices
based on wind flow. To derive a closed-form solution, the
authors considered the steady-state response of the breathing
process, where they obtain a closed-form Green’s function.
The obtained closed-form solution for the droplet concentration is represented as


(z+H)2
(z−H)2
R − y4η2
− 4η
− 4η
e
+e
C(η, y, z) =
e
(23)
4uπη
where η is the turbulence indicator due to wind sources, H
is the height of a person’s mouth to the ground, and u is the
flow velocity in the x dimension.
These models are attractive from the propagation and system
theory point of view. However, the authors do not explore
practical results in terms of infection. During exposure to an
infected human transmitter, several variables dictate the fate
of the human receiver, possibly leading to another infection,
and this can include the time of exposure as well as the
distance between the person emitting the droplets and the
human receiver. The authors in [47] present an analysis on
this end-to-end scenario, where the probabilities of infection
at the human receiver are evaluated in terms of distance, time
of exposure, and coughing angle. As droplets propagation
is bounded by the angle of release, it is also important to
incorporate spatial analysis on the infection probability, such
as the coughing angle.
3) Receiver: In the human receiver, the airborne droplets
are absorbed by the nasal-mouth cavity and propagate along
the respiratory tract until they reach the alveoli. During this
path, the virus undergoes replication, penetrating deep into
the epithelial tissues, and then into the circulatory system to
infect other organs and systems. In this section, we focus on
the high-level modelling and analysis focused on the infection
process through the human respiratory tract virus propagation.
Modelling the human receiver using a systems theory approach can be increasingly complex since there are two main
factors that, individually, comprise of several steps. First, there

SUBMITTED FOR JOURNAL PUBLICATION

11

a

c
Inhalable droplets
< 10 μm

Extrathoracic
region

Respirable droplets
< 10 μm

b

Thoracic fraction
< 2.5 μm particles

Thracheobronquial
region

Respirable fraction
< 2.5 μm particles

Alveolar
region

Airborne
channel

Droplets entrance
rate

Mouth-lung
propagation
Human receiver

Virus replication
and deposition
rates

Alveoli
sacks

Alveoli

d

e

Binding

Release

Spike
protein

Spike protein
binds to the
receptor
Receptor

Fig. 4. Molecular Communications model of the human receiver of airborne viruses. a) According to the different regions in the respiratory tract, the size of
the particles propagating downwards is smaller; b) The human receiver model is comprised of droplets entrance rate, mouth-lung propagation, virus replication
and deposition rates; c) Alveoli sack and alveoli with moderate and severe mucus presence due to infection progression; d) The virus duplication process; 2)
The virus deposition process.

is the entrance of the droplets containing viruses into the
human body and residing in the lungs. Secondly, there is the
infection process of internal progression. The model for the
viral entry can be found in [20], which accounts for virus
dispersion along the respiratory tract impacted by factors such
as the respiratory rate, viral exposure levels (i.e., the quantity
of virus that is inhaled), and the virus particle size. The
authors developed a computational model to account for the
changes in the virus propagation as it enters and propagates
in the respiratory tract. For the virus infection process, [20]
also considers the impact of the immune system and how it
influences the overall concentration of the virus within the
respiratory tract. The model in [47] focuses on a high-level
generic approach based on probability of infection calculated
from the probability of reception of droplets containing the
virus. Both models are different in terms of biological details
or probabilistic infection estimation solutions. We not only
support their integration, and creating a scenario where the
probability of infection is dependent on increased biology
realism, but also for these models to contribute towards
modelling the progression of infection and state of infectivity.
Understanding the end-to-end propagation to the infectivity
process is a crucial contribution for researchers, because this
can lead to insights of molecular interactions at the cellular
level and the impact of the infection on subsystems of the
body, which in turn can lead to precision medicine in clinical
decisions for treatments and patient recovery guidelines.
Our analysis on the viral impact on the human receiver
model is depicted in Fig. 4, which we refer to as M ODEL 9.
There are three main blocks in the model: the droplets entrance
rate, the mouth-lung propagation, and the virus replication and
deposition rates. The general model of virus propagation is
based on a governing equation based on the Fick’s second

law for advection-diffusion investigated in [20]. This model
accounts for the concentration of the virus in a particular
branch of the respiratory tract Gi , and can be represented as
∂Gi (x, t)2
∂Gi (x, t)
∂Gi (x, t)
=D
−u
− (p − k)Gi (x, t)
2
∂t
∂x
∂x
(24)
where i is the generation number (i = 0, 1, 2, 3, ...23) of the
lung branches, k is the virus deposition rate, p is the virus
replication rate, D is the diffusion coefficient, and x is the
direction of the virus propagation (downward or upward in
the respiratory tract). The Gi (x, t)|t=0 represents the droplet
entrance rate. Fig. 4d and Fig. 4e depicts the replication and
deposition of the virus, respectively. The authors in [20] also
explored the dynamics change in the viral pleomorphic size
changes during the propagation. The advection-diffusion component is used to model the breathing process to understand
the airflow into the lung. Even though they concentrate on
COVID-19, it is clear that their proposed model can be applied
to other virus types that propagate through the respiratory tract.
For the future, such models may need not only experimental
validation, but further integration with infection development
itself. As shown in Fig. 4c, the changes in the virus infection
process for SARS-CoV-2 (e.g., from moderate to severe), can
present changes in the volume of mucus present in the alveolus
and the entire respiratory tract. This infection process can not
only produce changes in the breathing rhythms and cough rate,
but it can also change the advection-diffusion process within
the lung generation. As the virus penetrate areas with a high
quantity of mucus, the propagation medium changes enough to
make the advection property of virus flow to dramatically reduced. Moreover, the deposition and replication rates changes
within the mucus areas. This, in turn, can affect the binding
process of the virus, which is different for pure diffusion in

SUBMITTED FOR JOURNAL PUBLICATION

air pockets compared to a space with mucus. One interesting
development could be the investigation of stochastic diffusion
coefficients, deposition rates and replication rates of the virus,
and how this evolves as the mucus production increases using
a multi-medium Molecular Communications model.
IV. L EVERAGING E XPERIMENTAL DATA FOR M OLECULAR
C OMMUNICATIONS
The Molecular Communications scientific community has
been abstracting cellular signalling for more than a decade of
active research, replicating the characterisation of the functions
of wired and wireless networking and computing systems.
However, with only a few experimental demonstration systems
reported to date [53], [54], the Molecular Communications
field generally falls short on validation. We anticipate similar
challenges to arise when building Molecular Communications
models of the virus in- and out-body propagation, which are
critically needed to understand virus dynamics and unveil new
insights that will increase our understanding of virus pathogenesis and enable spread and infection patterns to be more
predictable in vivo. To characterise the viral dynamics and
evolution, one of the initial generic computational modellings
demonstrated the necessity to integrate biophysical models and
infection properties [20].
Biophysical models present real physiological parameters
associated with the physical space where the virus propagates
through. These parameters are typically available in the literature to be readily used by the Molecular Communications
community for in silico modelling. The examples include the
analysis of entry and spread of SARS-CoV (1-2) and MERSCoV in the respiratory system, where M ODEL 1 and M ODEL
7-9 require values for the airflow profile, and diameter and
length of each airway generation available from [84]. For the
analysis of entry and spread of DENV, ZIKV and HCV in the
circulatory system, M ODEL 2 AND M ODEL 9 require values
for the blood velocity profile, diameter and length of each
vessel generation available from [85].
The basic set of infection properties includes viral exposure
levels (in different specimens), virion characteristics, and
how viruses interact with cells and the immune system. We
summarise relevant data for SARS-CoV (1-2), MERS-CoV,
EBOV, DENV, ZIKV and HCV in Table II and Table III. Apart
from exposure levels and virion characteristics (including their
genome, proteome and RNA transcripts), Table II identifies
detection methods, whereas Table III outlines the infection
impact and immune markers for each of the considered viruses.
This information is necessary for the effects on the receiver
communication models, or M ODEL 9, where the interactions
between virus-host cells are found.
Based on the available data, at least the concentration
profiles of each of these viruses given in Table II, SARSCoV (1-2), MERS-CoV and ZIKV translocation across the
epithelium, or M ODEL 1, and EBOV, DENV, ZIKV and HCV
spread via the bloodstream, or M ODEL 2, can be initially
analysed. One way of doing such analyses is to associate
the available concentration profiles given in Table II with
Vo given in (1) of M ODEL 1 and V (b) given in (7) of

12

M ODEL 2, respectively, and assume initial values for other
relevant concentration profiles occurring in (1)-(3) and (7)(11). In addition, the parametric values for the virus interaction
with the host cells and immune system cells, e.g., forwardand backward reaction rates, are still unavailable and need
to be assumed. Obtaining these values from the experiments
is challenging but can lead to accurate predictions of viral
dynamics.
More advanced modelling approaches also operate with
the host cell surface receptor distribution, host cell distribution, replication and deposition rates, and immune-responserelevant parameters. For example, in the case of SARS-CoV2, the virions use the ACE2 receptor to bind to and enter
host cells (Table III), which is important for M ODEL 7 and
M ODEL 9. The density of ACE2-expressing host cells is
modelled in the literature to follow the Gaussian distribution
(e.g., N (5.83, 0.71) (Copies/mL)) [86]). Spatial distributions
additionally complicate the Molecular Communications modelling since ACE2-expressing host cells are not spread evenly,
thus creating a heterogeneous concentration distribution across
the respiratory system [20]. Other parameters relevant for the
target-cell model (presented in Section III-A) that facilitate
binding by SARS-CoV-2 virus in the respiratory systems can
be found in [87], [88]. The overview of the infection impact
of other considered viruses is also given in Table III.
In the case of virus proliferation via neurons and EVs, no
relevant data for M ODEL 3 and M ODEL 4 have been collected
in the tables. We thus advocate for the need to conduct
relevant experiments and back up the corresponding Molecular
Communications models that are yet to be developed. As
of the immune system reaction via cytokines and antibodies,
we list the relevant immune markers and antibodies for each
of the considered viruses in Table III. The corresponding
concentration levels are typically available in the literature,
e.g., cytokine levels in SARS-CoV [89], [90], [91], and can
be used to support M ODEL 5 and M ODEL 6.
The airborne virus propagation models through droplets
based on M ODEL 8 need a set of data to characterise diffusion
properties when a human transmitter sneezes, coughs or talks.
The availability of this data is a critical issue as we found
very limited resources that can be used. However, existing
testbeds can be used to generate data that can be used by the
Molecular Communications researchers. A particular testbed
that is appropriate for this scenario is the Tabletop Molecular
Communication [54], where the authors presented the release
of isopropyl alcohol molecules through an electronic-activated
spray. These airborne molecules flow towards an alcohol
sensor through the airflow produced by a fan. The authors
demonstrate the successful encoding, transmission and reception of information encoded using molecules concentration.
This testbed can be used to study the effects of droplet
propagation, i.e., coupling it with M ODEL 8. The usage of
fans can provide modifications to the airflow that drives the
propagation of the droplets, and hence air jet streams found in
different indoor or outdoor scenarios. This would help estimate
parameters for velocity and turbulence measures, such as η and
u in (23). The production of droplets is not clear, especially
when trying to emulate events of sneeze, cough and speech.

SUBMITTED FOR JOURNAL PUBLICATION

13

TABLE II
AVAILABLE QUANTITATIVE DATA TO SUPPORT M OLECULAR C OMMUNICATIONS MODELLING
Type

Viral concentrations in specimens

Characteristics of virion

Detection

Ref.

SARS-CoV
(1-2)

SARS-CoV:
Nasopharyngeal aspirates – mean values of 2.3×105 RNA
copies/mL, 1.9×107 copies/mL, and 9.8×104 copies/mL on days
5, 10, and 15, respectively (collected from 14 patients)
Stool – a mean value of 1.0×107 copies/mL on day 10 (collected
from 1 patient)
SARS-CoV-2:
Lower respiratory specimens (sputum samples) – 641-1.34×1011
copies/mL, with a median of 7.52×105 (collected from 80 patients)
Posterior oropharyngeal saliva – a median of 1.58×105 copies/mL
Upper respiratory specimens (nasal and throat swabs) – cycle
threshold (Ct) values 19-40 (collected from 14 patients); Ct values are inversely related to viral RNA copy number, with Ct of
30.76, 27.67, 24.56, and 21.48 corresponding to 1.5×104 , 1.5×105 ,
1.5×106 , and 1.5×107 copies/mL

Enveloped, spherical, 60-140 nm in diameter with spikes of about 9-12 nm
Genome: 30 kb positive-sense, singlestranded RNA
RNA Transcript: 5’ cap, 3’ poly-A tail
Proteome: 10 proteins

Viral
RNA
and
protein
quantification;
Serologic
detection
of
antibodies
against viruses

[55],
[56],
[57],
[58],
[59],
[60]

MERS-CoV

Lower and upper respiratory specimens (sputum or tracheal
aspirate, and throat-swab) – a median of 1.62×107 RNA copies/mL
in the severe group and 3.47×105 copies/mL in the mild group
(depending on whether oxygen supplementation was used) (P=0.06)
(collected from 17 patients)

Around 100 nm in diameter
Genome: (+)ssrNA, 30 kb (20-33
kb) enveloped, positive-sense, singlestranded RNA virus
Proteome: 1a, 1b, S, e, M, N, Assorted
OrFs
RNA Transcript: 5’-capped

Viral
RNA
and
protein
quantification;
Serologic
detection
of
antibodies
against viruses

[61],
[60],
[62],
[63]

EBOV

Serum – up to 1010 RNA copies/mL in samples from the patients
who died; up to 108 within the first 8 days after the onset of
symptoms;
Viremia classified as low, intermediate, or high according to the viral
load (<1.73×104 , 1.73×104 -8.7×106 , and > 8.7×106 ) GEQ/mL
(genome equivalent per mL), respectively) (collected from 632
patients)

Filamentous, 970 nm long, 80 nm in
diameter, enveloped
Genome: approximately 19 kilobase
negative-sense, single-stranded RNA
Proteome: 7 sequentially arranged proteins
RNA Transcript: 5’ methyl cap, 3’
poly-A tail

Viral
RNA
and
protein
quantification;
Serologic
detection
of
antibodies
against viruses

[64],
[65],
[60]

DENV

Serum – 103 -1011 RNA copies/mL (collected from 228 patients,
whose data were stratified by infecting dengue serotype (DENV-1,
DENV-2, or DENV-3) and by immune status and clinical manifestation (primary infection dengue fever, secondary infection dengue
fever, or secondary infection dengue hemorrhagic fever)

Around 50 nm in diameter, icosahedral,
enveloped
Genome: 10.7 kilobase positive-sense,
single-stranded RNA
Proteome: single polyprotein, co- &
post-translationally cleaved into 11 mature proteins
RNA Transcript: 5’ methyl cap, no 3’
poly-A tail

Viral
RNA
and
protein
quantification;
Serologic
detection
of
antibodies
against viruses

[66],
[67],
[68],
[60]

ZIKV

Plasma – 6.30×102 RNA copies/mL
Urine – 1.26×103 RNA copies/mL
Semen – 3.98×108 RNA copies/mL (collected 2 weeks after
symptom onset from a 32-year-old man) and up to 1.58×109 RNA
copies/mL measured (collected from 12 men in French Guiana with
ZIKV infection)
Plasma, urine, and saliva – ZIKV RNA found in the saliva of only
the woman; ZIKV remained detectable in their plasma for about 2
weeks, while the urine of the man was consistently positive until
day 14 and that of the woman until day 25; The greater virus load
in the urine observed in the man (collected from a 69-year-old man
and 66-year-old-woman)

Enveloped, spherical, 50 nm in diameter with an electron dense core of 30
nm
Genome:
10.8 kb positive-sense,
single-stranded RNA
Proteome: single polyprotein, co- &
post-translationally cleaved into 11 mature proteins
RNA Transcript: 5’ methyl cap, no 3’
poly-A tail

Viral
RNA
and
protein
quantification;
Serologic
detection
of
antibodies
against viruses

[69],
[70],
[71],
[60]

HCV

Serum – 2×105 -1.61×107 RNA copies/mL (collected from 38
chronically infected patients – 19 infected by genotype 1 isolates
(1a and 1b), 13 by nongenotype 1 isolates (including genotypes 2
a/c, 3a, and 4), and 6 coinfected by genotype 1 and 6 isolates)

Around 50 nm in diameter, icosahedral,
enveloped
Genome: 9.6 kilobase positive-sense,
single-stranded RNA
Proteome: single polyprotein, co- &
post-translationally cleaved into 10 mature proteins
RNA Transcript: 5’ internal ribosomal
entry site (IRES), no 3’ poly-A tail

Viral
RNA
quantification;
Serologic
detection
of
antibodies
against HCV

[72],
[60]

However, we believe the testbed can be extended to include
different versions of the electronic-activated spray that can
modulate the release rate of molecules, for example. In that
way, parameter S(~r, t) in (22) would be associated with a

proper virus release rate profile in each emulated event. Lastly,
the propagation of the droplets itself can be used to determine
other model parameters including the droplet degradation loss
derived from environmental effects, which is σ in 22. The

SUBMITTED FOR JOURNAL PUBLICATION

14

TABLE III
V IRAL INFECTION IMPACT AND IMMUNE MARKERS FOR ENTRY POINTS
Type

Infection impact

Specific immune markers

Specific antibodies

Ref.

SARS-CoV
(1-2)

Initiates by the attachment of ACE2
glycoprotein to host receptors

SARS-CoV-2: Lower CD4, CD8, NK cell counts, PD-1,
Tim-3 on T cells, Phenotype change in monocytes, IP-10,
MCP-3, IL-1RA, IL-6, IL-8, IL-10, IL-2R, IL-1β, IL-4,
IL-18, GM-CSF, IL-2 and IFN-γ

Neutralising IgG antibodies that target internal N
protein or external S glycoprotein (RBD)

[73],
[74]

MERS-CoV

Initiates by the attachment of a glycoprotein to host DPP4 receptor

IFN-α, IL-12, IL-17, IFN-γ

RBD of S protein

[75]

EBOV

Initiates by the attachment of glycoprotein to host receptors

IL-1β (high), TNF-α (high), IL-6 (high), IL-1RA, sTNFR (high), SIL-6R, MIP-1α, MIP-1β, Neopterin, SAA,
NO2-, Cortisol, IL-10

Epitopes on the glycoprotein (RBD)

[76],
[77]

DENV

Initiates by glycoprotein E protein binding to DC-SIGN, a C-type lectin

IFN-α, IL-6, IL-15, TNF-α, IL-1RA, CXCL8, CCL3,
CCL4, CCL5, CCL11, M-CSF, G-CSF, ICAM-1, LSelectin, P-Selectin, CD40, CD40L, Fas, FasL, TRAILR2, TRAIL-R3, RANK-L, C3a, IL-2R, TNF-R1

Envelope
glycoprotein
(non-neutralising
antibodies may cause
ADE)

[78],
[79]

ZIKV

Initiates by the attachment of the viral
glycoprotein E protein to host receptors

CXCL10, ST2/IL-1R4

IgM binds ZIKV premembrane and envelope
glycoprotein

[78],
[80]

HCV

Initiates by E2 protein interacting with
cell surface heparan sulfate proteoglycans

CD127+CD8+ T cells, CD127-CD8+ T cells,
CD161+CD8+ T cells, PD-1, Regulatory CD4+
and CD8 T cells, IL-10, CXCR3, CXCR6

IgG binds HCV E1E2 envelope glycoprotein

[81],
[82],
[83]

value of σ can be broken down into different components as
shown in Table I, where the testbed can be used to estimate
σ.
V. O PEN I SSUES AND C HALLENGES
In this section, we explore the open issues and challenges
derived from the discussion presented in our survey so far. Our
vision is that Molecular Communications aligns itself further
with the area of bioengineering so that models of methods
can be verified by experiments, working in close collaboration
with relevant experts. We explore linking of experimental data
to Molecular Communications models, novel in-body viral
intervention techniques, emerging technologies for infection
theranostics, bridging Molecular Communications and bioinformatics, and novel Molecular Communications models.
A. Linking Experimental Data to Molecular Communications
Models
As discussed, Molecular Communications needs to provide further integration of its models with experimental data,
either already available or through novel experiments. The
validation of existing models will be of major benefit to the
community as it helps calibrate the works already developed,
to be directly applicable to the interpretation or prediction
of in vitro or even in vivo phenomena. Without validation,
Molecular Communications models are likely prevented from
expanding its usage to other areas of potential applications.
There are already some interesting works of how Molecular
Communications and experimental data can be integrated into
different scenarios and for different applications. For example,
models with experimental data can be found for calcium
signalling [92], [93], bacteria communication [94], [95], [15],
neural communication [96], and macro particle diffusion [54],
[97]. Other works have made great usage of experimental
data, such as data extracted from open source databases and

integrated into their Molecular Communication models, and
examples include works in [98], [99].
The reader must consider referring to all the data provided in
Section IV and the references provided for data acquisition for
new models of infection using the Molecular Communications
paradigm. Specifically, transmitter designs would benefit from
the process of genetic information encoding with data from
Table II. Propagation of viruses can be based on the diffusion information in different medium provided in the same
table. Lastly, the receiver design directly benefits from the
information provided in both tables. If the receivers are based
on electronic technology, the reader is referred to II, but if
the receivers are actual biological-based devices (e.g., lung
cells), the reader is referred to III. However, the data provided
here are not sufficient to derive all the necessary variables for
required non-linear models with complex behaviour, and for
that, the reader should consider them as a guiding basis for the
correct understanding of the communication parts involved in
Molecular Communications for infections diseases.
B. Novel In-body Viral Intervention Techniques
Even with the existing efforts in designing vaccination and
drugs for viral infections treatment, there is still a need for
novel interventions requiring robust in-body solutions [3]. The
main reasons are twofold: 1) the effectiveness of vaccines is
not always optimal, and 2) there are consequences to tissues
and organs during the infection that might require repairing
procedures [3]. Stem cell-based treatment is a novel in-body
solution that has been argued as a leading technology for future
intervention. This technology is used in different ways, e.g.,
can be used for drug delivery, and as regenerative therapy
(studies have shown that stem cells can modulate the immune
system for patients suffering from SARS-CoV-2 infection).
Particular stem cells can be derived from many tissues types,
including umbilical cord bone marrow, trabecular bone, syn-

SUBMITTED FOR JOURNAL PUBLICATION

ovial membrane, and fetal tissues such as lung, pancreas,
spleen, liver, etc. [100], [101], [102]. By interacting with
the media through chemical agents, stem cells can eliminate
existing pathogenic behaviours and repair the tissue or organ.
More specifically, mesenchymal stem cell-based approaches
have been proposed for interventions in many viral infections,
including hepatitis [3], [103], and SARS-CoV [104], [105].
Mesenchymal stem cells are adherent, Fibroblast-like cells
with the ability of self-renewal and differentiation into multiple
cell lineages such as Osteoblasts, Chondrocytes, Adipocytes,
and Hepatocytes. Looking at specific lung-damaging infections, Mesenchymal stem cells can secrete IL-10, hepatocyte growth factor, Keratinocytes growth factor, and VEGF
to alleviate Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome (ARDS),
regenerate and repair lung damage and resist Fibrosis [104],
[106], [107]. This opens new possibilities for the development
of novel Molecular Communications solutions that look at
communications between the Mesenchymal stem cells signalling and its process of repairing damaged tissue from
the communication process. Similar approaches have been
proposed in the community, where Exosome Vesicles (EVs)
were used to model the interactions between stem cells and
Glioblastoma [35], [44]. Even though EVs are also suggested
for the treatment of lung damage [104], we recognise that
different types of signalling information carriers can be used
to create a multi-carrier, or multi-molecules communication
system, serving as ways to increase the overall treatment
capacity.
C. Emerging Technologies for Infection Theranostics
In the intersection of fields such as bioengineering, material sciences, and medical sciences lies the development of
innovative technology that can lead to efficient treatment or
diagnosis of infectious diseases, herein referred to as infection
theranostics. Molecular Communications can play a role in
these emerging technologies by integrating communications
properties of transmission, propagation and reception. For
example, microfluidic-based organ-on-a-chip devices provide
experimental models of transmission, propagation and reception of molecules from cell-cell, tissue-tissue and even organorgan, with or without other external molecular agents [108].
Another example is the airborne viral detection from biosensors that can be either integrated into all-in-one devices [18] or
integrated biosensors with proposed emerging infrastructures
for 6G, such as the Intelligent Reflecting Surface [109]. In
this case, virus macro-scale propagation and its reception,
through either binding-ligand proteins or electrically charged
droplets, can include modelling expertise from Molecular
Communications researchers to develop such infrastructures.
In the following, we dive deeper into this topic using the
above-mentioned examples.
Microfluidic-based organ-on-a-chip are alternative experimental models compared to conventional in vitro and animal models, since they capture many tissue structures that
are found in human organs [110]. The presented literature
investigates how organ-on-a-chip can be used to study virushost interactions, viral therapy-resistance evolution, and development of new antiviral therapeutics, as well as underlying

15

pathogenesis. This can be applied to different organs of the
human body; for example, infection models have been applied
to liver chip [111], gut chips [112], [113], neural chips
[114] and lung chips [115], [116]. Molecular Communications
models of microfluidic-based organ-on-a-chip can be used to
develop future infection assays to study virus-induced diseases
in real-time and at high resolution. Molecular Communications
can aid in inferring methods of disease communication and
progression by analysing how cellular molecular functions
operate in both healthy as well as infectious states. This can be
further extended to design novel molecular modulation mechanisms are used either to augment cellular communication or to
understand effects from external molecular signals, such as a
viral drug. Within the Molecular Communications community,
there are a number of existing research on microfluidics modelling and experiments [117], [118], and this can be extended
to utilise organ-on-a-chip devices for viral theranostics.
Molecular Communications models can be used to design
the sensitivity of the binding process for airborne viral detection technology. The key principle is to couple the modelling
of air particle flow (as discussed in Section III-B) with the receiver design, which in this case is an airborne viral biosensor.
These biosensors can be built in a number of ways, including
ligand-binding protein receptors [109], electrically charged
particles [18], CMOS-coupled immunological assays, and even
through Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) technology [119].
The receiver design for biosensor technology based on a
realistic propagation model of viral particles is missing. For
example, in an outdoor space, the propagation of the airborne
viral particles can undergo stochastic propagation patterns due
to the changes in airflow directions and turbulence. Therefore,
the design of the biosensor receptor structure can incorporate
Molecular Communications model to help enhance the design
of the sensors that is appropriate for the specific environment. However, this will require considerable experimental
work where molecular propagation flow can be studied with
fluorescent technology, similar to the works proposed in [49],
[120], [121], in order to characterise the propagation patterns.
D. Bridging Molecular Communications and Bioinformatics
Tools
In this paper, we mostly investigated the Molecular Communication models of viral infection, but in Section IV, we
explored the link between these models to currently available
experimental data for viral-host genetic interactions. There
exist many interesting works that cover the analysis of these
interactions coming from a bioinformatics perspective, which
can analyse a large number of protein interactions and how
they affect cells activity and fate [122], [123], [124].
Bioinformatics is a very advanced area in the analysis of
genomics, as previously noted, with several tools and data
available for researchers who desire to investigate the genetic
relationships of viruses and host cells. Based on the genomic
sequencing, these tools can provide the assembly of fragmented sequenced data, phylogenetic analysis of taxonomic
groups, identification of genetic structures, identification of
domains, functions and metabolic pathways, as well as data

SUBMITTED FOR JOURNAL PUBLICATION

sharing capabilities [122]. Researchers in the area are hoping
that, by having open-shared data and tools access policy, they
facilitate the discovery of targeted genes and what leads to
cell behaviour [125]. Some works focus on the discovery of
new drugs or even vaccines [123], [124]. Even though some
exciting works related to the topic of genomics are presented
in the Molecular Communications field [17], [126], [127], the
total and practical integration of Molecular Communications
and bioinformatics tools are far from being explored. More
works linking genomics with cell behaviour can solve existing
issues, including the characterisation of natural cell signalling
modulation techniques, sources of noise and interference,
encoding/decoding of molecular information, and synthetic
Molecular Communications. The bioinformatics existing tools
already provide the information on the cell genetics and,
sometimes, linkage to cell behaviour. Seamless integration
with Molecular Communications leads to studies such as on
the interaction of viral DNA content [17] and techniques for
linking DNA exchange between bacteria for bacteria-based
Molecular Communications [126]. Looking at the various
models and systems presented in this paper, we advocate that
the viral genetic interactions with host cells can provide novel
understandings on how infected cells propagate the genetic
content to other cells from an information and communication
theory approach, while at the same time also considering the
evolution of the genetic content, which can provide novel
mechanisms for inferring infection propagation inside the
body.

16

from virus-host interactions, in order to lead to an end-to-end
diagnostic and therapeutic strategy for vaccine development.
For out-body models, where models have recently been
introduced on airborne droplet propagation, there are further
developments required. First, transmitter models for out-body
Molecular Communications should consider in more detail the
conditions of the human transmitter, i.e., the level of infection
and condition of the respiratory system. This understanding
can provide new relationships between the virus release rates
from the host, and the analysis of viral reception concentration
by another host. In the receiver, as explored in Section III-A,
the need to couple models of the propagation of the respiratory
tract, with actual rates derived from the airborne droplet
propagation models are needed. This will contribute towards
and end-to-end model that considers the Molecular Communication airflow propagation coupled with environmental effects
on the droplets, and to link this with the in-body propagation of
the virus into the lungs. Even though an end-to-end analysis
of these systems can lead to increasingly complex models,
they can be useful in accurately predicting infection spreading
patterns, and how this can impact on people with different
health conditions, in order to personalise and classify their risk
levels. Such accurate modelling can prevent total lockdowns
for the entire society, where people in different categories can
be allowed into society provided they take certain protective
measures.

VI. C ONCLUSIONS
E. Novel Molecular Communications Models
New advancements in Molecular Communications modelling are needed, from this point in time forward, to help
understand the virus propagation both in-body and out-body
and the end-to-end communication system. For in-body, the
link between virus replication and tissue response has yet to
be thoroughly investigated. For example, the interactions of
the virus with neural communications [128], [13], or calcium
signalling in different tissues or organs (especially the epithelium) [129], [130], can provide further understanding between
the virus and hosts interactions using molecular signals as
infection information carriers. As we know from the literature,
the human immune response is triggered after the human body
recognises the presence of infectious agents, foreign to the
body itself [131]. The immune response is yet to be explored
using concepts from Molecular Communications, similar to the
models initially discussed in Section II, and to tie this to other
Molecular Communication models (e.g., propagation within
the circulatory system), in order to create an end-to-end system
model. The key benefit of these studies is the ability to accurately capture the effects of viral propagation communication
on the immune response communication, which would create
computational models that can benefit vaccine designers in the
future if the various sub-communication systems and interactions are well understood. These new models could be used
to analyse new techniques to modulate the immune system
response, coming from a regenerative medical intervention,
based on the precise calculation of infections stages derived

Molecular Communications can play a significant role in
viral infectious disease research, by considering the detail
characterisation of the transmission, reception and propagation
of viruses inside and outside the human body. We provided
an extensive review of the existing literature on the topic, by
analysing the existing models for in-body and out-body Molecular Communications. For in-body models, we explored the
viral translocation across the epithelial and endothelial barriers, neurotropic viral spread, EV-based viral spread, cytokinebased- and antibody-based Molecular Communications. In outbody models, we analysed models for the transmission process
of viruses spelt from a human transmitter, the airborne droplet
and virus propagation coupled with many environmental effects including turbulent flow, puff flow, droplet evaporation
and droplet crystallisation, and finally, the reception process
of viruses in the human receiver. Besides, we reviewed models for the virus entrance mechanism focusing on the virus
concentration in the respiratory tract. We showed how the
available experimental data can be integrated into Molecular
Communications models, and what are the open issues and
future directions. We are looking forward to exciting new
research that can come as an output of the interdisciplinary
works using Molecular Communications for developing new
methods for treatment of infection as well as vaccination
methods. Based on the analysis provided in the paper, we are
confident that fantastic novel research can emerge and help in
the fight against the current and future pandemics.

SUBMITTED FOR JOURNAL PUBLICATION

R EFERENCES
[1] L. Jones, D. Brown, and D. Palumbo, “Coronavirus: A visual guide to
the economic impact,” BBC News, vol. 28, 2020.
[2] M. Stevis-Gridneff, “A C750 billion virus recovery plan thrusts Europe
into a new frontier,” The New York Times, 2020.
[3] V. Saxena, “Mesenchymal stem cell based therapeutic intervention
against viral hepatitis: A perspective,” J Stem Cells and Genetics 2017,
vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 1–2, 2017.
[4] T. Thompson, Annals of influenza or epidemic catarrhal fever in Great
Britain from 1510 to 1837. Sydenham society, 1852, vol. 21.
[5] A. Roldão, M. C. M. Mellado, L. R. Castilho, M. J. Carrondo, and P. M.
Alves, “Virus-like particles in vaccine development,” Expert review of
vaccines, vol. 9, no. 10, pp. 1149–1176, 2010.
[6] I. F. Akyildiz, M. Pierobon, and S. Balasubramaniam, “An information
theoretic framework to analyze molecular communication systems
based on statistical mechanics,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 107,
no. 7, pp. 1230–1255, 2019.
[7] T. Nakano, “Molecular communication: A 10 year retrospective,” IEEE
Transactions on Molecular, Biological and Multi-Scale Communications, vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 71–78, 2017.
[8] I. F. Akyildiz, M. Pierobon, S. Balasubramaniam, and Y. Koucheryavy,
“The internet of bio-nano things,” IEEE Communications Magazine,
vol. 53, no. 3, pp. 32–40, 2015.
[9] I. F. Akyildiz, F. Brunetti, and C. Blázquez, “Nanonetworks: A new
communication paradigm,” Computer Networks, vol. 52, no. 12, pp.
2260–2279, 2008.
[10] L. Felicetti, M. Femminella, G. Reali, and P. Liò, “Applications of
molecular communications to medicine: A survey,” Nano Communication Networks, vol. 7, pp. 27–45, 2016.
[11] B. Atakan, O. B. Akan, and S. Balasubramaniam, “Body area nanonetworks with molecular communications in nanomedicine,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 50, no. 1, pp. 28–34, 2012.
[12] M. T. Barros, W. Silva, and C. D. M. Regis, “The multi-scale impact
of the Alzheimer’s disease on the topology diversity of astrocytes
molecular communications nanonetworks,” IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp.
78 904–78 917, 2018.
[13] M. Veletić and I. Balasingham, “Synaptic communication engineering
for future cognitive brain–machine interfaces,” Proceedings of the
IEEE, vol. 107, no. 7, pp. 1425–1441, 2019.
[14] S. Balasubramaniam and J. Kangasharju, “Realizing the internet
of nano things: challenges, solutions, and applications,” Computer,
vol. 46, no. 2, pp. 62–68, 2012.
[15] D. P. Martins, K. Leetanasaksakul, M. T. Barros, A. Thamchaipenet,
W. Donnelly, and S. Balasubramaniam, “Molecular communications
pulse-based jamming model for bacterial biofilm suppression,” IEEE
Transactions on NanoBioscience, vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 533–542, 2018.
[16] D. P. Martins, M. T. Barros, and S. Balasubramaniam, “Using competing bacterial communication to disassemble biofilms,” in Proceedings
of the 3rd ACM International Conference on Nanoscale Computing
and Communication, 2016, pp. 1–6.
[17] F. Walsh and S. Balasubramaniam, “Reliability and delay analysis of
multihop virus-based nanonetworks,” IEEE Transactions on Nanotechnology, vol. 12, no. 5, pp. 674–684, 2013.
[18] M. Khalid, O. Amin, S. Ahmed, B. Shihada, and M.-S. Alouini,
“Communication through breath: Aerosol transmission,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 57, no. 2, pp. 33–39, 2019.
[19] ——, “Modeling of viral aerosol transmission and detection,” IEEE
Transactions on Communications, 2020.
[20] D. Vimalajeewa, S. Balasubramaniam, D. P. Berry, and G. Barry, “In
silico modeling of virus particle propagation and infectivity along the
respiratory tract: A case study for SARS-CoV-2,” bioRxiv, 2020.
[21] D. P. Martins, M. T. Barros, M. Pierobon, M. Kandhavelu, S. Balasubramaniam et al., “Computational models for trapping Ebola virus
using engineered bacteria,” IEEE/ACM Transactions on Computational
Biology and Bioinformatics, vol. 15, no. 6, pp. 2017–2027, 2018.
[22] A. Sariol and S. Perlman, “Lessons for COVID-19 immunity from
other coronavirus infections,” Immunity, 2020.
[23] H. F. Florindo, R. Kleiner, D. Vaskovich-Koubi, R. C. Acúrcio,
B. Carreira, E. Yeini, G. Tiram, Y. Liubomirski, and R. SatchiFainaro, “Immune-mediated approaches against COVID-19,” Nature
nanotechnology, pp. 1–16, 2020.
[24] G. Lebeau, D. Vagner, É. Frumence, F. Ah-Pine, X. Guillot,
E. Nobécourt, L. Raffray, and P. Gasque, “Deciphering SARS-CoV-2
virologic and immunologic features,” International Journal of Molecular Sciences, vol. 21, no. 16, p. 5932, 2020.

17

[25] M. Wadman, J. Couzin-Frankel, J. Kaiser, and C. Matacic, “A rampage
through the body,” Science, vol. 368, no. 6489, pp. 356–360, 2020.
[26] A. A. Ansari, “Clinical features and pathobiology of Ebolavirus infection,” Journal of autoimmunity, vol. 55, pp. 1–9, 2014.
[27] U. Food, D. Administration et al., “First FDA-approved vaccine for
the prevention of Ebola virus disease, marking a critical milestone in
public health preparedness and response,” Press Announc, 2019.
[28] A. M. Henao-Restrepo, A. Camacho, I. M. Longini, C. H. Watson, W. J.
Edmunds, M. Egger, M. W. Carroll, N. E. Dean, I. Diatta, M. Doumbia
et al., “Efficacy and effectiveness of an rVSV-vectored vaccine in
preventing Ebola virus disease: final results from the guinea ring
vaccination, open-label, cluster-randomised trial (Ebola Ça Suffit!),”
The Lancet, vol. 389, no. 10068, pp. 505–518, 2017.
[29] D. Normile, “Surprising new dengue virus throws a spanner in disease
control efforts,” Science, 2013.
[30] M. J. Conway, B. Londono-Renteria, A. Troupin, A. M. Watson,
W. B. Klimstra, E. Fikrig, and T. M. Colpitts, “Aedes aegypti D7
saliva protein inhibits dengue virus infection,” PLoS neglected tropical
diseases, vol. 10, no. 9, p. e0004941, 2016.
[31] C. I. Yu and B.-L. Chiang, “A new insight into hepatitis C vaccine
development,” Journal of Biomedicine and Biotechnology, vol. 2010,
2010.
[32] J. Louten, “Virus transmission and epidemiology,” Essential Human
Virology, pp. 71–92, 2016.
[33] M. Bomsel and A. Alfsen, “Entry of viruses through the epithelial
barrier: pathogenic trickery,” Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology,
vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 57–68, 2003.
[34] Y. Cong and X. Ren, “Coronavirus entry and release in polarized
epithelial cells: a review,” Reviews in medical virology, vol. 24, no. 5,
pp. 308–315, 2014.
[35] M. Veletić, M. T. Barros, I. Balasingham, and S. Balasubramaniam, “A
molecular communication model of exosome-mediated brain drug delivery,” in Proceedings of the Sixth Annual ACM International Conference on Nanoscale Computing and Communication, ser. NANOCOM
’19. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery,
2019.
[36] C. Zitzmann and L. Kaderali, “Mathematical analysis of viral replication dynamics and antiviral treatment strategies: From basic models to
age-based multi-scale modeling,” Frontiers in Microbiology, vol. 9, p.
1546, 2018.
[37] S. Bonhoeffer, R. M. May, G. M. Shaw, and M. A. Nowak, “Virus
dynamics and drug therapy,” Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A, vol. 94, no. 13,
pp. 6971–6976, 1997.
[38] Y. Chahibi, M. Pierobon, S. O. Song, and I. F. Akyildiz, “A molecular
communication system model for particulate drug delivery systems,”
IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering, vol. 60, no. 12, pp.
3468–3483, 2013.
[39] Y. Arjmandi, M. Zoofaghar, S. V. Rouzegar, M. Veletić, and I. Balasingham, “On mathematical analysis of active drug transport coupled
with flow-induced diffusion in blood vessels,” IEEE Transactions on
NanoBioscience, vol. x, no. x, pp. x–x, 2020, in press.
[40] J. Huang, M. Zheng, X. Tang, Y. Chen, A. Tong, and L. Zhou, “Potential of SARS-CoV-2 to cause CNS infection: Biologic fundamental
and clinical experience,” Frontiers in Neurology, vol. 11, p. 659, 2020.
[41] R. Kalluri and V. S. LeBleu, “The biology, function, and biomedical
applications of exosomes,” Science, vol. 367, no. 6478, 2020.
[42] L. Urbanelli, S. Buratta, B. Tancini, K. Sagini, F. Delo, S. Porcellati,
and C. Emiliani, “The role of extracellular vesicles in viral infection
and transmission,” Vaccines, vol. 7, no. 3, p. 102, 2019.
[43] E. Nolte-’t Hoen, T. Cremer, R. C. Gallo, and L. B. Margolis, “Extracellular vesicles and viruses: Are they close relatives?” Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America,
vol. 113, no. 33, pp. 9155–9161, 2016.
[44] M. Veletić, M. T. Barros, H. Arjmandi, S. Balasubramaniam, and
I. Balasingham, “Modeling of modulated exosome release from differentiated induced neural stem cells for targeted drug delivery,” IEEE
Transactions on NanoBioscience, vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 357–367, 2020.
[45] C. Tricarico, J. Clancy, and C. D’Souza-Schorey, “Biology and biogenesis of shed microvesicles,” Small GTPases, vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 220–232,
2017.
[46] A. Handel, I. M. Longini, and R. Antia, “Towards a quantitative
understanding of the within-host dynamics of influenza A infections,”
Journal of The Royal Society Interface, vol. 7, no. 42, pp. 35–47, 2010.
[47] F. Gulec and B. Atakan, “A molecular communication perspective on
airborne pathogen transmission and reception via droplets generated by
coughing and sneezing,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.07598, 2020.

SUBMITTED FOR JOURNAL PUBLICATION

[48] L. Bourouiba, E. Dehandschoewercker, and J. W. Bush, “Violent expiratory events: on coughing and sneezing,” Journal of Fluid Mechanics,
vol. 745, pp. 537–563, 2014.
[49] S. Chaudhuri, S. Basu, P. Kabi, V. R. Unni, and A. Saha, “Modeling
the role of respiratory droplets in COVID-19 type pandemics,” Physics
of Fluids, vol. 32, no. 6, p. 063309, 2020.
[50] C. Chen and B. Zhao, “Some questions on dispersion of human exhaled
droplets in ventilation room: answers from numerical investigation,”
Indoor Air, vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 95–111, 2010.
[51] Z. Han, W. Weng, and Q. Huang, “Characterizations of particle size
distribution of the droplets exhaled by sneeze,” Journal of the Royal
Society Interface, vol. 10, no. 88, p. 20130560, 2013.
[52] K. Mui, L. Wong, C. Wu, and A. C. Lai, “Numerical modeling of
exhaled droplet nuclei dispersion and mixing in indoor environments,”
Journal of hazardous materials, vol. 167, no. 1-3, pp. 736–744, 2009.
[53] V. Jamali, A. Ahmadzadeh, W. Wicke, A. Noel, and R. Schober,
“Channel modeling for diffusive molecular communication—a tutorial
review,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 107, no. 7, pp. 1256–1301,
2019.
[54] N. Farsad, W. Guo, and A. W. Eckford, “Tabletop molecular communication: Text messages through chemical signals,” PloS one, vol. 8,
no. 12, p. e82935, 2013.
[55] J. Peiris, C. Chu, V. Cheng, K. Chan, I. Hung, L. Poon, K. Law,
B. Tang, T. Hon, C. Chan et al., “Clinical progression and viral load
in a community outbreak of coronavirus-associated SARS pneumonia:
a prospective study,” The Lancet, vol. 361, no. 9371, pp. 1767 – 1772,
2003.
[56] I. F. N. Hung, V. C. C. Cheng, A. K. L. Wu, B. S. F. Tang, K. H. Chan,
C. M. Chu, M. M. L. Wong, W. T. Hui, L. L. M. Poon, D. M. W. Tse
et al., “Viral loads in clinical specimens and SARS manifestations,”
Emerging infectious diseases, vol. 10, no. 9, pp. 1550–1557, 2004.
[57] Y. Pan, D. Zhang, P. Yang, L. L. M. Poon, and Q. Wang, “Viral load
of SARS-CoV-2 in clinical samples,” The Lancet Infectious Diseases,
vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 411–412, 2020.
[58] K. K.-W. To, O. T.-Y. Tsang, W.-S. Leung, A. R. Tam, T.-C. Wu,
D. C. Lung, C. C.-Y. Yip, J.-P. Cai, J. M.-C. Chan, T. S.-H. Chik
et al., “Temporal profiles of viral load in posterior oropharyngeal saliva
samples and serum antibody responses during infection by SARSCoV-2: an observational cohort study,” The Lancet Infectious Diseases,
vol. 20, no. 5, pp. 565–574, 2020.
[59] L. Zou, F. Ruan, M. Huang, L. Liang, H. Huang, Z. Hong, J. Yu,
M. Kang, Y. Song, J. Xia et al., “SARS-CoV-2 viral load in upper
respiratory specimens of infected patients,” New England Journal of
Medicine, vol. 382, no. 12, pp. 1177–1179, 2020.
[60] B. E. Pickett, E. L. Sadat, Y. Zhang, J. M. Noronha, R. B. Squires,
V. Hunt, M. Liu, S. Kumar, S. Zaremba, Z. Gu et al., “ViPR: an open
bioinformatics database and analysis resource for virology research,”
Nucleic acids research, vol. 40, no. D1, pp. D593–D598, 2012.
[61] M.-d. Oh, W. B. Park, P. G. Choe, S.-J. Choi, J.-I. Kim, J. Chae, S. S.
Park, E.-C. Kim, H. S. Oh, E. J. Kim et al., “Viral load kinetics of
MERS coronavirus infection,” New England Journal of Medicine, vol.
375, no. 13, pp. 1303–1305, 2016.
[62] A. R. Fehr and S. Perlman, “Coronaviruses: an overview of their
replication and pathogenesis,” in Coronaviruses. Springer, 2015, pp.
1–23.
[63] S. Al Hajjar, Z. A. Memish, and K. McIntosh, “Middle east respiratory
syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV): a perpetual challenge,” Annals of
Saudi medicine, vol. 33, no. 5, pp. 427–436, 2013.
[64] J. S. Towner, P. E. Rollin, D. G. Bausch, A. Sanchez, S. M. Crary,
M. Vincent, W. F. Lee, C. F. Spiropoulou, T. G. Ksiazek, M. Lukwiya et al., “Rapid diagnosis of Ebola hemorrhagic fever by reverse
transcription-PCR in an outbreak setting and assessment of patient viral
load as a predictor of outcome,” Journal of Virology, vol. 78, no. 8,
pp. 4330–4341, 2004.
[65] M.-A. de La Vega, G. Caleo, J. Audet, X. Qiu, R. A. Kozak, J. I.
Brooks, S. Kern, A. Wolz, A. Sprecher, J. Greig et al., “Ebola viral load
at diagnosis associates with patient outcome and outbreak evolution,”
The Journal of Clinical Investigation, vol. 125, no. 12, pp. 4421–4428,
12 2015.
[66] R. Ben-Shachar, S. Schmidler, and K. Koelle, “Drivers of interindividual variation in Dengue viral load dynamics,” PLOS Computational Biology, vol. 12, no. 11, pp. 1–26, 11 2016.
[67] W.-K. Wang, D.-Y. Chao, C.-L. Kao, H.-C. Wu, Y.-C. Liu, C.-M. Li,
S.-C. Lin, S.-T. Ho, J.-H. Huang, and C.-C. King, “High levels of
plasma Dengue viral load during defervescence in patients with Dengue
Hemorrhagic Fever: Implications for pathogenesis,” Virology, vol. 305,
no. 2, pp. 330 – 338, 2003.

18

[68] W. K. Wang, H. L. Chen, C. F. Yang, S. C. Hsieh, C. C. Juan, S. M.
Chang, C. C. Yu, L. H. Lin, J. H. Huang, and C. C. King, “Slower
rates of clearance of viral load and virus-containing immune complexes
in patients with Dengue hemorrhagic fever,” Clin Infect Dis, vol. 43,
no. 8, pp. 1023–30, 2006.
[69] J. M. Mansuy, M. Dutertre, C. Mengelle, C. Fourcade, B. Marchou,
P. Delobel, J. Izopet, and G. Martin-Blondel, “Zika virus: high infectious viral load in semen, a new sexually transmitted pathogen?” The
Lancet Infectious Diseases, vol. 16, no. 4, p. 405, 2016.
[70] F. de Laval, S. Matheus, T. Labrousse, A. Enfissi, D. Rousset, and
S. Briolant, “Kinetics of Zika viral load in semen,” New England
Journal of Medicine, vol. 377, no. 7, pp. 697–699, 2017.
[71] C. Fourcade, J.-M. Mansuy, M. Dutertre, M. Delpech, B. Marchou,
P. Delobel, J. Izopet, and G. Martin-Blondel, “Viral load kinetics of
Zika virus in plasma, urine and saliva in a couple returning from
Martinique, French West Indies,” Journal of Clinical Virology, vol. 82,
pp. 1 – 4, 2016.
[72] H. Lerat, S. Rumin, F. Habersetzer, F. Berby, M. A. Trabaud, C. Trépo,
and G. Inchauspé, “In vivo tropism of hepatitis C virus genomic sequences in hematopoietic cells: influence of viral load, viral genotype,
and cell phenotype,” Blood, vol. 91, no. 10, pp. 3841–3849, 1998.
[73] N. Vabret, G. J. Britton, C. Gruber, S. Hegde, J. Kim, M. Kuksin,
R. Levantovsky, L. Malle, A. Moreira, M. D. Park et al., “Immunology
of COVID-19: Current state of the science,” Immunity, vol. 52, no. 6,
pp. 910 – 941, 2020.
[74] M. Z. Tay, C. M. Poh, L. Rénia, P. A. MacAry, and L. F. P. Ng, “The
trinity of COVID-19: immunity, inflammation and intervention,” Nature
Reviews Immunology, vol. 20, no. 6, pp. 363–374, 2020.
[75] E. Faure, J. Poissy, A. Goffard, C. Fournier, E. Kipnis, M. Titecat,
P. Bortolotti, L. Martinez, S. Dubucquoi, R. Dessein et al., “Distinct
immune response in two MERS-CoV-infected patients: can we go from
bench to bedside?” PLoS One, vol. 9, no. 2, p. e88716, 2014.
[76] S. Baize, E. M. Leroy, A. J. Georges, M. C. Georges-Courbot,
M. Capron, I. Bedjabaga, J. Lansoud-Soukate, and E. Mavoungou,
“Inflammatory responses in Ebola virus-infected patients,” Clinical and
experimental immunology, vol. 128, no. 1, pp. 163–168, 2002.
[77] M. M. Levine, “Monoclonal antibody therapy for Ebola virus disease,”
New England Journal of Medicine, vol. 381, no. 24, pp. 2365–2366,
2019.
[78] R. Fares-Gusmao, B. C. Rocha, E. Sippert, M. C. Lanteri, G. Áñez,
and M. Rios, “Differential pattern of soluble immune markers in
asymptomatic Dengue, West Nile and Zika virus infections,” Scientific
Reports, vol. 9, no. 1, p. 17172, 2019.
[79] M. G. Guzman, S. B. Halstead, H. Artsob, P. Buchy, J. Farrar, D. J.
Gubler, E. Hunsperger, A. Kroeger, H. S. Margolis, E. Martı́nez et al.,
“Dengue: a continuing global threat,” Nature Reviews Microbiology,
vol. 8, no. 12, pp. S7–S16, 2010.
[80] M. H. Collins, H. A. Tu, C. Gimblet-Ochieng, G. A. Liou, R. S.
Jadi, S. W. Metz, A. Thomas, B. D. McElvany, E. Davidson, B. J.
Doranz et al., “Human antibody response to Zika targets type-specific
quaternary structure epitopes,” JCI Insight, vol. 4, no. 8, 2019.
[81] P. Klenerman and R. Thimme, “T cell responses in hepatitis C: the
good, the bad and the unconventional,” Gut, vol. 61, no. 8, pp. 1226–
34, 2012.
[82] H. Hetta, M. Mehta, and M. Shata, “Gut immune response in the
presence of hepatitis C virus infection,” World Journal of Immunology,
vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 52–62, 2014.
[83] R. E. Swann, V. M. Cowton, M. W. Robinson, S. J. Cole, S. T.
Barclay, P. R. Mills, E. C. Thomson, J. McLauchlan, and A. H. Patel,
“Broad anti-hepatitis C virus (HCV) antibody responses are associated
with improved clinical disease parameters in chronic HCV infection,”
Journal of Virology, vol. 90, no. 9, pp. 4530–4543, 2016.
[84] I. Balásházy, W. Hofmann, and T. B. Martonen, “Inspiratory particle
deposition in airway bifurcation models,” Journal of Aerosol Science,
vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 15 – 30, 1991.
[85] M. S. Olufsen, C. S. Peskin, W. Y. Kim, E. M. Pedersen, A. Nadim,
and J. Larsen, “Numerical simulation and experimental validation of
blood flow in arteries with structured-tree outflow conditions,” Annals
of Biomedical Engineering, vol. 28, no. 11, pp. 1281–1299, 2000.
[86] H. Xu, L. Zhong, J. Deng, J. Peng, H. Dan, X. Zeng, T. Li, and Q. Chen,
“High expression of ACE2 receptor of 2019-nCoV on the epithelial
cells of oral mucosa,” International Journal of Oral Science, vol. 12,
no. 1, p. 8, 2020.
[87] E. A. Hernandez Vargas and J. X. Velasco-Hernandez, “In-host modelling of COVID-19 kinetics in humans,” medRxiv, 2020.
[88] R. Wölfel, V. M. Corman, W. Guggemos, M. Seilmaier, S. Zange,
M. A. Müller, D. Niemeyer, T. C. Jones, P. Vollmar, C. Rothe et al.,

SUBMITTED FOR JOURNAL PUBLICATION

[89]

[90]

[91]

[92]

[93]

[94]

[95]

[96]

[97]

[98]

[99]

[100]

[101]

[102]

[103]

[104]

[105]

[106]

[107]

“Virological assessment of hospitalized patients with COVID-2019,”
Nature, vol. 581, no. 7809, pp. 465–469, 2020.
Y. Zhang, J. Li, Y. Zhan, L. Wu, X. Yu, W. Zhang, L. Ye, S. Xu, R. Sun,
Y. Wang, and J. Lou, “Analysis of serum cytokines in patients with
severe acute respiratory syndrome,” Infection and immunity, vol. 72,
no. 8, pp. 4410–4415, 2004.
C. Y. Cheung, L. L. M. Poon, I. H. Y. Ng, W. Luk, S.-F. Sia, M. H. S.
Wu, K.-H. Chan, K.-Y. Yuen, S. Gordon, Y. Guan, and J. S. M. Peiris,
“Cytokine responses in severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirusinfected macrophages in vitro: possible relevance to pathogenesis,”
Journal of virology, vol. 79, no. 12, pp. 7819–7826, 2005.
Y. Jiang, J. Xu, C. Zhou, Z. Wu, S. Zhong, J. Liu, W. Luo, T. Chen,
Q. Qin, and P. Deng, “Characterization of cytokine/chemokine profiles
of severe acute respiratory syndrome,” Am J Respir Crit Care Med,
vol. 171, no. 8, pp. 850–7, 2005.
M. T. Barros, P. Doan, M. Kandhavelu, B. Jennings, and S. Balasubramaniam, “Engineering calcium signaling of astrocytes for neuralmolecular computing logic gates,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.06646,
2020.
T. Nakano, Y. Okaie, Y. Kinugasa, T. Koujin, T. Suda, Y. Hiraoka, and
T. Haraguchi, “Roles of remote and contact forces in epithelial cell
structure formation,” Biophysical Journal, 2020.
L. Grebenstein, J. Kirchner, W. Wicke, A. Ahmadzadeh, V. Jamali,
G. Fischer, R. Weigel, A. Burkovski, and R. Schober, “A molecular
communication testbed based on proton pumping bacteria: Methods
and data,” IEEE Transactions on Molecular, Biological and Multi-Scale
Communications, vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 56–62, 2019.
Y. Liu, C.-Y. Tsao, E. Kim, T. Tschirhart, J. L. Terrell, W. E. Bentley,
and G. F. Payne, “Using a redox modality to connect synthetic biology
to electronics: Hydrogel-based chemo-electro signal transduction for
molecular communication,” Advanced healthcare materials, vol. 6,
no. 1, p. 1600908, 2017.
S. Balasubramaniam, N. T. Boyle, A. Della-Chiesa, F. Walsh,
A. Mardinoglu, D. Botvich, and A. Prina-Mello, “Development of
artificial neuronal networks for molecular communication,” Nano Communication Networks, vol. 2, no. 2-3, pp. 150–160, 2011.
D. T. McGuiness, S. Giannoukos, A. Marshall, and S. Taylor, “Experimental results on the open-air transmission of macro-molecular
communication using membrane inlet mass spectrometry,” IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 22, no. 12, pp. 2567–2570, 2018.
L. Felicetti, M. Femminella, G. Reali, P. Gresele, M. Malvestiti, and
J. N. Daigle, “Modeling CD40-based molecular communications in
blood vessels,” IEEE transactions on nanobioscience, vol. 13, no. 3,
pp. 230–243, 2014.
S. Vishveshwara, A. Ghosh, and P. Hansia, “Intra and inter-molecular
communications through protein structure network,” Current Protein
and Peptide Science, vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 146–160, 2009.
O. K. Lee, T. K. Kuo, W.-M. Chen, K.-D. Lee, S.-L. Hsieh, and T.-H.
Chen, “Isolation of multipotent mesenchymal stem cells from umbilical
cord blood,” Blood, vol. 103, no. 5, pp. 1669–1675, 2004.
V. Sottile, C. Halleux, F. Bassilana, H. Keller, and K. Seuwen, “Stem
cell characteristics of human trabecular bone-derived cells,” Bone,
vol. 30, no. 5, pp. 699–704, 2002.
C. De Bari, F. Dell’Accio, P. Tylzanowski, and F. P. Luyten, “Multipotent mesenchymal stem cells from adult human synovial membrane,”
Arthritis & Rheumatism, vol. 44, no. 8, pp. 1928–1942, 2001.
Y. Sato, H. Araki, J. Kato, K. Nakamura, Y. Kawano, M. Kobune,
T. Sato, K. Miyanishi, T. Takayama, M. Takahashi et al., “Human
mesenchymal stem cells xenografted directly to rat liver are differentiated into human hepatocytes without fusion,” Blood, vol. 106, no. 2,
pp. 756–763, 2005.
S. Gupta, V. Krishnakumar, Y. Sharma, A. K. Dinda, and S. Mohanty,
“Mesenchymal stem cell derived exosomes: a nano platform for therapeutics and drug delivery in combating COVID-19,” Stem cell reviews
and reports, pp. 1–11, 2020.
M. T. Islam, M. Nasiruddin, I. N. Khan, S. K. Mishra, M. Kudrat-EZahan, T. A. Riaz, E. S. Ali, M. S. Rahman, M. S. Mubarak, M. Martorell et al., “A perspective on emerging therapeutic interventions for
COVID-19,” Frontiers in public health, vol. 8, 2020.
T. Cruz and M. Rojas, “Preclinical evidence for the role of stem/stromal
cells in targeting ards,” in Stem Cell-Based Therapy for Lung Disease.
Springer, 2019, pp. 199–217.
M. Zanoni, M. Cortesi, A. Zamagni, and A. Tesei, “The role of mesenchymal stem cells in radiation-induced lung fibrosis,” International
journal of molecular sciences, vol. 20, no. 16, p. 3876, 2019.

19

[108] A. R. Perestrelo, A. C. Águas, A. Rainer, and G. Forte, “Microfluidic organ/body-on-a-chip devices at the convergence of biology and
microengineering,” Sensors, vol. 15, no. 12, pp. 31 142–31 170, 2015.
[109] H. Šiljak, N. Ashraf, M. T. Barros, D. P. Martins, B. Butler, A. Farhang,
N. Marchetti, and S. Balasubramaniam, “Evolving intelligent reflector
surface towards 6G for public health: Application in airborne virus
detection,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.02224, 2020.
[110] H. Tang, Y. Abouleila, L. Si, A. M. Ortega-Prieto, C. L. Mummery,
D. E. Ingber, and A. Mashaghi, “Human organs-on-chips for virology,”
Trends in Microbiology, 2020.
[111] M. Ringehan, J. A. McKeating, and U. Protzer, “Viral hepatitis and liver
cancer,” Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological
Sciences, vol. 372, no. 1732, p. 20160274, 2017.
[112] R. Villenave, S. Q. Wales, T. Hamkins-Indik, E. Papafragkou, J. C.
Weaver, T. C. Ferrante, A. Bahinski, C. A. Elkins, M. Kulka, and
D. E. Ingber, “Human gut-on-a-chip supports polarized infection of
coxsackie B1 virus in vitro,” PloS one, vol. 12, no. 2, p. e0169412,
2017.
[113] J. O. Cifuente, M. F. Ferrer, C. J. de Giusti, W.-C. Song, V. Romanowski, S. L. Hafenstein, and R. M. Gomez, “Molecular determinants of disease in coxsackievirus B1 murine infection,” Journal of
medical virology, vol. 83, no. 9, pp. 1571–1581, 2011.
[114] B. N. Johnson, K. Z. Lancaster, I. B. Hogue, F. Meng, Y. L. Kong,
L. W. Enquist, and M. C. McAlpine, “3D printed nervous system on
a chip,” Lab on a Chip, vol. 16, no. 8, pp. 1393–1400, 2016.
[115] K. H. Benam, R. Villenave, C. Lucchesi, A. Varone, C. Hubeau, H.H. Lee, S. E. Alves, M. Salmon, T. C. Ferrante, J. C. Weaver et al.,
“Small airway-on-a-chip enables analysis of human lung inflammation
and drug responses in vitro,” Nature methods, vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 151–
157, 2016.
[116] L. Si, R. Prantil-Baun, K. H. Benam, H. Bai, M. Rodas, M. Burt,
and D. E. Ingber, “Discovery of influenza drug resistance mutations
and host therapeutic targets using a human airway chip,” bioRxiv, p.
685552, 2019.
[117] Y. Deng, M. Pierobon, and A. Nallanathan, “A microfluidic feed forward loop pulse generator for molecular communication,” in GLOBECOM 2017-2017 IEEE Global Communications Conference. IEEE,
2017, pp. 1–7.
[118] M. Hamidović, W. Haselmayr, A. Grimmer, R. Wille, and A. Springer,
“Passive droplet control in microfluidic networks: A survey and new
perspectives on their practical realization,” Nano Communication Networks, vol. 19, pp. 33–46, 2019.
[119] C. F. Fronczek and J.-Y. Yoon, “Biosensors for monitoring airborne
pathogens,” Journal of laboratory automation, vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 390–
410, 2015.
[120] L. Grebenstein, J. Kirchner, R. S. Peixoto, W. Zimmermann, F. Irnstorfer, W. Wicke, A. Ahmadzadeh, V. Jamali, G. Fischer, R. Weigel et al.,
“Biological optical-to-chemical signal conversion interface: A smallscale modulator for molecular communications,” IEEE transactions on
nanobioscience, vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 31–42, 2018.
[121] D. T. McGuiness, S. Giannoukos, A. Marshall, and S. Taylor, “Parameter analysis in macro-scale molecular communications using advectiondiffusion,” IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 46 706–46 717, 2018.
[122] D. D. Roumpeka, R. J. Wallace, F. Escalettes, I. Fotheringham, and
M. Watson, “A review of bioinformatics tools for bio-prospecting from
metagenomic sequence data,” Frontiers in genetics, vol. 8, p. 23, 2017.
[123] R. E. Soria-Guerra, R. Nieto-Gomez, D. O. Govea-Alonso, and
S. Rosales-Mendoza, “An overview of bioinformatics tools for epitope
prediction: implications on vaccine development,” Journal of biomedical informatics, vol. 53, pp. 405–414, 2015.
[124] C. Garrido, V. Roulet, N. Chueca, E. Poveda, A. Aguilera, K. Skrabal,
N. Zahonero, S. Carlos, F. Garcı́a, J. L. Faudon et al., “Evaluation of
eight different bioinformatics tools to predict viral tropism in different
human immunodeficiency virus type 1 subtypes,” Journal of clinical
microbiology, vol. 46, no. 3, pp. 887–891, 2008.
[125] Q. Wang, J. A. Fish, M. Gilman, Y. Sun, C. T. Brown, J. M. Tiedje,
and J. R. Cole, “Xander: employing a novel method for efficient genetargeted metagenomic assembly,” Microbiome, vol. 3, no. 1, p. 32,
2015.
[126] S. Balasubramaniam and P. Liò, “Multi-hop conjugation based bacteria
nanonetworks,” IEEE Transactions on nanobioscience, vol. 12, no. 1,
pp. 47–59, 2013.
[127] B. A. Bilgin, E. Dinc, and O. B. Akan, “DNA-based molecular
communications,” IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 73 119–73 129, 2018.
[128] M. Veletić and I. Balasingham, “An information theory of neurotransmission in multiple-access synaptic channels,” IEEE Transactions
on Communications, vol. 68, no. 2, pp. 841–853, 2019.

SUBMITTED FOR JOURNAL PUBLICATION

[129] M. T. Barros, S. Balasubramaniam, and B. Jennings, “Comparative endto-end analysis of Ca2+-signaling-based molecular communication in
biological tissues,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 63,
no. 12, pp. 5128–5142, 2015.
[130] M. T. Barros, “Ca2+-signaling-based molecular communication systems: Design and future research directions,” Nano Communication
Networks, vol. 11, pp. 103–113, 2017.
[131] L. M. Sompayrac, How the immune system works. John Wiley &
Sons, 2019.

20

