arXiv:2011.11801v1 [econ.GN] 23 Nov 2020

Job Transitions in a Time of Automation
and Labor Market Crises
Nikolas Dawson,1∗,2 Marian-Andrei Rizoiu,3,4 Mary-Anne Williams1
1

Centre of Artificial Intelligence, University of Technology Sydney
15 Broadway, Ultimo NSW 2007, Australia
2
3

OECD Future of Work Research Fellow

Faculty of Engineering & IT, University of Technology Sydney
4

∗

CSIRO’s Data61
To whom correspondence should be addressed; E-mail: nikolasjdawson@gmail.com

Job security can never be taken for granted, especially in times of rapid, widespread
and unexpected social and economic change. These changes can force workers to transition to new jobs. This may be because technologies emerge or
production is moved abroad. Perhaps it is a global crisis, such as COVID19, which shutters industries and displaces labor en masse. Regardless of the
impetus, people are faced with the challenge of moving between jobs to find
new work. Successful transitions typically occur when workers leverage their
existing skills in the new occupation. Here, we propose a novel method to
measure the similarity between occupations using their underlying skills. We
then build a recommender system for identifying optimal transition pathways
between occupations using job advertisements (ads) data and a longitudinal
household survey. Our results show that not only we can accurately predict
occupational transitions (Accuracy = 76%), but we account for the asymmetric difficulties of moving between jobs (it is easier to move in one direction
1

than the other). We also build an early warning indicator for new technology adoption (showcasing Artificial Intelligence), a major driver of rising job
transitions. By using real-time data, our systems can respond to labor demand
shifts as they occur (such as those caused by COVID-19), and can be leveraged
by policy-makers, educators, and jobseekers who are forced to confront the
often distressing challenges of having to find new jobs.

Introduction
In March 2020, COVID-19 caused entire industries to shutter as governments scrambled to
‘flatten the curve’. Jobs were lost or subject to an indefinite hiatus; firms went into ‘hibernation’ to wait out the depressed demand; and governments exercised wartime measures of labor
redeployment and wage subsidies of unprecedented scale. All in a matter of weeks.
Labor market shocks, such as those caused by COVID-19, force workers to abruptly transition between jobs. Crises, however, are not the only cause of large-scale job transitions.
Structural shifts in labor demand are another major obstacle (1), but usually unfold more gradually. Indeed, technological advances were expected to cause the next wave of major labor
market disruptions (2, 3). The ‘future of work’ was to be defined by technologies like Artificial
Intelligence (AI); technologies that would automate and augment workers, but at the same time
transform the requirements of jobs and the demand for labor en masse (4–6).
Despite the impetus, many workers need to transition between jobs. In some countries, such
as Australia, labor displacement has increased over the past two decades with relatively high
levels of job transitions (7); a situation exacerbated by COVID-19 (8). While job turnover is
not innately negative and can be a signal of labor market dynamism, it does depend on how efficiently workers transition back into the workforce. Transitioning from one job to another can
be difficult or unfeasible when the skills gap is too large (9). Successful transitions typically
2

involve workers leveraging their existing skills and acquiring new skills to meet the demands
of the target occupation (10, 11). Therefore, transitioning workers successfully at scale requires
maximising the similarity between workers’ current skills and their target jobs. Skills, knowledge areas, and capabilities enable workers to achieve tasks required by jobs (12). We refer
to these aspects of human capital as ‘skills’ throughout this research and we characterize labor
market entities (individual jobs, standardized occupations, industries etc.) as sets of skills.
Here, we report a novel method to measure the distance between sets of skills from 8,002,780
real-time job advertisements (ads) in Australia from 2012-2020. We call this data-driven methodology S KILLS S PACE. The S KILLS S PACE method enables us to measure the distance between
any defined skill sets, based on distances at the individual skill level. When two skill sets are
highly similar (for example, two occupations), the skills gap is narrow and the barriers to transitioning from one to the other are low. Drawing from previous work (9–11, 13), we construct
a unique Job Transitions Recommender System that incorporates the skill set distance measures
together with other labor market data from job ads and employment statistics. The outputs of
the recommender system accurately predict transitions between occupations (Accuracy = 76%)
and are validated against a dataset of occupational transitions from a longitudinal household
survey (14). While previous studies have analyzed job transitions using the same or similar job
ads data (15–18), they have not accounted for the asymmetries between jobs. Our system accounts for the asymmetries between occupations, leverages real-time job ads data at the granular
skills-level, and accurately recommends occupations and skills that can assist workers looking
to transition between jobs based on their personalized skills set. We further demonstrate the
flexibility of the S KILLS S PACE method by constructing a leading indicator of Artificial Intelligence (AI) adoption within Australian industries. In our applications of S KILLS S PACE, we are
able to both recommend transition pathways to workers based on their personalized skill sets
and detect forthcoming AI disruption that could accelerate job transitions.
3

Results and Discussion
In order to measure the distance between occupations (or other skill groups), we first measure
the pairwise distance between individual skills (6,981 skills in 2018) in jobs ads for each calendar year from 2012-2020. Intuitively, two skills are similar when they are simultaneously
important for the same set of job ads. We measure the importance of a skill in a job ad using an
established measure called ‘Revealed Comparative Advantage’ (RCA – Equation (1)) that has
been applied across a range of disciplines, such as trade economics (19, 20), identifying key industries in nations (21), detecting the labor polarization of workplace skills (22), and adaptively
selecting occupations according to their underlying skill demands (23). RCA normalizes the
total share of demand for a given skill across all job ads. We then calculate the pairwise skill
similarity between each individual skill using Equation (2) as implemented by Alabdulkareem
et al. (22) and again by Dawson et al. (23) (see Materials & Methods for more details). These
individual skill distances form the basis for measuring the distance between sets of skills.
Figure 1A shows the two-dimensional skill distance embeddings for the top 500 skills by
posting frequency in 2018. Here, each marker represents an individual skill that is colored according to one of 13 clusters of highly similar skills, using the K-Medoids clustering algorithm.
By using a triplets method for dimensionality reduction (24), we are able to preserve the global
structure of the embedding (global structure = 98%). That is, two markers are depicted closer
together when their corresponding skills are more similar (i.e. have low distance). This provides useful insights, highlighting that specialized skills (such as ‘Software Development’ and
‘Healthcare’) tend to lay toward the edges of the embedding, whereas more general and transferable skills lay toward the middle, acting as a ‘bridge’ to specialist skills. Highly similar skills
cluster closely together; for example the ‘Software Development’ cluster (see inset) regroups
programming skills such as scripting languages ‘Python’, ‘C++’, and ‘HTML5’. It is impor-

4

Python
Atlassian JIRA
DevOps

Software
Development

C++

A

Print Finisher
Printing Machinist
Machine Operators
Fitter and Turner
Hairdresser
Signwriter
Licensed Club Manager

B

Scrum
Software Development CSS
Systems Development Life Cycle (SDLC)
Web Application Development
HTML5
Extensible Markup Language (XML)

Automation Risk %

Tour Guide Lifeguard

0.75
Screen Printer
Metal Fabricator

0.50
SQL
Healthcare

Body Artist

0.25

Front−end Development

Sawmill or Timber
Yard Worker

.NET

Miner

Hypertext Preprocessor (PHP)
Mechanical Engineering
Technician
Product
Examiner

People Management
Legal &
Governance

Resource Management

Rehabilitation
Counsellor

Software
Development

Truck Driver
General Clerk
Inspectors and
Regulatory Oﬃcers

Basic Skills
Sales

Cardiothoracic Surgeon

Commodities Trader

Radio Despatcher

Registered Nurse
(Developmental Disability)
Marketing &
Communications

Crowd
Controller

Fire Fighter

Endocrinologist

Social Skills

Sheetmetal Trades
Worker

Airconditioning and
Refrigeration Mechanic

Labor & Trades

Data Analytics

Industrial
Designer

Artistic Director

Electrician

Data Engineering

Engineering &
Skilled Trades

Plastics Production
Machine Operator
Diesel Motor Mechanic

Packer

Nurse
Practitioner
Private Tutors
and Teachers

Figure 1: Measuring the distance between skills and occupations. (A) Shows a two-dimensional
embedding of the 2018 skill distances, where the top 500 skills by posting frequency are visualized. Each marker represents an individual skill colored according to 13 clusters using
K-Medoids clustering. As observed in the ‘Software Development’ inset, highly similar skills
cluster together. Additionally, the specialized skill clusters, such as ‘Software Development’
and ‘Healthcare’ tend to lay toward the edges; whereas the more general and transferable skills
lay toward the middle of the embedding and act as a ‘bridge’ to specialist skills. These individual skill distances form the basis of measuring the distance between sets of skills. (B) We
leverage S KILLS S PACE to measure the distance between official Australian occupations at the
6-digit level (characterised by their skill sets) in 2018. The markers represent individual occupations and they are colored by technological labor automation risk, as calculated by Frey &
Osborne. Occupations that require lower levels of routine, manual and/or low cognitive labor
tasks tend to be at higher risk (colored darker red); whereas occupations characterised by nonroutine, interpersonal, and/or high cognitive labor tasks are at lower risk (colored darker blue)
over the next two decades.

5

tant to measure the similarity between jobs based on their underlying skills because workers
leverage their existing skills to make career changes (25).
Next, we use the pairwise skill distances to measure the distance between sets of skills. Here,
a set of skills can be arbitrarily defined, such as an occupation, an industry, or a personalized
skills set. Intuitively, two sets of skills are similar when their most important skills are similar.
We first introduce a measure of skill importance within a skill set as the mean RCA over all the
job ads pertaining to the skill set (Equation (3)). Second, we define the similarity between two
skill sets as the weighted average similarity between the individual skills in each set, where the
weights correspond to the skill importance in their respective sets (see Materials & Methods).
In Figure 1B, the markers depict groups of skills that correspond to individual occupations,
using the official Australian standard (at the 6 digit level – see Supplementary Information for
more details). To visualize the distance between occupations, we use the same dimensionality
reduction technique as for individual skills in Figure 1A. Each occupation is colored on a scale
according to their automation susceptibility, as calculated by Frey and Osborne (4) – dark blue
represents low risk probability and dark red shows high risk probability over the coming two
decades. As seen in Figure 1B and the magnified inset, similar occupations lie closely together
on the map. Furthermore, occupations in low risk of automation tend to be characterized by
non-routine, interpersonal, and/or high cognitive labor tasks (26); whereas occupations in high
risk of automation tend to require routine, manual, and/or low cognitive labor tasks. For example, in the inset of Figure 1B, a ‘Sheetmetal Trades Worker’ is deemed to be at high risk of labor
automation (82% probability) due to high levels of routine and manual labor tasks required by
the occupation. However, the skill set demands of a ‘Sheetmetal Trades Worker’ are highly
similar to an ‘Industrial Designer’, which is considered at low risk of labor automation over the
coming two decades (4% probability). Therefore, an ‘Industrial Designer’ represents a transition opportunity for a ‘Sheetmetal Trades Worker’ that leverages existing skills and protects
6

Crop Farm Workers
Garden and Nursery Laborers
Earthmoving Plant Operators
Crane, Hoist and Lift Operators
Truck Drivers
Plumbers
Motor Mechanics
Metal Fitters and Machinists
Hotel and Motel Managers
Human Resource Clerks
Motor Vehicle and Parts Salespersons
Advertising, PR and Sales Managers
Technical Sales Representatives
Sales Representatives
ICT Business and Systems Analysts
Finance Managers
Life Scientists
Psychologists
Child Carers
Education Aides
Bar Attendants and Baristas
Shelf Fillers
Accounting Clerks
Keyboard Operators

Keyboard Operators
Accounting Clerks
Shelf Fillers
Bar Attendants and Baristas
Education Aides
Child Carers
Psychologists
Life Scientists
Finance Managers
ICT Business and Systems Analysts
Sales Representatives
Technical Sales Representatives
Advertising, PR and Sales Managers
Motor Vehicle and Parts Salespersons
Human Resource Clerks
Hotel and Motel Managers
Metal Fitters and Machinists
Motor Mechanics
Plumbers
Truck Drivers
Crane, Hoist and Lift Operators
Earthmoving Plant Operators
Garden and Nursery Laborers
Crop Farm Workers

Probability of Transition
Low
Medium
High

Figure 2: Validation and the Transitions Map. Visualizes a subset of the Transitions Map, where
20 occupations and their pairwise transition probabilities can be observed. In this visualization,
transitions occur from columns to rows and dark blue depicts high transition probabilities and
white depicts low probabilities. While job transitions to the same occupation yield the highest probabilities (dark blue diagonal squares), it is clear that transitions are asymmetric. The
dendrogram highlights how similar occupations cluster together, where there is a clear divide
between services and manual labor occupations.

7

0.75

Accuracy

0.7

0.65

0.6

All Features

Labor Demand +
Labor Supply

Labor Demand

Labor Supply

Figure 3: The prediction accuracy scores of the different classifier model feature configurations. The highest performance is achieved when ‘All Features’ are incorporated in the classifier
models to predict occupational transitions (76%). Moreover, by incorporating all features, the
standard deviation decreases (shown by the performance bars), which highlights the complementarity of the combined features and the ability to now account for the asymmetry between
jobs.
against potential risks of technological labor automation.

Constructing a Job Transitions Recommender System
Job transitions, however, are asymmetric (9, 13, 27) – the direction of the transition affects the
difficulty. Therefore, transitions are determined by more than the symmetric distance between
skill sets; other factors, such as educational requirements and experience demands, contribute
to these asymmetries. We account for the asymmetries between job transitions by constructing
a machine learning classifier framework that combines the S KILLS S PACE distance measures
with other labor market features from job ads data and employment statistics (discussed in Setup
and Validation below). We then apply the trained model to predict the probability for every possible occupational transition in the dataset – described as the transition probability between a
8

Aged and Disabled Carers

Commercial Cleaners
Waiters
Sales Assistants
Domestic
Cleaners

Which skills should a Domestic
Cleaner develop?
High importance & High distance

Bar Attendands and Baristas
Chefs
Cooks
Aged and Disabled Carers

Job ads growth March-April 2019
to March-April 2020
Very high
High

Which skills not to develop?
1) Low importance
2) Low distance

General Clerks
Child Carers

Low
Very low

Figure 4: Here, we demonstrate the Job Transitions Recommender System using the ‘Domestic
Cleaner’ occupation as an example – an occupation that has experienced significant declines
during the beginning of the COVID-19 outbreak in Australia. We first use the Transitions Map
to calculate the occupations with the highest transition probabilities (other than itself). These are
the nodes on the right-side of the flow diagram, where the link colors depict posting frequency
percentage change from March-April 2019 to March-April 2020. The link widths represent
the posting frequency volume of March-April 2020 to indicate labor demand. The top six occupations have all experienced significant declines during the COVID-19 period; however, the
seventh recommendation, ‘Aged and Disabled Carers’, is experiencing significant labor demand
growth. We select this as the target occupation and then make personalized skill recommendations. We argue that workers trying to transition to another occupation should invest time and
resources into skill development when (1) the skills are of high importance and (2) there is a
high distance to acquire the skill. Conversely, workers should not focus on skill development
if (1) the skills are low importance or (2) there is a low distance to acquire the skill.

9

‘source’ and a ‘target’ occupation. This creates the Transitions Map, for which a subset of 20
occupations can be seen in Figure 2. The colored heatmap shows the transition probabilities
(‘source’ occupations are in columns and ‘targets’ are in rows). Dark blue represents higher
transition probabilities and lighter blue shows lower probabilities, where the asymmetries between occupation pairs are clearly observed. For example, a ‘Finance Manager’ has a higher
probability of transitioning to become an ‘Accounting Clerk’ than the reverse direction. Moreover, transitioning to some occupations is generally easier (for example, ‘Bar Attendants and
Baristas’) than others (‘Life Scientists’). The dendrogram illustrates the hierarchical clusters of
occupations where there is a clear divide in Figure 2 between service-oriented professions and
manual labor occupations.
Setup and Validation. We construct the occupational transitions recommender system as a
binary machine learning classifier using XGBoost (28) – that is, predict whether an occupational
transition from the ‘source’ and the ‘target’ can occur (positive example) or not (negative). Here,
we use a longitudinal dataset of actual job transitions (14) (described in Materials & Methods).
We then randomly simulate an alternate sample of transitions where we maintain the same
‘source’ occupations and randomly select ‘target’ occupations (called ‘Random Sample’). This
produces a balanced dataset of 5,998 positive and negative occupational transitions. We then
associate each ‘source’ and ‘target’ observation with their temporal pairwise distance measure
using the S KILLS S PACE method. Statistical testing shows that the S KILLS S PACE distance
measure is statistically significant in representing occupational transitions (using a paired ttest, p-value < 0.001, Cohen’s D effect size = 0.14, see Materials & Methods). However,
the measure is symmetric. To represent the asymmetries between job transitions, we assign
each ‘source’ and ‘target’ occupation with a range of explanatory features. These occupational
features include their pairwise distance measures and other variables, such as years of education
required, years of experience demanded, and salary levels, from employment statistics (‘Labor
10

Supply’) and job ads data (‘Labor Demand’ – see Supplementary Information for full list of
features).
After training the classifier models with different feature configurations, we identify three
main findings. First, as seen in Figure 3, the models that incorporate the distance measures with
all of the other occupational features (‘All Features’) consistently achieve the highest accuracy
for occupational transitions (Accuracy = 76%). This feature setup achieves higher results than
models that only use the ‘Labor Demand + Labor Supply’ features (Accuracy = 74%) or the
distance measures alone (Accuracy = 73%). To further validate these findings, we conduct an
ablation test where each feature is iteratively removed from the feature set and the model is
re-trained – the model configurations with lower performance indicate higher feature importance. Here, the exclusion of the S KILLS S PACE distance measure caused the greatest decline
in performance, therefore reiterating its predictive power. We also conduct a feature importance
analysis, which again shows that the S KILLS S PACE distance measure is the most important
feature for predicting transitions (see Supplementary Information for further details). Second,
the standard deviation of accuracy over repeated trials decreases when all features are combined (as seen with the spread of the performance bars in Figure 3). This shows that the S KILLS
S PACE distance measures and the occupational features are complementary in predicting job
transitions. Third, and most important, is that by combining all features, we can construct the
asymmetries between occupations. While transitioning to a job in the same occupation yields
the highest probabilities (as seen by the dark blue diagonal line in Figure 2), the occupational
features add asymmetries between occupational pairs, such as accounting for asymmetries in
education and experience requirements.
Recommending Jobs and Skills. The Transitions Map provides the basis for making qualified job transition recommendations. We call this the Job Transitions Recommender System. In
Figure 4, we highlight the example of ‘Domestic Cleaners’, an occupation that has experienced
11

significant declines in labor demand and employment levels during COVID-19 (see Supplementary Information). First, we use the Transitions Map to recommend the occupations with
the highest transition probabilities; these are the nodes on the right-side of the flow diagram in
Figure 4, ordered in descending order of transition probability. Segment widths show the labor
demand for each of the recommended occupations during the COVID-19 period (measured by
posting frequency). The segment colors represent the percentage change of posting frequency
during March and April 2019 compared to the same months in 2020; dark red indicates a big
decrease in job ad posts and dark blue indicates a big increase. The first six transition recommendations for ‘Domestic Cleaners’ have all experienced negative demand, which is unsurprising given that ‘non-essential’ services were restricted in Australia during this period. However,
the seventh recommendation, ‘Aged and Disabled Carers’, has significantly grown in demand
during the COVID-19 period and there is a high number of jobs advertised. Given that it is
generally favorable to transition to high demand jobs, we select ‘Aged and Disabled Carers’ as
the target occupation for this example.
We then take the Job Transitions Recommender System a step further by incorporating skill
recommendations. Transitioning to a new occupation generally requires developing new skills
under time and resource constraints. Therefore, workers must prioritize which skills to develop.
We argue that a worker should invest in developing a skill when (1) the skill is important to the
target occupation and (2) the distance to acquire the skill is large (that is, it is relatively difficult
to acquire). We calculate skill importance as the mean RCA for each skill across all job ads
within an occupation using Equation (3); skill distance is calculated as the distance between
the ‘source’ occupation skill set and each individual skill in a ‘target’ occupation using Equation (4) (i.e. the ‘target’ skill set (S2 ) is made out of a single skill). In the case of the ‘Domestic
Cleaner’ in Figure 4, the top recommended skills to assist in the transition to the ‘Aged and
Disabled Carer’ occupation are specialized patient care skills, such as ‘Patient Hygiene Assis12

tance’. Conversely, the reasons not to develop a skill are when (1) the skill is not important or
(2) the distance is small to the target occupation. Figure 4 shows that while some ‘Aged and
Disabled Carer’ jobs require ‘Business Analysis’ and ‘Finance’ skills, these skills are of low
importance for the ‘Aged and Disabled Carer’ occupation, so they should not be prioritized.
Similarly, skills such as ‘Ironing’ and ‘Laundry’ are required by ‘Aged and Disabled Carer’
jobs but the distance is small, so it is likely that either a ‘Domestic Cleaner’ already possesses
these skills or they can easily acquire them.

Developing a Leading Indicator of AI Adoption
Emerging technologies can change the demand for labor and accelerate forced job transitions
by disrupting labor markets (29). However, in order for emerging technologies to have these
effects, they must first be widely adopted by firms across many industries. In this sense, technology adoption rates are a precursor to the societal impacts that they impose, such as widespread
changes to labor demand and accelerated job transitions. Measuring technology adoption, however, can be difficult as it often depends on the private activities of firms and is influenced by a
range of factors (see Supplementary Information). Therefore, measuring the drivers that enable
emerging technology adoption (see Supplementary Information) can provide leading indicators
of adoption rates. One major driver is the availability of skilled labor. Firms that can readily access workers with relevant skills are able to make productive use of the emerging technologies
and accelerate their adoption rates, particularly in the early stages of technology growth (30).
S KILLS S PACE offers a useful method for identifying the extent of specific skill gaps of firms
within industries. As an industry’s skills set becomes more similar to the skills of an emerging
technology, the skills gap is narrowed and the barriers to adopting the emerging technology
are reduced. When access to relevant skilled labor is plentiful, the labor requirements enabling
technological adoption can be readily achieved and help accelerate adoption rates. Therefore,

13

measuring temporal levels of skill set similarity for an emerging technology within an industry
provides a useful leading indicator of technology adoption over time. These measures offer
early detection signals of emerging technology adoption and the changing skill requirements
that could cause labor disruptions within industries, such as forced job transitions.
Here, we develop a leading indicator for emerging technology adoption and potential labor market disruptions based on skills data, using AI as an example. We select AI because
of its potential impacts on transforming labor tasks and accelerating job transitions (2, 4, 6).
Adapting the S KILLS S PACE method, our indicator temporally measures the similarity between
a dynamic set of a AI skills against the 19 Australian industry skill sets from 2013-2019. To
create these yearly sets of top AI skills, we first select a sample of core ‘seed skills’ that are
highly likely to remain important to AI over time – here we selected ‘Artificial Intelligence’,
‘Machine Learning’, ‘Data Science’, ‘Data Mining’, and ‘Big Data’ as the seed skills. We then
use Equation (2) to measure the similarity (θ) of each seed skill to every other skill in a given
year. By calculating the average θ for every skill relative to the seed skills, we return an ordered
list of skills with the highest similarity. This process is repeated for each calendar year from
2013-2019 where we select the top 100 skills for each year. The skill similarity approach allows
us to build an adaptive list of AI skills that captures evolving skill demands. This is especially
important for a skill area like AI, where the skill demands are changing very quickly. For example, ‘TensorFlow’ (a Deep Learning framework) emerged as a skill in November 2015 and
has since become among the fastest growing AI skills. The AI skill lists we create detect the
importance of ‘TensorFlow’ in 2016, whereas a static list pre-defined before before 2016 would
have missed these important changes to AI skill demands.
Having constructed temporal sets of AI skills, we then measure the yearly similarities between the AI skill sets and the skill sets of Australia’s 19 major industries – classified according
to the Australian & New Zealand Standard Industrial Classification (ANZSIC) Division level.
14

2019

Professional, Scientific
and Technical Services

2016

Financial and
Insurance Services

2013

Information Media and Telecommunications
Retail Trade

Electricity, Gas, Water
and Waste Services

Education and Training
Transport, Postal
and Warehousing

Public Admin
Rental, Hiring and
Real Estate Services
Arts and Recreation
Services

Manufacturing
Administrative and
Support Services

Wholesale Trade
Mining
Construction
Other Services
Health Care and Social Assistance

Accommodation and Food Services
Agriculture, Forestry and Fishing

Figure 5: By applying S KILLS S PACE, we measure the yearly similarities between adaptive sets
of AI skills against each of the 19 Australian industries from 2013-2019. As industry skill sets
become more similar to the AI skills, the colored area of the radar chart expands. All industries
have increased their similarity levels to AI skills, albeit at different rates. We argue that higher
levels of AI similarity indicate AI skills are becoming more important to firms within an industry
and that the skills gap to acquiring AI skills is narrowed. Access to these skills accelerate the
rate of firms adopting AI and making productive use of the technologies, which offers a leading
indicator of AI adoption and potential labor disruptions within these industries.

15

Using the S KILLS S PACE method, we construct each industry as a set of skills for every year
and use Equation (4) to calculate similarity to the yearly AI skill sets. This allows us to observe and compare the extent to which AI skills have diffused throughout industries and the
relative importance of AI skills to these industries. The advantages of using this skill similarity
approach as opposed to ad hoc skill counts from pre-defined skills are twofold: First, we create
dynamic sets of skills that capture evolving skill demands; and second, we account for skill importance within individual job ads by normalizing for high-occurring skills (see Supplementary
Information for more details).
Figure 5 shows that all Australian industry skill sets have grown in similarity to AI skills
from 2013 to 2019 – illustrated by the expanding colored areas. This highlights the growing
importance of AI skills across the Australian labor market. However, the rates of similarity
are unequally distributed. Some industries, such as ‘Finance and Insurance Services’ and ‘Information Media and Telecommunications’ command much higher rates of AI skill similarity.
This indicates that not only are firms within these industries increasingly demanding AI skills,
but also that the AI skills gaps within these industries are much smaller. Also noteworthy are
the differences in growth rates toward AI skill similarity. As clearly seen in Figure 5, AI skill
similarity has rapidly grown for some industries and more modestly for others. For instance,
‘Retail Trade’ has experienced the highest levels of growth in similarity to AI skills, increasing
by 407% from 2013 to 2019. The majority of this growth has occurred recently, which coincides with the launch of Amazon Australia in 2017 (31). Since then, Amazon has swiftly hired
thousands in Australia.
By adapting the S KILLS S PACE method, we develop a leading indicator that detects AI
adoption from real-time job ads data. Such a measure can act as an ‘early warning’ signal of
forthcoming labor market disruptions and accelerated job transitions caused by the growth of
AI. This indicator can assist policy-makers and businesses to robustly monitor the growth of AI
16

skills (or other emerging technologies), which acts as a proxy for AI adoption within industries
(or other labor market groups).

Conclusion
Leveraging longitudinal datasets of real-time job ads and occupational transitions from a household survey, we have developed the S KILLS S PACE method to measure the distance between
sets of skills. This enabled us to build systems that both recommend job transition pathways
based on personalized skill sets and detect the growth of disruptive technologies in labor markets that could accelerate forced job transitions. Our Job Transitions Recommender System
has the potential to assist workers, businesses and policy-makers to identify efficient transition
pathways between occupations. These targeted and adaptive recommendations are particularly
important during economic crises when labor displacement increases and workers are forced to
transition to another job. The Job Transitions Recommender System could therefore assist with
the current labor crisis caused by COVID-19. Additionally, it could assist with potential future
crises, such as accelerated job transitions caused by AI labor automation.
We further demonstrate the usefulness and flexibility of S KILLS S PACE by applying it as a
measure of AI adoption in labor markets. This acts as an ‘early warning system’ of forthcoming
labor disruptions caused by the adoption and diffusion of AI within industries. Such a measure
could complement other indicators of AI adoption, serving policy-makers and businesses to
monitor the growth of AI technologies and its potential to accelerate job transitions.
While the future of work remains unclear, change is inevitable. New technologies, economic
crises, and other factors will continue to shift labor demands causing workers to move between
jobs. If labor transitions occur efficiently, significant productivity and equity benefits arise at all
levels of the labor market (32); if transitions are slow, or fail, significant costs are borne to both
the State and the individual. Therefore, it is in the interests of workers, firms, and governments

17

that labor transitions are efficient and effective. The methods and systems we put forward here
could significantly improve the achievement of these goals.

Materials and Methods
Job Ads Data
This research draws on 8,002,780 online job ads in Australia from 2012-01-01 to 2020-04-30,
courtesy of Burning Glass Technologies (BGT). This dataset provides unique insights into the
evolving labor demands of Australia. It also covers the early periods of the COVID-19 crisis
when Australian governments closed ‘non-essential’ services (33). To construct this dataset,
BGT have systematically collected job ads via web-scraping. In this process, they remove duplicates of job ads posted across multiple job boards or job ads re-posted in short time-frames.
They also parse the unstructured job description text through their proprietary systems that extract key features from the advertised job. These features include location, employer, salary, education requirements, experience demands, occupational class, industry classifications, among
others. Importantly for this research, the skill requirements have also been extracted (¿11,000
unique skills).
Employment Statistics
The employment data used for this research is drawn from the ‘Quarterly Detailed Labor Force’
statistics by the Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) (34). These data represent labor supply
features for the 4-digit occupations in the Job Transitions Recommender System and include
measures of employment levels and hours worked per occupation.
Occupational transitions ground-truth data
The Household, Income and Labour Dynamics in Australia (HILDA) Survey is a nationally
representative longitudinal study of Australian households that commenced in 2001 (14). The
18

HILDA Survey is a household-based panel study of Australian households and has three main
areas of interest: income, labor, and family dynamics. The HILDA survey is in its 18th consecutive year with the latest available data available from 2018.
Included within the HILDA are data on occupational history and movements of anonymized
respondents. We use this data to identify when respondents have changed jobs from one year to
another. The occupations are recorded at the 4-digit level from the Australian and New Zealand
Standard Classification of Occupations (ANZSCO). This shows the occupation of the previous
year and the current year. We use this longitudinal dataset as the ground truth for validating
S KILLS S PACE. As the job ads dataset used for this research begins at 2012, we isolate the
observations of occupational transitions from 2012 to 2018 (the latest available year). This
results in a sample of 2,999 occupational transitions in Australia.
Skill similarity
We start by measuring the pairwise similarity between every skill for each year in the dataset. To
remove extremely rare skills and reduce noise we select skills with a posting frequency count
>= 5, which represent 75% of all skills (see Supplementary Information for more details).
Let S be the set of all skills and J be the set of all job ads in our dataset. We measure the
similarity between two individual skills s1 and s2 (s1 , s2 ∈ S) using a methodology proposed
by Alabdulkareem et al. (22). First, we use the Revealed Comparative Advantage (RCA) to
measure the importance of a skill s for a particular job ad j:
P
x(j, s)/
x(j, s0 )
s0 ∈S
P
RCA(j, s) = P
0
x(j , s)/
x(j 0 , s0 )
j 0 ∈J

(1)

j 0 ∈J,s0 ∈S

where
x(j, s) = 1 when
"
# the skill s is required for job j, and x(j, s) = 0 otherwise; RCA(j, s) ∈
P
0,
x(j 0 , s0 ) , ∀j, s, and the higher RCA(j, s) the higher is the comparative advantage
j 0 ∈J,s0 ∈S

that s is considered to have for j. Visibly, RCA(j, s) decreases when the skill s is more ubiqui19

P
tous (i.e. when
x(j 0 , s) increases), or when many other skills are required for the job j (i.e.
j 0 ∈J
P
when
x(j, s0 ) increases). Next, we measure the similarity between two skills based on the
s0 ∈S

likelihood that they are both effectively used in the same job ads. Formally:
P
e(j, s1 ) · e(j, s2 )
j∈J
!
θ(s1 , s2 ) =
P
P
max
e(j, s1 ), e(j, s2 )
j∈J

(2)

j∈J

where e(j, s) is the effective use of a skill in a job, defined as e(j, s) = 1 when RCA(j, s) ≥ 1
and e(j, s) = 0 otherwise. Note that θ(s1 , s2 ) ∈ [0, 1], a larger value indicates that s1 and s2
are more similar, and it reaches the maximum value when s1 and s2 always co-occur (i.e. they
never appear separately) while e(j, s1 ) = 1 and e(j, s2 ) = 1, ∀j ∈ J.
Skill set similarity
First, we define the importance of a skill in a skill set. Assume there exists a job ads grouping
criterion, for example job ads pertaining to an occupation, a company or an industry. We obtain
the job ads set J ⊂ J and the set of skills S ⊂ S occurring within j ∈ J . We denote J as the
set of job ads associated with the skill set S. We measure the importance of skill s for S (and
implicitly for J ) as the mean RCA over all the job ads pertaining to the skill set S. Formally,
w(s, S) =

1 X
RCA(j, s)
|J | j∈J

(3)

When measuring the AI adoption, the skill set S is defined starting from a set of seed skills – i.e.
not defined based on a grouping criterion as here above. In this case, J is not defined, and we
measure the importance of a skill as the average θ similarity to the seed skills. Repeating this
process temporally allows us to build dynamic skill sets, as discussed in Developing a Leading
Indicator of AI Adoption.
Next, we measure the distance between two sets of skills. Let S1 and S2 be two sets of skills
(pertaining, for example, to two occupations), and J1 and J2 their corresponding sets of job
20

ads. We define Θ the similarity between S1 and S2 as the weighted average similarity between
the individual skills in each set, where the weights correspond to the skill importance in their
respective sets. Formally,
Θ(S1 , S2 ) =

1 X X
w(s1 , S1 )w(s2 , S2 )θ(s1 , s2 )
C s ∈S s ∈S
1

where C =

P

P

1

2

(4)

2

w(s1 , S1 )w(s2 , S2 ). Similar to θ defined in Equation (2), Θ is a similarity

s1 ∈S1 s2 ∈S2

measure (higher means more similar) and Θ(S1 , S2 ) ∈ [0, 1].
Validation of S KILLS S PACE distance
We validate the link between the S KILLS S PACE and job transitions by conducting paired ttests, as illustrated in Figure 6. Here, we use a longitudinal household survey dataset containing
actual job transitions (14) (called the ‘True Sample’). Each occupational pair (‘source’ to ‘target’) is labeled with its S KILLS S PACE distance for the given year. We randomly simulate an
alternate sample of transitions by maintaining the same ‘source’ occupations and randomly selecting ‘target’ occupations (called ‘Random Sample’). Our objective is to determine whether
the differences in S KILLS S PACE distance between the ‘True Sample’ and the ‘Random Sample’ are statistically significant. First, we test the differences of the two samples including all
occupational transitions. We find that the differences between the two samples are statistically
significant (t-statistic = 16.272, p-value = 2.707 × 10−58 , Cohen’s D effect size = 0.42) (see
Supplementary Information). However, one-third of the ‘True Sample’ transitions are to another job but are classified as the same occupation. Therefore, we perform a second test only on
transitions between different occupations, i.e. we remove all observations where the ‘source’
and ‘target’ are identical. Again, the differences between the ‘True Sample’ and the ‘Random
Sample’ are statistically significant (t-statistic = 4.514, p-value = 6.535 × 10−6 , Cohen’s D effect size = 0.14), as illustrated in Figure 6A. We repeat the procedure 100 times: we generate
100 new ‘Random Samples’ and we perform the statistical test for each of them. 87% of these
21

1.2

A

True transitions
Random transitions

1

Density

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
−3

−2

−1

0

1

2

Occupational transitions similarity
70

B

60

Density

50
40
30

p-values
density

20
10
0

0

0.05

0.1

0.15

0.2

0.25

Figure 6: The S KILLS S PACE is statistically significant in representing job transitions. (A)
The x-axis shows the log-transformed S KILLS S PACE distance for a ‘True’ sample of actual
transitions (shown in magenta color) and a ‘Random’ sample of simulated transitions (shown
in gray color). Each Random transition is paired with an Actual transition: it shares the same
‘source’ occupation as the Actual transition but the ‘target’ occupation is randomly selected and
is different to the Actual observation. The difference between the two populations is statistically
significant (paired t-test, t-statistic = 4.514, p-value = 6.535 × 10−6 , Cohen’s D effect size =
0.14). (B) We repeat the procedure 100 times: we generate 100 ‘Random’ populations and we
perform the statistical testing for each. The figure shows the histogram (density and rug plot)
of the 100 obtained p-values, 87 of which are lower than 0.05.
22

tests are statistically significant, as shown in Figure 6B. These results provide evidence that the
S KILLS S PACE distance measure is representative of actual job transitions.
Job Transitions Recommender System setup
In this work, we predict occupational transitions using XGBoost (28) – an off-the-shelf classification algorithm. XGBoost is an implementation of gradient boosted tree algorithms, which
has achieved state-of-the-art results on many standard classification benchmarks. Like most machine learning algorithms, XGBoost has a set of hyper-parameters – parameters related to the
internal design of the algorithm that cannot be fit from the training data. The hyper-parameters
are usually tuned through search and cross-validation. In this work, we employ a RandomizedSearch (35) which randomly selects a (small) number of hyper-parameter configurations and
performs evaluation on the training set via cross-validation. We tune the hyper-parameters for
each learning fold using 2500 random combinations, evaluated using a 5 cross-validation. We
train the models on 80% of the observations, leaving aside 20% of the data for testing, which
we randomly seed. We repeat the process 10 times for each feature model configuration and
change the random seed to select a new testing sample, which provides us with the standard
deviation bars seen in Figure 2.
Data Availability
The codes for reproducing the Transitions Map will be made available upon acceptance of the
paper. The job ads data will be made available on a case-by-case basis, assessed by the Burning
Glass Technologies as the data owner.

23

References and Notes
1. D. Acemoglu, D. Autor, Handbook of Labor Economics (Elsevier, 2011), vol. 4, pp. 1043–
1171.
2. E. Brynjolfsson, A. McAfee, The second machine age: Work, progress, and prosperity in a
time of brilliant technologies (WW Norton & Company, 2014).
3. K. Schwab, The Fourth Industrial Revolution (Currency, 2017).
4. C. B. Frey, M. A. Osborne, The future of employment: How susceptible are jobs to computerisation? Technological Forecasting and Social Change 114, 254 (2017).
5. D. Acemoglu, P. Restrepo, Artificial intelligence, automation and work, Tech. rep., National
Bureau of Economic Research (2018).
6. M. R. Frank, et al., Toward understanding the impact of artificial intelligence on labor.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA. p. 201900949 (2019).
7. U. Sila, Job displacement in Australia: Evidence from the HILDA survey (2019).
8. ABS, Labour Force,

Australia,

https://www.abs.gov.au/statistics/

labour/employment-and-unemployment/labour-force-australia/
latest-release (2020). Accessed: 2020-10-8.
9. L. Nedelkoska, F. Neffke, S. Wiederhold, Skill mismatch and the costs of job displacement.
Annual Meeting of the American Economic Association (2015).
10. M. Poletaev, C. Robinson, Human capital specificity: evidence from the dictionary of occupational titles and displaced worker surveys, 1984–2000. Journal of Labor Economics
26, 387 (2008).
24

11. C. Gathmann, U. Schönberg, How general is human capital? A task-based approach. Journal of Labor Economics 28, 1 (2010).
12. L. Nedelkoska, D. Diodato, F. Neffke, Is our human capital general enough to withstand the
current wave of technological change?, Tech. rep., Center for International Development,
Harvard University (2018).
13. N. Bechichii, R. Grundkei, S. Jameti, M. Squicciarini, Moving between jobs: An analysis
of occupation distances and skill needs, Tech. Rep. 52, OECD (2018).
14. Department of Social Services and Melbourne Institute of Applied Economic and Social
Research, The household, income and labour dynamics in australia (HILDA) survey, RESTRICTED RELEASE 18 (waves 1-18) (2020).
15. WEF, Towards a reskilling revolution a future of jobs for all, Tech. rep., World Economic
Forum and The Boston Consulting Group (2018).
16. WEF, Towards a reskilling revolution Industry-Led action for the future of work, Tech. rep.,
World Economic Forum and The Boston Consulting Group (2019).
17. Australia. Department of Employment, Skills, Small and Family Business. Future of Work
Taskforce., Reskilling Australia: A data-driven approach, Tech. rep., Australian Government (2019).
18. K. F. Kyle Demaria, K. Wardrip, Exploring a skills-based approach to occupational mobility, Tech. rep., Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, and Cleveland (2020).
19. C. A. Hidalgo, B. Klinger, A.-L. Barabási, R. Hausmann, The product space conditions the
development of nations. Science 317, 482 (2007).

25

20. T. L. Vollrath, A theoretical evaluation of alternative trade intensity measures of revealed
comparative advantage. Weltwirtsch. Arch. 127, 265 (1991).
21. S. T. Shutters, R. Muneepeerakul, J. Lobo, Constrained pathways to a creative urban economy. Urban Studies. 53, 3439 (2016).
22. A. Alabdulkareem, et al., Unpacking the polarization of workplace skills. Science Advances
4, eaao6030 (2018).
23. N. Dawson, M.-A. Rizoiu, B. Johnston, M.-A. Williams, Adaptively selecting occupations
to detect skill shortages from online job ads. 2019 IEEE International Conference on Big
Data (Big Data) (IEEE, 2019), pp. 1637–1643.
24. E. Amid, M. K. Warmuth, TriMap: Large-scale Dimensionality Reduction Using Triplets.
ArXiv e-prints (2019).
25. E. Brynjolfsson, P. Milgrom, Complementarity in organizations. The Handbook of Organizational Economics pp. 11–55 (2013).
26. D. Autor, B. Price, The changing task composition of the US labor market: An update of
Autor, Levy, and Murnane (2003). MIT Paper 21 (2013).
27. C. Robinson, Occupational mobility, occupation distance, and specific human capital. Journal of Human Resources 53, 513 (2018).
28. T. Chen, C. Guestrin, XGBoost: A scalable tree boosting system. Proceedings of the 22nd
ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, KDD
’16 (Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2016), pp. 785–794.

26

29. T. F. Bresnahan, E. Brynjolfsson, L. M. Hitt, Information technology, workplace organization, and the demand for skilled labor: Firm-level evidence. The Quarterly Journal of
Economics 117, 339 (2002).
30. J. Bessen, Learning by Doing: The Real Connection between Innovation, Wages, and
Wealth (Yale University Press, 2015).
31. E. Koehn, ‘we’re just getting started’: Amazon Australia revenue surges to $292m. The
Sydney Morning Herald (2019).
32. OECD, OECD Employment Outlook 2020 (2020).
33. ABC, Australia’s social distancing rules have been enhanced to slow coronavirus — here’s
how they work. ABC News (2020).
34. Australian Bureau of Statistics, 6291.0.55.003 - Labour Force, Australia, Detailed, Quarterly (2019).
35. J. Bergstra, Y. Bengio, Random search for hyper-parameter optimization. Journal of Machine Learning Research 13, 281 (2012).
36. G. J. Borjas, J. C. Van Ours, Labor economics (McGraw-Hill/Irwin Boston, 2010).
37. T. W. Schultz, Investment in human capital. The American Economic Review 51, 1 (1961).
38. G. Becker, Human capital (Columbia University: Columbia University Press, 1964).
39. G. S. Becker, K. M. Murphy, R. Tamura, Human capital, fertility, and economic growth.
Journal of Political Economy 98, S12 (1990).
40. M. Pries, R. Rogerson, Hiring policies, labor market institutions, and labor market flows.
Journal of Political Economy 113, 811 (2005).
27

41. A. Bassanini, A. Garnero, Dismissal protection and worker flows in oecd countries: Evidence from cross-country/cross-industry data. Labour Economics 21, 25 (2013).
42. J. Hassler, J. V. Rodriguez Mora, K. Storesletten, F. Zilibotti, A positive theory of geographic mobility and social insurance. International Economic Review 46, 263 (2005).
43. C. D. Goldin, Human capital (2016).
44. L. Nedelkoska, F. Neffke, Skill mismatch and skill transferability: Review of concepts and
measurements. Papers in Evolutionary Economic Geography (2019).
45. E. Wasmer, General versus specific skills in labor markets with search frictions and firing
costs. American Economic Review 96, 811 (2006).
46. OECD, OECD skills strategy 2019 - skills to shape a better future, Tech. rep., OECD
(2019).
47. A. Gardiner, C. Aasheim, P. Rutner, S. Williams, Skill requirements in big data: A content
analysis of job advertisements. Journal of Computer Information Systems 58, 374 (2018).
48. R. H. Topel, M. P. Ward, Job mobility and the careers of young men. The Quarterly Journal
of Economics 107, 439 (1992).
49. R. B. Freeman, Overinvestment in college training? Journal of human resources pp. 287–
311 (1975).
50. C. D. Goldin, L. F. Katz, The race between education and technology (harvard university
press, 2009).
51. F. Vona, D. Consoli, Innovation and skill dynamics: a life-cycle approach. Industrial and
Corporate Change 24, 1393 (2015).
28

52. J. Mincer, Human capital, technology, and the wage structure: what do time series show?,
Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research (1991).
53. E. Berman, J. Bound, Z. Griliches, Changes in the demand for skilled labor within us
manufacturing: evidence from the annual survey of manufactures. The Quarterly Journal
of Economics 109, 367 (1994).
54. D. H. Autor, L. F. Katz, A. B. Krueger, Computing inequality: have computers changed the
labor market? The Quarterly journal of economics 113, 1169 (1998).
55. D. H. Autor, M. J. Handel, Putting tasks to the test: Human capital, job tasks, and wages.
Journal of labor Economics 31, S59 (2013).
56. M. Goos, A. Manning, A. Salomons, Explaining job polarization: Routine-biased technological change and offshoring. American economic review 104, 2509 (2014).
57. T. B. Brown, et al., Language models are Few-Shot learners (2020).
58. H. Touvron, A. Vedaldi, M. Douze, H. Jégou, Fixing the train-test resolution discrepancy:
FixEfficientNet (2020).
59. D. Silver, et al., A general reinforcement learning algorithm that masters chess, shogi, and
go through self-play. Science 362, 1140 (2018).
60. A. S. Blinder, A. B. Krueger, Alternative measures of offshorability: a survey approach.
Journal of Labor Economics 31, S97 (2013).
61. D. H. Autor, D. Dorn, G. H. Hanson, The china syndrome: Local labor market effects of
import competition in the united states. Am. Econ. Rev. 103, 2121 (2013).

29

62. K. L. Shaw, A formulation of the earnings function using the concept of occupational investment. Journal of Human Resources pp. 319–340 (1984).
63. K. L. Shaw, Occupational change, employer change, and the transferability of skills. Southern Economic Journal pp. 702–719 (1987).
64. B. F. Ingram, G. R. Neumann, The returns to skill. Labour economics 13, 35 (2006).
65. N. Bechichi, R. Grundke, S. Jamet, M. Squicciarini, Moving between jobs (2018).
66. R. Grundke, S. Jamet, M. Kalamova, M. Squicciarini, Having the right mix: The role of
skill bundles for comparative advantage and industry performance in gvcs (2017).
67. J. Bessen, Technology adoption costs and productivity growth: The transition to information technology. Review of Economic Dynamics (2002).
68. J. E. Bessen, S. M. Impink, R. Seamans, L. Reichensperger, The business of AI startups
(2018).
69. E. M. Rogers, New product adoption and diffusion. Journal of consumer Research 2, 290
(1976).
70. E. Karahanna, D. W. Straub, N. L. Chervany, Information technology adoption across time:
a cross-sectional comparison of pre-adoption and post-adoption beliefs. MIS quarterly pp.
183–213 (1999).
71. I. Im, S. Hong, M. S. Kang, An international comparison of technology adoption: Testing
the utaut model. Information & management 48, 1 (2011).
72. J. Y. Thong, An integrated model of information systems adoption in small businesses.
Journal of management information systems 15, 187 (1999).
30

73. L. Andrés, D. Cuberes, M. Diouf, T. Serebrisky, The diffusion of the internet: A crosscountry analysis. Telecommunications policy 34, 323 (2010).
74. A. Perrin, Social media usage. Pew research center pp. 52–68 (2015).
75. J. Bughin, J. Seong, J. Manyika, M. Chui, R. Joshi, Notes from the AI frontier: Modeling
the impact of AI on the world economy, Tech. rep., McKinsey Global Institute (2018).
76. K. S. Moorthy, Using game theory to model competition. Journal of Marketing Research
22, 262 (1985).
77. D. Andrews, C. Criscuolo, P. N. Gal, Frontier firms, technology diffusion and public policy:
Micro evidence from OECD countries, Tech. rep., OECD (2015).
78. J. W. Mamer, K. F. McCardle, Uncertainty, competition, and the adoption of new technology. Management Science 33, 161 (1987).
79. B. H. Hall, B. Khan, Adoption of new technology, Tech. rep., National bureau of economic
research (2003).
80. Business

use

of

information

technology,

https://www.abs.gov.

au/statistics/industry/technology-and-innovation/
business-use-information-technology/latest-release

(2017).

Accessed: 2020-9-21.
81. P. Beaudry, M. Doms, E. Lewis, Endogenous skill bias in technology adoption: City-level
evidence from the it revolution, Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research (2006).
82. D. Andrews, G. Nicoletti, C. Timiliotis, Digital technology diffusion: A matter of capabilities, incentives or both?, Tech. rep., OECD (2018).

31

83. S. T. Anderson, R. G. Newell, Information programs for technology adoption: the case of
energy-efficiency audits. Resource and Energy economics 26, 27 (2004).
84. E. Brynjolfsson, D. Rock, C. Syverson, The Economics of Artificial Intelligence: An
Agenda (University of Chicago Press, 2018).
85. G. Perino, T. Requate, Does more stringent environmental regulation induce or reduce technology adoption? when the rate of technology adoption is inverted u-shaped. Journal of
Environmental Economics and Management 64, 456 (2012).
86. Cloud AutoML, https://cloud.google.com/automl. Accessed: 2020-9-21.
87. Australian Bureau of Statistics, 1220.0 - ANZSCO – Australian and New Zealand
Standard Classification of Occupations, 2013, Version 1.2, https://www.abs.
gov.au/ausstats/abs@.nsf/0/E3031B89999B4582CA2575DF002DA702?
opendocument#:˜:text=The%20structure%20of%20ANZSCO%20has,
grouped%20into%20’minor%20groups’. (2013). Accessed: 2019-8-1.
88. U.S. Department of Labor, O*NET, https://www.onetonline.org/. Accessed:
2020-9-22.
89. Australian Federal Department of Education, Skills and Employment, ANZSCO to O*NET
concordance.
90. A. Carnevale, T. Jayasundera, D. Repnikov, Understanding online job ads data, Tech. rep.,
Georgetown University (2014).

32

Supplementary Materials
Related Work
This section discusses the related works that have directly informed the research in J OB T RAN SITIONS IN A

T IME

OF

AUTOMATION

AND

L ABOR M ARKET C RISES. There is firstly a dis-

cussion of the factors affecting labor mobility, the causes and effects of skill mismatches, measuring human capital transferability, and accounting for the asymmetries between jobs. Then
there is a brief literature review of the factors affecting the adoption of Artificial Intelligence
(AI) technologies.

Job Transitions
The related literature on job transitions broadly falls into the categories of labor mobility and
human capital within the discipline of labor economics. ‘Labor mobility’ refers to the allocation
of workers to firms and their ability to move between jobs (36). Labor mobility is an important
determinant of healthy labor markets. Efficient labor movements enable firms to hire more
productive workers, effectively match workers to jobs based on their preferences, and helps to
protect markets against economic shocks and structural changes. ‘Human capital’ refers to the
skills, knowledge, capabilities, and experiences possessed by an individual that influence their
productive capacities and that can be exchanged for labor at a prevailing market wage (37–39).
The process of labor mobility is constantly evolving and influenced by a variety of factors. These include labor market policies that shape hiring practices, job separation support
programs, and relocation incentives (40–42). It is also impacted by the extent of human capital
in a labor market, which refers to the supply of skills, knowledge, and abilities of a labor force
that firms can employ to produce goods and services (43). According to Nedelkoska and Frank,
skills should be considered part of human capital that is acquired through education, training,

33

and work experiences (44). While access to education and training undoubtedly affects the
acquisition of skills, particularly ‘general’ skills (38), skills are also acquired through work experience. Typically, firm or industry-specific skills are not perfectly mobile across employers
and can hinder labor mobility (45). Therefore, the extent of human capital ‘specificity’ in labor
markets is an important factor affecting labor mobility. It impacts how transferable skill sets are
between jobs and reveals their underlying mismatch. The remainder of this section reviews the
literature relating to the cause, effects, and measurement of skill mismatch and skill transferability. There are subtle, but important, differences between these terms. ‘Skill mismatch’ refers to
the differences between the supply of and demand for skills in a labor market. Whereas ‘skill
transferability’ is the capacity to leverage previously acquired skills to perform tasks across different jobs, either because the tasks are similar or the skills can be flexibly applied to different
tasks (44).The following literature forms the theoretical basis that directly informs our novel
approach to measuring the distance between skills and sets of skills.
Causes and effects of skill mismatches. Skills provide the means for workers to complete tasks
that are required by jobs. A distinction should also be made between skills, knowledge areas,
and abilities. ‘Skills’ are the proficiencies developed through training and/or experience (46);
‘knowledge’ is the theoretical and/or practical understanding of an area; and ‘ability’ is the competency to achieve a task (47), where a task is a unit of work required by a job. For simplicity,
the term ‘skill’ will collectively represent these three definitions throughout this paper.
Skill mismatch occurs when the skill demands of a job differ from the supply of skills
available in a labor market (44). When labor demand outweighs the supply of specific skills, it
is referred to as a ‘skill shortage’; when supply exceeds labor demand, it is often called ‘skill
excess’ or ‘over-supply’. Skill mismatches are closely monitored by labor economists due to
the cost burdens they impose. For workers, they lower wages and employment opportunities;
for firms, they restrict access to talent to implement specific tasks; for economies, they drain
34

productivity (44).
The causes of skill mismatches can be both frictional and structural. There are search costs
associated with a worker finding a job suitable to their skills, education, and experiences (48).
The frictions of matching workers to appropriate jobs can hamper efficient job transitions and
exacerbate skill mismatches. Structural factors causing skill mismatches, however, are concerned with the supply and demand for skills.
Regarding the supply side, the literature has mainly focused on the role of public institutions to facilitate skill development through education and training. Freeman, among others,
demonstrated that the oversupply of skills can depress wage premiums that are typically earned
by highly educated workers (49). Further, Goldin and Katz showed that the wage premium
of US college graduates was a function of the supply of college education, with college wage
premiums increasing when the supply of college degrees in the labor market was low (50).
Structural changes in the demand for skills are predominantly caused by (1) technological advances and (2) globalization or trade. Concerning technology and innovation, Vona and
Consoli (51) present a useful framework for understanding the evolving relationship between
skills and technological change. In the early stages of new technology adoption, the authors
argue that tasks are typically complex and non-routine. Consequently, specialized and highly
skilled labor is required to make productive use of these new technologies. As time progresses,
however, knowledge becomes structured and codified, enabling tasks to be routinized and automated. Eventually, the marginal benefits of specialization diminish as the use of the technology
becomes standardized and tasks are able to be performed by lower-skilled workers. Related,
is the theory of Skill-Biased Technological Change (SBTC). The SBTC hypothesis posits
that technologies disproportionately advantage highly-skilled labor over lower-skilled labor,
as technologies tend to enhance the skills highly-skilled workers and automate lower-skilled
workers (52–54). The SBTC hypothesis was later modified to account for the relationship
35

between computers and task-specific requirements of jobs. This Task-biased Technological
Change (TBTC) framework (1, 55) classifies labor tasks along two main spectra; routine to
non-routine tasks and cognitive to manual tasks. Computerization, according to TBTC, tends to
assist non-routine tasks and automate routine tasks. As a result, computers automate the labor
tasks of middle-skilled workers (typically, routine-cognitive workers), which helps to account
for recent dynamics such as declining real wages of middle-skilled workers and labor polarization (56). However, the argument that the negative demand-side effects of computerization
are limited to routine tasks is now coming under scrutiny. The rapid advances and diffusion of
AI technologies cast doubt over this assumption. Brynjolfsson and McAfee (2) and Frey and
Osborne (?) present compelling arguments that the automation capabilities of AI are extending
to non-routine tasks, both in the cognitive and manual domains. Non-routine tasks that were
previously considered out of reach by AI are quickly outperforming human levels in a range of
non-routine tasks, such as Natural Language Processing (NLP) (57), Image Recognition (58),
and unstructured learning tasks (59).
Globalization or trade also has important implications on the demand for skills, which can
exacerbate skill mismatches. Offshoring enables firms to fulfill their required labor tasks without personal contact, which can be managed electronically without a loss in quality (60). This
shifts the demand for skills towards countries with lower labor costs. Autor et al. (61) found that
approximately one quarter of the decline in US manufacturing employment can be attributed to
increasing trade with China.
Taken collectively, changes in the supply of and demand for skills alter the extent of skill
mismatches in a labor market. This equilibrium is dynamic and directly affects labor mobility.
The following subsection reviews the literature for measuring skill mismatch and transferability,
which directly informs this work.
Measuring skill transferability and mismatch. This research is part of a small but growing
36

area of labor economics that measures the ‘distance’ between skills, jobs, and other defined
skill sets. Among the earliest work in this area was conducted by Shaw (62, 63) who defined
measures of occupational distances via proxies of skill transferability across occupations. This
was based under the assumption that occupations with high levels of skill transferability are
strongly correlated with high probabilities of transitioning between these occupations. This is an
assumption that we adapt, test, and prove in J OB T RANSITIONS
AND

IN A

T IME

OF

AUTOMATION

L ABOR M ARKET C RISES.

More recent studies have made use of skill and task-level data, such as the US Dictionary of
Occupational Titles (DOT - a predecessor to O*NET) or the German Qualification and Career
Survey (QCS). Poletaev and Robinson (10) use task-level data from DOT to study the similarity between occupations. The authors construct four measures of basic skills, applying the
factor analysis method used by Ingram and Neumann (64). These four skill measures characterize the ‘skill portfolios’ of occupations, which are organized as vectors of skills. They then
use Euclidean distance to compute the similarity between occupational skill vectors in order to
identify which workers change their skill portfolios when transitioning between jobs. The authors show that workers who find jobs with similar skill requirements to their earlier jobs before
displacement avoid large wage losses.
Similarly, Gathmann and Schönberg (11) use the QCS to classify occupations into a 19dimension skill space defined by the survey. Each occupation represents a skill vector, where
occupations consist of certain skills with varying degrees of mastery. The authors use the angular distance between the 19 skill vectors to position the occupations and measure their relative
distances. The authors demonstrate that individuals transition to occupations with similar task
requirements and that the distance requirements decline with greater work experience.
Most recently, Alabdulkareem et al. (22) used techniques from Network Science and unsupervised Machine Learning to illustrate occupational polarization based on their underlying
37

skill. Data sources included a combination of O*NET skill-level data and US occupational
transitions data in the Current Population Survey from the US Bureau of Labor Statistics. The
authors implemented an established measure from Trade Economics, called ‘Revealed Comparative Advantage’ (RCA), to firstly measure the relative importance of a skill in a job while
normalizing for high-occurring skills. After setting a threshold for skill importance, skill similarity was then calculated as the minimum of conditional probabilities that a skill pair are both
important in a job when they co-occur. The authors then used these pairwise skill similarities to
map workplace skills as a network, highlighting skill polarization and proving a correlation with
wage polarization. Dawson et al. (23) extended this approach by applying this method to realtime job ads data to adaptively select occupations based on their underlying skill demands. This
enabled the authors to accurately monitor changing labor demands and detect skill shortages
for an evolving set of Data Science and Analytics occupations in Australia. The skill similarity
methods applied by Alabdulkareem et al. (22) and Dawson et al. (23) provide the foundation
for the S KILLS S PACE method.
While all of these approaches represent significant contributions in the evolution of measuring skill transferability, there is one major shortcoming. All of these methods yield symmetric
distance measures. That is, the distance from one skill or occupation to another is the same
despite the direction. For example, according to these methods, it is just as difficult for a Nurse
to become a Surgeon as the other way around. Intuitively, however, acquiring certain skills to
transition to a particular occupation is more difficult in one direction than the other. In this
sense, skill acquisition and occupational transitions are directed and asymmetrical.
Asymmetric measures for skill mismatches. Nedelkoska et al. (9) develop skill mismatch
metrics that account for the strong asymmetries in the transferability between skills. The authors construct occupational skill profiles by using factor analysis to extract five task-based
skills on German administrative and data on individuals’ work histories. They then calculate
38

the share of workers in each occupation carrying out these tasks. The average years of education and training associated with each task are used as weights to indicate skill complexity
required by an occupation. Adding these weights reveals asymmetries between skills and therefore occupations. They show that by switching occupations, people incur both skill shortages
and skill redundancies, which results in significant wages losses up to 15 years following the
job displacement. While accounting for skill asymmetries represents a clear improvement for
measuring the distance between skills, using years of education and training as the sole proxy
for skill complexity is questionable. As previously stated, work experiences are an important
contributor to the acquisition of skills and causes of mismatch.
Bechichi et al. (65) adapt the Nedelkoska et al. (9) model by analyzing occupational data
from the OECD Survey of Adult Skills (PIAAC). They firstly use the six task-based skill indicators from PIACC (66). The authors then measure these indicators on 127 occupations (at the
3-digit occupational level) across 31 different countries to assess occupational distances based
on ‘cognitive skills’ and skills acquired from tasks ‘on the job’. This method accounts for skill
asymmetries and skills acquired from work experiences. The resulting ‘skill shortage’ and ‘skill
excess’ measures are then used to predict education and training resources required to transition
workers from one occupation to another. Therefore, this research represents another advance
toward the goal of accurately measuring skill and occupational distances. However, a minor
shortcoming of this work is that it is performed at the 3-digit occupational level, which is a relatively high classification level (1-digit being the highest and 6-digit being the lowest and most
detailed). Additionally, surveys provide lagging data that are typically slow to report and expensive to conduct. This is problematic in labor crises, such as the job displacements caused by
COVID-19. Dynamics of labor markets quickly change in times of crisis and displaced workers
are faced with transitioning between jobs with rapidly evolving skill demands. Real-time data,
therefore, becomes essential.
39

Our research builds on these significant works and addresses both of these shortcomings
by using real-time job ads data and applying a method capable of measuring the distance between any defined set of skills, such as occupations at the detailed 6-digit occupational level,
industries, or even personalized skill sets.

Artificial Intelligence Adoption
The labor market impacts of AI depend on the adoption rates of AI technologies by firms. If
firms are slow or fail to adopt AI, then its effects are naturally restricted. Therefore, the risks
of AI accelerated labor automation will only be realized if these technologies are adopted by
firms, absorbed in workflows, and broadly diffused. Otherwise, they’re just isolated use cases.
This consideration, however, is often ignored. Much of the recent research on the economic
impacts of AI assume broad adoption and diffusion. For example, the prominent study by Frey
and Osborne estimated that 47% of occupations face a near-term risk of automation from AI (4).
These results were based on the assessments of a small panel of Machine Learning experts who
were asked to identify which of 70 jobs were ‘completely automatable’ in 2013. However, these
forecasts rely on some questionable assumptions. Chief among them is that firms will quickly
and efficiently adopt AI for commercial use. This should not be taken as a given. As Bessen
et al. (67, 68) point out that, just because new technologies have commercial applications does
not mean that they will be adopted and diffused in a timely manner. Therefore, understanding
the factors that influence the adoption and diffusion of AI in firms is important. It enables more
accurate forecasting and better planning for policymakers, businesses, and civil society.
Explanatory variables for AI adoption and diffusion. Research on the factors that affect
firms’ decisions to adopt digital technologies is well established (69–71). Researchers have
closely examined the adoption dynamics of innovations such as personal computers (72), the
Internet (73), and social media (74). AI builds upon these digital technologies. The factors that

40

influence the adoption of AI by firms differ by degree but not by kind. The literature suggests
eight major factors influencing AI adoption rates at the firm-level:
(1) Competition: McKinsey Global Institute found that the extent of rivalry within markets
has the largest effect on AI adoption (75). This is consistent with game theory (76), where the
marginal propensity to adopt AI depends on the proportion of rivals that have already decided to
adopt. Assuming the new technology becomes broadly diffused, then early adopters typically
enjoy disproportionate rewards. However, as more firms adopt, the marginal incentive to adopt
diminishes as the technology provides less competitive advantages. Therefore, laggard firms
are punished with shrinking market shares (77). These competitive forces drive adoption rates
as firms jostle to assert a competitive edge and advance market share (78). However, adoption decisions are made with imperfect information as it can be difficult to know what actions
competitors are taking. Competition, therefore, can drive rapid periods of adoption growth.
(2) Firm characteristics: The size, income level, and industry of firms have all been shown
to affect the rate that a new technology is adopted (79). For example, larger firms, by headcount
and income, typically adopt digital technologies earlier and at faster rates than smaller firms.
Also, firms in Financial Services and ICT industries tend to adopt digital technologies earlier
and at faster rates than firms in Agricultural and Construction industries (80). Similarly, the AI
adoption indicator we propose suggests material differences between industry categories, with
highest levels of adoption in Financial & Insurance Services firms and lowest in the Agriculture
Industry.
(3) Labor force skill capabilities: Emerging technologies, such as AI, often require specific
skills (67). The availability of workers with these skills can influence the extent of adoption and
diffusion (81). The ability to access such labor competencies, however, varies between firms,
industries, and economies. The implementation of AI requires strong technical competencies.
These competencies are unevenly distributed between firms, industries, and economies (68).
41

Therefore, the more firms are able to access relevant skilled labor, the greater the likelihood that
firms will adopt AI.
(4) Digital Maturity: Previous research has shown that the adoption of new digital technologies often depends on the adoption of previous digital technologies (82). For instance,
broadband infrastructure supports the adoption of more sophisticated digital applications. This
relationship also appears to hold for AI. According to McKinsey Global Institute, firms that
have adopted and absorbed cloud infrastructure and ‘web 2.0 technologies’, such as mobile
technologies and Customer Relationship Management (CRM) systems, are more likely to adopt
AI technologies (75).
(5) Expected return on AI investments: Firms’ perceptions of the value that a new technology can create also influences adoption rates (83). Similarly, firms that are positive about
the business use cases of AI are more likely to adopt earlier and faster (75). Conversely, firms
that are uncertain about AI use cases are slower or less likely to adopt, which delays aggregate
adoption rates.
(6) AI complements: As with other General Purpose Technologies, the more complementary
technologies are developed and implemented, the faster AI will be adopted by firms (84). That
is, the more a firm invests in one type of AI, the more likely it will invest in another. For
example, a retailer that implements robotic process automation to retrieve stock is more likely
to adopt computer vision to identify inventory items than a retailer that has not adopted any AI
technologies. Capital investment deepens as AI is increasingly absorbed in workflows.
(7) Regulatory effects: Regulatory effects can be important to consider when comparing the
adoption rates across economies (71, 85). For example, it is plausible that the more stringent
data protection regulations in Europe could delay AI adoption in European firms compared to
US firms in the short-run.
(8) Standardization and usability: As the use of emerging technologies are standardized
42

across firms and industries, the ease of use for these technologies naturally improves, which
has been shown to accelerate adoption and diffusion rates (30). While AI models are still ‘narrow’ in the sense that they tend to be highly specific to a particular task and require non-routine
customization (as in hyper-parameter tuning or feature data engineering), AI usability has improved over the past decade. For example, individuals are able to implement high-performing
machine learning models using their own data with little or no knowledge of scripting languages (see (86)). As the use of AI technologies become standardized and usability improves,
it is likely that this will increase adoption rates.
While other variables could affect rates of AI adoption, the eight factors listed above are
likely to account for a significant proportion of firm-level AI adoption decisions.

Using a standardized occupation taxonomy – ANZSCO.
All data sources mentioned above correspond to their respective occupational classes according
to the Australian and New Zealand Standard Classification of Occupations (ANZSCO) (87).
ANZSCO provides a basis for the standardized collection, analysis and dissemination of occupational data for Australia and New Zealand. The structure of ANZSCO has five hierarchical levels - major group(1-digit), sub-major group (2-digit), minor group (3-digit), unit group
(4-digit) and occupation group (6-digit). For visualizing the distance between occupations in
Figure 1b in J OB T RANSITIONS IN A T IME OF AUTOMATION AND L ABOR M ARKET C RISES,
the 6-digit grouping level was applied. We used the 6-digit level here because (1) it is the most
detailed occupational grouping and (2) the automation probabilities from Frey & Osborne were
mapped at this level (4). The presented results for the ‘Job Transitions Recommender System’
and the subset of the Transitions Map shown in Figure 2c are grouped at the 4-digit unit grouping level. Occupational recommendations were made at this level to match the ground-truth
of actual transitions from the Household, Income and Labour Dynamics in Australia (HILDA)
43

longitudinal dataset (14).
Shortcomings of ANZSCO. There are shortcomings to analyzing occupations within ANZSCO
classifications. Official occupational classifications, like ANZSCO, are often static taxonomies
and are rarely updated. They therefore fail to capture and adapt to emerging skills, which can
misrepresent the true labor dynamics of particular jobs. For example, a ‘Data Scientist’ is a relatively new occupation that has not yet received its own ANZSCO classification. Instead, it is
classified as an ‘ICT Business & Systems Analyst’ by ANZSCO, grouped with other job titles
like ‘Data Analysts’, ‘Data Engineers’, and ‘IT Business Analysts’. However, as ANZSCO is
the official and prevailing occupational classification system, all data used for this research are
in accordance with the ANZSCO standards.
Mapping O*NET to ANZSCO. To leverage the strengths of earlier research by Frey and Osborne (4) on the occupational risks of labor automation caused by AI technologies, we first
needed to map O*NET occupations to ANZSCO, so as to take advantage of their automation
risk probabilities at the 6-digit level. O*NET is a standardized and publicly available database
of labor market data in the United States (88). The occupations, however, are slightly different
compared to ANZSCO. Therefore, we used a concordance table from the Australian Federal Department of Education, Skills and Employment (89) to map O*NET occupations to ANZSCO
at the 6-digit level. This resulted in each ANZSCO occupation being assigned an automation
risk probability according to the Frey and Osborne research.

Model Features
Below is a summary of the features included within the ‘Job Transitions Recommender System’
models. The features have been grouped into ‘Labor Demand’ (job ads data) and ‘Labor Supply’
(employment statistics) categories for ease of review. Each feature in 1 is measured at the
ANZSCO 4-digit level per calendar year from 2012-2018. This reflects the first available year
44

Table 1: Summary of constructed features and their explanation.
Feature

Labor Demand

theta:
Posting Frequency:
Posting Frequency Difference:
Median Salary:
Salary Difference:
Minimum Education:
Education Difference:

Labour Supply

Minimum Experience:
Experience Difference:
Total Employed:
Total Employed Difference:
Total Hours Worked:
Total Hours Worked Difference:

Description
S KILLS S PACE distance between ‘source’ and ‘target’
occupation
number of job advertisement vacancies
difference between the ‘source’ and ‘target’ posting
frequency
maximum median salary advertised
difference between the ‘source’ and ‘target’ salaries
minimum years of formal education required
difference between the ‘source’ and ‘target’ years of
formal education required
minimum years of formal experience required
difference between the ‘source’ and ‘target’ years of
experience required
total number employed at ANZSCO Unit level (000’s)
difference between the ‘source’ and ‘target’ of total
number employed at ANZSCO Unit level (000’s)
total hours worked at ANZSCO Unit level (000’s)
difference between the ‘source’ and ‘target’ of total
hours worked at ANZSCO Unit level (000’s)

of the longitudinal job ads data (2012) and the most recent year of the ‘ground-truth’ HILDA
data (2018). The ‘source’ and ‘target’ occupations are independently associated with each of
the features in 1. However, the ‘theta’ (distance between skill sets measure) and ‘Difference’
features relate to both the ‘source’ and ‘target’ occupational pair. In total there are 19 features.

Validation
Statistical Test. To obtain initial validation of the S KILLS S PACE distance measures, we conducted a paired statistical test, as explained in J OB T RANSITIONS IN A T IME OF AUTOMATION
AND

L ABOR M ARKET C RISES. To run this experiment, we labeled each ‘source’ and ‘target’

occupational pair with their distance measure for their given year (called the ‘True Sample’).
We then simulated an alternate sample of transitions where we maintain the same ‘source’ oc45

cupations and randomly select ‘target’ occupations, all assigned with their pairwise distance
scores (called ‘Simulated Sample’). Figure 7a shows the distribution of all job transitions, including transitions to the same occupation. We found that the differences between the ‘True’
and ‘Simulated’ transition samples are statistically significant (t-statistic = 16.272, p-value =
2.706911e-58, Cohen’s D effect size = 0.42). However, 909 of the 2999 (or 30%) of the yearly
job transitions from 2012-2018 are movements to the same occupation. Intuitively, the skill
set distance of transitioning to another job in the same occupation is likely small, especially
compared to other occupations. Therefore, we wanted to test whether the statistical significance
holds when we exclude transitions to the same occupation. To run this test, we first removed job
transitions to the same occupation (leaving 2090 occupations from 2012-2018). Following the
same process described above, we created ‘True’ and ‘Simulated’ samples. Figure 7b illustrates
the differences between the two samples, which are again statistically significant (t-statistic =
4.514, p-value = 6.534642e-06); however, the effect size is lowered (Cohen’s D effect size =
0.14).
We repeated the procedure 100 times: we generated 100 ‘Random’ populations and we perform the statistical testing for each. As shown in J OB T RANSITIONS IN A T IME OF AUTOMA TION AND

L ABOR M ARKET C RISES, 87 of the 100 obtained p-values were lower than 0.05

providing confidence in the statistical significance of S KILLS S PACE to represent occupational
transitions in this research.
Job Transitions Recommender System validation. Figure 8a shows the confusion matrix for
the binary classifier model containing all of the features from Table 1. This feature configuration achieved the highest performance (Accuracy = 76% and F1 Macro Average = 77%). As
observed, this trained model was able to predict True Negatives (‘Not a Transition’ – Recall =
84%) slightly better than True Positives (‘Actual Transition’ – Recall = 71%). Figure 8b shows
the ‘receiver operating characteristic’ curve (ROC curve), which is the performance of the bi46

Simulated Transitions

Actual Transitions

1.2
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
−3

−2

−1

0

1

2

1.2
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
−3

−2

−1

0

1

2

Figure 7: Density plots for (a) statistical tests against all occupational transitions and (b) against
transitions where the worker changed occupations.

47

nary classification model at all classification thresholds. ROC curves summarize the trade-off
between the True Positive rate (y-axis) and False Positive rate (x-axis) for the classifier model
using different probability thresholds. Generally, high-performing models are represented by
ROC curves that bow up to the top left of the plot. As illustrated in Figure 8b, the blue ROC
curve is consistently above the diagonal red dashed line that represents a 50% probability –
models that perform below this dashed line are no better than random chance. This reinforces
that the model consisting of ‘All Features’ achieves strong performance levels.
Similarly, Figure 8c shows the confusion matrix and Figure 8d illustrates the ROC curve for
the classifier model that only includes the S KILLS S PACE distance measure (‘theta’). While the
‘theta only’ model still performs relatively well (Accuracy & F1 Macro Average = 73%), performance does decline. Again, the True Negatives (‘Not a Transition’ – Recall = 83%) outperform
the True Positives (‘Actual Transition’ – Recall = 64%). This highlights that the added labor
market features from job ads data and employment statistics increased the performance capabilities of the models to predict True Positives. These performance differences are also represented
in Figure 8d showing a slightly lower ROC curve for models that used ‘theta’ alone.
Ablation Test and Feature Importance. In order to understand the relative importance of the
modeled features in the ‘Job Transitions Recommender System’, we conducted an ablation test
and feature importance analysis. An ablation test involves iteratively removing one feature from
the feature set and then re-training the model to make predictions and evaluate performance. We
conclude that a feature is ‘more important’ to a model’s predictive capabilities if performance
declines when it is removed. Figure 9a shows the results of all 19 features, highlighting that the
largest performance decline occurred when the ‘theta’ distance measure was removed. These
models were all trained with a consistent setup, as explained in J OB T RANSITIONS
OF

IN A

T IME

AUTOMATION AND L ABOR M ARKET C RISES.
To reinforce the results from the ablation test, we then conducted a feature importance anal48

Not a Transition

Receiver operating characteristic

Actual Transition

1.0

500
450

504

96

0.8

True Positive Rate

Not a Transition

400

Actual

350
300
250
Actual Transition

176

424

XGBoost Classifier (area = 0.77)
0.0

100

Predicted

400

Actual

300
250

217

383

Predicted

0.6

0.8

1.0

(b)

0.8

True Positive Rate

102

0.4

False Positive Rate

1.0

350

Actual Transition

0.2

Receiver operating characteristic

Actual Transition

498

0.0

(a)

450
Not a Transition

0.4
0.2

200
150

Not a Transition

0.6

0.6
0.4

200

0.2

150

0.0

XGBoost Classifier: theta only (area = 0.73)

(c)

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

False Positive Rate

0.8

1.0

(d)

Figure 8: Job transition model that includes all features achieves the highest results, as seen
with (a) the confusion matrix and (b) the ROC curve; whereas the job transitions classifier
model that only includes S KILLS S PACE distance method has lower performance, as seen by
(c) the confusion matrix and (d) the ROC curve.

49

ysis as seen below. We use the ‘Gain’ metric, which shows the relative contribution of each
feature to the model by calculating the features’ contribution for each tree in the XGBoost
model. A higher gain score indicates that a feature is more important for generating a prediction. Again, ‘theta’ is overwhelmingly identified as the most important feature for predicting
job transitions.

50

Excluded Feature

XGBoost Classifier Ablation Test
theta
TargetMedianSalary
TargetMinEducation
EmployedDiff
SourcePostingFreq
PostingFreqDiff
TargetMinExperience
HoursWorkedDiff
ExperienceDiff
SourceMedianSalary
TargetTotalEmployedYearlyAvg
SourceTotalEmployedYearlyAvg
SourceMinEducation
SalaryDiff
TargetHoursWorkedYearlyAvg
EducationDiff
TargetPostingFreq
SourceHoursWorkedYearlyAvg
SourceMinExperience
0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

Metric: F1 Macro Average

(a)

Features

Feature Importance
theta
TargetTotalEmployedYearlyAvg
HoursWorkedDiff
TargetMedianSalary
TotalEmployedDiff
TargetHoursWorkedYearlyAvg
TargetPostingFreq
PostingFreqDiff
EducationDiff
TargetMinExperience
SalaryDiff
SourceMinEducation
SourceHoursWorkedYearlyAvg
SourceMedianSalary
SourceTotalEmployedYearlyAvg
TargetMinEducation
ExperienceDiff
SourcePostingFreq
SourceMinExperience
0

10

20

30

40

50

60

Metric: gain

(b)
Figure 9: (a) Ablation test of classifier features and (b) feature importance analysis both show
that the S KILLS S PACE distance measure (‘theta’) is the most important feature for predicting
occupational transitions.
51

Recommending Jobs & Skills
Transitions Example – Domestic Cleaner.
Occupation

Transition Probability

Num. Job Ads 2019

Num. Job Ads 2020

Difference

Percentage Difference

0.960395
0.946621
0.943874
0.937961
0.935315
0.926472
0.914349
0.893725
0.887601
0.876921

323
865
690
600
2835
1904
726
961
837
2281

276
671
253
180
1609
877
356
1302
414
1466

-47
-194
-437
-420
-1226
-1027
-370
341
-423
-815

-14.551084
-22.427746
-63.333333
-70.000000
-43.245150
-53.939076
-50.964187
35.483871
-50.537634
-35.729943

Domestic Cleaners
Commercial Cleaners
Waiters
Bar Attendants and Baristas
Sales Assistants (General)
Chefs
Cooks
Aged and Disabled Carers
Child Carers
General Clerks

AI Adoption
AI Similarity Scores. The table below contains the underlying data for the AI Adoption radar
chart in the Developing a Leading Indicator of AI Adoption section.
Industry

2013

2016

Financial and Insurance Services
0.000958
Information Media and Telecommunications
0.001057
Professional, Scientific and Technical Services 0.000545
Retail Trade
0.000266
Electricity, Gas, Water and Waste Services
0.000443
Education and Training
0.000707
Transport, Postal and Warehousing
0.000282
Public Admin
0.000270
Rental, Hiring and Real Estate Services
0.000157
Arts and Recreation Services
0.000256
Manufacturing
0.000206
Administrative and Support Services
0.000243
Wholesale Trade
0.000219
Mining
0.000260
Construction
0.000136
Other Services
0.000136
Health Care and Social Assistance
0.000080
Accommodation and Food Services
0.000086
Agriculture, Forestry and Fishing
0.000108

0.001599
0.001283
0.001027
0.000568
0.000520
0.000933
0.000427
0.000481
0.000439
0.000571
0.000356
0.000346
0.000388
0.000223
0.000236
0.000180
0.000170
0.000208
0.000183

2019 Percentage change 13-19
0.002887
0.002286
0.001590
0.001348
0.001300
0.001257
0.000981
0.000905
0.000775
0.000738
0.000690
0.000661
0.000642
0.000595
0.000487
0.000306
0.000281
0.000267
0.000239

201.395294
116.285278
191.537693
407.375732
193.594618
77.744881
247.957226
234.594611
392.117595
188.519596
235.589203
172.344264
193.307221
128.900314
257.990332
124.906123
252.858476
208.987030
120.979250

Temporal AI skill similarity to Australian Industries. The figure below is another visualization of the same data in the Developing a Leading Indicator of AI Adoption section illustrating
52

Industry Skill Similarities to Top AI Skills in AUS 2012-2019
Accommodation and Food Services

Administrative and Support Services

Agriculture, Forestry and Fishing

Arts and Recreation Services

Construction

Education and Training

Electricity and Waste Services

Financial and Insurance Services

Health Care and Social Assistance

IMT

Manufacturing

Mining

Other Services

Professional and Scientific Services

Public Admin

Real Estate

Retail Trade

Transport, Postal and Warehousing

Wholesale Trade

0.002
0.001

Simiarity to AI Skills

0.002
0.001

0.002
0.001

0.002
0.001

0.002
0.001

ANZSIC Industries 2012 to 2019

Figure 10: Yearly skill similarities between AI skills and Australian Industry (ANZSIC Division) skill sets from 2012-2019.
all of the yearly AI similarity scores for the Industries from 2012-2019.

Skill Count Distribution
As discussed in Materials & Methods, before calculating individual skill similarities, we filtered
out extremely rare skills to reduce noise and computational complexity. We set the minimum
yearly skill count threshold to be greater than or equal to 5.

53

As seen in the Empirical Cumulative Distribution Function (ECDF) in ?? , this threshold
represents over 75% of all skills in 2018 (6,981 skills). All skills on the left side of the dotted
threshold line were excluded, which accounted for <25% of skills.

54

1.00

Empirical CDF

0.75

0.50

0.25

0.00

1

2

3 45

log10(Skill Count 2018)

Figure 11: Empirical Cumulative Distribution Function of skill counts within job ads for 2018.

55

Advantages of Skill Similarity over Posting Frequency
The proxy most widely used in literature (90) for skill importance is skill frequency. This simply
counts how many times a skill appears in job ads associated with a given occupation (or other
groups) during a predetermined period of time; the higher the count, the greater the demand
and, implicitly, the greater importance of the skill to the occupation. While skill frequency can
provide some indication of labor demand, it fails to normalize for skills that are demanded by
all or most jobs. This does not necessarily reveal which skills are more or less important to
a given occupation, as some skills generalize across all occupations at high frequencies. For
example, ‘Communication Skills’ and ‘Teamwork’ occur in over one-quarter of all job ads and
are ubiquitous across all occupations). However, we know that some skills are more important
than others to specific jobs. We therefore capture a proxy for skill importance by measuring the
comparative advantage of each skill in each job ad, as seen in the RCA equation in Materials
& Methods. Our measure controls for high-occurring skills through normalization and develops
a measure of skill importance within individual job ads that later represent skill importance
within labor market groups (occupations, industries etc.).

56

