Birds of a feather flock together? Diversity and spread of COVID-19 cases in India
Udayan Rathore*
Oxford Policy Management
(rathore.udayan@gmail.com)
Upasak Das
Presidential Fellow in Economics of Poverty Reduction
Global Development Institute, University of Manchester,
(upasak.das@manchester.ac.uk)
Prasenjit Sarkhel
Associate Professor
Department of Economics, University of Kalyani
(prasenjitsarkhel@gmail.com)

Abstract:
Arresting COVID infections requires community collective action that is difficult to achieve in a socially
and economically diverse setting. Using district level data from India, we examine the effects of caste and
religious fragmentation along with economic inequality on the growth rate of reported cases. The findings
indicate positive effects of caste homogeneity while observing limited impact of economic inequality and
religious homogeneity. However, the gains from higher caste homogeneity are seen to erode with the
unlocking procedure after the nationwide lockdown. We find that community cohesion through caste
effect is relatively dominant in rural areas even when mobility restrictions are withdrawn. Our findings
indicate planners should prioritize public health interventions in caste-wise heterogeneous areas to
compensate for the absence of community cohesion. The importance of our study lies in empirically
validating the causal pathway between homogeneity and infection and providing a basis for zoning
infection prone areas.
Keywords: Caste, COVID-19, diversity, unlock, social cohesion, India

_______________________________________________________
The authors acknowledge Sushmita Chakraborty for the assistance received in generating the maps and Ritabrata
Bose for helping with initial collation of the data.
* Any views expressed by Rathore are his alone and not necessarily of his employer.

1. Introduction
The novel corona virus (SARS -CoV-2), hereafter referred to as (COVID-19) pandemic has spread
exponentially across the world claiming thousands of lives every day. With no readily available vaccines
or pharmaceutical therapies, precautionary measures like lockdowns, maintaining at least six feet of
distance between two individuals and restricting respiratory contacts through masks have become the
commonly resorted interventions to arrest the infection growth. However, given the highly infectious
nature of the virus, the benefits of an individual adhering to the protocols would be negligible if others in
the community are reluctant to adopt these protective measures. It follows therefore that ensuring
compliance is identical to the problem of collective action where coordinated among communities would
add to the stock of public health. In particular, public agencies and health bodies in India initiated
widespread informational campaigns on COVID-19 during the pandemic. Community based information
networks are likely to have taken cognizance of this information to promote voluntary compliance
behavior. The realization of cooperative equilibrium, however, could be particularly challenging in the
context of developing countries that are populous and are commonly characterized by fragmentation
along social, religious and economic lines.
In such a setting, could an individual residing in a diverse neighborhood be more susceptible to
COVID-19 infections as against someone in a more homogeneous setting? What is the nature of the
heterogeneities that matter? Are social, religious and economic differences equally important or do some
heterogeneities matter more than the others? We pose these questions in the context of India, which
remains among the worst hit country in Asia with number of infected cases only second to the United
States of America (USA) and deaths just below USA and Brazil. At the point of drafting the paper, close
to 8.6 million cases have been reported with a fatality of more than 127,000 (As of November 10, 2020).
Particularly, in this paper, we study the implications of social, religious and economic diversity on the
growth in the number of reported infections starting from the beginning of the nationwide lockdown
(March 25, 2020) till July 26, 2020. Thereafter this lockdown was implemented in four phases panning
for about two months: Phase 1: 25 March-April 14; Phase 2: April 15 to May 3; Phase 3: May 4 to May
17 and Phase 4: May 18 till May 31. Thereafter, the economic unlocking process was initiated and
accordingly we consider four additional phases for about two months, Phase 5: June 1 -June 14, Phase 6:
June 15-June 28, Phase 7: June 29 -July 12, Phase 8: July 13 to July 26 for analysis. This allows us to
examine the effects on unlocking over the growth in the number of cases and the associated implications
of diversity.

The question on diversity and its influence in determining the efficacy of community action
against COVID-19 is pertinent due to strong presence of caste and religious stratification in the social
architecture in India. Dating back to 1500-500 BCE the caste system comprises of over 4000 social
categories making India one of the most genetically diverse countries in the world (Munshi, 2019). In this
paper we define heterogeneity in terms of four broad caste groups. This includes the Upper Caste
(Others), the Scheduled Caste, SC (formerly untouchable caste), the ethnic and the tribal group belonging
to Scheduled Tribes (ST) and Other Backward Classes (OBC). As (Munshi, 2019) describes, these groups
are delineated with distinct spatial segregation that extends over the clusters in terms of information
sharing and social identity and are likely to play an important role in protective effort against the spread
of infection.
Such segregation is not restricted to caste and social group affinity alone. Ever since the
independence of India in 1947 that entailed a violent partition along religious lines, religious conflicts,
especially the ones between Hindus and Muslims have also been viewed as a source of social cohesion or
fragmentation (Field, Levinson, Pande, & Visaria, 2008); (Susewind, 2017); (Mitra & Ray, 2014). While
the existing literature stuides the effects of social fragmentation on public good provisioning, the impact
of caste and religion based diversity on infection spread remains relatively less explored . Thus, in a
country like India where caste and religion are deeply embedded in societal affairs, exploring the impact
of diversity in these dimensions on COVID-19 spread could provide important policy pointers for
accelerating medical interventions. Notably, in addition to caste and religion heterogeneity which are
largely social in nature, we consider economic diversity manifested through inequality in household
consumption expenditure and explore its relationship with the spread of the infection. Higher economic
inequality is likely to reduce group solidarity and act as a deterrent to collective provisioning (Wade,
1994); (Dayton-Johnson, 2000). In other words, we posit that notions of trust and coordinated community
action can go beyond social and religious affiliations and be aligned along economic lines with respect to
adherence to the COVID-19 compliance protocols.
The idea that diversity may undermine voluntary cooperation to public good, that in our case is
adherence to compliance protocols has been a persistent theme across developing countries (Banerjee,
Iyer, & Somanathan, 2005); (Habyarimana, Humphreys, Posner, & Weinstein, 2007).The underlying
mechanism that drives the relationship is understood through a number of channels: first is through the
preference link where individuals of a particular group care more for in-group members rather than
outsiders (Tajfel, Billig, Bundy, & Flament, 1971); (Vigdor, 2004); (Alesina & Ferrara, Ethnic diversity
and economic performance, 2005). Secondly, homogeneous societies, by virtue of higher social
interactions often possess greater levels of social capital, that influences the expected reciprocity from

others reflecting higher level of interpersonal trust. Accordingly, higher social ties, and networks ensure
homogeneous communities to monitor the violations more efficiently and hence able to impose social
sanctions effectively, which can potentially lead to improved collective action (Banerjee, Iyer, &
Somanathan, 2005); (Miguel & Gugerty, 2005). Finally, greater diversity is also associated with
divergence in preferences and varied risk perception that may lead to sub-optimal level of compliance
(Alesina, Baqir, & Easterly, 1999); (Munshi & Rosenzweig, 2018). However, given the highly infectious
nature of the virus, it may also be plausible that there exists a possibility of lower inter-personal
interaction in diverse communities as a result of which the chances of spread of the virus may be low in
more heterogeneous communities (Bosancianu, et al., 2020). This countervailing possibility turns the
potential relationship between diversity and spread of the infection to be an ambiguous one and thus
necessitate empirical validation.
To study the relationships of interest, we integrate data from multiple sources. The district-wise
data on COVID-19 cases (outcome) for the period of the study, as described previously comes from the
Development Data Lab’s (DDL) COVID India database (Asher, Tobias, Matsuura, & Novosad, 2020).
We also construct a range of relevant controls at the district level using multiple recent rounds of the
National Sample Survey Organization (NSSO), which arguably are among the most credible official
surveys for India. In particular, we examine the changes in the effect size for social, religious and
economic homogeneity at the district level for the time period starting from March 25 to July 26, 2020
dividing, this window it into 8 periods, the first four capturing the phases of the nation-wide lockdown
and the latter corresponding to the four periods of unlocking.
While estimating the relationship of interest, we can negate the possibility of bias from reverse
causation that entails residential self-selection because of the exogenous and unprecedented nature of the
pandemic. Instead central challenge in ascertaining a causal relationship comes from the possibility of
endogeneity that may stem from Omitted Variable Bias (OVB). 1 Despite controlling for various
confounders, it is possible that we are unable to account for unobservables that are simultaneously
correlated with both the variable of interest and the outcomes, thereby inducing bias in our findings. To
account for such possibilities, we undertake the following measures. First, we control for the COVID-19
cases reported in a district before the first phase of the lockdown (25th March 2020). This is critical to
address the selection on unobservables as it subsumes the cumulative influence of initial hotspots,
superior international connectivity, and integration of certain districts into the global supply chain among
others, all of which are likely to be associated with residential patterns that may shape measures of

1

Given that COVID-19 was an exogenous shock, endogeneity via reverse causality is less of a concern.

heterogeneities at the district level. For example, note that the COVID-19 virus did not originate in India 2,
but entered the country through districts/cities that facilitate international travel and handle large volumes
of passengers, especially from China, Europe and the Middle East.3 These districts are also likely to be
better integrated with global supply chains and thereby be favored employment destinations across social,
religious and economic lines. Such factors may result in higher or lower heterogeneity depending on
socio-economic or socio-religious mobility. Such an effect would confound with the relationship of
interest thereby leading to biased estimates. Second, to account for the dynamic supply side responses for
each phase of the lockdown, we control for number of deaths in the district for the previous period in all
the regressions, in addition to the district level physical and human health infrastructure. Here, a plausible
assumption is that the district and other levels of administration are likely to be more sensitive to the
number of COVID-19 deaths in the previous period when formulating or reviewing a policy response.
Third, for all the regressions, we take intra-state, region fixed effects to account for any region level
unobserved characteristics that might be correlated with both the variables of interest and the outcome.
Specifically, this variable along with the time/ period dummies is likely to control for the variation in
COVID-19 testing that is likely to be similar within but vary across these regions with time. Finally, we
use the strategy by (Altonji, Elder, & Taber, 2005) and then (Oster, 2019) to examine the bounds of our
coefficients with a sizeable and standard assumption of selection on unobservables. These steps ensure
that the influence of unobservable confounders are accounted for and the coefficients of homogeneity
derived from the main regression estimations can be viewed from a robust causal lens, which aids
devising important policy instruments.
Our findings indicate, ceteris paribus, districts with higher caste-group homogeneity are likely to
experience lower growth in number of COVID-19 infections on average. The relationship becomes
stronger through extended phases of the lockdown but weakens with the beginning of the unlocking
process. The overall relationship remains statistically significant for the first month of unlocking and
dissipates thereafter. We also find a modest but positive effect of economic equality on spread of
infection in the first three phases of the lockdown thereby underscoring the importance of social ties
based on economic lines. We find no evidence of a significant relationship with religious homogeneity in
a similar context. These results are statistically valid for a range of robustness checks. We also examine
the implications of the unlocking procedure on the relationships of interest. Our findings indicate a
significant influence of the unlocking process, with the gains of caste-group homogeneity attenuating
2

The virus first appeared in Wuhan, China with the Chinese authorities confirming the possibility of human to
human transmission in late January https://www.nytimes.com/2020/01/20/world/asia/coronavirus-chinasymptoms.html
3
The first few cases in India were recorded in the state of Kerala along with the cities of Delhi and Mumbai among
others with high international passengers and transnational migrants

once the lockdown was lifted. Interestingly, for the districts that were predominantly rural, we find that
these gains increased in the unlocking phase. This heterogeneous finding potentially underscores the
importance of social cooperation and ties which is likely to be much stronger in rural areas in comparison
to the more urbanized ones.
Our main contribution through the paper is two-fold. One, we contribute to the growing literature
on the relationship between social fragmentation and provisioning of public goods. Importantly, we
evidence this relationship in context of a unique public good that is tied to public health and compliance
with COVID-19 protocols. This has far reaching implications for preserving both lives and livelihoods in
context of post pandemic world order. Second, from a policy perspective, our findings would imply
identifying socially heterogeneous geographical pockets as potential hotspots and ensuring early
administrative allocation of scarce medical facilities and services in these pockets, until the supply of
these can be scaled up. Also, our findings underscore the importance of social protection and economic
support, especially during lockdowns to ensure that the gains made in arresting the growth of infection
during lockdown remains intact even after the initiation of unlocking the economy. Importantly, our
research underlines the importance of social cohesion and community ties and builds a case against
divisive political agendas that deepens the existing fissures across communities. Instead, our work
outlines the potential gains from promoting harmony across different social groups, especially in the
fragmented pockets.
The structure of this paper is as follows. Section 2 introduces the data used and presents summary
statistics. Section 3 discusses the empirical framework by outlining the estimation and the identification
strategy. Section 4 discusses the results alongside some robustness checks. Section 5 concludes with a
summary of findings, limitations of the study and its policy implications.
2. Data and Descriptive Statistics
District-day-level data on COVID-19 cases and deaths comes from the Development Data Lab’s
(DDL) COVID India database, which is available for 719 of 733 (98%) of the total districts in India. 4 The
period of analysis ranges from 25th March 2020 to 26th July 2020 and covers the period of nation-wide
lockdown, which ended on the 31 st of May 2020, as well as the subsequent two month period of
unlocking. 5 Figure 1 which provides a spatial view of spread of COVID-19 infections in India through
4

The Socioeconomic High-resolution Rural-Urban Geographic Platform for India (SHRUG) is an open source
platform to facilitate data sharing between researchers working on India. This may be accessed at:
http://www.devdatalab.org/shrug. These numbers are taken from covidindia.com, a crowd sourced project.
5
GoI announced nationwide lockdown in four continuous phases starting from the 25 th of March that lasted until the
end of 31st May with detailed guidelines issued on measures such as social distancing and hygiene practices.

subsequent phases of the lockdown indicates shrinking of the green area, which represents low infection
band. Post lockdown we observe a rising number of reported cases as indicated in Table 1.
Figure 1: Spread of COVID-19 cases across districts of India for each phase of the lockdown (until 31 st May 2020)

Thereafter, the respective state governments were given more freedom to decide on further restrictions outside a
countrywide negative list that for example included international travel and opening of educational institutions
https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/india/lockdown-4-0-after-may-31-states-to-have-own-curbslists/articleshow/76024524.cms

To assess district level social, religious and economic diversity, we use the Herfindahl Hirschman
Index (HHI)6 (Rhoades, 1993) and the Gini Index (GI), respectively. As discussed previously, for caste
diversity, we use the broad caste groups that includes the historically disadvantaged groups of SCs, STs
and OBCs in addition to the privileged castes aggregated under “Others”.7 For religion, representation
across 8 major religious groups is accounted for. 8 The HHI varies on a scale of 0 to 1 with a higher value
implying increased homogeneity or concentration. GI is based on monthly household consumption
expenditure, which is also computed on a scale of 0 to 1 with a higher value implying higher inequality. 9
Figure 2 gives a spatial overview of the social group, religion and economic diversity across India
districts.
Figure 2: Social, Religious and Economic diversity across districts of India (2018)

Source: Authors’ calculations using NSSO 76th round

For analysis, the variables of interest are taken as standardized Z-scores, which are standard
deviation units of difference from all-India means. 10 Data for this comes from the 76th round of the
National Sample Survey Organization (NSSO) on drinking water, sanitation, hygiene, and housing

6

The HHI index is a measure of size of firm with respect to the industry and is typically used as a measure of
competition with a higher value implying higher monopolization.
7
The social networks within the Indian caste system are splintered into various sub-caste or jatis. In this paper, we
restrict ourselves to the broad caste groupings as district level representative data is only available for this level for
period as recent as 2018.
8
These include Hindu, Muslim, Christian, Sikh, Jain, Buddhist, Zoroastrian and Others.
9
We assume that intra-household as against inter-household coordination and cooperation is relatively much easier
to achieve. Thus, in this paper we compute the variables of interest (HHI and GI) using data at the household level,
which is then aggregated at the district level using weights. We do however check for the robustness of our findings
using individual level variables which are qualitatively similar.
10
Standard deviation units of difference from the median are also considered for robustness check.

conditions collected between July-December 2018. 11 This is the latest available data, to the best of our
knowledge that would provide representative estimates of the socio-economic profile at the district level
by using appropriate sampling weights. Notably, data from NSSO is often used to estimate prevalence of
poverty, and unemployment by the Government of India along with generating estimates on educational,
agricultural and health indicators among others, which gives credence to our main variables of interest as
well as the control ones.
We also control for a range of socio-economic, demographic and mobility controls from the 76th
round of the NSSO survey. This includes share of households with access to basic amenities such as
improved latrines and water sources as per the WHO guidelines. Access to these amenities is likely to
facilitate reduced movement and exposure to infections from others in the vicinity. As proximity to other
households is critical in achieving compliance with social distancing measures, we control for density of
population12 as well as share of households in the district living in slum or squatter settlements. Given the
importance of hygiene, especially handwashing habits in preventing the spread of the COVID-19
infection, we account for share of households with human faeces spotted around premises during the
survey, as well as share of households whose members wash hands regularly with soap after defecating. 13
Emerging literature suggests that the COVID-19 pandemic has an inherent urban character with a critical
role of cities in in disease transmission (Mishra, Gayen, & Haque, 2020). To account for this, share of
households in the district that reside in urban areas is controlled for. Given the vulnerability of the elderly
population (>=60 years) to infections (Daoust, 2020), share of elderly population is also accounted for.
For economic profile, share of households with at least a member with a graduate degree and regular
employment are considered. We control for mobility in various ways, given it is a critical channel for
transmission: firstly we account for the family mobility trend by including the share of households in the
district with current place of residence being at least 10 years. Secondly, we check for the high frequency
mobility pattern by including the share of households where someone travels for more than 15 kilometres
(km) for work.
Additionally, to account for health profile of the district, information on share of population in a
district with chronic ailment is taken from the 75th NSSO round on Health Consumption. 14 For availability

11

These district wise estimates are computed from the household level data for 106,838 households across India.
Total area for each district in square kilometres is taken from DDL COVID India database, which is discussed
subsequently.
13
In the survey, the household is considered to be washing hands if a majority of the members in the household are
cleaning both the palms, front side and back with all the fingers included with soap or detergent which includes
liquid soaps, hard soaps, hand sanitizers, wet and dry tissue papers etc.
14
This data was collected between July 2017 and June 2018 and covered 113,823 households for each district of
India and provides representative account for each district.
12

of health infrastructure, both physical and human, number of hospitals as well as number of doctors per
million households in a district is considered. This is taken from the DDL COVID India database that
sources this information from the Population Census (2011) and the Socio-Economic Caste Census
(2012) (Asher, Tobias, Matsuura, & Novosad, 2020). The above list of controls is available for 670 of the
733 (91%) districts of India and we are able to map these variables with information on COVID-19 cases
and deaths for 661 of the 719 (92%) districts.
To explore the relationship between diversity and spread of COVID-19 infection, we first present
a scatter of social group homogeneity and the natural logarithm of cases across the eight periods
considered for the analysis. These periods comprise of the four phases each of lockdown and unlocking,
respectively. We also use the administrative data from Government of India (GoI) notification dated 30th
April 2020, issued by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MoHFW). As per the notification,
districts were classified into red, orange and green zones (dangerous, mild, no apparent danger
respectively) for the week following the end of second phase of lockdown (3rd May 2020) using a multifactorial approach.15 Here, the movement of the districts coded as green across the distribution of HHI for
different phases suggests that the districts at the lower end of the distribution (lower social group
homogeneity) moved further to the right as compared to the green districts at the upper end of the
distribution, which were relatively more homogeneous (Figure 3).The trend is similar for consumption
inequality with cases appearing to rise faster for green coded districts with higher economic inequality. 16
Figure 3: Progression of cases and social group homogeneity across districts classified as red, orange and green by
MoHFW via notification on the 30th April 2020

15

This approach accounted for number of cases, extent of testing, surveillance feedback and doubling rates in
respective districts. As per this criterion, a district was classified under green zone if there were no confirmed cases
of COVID-19 in the past 21 days. No subsequent notifications with such categorizations were disseminated by the
Ministry to the best of our knowledge.
16
The scatter plots for GI from household consumption inequality are available on request.

Note: Author’s calculations

We now turn to a discussion on descriptive statistics and provide summary measures of
outcomes, variables of interest and other control variables. It must be noted that across the districts of
India, close to 85% of the districts had no COVID-19 cases reported until the beginning of the lockdown
(25th March 2020). For each of the four phases of the lockdown, which were considered to be among the
most stringent across the world,17 the share of districts with no cases reduced to 47%, 31%, 26% and 15
% respectively. The average number of cases (deaths) per district in this duration increased from about 4
(0) before the first phase of the lockdown to 2669 (80) for the period ending 31 st of May 2020. For the last
period of analysis ending 26th July 2020, the average cases and deaths were as high as 21,279 and 537
respectively (Table 1).
Among the variables of interest, given the vast majority of the country is Hindu, the degree of
religious homogeneity is significantly larger than social group homogeneity, on average. Religious
homogeneity is found to be the highest in districts of Odisha, Uttarakhand, and Gujarat with 11, six and
five districts featuring in the top decile of the distribution. For social group homogeneity, the states of
Nagaland, Arunachal Pradesh and Mizoram had the highest figures with 10, eight and seven districts
featuring in the top decile. The corresponding numbers for consumption inequality were highest for
Chhattisgarh, Odisha and Madhya Pradesh eight, seven and six districts featuring in the top decile,
respectively (Figure 2).
Table 1: Summary Statistics
COVID-19 cases for the following periods:
Pre-lockdown (before 25th March 2020)
1st phase of lockdown (25th March-14th April 2020)
17

Mean

Standard
Deviation

No. of
Districts

4.25

20.21

719

111.91

521.86

719

https://www.bsg.ox.ac.uk/research/research-projects/coronavirus-government-response-tracker, Invalid source specified.

2nd phase of lockdown (14th April-3rd May 2020)

597.46

3rd phase of 3rd lockdown (4th May-17th May 2020)
4th phase of lockdown (18th May-31st May 2020)

3785.95

719

1321.92

9455.72

719

2669.26

19949.42

719

1st phase of unlocking (1st June-14th June 2020)

4853.02

34572.44

719

2nd phase of unlocking (15th June-28th June 2020)

8085.33

55819.61

719

3rd phase of unlocking (29th June-12th July 2020)

13107.08

83636.75

719

4th phase of unlocking (13th July-26th July 2020)

21279.03

COVID-19 related deaths for the following periods:
COVID-19 related deaths at the end of 1st lockdown (14th March
2020)
COVID-19 related deaths at the end of 2nd lockdown (3rd May
2020)
COVID-19 related deaths at the end of 3rd lockdown (17th May
2020)
COVID-19 related deaths at the end of 4th lockdown (31st May
2020)
1st phase of unlocking (1st June-14th June 2020)

Mean

109903.30
Standard
Deviation

719
No. of
Districts

2.81

26.05

719

18.46

161.38

719

43.38

368.68

719

79.72

689.19

719

141.35

1189.75

719

2nd phase of unlocking (15th June-28th June 2020)

264.03

2407.39

719

3rd phase of unlocking (29th June-12th July 2020)

381.64

3285.10

719

4th phase of unlocking (13th July-26th July 2020)

536.53

3985.15
Standard
Deviation

Variables of interest (0-100)
HHI social group

Mean

719
No. of
Districts

48.85

17.25

670

HHI religion group

77.45

16.71

670

Gini coefficient

27.16

5.74
Standard
Deviation

Share of households in a district (scale 0 to 100)

Mean

670
No. of
Districts

Using improved latrines in HH

78.71

18.13

670

HH with improved water source

89.37

15.36

670

Living in slum/squatter settlement

1.36

4.08

670

HH wash hands with soap after defecating

72.82

22.70

670

Human faeces spotted around HH premises

8.48

11.97

670

With chronic ailments

2.88

4.16

670

HH in urban areas

25.32

21.82

670

Elderly (>=60 years) in HH

10.22

4.50

670

At least one member with regular employment in HH

8.17

6.42

670

Share of graduate in the HH

8.86

5.13

670

399922.00

388013.10

670

No. of HH in the district
Density of households per square km

1664.16

32063.58

648

Duration of stay at current place >=10 years

81.13

15.99

670

HH with any member travelling more than 15 kms for work

8.06

8.03

670

Allopathic hospitals per million HH in district

56.46

76.57

670

Allopathic doctors per million HH in district

400.51

811.55

670

Note: From the third phase of lockdown, each lockdown lasted for two weeks beginning on Monday and ending on a Sunday. Post unlocking
period has been broken down into 4 phases in a corresponding way

To further understand how the outcome of interest varies with measures of homogeneity, we use
the kernel weighted local polynomial smoothened plots with 95% confidence interval that makes no
restrictive distributional assumptions on the error term (Fan & Gijbels, 1996). In Figure 4, for the duration
of the analysis, we find that the rate of growth of COVID-19 cases falls as social group homogeneity rises
along the x-axis. The growth of infections also appears to be rising with higher income inequality as
measured by higher values of the Gini coefficient along the x-axis. As this analysis is devoid of potential
confounders, we now turn to a regression-based approach to validate the relationships of interest. For this,
we first present the empirical framework and then present the corresponding findings over the next two
sections.
Figure 4: Local polynomial plots for log of COVID cases and caste, religious, and economic homogeneity
across districts

Note: Authors’ calculations

Empirical Framework

4. 1 Estimation Strategy
First, we estimate the relationship between the indices associating homogeneity with the number of
COVID-19 infections across districts at the end of the 8 th period (as on 26th July 2020) that we considered.
To test our hypothesis, we regress the logarithm of number of COVID-19 infection cases reported in each
district (d) of administrative region (r) on the variables of interest that capture homogeneity along caste
, religious

and economic lines

. To ensure comparability, we standardize

the three indices and use them directly in the regression. To estimate the association, we first use the
following model:

̅

Here ̅

̅

denotes 1 added to the number of the COVID-19 infection cases reported in district, d

located in the administrative region, r at the end of the 8th period. Given that natural logarithm of zero is
undefined, we add one to each of the variable before logarithmic transformation to ensure that there is no
and ̅

sample selection bias (MaCurdy & Pencavel, 1986).

COVID-19 cases reported before the announcement of the lockdown
fatalities due to the virus at the district level in the previous period

indicates the number of
and number of reported
For both these controls, one is

added for reasons stated previously . Both these controls would account for the potential supply side
short-term response for the authorities to arrest the growth in infection. This would potentially include
timely medical interventions, strategic planning to contain the growth in infection and awareness
campaigns among many others.

and

represents the district level standardized values of

HHI index for caste and religion respectively and

is the standardized Gini coefficient for

consumption expenditure. The vector of time invariant control variables at the district level is given by
. The administrative region

18

fixed effects are denoted by

which account for inter-regional

heterogeneities that are time invariant and may cofound with our relationship of interest while

is the

error term. The regression estimation is done through the normal Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) and
robust standard errors that control for potential heteroscedasticity are used. Here,

are the

coefficients of interest.
Next as discussed, we divide the time since the commencement of the first lockdown (March 25,
2020) till July 26, 2020 into 8 periods each consisting of about 15 days.19 The first four periods
correspond to the four lockdown phases and the next four represent the unlocking phases. To examine the
implications of homogeneity across these time periods, we estimate the following pooled OLS regression
equation:
̅

18

̅

The National Sample Survey Organization divides all the districts into a number of mutually exclusive and
exhaustive administrative regions, which are used as fixed effects in our regressions.
19
Initial phases (1 and 2) were longer as lockdown phase lasted more than 2 weeks in the beginning but later was
extended by intervals of 2 weeks.

Here

denotes the periods dummies. ̅

period, and ̅

represents 1 added to the number of reported cases in

is the reported number of deaths till the lagged period,

in district, d. To assess

the relationship between homogeneity and the changes in infections over time, we examine the
coefficients,

.

Our central hypothesis links caste and religious homogeneity, alongside lower economic inequality
with a potentially slower growth of infection in a spatial unit. The underlying pathway for this, as argued
is that of within group cooperation and trust, which facilitates coordinated community action to tackle the
spread of a pandemic. To establish causality of homogeneity or inequality to the number of reported
infection, we need to account for the potential endogeneity, the two main concerns of which are reverse
causality and the Omitted Variable Bias (OVB).
In the context of our study, reverse causality is of negligible concern. Given that COVID-19
induced lockdown in India was an unanticipated shock and introduced with just a four-hour notice, the
chances of residential clustering on social, religious and economic lines across districts as a response to
the outbreak would be improbable. This sounds especially true when studies have documented the low
levels of inter-district or inter-state migration in India even during the non-COVID times (Munshi and
Rosenzweig 2009; Munshi 2016; Rowchowdhury 2019). Post lockdown, although mobility increased, it is
still likely that this was s considerably lower than that during the pre-COVID period. Hence, the chances
of reverse causality restricting us to view the estimates from causal lens are almost negligible.
To control for the OVB, we introduce a host of control variables that range from district level
economic conditions and urbanization to sanitation and hygiene practice along with health indicators and
availability of physical infrastructure and health workers among many others. Note that the initial
hotspots where the chances of the spread of infection remain high have been controlled for through the
number of cases reported across districts before the initiation of the lockdown. This in our view is critical
to address the issue of endogeneity as it controls for various characteristics of districts that became
epicenters of COVID-19 epidemic in India. For example, the major metropolitan cities of Delhi, Mumbai,
Kolkata and Chennai accounted for more than half the total tally of cases 20 and are also major centers for
urban jobs in India. The time variant potential health measures in response to COVID-19 deaths have
been controlled through the district level number of deaths in the lagged period. Given the administrative
structure of India where each district is under the stewardship of a bureaucrat (district collector) that
directly reports to the Chief Minister of a state, allocation of scarce administrative resources in a
pandemic is likely to be most sensitive to COVID-19 related casualties. In addition, the region fixed
20

https://www.financialexpress.com/lifestyle/health/covid-19-four-metros-account-for-half-of-all-cases-nationwidetally-nears-2-4-lakh/1983731/

effect are introduced to control for all the time invariant characteristics that may be common to all the
districts lying within the respective regions.
Despite these elaborate set of control variables, one may still argue some potential confounders getting
omitted from the regressions, which can yield biased estimates. To ensure this is not the case, we examine
the potential variation in the estimates after accounting for the OVB through a strategy developed by
(Oster, 2019) based on (Altonji, Elder, & Taber, 2005)that rests on the assumption that selection on
unobservable variables can be measured through the extent of selection on observables. For further
elaboration, consider the following regression equation:

Here

is the dependent variable,

variables and

denotes the primary variable of interest,

is the vector of control

is the vector of all unobserved components that was omitted from the regression. Our aim

is to examine the corresponding changes in

or whether it changes its sign when

is considerably high.

Here the primary assumption is:

The above equation indicates that the relationship between
proportional to the correlation between

and the unobserved component,

and the observed component (

is

and the degree of

proportionality is given by . With this, (Oster, 2019) show that it is possible to derive a possible range of
through two parameters:

and

.

is the R-squared value of a hypothetical regression that

incorporates all the observable along with the unobserved components and hence is the maximum value
of R-square it can achieve. While there can be various options to compute the bound on
from a wide sample of randomized experiments, (Oster, 2019)proposes
R-squared value of the full model with observed control variables and

, using data
, where

is the

.21 For parameter

,

assuming that the extent of association of the observables is as much as the effect of omitted variables,
then the

lies between [-1,1] (Altonji, Elder, & Taber, 2005); (Mukhopadhyay & Sahoo, 2016). (Oster,

2019) proposes two equivalent approaches to test if the effect becomes statistically insignificant after
accounting for the OVB. Firstly, we check if

for which the coefficient of interest turns 0 with

exceeds a threshold of 1. The argument is if

goes beyond 1 or falls below -1, the extent of the

association with unobservable has to be massively high in either direction, which may not be valid
especially after controlling for the robust set of observed covariates. Secondly, we examine if
21

changes

According to Oster (2019), the bounding value of the cut off at 1.3 allows effects from at-least 90% of the random experiments to survive.

its sign if in the interval

[-1, 1] and

. If sign does not change, then even with a very

stringent condition of the extent of association with the unobservable being as high as that with the
observables and in both the directions as well, the null hypothesis (

can be rejected. We find these

conditions to satisfy well (shown later) that ensure us to look at the estimates from causal lens.
4. Results
4.1 Regressions
We first present the estimates of the regression of the natural logarithmic value of the reported cases on
the three different indices of homogeneity as outlined in equation (1) in Table 2. To check the level of
stability of the coefficient of interest, we use four different specifications. In the first specification, apart
from the variables of interest, we incorporate natural log of cases reported prior to the initiation of
lockdown in the district and number of deaths in the previous period alongside regional specific fixed
effects. To this, in specification 2, we add indicators on access to amenities such as improved toilet and
primary source of water. Further, we also add variables on share of households (HH) in the district that
reside in slums/squatter settlements and general hygiene and cleanliness practices around their premises.
In specification 3, we subsequently control for the economic and demographic variables. In this
specification, in addition we account for share of individuals in the district reporting chronic ailments. In
the last specification, we control for the mobility indicators as specified previously alongside average
density of population in the district as well as the existing physical and health infrastructure of the district.
Because it controls for a host of observable covariates spanning from economic to demographic
characteristics along with sanitary and health indicators and also the supply side response to the outbreak,
this is our preferred specification, which is used in the subsequent regressions as well.
The results appear to be quite stable across specifications with findings from the final
specification (column 4) suggesting that a one standard deviation increase in homogeneity across caste
groups, ceteris-paribus, is associated with a decrease in the logarithmic value of the reported cases by
about 0.18 on an average. The results for income GINI are qualitatively similar in the sense that an
increase in inequality is related to higher number of cases albeit with a lower magnitude with an average
effect size of about 0.13 for every standard deviation increase, thereby underscoring the importance of
equity. Notably, the bearing on religious homogeneity remains statistically indistinguishable from zero.
The findings from other set of covariates indicate expected results as we observe that the number of
reported cases and deaths in the pre-lockdown phase to be significantly associated with the current
number of reported cases.

Table 2: OLS regression for growth (natural logarithm) of COVID-19 cases from the beginning of the lockdown to
end of July 2020 on caste, religious and economic diversity across districts of India

Logarithm of cases before the lockdown (25th March
2020)
Logarithm of cumulative deaths in the period
Z-score HHI SG
Z-score HHI Religion
Z-score Gini
Additional district level controls:
Amenities, sanitation and hygiene
Demographic, economic, long-term health outcomes
Mobility, density and health infrastructure
Region Fixed Effects
Constant
Observations
R2

(1)
model1
b/se
0.302***

(2)
model2
b/se
0.285***

(3)
model3
b/se
0.205***

(4)
model4
b/se
0.205***

(0.056)
0.315***
(0.042)
-0.241***
(0.077)
-0.051
(0.070)
0.134**
(0.065)

(0.053)
0.316***
(0.043)
-0.249***
(0.078)
-0.061
(0.063)
0.162***
(0.060)

(0.073)
0.265***
(0.063)
-0.176**
(0.076)
-0.024
(0.054)
0.106
(0.067)

(0.075)
0.265***
(0.059)
-0.175**
(0.075)
-0.023
(0.053)
0.129**
(0.065)





8.258***
(0.450)
661
0.785





8.091***
(0.578)
661
0.793





3.309
(2.137)
661
0.805





3.382*
(1.913)
661
0.807

Note: Authors’ calculations. *** p-value < 0.01, ** p-value < 0.05, * p-value <0.10, standard errors are robust to heteroscedasticity. To ensure
that districts with no cases in any period do not drop out of the analysis, unity was added to cases before taking natural log. Results are robust to
adding a smaller positive number. Results are robust with three- and seven-day rolling averages replacing daily reported cases for each period.
Detailed tables are available on request.

Next, we run a pooled OLS regression using the number of district level reported cases at the end
of each of the 8 periods we considered through equation (2) as outlined earlier. Through the interaction
effects of the homogeneity indices and the period dummies, this allows us to examine the heterogeneous
implications of our primary variables of interest on the changes in the reported number of infectious cases
over time. Figure 5 presents the marginal effects of these interaction terms, controlling for the potential
confounders discussed earlier. Note that at the end of period 4, the government mandated lockdown
ended, and the unlocking procedure commenced. The findings from the regressions indicate an interesting
pattern. We observe incremental marginal gains of higher homogeneity on the caste lines over each of the
4 lockdown phases. By the end of the lockdown phase 4, we find that one standard deviation increase in
homogeneity in terms of caste groups through the HHI results in an average drop by 0.53 in the
logarithmic value of the reported cases. However, post lockdown, the relationship starts to weaken and by
the end of the 7th period, we observe no additional gains from higher caste group homogeneity (See panel
(a), figure 5).

As observed through panel (b) of figure 5, we find no significant relationship of religious
homogeneity on the number of infections across time. For economic inequality, more equal districts are
found to be associated with a lower number of reported cases through this relationship remains strong
until the end of the third period of the lockdown but erodes completely by end of the fourth phase of the
lockdown. Over the unlocking period (period: 5 to 8), the marginal gains from higher economic equality
remains statistically indistinguishable from zero.
Figure 5: Coefficients of variables of interest from OLS regression for growth (natural logarithm) of COVID-19
cases across 4 periods of lockdown and 4 periods of unlocking, until end of 26 th July 2020

(a) Period-wise coefficients for
HHI Caste Group

(b) Period-wise coefficients for
HHI Religion

(c) Period-wise coefficients for
Gini Index (HH consumption)

Note: The coefficients come from the full control scheme, as described in model 2 above with confidence bands of 95%. The vertical line at x=4
signifies end of nationwide lockdown (31 st May 2020). To ensure that districts with no cases in any period do not drop out of the analysis, unity
was added to cases before taking natural log. Results robust to adding a smaller positive number. Results robust with three- and seven-day rolling
averages replacing daily reported cases for each period. Detailed tables available on request.

4.2 Accounting for OVB
How effective is our variables of interest in arresting the growth in the reported cases of COVID19 infection? Does diversity in terms of caste groups or in economic lines lead to higher number of cases?
As argued earlier, we include a host of control covariates in our regression that account for most of the
variations in the number of cases across districts. The information about the number of tests carried out at
the district level is unavailable but the region fixed effects along with the period dummies have been
incorporated in the model. To the extent that there are no systematic changes in the testing across time for
districts within a region, the fixed effects would account for large part of the effect through differential
testing numbers. Note that the associated R-square value from regressions corresponding with figure 5 is
observed to be 0.75, which indicates 75% of the variation in the dependent variable has already been
accounted for through the set of control variables used in the regression. To that extent, we argue that we
can view the inferences drawn through causal lens.
Nevertheless, because one may still argue about some omitted variables biasing our estimations,
we use strategy developed by (Oster, 2019)based on (Altonji, Elder, & Taber, 2005)that estimates the
bounds of the main coefficient of interest assuming that the extent of selection on unobservables can be

measured through the selection on observables as explained earlier. The results from this exercise are
presented in Table 3. For interaction coefficients which are found to be statistically significant at 10%
level or less, the

needs to be well over 1 to bring them to zero (Oster, 2019). This, as argued earlier is

unlikely especially since we are already controlling for a host of covariates, which potential accounts for
many unobservable factors as well. However, even if we assume the extent of unobservable
characteristics confounding the dependent variables is proportional to that which is explained through the
observed covariates, the significant effects of homogeneity with regards to caste and also that related to
economic inequality through Gini are preserved and do not wither away.
Table 3: Accounting for potential omitted variable bias
HHI Caste Group
Coefficient
(Controlled)

Coefficient
(Uncontrolled)

for β=0 with

Gini (HH consumption)
Coefficient
(Controlled)

Coefficient
(Uncontrolled)

for β=0
with

25 March-14 April
0.075
-0.379
-0.453
0.459***
0.478
16.376
15 April-3 May
-0.171*
-0.644
0.885
0.361***
0.447
7.769
***
**
4 May-17 May
-0.356
-0.838
1.691
0.168
0.324
2.707
18 May- 31 May
-0.525***
-1.008
2.325
-0.015
0.187
-0.220
1 June - 14 June
-0.293***
-0.805
1.356
-0.043
0.124
-0.774
15 June - 28 June
-0.182**
-0.734
0.816
0.009
0.146
0.188
29 June-12 July
-0.047
-0.640
0.206
0.084
0.193
2.021
13 July-26 July
0.020
-0.608
-0.085
0.080
0.174
2.218
Note: Authors’ calculations. *** p-value < 0.01, ** p-value < 0.05, * p-value <0.10. The uncontrolled coefficient is from regression of outcome
exclusively on variable of interest. Controlled coefficients are from the hypothetical regression with
and
where
is
from the final regression with all observed variables. Results obtained via user written Stata command psacalc (Oster, 2016).

The findings, we argue have considerable implications in terms of identifying the target group
for scaling up compliance inducing actions. Among all measures of social cohesion, our findings show,
caste heterogeneity remains persistently negative predictor of infection spread during lockdowns relative
to religion and income. Further, impact of higher caste homogeneity seems to get multiplied with each
subsequent phase of the lockdown.22 Its only after the lockdown was lifted did the gains from caste group
cohesion start declining. Here one may argue that because of the continuous stretch of nationwide
lockdowns spanning for more than two months, despite collective benefits, the associated private costs
due to disruptions in livelihood and declining economic well-being led to weakening of the social ties
among people of similar caste groups (Ahmed et al. 2020; Lancet, 2020). Incidentally, studies have
indicated a decline in private compliance to COVID-9 non-pharmaceutical protocols like maintaining
social distancing and wearing facemasks over time possibly due to fatigue and economic costs (Briscese
et. al., 2020; Das et al., 2020).To complement our findings using period-wise data, we also run pooled
OLS regressions taking daily data on the number of infection cases. Here instead of period dummies, we
incorporate daily dummies and examine the coefficients on the daily interactions with our main variables
22

According to the Blavatnik School of Governance study, India is found to have the most stringent lockdown
among all the major countries in the world (https://www.bsg.ox.ac.uk/research/research-projects/coronavirusgovernment-response-tracker) (accessed on September 30, 2020)

of interest. Figure 6 presents the estimations from the regression. The findings indicate similar inferences
that we obtained earlier. The gains from caste homogeneity seems to increase over each day of the
lockdown on an average, but post lockdown the effect size is found to get reduced over time. Economic
equality is also found to bear some discernible gains in the initial phases of the lockdown but the effect
seems to be withered with time.
Figure 6: Coefficients of variables of interest from OLS regression for growth (natural logarithm) of COVID-19
cases using daily data from 25th of March to 26th of July 2020

Note: based on authors’ calculations

4.3 Robustness Checks
We run a battery of robustness checks to ensure our inferences are robust.

(i) Shannon’s entropy measure
First, we consider Shannon’s entropy measure (SEM) of diversity instead of the HHI indices for caste
group and religious homogeneity. This value of this measure ranges from zero to infinity with a higher
value implying greater diversity (Frenken, 2004). Mathematically, this can be presented as
∑

where

is the share of each group in overall population which can be divided into

mutually exclusive groups. The results for this are presented in Figure 7. Unlike the HHI that ranges
between 0 and 1 with higher value implying higher homogeneity, SEM ranges from 0 to infinity with
higher values representing greater diversity. Thus, although the HHI and SEM are inversely related, the
coefficients are not directly comparable. However, the results suggest the relationships of interest are
robust to the measure of diversity. Note that in some of the districts, many of the groups may not be
present which would make their share in the population to be zero. As a result, these districts drop out of
the analysis. To validate that this is not driving our findings, we re-estimate the model using HHI of
heterogeneity for the sub-set of districts for which the SEM could be computed. We are able to ascertain
that the relationship of interest is robust and the findings can be provided on request.
Figure 7: Coefficients of variables of interest from OLS regression for growth (natural logarithm) of COVID-19
cases across 4 periods of lockdown and 4 periods of unlocking, until end of 26 th July 2020 (using Shannon’s Index
of diversity)

Note: The coefficients come from the full control scheme, as described in model 2 with confidence bands of 95%. The vertical line at x=4
signifies end of nationwide lockdown (31 st May 2020). To ensure that districts with no cases in any period do not drop out of the analysis, unity
was added to cases before taking natural log. Results are robust to adding a smaller positive number. Results are robust with three- and seven-day
rolling averages replacing daily reported cases for each period. Detailed tables are available on request.

(ii) Regression with non-capital districts
Data indicates that the bigger cities are clusters with higher economic activity and larger in-flow of
migrants. Thus, they could potentially drive our results. Though we adequately controlled for these
characteristics in our specifications, as robustness check, we remove the districts that contain the capital
of a state and re-estimate the model with non-capital districts across all the Indian states. This is because

it is likely that these districts with the state capitals are likely to be the major hotspots within a state.
Figure 8 which presents the findings indicate that we are able to replicate our results with such this subsample of districts as well.
Figure 8: Coefficients of variables of interest from OLS regression for growth (natural logarithm) of COVID-19
cases across 4 periods of lockdown and 4 periods of unlocking, until end of 26 th July 2020 for non-capital districts
across all Indian states

(a) Period-wise coefficients for
HHI Caste Group

(b) Period-wise coefficients for
HHI Religion

(c) Period-wise coefficients for
Gini Index (HH
consumption)

Note: The coefficients come from the full control scheme, as described in model 2 with confidence bands of 95%. The vertical line at x=4
signifies end of nationwide lockdown (31 st May 2020). To ensure that districts with no cases in any period do not drop out of the analysis, unity
was added to cases before taking natural log. Results are robust to adding a smaller positive number. Results are robust with three- and seven-day
rolling averages replacing daily reported cases for each period. Detailed tables are available on request.

4.4 Further Analysis
Effects of unlocking
We argue social cohesion on caste lines and to a lesser extent economic equality, among other factors can
be the key to arrest growth in COVID-19 infection cases over time. This is evident especially during the
lockdown phases as we find increasing gains of homogeneity across caste over time and higher returns of
economic equality at least during the early phases of the government mandated nationwide lockdown. As
the unlocking commenced after May 31, 2020, figure 4 indicate that no discernible gain from economic
equality or even if there is a gain, which is statistically distinguishable from zero, the effect size is lower.
So, is it the case government unlocking of the economy after the mandated lockdown played a role in
altering the influence of homogeneity on caste lines or that of economic equality? Did the returns from
lower diversity erode with unlocking of the economy?
We examine this using the following regression model:

̅

̅

This looks same as equation (2) with the only difference being introduction of an unlock dummy instead
of period dummies. The “unlock” dummy takes the value of 1 for period 5 to 8 and 0 for the periods 1 to
4. Note that as in the earlier case, this regression controls for the number of fatalities in the lagged period
along with the other confounders as included earlier.
The findings from the regression, presented in table 4 suggest a positive and significant rise in the
cases post unlocking in areas with higher caste homogeneity. In other words, the marginal gains of higher
caste homogeneity through lower infection cases seem to get diluted once the unlocking process of the
economy started and it led to about a 0.61 increase in the logarithmic value of the number of reported
cases with each additional standard deviation increase in caste homogeneity. Please note that the
relationship between this homogeneity and the reported cases remains negative and statistically
significant even during the initial phases of the unlocking period. The positive sign on the interaction term
just indicates that the influence of the social cohesion working through caste get reduced significantly
after the initial of the unlock process from the government.
Interestingly, this relationship does not seem to hold for religious homogeneity or economic
inequality as we observe their corresponding interaction coefficients to be statistically insignificant. The
larger implication of the findings as indicated earlier indicates that the social cohesion for caste seem to
have worked with a mandatory deterrence measure of nationwide stringent lockdown. Nevertheless with
the unlocking process, this cohesion possibly weakened potentially in the wake of massive economic
disruptions which led a rise in cases even in areas with higher homogeneity, though this would need
further research to pin point the exact reasons
Table 4: OLS regression for logarithm of COVID-19 cases across 2 periods (lockdown and unlocking) until end of
July 2020 on measures of heterogeneity and consumption inequality
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
model1
model2
model3
model4
b/se
b/se
b/se
b/se
Log of cases before lockdown
0.231***
0.237***
0.237***
0.231***
(0.065)
(0.066)
(0.066)
(0.065)
Past period cumulative deaths
0.331***
0.307***
0.307***
0.332***
(0.054)
(0.055)
(0.055)
(0.054)
Z-score HHI SG
-0.477***
-0.173**
-0.173**
-0.480***
(0.095)
(0.069)
(0.069)
(0.095)

Z-score HHI Religion
Z-score Gini
Unlocking (base: lockdown)
Unlocking # Z-score HHI SG
Unlocking # Z-score HHI Religion
Unlocking # Z-score Gini
Additional district level controls:
Amenities, sanitation and hygiene
Demographic, economic, long-term health outcomes
Mobility, density and health infrastructure
Region Fixed Effects
Constant
Observations
R2

0.010
(0.056)
0.115**
(0.056)
2.007***
(0.168)
0.606***
(0.105)
NA
NA
NA
NA

0.009
(0.076)
0.116**
(0.056)
2.053***
(0.174)
NA
NA
0.004
(0.095)
NA
NA

0.012
(0.056)
0.164**
(0.077)
2.052***
(0.174)
NA
NA
NA
NA
-0.094
(0.108)

0.039
(0.073)
0.110
(0.076)
2.005***
(0.169)
0.614***
(0.105)
-0.058
(0.089)
0.008
(0.105)





0.041
(1.756)
1322
0.760





-0.201
(1.778)
1322
0.750





-0.200
(1.778)
1322
0.750





0.047
(1.757)
1322
0.760

Notes: Authors calculations', *** p-value < 0.01, ** p-value < 0.05, * p-value <0.10, standard errors are clustered at district level

Nonetheless, the implications of caste homogeneity in areas which are more likely to be
associated with higher social ties and coordination with stronger inter-personal relationship are likely to
offer some insights into isolating the economic considerations from social cohesion. Since rural India is
more likely to be characterized by these features, we examine if the gains through caste homogeneity hold
in the less urbanized districts in the post unlocking period (Banerjee B. , 1986). To give evidence on this,
we look at the differential effects of unlocking in areas with varying levels of urbanization. To understand
this, we create a dummy variable,

, which takes the value of 1 for districts with less than

population living in urban areas and 0 for those with

or more than k percent urban population. We use

this in our regression, given by the following:

̅

Here

is our coefficient of interests.

percent

̅

Figure 9, which presents the findings with various levels of

indicate exactly what we

hypothesized. In areas with low urbanization, the marginal gains from higher caste homogeneity seem to
not only remain intact even after the unlock process but also show positive effects in reducing the growth
in reported COVID-19 cases, even after lockdown. Interestingly, for districts with more than 90% and
even 80% rural population, the implications of caste homogeneity on the unlocking initiation is found to
bear a significant and negative relationship with the number of reported cases with the effect size being
larger for the former than the latter. This underscores the importance of higher social cohesion and interpersonal ties. Coordination action through strong caste networks is likely to play an important role in
ensuring low growth in infections. This is observed to be true even during the period when the unlocking
process was initiated and the potential mobility increases along with the likelihood of complying with the
pandemic protocols like social distancing among others.
Figure 9: Coefficients form three-way interaction of variables of interest with lower bound of rural population share
and unlocking (for caste groups)

Note: The coefficients come from the full control scheme, as described in model 4 with confidence bands of 95%. Unlocking dummy takes value
0 if data from period before end of nationwide lockdown and takes value 1 if after unlocking.

5. Policy Implication
The key findings of the paper can be summarized via three important results. First, we find that castegroup homogeneity has a significant influence in curtailing the spread of COVID-19 spread in India.
Religious fragmentation, however has a limited role. In addition, we find that income inequality exerts a
negative influence on growth of COVID-19 cases, which tend to rise faster in more unequal districts.
Accordingly, our results emphasize the importance of strong community cohesion mainly working

through caste-groups and to a lesser through economic affinity in ensuring socially beneficial compliance.
A major challenge to sustain the community norms arises from the economic hardship due to subsequent
lockdown phases. These are likely to intensify economic needs to violate compliance norms. Evidently,
the gains through cohesion seem to attenuate after easing of these phases of mandatory lockdown. In this
context, firstly the paper emphasizes the importance of robust social protection and redistributive
measures, which are a vital link that needs to strengthened during the pandemic, not only as a step to
mitigate the economic hardship but also to arrest the spread of the infection through sustained community
coordination.
Finally, the effect from caste-group homogeneity is found to be more prominent in areas that are
less urbanized and that this effect continues to operate even after mobility restrictions are withdrawn. It is
our surmise that the result is suggestive of the fact that relative importance of different dimension of
social fragmentation varies with the degree of urbanization. In districts that are less urbanized, community
cohesion is likely to be dominated by social identity. People in rural areas have a relatively restricted
social network but this network entails strong ties relative to urbanized households that have more
contacts but weaker social ties (Sato & Zenou, 2015). In other words, urban interactions are more
frequent but ties are voluntary in nature, which in rural areas are mostly based on social norm and kinship
(White & Guest, 2003). Studies have also found that people living in urban areas are less likely to
participate in collective action (Bovaird, Van Ryzin, Loeffler, & Parrado, 2014). We believe among other
factors, the nature of interaction and community structure in the rural areas are the enabling reasons for a
stronger relationship between homogeneity and spread of infections through better social cohesion.
Importantly we still observe that community effect continues to display significant resilience in rural
areas even in the unlock period when movement restrictions are partially lifted albeit its effect is found to
be disappear in more urbanized areas. Given the fact, that COVID-19 cases continue to spread in India
these possibilities open up a number of policy avenues for health interventions.
First, government should prioritize socially heterogeneous areas relative to homogeneous ones as
they might be more vulnerable and possess lower social capital to tackle infection growth. Our findings
provide a basis for identifying and zoning of local areas into socially homogenous and heterogeneous
blocks. The heterogeneous blocks can be prioritized for medical intervention as well as income support to
compensate for the already weak community cohesion as a short and medium response to pandemic.
Secondly, in the relatively homogenous areas, as existing social ties are getting weakened with onset of
gradual opening up of the economy strategies to strengthen community networks might be undertaken.
One possible channel could be decentralizing health interventions through community channels involving
greater community participation. Research indicates that positive perception about the community is

found to enhance private compliance behavior with respect to the pandemic (Das et al. 2020). Here
targeted intervention and educational messages catering to the relevance of the community through
workers belonging from the same community can prove to be important. The effectiveness of these
policies, if implemented would then be an important area of future research.
Conclusion
Curtailing growth in infection requires strong social cohesion and ties within a community, something
that might be difficult in a diverse and heterogenous context. Such a setting places obstacles in

realization of trust and cooperation that is required for coordinated community action during
pandemics. Using high frequency data on COVID-19 infection at the district level, we find that social
homogeneity through caste to play a significant role in ensuring lower growth in COVID-19 cases in the
Indian context. During the nationwide lockdown, social cohesion played an important role in arresting the
growth of infection. However, the marginal gains seem to dampen after the initiation of the unlocking
process that potentially led to higher mobility. Importantly community effect continues to display
significant resilience in rural areas even in the unlocked period albeit its effect is found to disappear in
more urbanized areas. As we have accounted for a wide range of potential confounders, we have reasons
to believe that our estimates reveal the impact of community cohesion on infection spread via coordinated
compliance. This becomes even more robust after we account for potential selection on unobservables,
which might nullify the positive effects of caste-group homogeneity. Our analysis suggest that caste-wise
heterogeneous areas and to some extent economically unequal areas are most likely to be vulnerable to
infection growth and government must prioritize a response to such areas while expanding its emergency
capacity. In areas which are relatively homogenous, we stress on community strengthening efforts.
Despite our robust findings, the exact mechanisms through which caste-based heterogeneity becomes
important in the context of in India remain unexplored in our paper. We propose this as an important
agenda for future research.
References

Alesina, A., & Ferrara, E. L. (2005). Ethnic diversity and economic performance. Journal of Economic
Literature, 43(3), 762-800.
Alesina, A., Baqir, R., & Easterly, W. (1999). Public goods and ethnic divisions. The Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 114(4)((4)), 1243-1284.
Altonji, J. G., Elder, T. E., & Taber, C. R. (2005). Selection on observed and unobserved variables:
Assessing the effectiveness of Catholic schools. Journal of Political Economy,, 113(1), 151-184.

Asher, S., Tobias, L., Matsuura, R., & Novosad, P. (2020). COVID-19 data resources.
Banerjee, A., Iyer, L., & Somanathan, R. (2005). History, social divisions, and public goods in rural
India. Journal of the European Economic Association, 3((2-3)), 639-647.
Banerjee, B. (1986). Rural to Urban Migration and the Urban Labour Market: A Case Study of Delhi.
New Delhi: Himalaya Publishing House.
Bosancianu, C., Dionne, K. Y., Hilbig, H., Humphreys, M., Sampada, K. C., Lieber, N., & Scacco, A.
(2020, June 16). Political and Social Correlates of Covid-19 Mortality. doi:10.31235/osf.io/ub3zd
Bovaird, A., Van Ryzin, G., Loeffler, E., & Parrado, S. (2014). Activating Citizens to Participate in
Collective CoProduction of Public Services. Journal of Social Policy, 1-23.
Briscese, G., Lacetera, N., Macis, M., & Tonin, M. (2020). Compliance with covid-19 social distancing
measures in Italy: the role of expectations and duration (No. w26916). National Bureau of
Economic Research
Daoust, J. F. (2020). Elderly people and responses to COVID-19 in 27 Countries. PloS one, 15(7).
Das, U., Sarkhel, P., & Ashraf, S. (2020). Love Thy Neighbor? Perceived Community Abidance and
Private Compliance to COVID-19 Norms in India. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.12350.
Dayton-Johnson, J. (2000). Determinants of collective action on the local commons: a model with
evidence from Mexico. Journal of Development Economics, 62, 181–208.
Fan, J., & Gijbels, I. (1996). Local polynomial modelling and its applications: monographs on statistics
and applied probability. CRC Press.
Field, E., Levinson, M., Pande, R., & Visaria, S. (2008). Segregation, rent control, and riots: The
economics of religious conflict in an Indian city. American Economic Review, 98(2), 505-10.
Frenken, K. (2004). The Elgar companion to Neo-Schumpeterian economics. In H. Horst, & A. Pyke,
Entropy and information theory (pp. 544–555). Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.
Habyarimana, J., Humphreys, M., Posner, D. N., & Weinstein, J. M. (2007). Why does ethnic diversity
undermine public goods provision? American Political Science Review, 709-725.
Lancet (2020). India under COVID-19 lockdown. Lancet.. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30938-7
MaCurdy, T. E., & Pencavel, J. H. (1986). Testing between competing models of wage and employment
determination in unionized markets. Journal of Political Economy, 94(3), S3-S39.
Miguel, E., & Gugerty, M. (2005). Ethnic diversity, social sanctions, and public goods in Kenya. Journal
of Public Economics, 89(11-12), 2325-2368.
Mishra, S., Gayen, A., & Haque, S. M. (2020). COVID-19 and urban vulnerability in India. Habitat
international, 103.

Mitra, A., & Ray, D. (2014). Implications of an economic theory of conflict: Hindu-Muslim violence in
India. Journal of Political Economy, 122(4), 719-765.
Mukhopadhyay, A., & Sahoo, S. (2016). Does access to secondary education affect primary schooling?
Evidence from India. Economics of Education Review, 54, 124-142.
Munshi, K. (2019). Caste and the Indian economy. Journal of Economic Literature, 57(4), 781-834.
Munshi K, Rosenzweig M (2009) Why is mobility in India so low? Social insurance,
inequality, and growth (No. w14850). National Bureau of Economic Research
Munshi, K., & Rosenzweig, M. ( 2018). Ethnic Diversity and the Under-Supply of Local Public Goods.
Working Paper.
Oster, E. (2019). Unobservable selection and coefficient stability: Theory and evidence. Journal of
Business & Economic Statistics, 37(2), 187-204.
Rhoades, S. A. (1993). The herfindahl-hirschman index. Fed. Res. Bull., 188.

Roychowdhury P (2019) Peer effects in consumption in India: An instrumental variables
approach using negative idiosyncratic shocks. World Development 114: 122-137
Sato, Y., & Zenou, Y. (2015). How urbanization affect employment and social interactions. European
Economic Review, 75, 131-155.
Susewind, R. (2017). Muslims in Indian cities: Degrees of segregation and the elusive ghetto.
Environment and Planning A, 49(6), 1286-1307.
Tajfel, H., Billig, M. G., Bundy, R. P., & Flament, C. (1971). Social categorization and intergroup
behaviour. European Journal of Social Psychology, 1(2), 149-178.
Vigdor, J. L. (2004). Community composition and collective action: Analyzing initial mail response to
the 2000 census. Review of Economics and Statistics, 86(1), 303-312.
Wade, R. (1994). Village Republics: Economic Conditions for Collective Action in South India.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
White, K. J., & Guest, ,. A. (2003). Community lost or transformed? Urbanization and social ties. City &
Community, 2(3), 239-259.

