Towards Mass Adoption of Contact Tracing Apps Learning from Users’ Preferences to Improve App Design
Dana Naousa, Manus Bonnera, Mathias Humbertb and Christine Legnera
a
b

Faculty of Business and Economics (HEC), University of Lausanne, Switzerland
armasuisse, Science and Technology, Switzerland
Abstract. Contact tracing apps have become one of the main approaches to
control and slow down the spread of COVID-19 and ease up lockdown measures.
While these apps can be very effective in stopping the transmission chain and
saving lives, their adoption remains under the expected critical mass. The public
debate about contact tracing apps emphasizes general privacy reservations and is
conducted at an expert level, but lacks the user perspective related to actual
designs. To address this gap, we explore user preferences for contact tracing apps
using market research techniques, and specifically conjoint analysis. Our main
contributions are empirical insights into individual and group preferences, as well
as insights for prescriptive design. While our results confirm the privacypreserving design of most European contact tracing apps, they also provide a
more nuanced understanding of acceptable features. Based on market simulation
and variation analysis, we conclude that adding goal-congruent features will play
an important role in fostering mass adoption.
Keywords: Contact tracing; Mobile app design; Conjoint analysis; Privacy
design; Value-added services.

Introduction
The COVID-19 pandemic has created a state of emergency in countries worldwide.
Governments imposed lockdown measures to help control the outbreak of the virus and
slow down its transmission. As lockdowns resulted in negative economic and social
consequences, contact tracing apps arguably are one of the best tools we currently have
available to avoid a second wave and potential re-lockdown. These apps have been
developed in various countries, among them SwissCOVID in Switzerland, StopCOVID
in France, Corona-Warn-App in Germany and many more. Experts estimate that a
critical mass threshold of 60% of the country’s population would be required to ensure
contact tracing apps are effective (University of Oxford 2020). However, in many
countries adoption rates are far from achieving this goal. For instance, Italy, the first
European country with COVID-19 outbreak, has an adoption rate of 14% (Follis 2020).
France’s user base of StopCOVID never increased beyond an initial adoption rate of 3%
(archyde 2020). Singapore with 40% adoption, as well as Germany with 21% (CellanJones and Kelion 2020) and Switzerland with 17% (FOPH 2020), boast “best in class”
adoption rates to date, however still fail to meet expectations in terms of critical mass.
The introduction of contact tracing apps has been accompanied by controversial debates
about their privacy implications. This debate is primarily conducted by experts and at
the political level, but lacks consideration of the user's perspective. Among the few
empirical studies that focus on users are Trang et al. (2020) who analyze the impact of
various app specifications (i.e. benefit appeal, privacy design, and convenience design)
on app acceptance. However, they conducted their study before the contract tracing
apps were launched and therefore lack the perspective from actual users and actual
designs. In view of the slow adoption rates, von Wyl et al. (2020) call for more research
on the acceptability of contact tracing apps to provide an understanding of the rationale
behind their use. Gupta and De Gasperis (2020) argue for the participatory design of

1

such apps in order to improve their market acceptance. To address this gap, we study
the following question:
What are users’ preferences for contact tracing app features and how can they
inform app design?
Based on a conjoint analysis (CA) study with 300 participants in Germany, we provide
empirical insights into users’ preferences for core and privacy-preserving features as
well as value-added services of contact tracing apps. CA, as an established market
research technique, is a "practical set of methods for predicting consumer preferences
for multi-attribute options in a wide variety of product and service contexts" (Green and
Srinivasan 1978, p. 103). It has been occasionally used for understanding the privacy
trade-offs in the design of personal ICTs (Mihale-Wilson et al. 2017; Naous and Legner
2019). Our results confirm the dominant privacy-preserving design of most national
contact tracing apps in Europe, but also contribute to a more nuanced understanding of
acceptable features. From our study, we gain insights for prescriptive design that allow
the formation of app features that fit users’ expectations, with implications for service
providers to adjust their offerings to different user segments. Following market
simulations, we demonstrate that goal-congruent features, and specifically value-added
services, can play an important role in driving user adoption.
The remaining of the paper is structured as follows: First we provide a background on
contact tracing in the context of COVID-19. Then, we introduce the applied research
methodology, followed by a detailed description of the design of the CA. Afterwards,
we present the empirical results. Finally, we discuss our findings and conclude with
implications for research and practice.

2

Background
Contact Tracing and Disease Control
Contact tracing is a key control measure in the battle against infectious diseases and can
break the chains of transmission when systematically applied. The World Health
Organization (WHO) defines contact tracing as “the process of identifying, assessing,
and managing people who have been exposed to a disease to prevent onward
transmission” (WHO 2018, p. 2). Contact tracing is an extreme form of locally targeted
control and has the potential to be highly effective when dealing with a low number of
cases (Eames and Keeling 2003). It has been traditionally performed by health
authorities using expert-led interview-based techniques.
In the case of COVID-19, contact tracing requires identifying people who may have
been exposed to the virus and following up with them daily for a period of at least 14
days from the last point of exposure (Legendre et al. 2020). The fact that symptom onset
may only occur days after infection makes it difficult for traditional approaches to map
the network of potential exposure traces and thus control the transmission rate of the
virus. Therefore, advanced techniques are required for effective contact tracing in the
COVID-19 context.

Contact Tracing Apps for COVID-19
Governments and health authorities over the world therefore promote mobile
applications that enable digital contact tracing, as fast and reliable solution to support
traditional approaches performed by the public health authorities in fighting pandemics.
The goal of these contact tracing apps is to continuously track user’s proximity and to
notify them in the event of possible COVID-19 exposure for self-isolation (Legendre et
al. 2020). Simulations confirm that if approximately 60% of the population uses the

3

requisite country app, it has the potential to stop the epidemic and keep countries out of
lockdown (University of Oxford 2020).
Among the first countries to develop and launch a contact tracing app was Singapore
with TraceTogether. The app has to date 2.3 million users indicating around 40%
adoption rate (tracetogether.gov.sg). Based on the same framework, the Australian app
(COVIDSafe) currently boasts a user base of around 7 million, which represents over a
quarter of the Australian population (Norman 2020). In Europe, Austria’s Stopp Corona
App was first launched in March. Currently uptake is 8% remaining well below
expectations (Reuters 2020). Italy, which was among the mostly affected countries with
COVID-19, launched Immuni app in June, but its adoption rate remains at 14% (Follis
2020). France also launched StopCOVID in the same period, and has only 3% adoption
rate (archyde 2020). Among the countries that witnessed a higher rate of adoption in
Europe are Germany and Switzerland. Germany’s Corona-Warn-app was launched in
June and has over 17 million users (over 20% of the population) 4 months after the
launch (Cellan-Jones and Kelion 2020). Switzerland also launched its SwissCOVID app
in June, 3 months later, it has over 1.5 million users, however lags behind the active
user goal of 3 million for SwissCOVID to be effective (FOPH 2020).

Design of Contact Tracing Apps for COVID-19
The design of national contact tracing apps (Table 1) has been subject to a lively debate
in most European countries with emphasis on their privacy implications. Common
tracing mechanisms rely on smartphone’s absolute location (in the case of locationbased tracing) or relative location (in the case of proximity-based tracing) to other
smartphones (Legendre et al. 2020). Proximity-based contact tracing relies on Bluetooth
Low Energy (BLE) to infer the relative proximity of smartphones (up to 50m outdoors
and 25m indoors), while location-based contact tracing uses GPS traces for precise

4

location. Whereas most countries use BLE technology in building their contact tracing
apps, only few have adopted a location tracing mechanism for cross-checking paths,
among them the Israeli app Hamagen.
The alerting mechanism in these apps (i.e., centralized versus decentralized) has
significant privacy implications (Criddle and Kelion 2020). While both approaches
require a central server for exchanging the pseudo IDs of users, the matching of traces
with positive user IDs is the main difference. With the centralized approach, IDs are
shared with the central server managed by the public health authorities for matching
with positive cases and notifications. This allows authorities to have a controlled
environment for fighting the pandemic since the alerting is carried out by the central
server in case of a match. With a decentralized approach, the matching is done on the
user’s smartphone with the list of infected IDs. Both approaches communicate
anonymously, however the decentralized approach is regarded as more privacypreserving since no logging data is exchanged with the server from the user’s
smartphone, except in the case of infection (Legendre et al. 2020). Among the countries
that follow a centralized approach is France with the StopCOVID app, which is built
based on the ROBust and privacy-presERving proximity Tracing protocol (ROBERT).
It is worth noting that apps with centralized architecture might require pre–registration
with personal information (e.g., TraceTogether and COVIDSafe) for verification by the
central server, however, apps relying on the ROBERT protocol do not require such
information (Ahmed et al. 2020).
The core functionality of apps comprises of tracing and alerting users. In addition, these
apps can provide additional features for fighting the pandemic and applying safety
measures. For instance, logged data on encounters and information provided on the app
can be used to estimate possible infection risk, which is the case for the Corona-Warn-

5

App that is accompanied by a risk-assessment feature. Other apps provide notifications
on safe places and infected zones, or contextual services such as check-in services for
safe entry (e.g., TraceTogether).

App
(by country)

Launch
Date
March
20th

Number of % of total Approach
users
of
population
+2M
~42%
Centralized

Technology User
Special
Identification Feature
based on
Phone number SafeEntry
legacy BLE required
integration

TraceTogether
(Singapore)

March
22nd

+1.5M

~17%

Decentralized CrossNo
referencing information
of GPS data required

Safe places

March
25th

+0.7M

~8%

Decentralized based on
Phone number Symptoms
legacy BLE required
check

April 26th +7M

~28%

Centralized

June 1st

+4M

~14%

Decentralized AppleRegion
Google
required
Exposure
Notification

-

June 2nd

+2.3M

~3%

Centralized

-

~21%

Decentralized AppleNo
Google
information
Exposure
required
Notification

Risk
assessment

Decentralized DP-3T and
AppleGoogle
Exposure
Notification
Decentralized AppleGoogle
Exposure
Notification

No
information
required

-

Region
required

Symptoms
check

Hamagen
(Israel)

StoppCorona
(Austria)

based on
Personal
legacy BLE information
required

-

COVIDSafe
(Australia)

Immuni
(Italy)

StopCOVID
(France)

June 16th +17.8M

Corona-WarnApp (Germany)

June 25th +1.5M
~17%
active users
SwissCOVID
(Switzerland)

Not
launched
NHS COVID-19
(UK)

-

-

Table 1. Overview of Contact Tracing Apps

6

ROBERT
No
(centralized information
based on
required
legacy BLE)

Research Gap
Augmenting adoption of contact tracing apps has proven to be a challenge, and
involving the users in the discussion on app characteristics and aspects related to the
data processing is critical for ensuring mass acceptance. This was also highlighted by
Gupta and De Gasperis (2020), who suggest participatory design with users to better
build contact tracing apps. The few studies that have investigate the user perspective
highlight the important role of perceived benefits for self and society together, privacy
perceptions and usability aspects in the adoption of contact tracing apps (e.g., Trang et
al. 2020). While those studies focus on user perceptions, they do not provide input on
the most appealing realization options that inform app design. Moreover, most studies
were conducted before these apps were launched; they therefore lack the perspective
from actual users and actual designs. This has resulted in calls for research, for instance
by von Wyl et al. (2020), on the acceptability of contact tracing apps and adherence by
the target population.While Trang et al. (2020) suggest that there should be one app that
fits all with defined specifications in this specific context of contact tracing, we foresee
an opportunity to address the varying preferences of the whole population. Based on
prior research (Wortmann et al. 2019), we can infer that goal-congruent feature
additions could have a positive influence on app adoption by the foreseen benefits
associated to using the app through extended services.

Research Approach and Design
Our study aims at improving the understanding of users’ preferences and privacy tradeoffs in contact tracing apps and gain additional insights for prescriptive design
(Bélanger and Crossler 2011). We employ CA, which aims to provide evidence on the
most influencing factors on the consumer’s choice of a product. Applying the utility
concept from economics, CA enables the estimation of a user preference structure based

7

on his evaluation of different product attributes or features. It is a very suitable method
to inform IS design through an empirical analysis of user preferences. For these reasons,
CA is gaining popularity to study information privacy trade-offs in different types of
services (Krasnova et al. 2009; Ho et al. 2010).
In applying CA, we follow the methodological guidelines for IS studies outlined by
Naous and Legner (2017) and use ACBCA, which extends the traditional full-profile
CA (Green and Srinivasan 1978). This CA variant combines the advantages of adaptiveand choice-based procedures (Johnson et al. 2003). It is based on a choice experiment
where participants have to choose among a set of profiles (corresponding to different
product combinations) after they perform a self-explicated task to assess must have and
unacceptable attribute levels from the evaluation to reduce the choice burden. Based on
users’ choices, part-worth utilities and relative importance measures are calculated
using the Hierarchical Bayes (HB) estimation (Howell 2009).

Attributes and Levels Selection
A first and often challenging step in CA is to identify the attributes that are relevant to
users in forming their preferences. In selecting the attributes and levels, we followed a
mixed method approach (Naous and Legner 2017) based on four stages.
In the first stage, we reviewed recent articles that compare the different contact tracing
apps (Legendre et al. 2020; Ahmed et al. 2020) and assess the user’s perspective (Trang
et al. 2020; Gupta and De Gasperis 2020) to identify attributes describing the core
functionalities and privacy related characteristics. This resulted in 12 attributes
corresponding to four dimensions representing the main contact tracing app features:
initiation, core functionalities, transparency and control, and platform characteristics.
In the second phase, we examined 9 contact tracing apps (cf. Table 1) to understand the
realization options and identify the attribute levels. Based on this analysis, we decided

8

to add two attributes to our list characterized as value-added services that can provide
additional benefits and attract more users; diagnosis and contextual services.
In the third phase of the attributes and levels selection, we organized a focus group with
five current and potential users of COVID-19 apps to identify important attributes and
eliminate unacceptable option. This phase also allowed us to add one attribute that we
did not consider in our initial list. The ability to provide a risk assessment on the app
might require additional health information for accurate estimations. We therefore
consider health information registration as an option for the initiation dimension.
We finally assess the list of attributes and levels with two privacy experts (who are also
familiar with the different contact tracing apps) that validated the attributes and the
levels. Based on these phases, our final list was formed of ten attributes with their
corresponding levels (Table 4):
The Initiation dimension specifies attributes related to the registration to the app. We
excluded attributes for registration options that are present in all apps and focus only on
one attribute:
•

Health information registration: specifies whether data about health status (e.g.,
COVID-19 risk groups) is required on the app or not for a more robust data
analysis and ideally risk assessment.

The Core Functionalities comprises of three basic features offered by all existing
COVID-19 apps:
•

Exposure logging: corresponds to the tracing mechanism employed on the app. It
could be proximity tracing with Bluetooth technology, location tracking via GPS
traces or a combination of both.

•

Test results sharing: indicates how the exposure notification is triggered on the app;
it could be via user sharing on the app symptoms or positive test results, sharing

9

positive test results validated by the healthcare provider, or direct sharing of test
results by the healthcare provider (i.e., also includes clearing status in case of
negative test result).
•

Exposure notification: refers to how users get notifications in case of encounter
with an infected person. It could be alerting only in case of exposure, in addition
users can get risk assessment based on logged data, information on country region,
health status and possibly other background information.

Value-added services comprise features that provide additional benefits to users.
•

Diagnosis services: can be used for checking COVID-19 symptoms; they can be
either through basic health checklists on possible symptoms, or advanced diagnosis
with machine learning on mobile sensor data (i.e., heart rate, breathing, coughing
strength, etc.) (CORDIS 2020).

•

Contextual services: correspond to additional services related to safety measures;
examples are check-in services for safe entry in public places based on customer
count or identification of safe places and infected zones through interactive maps.

Transparency & Control comprise features for transparent data management on the app.
•

Dashboard: corresponds to the transparency about the data usage on app; could be
a basic dashboard on status and data logs or detailed with sharing information on
data logging, contact traces and sharing parties.

•

Data sharing purpose: refers to what is the target of data sharing and with whom it
will be shared; it can be restricted to contact tracing (sharing with app provider, i.e.,
public health authorities only), involves epidemiological insights and research
(sharing with public health authorities, healthcare providers and researchers), or
also includes sharing for additional safety measures (for instance check-in at
restaurants, public transports or workplaces).

10

Platform characteristics correspond to the technical design of the app and the
communication between the app and the remote server.
•

App Architecture: corresponds to the communication between the app and the
central server, which can be implemented in a centralized or decentralized approach
(Ahmed et al. 2020). In a centralized architecture, users share their IDs with a
central server and matching with positive cases is done on the server. In a
decentralized approach, only an infected person is required to share data with the
server and all matching with positive cases is done on the user’s smartphone that
periodically receives the list of infected IDs from the server.

•

Interoperability: corresponds to the cross-country integration options; it could be a
national app that can only be used in the specific country, or a national app that
allows safe information exchange with other apps to be used when travelling.

Dimension

Attribute

Attribute Levels

Initiation

Health
Information
registration
Exposure
Logging

No information is required

Core
Functionalities

Health status (i.e., COVID-19 risk groups information)
Contacts (Bluetooth)
Locations (GPS Traces)
Contacts & Locations

Value-added
Services

Test Results
Sharing

User can share symptoms or positive test results on app
User can share positive test results on app only with a
validation code by the healthcare provider
Healthcare provider directly shares test results
(positive/ negative) with users

Exposure
Notification

Alert only if you had contact with an infected person
Alert if you had contact with an infected person;
includes risk assessment (low, medium, high)
No in-app diagnosis

Diagnosis
services

Contextual
services

Simple diagnosis: Symptoms tracking with a checklist
Advanced diagnosis: Using sensors to capture
symptoms (e.g., breathing, coughing)
No additional services
Check-in service with QR code in public places for
safe entry (e.g., restaurants, supermarkets)
Maps with indication of safe areas/ infected zones

11

Transparency
and Control

Dashboard

Data sharing

Basic dashboard on data logging
Detailed dashboard on data logging, updates and
sharing
Restricted to contact tracing (sharing with app
provider, i.e., public health authorities)
Contact tracing, epidemiological insights and research
(sharing with public health authorities, healthcare
providers and researchers)
Contact tracing, research and specific purposes for
safety measures (e.g., restaurants, transportation
providers, workplace)

Platform
Characteristics

App
Architecture
Interoperability

Centralized
Decentralized
Cross-country integration
No cross-country integration

Table 4. List of attributes and levels
Study Setup
To run our study, we used Sawtooth Software, which is a specialized software with
advanced modules for CA survey administration and data analysis. The online survey
started with an introduction about contact tracing apps and the conjoint survey sections.
We then explained the attributes involved and the different levels (or options) before
collecting user choices in the typical ACBCA sections. We added screenshots of the app
when possible to illustrate the differences between levels, this was done for two
attributes: exposure notification and dashboard (Figure 2). Visuals would make it easier
for the users to select based on concrete realization instead of verbal descriptions
(Naous and Legner 2017).
Participants had to complete the four ACBCA sections in the following order:
1. Build Your Own (BYO): Participants are asked to build the most preferred
configurations of the contact tracing app from the list of available attributes and
levels. This provides input of individual preferences. The following sections are
then adapted to the preferred levels selected by the participants.

12

2. Screening: The survey contained 7 screening tasks with 3 options, where
participants assess the possibility of using different app designs. As part of the
self-explicated task, this section helps in understanding the user’s noncompensatory behaviour. Respondents are asked about must have and
unacceptable features based on their response pattern. These identified features
will not be displayed later to avoid bias in selection.
3. Choice Task Tournament: Based on their answers to previous questions, “[...]
respondents are evaluating concepts that are close to their in the build your own
section specified product, that they consider ‘possibilities’, and that strictly
conform to any cut off (must have/unacceptable) rules” (SawtoothSoftware
2014). We present a maximum of 10 choice tasks to respondents with three
options. This allows us to estimate the user preferences for the different
attributes and levels based on the choice data.
4. Calibration: While traditional CBCA includes a “None” option, this is not
available in ACBCA. Instead a “None” threshold can be estimated via the
Screening and Calibration section. To calibrate utilities, participants are shown
six concepts, including the concept identified in the BYO section, the concept
winning the Choice Tournament as well as four previously shown concepts that
were either accepted or rejected. The participant is asked about their likelihood
to use these concepts using five-point scale from "Definitely would not" to
"Definitely would".
The last phase of the survey included questions on demographics (gender, age) and
professional background, as well as questions on general mobile app use and opinion
about the COVID-19 app.

13

(a) Exposure notification

(b) Dashboard

	  
Figure 2. Mobile screenshots for attributes levels

Study Sample
To obtain qualified results, we targeted 300 participants from Germany, the country
with the highest number of absolute contact tracing app users (now 17.8 million), who
are users or potential users of the national contact tracing app (Corona-Warn-App). We
selected Prolific.co as crowdsourcing platform to hire survey participants from an
online pool of users. Crowdsourcing platforms, such as MTurk and Prolific, provide fast,
inexpensive and convenient sampling method and are appropriate for generalizing
studies (Jia et al. 2017). They have been widely used in research on security and privacy
(Redmiles et al. 2019), and allow a wide reach in CA studies (Pu and Grossklags 2015;
Naous and Legner 2019). The study setup was examined by the Ethics Committee
within our academic context, to guarantee that respondents’ participation was
completely anonymous and all data collected is treated confidentially and will not be
disclosed in its original form.
Participants were screened based on their smartphone use and knowledge about the
COVID-19 app. Survey respondents were compensated 2.50£ for their participation,
which is a fair amount for a 15-20 minutes survey on this platform. As quality criteria,

14

we eliminated 17 responses that took less than 7 minutes for survey completion, which
might affect the consistency of the analysis.
From the total remaining 283 respondents, that we included in the final data analysis,
we had 55.83% male participants and 44.17% females. The majority aged between 26
and 35 years old (50.18%) and 94% less than 46 years old. Our respondents are mostly
privacy aware and have frequently heard about the misuse of user information on media
and press (82.33%). In terms of mobile app use, our sample is tech-savvy and uses
plenty of apps, among them navigation (95.41%), social networking (79.86%) as well as
health and fitness apps (54.77%). Finally, we note that 62.54% of the respondents think
that the COVID-19 contact tracing app should be mandatory.
Variable
Gender
Age

Privacy Awareness

Level
Male
Female
18-25
26-35
36-45
46-55
56-65
66-75
Not informed
Well informed

%
55.83
44.17
31.10
50.18
12.72
3.53
2.12
0.35
17.67
82.33

Table 5. Sample demographics and background information
Results
Relative Importance
CA provides relative importance scores based on part-worth utilities for each attribute
(Figure 4). Our results show exposure logging (19%) and test results sharing (13%) as
the two most important attributes. The app architecture (12%) comes next, which
reflects the general debate about central and decentralized architectures. Diagnosis
services had 11%, as value-added service, whereas interoperability (i.e, cross-country
integration) and contextual services had a similar importance of 10%. Data sharing and

15

health information registration follow with 8% importance score, even though these two
attributes are concerned about user privacy on the app and the associated risks.
Although being a core service, exposure notification (5%) was less important to users
who might not be interested on the method or form of the notification. Interestingly, the
transparency on the app was least important with a score of 4%, which contradicts other
studies on privacy concerns and transparency in data management (Ahmed et al. 2020).
5% 4%
8%

Exposure logging
Test results sharing

19%

App Architecture
Diagnosis services

8%

Interoperability

13%

Contextual services

10%

Data sharing
Health information registration

12%

10%

Exposure notification

11%

Dashboard

Figure 4. Relative importance of contact tracing app attributes

Part-worth Utilities and Preferences
Part-worth utilities are normalized HB estimates that provide insights about users’
preferences for the different attributes and levels. Positive utilities correspond to
preferred levels and negative utilities correspond to undesired levels. We assess the
“goodness of fit” using percentage certainty (PC) and root likelihood (RLH)
(Giessmann and Stanoevska 2012). We obtained a PC mean of 0.486, indicating
acceptable results of fit. RLH valued 0.654, which is considered more fit than the
chance level given we have three choice tasks.
The part-worth utility distribution (Table 6) allows us to identify attribute levels that are
mostly selected by users through the choice options, thus correspond to their preference

16

structure and trade-offs with respect to the overall app design. Interestingly, we observe
that users prefer to provide information about their health status on the app, most likely
because this information would help to provide more targeted analysis of their situation
in regards to COVID-19. In terms of exposure logging, contact tracing via Bluetooth the most privacy-preserving option - has the highest utility, while GPS tracking had a
negative utility and a combination of both has positive utility. For test results sharing,
users have positive utilities for trusted and officially validated test results sharing.
However, the highest utility was for sharing by the user via a validated code from the
healthcare provider. For exposure notification, users appreciate having a risk assessment
in addition to the notification. In terms of value-added services, the highest utilities
were for simple diagnosis service. Although advanced diagnosis options with mobile
sensors can be of great help in detecting patterns and assessing severity of symptoms,
users seem to have concerns of extensive data collection via the app. For contextual
services, users prefer the second option with maps identifying infected zones. However,
when assessed individually in the BYO section, users stated that they would not prefer
an additional contextual service with the app. For transparency and control, higher
utilities were recorded for the detailed dashboard and restricted data sharing, which are
more privacy-preserving options. For the choice of platform, users have positive utilities
for the decentralized approach as more privacy-preserving approach also. Finally, the
cross-country integration is preferred by users. Our results thereby support the European
Union (EU) member states' effort to establish a technical framework for cross-country
contacts tracing for travelers and cross-border employees (Lomas 2020).

17

Attribute

Attribute levels

Health
information
registration
Exposure
logging

No information is required
Health status

Average
Utilities
-2.86

Standard Distribution
Deviation for
BYO
Section (%)
51.16
43.46

2.86

51.16

56.54

Contacts
Location
Contacts and Location
Symptoms or positive test results
Positive test results with validation
code
Healthcare provider shares test
results
Contact with an infected person
With risk assessment

41.46
-50.00
8.54
-51.42

113.56
83.95
62.07
58.06

46.64
15.90
37.46
12.37

32.69

42.74

48.06

18.72

51.74

39.58

-7.01

30.56

40.28

7.01

30.56

59.72

No in-app diagnosis
Simple diagnosis
Advanced diagnosis
Contextual
No additional services
services
Check-in service with QR code
Maps of safe areas/ infected zones
Dashboard
Basic dashboard
Detailed dashboard
Data sharing
Restricted to contact tracing
Includes epidemiological insights
and research
Includes specific purposes for
safety measures
App
Centralized
Architecture
Decentralized
Interoperability No cross-country integration
Cross-country integration

5.74
25.83
-31.57
-4.52
-8.67
13.19
-9.30
9.30
11.12

53.54
31.15
57.32
51.02
52.58
32.43
18.76
18.76
41.96

34.63
47.35
18.02
37.10
29.33
33.57
37.81
62.19
39.93

3.39

26.85

24.38

-14.51

46.59

35.69

-37.37
37.37
-45.09
45.09

69.83
69.83
44.76
44.76

37.10
62.90
14.13
85.87

(1)
Test results
sharing

Exposure
notification
Diagnosis
services

Table 6. User preferences and part-worth utilities (preferred levels are highlighted)

User Segmentation
To gain insights into user segments for contact tracing apps, we performed a cluster
analysis based on the individual part-worth utilities. By applying k-means clustering, we
derived three clusters of users with varying preferences with respect to privacypreserving features and value-added services (Table 7). While the first two clusters
(with majority of users combined) are privacy concerned and prefer basic features that
guarantee user privacy, the third cluster is unconcerned and would prefer all options that
provide an enhanced app.

18

Cluster 1
76 (26.85%)

Cluster 2
92 (32.51%)

Cluster 3
115 (40.64%)

Privacy concerned
users
No additional services

Privacy concerned
users
Included

Unconcerned users

Health information
registration
Exposure logging

Not required

Not required

Health status

Contacts

Contacts

Contacts and Location

Test results sharing
Exposure
notification
Diagnosis services

Positive test results on
with validation code
Contact with an
infected person
No in-app diagnosis

Positive test results on
with validation code
With risk assessment

Healthcare provider
shares test results
With risk assessment

Simple diagnosis

Advanced diagnosis

Contextual services

No additional services

Dashboard

Detailed dashboard

Maps of safe areas/
infected zones
Detailed dashboard

Maps of safe areas/
infected zones
Detailed dashboard

Data sharing

Restricted to contact
tracing

Restricted to contact
tracing

Specific purposes for
safety measures

App Architecture
Interoperability

Decentralized
Cross-country
integration

Decentralized
Cross-country
integration

Centralized
Cross-country
integration

Number of
participants
Privacy
Characterization
Value-added services

Included

Preferences

Table 7. Identified clusters with preferences based on customer segmentation
The first two clusters are similar by their preferences to privacy-preserving features
when it comes to the core functionalities including contact tracing via Bluetooth and
sharing only validated test results to avoid false alerts. However, for exposure
notification, the second group prefers having a risk assessment in addition to the
notification. The main difference is in the value-added services, where the first segment
(26.85%) does not prefer any value added-service, while the second segment (32.51%)
prefers at least a simple diagnosis service for tracking COVID-19 symptoms, and a
contextual service that provides information about infected zones and safe places. For
all other features, both segments share the same preferences: They do not prefer to share
any health information on the app, prefer a detailed dashboard and no data sharing with
parties other than the public health authorities. They also prefer a decentralized
approach, however a cross-country integration.

19

The third cluster, with more than 40% of the participants, prefers enhanced features on
all attributes. Major differences to the previous segments are in the health information
registration, exposure logging, and diagnosis services where this segment would prefer
a combination of contact and location tracking, as well as advanced diagnosis services.
This segment also has inherent trust in the authorities, and would choose all available
app features even if it would be privacy intrusive. This is shown in their choice of test
results sharing by the authorities and the centralized approach. In addition, data sharing
for this segment can be for the purposes of helping to fight the pandemic in different
contexts.

Variation Analysis
Variation analysis allows us to study the effect of changing attributes on market share
predictions. Thus, it provides a market simulation based on reliable quantitative data
that can feed the design of the app and identify features that would improve the
adoption.
With market simulation we can then understand if adding value-added services with the
proposed contact tracing app can result in higher market shares, thus better adoption
rates. As a reference app, we use the characteristics of the German Corona-Warn-App.
We then propose 5 variations (Table 8) corresponding to the multiple combinations of
value-added services within the app. App 1 has a simple diagnosis service for checking
symptoms via checklists. App 2 has an advanced diagnosis service based on data
processing of sensor data (e.g., heart rate, breathing, coughing, etc.) and applying
machine learning algorithms on that. App 3 has a safe entry check-in service with QR
code that can be used in public places for tracking the count of people inside a place and
tracking positive check-ins. App 4 has a map function with indications of safe places

20

and infected zones within a region. The final app (App 5) combines two value-added
services that are selected with highest utilities: simple diagnosis and map function.
Label

Reference

App 1

App 2

App 3

App 4

Description

CoronaWarn-App

Simple
Diagnosis

Advanced
Diagnosis

Check-in
Service

Maps

Health
information
registration

No information is required
Contacts (via Bluetooth)

Exposure logging
Test results
sharing
Exposure
notification
Dashboard

User can share positive test results on app only with a validation code by the
healthcare provider
Alert if you had contact with an infected person with risk assessment
Basic dashboard on data logging

Data sharing

Restricted to contact tracing

App Architecture

De-centralized

Interoperability

Diagnosis services

No in-app
diagnosis

Contextual
services

No
additional
services

Market share

App 5
Simple
Diagnosis +
Maps

No cross-country integration
Advanced
Simple
diagnosis:
diagnosis:
Using
No in-app
No in-app
Symptoms
sensors to
diagnosis
diagnosis
tracking with
capture
checklists
symptoms
Check-in
Maps with
service with indication of
No
No
QR code in safe areas/
additional
additional
public places infected
services
services
for safe entry zones
57%
39%
49%
56%

Simple
diagnosis:
Symptoms
tracking with
checklists
Maps with
indication of
safe areas/
infected
zones
60%

Table 8. Scenarios for variation analysis simulation
Based on the simulation results, we observe that all apps generate market shares. This
means that their utility is higher than the None threshold1, and people would be willing
to adopt such apps. However, the difference in market shares compared to the reference
app (i.e., Corona-Warn-App) vary in strength. We observe that App 1 (simple diagnosis)
and App 4 (Maps) would result in higher market shares with slightly better results for
App 1. Consequently, App 5 with a diagnosis service of symptoms tracking and

1

With the ACBCA, a None parameter can be estimated in market simulations to predict
whether the respondents would be selecting a proposed option or not. Based on that, if the
utility of the product concept proposed is higher than the None utility, it will be chosen.

21

contextual service of maps also resulted in higher market shares corresponding to 60%
of users.

Discussion: Users’ Preferences for Contact Tracing Apps
The results from our conjoint analysis provide a micro perspective (i.e., that of the user)
into users’ preferences for contact tracing apps through evaluation of feasible design
options. We thereby address Pillar III of Von Wyl et al.(2020)’s research agenda for
digital tracing apps, and contribute to understanding the acceptability of these apps.
Our empirical study with CA provides a system evaluation through features, and
highlights which privacy-preserving features are required or mostly valued by users via
part-worth utility measures and relative importance of features.
With regard to individual user preferences, we find that the exposure logging and test
results sharing are the most important features in the contact tracing apps, while
exposure notification as the third core service is lagging far behind. Our findings
support the dominant privacy-preserving design of most European contact tracing apps;
they clearly confirm user preferences for a decentralized approach and for contact
tracing through proximity rather than a location-based tracking via GPS. Despite the
ongoing debate about privacy concerns raised by contact tracing apps, the results show
that not all privacy-preserving features are valued by users and that users care less about
privacy-related aspects in comparison to core and value-added services. An alternative
interpretation is that users trust these apps because they implement privacy by design
principles and are implemented by authorities who protect the privacy rights of citizens
through the EU General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) (Yang et al. 2020).
Our study also provides interesting insights into the behaviour of heterogeneous
respondent groups, represented by the user segments identified. The segmentation is
particularly interesting given the diverging adoption rates and provides valuable insights

22

into the prescriptive design of contact tracing apps. We realize that there is no one app
that fits all (Trang et al. 2020), and that different specifications of tracing apps
contribute to their mass acceptance. While we observe a tendency for privacypreserving features and basic functionalities (in the first and second segments), the
largest segment of users values extended services more than privacy-enhancing features.
Our simulation results based on this CA approach highlight how value-added services
are an important topic for consideration in further developing and improving the current
apps through targeted and extended services.

Implications
By providing empirical insights into individual and group preferences, our results draw
the attention to heterogeneous types of users with diverging preferences. We argue that
these user segments need to be addressed with targeted features to achieve mass
adoption, and thereby contradict Trang et al. (2020)'s view that there can only be one set
of specifications of a tracing app for all citizens. Based on the market simulation and
variation analysis, we conclude that contact tracing apps could achieve higher market
shares if value-added services were added beyond the basic app for tracing encounters.
This is in line with studies by Wortmann et al. (2019) who have shown that adding goalcongruent features to a core system may result in higher adoption. For contact tracing
apps, goal-congruent design would imply a paradigm shift from a strong focus on
privacy-aware design to explore value-added services that complement the app (e.g.,
through diagnosis and contextual services). Based on our results, value-added services
could become a game changer in the adoption challenge. A viable implementation
option that would take into account privacy preferences is to develop auxiliary apps that
can be integrated within the COVID-19 app if needed. Similar to Singapore, who has

23

merged the national TraceTogether app with the SafeEntry app as part of the safety
measures to increase adoption rate (Lee 2020).
From a practical perspective, our results are relevant to application developers and
service providers of contact tracing apps. The preference model resulting from the CA
study provides concrete realization options of the contact tracing app to be taken into
consideration in order to gain sufficient critical mass and acceptability amongst users.
Our study supports the idea of participatory design (Gupta and De Gasperis 2020)
through providing a data-driven approach that allows capturing user preferences and
including the different stakeholders in the discussion of most convenient design options.

Limitations
Contact tracing apps have a national scope and thus may be impacted by the specific
national implementation as well as contextual factors. Therefore, an important
limitation of our study is its focus on a sample from Germany with apriori model of
decentralized contact tracing. It would be interesting to have comparative studies in
other countries that have introduced centralized proximity or location-based tracing
apps to assess the different design options.

References
Ahmed N, Michelin RA, Xue W, et al (2020) A survey of covid-19 contact tracing apps.
IEEE Access 8:134577–134601
archyde (2020) StopCovid flop: why tracking apps are more adopted by our neighbors.
In: Archyde. https://www.archyde.com/stopcovid-flop-why-tracking-apps-aremore-adopted-by-our-neighbors/. Accessed 2 Sep 2020
Bélanger F, Crossler RE (2011) Privacy in the digital age: a review of information
privacy research in information systems. MIS Quarterly 35:1017–1042
Cellan-Jones R, Kelion L (2020) Coronavirus: The great contact-tracing apps mystery.
In: BBC. https://www.bbc.com/news/technology-53485569. Accessed 2 Sep
2020.

24

Criddle C, Kelion L (2020) Coronavirus contact-tracing: World split between two types
of app. In: BBC. https://www.bbc.com/news/technology-52355028. Accessed 2
Sep 2020.
Eames KT, Keeling MJ (2003) Contact tracing and disease control. Proceedings of the
Royal Society of London. Series B: Biological Sciences 270:2565–2571
Follis A (2020) ROME - Italian COVID app “Immuni” lacks sufficient users to be
effective. In: www.euractiv.com.
https://www.euractiv.com/section/politics/short_news/rome-italian-covid-appimmuni-lacks-sufficient-users-to-be-effective/. Accessed 2 Sep 2020
FOPH FO of PH (2020) New coronavirus: SwissCovid app and contact tracing.
https://www.bag.admin.ch/bag/en/home/krankheiten/ausbrueche-epidemienpandemien/aktuelle-ausbrueche-epidemien/novel-cov/swisscovid-app-undcontact-tracing.html. Accessed 2 Sep 2020
Giessmann A, Stanoevska K (2012) Platform as a Service – A Conjoint Study on
Consumers’ Preferences. In: Proceedings of the 33rd International Conference
on Information Systems, Orlando, pp 1 – 16
Green PE, Srinivasan V (1978) Conjoint Analysis in Consumer Research: Issues and
Outlook. Journal of Consumer Research 103–123
Gupta A, De Gasperis T (2020) Participatory Design to build better contact-and
proximity-tracing apps. ArXiv Prepr ArXiv200600432
Ho K, See-to E, Xu X (2010) The Impacts of Information Privacy, Monetary Reward,
and Buyers’ Protection Excess on Consumers’ Utility Using E-payment
Gateways: A Conjoint Analysis. In: Proceedings of ACIS 2010
Howell J (2009) CBC/HB for beginners. Sawtooth Software Research Paper 1–5
Jia R, Steelman ZR, Reich BH (2017) Using Mechanical Turk Data in IS Research:
Risks, Rewards, and Recommendations. Communications of the Association of
Information Systems 41:14
Krasnova H, Hildebrand T, Guenther O (2009) Investigating the value of privacy in
online social networks: conjoint analysis. In: Proceedings of ICIS 2009
Lee M (2020) Given low adoption rate of TraceTogether, experts suggest merging with
SafeEntry or other apps. In: TODAYonline.
https://www.todayonline.com/singapore/given-low-adoption-rate-tracetogetherexperts-suggest-merging-safeentry-or-other-apps. Accessed 2 Sep 2020
Legendre F, Humbert M, Mermoud A, Lenders V (2020) Contact Tracing: An
Overview of Technologies and Cyber Risks. ArXiv Prepr ArXiv200702806
Lomas N (2020) EU states agree a tech spec for national coronavirus apps to work
across borders | TechCrunch. In: TechCrunch.
https://techcrunch.com/2020/06/16/eu-states-agree-a-tech-spec-for-nationalcoronavirus-apps-to-work-across-borders/. Accessed 2 Sep 2020

25

Mihale-Wilson C, Zibuschka J, Hinz O (2017) ABOUT USER PREFERENCES AND
WILLINGNESS TO PAY FOR A SECURE AND PRIVACY PROTECTIVE
UBIQUITOUS PERSONAL ASSISTANT. In: Proceedings of the 25th
European Conference on Information Systems
Naous D, Legner C (2019) Understanding Users’ Preferences for Privacy and Security
Features–A Conjoint Analysis of Cloud Storage Services. In: International
Conference on Business Information Systems Workshops. Springer, pp 352–365
Naous D, Legner C (2017) Leveraging Market Research Techniques in IS–A Review of
Conjoint Analysis in IS Research. In: Proceedings of the 38th International
Conference on Information Systems
Norman J (2020) Deputy CMO urges Australians to use COVIDSafe app following
updates. https://www.abc.net.au/news/2020-08-09/australians-encouraged-toactivate-covidsafe-coronvirus-app/12539494. Accessed 2 Sep 2020
Pu Y, Grossklags J (2015) Using Conjoint Analysis to Investigate the Value of
Interdependent Privacy in Social App Adoption Scenarios. In: Proceedings of
ICIS 2015
Redmiles EM, Kross S, Mazurek ML (2019) How well do my results generalize?
comparing security and privacy survey results from mturk, web, and telephone
samples. In: IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP). IEEE, pp 1326–
1343
Reuters (2020) Austria invites suggestions to improve coronavirus track and trace app.
Reuters. https://www.reuters.com/article/healthcoronavirus-austria-appsidUSL8N2EF1BB. Accessed 2 Sep 2020
University of Oxford (2020) Digital contact tracing can slow or even stop coronavirus
transmission and ease us out of lockdown.
https://www.research.ox.ac.uk/Article/2020-04-16-digital-contact-tracing-canslow-or-even-stop-coronavirus-transmission-and-ease-us-out-of-lockdown.
Accessed 2 Sep 2020
von Wyl V, Bonhoeffer S, Bugnion E, et al (2020) A research agenda for digital
proximity tracing apps. Swiss Medical Weekly150:w20324
WHO C (2018) Emergencies preparedness, response. Chikungunya
Wortmann F, Thiesse F, Fleisch E (2019) The impact of goal-congruent feature
additions on core IS feature use: when more is less and less is more. Journal of
the Association for Information Systems 20:13
Yang SK., Kwon YJ, Lee SYT (2020) The Impact of Information Sharing Legislation
on Cybersecurity Industry. Industrial Management & Data Systems 120:9

26

