COVID-19 P LATEAU : A P HENOMENON OF E PIDEMIC
D EVELOPMENT UNDER A DAPTIVE P REVENTION S TRATEGIES

arXiv:2011.03376v1 [physics.soc-ph] 6 Nov 2020

A P REPRINT
Ziqiang Wu
Shenzhen University
Shenzhen, China
wzqgddg@foxmail.com

Hao Liao
Shenzhen University
Shenzhen, China
jamesliao520@gmail.com

Alexandre Vidmer
Shenzhen University
Shenzhen, China
alexandre@vidmer.com

Wei Chen
Microsoft Research Asia
Beijing, China
weic@microsoft.com

Mingyang Zhou
Shenzhen University
Shenzhen, China
zhoumy2010@gmail.com

November 9, 2020

A BSTRACT
Since the beginning of the COVID-19 spreading, the number of studies on the epidemic models
increased dramatically. It is important for policy makers to know how the disease will spread, and
what are the effects of the policies and environment on the spreading. In this paper, we propose
two extensions to the standard infectious disease models: (a) We consider the prevention measures
adopted based on the current severity of the infection, those measures are adaptive and change over
time. (b) Multiple cities and regions are considered, with population movements between those
cities/regions, while taking into account that each region may have different prevention measures.
While the adaptive measures and mobility of the population were often observed during the pandemic,
these effects are rarely explicitly modeled and studied in the classical epidemic models. The model we
propose gives rise to a plateau phenomenon: the number of people infected by the disease stay at the
same level during an extended period of time. We show what are conditions needs to be met in order
for the spreading to exhibit a plateau period, and we show that this phenomenon is interdependent:
when considering multiples cities, the conditions are different from a single city. We verify from
the real-world data that plateau phenomenon does exists in many regions of the world in the current
COVID-19 development. Finally, we provide theoretical analysis on the plateau phenomenon for the
single-city model, and derive a series of results on the emergence and ending of the plateau, and on
the height and length of the plateau. Our theoretical results match well with our empirical findings.
Keywords COVID-19, Infectious disease model, human mobility, plateau phenomenon

1

Introduction

Since December 2019, a virus named SARS-CoV-2 has been affecting the world. As of October 11, 2020, the virus
had infected 11,195,010 people, including the UK Prime Minister Boris Johnson and the US President Donald Trump.
Although the epidemic in some countries has been brought under control, the epidemic in most part of the world is still
ongoing. Nowadays (October, 2020), the number of new cases is still more than 100,000 every day.
The number of studies based on the epidemic analysis has considerably grown since the start of the COVID-19 epidemic.
Scholars from different fields usually have been using the infectious disease models to analyze the evolution of the
disease and model its future evolution. In a widely used SIR model [1], we distinguish every individual in three
different state susceptible (S), infected (I) and recovered (R), hence the name. The susceptible portion of the population

A PREPRINT - N OVEMBER 9, 2020

comprises the people who can be infected by the disease, the infected part is the part of the population who is infected
and can transmit the disease, while the recovered part is the one who has been out of the spread process.
SIR and related models are well studied in the literature. However, during the COVID-19 pandemic, many regions
gradually adopt adaptive prevention strategies to try to balance between epidemic prevention and economic growth, and
different regions often employ different prevention strategies. This may bring new phenomenon that does not exist in
the standard epidemic models.
In this paper, we propose two extensions to the standard infectious disease models: (a) we consider adaptive changes
in prevention strategies based on the current infection severity; and (b) we consider multiple regions with population
mobility while each region may employ different prevention strategies. For simplicity, we refer each region as a city
henceforth. We first conduct simulation studies on the proposed model using parameters learned from the real-world
data, and observe that in many situations the epidemic development has a period where the number of existing infected
people stays at the same level, for which we call it a plateau period. We discover that in the single-city model, the
plateau may only occur under certain conditions, and their heights and length may differ. For example, the height of
a plateau seems to be positively correlated with the prevention threshold used to trigger the changes in prevention
intensity, but not affected by other prevention measures. In the multi-city model, we discover that the plateau always
co-occur among all cities, even when some city’s prevention strategy would not generate a plateau in the single city
model. We next verify from the real-world data that plateau phenomenon does exists in many regions of the world in
the current COVID-19 development, indicating that this is an important phenomenon to study. Finally, we provide
theoretical analysis on the plateau phenomenon on the single-city model, and derive a series of results on the emergence
and ending of the plateau, and on the height and length of the plateau in the single-city model. Our theoretical results
match well with our empirical findings.
To summarize, the key contributions of this paper are as follows:
• we extend the SIR model to incorporate adaptive prevention strategies and population mobility among different
regions that also employ different prevention strategies.
• We empirically verify through simulations and real-world data that an important plateau phenomenon exists,
and summarize some interesting properties on its appearance and characteristics in the single-city model and
relationships among plateaus in the multi-city model.
• We conduct theoretical analysis on the properties of the plateau and our theoretical results match well with the
empirical findings.

2

Related Works

Most of the existing epidemiological studies based on COVID-19 can be divided into the following four categories.
Research on the epidemiological characteristics of COVID-19. Although most of the attributes of SARS-CoV-2
cannot be obtained by epidemic analysis, the epidemiological characteristics of COVID-19 can be estimated. Most
of the works [2, 3, 4, 5, 6] focus on the study of the basic reproduction number R0 of COVID-19, which can reflect
the propagation ability of SARS-CoV-2. Other works [7, 8, 9, 10] analyzed the characteristics of COVID-19 such as
generation interval (cases doubling time).
Prediction of the virus trend. By combining real data with the model, these works aims to predict the development
of COVID-19. Since the beginning of the COVID-19 outbreak, it has been a hot topic. The most common method to
predict the number of futures infections relies on real-time data [11, 12, 13, 14, 6]. Due to the global characteristics of
the epidemic, many focused on combining population mobility data with the spreading model [15, 2, 5, 16, 17].
Improvement of the epidemic model. Apart from the population mobility, there are additional aspects that were studied
to enhance the quality of the prediction. The SEAIRD model allows for further division of the population [18, 19, 20].
Environmental parameters were also added to the models [21, 22], and machine learning algorithms were used [23, 24].
Exploration of the effects of prevention measures. Some countries try their best to prevent COVID-19, while others
wait for mass immunity. The significance of prevention has become the subject of many studies [25, 16, 26, 27]. Based
on the development of the epidemic situation before and after prevention, the role of prevention was analyzed. Almost
all the results affirmed the role of prevention, and pointed out that the epidemic would worsen more seriously without
prevention.
These works have studied various aspects of on COVID-19 pandemic, but none of them looked into the effect of
adaptive changes of prevention measures over time on the epidemic development, and none of them study the plateau
phenomenon that appears in practice. This is the subject of our study that differentiates ours from existing studies.
2

A PREPRINT - N OVEMBER 9, 2020

3

Epidemic Model with Prevention Strategy

Traditional epidemic models such as the SIR model [1] do not model behavioral changes in the population that could
change the virus propagation dynamics. However, as we have seen with the COVID-19 epidemic, people change their
behaviors due to the epidemic either voluntarily or by government restrictions, such as wearing masks, reduce traveling
and gathering when the epidemic is getting severe, until the epidemic situation is getting better. Moreover, different
geographic regions could impose different prevention strategies, and it is further complicated by the cross-regional
population movement.
In this paper, we incorporate the constantly changing prevention measures as well as the population mobility between
regions into the SIR model. For the COVID-19 with latent period, we do not choose the SEIR model, because using the
SIR model in the process of studying the prevention strategy can simplify the analysis process, and is no different from
the SEIR model. For simplicity, we refer regions as cities, but in reality they could represent either cities or provinces,
states, counties, or communities.
3.1

SIR-based Single-city Model

Our single-city model is based on the SIR model [1], in which each individual goes through the states of being
susceptible (S), infected (I), and recovered or removed (R). The standard SIR model is governed by two parameters —
infection rate β and recovery rate γ. To incorporate the prevention strategies and its dynamic changes into the model,
we further add a prevention parameter r into the model. Thus, in our model β is interpreted as the probability that
when a susceptible individual interacts with an already infected individual in a time unit, the susceptible individual gets
infected from the latter, and γ is the probability that an infected individual recovers from the disease in a time unit, while
r is the number of individuals one infected individual would interact with in one time unit. It is important to remark that
in our model, β and γ are the intrinsic properties of the virus, and it is not affected by the prevention measures, while r
is affected by the prevention measures — r will be smaller if the city imposes higher level of prevention measures and
people exercise social distancing, and r is larger if the city relaxes its prevention measures. The combined rβ would
correspond to the β parameter in the standard SIR model. Then, the differential equations of the single-city model are
as follows:
dS
rβIS
=−
,
dt
N
dI
rβIS
=
− γI,
dt
N
dR
= γI,
dt

(1)
(2)
(3)

where S is the susceptible population, I is the infected population, R is the recovered population, N is the total
population of the city, and t is the time. Note that S, I, R are considered variables that change over time, while N
remains the same over time. Equation (1) can be interpreted as the change of S in a time unit dt due to the fact that
each infected individual meets r individuals, among them a fraction of S/N are susceptibles, and thus β fraction of
them will be infected and change from S state to I state, and since we have I infected individuals, the total decrease on
S is rβIS
N . Equation (3) is simply because there are currently I infected individuals and γ fraction of them would be
recovered in each time unit dt, and Equation (2) is the combined effect of the other two equations.
3.2

Multi-city Model

We extend the single-city model to multiple cities where different cities may impose different levels of prevention
measures and there are population movement between the cities. In the multi-city model, there are m cities. For each
city i, we use subscript i in Si , Ii , Ri , Ni and ri to represent the SIR variables and parameters. Note that β and γ are
the same across cities since they model the intrinsic characteristics of the virus, while the prevention parameter ri ’s are
different across different cities, modeling different prevention measures taken among the cities.
3.2.1

Population balancing with the external environment

In the real world, the population base of a city is usually stable over time. Thus, we would like our model to maintain
the population for city i, Ni , the same over time, which also simplifies our model analysis. However, with different
population mobility between cities, it is not trivial to maintain population balance in the multi-city model. To achieve
this, we introduce the external environment as the background that could counter balance the excess or deficit of
population of each city due to the population movement. The external environment could be viewed as other cities that
3

A PREPRINT - N OVEMBER 9, 2020

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1: Take city A, city B and city C as examples to demonstrate the rules of population mobility. The number next to the circle
is the total floating population of the city, and the number on the side is the floating population between the two cities, in units of
thousand people.

we would not model explicitly or the rural areas surrounding the cities. The technical model and mobile population
calculation is explained below.
Suppose that each city i has a floating population fi , which is a fraction of the total population who will move in or
out of the city in a time unit. Let fi,j be the population moving from city i and city j in a time unit, and
Pmfi,0 be the
population moving between the city i to the external environment in a time unit. Thus, we have fi = j=0,j6=i fi,j .
We use the following rules to govern the inter-city population movement: (1) between two cities, the two directional
movement population is balanced, i.e. fi,j = fj,i ; and (2) the population movements from one city i to two different
cities j and j 0 are proportional to the two destination cities’ floating populations, i.e. fi,j /fi,j 0 = fj /fj 0 . To realize the
actual values of the population movement, we use the following simple procedure: We first sort the floating population
fi from the smallest to the largest, and determine the population movement of each city in this order (without loss
of generality, assuming f1 ≤ f2 ≤ · · · ). For the city 1 with the smallest floating population, we first allocate a fixed
fraction (e.g. 20%) of the floating population as the exchange population with the external environment to ensure that
every city has population exchange with the environment, and the remaining floating population is allocated to f1,j
proportional to the city j’s floating population fj , according to rule (2) above. Then for each remaining city i in the
order, we first apply rule (1) above to fix the fi,j = fj,i for all j < i, and then apply
(2) on the remaining cities
Prule
m
j 0 > i to get fi,j 0 proportional to fj 0 , and finally for the left over population fi − j=0,j6=i fi,j , we assign it to the
exchange population with the environment fi,0 .
Figure 1 shows a concrete example of the procedure. (a) The floating population of city A, city B and city C is 30, 20
and 10 thousand respectively. First of all, the floating population between city C and other cities is calculated, with 20%
floating population (i.e. 2,000) exchanges with the environment, and the remaining 80%, or 8,000 is allocated among
moving populations to city A and city B. Based on the population proportion, movement to city B accounts for 40%,
which is 3,200, and movement to city A is 4,800. (b) Then we calculate the city B with the second smallest floating
population. The floating population between city B and city C is 3,200, and the ratio of floating population between city
C and city A is 1: 3. Therefore, the proportion of floating population between city B and city C and between city B and
city A is also 1:3. The floating population between city B and city A is 9,600, and the remaining 7,200 are between city
B and the external environment. (c) Similarly, the remaining 15,600 floating population in city A will be used as the
floating population with the external environment.
With the above rules of population mobility, the population base of each city remains unchanged, and the cities with
more floating population account for a larger proportion of the floating population in other cities.

3.2.2

Multi-city SIR model base on population mobility

We now combine the single-city SIR model with the mobility rules defined in the previous section. With the rules
of population mobility and the external environment, we can ensure the dynamic balance of population mobility in
multiple cities in the model. By adding the part of floating population to the single-city model, we get the multi-city
4

A PREPRINT - N OVEMBER 9, 2020

model with the following equations:
m
X
dSi
ri βIi Si
Si
Sj
=−
+
−
),
fi,j (
dt
Ni
Nj
Ni

(4)

dIi
ri βIi Si
=
− γIi +
dt
Ni

(5)

j=0,j6=i
m
X

j=0,j6=i

fi,j (

Ii
Ij
−
),
Nj
Ni

m
X
Ri
dRi
Rj
= γIi +
−
),
fi,j (
dt
Nj
Ni

(6)

j=0,j6=i

where m for the total number of cities, 0 represents the external environment, and 1 ∼ m represent the cities. The
explanation of the above equations should be straightforward. For example, for Eq. (4), besides the virus infection
i Si
within the city given by the term ri βI
same as in Eq.(1), we also account for movements between the cities: for
Ni
every j 6= i, fi,j Si /Ni is the number of susceptible individuals moving out of city i to city j, assuming that the mobile
population has the same fraction of susceptible individuals as the general city population; and fi,j Sj /Nj is the number
of susceptible individuals moving into city i from city j. The other equations have the similar explanation.
From the model, in particular Eq. (5), we can see that if city j has a higher portion of infected people than city i, i.e.,
Ij /Nj > Ii /Ni , then city j contributes the inflow of infected to city i, and vice versa. This matches the intuition of
virus propagates from highly infected cities to lowly infected cities.
3.3

Prevention Strategy

During the epidemic, different cities or regions may have different strategies and measures to deal with infectious
diseases. For example, during the COVID-19 outbreak, some regions impose mandatory mask wearings while some
do not, many enforce social distancing, but at different scales, such as limited the size of gathering of no more than
50 or 100 people, closing schools, or restricting travels to and from high risk regions. All these restrictions can be
reflected into two parameter changes within our model. First is the prevention parameter ri for each city i. Different
social distancing measures essentially all reduce the number of people any individual would meet in a time unit, which
is modeled by ri . Thus we use ri to model the prevention measures, with lower ri meaning high level of prevention
measures and high ri meaning low level of prevention measures. Another parameter affected by the prevention measure
is the fraction of the floating population fi /Ni of each city i, denoted as pi — a higher prevention level decreases the
fraction of the floating population while a lower prevention level increases the fraction of the floating population.
Most cities or regions also dynamically adapt their prevention measures based on the current infection data — when the
new infection cases rise the prevention measures intensifies, and when the number of new cases drops, the prevention
measures is relaxed. We model this scenario by setting an prevention threshold and dynamically change the prevention
parameter ri and the fraction of the floating population pi based on whether the current infection cases is below or
above the prevention threshold. Technically, we have three main factors for deciding and changing the prevention
measures: (1) Prevention threshold θ, which sets a limit on the number of new infections within a time period. New
infections only include new cases caused by intra-city infections, excluding imported cases brought outside the city.
When the new number of infected people each day for 14 consecutive days is lower than the prevention threshold, it
shows that the epidemic situation is getting under control, and the prevention intensity begin to decline (r increases).
When the number of new infected people in any given day is higher than the prevention threshold, it shows that the
epidemic may worsen again, and prevention intensity begin to rise (r decreases). (2) The range of changing prevention
intensity [rL , rH ] and [pL , pH ], which gives the range of changes of each prevention parameter ri and the fraction
of floating population parameter pi . When the prevention measure intensifies, the values are changed to rL and pL
respectively, and when the prevention measure relaxes, the values are changed to rH and pH . (3) The speed of the
change in prevention intensity, as measured by the number of days k to complete the change. In the real world, the
change of prevention measures never happens instantaneously and it takes some time. So we use k to model the number
of days needed to change rL to rH and pL to pH , or in the reverse order. We use the geometric sequence to implement
such change sequences, as given below:
rH (−1)s
rt+1 = rt · ( ) k ,
rL
pH (−1)s
pt+1 = pt · (
) k ,
pL
where t represents days and s represents the direction of change in prevention. When s = 0, it means that the prevention
intensity is reduced. When s = 1, it means that prevention intensity is strengthened. The prevention intensity r and the
proportion of floating population p are always within the range of the prevention strategy.
5

A PREPRINT - N OVEMBER 9, 2020

Table 1: Indicators of prevention strategy.

∗

θ

r-range

p-range

k

PS1

−

r

p

−

PS2

θ

[rL , rH ]

[pL , pH ]

k

θ indicates the prevention threshold, r-range indicates the range of changing prevention intensity, p-range indicates the
range of changing proportion of floating population, k indicates the speed of the change in prevention intensity, and PS
indicates prevention strategy.

(a) Single city with constant strategy (b) Single city with adaptive strategy (c)
gies

Multiple cities with constant strate-(d) Multiple cities with mixed constant
and adaptive strategies

Figure 2: Infectious disease model with constant or adaptive prevention strategies. In the single-city model, the initial condition of
the city is IC = (200000, 0.5%), as shown in (a), (b). In the multi-city model, the initial conditions of the three cities A, B and C
are all IC = (200000, 0.5%), while the initial condition of the external environment is IC = (100000, 0.01%). Notations r and p
represent the constant prevention intensity and the constant proportion of population mobility, respectively. For adaptive strategies,
r0 indicates the initial prevention intensity, while rL and rH indicate the lower limit and upper limit of the prevention intensity,
respectively; p0 indicates the initial proportion of population mobility, while pL and pH represent the lower and upper limits of the
proportion of population mobility, respectively; θ represents the prevention threshold, and k represents the speed of the change in
prevention intensity.

In general, prevention strategies can be summarized like in Table 1. PS1 is the case that the prevention intensity remains
unchanged: the parameters of prevention intensity r and the proportion of floating population p are fixed values, and
there is no prevention threshold and reaction speed. This corresponds to the classical infectious disease model, and
we refer to it as a model with a constant prevention strategy. PS2 corresponds to the adaptive changes in prevention
intensity that we commonly see during the COVID-19 pandemic: the full strategy is characterized by the prevention
threshold θ, the r-range [rL , rH ], the p-range [pL , pH ], and the change speed k, and we refer to such ones as models
with an adaptive prevention strategy.
In the next section, we will empirically evaluate our models to discover the key phenomenon of epidemic plateau, and
validate it against the real-world COVID-19 data. We will then provide theoretical analysis on the plateau phenomenon
in Section 5.

4

Empirical Observations — the Plateau Phenomenon

Based on the above epidemic model with prevention strategy, we take the COVID-19 as an example to simulate the
epidemic development in a single city and in multiple cities. We will use one day as the time unit for the model given in
the previous section.
4.1

Experiment Setup

We base the choice of our parameters on the research that have been made on the COVID-19.
4.1.1

Infection rate and recovery rate

The first parameters are the infection rate and the recovery rate of COVID-19. A person stays infected by COVID-19
for 8.4 days on average [2]. The recovery rate is thus defined as γ = 1/8.4 = 0.12. For the infection rate of COVID-19,
we use the most common indicator in the epidemic research, the reproduction number to calculate.
6

A PREPRINT - N OVEMBER 9, 2020

The reproduction number can be divided into basic reproduction number and effective reproduction number. The basic
reproduction number represents the average number of people infected in a group of all susceptible people before an
infected person recovers, expressed as R0 . The estimation of the basic reproduction number is generally chosen in
the early stage of the outbreak, as the proportion of susceptible people in the population is close to 1. The effective
reproduction number is different from the basic reproduction number, and it represents the average number of people
infected at time t with a certain proportion of the susceptible population before an infected person recovers, expressed
as Rt . The effective reproductive number Rt will change over time, because the proportion of susceptible people will
change with the development of the epidemic. When the effective reproduction number Rt < 1, it indicates that the
epidemic is receding and will die out soon. The time from infection to the recovery from the infection is an infection
cycle, which is γ1 days. Before recovering, the infected person will come into contact with r individuals every day.
Among these people, only susceptible people will be infected, and the probability of each susceptible individual getting
infected is β. Therefore, the basic reproductive number R0 and the effective reproductive number Rt have the following
relationship with infection rate β and recovery rate γ:
rβ
,
γ
rβ S
Rt =
· .
γ N

R0 =

(7)
(8)

We can get the infection rate β of COVID-19 through the basic reproduction number R0 of SARS-CoV-2 and the
number of human contact r as in Eq. (7).
Before calculating the infection rate β, it is necessary to know the prevention parameter r, or the number of human
contacts per day. As discussed before r will change according to the prevention measures. The basic reproduction
number R0 should corresponds to the situation of the early stage of the outbreak before prevention. At this time, the
proportion of susceptible people is close to 1, and the number of contacts with the population is at the normal level. In
order to better estimate the number of human contacts, we used the epidemic data provided by the Information Center
of Shenzhen Public Security Bureau. In Shenzhen, for people infected with COVID-19, the Public Security Bureau will
track down the people who have been in contact with him during the incubation period and conduct medical observation
to avoid further spreading. The Public Security Bureau records the number of contacts tracked every day and refers to
the number of people obtained as the number of medical observers. Based on the number of daily medical observations,
divided by the product of the number of new diagnoses per day and the incubation period (3.0 days), we estimate the
normal number of contacts among people r = 24. In order to make the results closer to the normal number of human
contact, the data from the early stage of the epidemic (the first 5 days of the outbreak in Shenzhen) were selected in the
experiment.
There are some estimates of the basic reproduction number R0 in the articles about COVID-19, and the results are all
around 3 [2, 3, 4, 5, 14]. Assuming that the basic reproduction number of SARS-CoV-2 R0 = 3, combined with the
recovery rate γ = 0.12 and the contact times of the population r = 24, the infection rate of COVID-19 can be obtained
as β = 0.015 from Eq. (7).
4.1.2

The number of population contacts and the proportion of population mobility

As derived above, r = 24 is the number of contacts without prevention. The prevention strategies would reduce r. Only
when the effective reproduction number Rt < 1, the epidemic begins to subside, and the number of infections declines.
We call the number r that corresponds to Rt = 1 as r̃t , the effective prevention intensity, which corresponds to the
effective reproduction number Rt according to Eq. (8). Based on Eq. (8) and the calculated infection rate and recovery
rate from above, we can obtain that the number of infections will decrease immediately when the prevention intensity
r < 8.
With the assistance of the Information Center of Shenzhen Public Security Bureau, the population mobility ratio p is
estimated according to the population mobility data of Shenzhen in 2019 and 2020. During the outbreak of COVID-19
in 2020, Shenzhen implemented strict restrictions on population mobility, and the proportion of population mobility
was around 5%. In the same period in 2019, the proportion of people moving fluctuated between 10% and 20%. In this
paper, it is assumed that the proportion of population mobility under normal conditions is p = 20%.
4.1.3

Initial condition.

In the simulation experiment, the total population and the proportion of initial infected people in the city are called
initial conditions. Different initial conditions will appear in the single-city model and the multi-city model. An initial
condition can be expressed as IC = (N, IN0 ).
7

A PREPRINT - N OVEMBER 9, 2020

(a) Prevention threshold

(b) The range of changing prevention intensity (c) The speed of the change in prevention intensity

Figure 3: The influence of various indicators on the plateau. In the single-city model, the initial condition of the city is
IC = (200000, 0.5%). (a) Prevention threshold θ is the indicator for comparison, other indicators r0 = 6, rL = 6, rH = 10, k = 5.
(b) The range of changing prevention intensity [rL , rH ] is the indicator for comparison, other indicators θ = 40, k = 5. (c) The
speed of the change in prevention intensity k is the indicator for comparison, other indicators θ = 40, r0 = 6, rL = 6, rH = 10.

4.2

Simulation Results

Figure 2 shows the development of the epidemic in single city and multiple cities with constant or adaptive prevention
strategies. The y-axis is the value of I for a particular day, which is the number of current existing infected individuals
that can still transmit the disease (note that it is not the number of newly infected cases in that day). As a convention,
for a constant prevention strategy that does not change r, e.g. r is always 6, we denote it as r = 6 in the figure legend;
for an adaptive prevention strategy, if we initially set a prevention strategy to be at a certain level e.g. 6, and then it will
change in the range [rL , rH ] when the newly infected case per day drops below the threshold, we denote it as r0 = 6
and rL , rH to the appropriate values in the legend. The fraction of floating parameter p and the corresponding p0 and
pL , pH are treated in the same manner.
The results from Figure 2 are as follows.
• Figure 2(a): In the single-city model with a constant prevention strategy, the change curve of the number of
existing infections is smooth. The number of infections either continues to decline (r ≤ 8), or rises first and
then falls (r > 8).
• Figure 2(b): In the single-city model with an adaptive prevention strategy, the change curve of the number
of existing infections is no longer smooth. Comparing to the single-city model with a constant prevention
strategy (Figure 2(a)), it has a distinctive feature — a long period in which the number of existing infected
people remains more or less the same, with small fluctuations. We refer to such a flat period a plateau, and it is
the main phenomenon we are going to study in this paper.
• Figure 2(c): This is the three city case and all cities have constant prevention strategies. In the multi-city
model, it can be found that the urban epidemic situation affects each other under the influence of population
mobility. The number of infections in city C should have risen to a higher level (I > 5000), but instead it
begins to decline earlier under the influence of other cities. On the contrary, there has been an increase in the
number of infections in the external environment EE which should have been declining (r = 6). There is no
plateau phenomenon in this case.
• Figure 2(d): In this case, two of the cities (B and C) adopt adaptive prevention strategies, and one city (A) as
well as the external environment use a constant prevention strategy. The phenomenon of horizontal fluctuation
in the number of existing infections, i.e. the plateau, appears again. More interestingly, the plateau appears
in every city, has occurred in every city and the environment, even if some city and the environment adopt a
constant prevention strategy.
4.2.1

Plateau

As shown in Figure 2, in some cases we see that the phenomenon of plateau may occur, that is, there is a prolonged
period in which the number of existing infections maintains at the same level with small fluctuations. The plateau means
that there will be a prolonged period in which the infection within the population will be maintained at the steady level.
We will see in the next subsection that indeed we could observe such plateau phenomenon in the real-world COVID-19
epidemic. The emergence and the properties of such plateaus are certainly important for the public health authorities to
devise appropriate policies to battle against the COVID-19 pandemic. In this section, we will use empirical observations
8

A PREPRINT - N OVEMBER 9, 2020

to extract the possible conditions for the emergence of the plateau and its properties, and in Section 5, we will provide
theoretical analysis to validate these observations.
First, from Figure 2, we can see that the adoption of adaptive prevention strategies is strongly correlated to the emergence
of the plateau. When there is no adaptive prevention strategies deployed, we do not see the plateau phenomenon.
However, the adoption of adaptive strategies itself is not sufficient to guarantee the appearance of the plateau, which
can be seen in the blue curve in Figure 2(b). Moreover, in the multi-city situation, even if some city does not adopt an
adaptive prevention strategy, it still exhibits a plateau (city A in Figure 2(d)), seemingly under the influence from other
cities with adaptive prevention strategies. Thus, the actual condition of the emergence of plateau needs to be further
analyzed.
Second, the height of the plateau is different with different adaptive prevention strategies. In the next test, we will try
different prevention strategies parameters to empirically verify the factors that affect the height of the plateau.
4.2.2

The effect of prevention strategies

From Figure 2, we can see that the adaptive prevention strategies affect the appearance of the plateau. Now we also
try different prevention parameters to see their effect on the plateau, especially on the height of the plateau. We use
single-city model for this test to make the effect of prevention strategies more direct. As stated in Section 3.3, in the
single-city model, an adaptive prevention strategy consists of parameters of prevention threshold θ, range of prevention
intensity [rL , rH ] and the speed of change k in the number of days to switch the prevention intensity. We now analyze
the effect of each of these parameters.
Prevention threshold θ. As shown in Figure 3a, when there is a plateau in the development of the epidemic, it can be
found that the prevention threshold θ is positively correlated with the height of the plateau. The greater the prevention
threshold, the higher the plateau. A closer look at their relationship, one may even see a close to linear relationship
between the prevention threshold and the height of the plateau. We will validate this relationship in the theoretical
analysis section. In addition, the higher the plateau, the greater the daily fluctuation of the number of existing infections,
but in general it still remains at a certain level.
The range of changing prevention intensity [rL , rH ]. As shown in Figure 3b, when there is a plateau in the
development of the epidemic, different [rL , rH ] will not change the height of the plateau. However, [rL , rH ] will
determine whether the plateau occurs. When both rL and rH are small, the plateau does not occur, and the number of
existing infections continues is declining (see the red line). When both rL and rH are large, the number of existing
infections will rise at first and then decrease, but there will still be a plateau in the end (see the yellow line). The size of
the changing range does not affect the height of the plateau, but it is related to the amplitude. The greater the range of
change, the greater the amplitude (compare the blue line with the purple line).
The speed of the change in prevention intensity k. Figure 3c shows that k does not affect the height of the plateau,
but it does affect the fluctuation amplitude of the plateau. The smaller the k, the greater the fluctuation of the number of
existing infections during the plateau (compare the blue line with the purple line).
Through our simulations, we can see that the emergence of plateau is related to the range of changing prevention
intensity [rL , rH ], and the height of plateau is positively correlated with prevention threshold θ. It shows that the
integration of prevention strategies, especially the adaptive ones, would change the dynamics of the epidemic that is not
covered by the traditional epidemic models. The plateau and its related phenomenon is actually more consistent with
what happens in the real world for the COVID-19 pandemic, as we illustrate in Section 4.3.
4.2.3

Results and Discussion on the Multi-city Model

As shown in Figure 2d, it is found that the platform period also exists in the multi-city model. Through simulation and
empirical observation, we found the following phenomena.
• The height of plateaus change from the single-city model: In the multi-city model, if all cities have the same
IC and adopt adaptive prevention strategies, they all have a plateau, but the height of the plateau is different
from that of the single-city model. Comparing Figure 4(a) with Figure 3a, the height of the plateau of city A
decreased, while that of city C increased. The reason is due to the population mobility in the multi-city model.
As the proportion of infected people in city A is the highest, the outflow of infected people is larger than the
inflow, and the number of infected people in city A will decrease, i.e. the height of the plateau of city A will
decrease. City C is the opposite.
• Cities that would not have a plateau by itself could have a plateau in the multi-city model: Cities with constant
prevention strategies could also enter a plateau period in the multi-city model. In Figure 4(b), both city A and
9

A PREPRINT - N OVEMBER 9, 2020

(a)

The height of plateau changes in multiple
cities

(b) City B leads other cities to a platform

(c) No plateau in any cities

Figure 4: The phenomena of the plateau in multi-city model. Initial conditions of city A, city B and city C are all IC =
(200000, 0.5%), while the initial condition of the external environment EE is IC = (100000, 0.01%).
city C adopt constant prevention strategy, in which the number of infections in city A should rise at first and
then decline, and the number of infections in city C should be declining all the time, as shown in Figure 2a.
However, under the influence of population mobility and city B, every city has entered a plateau. We infer that
in the multi-city model, one city have plateau, then it is possible to lead other cities to enter the plateau period.
• Either all cities are in the plateau or none of them is in the plateau: In the multi-city model, Comparing
Figure 4(c) with Figure 4a & 4b, we find that the epidemic development in cities is not independent. Either
every city has entered a plateau(See Figure 4a & 4b), or every city keeps receding without a plateau after their
initial peaks.
The above observations show that quite interesting plateau phenomenon emerges even in the multi-city model with
complex epidemic dynamics within cities and population mobility dynamics cross cities. In particular, the results
strongly indicate that all cities are interdependent in terms of the epidemic development — their plateau phenomenon
co-occur, and even a city that would not have a plateau by itself would enter a plateau under the influence from the
adaptive strategies of other cities. This suggests that in battling the COVID-19 pandemic, one should not look only at
the local prevention strategies, but also need to take into account other regions’s strategies and population mobility, and
perhaps some global coordination would be more effective.
4.3

Real World Data Verification

The pateau phenomenon also appears in the real world epidemic, in particular in the current COVID-19 pandemic. We
collect the epidemic data from the total of 189 countries from data source DXY1 , which collects data from sources
including the World Health Organization (WHO), with data up to the date of October 11, 2020. We visually investigated
the data and found that there are 35 countries that have demonstrated clear plateau phenomenon for more than one
month. Among other countries, 129 of them are still suffering worsening situations or are facing a new rising of the
epidemics, and 10 countries have receding epidemic. The basic statistics are summarized in the following table.
Table 2: Epidemic situation in various countries.
countries

plateau

worsening

receding

35

129

10

Figure 5 shows a few examples of countries that have a clear plateau phenomenon, including Thailan, South Korea,
Tajikstan and Qatar. These data clearly support the existence of the plateau phenomenon in practice, which means it is
important for us to study in more details on the plateau phenomemon. Although it may be difficult to pin point the
exact reasons that cause the plateau phenomenon for each country, from our simulation result observations, we believe
that the plateau phenomenon in these countries is likely related to the adaptive prevention strategies adopted by the
countries.
For the majority of countries that are still experiencing worsening COVID-19 epidemic, if proper adaptive prevention
strategies are enforced, we could expect that they will also enter the plateau period in the future. Thus, understanding
1

https://github.com/BlankerL/DXY-COVID-19-Data

10

A PREPRINT - N OVEMBER 9, 2020

(a) Thailand

(b) South Korea

(c) Tajikstan

(d) Qatar

Figure 5: Examples of countries that have a clear plateau phenomenon. The number of existing infections is calculated by the
confirmed cases, minus the sum of recovery cases and death cases.

the plateau phenomenon would be useful for most countries that are suffering the COVID-19 epidemic. In the next
section, we will provide theoretical analysis on the plateau phenomenon.

5

Theoretical Analysis

In the simulation study, we found that epidemic development might enter a plateau period after SIR model is integrated
with an adaptive prevention strategy. The simulation study suggests some simple relationships such as the emergence of
plateau is related to the changing range of prevention intensity [rL , rH ], and the height of plateau is positively correlated
with the prevention threshold θ. In this section, we will analyze theoretically the conditions of the emergence and
ending of the plateau as well as the properties of the plateau. Our analysis focus on the single-city model. The multi-city
model involves much more complicated dynamics due to the mobile populations between the cities and we will leave
its theoretical analysis as a future work item.
5.1

Effective Prevention Strategy and the Ideal Model

As suggested from the simulation study, the plateau is related to the adaptive prevention strategy, but it is also the case
that not every prevention strategy would generate a plateau (See Figure 3b). A closer investigation shows that this is
related to the effective prevention intensity r̃t , as defined in Section 4.1.2. Recall that the effective prevention intensity
r̃t is the value of prevention intensity r when the effective reproduction number Rt takes the value of 1. Intuitively,
when Rt = 1, the number of infections an infected individual makes before he/she is recovered is exactly 1, meaning
that the number of existing infected cases would remain the same. Thus, r̃t is the corresponding prevention intensity
level that would maintain the infection cases the same. Note that in general the effective prevention intensity r̃t is
different from the actual value of the prevention intensity r used: the former is the would-be value to keep the infection
cases the same while the latter is the actual value of the prevention strategy used at each day, and this is also the reason
we use different notations to distinguish the two. The effective prevention intensity r̃t has the following simple but
important property:
Lemma 1 The effective prevention intensity r̃t is monotonically increasing with time t.
Proof 1 By Eq. (8), and the fact r̃t is defined as the value of r when Rt = 1, we have
r̃t =

N ·γ
.
S·β

(9)

Since the number of susceptible people S is monotonically decreasing with time t while other parameters N, β, γ stay
constant, we have that r̃t is monotonically increasing.
In the single-city model summarized in Section 3, we have several aspects that try to reflect the real-world scenario,
such as the 14 day grace period before relaxing the prevention intensity, and the changing of the strategies taking some
time governed by parameter k. To emphasize the essence of the model, for the theoretical analysis, we consider the
following simplified ideal single-city model, which is consistent with the principle of full model . In the ideal model,
once the daily new cases drop to the prevention threshold θ, we immediately adjust the prevention strategy r such that
we keep the daily new cases to be exactly θ, as long as we have r ≤ rH . Moreover, we assume that the city starts
with a significant number of infected cases and under intense prevention control, and thus the prevention strategy is
relaxed when the infection cases drop below the prevention threshold. Technically we require that the initial infection
number I0 satisfies I0 · γ > θ, that is, the number of daily infected people initially is I0 · γ and it is more than θ. This
11

A PREPRINT - N OVEMBER 9, 2020

corresponds to the real-world scenario where the prevention strategies are only employed after the epidemic outbreak
already begins, and the adaptive strategies are designed to maintain the infection cases at a low level after the initial
infection peak already occurs. Note that the above description on the ideal model only applies to the adaptive prevention
strategy. The constant prevention strategy remains the same in the ideal model. We will also use the simulation results
from the full model to validate the accuracy of the prediction from the ideal model.
5.2

The Emergence and Ending of Plateau

We first investigate the conditions for the presence or the absence of the plateau, in the single-city model. Let tθ be
the time when the number of daily recovered people drops to θ, i.e. Iγ = θ. Recall that we assume that initially
I0 γ > θ, and thus I will eventually drop to θ. With Lemma 1, we can derive the following result connecting the
effective prevention intensity with the plateau phenomenon.
Theorem 1 In the ideal single-city model with an adaptive prevention strategy, at any time t, if the effective prevention
intensity at this time r̃t ≥ rH , then there will be no plateau after time t. On the other hand, if r̃tθ < rH , then there will
be a plateau starting at tθ .
Proof 2 (Proof (Sketch)) When r̃t ≥ rH , we know that for any time t0 > t, r̃t0 > r̃t according to Lemma 1. This
means that for all time t0 > t, the actual prevention intensity r as the property that r ≤ rH < r̃t0 . Since r̃t0 corresponds
to the effective reproduction number Rt0 = 1, this implies that Rt0 < 1 by Eq. (8), which in turn implies that for all
time t0 > t, the number of new infections any infected people would generate is less than 1, and the epidemic will keep
receding.
Now suppose that r̃tθ < rH . According to the definition of r̃tθ , at time tθ Iγ = θ. Let t0 be the time when the daily
infected people first hits θ. By our assumption, at time t0 the infected people I is dropping from I0 with I0 γ > θ. Thus
at time t0 Iγ > θ since in the days before θ, the daily infected people must be greater than θ. This means t0 < tθ .
This implies that before time tθ the ideal model would already adjust r to keep the daily infection number as θ. The
condition r̃tθ < rH guarantees that it can keep the daily infection number as θ to time tθ , at which the daily infection
number balances with the daily recovery number Iγ. From time tθ on, we can always keep the prevention intensity r as
r̃t until it increases to rH . During this period, the daily infection and daily recover balance each other, and we have the
plateau.
The above theorem shows that the relationship of the effective prevention intensity r̃t and the upper bound of the
prevention intensity range rH directly determine the presence of the plateau. Note that for a constant prevention strategy
with a fixed value r, it is clear that it has no plateau because it is essentially the same as the standard SIR model.
Therefore, we can obtain the following conclusion on the emergence and the ending of the plateau.
Corollary 1 (Condition for the emergence of the plateau) In the ideal single-city model, the condition that the
plateau will emerge is that we use an adaptive prevention strategy and r̃tθ < rH .
Corollary 2 (Condition for the ending of the plateau) In the ideal single-city model, given that there is a plateau at
time t, the plateau period will end at time t0 > t when r̃t0 ≥ rH .
Corollary 1 states that we will have a plateau when the effective prevention intensity is still less than rH when the daily
recovery number hit the prevention threshold, while Corollary 2 states that when it happens, the plateau will end once
the effective prevent intensity reaches rH . We defer the discussion on the actual calculation of the condition r̃tθ < rH
to Section 5.4 when we study the length of the plateau.
We use simulation results shown in Figure 6 to validate these conditions in our actual model. Figure 6a shows the
epidemic development under two adaptive prevention strategies. The first strategy, shown in the blue curve, has a clear
plateau period. In Figure 6b, we show the corresponding changes of the effective prevention intensity and the actual
prevention intensity. For the blue curve in Figure 6a, the blue curve in Figure 6b shows the corresponding changes in the
actual prevention intensity r, which fluctuates between rL = 6 and rH = 10 for a period of time. During this period,
the yellow curve, corresponding to the effective prevention intensity r̃t,1 of the first strategy increases gradually from 8
to 10. Since θ = 40 and γ = 0.12, when y-axis I is about 40/0.12 ≈ 333, the corresponding the effective prevention
intensity is around 8, which is less than rH = 10, which is consistent with Corollary 1 that the plateau would appear.
When r̃t,1 increases to 10 = rH , we can see that the plateau ends in the corresponding blue curve on the left. Now, for
the second strategy, the red curve in Figure 6a, we see that there is no plateau. The actual prevention intensity r keeps at
the level rH = 8 in this case (the red curve in Figure 6b), while the effective prevention intensity r̃t,2 starts at 8 and
increases slowly above 8 (the purple curve in Figure 6b). This is also consistent with Corollary 1, meaning that when
r̃tθ ≥ rH = 8, there will be no plateau in this case.
12

A PREPRINT - N OVEMBER 9, 2020

(a) The change curve of I

(b) The change curve of r

Figure 6: The relationship between the emergence and ending of the plateau and the change of prevention intensity. In the single-city
model IC = (200000, 0.5%), the experimental results of different range of changing prevention intensity [rL , rH ] show that one
has a plateau and the other does not.r̃t,1 expressed the changes in the effective prevention intensity of the first prevention strategy
during the development of the epidemic.r̃t,2 stands for the second prevention strategy.

5.3

The Height of the Plateau

Although the number of infected people in the plateau period has small fluctuations, it is basically maintained at a same
value. We call the value around which the number of existing infections fluctuates is the height of the plateau, and
denote it as IP . In the ideal model, the height of the plateau IP is when the number of existing infected people does not
change, that is, when the effective reproduction number Rt = 1. Using the relations we derived before, we can obtain
the following result on IP .
Theorem 2 In the ideal single-city model, the height of the plateau is given as follows:
θ
IP = ,
γ
where θ is the prevention threshold and γ is the recovery rate.

(10)

Proof 3 In the ideal model, in the plateau we have Rt = 1, and the daily newly infected people is exactly equal to the
prevention threshold θ. According to the SIR model the daily newly infected people is rβIS
N (excluding the number of
recovered people), and thus in the plateau period,
rβIP S
θ=
.
(11)
N
From Eq. (8), and setting Rt = 1, we know that

rβS
N

= γ. Plugging it into Eq.(11), we have IP = θ/γ.

Theorem 2 directly shows that the height of the plateau has positive linear relationship with the prevention threshold θ,
and it is not related to the other parameters such as the range of prevention strategy [rL , rH ] or the speed of prevention
k. This result is consistent with our simulation study findings (see Figure 3). In particular, comparing with Figure 3a,
when we plug in θ = 10, 20, 40, 80 with γ = 0.12, we obtain the theoretical heights as IP = 83, 167, 333, 667, while
the empirical averages we obtain the simulation results are 77, 154, 308, 622 respectively, indicating that the theoretical
results match with the simulation results reasonably well. The reason that the empirical results are consistently lower
than the theoretical predictions is because in our actual model, we have an asymmetric strategy adjustment: we need
14 consecutive days of new cases dropping below θ to relax the prevention, while we only need one day of new cases
rising above θ to strengthen the prevention. This asymmetric control push the actual height lower than our theoretical
prediction from the ideal model.
5.4

The Length of the Plateau

After obtaining the height of the plateau IP , we can further calculate the length of the plateau by the Area Method. We
denote the length of the plateau, i.e. the time period from when the plateau begins to the plateau ends, as T . It is clear
that T · IP is the area covered under the plateau period. So, we just need to calculate the area underlying the plateau to
get T . The result is given in the following theorem.
13

A PREPRINT - N OVEMBER 9, 2020

Table 3: The empirical and theoretical lengths of the plateau for settings in Figure 3a.
θ

10

20

40

80

days (empirical)

3,929

1,975

1,002

514

days (theoretical)

3,637

1,830

927

475

Theorem 3 In the ideal single-city model, assuming that the number of new infections falls to θ is the beginning of the
plateau period, the length of the plateau is given as follows:
T =

SB − SE
,
θ

(12)

γN
where SE is the number of susceptible people when the plateau ends, and SE = βr
, and SB is the number of
H
susceptible people when the plateau begins, and it is the solution of the following equality

S = (S0 + I0 ) − IP +

Nγ
S
ln ,
r0 β S0

(13)

where S0 , I0 are the number of susceptible and infected people when the time starts, and r0 is the initial prevention
intensity used before the prevention intensity is adjusted in the range [rL , rH ].
Proof 4 (Proof (Sketch)) In the curve with I as y-axis and time as x-axis, the area under curve (AUC) by time t is
the cumulative existing infected people by time t. On average, each infected individual takes 1/γ time to recover, so
each infected individual is counted 1/γ times. Therefore, the AUC by time t is the total number of once infected people
multiplied by 1/γ, which is (I + R)/γ. Since S + I + R = N , so we have the AUC by time t is (N − S)/γ. Let tB , tE
be the time when the plateau begins and ends, and correspondingly SB and SE are the numbers of susceptible people at
time tB and tE respectively. Then we have the AUC between tB and tE is (N − SE )/γ − (N − SB )/γ = (SB − SE )/γ.
E )/γ
E
Since the height of the plateau is θ/γ by Theorem 2, we know the length of the plateau T = (SB −S
= SB −S
.
θ/γ
θ
Thus Eq.(12) holds.
We now show how to derive SB and SE . First, for SE , we know from Corollary 2 that when the plateau ends, r̃tE = rH ,
γN
and by the definition of r̃tE , we know RtE = 1. Plugging these values into Eq. (8), we obtain that SE = βr
.
H
To derive the result for SB , we rely on the equation below connecting I and S in the SIR model [28]:
I = (S0 + I0 ) − S +

Nγ
S
ln ,
rβ
S0

where S0 , I0 are the numbers of susceptible and infected people when the time starts. Before entering the plateau
period, the prevention intensity r is fixed to a value r0 . When it first hits the pateau period, I is equal to IP . Thus, when
plugging I = IP and r = r0 into the above equation, we obtain Eq.(13), and SB is the solution of this equation.
Note that SB derived from Eq. (13) can be used to test condition r̃tθ < rH in Corollary 1: r̃tθ =
Eq.(9).

N ·γ
SB ·β

according to

We now validate Theorem 3 with the empirical results. We compare our theoretical prediction on the plateau length
with the empirical results from Figure 3a, with the initial condition IC = (200000, 0.5%) and parameters r0 = 6, rL =
6, rH = 10, k = 5 and θ from 10 to 80. Table 3 summarizes the comparison result. We can see that the theoretical
and empirical results match reasonably well. Moreover, the estimation error is mainly from the error in the estimation
of the height — if we replace the theoretical heights with the empirical heights, we get much closer estimates of
3920, 1984, 1002, 509 respectively, which means our theoretical AUC prediction is quite accurate.

6

Conclusion and Future Work

In this paper we study a phenomenon of epidemic development: COVID-19 plateau. This phenomenon is formed under
the change of prevention intensity of adaptive prevention strategies. In the traditional infectious disease model, it is
difficult to find the existence of the plateau. We investigate empirically from both simulations and real-world data
and on the plateau phenomenon, in both single-city models and multi-city models, and further provide theoretical
analysis in the single-city model and obtain an number of results on the emergence and the characteristics of the plateau
phenomenon. Our results also suggest that all regions are interconnected and local prevention strategies would have
14

A PREPRINT - N OVEMBER 9, 2020

effects to other regions as well. Understanding the plateau phenomenon would be useful for most countries that are
suffering the COVID-19 epidemic.
There could be some future work along this direction. On the empirical side, one could investigate in more detail the
real-world plateau phenomenon and their correlations with specific prevention strategies used. On the theoretical side,
the multi-city model is much more challenging due to the complicated population mobility dynamics, and it would
be very important and beneficial to obtain some insightful results in the multi-city model. We hope that our findings
could help the understanding of the COVID-19 pandemic (and other epidemics as well) in connection with different
prevention strategies, and assist policy makers in predicting the effect of their prevention strategies.

References
[1] M. E. J. Newman. Networks. Oxford University Press, 2010.
[2] Joseph T Wu, Kathy Leung, and Gabriel M Leung. Nowcasting and forecasting the potential domestic and
international spread of the 2019-ncov outbreak originating in wuhan, china: a modelling study. The Lancet,
395(10225):689–697, 2020.
[3] Xingjie Hao, Shanshan Cheng, Degang Wu, Tangchun Wu, Xihong Lin, and Chaolong Wang. Reconstruction of
the full transmission dynamics of covid-19 in wuhan. Nature, 584(7821):420–424, 2020.
[4] Tao Zhou, Quanhui Liu, Zimo Yang, Jingyi Liao, Kexin Yang, Wei Bai, Xin Lu, and Wei Zhang. Preliminary
prediction of the basic reproduction number of the wuhan novel coronavirus 2019-ncov. Journal of Evidence-Based
Medicine, 13(1):3–7, 2020.
[5] Zhidong Cao, Qingpeng Zhang, Xin Lu, Dirk Pfeiffer, Lei Wang, Hongbing Song, Tao Pei, Zhongwei Jia, and
Daniel Dajun Zeng. Incorporating human movement data to improve epidemiological estimates for 2019-ncov.
medRxiv, 2020.
[6] Chernet Tuge Deressa and Gemechis File Duressa. Modeling and optimal control analysis of transmission
dynamics of covid-19: The case of ethiopia. Alexandria Engineering Journal, 2020.
[7] Wei-jie Guan, Zheng-yi Ni, Yu Hu, Wen-hua Liang, Chun-quan Ou, Jian-xing He, Lei Liu, Hong Shan, Chun-liang
Lei, David SC Hui, et al. Clinical characteristics of 2019 novel coronavirus infection in china. MedRxiv, 2020.
[8] Sheikh Taslim Ali, Lin Wang, Eric HY Lau, Xiao-Ke Xu, Zhanwei Du, Ye Wu, Gabriel M Leung, and Benjamin J
Cowling. Serial interval of sars-cov-2 was shortened over time by nonpharmaceutical interventions. Science,
369(6507):1106–1109, 2020.
[9] Kieran A Walsh, Susan Spillane, Laura Comber, Karen Cardwell, Patricia Harrington, Jeff Connell, Conor Teljeur,
Natasha Broderick, Cillian F de Gascun, Susan M Smith, et al. The duration of infectiousness of individuals
infected with sars-cov-2. Journal of Infection, 2020.
[10] Daihai He, Shi Zhao, Xiaoke Xu, Qiangying Lin, Zian Zhuang, Pei-Hua Cao, Maggie Wang, Yijun Lou, Li Xiao,
Ye Wu, and Lin Yang. Low dispersion in the infectiousness of covid-19 cases implies difficulty in control. BMC
Public Health, 10 2020.
[11] Salah Ghamizi, Renaud Rwemalika, Maxime Cordy, Lisa Veiber, Tegawendé F Bissyandé, Mike Papadakis,
Jacques Klein, and Yves Le Traon. Data-driven simulation and optimization for covid-19 exit strategies. In
Proceedings of the 26th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining, pages
3434–3442, 2020.
[12] Jinchang Ren, Yijun Yan, Huimin Zhao, Ping Ma, Jaime Zabalza, Zain Hussain, Shaoming Luo, Qingyun Dai,
Sophia Zhao, Aziz Sheikh, et al. Derivation and validation of a novel intelligent computational approach to model
epidemiological trends and assess the impact of non-pharmacological interventions for covid-19. IEEE journal of
biomedical and health informatics, 2020.
[13] Domenico Gaglione, Paolo Braca, Leonardo Maria Millefiori, Giovanni Soldi, Nicola Forti, Stefano Marano,
Peter K Willett, and Krishna R Pattipati. Adaptive bayesian learning and forecasting of epidemic evolution—data
analysis of the covid-19 outbreak. IEEE Access, 8:175244–175264, 2020.
[14] William Marciel de Souza, Lewis Fletcher Buss, Darlan da Silva Candido, Jean Paul Carrera, Sabrina Li, Alexander
Zarebski, Maria Vincenti-Gonzalez, Janey Messina, Flavia Cristina da Silva Sales, Pamela dos Santos Andrade,
et al. Epidemiological and clinical characteristics of the early phase of the covid-19 epidemic in brazil. medRxiv,
2020.
[15] Qianyue Hao, Lin Chen, Fengli Xu, and Yong Li. Understanding the urban pandemic spreading of covid-19 with
real world mobility data. In KDD ’20: The 26th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data
Mining, 2020.
15

A PREPRINT - N OVEMBER 9, 2020

[16] Jayson S Jia, Xin Lu, Yun Yuan, Ge Xu, Jianmin Jia, and Nicholas A Christakis. Population flow drives
spatio-temporal distribution of covid-19 in china. Nature, pages 1–5, 2020.
[17] Jizhou Huang, Haifeng Wang, Miao Fan, An Zhuo, Yibo Sun, and Ying Li. Understanding the impact of the
covid-19 pandemic on transportation-related behaviors with human mobility data. In Proceedings of the 26th
ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining, pages 3443–3450, 2020.
[18] Xian-Xian Liu and Simon Fong. Towards a realistic model for simulating spread of infectious covid-19 disease.
In Proceedings of the 2020 the 4th International Conference on Big Data and Internet of Things, pages 96–101,
2020.
[19] Degang Xu, Xiyang Xu, and Zhifang Su. Novel sivr epidemic spreading model with virus variation in complex
networks. In The 27th Chinese Control and Decision Conference (2015 CCDC), pages 5164–5169. IEEE, 2015.
[20] I Nino, M Fernandez, M De la Sen, S Alonso-Quesada, R Nistal, and Asier Ibeas. About two compared seiadr
and seir discrete epidemic models. In 2019 17th International Conference on ICT and Knowledge Engineering
(ICT&KE), pages 1–6. IEEE, 2019.
[21] Qian Zhang, Nicola Perra, Daniela Perrotta, Michele Tizzoni, Daniela Paolotti, and Alessandro Vespignani.
Forecasting seasonal influenza fusing digital indicators and a mechanistic disease model. In Proceedings of the
26th international conference on world wide web, pages 311–319, 2017.
[22] Hemant Bherwani, Ankit Gupta, Saima Anjum, Avneesh Anshul, and Rakesh Kumar. Exploring dependence of
covid-19 on environmental factors and spread prediction in india. npj Climate and Atmospheric Science, 3(1):38,
Sep 2020.
[23] Wandong Zhang, WG Will Zhao, Dana Wu, and Yimin Yang. Predicting covid-19 trends in canada: a tale of four
models. Cognitive Computation and Systems, 2(3):112–118, 2020.
[24] Massimo A Achterberg, Bastian Prasse, Long Ma, Stojan Trajanovski, Maksim Kitsak, and Piet Van Mieghem.
Comparing the accuracy of several network-based covid-19 prediction algorithms. International Journal of
Forecasting, 2020.
[25] Huaiyu Tian, Yonghong Liu, Yidan Li, Chieh-Hsi Wu, Bin Chen, Moritz UG Kraemer, Bingying Li, Jun Cai,
Bo Xu, Qiqi Yang, et al. An investigation of transmission control measures during the first 50 days of the covid-19
epidemic in china. Science, 368(6491):638–642, 2020.
[26] Zhanwei Du, Xiaoke Xu, Lin Wang, Spencer J Fox, Benjamin J Cowling, Alison P Galvani, and Lauren Ancel
Meyers. Effects of proactive social distancing on covid-19 outbreaks in 58 cities, china. Emerging infectious
diseases, 26(9):2267, 2020.
[27] Canelle Poirier, Wei Luo, Maimuna S Majumder, Dianbo Liu, Kenneth Mandl, Todd Mooring, and Mauricio
Santillana. The role of environmental factors on transmission rates of the covid-19 outbreak: An initial assessment
in two spatial scales. Available at SSRN 3552677, 2020.
[28] Zhen Jin. Mathematical Modeling and Research on Dynamics of Infectious Diseases. 2004.

16

