Optimal governance and implementation of vaccination programs to contain the
COVID-19 pandemic
Mahendra Piraveenan1,2, Shailendra Sawleshwarkar3,5,6, Michael Walsh4,6, Iryna Zablotska3,6, Samit
Bhattacharyya7, Habib Hassan Farooqui5, Tarun Bhatnagar8, Anup Karan5, Manoj Murhekar8, Sanjay Zodpey5,
K. S. Mallikarjuna Rao9, Philippa Pattison10, Albert Zomaya11, Matjaz Perc12, 13, 14

1. Complex Systems Research Group, Faculty of Engineering, The University of Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia
2. Charles Perkins Centre, The University of Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia
3. Westmead Clinical School, Faculty of Medicine and Health, University of Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia
4. School of Public Health, Faculty of Medicine and Health, The University of Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia
5. Public Health Foundation of India, Delhi, India
6. Marie Bashir Institute of Infectious Diseases and Biosecurity, The University of Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia
7. Department of Mathematics, School of Natural Sciences, Shiv Nadar University, UP, India
8. ICMR-National Institute of Epidemiology, Chennai, India
9. Industrial Engineering and Operations Research, Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, Mumbai, India
10. The University of Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia
11. School of Computer Science, Faculty of Engineering, The University of Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia
12. Faculty of Natural Sciences and Mathematics, University of Maribor, Maribor, Slovenia
13. Dept. of Medical Research, China Medical University Hospital, China Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan
14. Complexity Science Hub Vienna, Vienna, Austria

Abstract
Once a viable vaccine for SARS-CoV-2 has been identified, vaccination uptake will determine
our success in containing the COVID-19 pandemic. We argue that game theory and social
network models should be used to guide decisions pertaining to vaccination programs for
the best possible results. In the months following the introduction of vaccines, their
availability and the human resources needed to run the vaccination programs will likely be
scarce in many countries. Vaccine hesitancy can also be expected from some sections of the
general public. We emphasize that decision making under uncertainty and imperfect
information, and with only conditionally optimal outcomes, is a unique forte of established
game theoretic modelling. Therefore, we can use this approach to obtain the best
framework for modelling and simulating vaccination prioritisation and uptake that will be
readily available to inform important policy decisions for the optimal control of the COVID19 pandemic.

1

1. Introduction
Vaccination is the main hope to contain the COVID-19 pandemic currently enveloping the
world (1, 2). Several vaccines for SARS-CoV-2 are under development, and their potential
impact and limitations are hotly debated. It is expected that herd immunity (3) (4-6) will
play a role in containing the pandemic once a sufficiently high proportion of the world
population gains adaptive immunity. Nevertheless, if high morbidity, mortality, and
economic catastrophe are to be avoided, the vast majority of the population should acquire
immunity through vaccination rather than infection. While global eradication of COVID-19
could be a difficult goal to achieve (7, 8), a successful vaccination program may target
regional elimination in the short- to medium-term. Hence, vaccination uptake will have a
direct and critical influence on the dynamics of the COVID-19 pandemic, and the ability of
the healthcare systems to manage it.
In this paper, we argue that the level of vaccination uptake in populations, the effective
prioritisation of potential vaccine recipients, and the efficient use of the resources needed
by vaccination administration programs, will be the key determinants in how the COVID-19
pandemic is contained and/or eliminated in populations in the coming years. We posit that
without widespread uptake, any vaccination program will fail regardless of the efficacy (9,
10) of the vaccine itself. Therefore, what we describe in this paper are conditions under
which the vaccination programs can achieve their maximum uptake and effectiveness, and
the modelling and implementation approaches needed to help the vaccination programs
achieve this.
We propose that game theoretic modelling, which is the established theoretical framework
for modelling rational decision making (11 - 19), coupled with social network analysis and
agent-based techniques for modelling the population and simulating the disease dynamics
(4) (20 - 24), will give us the most effective toolset to model the vaccination uptake. This
multi-faceted approach will produce a definitive roadmap for the implementation of
vaccination programs which will lead to successful long-term management of COVID-19.
Position statements
1.1 In the coming years, the most important factors that will determine the success of
controlling the COVID-19 pandemic will be the level of vaccination uptake by the
population, and the effective use of resources to administer the vaccine in highly varied and
variable settings.
1.2 Game theory, supplemented by social network analysis and agent-based modelling,
should be extensively used by researchers to model vaccination uptake by populations and
guide difficult policy decisions regarding vaccination programs and thus maximise
containment of the COVID-19 pandemic.

2

2.1 Given the limited availability of vaccines at the initial stages, effective prioritisation and
optimal use of resources will be crucial. If the vaccine is of the type which reduces the
transmissibility of the SARS-CoV-2 virus, prioritisation should be based on targeting
individuals, cities, or states that can act as critical nodes of transmission or superspreaders.
Whereas if the vaccine is of the type that reduces symptoms or mortality, prioritisation
should be based on targeting individuals, cities, or states that are likely to have poor
outcomes if infected.
2.2 Game theory, together with social networks and agent-based modeling, can be used as a
primary theoretical framework in determining effective prioritisation of scarce resources
needed in different vaccination programs, depending on a broad range of bounding
conditions for successful implementation.

2. Background
2.1 The current state of SARS-CoV-2 vaccine development and delivery
Effective SARS-CoV-2 vaccine development, production and dissemination are expected to
take at least 12 to 18 months (25, 26). Currently, WHO lists 30 vaccine candidates as under
investigation in human clinical trials and 119 in preclinical trials (27). Efforts to develop
vaccines have explored different approaches, ranging from recombinant vaccines and
nucleotide-based vaccines to subunit vaccines and others. Most vaccine candidates are
aimed at inducing neutralising antibodies against the viral spike (S) protein of SARS-CoV-2,
which prevent binding to ACE2 receptors of host cells (2). Eight vaccine candidates are in
phase 3 clinical trials at present, with three other candidates in phase 2 or phase 2/3.
Among the vaccine candidates which are currently in phase 3, the leading ones are 1) the
ChAdOx1 vaccine developed by the University of Oxford and AstraZeneca, 2) the Moderna
RNA vaccine, which is designed to induce antibodies against a portion of the coronavirus S
protein, 3) the Sinopharm inactivated SARS-CoV-2 vaccine, and 4) the CanSino Biologics Ad5nCoV vaccine, which employs an adenovirus vector. Pfizer and BioNTech are currently
testing their BNT162 vaccine candidate in a combined phase 2/3 trial structure (28).
The current pace of these SARS-CoV-2 vaccine clinical trials and their projected manufacture
have raised hopes that the conventional timeline for vaccine development and delivery will
be significantly reduced (29, 30). Moreover, the global collaborative effort, COVAX, has been
initiated to negotiate and ensure equitable access of SARS-CoV-2 vaccines to all
participating countries regardless of income levels (28). Several countries have also made
alternative arrangements for procuring approved vaccines directly from the manufacturers.
Nevertheless, despite unprecedented levels of accelerated research and international
cooperation, no country is expected to procure sufficient doses to vaccinate its entire
population for many months following the release of first vaccines.

3

2.2 SARS-CoV-2 vaccination objectives and the role of herd immunity
Achieving herd immunity is often a key objective of population-level vaccination coverage
(31). Herd immunity is a population threshold that marks the necessary proportion of the
population that needs to be immune to an infection, either through vaccination or through
exposure to the pathogen, so that the transmission of the infectious agent is sufficiently
disrupted, and the entire population is protected (3). It is not desirable to expose a
significant portion of the population to the pathogen in order to acquire herd immunity.
Rather the objective should be to achieve herd immunity through vaccination to minimise
morbidity and mortality.
The level of herd immunity needed to protect a population can be derived from the basic
reproduction number (R0), which is defined as the number of secondary infections produced
on average by an infected index case within a completely susceptible population, assuming
there is no human intervention (4-6). The epidemic threshold is defined as the inverse of the
basic reproduction number (5, 6). The level of herd immunity needed to protect a
population from an epidemic is equal to the complement of the epidemic threshold (i.e.
herd immunity threshold = 1 - 1/R0).
The basic reproduction number R0 for COVID-19 and the corresponding herd immunity
threshold are not yet known definitively, with current best estimates of R 0 ranging from 2.53.0 (14) (32 - 35), with the corresponding herd immunity thresholds ranging from 60% 67%. Furthermore, much uncertainty remains regarding the nature of the immunogenicity
of the pathogen, with important implications for vaccine candidates. It is currently unknown
whether humoral or cell-mediated responses drive neutralising immunity or other
correlates of protection, and how long any such protection endures (36 - 38). If vaccination
does not generate protective immunity in every member of the population who gets
vaccinated, then the number of people requiring vaccination for the population to achieve
herd immunity will be higher than the number determined by the herd immunity threshold
as defined by R0. Similarly, waning vaccine-induced immunity will require greater population
coverage than that derived from R0, and also may necessitate the administration of booster
vaccination. Also, the targeting of epidemiologically influential subgroups will be important,
and the relative importance of some of these subgroups is disease-specific. For example,
healthcare and other essential workers may be important subgroups to target for SARS-CoV2 vaccination due to their relatively high levels of exposure. According to recent evidence
(39, 40), children also may be more influential to transmission than previously assumed.
Therefore, despite the transient immunogenicity of SARS-CoV-2, targeted vaccination
delivery may achieve herd immunity at or below the threshold derived from R 0 if
epidemiologically influential subgroups are prioritised. All these aspects of herd immunity
specific to COVID-19 will necessarily be foundational to the modeling of SARS-CoV-2 vaccine
effectiveness.

4

2.3 Game theory in vaccination uptake modelling
Game theory, which is the study of strategic decision making by rational players, is used to
study several phenomena and behavioural patterns in human societies and socioeconomical systems, and is applied in fields ranging from evolutionary biology to computer
science and project management (4) (41 - 45). Several previous studies have modelled
vaccination uptake using game theory in the context of diseases such as influenza, measles,
chickenpox and hepatitis (4). When modelling vaccination uptake using game theory,
players usually represent individuals, and the actions involve taking or not taking a vaccine.
The payoff is decided by several factors including the perceived risk of infection (perceived
prevalence and transmissibility), severity of the disease, financial and non-financial cost of
vaccination, and the perceived uptake of vaccination by other players.
To reach a decision, individuals either try achieving utility maximization or comparing the
payoffs of two strategies. The decision-making process is modelled in two ways: (a) Selflearning (Aspiration game) (65) (b) social-learning (Imitation game) (4, 66). Through selflearning, individuals rely on their knowledge, memory and personal perception, and
awareness of the disease, and switch strategies if their own aspiration level is not met, while
imitation dynamics put individuals into an environment where personal decisions are
influenced by the choices of the population, and individuals update their strategies by
comparing their own expected payoffs with others in the population and switch to the
strategy which gives the better payoff (63, 65, 66). The imitation game can be played in a
homogenous population structure representing a well-mixed population, or a
heterogeneous population structure, where the influence by neighbours is determined by
the number and strength of contacts between the individual and his/her neighbours (67).

3. Vaccination uptake as a key determinant of COVID-19 containment success
3.1 Key drivers and barriers of vaccination programs
Levine (46) describes six key drivers that may influence vaccine uptake. These include the
epidemic potential of the pathogen, localised transmission potential of the pathogen, safety
concerns with the vaccine, strength and flexibility of public health delivery systems, public
investment in resources for immunization, and local ownership and individual normative
behaviors. The level of vaccine hesitancy by the population (47), and the local context and
its multifactorial determinants also need to be considered.
Assuming that safe and effective SARS-CoV-2 vaccines will be available after timely
regulatory approvals, countries will still require enormous resources and systems in place to
address vaccination program implementation challenges. The challenges in vaccination
program implementation include vaccine procurement and supply chain management,
developing and deploying vaccine delivery platforms, developing vaccine delivery strategies
5

including identification of eligible/target subpopulations for vaccination, training of frontline
workers, and social mobilization (1). These barriers and challenges must also be viewed in
light of the shortages of health workers that exist in many parts of the world. The High Level
Commission on Health, Employment and Economic Growth of WHO (48) noted in 2016 that
there was a global shortage of 180 million health workers to meet the prescribed minimum
threshold of 44.5 health workers per 10, 000 individuals. Given these pre-COVID-19 deficits,
the optimal management of human resources to meet the increased demands of the
pandemic, manage the normal caseloads from other diseases, and still allocate sufficient
human resources for the urgent task of vaccination will be a significant challenge to many
countries.
3.2 Comparative significance of vaccination uptake
We posit that strategic vaccine delivery and its uptake comprise the most important
determinants of containing COVID-19 successfully, and compare favourably against
considerations related to vaccine efficacy. Vaccine efficacy is defined as the percentage
reduction of disease in a vaccinated group of people compared to an unvaccinated group,
using the most favorable conditions (9) (10). Modelling suggests that a vaccine with partial
efficacy may have significant impact and cost-effectiveness with maximal gains achieved
with earlier introduction (1). Therefore, we argue that any vaccine candidate which has met
the minimum endpoints explicitly defined in their phase 3 protocols must be deployed
immediately, and the efficacy of such a vaccine, while important, is a concern secondary to
achieving strategically targeted coverage as early as possible.
Similarly, we argue that while Non-Pharmaceutical Interventions (NPIs) will retain their
significance in containment efforts in the short to medium-term, vaccination uptake will
eventually supplant them as the primary means to containing COVID-19. Several countries
have used contact tracing and isolation efforts, coupled with mask-wearing and social
distancing measures, to contain COVID-19, as an interim measure until reliable vaccines
become available (49). When implemented consistently, these efforts have enjoyed
considerable success, but are also both highly resource-intensive and socio-economically
disruptive (49, 50). As such, they may be unsustainable over the long-term due to
population fatigue, economic hardship, and the lack of requisite public health resource
capital (51). Therefore, while they are crucial to the containment of COVID-19 in the short
term, the importance of vaccination efforts will surpass them in significance in the longterm.

4. Applying game theory in SARS-CoV-2 vaccination uptake modelling
4.1 Why game theory?
There are many compelling reasons why game theory should be employed in the modelling
and analysis of SARS-CoV-2 vaccine uptake. Firstly, compulsory vaccination is likely to

6

encounter a level of resistance from the public, and there may not be enough vaccines to
vaccinate everyone. Therefore, decisions will have to be made by governments and policy
makers about who to vaccinate, and by individuals about whether they want to take the
vaccine. An individual is likely to get vaccinated only if the policy makers decide to offer
vaccination to that individual, and the individual decides to accept it. Game theory can be
used to explicitly model the decision making of policy makers (vaccine givers) and
individuals (vaccine takers), because it has well-defined branches which model “public
good” decision making (cooperative game theory) and selfish decision making (noncooperative game theory) (11, 44).
Secondly, game theory can also model the evolution of strategies. In the COVID-19 context,
strategies will evolve as more information becomes available about the disease itself and
about the vaccines. Different strategies will contest for primacy, and evolutionary game
theory (12, 64) can explicitly model this.
Thirdly, game theory can explicitly account for “bounded rationality” - the limited ability of
people to assess reality. Thus, game theory can model the perceived and real payoffs of
vaccination and distinguish between them, which is important with respect to COVID-19
because of the amount of misinformation and conspiracy theories present.
Finally, game theory can be used in conjunction with other tools, such as prospect theory
(52), Monte-Carlo simulation (53), and agent based models (54), which will be useful in
modelling the COVID-19 dynamics, and computing and predicting epidemic parameters
which can then be used as input to model decision making, completing the feedback loop. It
can also employ supercomputing resources in calculating equilibrium solutions (68, 69).
4.2 Factors and Parameters
A complex array of factors, parameters, drivers and attributes, which influence the decision
by individuals to take the vaccine, the decision by governments and policy makers to
provide a vaccine to certain people, or both, need to be considered in modelling SARS-CoV-2
vaccination uptake. The age and gender distributions of people will influence vaccination
uptake, since older people are more likely to be adversely affected by COVID-19, and likely
to have higher mortality rates (13, 14), and thus may have more incentive to take the
vaccination. Similarly, some preliminary studies suggest that (15, 16) men compared to
women are more likely to be symptomatic with COVID-19 or to have higher morbidity, thus
men may have comparatively more incentive to take vaccination. The cost and accessibility
of the vaccine will obviously influence the levels of uptake. In some countries, governments
may make the vaccination compulsory for certain demographics, such as people above a
certain age, and this may reduce the incentive for others to vaccinate voluntarily.
The type of vaccine will influence the uptake. We need to model scenarios where the
vaccine will be one-off, seasonal, or a chemoprophylaxis. We also need to consider whether
the potential vaccine will reduce transmissibility or will reduce the severity of the symptoms
7

and the mortality rate. If the vaccine will reduce transmissibility, then relatively young
people, who are more likely to travel and interact with others, should be given preference
by policymakers in vaccine access. On the other hand, if the vaccine primarily reduces
symptoms or mortality, then older people, and people who have illnesses that increase the
likelihood of a poor outcome, will have a higher incentive to take the vaccine, and policy
makers will have a higher incentive to give the vaccine to them.
Other influential factors are epidemiological metrics, such as COVID-19 incidence,
prevalence, and cumulative incidence, and these need to be considered at suburb, city,
state and country levels, creating a complex array of parameters. Furthermore, the
perceived epidemiological parameters can differ from real parameters if misinformation is
being spread, and this difference between perceived and real parameters can be correlated
to the ‘bounded rationality’ (18, 19, 55, 56) of the potential vaccinees, or the level of ‘noise’
present in the information. All such context and nuance will need to be modelled.
The level of interaction a person expects to have with the community in general, and other
SARS-CoV-2-infected people in particular, will influence vaccination decisions, and will have
to be modelled. For example, a person who travels to work by train, or is employed in a
people-facing job such as teaching or food service work, may be more likely to vaccinate
compared to a person working from home. Similarly, health workers are more likely to
vaccinate.
Other factors involve the health of the potential vaccinees. In particular, the perceived and
real levels of immunity of people have to be modelled, because people who have relatively
higher levels of immunity have less incentive to take vaccination. Similarly, the overall
health of the vaccinee, including the presence of chronic diseases, such as hypertension,
diabetes, and chronic heart diseases, and the perceived correlation of these conditions with
severe COVID-19 (17, 57) will need to be modelled, as will the perceived and real likelihood
of adverse side-effects from the vaccine (especially in individuals with other chronic
diseases).
Finally, the logistic and human resource management challenges in distributing and
administering the vaccine, such as transport of vaccine, storage of vaccine, availability of
clinical and support staff to administer the vaccine, and the durability of vaccine after
manufacture are factors that need to be considered and modelled in understanding the
SARS-CoV-2 vaccination uptake.
4.3 Coupling between game theory and simulation
Usually, when the prevalence of a disease decreases, the perceived risk decreases, resulting
in a smaller perceived payoff for taking the vaccine, which will in turn result in less vaccine
uptake. This may over time result in the re-emergence of disease, which will in turn increase
the payoff, so more people will take the vaccine. Therefore, there is a risk that COVID-19 will
become endemic, and go through endemic stable cycles (and vaccine uptake will also go
8

through corresponding cycles), if the perceived ‘payoff’ for taking the vaccine is not high
enough on average when the prevalence becomes relatively low (4). It will be important to
establish the conditions under which the SARS-CoV-2 vaccination uptake will go through
such cycles, in different countries and sub-demographics, so that policy decisions can be
made that ensure the payoff for the vaccine is always high enough to avoid such endemic
stable cycles. As such, game theoretic modelling of vaccination uptake has to be tightly
coupled with high fidelity simulation modelling (20, 21) of population demographics and
disease dynamics, using techniques such as agent-based modelling, to gain a holistic picture
about vaccination uptake.
In particular, large scale agent-based simulation methods (54) can be used to model
population demographics, including age, gender, and household distributions of people,
commuting and travel patterns, workplace locations and size distributions, school location
and size distributions, and the mixing patterns of people (21) (See Fig. 1). These can in turn
be used to estimate epidemic parameters such as transmissibility, basic reproduction
number, effective reproduction number, incidence, prevalence, and cumulative incidence.
An inter-city flux model (4) (22 - 24), populated from census data (20, 21), could be used to
model travelling patterns and their effect on infection spread.

Figure 1. Simulation of epidemic spread in Australia using the ACEMod platform (Left.
adapted from (21) - Reprinted with permission from Elsevier: Right. adapted from (20) Reprinted with permission from exclusive licensee American Association for the
Advancement of Science). Left: Prevalence proportion choropleths showing the spatial
distribution of simulated epidemics in Australia for R 0 = 1.5 and R0 = 2.0. The minimum
prevalence (green) is 5 × 10−3 and maximum prevalence (red) is 8 × 10−2. The distribution is
shown for days 62 (top row) and 88 (bottom row). Both simulations are sample
realisations comprising the same demographics (contact) and mobility networks, as well
as identical seeding at the same rate at major international airports around Australia. The
epidemic peaks at larger cities at similar times, whereas less populous areas are less likely
to synchronise (20). Right: The ensemble average of prevalence for simulated influenza
epidemics in 2006, 2011, and 2016, with clear trends in the increased peak prevalence and
faster spreading rates (21).
9

5. Applying game theory in the allocation and prioritisation of resources
The allocation, prioritisation, and distribution of scarce resources needed for
implementation will be an important aspect of any future vaccination program, particularly
in countries like India and Brazil with large populations and moderate per-capita spending
on health (58). Such resources include human resources, vaccine resources, rolling stock,
and storage facilities. As a result, targeting decisions inevitably will need to be made (59,
60). Therefore, the vaccination program becomes a resource allocation problem, and
modelling optimal vaccination resource allocation is essential.
In scenarios where limited resources have to be optimally distributed and used, cooperative
game theory can be applied with maximum benefit. Often, the outcome of a cooperative
game played in a system is equivalent to the result of a constrained optimisation process
(61): therefore, such cooperative games are often solved by using a linear programming
framework or other optimisation tools. In the context of SARS-CoV-2 vaccination,
minimisation of epidemic parameters, such as incidence or prevalence, minimisation of
economic costs of the pandemic, minimisation of mortality, and minimisation of disruption
to daily lives could be some of the goals of governments and policy makers in deploying
vaccines. Therefore, vaccination prioritisation could be modeled as a constrained multiobjective optimisation problem in real time (62), and cooperative game theory, again
coupled with simulation modelling techniques, could be used to solve it.
Clearly, the multi-objective optimisation will have to take into account the nature of the
vaccine: If the vaccine reduces the transmissibility of SARS-CoV-2, prioritisation should be
given to targeting individuals, cities, or states that can act as critical nodes of transmission
or superspreaders. Therefore, the goal will be to reduce transmission, or the number of
diagnosed cases. Whereas if the vaccine reduces symptom severity or mortality,
prioritisation should be given to individuals, cities, or states that are likely to have poor
outcomes. Therefore, the goal will be to reduce mortality and morbidity.

6. Conclusions
In this paper, we articulated and discussed the view that vaccination uptake will have the
most significant influence in the ultimate control of the COVID-19 pandemic, and effective
modelling of uptake using appropriate tools therefore is of paramount importance. We
presented the case for game theory, coupled with simulation techniques, social network
analysis, and agent-based modelling, to be the most significant mathematical and
computational toolset available for this modelling. We highlighted that while the efficacy of
the vaccines developed, as well as the efficiency of testing, contact tracing, and isolation
procedures, shall remain important factors in containing the COVID-19 pandemic, the
effectiveness of the vaccination program and the level of vaccination uptake will surpass
these factors in significance in the effort to finally contain, locally eliminate, and globally
stabilise the COVID-19 pandemic.

10

We discussed the modelling of vaccination decision making in detail, and articulated that
this has two components: a) the decision making process by individuals to get the vaccine b)
the decision making process by governments and policymakers to choose vaccinees, given
the reality of limited vaccine doses at the initial stages of vaccination. We argued that the
individual decision-making regarding vaccination uptake is influenced by a range of factors
including demographics, physical location, level of interaction, the health of the vaccinee,
epidemic parameters, and perceptions about the vaccine being introduced. Similarly, the
decision making of the government will be influenced by epidemic parameters, the nature
of the vaccine being introduced, logistics, management of human resources needed for the
vaccination effort, and the amount of vaccine doses available. We explained that noncooperative game theory is ideally suited for modelling individual decision making
behaviour regarding vaccination, while cooperative game theory can be used to inform
government decisions regarding prioritisation.
We believe that this paper will stimulate research and deliberation among all stakeholders
which will aid the successful implementation of vaccination programs against COVID-19 and
its decisive containment soon.

7. Acknowledgements
Matjaz Perc was supported by the Slovenian Research Agency (Grant Nos. P1-0403, J1-2457,
J4-9302, and J1-9112).

8. References
1.

Makhoul M, Ayoub HH, Chemaitelly H, Seedat S, Mumtaz GR, Al-Omari S, et al.
Epidemiological impact of SARS-CoV-2 vaccination: mathematical modeling analyses.
medRxiv. 2020.

2.

Jeyanathan M, Afkhami S, Smaill F, Miller MS, Lichty BD, Xing Z. Immunological
considerations for COVID-19 vaccine strategies. Nature Reviews Immunology.
2020;20(10):615-32.

3.

Fine P, Eames K, Heymann DL. “Herd immunity”: a rough guide. Clinical infectious
diseases. 2011;52(7):911-6.

4.

Chang SL, Piraveenan M, Pattison P, Prokopenko M. Game theoretic modelling of
infectious disease dynamics and intervention methods: a review. Journal of
Biological Dynamics. 2020;14(1):57-89.

5.

Dietz K. The estimation of the basic reproduction number for infectious diseases.
Statistical methods in medical research. 1993;2(1):23-41.

6.

Delamater PL, Street EJ, Leslie TF, Yang YT, Jacobsen KH. Complexity of the basic
reproduction number (R0). Emerging infectious diseases. 2019;25(1):1.
11

7.

Kissler SM, Tedijanto C, Goldstein E, Grad YH, Lipsitch M. Projecting the transmission
dynamics of SARS-CoV-2 through the postpandemic period. Science.
2020;368(6493):860-8.

8.

Heywood AE, Macintyre CR. Elimination of COVID-19: what would it look like and is it
possible? The Lancet Infectious Diseases. 2020;20(9):1005-7.

9.

Orenstein WA, Bernier RH, Dondero TJ, Hinman AR, Marks JS, Bart KJ, et al. Field
evaluation of vaccine efficacy. Bulletin of the World Health Organization.
1985;63(6):1055.

10.

Weinberg GA, Szilagyi PG. Vaccine epidemiology: efficacy, effectiveness, and the
translational research roadmap. The Journal of infectious diseases.
2010;201(11):1607-10.

11.

Osborne MJ. An introduction to game theory: Oxford university press New York;
2004.

12.

Binmore K. Game theory: a very short introduction: OUP Oxford; 2007.

13.

Liu Y, Mao B, Liang S, Yang J-W, Lu H-W, Chai Y-H, et al. Association between age and
clinical characteristics and outcomes of COVID-19. European Respiratory Journal.
2020;55(5).

14.

Liu Y, Gayle AA, Wilder-Smith A, Rocklöv J. The reproductive number of COVID-19 is
higher compared to SARS coronavirus. Journal of travel medicine. 2020.

15.

Sharma G, Volgman AS, Michos ED. Sex differences in mortality from COVID-19
pandemic: are men vulnerable and women protected? JACC: Case Reports.
2020;2(9):1407-10.

16.

Jin J-M, Bai P, He W, Wu F, Liu X-F, Han D-M, et al. Gender differences in patients
with COVID-19: Focus on severity and mortality. Frontiers in Public Health.
2020;8:152.

17.

Zhang S-Y, Lian J-S, Hu J-H, Zhang X-L, Lu Y-F, Cai H, et al. Clinical characteristics of
different subtypes and risk factors for the severity of illness in patients with COVID19 in Zhejiang, China. Infectious diseases of poverty. 2020;9(1):1-10.

18.

Rubinstein A. Modeling bounded rationality: MIT press; 1998.

19.

Kasthurirathna D, Piraveenan M. Emergence of scale-free characteristics in socioecological systems with bounded rationality. Scientific reports. 2015;5(1):1-16.

20.

Zachreson C, Fair KM, Cliff OM, Harding N, Piraveenan M, Prokopenko M.
Urbanization affects peak timing, prevalence, and bimodality of influenza pandemics
in Australia: Results of a census-calibrated model. Science advances.
2018;4(12):eaau5294.

21.

Cliff OM, Harding N, Piraveenan M, Erten EY, Gambhir M, Prokopenko M.
Investigating spatiotemporal dynamics and synchrony of influenza epidemics in
Australia: An agent-based modelling approach. Simulation Modelling Practice and
Theory. 2018;87:412-31.

22.

Chang SL, Piraveenan M, Prokopenko M. The effects of imitation dynamics on
vaccination behaviours in SIR-network model. International journal of environmental
research and public health. 2019;16(14):2477.

12

23.

Stolerman LM, Coombs D, Boatto S. SIR-network model and its application to dengue
fever. SIAM Journal on Applied Mathematics. 2015;75(6):2581-609.

24.

Arino J, Van den Driessche P. A multi-city epidemic model. Mathematical Population
Studies. 2003;10(3):175-93.

25.

Lurie N, Saville M, Hatchett R, Halton J. Developing Covid-19 Vaccines at Pandemic
Speed. New England Journal of Medicine. 2020;382(21):1969-73.

26.

Hanney SR, Wooding S, Sussex J, Grant J. From COVID-19 research to vaccine
application: why might it take 17 months not 17 years and what are the wider
lessons? Health Research Policy and Systems. 2020;18(1):61.

27.

Organisation WH. Draft landscape of COVID-19 candidate vaccines 2020 08/10/2020.
Available from: https://www.who.int/publications/m/item/draft-landscape-of-covid19-candidate-vaccines.

28.

GAVI. The latest in the COVID-19 vaccine race 2020 [cited 2020 08/10/2020].
Available from: https://www.gavi.org/vaccineswork/covid-19-vaccine-race.

29.

Chandler RE. Optimizing safety surveillance for COVID-19 vaccines. Nature Reviews
Immunology. 2020;20(8):451-2.

30.

Funk CD, Laferrière C, Ardakani A. A snapshot of the global race for vaccines
targeting SARS-CoV-2 and the COVID-19 pandemic. Frontiers in Pharmacology.
2020;11:937.

31.

Clemente-Suárez VJ, Hormeño-Holgado A, Jiménez M, Benitez-Agudelo JC, NavarroJiménez E, Perez-Palencia N, et al. Dynamics of population immunity due to the herd
Effect in the COVID-19 pandemic. Vaccines. 2020;8(2):236.

32.

Organization WH. Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) Situation Report-31, 20th
February2020.

33.

Viceconte G, Petrosillo N. COVID-19 R0: Magic number or conundrum? Infectious
disease reports. 2020;12(1).

34.

Zhang S, Diao M, Yu W, Pei L, Lin Z, Chen D. Estimation of the reproductive number
of novel coronavirus (COVID-19) and the probable outbreak size on the Diamond
Princess cruise ship: A data-driven analysis. International journal of infectious
diseases. 2020;93:201-4.

35.

D'Arienzo M, Coniglio A. Assessment of the SARS-CoV-2 basic reproduction number,
R0, based on the early phase of COVID-19 outbreak in Italy. Biosafety and Health.
2020.

36.

Ibarrondo FJ, Fulcher JA, Goodman-Meza D, Elliott J, Hofmann C, Hausner MA, et al.
Rapid Decay of Anti–SARS-CoV-2 Antibodies in Persons with Mild Covid-19. New
England Journal of Medicine. 2020;383(11):1085-7.

37.

Long Q-X, Tang X-J, Shi Q-L, Li Q, Deng H-J, Yuan J, et al. Clinical and immunological
assessment of asymptomatic SARS-CoV-2 infections. Nature Medicine.
2020;26(8):1200-4.

38.

Grandjean L, Saso A, Ortiz A, Lam T, Hatcher J, Thistlethwaite R, et al. Humoral
Response Dynamics Following Infection with SARS-CoV-2. medRxiv.
2020:2020.07.16.20155663.

13

39.

Auger KA, Shah SS, Richardson T, Hartley D, Hall M, Warniment A, et al. Association
between statewide school closure and COVID-19 incidence and mortality in the US.
Jama. 2020;324(9):859-70.

40.

Dattner I, Goldberg Y, Katriel G, Yaari R, Gal N, Miron Y, et al. The role of children in
the spread of COVID-19: Using household data from Bnei Brak, Israel, to estimate the
relative susceptibility and infectivity of children. medRxiv. 2020.

41.

Rong Z, Wu Z-X, Wang W-X. Emergence of cooperation through coevolving time
scale in spatial prisoner’s dilemma. Physical Review E. 2010;82(2):026101.

42.

Kasthurirathna D, Piraveenan M, Harré M. Influence of topology in the evolution of
coordination in complex networks under information diffusion constraints. The
European Physical Journal B. 2014;87(1):3.

43.

Colman AM, Wilson JC. Antisocial personality disorder: An evolutionary game theory
analysis. Legal and Criminological Psychology. 1997;2(1):23-34.

44.

Piraveenan M. Applications of Game Theory in Project Management: A Structured
Review and Analysis. Mathematics. 2019;7(9):858.

45.

Wang Z, Bauch CT, Bhattacharyya S, d'Onofrio A, Manfredi P, Perc M, et al. Statistical
physics of vaccination. Physics Reports. 2016;664:1-113.

46.

Levine OS. What drivers will influence global immunizations in the era of grand
convergence in global health? Vaccine. 2017;35 Suppl 1:A6-A9.

47.

Organization WH. Improving vaccination demand and addressing hesitancy.
Retrieved May. 2019;17:2019.

48.

Organization WH. High-level commission on health employment and economic
growth: report of the expert group. 2016.

49.

Hellewell J, Abbott S, Gimma A, Bosse NI, Jarvis CI, Russell TW, et al. Feasibility of
controlling COVID-19 outbreaks by isolation of cases and contacts. The Lancet Global
Health. 2020.

50.

Caly L, Druce J, Roberts J, Bond K, Tran T, Kostecki R, et al. Isolation and rapid sharing
of the 2019 novel coronavirus (SARS‐CoV‐2) from the first patient diagnosed with
COVID‐19 in Australia. Medical Journal of Australia. 2020.

51.

Bärnighausen T, Bloom DE, Cafiero-Fonseca ET, O’Brien JC. Valuing vaccination.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 2014;111(34):12313-9.

52.

Levy JS. An introduction to prospect theory. Political Psychology. 1992:171-86.

53.

Harrison RL, editor Introduction to monte carlo simulation. AIP conference
proceedings; 2010: American Institute of Physics.

54.

Billari FC, Fent T, Prskawetz A, Scheffran J. Agent-based computational modelling: an
introduction. Agent-Based Computational Modelling: Springer; 2006. p. 1-16.

55.

Kasthurirathna D, Harre M, Piraveenan M, editors. Influence modelling using
bounded rationality in social networks. Proceedings of the 2015 IEEE/ACM
International Conference on Advances in Social Networks Analysis and Mining 2015;
2015.

56.

Kasthurirathna D, Piraveenan M, Uddin S. Modeling networked systems using the
topologically distributed bounded rationality framework. Complexity.
2016;21(S2):123-37.
14

57.

Wang X, Fang X, Cai Z, Wu X, Gao X, Min J, et al. Comorbid chronic diseases and
acute organ injuries are strongly correlated with disease severity and mortality
among COVID-19 patients: a systemic review and meta-analysis. Research.
2020;2020:2402961.

58.

Jakovljevic M, Potapchik E, Popovich L, Barik D, Getzen TE. Evolving health
expenditure landscape of the BRICS nations and projections to 2025. Health
economics. 2017;26(7):844-52.

59.

Haworth E, Booy R, Stirzaker L, Wilkes S, Battersby A. Is the cold chain for vaccines
maintained in general practice? British medical journal. 1993;307(6898):242-4.

60.

Piraveenan M, Prokopenko M, Hossain L. Percolation centrality: Quantifying graphtheoretic impact of nodes during percolation in networks. PloS one.
2013;8(1):e53095.

61.

Bell M, Perera S, Piraveenan M, Bliemer M, Latty T, Reid C. Network growth models:
A behavioural basis for attachment proportional to fitness. Scientific reports.
2017;7(1):1-11.

62.

Deb K. Multi-objective optimisation using evolutionary algorithms: an introduction.
Multi-objective evolutionary optimisation for product design and manufacturing:
Springer; 2011. p. 3-34.

63.

Bauch CT. Imitation dynamics predict vaccinating behaviour. Proceedings of the
Royal Society B: Biological Sciences. 2005 Aug 22;272(1573):1669-75.

64.

Bauch CT, Bhattacharyya S. Evolutionary game theory and social learning can
determine how vaccine scares unfold. PLoS Comput Biol. 2012 Apr 5;8(4):e1002452.

65.

Bauch CT, Earn DJ. Vaccination and the theory of games. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences. 2004 Sep 7;101(36):13391-4.

66.

Bhattacharyya S, Bauch CT. “Wait and see” vaccinating behaviour during a pandemic:
a game theoretic analysis. Vaccine. 2011 Jul 26;29(33):5519-25.

67.

Bhattacharyya S, Vutha A, Bauch CT. The impact of rare but severe vaccine adverse
events on behaviour-disease dynamics: a network model. Scientific reports. 2019
May 9;9(1):1-3.

68.

Anderson M. Has the Summit Supercomputer Cracked COVID’s Code? IEEE
Spectrum. 2020 August 2. Available from: https://spectrum.ieee.org/the-humanos/computing/hardware/has-the-summit-supercomputer-cracked-the-covid-code

69.

Intel. Supercomputing the Pandemic: Scientific Community Tackles COVID-19 from
Multiple Perspectives. 2020 November 12. Available from:
https://www.intel.com.au/content/www/au/en/corporate-responsibility/covid-19supercomputing-article.html

15

