Plazas et al.

RESEARCH

arXiv:2011.01117v1 [physics.soc-ph] 2 Nov 2020

Modeling partial lockdowns in multiplex networks
using partition strategies
Adrià Plazas1,2† , Irene Malvestio1,2† , Michele Starnini3* and Albert Dı́az-Guilera1,2*
*

Correspondence:
michele.starnini@gmail.com;
albert.diaz@ub.edu
3
ISI Foundation, 10126 Torino,
Italy
2
Universitat de Barcelona Institute
of Complex Systems (UBICS),
Universitat de Barcelona, 08028
Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain
Full list of author information is
available at the end of the article
†
Equal contributor

Abstract
National stay-at-home orders, or lockdowns, were imposed in several countries to
drastically reduce the social interactions mainly responsible for the transmission
of the SARS-CoV-2 virus. Despite being essential to slow down the COVID-19
pandemic, these containment measures are associated with an economic burden.
In this work, we propose a network approach to model the implementation of a
partial lockdown, breaking the society into disconnected components, or
partitions. Our model is composed by two main ingredients: a multiplex network
representing human contacts within different contexts, formed by a Household
layer, a Work layer, and a third Social layer including generic social interactions,
and a Susceptible-Infected-Recovered process that mimics the epidemic
spreading. We compare different partition strategies, with a twofold aim: reducing
the epidemic outbreak and minimizing the economic cost associated to the partial
lockdown. We also show that the inclusion of unconstrained social interactions
dramatically increases the epidemic spreading, while different kinds of restrictions
on social interactions help in keeping the benefices of the network partition.
Keywords: Multiplex network; Epidemic processes; SARS-CoV-2 spreading

1 Introduction
The current COVID-19 pandemic left already more than one million deaths around
the world and this number will increase in the near future [1]. As a response, almost
all countries implemented unprecedented measures to restrict individual mobility
and promote social distancing. Starting by mid-March, several governments adopted
a number of Non-Pharmaceutical Interventions (NPIs), whose severity rapidly increased in time: starting from school and university closures, large social gatherings
avoidance, closure of non-essential activities, and finally national stay-at-home order, or lockdown [2]. The aim of these NPIs was to reduce and possibly interrupt
the transmission of the SARS-CoV-2 virus. National lockdowns have demonstrated
very effective in slowing down the spread of the COVID-19 epidemic [3, 4], as the
time-varying reproduction number of the epidemic –representing the mean number of secondary infections generated by one primary infected individual, over the
course of an epidemic[5]– started to significantly drop few days after their implementation [6, 7]. Despite being essential to contain the pandemic, these measures
deeply affected the state of the economy, triggering a major world recession [1] . For
this reason, drastic NPIs such as national lockdowns have been adopted only for
https://www.worldbank.org/en/news/press-release/2020/06/08/covid-19-toplunge-global-economy-into-worst-recession-since-world-war-ii or a related post
[1]

Plazas et al.

Page 2 of 15

a limited time span. This apparent trade-off between public health and economy
sparkled a heated debate regarding the optimal duration and intensity of lockdowns.
The ultimate goal of all NPIs is to decrease the number, duration, and frequency of
social contacts among individuals, so to reduce the probability of virus transmission.
The unfolding of social interactions can be represented by social networks, where
nodes represent individuals and links stand for interactions [8]. Network science has
demonstrated to be a crucial tool to understand, model, and predict phenomena
of social dynamics [9, 10]. The theoretical framework of network science has been
recently enriched by two key concepts: Multi-layer networks [11, 12], whose edges
belong to different layers, representing different kinds of interactions; and temporal networks, whose edges appear and disappear in time, representing interactions
switching on and off with given characteristic time scales [13, 14]. Both concepts
have proved very useful for a deeper understanding of the dynamical processes on
top of real networks, such as epidemic spreading [15, 16, 17, 18].
Within a network perspective, the implementation of lockdowns can be effectively
seen as link removal processes, in which nodes represent individuals and links stand
for their social interactions operated in different contexts, such as at work, home,
or school. At the same time, the unfolding of the COVID-19 pandemic can be
effectively represented as the spreading of an epidemic process on such networks [19].
The aim of this study is to evaluate different (partial) lockdown strategies, which
consist in splitting the society into disconnected components, uniquely identified by
a ”color”. In the network science domain, this translates into removing links. Here,
we assume that these links are removed with respect to social interactions occurring
at workplaces, since other options (e.g. splitting households) are less feasible. This
is associated, however, to an economic cost. In this work, we compare different
strategies aimed at reducing such economic loss, while at the same time controlling
the epidemic spread.
The structure of the paper is the following. In Section 2 we describe the social
network modelling the substrate responsible for the virus transmission. In Section 3
we propose different partition strategies, corresponding to different possible partial
lockdowns. In Section 4 we show the results of numerical simulations of the epidemic spreading, while in Section 5 we address the effects of the inclusion of social
interactions. Finally, Section 6 is devoted to conclusions.

2 Modelling social interactions as a multiplex network
The spreading of a disease like COVID-19 requires close contacts during certain
time. Along a normal working day, people engage in different social interactions
that can potentially infect others. These contacts are usually modelled by networks,
where different activities can be represented as different layers of a multiplex network [20]. For the sake of simplicity, here we consider individuals to have three
kinds of interactions, similarly to what is done in [21], represented by three layers:
Household, Work, and Social. According to the multiplex construction, individuals
are the same across layers. Work and Household layers represent the strongest and
well characterized fixed sets of connections in our daily life. A third Social layer is
introduced to take into account the random and time-dependent social interactions
that represent for instance shopping, using public transportation, gyms, meeting
friends, and so on.

Plazas et al.

Page 3 of 15

Figure 1 Multiplex construction of the two basic and fixed sets of connections. Top layer
corresponds to the Work construction formed by cliques of relative large size. Bottom layer
corresponds to the Household construction formed by cliques of very small size. Dashed lines are
drawn just to recall that the nodes in the two layers correspond to the same individual. Merging
these two layers into a single one results in a largest component, as shown in the single merged
layer in the bottom of the panel.

In this way, all individuals who work in the same company, or department (from
now on, workplace) are connected in a clique (a complete subgraph) in the Work
layer, which is disconnected from cliques corresponding to other companies. A fraction of individuals is considered to work from home (or unemployed), thus being
represented as isolated nodes in the Work layer, because they do not have close contact to other working people. All individuals in a household form a small clique in
the Household layer, which is disconnected from cliques generated by other households. Individuals can also interact in the Social layer, according to different hypotheses to be described in Section 5. Although Work and Household layers are
formed by isolated cliques, it is the superposition of all the layers what generates a
large connected component where a disease can easily spread. This basic multiplex
construction (excluding the Social layer) is visualized in Fig. 1. This will be our
initial setting that can be changed by containment measures. One does not observe
a connected component in any of the layers but, if layers are merged a very large
connected component (not necessarily spanning the whole network) shows up. Intuitively, this makes it easier for an epidemic process to reach most of the population.
Here, we focus on modelling a typical urban area, in which social interactions
are more frequent and disease transmission easier. Note that the interplay between
several urban and rural areas could be modelled through the adoption of a metapopulation structure [22]. We set a working scenario with the following distribution
of household sizes: 1 member 0.38, 2 : 0.38, 3: 0.14, 4: 0.08, 5: 0.015, 6: 0.005.
This data has been taken from the empirical distribution of the city of Barcelona

Plazas et al.

Page 4 of 15

[2]

. The distribution of workplace size is assumed to be a Gaussian with mean
15 and standard deviation 5. Other choice for the household and workplace size
distribution are shown in the supplementary material. We also consider that 25%
of the population is not part of any workplace (these people either work from home
or are unemployed). Notice that we consider that the maximum possible number
of people who work from home is included already in this group. In the following
simulations, the size of the network is set to N = 5000.

3 Strategies for network partition
The aim of this study is to evaluate different (partial) lockdown strategies, which
consist in splitting the society into disconnected components, identified by a “color”.
The goal of this procedure is to make barriers to stop the disease spreading. We
first assign colors to the workplaces. As individuals live in households, it can happen
that individuals of the same household have different colors assigned. This situation
would produce a conflict, namely a possible path of transmission to other companies,
and hence to other families and so on, if there are infected individuals. In order to cut
these potential paths of disease transmission, we solve the conflict by removing the
node(s) from the Work layer and assigning all household members the same color.
This has, however, an associated economic cost: individuals removed from their
workplace cannot work from home (since we have already included the maximum
percentage of work from home in the model). The aim of the strategies is to minimize
the number of conflicts in order to reduce the economic loss but balancing it with
a low disease transmission rate.
A strategy consists in assigning one color Cj to each node j = 1, . . . , N , from a set
{ci , i = 1, . . . , Nc }, where Nc is the total number of colors. Nc is a free parameter of
the model; its limiting values are 1, corresponding to the original merged network
which is the most fragile case in terms of the epidemic spread, and the number
of workplaces, which is a complete segregation representing the worst economic
scenario.
For the color assignment, we would ideally like to reach two (opposite) objectives:
From one side, we would like to limit the fraction of conflicts (χ); from the other
side, we want to make sure that the assignment is as effective as possible in limiting
the spreading of the virus. The effectiveness of a network segregation in slowing
down the spreading is related to the size distribution of its components. This is
because the larger a component is the more vulnerable it is to the disease [23]. We
propose two magnitudes to quantify this vulnerability. On the one hand, the fraction
of nodes that are part of the largest connected component of the network, G. On
the other hand, we propose the entropy of the color distribution, which measures
how much the color distribution is homogeneous. If pci is the fraction of nodes in
the network with color ci , the normalized entropy S ({pci }) of the color distribution
is:
S ({pci }) =

Nc
X
1
pci log pci .
log Nc−1 i=1

Percentages obtained from the study of the Barcelona municipal register 2019:
https://www.bcn.cat/estadistica/catala/dades/tpob/llars/padro/a2019/edat/t23.htm
[2]

Plazas et al.

Page 5 of 15

Figure 2 The merged network that gives rise to a single connected component in Fig. 1 is now
splitted into two components (red and green) by removing some work links

We consider four strategies for the color assignment, with a fixed number of colors
Nc .
Random We start by assigning a different color to each workplace (corresponding
to a clique). The number of colors is reduced by randomly merging pairs
of workplaces that now will have the same color, until we reach the desired
total number of colors Nc . Then we solve conflicts (household members with
different colors) by removing nodes from the Work layer.
Aggregation Similar to the previous one: we start with a different color for each
workplace; then we iterate by merging colors together. The first color ci to
be merged is selected at random, while, differently from the random case, the
second color cj 6= ci corresponds to (one of) the most popular colors among
the neighbours node of cj , computed over all the network. We stop when the
desired number of colors Nc has been reached.
Optimized This strategy works similarly but it aims at a more homogeneous color
distribution, thus it merges first those colors assigned to the smallest set of
nodes. The algorithm is the same as for Aggregation, with the difference that
the first color ck to be merged is not selected at random, but as the rarest
between the colors available. The merging procedure stops once the desired
number of colors Nc is reached.
Segregation In this strategy, instead, we start with all nodes having assigned the
same color. Then, we remove nodes from the Work layer in descendent order
of their betweenness centrality [24], up to obtaining a number of disconnected
components equal to the desired number of colors Nc . The betweenness centrality is recomputed after each node removal.
Fig. 2 shows the multiplex network introduced in Fig. 1 as broken into two independent components. Sizes of the components are very similar and the node removal
from the Work layer has been minimized. Individuals who work from home have
assigned the color that corresponds to their household.
Fig. 3 shows a representation of the network partitioned according to different
strategies. The nodes represent the workplace cliques, or alternatively, single individuals who work from home. The links connect two nodes if there is at least one
pair of members sharing a household. The colors identify separate connected components in the networks. We can see how the Random strategy has a more uniform
color distribution but clearly disconnects the network into many small components,
while at the other extreme Aggregation and Segregation strategies show the predominance of one color corresponding to one big connected cluster. The Optimized
strategy is somehow a balance between these two behaviours.

Plazas et al.

Page 6 of 15

Figure 3 Network of workplaces. Each node represents a different workplace, whose size is
proportional to the number of people working in that workplace. If the workers of two workplaces
are part of the same household, the workplaces are connected by a link. The link width is
proportional to the number of common housemates. The smallest dots represent people who work
from home or do not work (workplace of size 1). The nodes are colored according to the strategy
(different for each panel from (a) to (d)). The number of colors chosen is Nc = 10.

Plazas et al.

Page 7 of 15

0.3

(a)

Random
Aggregation
Optimized
Segregation

0.2
0.1
0.0
1.0
0.8

G

(b)

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

(c)

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

2

4

6

Nc

8

10

12

14

0.6
0.4
0.2
1.0
0.8

S

0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0

Figure 4 Fraction of conflicts χ (a), relative size of the biggest connected component G (b), and
entropy of the color distribution S (c) as a function of the number of colors in the network Nc ,
for the different containment strategies.

In Fig. 4 we compare the performance of the different strategies for the network
partition. For each strategy, we show the fraction (with respect to the whole population) of conflicts in the network χ, the relative size of the largest connected component G, and the entropy S of the color distribution, as a function of the number
of colors Nc . As expected, an increasing number of colors gives a more disconnected
network (smaller G) and a more homogeneous color distribution (higher S), while
the number of conflicts χ increases. For the Random and Aggregation strategies,
the entropy is almost constant for the interval of colors considered. Coherently to
what we notice in Fig. 3, the Random method is the one that gives the best performance in term of breaking the connectivity of the network (smallest size of the
largest connected component) and has a more homogeneous color distribution, as
assessed by the entropy. But the Random method is also the one with the highest
percentage of conflicts, as expected. Aggregation and Segregation have the opposite
trend: a low number of conflicts, but a very high proportion of the nodes are still
connected, while the color distribution is not very homogeneous. Finally, the Optimized method can provide an intermediate number of conflicts, while being able to
disrupt the network connectivity with a relatively low number of colors (Nc ≈ 10).
We also study the dependence of these results on the workplace and family size
distribution (see of Supplementary Material Section I, Fig. 8 and Fig. 9). We notice
that the influence of the company size distribution is minimal. The household size
distribution, instead, has more influence for our results (Fig. 8): the inclusion of
household with more members, gives rise to a higher number of conflicts and bigger
connected components.
The theoretical problem of finding a division in colors of the network that leads
to the segregation of the largest connected component reminds the work of Kundu
and Manna on colored percolation [25]. In their work though the links are possible

Plazas et al.

Page 8 of 15

Original
Random
Aggregation
Optimized
Segregation

30
25

R

20
15
10
5
2

4

6

8

Nc

10

12

14

Figure 5 Final fraction of recovered agents R∞ for the considered strategies as a function of the
number of colors Nc . The purple line represent the corresponding value for the original case with
no color. Error bars are not plotted for being negligible.

only between nodes of different colors, while in our case links are possible within
the same colors. Future theoretical work can focus on the difference between these
two scenarios.

4 Epidemic spreading
In order to assess the effectiveness of the lockdown strategies presented in the previous section, we simulate the SIR (Susceptible-Infected-Recovered) model [26] on
the multiplex network. Briefly, in the SIR model agents are divided in the three
compartments and have a probability rate to become Infected if they are Susceptible (namely the infection probability β) or to become Recovered if they are Infected
(namely the recover probability γ).
As mentioned previously, our network is a multilayer formed by the Work, Household, and Social layers. In this multilayer the infection spreads following a SIR-like
infection, but considering the infection probability as a node variable in order to
simulate a more realistic situation that takes into account how the spread of the
infection evolves differently in each layer. We assume the infection probability β
L
to depend on the layer and on the node’s degree [21, 27], βiL = βκL . Here we indii

cate with βiL the infection probability of node i in layer L, β L the overall infection
probability in layer L, and κL
i the degree of node i in layer L. We then set the paramL
eters β , γ and the initial fraction of infected agents, assuming β household = 0.50,
P
β work = 0.30, β social = 0.20 (so that L β L = 1), that implies that the transmission probability is larger in households than at work. We also assume γ = 0.30 and
the initial fraction of infected agents to be equal to 1%.
We start our exploration of the effect of different lockdown strategies without
considering the Social layer, namely by setting β social = 0. Figure 5 shows the final
fraction of recovered individuals R∞ , averaged over 1000 runs. As expected, the
more colors the less infected individuals, due to a more disconnected network. With
that in mind, the Random strategy is the best to contain the spread of the epidemic,
because of the smaller size of the largest connected component, followed by the
Optimized strategy, the Segregation strategy and finally the Aggregation strategy,
in consonance with the results presented in Fig. 4. Note that these strategies are
ranked precisely in the reverse order with respect to the number of conflicts χ (see
Fig. 4).

Plazas et al.

Page 9 of 15

Figure 6 Fraction of recovered agents, R∞ , for different strategies. Here we compare a multiplex
with only Work and Household layers (without Social layer) and a multiplex which includes also
an unconstrained Social layer. The color strategies are for the case of 10 colors. Error bars are not
plotted for being negligible.

5 Effect of Social interactions
We now explore the effects of social interactions, by adding the Social layer that
accounts for all interactions that do not occur at work or in households. This layer
is built as Erdos Reny graph with average connectivity κmean . In other words, each
node in the Social layer will randomly connect, on average, to a given number of
nodes κmean assumed to be 4. Moreover, we considered four different situations
about how the links can be formed in the Social layer. Links can indeed be added
by respecting color, that is, two nodes can be connected in the Social layer only
if they share the same color, or without respecting it. Furthermore, links can be
generated with or without memory, that is, at every time step the links are rewired
or not, respectively.
Unconstrained (no memory, no color) the Social layer is time-dependent,
changing at each time step, and links are randomly formed between nodes
regardless of the color.
Color the Social layer is time-dependent, changing at each time step, and links are
randomly formed only between nodes of the same color.
Memory the Social layer is static, without time-dependence, and links are randomly formed between nodes regardless of the color.
Fully constrained (memory and color) the Social layer is static, without timedependence, and links are randomly formed only between nodes of the same
color.
From here on, we will include the Social layer in the multiplex representation
and consider the four possible forms of social interactions described above. First,
we analyze the effects of including a Social layer whose interactions do not follow
any restriction: the unconstrained case (no memory, no color). In Fig. 6 we compare the consequences of including the Social layer in the worst scenario possible
(unconstrained), compared to the original setting (without the Social layer) for the
case of 10 colors. Fig. 6 shows that with the addition of the Social layer the unconstrained case results in a much larger fraction of infected individuals, regardless of
the strategy employed for the network partition. We conclude that the inclusion of

Plazas et al.

Page 10 of 15

Figure 7 Fraction of avoided infected agents considering different forms of social interactions
compared to the scenario of no memory and not respecting the colors for the original network.
Top panel: strategies are with Nc = 6; bottom panel: Nc = 14. Error bars are not plotted for
being negligible.

an unconstrained Social layer destroys the effectiveness of the colored strategies to
contain the epidemic.
In the following we explore more restricted forms of social interactions. Figure
7 shows the fraction of avoided infections for the different forms of social interactions, compared to the previously studied unconstrained situation, for a case with
a small number of colors (6) and a case with a large number of colors (14). Several comments are in order. First, the greater the number of colors, the better the
containment of the epidemic. Second, the best strategies are the ones that return a
more disconnected network, namely the Random and Optimized strategy. Finally,
for a small number of colors, forcing social interactions with memory (within a fixed
set of individuals) is more effective than imposing colored social interactions (with
individuals sharing the same color). At the opposite, for a larger number of colors, it
is more effective to constrain social interactions within individuals sharing the same
color instead of social interactions with memory. In both cases, fully constrained
social interactions with both colors and memory is the most effective strategies to
avoid additional infections.
In the Table 1 we summarize the fraction of recovered individuals R∞ for different
compositions of the multiplex network and with different constraints in building the
Social layer. One can see that the implementation of an Optimized partition strategy
is extremely effective in reducing the impact of the disease, of about two thirds. At
the same time, the economic burden of such strategy is relatively limited, with 14%
of individuals forced to stay home and temporarily lose their job. However, the
inclusion of a Social layer dramatically alter this picture: the epidemic outbreak
increases from 32% to 81% of the population. This is due to the fact that, in a
network formed by interacting cliques, the presence of a small number of random

Plazas et al.

Page 11 of 15

Table 1 Fraction of recovered agents R∞ for different compositions of the multiplex network: Work
and Household only, and with the inclusion of a Social layer. We compare the cases with no
restrictions and with different combinations of constraints. We consider here the Optimized strategy
with ten colors, whose fraction of conflicts is χ = 14%.
Network layers
Work & Household
Work & Household & Social

Constraints
−
Color (Optimized)
−
Memory
Color (Optimized)
Color (Optimized) + Memory

R∞
32%
12%
81%
78%
71%
64%

interactions can dramatically worsen the effect of an epidemic. Finally, one can
see that such epidemic outbreak can be reduced by imposing constraints to social
interactions. The most effective one is the joint application of color and memory
constraints in building the Social layer.

6 Conclusions
In this work we proposed a network approach to model the implementation of different strategies for a partial lockdown. Our model is composed by two main ingredients: a multiplex network including social interactions within different contexts,
and numerical simulations of a SIR process to mimic the epidemic spreading. We
proposed different strategies to segregate the network into disconnected components
(partitions) with a twofold goal: halting the epidemic spreading, whose effectiveness
can be measured by the reduction in the number of infected individuals, and minimizing the economic burden of the partial lockdown, that can be quantified by the
removed links in the Work layer, that represent job losses. We found that the best
partition strategy for containing the epidemic is a Random strategy, but this comes
with the larger job loss. A good compromise is the so-called Optimized strategy,
which is able to create a good segregation in the network while also minimizing
the link removal. We showed that the inclusion of unconstrained social interactions
dramatically increased the spreading of the disease. As a consequences, we studied
different constraints to be applied specifically to the links in the Social layer: only
within the same partition (joining nodes with the same color) and/or with memory
(individuals interact with the same peers over time). With a number of color high
enough, imposing color on the social interactions is more effective than maintaining
memory, while clearly the two methods together would be the best combinations to
reduce the epidemic outbreak.
Our work comes with limitations. For instance, the multiplex network that models
social interactions is built on several assumptions and not directly by using empirical
data regarding contact matrix within work or household contexts. Note that we
did not include schools in the network modelling, assuming that schools can stay
temporarily closed during partial lockdowns. However, data such as the precise
composition of households or workplaces are not readily available. Furthermore, we
adopted a very simple model for the epidemic spreading – the SIR model –, which
is not realistic. This choice is however motivated to keep the number of parameters
of the model, which is quite large, as low as possible. In future works, it would be
interesting to explore the effects of the proposed partition strategies and restriction
for social interactions on empirical data, regarding both the network reconstruction

Plazas et al.

Page 12 of 15

and the disease propagation. Finally, it would be interesting to include mobility
data to test if the proposed partition strategies could be realistically implemented.

List of abbreviations
SIR: Susceptible-Infected-Recovered
NPIs: Non-Pharmaceutical Interventions

Declarations
Availability of data and materials
The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding authors upon reasonable
request.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Funding
A.D.-G. and I.M. acknowledge financial support from Spanish Government via Project No. PGC2018-094754-B-C22
(MCIU/AEI/FEDER,UE) and Generalitat de Catalunya via Grant No. 2017SGR341.
Author’s contributions
A.D.-G. designed the experiments, A.P. and I.M. performed simulations. All authors discussed the methods and
results, and wrote the manuscript.
Acknowledgements
A.D.-G. is indebted to COVIDWarriors association, and specially to Jordi Bosch, for suggesting PARCHIS as a
strategy to maximize economic reactivation while minimizing the risk of infection.
Author details
1
Departament de Fı́sica de la Matèria Condensada, Universitat de Barcelona, 08028 Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain.
2
Universitat de Barcelona Institute of Complex Systems (UBICS), Universitat de Barcelona, 08028 Barcelona,
Catalonia, Spain. 3 ISI Foundation, 10126 Torino, Italy.
References
1. Dong, E., Du, H., Gardner, L.: An interactive web-based dashboard to track covid-19 in real time. The Lancet
Infectious Diseases 20(5) (2020). doi:10.1016/S1473-3099(20)30120-1
2. Hsiang, S., Allen, D., Annan-Phan, S., Bell, K., Bolliger, I., Chong, T., Druckenmiller, H., Huang, L.Y.,
Hultgren, A., Krasovich, E., Lau, P., Lee, J., Rolf, E., Tseng, J., Wu, T.: The effect of large-scale anti-contagion
policies on the COVID-19 pandemic. Nature 584(March) (2020). doi:10.1038/s41586-020-2404-8
3. Flaxman, S., Mishra, S., Gandy, A., Unwin, H., Mellan, T., Coupland, H., Whittaker, C., Zhu, H., Berah, T.,
Eaton, J., Monod, M., Perez-Guzman, P., Schmit, N., Cilloni, L., Ainslie, K., Baguelin, M., Boonyasiri, A.,
Boyd, O., Cattarino, L., Cooper, L., Cucunubá, Z., Cuomo-Dannenburg, G., Dighe, A., Djaafara, B., Dorigatti,
I., van Elsland, S., FitzJohn, R., Gaythorpe, K., Geidelberg, L., Grassly, N., Green, W., Hallett, T., Hamlet, A.,
Hinsley, W., Jeffrey, B., Knock, E., Laydon, D., Nedjati-Gilani, G., Nouvellet, P., Parag, K., Siveroni, I.,
Thompson, H., Verity, R., Volz, E., Walters, C., Wang, H., Wang, Y., Watson, O., Winskill, P., Xi, X., Walker,
P., Ghani, A., Donnelly, C., Riley, S., Vollmer, M., Ferguson, N., Okell, L., Bhatt, S.: Estimating the effects of
non-pharmaceutical interventions on covid-19 in europe. Nature 584(7820) (2020).
doi:10.1038/s41586-020-2405-7
4. Walker, P.G.T., Whittaker, C., Watson, O.J., Baguelin, M., Winskill, P., Hamlet, A., Djafaara, B.A., Cucunubá,
Z., Olivera Mesa, D., Green, W., Thompson, H., Nayagam, S., Ainslie, K.E.C., Bhatia, S., Bhatt, S.,
Boonyasiri, A., Boyd, O., Brazeau, N.F., Cattarino, L., Cuomo-Dannenburg, G., Dighe, A., Donnelly, C.A.,
Dorigatti, I., van Elsland, S.L., FitzJohn, R., Fu, H., Gaythorpe, K.A.M., Geidelberg, L., Grassly, N., Haw, D.,
Hayes, S., Hinsley, W., Imai, N., Jorgensen, D., Knock, E., Laydon, D., Mishra, S., Nedjati-Gilani, G., Okell,
L.C., Unwin, H.J., Verity, R., Vollmer, M., Walters, C.E., Wang, H., Wang, Y., Xi, X., Lalloo, D.G., Ferguson,
N.M., Ghani, A.C.: The impact of covid-19 and strategies for mitigation and suppression in low- and
middle-income countries. Science 369(6502), 413–422 (2020). doi:10.1126/science.abc0035.
https://science.sciencemag.org/content/369/6502/413.full.pdf
5. Liu, Q.H., Ajelli, M., Aleta, A., Merler, S., Moreno, Y., Vespignani, A.: Measurability of the epidemic
reproduction number in data-driven contact networks. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America 115(50), 12680–12685 (2018). doi:10.1073/pnas.1811115115
6. You, C., Deng, Y., Hu, W., Sun, J., Lin, Q., Zhou, F., Pang, C.H., Zhang, Y., Chen, Z., Zhou, X.-H.:
Estimation of the time-varying reproduction number of covid-19 outbreak in china. International Journal of
Hygiene and Environmental Health 228, 113555 (2020). doi:10.1016/j.ijheh.2020.113555
7. Starnini, M., Aleta, A., Tizzoni, M., Moreno, Y.: Impact of the accuracy of case-based surveillance data on the
estimation of time-varying reproduction numbers. medRxiv (2020). doi:10.1101/2020.06.26.20140871.
https://www.medrxiv.org/content/early/2020/06/28/2020.06.26.20140871.full.pdf
8. Jackson, M.: Social and Economic Networks. Princeton University Press, Princeton (2010)
9. Newman, M.E.J.: Networks: An Introduction. Oxford University Press, Oxford (2010)

Plazas et al.

Page 13 of 15

10. Castellano, C., Fortunato, S., Loreto, V.: Statistical physics of social dynamics. Rev. Mod. Phys. 81, 591–646
(2009)
11. Boccaletti, S., Bianconi, G., Criado, R., del Genio, C.I., Gómez-Gardeñes, J., Romance, M., Sendiña-Nadal, I.,
Wang, Z., Zanin, M.: The structure and dynamics of multilayer networks. Physics Reports 544(1), 1–122
(2014)
12. Aleta, A., Ferraz de Arruda, G., Moreno, Y.: Data-driven contact structures: From homogeneous mixing to
multilayer networks. PLoS computational biology 16(7), 1008035 (2020). doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1008035.
2003.06946
13. Holme, P., Saramäki, J.: Temporal networks. Physics Reports 519(3), 97–125 (2012).
doi:10.1016/j.physrep.2012.03.001
14. Holme, P.: Modern temporal network theory: a colloquium. Eur. Phys. J. B 88(9), 234 (2015)
15. Lambiotte, R., Tabourier, L., Delvenne, J.-C.: Burstiness and spreading on temporal networks. Eur. Phys. J. B
86, 320 (2013)
16. De Domenico, M., Granell, C., Porter, M.A., Arenas, A.: The physics of spreading processes in multilayer
networks. Nat Phys 12, 901–906 (2016)
17. Starnini, M., Baronchelli, A., Pastor-Satorras, R.: Effects of temporal correlations in social multiplex networks.
Scientific Reports 7(1), 8597 (2017). doi:10.1038/s41598-017-07591-0
18. Estrada, E.: Covid-19 and sars-cov-2. modeling the present, looking at the future. Physics Reports 869, 1–51
(2020). doi:10.1016/j.physrep.2020.07.005
19. Pastor-Satorras, R., Castellano, C., Van Mieghem, P., Vespignani, A.: Epidemic processes in complex networks.
Rev. Mod. Phys. 87(3), 925 (2015)
20. Kivelä, M., Arenas, A., Barthelemy, M., Gleeson, J.P., Moreno, Y., Porter, M.A.: Multilayer networks. Journal
of Complex Networks 2(3), 203–271 (2014). doi:10.1093/comnet/cnu016
21. Aleta, A., Martı́n-Corral, D., Pastore y Piontti, A., Ajelli, M., Litvinova, M., Chinazzi, M., Dean, N.E.,
Halloran, M.E., Longini, I.M., Merler, S., Pentland, A., Vespignani, A., Moro, E., Moreno, Y.: Modelling the
impact of testing, contact tracing and household quarantine on second waves of COVID-19. Nature Human
Behaviour (2020). doi:10.1038/s41562-020-0931-9
22. Colizza, V., Vespignani, A.: Epidemic modeling in metapopulation systems with heterogeneous coupling pattern:
Theory and simulations. Journal of Theoretical Biology 251(3), 450–467 (2008). doi:10.1016/j.jtbi.2007.11.028
23. Newman, M.E.J.: Spread of epidemic disease on networks. Physical Review E - Statistical Physics, Plasmas,
Fluids, and Related Interdisciplinary Topics 66(1), 1–11 (2002). doi:10.1103/PhysRevE.66.016128
24. Freeman, L.C.: A set of measures of centrality based on betweenness. Sociometry, 35–41 (1977)
25. Kundu, S., Manna, S.: Colored percolation. Physical Review E 95(5), 052124 (2017)
26. Kermack, W.O., McKendric, A.G.: A contribution to the mathematical theory of epidemics. Proceedings of the
Royal Society of London 115, 700–721 (1927)
27. Perez, I.A., Di Muro, M.A., La Rocca, C.E., Braunstein, L.A.: Disease spreading with social distancing: a
prevention strategy in disordered multiplex networks. Physical Review E 022310(7600), 1–22 (2020).
doi:10.1103/PhysRevE.102.022310. 2004.10593
Supplementary materials

Plazas et al.

Page 14 of 15

Figure 8 Dependence of the results on the workplace size distribution, for the different
containment strategies (Random, Aggregation, Optimized, Segregation). The number of nodes is
Nn = 1000. The asterisk (Size 0) refers to the setting that we use in the main analysis of the
paper. All the distribution of workplace sizes are Gaussian with different means and standard
deviation. Size 0: mean 15, std 5; Size 1: mean 20, std 5; Size 2: mean 25, std 5; Size 3: mean 20,
std 10. The influence of the company size distribution is minimal.

Plazas et al.

Page 15 of 15

Figure 9 Dependence of the results on the household size distribution, for the different
containment strategies (Random, Aggregation, Optimized, Segregation). The number of nodes is
Nn = 1000. The asterisk (Size 1) refers to the setting that we use in the main analysis of the
paper. Distribution of household sizes: Size 0: 1 member 10%, 2 : 80%, 3: 10%;
Size 1: 1 member 38%, 2 : 38%, 3: 14%, 4: 8%, 5: 1.5%, 6: 0.5%;
Size 2: 1 member 23%, 2 : 28%, 3: 19%, 4: 13%, 5: 11.5%, 6: 5.5%;
Size 3: 1 member 13%, 2 : 18%, 3: 19%, 4: 23%, 5: 16.5%, 6: 5.5%, 7: 5%. We notice that
households with more members give rise to a higher number of conflicts and bigger connected
components.

