arXiv:2011.09033v2 [stat.ME] 10 Dec 2020

Estimating Seroprevalence of SARS-CoV-2 in Ohio: A
Bayesian Multilevel Poststratification Approach with
Multiple Diagnostic Tests
David Kline1 , Zehang Li2 , Yue Chu3 , Jon Wakefield4 , William C. Miller5 , Abigail
Norris Turner6 , and Samuel J. Clark3
1

Center for Biostatistics, Department of Biomedical Informatics, The Ohio State
University, Columbus, Ohio
2
Department of Statistics, University of California Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz,
California
3
Department of Sociology, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio
4
Department of Statistics and Department of Biostatistics, University of
Washington, Seattle, Washington
5
Division of Epidemiology, College of Public Health, The Ohio State University,
Columbus, Ohio
6
Division of Infectious Diseases, College of Medicine, The Ohio State
University, Columbus, Ohio

Abstract
Globally the SARS-CoV-2 coronavirus has infected more than 59 million people and killed
more than 1.39 million. Designing and monitoring interventions to slow and stop the spread of
the virus require knowledge of how many people have been and are currently infected, where
they live, and how they interact. The first step is an accurate assessment of the population
prevalence of past infections. There are very few population-representative prevalence studies
of the SARS-CoV-2 coronavirus, and only two American states – Indiana and Connecticut –
have reported probability-based sample surveys that characterize state-wide prevalence of the
SARS-CoV-2 coronavirus. One of the difficulties is the fact that the tests to detect and characterize SARS-CoV-2 coronavirus antibodies are new, not well characterized, and generally
function poorly. During July, 2020, a survey representing all adults in the State of Ohio in
the United States collected biomarkers and information on protective behavior related to the
SARS-CoV-2 coronavirus. Several features of the survey make it difficult to estimate past
prevalence: 1) a low response rate, 2) very low number of positive cases, and 3) the fact that
multiple, poor quality serological tests were used to detect SARS-CoV-2 antibodies. We describe a new Bayesian approach for analyzing the biomarker data that simultaneously addresses

1

these challenges and characterizes the potential effect of selective response. The model does
not require survey sample weights, accounts for multiple, imperfect antibody test results, and
characterizes uncertainty related to the sample survey and the multiple, imperfect, potentially
correlated tests.

1

Introduction

Slowing or stopping the spread of a new virus for which a vaccine does not exist starts with two
key pieces of information. One, what fraction of the population has been infected and is thereby
potentially less or not susceptible to future infection, and two, what fraction of the population
is currently infected and potentially able to infect others. Together with a basic understanding
of the infection process, this information roughly characterizes the potential for the epidemic to
grow. This is invaluable to public health officials and policy makers who have the responsibility to
manage the epidemic and protect the public.
As of this writing (late November, 2020), the global SARS-CoV-2 coronavirus (hereafter
“CV19”) pandemic has infected more than 59 million people and killed more than 1.39 million
[1]. Basic epidemiological information to describe the pandemic is scarce because the virus is
new and the pandemic exploded rapidly. In its place are a wide variety of indicators based on
convenient, mostly non-representative, or indirectly related data – counts of all-cause deaths (e.g.
[2, 3, 4]), facility-based testing results for symptomatic patients, non-representative samples, and in
many situations, results from inadequately characterized tests that perform poorly [5]. Franceschi
and colleagues [6] identify 37 CV19 prevalence studies from nineteen countries. Most present
results from non-representative, otherwise special, or very small study populations. Just fourteen
represent large enough populations to be of policy interest – national or state-level – and use a
probability-based sample from a credible sampling frame to produce results that could represent
the population of interest – Asia: one [7], Europe: seven [8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14], North America:
two [15, 16], and South America: four [17, 18, 19, 20]. The two in North America are the State of
Indiana [15] and the State of Connecticut [16] in the United States.
Conducting population-representative biomarker surveys is difficult – particularly in the United
States. Good sampling frames exist in a variety of forms (tax rolls, telephone numbers, etc.), but
recruiting willing respondents is exceptionally difficult and likely affected by selection relative
to the outcome of interest. Both of the studies in the United States had low response rates for
the full interview with valid CV19 test results – Indiana: 23.4% and Connecticut: 7.8%. Further complicating analysis, there were few positive tests among those who did respond – Indiana:
47/3, 658 = 1.3% for the PCR test of current infection, and 38/3, 658 = 1.0% for antibody test
of ever infected; and Connecticut: 23/567 = 4.1% for the antibody test of ever infected. Both
studies described concern that the non-responding participants were likely to be at higher risk of
infection with CV19. Finally, like all CV19 immunology investigations to date, both studies struggled with poor quality antibody tests whose unfavorable performance characteristics were not well
understood; see [7] for an overview of these issues.
Statistical analysis of data like these is difficult. First, the low response rate requires extensive
recalibration of the sampling weights, and in the worst case, there may be sampling units with no
respondents at all. Second, the very small number of positive cases pushes the asymptotic (large
sample) assumptions of frequentist methods to their limits and can break them. Third, the imperfect
2

and poorly characterized antibody tests potentially add a lot of uncertainty that must be reflected
in the results, particularly in low prevalence settings [21]. Fourth, when results from multiple
tests with different performance characteristics are combined, the joint result must be accurately
described and its uncertainty propagated to the final estimate of prevalence – importantly, including
the possibility that results from individual tests are correlated. Finally, if there is selection on the
outcome, then the effect of this must be understood. In our review of the literature we did not find
an existing method that addresses all of these challenges in a unified way.
Here, we describe an analytical approach developed to produce estimates of past infection with
CV19 using data from a probability-based household survey representing adults in the State of
Ohio in the United States. Like the CV19 prevalence studies in Indiana and Connecticut, the Ohio
survey had a low response rate, few positive cases, and the possibility of selective response. Additionally, the Ohio survey used multiple imperfect antibody tests for the same antibodies, resulting
in the need to quantify uncertainty in the joint result and account for possible dependence among
results.
To overcome these challenges, we weave together two well-established modeling frameworks
into a single coherent approach. We utilize the literature on modeling multiple imperfect diagnostic
tests through the use of a Bayesian latent class model (e.g. [22, 23]). This enables us to combine
information across tests to infer the true latent infection status of a participant while incorporating
uncertainty about the characteristics of the tests. We use the latent infection status to generate
model-based estimates of the population prevalence using multilevel regression and poststratification [24, 21]. These approaches are integrated into a single Bayesian model that allows for the
full propagation of uncertainty, exact inferences, and the ability to specify informative priors using
external information. By doing so we produce estimates that reflect all available information and
uncertainty.

2

Methods

The purpose of this study is to estimate the prevalence of past CV19 infections in the State of Ohio
using three separate antibody tests given to randomly selected adult participants. We know that
each antibody test is imperfect, and there is no gold standard for detecting prior CV19 infection.
Prevalence estimates based on a single imperfect test are always biased, but particularly in the case
of CV19 infection rates, which are low [21]. To mitigate that bias and incorporate variability due
to error in the testing results, we will take a Bayesian latent class approach for modeling multiple
diagnostic tests. Our approach will be based on combining a fixed effects framework for modeling
conditional dependence across multiple diagnostic tests [22, 23] with a model-based analysis using
multilevel regression and poststratification [24] to acknowledge the complex design aspects of the
survey.

2.1

Survey Design

The survey was designed to provide policymakers with a “quick” overall snapshot of the prevalence
of prior infection at the state level. The survey sampling scheme was designed as a stratified twostage cluster sample. Strata were defined by 8 administrative regions used by the state. Within
each region, 30 census tracts were randomly selected with probability proportional to size (PPS)
3

Table 1: Mapping from the three binary test results to the multinomial response vector and corresponding probabilities.
Yi
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

Ti1
1
1
1
0
1
0
0
0

Ti2
1
1
0
1
0
1
0
0

Ti3
1
0
1
1
0
0
1
0

pi
pi1
pi2
pi3
pi4
pi5
pi6
pi7
pi8

based on total population size. Then within a selected tract, 5 households were randomly selected
and one adult (at least 18 years of age) within each household was randomly selected to participate
in the study. Thus, the planned target sample size was 1200 participants. The study was conducted
from July 9-28, 2020.
Each participant in the study provided biological samples which would be put through a series
of diagnostic tests. In this paper, we will focus on prior infection as determined by the presence
of SARS-CoV-2 antibodies. Since antibody tests for CV19 are new to the market and of varying
quality, we processed participant samples using 3 different antibody tests. Specifically, we used
the Abbott IgG, Liaison IgG, and Epitope IgM tests.

2.2

Model

For each participant in the study, indexed by i = 1, . . . , n, let Ti = (Ti1 , Ti2 , Ti3 ) be indicators of
a positive test result of the Abbott IgG, Liaison IgG, and Epitope IgM, respectively. Let Di be the
unobserved indicator of whether participant i had a prior infection of CV19. This latent indicator
of prior infection is our primary outcome of interest. Analysis methods for multiple diagnostic
tests without a gold standard hinge on assumptions related to conditional independence [23]. We
will assume that (Ti1 , Ti2 ) and Ti3 are independent given the true infection status. This implies
that conditional on the true presence of prior infection, we assume tests for the same antibody are
dependent and tests for different antibodies are independent. Based on the underlying design of the
tests and what they target, we believe these assumptions are reasonable for this specific application.
Given the assumptions stated above, we can consider this a problem with two conditionally
independent sets of tests: the two IgG tests and the IgM test. Thus, we can decompose the joint
probability as
Pr(Ti1 , Ti2 , Ti3 |Di ) = Pr(Ti1 , Ti2 |Di ) Pr(Ti3 |Di ).
By doing so, each conditional probability on the right hand side can be estimated following a fixed
effects approach [22]. Since each test result is binary, this leads to 8 potential combinations of
results, shown in Table 1, and suggests the following distribution:
Yi |Di ∼ Multinomial(1, pi )
4

where Yi is an indicator of participant i’s result pattern and pi = pi (Di ) is a vector of length 8
where each element is the probability of a result pattern.
To construct the probability vector pi , we first need to define the conditional probabilities within
each antibody. Let Sj be the sensitivity and Cj be the specificity of test j. Since we have two IgG
1
tests (j = 1, 2), we allow for their results to be correlated. Let R12
be the covariance between the
0
results of test 1 and 2 given the infection status is positive and R12 be the covariance when the
infection status is negative. Then for the joint probabilities of the IgG test results [22], we have
1
Pr(Ti1 = ti1 , Ti2 = ti2 |Di = 1) = S1ti1 S2ti2 (1 − S1 )1−ti1 (1 − S2 )1−ti2 + (−1)ti1 +ti2 R12

Pr(Ti1 = ti1 , Ti2 = ti2 |Di = 0) =

C11−ti1 C21−ti2 (1

ti1

− C1 ) (1 − C2 )

ti2

+ (−1)

ti1 +ti2

(1)

0
R12
.

Since we only have one IgM test (j = 3), we have
Pr(Ti3 = ti3 |Di = di ) = di S3ti3 (1 − S3 )1−ti3 + (1 − di )C31−ti3 (1 − C3 )ti3 .

(2)

We then use these conditional probabilities to construct the probabilities in the vector pi in the
multinomial distribution above. Those eight probabilities can calculated with the following general
equation for each test result pattern
Pr(Ti1 = ti1 , Ti2 = ti2 , Ti3 = ti3 |Di = di ) = Pr(ti1 , ti2 |di ) Pr(ti3 |di ).
These probabilities are the individual elements of the vector pi which is a function of Di , S, C, R
1
0
where S = (S1 , S2 , S3 ), C = (C1 , C2 , C3 ) and R = (R12
, R12
).
The latent true infection status is the primary process of interest as we are interested in estimating the prevalence of prior CV19 infections. We assume
Di |πi ∼ Bernoulli(πi )
where πi is the probability of prior infection for participant i, which will be determined by region,
strata, and census tract. Specifically, we let r[i], s[i], and t[i] refer to the region, strata, and census
tract for participant i and assume
logit(πi ) = αr[i] + Xs[i] β s + Xt[i] β t + bt[i]

(3)

where αr is a region-specific random intercept, Xs is a vector of stratum indicators with fixed
effects vector β s , Xt is a vector of census tract covariates with fixed effects vector β t , and bt
is a random effect for census tract. In this analysis, Xs includes indicators of participant age
group and sex and Xt is a scalar and corresponds to the log of the total census tract population.
We code the groups using sum to 0 contrasts, and the log population was standardized to have
iid
0 mean and standard deviation of 1 across the entire state. We assume αr ∼ N (α, σ 2 ). Since
the fixed effects are coded to sum to 0, α reflects the overall mean on the logit scale and αr can
iid
be interpreted as regional means. We also assume bt ∼ N (0, τ 2 ), which accounts for correlation
between individuals in the same census tract.
At this point, we link the diagnostic test model to a multilevel regression and poststratification
approach [24, 21] for estimating population prevalence. In Equation [3], we specified a multilevel
logistic regression model for the probability of prior infection. Since true infection was rare in our
5

sample, we were unable to fit a saturated model. Instead, we chose to use a hierarchical model with
fixed strata effects. By doing so, we assume that while regions may have different probabilities
of infection, the relative ordering of the strata will be the same across regions (i.e., there is no
interaction between region and strata). Effects for region and census tract population are included
to account for the characteristics of the underlying survey design (stratification and PPS sampling),
making the selection process ignorable [25].
To obtain the population prevalence, we calculate
P P P
r P
s P
t πrst Prst
π= P
r
s
t Prst
where πrst is the prevalence and Prst is the adult population in stratum s in Census tract t in region
r. The prevalence contribution for region r, strata s and tract t is
πrst = expit(αr + Xs β s + Xt β t + bt )
iid

where bt ∼ N (0, τ 2 ).
Since we are fitting the model in the Bayesian paradigm, we must specify prior distributions on
all unknown parameters. The main reason we chose a fixed effects model for the test results was
because it is directly determined by test sensitivity and specificity. This allows us to transparently
incorporate prior information using the validation data on the package insert (as of October 2020)
for each test. Based on this information, we let
S1 ∼ Beta(109, 13)
S2 ∼ Beta(96, 39)
S3 ∼ Beta(9, 11)

C1 ∼ Beta(1066, 4)
C2 ∼ Beta(1074, 16)
C3 ∼ Beta(54, 0.1).

The remaining parameters for the diagnostic testing part of the model are the covariance parameters. We enforce necessary constraints on these parameters by specifying independent uniform
prior distributions for each parameter restricted to its allowable range [22]. Assuming only positive
dependence between tests, we have
1
R12
∼ Uniform(0, min(S1 , S2 ) − S1 S2 )
0
R12 ∼ Uniform(0, min(C1 , C2 ) − C1 C2 ).

For the multilevel regression part of the model, we assume each element of β is independently
normally distributed with 0 mean and variance of 9. We assume τ and σ have independent uniform
distributions on (0, 5). We assume α ∼ N (logit(0.03), 1) to reflect prior belief that the prevalence
of prior infection is around 3% and puts 95% of the probability between 0.4% and 18.0%.
By putting everything together, we have the full model
2

2

p(S, C, R, D, α, β, b, τ , α, σ |T) ∝
×

n
Y
i=1

n
Y
i=1

Pr(Ti |S, C, R, Di ) × p(R|S, C) × p(S, C)
Pr(Di |α, β, b) × p(b|τ 2 ) × p(α|α, σ 2 ) × p(β)p(α)p(τ 2 )p(σ 2 )
6

1
0
where T = (T1 , . . . , Tn ), S = (S1 , S2 , S3 ), C = (C1 , C2 , C3 ), R = (R12
, R12
), D = (D1 , . . . , Dn ),
s
t
β = (β , β ), α is the vector of region-specific intercepts, and b is the vector of census tract
random effects. To compute the posterior distribution, the model was fit using a Markov Chain
Monte Carlo (MCMC) algorithm implemented in R [26] using NIMBLE [27]. The algorithm
was run for 500,000 iterations, discarding the first 250,000 as burn-in, and thinning the remaining
iterations by keeping every 20th draw. Convergence was assessed by visually inspecting trace plots.
Posterior distributions are summarized by the posterior mean and 95% highest posterior density
(HPD) credible interval. Code is available online at: https://github.com/sinafala/
bayes-prevalence.

2.3

Missing Test Results

Some participants did not have results for all 3 tests considered. However, since our primary
interest is in the latent infection status of the participant, we can still gain some information about
this from the test results that are available. Test result pattern probabilities would still be calculated
as above corresponding to the test or pair of tests available for the participant. For example, if a
participant only had the IgG test results, there would be 4 patterns of results that would be defined
by the probabilities in Equation [1]. If an IgG and IgM test are observed, the 4 probabilities would
be computed from products of
1−tij

t

Pr(Tij = tij |Di = di ) = di Sjij (1 − Sj )1−tij + (1 − di )Cj

(1 − Cj )tij .

(4)

A single available test result would simply lead to a Bernoulli distribution of whether the result was
positive (tij = 1) with the probability calculated as in Equation [4] with the appropriate parameters
for the observed test.

2.4

Sensitivity Analyses

For the analysis of any survey, it is important to account for the potential of non-response bias.
We note that our primary analysis is valid assuming a non-response mechanism that is ignorable
given stratum. This is likely a strong assumption and so we will consider sensitivity analyses under
several assumptions of potential non-ignorable scenarios. To do so, assume
R
N N
πrst = πrst
(1 − pN
rst ) + πrst prst

(5)

R
N
where πrst
and πrst
are the prevalence among the responders and non-responders and pN
rst is the
R
N
probability of non-response. Note that when ignorability is satisfied, we have πrst = πrst = πrst
,
which results in the estimates from the primary analysis. Due to the survey design, we can only
N
obtain household non-response rates by region, and so, we assume pN
rst = pr for all strata and
tracts. In order to carry out a sensitivity analysis, we will assume the prevalence among nonresponders is:
N
R
πrst
= λπrst

(6)

R
where λ is the prevalence ratio in non-responders compared to responders and πrst
is the prevalence estimated from the logistic regression described above. We will vary λ to explore different
scenarios and assess the sensitivity of our estimates to changes in the prevalence in non-responders.

7

Table 2: Descriptive statistics of participants with at least one antibody test result who were included in the analysis of prior infection prevalence.
Variable
Age 18-44
Age 45-64
Age 65 and over

3

Count Proportion
175
0.262
239
0.358
253
0.379

Male
Female

275
392

0.412
0.588

Central
East Central
Northeast
Northwest
Southeast
Southeast Central
Southwest
West Central

82
90
75
156
77
56
65
66

0.123
0.135
0.112
0.234
0.115
0.084
0.097
0.099

Results

A total of 727 adults participated in the survey. To be included in the analysis, participants had to
have at least one antibody test result and have age and sex recorded. Of the 727 participants, 667
(92%) were included in the analysis. Characteristics of those included in the analysis are shown in
Table 2. We observe that our included participants tend to be older and female. We also observe
that 23.4% of included participants were from the Northwest region of Ohio.
Our primary goal is to estimate the statewide prevalence of prior infection with CV19. Based
on our model, the posterior mean prevalence is 1.3% with a 95% credible interval of (0.2%, 2.7%).
This corresponds to approximately 117,000 adults. As noted in Section 2, the prevalence estimates
are based on the latent infection status estimates inferred from the antibody test results. In Figure
1, we show the posterior mean probability of prior infection for all 667 participants included in the
analysis. This illustrates that there were very few participants in the study that were estimated to
actually have prior infection. In fact, only 17 (2.5%) participants had a posterior probability of past
infection greater than 1%. As expected, those with the highest estimated probabilities were those
for whom there was agreement across the tests. In general, there was little observed agreement
across the 3 diagnostic tests. Of the 39 participants with at least one positive result, only 3 (7.7%)
had a positive result on more than one test. For parameters that had informative prior distributions,
Figures S1 and S2 show prior and posterior densities to illustrate learning based on the observed
data.
We now turn to the sensitivity analysis that accounted for potential non-ignorable non-response.
The household-level non-response rates by region are shown in Table 3. We believe that nonresponders were most likely to have a higher prevalence of past infection than responders. In Figure
2, we show that if we assume the prevalence of past infection in non-responders was three times that
of responders, the upper bound of the 95% credible interval is at a prevalence of 7%. Thus, across
8

(a) Posterior Probability of Infection

(b) Posterior Probability of Infection >1%

Figure 1: Posterior probability of past infection of CV19 for all participants and limited to those
participants with a probability of greater than 1%.
Table 3: Household-level non-response rates by region.
Region
Rate
Central
0.783
East Central
0.841
Northeast
0.840
Northwest
0.832
Southeast
0.752
Southeast Central 0.790
Southwest
0.810
West Central
0.818
the range of reasonable scenarios that we considered, we observe rates of past infection that do not
dramatically differ from the estimates in our primary analysis. In addition, all of the estimates in
the sensitivity analysis would be aligned with a similar public health and policy response as they
are not compatible with having reached herd immunity.

4

Discussion

In this paper, we present an approach to coherently integrate multiple imperfect diagnostic tests
and a model-based analysis. By using this approach, we are able to estimate the past prevalence of
CV19 in the State of Ohio in the United States while appropriately accounting for uncertainty in
multiple antibody tests and leveraging the strengths of a designed survey. Through the Bayesian
paradigm, we are also able to incorporate external information through informative prior distributions and provide exact inferences for the prevalence estimates. Our approach provides policy
makers with the best possible estimates of prior infection given the survey results and our current
knowledge of the quality of the antibody tests.
Through our study, we estimate the magnitude of prior CV19 infection to be low, roughly
117,000 adults. However, this still reflects a higher burden of infection than the reported number of
cases – approximately 95,300 after removing deaths through the end of July 2020. Our sensitivity
9

Figure 2: Posterior mean and 95% highest posterior density credible intervals for the prevalence
of past infection under several scenarios of non-ignorable non-response. The prevalence ratio is λ
in Equation [6].
analysis shows that even with a prevalence ratio of 3 between non-responders and responders,
the upper bound of the credible interval is a prevalence of about 7%. Thus, even in hypothetical
scenarios with large selective response, we conclude that the vast majority of Ohio adults still
remain susceptible to CV19 infection. This implies that the state must remain vigilant and continue
to deploy non-pharmaceutical interventions like masks and social distancing to limit the spread of
CV19.
Methodologically, we developed a coherent statistical framework for analyzing seroprevalence
surveys with multiple imperfect diagnostic tests. Typically, one might rely on a single test or the
creation of deterministic rules that combine test results to assess positive cases. In contrast, we
utilized existing methodology for combining the results of multiple diagnostic tests to fully incorporate information on infection status from each test. We then connected the estimated infection
status to a multilevel regression and poststratification approach for generating population-based
estimates. Through our fully Bayesian, model-based analysis, we are able to appropriately propagate uncertainty and provide exact inferences while synthesizing the information from each type
of test administered. Our approach allows us to make full use of the data collected by the survey
while also accounting for its quality.
Our study has significant strengths: a representative random sample; employing multiple diagnostic tests; and conducting a fully Bayesian analysis. There are also limitations. The survey
was designed to estimate CV19 prevalence at the level of the whole state and was not designed for
estimation within any subgroups or smaller geographies. A future study should consider oversampling high risk subgroups or regions to enable inference specific to those important populations.
Non-response was a major issue that was addressed in the field using all available resources. We
do not have detailed information on non-responders that could have been incorporated into a more
sophisticated model for missing data. However, based on our sensitivity analysis, we do not believe the substantive policy implications of the study would change based on a more complicated
missing data model. Finally, the informative prior distributions for antibody test characteristics are
based on validation data presented in the test inserts – we are unable to verify the rigor and quality
10

of those validation studies.
In conclusion, we have developed a new statistical analysis framework for analyzing seroprevalence survey data with few positive cases and results from multiple imperfect diagnostic
tests. Since estimates of prior and current prevalence are relevant to policy, seroprevalence studies
of CV19 are becoming increasingly important and more frequently conducted. Our methodological approach is a critical component to ensuring that serology data are analyzed in a way that is
consistent both with the design of the survey and with the inherent limitations in the accuracy of
antibody tests. This enables policy makers to have access to the best available estimates that also
fully and honestly account for all of the sources of uncertainty that contribute to the quantification
of CV19 infection.

References
[1] Ensheng Dong, Hongru Du, and Lauren Gardner. An interactive web-based dashboard to
track COVID-19 in real time. The Lancet Infectious Diseases, 20(5):533–534, 2020.
[2] National Center for Health Statistics and others. Excess deaths associated with COVID-19.
Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Washington, DC, 2020.
[3] Daniel M Weinberger, Jenny Chen, Ted Cohen, Forrest W Crawford, Farzad Mostashari, Don
Olson, Virginia E Pitzer, Nicholas G Reich, Marcus Russi, Lone Simonsen, et al. Estimation
of excess deaths associated with the COVID-19 pandemic in the United States, March to May
2020. Journal of the American Medical Association Internal Medicine, 180(10):1336–1344,
2020.
[4] Lauren M Rossen, Amy M Branum, Farida B Ahmad, Paul Sutton, and Robert N Anderson.
Excess deaths associated with COVID-19, by age and race and ethnicity—United States,
January 26–October 3, 2020. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, 69(42):1522, 2020.
[5] Mayara Lisboa Bastos, Gamuchirai Tavaziva, Syed Kunal Abidi, Jonathon R Campbell,
Louis-Patrick Haraoui, James C Johnston, Zhiyi Lan, Stephanie Law, Emily MacLean, Anete
Trajman, et al. Diagnostic accuracy of serological tests for COVID-19: systematic review
and meta-analysis. British Medical Journal, 370, 2020.
[6] Vinicius Bonetti Franceschi, Andressa Schneiders Santos, Andressa Barreto Glaeser,
Janini Cristina Paiz, Gabriel Dickin Caldana, Carem Luana Machado Lessa, Amanda
de Menezes Mayer, Julia Goncalves Kuchle, Paulo Ricardo Gazzola Zen, Alvaro Vigo, et al.
Population-based prevalence surveys during the COVID-19 pandemic: a systematic review.
medRxiv, 2020.
[7] Maryam Shakiba, Seyed Saeed Hashemi Nazari, Fardin Mehrabian, Seyed Mahmoud Rezvani, Zahra Ghasempour, and Abtin Heidarzadeh. Seroprevalence of COVID-19 virus infection in Guilan province, Iran. medRxiv, 2020.
[8] Helen Ward, Christina J Atchison, Matthew Whitaker, Kylie EC Ainslie, Joshua Elliot,
Lucy C Okell, Rozlyn Redd, Deborah Ashby, Christl A Donnelly, Wendy Barclay, et al. Anti11

body prevalence for SARS-CoV-2 in England following first peak of the pandemic: REACT2
study in 100,000 adults. medRxiv, 2020.
[9] Steven Riley, Kylie EC Ainslie, Oliver Eales, Benjamin Jeffrey, Caroline E Walters,
Christina J Atchison, Peter J Diggle, Deborah Ashby, Christl A Donnelly, Graham Cooke,
et al. Community prevalence of SARS-CoV-2 virus in England during May 2020: REACT
study. medRxiv, 2020.
[10] P Maver Vodičar, A Oštrbenk Valenčak, Blaž Zupan, T Avšič Županc, Slavko Kurdija, Miša
Korva, Miroslav Petrovec, Janez Demšar, Nataša Knap, Erik Štrumbelj, et al. Low prevalence of active COVID-19 in Slovenia: a nationwide population study of a probability-based
sample. Clinical Microbiology and Infection, 2020.
[11] Béla Merkely, Attila J Szabó, Annamária Kosztin, Ervin Berényi, Andor Sebestyén, Csaba
Lengyel, Gergő Merkely, Júlia Karády, István Várkonyi, Csaba Papp, et al. Novel coronavirus
epidemic in the Hungarian population, a cross-sectional nationwide survey to support the exit
policy in Hungary. GeroScience, 42(4):1063–1074, 2020.
[12] Marina Pollán, Beatriz Pérez-Gómez, Roberto Pastor-Barriuso, Jesús Oteo, Miguel A
Hernán, Mayte Pérez-Olmeda, Jose L Sanmartín, Aurora Fernández-García, Israel Cruz,
Nerea Fernández de Larrea, et al. Prevalence of SARS-CoV-2 in Spain (ENE-COVID): a
nationwide, population-based seroepidemiological study. The Lancet, 396(10250):535–544,
2020.
[13] Chantal J Snoeck, Michel Vaillant, Tamir Abdelrahman, Venkata P Satagopam, Jonathan D
Turner, Katy Beaumont, Clarissa PC Gomes, Joelle Veronique Fritz, Valerie E Schröder,
Anne Kaysen, et al. Prevalence of SARS-CoV-2 infection in the Luxembourgish population:
the CON-VINCE study. medRxiv, 2020.
[14] Daniel F Gudbjartsson, Agnar Helgason, Hakon Jonsson, Olafur T Magnusson, Pall Melsted,
Gudmundur L Norddahl, Jona Saemundsdottir, Asgeir Sigurdsson, Patrick Sulem, Arna B
Agustsdottir, et al. Spread of SARS-CoV-2 in the Icelandic population. New England Journal
of Medicine, 2020.
[15] Nir Menachemi, Constantin T Yiannoutsos, Brian E Dixon, Thomas J Duszynski, William F
Fadel, Kara K Wools-Kaloustian, Nadia Unruh Needleman, Kristina Box, Virginia Caine,
Connor Norwood, et al. Population point prevalence of SARS-CoV-2 infection based on
a statewide random sample—Indiana, April 25–29, 2020. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly
Report, 69(29):960, 2020.
[16] Shiwani Mahajan, Rajesh Srinivasan, Carrie A Redlich, Sara K Huston, Kelly M Anastasio, Lisa Cashman, Dorothy S Massey, Andrew Dugan, Dan Witters, Jenny Marlar, et al.
Seroprevalence of SARS-CoV-2-specific IgG antibodies among adults living in Connecticut:
Post-infection prevalence (PIP) study. The American Journal of Medicine, 2020.
[17] Cristiana Costa Gomes, Crispim Cerutti, Eliana Zandonade, Ethel Leonor Noia Maciel,
Filomena Euridice Carvalho de Alencar, Gilton Luiz Almada, Orlei Amaral Cardoso,
12

Pablo Medeiros Jabor, Raphael Lubiana Zanotti, Tania Queiroz Reuter, et al. A populationbased study of the prevalence of COVID-19 infection in Espírito Santo, Brazil: methodology
and results of the first stage. medRxiv, 2020.
[18] Antônio Augusto Moura da Silva, Lídio Gonçalves Lima Neto, Conceição de Maria Pedrozo,
Silva de Azevedo, Léa Márcia Melo da Costa, Maylla Luana Barbosa Martins Bragança,
Allan Kardec Duailibe Barros Filho, Bernardo Bastos Wittlin, Bruno Feres de Souza, Bruno
Luciano Carneiro Alves de Oliveira, et al. Population-based seroprevalence of SARS-CoV-2
is more than halfway through the herd immunity threshold in the State of Maranhao, Brazil.
medRxiv, 2020.
[19] Mariângela F Silveira, Aluísio JD Barros, Bernardo L Horta, Lúcia C Pellanda, Gabriel D
Victora, Odir A Dellagostin, Claudio J Struchiner, Marcelo N Burattini, Andréia RM Valim,
Evelise M Berlezi, et al. Population-based surveys of antibodies against SARS-CoV-2 in
Southern Brazil. Nature Medicine, 26(8):1196–1199, 2020.
[20] Pedro Hallal, Fernando Hartwig, Bernardo Horta, Gabriel D Victora, Mariangela Silveira,
Claudio Struchiner, Luis Paulo Vidaletti, Nelson Neumann, Lucia C Pellanda, Odir A Dellagostin, et al. Remarkable variability in SARS-CoV-2 antibodies across Brazilian regions:
nationwide serological household survey in 27 states. medRxiv, 2020.
[21] Andrew Gelman and Bob Carpenter. Bayesian analysis of tests with unknown specificity and
sensitivity. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series C (Applied Statistics), 69(5):1269–
1283, 2020.
[22] Nandini Dendukuri and Lawrence Joseph. Bayesian approaches to modeling the conditional
dependence between multiple diagnostic tests. Biometrics, 57(1):158–167, 2001.
[23] Zhuoyu Wang, Nandini Dendukuri, Heather J. Zar, and Lawrence Joseph. Modeling conditional dependence among multiple diagnostic tests. Statistics in Medicine, 36(30):4843–
4859, 2017.
[24] Andrew Gelman. Struggles with survey weighting and regression modeling. Statist. Sci.,
22(2):153–164, 05 2007.
[25] Susanna Makela, Yajuan Si, and Andrew Gelman. Bayesian inference under cluster sampling
with probability proportional to size. Statistics in Medicine, 37(26):3849–3868, 2018.
[26] R Core Team. R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing. R Foundation for
Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria, 2019.
[27] P. de Valpine, D. Turek, C.J. Paciorek, C. Anderson-Bergman, D. Temple Lang, and R. Bodik.
Programming with models: writing statistical algorithms for general model structures with
NIMBLE. Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics, 26:403–417, 2017.

13

Estimating Seroprevalence of SARS-CoV-2 in Ohio: A
arXiv:2011.09033v2 [stat.ME] 10 Dec 2020

Bayesian Multilevel Poststratification Approach with
Multiple Diagnostic Tests
David Kline1 , Zehang Li2 , Yue Chu3 , Jon Wakefield4 , William C. Miller5 , Abigail
Norris Turner6 , and Samuel J. Clark3
1

Center for Biostatistics, Department of Biomedical Informatics, The Ohio State
University, Columbus, Ohio
2

Department of Statistics, University of California Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz,
California
3
4

Department of Sociology, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio

Department of Statistics and Department of Biostatistics, University of
Washington, Seattle, Washington

5

Division of Epidemiology, College of Public Health, The Ohio State University,
Columbus, Ohio
6

Division of Infectious Diseases, College of Medicine, The Ohio State
University, Columbus, Ohio

1

(a) Sensitivity of Abbott IgG

(b) Specificity of Abbott IgG

(c) Sensitivity of Liaison IgG

(d) Specificity of Liaison IgG

(e) Sensitivity of Epitope IgM

(f) Specificity of Epitope IgM

Figure 1: Density plots of the prior and posterior distributions for the sensitivity and specificity of
each antibody test

2

Figure 2: Density plots of the prior and posterior distributions of α

3

