An Incentive Based Approach for COVID-19 using
Blockchain Technology
Manoj MK∗ , Gautam Srivastava† , Siva Rama Krishnan Somayaji∗ ,
Thippa Reddy Gadekallu∗ , Praveen Kumar Reddy Maddikunta∗ , and Sweta Bhattacharya∗
∗ Vellore

arXiv:2011.01468v1 [cs.CY] 3 Nov 2020

Institute of Technology, Vellore, Tamil Nadu, India
{mk.manoj2015,siva.s,thippareddy.g,praveenkumarreddy,sweta.b}@vit.ac.in
† Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, Brandon University, Manitoba, Canada; srivastavag@brandonu.ca

Abstract—The current situation of COVID-19 demands novel
solutions to boost healthcare services and economic growth. A
full-fledged solution that can help the government and people
retain their normal lifestyle and improve the economy is crucial.
By bringing into the picture a unique incentive-based approach,
the strain of government and the people can be greatly reduced.
By providing incentives for actions such as voluntary testing,
isolation, etc., the government can better plan strategies for
fighting the situation while people in need can benefit from
the incentive offered. This idea of combining strength to battle
against the virus can bring out newer possibilities that can
give an upper hand in this war. As the unpredictable future
develops, sharing and maintaining COVID related data of every
user could be the needed trigger to kick start the economy and
blockchain paves the way for this solution with decentralization
and immutability of data.
Index Terms—COVID-19, coronavirus, Blockchain, Incentive
based token, Travel history, tamper proof data, colour bands.

I. I NTRODUCTION
The novel coronavirus or COVID-19 is a global pandemic
respiratory disease caused by SARS-CoV2. The World Health
Organization(WHO) declared the outbreak a pandemic on
March 11th 2020 [1]. Some of the preventive measures include repeated hand washing, usage of face mask and social
distancing [2]. The virus spreads from person to person
mainly through contact with infected secretions. The ongoing
pandemic has caused serious social and economic disruptions
globally. The shortage of medical supplies, infrastructure and
daily necessities is just the tip of the problems faced. The
global recession, lockdown and closing of schools or universities, etc. had a major setback on mental and physical health
of the people worldwide. The stress and overwork of frontline
workers during these tough times are showcased severely by
media. [3] The key to winning this battle is through effective
isolation of COVID positive patients and their close contacts.
Until a vaccine is ready, there are no other means to stop the
virus spreading. During these severe economic crises, a vast
majority of people are laid off and this in conjunction with
the closing of shops, factories, etc. It is safe to assume that
the economic cash flow is dwindling. This situation could be
a battle as severe as the pandemic itself. Every country has
taken varied approaches to combat these problems.
The use of information and communication technology
plays a significant role in helping healthcare workers perform

the diagnosis faster [4], [5]. The deployment of body wearable sensors, telehealth and AI-chatbots, can help in remote
diagnosis of the patients [6], [7]. Various AI applications play
a crucial role in predicting virus effects by analyzing previous
or historical data [8]. In countries like Afganistan, where
health care services have resource constraints, the deployment
of Internet of things (IoT) along with telemedicine, was
considered [9]. After the lockdown, a few organizations have
begun restoring their services by following strict guidelines
such as sanitization, social distancing and thermal scanning
before they allow customers to enter the premises. In a few
places, the researchers have implemented a smart helmet with
Mounted Thermal Imaging System embedded with IoT for
obtaining real-time data. This is one of the solutions to curtail
the virus spread [10].
The principal objective of this paper is to help bridge
the gap of the economy discrepancy while curtailing the
virus spread. Since the virus can only spread from person to
person, by backtracking all contacts of the origin, an effective
strategy of isolation can be implemented. A unique incentivebased approach is provided to channel isolation while also
helping the people in need during these tough times. The
use of blockchain [11]–[13] in this work provides a means
of decentralization of information that is severely required to
propagate effective battle plans to not only scrub the virus at
current times but also to think about the steps to sail through
the uncertain future effectively.
The unique contributions of the work are given below:
1) A unique incentive based approach for effective cooperation and battle against the pandemic to provide both
the government and its people a win-win situation
2) A blockchain based solution to prevent information
tampering such as the covid test results
The organization of the paper is as follows. Section 2
presents the Literature review. Section 3 presents preliminary
information on the technology used and describes the proposed
methodology. Section 4 highlights the results of experimentation, and Section 5 discusses the conclusions and points
direction of future work.
II. L ITERATURE S URVEY
With the advent of development in new technologies such
as 5G, Internet of medical things (IOMT), edge computing,

artificial intelligence (AI), blockchain, etc., solving real-world
problems become more natural and efficient. In most of the
scenarios presented, the AI and IOMT work together on the
blockchain framework. From the end of 2019, the world is
facing a massive health crisis due to the rapid spread of the
coronavirus. The authors in [14] analyze the integration of new
technologies to aid in the diagnosis of COVID-19. The authors
also infer from the survey that the blockchain technology can
help in accelerating the diagnostic process.
The world has come to a standstill due to the epidemic
spread of coronavirus, and it has affected all the sectors
drastically. The current health care system may not be effective
is quick diagnosis and treatment on a larger scale. The authors
in [15] propose a cost-effective framework for integrating
blockchain technology and AI for testing and tracking COVID19 patients. This can be an effective solution during this crucial
resource constraint situation.
The accumulation of funds to help the COVID-19 is vital.
These funds need to be adequately managed to dissipate the
resources effectively. The integration of blockchain with IPFS
and AI [16] can be an efficient solution for this challenge. The
blockchain can be used for a secure data store of the records
and the related parameters inputted by the AI techniques.
The epidemic virus called 2019-nCoV was reported by the
Chinese Govt. in the first week of January 2020. The WHO
has listed various strategies to be followed for detecting and
preventing the spread of this epidemic. The technologists and
researchers worldwide are working on effective strategies to
be implemented in the health care sector for better and faster
diagnoses. The authors in [17], [18] propose blockchain as a
framework to store, track, and securely share medical data.
The authors also use consensus mechanisms such as a smart
contract to aid the secured data sharing process.
The coronavirus epidemic has affected all the sectors across
the globe. There is a dire need for a fast and accurate system
for diagnosing the several patients affected by COVID-19. The
authors analyze various technologies [19], which can be used
to aid the diagnostic process. Most of the researchers talk
about using image processing and AI to analyze the patients’
records. Big data analytics also plays a vital role in analyzing
the virus’s symptoms for creating the drug. Many researchers
across the globe are working together and sharing data over
blockchain using a consensus method.
Various policies and strategies are being formed by several
countries to combat the crisis during the lockdown phase of
COVID-19. This lockdown has affected the global economy
severely, and all the countries joined together to find the
solution in the current situation. The authors in [20] highlight
the use of smart city network for secure data sharing across
different countries to formulate newer policies which help in
increasing the overall economic development. The authors also
suggest using blockchain technology while sharing the data
securely and maintaining the privacy of the stored data.
Blockchain technology revolutionized the health care sector
by providing a secure means of transaction processing and data
access ubiquitously. Every bit of detail of electronic health

records is accessible through blockchain, which aids easier
and a secured access [21] controlled by the patient.
Researchers and medical practitioners across the globe are
trying to find a suitable vaccine for the coronavirus. In this
regard, the upcoming challenge would be to distribute this
vaccine to the entire world. The authors in [22] propose
blockchain based supply chain monitoring system to help
distribute the vaccine. This recommended system aids in delivering the vaccine in 3 stages; sent, storage and application,
where the blockchain is used to monitor each step of the
vaccine supply chain.
There is a massive effect of COVID-19 on the economic
conditions of developing nations. Most of the production units
are in China, and the financial crisis also affects these big
companies. The existing supply chain methods are failing to
address the material shortage, which might continue postpandemic. The authors in [23] suggest after thorough analysis
that the blockchain technology would help is improvising the
supply chain process. The authors also indicate that smart contracts can eradicate the delays that occurres due to paperwork.
The information posted on social media has a significant
influence on the mindset of people. Unfortunately, information
shared on any social media platform is rarely accurate and
requires verification with different sources. There is an urgent
need to capture the real information posted on social media,
and a proper method needs to be established on propagating
such information. The authors in [24] use Weibo data and natural language processing methods to segregate the COVID-19
information into situational details. The authors also analyze
specific features in estimating the social media post, which
might provide useful information to the public.
During this pandemic situation, all the countries are using
innovative methods to spread awareness of COVID-19. For
example, the Australian government came up with a tracking
smartphone app [25], which is used to deliver the current situation and information to the people. This app gives significant
privacy issues and provides an unconventional policy addressing the privacy protection and trust-less IT infrastructure to
develop Australia’s digital-political comeback to COVID-19.
COVID-19 has challenged the current health systems and
also the global economy. Most of the countries are encouraging
scientists, medical practitioners, and academicians to research
upon the solution for combating the current crisis. The authors
in [26] suggest that open innovation would help in finding the
solutions faster. Open innovation provides a platform for any
user from any domain irrespective of this background to get
involved in delivering solutions that might improve the crisis.
There is a dire need for a stable data management and
information sharing method, which can aid in speeding up
the diagnosis or the discovery of the vaccine for COVID19. The existing technologies such as database or cloud has
main challenges such as security [27] and a single point of
failure of a centralized system. The authors in [28] propose
using blockchain technology for data management and storage,
which would safeguard patients’ data stored and would provide
robust data management to track the affected patients.

The vaccine for COVID-19 is still being researched and
might be released after thorough testing, which is months
away. Meanwhile, most of the countries have started resuming
regular operation but with maintaining social distancing and
sanitizer usage. The authors in [29] implement a novel solution
using an app in the smartphones to track the location history
and prove that it can be used as an e-pass to confirm that
the individual is not in contact with a person infected by the
virus. This data is stored in the disturbed ledger of blockchain,
which is securely available to any official. In a similar work
of tracking the users’ location, the authors in [30] implement
BeepTrace, which is a method of tracking the contact of the
individual. The users’ credentials and the location information
is stored securely in the blockchain.
III. P ROPOSED S YSTEM
A blockchain based system is proposed to keep track of
every individual’s COVID data in the country while also
maintaining a personal color scheme that can indicate whether
an individual is tested positive, is suspected of having the
virus or is healthy. One of the proposal’s main ideas is to
keep track of an individual’s passport number to identify the
travel history to segregate and isolate potential cases. This is
done so that the virus may be contained at its initial stage
without much spreading. Every individual is provided with
a unique identifier that may be different according to the
country, such as the case of Social Security Number, etc.
This is used as an identification with combined reference
to the individual’s passport number to identify an individual
uniquely. This is proposed since the proper identification of an
individual is crucial for preventing the virus from spreading.
Misidentification of an individual can cause isolation of a
wrong individual while not helping prevent the infection from
spreading.
The key idea is to verify an individual’s blockchain data
to provide a means of the tamper-proof record of a person’s
condition. This is a dire need of the hour since there may
be defaulters who may not realize the situation’s seriousness
and can negatively impact it. Three colour bands are proposed,
such as Red for Positive, Amber for suspicion, or awaiting test
result and Green for a healthy individual. The primary spread
of the virus is through a person who has already contracted the
disease. Thus, by identifying the root origin and segregating
the individuals to isolation, the virus’s spread can be stopped
to a great extent. By searching the travel history of each
individual, the probability that people may be affected can
be determined before the wider spread. Since the data of the
virus spread is relatively known, by analyzing an individual’s
travel history through the passport number in search with the
current situation of the virus at the airports visited by the
individual, a clear case of suspected patients may be drawn.
To make the search more effective, the spread of virus 14
days before and 14 days after the travel of the individual to
the airport may be seen to place an individual under suspicion
if the area surrounding the airport in the travel history has had
cases. The most efficient solution would be to determine and

track the individual’s movement completely and every location
visited but this data is not readily available and takes a long
time to gather. Hence checking the airports visited can start
as a small and significant step towards the containment of the
virus. Once an individual is placed under suspicion or tested
positive, a detailed overview may be obtained from the patient
to contain the places the patient had visited.
The usage of blockchain ensures that everything is made
digital and now has an easier reference of access to anyone,
which helps in identifying more potential cases. Every location
must check an individual’s data block to obtain their band
status before assuring services. This minor improvement can
mean everyday activities can resume without hindrance or fear
of the virus. The proposed system also contains additional
information as a text-based data entry, which can enable
flexibility to the deployed blockchain. The need for change
in data columns stored on to the blockchain may wary at a
later point of time and by deploying a smart contract protocol
without any flexibility which means that forking or restarting
the chain might be the only solution to implement changes.
Hence this addition can effectively improve the adaptability of
the blockchain to the unprecedented future needs.
The government has a significant role to play at dire times,
such as lockdown wherein every individual is void of cash
flow, and many people may suffer from its consequences.
As such, the responsibility and the strain on the government
officials are too high. There may be cases where keeping track
of every individual may not be possible by traditional methods
and that obtaining data of every individual currently residing
in the country or state may not be possible. This may happen
significantly to the lower classes of the society like daily wage
workers, homeless, etc., who cannot sustain themselves during
a crucial period of lockdown. As a government, to connect
with and help everyone may not be possible at times.
The proposed solution, an incentive-based approach, can
combat this issue with very significant benefits. The aim
is to provide individuals with Incentive Tokens from the
government directly to the individual. A token may be offered
to the individual for voluntary testing or agreeing to selfquarantine properly. This enables the government to keep track
of the people who willingly cooperate. This means that any
individual that may have been missed out can also now be
identified and kept track on. The incentive tokens can act as a
means to leverage people in abiding by the government created
rules and the compensation for an individual who follows the
rules could be a token. The token may be utilized by every
country to amend and modify the range of rules and its benefits
offered.
The token may act as a direct monetary benefit or a
substantial benefit for people who may be in dire need of
benefits from their government. There may be situations where
the government may be overwhelmed by the situation, and any
benefits planned for people may not reach them in their time
of need. Such a situation is worse than the virus spread, and
the fate such people have to endure may be cruel.
To combat these potential problems, the incentive token may

pave the way while not only having the benefit of co-operative
people but also providing direct benefits instead of it reaching
various intermediaries before reaching the people. The tokens
may be improved by the government according to the needs,
but some examples could be, providing monetary benefit,
helping provide necessities as a package for exchange of a
token, reduction in tax, electricity bill, water bill, reduction of
rent, fare reduction for immigrant workers, etc.
The approach can be a significant winner since not only are
people able to obtain these benefits in their needy situation; the
government can also leverage the incentives to make a broader
impact on safety and security by containing the virus spread
at a much larger pace. Consider an example, an incentive
token may be provided to all individuals who voluntarily
take up COVID testing at a potential hotspot location. This
could benefit not only the people but also the government in
helping to assess the situation of the area more accurately
while helping to deploy battle plans much efficiently.
Algorithm 1: Working of incentive token
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

9
10

Step 1: Identify Pv where Pv = volunteer
Step 2:
if (uid)Pv exist then
(uid)Pv =unique id assigned to Pv
continue;
else
assign uid to Pv
Step 3: Government Authority increments incentive
token count (I) Pv
Step 4: Update (I) Pv to the blockchain
Step 5: Pv can redeem (I) Pv based on Government
regulations

IV. R ESULTS AND D ISCUSSION
The proposed system can benefit by not only keeping track
of individuals in the country but can also act as a means of
direct benefit to the individual involved without the need for
third-party interference. Users may be added with the help
of UI proposed in Fig 2. Any user may be added to the
system by assigning a unique ID for that user. This can help
combat the identification problem of users who may not have
registered with the government or were stranded by the current
situation. The passport number may not be available for all
and hence may be left blank if necessary. Any individual
can avail the benefits of the incentive tokens without any
repercussions. This token value may be updated along with
the colour band, additional info section, and current location
through the Update UI, as shown in Fig 3. Data of any user
may be viewed using the User Side UI by searching for the
Unique ID or passport number, as shown in Fig 4. This feature
may be used before providing services such as restaurant dinein and can act as a protective barrier in eliminating the virus
spread while still paving the way to day to day activities. A
sample block created for a user is depicted in Fig 5.

The need for keeping track of every individual in the country
is enormous and is the need of the hour. By also providing
incentive benefits, this method can attract more individuals to
join the battle plan of government willingly as it is a winwin situation for both the involved parties. The government
now has a record of all the people and can plan to fight the
pandemic more efficiently while the users can claim direct
benefits from the government. During difficult times such
as lockdown, the government’s stimulus may be required to
sustain a lot of people who may otherwise be unable to fight
the situation on their own. Being advantageous to both parties,
the proposed system is unique and effective in gathering
people willing to fight the pandemic.
A. Significance of the work
The proposed system aims to eradicate the virus’s entry
and spread from a foreign region. By isolating the entry of
the virus, the infection can be nipped in its bud. The use of
passport to identify and segregate potentially suspected people
is the first phase of the battle plan to halt the virus’s entry.
This way, the potential losses due to the entry of people into a
region without proper screening may be significantly reduced.
In the current era of information, misinformation may be
the greatest enemy. To combat this problem, a blockchainbased system is proposed as the core solution. This provides a
transparent and immutable copy of the data, freely accessible
to anyone. This provides the basis for tracking and isolation of
future cases and helps visualize the impact on various regions,
which can be used to effectively formulate battle plans such
as restriction of services or lockdown to stop the virus in areas
of hotspots.
During such drastic measures, the key is to reduce contact
between people, which in turn stops the virus spread. But any
service, manufacturing, health, or other activities all require
interactions of various people. While stopping such activities
for a short time may be the most effective plan, its severity can
easily be felt by any person. The livelihood of many may be at
stake through such a move. The proposed system combats such
issues and rewards people for co-operation. By co-operating
with the government laid rules, one can earn an incentive
token. These tokens, as advised by government may carry a
wide range of benefits from monetary benefits to tax reduction,
etc. The greatest strength of the token is its flexibility in
adapting to any government rules. Not all locations require
the same benefits as others, and to cater to the needs of the
widespread, the distribution and redeeming of tokens may be
varied while still maintaining the general idea of uniting the
people and also rewarding them directly to sustain.
Life after the pandemic is still unforeseen in various regions.
The sooner a country can get its economy rolling, the faster
the country may grow. The fight with the pandemic is twophased. If the economy is sacrificed to win the pandemic,
the victory is bittersweet. The proposed system can be a
much-needed solution to resume the declining economy. By
making the COVID details easily accessible to every person,
the services to healthy people may be resumed with safety

measures faster than anticipated while not having major problems. The immutability and accessibility of this information
are key to the revival of the economy. One of the best possible
approaches to this problem is through blockchain, which can
help decentralize the data while having no security concerns.
Resuming services essential or non-essential, production, and
opening the market are the first steps to the economic revival.
The visualization of this architecture is depicted in Fig 1.

Hospital

Shopping Malls

Medical supply
production

Restaurant

Persons
COVID Data

Fig. 4. Updation UI.

Unique ID
Non Essentials

Essentials
Passport No

Government

Location

Incentive Token
Additional INFO

Dedicated
COVID Centre

Police

Army

Fig. 1. Visualizing interoperability of proposed solution.

Fig. 5. Sample Block.

V. C ONCLUSION
Fig. 2. Add User UI.

Fig. 3. User Search UI.

The pandemic has brought uncertainty to an extent never
seen before. The economic slowdown, recession, and flaws
in the current health infrastructures have been brought to
light during the current situation. As much as people seek
the government’s help, fighting a pandemic at this order of
intensity is not a one mans job. To seek unity in this fight is
the key to prevailing such a battle. This incentive approach
takes a very different dig on the strategic battle against the
pandemic by providing positive points for both the government
and its people. The ease of access to COVID related data could
be the much needed first step in reviving the daily activities.
The strain brought by the virus to the mental and physical
health of people is immeasurable, and lack of information
or misinformation will only worsen the existing situation.

Securing the data through blockchain and providing ease of
access can help trigger the normal working of the society,
which in turn can bring back the economy, providing the
first steps in surviving the pandemic. As everyone focuses on
measures to prevail in the pandemic, this approach could be a
nudge in the right direction with easy implementation and no
drawbacks.
The proposed system prioritizes the early detection of the
virus to not have negative repercussions. The work solidifies
the identification of the virus spread at an early stage through
the travel history of passengers. The blockchain-based system
can provide a more direct self - realization approach to the
current situation and become a referral backbone for the kick
start of the economy while stopping the spread. Unity is a
power untapped, which can give rise to newer methods and
possibilities in the fight against the virus. By combining all
our efforts into one problem, a solution towards that can be
devised much easier. The incentive-based approach is a means
to not only unite people to be on the same page but also
to help people who are severely in need during these tough
situations. The dreams, plans, and efforts of many have now
been decapitated, and what the future holds for us has become
unknown. The system can not only unite people towards the
greater goal but can also help fight the pandemic in a much
needed strategic manner. In the face of unpredicted danger,
humanity can only rely on its unity as strength and what better
way to realize that other than through technology.
R EFERENCES
[1] WHO, Naming the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) and the
virus that causes it, 2020 (Accessed on April 22, 2020),
https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novel-coronavirus-2019/
technical-guidance/naming-the-coronavirus-disease-(covid-2019)
-and-the-virus-that-causes-it.
[2] Coronavirus 5 things you can do to protect yourself
and
your
community,
2020
(Accessed
on
April
22,
2020),
https://publichealthmatters.blog.gov.uk/2020/03/04/
coronavirus-covid-19-5-things-you-can-do-to-protect-yourself\
-and-your-community/.
[3] K. F. Yuen, X. Wang, F. Ma, and K. X. Li, “The psychological causes
of panic buying following a health crisis,” International Journal of
Environmental Research and Public Health, vol. 17, no. 10, p. 3513,
2020.
[4] T. R. Gadekallu, N. Khare, S. Bhattacharya, S. Singh, P. K. R. Maddikunta, and G. Srivastava, “Deep neural networks to predict diabetic
retinopathy,” J. Ambient Intell. Humaniz. Comput, 2020.
[5] T. R. Gadekallu, N. Khare, S. Bhattacharya, S. Singh, P. K. Reddy Maddikunta, I.-H. Ra, and M. Alazab, “Early detection of diabetic retinopathy using pca-firefly based deep learning model,” Electronics, vol. 9,
no. 2, p. 274, 2020.
[6] Technology can help diagnose, contain COVID -19 – within limits, 2020
(Accessed on March 20, 2020), https://www.healthcareitnews.com/news/
technology-can-help-diagnose-contain-covid-19-within-limits.
[7] E. M. Abou-Nassar, A. M. Iliyasu, P. M. El-Kafrawy, O.-Y. Song, A. K.
Bashir, and A. A. Abd El-Latif, “Ditrust chain: Towards blockchainbased trust models for sustainable healthcare iot systems,” IEEE Access,
2020.
[8] R. Vaishya, M. Javaid, I. H. Khan, and A. Haleem, “Artificial intelligence (ai) applications for covid-19 pandemic,” Diabetes & Metabolic
Syndrome: Clinical Research & Reviews, 2020.
[9] A. Azizy, M. Fayaz, and M. Agirbasli, “Do not forget afghanistan in
times of covid-19: telemedicine and the internet of things to strengthen
planetary health systems,” OMICS: A Journal of Integrative Biology,
2020.

[10] S. Hakak, W. Z. Khan, M. Imran, K.-K. R. Choo, and M. Shoaib, “Have
you been a victim of covid-19-related cyber incidents? survey, taxonomy,
and mitigation strategies,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 124 134–124 144,
2020.
[11] B. Bera, S. Saha, A. K. Das, N. Kumar, P. Lorenz, and M. Alazab,
“Blockchain-envisioned secure data delivery and collection scheme for
5g-based iot-enabled internet of drones environment,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, 2020.
[12] S. Aggarwal, R. Chaudhary, G. S. Aujla, N. Kumar, K.-K. R. Choo,
and A. Y. Zomaya, “Blockchain for smart communities: Applications,
challenges and opportunities,” Journal of Network and Computer Applications, vol. 144, pp. 13–48, 2019.
[13] S. Hakak, W. Z. Khan, G. A. Gilkar, B. Assiri, M. Alazab, S. Bhattacharya, and G. T. Reddy, “Recent advances in blockchain technology: A survey on applications and challenges,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2009.05718, 2020.
[14] D. S. W. Ting, L. Carin, V. Dzau, and T. Y. Wong, “Digital technology
and covid-19,” Nature Medicine, vol. 26, no. 4, pp. 459–461, 2020.
[15] T. P. Mashamba-Thompson and E. D. Crayton, “Blockchain and artificial
intelligence technology for novel coronavirus disease-19 self-testing,”
2020.
[16] S. Johnstone, “A viral warning for change. covid-19 versus the red cross:
Better solutions via blockchain and artificial intelligence,” COVID-19
Versus the Red Cross: Better Solutions Via Blockchain and Artificial
Intelligence, elsevier, no. 2020/005, 2020.
[17] A. Khatoon, “Use of blockchain technology to curb novel coronavirus
disease (covid-19) transmission,” Available at SSRN 3584226, elsevier,
2020.
[18] M. C. Chang and D. Park, “How can blockchain help people in the
event of pandemics such as the covid-19?” Journal of Medical Systems,
vol. 44, pp. 1–2, 2020.
[19] Q.-V. Pham, D. C. Nguyen, W.-J. Hwang, P. N. Pathirana et al.,
“Artificial intelligence (ai) and big data for coronavirus (covid-19)
pandemic: A survey on the state-of-the-arts,” 2020.
[20] Z. Allam and D. S. Jones, “On the coronavirus (covid-19) outbreak
and the smart city network: universal data sharing standards coupled
with artificial intelligence (ai) to benefit urban health monitoring and
management,” in Healthcare, vol. 8, no. 1. Multidisciplinary Digital
Publishing Institute, 2020, p. 46.
[21] N. Deepa, Q.-V. Pham, D. C. Nguyen, S. Bhattacharya, T. R. Gadekallu,
P. K. R. Maddikunta, F. Fang, P. N. Pathirana et al., “A survey on
blockchain for big data: Approaches, opportunities, and future directions,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.00858, 2020.
[22] L. J. Ramirez Lopez and N. Beltrán Álvarez, “Blockchain application in
the distribution chain of the covid-19 vaccine: a designing understudy,”
2020.
[23] S. S. Priyanka, N. Lokeswari, and K. Amaravathi, “Blockchain-a potential solution for covid-19 pandemic economical crisis environment.”
[24] L. Li, Q. Zhang, X. Wang, J. Zhang, T. Wang, T.-L. Gao, W. Duan,
K. K.-f. Tsoi, and F.-Y. Wang, “Characterizing the propagation of
situational information in social media during covid-19 epidemic: A case
study on weibo,” IEEE Transactions on Computational Social Systems,
vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 556–562, 2020.
[25] K. Nabben, “Trustless approaches to digital infrastructure in the crisis
of covid-19 australia’s newest covid app. home-grown surveillance
technologies and what to do about it,” Home-Grown Surveillance
Technologies and What to Do About it (April 14, 2020), 2020.
[26] H. Chesbrough, “To recover faster from covid-19, open up: Managerial
implications from an open innovation perspective,” Industrial Marketing
Management, 2020.
[27] C. Iwendi, Z. Jalil, A. R. Javed, T. Reddy, R. Kaluri, G. Srivastava, and
O. Jo, “Keysplitwatermark: Zero watermarking algorithm for software
protection against cyber-attacks,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 72 650–
72 660, 2020.
[28] A. Azim, M. N. Islam, and P. E. Spranger, “Blockchain and novel coronavirus: Towards preventing covid-19 and future pandemics,” Iberoamerican Journal of Medicine, no. AheadOfPrint, pp. 0–0, 2020.
[29] H. Choudhury, B. Goswami, and S. K. Gurung, “Covidchain: An
anonymity preserving blockchain based framework for protection against
covid-19,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.10607, 2020.
[30] H. Xu, L. Zhang, O. Onireti, Y. Fang, W. B. Buchanan, and M. A. Imran,
“Beeptrace: Blockchain-enabled privacy-preserving contact tracing for
covid-19 pandemic and beyond,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.10103,
2020.

