Clinical Landscape of COVID-19 Testing: Difficult
Choices
Darshan Gandhi∗ , Sanskruti Landage∗ , Joseph Bae∗† , Sheshank Shankar∗ , Rohan Sukumaran∗ , Parth Patwa∗ ,
Sethuraman T V∗ , Priyanshi Katiyar∗ , Shailesh Advani∗ , Rohan Iyer∗ , Sunaina Anand∗ , Aryan Mahindra∗ , Rachel Barbar‡ ,
Abhishek Singh‡ , Ramesh Raskar∗‡

arXiv:2011.04202v2 [q-bio.OT] 15 Nov 2020

∗ PathCheck

Foundation,‡ MIT Media Lab
Cambridge, MA, USA
† Renaissance School of Medicine
Stony Brook, NY, USA
Corresponding Author: darshan.gandhi@pathcheck.org
Abstract—The coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic
has spread rapidly across the world, leading to enormous
amounts of human death and economic loss. Until definitive
preventive or curative measures are developed, policies regarding
testing, contact tracing, and quarantine remain the best public
health tools for curbing viral spread. Testing is a crucial component of these efforts, enabling the identification and isolation of
infected individuals. Differences in testing methodologies, time
frames, and outcomes can have an impact on their overall
efficiency, usability and efficacy. In this early draft, we draw
a comparison between the various types of diagnostic tests
including PCR, antigen, and home tests in relation to their
relative advantages, disadvantages, and use cases. We also look
into alternative and unconventional methods. Further, we analyze
the short-term and long-term impacts of the virus and its testing
on various verticals such as business, government laws, policies,
and healthcare.
Index Terms—COVID-19, Testing, RT-PCR, Privacy, Quarantine, Sensitivity, Specificity, Molecular testing, Serological testing,
Unconventional testing

I. I NTRODUCTION
Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARSCoV-2) was identified as a novel type of coronavirus after
the outbreak in the Wuhan region of China in late 2019.
On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization (WHO)
declared COVID-19, the disease caused by this RNA virus,
as a pandemic. COVID-19 is a disease with a relatively high
transmission rate, and is spread primarily by person-to-person
contact through respiratory droplets. As of November 5th
2020, COVID-19 has led to more than 48 million cases and
1 million deaths globally. Diagnosis of COVID-19 among
patients involves testing through laboratory testing, clinical
examination and diagnostics (X-ray, Chest-CT and others).
Early positive test identification enables isolation of infected
patients in order to reduce transmission [24]. Notably, a large
group of individuals identified as infected with SARS-CoV2 are asymptomatic. This suggests the necessity for frequent
testing of all individuals in a population, which in turn requires
more cost efficient and rapid testing platforms .

Presently, reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR) assays are the most widely used method of COVID19 detection. RT-PCR identifies the existence of viral RNA in
biological specimens from patients [19]. In RT-PCR testing
the most time-consuming steps are purification of RNA and
reverse transcription. Because it detects viral RNA, RT-PCR
is extremely sensitive and specific for SARS-CoV-2 infection
detection. Rapid antigen tests are another common form of
testing in the setting of COVID-19, and detect viral proteins in
patient samples. These tests are much cheaper, faster, and more
convenient than RT-PCR tests, but are generally less sensitive.
Although less sensitive, antigen tests can be used to identify
the most infected patients in the affected region to control the
spread of COVID-19 [37].
In this early draft, our goal is to address the current
scenario of COVID-19 testing methodologies and summarize
the implementation, cost and production estimates, and finally
effects on different sectors of society of these tests. Relevant
related work in surveys, comparative studies and methods
to mitigate the COVID-19 crisis is discussed in the Related
Work section. We then move to an in-depth discussion of
the various current testing methods stratified by molecular,
serological and alternative/unconventional approaches in the
Native Methodologies in Clinical Testing section. We further
dive deeper to understand the implications of testing and the
impacts it has on privacy, communication, the economy, etc.
in the Effect of Testing section.
II. R ELATED W ORK
Fig 1 elaborates on temporal patterns of viral shedding in
94 patients with laboratory-confirmed COVID-19 and modeled
COVID-19 infectiousness profiles from a separate sample of
77 infector–infectee transmission pairs. They observed the
highest viral load in throat swabs at the time of symptom
onset, and inferred that infectiousness peaked on or before
symptom onset. The authors have estimated that 44% (95%
confidence interval, 30–57%) of secondary cases were infected
during the index cases’ presymptomatic stage, in settings

Figure 1. Symptom profiles and patient behaviours appropriate for various
COVID-19 testing methodologies.

Figure 3. Human to Human Transmission: Temporal dynamics in viral
shedding and transmission of COVID-19 (waiting for permission) [30]

Figure 2. Estimated serial interval distribution (top left), inferred infectiousness profile (top right) and assumed incubation period (bottom middle) of
COVID-19 (waiting for permission) [30]

with substantial household clustering, active case finding and
quarantine outside the home. Disease control measures should
be adjusted to account for probable substantial presymptomatic
transmission [30].
Tang Wi et al. discusses the current landscape of COVID19 in different windows, namely pre-analytical, analytical,
and post-analytical. The pre-analytical window discusses the
importance of collecting the right specimen at the right time
in COVID-19 infection. The analytical window seeks to weigh
the relative advantages of different testing approaches including RT-PCR and antigen tests. Finally the post-analytical landscape discusses how tests might be understood with relevant
molecular or serological bottlenecks. Our paper aims to go
further in providing a comprehensive analysis of both the
various tests available as well as their relative advantages
in different use cases. We also discuss various secondary
and alternative testing methods in addition to serological
approaches [44].
Mina et al. examines the current testing scenario to explain
the flaws in the current testing landscape. They primarily claim
that the more accurate RT-PCR tests used may be primarily

detecting non-infectious individuals with low viral loads. Mina
et al. also suggests that a low sensitivity test done at more
frequent intervals might be more efficient in understanding
viral spread than limited, high sensitivity tests might be able
to do [36].
Marac et al. does a comprehensive review on molecular
and serological tests and also talks about the need to upscale
in-vitro diagnostic assays. The paper also shows that these
different tests could help inform healthcare providers and
policy makers, especially in understanding the efficacy of tests
and in making efficient policy decisions [34].
Ngyun, T Thanha discusses the AI methods that are made
to understand and fight against the ongoing pandemic. The
paper is a survey of methods in image analysis, text understanding and information extraction, data analytics, IoT, etc..
An overview of the relevant data sources and a description of
13 sub groups of problems where AI and relevant methods
can potentially be useful are also presented [38].
III. NATIVE M ETHODOLOGIES OF C LINICAL T ESTING
A. Need for Testing
Given that many people infected with COVID-19 continue
to be asymptomatic and potential carriers of the virus, testing
plays a crucial role in identifying these individuals to prevent
further spread through contact tracing and isolation. Testing
can be carried out to identify infected cases, most importantly
helping to identify individuals who are infected and isolate
them. With the availability of numerous testing practices, there
are many methods with different analytical performances in
terms of sensitivity and specificity. Because viral load is often
correlated with the probability of a test, patients with an early
infection may often not be detected. After 3-4 days following infection, there is an exponential increase in viral load,
generally seeming to result in symptom development. These
can range from mild infection to adverse and serious events

involving lung disease, acute respiratory distress syndrome
(ARDS), and other non-pulmonary manifestations.
B. Diagnostic Tests
Testing for SARS-CoV-2 can be largely classified into
two broad categories: diagnostic testing attempts to identify
viral presence, whereas antibody/serological tests identify the
immune response generated to the virus [17].
The gold standard method for diagnostic testing involves
the use of reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RTPCR). RT-PCR tests identify viral genomic material from human samples typically taken from the nasopharyngeal cavity,
throat, saliva, and so on. Specimens obtained from patients
must therefore be sent to centralized laboratories for storage
and testing [11], [29]. The results of these tests can be obtained
in a few hours after specimens arrive at the laboratory, but
the total turnaround time to patients is often between 3-7
days. The test is highly sensitive and specific in nature and is
generally the gold standard at the moment. Reliable methods
of evaluating the objective accuracy, sensitivity, and specificity
of RT-PCR tests have not been developed, but it is assumed
that in ideal laboratory conditions these tests are able to detect
SARS-CoV-2 genetic material with high degrees of sensitivity
and specificity [33], [35], [41], [43].

regions as those used for RT-PCR (nasopharyngeal, nasal,
throat, etc), but testing can be done in a rapid manner and is
often done on-site rather than at specialized laboratories [25].
Specimens are analyzed via immunological assays for viral
particles and can be done in many non-specialized laboratory
settings. Results for RADT can be obtained as quickly as
30-60 minutes, but the sensitivity of these tests is generally
lower than RT-PCR (84-97% when compared with RT-PCR
results). However, these tests are considered very specific (9098% when compared with RT-PCR). Because of this, a patient
testing positive by RADT will generally be considered to be
infected with the virus whereas a patient testing negative may
be referred to an RT-PCR test if there is suspicion of infection.
Due to their speed and cost-effectiveness, RADT can be used
in point-of-care settings (doctors, hospitals) and can also be
used as a public health intervention for rapid detection and
estimation of disease burden in a community setting.

Figure 5. Diagram briefly describing the function of medical diagnostic
dipsticks (waiting for permission) [9].

Figure 4. Steps in the RT-PCR test: a) A patient specimen is obtained
(commonly through nasopharyngeal swab) b) viral RNA is retrieved and c)
reverse transcription is used to create complimentary DNA (cDNA). d) DNA
primers are then affixed to cDNA and are used for amplification. Fluorescence
is created following degradation of specialized DNA probes which increase
as copies of the viral cDNA are made. e) Once the detected fluorescence level
crosses a threshold, a positive test is identified (waiting for permission) [18].

Rapid Antigen Detection Tests (RADT) is a rapid way of
testing to detect the presence or absence of SARS-CoV-2 in
a point-of-care setting. These tests identify the presence of
virus-specific proteins (antigens) in collected specimens from
patients. Specimens are generally collected from the same

Lateral flow assay (LFA) antigen tests are another example
of rapid point-of-care testing. The test analyzes plasma, blood,
or other patient samples and is capable of detecting viral
antigen. These tests do not require laboratory analysis and can
be performed in any clinical setting. These tests have relatively
low sensitivities but are both fast and cost-effective. Due to
these reasons, these sometimes serve as an alternative and a
useful tool in identifying the prevalence of COVID-19 spread
in a community [29].
The RT-PCR test employs the amplification of small
amounts of viral RNA particles in patient specimens. Cycle
Thresholding (CT) [15] is the concept of amplifying the virus
‘x’ number of times, where ‘x’ can be any number in order
to understand the viral concentration (viral load). Lower CT
values mean that fewer amplification cycles were required to
detect viral RNA, indicating that the patient sample had a high
viral load. Alternatively, high CT Values indicate that the viral
load is comparatively low and hence additional amplifications
are required for detection.There is no definite threshold for
clearing the individual for the risk of spreading the virus.
Some research has indicated that CT values can be correlated
to infectivity, with higher values indicating a lower chance
that a person might transmit COVID-19. CT values also differ

it relies on an increased understanding into the relationship
between viral load, infectivity, and symptom manifestation
in the setting of COVID-19. Further, it is likely that this
testing paradigm would still need to be supplemented by
higher sensitivity testing in vulnerable populations where even
low viral load COVID-19 infection could result in severe
outcomes.

Figure 6. LFA Strip architecture where the analyte is detected in the test line,
and red control line indicates the test was performed (waiting for permission)
[28].

based on parameters such as age, gender, the prevalence of
comorbidities, or concurrent infection [20].

Figure 8. Virus Kinetics within the Individual (waiting for permission) [36]

C. Antibody Tests

Figure 7. Stages for RT-PCR Post Run Analysis (waiting for permission)
[15].

Rethinking the Test Sensitivity: When considering the
relative advantages and disadvantages of the various diagnostic
COVID-19 tests approved by the FDA for emergency use, it is
important to understand the intended use case of the test. Mina
et al. [36], suggests that low sensitivity, low price tests such
as LFA antigen tests might most effectively be used in public
health scenarios in which the desired outcome is outbreak
suppression. By testing each individual in a community daily
with these tests, Mina et al., argues that patients with high
viral loads (and therefore potentially higher infectivity) will
be immediately recognized by low sensitivity tests and can
then be quarantined to prevent disease spread. While this does
seem to be an attractive testing policy for reducing outbreaks,

Antibody tests are done after recovery from COVID-19 to
check whether a patient has developed immunity to COVID-19
through measurements of IgM or IgG antibodies against the
virus. Antibodies are a physiological immune response against
SARS-CoV-2 infection, and their presence might indicate that
an individual has recently been infected with the virus or has
developed long term immunity to the same. The information
provided by antibody testing is highly variable from patient
to patient and depends significantly on when the test was
acquired relative to infection with SARS-CoV-2. Antibody
responses can take up to weeks to be detectable following viral
infection, and some patients might not have detectable levels
despite a previous infection. Alternatively, there is evidence
that positive test results can be observed for patients without
recent SARS-CoV-2 infection due to the presence of antibodies
to similar viruses. These tests are not meant to be diagnostic
in nature. Instead, antibody testing is often done to determine
whether an individual had previously been infected by SARSCoV-2. This can be useful in the setting of determining eligible
plasma donors for COVID-19 treatments, or in other similar
scenarios [4], [23], [33].
D. Current Scenario of Testing
Testing guidelines have varied over the course of the
COVID-19 pandemic, generally dependent on the availability
of tests. Initially, testing supply shortages in the United States
necessitated strict rationing of testing kits to only those who
are sick and mandating that individuals be recommended by
a physician in order to receive a test. Currently, the CDC recommends that individuals with symptoms of infection, recent

Figure 9. Comparison between Native Testing Methodologies

from lower accuracies than RT-PCR, they are attractive due to
their convenience and relatively low price point.
There remains a need to develop strict guidelines for social
distancing and mobility including use of PPE and masks when
visiting public places.
E. Activity-Feeling Guide

Figure 10. Comparative Analysis Between Native Testing Methodologies

contact with someone with COVID-19, or a recommendation
from a healthcare provider be tested for infection with SARSCoV-2. Additionally, workplaces require essential workers and
other non-essential workers to have repeat COVID-19 tests
before arriving at their workplace. Molecular tests including
RT-PCR are recommended for diagnosis of COVID-19, as
these are known to provide the most specific and sensitive
results.
Errors in testing can have dramatic effects. False-negative
results might delay the quarantine of an individual, increasing
the likelihood of disease spread. False-positive results might
cause undue stress for a patient and cause loss of access to
economic, social, and personal support in lieu of quarantine.
It is important to note that comparative analysis between the
various testing methodologies with respect to their accuracy,
false negative rate and costing are not completely dependable
since there are many players in the market who manufacture
the testing kits to be used for the process and also the inherent
disparity that can be observed in the laboratory vs clinical
performance of a test.
Home test kits are a recent development and are becoming
increasingly prevalent. The majority of home tests collect
samples of either saliva (in a collection tube) or nasal swabs
(through cotton swabs). Using these kits, an individual can ship
their samples to testing labs directly from their house. After
the sample is received by the lab, results are typically delivered
within 48-72 hours [5]. Although these tests generally suffer

Getting tested is not a binary decision. There are many
decisions that need to be made for uninformed user-specific
guidance, such as an Activity-Feeling Matrix, which is a
helpful tool. It is important to promote low friction home tests
for low-stakes situations and drive behavior to optimal riskanxiety levels.
For example, depending on the individual’s level of activity
(i.e. work from home vs working in the community) level and
frequency of tests might vary in terms of intensity and follow
up. There can be an observed shift from the less accurate tests
such as home tests to the far more accurate ones like the RTPCR if an individual wishes to attend social functions or has
a need for travel.
F. Assessment of Risks and Incident Prevention
Risk management is a highly understood field, and wellestablished strategies make use of multi-layer interventions in
order to prevent undesirable outcomes.

Figure 11. Swiss cheese model of process safety (waiting for permission)
[12]

This same approach can be adopted in the setting of
COVID-19, in which multiple interventions can be simultaneously leveraged to reduce disease spread. These strategies
might include maintaining social distancing practices, employing effective ventilation systems in buildings, wearing masks,
washing and sanitizing hands at regular intervals, having
quicker and efficient testing procedures, and improved contact
tracing procedures in order to quickly contain outbreaks of the
disease. Further, strict follow-up of individuals who are either
quarantined due to positive test or exposed to a COVID-19
positive individual remains crucial for successful reduction in
the burden of COVID-19.

of testing substantially reduces the costs of testing and is a
faster method for testing multiple individuals. This enables
estimations of COVID-19 prevalence in group settings such as
institutions or communities. The ideal use case for these tests
is in the setting of relatively sparse COVID-19 positivity/low
prevalence [11], [46].
C. Wastewater Testing
Experiences with other viral diseases have shown that monitoring wastewater enables effective surveillance of COVID19 by tracing pathogen levels in sewage. This can effectively
show the presence of pathogens in an entire community,
providing a sensitive signal to detect whether the transmission
is increasing or declining.
Wastewater testing could have many benefits with regards
to the detection of COVID-19 as it is cost-effective to survey
the dynamics of communities. Other forms of epidemiological
indicator biases are effectively avoided and it enables the
collection of data even from people who don’t have access
to healthcare.
After excretion in feces, the virus collects in municipal
wastewater channels. Monitoring of this wastewater at treatment plants can be achieved by detecting viral RNA.
V. U NCONVENTIONAL T ESTING M ETHODOLOGIES

Figure 12. Swiss Cheese Respiratory Virus Pandemic Defense (Swiss Cheese
Respiratory Virus Pandemic Defense) (waiting for permission) [1]

IV. A LTERNATIVE T ESTING M ETHODS
A. Introduction
It is integral to expand testing capabilities to manage the
further spread of COVID-19. Along with this expansion, there
is a need for developing alternative strategies to identify
and isolate asymptomatic and presymptomatic individuals.
Efficient pipelines for specimen collection and analysis are
crucial.
A variety of factors must be considered when selecting a
COVID-19 test including cost, accuracy, availability, dissemination, and speed of testing results. Depending on the use
case, each of these factors might be weighted in a different
manner. There is an increase in alternative testing methods as
emergency use authorizations have been provided by the FDA,
enabling multiple community-level testing strategies to control
COVID-19.
B. Pool Testing
In pooled tests, several samples are mixed together in a
batch in order to test specimens from multiple individuals
simultaneously. This allows for greater testing capabilities
without using more resources. In this process there is an
increased chance of positive sample dilution, potentially decreasing test sensitivity. According to FDA guidelines, test
performance following the pooling of samples should have a
positive predictive agreement (PPA) of greater than 85% when
compared with tests run on individual samples [14]. This type

A. COVID-19 and Animals
In most research works related to healthcare and medicine
animals are very essential segment of the cycle, especially
in zoonotic viruses such as SARS-CoV-2. However, thorough
testing on animals has not been performed yet; only a few
species (such as ferrets, dogs, birds, cats, hamsters and minks)
have shown to be susceptible to the virus. Preliminary research
has shown high interspecies transmission rates in ferrets,
cats, and golden hamsters, but significantly lower rates in
dogs. Furthermore, animals such as ducks, chickens, mice
and pigs do not seem to be able to contract or transmit
the virus [3]. Further experiments can be performed in these
species to understand the mechanisms by which other animals
might recover from infection, potentially informing treatment
development for humans [6].
B. Reverse transcription loop-mediated isothermal amplification (RT-LAMP)
Researchers from the Journal of Science Translational
Medicine proposed the use of a technique called reverse transcription loop-mediated isothermal amplification (RT-LAMP)
[27] carried out at a constant temperature with a different set of
reagents than those used in RT-PCR. Here, simple equipment
like plate scanners with spectrophotometric quantification,
mobile phone cameras, copy machines, or office scanners can
be used for immunofluorescent detection. Expensive special
equipment such as thermal cyclers with real-time fluorescence
measurements is not required for an RT-LAMP assay to perform, because within 30 minutes after the start of incubation
(at 65°C), positive samples can be determined by a color
change from red to yellow [29], [33].

This testing is less sensitive than a quantitative RT-PCR,
however, it could be beneficial in the testing of large groups
of people because of its potential to be a simple, scalable, and
broadly applicable testing method.
C. SalivaDirect
SalivaDirect is a testing method that relies on a similar
molecular process as RT-PCR. Compared to RT-PCR, this
method is less expensive and places less stress on the supply chain. In addition, RT-PCR requires a trained person
to collect nasopharyngeal (NP) swabs, not only adding a
logistical barrier, but also putting the performer at risk of
getting infected. Saliva samples are easier to collect and less
uncomfortable, encouraging people to get tested frequently.
However, saliva tests were found to have lower sensitivity than
a nasopharyngeal swab test [26].
D. LamPORE
LamPORE combines barcoded multi-target amplification,
real-time nanopore sequencing, and 15-minute barcode library
preparation [31]. It enables a larger number of samples to be
rapidly tested/screened for the presence or absence of SARSCoV-2, the virus causing COVID-19. Starting with extracted
RNA, results for 12-96 samples can be obtained in less than
2 hours [27].
This method not only fits both large-scale and small-scale
laboratory environments, but can also potentially analyze thousands of samples daily using a single instrument. LamPORE
is dependent on up-to-date workflow, including automatic handling of all samples and an amalgamation with the information
management systems of the laboratory.
VI. E FFECT OF THE T ESTINGS
A. Quarantine
Generally, an individual takes a COVID-19 test because they
are either showing symptoms of the virus, or due to mandated
workspace regulations. Until test results are received, the individual must stay isolated. If an individual receives a negative
result from a lower sensitivity point-of-care or home test, it
is recommended that they seek another negative result via
RT-PCR if infection is still suspected. During quarantine, the
patient should keep away from others, wear a face covering,
follow strict hand-hygiene, and make an effort to utilize
different utensils, instruments and tools from other members
of his/her household [24].
In case of an emergent need for the patient to break
quarantine, they should maintain at least 6 feet distance from
others. In addition, caretakers and family members exposed to
an individual with COVID-19 should follow similar guidelines
(including testing, quarantine, and preventive techniques).
B. Privacy
COVID-19 testing practices involve the collection and distribution of a significant amount of personal information. Often
an individual’s name, race, location, travel history, and past
health records are collected. This dependence on sensitive

patient data provides many potential privacy concerns related
to COVID-19 testing. For example:
1) To schedule a test, a user has to share their name, email,
phone number, ethnicity, country of birth, and recent
travel history. Although it differs based on the testing
site and country, this personally identifiable information
often sits on web servers or in handwritten forms at
testing campsites.
2) Some private testing companies collect extensive user
information about the user despite its irrelevance to
COVID-19 testing. This can vary significantly between
testing sites and countries. The use of anonymous randomized identifiers can reduce these risks.
3) Contact tracing is the single public health intervention
that has been most effective in identifying potentially infected individuals. These efforts often neglect thorough
safeguards of individual privacy.
4) COVID-19 results are often conveyed to users on websites that require no more than name and birthdate to
look up the results, an obvious privacy concern.
The privacy breaches outlined above can form the basis for
more significant invasions of patient privacy [25], allowing
disingenuous parties to track patient schedules, economic
status, and social contacts. The potential misuse of this information can dramatically impact patient safety and well-being.
C. Communication
Testing and contact tracing remains crucial to the public
health workforce around the world in identifying, assessing,
and managing individuals to contain the spread of COVID19. But for many people, coming forward to get tested and
revealing the personal information of friends, family, and close
associates remains a challenge due to privacy reasons. The
COVID-19 upsurge has given rise to discriminatory behaviors
towards anyone discerned to have been in contact with the
virus [24]. This social stigma discourages individuals from
receiving COVID-19 tests, adding another layer of complexity
to public health policies and data collection efforts surrounding
the pandemic.
D. Economy
The impact of COVID-19 on the economy has been significant. Due to COVID-19, several small and large-scale
businesses have been negatively affected. The virulent and
rapid spread of COVID-19 has required many organizations
to change their work and marketing strategies. Small case
businesses have been most significantly affected [22]. 43%
of businesses were temporarily shut down in earlier stages
of the pandemic, and the employment rate dropped down
by 40% in the United States. This has raised questions
about the financial stability of small businesses as many have
needed to acquire additional debts, temporarily cut down
or furlough their workforce, and ultimately shut down in
many cases. A recent analysis [7] has provided 3 potential
future economic scenarios in the setting of COVID-19: global
economic slowdown, global recession, or a quick reformation

of the economy. The last relies upon the implementation of
public policies including widespread testing, mandated face
coverings, social distancing, and new sanitization standards
in order to facilitate a return to normalcy for the economy. In
scenarios in which transmission of the virus cannot be curbed,
economic slowdowns and recessions are far more likely.
VII. F UTURE POSSIBILITIES FOR T ESTING
Researchers are in the preliminary phases of exploring
multiple novel methods, focused on improving the accuracy,
speed, cost and complexity of COVID-19 tests. One such initiative based on various biological innovations is STOPCovid
[32], working to offer rapid at-home tests with simpler kits.
Researchers are also exploring testing methods that leverage
machine learning to detect COVID-19 from signals such as
cough noises, lung and respiratory performance, and vocal
cord strength [38]. These methods have the potential to substantially simplify the testing process, allowing for increased
accessibility and mass population testing.
VIII. D ISCUSSION AND C ONCLUSION
As the COVID-19 pandemic continues to rapidly grow in
the United States and across the world, new testing methodologies will continually be developed. In this early draft, we
present a detailed review of the clinical landscape of COVID19 testing and establish the metrics by which future tests might
be measured and understood. Test sensitivity is only one factor
that must be considered in combination with a test’s cost,
speed, diagnostic potential,
Using this framework, we describe the current mainline
diagnostic and serological testing methodologies available as
well as their relative advantages and use cases. Further, we
extend our analysis to novel, unconventional, and alternative
methods of testing, which could reduce the time and cost
involved to obtain results.
We also discuss the potential privacy concerns relevant
to current testing approaches. Given the tradeoffs between
benefits vs harms of testing, the landscape remains open to
new testing strategies, especially those that minimize the risk
to an individual’s privacy. New testing methods and tools, such
as STOPCovid and Cosware, might be used to supplement
current COVID-19 testing strategies while maintaining user
privacy.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We are grateful to Riyanka Roy Choudhury, CodeX Fellow, Stanford University, Adam Berrey, CEO of PathCheck
Foundation, Dr. Brooke Struck, Research Director at The
Decision Lab, Canada and Vinay Gidwaney, Entrepreneur
and Advisor, PathCheck Foundation for their assistance in
discussions, support and guidance in writing of this paper.
R EFERENCES
[1] Michigan Tech, 2019.
https://patch.com/img/cdn20/users/
22208328/20201028/\040812/styles/patch image/public/
swisscheeseinterventionmodel28160713150.jpg?width=695.

[2] Artificial intelligence model detects asymptomatic Covid-19 infections
through cellphone-recorded coughs, 2020. https://news.mit.edu/2020/
covid-19-cough-cellphone-detection-1029.
[3] CORONAVIRUS AND PETS: FAQS FOR OWNERS, 2020. https://
vetmed.illinois.edu/pet$ $column/coronavirus-pets/.
[4] Coronavirus Disease 2019 Testing Basics, 2020. https://www.fda.gov/
consumers/consumer-updates/coronavirus-disease-2019-testing-basics.
[5] Coronavirus Home Tests: How They Work, What They Cost, and
How Accurate They Are, 2020. https://www.health.com/condition/
infectious-diseases/coronavirus/coronavirus-home-tests.
[6] COVID-19 and Animals, 2020.
https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/
2019-ncov/daily-life-coping/animals.html.
[7] COVID-19: Implications for business, 2020. https://www.mckinsey.com/
business-functions/risk/our-insights/covid-19-implications-for-business.
[8] Evaluation of LamPORE rapid tests for Covid-19 show high
levels of diagnostic sensitivity, 2020.
https://www.ox.ac.uk/news/
2020-09-25evaluationlamporerapidtestscovid19showhighlevelsdiagnosticsensitivity.
[9] File:Diagnostic Medical Dipstick.png, 2020.
https://commons.
wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Diagnostic Medical Dipstick.png.
[10] Interim Guidance for Rapid Antigen Testing for SARS-CoV-2,
2020.
https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/lab/resources/
antigen-tests-guidelines.html.
[11] LabCorp COVID-19 RT-PCR test EUA Summary, 2020. https://www.
fda.gov/media/136151/download.
[12] Michigan Tech, 2020. https://www.mtu.edu/unscripted/stories/2018/
february/im\ages/cheese-model-5-1024w-800banner.jpg.
[13] A
National
Decision
Point:
Effective
Testing
and
Screening
for
Covid-19,
2020.
https://www.
rockefellerfoundation.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/09/
ANationalDecisionPointEffectiveTestingScreeningforCovid-19FullReport.
pdf.
[14] Pooled
Sample
Testing
and
Screening
Testing
for
COVID-19,
2020.
https://www.fda.gov/
medical-devices/coronavirus-covid-19-and-medical-devices/
pooled-sample-testing-and-screening-testing-covid-19#pooled.
[15] Understanding cycle threshold (Ct) in SARS-CoV-2 RTPCR: A guide for health protection teams, 2020.
https:
//assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/
attachment data/file/926410/Understanding Cycle Threshold Ct in
SARS-CoV-2 RT-PCR .pdf.
[16] What is SalivaDirect™?, 2020.
https://publichealth.yale.edu/
salivadirect/.
[17] Which test is best for COVID-19?, 2020. https://www.health.harvard.
edu/blog/which-test-is-best-for-covid-19-2020081020734.
[18] The
Worldwide
Test
for
Covid-19,
2020.
https:
//www.globalbiotechinsights.com/articles/20247/
the-worldwide-test-for-covid-19.
[19] Fernando Almazán, José M. González, Zoltan Pénzes, Ander Izeta,
Enrique Calvo, Juan Plana-Durán, and Luis Enjuanes. Engineering the
largest rna virus genome as an infectious bacterial artificial chromosome.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 97(10):5516–5521,
2000.
[20] Nobuhiro Asai, Daisuke Sakanashi, Wataru Ohashi, Akiko Nakamura,
Atsuko Yamada, Yuzuka Kawamoto, Narimi Miyazaki, Tomoko Ohno,
Isao Koita, Hiroyuki Suematsu, Takaaki Kishino, Hideo Kato, Mao Hagihara, Arufumi Shiota, Yusuke Koizumi, Yuka Yamagishi, and Hiroshige
Mikamo. Could threshold cycle value correctly reflect the severity of
novel coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19)? Journal of Infection and
Chemotherapy, 2020.
[21] Joseph Bae.
Breaking down COVID-19 tests: what’s out there
and what’s the difference, 2020.
https://joseph-bae.medium.com/
breakingdowncovid-testswhatsoutthereandwhatsthedifference564d5433a6ea.
[22] Alexander W. Bartik, Marianne Bertrand, Zoe Cullen, Edward L.
Glaeser, Michael Luca, and Christopher Stanton. The impact of covid19 on small business outcomes and expectations. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 117(30):17656–17666, 2020.
[23] Alyssa Billingsley. The Latest in Coronavirus (COVID-19) Testing Methods and Availability, 2020. https://www.goodrx.com/blog/
coronavirus-covid-19-testing-updates-methods-cost-availability/.
[24] Indranil Chakraborty and Prasenjit Maity. Covid-19 outbreak: Migration,
effects on society, global environment and prevention. Science of The
Total Environment, 728:138882, 2020.

[25] Cathy Cosgrove.
Privacy questions for COVID-19 testing
and
health
monitoring,
2020.
https://iapp.org/news/a/
privacy-questions-for-covid-19-testing-and-health-monitoring/.
[26] László Márk Czumbel, Szabolcs Kiss, Nelli Farkas, Iván Mandel, Anita
Hegyi, Ákos Nagy, Zsolt Lohinai, Zsolt Szakács, Péter Hegyi, Martin C.
Steward, and Gábor Varga. Saliva as a candidate for covid-19 diagnostic
testing: A meta-analysis. Frontiers in Medicine, 7:465, 2020.
[27] Viet Loan Dao Thi, Konrad Herbst, Kathleen Boerner, Matthias Meurer,
Lukas PM Kremer, Daniel Kirrmaier, Andrew Freistaedter, Dimitrios
Papagiannidis, Carla Galmozzi, Megan L. Stanifer, Steeve Boulant,
Steffen Klein, Petr Chlanda, Dina Khalid, Isabel Barreto Miranda, Paul
Schnitzler, Hans-Georg Kräusslich, Michael Knop, and Simon Anders.
A colorimetric rt-lamp assay and lamp-sequencing for detecting sarscov-2 rna in clinical samples. Science Translational Medicine, 12(556),
2020.
[28] Kamrul H Foysal, Sung Eun Seo, Min Ju Kim, Oh Seok Kwon, and
Jo Woon Chong. Analyte quantity detection from lateral flow assay
using a smartphone. Sensors, 19(21):4812, 2019.
[29] Kile Green, Amanda Winter, Rachel Dickinson, Sara Graziadio, Robert
Wolff, Susan Mallett, and A. Joy Allen. What tests could potentially be
used for the screening, diagnosis and monitoring of covid-19 and what
are their advantages and disadvantages?, 2020.
[30] Xi He, Eric H. Y. Lau, Peng Wu, Xilong Deng, Jian Wang, Xinxin
Hao, Yiu Chung Lau, Jessica Y. Wong, Yujuan Guan, Xinghua Tan,
Xiaoneng Mo, Yanqing Chen, Baolin Liao, Weilie Chen, Fengyu Hu,
Qing Zhang, Mingqiu Zhong, Yanrong Wu, Lingzhai Zhao, Fuchun
Zhang, Benjamin J. Cowling, Fang Li, and Gabriel M. Leung. Temporal
dynamics in viral shedding and transmissibility of covid-19. Nature
Medicine, 26(5):672–675, May 2020.
[31] Phillip James, David Stoddart, Eoghan D Harrington, John Beaulaurier,
Lynn Ly, Stuart W Reid, Daniel J Turner, and Sissel Juul. Lampore:
rapid, accurate and highly scalable molecular screening for sars-cov-2
infection, based on nanopore sequencing. medRxiv, 2020.
[32] Julia Joung, Alim Ladha, Makoto Saito, Michael Segel, Robert Bruneau,
Meei-li W Huang, Nam-Gyun Kim, Xu Yu, Jonathan Li, Bruce D.
Walker, Alexander L. Greninger, Keith R. Jerome, Jonathan S. Gootenberg, Omar O. Abudayyeh, and Feng Zhang. Point-of-care testing for
covid-19 using sherlock diagnostics. medRxiv, 2020.
[33] Ramesh Kumar, Suman Nagpal, Samander Kaushik, and Sanjay Mendiratta. Covid-19 diagnostic approaches: different roads to the same
destination. VirusDisease, 31(2), 2020.
[34] Antonio La Marca, Martina Capuzzo, Tiziana Paglia, Laura Roli, Tommaso Trenti, and Scott M. Nelson. Testing for sars-cov-2 (covid-19):
a systematic review and clinical guide to molecular and serological invitro diagnostic assays. Reproductive BioMedicine Online, 41(3):483 –
499, 2020.
[35] Rajab Mardani, Abbas Vasmehjani, Fatemeh Zali, Alireza Gholami,
Seyed Dawood mousavi nasab, Hooman Kaghazian, Mehdi Kaviani,
and Nayeb Ali Ahmadi. Laboratory parameters in detection of covid-19
patients with positive rt-pcr; a diagnostic accuracy study. Archives of
academic emergency medicine, 8:e43, 04 2020.
[36] Michael J. Mina, Roy Parker, and Daniel B. Larremore. Rethinking
covid-19 test sensitivity — a strategy for containment. New England
Journal of Medicine, 0(0):null, 0.
[37] Leila Mousavizadeh and Sorayya Ghasemi. Genotype and phenotype
of covid-19: Their roles in pathogenesis. Journal of Microbiology,
Immunology and Infection, 2020.
[38] Thanh Nguyen. Artificial intelligence in the battle against coronavirus
(covid-19): A survey and future research directions, 04 2020.
[39] Parth Patwa and Rohan Sukumaran.
Survey of Articles on
COVID-19 Testing, 2020.
https://parthpatwa1.medium.com/
survey-of-articles-on-covid-19-testing-218cf0bac479.
[40] Brett Ragnesola, Daniel Jin, Christopher C. Lamb, Beth H. Shaz,
Christopher D. Hillyer, and Larry L. Luchsinger. Covid19 antibody
detection using lateral flow assay tests in a cohort of convalescent plasma
donors. BMC Research Notes, 13(1):372, Aug 2020.
[41] Md Rahman, Muhammed Uddin, Razia Sultana, Arumina Moue, and
Muntahina Setu. Polymerase chain reaction (pcr): A short review. Anwer
Khan Modern Medical College Journal, 4, 02 2013.
[42] Neeraj Sharma, Prashant Krishnan, Rohit Kumar, Shreyas Ramoji,
Srikanth Chetupalli, Nirmala R., Prasanta Ghosh, and Sriram Ganapathy.
Coswara – a database of breathing, cough, and voice sounds for covid-19
diagnosis, 05 2020.

[43] Daniel Shyu, James Dorroh, Caleb Holtmeyer, Detlef Ritter, Anandhi
Upendran, Raghuraman Kannan, Dima Dandachi, Christian RojasMoreno, Stevan P. Whitt, and Hariharan Regunath. Laboratory tests
for covid-19: A review of peer-reviewed publications and implications for clinical uise. Missouri medicine, 117(3):184–195, 2020.
32636542[pmid].
[44] Yi-Wei Tang, Jonathan E. Schmitz, David H. Persing, and Charles W.
Stratton. Laboratory diagnosis of covid-19: Current issues and challenges. Journal of Clinical Microbiology, 58(6), 2020.
[45] IHME COVID-19 Forecasting Team. Modeling covid-19 scenarios for
the united states. Nature Medicine, 2020.
[46] Anne E Watkins, Eli P. Fenichel, Daniel M. Weinberger, Chantal B.F.
Vogels, Doug E. Brackney, Arnau Casanovas-Massana, Melissa Campbell, John Fournier, Santos Bermejo, Rupak Datta, Charles S. Dela Cruz,
Shelli F. Farhadian, Akiko Iwasaki, Albert I. Ko, Nathan D. Grubaugh,
and Anne L Wyllie. Pooling saliva to increase sars-cov-2 testing
capacity. medRxiv, 2020.

