Electrocharged facepiece respirator fabrics using common materials
M. M. Bandi1

arXiv:2011.13642v1 [cond-mat.soft] 27 Nov 2020

1

Nonlinear and Non-equilibrium Physics Unit, OIST Graduate University, Onna, Okinawa, 904 0495 Japan∗
(Dated: November 30, 2020)
Face masks in general, and N95 filtering facepiece respirators (FRs) that protect against SARSCov-2 virion in particular, have become scarce during the ongoing COVID-19 global pandemic.
This work presents practical design principles for the fabrication of electrocharged filtration layers
employed in N95 FRs using commonly available materials and easily replicable methods. The
input polymer is polypropylene or polystyrene, and can include discarded plastic containers of these
materials, and the fabrication setup is based on the cotton candy (CC) principle. The primary
parameters underlying the CC principle are translated to simple design rules that allow anyone
to construct their own fabrication system from common parts, or employ a commercial cotton
candy machine with minimal modifications. Finally, basic characterization results for structural
and filtration properties of electrocharged fabrics made using the CC principle are detailed.

I.

INTRODUCTION

The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic has witnessed multifold increase in face mask use for protection against viral infection, with many countries now mandating face
masks in public areas [1]. This sudden demand surge
has created a scarcity of face masks, necessitating homemade cloth mask fabrication [1]. But neither homemade
cloth masks nor surgical masks are designed to protect
against the SARS-Cov-2 virion, only respirators conforming to N95 or higher standard are rated for such protection. This capability of N95 filtering facepiece respirators
(FRs) is owed primarily to an electrocharged filtration
layer among other notable design features, deemed the
most efficient among various particle filtration methods
employed in face masks.
Taken together, these features permit filtration of ≥
95% of particles of size ≥ 0.3µm under test standards
designated by the US National Institute for Occupational
Safety and Health (NIOSH) [2] for N95 (US: NIOSH42C-FR84) and its counterparts, including FFP2 (Europe: EN149-2001), KN95 (China: GB2626-2006), P2
(Australia and New Zealand: AS/NZ1716:2012), Korea 1st class (South Korea: KMOEL-2017-64), and DS2
(Japan: JMHLW-Notification214 from year 2018) facepiece respirators [3]. Unfortunately, the electrocharged
polymer filtration layers used in these FRs are manufactured through industrially sophisticated processes that
are hard to duplicate using commonly available materials or methods.
This article details a process to fabricate electrocharged polymer based fabric using commonly available materials and easily replicable methods. The fabrication setup is based on the Cotton Candy (CC) principle, also known as rotary jet spinning or centrifugal spinning method [4]. The primary control parameters for the
CC method [5] are translated to practical design rules for

∗ Email:

bandi@oist.jp

either the construction of a fabric manufacturing setup
from common parts, or through minimal modification of
commercial cotton candy machines. Practical solutions
to tune the control parameters for fabrication of electrocharged polymer fabrics are also specified. Finally,
characterisation of electrocharged fabrics made using the
CC method for structural as well as filtration properties
using two mask designs are presented.

II.

FILTRATION PRINCIPLES
A.

Basic Mechanisms

Face mask filtration mechanisms must optimize between two competing requirements. On one hand the
mask’s filtration layers must possess an average pore diameter small enough to trap and filter particles from
being inhaled, but at the same time too small a pore
diameter prevents the user from breathing comfortably
[6]. For this reason, face mask filtration layers cannot
be fabricated below a certain pore diameter. Furthermore, mechanisms for filtration of large particles differ
from those for small particles, thereby requiring a range
of filtration strategies to be adopted. These strategies
commonly involve three physical mechanisms, viz. inertial impaction, diffusion, and electrostatic attraction [7].
Large particles with diameters ≥ 1µm possess inertia to deviate from aerodynamic streamlines and collide
with filtration fibers and get caught in the filter mesh.
Small particles of typical diameters ≤ 0.1µm which follow
streamlines while undergoing diffusion, execute a complex, meandering trajectory through the tortuous porous
matrix and get trapped in the filtration layers. These
two mechanisms are easily achieved in any cloth-based
or commercial (surgical or PM2.5) masks, but they do
not incorporate the third mechanism of electrostatic filtration [8, 9], which traps particles of intermediate sizes
in the range 0.1 − 1µm and is considered most effective of
the three mechanisms. When an electrostatically charged
layer is embedded among standard mask filtration lay-

2
ers, oppositely charged particles (both small and large in
diameter) are attracted by the long-range electrostatic
Coloumb force towards the electrocharged layer. Once
caught, the particles are held in place through van der
Waals forces.

B.

Electrocharged Filtration

It is known from common experience, especially in cold
climates with low ambient humidity, that when two dissimilar fabrics rub against each other they gain static
electricity, a phenomenon known as triboelectric charging. Fabrics woven from natural fibers like wool or cotton, which possess high roughness, and even synthetic
fabrics like Nylon are common examples of fabrics with
high triboelectric charging ability. The idea of exploiting
charged fabrics to aid in filtration goes back nearly five
decades [10], and indeed some early face mask designs
incorporating electrocharged filtration employed wool or
felt fibers, with resin additives to enhance filtration efficiency many times over that achieved with basic fabric materials alone [7]. However, resin additives degrade upon exposure to airborne oil aerosol droplets,
which can shield electrostatic charges. Consequently over
time, synthetic electret fabrics such as plastic fibers (e.g.
polypropylene and polystyrene) with high electrostatic
charge characteristies were found to resist the shielding effect of oil aerosols quite effectively and came to
be adopted as the material of choice for electrocharged
filtration fabrics. An additional advantage of plastic electret fabrics was that they were non-woven, thus saving
fabrication time. Finally, the disordered fabric pattern in
non-woven electret fabrics, as opposed to knitted fabric
with interleaving fiber strands in a grid, assures a highly
irregular porous medium ensuring particles follow tortuous streamlines through the porous matrix.

III.

ELECTROCHARGED MATERIAL
FABRICATION METHODS

All plastic electrets or electrocharged fabrics are manufactured by bonding polymer fibers in a porous mesh.
In order to generate polymer fibers, one starts with liquid
polymer either from solution (polymer dissolved in solvent) or polymer melt. The bulk liquid must be forced
through a tiny orifice to overcome capillary forces, and
quickly accelerated to stretch or extend the viscoelastic solution into fibers of diameter ranging from 100s of
nanometers to 10s of µm. This dispersity in fabric diameters helps provide large surface area exposure (relative
to bulk volume) to attract particles. Additionally, the
non-woven fibers bonding together with the dispersity
helps increase fabric disorder and results in a tortuous
porous matrix. These fibers either evaporate their solvent or cool if derived from melt, as they traverse from
the orifice to be collected on a surface where they so-

lidify into an enmeshed fabric. The various fabrication
methods therefore vary in the forcing mechanisms employed to overcome capillary force and thence accelerate
the polymer. The three primary methods, viz. Electrospinning, Melt Blowing, and Rotary Jet Spinning, are
briefly reviewed as they inform the design rules to follow
subsequently.
Electrospinning: Electrospinning is a widely used platform for generating polymer fibers [11–15]. In this
method, polymer solution or polymer melt in fewer settings [16, 17] is forced out of a container (emitter) with
tiny orifice using a piston, such as a syringe pump. This
emitter is connected to the positive terminal of a high
voltage DC source (∼ few to 10s of kV) and a flat plate
or drum placed at a distance (collector) is connected to
the voltage source’s negative terminal, thereby setting up
a high voltage DC electric field between the emitter and
collector. The piston pressure competes with surface tension to generate a polymer jet, whereas the DC electric
field accelerates the jet from emitter towards the collector
and stretches them into fibers. The fibers are deposited
on the collector where they evaporate their solvent to result in the electret fabric. A schematic representation of
the electrospinning principle is shown in fig. 1a. Whereas
polymers used in electrocharged fabrics possess embedded charges, the electric field between the emitter and
collector aids in orienting dipoles of the polymer melt
during droplet stretching, thereby further enhancing the
material’s electrocharging properties.
The electrospinning method is agnostic to the type of
polymer material, with material dependent parameters,
e.g. melting temperature and DC field voltage, being
easy to adjust for each material once the primary setup
is in place. However, the electrospinning process suffers from two disadvantages. Firstly, electrospun polymer throughput scales linearly with the number of orifices or syringes, requiring several syringes in parallel for
increased throughput. Secondly, the high voltage DC
electric field is expensive and requires additional operational safety features, hence not suitable outside laboratory and industrial settings where the method outlined
below is intended to find its primary use.
Melt Blown Process: The most common method for
manufacture of electrocharged filtration fabrics is Melt
Blowing [18–20]. In this method, jets of molten polymer
are generated by injecting it from a conical die, wedged
in a gap within an air knife that converge at the die tip;
Fig. 1b shows a cross-sectional view of the cylindrical geometry for a generic Melt Blowing setup. The hot air
accelerates and stretches the polymer jet into fiber. Cold
air sprayed at the polymer strands as they depart the
die tip solidifies them as they land on a conveyor belt
or drum [21, 22]. Like electrospinning, the melt blown
process too can employ a variety of polymers by controlling temperatures of the die (for polymer melting)
and hot air jets. Melt blowing offers a higher throughput relative to electrospinning and does not require high
DC fields. However, melt blowing setups are inherently

3
(a)

(b)

FIG. 1: (Color online) Schematic of (a) a generic electrospinning setup and (b) cross-sectional view of a Melt Blowing setup.

suited for large volume manufacturing, requiring a dedicated source of high pressure air at large flow rates, and
thus not easily amenable to construction from commonly
available parts. The quality of fabric too is ever so sensitive to die geometry and shaping of the high velocity hot
air currents, thus requiring time-consuming fine tuning
of the process.

Rotary Jet Spinning: In recent times, Rotary Jet or
Centrifugal Spinning process has emerged as an attractive alternative platform [5, 23]. In this method (see
schematic in Fig. 2), a central cylindrical container (emitter) holds the polymer and has several orifices along its
wall. The emitter is heated to melt the polymer, but high
viscosity prevents it from flowing out of the orifices under
static conditions. However, when the emitter is spun at
several 1000s of revolutions per minute (rpm), the molten
polymer is forced out of the orifices in jets, which are
stretched into fibers by centrifugal force generated from
fast spinning. A cylindrical drum enclosure (collector)
surrounds the emitter and as the stretched polymer jets
traverse the distance from emitter to collector in a spiral trajectory as shown in Fig. 2a, they are cooled and
deposited on the collector surface. Rotary jet spinning
employs the same forcing scheme to generate as well as to
accelerate and stretch polymer jets. It neither requires a
high voltage electric field as employed in electrospinning
[24] nor hot air jets used in melt blowing. Furthermore,
since the emitter wall has several orifices, rotary jet spinning offers higher throughput relative to electrospinning
[4]. In fact, rotary jet spinning has been long known in
regular life through the cotton candy machine and for this
reason, it is also called the Cotton Candy (CC) method
[25, 26]. Replacing sugar with polymer and tuning the
temperature and emitter rpm offers an easy design one
can construct from commonly available parts.

IV.

FABRICATION SETUP

The ability to construct a low-cost fabrication setup
from commonly available parts and materials forms the
primary consideration behind the design strategy detailed in this article. For this reason, some design choices
were made at the very outset to keep the design rules
accessible to the layperson. Firstly, non-woven electret
polymer fabrics can also be manufactured by dissolving
polymers in suitable organic solvents, as opposed to melting them at high temperatures. However, organic solvents are not commonly available whereas heat sources
are universally accessible. For this reason, methods involving liquid polymers dissolved in solvents are not explored here and will form part of a future study. Secondly, as already discussed, CC method offers easy construction from common materials as opposed to electrospinning and melt blowing. The design strategy therefore relies heavily on the CC method (Fig. 2), with hybrid
characteristics that adopt some aspects of electrospinning
and melt blowing wherever practicable.

A.

Control Parameters

As discussed earlier, electret fabrication involves forcing in two stages, whose order of magnitude analysis presented here is borrowed from Ref. [5] and the terms defined below are also shown in the schematic in Fig. 2. The
first stage concerns droplet generation in order to initiate
a jet by overcoming the capillary force Fσ = σrO , where
σ is the surface tension of the polymer melt and rO is the
orifice radius. Hydrostatic pressure being much smaller
in magnitude than the centrifugal force Fω ∼ ρω 2 RE rO
(ρ being polymer melt density, ω the emitter’s angular
speed, and RE emitter radius), balancing the inertial
3
force ρω 2 RE rO
with Fσ provides the threshold angular

4
(a)

(b)

FIG. 2: (Color online) (a) Top and (b) Side view schematic of Rotary Jet Spinning (CC method).

speed ωth for droplet generation and jet initiation:
r
σ
ωth ∼
2
rO RE ρ

B.

(1)

The second stage of droplet acceleration or jet elongation concerns a competition between the centrifugal force
Fω and the viscous force Fµ ∼ µv/x where v is√the jet
velocity at a distance x from the orifice and µ = σRE ρ
is its extensional viscosity since the polymer melt is a
viscoelastic fluid and the droplet stretching represents a
case of extensional rheology. Applying mass conservation between matter ejected at the orifice with speed u
and the elongated jet of radius r arriving at the collector
at a distance RC from emitter, provides the mean fiber
radius:
r∼

rO u1/2 ν 1/2
3/2

,

(2)

RC ω
where ν = µ/ρ is the extensional kinematic viscosity; it
is assumed RC  RE .
Whereas equations 1 and 2 resulting from scaling analysis [5] provide appropriate control parameters for the
CC method, some of them are invariant. For instance,
surface tension σ does not vary significantly with temperature T and maybe assumed constant, and since polymers dissolved in solvents by concentration are not explored here, the extensional viscosity µ varies only with
temperature through density ρ. Therefore the dominant
parameters that control our design are orifice radius rO ,
emitter radius RE , collector radius RC , angular speed ω
and heating temperature T through which ρ (and µ) is
varied. It may then be surmised that the material dependence enters only through the temperature. Armed
with these parameters, practical design rules may now be
developed.

Design Rules
1.

Materials

The material of choice in manufacture of electrocharged filtration fabrics is usually polypropylene
(PP) of high molecular weight, but polystyrene (PS) and
poly(4-methylpent-1-ene) also possess high electrocharging characteristics. Commonly available materials being
the primary goal, PP and PS become the natural materials of choice as they can be easily sourced as raw
material, or are commonly available through plastic containers. This has implications for the manufacturing process in that PS being glassy, requires better temperature
control, but cooling is less difficult. On the other hand,
PP viscosity is nearly insensitive to temperature above
its melting point, but does require cooling well below its
melting point in order to crystallise.
In using PP, it is known that low molecular weight
(MW ) isotactic PP (MW < 12000) tends to form brittle fibers that easily break up [27]. If working with
PP pellets ordered from regular suppliers, high molecular weight isotactic PP is preferred. In the following,
fabrics made from isotactic PP were fabricated with material characteristics: MW = 250000, melting temperature TM = 160 − 165◦ C and density ρ = 900kg/m3 ;
this is in fact the preferred material for manufacture of
N95 FR electrocharged layers. Another commonly available polymer used in electrocharged filtration fabrics is
polystyrene owing to its high charge retention property,
as is known from common experience with styrofoam
packaging material which easily sticks to surfaces due
to static charge. PS material was employed with material properties molecular weight MW = 35000, glass
transition temperature TG = 100◦ C but with a reasonable minimum temperature for processing in the range

5
T = 123 − 128◦ C and density ρ ∼ 1060 kg/m3 .
One can also use discarded PP and PS plastic containers, but care should be taken not to use expanded PS
that is generally available in the form of packaging material, but rather regular PS known as General Purpose
Polystyrene in industry and used in fabrication of plastic containers through injection moulding. When using
discarded PP and PS containers, they were crushed into
powder using a commonly available blender. However,
PP containers are often manufactured from low crystallinity PP, which results in very dense fabric mesh due
to high cohesive properties, and is uncomfortable when
breathing [28]. Additionally, low crystallinity PP was
found not to possess high charge relative to isotactic PP.
However, when mixed with PS from discarded containers,
the resulting fabric is more compliant, less dense allowing
easier respiration, and retains excellent electrocharging
characteristics. A mixture of 80% low crystallinity PP
with 20% PS (PP-PS blend) gave very good results. It
is noted that PP and PS are not miscible, and that by a
blend it is merely implied that both powders were molten
together.
The melting and extrusion process of PP or PP-PS
would likely inactivate most biological material (in particular bacteria, fungi and viruses). As a comparison,
autoclaves are typically run at comparable temperatures
(160- 190◦ C) on a dry cycle for 15-120 minutes. For compatible materials, sterilization is usually done in a wet cycle at 120◦ C and fairly high pressure (∼100 kPa) as the
steam helps to break open cells and irreversibly denature protein and nucleic acids. Quickly melting polymer
powder of contaminated bottles passed through a blender
may not result in destruction of 100% of the infectious
properties of potential contaminants. This is of particular concern when using the resulting material for face
protection. It is therefore advisable that plastic containers be cleaned in a domestic pressure cooker at high steam
for 20 minutes before crushing them in a food processor
to turn into powdery material.

2.

Jet Generation

Temperature: Tests on the appropriate range of temperatures were heavily informed by Ref. [26]. Although
the transition temperature for PS is TT = 123 − 128◦ C
and that of PP is TT = 160 − 165◦ C, they do not readily
flow at these temperatures but merely soften into highly
viscous fluids. Whether working with pure PP or PP-PS,
heating the emitter to higher temperatures in the range
T = 175−200◦ C reduces the viscosity, but the jets tend to
break up during extension and do not result in fibers. We
found that fibers were indeed generated in the temperature range T = 200 − 250◦ but resulted in beaded structures. Increasing the emitter angular speed ω did result
in continuous fibers in accord with published literature
[5]. However, temperatures T > 280◦ reduced viscosity
sufficiently to give continuous fibers even at lower angu-

lar velocities. Note that Eq. 2 shows mean fiber radius
r ∼ ν 1/2 and inversely proportional to ω. It is therefore
desirable to tune the heating temperature T to match
the maximum rpm achievable by the motor employed to
spin the emitter as discussed below.
Small commercial cotton candy machines usually employ electrical heating elements whereas larger ones are
gas fired. Irrespective of the heating method, most
cotton candy machines operate at temperatures around
T = 160 − 175◦ C, which falls below the temperature
range desirable for generating jets of pure PP or PP-PS
(T = 280 − 340◦ ). If working with commercial machines,
tweaking the heating elements to achieve the desirable
temperature range is suggested. If building one’s own
machine, developing one’s own electrical heating element
is desirable if one has working knowledge, since electrical
heating elements provide precise control. A simpler alternative is to use a gas torch and tweak the torch flame
and its distance from emitter by checking emitter temperature with an ordinary thermometer used for home
baking.
Emitter Motor: The choice of emitter motor for CC
method is dictated by Eq. 1 as it sets the lower bound on
the revolutions per minute (rpm) to overcome ωth . Taking surface tension of PP to be σP P ∼ 20 × 10−3 N/m,
ρ = 900 kg/m3 , rO of order 100s of microns (∼ 10−4
m), and RE of order few cm (∼ 10−2 m) yields ωth ∼
470 s−1 or 4500 rpm. In practice however, fibers emerge
at around 2500 rpm, which is easily achieved with most
commercial cotton candy machines as they operate between 3000 - 4500 rpm. If constructing one’s own machine, high rpm DC motors capable of going up to 15000
rpm are suggested. A simple alternative is to repurpose
an electrical drill to spin the emitter as they commonly
achieve up to 4500 rpm or a Dremel drill with variable
adjustable speeds in the range 3000 - 37000 rpm. Drills
can be easily connected to an emitter container with a
suitably threaded steel rod, nut, and washer. Two simple alternatives exist in the event a high rpm motor is
unavailable, as presented below when discussing emitter
geometry.
Emitter: The emitter follows a standard cylindrical
geometry of radius RE ∼ 5 cm (0.05 m) and height of
roughly 0.1 m. The side wall of the cylindrical emitter is
dotted with several tiny orifices through which the polymer jets are forced out when the emitter is spun. Since
orifice radius rO and emitter radius RE are the system
design parameters entering Eq. 1 (rO also enters Eq. 2),
they should be chosen to match the material parameters σ and ρ in order to obtain a comfortable ωth within
the operational rpm range of one’s chosen emitter motor.
Smaller the orifice radius rO , higher is the required ωth
as they’re inversely proportional, thus setting the upper
bound on choice of rO . However, the mean fiber radius r
scales linearly with rO , and constrains the upper bound
through Eq. 2. If one has access to high rpm motor, then
it is advisable to go to lower rO of order few 100 microns.
Commerical cotton candy machines either use an emit-

6
(a)

(b)

FIG. 3: (Color online) Commercial candy machine emitters usually come with ((a) vertical or diagonal slats or (b) wire mesh
for orifices.

ter mesh with large orifice dimensions of order 1-2 mm
or vertical/diagonal slats of width ∼ 1 mm, see fig. 3 for
an exemplar. Replacing such emitters with home-built
emitter cylinders of lower orifice radii is suggested. Alternatively, if constructing one’s own fabrication system,
an easy way to construct the emitter is using a soda or
beer can as they come readily manufactured to the right
radial dimension and aluminum is an excellent thermal
conductor. Cutting or shearing a soda or beer can in
half and using the bottom half gives a readymade emitter. Folding the top open edge along the wall perimeter and drilling holes of few 100 micron radius along the
emitter wall provides satisfactory results. For instance,
the present study used drill bits of gauge 87 to obtain
rO = 0.254 mm with a Dremel drill motor connected to
bottom half of a soda can with a nut and washer to drive
the emitter, which gave very satisfactory results.
In the event, one does not have a high rpm motor, a hybrid design combining rotary jet spinning (CC method)
with melt blowing works just as well. Recognizing that
Eq. 1 results from a balance between surface tension and
inertial forces because hydrostatic pressure is low, one
could consider sealing the top of the emitter and pump
compressed air at roughly 0.2 - 0.3 MPa, while spinning
the emitter at lower rpm to overcome the surface tension
force to generate polymer jets. This is simply the melt
blowing principle in disguise, and it shifts the inertial
force by a DC offset value proportional to the pumping
2
pressure divided by emitter wall’s surface area πRE
h (h
is emitter height), thus bringing down the ωth value. Of
course, as a consequence, the lower ω would lead to larger
mean fiber radius since r ∼ 1/ω but this can be overcome
by either decreasing rO and/or increasing RC , the latter
usually being easier to accomplish.

−3/2

r ∼ RC
scales linearly with rO and inversely with ω,
which together form the system design parameters controlling fiber radius. It is therefore advantageous to have
as large a collector radius to achieve fibers of ever smaller
radii. These system design parameters are complemented
by the polymer’s kinematic extensional viscosity ν = µ/ρ
which scales as r ∼ ν 1/2 . For this reason, emitter temperatures in the range T = 280 − 340◦ C are suggested so
that the viscosity is low enough for the polymer melt to
flow, but still high enough to result in continuous, fibers
of lower radii. The droplet ejection velocity u is not a
controllable parameter since it is a resultant of the competing (viscous, surface tension, and centrifugal) forces.
Typical range of collector radii for commercial candy
machines fall in the range RC ∼ 0.1 − 0.3 m. Naturally, larger the RC , the finer the fiber radii generated,
by virtue of Eq. 2. If constructing one’s own fabrication
system, one has the freedom to set RC to larger radii. We
have found RC ∼ 0.25 − 0.4 m worked best as they gave
sufficient distance for fibers to stretch and cool as they
traverse from emitter to collector. Furthermore, if one’s
emitter motor is unable to achieve high rpm, we suggest
a simple hybrid solution borrowed from electrospinning
to circumvent the problem. It was observed that at low
rpm ∼ 3000 − 4000 rpm, and RC ∼ 0.3 m, connecting
a car battery or laboratory power supply at 12 - 24V
DC (negative terminal to emitter and positive terminal
to collector with insulation between the two) generates a
DC electric field to add sufficient droplet acceleration to
stretch the fibers to desired radii. Irrespective of acceleration needs, the electric field also plays an indirect role
in enhancing the fabric’s surface charge characteristics,
as discussed later.

4.
3.

Electrocharging

Fluid Acceleration and Stretching

Fluid acceleration and stretching is the stage at which
the fibers are formed. Once the jets are generated,
they’re flung radially outwards and execute a spiral trajectory as shown in Fig. 2b before they’re deposited on
the collector surface. From Eq. 2, the mean fiber radius

Electrets – dielectric materials which exhibit an external electric field in the absence of an applied field – can
be broadly classified in two varieties, viz. space-charge or
real-charge electrets and dipolar or oriented-dipole electrets [29]. Real-charge electrets possess an injected or
embedded excess charge (of one or both polarities) within

7
the dielectric volume or at the surface; they are usually
manufactured via direct charge injection into the dielectric material. Dipolar electrets are formed by dipole orientation (polar groups) within the dielectric material and
are usually formed, or rather polarized, by applying an
electric field to the material either at an ambient temperature or by heating the material above its transition
temperature TT where dipoles become mobile. An alternative method is to employ charge injection techniques
on dipolar electrets where the embedded charge causes
dipole reorientation. The fundamental limitation to all
electret-charging methods is dielectric breakdown of the
polymer material or external medium, which depends on
the dielectric strength of a given material (typically of
order few MV/cm for polymers with charge densities of
a few tenths of µC.cm−2 ). The primary methods for electric charging of electrets include, Triboelectric charging,
Thermal charging, Isothermal charging, Electron and ion
beam charging and Photoelectret charging.
As the name suggests, triboelectric charging occurs
from charge transfer due to frictional contact between
dissimilar dielectric materials. Not only is this method
very unreliable as it requires intimate contact between
the two surfaces being charged, the present study does
not employ two different materials, hence triboelectric
charging does not apply here. Thermal charging involves
application of an external electric field to the polymer at
elevated temperatures, as occurs with the electrospinning
process. Even though PP and PP-PS materials used here
fall under the real-charge electret classification, application of a weak (12-24 V) DC electric field as described
in the previous subsection did enhance surface charge
characteristics as shown later. Electron and ion beam
charging involves low energy secondary electron cascade
resulting from scattering of the primary beam within the
dielectric bulk and is not generally efficient for non-woven
polymer fabrics of the kind explored here. On the other
hand high energy electron beams cause chemical damage
to most dielectric materials, hence not a suitable process
for present needs. The photoelectret process only applies
to charging of photoactive polymers and not relevant to
the current study.
The best results were obtained by Isothermal charging [30, 31]. In this method the polymer fabric is placed
between two electrodes maintained at high electric fields
(typically kilovolts and 100s of µA current). Although
this method may seem complicated due to requirement
of high voltages, it is in fact the easiest to achieve [32, 33].
Ionizing air purifiers used in homes and offices operate on
the isothermal charging principle, where they apply high
voltage to ionize or electrically charge air molecules to
attract charged dust particles, bacteria, and viruses. Air
ionizers come in two varieties – those generating negative
ions (anions) and electrostatic discharge (ESD) ionizers
(balanced ion generators). ESD ionizers should not be
used for iosthermal charging because not only do they not
impart charge, they in fact neutralize existing charges on
surfaces. The relevant ionizers suitable for electrocharg-

ing fabrics are anion generators. The present study used
an ionizing air purifier for home settings (Model NIP6E from Mystic Marvels LLC) operating at 9kV and 160
µA. Exposing the fabricated polymer fabric to isothermal charging for 10 minutes at a distance of 1 cm (0.1 m)
substantially enhanced their surface charge characteristics. Details of the charge characterization are presented
in the next section.

C.
1.

Fabrication Process
Setup and Material

Having outlined the primary control parameters for
the CC method and various ways to optimize them in
the design process, the basic fabrication process is now
explained. The dimensions and operating ranges naturally vary by user; the fabrication setup employed in
this study had emitter radius RE = 0.055 m, collector
radius RC = 0.35 m, and orifice radius rO = 254 µm
(2.54 × 10−4 m). The emitter heating element could be
adjusted to achieve temperatures up to T = 400◦ C, but
the operating temperature in this study was T = 285◦ C
for PP-PS and T = 300◦ C for PP. The emitter motor
could achieve a maximum rpm of 35000, but the emitter was run at 10000 - 12000 rpm, capable of yielding a
throughput of approximately 0.65 kg of fibers per hour.
The basic process steps are outlined in Fig. 4, also
see movie M1.mov in supplementary material for a brief
video of fiber generation process. Each fabrication run
used 12 grams of polymer as input, and the resulting
fibers were available in less than a minute. The fibers
scooped out from the collector wall had a concentric circular profile, which were then sandwiched between two
flat and clean surfaces at high pressure, this study employed 1 cm thick float glass plates, resulting in thin fabric sheets of 0.2 - 0.3 mm thickness. The values vary
with the collector dimensions, quantity of material used
per fabrication run, pressure applied to generate the final fabric sheet and are best worked out through trialand-error by each end user. Characterisation details for
fabrics are provided in the next section.

2.

Face Masks

Two approaches were followed to turn the fabricated
material into face masks. Lacking in-house capability to
stitch fabric layers into masks, in the first approach a
sheet of the electrocharged fabric manufactured by the
CC method was added to the inner surface of surgical
and PM2.5 face masks available commercially as shown
in Fig. 5 (a-c). Three different sets of tests were performed on these masks. The first, a control test, was
performed on the surgical masks in the condition they
were procured to measure their baseline filtration quality. In the second test, a sheet of the manufactured fab-

8

FIG. 4: (Color online) Fabrication flow process: Fibers generated in a modified cotton candy machine (see movie M1.mov in
supplementary material for brief movie of the process) could be scooped out as a concentric fiber fabric, which was sandwiched
and cut into individual sheets. The sheets were then subjected to isothermal charging with an air ionizer 1 cm from the fabric
for a 10 minute duration to improve the fabric’s static charge characteristics.

ric was added after intentionally bleeding the sheet of its
electrostatic charge with a static eliminator. The reason
for this second test was to discriminate between filtration
quality arising purely from the presence of an additional
porous layer without electrocharged filtration capability.
The final test was performed on a surgical mask with
an electrocharged fabric layer added to its inner surface.
In all three cases, the static electricity on the masks
before and after filtration tests were measured with a
non-contact electrostatic potentiometer (KSS-2000 Digital Electrostatic Potentiometer, Manufacturer: Kasuga
Denki Inc.). Whereas these filtration tests did show improvement in filtration quality due to addition of the electrocharged fabric layer, as is well known, the lack of tight
facial fit left gaps through which particles could easily
pass unfiltered.
In the second approach, face mask holders were 3D
printed from an open-source design known as the Montana Mask [34] as shown in Fig. 5(d-f)) to overcome
the deficiency of standard surgical masks in providing
a tight facial fit. The Stereolithography (STL) format
design files for the Montana Mask are publicly available
for download from Ref.[34]. One of the design features
that allows N95 FRs achieve superior filtration efficiency
of ≥ 95% is their ability to provide tight facial fit and prevent air from leaking through the interstitial gap between
the mask and skin during respiration. Mask holders
(fig. 5d) were manufactured on an Objet 500 3D printer
from the open source STL files [34]. The filter holder
shown in fig. 5e-f (front and back views, respectively)
with a square grid could hold a square patch roughly
5 cm × 5 cm in dimensions. Adding up to three electrocharged filtration layers resulted in the desired N95
filtration quality, but respiration became difficult with
5 layers because the fabricated layers were denser than
the layers present in commercial N95 FRs. These 3D
printed Montana masks were therefore limited to 4 electrocharged filtration layers for optimal respiratory comfort without sacrificing filtration quality. Table I lists the
mean densities (g.cm−3 ) obtained by dividing the measured weight by the dimensions of the samples for commercial fabrics and ones manufactured in-house. The

standard deviation is quoted over measurements for ten
samples of each material, except for the N95 FR for which
only one sample was used. All values are rounded off to
second decimal place, and the raw data is available at
Ref. [35]. The variability is higher in fabrics manufactured in-house, and that is to be expected strict quality
control processes possible in industrial methods were not
permissible in the in-house fabrication method.
V.

CHARACTERISATION

Following details of the design rules and fabrication
process, characterisation studies performed on the fabricated electrocharged material and resulting face masks
are now presented for the structural, charge retention,
and filtration properties of fabrics and masks developed
in-house. Recognizing that knowledge of their properties
were not meaningful by themselves, the same tests were
performed on a NIOSH-certified commercial N95 FR to
serve as the benchmark against which to compare the
quality of our fabrics and masks.
A.

Structure

Structural properties of the electrocharged filtration
fabrics were studied using scanning electron microscopy
(SEM). As a preparatory step, platinum-palladium sputter coating deposition was performed on the fabric sample surfaces for SEM visualization, followed by interrogation under a scanning electron microscope (Quanta 250
FEG, Manufacturer: FEI Thermo Fisher) at 2 kV acceleration voltage.
Figure 6 presents scanning electron micrographs for
electrocharged fabrics. In qualitative terms, the N95 electrocharged fabric layer (fig. 6a) seems structurally similar to PP (fig. 6b) and PP-PS (fig. 6c) fabrics in terms of
obtaining a heterogeneous, non-woven fabric of enmeshed
fibers. This heterogeneous structure results from fluctuations in fiber trajectories arising from the individual forcing conditions, viz. acceleration under DC electric field

9

FIG. 5: (Color online) (a) Standard surgical masks (typical dimensions 9 cm × 16 cm) were (b) reinforced with an electrocharged
filtration layer (5 cm × 10 cm) fabricated in-house and attached to mask’s inner surface to improve filtration efficiency upon
(c) wearing the mask. Montana Mask holders with tight facial fit with (d) placement design for Object 500 3D printer and the
(e) front and (f) back view of finished Montana Mask, to hold square (5 cm × 5 cm) patches of electrocharged filtration fabric
(3 layers per mask) to achieve N95 filtration quality.

TABLE I: Electrocharged fabric densities, data available at Ref. [35]
Material
Density (g.cm−3 ): Mean ± Stdev.
N95 FR
0.45
Surgical mask
0.38 ± 0.03
Isotactic PP
0.73 ± 0.09
PP-PS
0.63 ± 0.09

in electrospinning, hot air jet in case of melt blowing,
and centrifugal forcing for the CC method. The qualitative similarity in fabric heterogeneity obtained by CC
method (fig. 6b and c) relative to N95 electrocharged fabric (fig. 6a) presumably manufactured via melt blowing
was therefore very encouraging.
A cursory inspection suggests the commercial N95 FR
fabric’s fibers were slightly more tortuous relative to PP
fabric, and less tortuous than PP-PS fibers. To understand the qualitative difference in fiber tortuosity, it is
recalled that PP melt forms crystalline fibers whereas
PS is a glass. PP fibers are therefore expected to result
in linear, crystalline fibers relative to PS fibers which
freeze into tortuous structures as the molten fluid undergoes glass transition under cooling and viscosity abruptly
shoots up. Within PP, isotactic PP is more crystalline
than low crystallinity PP obtained from discarded plastic
containers. It is therefore important to ascertain how degree of crystallinity affects tortuosity or other structural
characteristics. Fiber tortuosity is expected to impact

the fabric’s porosity. Though porosity could not be measured directly, filtration tests did present a small measurable difference between isotactic PP and PP-PS fabrics,
which may be attributed to charge characteristics rather
than porosity.
Figure 7 presents scanning electron micrographs for
low crystallinity PP (fig. 7a) and PS (fig. 7b) fabrics.
Firstly, a comparison of isotactic PP (fig. 6b) and low
crystallinity PP (fig. 7a) fabrics manufactured under similar conditions shows both fibers are relatively linear.
However, low crystallinity PP fibers possess a more uniform and thicker radius and its fibers are more linear than
isotactic PP fibers. When manufactured under similar
conditions, mean fiber radii for low crystalline PP were
almost twice that of isotactic PP (see Table II). This implies, the presence of crystalline order, be it low or high,
is sufficient to obtain relatively linear fibers whereas the
degree of crystallinity determines the average fiber radius
under identical fabrication conditions (temperature and
rpm).

10

FIG. 6: (Color online) Scanning electron micrographs for electrocharged fabrics from (a) a commercial N95 FR, (b) isotactic
Polypropylene (PP) fabricated in-house, and (c) Low crystallinity Polypropylene - Polystyrene (PP-PS) blend fabricated inhouse. High resolution images available at Ref. [35]

A comparison of scanning electron micrographs for low
crystallinity PP (fig. 7a) and PS (fig. 7b) shows PS fibers
are far more tortuous owing to their glassy nature, albeit
with less variability in fiber radius (see Table II). Combining the two materials in different proportions helps
control the fiber tortuosity, and therefore the porosity,
as done in this study which used 80% low crystalline
PP with 20% PS by weight (fig 6c). Commercial N95
FR fabrics most likely use a proprietary mix of polymers to control porosity and charge retention, but the
specific materials and their percentages are not available
in the public domain. The mean and standard deviation of the fiber radii obtained from image analysis using
ImageJ open source software of the scanning electron micrographs for all material combinations investigated are
listed in Table II. High resolution images for scanning
electron micrographs presented in fig. 7 and fig. 8 are
available at Ref. [35].

B.

Filtration

Setup: Filtration tests for face mask certification are
usually performed on specialized equipment such as the
Portacount Respirator Fit-Tester and MITA 8120, both
from TSI Inc. or AccuFIT 9000 from Accutec-IHS Inc.
Lacking access to such special testing system and its nonaffordability, a filtration testing system was designed inhouse as shown in fig. 8. A manikin head used in retail
store fronts was drilled with a hole from its mouth to
the back of its head. The face mask under test was then
mounted onto the manikin head’s face and placed in a
confining box. An inexpensive piezeoelectric atomizer
(APGTEK Aluminum Mist Maker) usually employed in
home decoration was submerged in Sodium Chloride solution (5% by weight NaCl in de-ionized water) to generate aerosol particles. The generated mist was exposed
to negative ion air purifier to charge the aerosol particles for some of the tests. The mist could pass through
a pipe with a second connecting pipe open to ambient
air as shown in fig. 8 and both pipes had valves to help
control the total aerosol concentration in the air entering

the confining box.
A portable PM2.5 air quality monitor (Manufacturer:
Dienmern) used normally for home and office air quality
monitoring was placed in the confining box (Monitor A
in fig. 8) to measure the particle concentration within the
box. By reading this PM2.5 monitor, the two inlet valves
were adjusted for aerosol mist and ambient air to control
aerosol concentration in the confining box. The back of
the manikin head was connected to a pipe which exited
the confining box and terminated in a box containing a
second PM2.5 air quality monitor (Monitor B in fig. 8).
This monitor gave reading of particles that had passed
through the fabric and manikin mouth and allowed measurement of filtration quality. This box containing the
second PM2.5 monitor was, in turn connected to a vacuum pump as shown in fig. 8. When the vacuum pump
was turned on, a suction pressure was felt in the confining box and aerosol particles mixed with ambient air
were sucked into the confining box and passed through
the face mask to enter the drilled hole in the manikin
head and exited the confining box. By controlling the
vacuum pump valve, one was able to simulate flow rates
for normal (30 liters per minute) and high (85 liters per
minute) respiration rates.
The general ambient conditions under which all filtration tests were conducted are now specified before explaining some of the design shortcomings of the homedesigned filtration test setup. The lab temperature during all tests was maintained at 23 ◦ C ± 2◦ C and relative
humidity of 43%. The relative humidity within the filtration test setup’s confining box was however higher due to
aerosol presence at 58%. The area of fabric samples used
for surgical masks (SM) was 9 cm × 16 cm with the electrocharged filtration layer occupying an area of 5 cm × 10
cm, where as the fabric area in the 3D printed montana
mask was 5 cm × 5 cm. The aerosol number concentration at 30 L/min flow rate was 1.7 × 108 particles per
cm3 and at 85 L/min flow rate was 1.25 × 108 particles
per cm3 , providing high enough aerosol concentration.
Two tests were performed to study time to failure, i.e.
the total duration from test commencement after which
filtration started to deteriorate and varied between 14.5

11

FIG. 7: (Color online) Scanning electron micrographs for electrocharged fabrics manufactured in-house with (a) Low crystallinity
Polypropylene and (b) Polystyrene. High resolution images available at Ref. [35]

TABLE II: Electrocharged fabric fiber diameters
Material
Radius: Mean ± Stdev (µm)
N95 FR
4.1 ± 4.7
Isotactic PP
4.54 ± 6.2
PP-PS
4.9 ± 5.1
Low crystallinity PP
9.63 ± 2.4
PS
18.5 ± 2.8

with NaCl test agent at 85 liters per minute flow rate
and inhalation resistance (maximum pressure drop across
mask) of ≤ 343 Pa and exhalation resistance of ≤ 245
Pa [3]. The filtration test setup developed in-house had
no means to measure the pressure drop nor could one
simulate the oscillatory respiratory air flow from inhalation and exhalation and the scheme could only generate
steady suction flow.

FIG. 8: (Color online) Filtration test setup schematic.

hours (for PP fabrics) to 17 hours (for PP-PS blend). As
a comparison commercial N95 FRs failed after 22 hours.
NIOSH certification standard for N95 FRs requires use of
neutrally charged sodium chloride solution (10% NaCl in
water). However the filtration tests in the current study
had a dual role, firstly to demonstrate the efficacy of
electrocharged filtration, and secondly to test the filtration efficiency itself. To demonstrate the efficacy of electrocharged filtration, independent tests were conducted
with aerosol particles that were charged and charge neutralized for N95 FR and the 3D printed Montana Mask
design.
Design shortcomings: It is emphasized that this filtration test setup does not conform to some of the stringent
testing specifications employed in face piece respirator
certification. For instance, NIOSH 42 CFR Part 84 standard for N95 FRs requires filter performance of ≥ 95%

An important quantity in face mask filtration quality
testing is the Most Penetrating Particle Size (MPPS);
MPPS for N95 FRs is 300 nm or 0.3 µm. An important
shortcoming of the filtration test setup detailed here is
that it cannot provide a size distribution of aerosol particles generated by the relatively inexpensive piezoelectric atomizer. Secondly, commercial respirator testing
systems use laser-based particle counter sensors that are
sensitive to detection of particles below the MPPS value
down to about 100 nm. The PM2.5 air quality monitors,
as their name suggests, are rated for measuring particles
as small as 2.5 µm. Be that as it may, PM2.5 monitors
also employ the same laser-based particle counter sensors
and do hold the capability to detect particles down to 0.3
µ. Although a proper verification was not possible, it is
reasonable to assume the PM2.5 monitors could detect
particles at least down to 0.3 µm diameter.
Test Results: FR filtration efficiency is usually measured in terms of the penetration percentage (P), defined
as percentage of particles present in the environment that
pass through the FRs and is quoted against the particle
diameters. Since particle sizes could not be measured by
the PM2.5 monitors, the penetration is instead defined

12

FIG. 9: Filtration test results showing penetration P(t) (%)
versus time (hours) over 12 hour duration for (a) N95 FR with
charged (open black symbols) and neutral (filled black symbols) aerosols at 30 L/min (circles) and 85 L/min (squares)
flow rate and (b) commercial surgical mask (SM) taped (filled
black symbols) and not taped (open black symbols) around
manikin head at 30 L/min (upright triangles) and 85 L/min
(inverted triangles).

as:
P (t) =

CB (t)
× 100%
CA (t)

(3)

where CA (t) and CB (t) are the particle concentrations of
PM2.5 monitors A and B respectively at time t. The penetration as a function of time was followed to study any
deterioration in filtration properties. The PM2.5 monitors A and B were connected to a laptop and programmed
to record concentration values at 15 minute intervals over
a duration of 12 hours. Raw time series data for all filtration tests presented in fig. 9 and fig. 10 and Table III
are available at Ref. [35].
The first tests were performed on commercial N95 FR
and surgical masks (SMs) to obtain baseline calibration
readings on the filtration test setup designed in-house,
which would then form the comparative standard for
tests performed on filtration fabrics manufactured with
the CC method. Since a tight facial fit for N95 FR is often emphasized, the test N95 FR was taped with a mask
tape on to the manikin face and performed separate tests
using aerosol particles that were both charged and charge
neutral. On the other hand, baseline SM calibration tests
were performed only with neutrally charged aerosol particles, but with and without mask tape applied for tight
facial fit. Figure 9 shows the results for the baseline com-

mercial N95 FR and SM tests. A few details that are
known among filtration research community are immediately apparent. Firstly, N95 FR filters out more than
95% of the particles at both 30 and 85 L/min flow rates
(see fig. 9a). Secondly, a small but measurable difference
in penetration percentage is clearly observable between
charged (1 - 2% penetration) and neutral (∼ 3% penetration) aerosol particles. Finally, no measurable dependence on flow rate could be observed for the N95 FR.
The SM results were in stark contrast with the N95
FR. Firstly, emphasis on the importance of tight facial
fit becomes immediately apparent from fig. 9b. When
no tape was applied to close the interstitial gap between
the face and mask, the penetration was nearly 50% at 85
L/min and around 40% at 35 L/min implying substantial
leakage. Taping the mask around the manikin face drastically brought down the penetration percentage values
to around 12% at both flow rates, thereby underscoring
the importance of tight facial fit in filtration masks and
respirators. Secondly, even after applying tape to close
the gap between face and mask, the penetration value
of around 12% was still higher than the N95 standard
of ≤ 5%. The reason for this discrepancy lies in the
fact that SM fabrics do not employ electrocharged layers
and rely entirely on inertial impaction and diffusion to
achieve filtration, thus underscoring the importance of
the electrocharged filtration mechanism.
Following these baseline tests, results are presented
for tests performed on the two mask designs using isotactic PP fabrics. Figure 10a presents results for the
first design where a filtration fabric layer manufactured
in-house was placed on the inner side of a commercial
surgical mask (SM). Tests were performed using an electrocharged layer as well as a fabric layer whose charge was
depleted with a static eliminator as described earlier. All
tests were performed by taping the SM to the manikin
head. From fig. 10a it is seen that commercial SM with
non-electrocharged layer exhibits the same penetration
percentage of around 12% at both flow rates (30 and 85
L/min) and the results are statistically identical to ones
shown in fig. 10b for taped masks. However, adding the
electrocharged filtration layer leads to a marked decrease
in penetration of aerosol particles down to around 7%
at both flow rates. Unfortunately though, at 7% penetration, it still falls short of the N95 FR requirement of
≤ 5%. Be that as it may, at just 7% penetration the
proposed solution of an electrocharged fabric layer in a
commercial SM provides ample protection for people using face masks in non-critical settings, but falls short of
protection deemed necessary for say, emergency response
and healthcare services.
Figure 10b presents filtration test results for the 3D
printed Montana mask design meant to achieve the N95
FR tight facial fit. Four electrocharged filtration fabric
layers of 0.2 - 0.3 mm thickness each were employed here.
Charged aerosol particles exhibited slightly less penetration at 3.6% (30 L/min) and 4.35% (85 L/min) relative
to neutral aerosols with 4.6% (30 L/min) and 5.2% (85

13

FIG. 10: Penetration P(t) (%) versus time (hours) for (a) PP fabric mounted on a taped SM (b) PP fabric mounted on 3D
printed Montana mask holder, (c) PP-PS fabric mounted on a taped SM, and (d) PP-PS fabric mounted on a 3D printed
Montana mask holder.

L/min). This trend is similar to one observed for commercial N95 FR in fig. 10a, but the penetration values for
fabrics manufactured using the CC method were unfortunately slightly higher than commerical N95 FR. The penetration values do fall within the 5% requirement for the
N95 standard for all cases except neutral aerosols at 85
L/min, which misses the target by a meagre 0.16%. However, in natural work settings, one expects to be exposed
to both charged and neutral aerosols. Therefore, when
taken together, the mean penetration for all aerosols at
30 L/min flow rate is 4.12% and at 85 L/min is 4.86%,
i.e. just below the 5% penetration requirement. Ergo, the
3D printed Montana mask design fit with electrocharged
filtration fabrics barely manages to meet the N95 standard, but it is emphasized once again that the test for
pressure drop across the filtration fabrics could not be
measured nor could the oscillatory inhalation-exhalation
cycles present in normal respiration be simulated with
the in-house filtration test setup.
Filtration tests were also performed under identical
conditions using PP-PS fabrics. Figure 10c shows results for SMs with and without PP-PS electrocharged
fabric layer and should be compared against PP results
in fig. 10a. The penetration percentages were identical at both flow rates for the non-electrocharged layer,
suggesting the slightly higher tortuosity in PP-PS fabric
(fig. 7c) relative to PP fabric (fig. 7b) had no measurable
impact on filtration quality. However, SM with PP-PS
electrocharged filtration layer performed marginally better by ∼ 1% (fig. 10c compared to identical test with PP
fabric (fig. 10a). A similar improvement in penetration
percentage was also observed for the 3D printed Montana mask design (see fig. 10d). Tests for both charged

and neutral aerosols at 30 as well as 85 L/min flow
rate yielded penetration values in the same range of 3
- 4%, modulo the variability one observes in the data
(fig. 10c). Ergo, the PP-PS fabrics surpassed the N95
requirement to within the testing limitations. Since the
minor structural differences (tortuosity) between PP and
PP-PS tests did not show any difference, it can only be
surmised that the higher performance of PP-PS fabrics
(relative to PP) comes from electrocharging as is confirmed in the following subsection. The mean penetration and standard deviation are listed for all our tests
in Table III, with all values rounded off to the second
decimal place.
Nanoparticle filtration test: An important question
that arose was if the masks were capable of trapping individual viral particles, such as the SARS-Cov-2 virion.
The SARS-Cov-2 virion is estimated to have a diameter
between 50 - 200 nm. More precisely, Ref. [36] places
the SARS-Cov-2 virion of order 70 - 90 nm and Ref. [37]
places it at 50 - 200 nm. Although MPPS for N95 FRs
is set at 300 nm (0.3 µm), some studies have suggested
MPPS for N95 FRs occurs in the range of 40 - 60 nm
[38, 39]. In particular, experiments by Balazy et al [38]
using MS2 virion – bacteriophage with single-stranded
RNA comprising 3569 nucleotides that infects male E.
Coli bacteria – with an approximate diameter of 27.5
nm shows that N95 FRs can achieve superlative filtration for particle diameters smaller than its rated MPPS.
This indicates that N95 FRs would perform equally well
at trapping an individual SARS-Cov-2 virion with lower
bound on diameter roughly 1.5 times that of MS2.
Having placed the approximate range for the SARSCov-2 virion, the next question is if the SARS-Cov-2

14
TABLE III: Penetration percentage values measured from filtration tests. Raw time series for all data are available at Ref. [35]
Material
Penetration (%): Mean ± Stdev
N95 FR Charged (30 L/min) [Fig. 9a]
1.43 ± 0.03
N95 FR Neutral (30 L/min) [Fig. 9a]
3.29 ± 0.02
N95 FR Charged (85 L/min) [Fig. 9a]
1.54 ± 0.03
N95 FR Neutral (85 L/min [Fig. 9a]
3.37 ± 0.03
SM No Tape (30 L/min) [Fig. 9b]
40.72 ± 0.85
SM Taped (30 L/min) [Fig. 9b]
11.98 ± 0.73
SM No Tape (85 L/min) [Fig. 9b]
47.18 ± 0.45
SM Taped (85 L/min) [Fig. 9b]
13.13 ± 0.57
PP: SM + Non-Electrocharged Layer (30 L/min) [Fig. 10a]
12.04 ± 0.26
PP: SM + Non-Electrocharged Layer (85 L/min) [Fig. 10a]
12.26 ± 0.31
PP: SM + Electrocharged Layer (30 L/min) [Fig. 10a]
7.19 ± 0.32
PP: SM + Electrocharged Layer (85 L/min) [Fig. 10a]
7.3 ± 0.37
PP: 3D Charged (30 L/min) [Fig. 10b]
3.62 ± 0.13
PP: 3D Neutral (30 L/min) [Fig. 10b]
4.65 ± 0.2
PP: 3D Charged (85 L/min) [Fig. 10b]
4.34 ± 0.17
PP: 3D Neutral (85 L/min) [Fig. 10b]
5.14 ± 0.27
PP-PS: SM + Non-Electrocharged Layer (30 L/min) [Fig. 10c]
12.31 ± 0.31
PP-PS: SM + Non-Electrocharged Layer (85 L/min) [Fig. 10c]
12.1 ± 0.24
PP-PS: SM + Electrocharged Layer (30 L/min) [Fig. 10c]
6.67 ± 0.19
PP-PS: SM + Electrocharged Layer (85 L/min) [Fig. 10c]
6.22 ± 0.22
PP-PS: 3D Charged (30 L/min) [Fig. 10d]
2.97 ± 0.22
PP-PS: 3D Neutral (30 L/min) [Fig. 10d]
3.53 ± 0.25
PP-PS: 3D Charged (85 L/min) [Fig. 10d]
3.17 ± 0.29
PP-PS: 3D Neutral (85 L/min) [Fig. 10d]
3.48 ± 0.25

virion possesses a surface electric charge that permits it
to get attracted to an electrocharged filtration layer. The
net charge would be determined by the sum of the charges
exposed on the viron surface and can be calculated from
the protein structure(s) at the surface. However, in order
for the virus to be trapped by the electrocharged filters,
there are two small issues to contend. Firstly, individual
SARS-Cov-2 virions are not likely to be airborne. Instead, like most enveloped viruses, it is hydrated or in
solution and is transmitted by aerosol droplets. When
dehydrated, the virion’s lipid membrane collapses and
its proteins become denatured within a certain time, depending on temperature etc., i.e., it is rendered inactive.
Despite the low probability of encountering individual
SARS-Cov-2 virions, it was a question still worthy of an
investigative test.
Secondly, the net charge of a protein in solution (water, typically) depends on the pH. Every amino acid has
a pKa (the log of the acid dissociation constant), which
is an equilibrium constant indicating the pH at which the
charges are balanced (net neutral). There are pKa values
for each chemical group. If the pH is lower than the pKa,
that amino acid becomes protonated, if it can. At low
pH, there is an abundance of positively charged protons.
Even some acids can become protonated at low pH. One
can approximate the net charge of a linear peptide from

its sequence and by providing a pH for the solvent using
tools on the web (e.g. see Ref. [40]) one can arrive at an
estimate for surface charge. However, this does not take
into account that structures are folded in 3D and some
charges are hidden inside. Although it is only a rough
value, it does still provide an estimate because residues
buried inside are often hydrophobic, i.e. not charged.
There are several online tools available to calculate net
charges of folded protein structures as well as their surface charge distribution, e.g. DELPHI [41]. The isoelectric point pI is the pH at which the net charge is neutral.
Below the pI, the net charge is positive, above it is negative. Ref. [42] lists some examples of viruses, most of
their pIs being < 7, suggesting that most viruses would
be net negatively charged at neutral pH, thus suggesting that the COVID-19 virion is also net negative. The
main surface protein for SARS-Cov-2 is the spike protein [43]. It is glycosylated, thus has some amino acids,
mostly arginines, chemically attached to sugars that can
be charged, like sialic acid, which would also contribute
to an overall negative charge. When the sequence of the
spike 6VXX is input into Ref. [44], a pI=5.8 is obtained,
thus net negative.
Commercial filtration test systems permit detection of
individual virion penetration as these systems can identify particle diameters. In the absence of such a system,

15
and lacking knowledge of handling even inactive virions,
a surrogate technique using fluorescent tagged nanoparticles was employed. Polystyrene nanospheres fluorescently tagged with Dragon Green (480 nm Absorption
wavelength, 520 nm Emission wavelength) with mean diameter 50 nm ± 10 nm (Manufacturer Bangs Labs, Catalog No. FSDG001, Lot No. 14092) were used as a substitute for the SARS-Cov-2 virion. Since the polystyrene
nanospheres were to mimic virions, the aqueous solution
was first dried and the nanoparticle dust was exposed to a
brief burst of coronal discharge. Unsure whether coronal
discharge exposure would dissociate fluorescent markers
off the surface of the nanoparticles, a quick fluorescene
test was performed and confirmed that the fluorescent
nanoparticles performed to specification.
The filtration test was performed on the 3D mask design with nanoparticle dust replacing the mist generator
in fig. 9. Measurement of penetration was meaningless as
the PM2.5 monitors could detect dust particles from ambient air entering the confining box. Instead, the test was
conducted at 30 L/min flow rate for one hour duration
and then the electrocharged filtration layers were interrogated under a confocal microscope (Nikon Andor Revolution WD spinning disk confocal, Laser wavelength 455
nm) for fluorescence signals from the trapped nanoparticles, if any. Figure 11 presents the fluorescence emission
signal from polystyrene particles trapped along fiber surfaces of the electrocharged layer as measured under the
confocal at a depth of 500 nm from the outer surface (exposed to the environment). It is observed that the fluorescence signal occurs in clusters because the nanoparticles were not dispersed in aqueous solution as usually
done in experiments. Instead the solution was dried to
obtain nanodust that comprised clumps of particles, or
alternatively it is possible the charged particles were preferentially attracted to charge centers that acted as traps
and begs further future investigation. This was a proof of
principle test to check whether the electrocharged fabrics
were capable of trapping charged particles of dimensions
comparable to the SARS-Cov-2 virion, and further quantitative analysis was not undertaken for the purposes of
the current study.

C.

Charge

Electrostatic charge measurements were made with a
non-contact electrostatic potentiometer (KSS-2000 Digital Electrostatic Potentiometer, Manufacturer: Kasuga
Denki Inc.) with a piezoelectric transducer capable of
measuring electrostatic voltage at a distance of 50 -100
nm from the sample. The measurement readings for various fabric samples are listed in Table IV. The mean and
standard deviation are taken over a set of 100 measurements conducted at various locations on several samples
of each fabric material.
The commercial N95 FR fabric material which serves
as the comparative standard for this study clearly holds

FIG. 11: (Color online) Confocal image of fluorescence emission signal from polystyrene nanospheres trapped along fiber
surfaces at a depth of 500 nm from the outer surface of the
electrocharged filtration layer exposed to the environment.

the highest electrostatic potential at 11.1 ± 0.9 kV (see
Table IV. The electrostatic potential quoted here for the
commercial N95 FR was measured after extracting the
electrocharged fabric layer sandwiched between the neutral outer layers. For this reason, the value quoted here
will be higher than the actual potential an aerosol or dust
particle experiences because of the outer neutral layer
forming a dielectric barrier between the electrocharged
layer and ambient environment. Be that as it may, for
purposes of this study, the electrostatic potential of the
commercial N95 FR’s bare electrocharged layer forms
the right comparative standard for fabrics manufactured
with the CC method. SM fabrics had the lowest electrostatic potential at 0.4 ± 0.3 kV (see Table IV) and were
practically neutral given the standard deviation (0.3 kV)
nearly equals the mean (0.4 kV) electrostatic potential.
With the commercial N95 FR’s electrocharged layer
and SM fabrics as the two bounds of the comparative
standard, it becomes possible to establish a correspondence between the electrostatic potential and filtration
efficiency for all the fabrics studied here. Firstly, the
measured electrostatic potential listed in Table IV shows
PS fabrics possess more charge than isotactic PP fabrics, as is established by prior independent measurements
[45]. Although both PP and PS are poor conductors in
pure form, PS molecules have benzene rings which improve charge concentration of PS molecules [46], this is
not so for PP molecules which do not possess the benzene ring. However, several extraneous factors such as
purity, thermal treatment (recrystallization in PP versus
physical aging in PS) etc. also influence charge retention. Indeed, it is known that N95 FR electrocharged

16
TABLE IV: Electrostatic potential of various fabric samples.
Material
Electrostatic potential (kV)
N95 FR
11.1 ± 0.9
SM
0.4 ± 0.3
PP
5.3 ± 0.44
Isothermal charged PP
7.4 ± 0.23
PS
8.1 ± 0.28
Isothermal charged PS
10.8 ± 0.41
PP-PS
8.4 ± 0.36
Isothermal charged PP-PS
10.1 ± 0.3

layers embed dopants [47, 48] for charge enhancement,
particularly in polypropylene. Fabrication with simple
materials and methods being the design strategy, such
charge enhancement using dopants was not explored in
the present work.
Secondly, isothermal charging of the manufactured fabric certainly increases the electrostatic potential of all
samples by roughly 25% (for PP-PS) to 40% (for isotactic PP) thereby establishing the efficacy of the secondary
isothermal charging step employed in the present study.
Finally, a one-to-one correspondence is observed between
electrostatic potential and filtration efficiency obtained
from the penetration tests. The difference in filtration efficiency we observed between the PP and PP-PS samples
could not be attributed to slight structural difference in
tortuosity of the fiber porous matrix, but PP-PS fabrics
hold higher electrostatic potential than PP fibers. This
explains why PP-PS 3D printed Montana mask respirators consistently met the N95 requirement of ≤ 5% penetration, whereas PP 3D printed Montana masks could
barely meet the requirement, with especially neutral particles falling slightly above the requirement.

VI.

CONCLUSIONS

In summary, a set of general design principles have
been presented to construct one’s own fabrication setup
and manufacture of electrocharged filtration fabrics using
the CC principle, together with some potential designs
to use these filtration fabrics in face masks. In doing so,
attention has been paid to utilising commonly available
materials and easily replicable methods using two commonly available candidate materials, viz. PP and PS and
their blends.
Electrocharged filtration fabrics must meet two
requirements, structural heterogeneity for filtration
through inertial impaction and diffusion, and high charge
retention for electrocharged filtration. Fabric heterogeneity comes in several forms and includes a non-woven fabric comprised of fibers enmeshed in a random manner,
fiber tortuosity which affects the fabric porosity, and variability of fiber radii which control the surface to volume
ratio. The CC method can easily achieve a disordered

non-woven fabric of enmeshed fibers, but tortuosity and
variability of fiber radii is a material dependent parameter that enters via operating temperature. Whereas
isotactic PP fabrics exhibited all three forms of heterogeneity (fiber radius 4.54 ± 6.2 µm), they possessed less
charge (5.3 ± 0.44 kV without and 7.4 ± 0.23 kV with
isothermal charging) relative to PS fabrics (8.1 ± 0.28 kV
without and 10.8 ± 0.41 kV with isothermal charging).
On the other hand PS fabrics resulted in thicker fiber
radii of lower variability (18.5 ± 2.8 µm), albeit with
higher tortuosity than PP fabrics. Achieving an optimal
mix of heterogeneity and charge retention by blending
PP and PS (fiber radii 4.9 ± 5.1 µm and charge of 8.4
± 0.36 kV without and 10.1 ± 0.3 kV with isothermal
charging) resulted in fabrics that were able to meet the
N95 FR standard (fiber radii 4.1 ± 4.7 µm and electrostatic potential 11.1 ± 0.9 kV), at least within the limitations of the filtration test setup designed and constructed
in-house.
The current work maintained exclusive focus towards
providing a proof of principle for the process and underlying mechanics of the CC principle as a viable method
for fabrication of electrocharged filtration fabrics. Further work to be explored in future includes researching
more commonly available fabric materials, such as Poly
Ethylene Terepthalate, universally available as PET bottles for beverages, and Biaxially-oriented Poly Ethylene
Terepthalate (BoPET), better known as Mylar and available as plastic bags and food wrapping. A more detailed characterisation of the structural and electrocharging properties of fabrics obtained via the CC method is
also needed. Another avenue that begs exploration is the
introduction of metallic nanoparticles at the fabrication
stage to embed them into fabrics for charge enhancement,
and possibly even decontamination, without endangering
users as these fabrics are meant to be worn around mouth
and nose for safe respiration.
Although the COVID-19 pandemic provided the impetus for the current effort, face masks may well become a
mainstay of human social interactions going forward. On
order of two viruses jump across from animals to humans
per year [49] with most animals exhibiting viral richness
showing propensity for close human contact [50]. If even
a small fraction of those viruses result in asymptomatic

17
viral shedding in human exhalation (breathing, coughing,
or sneezing) [51], face mask protection at the population
level becomes a necessary means of protection. Decentralized local manufacture of face masks with high filtration efficiency from commonly available materials and
simple designs could potentially alleviate global supply
chain disruptions during such times, as witnessed during
the COVID-19 pandemic [52]. It is hoped that this effort
will help communities with face mask protection during
such pandemics.

MMB first learned about the cotton candy method from a
passing remark by Dr. L. Mahadevan in 2010. MMB acknowledges advice from Dr. M. Wolf on COVID-19 surface charge characteristics, Dr. S. Ghosh on using PM2.5
air quality monitors for filtration testing, and help from
Dr. K. Deasy with 3D printing, N. Ishizu with Scanning Electron Microscopy and Dr. H. B. Kang for characterisation, and OIST Imaging section with Confocal
Microscopy. Dr. S. Velankar is gratefully acknowledged
for critical reading of the manuscript and several helpful
suggestions for its improvement.

Acknowledgments

This work was supported by the Nonlinear and Nonequilibrium Physics Unit, OIST Graduate University.

[1] https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/
prevent-getting-sick/diy-cloth-face-coverings.
html.
[2] https://www.cdc.gov/niosh/npptl/topics/
respirators/disp_part/N95list1.html.
[3] https://multimedia.3m.com/mws/media/1791500O/
comparison-ffp2-kn95
-n95-filtering-facepiece-respirator-classes-tb.
pdf.
[4] J. J. Rogalski, C. W. M. Bastiaansen, and T. Peijs,
Nanocomposites 3, 97 (2017).
[5] P. Mellado, H. A. McIlwee, M. R. Badrossamay, J. A.
Goss, L. Mahadevan, and K. K. Parker, Appl. Phys. Lett.
99, 203107 (2011).
[6] W. H. Revoir and C. T. Bien, Respiratory Protection
Handbook (Lewis Publisher, New York, 1995).
[7] Reusability of Facemasks During an Influenza Pandemic:
Facing the Flu (Institute of Medicine, The National
Academies Press, Washington, D. C., 2006).
[8] A. Konda, A. Prakash, G. A. Moss, M. Schmoldt, G. D.
Grant, and S. Guha, ACS Nano 14, 6339 (2020).
[9] A. Davies, K. A. Thompson, K. Giri, G. Kafatos, J. Walter, and A. Bennett, Disaster Med. Public Health Prep.
7, 413 (2013).
[10] E. R. Frederick, J. Air Pollution Control Assoc. 23, 1164
(1974).
[11] W. E. Teo and S. Ramakrishna, Nanotechnology 17, R89
(2006).
[12] Q. P. Pham, U. Sharma, and A. G. Mikos, Tissue Engg.
12, 1197 (2006).
[13] Z. M. Huang, Y. Z. Zhang, M. Kotaki, and S. Ramakrishna, Composites Sci. and Tech. 63, 2223 (2003).
[14] J. D. Schiffman and C. L. Schauer, Polymer Reviews 48,
317 (2008).
[15] I. S. Chronakis, J. Mat. Proc. Tech. 167, 283 (2005).
[16] D. M. Hutmacher and P. D. Dalton, Chemistry 6, 44
(2011).
[17] P. D. Dalton, D. Grafahrend, K. Klinkhammer, D. Klee,
and M. Möller, Polymer 48, 6823 (2007).
[18] Y. Pu, J. Zheng, F. Chen, Y. Long, H. Wu, Q. Li,
X. Wang, and X. Ning, Polymers (Basel) 10, 959 (2018).
[19] H. Zhang, J. Liu, X. Zhang, C. Huang, and X. Jin, RSC

Advances 198, 7932 (2018).
[20] J. Drabek and M. Zatloukal, Phys. Fluids 31, 091301
(2019).
[21] G. Kellie, Advances in Technical Nonwovens (Woodhead
Publishing, Elsevier Ltd., 2016).
[22] D. Zhang, Advances in Filament Yarn Spinning of Textiles and Polymers (Cambridge, UK: Woodhead Publishing Ltd., 2014).
[23] M. R. Badrossamay, H. A. McIlwee, J. A. Goss, and K. K.
Parker, Nano Lett. 10, 2257 (2010).
[24] J. J. Rogalski, C. W. M. Bastiaansen, and T. Peijs, Fibers
6, 37 (2018).
[25] L. Wang, J. Shi, E. Secret, and Y. Chen, Microelectronic
Engg. 88, 1718 (2011).
[26] R. Wongpajan, S. Thumsorn, H. Inoya, M. Okoshi, and
H. Hamada, Fibers and Polymers 19, 135 (2018).
[27] K. J. Choi, J. E. Spruiell, J. F. Fellers, and L. C.
Wadsworth, Polym. Eng. Sci 28, 81 (1988).
[28] Y. Lee and L. C. Wadsworth, Polym. Eng. Sci. 30, 1413
(1990).
[29] G. M. Sessler, Electrets. Vol. 1 (Laplacian ress: Morgan
Hill, California, 1998).
[30] J. A. Giacometti and O. N. Oliveira, IEEE Trans. Elec.
Insulation 27, 924 (1992).
[31] S. Kumara, Y. V. Serdyuk, and S. M. Gubanski, IEEE
Trans. Dielectrics and Elec. Insulation 16, 726 (2009).
[32] P. Molinié, J. Electrostat. 45, 265 (1999).
[33] A. Kravtsov, H. Brünig, S. Zhandarov, and
R. Beyreuther, Adv. Polymer Tech. 19, 312 (2000).
[34] https://www.makethemasks.com/3d-printing.
[35] M. M. Bandi, Dryad, Data set https://doi.org/10.
5061/dryad.ffbg79crq (2020).
[36] J.-M. Kim, Y.-S. Chung, H. J. Jo, N.-J. Lee, M. S. Kim,
S. H. Woo, S. Park, J. W. Kim, H. M. Kim, and M.G. Han, Oosong Public Health and Res. Perspect. 11, 3
(2020).
[37] N. Chen, M. Zhou, X. Dong, J. Qu, F. Gong, Y. Han,
Y. Qiu, J. Wang, Y. Liu, Y. Wei, et al., Lancet 395, 507
(2020).
[38] A. Balazy, M. Toivola, T. Reponen, A. Podgórski,
A. Zimmer, and S. A. Grinshpun, Ann. of Occup. Hygiene 50, 259 (2006).

18
[39] S. Rengasamy, R. Verbofsky, W. P. King, and R. E. Shaffer, J. Int. Soc. Resp. Protection 24, 49 (2007).
[40] http://protcalc.sourceforge.net/.
[41] http://honig.c2b2.columbia.edu/delphi.
[42] B. Michen and T. Graule, J. Appl. Microbiology 109,
388 (2010).
[43] http://www.rcsb.org/structure/6VXX.
[44] http://isoelectric.org/calculate.php.
[45] G. Dodbiba, A. Shibayama, T. Miyazaki, and T. Fujita,
Mat. Trans. 44, 161 (2003).
[46] G. Wypych, Handbook of Polymers (Toronto, Canada:
ChemTec Publishing; 2nd Edition, 2016).
[47] H. Zhang, J. Liu, X. Zhang, C. Huang, and X. Jin, RSC
Advances 8, 7932 (2018).

[48] A. Kilic, E. Shim, and B. Pourdeyhimi, Aerosol Sci. and
Tech. 49, 666 (2015).
[49] M. E. J. Woolhouse, R. Howey, E. Gaunt, L. Reilly,
M. Chase-Topping, and N. Savill, Proc. R. Soc. B. 275,
2111 (2008).
[50] K. J. Olival, P. R. Hosseini, C. Zambrana-Torrelio,
N. Ross, T. L. Bogich, and P. Daszak, Nature 546, 646
(2017).
[51] C. Fraser, S. Riley, R. M. Anderson, and N. M. Ferguson,
Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. of the USA 101, 6146 (2004).
[52] A. et al. Molina, arXiv:2004.13494 [physics.app-ph]
(2020).

