Playing With Friends — The Importance of Social Play During
the COVID-19 Pandemic
Sebastian Cmentowski

Jens Krüger

sebastian.cmentowski@uni-due.de
High-Performance Computing
University of Duisburg-Essen
Duisburg, Germany

arXiv:2011.00264v1 [cs.HC] 31 Oct 2020

ABSTRACT
In early 2020, the virus SARS-CoV-2 evolved into a new pandemic,
forcing governments worldwide to establish social distancing measures. Consequently, people had to switch to online media, such as
social networks or videotelephony, to keep in touch with friends
and family. In this context, online games, combining entertainment
with social interactions, also experienced a notable growth. In our
work, we focused on the potential of games as a replacement for
social contacts in the COVID-19 crisis. Our online survey results
indicate that the value of games for social needs depends on individual gaming habits. Participants playing mostly multiplayer games
increased their playtime and mentioned social play as a key motivator. Contrarily, non-players were not motivated to add games
as communication channels. We deduce that such crises mainly
catalyze existing gaming habits.

CCS CONCEPTS
• Applied computing → Computer games; • Human-centered
computing → Empirical studies in collaborative and social
computing.

KEYWORDS
games; social play; COVID-19; social interactions
ACM Reference Format:
Sebastian Cmentowski and Jens Krüger. 2020. Playing With Friends — The
Importance of Social Play During the COVID-19 Pandemic. In Extended
Abstracts of the 2020 Annual Symposium on Computer-Human Interaction in
Play (CHI PLAY ’20 EA), November 2–4, 2020, Virtual Event, Canada. ACM,
New York, NY, USA, 4 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3383668.3419911

1

INTRODUCTION

In the first months of 2020, the world was struck by a new pandemic.
The virus SARS-CoV-2, causing the respiratory disease COVID-19,
first appeared in the Chinese province Hubei and quickly spread
worldwide. As a consequence of exponentially rising infection rates,
most countries imposed severe measures. The goal was to slow the
spread of the virus and protect the healthcare systems. These actions
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
CHI PLAY ’20 EA, November 2–4, 2020, Virtual Event, Canada
© 2020 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-7587-0/20/11. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3383668.3419911

jens.krueger@uni-due.de
High-Performance Computing
University of Duisburg-Essen
Duisburg, Germany
were mostly aimed at preventing situations in which people could
be close enough for droplet infection. The individual measures to
achieve social distancing ranged from using smaller working shifts
or home office to drastic steps such as curfews.
Even though the infection curve in many countries was successfully flattened, the lockdown of public life had widespread consequences. Above all, staying at home and limiting personal contacts
to a minimum reduced social interactions to online platforms. It is
no surprise that software providers for video-conferences, chats, or
social networks reported significant consumer growth. However,
this trend was also observed for another communication-intensive
media type: online gaming. For example, Verizon reported a 75%
increase in gaming usage in peak hours for the United States [18].
This trend could indicate that more people are using digital
games as communication media to keep in touch with their friends.
For instance, Jones describes her gaming activities in her autoethnography as an opportunity to "cement social engagement with
a wider group of friends" [8]. Even though social play [6] is a
well-researched topic, the unique circumstances of the worldwide
isolation measures provide an ideal situation to examine the effects
on gaming habits.
To this end, our research addresses the question: How important are social activities in games for players affected by isolation
measures? We subdivide this question into three parts, forming a
holistic image of how the crisis has changed the personal gaming
behavior, focusing on social interactions. First, we assess the influence of the pandemic on gaming habits. Next, we examine whether
the circumstances provoked a shift in popular games or genres.
Finally, we ask players to rate social interactions in games directly.
We conducted an online study analyzing the players’ gaming
preferences and habits within the first months of 2020. The results
indicate that the COVID-19 crisis influenced the gaming behavior
of active gamers. Roughly 50% of players increased their gaming
activities, played more multiplayer titles, and listed social aspects
as their key motivators. However, these effects are mostly limited
to the gamer subgroup using multiplayer games as a social medium.
On the other hand, our study implies that the crisis did not motivate
new players to include games as communication channels.

2

RELATED WORK

Gaming activities can fulfill a wide variety of personal needs, e.g.,
enjoyment, social interactions, or challenging situations [19]. Especially in global crises, games can help cope with the negative
effects of social isolation [11]. For instance, exergames could help
replace exercise facilities or outdoor activities and aid in treating
anxiety disorders [21]. Besides, multiplayer games are known to

Table 1: Custom Questions (CQ) used in the online survey. Answers are either provided in free-text form or on a fixed scale.
Question

Type

RQ1:
CQ1:
CQ2:
CQ3:

Does the COVID-19 pandemic influence gaming habits?
How would you describe your gaming habits before the COVID-19 pandemic?
Did you change your gaming habits in the last three months?
If your gaming habits changed, please state your personal reasons.

5-point scale
6-point scale
Free-text form

RQ2:
CQ4:
CQ5:
CQ6:

Is there a shift regarding the popular genres?
Which games did you play more than 10hrs in 2019?
Which games did you play within the last 3 months?
What were your main reasons for choosing these specific games during the last 3 months?

Free-text form
Free-text form
Free-text form

RQ3
CQ7:
CQ8:
CQ9:

How important do players rate social interactions in games during the pandemic?
What are your personal main reasons to play games?
How important would you rate social interactions ( collaborative or competitive tasks) in games?
Do you think that your rating on social interactions is biased by the current lockdown situation?

Free-text form
5-point scale
5-point scale

strengthen the connectedness with a virtual community [3], which
could benefit the overall mental health by reducing feelings of solitude. However, increased gaming activities may also intensify the
downsides in the form of addictive effects. King et al. [9] discuss
the risks of online gaming in the context of COVID-19 and mention
a potential increase in gaming disorders paired with a decrease
in social connections. Nevertheless, at the same time, the closure
of casinos and other gaming facilities might mitigate the overall
situation [16].
In this work, we place a particular focus on the social play aspect
that can help people cope with reduced social activity. Social play [6]
covers a wide variety of settings in which multiple people are
involved in a single game. These include both co-located sessions
and distributed games. In the past, social play has been thoroughly
covered in research [12, 17]. In particular, work focused on the
inter-player relations and interactions that shape the social context
between the players [4, 5]. A key concept to the player experience is
the social presence [1, 2, 7], described as "the sense of being together
with another" [1]. Games eliciting such feelings can reduce the sense
of solitude caused by social distancing.

3

ONLINE SURVEY

Our research’s central goal was to determine how the COVID-19
pandemic influenced the players’ gaming preferences and habits.
Therefore, we conducted a qualitative online study assessing the
participants’ personal situations and opinions. The final questionnaire comprised three custom questions per RQ and three questions
assessing the demographics of the participants (see Table 1). Since
we were interested in how the general public played games during
the lockdown, we refrained from targeting specific gaming communities, e.g., Discord chats dedicated to a single title. Instead, we
promoted the survey on general online channels, such as Twitter
or Reddit. Additionally, we used some online groups dedicated to
the recruitment of survey participants.
In total, 78 participants completed the survey. Most subjects were
of German nationality (65 participants), followed by American (7),
Austrian (2), and Belgian (4) nationality. The mean age was 25.4
(SD = 6.79), with a range from 16 to 57. Concerning the gender, the

Table 2: The participants listed various reasons for playing
more/less during the COVID-19 crisis.
Reasons for playing more
more time, e.g., due to home office
social needs, e.g., meet friends virtually
lack of alternative activities / boredom
other reasons, e.g., new game releases
Reasons for playing less
less time, e.g., occupied with other duties
not in the mood

Frequency
46.27%
35.82%
11.94%
5.97%
Frequency
71.43%
28.57%

sample was slightly uneven: 35 males and 43 females participated
in our study.

4

RESULTS

The first questions dealt with personal gaming habits. When asked
for their gaming behavior before the pandemic (CQ1), the subjects
split almost equally between the five options, ranging from everyday gamers to non-players (cf. Figure 1). The participants were
asked whether their habits changed during the crisis. Only one
subject started playing during this period. Excluding the 23% nonplayers, a majority of 53.5% played more than before the pandemic,
36.7% did not alter their gaming behavior, and 10% reduced their
playtime. Asking for the reasons behind these decisions (cf. Table 2),
most participants reported having more time or an increased need
for social contacts. Subjects reducing the playtime were occupied
with other duties or not in the mood for games.
In the second part, we asked for the played games before (CQ4)
and during the crisis (CQ5), which resulted in two lists of 96 and
91 games. The most popular titles were similar in both cases, e.g.,
Counter Strike: Global Offensive [20], League of Legends [14], or
Rocket League [13]. The only differences were due to novel releases, such as Valorant [15] or Animal Crossing: New Horizons [10].
Also, we could not find any significant difference in popular genres, which were led by First-Person Shooters, Action-Adventures,

Figure 1: We asked the subjects several questions about their gaming habits and their opinion on social interactions. The pie
charts illustrate the respective questions CQ1, CQ2, CQ8, CQ9, and the overall answer distribution of the 78 participants.
Sports, and Social Simulations, but did not differ by more than four
percent. However, we measured a general shift towards games with
multiplayer capabilities. In CQ4, 68.4% of the listed games offered
multiplayer modes. This portion increased by 9.9% to 78.3% for the
second question (CQ5). Meanwhile, the percentage of single-player
games decreased from 70.8% to 63.1%.
In CQ6, we asked the participants to list reasons for their game
choices during the pandemic. CQ7 inquired about the reasons for
playing games in general. In both questions, we collected 29 distinct
reasons, including common answers and particularities, e.g., using
games as physical workouts. We grouped the reasons into seven
categories: fun/entertainment, game characteristics, playing with
friends, distraction, challenges, commitment, and external factors.
Between CQ6 and CQ7, we identified major differences depicted
in Figure 2. Before the COVID-19 pandemic, the subjects reported
playing primarily for fun, game characteristics, and social contacts.
Even though these reasons remained relevant in the last months,
the emphasis changed. Now, the ranking is dominated by the social
aspect of playing with friends, and the distraction from everyday
life.
In the final two questions, we asked the participants to rate the
importance of social interactions directly and asked them whether
the ongoing lockdown measures biased this rating (cf. Figure 1).
Overall, the participants had a very diverse opinion on social activities. 45% rated these interactions as rather important, 43% as
mostly unimportant. Only a third of the subjects stated that the
current situation positively altered their rating, while the majority
claimed no influence.

5

DISCUSSION

RQ1: Does the pandemic influence gaming habits?
The vast majority of participants (77%) reported playing games at
least once or twice per month, while 23% never played games. Only
one participant started playing within the crisis, to replace physical
outdoor activities. Meanwhile, 53.5% of the gamers increased their
playtime in the last months, mostly due to having more free time
and an increased need for social contacts. These observations illustrate that while the current circumstances have not encouraged
non-players to add gaming to their leisure activities, they have led
to an increased playing behavior among gamers.
RQ2: Is there a shift regarding popular game genres?
We were not able to identify big changes in the played game genres. However, the games played before and during the pandemic
differed in the ratio of single- to multiplayer games. A possible
explanation for the nearly 10% increase in multiplayer titles could
be derived from the assessed reasons to choose these games. The
biggest motivators reported by the participants were the social
connection when playing with friends, followed by the distraction
from frightening circumstances in their everyday life.
RQ3: How important do players rate social interactions in games
during the pandemic?
When being asked for the importance of social interactions in
games, only 25% of the subjects rated them very important, while
34% stated valuing these social connections more important than
before the crisis. This observation does not contradict our other

non-players were not motivated to use games as another communication channel. Therefore, it seems that crises like COVID-19
mainly catalyze existing habits.
Our results are based upon a limited set of subjects, mostly
residing in one country, who were asked after the first wave of
infection. While this phase was very similar in most countries, the
pandemic’s subsequent course varied greatly across the globe. The
varying infection rates and countermeasures provide an ideal setting for further studies assessing the long-term impact of isolation
measures on online media use.

REFERENCES

Figure 2: We asked the participants to list their reasons for
playing games in general (bottom, CQ7) and for choosing
specific games during the COVID-19 crisis (top, CQ6).

findings, where social play with friends is the most important motivator to increase the own gaming behavior and play specific titles. Despite a large number of multiplayer games, only 36% were
sole online coop or competitive titles. These were mainly listed by
participants rating social interactions as important. Additionally,
these subjects also named social play as their central motivator and
mostly reported increasing their playtime. Thus, it seems that only
a limited subset of players use games actively as a means of socialization. This subset is more likely to increase gaming activities to
replace the social contacts reduced by protective measures. Other
players, e.g., those preferring single-player games, do not profit
in the same way and do not consider games important for social
communication.

6

CONCLUSION

Global crises, like the COVID-19 pandemic, fuel the demand for
online communication channels, preserving social contacts and
replacing face-to-face encounters. Apart from social networks and
videotelephony, digital games are another potential source for fulfilling individual social needs. Our research addressed the question:
How important are social activities in games for players affected
by isolation measures?
Our online survey results indicate that the value of games for
social needs depends on the individual gaming habits. The subset
of participants playing mostly multiplayer games increased their
playtime and mentioned social play as a key motivator. In turn,

[1] Frank Biocca, Chad Harms, and Judee K Burgoon. 2003. Toward a more robust
theory and measure of social presence: Review and suggested criteria. Presence:
Teleoperators & virtual environments 12, 5 (2003), 456–480.
[2] Yvonne AW De Kort and Wijnand A Ijsselsteijn. 2008. People, places, and play:
player experience in a socio-spatial context. Computers in Entertainment (CIE) 6,
2 (2008), 1–11.
[3] Ansgar E. Depping and Regan L. Mandryk. 2017. Cooperation and Interdependence: How Multiplayer Games Increase Social Closeness. In Proceedings of the
Annual Symposium on Computer-Human Interaction in Play (Amsterdam, The
Netherlands) (CHI PLAY ’17). Association for Computing Machinery, New York,
NY, USA, 449–461. https://doi.org/10.1145/3116595.3116639
[4] Katharina Emmerich and Maic Masuch. 2013. Helping friends or fighting foes:
The influence of collaboration and competition on player experience.. In FDG.
150–157.
[5] John Harris and Mark Hancock. 2019. To Asymmetry and Beyond! Improving
Social Connectedness by Increasing Designed Interdependence in Cooperative
Play. In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems. 1–12.
[6] Katherine Isbister. 2010. Enabling social play: A framework for design and
evaluation. In Evaluating user experience in games. Springer, 11–22.
[7] Jeroen Jansz and Lonneke Martens. 2005. Gaming at a LAN event: the social
context of playing video games. New media & society 7, 3 (2005), 333–355.
[8] Xenia Rochelle Jones. 2020. Digital Society: A mini auto-ethnographic exposition
On the utilization of the digital while living life under the Covid-19 lockdown
(UK) (Draft). https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.12199128.v1
[9] Daniel L King, Paul H Delfabbro, Joel Billieux, and Marc N Potenza. 2020. Problematic online gaming and the COVID-19 pandemic. Journal of Behavioral Addictions
(2020).
[10] Nintendo. 2020. Animal Crossing: New Horizons. Game [Windows]. Nintendo,
Minami-ku, Kyoto, Japan.
[11] Hiroko Oe. 2020. Discussion of digital gaming’s impact on players’ well-being
during the COVID-19 lockdown. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.00594 (2020).
[12] Janne Paavilainen, Juho Hamari, Jaakko Stenros, and Jani Kinnunen. 2013. Social
network games: Players’ perspectives. Simulation & Gaming 44, 6 (2013), 794–
820.
[13] Psyonix. 2015. Rocket League. Game [Windows]. Psyonix, San Diego, California,
US.
[14] Riot Games. 2009. League of Legends. Game [Windows]. Riot Games, Los Angeles,
California, US.
[15] Riot Games. 2020. Valorant. Game [Windows]. Riot Games, Los Angeles,
California, US.
[16] Steve Ruddock. 2020. life in a post-covid-19 world. Gaming Law Review 24, 3
(2020), 168–168.
[17] Elena Márquez Segura and Katherine Isbister. 2015. Enabling co-located physical
social play: A framework for design and evaluation. In Game user experience
evaluation. Springer, 209–238.
[18] Patrick Shanley. 2020. Gaming Usage Up 75 Percent Amid Coronavirus Outbreak,
Verizon Reports. https://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/gaming-usage-up75-percent-coronavirus-outbreak-verizon-reports-1285140
[19] Gustavo F. Tondello and Lennart E. Nacke. 2019. Player Characteristics and
Video Game Preferences. In Proceedings of the Annual Symposium on ComputerHuman Interaction in Play (Barcelona, Spain) (CHI PLAY ’19). Association for
Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 365–378. https://doi.org/10.1145/
3311350.3347185
[20] Valve, Hidden Path Entertainment. 2012. Counter-Strike: Global Offensive. Game
[Windows]. Valve, Bellevue, Washington, US.
[21] Ricardo Borges Viana and Claudio Andre Barbosa de Lira. 2020. Exergames
as Coping Strategies for Anxiety Disorders During the COVID-19 Quarantine
Period. Games for Health Journal (2020).

