Date of publication xxxx 00, 0000, date of current version xxxx 00, 0000.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/ACCESS.2020.DOI

arXiv:2011.09342v2 [physics.soc-ph] 27 Jan 2021

Spatiotemporal Differences of COVID-19
Infection among Healthcare Workers and
Patients in China from January to March
2020
PEIXIAO WANG1 , XINYAN ZHU1,3,4 , WEI GUO1 , HUI REN1 , TAO HU2

1

State Key Laboratory of Information Engineering in Surveying, Mapping and Remote Sensing, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430079, China; (e-mail:
peixiaowang@whu.edu.cn,guowei-lmars@whu.edu.cn,renhui@whu.edu.cn)
2
Center for Geographic Analysis, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA
3
Collaborative Innovation Center of Geospatial Technology, Wuhan 430079, China
4
Key Laboratory of Aerospace Information Security and Trusted Computing, Ministry of Education, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430079, China

Corresponding author: Xinyan Zhu (e-mail: xinyanzhu@whu.edu.cn) and Tao Hu (e-mail: taohu@g.harvard.edu)
This project was supported by the Key Program of National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 41830645), National Key Research
and Development Program of China (Grant Nos. 2018YFB0505500,2018YFB0505503), Funding program: CAE Advisory Project No.
2020-ZD-16.

ABSTRACT Studying the spatiotemporal differences in coronavirus disease (COVID-19) between social
groups such as healthcare workers (HCWs) and patients can aid in formulating epidemic containment
policies. Most previous studies of the spatiotemporal characteristics of COVID-19 were conducted in a
single group and did not explore the differences between groups. To fill this research gap, this study assessed
the spatiotemporal characteristics and differences among patients and HCWs infection in Wuhan, Hubei
(excluding Wuhan), and China (excluding Hubei). The temporal difference was greater in Wuhan than in
the rest of Hubei, and was greater in Hubei (excluding Wuhan) than in the rest of China. The incidence was
high in healthcare workers in the early stages of the epidemic. Therefore, it is important to strengthen the
protective measures for healthcare workers in the early stage of the epidemic. The spatial difference was
less in Wuhan than in the rest of Hubei, and less in Hubei (excluding Wuhan) than in the rest of China.
The spatial distribution of healthcare worker infections can be used to infer the spatial distribution of the
epidemic in the early stage and to formulate control measures accordingly.
INDEX TERMS Healthcare worker infection; patient infection; spatiotemporal distribution; spatiotemporal
differences; COVID-19

I. INTRODUCTION

HE COVID-19 virus was first discovered at the end
of 2019, and subsequently spread rapidly worldwide.
At present, the world has been heavily hit by the COVID19 pandemic [1], [2]. Since the outbreak of COVID-19,
many researchers have performed classical, epidemiological,
mathematical, and statistical analyses to carry out emergency
research from the perspectives of pathology [3], [4], epidemiology [5], genomics [6], clinical medicine [7]–[9], and
molecular biology [10]. However, when a novel infectious
disease is prevalent, relevant preventative measures such as
self-isolation, restriction of crowd movement and gathering,
and wearing of masks became important emergency containment measures [11]–[13].

T

VOLUME 4, 2016

To achieve targeted and accurate containment, it is necessary to understand the spatiotemporal spread of COVID-19
as time progresses and determine its development trend earlyon [14]. In the early stages of the epidemic, patient infection
data were a very important data source. Patient infection
data contains a wealth of information that can be explored
via spatiotemporal analysis [15], [16]. Therefore, many researchers have used this data to explore the spatiotemporal
characteristics of COVID-19. However, studies using other
data sources to assess the characteristics of the epidemic
in social groups (e.g., healthcare workers) are scarce [17].
Studying the spatiotemporal distributions and differences in
healthcare worker infections can aid in better formulating
epidemic containment policies; however, the spatiotemporal
1

PEIXIAO WANG et al.: Preparation of Papers for IEEE ACCESS

characteristics of COVID-19 between healthcare workers are
rarely studied. To fill this research gap, the spatiotemporal
characteristics and differences between healthcare worker
infections and patient infections were analyzed from the
perspectives of Wuhan, Hubei (excluding Wuhan), and China
(excluding Hubei) by combining the data of healthcare workers infection and the data of patients infection. The main
contributions of this article are as follows:
(1) The spatiotemporal distributions of healthcare worker
infections were analyzed from the perspectives of Wuhan,
Hubei (excluding Wuhan), and China (excluding Hubei).
(2) The spatiotemporal differences among healthcare
worker infections and patient infections were also analyzed.
In addition, the study can provide a scientific reference
for relevant departments to formulate epidemic containment
policies from a new perspective.
II. RELATED WORKS

Many scientists have researched COVID-19 from different
perspectives. In this section, we primarily present a review of
relevant studies that explored the spatiotemporal distributions
of COVID-19.
To explore the spatiotemporal distribution of the disease is
mainly to summarize the spread law of COVID-19 to provide
the basis for prevention and control. In the early stage of
the epidemic, many studies were conducted based on patient
confirmed data. For example, Zhang et al. [18] analyzed
the epidemiological characteristics of COVID-19 in February
2020 based on patient confirmed data and reported the spatial
distribution of COVID-19 early-on in China. Hu et al. [19]
collected global patient confirmed data from different scales
and established a data repository to provide data support for
research related to the spatiotemporal distribution of COVID19. Wang et al. [20] used spatiotemporal scanning statistics
to detect the hotspots of new cases every week, based on
the confirmed cases of COVID-19 at the county level in
the United States, thereby characterizing the incidence trend.
Further, Zhang et al. [21] compared the spatiotemporal characteristics between COVID-19 and SARS at the provincial
level, thereby revealing the spread of COVID-19. Sun et
al. [22] analyzed the regional spatiotemporal changes of the
epidemic based on the daily new cases in 250 regions of
South Korea, thereby evaluating South Korea’s containment
strategy.
Researchers have also combined patient confirmed data
with other data sources to explore the spatiotemporal spread
of COVID-19. For example, Zhang et al. [23] examined
the factors influencing the number of imported cases from
Wuhan and the spread speed and pattern of the pandemic
by combining national flight and high-speed rail data. Based
on mobile phone and confirmed patient data, Jia et al. [24]
developed a spatiotemporal “risk source” model to determine
the geographic distribution and growth pattern of COVID19 and quickly as well as accurately assess the related risk.
Zhang et al. [25] used the GeoDetector and the decision
tree model to identify the main factors in low- and high-risk
2

areas by combining multi-source data. Loske [26] explored
the relationship between COVID-19 spread and transportation volume in food retail logistics by combining transport
volume data and confirmed patient data. Further, Zhang et
al. [27] measured the imported case risk of COVID-19 from
inbound international flights by combining both daily dynamic international air connectivity data and updated global
COVID-19 data.
However, the abovementioned studies are mostly based on
patient confirmed data. The spatiotemporal distributions of
COVID-19 in other groups are rarely explored. Thus, we analyzed the spatiotemporal characteristics of and differences
between healthcare worker infections and patient infections
from the perspectives of Wuhan, Hubei (excluding Wuhan),
and China (excluding Hubei).
III. STUDY AREA AND DATA SOURCES
A. STUDY AREA

As of July 2020, the total number of locally confirmed
COVID-19 cases in China had exceeded 80,000. Of these
cases, 68,135 were confirmed in Hubei Province, among
which 50,340 were confirmed in Wuhan, accounting for
81.5% and 60.80% of the country’s cases, respectively. To
study the temporal and spatial spread of COVID-19 in China,
the study area was divided into three parts: Wuhan City,
Hubei Province (excluding Wuhan), and the rest of China.
As shown in Figure 1, Hubei Province is in the central region
of China, and Wuhan City is in the central region of Hubei
Province.
B. DATA SOURCES AND DATA PREPROCESSING
1) Data Sources

The data used in this study were divided into two categories:
Patient Infection Table and healthcare worker’s infection
information. The Patient Infection Table was mainly obtained
from the National Health Commission of the People’s Republic of China (http://www.nhc.gov.cn/xcs/yqtb/list_gzbd.shtml)
and spanned from January 15, 2020, to June 28, 2020.
The confirmed information on healthcare workers was obtained mainly from the Chinese Red Cross Foundation
(https://www.crcf.org.cn/article/20672). The Chinese Red
Cross Foundation distributes relief funds to every healthcare
worker with a confirmed case. As of July 31, 2020, 81 batches
of confirmed healthcare workers had received foundation
assistance. We first used Python language and web crawler
technology to obtain 3,741 reports on confirmed healthcare
workers from the Chinese Red Cross Foundation and later
used the Baidu API for address matching. After matching
their address, details of the city, province, and county of
each healthcare worker with a confirmed case were obtained.
The data format is shown in Table 1. Each record shows the
confirmed time, province, city, and county of each confirmed
healthcare worker.

VOLUME 4, 2016

PEIXIAO WANG et al.: Preparation of Papers for IEEE ACCESS

FIGURE 1. Sketch map of the study area.

TABLE 1. Sample of healthcare worker infection data.

User ID
1
2
3
...
3741

Date
2020-01-15
2020-01-15
2020-02-04
...
2020-02-01

Province
Hubei
Hubei
Shandong
...
Beijing

City
Wuhan
Jingmen
Qingdao
...
Beijing

County
Huangpo
Zhongxiang
Shinan
...
Xicheng

2) Data Preprocessing

The Patient Infection Table is collected and processed by a
team at the China Data Center and is shared on the dataverse platform of Harvard University [19], [28]. Therefore,
the Patient Infection Table does not require additional data
preprocessing. In this study, we mainly conducted data preprocessing for the confirmed case information of healthcare
workers.
Infection information on healthcare workers is mainly
reported to the China Red Cross Foundation in two ways
[29]: (1) direct reporting by individuals to the Red Cross
Foundation of China, and (2) collection by the person’s
respective hospital which then reports the information to
the Red Cross Foundation of China. After examination and
approval by the Red Cross Foundation of China, the rescue
information is published on the website, after which the hospital may review it. Those who fail to pass the review do not
qualify to be rescued. Therefore, data records of unqualified
persons should be deleted from the original data. Second, the
Chinese Red Cross Foundation not only rescued the infected
healthcare worker, but also the infected or diseased staff
during the epidemic; such data records need to be deleted.
VOLUME 4, 2016

FIGURE 2. Characteristics of healthcare worker infection data.

As shown in Figure 2, after data preprocessing, the data of
a total of 3,701 healthcare workers infected with COVID-19
remained, including 3,667 from Hubei Province and 3,060
from Wuhan City.
IV. METHODS

The overall framework of the study is shown in Figure
3. First, the Healthcare Worker Infection Tables in China,
Hubei, and Wuhan, which recorded a high number of healthcare workers infection each day, were constructed. Second,
based on the Infection Tables, relevant statistical indicators
such as the mean, variance, change speed (rise and decline
periods), and the inflection point were used to analyze the
time spread characteristics of healthcare worker and patient
3

PEIXIAO WANG et al.: Preparation of Papers for IEEE ACCESS

FIGURE 3. Technical framework of spatiotemporal distribution and differences in healthcare workers and patient infection.

infections; we used Pearson’s correlation coefficient to calculate the time correlation between healthcare worker infection
and patient infection. Finally, the thematic map method was
used to analyze the spatial spread characteristics of infections
among healthcare workers and patients. We also calculated
the spatial correlation between healthcare worker and patient
infections.
A. CONSTRUCTION OF THE HEALTHCARE WORKER
INFECTION TABLE

The healthcare worker infection data which were collected
using the crawler record the basic information of confirmed
healthcare workers, however, the data cannot visually display
the temporal and spatial distributions and spread of the
confirmed healthcare worker’s infections. Therefore, based
on the modeling idea of "province - city - county," this study
constructed Healthcare Worker Infection Tables based on the
Partition Statistics from three perspectives: China, Hubei,
and Wuhan.
The data structure for the Healthcare Worker Infection
Tables are shown in Figure 4. The Table(S, T) represents
a spatiotemporal dataset, where S and T are the spatial
and temporal dimensions, respectively; S = {s1 , s2 , , sm }
represents the row index of the table, and T = {t1 , t2 , , tn }
represents the column index of the table.
Taking the Healthcare Worker Infection Table of Wuhan
as an example, the construction process is shown in Algorithm 1. {cmsi } represents healthcare worker infection data,
and T ableW uhan represents the Healthcare Worker Infection
4

FIGURE 4. Data structure of the confirmed inventories.

Table from the perspective of Wuhan. First, T ableW uhan is
initialized to 0 (line 1). Then, the values in the table are
assigned iteratively (lines 2-4), and T ableW uhan describes
in detail the changes in healthcare worker infections in every
county of Wuhan over time. Final, T ableW uhan is returned
(line 5). The corresponding Healthcare Worker Infection
Tables in China and Hubei are expressed as T ableChina and
T ableHubei , respectively. The Healthcare Worker Infection
Table of China records the number of healthcare worker
infections every day in each province of China, and the
Healthcare Worker Infection Table of Hubei records the
number of confirmed healthcare worker infections every day
in each city of Hubei Province.

VOLUME 4, 2016

PEIXIAO WANG et al.: Preparation of Papers for IEEE ACCESS

Algorithm 1 Construction of Infection Table
Require: Healthcare Inf ection Data = {cmsi }
Ensure: T ableW uhan (S, T )
1: T ableW uhan (S, T ) = 0
2: for each cms ∈ {cmsi } do
3:
T ableW uhan (cms.County, cms.Date)+ = 1
4: end for
5: return T ableW uhan

rspatial = p

B. TEMPORAL AND SPATIAL CHARACTERISTICS
INDEX

The Healthcare Worker Infection Table and the Patient
Infection Table are essentially a collection of time series that
contain spatial location information. Therefore, we further
analyzed the temporal and spatial distribution characteristics
of healthcare worker infections and patient infections.
In terms of temporal characteristics, we used eight indicators, namely the mean, standard variance, peak, rising period,
rising rate, falling period, falling rate, and inflection point,
to study the temporal characteristics of healthcare worker
and patient infections in China (excluding Hubei), Hubei
(excluding Wuhan), and Wuhan. In the Chinese scale, the
main reasons for excluding Hubei Province are as follows:
compared with other provinces, the number of patients and
healthcare worker infections in Hubei Province is extremely
high; if Hubei Province is not excluded, the temporal characteristics of China are only determined by the data of Hubei.
Similarly, in the Chinese scale, Wuhan city is also excluded.
In terms of spatial characteristics, we divided the Healthcare Worker Infection Table and the Patient Infection Table
based on time and used thematic maps to show the spatial
distribution characteristics of healthcare worker and patient
infections at each time node from China, Hubei, and Wuhan.
We determined the spatiotemporal differences between
infections in healthcare workers and patients by assessing the
differences in indices. A relatively small difference in indices
is indicative of a relatively small spatiotemporal difference
between infections in healthcare workers and patients, and
vice versa.
C. PEARSON CORRELATION COEFFICIENT

The Pearson correlation coefficient [30] was calculated to
quantitatively measure the spatiotemporal correlation between healthcare worker infections and patient infections,
i.e., the difference in space and time between healthcare
worker infections and patient infections. As shown in Figure
5, the spatial correlation was obtained by th3 and tp3 , and the
temporal correlation was obtained by sh3 and sp3 [31]. The
temporal and spatial correlation coefficients of the two series
were calculated using Equations (1) and (2), respectively:

rtemporal = p
VOLUME 4, 2016

Cov(spi ,shi )
p
D(spi ) D(shi )

(1)

Cov(tpi ,thi )
p
D(tpi ) D(thi )

(2)

where Cov(X, Y ) is the covariance of random variables X
and
p Y , D(X) is the variance of the random variable X, and
D(X) is the standard deviation of the random variable X.
The value range of correlation coefficient r is [−1, 1]. When
r>0, the random variables X and Y are positive correlations,
if r=1, random variables X and Y are completely positively
correlated; when r<0, the random variables X and Y are
negatively correlated, if r=-1, then the random variables X
and Y are completely negatively correlated. To measure the
time correlation between healthcare worker infections and
patient infections, X and Y , respectively, represent the time
series of healthcare worker infections and patient infections
in the same study object. Similarly, to measure the spatial
correlation between healthcare workers and patients, X and
Y , respectively, represent the number of healthcare worker
infections and patient infections in multiple regions at a specific time. A strong positive correlation between two random
variables is indicative of a relatively small spatiotemporal
difference between infections in healthcare workers and patients, and vice versa.
V. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
A. TEMPORAL DIFFERENCES BETWEEN HEALTHCARE
WORKER AND PATIENT INFECTIONS

In this study, the statistical graph was first used to qualitatively describe the changes in the number of daily healthcare
worker infections and patient infections over time. To make
the curve smoother, we used the moving average method
using a time window of seven days. The results are shown
in Figure 6. Overall, the curves of daily healthcare workers
infection and daily patients infection in China (excluding
Hubei), Hubei Province (excluding Wuhan), and Wuhan City
all initially showed a rising trend followed by a falling one.
At the same time, the peaks of infections in China (excluding Hubei), Hubei (excluding Wuhan), and Wuhan have
successively decreased. However, the curves of confirmed
healthcare workers and confirmed patients were significantly
different over time. For example, Figure 6(a) shows the onset
of infection in healthcare workers, while it was absent in
patients during the first week. There are two main reasons for
this difference. First, the statistical approaches of the two data
sources are different, which leads to the difference between
the data. Second, and more importantly, data of healthcare
worker infections were retrospective, while patient infections
data were reported in real time.
In addition, there were also significant differences in the
statistical characteristics of the curves for healthcare worker
and patient infections (Table 2). For example, The mean
times of onset of infection for healthcare workers in Wuhan,
Hubei (excluding Wuhan), and China (excluding Hubei)
were January 27, February 1, and February 2, 2020, while
those for patients were February 8, February 2, and January
5

PEIXIAO WANG et al.: Preparation of Papers for IEEE ACCESS

FIGURE 5. Temporal and spatial correlation coefficients.

FIGURE 6. Comparison between the temporal characteristics of healthcare worker infection data and patient infection data: (a) Wuhan City, (b) Hubei Province
excluding Wuhan, and (c) China excluding Hubei.

31, 2020, the differences being 12, 1, and 2 days, respectively.
The standard deviation values of infection onset time for
healthcare workers in Wuhan, Hubei (excluding Wuhan), and
China (excluding Hubei) were 9, 10, and 6 days, while those
for patients were 7, 7, and 6 days, the differences being 2,
3, and 0 days, respectively. The results showed the mean
time of onset for healthcare workers infection in Wuhan and
Hubei (except Wuhan) was earlier than those for patients
infection, and the mean times of onset for healthcare workers
infection in China (except Hubei) was later than those for
patients infection. There are two main reasons. First, the
epidemics in Wuhan and Hubei (except Wuhan) are more
serious. Compared with patient infections, healthcare worker
infections are more likely to be detected. Second, healthcare
workers have professional protective measures, so it is easier
to control the spread of the epidemic among healthcare
workers.
In addition, Pearson’s correlation coefficient was also
used to measure the temporal correlation between healthcare
worker and patient infections (Figure 7). The correlation
coefficient r values for Wuhan, Hubei (excluding Wuhan),
and China (excluding Hubei) were 0.26, 0.852, and 0.95,
respectively. There are two main reasons for the lowest
temporal correlation coefficient r in Wuhan. First, in the
early stage of the epidemic, the protection of healthcare
6

workers was insufficient, which made it easy to cause largescale infections in hospitals. Second, compared with patient
infections, infections in healthcare workers are more easily
detected, leading to them being counted. The correlation coefficient also confirms a temporal difference between healthcare worker and patient infections.
In general, healthcare worker infection is contained earlier
and faster. The temporal difference in Wuhan was greater
than that in Hubei (excluding Wuhan), and the temporal
difference in Hubei (excluding Wuhan) was greater than
that in China (excluding Hubei). Combined with the time
of epidemic occurrence in different regions, the temporal
difference in the early phase was greater than that in the later
phase, and the temporal difference in the early-onset region
was greater than that in the later-onset region.
B. SPATIAL DIFFERENCES BETWEEN HEALTHCARE
WORKER INFECTION AND PATIENT INFECTION

The spread of COVID-19 in space is a dynamic process. To
further compare the spatial distribution characteristics and
differences between healthcare worker and patient infections,
we first analyzed the spatial distribution characteristics of
healthcare worker and patient infections at each time node
with a time interval of 10 days and then quantitatively determined the spatial correlation between healthcare worker and
VOLUME 4, 2016

PEIXIAO WANG et al.: Preparation of Papers for IEEE ACCESS

FIGURE 7. Temporal correlations of healthcare worker infection data and patient infection data: (a) Wuhan City, (b) Hubei Province excluding Wuhan, and (c) China
excluding Hubei.

TABLE 2. Statistical characteristics.

Index
Mean
Standard
deviation
Inflection
point
Peak
Rising
period
Rising
rate
Falling
rate
Falling
rate

Study area
Wuhan
Hubei(outside Wuhan)
China(outside Wuhan)
Wuhan
Hubei(outside Wuhan)
China(outside Wuhan)
Wuhan
Hubei(outside Wuhan)
China(outside Wuhan)
Wuhan
Hubei(outside Wuhan)
China(outside Wuhan)
Wuhan
Hubei(outside Wuhan)
China(outside Wuhan)
Wuhan
Hubei(outside Wuhan)
China(outside Wuhan)
Wuhan
Hubei(outside Wuhan)
China(outside Wuhan)
Wuhan
Hubei(outside Wuhan)
China(outside Wuhan)

Healthcare Worker
Jan 27
Feb 1
Feb 2
9 days
10 days
6 days
Jan 22
Jan 29
Jan 30
128
23
3
15 days
19 days
12 days
64
12
1
34 days
27 days
19 days
55
11
1

Patient
Feb 8
Feb 2
Jan 31
7 days
7 days
6 days
Feb 12
Feb 1
Jan 31
3550
1058
756
23 days
14 days
10 days
1617
550
464
20 days
22 days
19 days
525
450
334

patient infections at each time node. In this section, the period
from January 7, 2020, to February 16, 2020 was selected as
the research interval.
1) Spatial Characteristics of Healthcare Worker Infection

Figure 8 shows the spatial distribution of healthcare worker
infections in China, Hubei, and Wuhan. In China, healthcare worker infections first occurred in Hubei, and then the
phenomenon of healthcare worker infection gradually spread
outwards through Hubei. As of February 6, 2020, the number
of healthcare worker infections in different provinces of
China significantly differed. Generally, the provinces with
many healthcare worker infections in China were mainly located in the southeast coastal areas of China; these provinces
are close to Hubei Province and have better economic development. The provinces with relatively low healthcare worker
infections were mainly located in northwestern China; these
provinces are far from Hubei and economically underdeveloped.
VOLUME 4, 2016

In Hubei, healthcare worker infections first occurred in
Wuhan and Huanggang and then spread across, with Wuhan
and Huanggang essentially being the center. As of January
27, 2020, most of the cities in Hubei Province had different degrees of healthcare worker infections, among which
Wuhan and Huanggang had more more severe infections.
Generally, cities with more severe healthcare worker infections are mainly concentrated in the eastern part of Hubei
province, while the cities with fewer healthcare worker infections are mainly concentrated in the western part of Hubei
Province.
In Wuhan, healthcare worker infections first occurred in
Wuhan Jianghan District and Jiangan District and then spread
to the two adjacent districts. As of February 06, 2020, all
districts in Wuhan had different degrees of healthcare worker
infection, among which the districts with more severe healthcare worker infections mainly occurred in the central district
of Wuhan, such as Jianghan and Wuchang, where the number
of healthcare worker infections exceeded 500. The districts
with mild healthcare worker infections were mainly located
in Jiangxia and Huangpo outside Wuhan, but there were
still more than 10 cases of healthcare worker infections. In
general, healthcare worker infections in Wuhan were severe.
2) Spatial Characteristics of Patient Infection

As a comparison with the spatial distribution characteristics
of healthcare infection, we showed the spatial distribution
characteristics of patient infection during the same period.
As it is difficult to obtain data on patient infections at the
county level in Wuhan from mid-January to mid-February,
we showed the spatial distribution characteristics of patient
infection only at the scale of China and Hubei. The results
are shown in Figure 9.
In China, the first case of infection in a patient was
reported in Hubei and then spread outward through Hubei.
As of February 06, 2020, the numbers of patient infections
in different provinces of China were significantly different.
Compared with healthcare worker infections, in addition to
the difference in the number of infections, there were also
certain differences in the spatial distribution of infection. For
example, the patient infections in Guangdong and Zhejiang
were relatively serious, but the healthcare infection in the two
7

PEIXIAO WANG et al.: Preparation of Papers for IEEE ACCESS

FIGURE 8. Spatial distribution characteristics of healthcare worker infections at different time nodes in China, Hubei, and Wuhan in 2020: (a) on January 7, (b) on
January 17, (c) on January 27, (d) on February 6, (e) on February 16.

8

VOLUME 4, 2016

PEIXIAO WANG et al.: Preparation of Papers for IEEE ACCESS

FIGURE 9. Spatial distribution characteristics of patient infections at different time nodes in China and Hubei in 2020: (a) on January 17, (b) on January 27, (c) on
February 6, (d) on February 16.

VOLUME 4, 2016

9

PEIXIAO WANG et al.: Preparation of Papers for IEEE ACCESS

TABLE 3. Spatial correlations of healthcare worker and patient infections in
China (excluding Hubei) and Hubei (excluding Wuhan).

Date
2020-01-27
2020-02-06
2020-02-16

China (outside Hubei)
r= 0.132
r= 0.159
r= 0.252

Hubei (outside Wuhan)
r= 0.845
r= 0.816
r= 0.859

provinces were relatively mild. This may be attributable to
the differences in the epidemic prevention strategies of different provinces. For example, Guangdong Province acquired
more valuable experience during the SARS outbreak and thus
managed to swiftly protect healthcare workers.
In Hubei, the first case of infection in a patient was
reported in Wuhan City and then spread outward throughout
Wuhan City. As of February 06, 2020, the spatial difference
was relatively small, except for the large difference in the
number of infections. In other words, cities with relatively
more severe patient infections have relatively more severe
healthcare infections, and cities with less patient infections
have less healthcare infections.
Further, to measure the degree of correlation quantitatively between healthcare worker infection and patient infection, we analyzed the spatial correlation between healthcare
worker and patient infections (Table 3). The correlation coefficients, r, for China (except Hubei) on January 27, February
06, and February 16 were 0.132, 0.135, and 0.252 respectively, indicating that the spatial distributions of healthcare
worker and patient infections in China (except Hubei) are
quite different. The correlation coefficients, r, for Hubei
(except Wuhan) on January 27, February 06, and February 16
were 0.845, 0.816, and 0.859, respectively, which indicated
that the spatial distribution difference between healthcare
worker and patient infections in Hubei (except Wuhan) was
small.
In general, in addition to the differences in the number of
healthcare worker and patient infections, the spatial distribution was different to some extent. The spatial distribution
difference in Hubei (except Wuhan) was greater than that in
China (except Hubei), that is, the difference in the late stage
was greater than that in the early stage; the difference in lateonset regions was greater than that in the early-onset regions.
C. LIMITATIONS OF THE STUDY

The limitations of this study are as follows: (1) the coverage of healthcare worker infection data was narrow, and
this study only examined the temporal and spatial distributions and differences between healthcare worker and patient
infections in China. Owing to the difficulty in obtaining
data on healthcare worker infections in other countries, the
temporal and spatial distributions and differences in other
countries were not compared and analyzed. (2) The infection
data of healthcare workers were not comprehensive. As the
information on healthcare worker infections is published on
the official website of the Red Cross Foundation in batches,
information may continue to be published in the future; thus,
10

this study may be missing information. (3) In terms of the
spatial distribution, it is difficult to obtain patient infection
data at the county level in Wuhan for the same period. This
study only examined the spatial distributions and differences
in China (excluding Hubei) and Hubei (excluding Wuhan). In
response to the above problems, future research direction will
focus on further collecting domestic and foreign healthcare
workers and patient infection data to analyze the temporal
and spatial distributions and differences more accurately
and comprehensively between healthcare worker and patient
infections.
VI. DISCUSSIONS AND CONCLUSION

At present, COVID-19 is still a pandemic. As specific vaccines and fundamental treatments take a long time, relevant
measures such as self-isolation, restriction of crowd activities
and gathering, and wearing of masks have become important
emergency containment measures. To accurately formulate
epidemic containment policies, it is important to study the
temporal and spatial spread of COVID-19 in social groups.
This study analyzed the temporal and spatial spread characteristics of and differences in COVID-19 among patients
and healthcare workers from three perspectives: China (excluding Hubei), Hubei (excluding Wuhan), and Wuhan.
In terms of temporal characteristics, healthcare worker
and patient infections in Wuhan, Hubei (excluding Wuhan),
and China (excluding Hubei) initially tended to increase
and then decrease; the peak value of infection gradually decreased. However, there are great differences between the two
curves. For example, the correlation coefficients, r, between
healthcare worker and patient infections for Wuhan, Hubei
(excluding Wuhan), and China (excluding Hubei) were 0.26,
0.852, and 0.95, respectively. In other words, the temporal
differences between healthcare worker and patient infections
were relatively large in Wuhan, whereas they decreased successively in Hubei (excluding Wuhan) and China (excluding
Hubei). Combined with the time of the occurrence of the
epidemic in different regions, the temporal difference in the
early stage is greater than that in the later stage between
healthcare worker and patient infections, and the temporal
difference in the early-onset region is greater than that in
the late-onset region. Through temporal difference, different
policies can be formulated for different social groups through
the following aspects. For example, it is very important to
strengthen the protective measures for healthcare workers in
the early stage of the epidemic. Because healthcare workers
work in a relatively closed space, the battle is on the frontline
of the epidemic. Even if the number of patients infected is
small, it can still result in many infections among healthcare
workers. In addition, we also can use the temporal difference
to predict the peak time of infection in patients [32].
In terms of spatial characteristics, healthcare worker and
patient infections in China spread mainly through Hubei
as the epicenter. Healthcare worker and patient infections
in Hubei spread mainly through Wuhan and Huanggang
as the epicenter. Healthcare worker infection and patient
VOLUME 4, 2016

PEIXIAO WANG et al.: Preparation of Papers for IEEE ACCESS

infections in Wuhan spread mainly through Jianghan and
Jiangan as the epicenter. In addition, the spatial distributions
of healthcare worker and patient infections also differed
from different scales. For example, on January 27, February
06, and February 16, 2020, the correlation coefficients, r,
between healthcare worker infection and patient infection
for China (excluding Hubei) were 0.132, 0.135, and 0.252,
respectively. Further, the correlation coefficients, r, between
healthcare worker infection and patient infection in Hubei
(excluding Wuhan) were 0.845, 0.816, and 0.859, respectively. Combined with the time of epidemic occurrence in
different regions, the spatial difference between healthcare
worker infection and patient infections in the early stage was
less than that in the later stage, and the spatial difference
in the early-onset region was less than that in the late-onset
region between healthcare worker and patient infections. The
results of this study offer significant guidance for epidemic
containment departments to accurately formulate different
epidemic containment policies for different social groups.
Through spatial correlation, we can use the spatial distribution of healthcare worker infection to infer the spatial
distribution of patient infection in the early stage of the
epidemic.
REFERENCES
[1] C. Biscayart, P. Angeleri, S. Lloveras, T. d. S. S. Chaves, P. Schlagenhauf,
and A. J. Rodríguez-Morales, “The next big threat to global health? 2019
novel coronavirus (2019-ncov): What advice can we give to travellers?–
interim recommendations january 2020, from the latin-american society
for travel medicine (slamvi),” Travel medicine and infectious disease,
vol. 33, p. 101567, 2020.
[2] Q. Liu, D. Sha, W. Liu, P. Houser, L. Zhang, R. Hou, H. Lan, C. Flynn,
M. Lu, T. Hu et al., “Spatiotemporal patterns of covid-19 impact on human
activities and environment in mainland china using nighttime light and air
quality data,” Remote Sensing, vol. 12, no. 10, p. 1576, 2020.
[3] M. Ackermann, S. E. Verleden, M. Kuehnel, A. Haverich, T. Welte,
F. Laenger, A. Vanstapel, C. Werlein, H. Stark, A. Tzankov et al., “Pulmonary vascular endothelialitis, thrombosis, and angiogenesis in covid19,” New England Journal of Medicine, 2020.
[4] P. Xie, W. Ma, H. Tang, and D. Liu, “Severe covid-19: A review of recent
progress with a look toward the future,” Frontiers in Public Health, vol. 8,
p. 189, 2020.
[5] L. Fu, B. Wang, T. Yuan, X. Chen, Y. Ao, T. Fitzpatrick, P. Li, Y. Zhou,
Y. Lin, Q. Duan et al., “Clinical characteristics of coronavirus disease 2019
(covid-19) in china: a systematic review and meta-analysis,” Journal of
Infection, 2020.
[6] P. Zhou, X.-L. Yang, X.-G. Wang, B. Hu, L. Zhang, W. Zhang, H.-R. Si,
Y. Zhu, B. Li, C.-L. Huang et al., “A pneumonia outbreak associated with
a new coronavirus of probable bat origin,” nature, vol. 579, no. 7798, pp.
270–273, 2020.
[7] Z. Fang, F. Yi, K. Wu, K. Lai, X. Sun, N. Zhong, and Z. Liu,
“Clinical characteristics of coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19): An
updated systematic review,” medRxiv, 2020. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.medrxiv.org/content/early/2020/03/12/2020.03.07.20032573
[8] W.-j. Guan, Z.-y. Ni, Y. Hu, W.-h. Liang, C.-q. Ou, J.-x. He, L. Liu,
H. Shan, C.-l. Lei, D. S. Hui et al., “Clinical characteristics of coronavirus
disease 2019 in china,” New England journal of medicine, vol. 382, no. 18,
pp. 1708–1720, 2020.
[9] C. Huang, Y. Wang, X. Li, L. Ren, J. Zhao, Y. Hu, L. Zhang, G. Fan,
J. Xu, X. Gu et al., “Clinical features of patients infected with 2019 novel
coronavirus in wuhan, china,” The lancet, vol. 395, no. 10223, pp. 497–
506, 2020.
[10] A. Pal, A. Pawar, K. Goswami, P. Sharma, and R. Prasad, “Hydroxychloroquine and covid-19: A cellular and molecular biology based update,”
Indian Journal of Clinical Biochemistry, pp. 1–11, 2020.
VOLUME 4, 2016

[11] I. Franch-Pardo, B. M. Napoletano, F. Rosete-Verges, and L. Billa, “Spatial
analysis and gis in the study of covid-19. a review,” Science of The Total
Environment, p. 140033, 2020.
[12] T. C. COVID, B. Stephanie, B. Virginia, C. Nancy, C. Aaron, G. Ryan,
H. Aron, H. Michelle, P. Tamara, R. Matthew et al., “Geographic differences in covid-19 cases, deaths, and incidence-united states, february 12april 7, 2020.” MMWR Morbidity and mortality weekly report, vol. 69,
2020.
[13] B. Nussbaumer-Streit, V. Mayr, A. I. Dobrescu, A. Chapman, E. Persad,
I. Klerings, G. Wagner, U. Siebert, D. Ledinger, C. Zachariah et al.,
“Quarantine alone or in combination with other public health measures
to control covid-19: a rapid review,” Cochrane Database of Systematic
Reviews, no. 9, 2020.
[14] S. Chen, Q. Li, S. Gao, Y. Kang, and X. Shi, “Mitigating covid-19 outbreak
via high testing capacity and strong transmission-intervention in the united
states,” medRxiv, 2020.
[15] X. Zhu, T. Hu, X. Ye, W. Guo, L. Huang, H. Xiong, H. Ai, B. She,
Q. Xiong, and L. Duan, “Development and implementation of a dynamic
and 4d gis based on semantic location model,” Geo-Spatial Information
Science, vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 193–213, 2019.
[16] B. She, T. Hu, X. Zhu, and S. Bao, “Bridging open source tools and
geoportals for interactive spatial data analytics,” Geo-spatial Information
Science, vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 185–192, 2019.
[17] J. Wang, M. Zhou, and F. Liu, “Reasons for healthcare workers becoming
infected with novel coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) in china,” J Hosp
infect, vol. 105, no. 1, 2020.
[18] C. P. E. R. E. Novel et al., “The epidemiological characteristics of an outbreak of 2019 novel coronavirus diseases (covid-19) in china,” Zhonghua
liu xing bing xue za zhi= Zhonghua liuxingbingxue zazhi, vol. 41, no. 2, p.
145, 2020.
[19] T. Hu, W. W. Guan, X. Zhu, Y. Shao, L. Liu, J. Du, H. Liu, H. Zhou,
J. Wang, B. She et al., “Building an open resources repository for covid19 research,” Data and Information Management, vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 1–18,
2020.
[20] Y. Wang, Y. Liu, J. Struthers, and M. Lian, “Spatiotemporal characteristics
of covid-19 epidemic in the united states,” Clinical infectious diseases,
2020.
[21] X. Zhang, H.-X. Rao, Y. Wu, Y. Huang, and H. Dai, “Comparison of
the spatiotemporal characteristics of the covid-19 and sars outbreaks in
mainland china,” medRxiv, 2020.
[22] S. Kim and M. C. Castro, “Spatiotemporal pattern of covid-19 and government response in south korea (as of may 31, 2020),” International Journal
of Infectious Diseases, vol. 98, pp. 328–333, 2020.
[23] Y. Zhang, A. Zhang, and J. Wang, “Exploring the roles of high-speed train,
air and coach services in the spread of covid-19 in china,” Transport Policy,
2020.
[24] J. S. Jia, X. Lu, Y. Yuan, G. Xu, J. Jia, and N. A. Christakis, “Population
flow drives spatio-temporal distribution of covid-19 in china,” Nature, pp.
1–5, 2020.
[25] Y. Zhang, Y. Li, B. Yang, X. Zheng, and M. Chen, “Risk assessment of
covid-19 based on multisource data from a geographical viewpoint,” IEEE
Access, vol. 8, pp. 125 702–125 713, 2020.
[26] D. Loske, “The impact of covid-19 on transport volume and freight
capacity dynamics: An empirical analysis in german food retail logistics,”
Transportation Research Interdisciplinary Perspectives, vol. 6, p. 100165,
2020.
[27] L. Zhang, H. Yang, K. Wang, Y. Zhan, and L. Bian, “Measuring imported
case risk of covid-19 from inbound international flights—a case study on
china,” Journal of Air Transport Management, vol. 89, p. 101918, 2020.
[28] C. Yang, D. Sha, Q. Liu, Y. Li, H. Lan, W. W. Guan, T. Hu, Z. Li, Z. Zhang,
J. H. Thompson et al., “Taking the pulse of covid-19: A spatiotemporal
perspective,” International journal of digital earth, vol. 13, no. 10, pp.
1186–1211, 2020.
[29] C. R. C. Foundation. (2020, Jul.) Management rules of chinese red cross
foundation bytedance healthcare workers humanitarian relief fund (revised
edition). [Online]. Available: https://new.crcf.org.cn/article/19718
[30] I. Cohen, Y. Huang, J. Chen, and J. Benesty, “Pearson correlation coefficient,” vol. 10.1007/978-3-642-00296-0, no. Chapter 5, pp. 1–4, 2009.
[31] S. Cheng and F. Lu, “A two-step method for missing spatio-temporal data
reconstruction,” International Journal of Geo-Information, vol. 6, no. 7, p.
187, 2017.
[32] C. Li, L. J. Chen, X. Chen, M. Zhang, C. P. Pang, and H. Chen, “Retrospective analysis of the possibility of predicting the covid-19 outbreak from
11

PEIXIAO WANG et al.: Preparation of Papers for IEEE ACCESS

internet searches and social media data, china, 2020,” Eurosurveillance,
vol. 25, no. 10, p. 2000199, 2020.

PEIXIAO WANG is a PhD candidate of State Key
Laboratory of Information Engineering in Surveying, Mapping and Remote Sensing, Wuhan University. His research focus on geographic information service and spatio-temporal data mining.
Email: peixiaowang@whu.edu.cn.

TAO HU is a post-doctoral fellow at Harvard Center for Geographic since July 2019. He is working
on the Spatial Data Lab project. Before that, he
was a post-doctor researcher at Kent State University since 2016. He received Ph.D. and B.S in GIS
from Wuhan University. His primary research field
is GIScience, with a focus on geospatial data analytics, spatiotemporal analysis with applications
to urban crimes, social sensing, and public health.
He has more than 20 peer-reviewed publications
and serves as a peer reviewer for more than 10 international journals.
Email:xinyanzhu@whu.edu.cn

XINYAN ZHU received the Ph.D. degree from
the State Key Laboratory of Information Engineering in Surveying, Mapping and Remote
Sensing, Wuhan University.He is currently a
Professor with Wuhan University. During the
past years, he has published over 100 refereed
journal articles and conference papers. His research interests cover spatio-temporal ata modeling and analysis,distributed spatial database,
holographic position map and its application, indoor location and navigation, social geographic computing, and public
health.Email:xinyanzhu@whu.edu.cn

WEI GUO received the Ph.D. degree from the
State Key Laboratory of Information Engineering in Surveying, Mapping and Remote Sensing, Wuhan University.He is currently a Associate Professor with Wuhan University. During
the past years, he has published over 40 refereed journal articles and conference papers. His
research interests cover spatio-temporal ata modeling and analysis,distributed spatial database,and
public health.Email:guowei-lmars@whu.edu.cn

HUI REN is currently pursuing the M.S. degree with State Key Laboratory of Information
Engineering in Surverying,Mapping and Remote
Sensing,Wuhan University. Her research focus
on public health and spatiotemporal analysis.
Email:renhui@whu.edu.cn

12

VOLUME 4, 2016

