Path-dependent course of epidemic: are two phases of quarantine better than one?
Varun Nimmagadda
Novi High School, Novi, MI 48375, USA and
Department of Physics, Oakland University, Rochester, MI 48309, USA

Oleg Kogan

arXiv:2011.13826v1 [physics.soc-ph] 27 Nov 2020

Physics Department, California Polytechnic State University, San Luis Obispo, California 93407, USA

Evgeniy Khain∗
Department of Physics, Oakland University, Rochester, MI 48309, USA
The importance of a strict quarantine has been widely debated during the COVID-19 epidemic
even from the purely epidemiological point of view. One argument against strict lockdown measures
is that once the strict quarantine is lifted, the epidemic comes back, and so the cumulative number
of infected individuals during the entire epidemic will stay the same. We consider an SIR model on
a network and follow the disease dynamics, modeling the phases of quarantine by changing the node
degree distribution. We show that the system reaches different steady states based on the history:
the outcome of the epidemic is path-dependent despite the same final node degree distribution. The
results indicate that two-phase route to the final node degree distribution (a strict phase followed
by a soft phase) are always better than one phase (the same soft one) unless all the individuals have
the same number of connections at the end (the same degree); in the latter case, the overall number
of infected is indeed history-independent. The modeling also suggests that the optimal procedure
of lifting the quarantine consists of releasing nodes in the order of their degree - highest first.
PACS numbers: 87.19.xd, 05.40.-a, 05.10.-a

I.

INTRODUCTION

Investigating disease dynamics on networks has received much recent attention [1–9]. Network paradigm
has been used in the analysis of epidemics of HIV [3],
SARS [10], COVID-19 [11], and flu [12]. In many cases
in which disease is studied on networks, each node in a
network represents a single individual and edges between
the nodes represent the contacts between people. The
degree of a node is just the number of edges connected
to this node; in general, a network has nodes of various
degrees, since there are individuals with a high number
of contacts and individuals with a low number of contacts. Once the node degree distribution is specified, one
can analyze the spread of the disease by employing one
of the compartmental epidemiological models, for example, an SIR model [13]. In this model, the node can be
in one of three possible states: susceptible (S), infected
(I) and recovered (R). If an infected node is connected
to a susceptible node, the latter becomes infected with a
certain probability (per unit time). Using an algorithm
called a configuration model, it is possible to create a
network with any desired degree distribution [1], [4]. Important results for the spread of an epidemic on such networks were obtained in the framework of the SIR model
[1]. In particular, there is an exact mapping between
the spread of disease on networks and bond percolation.
Therefore, there exists a threshold: the epidemic spreads

∗ Electronic

address: khain@oakland.edu

if the transmission rate exceeds a certain value and decays otherwise. In addition, once the epidemic spreads,
one can compute the overall number of people who catch
the disease in the course of the epidemic [1].
This theory assumes that the network itself does not
change with time, so that people have the same number
of contacts no matter how serious the epidemic situation is. Recently, a two-way coupling between the network topology and disease dynamics has been studied
[14], [15]. However, during the epidemic such as COVID19, another temporal variation of the network structure
has been crucial - one that results from from the various
quarantine measures that were introduced (and are currently in effect) in many countries across the globe. A
quarantine aims at reducing the number of contacts, and
therefore, the node degree distribution (1) differs from
the normal life situation [16] and (2) changes once one
phase of the quarantine (say, the strict quarantine) is replaced by a second phase of the quarantine (the softer
one). Recently, several authors incorporated quarantine
into COVID-19 modeling [17–19]. However, these models
are not network-based. In addition, they do not address
the question of the optimal strategy of easing the quarantine in order to minimize the net number of infected
individuals - one of the central questions in the present
paper.
Looking from a strictly epidemiological point of view,
the necessity of a strict quarantine has been called into
question [20–22]. One argument against strict lockdown
measures is that once the strict quarantine is lifted, the
epidemic spread returns to full effect, resulting in the total number of infected individuals during the entire epi-

2
demic staying the same. Some argue, therefore, that the
way Sweden handled the epidemic [23] might be better.
Indeed, if the overall number of infected is the same,
softer quarantine measures are more appealing rather
than the two phases (a strict quarantine followed by a
soft one) from the economic and social considerations.
Is this argument correct from a purely epidemiological
point of view? We test this idea by running simulations
of the SIR epidemic on a network where the node degree
distribution changes with time, following administrative
decisions to move from a strict quarantine to a soft one.
We focus on the final number of susceptible individuals
(or the overall number of infected individuals throughout
the epidemic) and test different strategies of lifting the
quarantine.
II.

EQUAL NUMBER OF CONNECTIONS

Let us first discuss the argument in favor of a singlephase soft quarantine. One can argue that some quarantine is certainly needed to “flatten the curve”. Indeed, without any quarantine measures, the instantaneous number of infected might be so high that it would
exceed the medical system capacity. However, one continues, there is no need for a quarantine stricter than
that needed to avoid medical collapse. Since eventually
the strict quarantine needs to be lifted, the disease will
be back, and the total number of people who catch the
disease in the course of epidemic remains the same. To
support this argument, one can consider the standard
SIR model [13] of an epidemic. The equation for the
fraction of infected individuals I(t) reads
dI
= r I S − α I,
dt

(1)

where S(t) is a fraction of susceptible individuals, the
parameter r characterises the transmission rate and the
parameter α is the rate of recovery. The number of infected increases if a susceptible person becomes infected
(see the first term on the right-hand side) and decreases
if an infected person recovers (see the second term on
the right-hand side). From this equation, the number of
infected starts declining when dI/dt becomes negative,
which happens only after the fraction of susceptible individuals becomes smaller than some threshold S ∗ given by
S ∗ = α/r. This means that the epidemic starts decaying
only after a certain fraction of population 1−S ∗ (a rather
big fraction in the case of COVID-19) catch the disease.
Therefore, any quarantine measures can only delay this
“herd immunity”, since after lifting the quarantine, we
can not avoid infecting less than 1 − S ∗ fraction of the
population, which often amounts to 70 or even 80 percent of the population (depending on the estimates of r
and α).
Let us now test this argument, considering the SIR
model on a network. In general, modeling the spread of
the disease on a network is a substantial improvement

[1] of the standard continuum (mean field) modeling in
two respects. The first advantage is related to the rate of
recovery of an infected individual. The continuum modeling implies a Poisson process, which means an exponential distribution of individual disease duration. This is
in contrast to observations showing that the distribution
is peaked around an average disease duration. Network
modeling can easily account for this peaked distribution
of individual disease durations. The second drawback of
the continuum modeling (that can be eliminated by using networks) is the assumption of an equal number of
contacts for each individual, i.e. ignoring the underlying
microscopic structure of the social network [1].
Let us first eliminate only the first drawback and consider a network where once the quarantine is lifted, all of
the individuals have an identical number of connections.
To be specific, let us consider a somewhat extreme example. Suppose that during the strict quarantine only
10 percent of the population are “essential workers” and
maintain a high number of contacts, 20 per day. The
remaining population works from home, where each individual has a minimal number of contacts, only 1 per
day. Specifying the transmission probability (taken to
be 0.01) and the duration of the disease (taken to be
14.5 days), we can follow the number of susceptible as a
function of time. To run the simulations, first a network
with 10000 nodes was constructed using the configuration model. Then one node was randomly infected and
the SIR model was simulated using the standard MonteCarlo method. The entire procedure was repeated many
times (of the order of 100 runs) and the average values
for S(t) and I(t) were computed taking into account only
the runs where an outbreak did occur.
Simulation results are shown in Figure 1. The blue
dash-dotted curve shows the fraction of susceptible individuals as a function of time. After several months
(once the epidemic is almost over), the quarantine is
lifted, so that each node has the same degree k = 20.
The inset shows the fraction of infected as a function
of time, and the corresponding blue dash-dotted line describes two waves of the epidemic: the smaller one during
the quarantine and the larger one after the quarantine is
lifted. Suppose now, we handle the epidemic differently
and do not introduce the strict quarantine at all. The
node degree distribution is the same as the final node
degree distribution above: each node has the same degree k = 20. The black solid curve shows the fraction of
susceptible individuals, while the red dotted line shows
the theoretical prediction for the final fraction of susceptible for the SIR epidemic on a configuration model of a
network (the mathematics is discussed in the next section). One can see that not only does the epidemic end
much earlier, but also the final fraction of susceptible is
almost the same as with the strict quarantine! So, the
strict quarantine did not change the total number of people who caught the disease in the course of the epidemic.
This result is in agreement with the argument based on
the continuum SIR model. Does it mean that the strict

3
quarantine is not needed at all? The next section shows
that this result is generally wrong and is related to the
unrealistic assumption of an equal number of contacts
across the population.

nodes have degree 14 and 10 percent of nodes have degree 50 as in the first scenario. What will be the final
fraction of susceptible individuals in these two scenarios?
1

1

0.5

0.8

0.9

0.3

0.8

0.2

I

0.4

I

0.3
0.2

0.7

0.1

0.6

0.1

S

S

0.6

0
0

100

0.4

0

0.5

200

0

t, days

100

200

300

t, days

0.4
0.2

0.3
0.2

0

0

50

100

150

200

250

300

t, days

0.1

0

100

200

300

400

500

t, days
FIG. 1: The fraction of susceptible individuals as a function
of time with and without strict quarantine. Shown are the
simulation of the SIR model on a network (the configuration
model) with 10000 nodes. The black solid line corresponds
to the no-quarantine case, where all the nodes have the same
degree k = 20. The blue dash-dotted line corresponds to
the two-phase scenario. In the first phase (the quarantine),
10 percent of nodes have degree k = 20 and 90 percent of
nodes have degree k = 1. After several months (once the
epidemic is almost over), the quarantine is lifted (the second
phase), and each node has the same degree k = 20 as in
the no-quarantine scenario. The inset shows the fraction of
infected as a function of time for both scenarios. The dotted
red line shows a theoretical prediction for the final fraction of
susceptible individuals for a single phase (without the strict
quarantine), see text.

III.

DISTRIBUTION OF THE NUMBER OF
CONNECTIONS

Now we are going to eliminate the second main drawback of standard continuum (mean-field) models and consider a network where different nodes have a different
number of connections. Again we will test the results
of two ways of handling the epidemic; importantly, the
final node degree distribution is the same in both cases.
The first scenario does not imply a strict quarantine: 90
percent of nodes have degree 14 and 10 percent of nodes
have degree 50. The second scenario has two phases, each
with its own node degree distribution. The first phase is
a strict quarantine: 90 percent of nodes have degree 2
and 10 percent of nodes have degree 50. These number
of contacts are similar to the numbers of casual contacts
suggested in the literature [24]. The second phase corresponds to lifting the strict quarantine: 90 percent of

FIG. 2: The fraction of susceptible individuals as a function
of time with and without quarantine. Shown are the simulation of the SIR model on a network (the configuration model)
with 10000 nodes. The black solid line corresponds to the noquarantine scenario, where 10 percent of nodes have a high
degree (k = 50) and 90 percent of nodes have a moderate
degree (k = 14). The blue dash-dotted line corresponds to
the two-phase scenario. In the first phase (the strict quarantine), 90 percent of nodes have a low degree k = 2 and 10
percent of nodes have a high degree k = 50. In the second
phase, the quarantine is lifted, and the node degree distribution matches this of the first scenario: 10 percent of nodes
have a high degree (k = 50) and 90 percent of nodes have a
moderate degree (k = 14). The inset shows the fraction of
infected as a function of time for both cases.

Figure 2 shows that the results are completely different. While the final fraction of susceptible individuals
without the strict quarantine is Sf ≈ 0.16, the final
fraction of susceptible in the scenario with quarantine
is Sf q ≈ 0.4, more than two times larger. This means
that the quarantine helped more than 20 percent of population, who avoided catching the highly unpleasant disease. This also illustrates a very interesting point: the
final steady state depends not only on the final node degree distribution (which is the same in both scenarios),
but also strongly depends on the history.
The final fraction of susceptible individuals for a single
phase (without quarantine) can be computed theoretically. We present here only a summary of results, and the
reader is referred to Ref. [1] for more detail. The calculation uses the concept of a generating function for the node
Pk=∞
degree distribution defined as g0 (z) = k=0 pk z k , where
pk is a fraction of nodes with degree k. In our case, the
generating function is given by g0 (z) = 0.9 z m + 0.1 z 50.
The generating function for the excess degree distribution
is g1 (z) = (1/k̄)dg0 /dz = (0.9 m z m−1+5 z 49 )/(0.9 m+5),

4
high degree nodes caught the disease during phase 1 and
are immune during phase 2. Therefore, as m increases
(from m = 2 to m = 10), Sf decreases, but Sf q does not
change. For larger m, the second wave of epidemic becomes stronger leading to a decrease in Sf q and smaller
values of η.
1

blue: fi =0.002
red: fi =0.005

0.9

green: fi =0.01
magenta: fi =0.025
black: fi =0.04

0.8

cyan: fi =0.05

S

where k̄ = 0.9 m + 5 is the average degree. Solving numerically the equation x = 1 − φ + φg1 (x), we obtain x
and compute the final fraction of susceptible individuals
for a single phase, Sf = g0 (x). Here φ = 1 − exp(−βτ ),
where we considered the following transmission rate and
disease duration: β = 0.01 and τ = 14.5 days. The computed value of Sf (for m = 14, Sf = 0.1624) is shown in
Figure 2 by the dotted red line. A similar calculation for
Sf was performed for the node degree distribution presented in Figure 1 (see the dotted red line). It is possible
to perform a theoretical calculation for the fraction of
susceptible Sk and infected Ik nodes of a certain degree
k as a function of time. Using a degree-based approximation of the SIR model [1], one can write down rate
equations for Sk and Ik . These equations however, do
not accurately reproduce the results of Monte-Carlo simulations on the network (shown in Figures 1 and 2) since
they assume exponential distribution of disease duration
times [25].

blue dashed: fi =0.07

0.7

red dashed: fi =0.1
green dashed: fi =0.12

0.6
0.5
0.4

2.5

0

50

100

150

200

250

300

t, days
0.2

0.48

Sfq

2

0.46

0.15

0.44

I

1.5

0.1

0.42
10-3

10-2

0.05

1
0

10

20

30

40

10-1

fi

50

m
FIG. 3: The relative importance of the strict quarantine.
Shown is η = (1 − Sf )/(1 − Sf q ) as a function of the lower degree m, where the final node degree distribution is the following: 90 percent of nodes have a low degree m and 10 percent
of nodes have a high degree 50.

The relative importance of the strict quarantine can be
characterised by comparing the final (steady state) fraction of susceptible individuals: η = (1 − Sf )/(1 − Sf q ).
Considering the final node degree distribution generated
by g0 (z) = 0.9 z m + 0.1 z 50, we computed η as a function
of the degree m. Figure 3 shows these numerical results.
As expected, in the limit of low m, η tends to 1, since
in this limit, phase 2 does not differ from phase 1. As
we have shown in the previous section, η tends to 1 also
in the limit of high m, since the quarantine has no effect
for the degree distribution where all individuals have the
same number of contacts. The maximum of η for intermediate values of m is related to the fact that lifting the
quarantine does not lead to an outbreak as most of the

0

0

50

100

150

200

250

300

350

t, days
FIG. 4: The fraction of susceptible individuals (the upper
panel) and the fraction of infected individuals (the bottom
panel) as a function of time for the two-phase dynamics: the
first phase is a strict quarantine, and the second phase is a
softer quarantine. See text for the corresponding node degree distributions. The quarantine is lifted when a fraction
fi of the population is still infected. Different curves in both
panels correspond to different timing of lifting the quarantine
(different values of fi ). The inset in the lower panel shows
the final fraction of susceptible individuals as a function of
fi , demonstrating the effect of timing.

We have also checked that the effect persists for more
complicated node degree distributions. Let us say that
during the strict quarantine 90 percent of nodes have a
low degree 2 and 10 percent of nodes have a high degree 50 as before. These high-degree nodes can represent
cashiers in big grocery stores [16]. Lifting the quarantine
means allowing gatherings (for example, 70 percent of

5
the population increase the number of connections from
2 to 6) and opening smaller stores and restaurants etc
(for example, 20 percent of the population increase the
number of connections from 2 to 25). The numbers are
of course quite arbitrary, but they represent the situation
qualitatively. Figure 4 shows results similar to the ones
on Figure 2: the quarantine helps. In addition, we investigated the effect of timing: when it is best to lift the
quarantine. Reaching the steady state takes time, and it
is difficult to keep the population in a strict quarantine
for a long time. What happens if we lift the quarantine
earlier? Suppose, the quarantine is lifted when a certain
(small) fraction of the population (let us denote it by fi )
is still infected. The upper panel (as well as the inset in
the lower panel) of Figure 4 shows that the second wave
of the epidemic is independent of fi for small values of fi
and only after a while starts growing with fi .
The explanation of this effect can be seen in the lower
panel of Figure 4. The strength of the second wave seems
to crucially depend on the fraction of the remaining high
degree nodes. As depicted by the dotted yellow line in the
lower panel of Figure 4, the epidemic in the population of
high degree nodes reaches the steady state significantly
faster (since these nodes are catching the disease earlier).
Once the steady state is reached, the final number of
susceptible individuals Sf q stops changing (see the inset).
IV.

SUMMARY AND DISCUSSION

This work discusses the importance of a strict quarantine from the purely epidemiological point of view.
One argument in favor of it is clear: it is called “flatten the curve” and says that some quarantine measures
are needed so that the instantaneous number of infected
individuals would not exceed the medical system capacity. However, should we really go beyond that and apply
stricter measures?
We have shown that in the case when each individual
has the same number of contacts, the strict quarantine is
not necessary: the same total number of people catch the
disease during the entire duration of epidemic. However,
in reality, the node degree distribution is not strongly
peaked around a certain degree, and there are individuals with low number of connections (low degree nodes)

[1] Newman M. E. J. , Networks, Second Edition (Oxford
University Press, Oxford, 2018).
[2] Barrat A., Barthélemy M., and Vespignani A., Dynamical
Processes on Complex Networks (Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, 2008).
[3] Keeling M. J. and Rohani P., Modeling infectious diseases
in humans and animals. (Princeton University Press,
2011).
[4] Newman M. E. J., Phys. Rev. E, 66 (2002) 016128.
[5] Kenah E. and Robins J. M., Phys. Rev. E, 76 (2007)

and individuals with a high number of connections (high
degree nodes). In this case, the two phase (or a multiphase) procedure of the strict quarantine followed by a
softer quarantine can save a substantial fraction of population from being infected. The effect results from the
fact that essential workers (people who still go to work
during the strict quarantine) have a high number of connections (cashiers in the big grocery stores or medical
staff are the common examples). A large number of these
high degree nodes become infected and then immune by
the time the strict quarantine is lifted, decreasing the
average degree of the remaining network.
This results suggest an optimal degree-based procedure
for lifting the quarantine: high degrees go first. In practice, when the state lifts the strict quarantine (or moves
from one phase of quarantine to the next phase), there is
always a choice. One can open smaller stores (where
cashiers are high-degree nodes) or/and one can allow
gatherings (which typically consist of low degree nodes).
The model suggests that the stores need to be opened
first: this way we can save many individuals (mostly low
degree nodes) from being infected.
Clearly, while qualitatively representative of real-life,
these results were obtained using a toy model with simplified node degree distributions. To make quantitative
predictions, one needs to have data on realistic node degree distributions during different stages of quarantine.
Although some attempts to measure the network of contacts in small group experiments are known [26], to our
knowledge, the real life node degree distributions on a
scale of a city are not available. Finally, in this work we
did not take into account the spatial degrees of freedom,
although the travel patterns are certainly important and
are known to be affected by the epidemic [27]. We have
checked however, that the main effect persists in the spatial model of neighborhoods on the lattice [16], and the
results obtained with that model (not shown) are similar
to the ones presented in Figure 2.

Acknowledgments

One of us (E.K.) is grateful to Tali Khain for fruitful
discussions.

036113.
[6] Pastor-Satorras R., Castellano C., Mieghem P. V., and
Vespignani A., Rev. Mod. Phys., 87 (2015) 925.
[7] Bansal S., Grenfell B. T., Meyers L. A., J. R. Soc. Interface, 4 (2007) 879.
[8] Slatheé M., Jones J. H., PLoS Comput. Biol., 6 (2010)
e1000736.
[9] Liu Z. and Hu B., Europhys. Lett., 72 (2005) 315.
[10] Meyers L. A., Pourbohlol B., Newman M. E. J., Skowronski D. M., Brunham R. C., J. Theor. Biol., 232 (2005)

6
71.
[11] Block P., Hoffman M., Raabe I. J., Down J. B., Rahal
C., Rashyap R., and Mills M. C., Nat. Hum. Behav., 4
(2020) 588.
[12] Litvinova M., Liu Q.-H., Kulikov E. S., and Ajelli M.,
PNAS, 116 (2019) 13174.
[13] Murray J. D., Mathematical Biology, Springer, New York
(2002).
[14] Gross T., D’Lima C. J. D., and Blasius B., Phys. Rev.
Lett., 96 (2006) 208701.
[15] Moinet A., Pastor-Satorras R., and Barrat A., Phys. Rev.
E, 97 (2018) 012313.
[16] Khain E., Phys. Rev. E, 102 (2020) 022313.
[17] GrossB., Zheng Z., Liu S., Chen X., Sela A., Li J., Li D.,
and Havlin S., EPL, 131 (2020) 58002.
[18] Trigger S. A. and Czerniawski E. B., Phys. Scr., 95
(2020) 105001.
[19] Maier B. F. and Brockmann D., Science, 368 (2020) 742.

[20] Day T., Park A., Madras N., Gumel A., and Wu J., Am.
J. Epidemiol., 163 (2006) 479.
[21] Raveendran A.V., Jayadevan R., Diabetes Metab. Syndr.,
14 (2020) 1323.
[22] The
Great
Barrington
Declaration,
https://gbdeclaration.org
[23] Vogel G., ‘It’s been so, so surreal.’ Critics of Sweden’s lax
pandemic policies face fierce backlash, Science Magazine,
(6 October, 2020).
[24] Renardy M., Eisenberg M., Kirschner D., J. Theor. Biol.,
507 (2020) 110461.
[25] Gomes M. F. C., Goncalves S., Physica A, 388 (2009)
3133.
[26] Read J. M., Eames K.T.D. and Edmunds W. J., J. R.
Soc. Interface, 5 (2008) 1001.
[27] Meloni S., Perra N., Arenas A., Gomez S., Moreno Y.
and Vespignani A., Sci. Rep., 1 (2011) 62.

