The Unintended Consequences of Stay-at-Home Policies on Work Outcomes:
The Impacts of Lockdown Orders on Content Creation
Xunyi Wang1, Reza Mousavi2, Yili Hong3
1

Baylor University, 2 University of Virginia, 3 University of Houston

Abstract
The COVID-19 pandemic has posed an unprecedented challenge to individuals around the globe.
To mitigate the spread of the virus, many states in the U.S. issued lockdown orders to urge their
residents to stay at their homes, avoid get-togethers, and minimize physical interactions. While
many offline workers are experiencing significant challenges performing their duties, digital
technologies have provided ample tools for individuals to continue working and to maintain their
productivity. Although using digital platforms to build resilience in remote work is effective,
other aspects of remote work (beyond the continuation of work) should also be considered in
gauging true resilience. In this study, we focus on content creators, and investigate how
restrictions in individual’s physical environment impact their online content creation behavior.
Exploiting a natural experimental setting wherein four states issued state-wide lockdown orders
on the same day whereas five states never issued a lockdown order, and using a unique dataset
collected from a short video-sharing social media platform, we study the impact of lockdown
orders on content creators’ behaviors in terms of content volume, content novelty, and content
optimism. We combined econometric methods (difference-in-differences estimations of a
matched sample) with machine learning-based natural language processing to show that on
average, compared to the users residing in non-lockdown states, the users residing in lockdown
states create more content after the lockdown order enforcement. However, we find a decrease in
the novelty level and optimism of the content generated by the latter group. Our findings have
important contributions to the digital resilience literature and shed light on managers’ decisionmaking process related to the adjustment of employees’ work mode in the long run. Our findings
also have important implications for designing digital platforms that are used for building
resilience in an ecosystem.
Keywords: COVID-19, crises, digital resilience, content creators, natural experiment,
difference-in-differences, text analytics, natural language processing (NLP)

1. Introduction
The COVID-19 pandemic has ravaged the world, infecting over 52 million individuals and
claiming the lives of 1.3 million as of November 2020. As a response, governments have
implemented various policies. Among the policies enforced by state authorities to curb the
spread of the pandemic, lockdowns have been considered as the last resort and the most
effective. These lockdowns, however, impose physical restrictions for the individuals in the
jurisdictions. From missing on visiting family and friends to the inability to shop in malls, the
lockdowns drastically changed the daily lives of individuals. In the presence of the lockdown
restrictions, many individuals were also forced to work remotely via digital platforms. While
offline workers are experiencing significant challenges, digital technologies have provided ample
tools for individuals to continue working and to maintain their productivity. These digital
platforms have been used to build resilience and aid individuals to quickly recover from or adjust
to the major disruptions (e.g., lockdowns) caused by the pandemic.
Although it appears that the digital platforms are effective in building resilience by
overcoming the restrictions related to geographical boundaries and aiding individuals to continue
working on their tasks remotely (Huang et al. 2020), they may not address other unintended
consequences of the disruptions on individuals’ work. For instance, individuals can use the
Zoom application to continue their work meetings (avoid disruptions); however, attending Zoom
meetings from a new work environment (their homes) could have consequences on their work.
For instance, research shows that individuals are exhausted at the end of the workday due to the
rise of “Zoom fatigue” (Fosslien and Duffy 2020). Thus, the resilience created by digital
platforms (such as the Zoom application) should not be solely interpreted as the continuation of
work after a disruption. Rather, it should be interpreted as the extent to which digital platforms

1

truly aid individuals to continue their work the same way they used to before the disruption. In
this perspective, not only the continuation of work is important, but also being able to produce
the same outputs as before is important. To understand to what extent digital platforms can build
resilience during lockdowns, we first need to study the consequences of lockdowns in terms of
individuals’ work outcomes. The consequences for work outcomes could be related to their work
productivity, work quality, and psychological state. On the one hand, during the lockdowns,
individuals have more time to work at home as the lockdowns restrict their activities outside of
their homes, but on the other hand, they may feel tired and weary of repeating the same activities
from the same physical environment (their homes), which may affect work quality as well as
their psychological state.
In this study, we examine the impact of working from home (as a consequence of
lockdowns) on the digital resilience in work outcomes in the context of content-creation
platforms. We specifically focus on content creators as they are an emerging group of individuals
who are increasingly gaining prominence. Given the slowdown in the traditional media,
entertainment, and sports industry, individual content creators have become an important
workforce satisfying the demand for creative content. In particular, we strive to understand
individuals’ content creation behavior on a video creation and sharing platform, TikTok. TikTok
is one of the fastest-growing social media platforms globally, which allows content creators to
post original content in the form of short videos. According to CNBC, TikTok’s user base has
grown 800% from January 2018 to July 2020.1 In this study, we are interested in a holistic
approach to gauge digital resilience by comparing content creators’ work outcomes before and
after the lockdowns. Given that prior research suggests that resilience is a multi-faceted concept

1

https://www.cnbc.com/2020/08/24/tiktok-reveals-us-global-user-growth-numbers-for-first-time.html
2

(Connor and Davidson 2003), we gauge digital resilience in work outcomes using three distinct
constructs that are essential in content creation industry: 1- productivity, 2- novelty, 3- and
optimism (positive emotions). Bearing this in mind, we seek to understand how state-wide
lockdowns impacted the work outcomes of social media content creators in terms of productivity
(quantity), content novelty, and optimism (positive emotions) in content. In particular, we intend
to answer the following research questions:
•

Do the state-wide lockdowns impact the productivity of content creators?

•

Do the state-wide lockdowns impact the novelty of content created by content creators?

•

Do the state-wide lockdowns impact the optimism in content created by content creators?
To answer these research questions, we leverage a natural experiment resulted from the

heterogeneous lockdown-related decisions taken by state governors in U.S. In particular, we
identified a number of states that enforced identical state-wide lockdowns precisely on the same
day; and we further identified a number of similar states that did not enforce any lockdowns
during the same time frame. Given that the decision about enforcing a state-wide lockdown is not
controlled by TikTok content creators, the differential lockdown policies create a natural
experimental setting that would allow us to use a Difference-in-Differences (DiD) approach to
examine the potential impacts of state-wide lockdowns on content creators’ productivity as well
as the novelty and optimism in their content. In addition to leveraging the lockdowns as
exogenous shocks for econometric identification, we used machine learning-based natural
language processing to construct measures of two key work outcomes (content novelty and
optimism), and we conducted various additional analyses to examine the robustness of our
results.

3

Based on the DiD analyses on a matched sample of content creators who reside in the
lockdown versus non-lockdown states, our results show that content creators in states that
enforced state-wide lockdowns posted significantly more content after the lockdown when
compared to content creators from the non-lockdown states. This finding suggests that there is a
productivity boost due to the physical restrictions caused by the lockdowns. However, our results
also show that content novelty and content optimism from content creators in lockdown states
(compared to similar content creators in non-lockdown states) both decrease after the
enforcement of the lockdowns.
Our findings provide important implications regarding productivity in the context of
remote work, particularly for emerging job categories such as independent content creators. In
line with prior work on the productivity effects of work-from-home (Bloom et al. 2015;
Choudhury et al. 2020), our findings suggest that the productivity of workers increase after they
are restricted to work from home, perhaps because they find more time to allocate to their work
when they work from their homes. However, other unintended consequences include the
reduction of novelty and optimism in their work. Therefore, the implications of our study would
inform decision makers to be aware of some of the unintended consequences of setting policies
around work-from-home. In particular, our findings have important implications for embedding
digital innovations in remote learning and remote work ecosystems. As digital innovators design
new platforms to build resilience, they need to be aware of the consequences of remote work and
design their platforms accordingly. That is, the design of the new platforms to aid remote work
and remote education should not be based on the assumption that subjects would behave the
same way they used to (before the disruption), but rather, they may behave differently due to the

4

change in their physical environment. Therefore, our research is a call to revisit the assumptions
about individuals’ behaviors when designing new platforms based on digital innovation.
The organization of this manuscript is as follows. The next section reviews the current
literature related to digital resilience and user-generated content (UGC) creation and presents the
arguments leading to our hypotheses. We present our data and variables in the next section. We
then describe the empirical model and present descriptive statistics along with the results of our
analyses. We conclude by discussing our findings, the theoretical and practical implications of
this study, as well as the limitations and potential extensions of this study.

2. Literature Review
2.1 Digital Resilience during Crises
There is a stream of IS literature on digital resilience, wherein most of the works focus on the
context of life-threatening events such as natural disasters and terrorist attacks. During those
unexpected large-scale crises, information technologies, with their high level of agility and
responsiveness, have been shown as effective means to disseminate information and support
decision-making (Park et al. 2015). For instance, oftentimes, an incident is initially reported by a
witness with a mobile communication device, the report is rapidly distributed through social
media services, and mainstream media involvement follows (Oh et al. 2013).
In particular, social media can play a critical role in propagating emergency information.
For example, during the 2017 Storm Cindy in the U.S., a limited number of Twitter handles
including those belonging to news and weather agencies, became the main source of information
regarding the storm (Kim et al. 2018). Similarly, a case study reported by Yates and Paquette
(2011) shows that during the 2010 Haitian earthquake, social media enabled effective knowledge
management in a dynamic emergency environment through establishing coordination among

5

various disaster relief agencies, resulting in transformation of knowledge in a way that it would
be better utilized by individuals and decision makers (Yates and Paquette 2011).
IT artifacts not only can help build resilience during natural disasters, but they can also be
used to cope with man-made emergency incidents such as shootings, building/structure fires, and
criminal incidents (Han et al. 2015). Specifically, IT can be incorporated into an ecosystem and
facilitate three sequential yet distinct operations: mobilization, situation assessment, and
intervention (Yang et al. 2013). In a study of emergency management networks in metropolitan
areas in Florida, Kapucu and Garayev (2012) find that IT utilization is positively related to the
sustainability of emergency management networks and call for more investment in IT
infrastructure. Researchers have also signified the role of IT artifacts in the design of emergency
systems. For example, Chen et al. (2007) offer general design principles for building better
emergency response management systems, and Chen et al. (2013) offer specific
recommendations for systems that are used in fire-related extreme events.
As one of the most destructive crises in history, COVID-19 pandemic created an
unprecedented challenge for individuals around the globe. It struck the world economy with the
biggest shock since the second world war, followed by a slump in consumer spending, numerous
business bankruptcies, and a temporary loss of 500 million jobs.2 Among the studies that have
examined the impact of the pandemic on the workforce, a significant number of them
particularly focused on the disruptions that the lockdowns brought to academics. For instance,
using a world-wide survey of researchers, Myers et al. (2020) find that the pandemic resulted in a
sharp decline in time spent on academic research. A few other studies also reveal the presence of
gender inequality in the change of research productivity during the pandemic (Andersen et al.
2

https://www.economist.com/leaders/2020/10/08/the-pandemic-has-caused-the-worlds-economies-todiverge.
6

2020; Cui et al. 2020; Kim and Patterson 2020). In conclusion, recent studies have signaled some
of the potential impacts of the pandemic and the subsequent lockdowns on the way people
perform their work.
In order to control the spread of the virus, many local and national governments,
including several U.S. states, counties, and municipalities, issued lockdown orders and mandated
their residents to stay at home for a specific period of time. In return, these lockdowns resulted in
major impacts on the way individuals live, the way they work, the places where they spend their
time, and the people they interact with (Ghose et al. 2020). An analysis of location data in New
York City (Bakker et al. 2020) revealed that a direct result of the lockdown is that distance
traveled every day dropped by 70%, the number of social contacts in certain places decreased by
93%, and the number of people staying home the whole day increased from 20% to 60%.
Furthermore, Bick et al. (2020), by conducting a survey on 5,000 working age adults, show that
35.2 percent of the workforce worked entirely from home in May 2020, up from 8.2 percent in
February 2020. In another study, Bartik et al. (2020) also find an increase in remote work.
However, they find that the increase in remote work varies across industries. For example,
remote work is more common in industries with more educated and higher-paid employees. And
the productivity effect across industries vary with education.
As the pandemic and its impacts on society is evolving, a few pioneering studies have
examined the individuals’ use of digital platforms during the pandemic. For instance, NabityGrover et al. (2020) examine the pandemic-related self-disclosure behavior on social media.
More specifically, they argue that the pandemic may have changed some topics from private to
public knowledge (i.e., inside-out) and from readily shared to hidden (e.g., outside-in). Further, a
recent study by Rao et al. (2020) analyzes tweets posted by government and health officials

7

during the pandemic. The analysis of the tweets revealed that the officials often use either an
alarming tone or a reassuring tone when they discuss COVID-19 topics on Twitter. The study
suggests that, as the officials use Twitter to post alarming content, they also need to use a
reassuring tone during the crisis (Rao et al. 2020). Overall, this emerging stream of literature has
established the importance of social media in responding to crisis situations.
2.2 User-Generated Content (UGC) Creation
This study is closely related to UGC creation literature, which includes a variety of themes
ranging from how to stimulate content creation (Burtch et al. 2018; Goes et al. 2016; Huang et al.
2019; Khern-am-nuai et al. 2018; Sun et al. 2017), to how to evoke novel content creation
(Burtch et al. 2020), to examining various impacts of the emotions embedded in the content (Yin
et al. 2014). These studies have largely expanded our understanding of mechanisms that would
result in desired outcomes such as creating more content by users or creating specific types of
content by them. In this section, we review the UGC literature related to content volume, content
novelty, and content optimism, and further theorize the impacts of the change in individuals’
physical environment (due to lockdown) on their content volume, content novelty, and content
optimism.
2.2.1 Content Volume
The proliferation of Web 2.0 technology has resulted in a wide-range of UGC-centered platforms
in a variety of use cases including purchase and investment decisions (Huang et al. 2019),
consumer analytics (Lee and Bradlow 2011), and entertainment (Moon et al. 2014) to name a
few. An essential element of UGC is related to users’ motivations for content creation. IS
research has identified several mechanisms to explain content creation. Sun et al. (2017), for
example, examine the moderating effect of social connectedness (intrinsic motivation) on the

8

relationship between monetary rewards and product review contribution. Burtch et al. (2018)
reveal that the combination of financial incentives and social norms result in motivating users to
write reviews in greater numbers and of greater length (Burtch et al. 2018). Design-based
incentives are also shown to drive content creation. For instance, Goes et al. (2016) find evidence
that incentive hierarchies, defined as achieving higher status within the platform, may
temporarily motivate users to contribute more in a crowd-based online knowledge exchange.
Additionally, gamification-based designs (symbolic awards) are found to have a sizeable effect
on user contribution and retention (Gallus 2017). And recently, content creation for digital
platforms has become a viable profession for many individuals (Tang et al. 2012). For example,
on platforms such as YouTube or TikTok, content creators are able to earn revenue through
advertising and other sources.
Despite the breadth of research in this area, there is a glaring lack of research in
identifying the potential impacts of changes in users’ physical environment on their contentcreation behaviors. Filling this gap in the UGC literature is even more critical due to the fact that,
as a result of the pandemic and the subsequent lockdowns, many individuals including UGC
content creators have been mandated to work from home (WFH). Understanding the potential
impacts of such a drastic change in individuals’ physical environment on their productivity can
inform the design of digital platforms in the hope of building a more resilient ecosystem. The
main question is whether working from home resulted in a higher or a lower level of
productivity. We argue that WFH facilitates greater work productivity, and we rationalize this
argument in two ways:
First, individuals who work from home, on average, would have more time to spend on
their work. For starters, those who work from home spend no time commuting to their

9

workplaces. A study by Bloom (2015) also suggest that individuals who work from home have
more time to spend on working because they do not run errands at lunch, they can start to work
earlier, take shorter and fewer breaks, and end their work late in the day. Consequently, the
increase in working hours can drive productivity higher. Second, people at home can have a
relatively quiet environment and spend less time socializing with their colleagues. Workplaces
could be perceived as distracting environments (Lee and Brand 2010) that could hinder
individuals’ focus and concentration (Roper and Juneja 2008). An empirical study using data
from Ctrip, the largest travel agency in China, revealed that switching employees from in-office
to WFH led to a 13.5% increase in employee productivity (Bloom et al. 2015). By conducting
interviews with employees who worked from home, Bloom and colleagues attributed the
increase of productivity to the quieter environment (home) and longer working time. Similarly,
in our case, due to the physical restrictions enforced by the lockdowns, content creators who
stayed at home, had more time to spend on content planning and shooting, video editing and
production, and were less distracted by the surrounding environment or socializing with others.
Therefore, we propose that they are likely to create more content:
H1: Ceteris paribus, individuals mandated to stay at home create more content compared
to those who are not mandated to stay at home.
2.2.2 Content Novelty
Content novelty is an important element in UGC and has been shown to be a good predictor of
content popularity (Carmel et al. 2012). Although originally rooted in psychology literature,
content novelty has been an important construct in organization science (Hargadon and Bechky
2006; Sosa 2011) and marketing literature (Smith et al. 2007; Yang and Smith 2009). To gain a
deeper understanding of the potential impact of the change in individuals’ physical environment

10

and the novelty of their content, we refer to the psychology literature. As suggested by PerrySmith and Shalley (2003, p. 91), novelty is not a static feature, but rather is determined within
“the bounds of social, cultural, and historical precedents of the field.” In other words, while
individuals are the sources of novelty, novelty stems from the interplay between the individuals
and the environment around them (Cattani and Ferriani 2008). In the film industry, for instance,
a longitudinal study finds that the socio-relational system nurtures individuals’ creative
performance (Cattani and Ferriani 2008). Woodman et al. (1993) proposed an interactionist
model that nests individual creativity within groups, which “constitutes the social context in
which the creative behavior occurs” (p. 303). Social interactions such as help-seeking and helpgiving can catalyze creativity (Hargadon and Bechky 2006). Similarly, Sosa (2011) shows that
having strong ties within a social network serves as an effective predictor for generating creative
ideas. In summary, the evidence from prior studies commonly suggests that people need social
interactions to generate new, novel, and creative ideas. While lockdowns can result in additional
free time and a less distracting environment, at the same time, people interact with fewer friends,
colleagues, and extended family members in person. The lack of in-person interactions, in turn,
would give rise to an enhanced perception of social isolation (Bullinger et al. 2020). In fact, a
survey study revealed that during the recent stay-at-home order in northern California, 56.4% of
the participants reported perceived isolation and 36% of the participants reported loneliness
(Gaeta and Brydges 2020). Taken together, we argue that the social isolation caused by the
lockdowns can impact the level of content novelty in a negative way. In our case, individuals
who are deprived of in-person interactions due to the state-wide lockdown orders are likely to
create less novel content during the lockdowns. Therefore, we propose our second hypothesis:

11

H2: Ceteris paribus, individuals mandated to stay at home create less novel content
compared to those who are not mandated to stay at home.
2.2.3 Content Optimism
While continuing work output and maintaining the quality of work (e.g., novelty) during the
crises are both important, exhibiting optimism under the difficult time is another dimension of
resilience (Connor and Davidson 2003). Since optimism would be reflected in positive emotions
embedded in the content, content optimism in the context we study refers to the presence of
positive emotions in UGC content.
Emotion embedded in content is an intriguing research topic that has drawn a great deal
of attention. Many studies adopt text analysis or topic classification methods and apply machine
learning-based sentiment analysis to measure the emotions embedded in textual documents.
Related studies in information systems (IS) and marketing have advanced our understanding of
emotions embedded in UGC. Broadly speaking, we can divide these studies into two streams;
one stream of research examines emotion as an outcome, and the other stream examines emotion
as an antecedent. To name a few studies from the first stream, Anderson and Agarwal (2011)
demonstrated the significant role of emotion in one’s decision-making process of health
information disclosure. Huang et al. (2017) find that social network integration increases positive
emotion and decreases negative emotion in the online review text. To name a few studies from
the second stream, in the context of online reviews, studies find differential impact of anxiety
and anger (Yin et al. 2014) in terms of perceived reviewer effort, as well as the relationship
between the expressed arousal and review helpfulness (Yin et al. 2017). Research focusing on
security reveals that positive emotion such as achievement and interest can encourage
precaution-taking behaviors, while negative emotion inhibits precaution-taking behaviors (Burns

12

et al. 2019). In terms of the application of emotion in other contexts such as healthcare, Wang et
al. (2018) found that there is a curvilinear relationship between emotional social support and
HIV patients’ self-care behavior.
Similar to the gap we identified in the literature on content volume and content novelty,
the bulk of the IS literature on content emotion has focused on the interplay between emotional
content and IS constructs; with emotional content being either the outcome or the antecedent.
Notably, there is a lack of research in connecting the change in the physical environment to one’s
emotional expressions. As noted in the previous section, one of the consequences of the
lockdowns is the increased perception of social isolation, anxiety, and loneliness (Gaeta and
Brydges 2020). Using Google trend data, Brodeur et al. (2020) indeed find a substantial increase
in the search intensity for boredom in Europe and the U.S. during the lockdowns. They also find
a significant increase in searches for loneliness, worry, and sadness. According to the selfdetermination theory established by Deci and Ryan (2000), relatedness, which refers to the desire
to feel connected to others – to love and care and to be loved and cared for, is one of the innate
psychological needs for human beings (Baumeister and Leary 1995; Deci and Ryan 2000). Thus,
feeling related or connected to others is a part of eudemonic living that can foster well-being
(Ryan et al. 2008). On the other hand, the feeling of loneliness can be negatively associated with
optimism (Davis et al. 1992; Ben-Zur 2012). Given the above discussions, we expect to observe
a drop in optimism in content created by individuals who were required to stay at their homes.
Therefore, we propose our third hypothesis:
H3: Ceteris paribus, individuals mandated to stay at home create less positive content
compared to those who are not mandated to stay at home.

13

3. Research Setting, Data, & Measures
3.1 Research Setting & Data
We collect data from TikTok, a short-video sharing social media platform that allows users to
create short original video content and share those videos with other users on the mobile
application called TikTok (Zhu et al. 2020). Founded in 2012 and launched in 2017 globally, it is
the fastest growing social media platform in the world (Omar and Dequan 2020), and is now
available in over 150 countries. As of October 2020, it is reported that TikTok has more than 800
million active users with almost 2 billion installations worldwide.3 TikTok is different from other
social media platforms due to its emphasis on sharing short videos, simple-to-use video editing,
and music-inclusion functionalities (Chen et al. 2019). We are specifically interested in studying
TikTok due to the fact that content creation in TikTok would require a more substantial effort
when compared to other social media platforms such as Instagram, Twitter, and Facebook, and
that the novelty of the content is an integral part of TikTok platform. In addition, career
professionals in a variety of fields have been tapping TikTok as a platform to create and share
their content.4
To examine the potential impact of lockdown orders, we first identified the treatment
group and the control group. There were five states (Arkansas, Iowa, Nebraska, North Dakota,
and South Dakota) that did not issue state-wide lockdown orders. All of the other states in the
U.S. issued state-wide lockdown orders at some point.5 The lockdown orders were issued over
time from as early as March 19, 2020 (California) to as late as April 13, 2020 (Rhode Island).

3

https://wallaroomedia.com/blog/social-media/tiktok-statistics/
https://www.cnn.com/2020/11/27/health/tiktok-therapist-mental-health-intl-wellness/index.html and
https://www.forbes.com/sites/forbesagencycouncil/2020/03/12/how-professionals-can-use-tiktok-as-amarketing-channel/?sh=32cbd8114a02
5
https://www.nbcnews.com/health/health-news/here-are-stay-home-orders-across-country-n1168736
4

14

Therefore, to form a relatively balanced treatment group, we targeted a date when there were,
ideally, five states issuing lockdown orders. This would allow us to create comparable control
and treatment groups, each including five states. We found that on March 23, 2020, five states
announced their lockdown orders: Connecticut, Louisiana, Ohio, Oregon, and Washington. Thus,
TikTok users residing in AR, IA, NE, ND, SD form our treatment group, and those who reside in
CT, LA, OH, OR, and WA form our control group. Since there is no geographic information
embedded in the short videos, we used video hashtags to identify user locations. Many users add
a hashtag in the text description of the video to show their location (e.g., state). For example, in
Figure 1, the user put the hashtag “#iowa” to reveal her/his location while watching the sunrise.

Figure 1. An Example TikTok video with Hashtag “#iowa”

Therefore, we obtained user information using ten hashtags representing ten states of
interest, respectively: #arkansas, #iowa, #nebraska, #northdakota, #southdakota, #connecticut,
#louisiana, #ohio, #oregon, and #washington. Due to the concern about the ambiguity in the
location of users who use the hashtag “#washington” around whether it refers to DC or WA, we
excluded the data from the state of Washington from our sample. It is worth noting that there is a
fraction of users who post a hashtag containing a state but actually not residing in the state. For
example, s/he may travel to another state and tag the state for the view. To this end, we carefully
15

examined each user’s location by reviewing her/his other videos and removed a small set of
users who show inconsistencies in their user locations.
Once the users were identified, we collected information on the users and the short videos
they published within the time period starting from November 1st, 2019 and ending to June 30th,
2020. Only the users who published at least one video during this time frame were included in
our data. With the lockdown orders issued on March 23, 2020, we identified 21 weeks as the pretreatment period and 14 weeks as the post-treatment period. The resulted data set contains
217,419 video observations that were posted by 2,346 unique TikTok users. On average, each
user posted 92.7 videos during the time frame of our study.
3.2 Variables & Measurements
Our dependent variables of interest are content volume, content novelty, and content optimism.
Content volume is measured by counting the weekly number of videos posted on the platform by
a focal user. To construct measures of content novelty and content optimism, we leveraged
methods and models in natural language processing, as detailed below:
When TikTok users post their short videos, they also provide a brief description of the
video. We decided to use these descriptions to understand users’ behaviors pre- and postlockdown orders. To this end, we began with pre-processing steps to prepare the text descriptions
for our analytical models. In the pre-processing steps, we first removed any html mark-ups such
as http and https. Then we lemmatized the tokens and removed all of the stop-words using the
spaCy package for Python.6 These pre-processing steps resulted in clean text descriptions that we
used as inputs in our text analytics. Below, we describe our approach in creating text-based
measures for the two constructs we used in our study: content novelty and content optimism.
6

We used spaCy’s “en_core_web_lg” pretrained model. Documentations are available here:
https://spacy.io/models/en
16

3.2.1. Measuring Content Novelty
Recent studies have used text-mining methods to identify novel ideas in text documents
(Balsmeier et al. 2017; Toubia and Netzer 2017). One common approach in measuring novelty in
UGC is to first create a vector representation of content and subsequently use those vector
representations to calculate distance metrics such as Jaccard or cosine similarity (Hass 2017). For
instance, Burtch et al. (2020) used this method to measure content novelty in Reddit and found
that the recipients of peer awards will create content that is significantly similar to their own past
content (i.e., less novel).
In this study, we use a similar approach by transforming the video descriptions to vector
representations and then measure content novelty by comparing the vector representations of
video descriptions created by a user with her/his previous content. If we convert the video
descriptions to vectors, then we could use a measure of spatial distance to compute the
differences between these vectors. For instance, if we have two vectors u and v, we could use the
following formula to compute their cosine distance:
𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑒_𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒(𝑢, 𝑣) = 1 −

!. $
||!||! ||$||!

(1)

where u . v is the dot product of u and v.
We define that if a user creates a novel video, it will contain something different from
her/his previous videos. And a novel video would be accompanied by a novel description, and
the novel description should be different from the previous descriptions created by that user.
Therefore, the cosine distance between the novel video description (u) and the user’s previous
descriptions (v) should be large. On the other hand, if the new video description is not novel,
then it would be similar to the previous descriptions created by the user and therefore should
have a smaller value for cosine distance. As noted earlier, this approach for measuring novelty

17

through text analytics is based on one proposed by Burtch et al. (2020). Given that we can
measure the novelty of video descriptions using cosine distance, the key task we need to perform
is to convert video descriptions to vectors with numeric values.
Vector representation of text documents is at the core of the majority natural language
processing tasks. There are many different methods such as Count Vectorizer,7 TF-IDF
Vectorizer,8 Doc2Vec,9 and more recently, Sentence-BERT10 for converting text sentences or
documents into vector representations. Different from Burtch et al. (2020), which uses TF-IDF
and Doc2Vec, we use an attention model, Sentence-BERT, which is based on Google’s
Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers (BERT). BERT is currently
considered the state-of-the-art model for many NLP tasks (Tenney et al. 2019). And BERT has
been shown to be a very effective method for converting text documents to vector
representations (Reimers and Gurevych 2019). Below, we explain how BERT creates
representations of text data. Then, we explain how we used a modified BERT model to create
vector representations of video descriptions.
BERT is an open-source language representation model introduced by Google in 2018.
BERT is a pre-trained deep learning model that could be fine-tuned for a variety of NLP tasks
and based on a variety of text data (Devlin et al. 2018). It uses Transformer, which is an attention
mechanism that could learn contextual relationships between tokens (e.g., words) in a text
document. Essentially, transformers are models that process words in relation to all the other
words in a sentence, rather than one-by-one in order. BERT models can therefore consider the

7

https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.feature_extraction.text.CountVectorizer.html
https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.feature_extraction.text.TfidfVectorizer.html
9
https://radimrehurek.com/gensim/models/doc2vec.html
10
https://github.com/UKPLab/sentence-transformers
8

18

full context of a word by looking at the words that come before and after it.11 Google has
released two versions of BERT: BERT Base and BERT Large. Both models are developed based
on deep neural networks. There are 12 hidden layers in BERT Base model while there are 24
hidden layers in BERT Large model. BERT is a pre-trained model, which means it has already
been trained and built using text data. Google used two text data sets to train BERT: 2.5B words
from Wikipedia and 800M words from BookCorpus (Devlin et al. 2018). BERT Base returns a
vector representation of length 768 while BERT Large returns a vector representation of length
1028 for each token. These vector representations can then be used in NLP tasks such as text
classification, question-answering, and natural language inference. The details of BERT, how it
is trained, and how it can be used in NLP tasks are discussed in (Devlin et al. 2018) and its
GitHub repository.12
In our study, we were interested in obtaining a vector representation for each video
description in our TikTok dataset. For this task, we chose BERT Base model, which returns a
vector of length 768 for each token (e.g., word) in each sequence (e.g., sentence).6 Each one of
these vectors represents a token in the video description. To obtain the vector representation of
the video descriptions (sequence of words), one could either take the mean of the vector
representations of the tokens in the video description or obtain the vector representation of a
special token that is automatically added to the beginning of each sequence before applying
BERT. This token is called [CLS], and its vector representation can be used as the vector
representation of the whole sequence (sentence). Although these two approaches are viable,
research shows that they both result in poor sentence embeddings (Reimers and Gurevych 2019).
Therefore, we decided to use a modified version of BERT that is designed for sentence
11
12

https://www.blog.google/products/search/search-language-understanding-bert.
https://github.com/google-research/bert.
19

embeddings. This model is called “Sentence-BERT” and is based on Siamese BERT networks
(Reimers and Gurevych 2019).
By applying Sentence-BERT to video descriptions, we obtained a vector of length 768
for each video description in our data. After obtaining the vector representations for each video
description in our data set, given that our panel data is in weekly format, we aggregated these
vector representations by taking their component-wise mean for each user for each week. To
examine the quality of the aggregated vector representations, we deployed unsupervised machine
learning algorithms t-distributed Stochastic Neighbor Embedding (t-SNE) and Balanced Iterative
Reducing and Clustering using Hierarchies (BIRCH). We reported the details of this quality
check and its results in Online Appendix A.
The aggregation resulted in a vector of length 768 for each user for each week the user
posted any videos. Then, we measured cosine distance using specification (1), in which 𝑢 is the
vector of component-wise averages of video descriptions posted by user 𝑖 during week 𝑡 and 𝑣 is
the vector of component-wise averages of video descriptions posted by user 𝑖 during the last
week before week 𝑡 that s/he posted any videos.13
3.2.2. Measuring Content Optimism
To measure content optimism (i.e., positive emotion) in video descriptions, we used Python
package NRCLex.14 This package is designed to measure emotional affect in text. NRCLex is a
lexicon-based dictionary that uses a comprehensive list of words that are associated with specific
emotional affects. NRCLex contains approximately 27,000 words, which are derived from the

13

We used SciPy package’s “spatial” module to measure the cosine distance. Documentations are
available here: https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/generated/scipy.spatial.distance.cosine.html
14
Documentations available in: https://pypi.org/project/NRCLex/
20

National Research Council Canada (NRC) affect lexicon15 and the NLTK library's WordNet
synonym sets.16 We used function “affect_frequencies” from Python package NRCLex to obtain
a score for positive affect in each video description in our data set.
It is worth noting that NRCLex provides a variety of other emotional affects, including
fear, anger, anticipation, trust, surprise, sadness, disgust, and joy. For each video description, we
obtained the scores for these additional emotional affects. These additional scores were used to
create a matched sample of treated and control groups, as described in section 3.3. Furthermore,
we used Python package “TextBlob”17 to measure the level of subjectivity in video descriptions.
The subjectivity score was also another construct that we used in section 3.3 to construct a
matched sample of treated and control groups. The subjectivity score ranges from 0 (least
subjective/ most objective) to 1 (most subjective/ least objective).
3.3 Matched Sample
The content creators included in the treatment group could systematically differ from those in the
control group. Therefore, to make the samples in the two groups more comparable, we
constructed matched samples before conducting the empirical analyses. We matched the samples
at the user level; that is, for each user in the treatment group, we identified a similar user in the
control group. In particular, we adopted the propensity score matching approach to balance the
observed characteristics between the treatment and control groups. We calculated the propensity
score using logit regression with an indicator of being treated (user in lockdown state) as a
dichotomous outcome and a set of observed characteristics as covariates. The covariates
primarily include the users’ content characteristics prior to the treatment (lockdown), such as

15

Details are available in: https://nrc.canada.ca/en/research-development/products-services/technicaladvisory-services/sentiment-emotion-lexicons
16
Documentations available in: https://www.nltk.org/howto/wordnet.html
17
Documentations available in: https://textblob.readthedocs.io/en/dev/
21

log-transformation of video count before the lockdown, video length (in seconds) before the
lockdown, and a number of features extracted from the video descriptions such as Subjective,
Fear, Anger, Anticipation, Trust, Surprise, Sadness, Disgust, Joy before the lockdown. Then,
based on the propensity scores, we matched users between the treatment and control groups by
applying the one-to-one nearest neighbor matching without replacement.
Table 1 presents the summary statistics of the treated and control groups before and after
matching. The t-tests and p-values confirm that the means of the two groups are more similar
after matching. Figure 2 presents the distribution of propensity scores for the treatment and
control groups for both unmatched and matched samples. This figure indicates that the matched
control group users have a propensity score distribution more similar to those in the treated
group than those in the unmatched control group. These checks validate that the matching
method is appropriate for producing similar groups.

Table 1. Summary Statistics of Control and Treat Group Before and After Matching
Before Matching (N = 2346)
Mean
Mean
t
p-value
(Treated)
(Control)
Video Count
0.82442
0.72328
3.52 0.000
Video Length 16.201
16.271
-0.26 0.793
Subjective
0.23392
0.22383
1.54 0.124
Fear
0.07823
0.07689
1.15 0.248
Anger
0.07422
0.07243
1.65 0.099
Anticipation
0.07604
0.07478
1.05 0.293
Trust
0.08313
0.08285
0.17 0.866
Surprise
0.06896
0.06781
1.14 0.255
Sadness
0.07445
0.07342
0.96 0.335
Disgust
0.07587
0.07459
1.11 0.269
Joy
0.07894
0.07716
1.46 0.143
Variable

22

After Matching (N= 2112)
Mean
Mean
t
p-value
(Treated)
(Control)
0.82442
0.78117
1.44 0.150
16.201
16.105
0.36 0.722
0.23392
0.23175
0.32 0.748
0.07823
0.0781
0.11 0.909
0.07422
0.07362
0.55 0.583
0.07604
0.07584
0.17 0.868
0.08313
0.08231
0.56 0.574
0.06896
0.06847
0.49 0.628
0.07445
0.07414
0.29 0.772
0.07587
0.07533
0.47 0.641
0.07894
0.0784
0.43 0.664

Figure 2. Distribution of Propensity Scores for Treatment and Control Groups (Both
Unmatched and Matched).

4. Empirical Model and Results
4.1 Model-free Evidence
As a preliminary model-free evidence, Figure 3 visualizes the weekly trends in content volume
from November 18, 2019 to June 30, 2020. The vertical line represents the week of March 23,
2020, which is the week the four states in the treatment group issued lockdown orders. We can
observe that the gap in content volume between the two groups increases after the lockdown,
suggesting an increase in content creation by individuals in lockdown states after the

2

Number of Tiktok Posts
3
4

5

enforcement of lockdown.

0

10

20

30

Week
No Stay-at-Home Order
With Stay-at-Home Order

Figure 3. Time Trends of the number of videos from November 2019 to June 2020
23

4.2 Econometric Model Specification
After the outbreak of the coronavirus in the U.S., many states issued lockdown mandates
between March 15 and April 15, 2020. As noted earlier, five states did not issue lockdown
orders, resulting in a natural experiment setting that allows the comparison of the difference in
the content creation behaviors before and after the lockdowns for states with the enforcement to
the same difference for states that do not enforce lockdowns. Our identification exploits the
lockdown as a result of the COVID-19 outbreak as an exogenous shock that has caused
substantial disruptions in people’s life by mandating residents to stay at home. The validity of
our approach resides in the assumption that the shock is exogenous with respect to the users’
anticipated responses. Given that the decisions about enforcing a state-wide lockdown are
heterogeneous decisions taken by state governors, they are not controlled by TikTok content
creators, ensuring the exogeneity of the shock. This identification strategy has been implemented
in several prior studies such as Chan and Ghose (2014), Mousavi and Gu (2019), and Sun and
Zhu (2013). To assess the effect of lockdown orders on content creation, we adopt the DiD
methodology and specify the following model:
𝑦&' = 𝛽( + 𝛽) × 𝐿𝑜𝑐𝑘𝑑𝑜𝑤𝑛' × 𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑡& + γ' + 𝛿& +𝜀&' (2)
Where i denotes the user, t denotes the week, γ' is the time-fixed effect including a set of
weekly time dummies that control for time trends, 𝛿& is the user-fixed effect that captures the
time-invariant characteristics of user i, and 𝜀&' is the error term. The dummy variable Lockdown
equals one if week t occurs after the lockdown was enforced (i.e., the week of March 23, 2020),
and zero otherwise. Its main effect is absorbed by the time-fixed effects. Treat is a dummy for
the treatment group (i.e., the states enforced lockdown order), which is set to one if the
observations belong to the four states with lockdown order, and zero if the observations belong

24

to the five states without lockdown order. Its main effect is absorbed by the user-fixed effects.
We use specification (2) to study the impact of lockdown enforcement on three dependent
variables (𝑦&' ). For the first dependent variable, content volume, we use the log-transformation of
video count. In this case, the coefficient β1 estimates the effect of lockdown on the content
volume in lockdown states relative to the content volume in non-lockdown states after the
lockdown enforcement. A positive and significant value for β1 means the users generate more
content (videos) in the lockdown states after the lockdown order. The second dependent variable
is content novelty. In this case, the coefficient β1 estimates the effect of lockdown on the content
novelty in lockdown states relative to the content novelty in non-lockdown states after the
lockdown order. A negative and significant value for β1 means the content was less novel in the
lockdown states after the lockdown order. The third dependent variable is content optimism, and
the coefficient β1 estimates the effect of lockdown on the content optimism embedded in the
videos in lockdown states relative to that in non-lockdown states after the lockdown order. A
negative and significant value for β1 means the users express less optimism (less positive
emotion) in the lockdown states after the lockdown order.
4.3 Main Results
Table 2 reports the estimated effect of the pandemic shock on content creation at the user level
using Equation (2). First, the results in column 1 reveal a significant increase in content creators’
productivity in terms of the volume of content that is produced. Specifically, we estimate that
after the lockdown order, we see an increase of 7% in content volume in the lockdown states
relative to the non-lockdown states. This result indicates that people who stay at home are more
productive, supporting Hypothesis 1. With respect to content novelty, as reported in the second
column of Table 2, the lockdown is negatively associated with the novelty of the content created

25

by individuals in lockdown states relative to individuals in the non-lockdown states. Therefore,
Hypothesis 2 is supported. Lastly, with respect to content optimism, our results reveal a postlockdown reduction in the level of optimism expressed in video descriptions created by
individuals in the lockdown states relative to individuals in non-lockdown states. Therefore,
Hypothesis 3 is also supported. In addition to the main DiD models, we seek to conduct a series
of falsification tests and robustness checks to rule out concerns of spurious correlations, which
we report next.
Table 2. Impact of Lockdown on Content Creation
(1) DV =
Content Volume
(2) DV =
(3) DV =
Variable
(log-transformed)
Content Novelty Content Optimism
Post × Treat
0.068**
-0.011*
-0.008*
(0.009)
(0.003)
(0.003)
Constant
0.675***
0.309***
0.134***
(0.013)
(0.004)
(0.004)
Week Fixed Effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
User Fixed Effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
# of Observations
67,584
38,887
39,627
# of User
2,112
2,091
2,112
Within R-squared
0.025
0.005
0.002
Notes: Cluster-robust standard errors in parentheses; ∗ p < 0.05; ∗∗ p < 0.01; ∗∗∗ p <
0.001
4.4 Falsification Tests
4.4.1 Lockdowns’ Impacts on Use of Common Words
Because there is no theoretical reason to expect that the pandemic shock would bear a
relationship with the occurrence of common words, such as articles (e.g., the, a, an), filler
expressions (e.g., you know, I mean), or numbers (e.g., first, hundred, thousand), we would not
expect to observe a significant effect on these measures.18 Thus, if we were to observe a

18

It is worth-noting that, for this analysis, we revised our previous pre-processing steps here to avoid removing stopwords.

26

significant effect, it would raise questions about the validity of our main results. As the results in
Table 3 demonstrate, we observe no significant effects of lockdown on these outcome variables,
lending further credence to our identification strategy.
Table 3. Impact of Lockdown on Common Words in Video Descriptions
Variable
(1) DV = Article (2) DV = Filler (3) DV = Numbers
Post × Treat
0.006
0.034
0.118
(0.071)
(0.025)
(0.075)
Constant
1.968***
0.055**
1.080***
(0.090)
(0.019)
(0.080)
Week Fixed Effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
User Fixed Effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
# of Observations
39,627
39,627
39,627
# of User
2,112
2,112
2,112
Within R-squared
0.001
0.001
0.002
Notes: Cluster-robust standard errors in parentheses; ∗ p < 0.05; ∗∗ p < 0.01; ∗∗∗ p <
0.001
4.4.2 Randomization Inference
Another way to address serial correlation is to employ a randomization inference method
(Bertrand et al. 2004). In this approach, computing the standard error for a specific experiment
consists of a two-step approach. First, the DiD estimates for a large number of randomly
generated placebo laws are estimated. Then the empirical distribution of the estimated effects for
these placebo laws is used to form a significance test for the true law. In our case, we started by
estimating the DiD estimate (β1 in specification (2)) using the observed data. The next step is to
randomly generate many placebo data and to run the model in specification (2) on these sets of
placebo data. We created 10,000 placebo data sets. We then ran a model with specification (2)
using each placebo set and obtained the corresponding DiD coefficient for each set. After
running the model on all 10,000 placebo sets (and obtaining the 10,000 corresponding DiD
estimates), we compared the actual DiD estimate obtained in the first step with the distribution of
the placebo DiD estimates. We set the significance level at 0.05. Table 4 reports the results of

27

this procedure for our three dependent variables. Based on the results, for all three dependent
variables, the p-values are smaller than 0.05, which indicates that the DiD coefficient for the real
data is statistically different from DiD coefficients obtained from placebo data. These results
confirm our findings about the impacts of lockdowns on content volume, content novelty, and
content optimism.
Table 4. Randomization Inference Results with 10,000 Simulations
(1) DV =
Content Volume
(2) DV =
(3) DV =
Variable
(log-transformed)
Content Novelty
Content Optimism
P-value
0.005
0.038
0.036
User Fixed Effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
# of User
2,112
2,112
2,112
4.5 Robustness Checks
To examine the robustness of our results, we conducted several additional robustness checks:
4.5.1 Ignoring Time-Series Information
Since we ran our analyses on weekly panel data, the estimated standard errors in our models may
be serially correlated. This is especially problematic because the content creation itself is
evidently serially correlated, which will exacerbate the bias in standard errors. To address this
problem, we employ a remedy suggested by Bertrand et al. (2004). We collapse the time-series
information into “pre-” and “post-” periods to eliminate the serial correlation observed in the
weekly panel data. This strategy would tease out the potential effects of inconsistent standard
errors due to serially correlated outcomes. To construct the collapsed dependent variables, we
calculate simple average of the three outcome variables before lockdown (ypre) and after
lockdown (ypost). According to Table 5, the results in three models confirm our previous findings.
The impact of lockdown on content volume is positive and significant, whereas its impact on
content novelty and content optimism is negative and significant.

28

Table 5. Impact of Lockdown on Collapsed DVs
(1) DV =
Content Volume
(2) DV =
(3) DV =
Variable
(log-transformed)
Content Novelty Content Optimism
Post × Treat
0.068**
-0.012*
-0.011*
(0.023)
(0.006)
(0.005)
Post
0.097***
-0.003
0.002
(0.016)
(0.004)
(0.003)
Constant
0.803***
0.350***
0.136***
(0.008)
(0.001)
(0.001)
User Fixed Effects Yes
Yes
Yes
# of Observations
4,224
4,041
4,132
# of User
2,112
2,091
2,112
R-squared
0.06
0.01
0.004
Notes: Cluster-robust standard errors in parentheses; ∗ p < 0.05; ∗∗ p < 0.01; ∗∗∗ p <
0.001
4.5.2 Parallel Trends Test
We test the parallel trends assumption by performing an analysis similar to the analysis in Cui et
al. (2020), Seamans and Zhu (2013), Cui et al. (2019), and Calvo et al. (2019), where we expand
specification (2) to estimate the treatment effect week by week before the shock. Specifically, we
replace Postt in specification (2) with week dummy variables 𝑊𝑒𝑒𝑘𝐷𝑢𝑚𝑚𝑦*' , where 𝜏 ∈
[ −9, . . . , −2, −1, 0] and 𝑊𝑒𝑒𝑘𝐷𝑢𝑚𝑚𝑦*' = 1 if 𝜏 = 𝑡 and 0 otherwise, indicating the relative
𝜏th week to the outbreak,
+)
'
'
ln(𝐷𝑉&' ) = 𝛽( + 𝛽) × ∑+)
*,+- 𝑊𝑒𝑒𝑘𝐷𝑢𝑚𝑚𝑦* × 𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑡& + ∑*,+- 𝑊𝑒𝑒𝑘𝐷𝑢𝑚𝑚𝑦* + 𝛿& +𝜀&' (3)

The benchmark group is the week of the pandemic outbreak. The coefficients β−9 to β−1
identify any week-by-week pre-treatment difference between the states with lockdown orders
and states without lockdown orders, which we expect to be insignificant. Table 6 reports the
results of the parallel trends test. The test results show no pre-treatment differences in any DVs
between control and treatment groups, which support the parallel trends assumption.

29

Table 6. Pre-Treatment Trends
(1) DV =
Content Volume
(2) DV =
(3) DV =
Variable
(log-transformed)
Content Novelty Content Optimism
Treat × Week−9
-0.015
0.019
0.005
(0.033)
(0.011)
(0.010)
Treat × Week−8
-0.023
0.005
0.005
(0.033)
(0.011)
(0.010)
Treat × Week−7
-0.031
0.002
0.005
(0.033)
(0.011)
(0.010)
Treat × Week−6
-0.042
0.004
0.021*
(0.033)
(0.010)
(0.010)
Treat × Week−5
-0.048
0.009
0.006
(0.033)
(0.011)
(0.010)
Treat × Week−4
-0.044
0.001
0.013
(0.033)
(0.010)
(0.010)
Treat × Week−3
-0.049
0.001
0.017
(0.033)
(0.010)
(0.010)
Treat × Week−2
-0.039
0.005
0.008
(0.033)
(0.010)
(0.010)
Treat × Week−1
-0.017
0.005
0.006
(0.033)
(0.010)
(0.010)
Constant
1.034***
0.271***
0.134***
(0.012)
(0.004)
(0.003)
Week Fixed Effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
User Fixed Effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
# of Observations
23,232
12,778
13,349
# of Users
2,112
1,907
2,022
Within R-squared
0.03
0.03
0.003
Notes: Cluster-robust standard errors in parentheses; ∗ p < 0.05; ∗∗ p < 0.01; ∗∗∗ p < 0.001
4.5.3 Effective Lockdown Period
When the states with lockdown orders issued one, many of them also specified an end date for
the order. In particular, three of the four states in our treatment group had an end date: lockdown
order issued by Connecticut’s ended on May 20, Louisiana’s lockdown ended on May 15, and
Ohio's lockdown ended on May 1. Considering that individuals may change their behaviors after
the expiration of the lockdowns, which may dilute our results, we re-run our main model using

30

only the effective lockdown periods stated above. Table 7 reports the results of this test, which
are consistent with the results in our main model.
Table 7. Impact of Lockdowns on Content Creation during Effective Lockdown Periods
(1) DV =
Content Volume
(2) DV =
(3) DV =
Variable
(log-transformed)
Content Novelty Content Optimism
Post × Treat
0.077**
-0.014*
-0.009*
(0.024)
(0.005)
(0.004)
Constant
0.672***
0.311***
0.134***
(0.014)
(0.005)
(0.004)
Week Fixed Effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
User Fixed Effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
# of Observations
62,136
35,606
36,346
# of User
2,112
2,085
2,112
R-squared
0.03
0.01
0.002
Notes: Cluster-robust standard errors in parentheses; ∗ p < 0.05; ∗∗ p < 0.01; ∗∗∗ p < 0.001

5. Discussions
The unprecedented COVID-19 pandemic has significantly transformed the way individuals live
and work (Ghose et al. 2020). During the outbreak of this pandemic, many countries around the
world enforced nation-wide lockdown orders to mandate people to stay at their homes as much
as possible. Many states in the U.S. also issued lockdown orders as the virus started to spread in
the states. In this study, we examine how the lockdown orders, which forced individuals work
from home, impact the content creators’ work outcomes in terms of content volume, content
novelty, and content optimism. To study this topic, we leveraged a natural experiment wherein
four states issued lockdown orders on the same day, and five states never issued any lockdown
orders. Using a unique dataset collected from TikTok, a short-video sharing social media
platform, we combined econometric methods (difference-in-differences estimations of a matched
sample) with machine learning-based natural language processing to find that compared to the
individuals residing in the non-lockdown states, the individuals who work from home (i.e.,

31

residing in the lockdown states) produce more content after the lockdown orders. However, the
novelty and optimism of the content created by the individuals in lockdown states decreased
when compared to content created by individuals in non-lockdown states.
5.1 Theoretical Implications
First and foremost, this work extends the literature on digital resilience, i.e., the use of IT/IS in
disaster management (Park et al. 2015; Rao et al. 2020; Yates and Paquette 2011). Although
prior work reveals that the IT artifacts such as social media can be effectively used for
information dissemination (Kim et al. 2018) and real-time alert provisions (Yates and Paquette
2011), our work explores the impact of the crisis-caused physical changes in users’ work
environment on their content creation behaviors in terms of the content volume, content novelty,
and content optimism. While the pandemic and the subsequent stay-at-home orders have affected
offline work significantly, the work enabled by digital platforms (e.g., creative content creation)
does not rely on commuting to traditional offices and can be continued by individuals with more
flexibility during the crisis. Our results suggest that individuals, at least to some extent, can cope
with the lockdown as they produce a higher volume of content. However, at the same time, the
level of content novelty and content optimism decreases, signaling an adverse effect on content
quality. These findings advance our understanding of the work outcome responses to the
pandemic in the space of digital creative content generation.
Second, our study contributes to the nascent COVID-19 literature in social science, which
has largely focused on a) the COVID’s influence on work productivity (Myers et al. 2020),
particularly gender inequality in research productivity (Andersen et al. 2020; Cui et al. 2020); b)
general descriptive studies reporting civilians’ reactions to the pandemic (Andersen 2020; Coven
and Gupta 2020); and c) theory-based studies such as research examining the trade-offs between

32

privacy and social good (Ghose et al. 2020) and the role of individualism during crises (Bian et
al. 2020). Our work explores how individuals react to the change in their physical environment
with respect to their online content creation behavior. We are aware of only one study that
examines the use of social media during the COVID-19 pandemic (Rao et al. 2020). The
researchers analyze tweets produced by official accounts and examine how alarming messages
due to retweets of officials’ messages may vary in comparison to reassurance message retweets.
They suggest that providing reassurance during the crisis is paramount for government officials,
health experts, and national news media (Rao et al. 2020). While this research is a pioneer that
studies people’s response to the pandemic using social media, it is mainly exploratory, it
discusses the retweeting behavior in general, and it does not reach induvial-level analysis. By
exploiting a natural experiment caused by the pandemic and the subsequent state-wide
lockdowns, our paper is the first attempt to examine online users’ responses to the COVID-19
pandemic, how do they adjust themselves, and how this adjustment impacts the pattern of their
responses.
Third, our study contributes to UGC literature (Goes et al. 2016; Huang et al. 2017;
Khern-am-nuai et al. 2018; Yin et al. 2014) by studying the impact of a change in users’ physical
environment on their content creation behavior. More specifically, our work extends research on
three important outcomes in content creation literature: content volume, content novelty, and
content optimism. While previous works on these areas have identified various mechanisms to
stimulate a larger volume of contents (Burtch et al. 2018), examined how to invoke novel content
(Burtch et al. 2020; Gallus 2017), and studied the embedded emotion elements in the context of
online reviews (Yin et al. 2014), they mainly conduct investigations within systems and examine
the interplays between the UGC characteristics and system features. We contribute to this

33

literature by studying the association between changes in individuals’ physical environment and
their content creation behaviors.
5.2 Managerial Implications
This study also has important managerial implications, particularly for the emerging job
categories such as independent content creators. In line with some prior work on the productivity
effects of work-from-home (Bloom et al. 2015; Choudhury et al. 2020), our findings reveal a
similar positive impact on content creation as individuals who are mandated to work from their
homes would find more time to spend on their work. However, the unintended consequences of
working from home include the reduction of novelty and optimism in the content. These findings
inform decision makers to be aware of some of the unintended consequences of setting policies
around work-from-home. We believe that this study is important not just because it is an attempt
to understand work-from-home behavior during lockdowns, but mainly because some
organizations have already decided to let their employees work from home indefinitely (Bartik et
al. 2020). The most prominent one, perhaps, is Microsoft that announced its decision in the midst
of the pandemic.19 In addition to Microsoft, a wide array of other companies have also decided to
let at least a portion of their employees work from home in the long run.20 Work-from-home has
become such an integral part of our society that the Federal Reserve’s chair, Jerome Powell,
urged policymakers to brace it and to consider it as a trend posed to stay even after we put the
COVID-19 pandemic behind us.21 Hence, understanding the potential impacts of work-fromhome positions on workers’ productivity is important. As suggested by our findings, although

19

https://www.forbes.com/sites/carlypage/2020/10/09/microsoft-will-let-employees-work-from-homepermanently/?sh=768c65a7172a
20
https://www.businessinsider.com/companies-asking-employees-to-work-from-home-due-tocoronavirus-2020
21
https://www.cnbc.com/2020/11/12/here-are-the-things-that-scare-jerome-powell-the-most-about-theeconomy-right-now.html
34

individuals are productive, they exhibit less novelty and optimism in their contents. Therefore, it
might be the case that employees are keeping their productivity level, but the quality of their
work is compromised. This could cause a serious concern for the technology sector in which
many jobs can be conducted remotely yet would require a significant level of novelty. Thus,
firms are suggested to evaluate both the quantity and quality of their employees’ work before
they make a decision about whether to allow remote work in the long run. Furthermore, if
employees work from home all the time, the lack of in-person communications with colleagues
may jeopardize their mental well-being, as suggested by our result regarding the reduced
optimism in content created by those who worked from home.
In addition, our findings have important implications for embedding digital innovations
in remote learning and remote work ecosystems. As digital innovators design new platforms to
build resilience, they need to be aware of the consequences of remote work and design their
platforms accordingly. That is, the design of the new platforms to aid remote work and remote
education should be based on the assumption that subjects would behave differently as a result of
the change in their physical environment. Therefore, our research is a call to revisit the
assumptions about subjects’ behaviors when designing new platforms based on digital
innovation.
5.3 Limitations and Future Research
As with most empirical studies that rely on observational data, our study is not free of
limitations. One of the limitations of our study is related to the sample. We identified users’
locations based on the hashtags they used in their video descriptions or based on whether they
revealed their locations in their user accounts. Therefore, this sampling strategy removes users
who did not use a location hashtag or did not disclose their location in their user account from

35

our sample. Therefore, future studies could conduct a larger-scale, more comprehensive study if
researchers are able to obtain all users’ location data. For example, future research could
potentially partner with social media platforms and retrieve users’ location information from
their servers given users’ consent.
Another limitation of our study is related to potential generalizability given our research
context. The individuals in our study are creative content workers in social media platforms as
opposed to workers in conventional jobs. Employees in conventional jobs are paid to perform
specific tasks. Therefore, ‘novelty’ may be less relevant for some more routine, less creative
kinds of jobs. And our findings likely will generalize to gig workers who engage in creative
tasks, such as website design, content creation, advertising campaigns, and so on. Further,
intrinsic motivation and extrinsic motivation could also take effects when employees perform
their work in terms of productivity and quality/level of novelty. To this end, managers should
employ a longer period of observation and comprehensive evaluation to decide whether they
should allow employees to work remotely in the long run.
Lastly, while we were able to investigate the direct work outcomes (e.g., content volume,
novelty, and optimism) during the lockdowns, we were not able to observe other important
outcomes such as individuals’ mental health status, which perhaps is one of the most important
questions to answer to better understand digital resilience during crises. Therefore, while the
current research makes the first effort to study individuals’ reaction to the change in their
physical work environment, it opens up many opportunities for future studies to better
understand the individuals’ work-related outcomes and psychological state in a changed physical
environment or during a crisis.

36

Reference
Andersen, J. P., Nielsen, M. W., Simone, N. L., Lewiss, R. E., and Jagsi, R. 2020. "MetaResearch: Is Covid-19 Amplifying the Authorship Gender Gap in the Medical Literature?"
Working Paper. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.06303.
Andersen, M. 2020. "Early Evidence on Social Distancing in Response to Covid-19 in the United
States." Working Paper. Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3569368 or
http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3569368.
Anderson, C. L., and Agarwal, R. 2011. "The Digitization of Healthcare: Boundary Risks,
Emotion, and Consumer Willingness to Disclose Personal Health Information,"
Information Systems Research (22:3), pp. 469-490.
Bakker, M., Berke, A., Groh, M., Pentland, A. S., and Moro, E. 2020. "Effect of Social Distancing
Measures in the New York City Metropolitan Area." Working Paper. MIT
Balsmeier, B., Fleming, L., and Manso, G. 2017. "Independent Boards and Innovation," Journal of
Financial Economics (123:3), pp. 536-557.
Bartik, A. W., Cullen, Z., Glaeser, E. L., Luca, M., and Stanton, C. 2020. "What Jobs Are Being
Done at Home During the Covid-19 Crisis? Evidence from Firm-Level Surveys." Working
Paper. Harvard Business School.
Baumeister, R. F., and Leary, M. R. 1995. "The Need to Belong: Desire for Interpersonal
Attachments as a Fundamental Human Motivation," Psychological Bulletin (117:3), pp.
497.
Ben-Zur, H. 2012. "Loneliness, optimism, and well-being among married, divorced, and widowed
individuals." The Journal of Psychology (146:1-2), pp. 23-36.
Bian, B., Li, J., Xu, T., and Foutz, N. Z. 2020. "Individualism During Crises." Working Paper.
Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3626841 or
http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3626841.
Bick, A., Blandin, A., and Mertens, K. 2020. "Work from Home after the Covid-19 Outbreak."
Working Paper. Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3638737 or
http://dx.doi.org/10.24149/wp2017.
Bloom, N., Liang, J., Roberts, J., & Ying, Z. J. 2015. Does working from home work? Evidence
from a Chinese experiment. The Quarterly Journal of Economics (130:1), 165-218.
Brodeur, A., Clark, A. E., Fleche, S., and Powdthavee, N. 2020. "Assessing the Impact of the
Coronavirus Lockdown on Unhappiness, Loneliness, and Boredom Using Google Trends."
Working Paper. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.12129.
Bullinger, L. R., Carr, J. B., and Packham, A. 2020. "Covid-19 and Crime: Effects of Stay-atHome Orders on Domestic Violence." NBER Working Paper No. 27667.
Burns, A., Roberts, T. L., Posey, C., and Lowry, P. B. 2019. "The Adaptive Roles of Positive and
Negative Emotions in Organizational Insiders’ Security-Based Precaution Taking,"
Information Systems Research (30:4), pp. 1228-1247.
Burtch, G., He, Q., Hong, Y., and Lee, D. 2020. "Peer Awards Increase User Content Generation
but Reduce Content Novelty ". Working Paper. Available at SSRN:
https://ssrn.com/abstract=3465879 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3465879.
Burtch, G., Hong, Y., Bapna, R., and Griskevicius, V. 2018. "Stimulating Online Reviews by
Combining Financial Incentives and Social Norms," Management Science (64:5), pp. 20652082.

37

Carmel, D., Roitman, H. and Yom-Tov, E. 2012. On the relationship between novelty and
popularity of user-generated content. ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and
Technology (3:4), pp. 1-19.
Cattani, G., and Ferriani, S. 2008. "A Core/Periphery Perspective on Individual Creative
Performance: Social Networks and Cinematic Achievements in the Hollywood Film
Industry," Organization Science (19:6), pp. 824-844.
Chen, R., Sharman, R., Rao, H.R. and Upadhyaya, S.J. 2007. Design principles for emergency
response management systems. Journal of Information Systems and e-Business
Management (5:3), pp. 81-98.
Chen, R., Sharman, R., Rao, H.R. and Upadhyaya, S.J. 2013. Data model development for fire
related extreme events: An activity theory approach. MIS Quarterly (37:1), pp. 125-147.
Chen, Z., He, Q., Mao, Z., Chung, H.-M., and Maharjan, S. 2019. "A Study on the Characteristics
of Douyin Short Videos and Implications for Edge Caching." Working Paper.
http://arxiv.org/abs/1903.12399
Choudhury, P., Foroughi, C., & Larson, B. Z. 2020. Work-from-anywhere: The productivity
effects of geographic flexibility. Academy of Management Proceedings (2020:1), pp.
21199. Briarcliff Manor, NY: Academy of Management.
Connor, K. M., and Davidson, J. R. 2003. Development of a new resilience scale: The ConnorDavidson resilience scale (CD-RISC). Depression and Anxiety (19:6), pp. 76-82.
Coven, J., and Gupta, A. 2020. "Disparities in Mobility Responses to Covid-19." Working Paper.
NYU Stern School of Business.
Cui, R., Ding, H., and Zhu, F. 2020. "Gender Inequality in Research Productivity During the
Covid-19 Pandemic." Working Paper. Available at SSRN:
https://ssrn.com/abstract=3623492 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3623492.
Davis, S.F., Miller, K.M., Johnson, D., McAuley, K. and Dinges, D. 1992. The relationship
between optimism-pessimism, loneliness, and death anxiety. Bulletin of the Psychonomic
Society (30:2), pp. 135-136.
Deci, E. L., and Ryan, R. M. 2000. "The" What" and" Why" of Goal Pursuits: Human Needs and
the Self-Determination of Behavior," Psychological Inquiry (11:4), pp. 227-268.
Devlin, J., Chang, M.-W., Lee, K., and Toutanova, K. 2018. BERT: Pre-Training of Deep
Bidirectional Transformers for Language Understanding. Working Paper.
http://arxiv.org/abs/1810.04805.
Fosslien, L., and Duffy, M. W. (2020). How to Combat Zoom Fatigue. Harvard Business Review
https://hbr.org/2020/04/how-to-combat-zoom-fatigue.
Gaeta, L., and Brydges, C. R. 2020. "Coronavirus-Related Anxiety, Social Isolation, and
Loneliness in Older Adults in Northern California During the Stay-at-Home Order,"
Journal of Aging & Social Policy (Forthcoming).
Gallus, J. 2017. "Fostering Public Good Contributions with Symbolic Awards: A Large-Scale
Natural Field Experiment at Wikipedia," Management Science (63:12), pp. 3999-4015.
Ghose, A., Li, B., Macha, M., Sun, C., and Foutz, N. Z. 2020. "Trading Privacy for the Greater
Social Good: How Did America React During Covid-19? ." Working Paper. Available at
SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3624069 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3624069.
Goes, P. B., Guo, C., and Lin, M. 2016. "Do Incentive Hierarchies Induce User Effort? Evidence
from an Online Knowledge Exchange," Information Systems Research (27:3), pp. 497-516.
Han, W., Ada, S., Sharman, R., & Rao, H. R. 2015. Campus emergency notification systems: An
examination of factors affecting compliance with alerts. MIS Quarterly (39:4), 909-930.

38

Hargadon, A. B., and Bechky, B. A. 2006. "When Collections of Creatives Become Creative
Collectives: A Field Study of Problem Solving at Work," Organization Science (17:4), pp.
484-500.
Hass, R. W. 2017. "Tracking the Dynamics of Divergent Thinking Via Semantic Distance:
Analytic Methods and Theoretical Implications," Memory & Cognition (45:2), pp. 233-244.
Huang, N., Burtch, G., Gu, B., Hong, Y., Liang, C., Wang, K., Fu, D., and Yang, B. 2019.
"Motivating User-Generated Content with Performance Feedback: Evidence from
Randomized Field Experiments," Management Science (65:1), pp. 327-345.
Huang, N., Burtch, G., Hong, Y., Pavlou, PA. 2020. Unemployment and Worker Participation in
the Gig Economy: Evidence from An Online Labor Market, Information Systems Research,
(31:2), pp. 431-448.
Huang, N., Hong, Y., and Burtch, G. 2017. "Social Network Integration and User Content
Generation: Evidence from Natural Experiments," MIS Quarterly (41:4), pp. 1035-1058.
Kapucu, N. and Garayev, V. 2013. Designing, managing, and sustaining functionally collaborative
emergency management networks. The American Review of Public Administration (43:3),
pp. 312-330.
Khern-am-nuai, W., Kannan, K., and Ghasemkhani, H. 2018. "Extrinsic Versus Intrinsic Rewards
for Contributing Reviews in an Online Platform," Information Systems Research (29:4), pp.
871-892.
Kim, J., Bae, J., and Hastak, M. 2018. "Emergency Information Diffusion on Online Social Media
During Storm Cindy in Us," International Journal of Information Management (40), pp.
153-165.
Lee, S. Y., and Brand, J. 2010. "Can Personal Control over the Physical Environment Ease
Distractions in Office Workplaces?," Ergonomics (53:3), pp. 324-335.
Lee, T. Y., and Bradlow, E. T. 2011. "Automated Marketing Research Using Online Customer
Reviews," Journal of Marketing Research (48:5), pp. 881-894.
Moon, Y. J., Kim, W. G., and Armstrong, D. J. 2014. "Exploring Neuroticism and Extraversion in
Flow and User Generated Content Consumption," Information & Management (51:3), pp.
347-358.
Myers, K. R., Wei Yang Tham, Yian Yin, Nina Cohodes, Jerry G Thursby, Marie C Thursby, Peter
E Schiffer, Joseph T Walsh, Karim R Lakhani, and Wang, D. 2020. "Quantifying the
Immediate Effects of the Covid-19 Pandemic on Scientists." Working Paper. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2005.11358.
Nabity-Grover, T., Cheung, C.M. and Thatcher, J.B. 2020. Inside out and outside in: How the
COVID-19 pandemic affects self-disclosure on social media. International Journal of
Information Management (55), pp. 102188.
Oh, O., Agrawal, M., and Rao, H. R. 2013. "Community Intelligence and Social Media Services:
A Rumor Theoretic Analysis of Tweets During Social Crises," MIS Quarterly (37:2), pp.
407-426.
Omar, B., and Dequan, W. 2020. "Watch, Share or Create: The Influence of Personality Traits and
User Motivation on Tiktok Mobile Video Usage," International Journal of Interactive
Mobile Technologies (14:4), pp. 121-137.
Park, I., Sharman, R., and Rao, H. R. 2015. "Disaster Experience and Hospital Information
Systems: An Examination of Perceived Information Assurance, Risk, Resilience, and His
Usefulness," MIS Quarterly (39:2), pp. 317-344.

39

Perry-Smith, J. E., and Shalley, C. E. 2003. "The Social Side of Creativity: A Static and Dynamic
Social Network Perspective," Academy of Management Review (28:1), pp. 89-106.
Rao, H. R., Vemprala, N., Akello, P., and Valecha, R. 2020. "Retweets of Officials’ Alarming Vs
Reassuring Messages During the Covid-19 Pandemic: Implications for Crisis
Management," International Journal of Information Management (55), p. 102187.
Reimers, N., and Gurevych, I. 2019. “Sentence-BERT: Sentence Embeddings Using Siamese
BERT-Networks,” Working Paper. http://arxiv.org/abs/1908.10084.
Roper, K. O., and Juneja, P. 2008. "Distractions in the Workplace Revisited," Journal of Facilities
Management (6:2), pp. 91-109.
Ryan, R. M., Huta, V., and Deci, E. L. 2008. "Living Well: A Self-Determination Theory
Perspective on Eudaimonia," Journal of Happiness Studies (9:1), pp. 139-170.
Sosa, M. E. 2011. "Where Do Creative Interactions Come From? The Role of Tie Content and
Social Networks," Organization Science (22:1), pp. 1-21.
Sun, Y., Dong, X., and McIntyre, S. 2017. "Motivation of User-Generated Content: Social
Connectedness Moderates the Effects of Monetary Rewards," Marketing Science (36:3),
pp. 329-337.
Tang, Q., Gu, B. and Whinston, A.B. 2012. Content contribution for revenue sharing and
reputation in social media: A dynamic structural model. Journal of Management
Information Systems, (29:2), pp. 41-76.
Tenney, I., Das, D., and Pavlick, E. 2019. BERT Rediscovers the Classical NLP. Working Paper.
http://arxiv.org/abs/1905.05950.
Toubia, O., and Netzer, O. 2017. "Idea Generation, Creativity, and Prototypicality," Marketing
Science (36:1), pp. 1-20.
Wang, X., Parameswaran, S., Bagul, D. M., and Kishore, R. 2018. "Can Online Social Support Be
Detrimental in Stigmatized Chronic Diseases? A Quadratic Model of the Effects of
Informational and Emotional Support on Self-Care Behavior of Hiv Patients," Journal of
the American Medical Informatics Association (25:8), pp. 931-944.
Woodman, R. W., Sawyer, J. E., and Griffin, R. W. 1993. "Toward a Theory of Organizational
Creativity," Academy of Management Review (18:2), pp. 293-321.
Yang, L., Yang, S.H. and Plotnick, L., 2013. How the internet of things technology enhances
emergency response operations. Technological Forecasting and Social Change (80:9),
pp.1854-1867.
Yates, D., and Paquette, S. 2011. "Emergency Knowledge Management and Social Media
Technologies: A Case Study of the 2010 Haitian Earthquake," International Journal of
Information Management (31:1), pp. 6-13.
Yin, D., Bond, S. D., and Zhang, H. 2014. "Anxious or Angry? Effects of Discrete Emotions on
the Perceived Helpfulness of Online Reviews," MIS Quarterly (38:2), pp. 539-560.
Yin, D., Bond, S. D., and Zhang, H. 2017. "Keep Your Cool or Let It Out: Nonlinear Effects of
Expressed Arousal on Perceptions of Consumer Reviews," Journal of Marketing Research
(54:3), pp. 447-463.
Zhu, C., Xu, X., Zhang, W., Chen, J., and Evans, R. 2020. "How Health Communication Via Tik
Tok Makes a Difference: A Content Analysis of Tik Tok Accounts Run by Chinese
Provincial Health Committees," International Journal of Environmental Research and
Public Health (17:1), pp. 192-205.

40

Supplementary Online Appendix
Appendix A: Examining the Quality of Sentence-BERT Embeddings
To evaluate the quality of the embeddings, we decided to use those embeddings to cluster video
descriptions. If the video descriptions within each cluster are related to each other, yet different
from the video descriptions in other clusters, this could indicate that the embeddings helped us
identify and recover the clusters properly. Given that the length of each embedding (vector
representation) is 768, we use t-distributed Stochastic Neighbor Embedding (t-SNE) to reduce the
dimensionality of the vector representation before cluster analysis. In t-SNE, the algorithm begins
with converting similarities between data points to joint probabilities. Then, the algorithm tries to
minimize the Kullback-Leibler divergence between the joint probabilities of the high-dimensional
data and the low-dimensional embedding (Van Der Maaten and Hinton 2008). We used scikitlearn’s TSNE function22 to create a low-dimensional representation of the embeddings. Then, we
used Python package “clusteval” 23 to determine the best value for the number of clusters.
“clusteval” iteratively examines different values of k (number of clusters) to find the value with
the best outcome. There are three different evaluation metrics implemented in “clusteval”: 1Silhouette, 2- Derivative, and 3- DBSCAN. Figure A.1 reports the result of this evaluation using
Silhouette as the evaluation metric. The red dashed line in Figure A.1 corresponds to 6 as the best
value for the number of clusters. That is, per this analysis, setting the number of clusters to 6 would
result in the highest value for Silhouette (0.324). Therefore, we ran the BIRCH clustering
algorithm by setting the value for the number of clusters to 6. Figure A.2 visualizes the clusters of
video descriptions in our data set. Clusters are identified using different colors. The x axis is the

22

Documentations available in https://scikitlearn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.manifold.TSNE.html
23
Documentations available in https://github.com/erdogant/clusteval
1

first dimension of t-SNE and the y axis is the second dimension of t-SNE. As can be observed in
Figure A.2, the clusters that are identified using BIRCH are quite distinct. That is, the data points
in each cluster are closer to other data points of the same cluster than other clusters. This analysis
signals that Sentence-BERT embedding was successful in recovering the structure in the video
descriptions.

Figure A.1. Silhouette Metric Reported for Different Number of Clusters

Figure A.2. Clusters of Video Descriptions Obtained Using BIRCH
Reference:
Van Der Maaten, L., and Hinton, G. 2008. “Visualizing Data Using T-SNE,” Journal of Machine
Learning Research.

2

