Analysis of the Impact of Mask-wearing in Viral Spread: Implications
for COVID-19

arXiv:2011.04208v1 [cs.SI] 9 Nov 2020

†

Yurun Tian1,† , Anirudh Sridhar2,‡ , Osman Yağan3,† , H. Vincent Poor4,‡
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Carnegie Mellon University
‡
Department of Electrical Engineering, Princeton University

Abstract— Masks are used as part of a comprehensive strategy of measures to limit transmission and save lives during
the COVID-19 pandemic. Research about the impact of maskwearing in the COVID-19 pandemic has raised formidable
interest across multiple disciplines. In this paper, we investigate
the impact of mask-wearing in spreading processes over complex networks. This is done by studying a heterogeneous bond
percolation process over a multi-type network model, where
nodes can be one of two types (mask-wearing, and not-maskwearing). We provide analytical results that accurately predict
the expected epidemic size and probability of emergence as
functions of the characteristics of the spreading process (e.g.,
transmission probabilities, inward and outward efficiency of the
masks, etc.), the proportion of mask-wearers in the population,
and the structure of the underlying contact network. In addition
to the theoretical analysis, we also conduct extensive simulations
on random networks. We also comment on the analogy between
the mask-model studied here and the multiple-strain viral
spreading model with mutations studied recently by Eletreby
et al.

I. INTRODUCTION
The rapid spread of COVID-19 has devastated the world
since its inception in December 2019, leading to global
economic crises and claiming hundreds of thousands of lives.
As schools and businesses reopen, it is of paramount importance to asses how various safety measures may limit the
spread of COVID-19. One such measure is mask-wearing,
which is known to reduce the transmissibility of viruses that
spread through respiratory droplets. Much of the existing
work surrounding the effectiveness of mask-wearing have
studied how it limits transmission between individuals [11],
[9]. However, several questions remain regarding the health
of the general public. How many people must wear masks to
significantly curb the spread of COVID-19? More generally,
how does mask-wearing change the spreading dynamics of
an epidemic?
In this paper, we provide quantitative answers to the questions above. To do so, we consider a natural generalization
of the commonly-used Susceptible-Infected-Recovered (SIR)
model on networks in which some individuals wear masks
while others do not. We allow for different probabilities of
transmission between mask-wearers and non-mask-wearers,
so that an individual wearing a mask is less likely to
be infected. We refer to this model as the mask model.
For networks with a given degree distribution, we provide
1 yurunt@andrew.cmu.edu, 2 anirudhs@princeton.edu
3 oyagan@andrew.cmu.edu, 4 poor@princeton.edu

analytical methods to accurately predict the total number of
infected individuals of each type (mask-wearing and nonmask-wearing) as well as the probability that an epidemic
will emerge. Technically, this is achieved by adapting techniques developed by Alexander and Day [2] as well as
Eletreby, Zhuang, Carley, Yağan and Poor [8], which were
used to study a multi-strain model with mutation. Finally, we
conduct extensive simulations to illustrate how mask-wearing
can impact the spread of an epidemic.
A. Related Work
Classical models of epidemics use a system of ordinary
differential equations (ODEs) to describe the fraction of
susceptible, infected and recovered individuals within the
population (see for instance [5]). Prior models which incorporate the effects of mask-wearing have modified the basic
ODE model in various ways. Brienen et al [6] considered a
simple modification in which the reproductive number of the
virus, R0 , is reduced by a multiplicative factor based on the
efficacy of masks. Subsequently, Tracht et al [17] as well as
Eikenberry et al [7] considered more complex generalizations
of the basic ODE model in which mask-wearers and nonmask-wearers have different transmissibilities and maskwearers become non-mask-wearers at some rate, as well as
vice versa. While ODE-based models are relatively simple to
simulate and analyze, they are only mathematically justified
under the unrealistic assumption that an infected individual
can transmit the virus to any other susceptible individual in
the population, regardless of location or other factors.
Our approach, on the other hand, falls under the class of
network epidemic models. These models take an individuallevel view of viral spread, and studies how the structure of
the contact network influences the epidemic. This provides
much finer information about the epidemic, but is costly
to simulate, spurring a large body of work devoted to
deriving analytical predictions of epidemiological properties
[15], [14], [12]. In particular, our work is closely related to
literature on heterogenous bond percolation [3], [10] and a
multiple-strain model with mutations [2], [8]. We elaborate
on these connections in later sections.
II. EPIDEMIC MODELS
The most basic model of network epidemics was studied
by Newman [15]; we briefly review his setup in order to
provide context for the more complex models we consider

in this paper. Given a prescribed degree distribution (for
instance Poisson or Power law), a random contact network
is generated via the configuration model [13], [4], [16].
Initially, a single individual (patient zero) is infected with
the virus, and each neighbor of patient zero becomes infected with probability T , where T is referred to as the
transmissibility of the virus. Patient zero then recovers and is
no longer susceptible. The process continues as each newlyinfected vertex attempts to infect their susceptible neighbors
in the same manner. The process terminates when there are
no more susceptible vertices in the population.
A. Single-strain propagation with masks
To account for the effects of mask-wearing on viral spread,
we make the following modifications to Newman’s model.
First, we specify m ∈ [0, 1] to be the expected fraction
of individuals who wear a mask. Formally, we assign each
vertex in the contact network a mask with probability m and
no mask with probability 1 − m. This is done independently
for each vertex. Second, we assume that the transmissibilities
are heterogenous: the probability that individual u infects
individual v depends on whether u and v are wearing masks.
We say that a vertex is of type 1 if they wear a mask and type
2 if they do not wear a mask. We then have four parameters
describing the transmissibility of the virus: T11 , T12 , T21 and
T22 . The parameter T11 is the transmissibility when u and v
both wear masks, T12 is the transmissibility when u wears a
mask and v does not, etc. For brevity, we refer to this model
as the Mask Model. This type of model is sometimes called
heterogenous bond percolation over multi-type networks. We
remark that while Allard et al [3] consider such a model in
full generality, an important contribution of this paper is to
study in detail the important case of mask-wearing. After the
initial submission of our paper in September 2020, Lee and
Zhu [10] studied the same Mask Model we propose here and
derived the epidemic threshold and expected epidemic size
using similar techniques as Allard et al. Here, using different
techniques we additionally characterize the probability of
emergence and provide extensive simulations to support our
results.
B. Multi-strain Model with Mutation
In [2], Alexander and Day proposed a multiple-strain
model that accounts for mutations between strains. In their
model, there are d possible strains of a virus with transmissibilities given by Q1 , . . . , Qd . If an individual is infected with
strain i, the virus may mutate into a different strain within
the host. Formally, the probability that strain i mutates into
strain j within a host is given by µij .
We next describe a mapping between the Mask Model
and the multi-strain model with mutation. The key insight
is that in expectation, a mask-wearing individual will have a
different effective transmissibility than a non-mask-wearing
individual. This will allow us to map the mask-wearing
model into a two-strain model with mutation.
We begin by deriving the transmissibilities of the twostrain model. Suppose that a vertex v is infected and wears

a mask. Since each neighbor wears a mask with probability
m, the expected transmissibility of v is given by
Q1 := T11 · m + T12 · (1 − m).

(1)

Similarly, if v does not wear a mask, the transmissibility is
given by
Q2 := T21 · m + T22 · (1 − m).
(2)
Proceeding with the analogy, the mutation probability µ11 is
the fraction of mask-wearing neighbors infected by a maskwearer. This is given by
µ11 :=

T11 · m
.
T11 · m + T12 · (1 − m)

(3)

Using the same reasoning, we can compute the other three
mutation probabilities as
T12 · (1 − m)
T11 · m + T12 · (1 − m)
T21 · m
=
T21 · m + T22 · (1 − m)
T22 · (1 − m)
=
.
T21 · m + T22 · (1 − m)

µ12 =

(4)

µ21

(5)

µ22

(6)

The advantage of this formulation is that it allows us to compute analytical predictions for the probability of emergence
and epidemic size in the Mask Model using the methods of
Eletreby et al [8], which hold for the multi-strain model with
mutation.
III. ANALYSIS
In this section, we derive analytical predictions for the
probability of emergence and the expected epidemic size.
One way to do so is by formulating the mask model as
a multi-strain model with mutation and then leverage the
analytical predictions of Eletreby et al [8]. We also compute
the probability of emergence and epidemic size directly for
the mask model, using methods developed by Alexander and
Day [2] as well as Eletreby et al [8].
A. Probability of emergence
Emergence refers to the event where the epidemic process
persists over time and keeps infecting susceptible individuals.
Extinction, on the other hand, is the event where the epidemic
dies out in finite time. In this section, we show how to
compute P1 (resp. P2 ) which is the probability of extinction
given that patient zero wears a mask (resp. does not wear a
mask). The probability of emergence can then be computed
as 1 − P1 if patient zero wears a mask and 1 − P2 otherwise.
Our analysis follows the method of Alexander and Day
[2], who derived expressions for the probability of emergence in the multi-strain model with mutation. Suppose that
a randomly chosen vertex v is patient zero and assume
that v wears a mask. Let X (resp. Y ) be the number
of mask-wearing (resp., non-mask-wearing) neighbors of v
who are infected by v. Then, conditioned on v having k1
susceptible mask-wearing neighbors and k2 susceptible nonmask-wearing neighbors, X and Y are independent with

X ∼ Binomial(k1 , T11 ) and Y ∼ Binomial(k2 , T12 ). Thus
for s, t ∈ R,
E[sX tY | k1 , k2 ]
= (1 − T11 + s · T11 )k1 (1 − T12 + t · T12 )k2 .
Next, if k is the total number of susceptible neighbors, we
have k1 ∼ Binomial(k, m) and k2 = k − k1 . Hence
k  
X
k
k
E[s t | k] =
(m(1 − T11 + sT11 )) 1
k1
X Y

k1 =0

× ((1 − m)(1 − T12 + tT12 ))

k−k1
k

= (1 − (mT11 + (1 − m)T12 ) + (msT11 + (1 − m)tT12 )) .
Using the analogy with the multi-strain model with mutation
(see (1)-(6)) we can equivalently write
E[sX tY | k] = (1 − Q1 + Q1 (sµ11 + tµ12 ))k .

(7)

We remark that (7) also holds in the multi-strain model
with mutation [2, Section 2.2], implying the probability of
emergence is identical in both models. For completeness, we
describe how to compute this probability.
Define γ1 (s, t) to be the probability generating function
(PGF) for the number of infections of each type (maskwearing or not) emanating from patient zero. We have
γ1 (s, t) = g(1 − Q1 + Q1 (sµ11 + tµ12 )),
where
P∞ g isk the PGF of the degree distribution, i.e., g(z) =
k=0 pk z . Following the same arguments, we have
γ2 (s, t) = g(1 − Q2 + Q2 (sµ21 + tµ22 )).
The PGF of the number of infections of each type emanating
from a later-generation infective wearing a mask, given by
Γ1 (s, t), is
Γ1 (s, t) = G(1 − Q1 + Q1 (sµ11 + tµ12 )),
where GPis the PGF for the excess degree distribution, i.e.,
∞
k k
G(z) = k=0 kp
hki z . We also have
Γ2 (s, t) = G(1 − Q2 + Q2 (sµ21 + tµ22 )).
With the derived PGFs in hand, the probability of extinction
starting from a later-generation infective, given by q1 (resp.,
q2 ) if patient zero wears a mask (resp., does not wear a
mask), is the smallest non-negative solution of the fixed-point
equation (s, t) = (Γ1 (s, t), Γ2 (s, t)). Finally, the probability
of emergence starting from patient zero, denoted by P1
(resp., P2 ) if patient zero wears a mask (resp., does not wear
a mask) is given by (P1 , P2 ) = (γ1 (q1 , q2 ), γ2 (q1 , q2 )).
Since the probability of emergence is the same in the Mask
model and the multi-strain model with mutation, the critical
threshold at which an epidemic emerges (also known as the
reproductive number R0 ) is the same in both models as well.
To calculate this threshold, we first introduce two matrices:




Q1 0
µ11 µ12
Q :=
and
µ :=
.
0 Q2
µ21 µ22

Then the formula for the critical threshold [8], [2] is

 2
hk i − hki
ρ(Qµ),
R0 :=
hki
where ρ(Qµ) denotes the spectral radius of Qµ and
hki, hk 2 i are the first and second moments of the degree
distribution, respectively. If R0 < 1 the epidemic dies out
in finite time, and if R0 > 1 an epidemic persists. To write
things in terms of the parameters of the Mask model, we can
define the matrices




T11 T12
m
0
T :=
and
m :=
,
T21 T22
0 1−m
and note that Qµ = Tm. Hence we equivalently have

 2
hk i − hki
ρ(Tm).
R0 =
hki
B. Expected epidemic Size
We follow the method of Eletreby et al [8]. Since the
contact network G is drawn from the configuration model
with degree distribution {pk }k , it is locally tree-like. We
can compute the probability that a given vertex is infected
by considering the tree-like neighborhood around it. Mathematically, we can consider an infinite rooted tree where
the bottom level is labeled level zero and the top (the root)
is labeled level infinity. We let q`,1 (respectively, q`,2 ) be
the probability that a mask-wearing (respectively, non-maskwearing) vertex is infected in level `.
The pair (q`+1,1 , q`+1,2 ) can be recursively computed from
(q`,1 , q`,2 ) as follows. Consider a vertex in level ` + 1 that
k
wears a mask. It has degree k with probability kp
hki due
to properties of the configuration model. Due to the tree
structure, k − 1 of these edges are sent to ` and one is
sent to the parent in level ` + 2. Out of the k − 1 level-`
neighbors, some number X wear a mask while the rest do
not, where X ∼ Binomial(k − 1, m). Out of the X maskwearing neighbors, some number U are infected, where U ∼
Binomial(X, q`,1 ). Similarly, there are V infected non-maskwearing neighbors, where V ∼ Binomial(k − 1 − X, q`,2 ).
Finally, if there are U infected mask-wearing neighbors and
V infected non-mask-wearing neighbors, the probability that
the mask-wearing parent in level ` + 1 becomes infected is
1 − (1 − T11 )U (1 − T21 )V . If we define
z  
X
z
f1 (z, q1 , q2 ) :=
mx (1 − m)z−x
x
x=0
x  
X
x u
×
q1 (1 − q1 )x−u
u
u=0
z−x
X z − x
×
q2v (1 − q2 )z−x−v
v
v=0
× (1 − (1 − T11 )u (1 − T21 )v ), (8)
then we have
q`+1,1 =

∞
X
kpk
k=0

hki

f1 (k − 1, q`,1 , q`,2 ).

If we define f2 to be the same as (8) except the term
(1 − (T − T11 )u (1 − T21 )v )
is replaced by
(1 − (1 − T12 )u (1 − T22 )v ),
then we also have
q`+1,2 =

∞
X
kpk
k=0

hki

f2 (k − 1, q`,1 , q`,2 ).

Following the analysis in [8], the sequence {q`,1 , q`,2 }`≥1
converges to a limit (q∞,1 , q∞,2 ) which satisfies the fixed
point equation
q∞,i =

∞
X
kpk
k=0

hki

fi (k − 1, q∞,1 , q∞,2 ),

i ∈ {1, 2}.

degree ranging between 0 and 10. To generate the simulation
plots, we took an average over 20,000 independent trials
where, in each trial, a new contact network was generated.
The parameters of the mask model were chosen to be m =
0.45, T11 = 0.126, T12 = 0.18, T21 = 0.42, T22 = 0.6. The
choice of m was based on the current fraction of maskwearers in the US [1]. The transmissibility parameters were
chosen as a reasonable baseline to illustrate the model and
our theoretical results about the model. For larger mean
degrees, we see that we have a near-perfect match between
the simulations and theoretical predictions. For smaller mean
degrees, the match is close, but not perfect, since the emergence event becomes quite rare close to the phase transition
point. We expect that if much larger networks are used, the
simulations will enjoy better alignment with the theoretical
predictions, even close to the phase transition point.

Finally, to compute the probability of infection at the root,
we note that the root has k neighbors with probability pk ,
and all neighbors are in a lower level. Thus, if S1 (S2 ) is
the probability of infection of a mask-wearing (non-maskwearing) root vertex, then we have
Si =

∞
X

pk fi (k, q∞,1 , q∞,2 ),

i ∈ {1, 2}.

k=0

As our analysis was for an arbitrarily chosen root node,
Si is the expected fraction of mask-wearing vertices that
eventually get infected by the epidemic, conditioned on the
epidemic occurring. The total fraction of infections is then
given by S = S1 · m + S2 · (1 − m).
IV. NUMERICAL RESULTS
A. Epidemic as a function of the mean degree

Fig. 1.
Plot of the probability of emergence from simulations and
theoretical predictions. The degree distribution is Poisson with varying
mean.

We conducted extensive numerical simulations to validate
our theoretical analysis. In Figure 1, we study the probability
of emergence. The contact network was generated via the
configuration model with Poisson degree distribution and
500,000 vertices. We studied several values for the mean

Fig. 2. Plot of the expected epidemic size conditioned on emergence from
simulations and theoretical predictions, with Poisson degree distribution.
The empirical and theoretical curves match very well, even close to the
phase transition point.

In Figure 2, we study the expected size of the epidemic,
conditioned on emergence. In our simulations, we used the
same number of nodes and degree distribution, averaged over
10,000 independent trials. The same parameters for the mask
model were used as well. We see very good alignment between the simulations and theoretical predictions, confirming
the validity of our theoretical results.
In Figure 3, we illustrate the interesting finding that while
the multi-strain model with mutations can be used to compute
the probability of emergence in the Mask model, it yields
an incorrect prediction of the expected epidemic size. There
seems to be a good alignment between the two curves close
to the critical threshold, but the two predictions diverge
for larger mean degrees. We give a possible reason for
this mismatch. In the mask model, there is a single strain
in the population and a susceptible vertex is infected as
long as as there is a successful infection by at least one
neighbor. In the multi-strain model with mutation, if there
are multiple successful infections to a susceptible vertex,
the resulting transmitted strain depends on the number of
successful infections of each type. When the mean degree

Fig. 3. Comparison of the theoretical prediction for the expected epidemic
size conditioned on emergence in the mask model (circles) and the multistrain model with mutation (dashed lines). There is good alignment close to
the critical threshold, but the predictions diverge for larger mean degrees.
We use the same parameters as in Figure 2.

demonstrating the effectiveness of masks in curbing the
spread of COVID-19. Interestingly, we see that the fraction of infected non-mask-wearers (shown in blue) is also
monotonically decreasing in m. The intuition for this observation is clear; if many individuals wear a mask, on a high
level it reduces the effective transmissibility of the virus,
thus reducing the number of infected non-mask-wearers as
well. Curiously, the fraction of infected mask-wearers is not
monotonically decreasing in m; the infection curve peaks
at m = 0.6. We provide a possible explanation. There are
two opposing effects which influence the number of infected
mask-wearers. As m increases, the total number of infected
mask-wearers will naturally increase, since there are more
susceptible mask-wearers in the population. On the other
hand, increasing m will also decrease the transmissibility of
the virus, leading to a lower rate of infection. When m < 0.6,
the first effect dominates: the increase in susceptible maskwearers is greater than the decrease in transmissibility. The
point m = 0.6 is where the two effect balance each other;
for m > 0.6, the decrease in transmissibility dominates the
increase in susceptible mask-wearers.

is small, it is unlikely that there will be more than one
successful infection, as the number of neighbors of a vertex is
small. However as the mean degree increases, the difference
becomes more pronounced. We plan to further investigate
the fundamental differences between the mask model and
multi-strain model with mutations in future work.
B. Epidemic as a function of the fraction of mask-wearers

Fig. 5. Plot of the simulated and theoretical critical degree for an epidemic
to persist. In our simulations, we generated a contact network with Poisson
degree distribution on 5,000 vertices. We averaged over 1,000 independent
simulations to generate the simulation data points for the plot.

In Figure 5, we study how the critical threshold depends
on m. As one may expect, as the fraction of mask-wearers
increase, a larger mean degree is required for an epidemic
to emerge.
Fig. 4. Plot of the expected epidemic size conditioned on emergence, as
a function of m. While masks decrease the fraction of infections in total
(red) and for the non-mask-wearing population (blue), the mask-wearing
infections (green) curiously peaks at m = 0.6.

Figure 4 illustrates the effect of the probability of maskwearing, m, on the expected epidemic size. In our simulations, we generated the contact network with 5,000,000
vertices and a Poisson(5) degree distribution. We studied
various values of m between 0 and 1. As the fraction
of mask-wearing individuals increases, the total number
of infections (shown in red) is monotonically decreasing,

C. Epidemic as a function of the baseline transmissibility
In Figure 6, we conside the effect of the baseline transmissibility (i.e., the transmissibility between two non-maskwearers) on the probability of emergence and expected
epidemic size. Instead of setting specific values for the transmissibilities in the mask model, we assume that masks have
an inward efficiency of Tmask,1 and an outward efficiency of
Tmask,2 . This implies that the transmission parameters have
the form T11 = Tmask,1 Tmask,2 T , T12 = Tmask,2 T and
T22 = T . Here, we fix Tmask,1 = 0.3 and Tmask,2 = 0.7
(this reflects the observation that masks have higher outward

V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we studied the effects of mask-wearing on
viral spread, specifically the probability of emergence and
the expected epidemic size conditioned on emergence. We
offered two different perspectives on modeling viral spread
with masks: through a heterogeneous bond percolation approach on multi-type networks and through an analogy with
a multiple-strain model with mutation. Theoretically, we find
that while the probability of emergence is the same in both
models, the expected epidemic size can be different. We
also show that the expected epidemic size is decreasing
as a function of the fraction of mask-wearing individuals,
confirming that mask-wearing can be an effective strategy in
curbing the spread of COVID-19.
(a)

(b)
Fig. 6.
Empirical and theoretical plots for the probability of emergence
(a) and expected epidemic size (b) as a function of T . The green (blue)
curves assume that patient zero is wearing (not wearing) a mask. The red
curve assumes that patient zero is randomly selected.

efficiency than inward) and we study how the epidemic
characteristics change with T . In our simulations, we set
m = 0.45 and assumed a Poisson(5) degree distribution
and generated networks with 5,000,000 vertices, averaging
over 100 independent simulations. In both the probability of
emergence and the expected epidemic size, the curves are
increasing with T , and an epidemic emerges when T = 0.3.
While the simulated probability of emergence deviates from
the theoretical curve, we expect to see concentration as we
increase the number of experiments.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was supported in part by the National Science Foundation through grants RAPID-2026985, RAPID2026982, CCF-1813637 and DMS-1811724; the Army Research Office through grants # W911NF-20-1-0204 and #
W911NF-17-1-0587; and the C3.ai Digital Transformation
Institute.

R EFERENCES
[1] “IHME: Covid-19 projections,” Sep 2020. [Online]. Available: https:
//covid19.healthdata.org/united-states-of-america?view=mask-use
[2] H. Alexander and T. Day, “Risk factors for the evolutionary emergence
of pathogens,” Journal of The Royal Society Interface, vol. 7, no. 51,
pp. 1455–1474, 2010.
[3] A. Allard, P.-A. Noël, L. J. Dubé, and B. Pourbohloul, “Heterogeneous bond percolation on multitype networks with an application to
epidemic dynamics,” Phys. Rev. E, vol. 79, p. 036113, Mar 2009.
[4] B. Bollobás, Random graphs. Cambridge university press, 2001,
vol. 73.
[5] F. Brauer, C. Castillo-Chavez, and C. Castillo-Chavez, Mathematical
Models in Population Biology and Epidemiology. Springer, 2012.
[6] N. C. J. Brienen, A. Timen, J. Wallinga, J. E. Van Steenbergen, and
P. F. M. Teunis, “The effect of mask use on the spread of influenza
during a pandemic,” Risk Analysis, vol. 30, no. 8, pp. 1210–1218,
2010.
[7] S. E. Eikenberry, M. Mancuso, E. Iboi, T. Phan, K. Eikenberry,
Y. Kuang, E. Kostelich, and A. B. Gumel, “To mask or not to mask:
Modeling the potential for face mask use by the general public to
curtail the covid-19 pandemic,” Infectious Disease Modelling, vol. 5,
pp. 293 – 308, 2020.
[8] R. Eletreby, Y. Zhuang, K. M. Carley, O. Yağan, and H. V. Poor, “The
effects of evolutionary adaptations on spreading processes in complex
networks,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
U.S.A., vol. 117, no. 11, pp. 5664–5670, 2020.
[9] A. Konda, A. Prakash, G. A. Moss, M. Schmoldt, G. D. Grant, and
S. Guha, “Aerosol filtration efficiency of common fabrics used in
respiratory cloth masks,” ACS Nano, vol. 14, no. 5, pp. 6339–6347,
2020, pMID: 32329337.
[10] D.-S. Lee and M. Zhu, “Epidemic spreading in a social network with
facial masks wearing individuals,” Oct 2020.
[11] N. Leung, D. Chu, E. Shiu, K.-H. Chan, J. Mcdevitt, B. Hau, H.L. Yen, Y. Li, D. Ip, J. S. Peiris, W.-H. Seto, G. Leung, D. Milton,
and B. Cowling, “Respiratory virus shedding in exhaled breath and
efficacy of face masks,” Nature Medicine, vol. 26, 05 2020.
[12] L. Meyers, “Contact network epidemiology: Bond percolation applied
to infectious disease prediction and control,” Bulletin of the American
Mathematical Society, vol. 44, no. 1, pp. 63–86, 2007.
[13] M. Molloy and B. Reed, “A critical point for random graphs with a
given degree sequence,” Random Structures & Algorithms, vol. 6, no.
2-3, pp. 161–180, 1995.
[14] C. Moore and M. E. Newman, “Exact solution of site and bond
percolation on small-world networks,” Physical Review E, vol. 62,
no. 5, p. 7059, 2000.
[15] M. E. J. Newman, “Spread of epidemic disease on networks,” Phys.
Rev. E, vol. 66, p. 016128, Jul 2002.
[16] M. E. Newman, S. H. Strogatz, and D. J. Watts, “Random graphs
with arbitrary degree distributions and their applications,” Phys. Rev.
E, vol. 64, no. 2, p. 026118, 2001.
[17] S. M. Tracht, S. Y. Del Valle, and J. M. Hyman, “Mathematical
modeling of the effectiveness of facemasks in reducing the spread
of novel influenza a (h1n1),” PLOS ONE, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 1–12, 02
2010.

