A Survey on Contact Tracing: the Latest Advancements
and Challenges
Ting Jiang1 , Yizheng Chen1 , Yang Zhang1 , Minhao Zhang1 , Chenhao Lu1 , Ji
Zhang ∗2 , Zhao Li3 , Jun Gao4 and Shuigeng Zhou5
1

arXiv:2011.02094v1 [cs.SI] 4 Nov 2020

2

Zhejiang Lab, Hangzhou, China
The University of Southern Queensland, Toowoomba, Australia
3
Alibaba Group, Hangzhou, China
4
Peking University, Beijing, China
5
Fudan University, Beijing, China

Abstract
Infectious diseases are caused by pathogenic microorganisms, such as bacteria,
viruses, parasites or fungi, which can be spread, directly or indirectly, from one person to another. Infectious diseases pose a serious threat to human health, especially
COVID-19 that has became a serious worldwide health concern since the end of
2019. Contact tracing is the process of identifying, assessing, and managing people
who have been exposed to a disease to prevent its onward transmission. Contact
tracing can help us better understand the transmission link of the virus, whereby
better interrupting its transmission. Given the worldwide pandemic of COVID-19,
contact tracing has become one of the most critical measures to effectively curb the
spread of the virus. This paper presents a comprehensive survey on contact tracing,
with a detailed coverage of the recent advancements the models, digital technologies,
protocols and issues involved in contact tracing. The current challenges as well as
future directions of contact tracing technologies are also presented.
Keywords— Infectious diseases, COVID-19, contact tracing technologies, mobile applications, protocols, privacy issues

1

Introduction

Infectious diseases are an illness resulting from pathogenic microorganisms, also known as transmissible or communicable diseases. The pathogens that cause infectious diseases are bacteria,
viruses, parasites, fungi and so on [1]. Infectious diseases bring a great threat to human health,
national economy and societal development. Death from infectious diseases is one of the top
10 causes of death worldwide, and the incidence of infectious diseases in developing countries is
especially high [2]. In 2016, infectious diseases resulted in 4.3 million deaths (1.7 million women
∗

Corresponding author: zhangji77@gmail.com

1

Figure 1: Statistics on the incidence and death of China’s statutory infectious diseases
in 2019.
and 2.7 million men) according to the WHO’s 2019 World Health Statistics report [3]. According
to the Statistics of the National Health Commission of China in 2019, a total of 1,0244,507 cases
of statutory infectious diseases were reported nationwide, resulting in 25,285 deaths. The reported morbidity rate was 733.57 per 100,000 and the mortality rate was 18,100 per 100,000. As
Figure 1 shown, viral hepatitis, diarrheal diseases, HIV/AIDS, malaria, and tuberculosis (TB)
are among the top causes of overall global mortality. Starting from the end of 2019, COVID-19
has taken a huge death toll on people’s life, having caused 45,406,832 infections and 1,183,726
deaths as of October 30, 2020 [4].
Infectious diseases can be categorized in different ways. Here, we present two commonly used
approaches for categorizing infectious diseases. According to the mode of transmission, infectious
diseases can be broadly divided into the following four categories [5]:
• Respiratory tract infectious diseases, such as SARS, measles and influenza, which
can be transmitted through air, droplets and contact with respiratory secretions, etc.;
• Digestive infectious diseases, such as paratyphoid A and B, foodborne diseases and
esherihioz, which can be transmitted through mosquitoes, flies or fleas;
• Transmissive or blood infectious diseases, such as malaria, plague and HIV infection,
which can be transmitted through blood;
• Surface infectious diseases, such as tetanus, anthrax and infection with multiple pathways like infectious mononucleosis and enterovirus infections, which can be transmitted
through the direct contact with the pathogen.
According to the diseases’ contagiousness, spread and risk of death, China classifies infectious
diseases into three main categories, called Class A, B and C infectious diseases as following [6]:

2

• Class A infectious diseases, which are subject to compulsory management, such as
plague and cholera;
• Class B infectious diseases, which are subject to stringent management, such as viral
hepatitis, typhoid and paratyphoid, AIDS, gonorrhea, syphilis, etc;
• Class C infectious diseases, which are subject to close monitoring, such as tuberculosis,
leprosy, influenza, epidemic parotitis and neonatal tetanus.
Contact tracing is the process of identifying, assessing, and managing people who have been
exposed to an infectious disease to prevent onward transmission. When systematically applied,
contact tracing will break the chains of transmission of an infectious disease and is thus an
essential public health tool for controlling infectious disease outbreaks [7]. It is a critical process
to ensure the best possible chance of control and the longest possible time to local take-off [8].
The importance of contact tracing, timely testing and adequate quarantine/isolation in disease
control has been proven [9]. The WHO had defined contact tracing as having three basic steps:
• Contact identification, where the infected person recalls activities and the roles of
persons involved since the onset of the infectious disease. Contacts can be anyone who
has been in close contact with an infected person, including, but not limited to, the family
members, work colleagues, friends or health care providers;
• Contact listing, which provides the names of potentially infected contacts;
• Contact follow-up, which monitors any onset of symptoms associated with the viral
infection [10].
In history, contact tracing has been widely used in the control of infectious diseases. In
1994, an HIV-positive obstetrician in Australia infected 149 pregnant women through contact.
This event attracted wide attentions, and also inspired the idea of controlling infectious diseases through contact tracing [11]. Contact tracing and the follow-up control measures such as
quarantine and isolation were crucially important during the SARS outbreak in 2003 [12], the
Ebola outbreak in Africa in 2014 [13], as well as in the eradication of smallpox [14]. Despite the
current advances in vaccine development technologies, the role of contact tracing and follow-up
control measures in the initial stage of an epidemic are still critical. The results show that a
response system based on enhanced testing and contact tracing can have a major role in relaxing
social-distancing interventions in the absence of herd immunity against SARS-CoV-2 [15].
Nevertheless, the traditional contact tracing approaches used to control the spread of infectious disease requires a lot of human and material resources, which is disadvantageous given that
the fast response is critical to deal with those highly infectious diseases. The more recent digital
contact tracing methods are far more efficient and have helped greatly reduce the consumption
of human labor and other material resources. Given their great advantages, various digital information technologies in contact tracing have been applied in many countries as effective means
for for COVID-19 inhibition [16].
To our best knowledge, the previous work on surveying contact tracing, particularly for
COVID-19, is rather limited. The only major survey work that we can find in our literature
review is the survey work carried out by Nadeem et al. [17]. Yet, this survey is very limited in
its scope and depth - it only covered some of the COVID-19 contact tracing apps and protocols.
In comparison, our survey is much more comprehensive, covering both the traditional and the
recent digital contact tracing technologies. Our survey presents the fundamental approach and
models of contact tracing and the latest digital contact tracing technologies, detailing a variety of
tracing systems and apps currently being used in many different countries, together with the associated positioning technologies. The important issues and protocols involved in digital contact

3

tracing are also discussed. At the end of the survey, we reflect on the current challenges contact
tracing technologies are facing and highlight several future trends projected for technological
developments of contact tracing in the future.
Structure of our survey. The rest of our survey is organized as follows. In Section 2,
we introduce the general contact tracing method and some underlying theoretical models that
the traditional contact tracing methods have used. In Section 3, we elaborate on a variety
of the latest contact tracing apps currently being used in many different countries as well as
the associated positioning technologies. The important privacy issues and protocols in contact
tracing are discussed in Section 4. Section 5 covers some other important issues involved in
contact tracing technologies. We identify the current challenges and future directions of contact
tracing technologies in Section 6. Finally, Section 7 concludes this survey.

2

General Contact Tracing Methods, Technologies and Models

In this section, we will present some preliminaries of contact tracing, including the general contact
tracing methods and the underlying mathematical models, both of which have been traditionally
utilized by medical and healthcare professionals for carrying out contact tracing.

2.1

General Contact Tracing Method

The fundamental principle in contact tracing is nothing more than the old-school detective work
- finding sick patients and then figuring out who they recently interacted with, even though the
exact approach implemented in contact tracing may vary.
The most popular and well-known contact tracing method is the backward tracing. It seeks
to establish how someone became infected in the first place, rather than the persons to whom the
infection has been passed to. For epidemics with high heterogeneity in infectiousness, experts
sometimes may adopt a hybrid strategy combining both the forward and backwards tracing to
find the source of infection, depending on local contact tracing capacity. A typical backward
contact tracing strategy is based on a community-based survey and follows a certain steps as
follows:
• When an individual is identified as being infected or as a virus carrier, he/she will be
reported to the relevant public health organisation and be put under quarantine;
• The individual will be interviewed by contact tracers to establish the history of his movements and the close contact whom might be infected;
• Contact tracers may also need to interview those who have information about the patients’
contact. Considering the possible cases of the interviewee’s intentional concealment or his
inability of recalling the details, necessary cross validation will be carried out;
• Once contacts are identified, contact tracers will contact them and test them for possible
infection;
• Once the contact is also identified as being infected by the disease, then contact tracers
will start again from the first step to carry on the tracing;
• If contacts cannot be individually identified, then some broader communications may be
issued to the public within a certain proper scope depends on how widely the virus has
possibly spread.

4

In the tracing process, case management software is often used by contact tracers to maintain
records of cases and contact tracing activities, which are typically stored in a centralized or cloudbased database to support fast information browsing and retrieval.
As far as the contact notification is concerned, it includes patient referral and provider
referral in the traditional contact tracing routine, according to the Australasian contact tracing
guidelines [18]. Table 1 provides a more detailed explanation about this. The contact tracing
management software may also have some special features that can use SMS or email directly to
notify people believed to have been in close contact with someone who has been contracted by
the infectious disease.
The above fundamental contact tracing method has been widely performed on contact tracing
for diseases such as tuberculosis, vaccine-preventable infections (e.g., measles), sexually transmitted infections (e.g., HIV), blood-borne infections, Ebola, some serious bacterial infections,
and novel virus infections (e.g., SARS, H1N1, Covid-19).
Even though it has been proven effective in handling many infectious diseases in the past,
the traditional contact tracing method suffers from some major limitations when dealing with
large-scale outbreak of infectious diseases such as the pandemic of COVID-19. Relying mainly
on manual interviews and investigations, the traditional tracing method is time and resource
consuming. A low, steady number of new cases is usually manageable by the traditional contact
tracing methods, but for those highly infectious diseases, such as COVID-19, the infection rate of
the diseases can easily outpace that of the contact tracing and will quickly overwhelm the tracing
system [19], making contact tracing lose much of its efficacy eventually. Also, the traditional
contact tracing method is mainly based on interviews and thus tends to produce highly incomplete
and inaccurate information. This will mislead or even disrupt the tracing process and waste a lot
of resources unnecessarily which may have already stretched to the limit. Therefore, it becomes
imperative for us to develop and deploy more efficient contact tracing technologies, by taking
advantage of the latest advancements in information and communication technologies, for faster
responses to major infectious disease outbreak.

2.2

Underlying Fundamental Models For Contact Tracing

As its theoretical foundation, contact tracing often draws on some underlying models that reveal
the dynamics of virus transmission. For example, mathematical models were developed to study
the dynamics of SARS and MERS transmissions in early 2000, which provide important support
to contact tracing for the two diseases. Models represented how contact tracing affected the
epidemic dynamics were useful for evaluating different infection control interventions and the
burden of infection to facilitate the further understanding of their epidemiology [20]. Such
models have direct utility in planning for future outbreaks of coronaviruses: they can be used to
estimate the scale of resources required to conduct effective contact tracing.

2.2.1

Networks Models.

Traditional methods are fundamentally linked to the individual-level spread of infection and, in
particular, the network of potential transmission routes. As a general and popular data structure
to represent complex relationships between entities such as in society [21][22] and biology [23],
network has been also an important concept in human disease modeling, where social interactions can take place over a wide range of distances. While some models have been developed to
consider the role of contact tracing in randomly interacting populations [8], only network-based
models that consider transmission pathways [24] and the associated pairwise equations can provide an accurate mechanistic understanding of the structured nature of human interactions.

5

Table 1: contacts notification.
Patient referral
Provider referral
Process
• The index patient personally notifies his/her
contact.
• The healthcare provider
provides the information to be imparted by
the index patient to the
partner.

• The healthcare provider directly advises the contact or
uses another agency (e.g.,
sexual health service, public
health unit or health department contact tracer) to ensure
that contacts are notified.
• The healthcare provider must
have the explicit approval of
the index patient.

Advantages
• Individuals usually prefer to notify contacts
personally.
• Quicker and easier.

• Higher level of confidentiality
for the index patient.
• Method of choice when an individual fears a violent reaction, and for certain situations and conditions (e.g.,
pulmonary TB, transfusionrelated infections, when contact will involve sex workers
or person with intellectual disability).
• May be appropriate for serious
infections such as HIV where
rigorous case finding is warranted.

Disadvantages
• Less confidentiality.
• Patients may not actually contact partners.

6

• More time and resource intensive.

Detailed pairwise equations [25] gain an analytical insight into contact tracing for STDs, such
as gonorrhoea and chlamydia, which are described by a susceptible–infected–susceptible (SIS)
framework, while the airborne infections, such as SARS, smallpox, polio and measles, follow the
susceptible–infected–recovered/dead paradigm.

2.2.2

Mathematical Models

Since 1991, Kermack et al. [26] have demonstrated that mathematical theory has made a significant contribution to epidemic control. Many mathematical models of epidemic have sprung
up. Currently, a large part of mathematical epidemiology is concerned with the investigation
of mechanisms and efficacy of control strategies against infectious diseases. They have proved
themselves as powerful tools, helping human beings to control the epidemic situation, but many
of them are found to have problems of low efficiency and high cost.
Specifically, the contact tracing models for epidemic control are mainly divided into stochastic
models, deterministic models and other models. Castillo-Chavezet et al. have written a book
which covers the use of dynamical systems (deterministic discrete, delay, PDEs, and ODEs
models) and stochastic models in disease dynamics [27].

a Stochastic Models

Stochastic models, as well as the Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods, have become
increasingly popular for calibrating stochastic epidemiological models with missing data which
treat the missing data as extra parameters [28][29][30]. Istvan Z. Kiss et al. thought that the
existing stochastic model does not consider the transmission of between groups, and put forward
a stochastic model with better clustering effect for epidemic diseases transmitted by groups [31].
For stochastic models, super spreading events were found pretty difficult to be considered in the
models.

b Deterministic Models

Yorke et al. constructed a deterministic model for the spread of gonorrhea in a community
by considering only the sexually active individuals who potentially may contract the disease from
their contacts [32]. Although deterministic modeling can be a guide for describing epidemics,
parameter estimation for deterministic models is usually a difficult task because of missing observations.
For deterministic models like discrete-time simulation models, there exists overestimation
in contact tracing efficacy due to failure of identifying correlation structure between diseases
generation by contact tracing.

c Other Models

As for other epidemic models, the most representative work is the SIR model. In 1927, the
SIR infectious disease model was established by Kermack and McKendrick using dynamics [33].
Lipsitch M et al. [34] have used a SIR model of SARS transmission to estimate the infectiousness
of SARS from the rate of increase of cases. Blum1 et al. [35] proposed a model of Approximate
Bayesian Computation (ABC), which replaced the data filling method such as Markov Chain
Monte Carlo Computation and was used in the reasoning of epidemiological models. A nonlinear
mathematical model was proposed to study the effects of contact tracing on infected persons
in a population with a variable size structure by Ram Naresh et.al [36]. They divided the
population into four groups (negatives but susceptibles, positives or infectives that do not know
they are infected, positives that know they are infected and that of epidemic patients). In most of
the widely-used traditional contact tracing models, many sexually transmitted diseases broadly

7

conform to the SIS paradigm model that individuals enter sexually active life as susceptible, and
infected individuals return to the susceptible class following treatment [14]. Such contact tracing
is an important public health tool [37] as it provides the only means by which such individuals
can be easily identified.

3

Digital contact tracing methods

Some respiratory infectious diseases, such as COVID-19, are highly infectious and can spread
very quickly if not properly contained. Even worse, someone who infected by the virus can go
unnoticed for up to 20 days before showing symptoms or being tested positive, before when the
infected individual may have already contacted many other people and passed the disease on to
them. Therefore, it is of a paramount importance to quickly and accurately to carry out contact
tracing to understand how the virus is transmitted and notify the contacted individuals as soon
as possible.
Digital contact tracking is a contact tracking method that relies on mobile devices to determine the contact between infected patients and users. Digital contact tracing has existed
as a concept since at least 2007 [38] [39] and it was proven to be effective in the first empirical investigation using Bluetooth data in 2014. The concept came to prominence during the
COVID-19 pandemic, where it was deployed on a wide scale for the first time through multiple governments and private COVID-19 apps. For mass population of people, digital contact
tracing offers unparalleled advantages in monitoring their health status, quickly establishing the
movement trajectories of infected people and generating the list of potentially contacts, making
it one of the most important technological means in the current contact tracing for combating
COVID-19. Considering its generic principles and algorithms involved, digital contact tracing
can also be applied to other respiratory infectious diseases as well.

3.1

The General Architecture of Digital Contact Tracing

Digital mobile devices, such as smartphones, have been deemed as the most ideal tracking devices
for contact tracing thanks to their popularity in use by the general public. Using smartphones
as the platform, a scores of mobile apps have been developed by many different countries for
dedicated contact tracing use. Even though those apps may be quite different in terms of the
positioning technologies, data storage and communication protocols used, their general working
mechanism is highly similar. Figure 2 presents the general architecture for the dedicated mobile
contact tracing apps developed on smartphones.
The positioning technologies that can support various contact tracing apps include Bluetooth,
GPS, Cellphone tower networks and WiFi. Contact tracing apps typically use one or two of those
positioning technologies to acquire proximity or encounter information, which is the important
information required in contact tracing.
There are two groups of users in these contact tracing apps, i.e., the general public (represented by User A, B and C in Figure 2) and the medical/healthcare professionals who are
responsible for diagnosing patients and carrying out contact tracing. Here, we suppose that all
users involved (User A, B and C) have installed and registered for using the contact tracing app,
and User B is tested positive to the infectious disease, e.g., COVID-19.
The general process of digital contact tracing using mobile apps takes the following four
steps:
• Every time when users make encounters with each other, the related information (e.g., the
location and encounter information) will be exchanged and stored in the apps of users or

8

sent to the back-end server;
• After User B has been diagnosed as having contracted the disease, the diagnosis information will be uploaded to the server by User B himself or by the medical or healthcare
professionals;
• After the server receives the information of a new patient (User B), it will analyze the
patient’s location and encounter information to find out potential contact (i.e., User C)
based on some predetermined rules in terms of the proximity and duration of contacts.
Then, the app will send a message to notify User C. Necessary medical tests and/or
quarantine measures will be taken for User C. Even though User A has encountered with
User B as well, the encounter does not satisfy the predetermined rules, so User A is deemed
to have a low risk and thus won’t be notified.

Figure 2: The General Architecture of Digital Contact Tracing Apps.

3.2

Contact Tracing Mobile Apps

A plethora of mobile apps have been developed for digital contact tracing during the COVID-19
pandemic to identify more efficiently the persons who may have been in contact with an infected
individual. In this subsection, we will detail a number of popular contact tracing mobile Apps,
that have been adopted by different countries in contact tracing of COVID-19. Table 2 presents
a summary of these apps.

a TraceToghther

The TraceToghther app [40] is a Bluetooth-based app proposed by the Singapore Government
in March 2020. It uses a digital contact tracing protocol called BlueTrace. Phones exchange
anonymized proximity information using Bluetooth during encounters. This information is stored

9

Table 2: Summary of
Name
Trace Toghther
CovidSafe
Aarogya Setu
COVID Tracker Ireland
HaMagen
Covid Watch
SwissCovid
QR Code basehd apps
Aura
SCT system

Mobile Apps for
Release Time
March, 2020
April, 2020
April, 2020
July, 2020
March, 2020
April, 2020
2020
Feb, 2020
July, 2020
May, 2020

COVID-19 Contact Tracing.
Country
Protocol
Singapore
BlueTrace
Australia
BlueTrace
India
GPS and Bluetooth
Ireland
ENS and Bluetooth
Israe
GPS
Arizona, US GAEN APIs
Switzerland DP3T
China
GPS
US
QR
US
BLE

securely on the phone and is automatically deleted after 25 days. If a user tests positive to
COVID-19, the data is only shared with the Ministry of Health (MOH) . Using received signal
strength indicator (RSSI) values, TraceToghther can measure the signal strength between devices.
Calibrated RSSI values are used to estimate the approximate distance between users during
an encounter. TraceTogether interpolates between successive communications to estimate the
approximate duration of an encounter.

Figure 3: TraceTogether (ios version) [41].
b CovidSafe

CovidSafe [42] was released by the Australian Government on 26th April 2020, with the
source code for both Android and iOS clients released on 8th May 2020 [43]. On 1 August
2020, NSW Health announced the app had helped them trace new contacts. They accessed the
app data on a corona-virus case and identified 544 additional people, two of whom are tested
positive to COVID-19 [44]. Covid-Safe is based on the Bluetrace protocol and exhibits many
similar characteristics to the TraceTogether app. The app augments traditional contact tracing
by automatically tracking encounters between users, and later allowing health authority to warn
a user if he has come within 1.5 meters with an infected patient for more than 15 minutes.

10

Figure 4: CovidSafe (ios version) [45].
c Aarogya Setu

Aarogya Setu [46] is an Indian open-source COVID–19 contact tracing, syndromic mapping
and self-assessment digital service. It was developed by the National Informatics Centre under
the Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology (MeitY). The source code is available
for Android and iOS app [47]. It uses GPS and Bluetooth information to track corona-virus
infections. With Bluetooth, it determines the risk if one has been within six feet of a COVID–19infected person by scanning through the database. Using location information, it determines
whether the location where one is at belongs to one of the infected areas based on the data
available. Aarogya Setu has several functions:
• Analyze the risk of contracting COVID-19 for the user;
• Helps users self-assess COVID-19 symptoms;
• Updates local and national COVID-19 cases;
• Advises the number of COVID-19 patients in a radius of 500 m, 1 km, 2 km, 5 km and 10
km from the user, respectively.

Figure 5: Aarogya Setu (iOS version) [48].
d COVID Tracker Ireland
11

COVID Tracker Ireland [49] is a digital contact tracing app released by the Irish Government
and the Health Service Executive(HSE) on 7 July 2020. The app uses ENS and Bluetooth
technology to determine whether a user have been in close contact with someone for more than
15 minutes who tested positive to COVID-19. As of 10 August, over 1,560,000 people have
downloaded the app and alerts for close contacts issued to 137 people [50].

Figure 6: COVID Tracker Ireland (iOS version) [51].
e HaMagen

HaMagen is developed by Israel’s Ministry of Health. The application cross-checks the GPS
history of a mobile phone with the historical geographical data of identified cases from the
Ministry of Health. The GPS data only stay in mobile phone and are not sent to any third parties.
The data from the Ministry of Health are sent to user’s mobile phone for cross-referencing. So
the cross-referencing of users’ GPS history with the locations of patients only happens on the
mobile phone. After installation, the app compares the location data of verified COVID-19
patients with users’ location data via GPS and can identify proximity between phones where
it is installed using Bluetooth technology. An overlap (based on location or proximity between
devices) between users and a verified COVID-19 patient can be detected. If this happens, the
app will alert users by SMS.

Figure 7: HaMagen (iOS version) [52].
f Covid Watch
12

Covid Watch [53] is an open-source nonprofit organization founded in February 2020. It
started as an independent research collaboration between Stanford University and the University
of Waterloo, and was the first team in the world that published a white paper [54] and developed
an open-source anonymous Bluetooth exposure alert protocol - the CEN Protocol [55], later
renamed the TCN Protocol - in collaboration with CoEpi [56] in early March 2020.
Covid Watch also built a fully open source mobile app for sending anonymous exposure alerts
first using the TCN Protocol in April 2020 and later using the nearly identical Google/Apple
exposure notification (GAEN) framework. The app uses Bluetooth to sense when one is near
someone else who has installed Covid Watch. A log of instances when one user was in a close
proximity to other users is stored solely on the phone. When tested positive to COVID-19, user
can inform the app about the diagnosis. Covid Watch will automatically warn everyone who
was in a close proximity about potential infection and encourage them to take action like getting
tested or take self-quarantine.

Figure 8: Covid Watch (iOS version) [57].
g SwissCovid

SwissCovid [58] is used in Switzerland. The app use Bluetooth and Decentralized PrivacyPreserving Proximity Tracing (DP-3T). It was developed in collaboration with the École polytechnique fédérale de Lausanne and the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology in Zurich as well
as other experts [59]. When within Bluetooth range, the mobile phone exchanges random IDs
with other mobile phones that have a compatible app installed. The random IDs are stored on
the mobile phone for 14 days before being deleted automatically.
If users test positive to the coronavirus, they receive a Covidcode from the cantonal authorities. The code allows them to activate the notification function in the app, thereby warning
app users that came into close contact with the infected person. The identity of the person who
triggered the notification is not revealed. App users receives notifications if they have spent more
than 15 minutes within 1.5 metres from infected person within a 24-hour period.

h Health QR Code based apps

Health QR Code is widely used in China, which is a key enabling feature used by plenty
of apps for COVID-19 status monitoring and tracing. It interfaces with apps such as WeChat,
Alipay and QQ. People should show their QR code before entering a subway station, a shopping
mall and a hospital, etc. Everyone is assigned a color code — green, yellow or red — that
indicates the health statue [61]. A green code enables its holder to move about unrestricted.
Someone with a yellow code may be asked to stay home for seven days. Red means a two-week

13

Figure 9: SwissCovid (iOS version) [60].
quarantine. Yellow or red code may be given to someone who has had contacted with an infected
person, visited a virus hot zone or reported having symptoms in the sign-up form.

Figure 10: health QR code.
i Aura

Aura [62] was designed by the Pennsylvania-based firm Nucleus Careers. It is used by
Albion College to collects students’ COVID-19 test results and alert others by collecting realtime locations. As shown in Figure 11, the Aura app generates a QR code based on students’
COVID-19 test results and schools can scan the QR code to reveal the student’s test result status.

j A Smart Contact Tracing (SCT) system

A Smart Contact Tracing (SCT) system [63] utilizes the smartphones Bluetooth Low Energy
(BLE) signals and machine leaning classifier to accurately and quickly determine the contact
profile. SCTs performs the classification of the users contacts into high or low-risk categories using
precise proximity sensing. It achieves anonymity using a privacy-preserving communications

14

Figure 11: Aura QR code.(From: TechCrunch)
protocol. SCT leverages BLEs non-connectable advertising feature to broadcast a signature
packet when the user is in the public space. Both broadcasted and observed signatures are stored
in the users’ smartphone and they are only uploaded to a secure signature database when user
is confirmed by public health authorities to be infected. Using received signal strength (RSS),
each smartphone estimates its distance from other users’phones and issues real-time alerts when
social distancing rules are violated.

3.3

Positioning Technologies

In support of the various mobile apps developed in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, many
different positioning technologies have been used. In this section, we discuss several major
positioning technologies, including Bluetooth, GPS, Cellphone tower networks and Wi-Fi, that
have been widely used for contact tracing. Table 3 gives a comparison among different positioning
technologies.

a Bluetooth

Bluetooth is used between two phones and has the advantage of a lower battery usage. Using
Bluetooth, we can obtain traces of contact devices with a resolution of 1-2 meters, which makes
it ideal for identifying close personal contacts that are most likely to transmit infectious diseases.
A major limitation of Bluetooth is that it is only able to record the proximity information of
users within a small neighborhood. So Bluetooth is ideal in generating the list of contacts in
contact tracing, but is not capable of producing the spatial location of users, making it difficult to
establish more accurate and complete movement trajectories of people to support more advanced
analysis if necessary.

b GPS

GPS can be used to track the users’ location and works generally well in the outdoor environment - the accuracy of GPS-based tracking is about 10 to 15 meters outdoors, but it is severely
reduced indoors due to the weak GPS signals, which is a major limitation since most infectious
contact occurs indoors. The usage of GPS is more private than Bluetooth, but can also lead to
privacy problems [64].

15

Table 3: Comparison between positioning technologies.
Data
Accuracy
Battery
use
Bluetooth
Record
the
en- Able to classify close Low loss
counter
between contacts within 2
each devices
metres
GPS
Record the GPS lo- Unable to filter for Medium
cation
proximity and has a loss
higher false positive
rate
Cellphone
Capture and store Low accuracy of the Negligible
tower
net- the information of location obtained
works
cellphone communication
Wi-Fi
Scan and store in- Very accurate if peo- Negligible
formation about all ple are in the same
surrounding devices Wi-Fi netwoeks, but
it is typically limited
in its range and coverage
c Cellphone tower networks

Cellphone tower networks can achieve location tracking. Using Cellphone tower networks
don’t require users to download and use a particular app. It was first deployed in Israel [65]. It is
non-intrusive and can be put in place without any user intervention assuming a legal framework
is in place. One of the major advantages of this technology is that the communication providers
have been already capturing and storing the information of cellphone communication, so the
information is readily available for contact tracing. The economic cost of using this technology
is therefore negligible compared to other technologies. However, since the area of any cell may
vary from a few hundred meters to several kilometers, the accuracy of the location obtained will
be very low, and the process of determining the contact based on these traces is very inaccurate.
Also, this technology could pose serious privacy concerns [66].

d Wi-Fi

Using WiFi we can determine the identity (MAC address) of the surrounding devices, which
help generate a very accurate list of possible contacts as long as they are in the same WiFi networks. Also, mobile nodes can periodically scan and store information about all these
surrounding devices, including the strength of the received signal (RSSI), which can be used to
estimate distance. However, Wi-Fi may not be ubiquitously available and it is typically limited
in its range and coverage.

16

4

Privacy issues and protocols

Privacy issues have undoubtedly become the major user considerations when users are deciding
whether to adopt contact tracing technologies or not. They are also the current major obstacles
hindering the adoption of contact tracing technologies in many countries. In response, various
protocols for preserving or protecting users privacy have been proposed and used in digital contact
tracing technologies to solve or mitigate the privacy issues involved.

4.1

Privacy Issues in Data Sharing and Usage

The privacy concerns are raised primarily in two major aspects in relation to users data in contact
tracing technologies, i.e., data sharing and data usage.

4.1.1

Data sharing

When using contact tracing systems or apps, users are supposed to be given the privileges in
controlling how their personal data are shared. At any time of the process, users should have
the access to consent withdrawal which refers to a user’s rights to stop sharing his personal data
to any other parties. This offers users with the assurance that they can delete their data or
eliminate their presence from the contact tracing app ecosystem at any time. This privilege will
help lessen users’ worry about their personal data being eventually end up with untrustworthy
or even malicious parties. This will also encourage users to comfortably share their data through
trustable technical means with the parties involved in the contact tracing technologies.
Specifically, the privilege of consent withdrawal should be implemented at different stages
when users are using contact tracing systems or apps:
(1) When user data have not been transferred from the local tracing devices to the server,
users should be able to delete the systems or apps from their devices, along with all the user
data that have been collected and stored locally on the devices;
(2) If user data have already been uploaded to the server, in the case of a centralized architecture, the server should delete the user data as soon as it processes the data and, if the uploaded
data contain the valuable information about the close contacts of an encounter for a positive
case, alerts will also be sent out to the close contacts. In the case of a decentralized architecture,
the process of consent revocation is more complex. If an infected user requests their personal
data to be deleted, the server can delete the stored data it receives from the user, but it might
be difficult to ensure that the data which have been transferred to other devices can be instantly
removed from those devices. The possible solution is to ensure that the transferred data are
always deleted after a specific time duration (e.g., 21 days) from all the devices involved in the
architecture. On top of that, enhanced data encryption among all the nodes in the architecture
can be implemented as the additional protective measures just in case the shared data are not
deleted in time.
(3) Once the system or app is deactivated or phased out at the end of a pandemic, the collected
user data must be automatically deleted even though no user consent revocation is received, unless
the user has explicitly agreed that their stored data be migrated to other locations.

4.1.2

Data usage

We understand that the location information of users might be misused for the purposes other
than contact tracing. For example, the information may be used by commercial entities to push
advertisements to potential customers or by adversaries to launch various fraudulent or criminal
activities, seriously threatening the privacy and rights of users. As a strict rule, these data can

17

only be used in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, and other purposes of usage are strictly
prohibited. Transparency in the use of data is the top priority to ensure public trust in contact
tracking systems and apps. Furthermore, users should be well informed of how their data are
being used. The guarantee from contact tracing systems or apps in deleting user data after the
tracing is completed alone is far from being sufficient. Users should be advised about what part
of their data are used for what purpose in contact tracing at what time. Contact tracing systems
and apps should receive explicit consent from users before their personal data can be used.

4.2

General Privacy Principles

Contact tracing applications should be designed with the following principles regarding privacy
in mind [67].
• Legitimacy. Contact tracing applications must comply with all applicable laws, rules and
regulations;
• Informed consent. Contact tracing applications can only be installed and used if the
user’s informed consent to each feature of the application is ensured;
• Identity control. Users make the determination to release redacted, disconnected, and/or
aggregated space-time points from location data;
• Transparency. Users should be informed of an organization’s information practices before
any personal information is collected from them;
• Accountability. Relevant stakeholders should be fully involved and consulted in the
development and deployment of contact tracing applications, including data protection
authorities, the privacy and security community, human rights and civil liberties organizations, government agencies, the technical community and public health professionals,
including epidemiologists;
• Voluntary compliance. The use of contact tracing applications should be voluntary,
not mandatory or compulsory.
The following is the checklist of some detailed considerations that takes into account the
aforementioned privacy issues and principles when contact tracing systems and apps are developed or evaluated.
• Whether to limit the amount of data that can be publicly released;
• Whether to provide tools to allow the diagnosed person and their healthcare provider to
redact any sensitive locations, such as home or work;
• Whether to encrypt location data end-to-end before sensitive locations are redacted;
• Whether to eliminate the risk of third-party access to information by allowing the infected
person to voluntarily self-report;
• Whether to support the collection of data around any entities, particularly the government,
to strictly regulate access to and use of the data;
• Whether targeted, affirmative, informed consent is obtained each time personal data is
used;
• Whether users are provided with the ability to see how their data is being used and to
withdraw consent for the use of their information;

18

• Whether users are provided with the ability to correct erroneous information.
• Whether individuals are informed about which data, how long it is stored, and who has
access to it at each stage of use;
• Whether user location data is deleted promptly after it is no longer necessary to perform
contact tracing;
• Whether open source software is used to foster trust in the application’s privacy claims.

4.3

Architectures and Protocols

According to what data is used or stored by the protocol, we can classify the architecture of
protocols into three classes: centralized, decentralized and hybrid. In this section, we discuss
these three architectures and relevant protocols. Table 4 summarizes the protocols described in
this survey.

4.3.1

Centralized Architectures

In a centralized architecture, there is a central database used to store users’ history data. In
centralized contact tracing, location and contact data are collected and integrated centrally by
a single agency. Additional information about the users, such as mobile communications service
provider or payment data, may be collected and paired with location data. Central authorities
identify infected people, determine their contacts, and request specific actions from those who
may have been exposed to the virus. The central system can create powerful tools for analysis
and public health decision-making. However, such systems also expose personal data to central
authorities, creating risks in undermining individual privacy.

Bluetrace protocol Bluetrace protocol [68] is developed by the Singaporean Government

for logging Bluetooth encounters between participating devices to power the contact tracing
for the TraceTogether app, and at the same time, protecting users’ personal data and privacy.
Bluetrace protocol works in the following several steps:
• Users register the app using their mobile phone number, and then the back-end service
generates randomly a unique ID, and bind with each user’s phone number. The phone
number is required for registration and can be used to notify the exposed users;
• Users exchange their information via Bluetooth to record each encounter. The information
is some temporary IDs (TempIDs) produced every 15 minutes or at other specified frequency. As shown in Figure 12, tempIDs includes userID, start time, expiry time, IV and
Auth Tag. The message is encoded and won’t reveal personal information, but healthy
authority can obtain the contact information from it.

Figure 12: Format of TempIDs [68].
19

Table 4: Protocol information summary
ArchitecturesName
Release
Country/Team
Time
Centralized Bluetrace
Apr
10, Singapore Government
2020
ROBERT
Apr
18, Inria and Fraunhofer
2020
PEPP-P
Apr 1, 2020 An European coalition of
techies and scientists
Decentralized PACT
(East- Apr 8, 2020 MIT Computer Science and
coast)
CSAIL
PACT (West- Apr 7, 2020 A team from the University
coast)
of Washingto
Whisper Trac- Apr
16, Nodle
ing
2020
DP-3T
Apr 4, 2020 École
Polytechnique
Fédérale
de
Lausanne,
ETH Zurich,KU Leuven,
Delft University of Technology,University
College
London, Helmholtz Centre
for Information Security,
University of Torino and ISI
Foundation
AGEN
May
27, Apple and Google
2020
TCN
Mar
17, TCN Coalition,
Covid
2020
Watch and CoEpi
Bychain
Jul 2, 2020
Beijing University of Posts
Telecommunications
Hybrid
DESIRE
Aug 4, 2020 PRIVATICS Team in Inria,
France
ConTra Corona Apr
29, Germany
2020
EpiOne
Apr
28, The University of California
2020
at Berkeley

20

• Users’ history data will be stored on the server for a certain number of days (e.g., 25 days);
• When an user has been infected, healthy authority will ask him/her to upload the encounter
history data;
• According to the time and distance of contacting, healthy authority will find the close
contact and notify them;
• Users have the option to deny access to their data by the server. If so, then the healthy
authority should delete the data related to them on the back-end server.

ROBERT ROBust and privacy-presERving proximity Tracing protocol [69] is jointly devel-

oped by the researchers at Fraunhofer in Germany and INRIA in France. It has basically the
same principle as the Bluetrace protocol. The main difference lies in that the data stored on
the ROBERT server are anonymous identifiers called Ephemeral IDs (EphIDs). In the notification step, users need to frequently check their used EphIDs to determine if they are exposed to
infected people.

PEPP-PT The Pan-European Privacy-Preserving Proximity Tracing (PEPP-PT) [70] is de-

veloped by an European coalition of techies and scientists from over eight countries, and led
by Germany’s Fraunhofer Heinrich Hertz Institute for telecoms (HHI). It uses Bluetooth Low
Energy (BLE) to discover and locally log individuals near a user, and ROBERT is a proposal for
PEPP-PT protocol.

4.3.2

Decentralized Architectures

In a decentralized architecture, all personal data is stored locally on users’ devices, and people
voluntarily decide whether to upload their data. Only location data of people identified as
infected needs to be shared.
Decentralized systems typically provide greater privacy protection and are therefore more
compliant with privacy requirements and regulations such as GDPR [71]. Tools such as culling
and obfuscation of infected people’s data can be used to help protect their privacy. Some utility
may be lost compared to a centralized system, as large datasets of users collected and aggregated
can be used for useful public health research. However, when we consider various approaches, the
serious privacy risks associated with centralized systems often far outweigh the limited additional
benefits, leading us to place a high value on decentralized approaches.

PACT(East-coast) The Private Automated Contact Tracing protocol [72] is developed by
the Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory (CSAIL) at Massachusetts Institute
of Technology(MIT). It includes two major layers:
• Chriping layer. Each smartphone will generate a 256-bit random seed every hour, and
every few seconds, it will generate and broadcast (using Bluetooth) a 28-bit ’chrip’ value
which combines the random seed with the current time. The ’chrip’ value is anonymous
and random, thus won’t reveal any information about users;
• Tracing layer. All metadata (e.g.„ received signal strength) will store on device locally
until the user has tested positive. When a user is diagnosed positive, he will be authorized
to upload his logs. People who have been in contact with him should read the metadata
information to check if they have really been in close contact with him;

21

PACT(West-coast) Privacy sensitive protocols and mechanisms for mobile Contact Tracing
[73] is developed by a team from the University of Washington. As is shown in Figure 13,
PACT(West-coast) is similar to PACT(East-coast). The main difference comes from the data it
broadcasts. PACT(West-coast) uses a secure cryptographic pseudorandom generator like G(x) =
SHA − 256(x) to generate pseudorandom IDs. The user initially samples a random n-bit (take
128 for example) seed, the generator generates a 256-bit length output, 128-bit of which is the
temporary pseudorandom ID and the other 128-bit is the seed of next pseudorandom generator.

Figure 13: The process of PACT(West-coast) [73].
Whisper Tracing. Whisper Tracing [74] is a decentralized and proximity-base contact tracing protocol proposed by Nodle. When running, the library locally generates temporary IDs and
uses Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE) to advertise those IDs and detect proximity event with other
whisper users. It is being used for the Government of Senegal’s Daancovid19 mobile contact
tracing app initiative.

DP-3T Decentralized Privacy-Preserving Proximity Tracing (DP-3T) [75] is developed by

researchers from EPFL, ETHZ, KU Leuven and so on in response to the COVID-19 pandemic
to facilitate digital contact tracing of infected participants. It is very similar in functionality
to PACT(East-coast) discussed earlier. Users’ smartphone with apps continually broadcasts an
ephemeral and pseudo-random ID, in the meanwhile, records the IDs observed from other users
in close proximity. The data of an user is stored on his apps until he is diagnosed with COVID-19,
in which situation he can upload all of her pseudo-random IDs to a central server. So far, apps
using this protocol have covered many countries, such as Austria, Belgium, Croatia, Germany,
and so on.

AGEN Apple-Google Exposure Notification protocol is developed by Apple and Google. Sim-

ilar to other protocols including PACT and DP-3T, the AGEN protocol uses Bluetooth to detect
proximity with others. Figure 14 shows the overview of the AGEN protocol. Later, David Culler
et al. enabled the AGEN protocol to support manual contact tracing efforts, provide visibility
into the spread of disease, and give the authority back to the local communities while preserving
privacy within the Apple and Google framework:

TCN Temporary Contact Number protocol [77] is developed by TCN Coalition, Covid Watch

and CoEpi in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. Applications following this protocol use iOS
and Android apps’ capability to share a 128-bit Temporary Contact Number (TCN) with nearby
apps using Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE).

22

Figure 14: The process of AGEN [76].
Bychain Bychain [78] is a decentralized and permissionless blockchain protocol for PrivacyPreserving Large-Scale Contact Tracing, which was developed by researchers in Beijing University
of Posts Telecommunications, China. The protocol protects data security and location privacy,
while efficiently and dynamically deploying SRC Internet of Thing (IoT) witnesses to monitor
large areas.

4.3.3

Hybrid Architectures

In the centralized architecture, almost all tasks are done in the back-end server, e.g. TempID
generate and receive, risk analysis and notifications for the close and at-risk contacts. On the
contrary, all the tasks are finished on devices like mobile phone with apps in the decentralized
architecture, and the back-end server is just used as a bulletin board for finding close contacts.
The hybrid architecture has combined the features of the centralized and decentralized architectures to achieve the advantages of both architectures. The tasks are split between the back-end
server and the devices. Specifically, TempID generation and management takes place on the
devices to protect users’ privacy, while risk analysis and notification takes place on the back-end
server.

DESIRE DESIRE [79] is developed by PRIVATICS Team in Inria. It has combined the
advantages of the protocols based only on the centralized or decentralized architecture. It works
based on the following ideas:
• Users register on an APP and the back-end server will send an unique ID to the APP;
• Mobile phones will generate their own Ephemeral ID (EphID) every 15 minutes. When
user encounter, the receiver will generate and store some PETs to record the encounter.
The process of PETs generation is shown in Figure 15.
• When a user has tested positive for COVID-19, he will be required to upload the data,
including ID, PETs and so on. Anyone who wants to check if he has the risk of exposing
to an infected individual, he should upload his PETs data and the server will make a risk
analysis by comparing the PETs from the infected individual.
• If a user finds that his score of the exposure risk is high, then he should contact the health
authority and ask for advice.

23

Figure 15: PETs Generation [79].
ConTra Corona ConTra Corona (Contact Tracing against the Coronavirus by Bridging the

Centralized–Decentralized Divide for Stronger Privacy) [80] is developed by German researchers
from the FZI Research Center for Information Technology and Karlsruhe Institute of Technology.

EpiOne Epione (Lightweight Contact Tracing with Strong Privacy) [81] is developed by a

research group led by the University of California at Berkeley. Similiar to TCN protocol, it uses
a short-range network (such as Bluetooth) to detect when two users are within a close range and
exchange a randomly generated "contact token". Figure 16 shows an overview of EpiOne.

Figure 16: An overview of EpiOne [81].

5

Other Issues of Contact Tracing Technologies

Besides the privacy issues that we have discussed in the previous section, we identify the following
several additional important issues for digital contact tracing that should also be considered when
developing or evaluating contact tracing technologies.

24

5.1

Security

The user data used in contact tracing are useful, important and often highly sensitive. The
security of the contact tracing solution contributes to users’ perception that their privacy are
properly protected when they are sharing their personal data for the purpose of contact tracing,
which will further helps boost user adoption of the solution.
Contact tracing systems or apps must keep data secure by safeguarding the data against
various internal and external security threats. A wide range of established security measures,
algorithms and techniques can be implemented on the servers, tracing devices and data communication channels [82]. For example, computer-based security measures can be used to effectively
block threats, high-level firewall is able to block malicious access from the networks, and sophisticated encryption can be applied to data transmission. Extra caution should also be taken when
sharing information to any third parties even if this has been agreed by users. Investigations on
the level of the third parties in securing sensitive data might be necessary.

5.2

Transparency

Adopting the open-source principal to make the source code of conduct tracing systems or apps
publicly available is an effective way to achieve transparency and trust, which are of great importance to wider adoption by end users. Thanks to the transparency in the underlying working
mechanism given to external parties, user trust can be better established towards the developers,
and the service providers in data communication and storage involved in the systems or apps.
Also, it would be useful to ensure regular reviews of code and credible third-party audits. This
allows external parties outside the development team to review the project’s code to fully understand the internal working mechanism of the technology, including the privacy and security
features implemented. The external parties can also make improvements to fix the existing loopholes or bugs, or use the source code as the basis to develop new features at/or new systems or
apps.
Nevertheless, we also understand that, in some occasions, the application development team
can rightfully choose not to publish their codes due to some valid reasons, e.g, they are seeking
to develop some proprietary technologies or using some patented technologies that are under IP
protection.

5.3

Tracing Effectiveness

When developing and evaluating contact tracing technologies, we hope that they are effective
in quickly identifying the chain of virus transmission in order to contain the infection. Yet, we
should understand that the effectiveness of contact tracing technologies can be affected by many
factors. Next, we elaborate on the factors from three major perspectives:

5.3.1

Implementation of scientifically correct contact tracing rules.

Contact tracing rules are developed based on domain expert knowledge and need to be implemented in contact tracing technologies. Given what is currently known about COVID-19
human-to-human transmission, contact tracing apps can correctly assess the potential infection
risk of a user with the virus if the following four important factors are considered:
1. The distance between the infected person and the user;
2. The length of time the infected person and the user occupy the same space;

25

3. How many days prior to infection the infected person interacted with the user;
4. Whether the user is likely to have touched a contaminated surface after interacting with
the infected person.
Developing corresponding rules based on the above factors helps establish the basic effectiveness of the developed contact tracing technologies.

5.3.2

Complete and accurate user data.

Digital contact tracing technologies are largely data-driven and the tracking mechanisms works
based on the analysis on the collected user data in order to produce the close contacts should an
encounter occurs with infected people.

5.3.3

Human and societal factors.

Contact tracing is a systematic process which goes beyond technologies themselves. Many human
and societal factors exert strong impacts on the effectiveness of contact tracing such as the level
of user adoption, government’s proactiveness in disease control as well as local regulations and
laws.

5.4

Energy Efficiency

As contact tracing is primarily carried out on smartphones, then the battery life of smartphones
is a major technical factor that determines the availability of contact tracing when it is needed.
The battery life of smartphones are impacted by a wide variety of factors, such as the processor,
the battery size, the screen size, the screen brightness, the screen-on time, and the number and
types of the running apps, etc. If we only focus on the energy efficiency of contact tracing apps,
then it is largely determined by the protocols used in positioning and data exchange.
Different positioning technologies, such as Bluetooth, GPS, cellphone tower networks and
Wi-Fi features different levels of energy efficiency, where cellphone tower networks and Wi-Fi are
comparatively more energy efficient, while GPS is more power hungry.
From the perspective of protocols, battery consumption is highly related to the number of
times data are exchanged with the server. For apps that utilize a centralized architecture, a
fixed size of information is periodically retrieved from the server to obtain a new TempID. In
contrast, there is no periodic data retrieval during the operational phase for the apps based on
a decentralized architecture. Therefore, apps based on a decentralized architecture are usually
more power efficient than those based on a centralized architecture.

5.5

Scalability

After a contact tracing solution is being framed, developed and deployed, it is then important
to understand and analyze how it behaves under certain computational parameters and assumptions. Given the typical large user base of contact tracing apps, it is technically challenging for
the system to efficiently handle the large number of user visits and their tracing data generated.
Apps that lack good scalability may be subject to frequent system crash which will seriously
disrupt the normal operation of contact tracing.
Achieving a good scalability performance sets high requirements on the efficiency of contact
tracing technologies in many aspects, such as the overall efficiency in data processing and analytic
algorithms, data exchange and communication, and database query processing. In many cases,

26

stress tests are necessary to assess the scalability of the system prior to its deployment to see
whether it, as a whole, can operate reliably under various high workloads for a sustained duration.

5.6

Compatibility

Smartphones are running on different types and versions of operating systems (OS), with Android
and iOS being the two main ones. Because digital contact tracing was only started very recently
in some countries, most tracing apps are developed for running on newer versions of OS to take
advantages of the latest positioning and security features offered by the operating system. For
example, TraceTogether and CovidSafe both require iOS 10 or later. TraceTogether requires
Android 5.1 or later, while CovidSafe can run on Android 6.0 or later. CovidSafe requires a
newer OS version for security reasons and improved Bluetooth functionality. Given this, some
problems may be caused due to the OS incompatibility issue, making some users unable to
participate in the contact tracing because of the incompatibility between their smartphones and
the contact tracing apps.
Also, incompatibility may happen across different apps. Let’s consider a case when a user
who is using an app released for a particular geographic region travels to an area where another
app has been deployed. Currently, there are no contact tracing apps that can directly talk to each
other to share functions or data. In addition,due to the possible architectural differences discussed
earlier, incompatibility between multiple apps may happen which may lead to conflicting ways
the data are shared and used. Thus, users should be aware of the potential implications that
may be caused by cross-app incompatibility in terms of privacy issues and other concerns.

6

challenges and future directions

Despite the unprecedented development of contact tracing technologies for COVID-19 witnessed
in the last 12 months, there are still several major challenges that the tracing technologies are
facing, which are elaborated as follows.

6.1

Difficulties in User Adoption

The ultimate success of contact tracing is largely dependent on how many users are willing to
participate in the tracing. Only when a significant percentage of users participating in contact
tracing can the tracing become truly effective. Conversely, user adoption has become a major
obstacle for contact tracing. In some countries, contact tracing using digital means have turned
out to be a failure. One example is Australians CovidSafe app, which was labeled by recently by
Australian media as a costly failure.
Arguably, the primary reason for users’ hesitation in participating in the tracing lies in
the concerns around the privacy and security issues of the contact tracing technologies. Despite
great efforts that have been taken by contact tracing system and app developers in enhancing the
preservation of privacy information of users and strengthening system security against possible
hacking and attacks which try to illegally access users’ sensitive information, it is still a very
challenging task to persuade users to adopt contact tracing technologies in many countries,
particularly in the Western countries where the culture of individual privacy is deep rooted. We
have witnessed some individual cases of mandatory adoption of contact tracing technologies in
several countries under some special circumstances. For example, all the arriving passengers
in South Korea and Singapore from overseas were once required, with no exception, to use
their contact tracing app upon passengers’ arrival. However, in a more border scale, we believe

27

that user adoption has been, and will continue to be, the primary obstacle for contact tracing
technologies.
The technological solutions applied to deal with the privacy issue often create the challenges
in balancing user privacy and data utility. While centralized storage of data can bring efficiency
to governments and support research and other activities, it raises concerns that data may be
stored or re-purposed for other uses. Thus, part of the equation to solve or mitigate the privacy
concerns in contact tracking may be to avoid centralized data collection. However, a decentralized
approach to data collection in contact tracing reduces the opportunity for health researchers and
epidemiologists to easily access data for comprehensive studies of populations, leading to reduced
data utility overall. For example, the UK government’s proposal to adopt Apple/Google products
has reduced public health surveillance and analysis. More importantly, reliance on Apple and
Google for this technology has the clear potential to place more data mining and public health
impact opportunities in the hands of the already dominant technology companies.

6.2

Incomplete and Low-quality Data

Technically, effective contact tracing relies largely on the availability of underlying complete
and high-quality user data collected in the first place. However, due to various objective and
subject reasons, the collected data are often incomplete and of a low quality. From the objective
point of view, the positioning technologies, due to their inherent limitations, may not be able
to generate complete and high-quality positioning data for the systems or apps to establish the
accurate human movement trajectory and the list of close contacts of people. The quality of
data may also be compromised in the communication process from the tracing devices to the
server. The smartphones, as the most important means of physical devices for contact tracing,
may not be properly working all the time, e.g., they may be running out of power when the
tracing is performed. From the subjective perspective, users may fail to open the tracing devices
for collecting the data. This may because that they are reluctant to use the tracing devices to
share the data or they simply forget to turn it on. This leads to the totally missing or incomplete
tracing data being collected. Whatever the underlying reasons they might be, incomplete and
low-quality data will undoubtedly make accurate and effective contact tracing very difficult, if it
is not entirely impossible.

6.3

Lack of Scenario-specific Tracing Technologies

The current digital contact tracing technologies are all very generic in the overall configuration
and setup. They are applied for contact tracing without scenario-specific customization. Hence,
using them directly in specific scenarios typically leads to subpar tracing performance. There
are few technologies which are developed particularly for specific tracing scenarios from the very
beginning. We understand that the tracing requirements for different scenarios (e.g., schools,
hospitals or residential areas) can be (quite) different in terms of, for example, the spatial location
(indoor or outdoor), temporal information (weekdays vs. weekends), population density and
mobility, etc. Such scenarios-specific factors will have impacts on the corresponding optimal
specification of the positioning technology, data collection and storage approaches, the values of
some key tracing parameters as well as notification and response strategies.

6.4

Lack of Global Standards and Availability

Governments in various countries and regions tend to support locally developed digital technologies for contact tracing due to the reasons of fast rollout and removal of obstacles posed by the

28

local laws and regulations. Consequently, there haven’t been international standards established
yet for unified contact tracing technologies and protocols. We haven’t seen any major initiatives
towards this goal led by any countries or international organizations either. This has created
a technological barrier for compatibility of the technologies used in different countries, so when
people are traveling across regions and countries, they have no choice but to adopt different technologies. This also creates isolated data islands and makes efficient sharing of contact tracing
data across different countries difficult.
In addition, digital contact tracing technologies at present are adopted and implemented in
a very small number of countries in the world, overwhelming majority of which are in developed
countries. This may be due to a higher percentage of population that use smartphones, better
ICT as well as public health infrastructures, and more funding resources, etc in developed countries compared to developing countries. Because of the unavailability of the contact tracing in
most countries in the world, the chasm has been created in tracing contacts for international
travelers when they are traveling from or to the countries where contact tracing are lacking.

6.5

Future Directions

Looking ahead, we envisage that the contact tracing technologies will carry some new characteristics in the future, which can be concisely described using the following several terms: privacy,
intelligence, pervasiveness, scenario customization and globalization.
• Privacy. Contact tracing technologies in the future will become increasingly safer and
provides a better protection of users sensitive information. Data collected and stored in
the servers and mobile devices, either in the centralized or distributed architecture, will
be better protected against malicious attacks to avoid the disclosure of sensitive data to
adversaries. Novel architectures may also emerge to offer better preservation of sensitive
users data than the existing architectures do. Relevant laws, policies or regulations will
be developed by different countries or international organizations to better regulate the
use and sharing of user data collected in contact tracing. All these developments will be
conducive to the higher level of acceptance and adoption among the public for contact
tracing technologies, which are of great importance to reduce the spread of virus;
• Intelligence. Contact tracing technologies, thanks to the fast development of various
intelligent technologies in the areas of machine learning, big data analytics and data visualization, etc, will become more intelligent and are capable of providing a rich set of
analytical features than just the tracking function that most of the existing tracing systems and apps deliver. Such intelligence in contact tracing technologies will allow them to
better tap the high values of the large amount of user data collected;
• Pervasiveness. Contact tracing technologies will become more pervasive and ubiquitous
to supply more complete data in support of high-quality contact tracing. This will be
empowered by various technological advancements including, but not limited to, the wider
usage of smartphones in the general public, more power efficient tracing devices and more
accessible and reliable communication infrastructures;
• Scenario customization. To achieve the best contact tracing performance, contact tracing technologies need to undergo scenario-specific customization by incorporating scenariospecific background facts and knowledge, enabling them be applied in a wide variety of
application scenarios, such as schools, hospitals, factories and companies, etc., in a more
effective and efficient manner;

29

• Globalization. Contact tracing systems or apps will become broader in terms of their
geographic coverage, pushing for the gradual (or rapid) globalization of the technologies.
Along with this development, standardization of the involved technologies will be naturally
entailed to create unified international standards in a bid to facilitate cross-border contact
tracing among different countries.
Looking ahead, we are confident that contact tracing, whatever form it will take, will continue
to play an indispensable role in our human being’s continuous and unrelenting combat against
infectious diseases into the future.

7

Conclusion

In this paper, we present a comprehensive survey on contact tracing, covering both the traditional
and the recent digital contact tracing technologies. The fundamental approach and models of
contact tracing are covered and, as the focus of this paper, we survey the latest digital contact
tracing technologies, detailing a variety of contact tracing mobile apps currently being used in
many different countries, together with the associated positioning technologies. The important
issues and related protocols are also discussed. At the end of the survey, we reflect on the current
challenges contact tracing technologies are facing and highlight several future trends projected
for technological developments of contact tracing in the future.
Given the rampant COVID-19 pandemic we are currently experiencing, we believe that
this survey work is relevant and significant. We hope that this survey can help readers better
understand the history, the current status and the future trends of contact tracing technologies,
and provide a good reference to researchers to research and develop future-generation conduct
tracing technologies to help curb the spread of deadly virus.

References
[1] (2020) infectious. [Online]. Available:
infection

https://medical-dictionary.thefreedictionary.com/

[2] (2020) Infectious disease a continued threat. [Online]. Available: https://www.who.int/
mediacentre/events/advisories/2006/ma07/en/
[3] WHO. (2020) world health statistics. [Online]. Available:
publications/world_health_statistics/en/

https://www.who.int/gho/

[4] (2020) Live broadcast of the covid-19. [Online]. Available: https://www.worldometers.info/
coronavirus/?utm_campaign=homeAdvegas1?
[5] C. A. Donnelly, A. C. Ghani, G. M. Leung, A. J. Hedley, C. Fraser, S. Riley, L. J.
Abu-Raddad, L.-M. Ho, T.-Q. Thach, P. Chau, K.-P. Chan, T.-H. Lam, L.-Y. Tse,
T. Tsang, S.-H. Liu, J. H. Kong, E. M. Lau, N. M. Ferguson, and R. M. Anderson,
“Epidemiological determinants of spread of causal agent of severe acute respiratory
syndrome in hong kong,” The Lancet, vol. 361, no. 9371, pp. 1761 – 1766, 2003. [Online].
Available: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0140673603134101
[6] (2007) Guidelines for isolation precautions: Preventing transmission of infectious agents
in healthcare settings-2007. [Online]. Available: http://www.cdc.gov/ncidod/dhqp/pdf/
guidelines/Isolation2007.pdf

30

[7] WHO. (2020) Contact tracing in the context of covid-19: interim guidance. [Online].
Available: https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/332049
[8] J. Müller, M. Kretzschmar, and K. Dietz, “Contact tracing in stochastic and deterministic
epidemic models,” Mathematical biosciences, vol. 164, no. 1, pp. 39–64, 2000.
[9] P. Ish, S. Agrawal, A. D. Goel, and N. Gupta, “Contact tracing: Unearthing key epidemiological features of covid-19,” SAGE Open Medical Case Reports, vol. 8, pp. 1–3, 2020.
[10] WHO. (2020) Contact tracing. [Online]. Available:
q-a-detail/contact-tracing

https://www.who.int/news-room/

[11] Julianne, Brown, Simon, Chapman, Deborah, and Lupton, “Infinitesimal risk as public
health crisis: News media coverage of a doctor-patient hiv contact tracing investigation,”
Social Science and Medicine, 1996.
[12] S. Riley, C. Fraser, C. A. Donnelly, A. C. Ghani, L. J. Abu-Raddad, A. J. Hedley, G. M.
Leung, L.-M. Ho, T.-H. Lam, T. Q. Thach et al., “Transmission dynamics of the etiological
agent of sars in hong kong: impact of public health interventions,” Science, vol. 300, no.
5627, pp. 1961–1966, 2003.
[13] S. Saurabh and S. Prateek, “Role of contact tracing in containing the 2014 ebola outbreak:
a review,” African health sciences, vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 225–236, 2017.
[14] K. T. D. Eames and M. J. Keeling, “Contact tracing and disease control.” Proceedings of
the Royal Society B: Biological ences, vol. 270, no. 1533, pp. 2565–2571, 2003.
[15] A. Aleta, D. Martín-Corral, A. P. Y. Piontti, M. Ajelli, and Y. Moreno, “Modelling the
impact of testing, contact tracing and household quarantine on second waves of covid-19,”
Nature Human Behaviour, pp. 1–8, 2020.
[16] WHO. (2020) Who 2019 ncov contact tracing tools annex. [Online]. Available: https://www.
who.int/publications/i/item/WHO-2019-nCoV-Contact_Tracing-Tools_Annex-2020.1
[17] N. Ahmed, R. A. Michelin, W. Xue, S. Ruj, R. Malaney, S. S. Kanhere, A. Seneviratne,
W. Hu, H. Janicke, and S. K. Jha, “A survey of covid-19 contact tracing apps,” IEEE Access,
vol. 8, pp. 134 577–134 601, 2020.
[18] Darlinghurst. (2010) Australasian society for hiv medicine. [Online]. Available:
//contacttracing.ashm.org.au/contact-tracing-guidance/steps-in-contact-tracing

http:

[19] V. von Wyl, S. Bonhoeffer, E. Bugnion, M. A. Puhan, M. Salathé, T. Stadler, C. Troncoso,
E. Vayena, and N. Low, “A research agenda for digital proximity tracing apps,” Swiss medical
weekly, vol. 150, p. w20324, 2020.
[20] K. O. Kwok, A. Tangd, VivianW.I.Wei, W. H. Park, E. K. Yeoh, and S. Riley, “Epidemic
models of contact tracing: Systematic review of transmission studies of severe acute respiratory syndrome and middle east respiratory syndrome,” Computational and Structural
Biotechnology Journal, vol. 17, pp. 186–194, 2019.
[21] J. Zhang, L. Tan, and X. Tao, “On relational learning and discovery in social networks: A
survey,” International Journal of Machine Learning and Cybernetics, pp. 2085–2102, 2018.
[22] G. Wang, H. Wang, X. Tao, and J. Zhang, “A self-stabilizing algorithm for finding a minimal k-dominating set in general networks,” in 2012 International Conference on Data and
Knowledge Engineering(ICDKE’12), 2012, pp. 74–85.

31

[23] K. Xu, R. Williams, S.-H. Hong, Q. Liu, and J. Zhang, “Semi-bipartite graph visualization for
gene ontology networks,” in The 17th International Symposium on Graph Drawing (GD’09),
2009, pp. 244–255.
[24] M. E. Halloran, I. M. Longini, A. Nizam, and Y. Yang, “Containing bioterrorist smallpox,”
Science, vol. 298, p. 1428–1432, 2002.
[25] K. T. D. Eames and M. J. Keeling, “Modeling dynamic and network heterogeneities in the
spread of sexually transmitted disease,” Proc. Natl Acad. Sci, vol. 99, p. 13 330–13 335,
2002.
[26] W.O.Kermack and A.G.McKendrick, “Contributions to the mathematical theory ofepidemics,” Bulletin of Mathematical Biology, vol. 53, pp. 1–2,33–55, 1991.
[27] C.Castillo-Chavez, S. Blower, P. Driessche, D. Kirchner, and A. Yakubu, “Mathematical
approaches for emerging and reemerging diseases,” New Trends in Stochastic Analysis, vol.
The IMA Volumes in Mathematics and itsApplications, vol. 126, 2002.
[28] P. D.O’Neill and R. G. O., “Bayesian inference for partially observed stochastic epidemics,”
Journal ofthe Royal Statal Society Series A (Stats in Society), p. 162, 1999.
[29] P. D.O’Neill., “A tutorial introduction to bayesian inference for stochastic epidemic models
using markov chain monte carlo methods.” Mathematical Biosciences, vol. 180, p. 103–114,
2002.
[30] S.Cauchemez, F. Carrat, C. Viboud, A. J. Valleron, and P. Y. Boelle., “A bayesian mcmc
approach to study transmission of influenza:application to household longitudinal data,”
Statisticsin Medicine, vol. 23, p. 3469–3487, 2004.
[31] K. IZ, G. D. M, and K. R. R, “Disease contact tracing in random and clusterednetworks,”
Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological ences, vol. 272, pp. 1407–1414, 2005.
[32] L. A and Y. J. A, “A deterministic model for gonorrhea in anonhomogeneous population,”
Mathematical Bioences, vol. 28, no. 3-4, pp. 221–236, 1976.
[33] Z. Ma, Mathematical Modeling and Research of Infectious Disease Dynamics. Science Press
of China, 2004.
[34] M. Lipsitch, T. Cohen, B. Cooper, J. M. Robins, S. M, L. James, G. Gopalakrishna, S. K.
Chew, C. C. Tan, M. H. Samore, D. Fission, and M. Murray, “Transmission dynamics and
control of severe acuterespiratory syndrome,” Science, vol. 20, no. 5627, pp. 1966–1970,
2003.
[35] M. G. B. Blum and V. C. Tran, “Hiv with contact tracing: a case study in approximate
bayesian computation,” Biostatistics, vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 644–660, 2010.
[36] R. Naresha, A. Tripathib, and D. Sharma, “A nonlinear hiv/aids model with contact tracing,” Applied Mathematics and Computation, vol. 217, no. 23, pp. 9575–9591, 2011.
[37] J. Clarke, “Contact tracing for chlamydia: data on effectiveness,” International Journal of
STD and AIDS, vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 187–191, 1998.
[38] T. Altuwaiyan, M. Hadian, and X. Liang, “Epic: Efficient privacy-preserving contact tracing
for infection detection,” in 2018 IEEE International Conference on Communications (ICC),
2018, pp. 1–6.

32

[39] S. Bahri, “Enhancing quality of data through automated sars contact tracing method using
rfid technology,” International Journal of Networking and Virtual Organisations, vol. 4,
no. 2, p. 145, 2007.
[40] (2020, Oct) Tracetogether. [Online]. Available: https://www.tracetogether.gov.sg/
[41] (2020, Oct) Tracetogether on the appstore. [Online]. Available: https://apps.apple.com/
sg/app/tracetogether/id1498276074
[42] (2020, Oct) Covidsafe app | australian government department of health. [Online].
Available: https://www.health.gov.au/resources/apps-and-tools/covidsafe-app
[43] (2020, Oct) Covidsafe. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/AU-COVIDSafe
[44] A. Godfrey. (2020, Aug) Covid safe app used to find new nsw coronavirus
cases | 7news.com.au. [Online]. Available: https://7news.com.au/news/public-health/
covid-safe-app-actually-found-nsw-coronavirus-cases-c-1210745
[45] (2020, Oct) Covidsafe on the appstore. [Online]. Available: https://apps.apple.com/sg/
app/covidsafe/id1509242894
[46] G. of India. (2020, Sep 16) Aarogya setu mobile app mygov in. [Online]. Available:
https://www.mygov.in/aarogya-setu-app/
[47] (2020, Oct) nic-delhi/aarogyasetu_android: Aarogya setu android app native code.
[Online]. Available: https://github.com/nic-delhi/AarogyaSetu_Android
[48] (2020, Jul) Aarogyasetu on the appstore. [Online]. Available: https://apps.apple.com/in/
app/aarogyasetu/id1505825357
[49] (2020) Covid tracker app - ireland’s coronavirus contact tracing app. [Online]. Available:
https://covidtracker.gov.ie/
[50] (2020)
Covid
tracker
app
alerts
for
close
contacts
issued
to
137
people so far. [Online]. Available:
https://www.irishtimes.com/news/health/
covid-tracker-app-alerts-for-close-contacts-issued-to-137-people-so-far-1.4318902
[51] (2020, Oct) Covid tracker ireland on the app store. [Online]. Available:
//apps.apple.com/ie/app/covid-tracker-ireland/id1505596721
[52] (2020, Sep) iphone screenshots. [Online]. Available:
id1503224314?ls=1

https:

https://apps.apple.com/us/app/

[53] (2020, Aug) Covid watch exposure notification app | digital contact tracing. [Online].
Available: https://www.covidwatch.org/
[54] (2020,
Mar)
Covid
watch
whitepaper:
Using
crowdsourced
data
to slow virus spread. [Online]. Available:
https://blog.covidwatch.org/en/
covid-watch-whitepaper-using-crowdsourced-data-to-slow-virus-spread
[55] (2020, Sep) Covid watch. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/covidwatchorg/
[56] (2020, Oct) Coepi: Community epidemiology in action | coepi. [Online]. Available:
https://www.coepi.org/
[57] (2020,
Oct)
Covid
watch
arizona
on
the
appstore.
[Online].
Available:
https://apps.apple.com/us/app/id1521655110?utm_source=website&utm_
medium=button&utm_campaign=app-store&hsLang=en

33

[58] (2020) Swisscovid app: Protect yourself and others. [Online]. Available:
//foph-coronavirus.ch/swisscovid-app/

https:

[59] (2020, Jul) Tackling covid-19 trace and trace app problems. [Online]. Available:
https://www.eenewseurope.com/news/tackling-covid-19-trace-and-trace-app-problems
[60] (2020, Oct) Swisscovid im appstore. [Online]. Available: https://apps.apple.com/ch/app/
id1509275381
[61] P. Mozur, R. Zhong, and A. Krolik. (2020, Aug. 7) In coronavirus fight, china
gives citizens a color code, with red flags - the new york times. [Online]. Available:
https://www.nytimes.com/2020/03/01/business/china-coronavirus-surveillance.html
[62] (2020) Fearing coronavirus, a michigan college is tracking its students with a flawed app
and students have no way to opt out. [Online]. Available: https://techcrunch.com/2020/
08/19/coronavirus-albion-security-flaws-app/?_guc_consent_skip=1600414290
[63] P. C. Ng, P. Spachos, and K. Plataniotis, “Covid-19 and your smartphone: Ble-based smart
contact tracing,” 2020.
[64] B.
J.
Stanley
and
J.
S.
Granick.
(2020)
The
limits
of
location
tracking
in
an
epidemic.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.aclu.org/report/aclu-white-paper-limits-location-tracking-epidemic?
redirect=aclu-white-paper-limits-location-tracking-epidemic
[65] O. Holmes. (2020, May) Israel to track mobile phones of suspected coronavirus cases. [Online]. Available: https://www.theguardian.com/world/2020/mar/17/
israel-to-track-mobile-phones-of-suspected-coronavirus-cases
[66] F. Legendre, M. Humbert, A. Mermoud, and V. Lenders, “Contact tracing: An overview of
technologies and cyber risks,” 2020.
[67] D. Greenwood, G. Nadeau, P. Tsormpatzoudi, B. Wilson, J. Saviano, and A. S.
Pentland. (2020, apr) Covid-19 contact tracing privacy principles. [Online]. Available:
https://law.mit.edu/pub/covid19contacttracingprivacyprinciples/release/7
[68] J. Bay, J. Kek, A. Tan, C. S. Hau, L. Yongquan, J. Tan, and T. A.
Quy. (2020, May) Bluetrace:
A privacy-preserving protocol forcommunity-driven
contact tracing across borders. [Online]. Available: https://bluetrace.io/static/bluetrace_
whitepaper-938063656596c104632de%f383eb33b3c.pdf
[69] Inria and F. AISEC. (2020) Robert:
Robust and privacy-preserving proximity
tracing. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/ROBERT-proximity-tracing/documents/
blob/master/ROBERT-summary-EN.pdf
[70] adhigo. (2020) An eu coalition of techies is backing a ’privacy-preserving’ standard for
covid-19 contacts tracing – techcrunch. [Online]. Available: https://papernewsnetwork.com/
an-eu-coalition-of-techies-is-backing-a-privacy-preserving-standard-for-covid-19-contacts-tracing-techcrunch/
[71] F. Chen, Y. Luo, J. Zhang, J. Zhu, Z. Zhang, C. Zhao, and T. Wang, “An infrastructure
framework for privacy protection of community medical internet of things - transmission
protection, storage protection and access control,” World Wide Web Journal (WWWJ), pp.
33–57, 2018.

34

[72] R. L. Rivest, J. Callas, R. Canetti, D. K. G. Kevin Esvelt, Y. T. Kalai, A. Lysyanskaya,
A. Norige, R. Raskar, A. Shamir, E. Shen, I. Soibelman, M. Specter, V. Teague,
A. Trachtenberg, M. Varia, M. Viera, D. Weitzner, J. Wilkinson, and M. Zissman. (2020)
The pact protocol specification. [Online]. Available: https://pact.mit.edu/wp-content/
uploads/2020/04/The-PACT-protocol-specification-ver-0.1.pdf
[73] J. Chan, D. Foster, S. Gollakota, E. Horvitz, J. Jaeger, S. Kakade, T. Kohno, J. Langford,
J. Larson, P. Sharma, S. Singanamalla, J. Sunshine, and S. Tessaro, “Pact: Privacy sensitive
protocols and mechanisms for mobile contact tracing,” 2020.
[74] (2020) Whisper tracing version 3: an open and privacy first protocol for contact tracing.
[Online]. Available: https://docsend.com/view/nis3dac
[75] C. Troncoso, M. Payer, J.-P. Hubaux, M. Salathé, J. Larus, E. Bugnion, W. Lueks,
T. Stadler, A. Pyrgelis, D. Antonioli, L. Barman, S. Chatel, K. Paterson, S. Čapkun,
D. Basin, J. Beutel, D. Jackson, M. Roeschlin, P. Leu, B. Preneel, N. Smart, A. Abidin,
S. Gürses, M. Veale, C. Cremers, M. Backes, N. O. Tippenhauer, R. Binns, C. Cattuto,
A. Barrat, D. Fiore, M. Barbosa, R. Oliveira, and J. Pereira, “Decentralized privacypreserving proximity tracing,” 2020.
[76] D. Culler, P. Dutta, G. Fierro, J. E. Gonzalez, N. Pemberton, J. Schleier-Smith, K. Shankari,
A. Wan, and T. Zachariah, “Covista: A unified view on privacy sensitive mobile contact
tracing effort,” 2020.
[77] T. Coalition. (2020) Tcn protocol. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/TCNCoalition/
TCN#the-tcn-protocol
[78] W. Lv, S. Wu, C. Jiang, Y. Cui, X. Qiu, and Y. Zhang, “Decentralized blockchain for
privacy-preserving large-scale contact tracing,” 2020.
[79] C. Castelluccia, N. Bielova, A. Boutet, M. Cunche, C. Lauradoux, D. L. Métayer, and
V. Roca, “Desire: A third way for a european exposure notification system leveraging the
best of centralized and decentralized systems,” 2020.
[80] W. Beskorovajnov, F. Dörre, G. Hartung, A. Koch, J. Müller-Quade, and T. Strufe, “Contra
corona: Contact tracing against the coronavirus by bridging the centralized - decentralized
divide for stronger privacy,” IACR Cryptol. ePrint Arch., vol. 2020, p. 505, 2020.
[81] N. Trieu, K. Shehata, P. Saxena, R. Shokri, and D. Song, “Epione: Lightweight contact
tracing with strong privacy,” 2020.
[82] WHO. (2020) Digital tools for covid-19 contact tracing. [Online]. Available: https://www.
who.int/publications/i/item/WHO-2019-nCoV-Contact_Tracing-Tools_Annex-2020.1

35

