1

Curse of Small Sample Size in Forecasting of the
Active Cases in COVID-19 Outbreak

arXiv:2011.03628v2 [cs.LG] 26 Nov 2020

∗ Mert

Nakıp, Student Member, IEEE, † Onur Çopur, ‡ Cüneyt Güzeliş

Abstract—The COVID-19 pandemic has affected almost all
countries in the world in the first half of 2020. During this
time, a massive number of attempts on the predictions of the
number of cases and the other future trends of this pandemic
have been made. However, they fail to predict, in a reliable way,
the medium and long term evolution of fundamental features
of COVID-19 outbreak within acceptable accuracy. This paper
gives an explanation for the failure of machine learning models
in this particular forecasting problem. The paper shows that
simple linear regression models provide high prediction accuracy
values reliably but only for a 2-weeks period and that relatively
complex machine learning models, which have the potential of
learning long term predictions with low errors, cannot achieve
to obtain good predictions with possessing a high generalization
ability. It is suggested in the paper that the lack of a sufficient
number of samples is the source of low prediction performance
of the forecasting models. The reliability of the forecasting
results about the active cases is measured in terms of the crossvalidation prediction errors, which are used as expectations
for the generalization errors of the forecasters. To exploit the
information, which is of most relevant with the active cases, we
perform feature selection over a variety of variables such as
the numbers of active cases, deaths, recoveries, and people per
kilometer square. We apply different feature selection methods,
namely the Pairwise Correlation, Recursive Feature Selection,
and feature selection by using the Lasso regression and compare
them to each other and also with the models not employing any
feature selection. Furthermore, we compare Linear Regression,
Multi-Layer Perceptron, and Long-Short Term Memory models
each of which is used for prediction active cases together with the
mentioned feature selection methods. Our results show that the
accurate forecasting of the active cases with high generalization
ability is possible up to 3 days only because of the small
sample size of COVID-19 data. We observe that the linear
regression model has much better prediction performance with
high generalization ability as compared to the complex models
but, as expected, its performance decays sharply for more than
14-days prediction horizons.
Index Terms—COVID-19, forecasting, machine learning, feature selection, generalization

I. I NTRODUCTION
Since the first COVID-19 case confirmed on December 2019
in Wuhan, the COVID-19 outbreak has been spreading with
acceleration all around the world. According to rapid spread
of this pandemic, in the most of the countries, the first concern
was that the medical facilities may not be sufficient to handle
Mert Nakıp (Corresponding Author) is with Institute of Theoretical and
Applied Informatics, Polish Academy of Sciences (PAN), ul. Baltycka 5,
44100 Gliwice, Poland. Email: mnakip@iitis.pl
Cüneyt Güzeliş is with the Department of Electrical-Electronics Engineering at Yaşar University, Izmir, Turkey. Email: cuneyt.guzelis@yasar.edu.tr.
Onur Çopur is a student at the Department of Statistics at Sapienza
Universiy of Rome, Rome, Italy. Email: copur.1891194@studenti.uniroma1.it

with the massive number of patients. To plan necessary actions
such as increasing the facilities or taking preventive decisions
to flatten the curve of daily cases, the determination of the
future pattern of the active cases has become one of the most
important issues. So, many studies on the forecasting of the
number of active cases have been published in the literature
[1], [2], [3]. Although there are many valuable results in the
published works, some of the publications optimistically make
long term predictions for the pandemic [2], [4]. Furthermore,
in most of the works, the test performance of the forecasting
results has not been demonstrated well due to the restricted
size of the available time series data covering several months
only [1], [2], [4].
In this study, we perform an analysis on the generalization ability of the data-dependent forecasters to explain why
forecasting models used for determining the trend of COVID19 cases possess poor medium and long term prediction
performances in the special case of machine learning models.
For this purpose, a forecasting system that consists of a feature
selection module and a machine learning based forecasting
module is designed and implemented. In the early phase of
our studies, we observed that such an architecture provides
the best forecasting performance among the considered models
including the standard architectures of Linear Regression (LR),
Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP), and Long-Short Term Memory
(LSTM) state-of-the-art models with or without feature selection. The rational behind the choice of these models relies
on the following three facts: 1) LR is a linear static model
which is the least complex architecture, so possessing the high
generalization ability [5]. 2) MLP is a nonlinear static neural
network model which has universal function approximation
property and can be said to be the most widely used neural
network model with producing successful results in many
applications [6]. 3) LSTM is a recurrent neural network model
which is capable of approximating to the nonlinear dynamics
and has proved itself as the best model in many challenging
applications requiring to capture the temporal relations hidden
in inherently nonlinear dynamics [7]. In order to determine
the best performance provided by this feature selection based
forecasting model in terms of the cross-validation error, we
trained and tested all of the feature selection and forecaster pair
combinations: For the feature selection module, No Feature
Selection (No FS), iterative feature selection based on the Pairwise Correlation (PCorr), Recursive Feature Selection (RFS),
and feature selection by using the Lasso regression (Lasso,
in short) [8] are used. For the machine learning module, LR,
MLP, and LSTM are chosen as the forecasters to process the
selected features.

2

A. Relationship to the State of the Art
Now, we present the relationship between our study and
the works that aim to forecast the active cases in COVID-19
outbreak. According to the best of the authors’ knowledge,
with respect to the method of forecasting, we classify the
studies that forecast the active cases in COVID-19 outbreak
into 3 categories as follows: (1) SIR (Susceptible, Infected,
Recovered) family [9]; (2) statistical time series analysis
methods (for example, Auto-Regressive Integrated Moving
Average (ARIMA)) [1]; (3) machine learning methods [10],
[11], [12].
The SIR model is a dynamical compartmental model for
describing the time evolution of a disease transmitted from
human to human within a population by a set of nonlinear
ordinary differential equations. In the SIR model, the total
population is assumed to be constant and divided into the
following classes: Susceptible (S), Infected (I), and Recovered
(R) [9]. The works in [9], [2], [13] use the SIR model as
the estimator for the number of active cases. In [9], the
authors focus on forecasting the active cases for all countries,
where forecasting horizon is 5 days. The study in [2], SIRD
(Susceptible, Infectious, Recovered, Dead) method is used to
predict the active cases under 3 different scenarios for only the
Hubei province of China. Furthermore, in [13], the authors
compare SIR with SEIR (Susceptible, Exposed, Infectious,
Recovered) considering only active cases in Wuhan. They
show that the SIR model performs much better than the
SEIR model in representing the information contained in the
confirmed-case data. This indicates that predictions using more
complex SIR-like dynamical models may not be reliable in
comparison to the ones using simpler SIR-like models. On
the other hand, although SIR-like models explains rise-andfall nature of growth of the pandemic, they fail to capture
the peak and the whole time-evolution of the disease within
a reasonable accuracy due to the sensitive dependence of
the time waveform of the solutions to the SIR differential
equations on model parameters such as the average number
of contacts per person per time. It should be noted that SIRlike models could be used for an accurate prediction of active
cases only when highly accurate parameter estimations are
achievable depending on the real data.
Besides SIR, statistical time series analysis methods are
also used to predict the active cases in COVID-19 outbreak.
For the COVID-19 outbreak in Italy, the works forecast the
active cases by using ARIMA which is a linear time-invariant
dynamical model with stochastic input[14], [15], [16], for 2
days [1] and Seasonal ARIMA (SARIMA) for 60 days [17].
In [3], the exponential smoothing based models are used to
predict future of the cumulative number of cases. The results of
the works in this category show that these forecasters make the
prediction similar to the trend of the past data. Thus, although
those forecasters are able to capture the increasing trend of
the active cases until the peak point, they are not capable of
determining the whole time evolution of the disease.
There are a few works that uses machine learning methods
in order to forecast the active cases in the COVID-19 pandemic. In the works [10], [18], [19], [20], the LSTM based

models are used to forecast the future of the pandemic by
training the model for the past COVID-19 data for each of
the selected countries. Similar to this work, the MLP based
models in [11], [21], support vector machine models in [22]
and the logistic regression in [12] were trained and then tested
on the COVID-19 data of each country that was selected
for test. In [4], the authors took into account the problem
of the small sample size for the COVID-19 pandemic and
trained their model on the 2003 SARS corona virus outbreak
data. The proposed results by the works in this category show
that the forecasting models perform well with respect to the
error metric measurements; however, the graphs show that the
models are not able to capture either the peak days and the
values or the non-increasing parts of the time series.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: In Section II,
we state the problem and our method proposed for the forecasting of the number of active cases. In Section III, we present the
feature selection methods and the parameter optimization for
each method. In Section IV, we present the implementation
of the considered forecasting methods. In Section V, we
present our results on the forecasting of the number of active
cases in COVID-19 pandemic. In Section VI, we present our
conclusions.
II. S TATEMENT OF THE P ROBLEM
In this section, we describe the forecasting problem for the
active cases in COVID-19 outbreak. We aim to examine the
generalization ability of the machine learning based forecasters
for identifying their predictive powers on the COVID-19 data.
To this end, we first analyze the effects of the different features
on the forecasting of active cases and then select the important
features that increase the forecasting accuracy. Second, we
design forecasting models that perform prediction of the number of active cases. Furthermore, we analyze the performance
of the forecasters for different forecasting horizons in an
increasing order, and we provide the most reliable forecasting
horizon for this problem by means of an empirical analysis.
A. System Design
For the forecasting of the number of active cases, we
design a system shown in Fig. 1 that consists of the Feature
Selection module and the Forecasting module. The output of
the system is the predicted value of each of the number of
active cases for 1- to K-day ahead forecasting. Furthermore,
the detailed explanation of the methods that are used in the
Feature Selection module and the Forecasting module are
given in Section III and Section IV, respectively.

Fig. 1. System Design of the Integrated Feature Selection - Forecasting for
the Number of Active Cases in the COVID-19 Pandemic

3

B. Selection of the Important Features
Since we know that there are many different features that
may affect the spread of the COVID-19 outbreak, we analyze
the features that we are able to access and select the feature
subset. Each feature in this subset has important effects on the
number of active cases. In order to improve the performance of
the overall system, we perform the feature analysis combined
with the forecasting module. That is, by using the feature
selection methods in Section III, we select feature subset that
achieves the best forecasting performance under the considered
forecasting scheme.
C. Forecasting of the Active Cases
In the forecasting problem, we aim to compute the future
value of the active cases. To this end, we use machine learning
models with supervised learning whose output is future value
of the active cases at Kth day. According to the best of
the authors’ knowledge, there is no study that examines
the maximum length of forecasting horizon that provides
the forecasting within a reasonable accuracy for COVID-19
pandemic. In order to determine this horizon (which is the
value of K), we forecast the total number of active cases for
the increasing forecasting horizon length from 1-day to 30days. We give the details of the machine learning methods
that are used as the forecasting model and their input-output
structures in Section IV

A. Feature Selection based on the Pairwise Correlation
(PCorr)
In this method, first, for each feature, we calculate the
correlation of this feature with each of the other features. After
we complete the calculation of the pairwise correlation values
for all of the feature candidate pairs, we compute the indices
of the feature candidate pairs each of which whose correlation
value is greater than the threshold value p or less than −p.
Third, from each pair of feature candidates, we eliminated
a feature whose average correlation with other features is the
greatest. Note that, we select the optimal value of p by using an
exhaustive search in the range of [0.5, 0.99] with the increment
of 0.01.
In order to calculate the correlation matrix, we used the
Pearson product-moment correlation, which is defined with
the formula in Equation 1. Each of the coefficients calculated
by using this formula measures the strength and the direction
of the linear relationship between two feature candidates.

ρij =

1
L−1

PL

s
s=1 (xi

− x̄i )(xsj − x̄j )

σi σj

,

∀i, j

(1)

In Equation 1, ρ(i,j) denotes the correlation value between
the ith and the jth features. xsi denotes the value of the ith
feature candidate at sample s, x̄i denotes the mean, and σi
denotes the standard deviation of the ith feature candidate. L
denotes the total number of samples. The numerator of this
formula is the covariance between ith and jth features.

III. A NALYSIS AND S ELECTION OF THE F EATURES
In this section, we describe the methods for the selection of
the relevant subset of features. For each country, first, we take
past values of each of the following daily time series datasets:
The number of total cases, the total number of deaths, and
the total number of recovered patients. In order to convert the
number of total cases to the number of active cases, which
is actually the important value that will affect the control of
the hospital facilities during the pandemic, we subtract the
total sum of the deaths and recovered from the total cases.
Then, in order to convert each of the total deaths and the
total recovered into the per day basis, we take the difference
between the samples. That is, the resulting three time series
are the number of active cases, the number of deaths per day,
and the number of recovered patients per day.
Second, we have selected additional 36 different features
that might affect the spread of COVID-19 and which are online
available for all countries [23], [24]. Note that none of these
features is not a time series data. The details of these features
are given in Section V-A
In order to select the subset of these feature candidates,
we apply three different feature selection methods: Iterative
feature selection based on the pairwise correlation (PCorr)
of each feature candidate pair (in short, correlation matrix),
Recursive Feature Selection (RFS), and feature selection by
using the Lasso regression (Lasso, in short). For each of the
forecasting models given in Section IV for each value of K, we
choose one of these feature selection methods by calculating
the overall performance based on the cross-validation.

B. Recursive Feature Selection (RFS)
The aim of the RFS is to shrink the set of the selected
features in a recursive way. The RFS algorithm takes the set
of feature candidates as the input. First, it trains an LR model
with all of the feature candidates and keeps the coefficients
of this LR. Note that we selected LR as the coefficient
determination model in order to increase the generalization.
The loop of the RFS searches for the optimal value of the
desired number of features NRFS between 1 and the total
number N of feature candidates. For each value of NRFS ,
RFS works as follows: 1) It updates the input set by pruning
N − NRFS features for which the LR coefficients are smaller
than others. 2) The forecasting model is trained and tested
with the resulting feature set by using cross-validation. 3) The
mean of the test scores over the folds of the cross-validation is
appended to the score list. When the end of the loop for NRFS
∗
is reached, the optimal value of NRFS
is computed empirically.
Finally, the resulting feature set is selected as to contain the
∗
first NRFS
features that have the LR coefficients with the
highest-values.
C. Feature Selection by using the Lasso Regression (Lasso)
In order to select the subset of the feature candidates, we
use the classical Lasso Regression with 5-fold cross-validation
over the input sample set. For each fold of the cross-validation,
we split data into the training and validation sets, then train the
Lasso model on training set, test it on the test set and finally
calculate the test score. As the best Lasso Regression model,

4

we select the model that achieves the highest test performance
over all of the models, each of which is trained in a crossvalidation fold. Finally, we select the features each of whose
Lasso coefficient is not equal to zero.
IV. F ORECASTING OF THE N UMBER OF ACTIVE C ASES
In this section, we describe how we forecast the future
values of the number of active cases, and the detailed design
of the forecasting module in Fig. 1.
In the forecasting module shown in Fig. 1, we use K
different forecasters for 1 to K step ahead forecasting. Each
of these forecasters is defined by its inputs, its output, and its
internal model parameters. For each forecasting step k, we set
the input of each forecasting model to the features that are
selected as explained in Section III. We set the output of this
forecaster to the value of the number of active cases at the kth
step in the future, denoted by x̂1 [t + k].
In order to forecast the future values of the number of active
cases, we perform a comparative study with LR, MLP, and
LSTM. We now describe the design and implementation of
each of these models.

A. Linear Regression
We have selected the well-known linear regression model as
a benchmark forecaster. In the implementation of this model,
we use the Linear Regression module from scikit-learn library
[25]. The module fits a linear model with the coefficients to
minimize the residual sum of squares between the observed
targets in the dataset, and the predicted values by the linear
approximation.

B. Multi-Layer Perceptron
We design an MLP model, which consists of two hidden
layers. We let nl denote the number of neurons at hidden layer
l. In order to find the local optimal architecture of the MLP
model, we search for the values of nl for l ∈ {1, 2} within
the range of [4, 32] for each integral power of two. We present
the resulting architecture of the MLP model and compare the
performances of these models in Section V-D. Furthermore,
we set the activation function of each neuron to tanh. In the
implementation of the MLP model, we use the Keras library
in Python [26].

C. Long-Short Term Memory
Our implementation of the LSTM model, which is coded
by using Keras library, consists of one lstm layer, two fully
connected layers, and an output layer. We let hlstm denote
the number of lstm units at the lstm layer and he denote the
number of neurons at each fully connected layer e ∈ {1, 2}.
We exhaustively search for the local optimal values of hlstm
and he within the range of [4, 32] for each integral power of
two.

V. R ESULTS
A. Dataset
In this paper, we have considered two different data domains. The first data domain is the time series data which
consists of the number of active cases, the number of deaths
and the number of recoveries for 71 different countries from
22th of January 2020 to 20th of July 2020. This domain
contains one dataset collected from [27]. The second data
domain consists of two different datasets each of which
includes different features that regard to each country. The first
dataset in the second domain consists of 63 different features
for 173 countries and is taken from [23]. The second dataset in
this domain consists of 58 different features for 194 countries
and is taken from [24].
We first got the intersection of all of the datasets with
respect to the countries. Then, in the resulting dataset, we
eliminated the features that are not available for all of the
countries. Furthermore, we chose the subset of the country
specific features, and we got 36 features. These country
specific features are as follows: (1) latitude, (2) longitude, (3)
population, (4) the number of people per kilometer square (in
short, Density), (5) urban population (in short, Urban-Pop),
(6) fertility, (7) median of the age (in short, Median-Age),
(8) average of the temperature between January 2020 and
March 2020 (in short, Avg-Temperature), (9) average of the
humidity between January 2020 and March 2020 (in short,
Avg-Humidity), (10) the number of male children born per
female giving birth (in short, Male-Birth), (11-16) the number
of males per female in overall (in short, MF) and in the age
groups 0-14 (in short, MF-14), 15-25 (in short, MF-25), 2654 (in short, MF-54), 55-64 (in short, MF-64), and 65+ (in
short, MF-65+), (17) the percentage of the smokers (in short,
Smokers), (18) the number of beds in hospitals (in short, BedCapacity), (19-21) the percentage of each of the female (in
short, % Female-Lung), male (in short, % Male-Lung) and both
female and male (in short, % Lung) that have lung diseases,
(22) the death rate per 100000 caused by flu pneumonia (in
short, Pneumonia-Death-100K), (23) the binary flag that is
equal to one for a country if the number of H1N1 cases
is underestimated in 2009 for this country (in short, H1N1Underestimate), (24) the total number of confirmed cases
per country during the H1N1 pandemic in 2009 (in short,
H1N1-Confirmed), (25) the total number of confirmed deaths
caused by H1N1 during the H1N1 pandemic in 2009 (in
short, H1N1-Deaths), (26) the annual precipitation (in short,
(Annual-Precipitation), (27) the ratio of median property prices
to the median familial disposable income (in short, PropertyAffordability), (28) the estimation [28] of the overall quality
of the health care system (in short, Health-Care), health care
professionals, equipment, staff, doctors and cost, (29) the gross
domestic product in 2019 (in short, GDP-2019), (30) the
health expenses in USD (in short, Health-Expenses), (31) the
health expenses per one million individuals (in short, HealthExpenses-1M), (32) the limit of the number of person for
gathering (in short, Gathering-Limit), and (33-36) the number
of days past between the date of the first confirmed case and
each of the closing date of the non-essential public places

5

Fig. 2. Heatmap of the pairwise pearson correlation for the feature candidates that are not time-series

(in short, Nonessential-Close-Days), the starting date of the
public gathering limitations (in short, Gathering-Limit-Days),
the closing date of the schools (in short, School-Close-Days),
and the closing date of the public places (in short, PublicPlaceClose-Days).
As a result, our dataset consists of 78 features, where 42
of them are the time series features during the COVID-19
pandemic, and 36 of them are the general country related
features.

B. Performance Evaluation by using 10-Fold Cross-Validation
For each of the LR, MLP, and LSTM models, in order to
measure the generalization ability of the model, we perform
10-fold Cross-Validation (CV).
In each fold of the CV, we first split the dataset into the
training set and test set randomly with ratios of 0.8 and 0.2,
respectively. Second, we train the model on the training set and
test it on the test set for the current fold. Third, we measure
both of the training and test performance of the model by
using the r2 metric [29].
In the training of the MLP and LSTM models, we use
the ADAM algorithm as optimizer with the loss selected as
the mean squared error (MSE). We set the parameters of the
ADAM algorithm as follows: the initial learning rate to 0.001,
beta1 to 0.9, beta2 to 0.999. Furthermore, we set the batch size
to 200. During the training of MLP and LSTM models, we set
the maximum number of epochs to 600 for the early stopping
that executes the training at the epoch where the training loss
has not been decreasing for the last 30 successive epochs.

C. Feature Selection Methods for the Forecasting of Active
Cases
In this subsection, for the forecasting problem of the active
cases, we give the resulting parameters and the computation
results for each of the PCorr, RFS, and Lasso feature selection
methods. Furthermore, in Section V-D, based on the r2 score,
we present the forecasting results for all of these feature
selection methods for each forecasting model.
1) Feature Selection based on the Pairwise Correlation
(PCorr): In Fig. 2, we present the heatmap of the resulting
pairwise pearson correlation for the feature candidates that
are not time-series. In this figure, as the color of a pixel
becomes whiter, the correlation value of the feature pair for
the corresponding pixel increases. That is, the pixels each
of whose color is very close to white and very close to
black indicate the feature pairs that are highly correlated. For
example, the Latitude of each country is inversely correlated
with the Avg-temperature in that country, where the correlation
value is −0.82. In addition, Median-Age and Fertility are
inversely correlated with the correlation value −0.84. On
the other hand, in Fig. 2, we see that all of % Lung, %
Male-Lung,% Female-Lung features are highly correlated with
correlation value above 0.87.
2) Recursive Feature Selection (RFS): In Fig. 3, we present
the optimal number of features NRFS that are selected by the
RFS algorithm. In this figure, we see that the RFS selects
all of the features for the LR forecaster. The reason is that
the elimination of the features does not improve the LR
performance any more. In addition, we see that the RFS selects
only at most 9 features, which is the lowest number of features
with respect the selected features for the other forecasters.

6

The features that are selected for the LSTM model are the
time series features with one exception, which is that the
one of the selected features for the forecasting of day 30
is the GDP-2019. Furthermore, we see that the numbers of
selected features for LR and LSTM models do not change
significantly with the increasing forecasting step; however, the
number of selected features for the MLP forecaster varies with
the increasing forecasting step.

Fig. 5. Forecasting performance of the Linear Regression for training and
test sets under different feature selection methods.

Fig. 3. Comparison of the total number of selected features by RFS for each
of LR, MLP, and LSTM forecasters

3) Feature Selection by using the Lasso Regression (Lasso):
In Fig. 4, we present the total number of selected features by
Lasso for the increasing forecasting step. Note that the selected
features by Lasso are the same for all forecasting models. We
see that the Lasso tends to select more features as the number
of forecasting step increases because the forecasting problem
of determining the number of active cases becomes harder as
the forecasting horizon widen. Furthermore, in the problem
of forecasting of the near future, the number of active cases
for the last day in the past has the best relationship with the
desired output.

Fig. 4. The total number of selected features by Lasso for the increasing
number of forecasting step

D. Forecasting Results for the Active Cases
In this subsection, we discuss the predictability of the
number of active cases for the COVID-19 pandemic. We also
compare the forecasting performances of the LR, MLP and
LSTM models.

In Fig. 5, we show the forecasting performance of the LR
model under no feature selection (No FS), PCorr, RFS, and
Lasso with respect to r2 metric. In this figure, for all of
the feature selection methods, we see that the generalization
gap between the training and the test performance of LR
enlarges as the number of time step increases. In addition,
the training performance (in r2 metric) of the LR method
is above 0.7; however the test performance is under 0 after
K = 20. Even tough the LR is a linear model with high
generalization ability, our results show that the LR model
over fits the training data for the average of the CV folds.
Furthermore, since the 99% of the COVID-19 patients develop
symptoms and are hospitalized within 14-days [30], we see a
significant performance improvement for K = 15 for all of
the feature selection methods. That is, the LR model is able to
capture the linear relationship between the past and the 15-day
ahead. Although the LR model cannot achieve a reasonable
performance after 15-days, it performs the best under Lasso.

Fig. 6. Forecasting performance of the MLP for training and test sets under
different feature selection methods.

In Fig. 6, we present the CV results on both of the training
and test sets for the MLP model under four different feature
selection methods. First, we see that the mean of the training
performance of MLP does not fall under 0.9 for all of the
feature selection methods. However, the test performance of
the MLP model significantly decreases as the value of K

7

increases. That is, MLP, as a nonlinear model, highly over
fits to the training data. Next, the MLP achieves its best r2
performance under RFS up to K = 5, and its performances
under No FS and under Lasso are comparable after K = 5.

the feature space, we see that LR outperforms the other two
models for all values of K, except K = 30.
According to our results shown in Fig. 5, Fig. 6, Fig. 7, and
Fig. 8, we see that due to the curse of small sample size, it
is hard to forecast the number of active cases in COVID-19
outbreak with high generalization ability after 3 days, except
the 15th day for which LR produces high prediction accuracy
that might be due to the linear relation caused by the 14-day
quarantine period applied to suspected persons.
1) Forecasting of Active Cases on Extended Dataset: In
order to see the performance improvement with increasing
sample size, we extended the dataset (which was collected
from January 22 to July 20, 2020) with the number of active
cases, the number of deaths and the number of recoveries for
71 different countries in COVID-19 pandemic until July 20,
2020. For this extended dataset, we repeat the methodology (in
Section II-A) to generate the results in the rest of this section.

Fig. 7. Forecasting performance of the LSTM for training and test sets under
different feature selection methods.

In Fig. 7, we show both of the training and test r2 performances of the LSTM model under four feature selection
methods. For the LSTM model under each of the No FS,
PCorr, RFS, and Lasso, since the training r2 performance of
the LSTM model does not fall under 0.73, the test performance
of that is under 0 after K = 15. Furthermore, we see that RFS
outperforms all of the other feature selection methods for the
LSTM model. However, even the performance of the LSTM
under RFS decreases to −1.45 r2 value for K = 30.
Fig. 9. Comparison of the forecasting performance of LR, MLP, and LSTM
under the best feature selection method for each value of K with respect to
the mean of the CV test scores on the extended dataset.

Fig. 8. Comparison of the forecasting performance of LR, MLP, and LSTM
under the best feature selection method for each value of K with respect to
the mean of the CV test scores.

In Fig. 8, we give the comparison of LR, MLP, and
LSTM models each of which is applied together with the
best performing feature selection method for each value of
K. First, we see that only up to K = 3, the r2 performances
of all models are higher than 0.9. However, the MLP model
significantly decreases at K = 3, where this point is K = 4
for the LSTM and K = 15 for the LR. Second, we see that
after K = 20, there are no forecaster that achieves the r2 score
which is higher than 0. It is concluded that since the number
of samples for the forecasting problem of the number of active
cases during COVID-19 pandemic is quite small to represent

In Fig. 9, we display the r2 performance of each forecasting
scheme LR, LSTM, and MLP. We see that for each value
of K, LR outperforms to both MLP and LSTM forecasters;
however, even the performance of LR is around the 0.5 for
K = 15. In addition, the r2 performance of LSTM decreases
after K = 5, and that of MLP decreases significantly after
K = 4. Furthermore, due to the increased sample size of the
dataset from Fig. 8 to Fig. 9, we see that the performances of
all forecasting schemes increase significantly for all value of
K.
2) Forecasting of Active Cases for Turkey: Now, in Fig. 10,
we present the forecasting results for the number of active
cases for the increasing time step ahead forecasting in Turkey
between 26th of March 2020 and 20th of July 2020. From
Fig. 10(a) to Fig. 10(f), we respectively set the value of K
equal to 1, 3, 5, 10, 15 and 30. In Fig. 10, for each value of
K, we concatenate the Kth-step ahead forecasting over the
sliding windows with 1-day sliding at each step.
In Fig. 10(a), we see that the LR and MLP perform better
than the LSTM forecaster, where LSTM is not able to forecast
the number of active cases at around peak day. In this figure,
except the days between 20th April and 10th May, all of
the LR, MLP and LSTM models perform forecasting, which
is close to real number of active cases. From Fig. 10(a) to

8

Fig. 10. Comparison of the LR, MLP, and LSTM with respect to each of 1, 3, 5, 10, 15 and 30-step ahead forecasting of the number of active cases in
Turkey between 26th of March 2020 and 20th of July 2020.

Fig. 10(f), as the value of K increases, we see that forecasting
performances of all forecasting schemes decreases, and LR
performs the closest forecasting to the real value of the number
of active cases. Thus, in Fig. 10(f), although the MLP forecasts
close to real until 1st of May and LR forecasts close to real
between 1st of June and 15th of June, we see that none of
the forecasting models are able capture the general trend of
the number of active cases and forecast the number of active
cases for the peak day correctly for Turkey when K = 30.
VI. C ONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we perform a study to determine the accurate
forecasting horizon for the number of active cases in COVID19 pandemic. To this end, we compare the performance of the
Linear Regression (LR), Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP), and
Long-Short Term Memory (LSTM) for a variety of forecasting
horizon lengths. Herein, the linear static model LR is chosen
for its potentially high generalization ability. The most widely
used static nonlinear neural network model MLP is preferred
due to its powerful approximation property. The recurrent
neural network LSTM is taken as the third benchmark model
since it is the state-of-the-art model that is highly successful in
capturing temporal relations in time series data. Considering
the existence of limited number of samples only for COVID19 pandemic, in order to achieve acceptable generalization
ability for each of the three forecasters, we perform a feature
selection to the input of the forecaster for reducing the model
complexities. The forecaster under no feature selection (No
FS) are then compared to the forecasters with the feature
selection based on the Pairwise Correlation (PCorr), Recursive
Feature Selection (RFS), and feature selection by using Lasso
regression (Lasso), respectively.

Our main conclusion is that the long term forecasting (in
other words, prediction) of the number of active cases in
COVID-19 pandemic is not possible with high test accuracy
at least for the considered three benchmark models as a
consequence of their poor generalization abilities under the
very limited number of samples available, up to now, for
the COVID-19 pandemic. This study is not conclusive. The
other machine learning models such as 1-dimensional or multidimensional Convolutional Neural Networks may be applied
for forecasting COVID-19 features such as active cases. However, all of these forecasting models will suffer from the small
sample size problem.
The study presented in this paper shows that the forecasting
problem of the active cases might be solved by achieving the
high performance and generalization ability up to 3-days ahead
only. In addition, this statement is also valid for the 15th day
ahead but only by using a linear model. Furthermore, even the
best performing model is not able to perform better than fitting
the mean of the data (which corresponds r2 value equals to 0)
after 20-days.
R EFERENCES
[1] D. Benvenuto, M. Giovanetti, L. Vassallo, S. Angeletti, and M. Ciccozzi,
“Application of the arima model on the COVID-2019 epidemic dataset,”
Data in brief, p. 105340, 2020.
[2] C. Anastassopoulou, L. Russo, A. Tsakris, and C. Siettos, “Data-based
analysis, modelling and forecasting of the COVID-19 outbreak,” PloS
one, vol. 15, no. 3, p. e0230405, 2020.
[3] F. Petropoulos and S. Makridakis, “Forecasting the novel coronavirus
COVID-19,” PloS one, vol. 15, no. 3, p. e0231236, 2020.
[4] Z. Yang, Z. Zeng, K. Wang, S.-S. Wong, W. Liang, M. Zanin, P. Liu,
X. Cao, Z. Gao, Z. Mai et al., “Modified seir and ai prediction
of the epidemics trend of COVID-19 in china under public health
interventions,” Journal of Thoracic Disease, vol. 12, no. 3, p. 165, 2020.

9

[5] X. Yan and X. Su, Linear regression analysis: theory and computing.
World Scientific, 2009.
[6] T. Hastie, R. Tibshirani, and J. Friedman, The elements of statistical
learning: data mining, inference, and prediction. Springer Science &
Business Media, 2009.
[7] H. Sak, A. W. Senior, and F. Beaufays, “Long short-term memory
recurrent neural network architectures for large scale acoustic modeling,”
2014.
[8] R. Muthukrishnan and R. Rohini, “Lasso: A feature selection technique
in predictive modeling for machine learning,” in 2016 IEEE international
conference on advances in computer applications (ICACA). IEEE,
2016, pp. 18–20.
[9] B. M. Ndiaye, L. Tendeng, and D. Seck, “Analysis of the COVID-19
pandemic by sir model and machine learning technics for forecasting,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.01574, 2020.
[10] I. G. Pereira, J. M. Guerin, A. G. S. Junior, C. Distante, G. S. Garcia,
and L. M. Goncalves, “Forecasting COVID-19 dynamics in brazil: a
data driven approach,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.09475, 2020.
[11] R. M. Rizk-Allah and A. E. Hassanien, “COVID-19 forecasting based
on an improved interior search algorithm and multi-layer feed forward
neural network,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.05960, 2020.
[12] M. Villalobos-Arias, “Using generalized logistics regression to forecast
population infected by COVID-19,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.02406,
2020.
[13] W. C. Roda, M. B. Varughese, D. Han, and M. Y. Li, “Why is it difficult
to accurately predict the COVID-19 epidemic?” Infectious Disease
Modelling, vol. 5, pp. 271–281, 2020.
[14] Z. Ceylan, “Estimation of COVID-19 prevalence in Italy, Spain, and
France,” Science of The Total Environment, p. 138817, 2020.
[15] M. H. D. M. Ribeiro, R. G. da Silva, V. C. Mariani, and L. dos Santos Coelho, “Short-term forecasting COVID-19 cumulative confirmed
cases: Perspectives for Brazil,” Chaos, Solitons & Fractals, p. 109853,
2020.
[16] P. Kumar, H. Kalita, S. Patairiya, Y. D. Sharma, C. Nanda, M. Rani,
J. Rahmani, and A. S. Bhagavathula, “Forecasting the dynamics of
COVID-19 pandemic in top 15 countries in April 2020: Arima model
with machine learning approach,” medRxiv, 2020.
[17] N. Chintalapudi, G. Battineni, and F. Amenta, “COVID-19 disease
outbreak forecasting of registered and recovered cases after sixty day
lockdown in Italy: A data driven model approach,” Journal of Microbiology, Immunology and Infection, 2020.
[18] S. M. Zandavi, T. H. Rashidi, and F. Vafaee, “Forecasting the spread of
COVID-19 under control scenarios using lstm and dynamic behavioral
models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.12270, 2020.
[19] R. Pal, A. A. Sekh, S. Kar, and D. K. Prasad, “Neural network
based country wise risk prediction of COVID-19,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2004.00959, 2020.
[20] S. R. Vadyala, S. N. Betgeri, E. A. Sherer, and A. Amritphale, “Prediction of the number of COVID-19 confirmed cases based on k-meanslstm,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.14752, 2020.
[21] S. Tamang, P. Singh, and B. Datta, “Forecasting of COVID-19 cases
based on prediction using artificial neural network curve fitting technique,” Global Journal of Environmental Science and Management,
vol. 6, no. Special Issue (COVID-19), pp. 53–64, 2020.
[22] M. Yadav, M. Perumal, and M. Srinivas, “Analysis on novel coronavirus
(COVID-19) using machine learning methods,” Chaos, Solitons &
Fractals, p. 110050, 2020.
[23] Patrick, “COVID-19 country data,” Kaggle. [Online]. Available:
https://www.kaggle.com/bitsnpieces/covid19-country-data
[24] M. Koryto, “countryinfo,” Kaggle. [Online]. Available: https://www.
kaggle.com/koryto/countryinfo
[25] F. Pedregosa, G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort, V. Michel, B. Thirion,
O. Grisel, M. Blondel, P. Prettenhofer, R. Weiss, V. Dubourg, J. Vanderplas, A. Passos, D. Cournapeau, M. Brucher, M. Perrot, and E. Duchesnay, “Scikit-learn: Machine learning in Python,” Journal of Machine
Learning Research, vol. 12, pp. 2825–2830, 2011.
[26] F. Chollet et al., “Keras,” https://keras.io, 2015.
[27] S. Rajkumar, “Novel corona virus 2019 dataset,” Kaggle. [Online]. Available: https://www.kaggle.com/sudalairajkumar/
novel-corona-virus-2019-dataset
[28] Numbeo, “Health care index by country 2020.” [Online]. Available:
https://www.numbeo.com/health-care/rankings by country.jsp
[29] S. Glantz, “A., slinker, bk, 1990. primer of applied regression and
analysis of variance.”
[30] S. A. Lauer, K. H. Grantz, Q. Bi, F. K. Jones, Q. Zheng, H. R. Meredith,
A. S. Azman, N. G. Reich, and J. Lessler, “The incubation period of
coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) from publicly reported confirmed

cases: estimation and application,” Annals of internal medicine, vol. 172,
no. 9, pp. 577–582, 2020.

Mert Nakıp obtained his B.Sc. degree, with graduation rank #1, from the Electrical-Electronics Engineering at Yaşar University (Izmir, Turkey) in
2018. His design of a multi-sensor fire detector via
machine learning methods was ranked #1 nationally
at the Industry-Focused Undergraduate Graduation
Projects Competition organized by TÜBİTAK (Turkish Scientific and Technological Research Council). He completed his M. Sc. thesis in ElectricalElectronics Engineering at Yaşar University (Izmir,
Turkey) in 2020. His thesis focused on the application of machine learning methods to IoT and was supported by the
National Graduate Scholarship Program of TÜBİTAK 2210C in High-Priority
Technological Areas. He is currently a Research Assistant and a Ph.D.
candidate at the Institute of Theoretical and Applied Informatics, Polish
Academy of Sciences (Gliwice, Poland).

Onur Çopur received the B.Sc. degree (with Graduation Rank #3) from the Department of Industrial Engineering, Yaşar University, İzmir, Turkey,
in 2019. He is currently pursuing the M.Sc. degree
in Data Science in Sapienza University of Rome.
His research paper titled as ”Periodic Route Optimization for FMCG Distributors”, published as
a chapter in the book called, ”Proceedings of the
International Symposium for Production Research
2019” by Springer and presented in the International Symposium for Production Research 2019
(ISPR2019) held at TU Wien. Vienna, Austria.

Cüneyt Güzeliş received the B.Sc., M.Sc., and
Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from İstanbul
Technical University, Istanbul, Turkey, in 1981,
1984, and 1988, respectively. He is a Professor of
electrical engineering and the Director of the Graduate School of Natural and Applied Sciences, Yaşar
University, İzmir, Turkey. He was with İstanbul
Technical University from 1982 to 2000, where he
became a Full Professor. His expertise is in nonlinear
circuits and systems, machine learning, and systems
biology. He has published over 50 SCI-indexed journal papers with more than 900 SCI citations, six peer-reviewed book chapters,
and more than 90 peer-reviewed conference papers. He has supervised 17 M.S.
students and 14 Ph.D. students. He has served as the Dean of the Faculty of
Engineering, Dokuz Eylül University, İzmir, and the Director of the Graduate
School of Natural and Applied Sciences, İzmir University of Economics,
İzmir. He has held visiting research and/or teaching positions with the
University of California at Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, USA; Aachen University
of Applied Sciences, Aachen, Germany; Paris-Est University, Champs-surMarne, France; and Paris-Nord University, Paris, France. He has participated
in over 20 scientific research projects funded by the national and international
institutions, such as the British Council and the French National Council for
Scientific Research.

