DATA-DRIVEN CONTROL OF THE COVID-19 OUTBREAK VIA
NON-PHARMACEUTICAL INTERVENTIONS: A GEOMETRIC
PROGRAMMING APPROACH∗

arXiv:2011.01392v1 [math.OC] 3 Nov 2020

MIKHAIL HAYHOE† , FRANCISCO BARRERAS‡ , AND VICTOR M. PRECIADO‡
Abstract. In this paper we propose a data-driven model for the spread of SARS-CoV-2 and use
it to design optimal control strategies of human-mobility restrictions that both curb the epidemic
and minimize the economic costs associated with implementing non-pharmaceutical interventions.
We develop an extension of the SEIR epidemic model that captures the effects of changes in human
mobility on the spread of the disease. The parameters of our data-driven model are learned using
a multitask learning approach that leverages both data on the number of deaths across a set of
regions, and cellphone data on individuals’ mobility patterns specific to each region. We propose an
optimal control problem on this data-driven model with a tractable solution provided by geometric
programming. The result of this framework is a mobility-based intervention strategy that curbs the
spread of the epidemic while obeying a budget on the economic cost incurred. Furthermore, in the
absence of a straightforward mapping from human mobility data to economic costs, we propose a
practical method by which a budget on economic losses incurred may be chosen to eliminate excess
deaths due to over-utilization of hospital resources. Our results are demonstrated with numerical
simulations using real data from the Philadelphia metropolitan area.
Key words. Epidemiology, mathematical modeling, multitask learning, optimal control, geometric programming
AMS subject classifications. 92D30, 93A30, 49N90, 68T05, 90C30

1. Introduction. Ever since the first COVID-19 case was reported on December
31st 2019 [34], the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic has spread world-wide, reaching alarming
levels of spread and severity [35]. The response to the first wave of COVID-19 by
governments was the implementation of large scale non-pharmaceutical interventions
(NPIs) ranging from contact tracing, quarantines and mask usage, to more aggressive
measures like city wide shelter-in-place orders, air-travel restrictions and closures of
non-essential businesses [4]. In the absence of pharmaceutical treatment, prevention,
or herd immunity, NPIs remain the only tool to curb the spread of the epidemic.
At the same time, governments across the world have began implementing strategies
to relax mobility restriction measures and reactivate the economy [23] while, at the
same time, preventing the collapse of their healthcare systems. However, relaxing
mobility restrictions too fast or carelessly can result in resounding waves, as we are
currently observing for the case of COVID-19. In fact, as long as enough people in
the population are susceptible, the danger of recurrent waves is not only real, but
probable. In this situation, it is of utmost societal importance to develop reopening
strategies in a principled manner utilizing the wealth of data readily available.
Several epidemic models have been proposed in the recent literature to simulate
the effects of social distancing on the evolution of the pandemic; see, e.g., [1, 7, 13].
Although the majority of epidemic models in recent years are variations of the seminal
mathematical models on theoretical epidemiology (see [32] and references therein),
∗ Submitted

to the editors on November 1, 2020.
Funding: This work was supported, in part, by the National Science Foundation under awards
NSF-TRIPODS-1934876, CAREER-ECCS-1651433, NSF-III-200884556, and the Rockefeller Foundation.
† Corresponding
author.
University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia,
PA (mhayhoe@seas.upenn.edu).
‡ University
of
Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia,
PA
(fbarrer@sas.upenn.edu,
preciado@seas.upenn.edu).
1

the availability of rich datasets describing human mobility and behavior is rapidly
changing the field of mathematical modelling of epidemics. Companies like Google,
Foursquare, Safegraph, Baidu and others, have provided public access to massive
datasets describing human mobility, enabling the development of data-driven epidemic
models capturing the effects of mobility restrictions. Indeed, the choices faced by
decision makers regarding disease management involve the use of multiple control
actuations such as vaccination, quarantine, treatment or, as is the case for COVID19, non-pharmaceutical interventions such as social distancing. These decisions must
face the trade-off of minimizing the impact of the disease and the economic cost
associated with the implementation of non-pharmaceutical interventions.
In order to increase predictive power and utility for policy decision-makers, epidemic models have gradually increased their complexity to account for a multitude of
features of real epidemics such as disease-specific compartmental models [41], resurgence [44], multi-scale effects [21], seasonality [6], differential risk structure in the population and healthcare system capacity [18, 27], among others. This increased sophistication in the modeling often comes at the cost of mathematical intractability, and most
recommended interventions are heuristics based on simulations [1, 2, 6, 8, 13, 18, 27].
Although informative for certain scenarios, these proposed interventions are not the
result of rigorously formulated optimal control problems.
Conversely, the control of epidemics does not usually admit straightforward solutions from optimal control theory due to the presence of nonlinearities and/or the
lack of convexity [32]. Some important theoretical results formulate control problems
as a static optimal resource allocation aiming to asymptotically drive the epidemic
to extinction [8, 31, 37, 38, 42, 43]. On the other hand, applications of Pontryagin’s
maximum principle (PMP) can be used to find exact solutions to resource allocation
problems under some variations of the SIS and SEIR, for example in [17, 24, 46].
Unfortunately, this approach does not easily generalize to other compartmental models, as solving the two-point boundary value problem that results from the PMP
is intractable, in general, and its solution requires additional information about the
structure of the optimal controller. Furthermore, the application of classical optimal
control tools have found limited applicability in real epidemics since they cannot easily
incorporate real data.
A practical concern is whether it may be possible to design optimal control strategies based on mobility restrictionstaking in to account the impact on the economy. In
this paper, we propose a data-driven model of the spread of COVID-19 and propose a
data-driven optimal control problem that directly minimizes the number of predicted
cumulative deaths by implementing mobility resctrictions in the population. We use
real mobility data from Google [20] to learn a nonlinear mapping representing the
impact of human mobility on the parameters of a dynamical epidemic model and propose a nonlinear, nonconvex optimal control problem that can be solved using tools
from geometric programming [9].
Our model consists of an extension of the classic SEIR model, augmented with
compartments for asymptomatic and hospitalized agents. We assume that the rate at
which agents become infected in any given day is a function of the mobility trends in
the population for that same day, reflecting the fact that an increase in mobility leads
to more infections. We rely on data from Google’s COVID-19 Community Mobility
Reports [20] to capture the changes in visitation patterns to different Places of Interest
(POIs). This mobility data consists of several time series measuring visits to various
categories of places like Retail & Recreation, Grocery & Pharmacy, and Workplaces.
The dataset is organized into separate time series for all counties in the United States,
2

and measures visits to multiple categories of places against a benchmark established
in January and February of 2020. The key point is that a decision maker can enforce
restrictions on the number visits to each of these categories to reduce the spread of
the epidemic while incurring a cost to the economy. Our objective is then to design
an optimal strategy to contain the spread of COVID-19 while taking in to account
the economic cost associated with these mobility restrictions.
The structure of the paper is as follows. In Section 2 we introduce the notation
used as well as some necessary background in geometric programming. In Section 3
we discuss the specifics of our data-driven model, consisting of a mobility layer and an
epidemic layer. In Section 4 we discuss the details of our learning strategy to identify
the parameters of the model. In Section 5 we present our optimal control framework
and present simulations showing the effectiveness of our method. In Section 6 we
conclude and discuss possibilities for further research.
2. Background and Notation. Throughout this paper bold characters are
used to denote vectors and upper-case characters denote either matrices or compartments of the epidemic model. For the following definitions let x1 , . . . , xn ≥ 0 denote
n non-negative variables, and let x = (x1 , . . . , xn ).
Definition 2.1 (Monomial). A function f (x) is called a monomial if it has the
form
f (x) = cxa1 1 xa2 2 . . . xann ,
for a1 , . . . , an ∈ R and c > 0.

Definition 2.2 (Posynomial). A sum of one or more monomials is called a
posynomial, that is, a function of the form
f (x) =

k
X

a

a

ci x1 i,1 x2 i,2 . . . xani,n .

i=1

Since posynomials admit negative exponents but do not admit negative coefficients
they are not necessarily polynomials, and vice versa. We remark that posynomials
are closed under addition, multiplication, and positive scalar multiplication. This
implies that if the entries of two matrices A ∈ Rm×k and B ∈ Rk×n are posynomials
of the same variables, then so are the entries of their product AB, since [AB]i,j =
Pk
t=1 Ai,t Bt,j , which is a sum of products of posynomials. This result extends trivially
to the product of an arbitrary number of matrices with posynomial entries.

Definition 2.3 (Convex in log-scale). A function f (x) is convex in log-scale if
the function F (y) := log f (exp(y)) is convex (where the exponentiation is component
wise).
A careful application of Hölder’s inequality shows that posynomials are convex in
log-scale.
We solve the epidemic control problems presented herein using a quasi-convex
optimization framework called geometric programming [9, 10], which has found wide
applicability in fields such as communication systems [14], epidemiology [38], and
control [33], among others. A geometric program (GP) is a mathematical optimization
program of the form
minimize
x

f (x)
3

subject to qi (x) ≤ 1

hi (x) = 1

for i ∈ 1, . . . m

for i ∈ 1, . . . p,

where f (x), q1 (x), . . . , qm (x) are posynomials and h1 (x), . . . , hp (x) are monomials.
Due to the convexity in log-scale, one can reduce a GP to a convex program by means
of the logarithmic change of variables yi = log(xi ) and transforming the objective
and constraints with the logarithmic transformations F (y) = log f (exp(y)), Qi (y) =
log qi (exp(y)) and H(y) = log h(exp(y)) to obtain
minimize
y

F (y)

subject to Qi (y) ≤ 0

Hi (y) = 0

for i ∈ 1, . . . m
for i ∈ 1, . . . p,

which is a convex program that can be efficiently solved using, for example, primaldual interior-point methods; see [15] for more details.
3. Model. We now describe the epidemiological model under analysis. We consider a region with N individuals and propose a population model with homogeneous
mixing, i.e., every pair of individuals come in contact with a probability that depends
on aggregated mobility variables. Population models are commonly used in the absence of granular data on the network of social contacts in a region [32]. We assume
that each individual can visit POIs belonging to different categories 1, 2, . . . , K; let
m(t) = (x1 (t), m2 (t), . . . , mK (t)) denote a vector of human mobility variables capturing the volume of visits to each of those categories at a particular discrete time t (e.g.,
days). In particular, we use publicly available mobility data from Google’s COVID-19
Community Mobility Reports [20] which capture daily changes in visitation patterns
to public places, for example, Retail & recreation, Grocery & pharmacy, and Parks,
as well as time spent at work. For each category, Google reports the relative change
in visits compared to a baseline of mobility measured before the lockdown measures
took place. This baseline corresponds to the median daily visits to each category over
the period comprising January 3 through February 6, 2020.
Our model consists of two layers: a mobility layer and an epidemic layer.
The mobility layer captures the effect of human mobility on the spread of the
disease and influences the dynamics taking place on the epidemic layer. In the epidemic layer, we consider an extension of the classic SEIR epidemic model [11, 29]
which explicitly accounts for asymptomatic hosts and hospitalizations. Each of the
individuals in a region belongs to one of seven possible compartments described below. In this model, S(t) represents the number of individuals susceptible to becoming
infected at a discrete time t. In our optimal control problems, we will consider a
finite horizon T over which we can assume an almost constant number of susceptible
individuals; hence, we assume S(t) ≈ S0 for all 0 ≤ t ≤ T . The variable E(t) represents the number of individuals who have contracted the virus (exposed) but are in
an incubation period at time t. After the incubation period, agents can move to one
of the infectious compartments; I(t) represents the number of symptomatic individuals and A(t) represents the number of asymptomatic individuals. The asymptomatic
compartment is included since asymptomatic individuals play a crucial role in the
spread of COVID-19, with transmission rates that are different from symptomatic
individuals [5, 19]. Asymptomatic individuals eventually recover on their own and
move on to the recovered compartment, represented by the variable R(t). Symptomatic individuals can recover on their own, or their symptoms can worsen and they
4

subsequently require hospitalization, in which case they are moved into a hospitalized
compartment, represented by the variable H(t). Since hospital capacity is a principal
concern with the treatment of COVID-19, we include this compartment to constrain
the control problems described in Section 5. In particular, our mobility-based control
input will be constrained to prevent a hospital capacity overflow. Finally, agents that
are hospitalized may either recover and transition to the compartment represented by
R(t) or may die, and subsequently transition to the compartment represented by D(t).
With explicit data on the number of deaths in every region, we may train our model
to predict the population of this compartment. We make the simplifying assumption
that only individuals with severe symptoms are at a risk of dying and, hence, all of
them are eventually hospitalized.

A

ρEA
β(t)

S

ρEI

E

ρAR
ρIR

R

I
ρIH

(1 − αD )ρHR

H

αD ρHR

D

Fig. 1. Illustration of the epidemic model under consideration.

All parameters related to the dynamics of this model are summarized in Table 1.
Using these parameters, the discrete-time evolution of the number of individuals in
each compartment, illustrated in Figure 1, is given by:
(3.1)
(3.2)
(3.3)
(3.4)
(3.5)
(3.6)

E(t + 1) = (1 − ρEI − ρEA ) E (t) + S0 β (t) (γA A (t) + I (t)),
I(t + 1) = (1 − ρIR − ρIH ) I (t) + ρEI E (t) ,

A(t + 1) = (1 − ρAR ) A (t) + ρEA E (t) ,

H(t + 1) = (1 − ρHR − ρHD ) H (t) + ρIH I (t) ,

R(t + 1) = R(t) + ρIR I(t) + ρAR A(t) + (1 − αD )ρHR H(t).

D(t + 1) = D(t) + αD ρHR H(t)

In our model, we assume that susceptible individuals can transition into the exposed compartment when in contact with either Infected (symptomatic) or Asymptomatic individuals. We assume that the rate at which asymptomatic individuals
infect others is weighted by a constant (unknown) parameter γA . We also assume
that the portion of hospitalized individuals who die, relative to those that recover,
is equal to an unknown constant αD . In Section 4, we will introduce a methodology
to learn these (and other) unknown parameters in our model. As mentioned above,
this model is intended to solve optimal control problems over a finite time horizon
T over which we can assume that the number of susceptible individuals at any time
0 ≤ t ≤ T , S(t) is well approximated with a constant, hence, we set S(t) = S0 ; hence,
we omit the dynamical equation corresponding to S(t). Moreover, this assumption
linearizes the dynamics of the states. As we will see in Section 5, this linearization
5

ensures that the entries of the state vector at any given time are posynomials on the
parameter β(t). However, we incorporate a non-linear dependency of the parameter
β(t) on the mobility restriction variables, which we will use as our external control
variable, rendering the resulting model non-linear and multiplicative in the control
input.
Parameter
β(t)

γA
ρEI
ρEA
ρIR
ρIH
ρAR
ρHR
αD

Description
Rate at which susceptible individuals become infected due to
contacts with infectious individuals at time t; β(t) is a function
of the mobility variables m(t) at time t
Weight representing lower risk of infection when infectious
individuals are asymptomatic
Rate at which exposed individuals become symptomatic
Rate at which exposed individuals become asymptomatic
Rate at which symptomatic individuals recover on their own
Rate at which symptomatic individuals develop severe symptoms
and become hospitalized
Rate at which asymptomatic individuals recover on their own
Rate at which hospitalized individuals recover
Proportion of hospitalized individuals that die, relative to those
that recover
Table 1
Summary of parameters in epidemic model.

The mobility layer of our model incorporates the effects of non-pharmaceutical
interventions, such as social distancing and other forms of mobility restrictions, which
a decision maker may employ to curb the spread of the epidemic. By reducing human
mobility, a decision maker induces fewer contacts between susceptible and infected
individuals and, thus, reduces the risk of infection. In particular, we relate the infection rate β(t) to a time series m(t) of human mobility variables by means of an
unknown function f (·). We choose f to be a parametric function whose parameters
will be learned from data (described in detail in Subsection 4.1).
In order to employ non-pharmaceutical interventions, a decision maker designs
a mobility control strategy to set the human mobility variables m(t) for some finite
horizon t ∈ {0, . . . , T }. In mathematical terms, the decision maker designs an input
{u(t)}Tt=0 which affects future values of the mobility variables. For simplicity, we
assume an identity mapping between mobility and the input, so that m(t) = u(t),
and u(t) is in some set of admissible actions U.
Intuitively, lower values of u(t) correspond to more restrictions on human mobility. The decision maker may have fine-grained control over their control strategy,
for example by closing individual establishments, imposing occupancy limits, or restricting hours of operation, and as such we treat the individual components of the
control action uk (t) as continuous variables. Moreover, some categories may have
different admissible actions, e.g., it may not be possible to close down all pharmacies
but closing all gyms is reasonable. In mathematical terms, we will consider a set of
allowable control actions U is that it be described using posynomial inequalities and
monomial equalities.
Unfortunately, implementing mobility restrictions in this manner cannot be done
without incurring a financial loss. Closure of businesses causes economic losses, which
6

need to be taken into consideration when selecting an appropriate control strategy. In
particular, applying the temporal control strategy u(t) of mobility restrictions incurs
a cost C(u(t)) which we assume to be monotonically decreasing with u and convex
in log-scale, reflecting that the costs on society of restricting mobility are marginally
increasing.

f (m; ✓, ↵, b) =
Retail &

..
.

..
.

Global parameters
k
✓k m↵
k +b

k=1

m1 ✓1 , ↵1

Recreation

K
X

⇢EA

⇢EI

A

⇢IR

⇢HR
↵D

A
I

<latexit sha1_base64="NyXNuuPTxs7o2ZWgYGPxEg1VeTo=">AAAB7XicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0lU0GPBS48V7Ae0oWw223btJht2J4US+h+8eFDEq//Hm//GbZuDtj4YeLw3w8y8IJHCoOt+O4WNza3tneJuaW//4PCofHzSMirVjDeZkkp3Amq4FDFvokDJO4nmNAokbwfj+7nfnnBthIofcZpwP6LDWAwEo2ilVm8SKjT9csWtuguQdeLlpAI5Gv3yVy9ULI14jExSY7qem6CfUY2CST4r9VLDE8rGdMi7lsY04sbPFtfOyIVVQjJQ2laMZKH+nshoZMw0CmxnRHFkVr25+J/XTXFw52ciTlLkMVsuGqSSoCLz10koNGcop5ZQpoW9lbAR1ZShDahkQ/BWX14nrauqd131Hm4qtXoeRxHO4BwuwYNbqEEdGtAEBk/wDK/w5ijnxXl3PpatBSefOYU/cD5/AM45j0s=</latexit>

b
mK

⇢IH

f (·)

<latexit sha1_base64="NyXNuuPTxs7o2ZWgYGPxEg1VeTo=">AAAB7XicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0lU0GPBS48V7Ae0oWw223btJht2J4US+h+8eFDEq//Hm//GbZuDtj4YeLw3w8y8IJHCoOt+O4WNza3tneJuaW//4PCofHzSMirVjDeZkkp3Amq4FDFvokDJO4nmNAokbwfj+7nfnnBthIofcZpwP6LDWAwEo2ilVm8SKjT9csWtuguQdeLlpAI5Gv3yVy9ULI14jExSY7qem6CfUY2CST4r9VLDE8rGdMi7lsY04sbPFtfOyIVVQjJQ2laMZKH+nshoZMw0CmxnRHFkVr25+J/XTXFw52ciTlLkMVsuGqSSoCLz10koNGcop5ZQpoW9lbAR1ZShDahkQ/BWX14nrauqd131Hm4qtXoeRxHO4BwuwYNbqEEdGtAEBk/wDK/w5ijnxXl3PpatBSefOYU/cD5/AM45j0s=</latexit>

Workplaces

⇢AR

✓K , ↵ K

S0

..
.

SEIRD
model

i
Xpredicted

Output (1 ⇥ T )

<latexit sha1_base64="NyXNuuPTxs7o2ZWgYGPxEg1VeTo=">AAAB7XicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0lU0GPBS48V7Ae0oWw223btJht2J4US+h+8eFDEq//Hm//GbZuDtj4YeLw3w8y8IJHCoOt+O4WNza3tneJuaW//4PCofHzSMirVjDeZkkp3Amq4FDFvokDJO4nmNAokbwfj+7nfnnBthIofcZpwP6LDWAwEo2ilVm8SKjT9csWtuguQdeLlpAI5Gv3yVy9ULI14jExSY7qem6CfUY2CST4r9VLDE8rGdMi7lsY04sbPFtfOyIVVQjJQ2laMZKH+nshoZMw0CmxnRHFkVr25+J/XTXFw52ciTlLkMVsuGqSSoCLz10koNGcop5ZQpoW9lbAR1ZShDahkQ/BWX14nrauqd131Hm4qtXoeRxHO4BwuwYNbqEEdGtAEBk/wDK/w5ijnxXl3PpatBSefOYU/cD5/AM45j0s=</latexit>

R0
Initial conditions

Input (K ⇥ T )

Fig. 2. The learning pipeline for a given region. Global parameters, learned using all available
data, are shown in magenta; initial conditions, learned for each region, are shown in blue; mobility
mapping parameters, again different across regions, are shown in red.

4. Learning the parameters from data. Several recent epidemic prediction
methods opt to set some or all of the parameters in their models to estimations from
the medical and virology literature (e.g. [1, 2, 7, 8, 13]). However, these parameters often have wide confidence intervals and are commonly inferred from statistical
models that do not take in to account the effects of social distancing and hospital
capacity [3]. In contrast to these approaches, our model is entirely data-driven in
that all parameters (including initial conditions) used are learned directly from data.
In particular, we employ a multitask learning approach [12] by leveraging both data
on the number of deaths across a set of regions, and mobility data describing how
often individuals in a region visit different points of interest. Indeed, certain parameters of the epidemic model are intrinsic to the disease; hence, they do not depend
on the geographical location from which data is collected. As such, when calibrating this model to a given region, we can benefit from the data from other regions
by employing a multitask learning framework, providing better parameter estimates
and avoiding overfitting. Towards this goal, we pool data from multiple regions (e.g.,
US counties) and minimize a global cost function in which the global parameters are
shared across regions but the mobility parameters and initial conditions are specific
to each region. The learning pipeline from data to predictions for a single region is
shown in Figure 2. We fit our models using publicly available mobility data from
Google’s COVID-19 Community Mobility Reports [20] which captures daily changes
in visitation patterns to public places, for example, Retail & Recreation, Grocery &
Pharmacy, and Parks, as well as time spent at Workplaces. This dataset is organized
as different time series for six different categories. For each category, Google reports
the relative change in visits compared to a baseline of mobility measured before the
lockdown measures took place. This baseline corresponds to the median daily visits
to each category over the period comprising January 3 through February 6, 2020.
Furthermore, we use public data from The New York Times, based on reports from
7

state and local health agencies [40], consisting of daily and cumulative caseloads and
deaths attributed to COVID-19 in The United States. To account for inconsistencies
and lags in reporting, we compute a 7-day rolling average on the original time series
for the calibration of our model.
As mentioned above, there are two layers to our model, namely (1) the mobility
layer, which is a mapping from mobility data to the infection rate β(t) (described in
subsection 4.1) and (2) the epidemic layer, which describes the dynamics of the disease
itself (discussed in subsection 4.2). Since parameters such as the latency period, ratio
of infected individuals who develop symptoms, and case fatality ratio are intrinsic to
the disease and should not vary greatly based on the geographical area being studied,
we group these together across regions as global parameters and learn them jointly
with all the available data. However, the mapping from mobility data to the infection
rate and initial conditions of the regional epidemic are dependent on the locality, and
thus they are learned using only the data from their region.
4.1. The mobility layer. To learn the function f : m 7→ β from mobility data
to the infection rate, we must first select an appropriate class of functions for such a
mapping. Although we could use any parametric familt of functions, such as neural
networks, to estimate f , not all choices are tractable. In particular, neural networks
may provide great prediction performance but would render an intractable control
problem. In order to obtain a tractable control problem, we chose to model the
function f using a parametric posynomial function [9]. As we will show in Section 5,
this choice allows us to use geometric programming to efficiently solve several optimal
control problems of interest. Thus, we model f in a parametric way as
(4.1)

f (m; θ, α, b) =

K
X

k
θk mα
k + b.

k=1

From a practical standpoint, this posynomial approximation is justified because β
can be viewed as the product of the contact rate (the expected number of contacts
an individual has with others) and the transmission risk, which is constant over time.
Moreover, the number of contacts within a category should exponentially increase
with the number of visits to points of interest in that category. Since the mobility
data is stratified across K different categories, we allow the parameters to be different
across the categories. Thus, in the parametric function f (m; θ, α, b) the probability
of transmission is captured by θ = (θ1 , . . . , θK ) ∈ RK
≥0 , the exponential growth of
infectivity is captured by α = (α1 , . . . , αK ) ∈ RK , and the bias term b accounts for
potentially unmodeled infections.
Since susceptible individuals may become infected by either symptomatic or
asymptomatic individuals, the mobility mapping f is incorporated into the epidemic
layer in two terms, as seen in (3.1). Firstly, it is used to model new infections from
symptomatic individuals via the term β(m(t))S0 I(t); secondly, we include a weighting
term γA in the term γA β(m(t))S0 A(t) to model the rate of new infections from asymptomatic infectious individuals. Thus, altogether we denote the set of parameters corresponding to the mobility mapping function for region i as Ψimobility := {θ, α, b, γA }.
4.2. The epidemic layer. Our model is a latent-space model; hence, the states
are not fully observable. Following common practice with these models, we treat the
unobserved initial conditions as unknown parameters to be identified from the data.
Since the dynamical trajectories of the epidemic are different across regions (e.g., US
counties), for each region i we learn a set of initial conditions Ψi0 := {S0i , . . . , R0i }.
8

As mentioned previously, we follow a multitask learning approach and, thus, the
remaining global parameters, which we assume to be intrinsic to the disease, are shared
across all regions and learned collectively using data available from all regions. The
set of global parameters is denoted by Ψglobal := {ρEA , ρEI , ρAR , ρIH , ρIR , ρHR , αD },
which includes all clinical parameters that depend on the nature of the virus alone
(i.e., they are not influenced by social mobility).

(a) Incident deaths in Baltimore County, MD

(b) Incident deaths in Montgomery County, PA

(c) Incident deaths in Philadelphia County, PA

(d) Cumulative deaths in Baltimore County, MD

(e) Cumulative deaths in Montgomery County, PA

(f) Cumulative deaths
Philadelphia County, PA

in

Fig. 3. Example of predicted deaths for several US counties, trained on 60 days of mobility and
death count data. Rolling 7-day averages of real data are shown in blue; predictions are shown in
orange. The area in white denotes training data, and the area in red denotes test data.

4.3. Simulated predictions for Philadelphia and surrounding counties.
In order to validate the predictive accuracy of our data-driven model, we conducted
a case study using counties from the Delaware Valley metropolitan statistical area
(commonly known as the Philadelphia metropolitan area). Using county-level data,
we learned both the local mobility mapping functions and initial conditions, as well as
the global clinical parameters of the epidemic. Due to the known inconsistencies and
lags in reporting of cases and deaths, we use the rolling 7-day average of cumulative
deaths for both training and prediction. Formally, if we have training data for M
counties over T days, the training loss for the set of parameters Ψ := Ψglobal ∪M
i=1
i
Ψimobility ∪M
i=1 Ψ0 is the following mean-squared error loss function:
!2
M T
1 X X X i (t) X̂ i (t; Ψ)
(4.2)
`train (Ψ) =
−
,
M T i=1 t=1
Ni
Ni

where Ni is the population of region i, X i (t) is the measured rolling 7-day average of
cumulative deaths on day t for region i, and X̂ i (t; Ψ) is the predicted value for the
same region for a set of parameters Ψ. We normalize the number of deaths by the
population in each county to avoid biasing our predictions towards counties with a
larger population.
9

Our model was trained by computing gradients of the loss function `train with
respect to all parameters in Ψ via the automatic differentiation package autograd
[28] and running stochastic gradient descent using adam [25] over several independent
trials using different initial guesses to account for the non-convexity of the training
problem. Global clinical parameters were initialized by using plausible values from the
medical literature [16, 30, 26, 22, 7, 39, 36, 45], while local parameters are initialized
randomly in each trial. Different counties are split across random batches, allowing
the global parameters (trained using all data in our multitask approach) to converge
more quickly, which in turn allows the local parameters to converge to values which
fit more closely with the global parameters. From these trials, we select the set of
parameters with lowest testing error, and present the predictions using these chosen
parameters in Figure 3.
5. Optimal control using geometric programming. Traditional optimal
control techniques are not directly applicable to compartmental epidemic models for
a number of reasons. First, epidemic models are typically nonlinear and the effect
of non-pharmaceutical interventions is not additive, but multiplicative. Therefore,
standard techniques such as LQR cannot be readily employed. Furthermore, a direct
application of Pontryagin’s Maximum Principle results in a high-dimensional twopoint boundary value problem for which numerical methods have no convergence
guarantees and present scalability issues. Due to the modeling choices proposed in
this paper, we obtain a mobility-driven epidemic dynamics amenable to solve certain
optimal control problems using tools from geometric programming [9]. In particular,
we can solve the data-driven optimal control problems aiming to minimize the final
number of deaths while respecting budget constraints on the economic costs associated
with implementing mobility restrictions, as well as avoiding hospital overflows, with
guarantees of global optimality.
We start our analysis by considering the minimization of the final number of
deaths. For completeness in our analysis,we allow the inclusion of a daily discount
factor γD and a terminal cost γ∞ on the number of deaths at the end of the time
horizon T . Hence, the decision maker aims to minimize the following objective function:
(5.1)

J :=

T
−1
X

t
γD
D(t) + γ∞ D(T ).

t=1

The discount factor γD ∈ (0, 1) is motivated by the uncertainty of deaths in the
future which might be prevented by interventions not available in the present day.
For example, the probability that a vaccine is developed in the future increases as
time passes. In particular, 1 − γD can be considered the probability of a vaccine
being created on each day in the future, so the probability of no vaccine being widely
available by day t is (γD )t and, hence, deaths predicted at day t are only accounted for
if there is not a vaccine that could prevent them. The terminal cost γ∞ illustrates the
desire to keep the number of deaths low beyond the time horizon in consideration. For
example, let us assume that beyond the time horizon T the epidemic has been curbed
and the number of new daily deaths falls below D(T ). In the worst case scenario we
would have D(t) = D(T ) for t ≥ T , hence,
∞
X

(γD )t D(t) = D(T )

t=T

10

T
γD
.
1 − γD

T
Defining γ∞ := γD
/(1 − γD ), the discounted number of deaths beyond T is given by
the terminal cost γ∞ D(T ).
Given that the infection rate β(t) depends on mobility, we assume that a decision
maker can restrict mobility dynamically to curb the number of deaths by designing
a mobility strategy u(t) so that β(t) = f (u(t)). Furthermore, we assume that u(t) is
constrained to be within a set U reflecting that essential businesses cannot be severely
restricted and that some mobility restrictions are only partially effective.
These mobility restrictions incur a cost which could be measured in terms of a
pecuniary cost to the economy, absolute number of visits lost by businesses, or impact
on the utility of citizens. In our framework, we quantify the economic cost of imposing
a mobility control strategy u(t) using a cost function Ct (u(t)) which, in general, can
be time-varying; hence, for example, we can use different costs for mobility restrictions
on workdays and weekends. We choose to model Ct (u(t)) as a posynomial on u(t),
since this is amenable to a geometric programming approach. We investigate the
problem of choosing an optimal mobility control strategy u? (t) that minimizes the
number
PT −1of cumulative deaths while keeping the total cost of the intervention, given
by t=0 Ct (u(t)), below a pre-specified budget B. As we will show, this problem can
be formulated as a geometric program; this stems from the fact that the states H(t)
and D(t) can be expressed as posynomial functions of the mobility control variables
u(t), as shown in the following lemma.

Lemma 5.1. The functions H(t) and D(t), representing the number of hospitalized individuals and deaths at time t, are posynomials on the entries of u(t) for
t = 0, 1, . . . , T .
Proof. See Appendix A.
Since a positively weighted sum of posynomials is also a posynomial, we obtain
our main result below.
Theorem 5.2. The optimal mobility control strategy u? (t) that minimizes the
function J in (5.1) while respecting the economic budget B and a limit on hospitalizations τH can be obtained by solving the following geometric program:
minimize

u(0),...,u(T −1)

(5.2)

subject to

T
−1
X

t
γD
D(t) + γ∞ D(T )

t=1

T
−1
X
t=0

Ct (u(t)) ≤ B

H(t) ≤ τH ,

u(t) ∈ U,

t = 1, . . . , T
t = 0, . . . , T − 1

where Ct (u(t)) is a posynomial cost function for all t, and the set of admissible control
actions U is described by posynomial inequalities and monomial equalities.

The choice of the cost function and the budget B is up to the decision maker
and, in practice, may be difficult to choose. In the presence of available economic
data, such a cost function may be computed via posynomial fitting techniques [9], or
directly provided by a decision maker. In any case, we propose a principled approach
to choosing a suitable B independently of the choice of cost function Ct (u(t)). This
is achieved by solving an auxiliary optimal control problem that aims to find the
minimum budget required to keep the number of hospitalized individuals H(t) below
a threshold τH . This auxiliary optimal control problem is also a geometric program
11

and, hence, can be solved efficiently; this fact is stated in Theorem 5.3 and the proof
follows directly from Lemma 5.1.
Theorem 5.3. The minimal budget required to keep hospitalizations below a given
threshold τH is given by
B? =

(5.3)

T
−1
X

Ct (u? (t)),

t=0

?

where u is the solution to the program
minimize

(5.4)

u(0),...,u(T −1)

subject to

T
−1
X

Ct (u(t))

t=0

H(t) ≤ τH ,

u(t) ∈ U,

t = 1, . . . , T
t = 0, . . . , T − 1

where Ct (u(t)) is a posynomial cost function for all t, and the set of admissible control
actions U is described by posynomial inequalities and monomial equalities, which is a
geometric program.
The budget B ? obtained from Theorem 5.3 can be seen as a conservative cost
which only guarantees that hospital operations remain within capacity, avoiding overflow. The decision maker should then use a budget B ≥ B ? in Theorem 5.2 to obtain
a less conservative control input u(t).

(a) Value of minimal-cost control action u? (t), fixed per
week.

(b) Actuation cost Ct (u? (t))
for control action u? (t), fixed
per week.

(c) Number of hospitalized individuals H(t); available hospital bed threshold τH shown as
the dashed red line.

Fig. 4. Minimal-cost control strategy u? (t) for Philadelphia County, PA, obtained by solving
the geometric program (5.4), fixing the control action to change only at the beginning of each week.
The control actions for Retail & Recreation and Workplaces are similar in Figure (a) and, hence,
are overlaid. Parameters of the models used herein were learned as described in Subsection 4.3. We
obtain the budget B? to use in geometric program (5.2) by taking the total cost of the minimal-cost
P −1
?
control strategy, i.e., B? = T
t=0 Ct (u (t)).

5.1. Control simulations. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our control approach with a case study for the counties in the greater Philadelphia area, illustrated
in Figure 4 and Figure 5. The parameters of our compartmental model as well as
the mobility mapping β(u(t)) are learned from data as described in Subsection 4.3
using the proposed multitask learning framework. Our models are trained using data
from July 1st to August 31st, 2020, and tested from September 1st-21st, 2020. In
12

(a) Value of optimal minimaldeath control action u? (t),
fixed per week.

(b) Actuation cost C(u? (t))
with control action u? (t), fixed
per week; average daily budget
B? /T shown dashed in red.

(c) Number of cumulative
deaths D(t); baseline amount
from true mobility data m(t)
shown in red.

Fig. 5. Optimal minimal-death control strategy u? (t) for Philadelphia County, PA, obtained by
solving the minimal-death GP (5.2), fixing the control action to change only at the beginning of each
week from September 1st-21st, 2020. The control actions for Retail & Recreation and Workplaces
are similar in Figure (a) and, hence, are overlaid. In Figure (c) we compare the cumulative deaths
predicted using the optimal control strategy u? (t) (shown in blue) with the cumulative deaths predicted
based on the true mobility data m(t) as a baseline (shown in red). Parameters of the models used
herein were learned as described in subsection 4.3, with the budget B? taken from the solution to the
minimal-cost GP (5.2).

particular, in Figure 5c we illustrate the number of cumulative deaths predicted using
the optimal control strategy u? (t) as compared to the number of cumulative deaths
predicted based on the true mobility data m(t) from September 1st-21st in Philadelphia.
Since the decision maker may tune the different categories of mobility variables
independently, each of the components k = 1, . . . , K of the mobility control action
u(t) may vary between a lower bound uk > 0 (representing full lockdown) and an
upper bound uk (representing no restrictions at all), leading to the set of admissible
control actions actions U = {u ∈ RK : uk ∈ [uk , uk ]}, which can be simply described
by posynomial inequalities. In our simulations, we select the values uk and uk independently for each category based on the mobility data used in our multitask learning
framework. Furthermore, as a realistic constraint we only allow the mobility control
strategy to vary on a weekly basis, since rapid changes in mobility levels may not be
feasible to enforce across a large region (e.g., a county).
In practice the cost function Ct (u(t)) may be supplied by a decision maker, or
may be found via posynomial fitting [9] using economic data from a region. In the
absence of such data, we choose a time-invariant cost function C(u(t)) that satisfies
the requirements of being convex in log-scale and decreasing, given by
(5.5)

C(u(t)) =

K
X

k=1

ck

uk (t)−1 − u−1
k
−1 ,
u−1
−
u
k
k

where c = (c1 , . . . , cK ) is a relative cost weighting of the mobility categories. This
relative cost could reflect that visits lost to, for example, healthcarePfacilities are more
T −1
costly than visits lost to retail venues. Notice that the inequality t=0 C(u(t)) ≤ B
−1
PT −1 PK ck uk (t)−1
PK
uk
is equivalent to t=0
k=1 u−1 −u−1 ; since the left-hand side
k=1 u−1 −u−1 ≤ B +
k

k

k

k

of the inequality is a posynomial in the entries of u(t) and the right-hand side is
constant, it can be readily handled by a geometric program. Similarly, minimizing
13

PT −1
t=0

C(u(t)) is equivalent to minimizing

PT −1 PK
t=0

ck uk (t)−1
k=1 u−1 −u−1 ,
k
k

which is again a

posynomial function amenable to geometric programming.

6. Conclusion and Future Work. In this paper we present a data-driven
learning and optimal control framework that aims to bridge the gap between optimal
control theory of epidemic models and applicable data-driven models for analyzing the
spread of COVID-19. To identify the parameters of our model, we propose a multitask
learning approach that leverages mobility and epidemic data from multiple regions to
capture how daily changes in mobility patterns affect the spread of the disease, and to
accurately predict the resulting daily and cumulative deaths. Using this data-driven
model we present an optimal control framework using geometric programming to
efficiently design non-pharmaceutical interventions to limit the spread of the epidemic
while obeying a budget constraint on the economic loss incurred. Furthermore, we
present a principled method for determining such a budget based on eliminating excess
deaths due to over-utilization of hospital resources. We validate both our model and
our control framework in a case study on the greater Philadelphia area.
In the future, this work could be extended to accommodate for robustness considerations as well as stochastic transitions in the epidemic layer, which introduce the
additional challenge of expressing chance constraints as posynomial functions. The
success of geometric programming in our work comes from expressing states of the
system as posynomials on the mobility variables, allowing for the potential extension
to models with more sophisticated mappings from human-mobility to epidemic dynamics. For example, generalized geometric programming admits functions that are
max-monomials or posynomials with fractional exponents [9], which opens the door
to modeling epidemic dynamics and human-mobility using ReLU neural networks or
posynomial approximations to arbitrary functions. Furthermore, since geometric programs can be solved efficiently, our approach could be applied to models with higher
dimensionality; for example, networked metapopulation models which can make use
of more granular datasets.
Appendix A. Proof of Lemma 5.1. We can rewrite equations (3.1)-(3.4) in
|
matrix form by defining a state vector y(t) = [E (t) , I (t) , A (t) , H (t)] to obtain the
dynamics


1 − ρEI − ρEA
S0 β (u(t))
γA S0 β (u(t))
0


ρEI
1 − ρIR − ρIH
0
0
y (t)
y(t + 1) = 


ρEA
0
1 − ρAR
0
0
ρIH
0
1 − ρHR − ρHD
(A.1)

=: Mt y(t).

It follows that



|
t−2
t
H (t) = [0, 0, 0, 1] Mt−1 · · · M1 M0 [E (0) , I (0) , A (0) , H (0)] = fH
{u (k)}k=0 .

We assume that ρEI < 1, ρIR + ρIH < 1, ρAR < 1, and ρHR + ρHD < 1, which is
reasonable because these numbers capture the fraction of agents in each compartment
that transition to other compartments, which must be less than one for the model to
be meaningful. Recalling that the mobility mapping β(u(t)) is a posynomial, each of
the matrices Mt haveposynomialentries on β(u(t)), and thus, on u(t); thus, it follows
t−2

t
that the function fH
{u (k)}k=0 is also a posynomial on u(t) as it is the product of

matrices with entries that are posynomials on u(t). Moreover, from (3.6) we can see
14

that D(t) is simply a sum of positive constants and positive scalar multiples of H(t)
and is also a posynomial.
REFERENCES
[1] Massimo A. Achterberg, Bastian Prasse, Long Ma, Stojan Trajanovski, Maksim Kitsak, and
Piet Van Mieghem. Comparing the accuracy of several network-based COVID-19 prediction
algorithms. International Journal of Forecasting, 2020.
[2] Alberto Aleta, David Martı́n-Corral, Ana Pastore y Piontti, Marco Ajelli, Maria Litvinova,
Matteo Chinazzi, Natalie E. Dean, M. Elizabeth Halloran, Ira M. Longini Jr, Stefano
Merler, et al. Modelling the impact of testing, contact tracing and household quarantine
on second waves of COVID-19. Nature Human Behaviour, 4(9):964–971, 2020.
[3] Sheikh Taslim Ali, Lin Wang, Eric H. Y. Lau, Xiao-Ke Xu, Zhanwei Du, Ye Wu, Gabriel M.
Leung, and Benjamin J. Cowling. Serial interval of SARS-CoV-2 was shortened over time
by nonpharmaceutical interventions. Science, 369(6507):1106–1109, 2020.
[4] Stay at-home orders across the country. COVID-19 community mobility reports. Available at https://www.nbcnews.com/health/health-news/here-are-stay-home-orders-acrosscountry-n1168736, 2020.
[5] Yan Bai, Lingsheng Yao, Tao Wei, Fei Tian, Dong-Yan Jin, Lijuan Chen, and Meiyun Wang.
Presumed asymptomatic carrier transmission of covid-19. Jama, 323(14):1406–1407, 2020.
[6] Duygu Balcan, Bruno Gonçalves, Hao Hu, José J Ramasco, Vittoria Colizza, and Alessandro
Vespignani. Modeling the spatial spread of infectious diseases: The global epidemic and
mobility computational model. Journal of computational science, 1(3):132–145, 2010.
[7] Mohamed Aziz Bhouri, Francisco Sahli Costabal, Hanwen Wang, Kevin Linka, Mathias Peirlinck, Ellen Kuhl, and Paris Perdikaris. COVID-19 dynamics across the US: A deep learning
study of human mobility and social behavior. medRxiv, 2020.
[8] John R. Birge, Ozan Candogan, and Yiding Feng. Controlling epidemic spread: Reducing
economic losses with targeted closures. University of Chicago, Becker Friedman Institute
for Economics Working Paper No. 2020-57., 2020.
[9] Stephen Boyd, Seung-Jean Kim, Lieven Vandenberghe, and Arash Hassibi. A tutorial on
geometric programming. Optimization and engineering, 8(1):67, 2007.
[10] Stephen Boyd and Lieven Vandenberghe. Convex optimization. Cambridge university press,
2004.
[11] Fred Brauer, Carlos Castillo-Chavez, and Zhilan Feng. Mathematical models in epidemiology.
Springer, 2019.
[12] Rich Caruana. Multitask learning. Machine learning, 28(1):41–75, 1997.
[13] Serina Y. Chang, Emma Pierson, Pang Wei Koh, Jaline Gerardin, Beth Redbird, David Grusky,
and Jure Leskovec. Mobility network modeling explains higher SARS-CoV-2 infection rates
among disadvantaged groups and informs reopening strategies. medRxiv, 2020.
[14] Mung Chiang. Geometric programming for communication systems. Now Publishers Inc, 2005.
[15] Joachim Dahl and Erling D. Andersen. A primal-dual interior-point algorithm for nonsymmetric
exponential-cone optimization. Optimization Online, 2019.
[16] Michael Day. COVID-19: four fifths of cases are asymptomatic, China figures indicate, 2020.
[17] Soheil Eshghi, M. H. R. Khouzani, Saswati Sarkar, and Santosh S. Venkatesh. Optimal patching
in clustered epidemics of malware. IEEE Trans. Network, 24(1):283–298, 2015.
[18] Neil Ferguson, Daniel Laydon, Gemma Nedjati Gilani, Natsuko Imai, Kylie Ainslie, Marc
Baguelin, Sangeeta Bhatia, Adhiratha Boonyasiri, ZULMA Cucunuba Perez, Gina CuomoDannenburg, et al. Report 9: Impact of non-pharmaceutical interventions (NPIs) to reduce
COVID-19 mortality and healthcare demand. 2020.
[19] Monica Gandhi, Deborah S. Yokoe, and Diane V. Havlir. Asymptomatic transmission, the
Achilles’ heel of current strategies to control covid-19, 2020.
[20] Google.
Covid-19
community
mobility
reports.
Available
at
https://google.com/covid19/mobility/. Accessed: 10-31-2020.
[21] Mikhail Hayhoe, Fady Alajaji, and Bahman Gharesifard. A Polya contagion model for networks.
IEEE Transactions on Control of Network Systems, 5(4):1998–2010, 2018.
[22] Xi He, Eric H. Y. Lau, Peng Wu, Xilong Deng, Jian Wang, Xinxin Hao, Yiu Chung Lau,
Jessica Y. Wong, Yujuan Guan, Xinghua Tan, et al. Temporal dynamics in viral shedding
and transmissibility of COVID-19. Nature medicine, 26(5):672–675, 2020.
[23] Juliana Kaplan and Lauren Frias. Our ongoing list of how countries are reopening, and which
ones remain under lockdown. BUSINESS INSIDER, Aug 2020.
[24] M. H. R. Khouzani, Santosh S. Venkatesh, and Saswati Sarkar. Market-based control of epi15

[25]
[26]

[27]

[28]
[29]
[30]

[31]

[32]

[33]
[34]
[35]
[36]
[37]

[38]

[39]

[40]

[41]

[42]
[43]

[44]

[45]

[46]

demics. In 2011 49th Annual Allerton Conference on Communication, Control, and Computing (Allerton), pages 314–320. IEEE, 2011.
Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.
Stephen A. Lauer, Kyra H. Grantz, Qifang Bi, Forrest K. Jones, Qulu Zheng, Hannah R.
Meredith, Andrew S. Azman, Nicholas G. Reich, and Justin Lessler. The incubation period
of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) from publicly reported confirmed cases: estimation
and application. Annals of internal medicine, 172(9):577–582, 2020.
Lars Lorch, William Trouleau, Stratis Tsirtsis, Aron Szanto, Bernhard Schölkopf, and Manuel
Gomez-Rodriguez. A spatiotemporal epidemic model to quantify the effects of contact
tracing, testing, and containment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.07641, 2020.
Dougal Maclaurin, David Duvenaud, and Ryan P. Adams. Autograd: Effortless gradients in
NumPy. In ICML 2015 AutoML Workshop, volume 238, page 5, 2015.
Maia Martcheva. An introduction to mathematical epidemiology, volume 61. Springer, 2015.
Hiroshi Nishiura, Tetsuro Kobayashi, Takeshi Miyama, Ayako Suzuki, Sung-mok Jung, Katsuma Hayashi, Ryo Kinoshita, Yichi Yang, Baoyin Yuan, Andrei R. Akhmetzhanov, et al.
Estimation of the asymptomatic ratio of novel coronavirus infections (COVID-19). International journal of infectious diseases, 94:154, 2020.
Cameron Nowzari, Victor M. Preciado, and George J. Pappas. Optimal resource allocation for
control of networked epidemic models. IEEE Transactions on Control of Network Systems,
4(2):159–169, 2015.
Cameron Nowzari, Victor M. Preciado, and George J. Pappas. Analysis and control of epidemics: A survey of spreading processes on complex networks. IEEE Control Systems
Magazine, 36(1):26–46, 2016.
Masaki Ogura, Masako Kishida, and James Lam. Geometric programming for optimal positive
linear systems. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, 2019.
World Health Organization. Novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV): Situation report 1. Technical
documents, World Health Organization, 2020-01-20.
World Health Organization. Novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV): Weekly epidemiological update,
21 September 2020. Technical documents, World Health Organization, 2020-09-20.
Sen Pei, Sasikiran Kandula, and Jeffrey Shaman. Differential effects of intervention timing on
COVID-19 spread in the united states. medRxiv, 2020.
Victor M. Preciado, Michael Zargham, Chinwendu Enyioha, Ali Jadbabaie, and George J.
Pappas. Optimal vaccine allocation to control epidemic outbreaks in arbitrary networks.
In 52nd IEEE conference on decision and control, pages 7486–7491. IEEE, 2013.
Victor M. Preciado, Michael Zargham, Chinwendu Enyioha, Ali Jadbabaie, and George J.
Pappas. Optimal resource allocation for network protection against spreading processes.
IEEE Transactions on Control of Network Systems, 1(1):99–108, 2014.
Hazhir Rahmandad, Tse Yang Lim, and John Sterman. Estimating COVID-19 under-reporting
across 86 nations: implications for projections and control. Available at SSRN 3635047,
2020.
New York Times.
Coronavirus (COVID-19) data in the united states.
Available at
https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2020/us/coronavirus-us-cases.html. Accessed: 1031-2020.
Wouter Van den Broeck, Corrado Gioannini, Bruno Gonçalves, Marco Quaggiotto, Vittoria
Colizza, and Alessandro Vespignani. The GLEaMviz computational tool, a publicly available software to explore realistic epidemic spreading scenarios at the global scale. BMC
infectious diseases, 11(1):37, 2011.
Piet Van Mieghem, Jasmina Omic, and Robert Kooij. Virus spread in networks. IEEE/ACM
Transactions on Networking (TON), 17(1):1–14, 2009.
Yang Wang, Deepayan Chakrabarti, Chenxi Wang, and Christos Faloutsos. Epidemic spreading
in real networks: An eigenvalue viewpoint. In 22nd International Symposium on Reliable
Distributed Systems, 2003. Proceedings., pages 25–34. IEEE, 2003.
Duncan J Watts, Roby Muhamad, Daniel C Medina, and Peter S Dodds. Multiscale, resurgent
epidemics in a hierarchical metapopulation model. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences, 102(32):11157–11162, 2005.
Roman Woelfel, Victor Max Corman, Wolfgang Guggemos, Michael Seilmaier, Sabine Zange,
Marcel A Mueller, Daniela Niemeyer, Patrick Vollmar, Camilla Rothe, Michael Hoelscher,
et al. Clinical presentation and virological assessment of hospitalized cases of coronavirus
disease 2019 in a travel-associated transmission cluster. MedRxiv, 2020.
Xiefei Yan and Yun Zou. Optimal and sub-optimal quarantine and isolation control in sars
epidemics. Mathematical and Computer Modelling, 47(1-2):235–245, 2008.
16

