1

Mobile Human Ad Hoc Networks: A
Communication Engineering Viewpoint on
Interhuman Airborne Pathogen Transmission

arXiv:2011.00884v1 [eess.SP] 2 Nov 2020

Fatih Gulec, Baris Atakan

Abstract—Pathogens such as viruses and bacteria play a vital
role in human life, since they cause infectious diseases which
can lead to epidemics. Recent coronavirus disease 2019 epidemic
has shown that taking effective prevention measures such as
wearing masks are important to reduce the human deaths and
side effects of the epidemic. It is therefore requisite to accurately
model the spread of infectious diseases whose one of the most
crucial routes of transmission is airborne transmission. The
transmission models in the literature are proposed independently
from each other, at different scales and by the researchers
from various disciplines. Thus, there is a need to merge all
these research attempts. To this end, we propose a communication engineering approach that melts different disciplines
such as epidemiology, biology, medicine, and fluid dynamics in
the same pot to model airborne pathogen transmission among
humans. In this approach, we introduce the concept of mobile
human ad hoc networks (MoHANETs). This concept exploits the
similarity of airborne transmission-driven human groups with
mobile ad hoc networks and uses molecular communication as
the enabling paradigm. The aim of this article is to present
a unified framework using communication engineering, and to
highlight future research directions for modeling the spread of
infectious diseases among humans through airborne pathogen
transmission. In this article, we first review the airborne pathogen
transmission mechanisms. Then, the MoHANET is given with a
layered structure. In these layers, the infectious human emitting
pathogen-laden droplets through air and the exposed human to
these droplets are considered as the transmitter and receiver, respectively. Moreover, the experimental methods for the proposed
approach are reviewed and discussed.

I. I NTRODUCTION
Throughout the history, epidemics caused by infectious
diseases have been a major threat to human life. Epidemic
diseases such as black plague, smallpox, Spanish flu and recent
coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) gave rise to millions
of human deaths. In addition, epidemics can induce mental
disorders in humans and recessions in the world economy due
to prevention and control measures such as lockdown. Owing
to these facts, it is essential to understand and accurately model
the spread of infectious diseases among humans.
The interhuman spread of infectious diseases occur via
direct contact and airborne transmission1 where pathogens are
transferred from an infectious human to a susceptible one.
This work was supported by the Scientific and Technological Research
Council of Turkey (TUBITAK) under Grant 119E041.
The authors are with the Department of Electrical and Electronics Engineering, Izmir Institute of Technology, 35430, Urla, Izmir, Turkey.
1 Here, transmission is employed synonymously with contagion rather than
its usage in communication engineering.

In airborne transmission, these pathogens (viruses, bacteria,
fungi, and so on) are carried by large droplets and aerosols
(droplet nuclei) which are emitted via breathing, speaking,
coughing and sneezing [1]. Throughout this article, we use
the term droplet to refer to both large droplets and aerosols
together.
As for the airborne pathogen transmission, it is not fully
unraveled how its mechanisms operate between two humans,
for example, it is still a matter of debate whether large droplets
or aerosols are more infectious. In addition, the mobility
and interplay of people during their daily life makes the
problem of modeling infectious disease spread in an epidemic
more chaotic. As people displace, there exist dynamic human
groups exchanging pathogens among each other. Due to their
mobility, humans form different groups in an ad hoc fashion
as their smart phones do in a mobile telecommunication
network. Actually, a human emitting expiratory droplets is an
information source [2]. When these emitted information carrying droplets are received by another human through sensory
organs, we can consider there exists a communication path
between them. Hence, an analogy between human groups and
mobile telecommunication networks can be established, since
they both possess an intermittent connectivity which is detailed
later. By utilizing this analogy, we propose an approach to
modeling interhuman airborne pathogen transmission with
communication engineering perspective where mobile humans
forming a group are considered as a mobile human ad hoc
network (MoHANET). In a MoHANET, the infectious human
is the transmitter (TX), the susceptible human is the receiver
(RX) and pathogen-laden droplets are information carriers
propagating in the communication channel, that is, air. Here,
molecular communication (MC) employing chemical signals
instead of electrical signals emerges as an enabler paradigm for
the communication among humans due to its biocompatibility
with the human body and multiscale applicability.
On the other hand, researchers from many disciplines work
separately in different scales to reveal the mechanisms of
airborne pathogen transmission and model the behavior of
epidemics. In fluid dynamics literature, researchers focus on
the propagation of pathogen-laden droplets and their interactions with air [1]. Biologists deal with the survival of airborne
pathogens in macroscale [3] and their interactions with the
human cells in microscale [4]. Furthermore, the medical
literature conducts researches in cellular level to discover
new drugs which cure the infectious diseases. In a larger
scale, epidemiology literature focuses on the epidemic data

2

Channel
Buoyancy
Pathogen-laden
droplets/aerosols

Gravity

Convective
Boundary
Layer

Face-to-side
orientation

Airflow

Transmitter

Face-to-face
orientation

Receiver

Figure 1. The spread of an infectious disease through airborne pathogen transmission with communication engineering
perspective and effective issues for an indoor sneezing/coughing scenario.

to develop mathematical models for the spread of epidemics
in time and space [5]. However, there is a need to merge
all of these research efforts in a unified framework. Communication engineering approach can provide this framework
by combining micro- and macroscale modeling issues. In
this way, researchers will be able to utilize theoretical tools
of communication theory in order to model the complicated
nature of airborne pathogen transmission.
In the remainder of this article, we first review the airborne
pathogen transmission mechanisms and the motivation to
use MC as the enabler communication paradigm. Then, the
communication engineering approach which merges different disciplines. In this approach, the layered architecture of
MoHANET is presented in detail and open research issues
are discussed. Finally, we give the existing and possible
experimental techniques and conclude the article.
II. A IRBORNE PATHOGEN T RANSMISSION M ECHANISMS
AND M OLECULAR C OMMUNICATION
This section provides a brief overview for the main issues
of the airborne pathogen transmission mechanisms. Then, the
roles of molecular signals in the transfer of pathogens among
humans are discussed.
A. Overview of Main Issues on Airborne Pathogen Transmission
1) Respiratory Activity and Droplet Size: Pathogen-laden
droplets are emitted to the air from an infected human via
respiratory activities such as coughing, sneezing, speaking
and breathing. These activities have different initial droplet
velocities allowing different propagation distances. For instance, the initial velocities for coughing and breathing are

about 10 m/s [1] and 2.4 m/s [6], respectively. Therefore, a
cough can infect people at a greater distance than breathing
in still air. Furthermore, the expiratory droplets are defined
according to their diameters where aerosols and large droplets
are assumed to have smaller and larger diameters than the size
range 5-10 µm, respectively [1]. While speaking, sneezing, and
coughing release more large droplets into the air, breathing
mostly contains aerosols.
2) Air Distribution: In addition to the initial velocity,
emitted droplets are influenced by the airflows, similar to
a MC channel with drift. In outdoor environments, winds
carry the droplets and dilute the concentration of pathogens
via dispersion. Therefore, it is less probable to get infected
in outdoor environments. However, in indoor environments
such as hospitals, offices or residential buildings, airflows
generated by ventilation systems are critical for the spread of
pathogens due to the circulation of air in bounded conditions.
Furthermore, personalized ventilation and exhaust systems are
proposed as advanced ventilation systems to diminish the
infection risk [1]. These air distributions are required to be
considered for realistic indoor airborne transmission models.
3) Posture, Relative Orientation, Distance and Movement of
the Human: For short distances, the posture, that is, standing,
sitting or lying position, and the relative orientation of the
infected and susceptible persons are important for the infection
risk as shown in Fig. 1. For instance, a doctor can reduce the
exposure from an infected lying patient in a hospital ward
via a standing posture and sideways orientation instead of
face-to-face orientation [1]. Furthermore, a walking person can
increase the infection risk in a closed and ventilated room by
increasing the dispersion of the droplets [7]. Another important
factor that influences the infection risk is the relative distance
of the humans which is also referred as the social distance.

3

MoHANET
kilometer
Networking Layer

Epidemiology

Receiver

micro
meter

Biology
Medicine

Channel
Transmitter

Molecular
Communication

Outer Reception
Sub-Layer

meter
Physical Layer

Communication
Engineering

Mobile Ad Hoc
Networks

Inner Reception
Sub-Layer

Fluid Dynamics
Biology

Emission of
pathogen-laden
droplets

Figure 2. Communication engineering framework to model the spread of infectious diseases through airborne pathogen
transmission and the layered MoHANET architecture.

Surely, the infection risk decreases, as the relative distance
between two people increases.
4) Thermofluid Boundary Conditions: The temperature difference between the human body surface and the surrounding
air generates a thermal plume which is a buoyancy-driven
upward flow of the surrounding air. As illustrated in Fig. 1,
this thermal plume leads to a convective boundary layer (CBL)
around the human body, which should be taken into account
for the movement of the droplets in the breathing zone [8].
This upward flow can change the channel impulse response
via generating an upward drift for the pathogens during the
reception into the human body.
5) Survival of Pathogens: Subsequent to a respiratory activity, all of the emitted pathogens may not survive. In [3], it
is shown that more than 80 percent of the influenza viruses
cannot survive within one minute. However, these survival
rates are severely influenced by environmental factors such
as temperature and relative humidity (RH). While increasing
temperature decreases survival rates of the pathogens due
to its effect at molecular levels, increasing RH results in
decreasing evaporation of droplets [9]. The decreasing number
of pathogens results in a time-varying channel due to the
dependence on the previous number of pathogens.
B. Do Humans Communicate via Molecular Signals?
Via the aforementioned respiratory activities, a human can
transfer pathogen-laden droplets to another human. This type
of transfer (or communication) among humans is investigated
in the medical literature where pheromone-based molecular

signals are studied for the interaction of humans. In [10], it is
proposed that pheromones secreted from the axillary apocrine
glands of women living in close proximity provides a synchronization in their menstrual cycle. Hence, molecular signals
may give rise to some biological responses in human organism.
As given in the next section, the transfer of the pathogen-laden
droplets which cause infection can be considered in the context
of MC.
III. C OMMUNICATION E NGINEERING A PPROACH TO
I NTERHUMAN A IRBORNE PATHOGEN T RANSMISSION
In this section, we present a framework with communication
engineering perspective to model the spread of infectious
diseases through airborne pathogen transmission. Furthermore,
open research issues are given.
As shown in Fig. 2, the proposed framework merges all
of the multiscale research efforts in various disciplines such
as fluid dynamics, biology, medicine, and epidemiology under
the umbrella of communication engineering. MC emerges as
the key paradigm that connects the studies among different
disciplines in macro- and microscales. First, the MoHANET
is introduced through a layered architecture as depicted in Fig.
2. Layers are associated with different disciplines from µm to
km scale in this architecture where each layer sends its output
to a upper layer. The first layer is defined as the physical
layer where the infectious human (TX) emits pathogen-laden
droplets through the communication channel (air) as illustrated
in Fig. 1. The next layer is the reception layer which takes

4

place at the susceptible human (RX) and includes two sublayers, that is, outer and inner reception sub-layers. The outer
reception sub-layer comprises the interactions of the facial
sensory organs with the droplets and inner reception sublayer provides the details about the interactions of pathogens
with the biological cells in the human body. The networking
layer where infectious diseases spread among different people
is given at the top of the MoHANET architecture. Here,
methods from mobile telecommunication networks literature
are exploited and the outputs of the lower layers are employed
rather. The details of this layered architecture are introduced
as follows.

RECEIVER
Pathogenladen droplets
around the
human body

Outer
Reception
Sub-Layer

Inner
Reception
Sub-Layer

Infection
state

Virus
Virus
DNA
Receptor

Human
Cell

Figure 3. Two-layered Receiver.
A. Physical Layer
1) Transmitter: In a MoHANET, an infected person is
considered as a TX and her/his respiratory activities determine
the TX parameters such as initial droplet velocities and droplet
size distribution [2]. The respiratory activities which are
mentioned earlier can be classified as impulsive (sneezing and
coughing) and continuous (breathing and speaking) emission
signals. For continuous emissions, the frequency of the human
exhalation is an influential factor for the transmission models.
However, it is crucial to characterize speaking, since it is not
always periodic and has more complex patterns than breathing.
In addition, the respiratory organs such as nose or mouth affect
the direction of the emitted signals. For example, the infection
risk increases, when the TX uses the mouth instead of nose
[1]. Furthermore, the convective boundary layer (CBL) of the
human body, posture and relative orientation should be taken
into account for accurate TX models. As mentioned earlier, the
upward flow stemming from the CBL can affect the direction
of the emitted pathogens in a TX model.
2) Channel: From the viewpoint of communication engineering, the channel is the physical medium between the
TX and RX including the boundary conditions. As shown
in Fig. 2, channel modeling in the physical layer requires
knowledge from fluid dynamics and biology due to the airdroplet interaction and survival of pathogens, respectively. The
propagation dynamics of droplets can be examined under two
subheadings depending on whether there is an external airflow
or not.
a) Still Air: In indoor environments such as residential
buildings, it is generally assumed that there is no airflow,
if there is not any ventilation system. After the emission
of pathogen-laden droplets with an initial velocity, they are
subject to Newtonian mechanics during their interaction with
the air. Emitted droplets can be modeled as a cloud consisting
of droplets and air particles. The movement of this cloud can
be defined as a two-phase flow where these phases represent
the gaseous state of air and liquid state of droplets [11]. Due
to gravity, large droplets may fall earlier to the ground with
respect to aerosols and evaporation can shrink the size of the
droplets. As mentioned earlier, the temperature of the air and
evaporation influence the survival rates of the pathogens. For
continuous emissions, this fact can affect the channel memory,
which is crucial for channel modeling. Furthermore, initial
velocities of droplets determined by respiratory activities can

give rise to short-term laminar and turbulent flows. These flows
fade out as the distance between the TX and RX increases.
b) Windy Air: For windy outdoor environments and
indoor environments with airflows such as ventilation or wind
arising from the open doors and windows, airflows dominate
the propagation of droplets rather than other factors given for
still air environments. The airflow which carries the pathogenladen droplets can be examined by advection and diffusion
mechanisms. Briefly, advection results from the airflow velocity and diffusion depends on the turbulent eddies during the
mass transfer [12]. It should be noted that molecular diffusion
related with the thermal energy of molecules is negligible in
macroscale. In order to calculate the concentration of droplets
in time and space, deterministic and stochastic approaches
which are based on differential Navier-Stokes and continuity
equations are employed. For certain initial and boundary conditions, the solutions of these equations for deterministic concentration are known as Gaussian Plume for steady-state and
Gaussian Puff Model for transient analysis [12]. Actually, the
concentration and velocity of droplets are random processes
whose mean values are represented by these deterministic
solutions. Thus, stochastic differential equations are obtained
which are non-trivial to solve as a closed form expression.
Therefore, these equations are mostly solved by numerical
methods using Eulerian and Langrangian approaches [12].
In addition, indoor ventilation types such as under floor air
distribution, mixing, displacement, and downward ventilation
should be incorporated into these airflow models. For example,
downward ventilation can reduce the infection risk by diluting
the dispersion of droplets [1].
B. Reception Layer
A human gets infected, when the transmitted pathogens are
received into the body. As shown in Fig. 2, the reception layer
covers the issues related to biology and medicine in microscale
where MC is utilized for the interactions of pathogens with the
human body. The reception of these pathogens by the exposed
human (RX) have not been well investigated, although there
are myriads of theoretical, experimental and clinical studies
for the propagation of pathogens. To this end, we propose a
two-layered RX as shown in Fig. 3 and detailed below.

5

Figure 4. Cloud trajectory along t = 10 s and its interaction
with the RX at xR = 1.5 m.

1) Outer Reception Layer: The reception of pathogenladen droplets occur in the eyes [13], mouth and nose for
many pathogens such as influenza virus [1]. Hence, we define
the first step of reception as the outer layer sensing for the
reception via facial sensory organs as illustrated in Fig. 3.
The whole surface of the human face is also important for the
reception, since an infection may occur by touching the face
contaminated with pathogens and these organs consecutively.
Pathogen-laden droplets emitted via a respiratory activity
propagate as a mixture of droplets and air particles, which
can be represented as a cloud [11]. This cloud is affected by
the momentum due to the initial velocity of droplets, gravity
and buoyancy stemming from the temperature difference of the
mouth and ambient air. According to this model, the trajectory
of the cloud is given in Fig. 4 for a scenario that the TX
emits pathogens by coughing. Here, there is no airflow in the
channel and, the TX and RX are standing toward each other at
the same height as illustrated in Fig. 1. Fig. 5 gives the change
of the number of droplets in the cloud by taking settling and

200
Number of droplets in the cloud
Number of received droplets
Threshold ( )

5500

Number of droplets in the cloud

= 80
180
160

5000

140
120

4500

100
4000

80
60

3500

40
3000
20
2500
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

Number of received droplets and Threshold

x R = 1.5 m,

6000

reception of droplets into account. The cross-section of the RX
is assumed to cover a circular area including eyes, mouth and
nose at the outer layer as illustrated in Fig. 3. At this point, an
analogy with the communication systems can be established
by considering the infected state of the RX as symbol 1 and
no infection as symbol 0. This reception is accomplished by
a detection according to a threshold value (γ = 80) indicating
the number of droplets required to become infected, as given
in Fig. 5. γ is a critical parameter in the airborne tranmission
model, since it depends on the strength of human’s immune
system. To this end, biomedical data of humans such as body
mass index, glucose level and whether or not having chronic
diseases can be employed to estimate γ.
In addition to these issues in the outer layer, the posture,
relative orientation and CBL of the RX should be taken into
account for an accurate receiver model as considered for the
TX. Furthermore, the reception of pathogen-laden droplets at
the outer layer with different types of masks is an open issue
to be investigated.
2) Inner Reception Layer: As shown in Fig. 3, pathogens
actually enter human body at the cellular level and increase
their population. For example, viruses replicate themselves by
inserting their genetic material (DNA or RNA) into human
cells in two ways: They can bind their fusion (or spike) protein
on specific receptor sites on the human cell or they can enter
by using endosomes like a Trojan horse [4]. Their binding
sites can have different concentrations in different parts of
the body. For instance, severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus-2, which causes COVID-19, binds to angiotensin
converting enzyme-2 receptors which are mostly found at
upper respiratory tract [14]. While large droplets are effective
in upper respiratory tract, aerosols can reach down to alveoli in
lower respiratory tract. Hence, the droplet size can be effective
to determine the infection risk according to the type of the
disease. Moreover, the viruses diffuse among human cells,
bind to receptors and copy their genetic material in a random
way. All of these issues at the inter- and intracellular level
need to be modeled for an accurate transmission model for the
spread of infectious diseases in MoHANETs. These modeling
efforts can also contribute to drug and vaccine developments.

0
10

Time (s)

Figure 5. The mean number of droplets in the cloud and their
reception by the RX.

C. Networking Layer
What we examine up to here in lower layers of the MoHANET architecture is about the transmission of infectious
diseases between two humans. However, these transmissions
occur many times in an epidemic, which requires a perspective
to handle the population as a connected group, that is, a
network. In the networking layer, the details of the MoHANET
architecture are presented in order to model the spread of
infectious diseases in a large scale (km) within the communication engineering framework as shown in Fig. 2.
1) Mobile Human Ad Hoc Networks: In epidemiology
literature, each human, that is, a node, can be represented
as susceptible (S), exposed (E), infectious (I) or recovered
(R) according to the SEIR-based models in the infectious
disease modeling approaches [5]. According to the disease

6

t1

t2

x

t3

Multiple-Access
Transmission

Multicast
Transmission
Point-to-Point
Transmission

N5
N2

N3
N2

N3

N9

N5
N5

N1

Infectious
node
Pathogen-laden
droplets
N4

N10

N6

N2

N9

N6
N4
N6

Coverage
area of
transmission
N1

Susceptible
node

Recovered
node

N7

N8
N1

N7

N8

y

Figure 6. The spread of an infectious disease in a MoHANET through 2-D space for three different time instances. As
time progresses, the number of nodes changes with mobility and the nodes change their state according to their exposure to
pathogen-laden droplets.

type, different combinations of these node types can be employed for the models such as SIR or SIRS. For example,
COVID-19 is suitable to use all the node types due to a
non-infectious incubation period. In the literature, the number
of these node types are modeled by ordinary differential
equations where the number of the nodes can be deterministic
or a stochastic process. The transition among different types
of nodes (S,E,I,R) are defined with certain rates which are
obtained by fitting statistical epidemic data. In experimental
studies, these data are obtained by oral surveys or exploiting
wireless sensor network technology [5]. It is noteworthy that
very few studies model the spatial change of the epidemic
rather than its temporal change.
By utilizing the widespread SIR model, a MoHANET is
given in Fig. 6 which gives both the spatial and temporal
changes. As the time elapses, the number of nodes may alter
and the nodes can make transitions between states such as S,
I or R. For example, a susceptible node can become infected,
if it is in the transmission range of an infectious node or an
infectious node can recover after a certain period.
2) Transmission Types in MoHANETs: As illustrated in Fig.
6, three transmission types are defined for the propagation
of pathogen-laden droplets from the infectious nodes to the
susceptible nodes as follows:
•

•

•

Point-to-Point Transmission includes the communication between two nodes where the infectious and susceptible nodes are the TX and RX, respectively.
Multicast Transmission is the scheme that one infectious
node spreads the disease to more than one node within
its communication range.
Multiple-Access Transmission comprises the scenario
where a susceptible node is exposed to pathogen-laden
droplets from multiple infectious nodes.

3) Routing and Mobility in MoHANETs: Humans are susceptible to infectious diseases in indoor places such as public
transportation vehicles, shopping malls or offices. However,
this is not the case that is encountered continuously. Instead,
the risk to get infected is intermittent due to the mobility of
humans. As people displace, their smart phones can communicate opportunistically with each other as they are in the
communication range. The same type of networking is also
used in many applications such as wireless sensor, vehicular,
and flying ad hoc networks. These dynamically changing
structures defined as mobile ad hoc networks (MANETs)
enable communication using the infrastructure at their location
without a dedicated router. Therefore, a MoHANET can be
resembled as a specific type of MANET, that is, a delay
tolerant network (DTN) in which an end-to-end link among
the nodes may not always exist. The nodes in a DTN store
their data and wait until they find a suitable connection. By
considering this waiting delay, the routing algorithms in DTNs
provide the path to the desired user. Similarly, an infected
human can store its pathogens until finding a susceptible
human to infect via airborne transmission. Hence, we propose
that opportunistic routing protocols such as epidemic or spray
and wait can be adopted to model the spread of the infectious
diseases. Interestingly, epidemic routing protocol which is a
reference method for routing in MANETs was already inspired
by the mechanism of infectious disease spread during an
epidemic [15].
IV. E XPERIMENTAL T ECHNIQUES AND S IMULATIONS
In order to observe and model the airborne transmission
mechanisms among humans, experimental setups and computer simulations can be employed. In this section, we present
and discuss how the performance of the proposed methods

7

in different layers of the MoHANET architecture can be
evaluated.
In physical and reception layers, the emulation of breathing,
coughing and sneezing in experimental setups are realized by
respiratory machines or thermal manikins which can be heated
to change their temperature. These devices emit tracer gases
including droplets. The concentration of droplets is measured
by air samplers or via imaging techniques such as particle
image velocimetry which gives the velocity and directions of
droplets [1]. Moreover, sprayer-based MC systems can also
be used instead of respiratory machines, manikins and air
samplers.
Albeit reliable results can be obtained by the physical experiments regarding the consideration of droplet-air interaction
and airflows, the collected data have a low-resolution in space
and time and experimental devices are expensive. Therefore,
computational fluid dynamics (CFD) simulations are employed
to evaluate the airborne transmission mechanisms with a
high spatiotemporal resolution and less cost [1]. However,
the simulation software programs are based on Navier-Stokes
equations which lack the capability to model all of the effects
during the transmission realistically.
These experimental techniques and CFD simulations can be
employed to model the airborne pathogen transmission with
communication engineering perspective for various scenarios
between two humans. In a larger scale, for example, in a
crowded city, it is essential to model the spread of infectious diseases with an approach that takes into account the
interaction of people and their mobility in both time and
space. The movement patterns of humans can be simulated
by synthetic models such as random waypoint model or tracebased models which rely on real mobility data of mobile
nodes as applied in MANETs. The adapted routing protocols
for MoHANETs can also be evaluated in time and space by
employing these mobility models according to the scenario via
network simulation software.
V. C ONCLUSION
This article presents a framework to model airborne
pathogen transmission with a communication engineering perspective. First, airborne pathogen transmission mechanisms are
reviewed and MC is utilized to model the propagation and
reception of this transmission. The concept of MoHANET
is proposed to handle the infectious disease spread modeling problem by using a layered structure in macro- and
microscales. Furthermore, simulation techniques and experimental methods to model airborne pathogen transmission are
reviewed and discussed. Throughout the article, open research
issues possessing the potential for development opportunities
are given. The efforts to model the infectious disease spread
via airborne pathogen transmission with a novel approach
given in this article has the potential for a holistic viewpoint.
This communication engineering viewpoint can bring different
disciplines such as fluid dynamics, medicine, biology and epidemiology together for accurate predictions about the spread
of infectious diseases. Hence, the most proper intervention
method (lockdown, social distancing, wearing masks, and so

on) can be chosen and how it will be applied can be determined
to stop the epidemics in an effective way.
R EFERENCES
[1] Z. Ai and A. K. Melikov, “Airborne spread of expiratory droplet nuclei
between the occupants of indoor environments: A review,” Indoor air,
vol. 28, no. 4, pp. 500–524, 2018.
[2] M. Khalid et al., “Communication through breath: Aerosol transmission,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 57, no. 2, pp. 33–39, 2019.
[3] F. Schaffer, M. Soergel, and D. Straube, “Survival of airborne influenza
virus: effects of propagating host, relative humidity, and composition of
spray fluids,” Archives of virology, vol. 51, no. 4, pp. 263–273, 1976.
[4] F. S. Cohen, “How viruses invade cells,” Biophysical journal, vol. 110,
no. 5, pp. 1028–1032, 2016.
[5] K. Rock et al., “Dynamics of infectious diseases,” Rep. on Prog. in
Phys., vol. 77, no. 2, p. 026602, 2014.
[6] N. Zhang et al., “Close contact behavior in indoor environment and
transmission of respiratory infection,” Indoor air, 2020.
[7] B. Halvoňová and A. K. Melikov, “Performance of “ductless” personalized ventilation in conjunction with displacement ventilation: Impact
of disturbances due to walking person (s),” Building and Environment,
vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 427–436, 2010.
[8] D. Licina et al., “Human convective boundary layer and its interaction
with room ventilation flow,” Indoor Air, vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 21–35, 2015.
[9] L. C. Marr et al., “Mechanistic insights into the effect of humidity on
airborne influenza virus survival, transmission and incidence,” J. of the
Roy. Soc. Interface, vol. 16, no. 150, p. 20180298, 2019.
[10] K. Stern and M. K. McClintock, “Regulation of ovulation by human
pheromones,” Nature, vol. 392, no. 6672, pp. 177–179, 1998.
[11] F. Gulec and B. Atakan, “A molecular communication perspective on
airborne pathogen transmission and reception via droplets generated by
coughing and sneezing,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.07598, 2020.
[12] A. De Visscher, Air dispersion modeling: foundations and applications.
John Wiley & Sons, 2013.
[13] J. S. Peiris et al., “The severe acute respiratory syndrome,” New England
J. of Medicine, vol. 349, no. 25, pp. 2431–2441, 2003.
[14] P. Zhou et al., “A pneumonia outbreak associated with a new coronavirus
of probable bat origin,” Nature, vol. 579, no. 7798, pp. 270–273, 2020.
[15] A. Vahdat and D. Becker, “Epidemic routing for partially connected ad
hoc networks,” 2000.

B IOGRAPHIES
FATIH GULEC (fatihgulec@iyte.edu.tr) received his B.Sc.
and M.Sc. degree from Gazi University, Ankara, Turkey in
2007 and 2015, respectively both in electrical and electronics
engineering. He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree in İzmir
Institute of Technology, İzmir, Turkey as a research/teaching
assistant under the supervision of Assoc. Prof. Dr. Barış
Atakan. His research interests include micro and macroscale
molecular communications and molecular networks.

BARIS ATAKAN (barisatakan@iyte.edu.tr) received his B.Sc.
degree from Ankara University, Ankara, Turkey, in 2000,
M.Sc. degree from Middle East Technical University, Ankara,
in 2005, and Ph.D. degree from the Next-Generation and
Wireless Communications Laboratory, School of Sciences and
Engineering, Koç University, Istanbul, Turkey, in 2011, all
in electrical and electronics engineering. He is currently an
Associate Professor with the Department of Electrical and
Electronics Engineering, İzmir Institute of Technology, İzmir,
Turkey. His current research interests include nanoscale and
molecular communications, nanonetworks and biologically
inspired communications.

