Online Tutoring in Introductory Physics Courses: a Lockdown Experience
Matteo Luca Ruggiero∗
Politecnico di Torino, Corso Duca degli Abruzzi 24, Torino, Italy

Lorenzo Galante†

arXiv:2011.13315v1 [physics.ed-ph] 26 Nov 2020

DISAT & TLLAB, Politecnico di Torino, Corso Duca degli Abruzzi 24, Torino, IT
INFN Torino, Via Pietro Giuria 1, Torino, IT and
Enrico Fermi Historical Museum of Physics and Study and Research Centre, Piazza del Viminale, 1, Roma, IT
(Dated: November 30, 2020)
Social distancing due to the Covid-19 pandemic deeply impacted on education worldwide, since
schools and universities had to rapidly organise lessons and courses on line. Traditional interactions
between teachers and students and, also among students, had to change and was substituted by on
line connections. In this context, laboratory work and tutoring, which have an important role in the
peer instruction model, needed to be redesigned. Here, we discuss an on line tutoring model adopted
for the introductory physics courses at Turin Polytechinc University and evaluate its effectiveness
by analysing the students performance both during the semester and the summer and autumn exam
sessions.
I.

INTRODUCTION

The impact of the ongoing Covid-19 pandemic on education is without precedents since, overnight, it deeply
changed teaching methods and organisations for billions
of students and teachers around the world. Schools and
universities had (and still have) gigantic challenges to
adapt their classes to distance learning as quickly as possible, in order to keep educational continuity.
Besides the obvious difficulties - both for teachers and
students - due to the switch in a very short time to online courses, there was an additional complication for the
learning process, provoked by the atypical situation [1–
4]. In fact, because of social distancing, interactions with
teachers and peers considerably changed, and, de facto,
students were forced to experience independent study
much more than in the past [5]. Accordingly, the role of
teachers and students became different from those in a
traditional learning process: in this case teachers cannot
directly interact with students and just act as facilitators
to support them, while students have to independently
develop their collaborative efforts [6]. Fortunately, due
to the development of the Internet and related technologies, today’s students have devices such as smartphones,
tablets and personal computers available. These technolgoies make it possible and easy to access large volumes
of information and to maintain contact with classmates
and educators. Undoubtedly, if this pandemic had spread
only 30 years ago, its effect on education systems worldwide would have been devastating.
In addition, activities such as laboratory work and tutoring were greatly limited during the pandemic and they
had to be re-designed in order to be effective in the learning process. These activities have an important role in

∗ Electronic
† Electronic

address: matteo.ruggiero@polito.it
address: lorenzo.galante@polito.it

the peer instruction model, whose effectiveness is well
known, from early childhood education [7] up to college
[8] and university level [9, 10]. In the literature peer collaboration refers to laboratory work and peer tutoring to
a tutoring model in which advanced students (“studenttutors”) or those in later years take on an instructional
role (see e.g. Boud et al. [11], Collings et al. [12]), mainly
aimed at the revision of the taught content. Peer tutoring has several advantages, as reported by Sneddon [13]:
for instance, students are freer to communicate with each
other in the absence of teachers; student-tutors have an
approach to the course materials and resources which is
more similar to the student one; the interaction between
students and student-tutors is more direct and personal
which can lead to a more lively and open learning environment. Usually, in this model there are meetings
two/three times per week, in which one or more studenttutors works with a small number (ranging from 50-100)
of students. There is evidence that in this model both
the tutees and the tutors get benefits [13].
Social distancing provoked by the pandemic acts as a
serious deterrent for carrying out peer tutoring which is
typically intended for weak and less experienced students.
For these reasons it is necessary to completely redesign
this model of tutoring, and the same, of course, holds
true for laboratory work [14, 15].
In this paper we report the results of an on line tutoring
model developed for the introductory physics courses at
Turin Polytechinc University during the lockdown due to
the Covid-19 pandemic. The tutoring was based on online activities, both synchronous, such as video and chat
sessions, and asynchronous, such as questionnaires and
exercises. The former were conducted by student-tutors
and organised by staff members. These activities aimed
to facilitate the students’ learning process and, also, to
mimic the classroom interactions that were not allowed.
In this work we aim to evaluate the effectiveness of the
tutoring model by analysing the performances of the students involved, both during its progress and during their

2
exams.
The paper is organised as follows: in Section II we
describe the tutoring model and the context, while in
Section III we examine the methodologies and give the
results, which are then discussed in Section IV. Conclusions are eventually drawn in Section V.

II.

THE ONLINE TUTORING MODEL

Turin Polytechinc University (TPU) is one of the most
important Italian Technical Schools for Engineers and
it attracts students not only from Italy, but also from
more than 100 countries around the world; about 45% of
students come from outside Piemonte, the region where
Turin is located, and 15% come from abroad. About 5000
students start studying at TPU every year, and during
the first year they are divided into 20 courses: 18 are
taught in Italian and 2 in English. The students in the
Italian courses are divided by alphabetical order rather
than ability. During the first year, students attend the
”Physics I” course, which is an introductory calculusbased course including classical mechanics and thermodynamics, Newtonian gravitation and basic electrostatics
in which Coulomb’s and Newton’s law are compared. In
each course, there are between 300 and 500 students: besides first year students, there are also students who did
not succeed in passing the exam from previous years. As
a consequence, each year there are approximately 10000
students in the Physics I courses.
The Physics I course is generally considered as diffi-

cult and among those which most frequently contributes
to dropping out of TPU. Consequently, TPU organises
tutoring activities to help students, in the spirit of the
Learning Assistants scheme, developed by the University of Colorado [16], where experienced students (usually 2 years older) are employed as tutors and, together
with course lecturers, they revise the key topics. Usually,
student-tutors work in pairs, and meet small groups of
students once or twice per week. The interaction is direct
and immediate and mainly involves solving exercises.
The Physics I course is taught during the second
semester of the academic year, which usually starts between the end of February and the beginning of March,
so in 2020 overlapped with the outbreak of the Covid-19
pandemic in Italy. Due to the emergency situation, all
courses were switched to online delivery at TPU and the
usual tutoring in conditions of social distancing could no
longer take place; consequently, it was necessary to design a new online tutoring model.
The model we developed is based on a Moodle platform, integrated in the Internet TPU portal, which is
accessible to all Physics I students; 20 student-tutors
(here and henceforth junior tutors) were recruited and
coordinated by 4 TPU staff members (here and henceforth senior tutors), who were lecturers in the Physics
I courses. The junior tutors were divided into 10 pairs
and each pair was assigned to two courses. The activities
described here refer to the courses taught in Italian only
because, due to the very short time available to organise
the tutoring, it was not possible to involve the 2 courses
taught in English.

FIG. 1: Tutoring weekly plan.

The weekly activities began one month after the beginning of the courses and were organised as follows (see also
Figure 1). (1) Senior tutors prepared a set of multiple choice questions on selected issues from the lectures; these
questions were about important concepts or aimed to eliminate typical misconceptions. (2) Students were invited to
answer the weekly questionnaire during the weekend. (3) On the basis of the results, senior tutors prepared specific

3
exercises in order to address common errors. (4)The exercises were discussed on the following Monday during an online
meeting between senior and junior tutors: the aim of the meeting was to inform junior tutors about the students’
results in the previous questionnaire in order to outline the expected errors for the proposed exercises. (5) Each
tutoring group had two weekly sessions (scheduled on different days at different times in order to give all the students
the possibility to attend the class); in each session the same exercises were used. The interactions with the students
during the tutoring sessions took place in the chatroom of the videoconferencing system and, also, using dedicated
Telegram channels. Each session was divided into two parts. In the first part, students had time to go through the
proposed exercises on their own, in the second part the exercises were solved by the junior tutors. All tutoring sessions
were recorded and, then, made available on the Moodle platform, together with the exercises and their solutions. (6)
Students were requested to complete the same questionnaire (with the same questions) after each tutoring session in
order to measure the impact of the tutoring activities.
The tutoring was organised over 8 weeks (plus 1 for
revision of mechanics) and the topics covered the whole
content of the Physics I course, in the following sequence:
• Week 1: Mathematical prerequisites
• Week 2: Kinematics
• Week 3: Dynamics
• Week 4: Conservation laws and collisions
• Week 5: Rigid body
• Week 6: Gravitation and electrostatics
• Revision of Mechanics
• Week 7: Calorimetry and first law of thermodynamics
• Week 8: Second law of thermodynamics
The entire tutoring lasted for 9 weeks, with 18
tutoring sessions per group. The whole set of activities
was recorded both on the Moodle platform and on the
Telegram channels: they are currently being analysed
and will be discussed in a forthcoming paper [17]. In
this work, we focus on two research questions that are
important to evaluate the effectiveness of this tutoring
model, both during its progress and in the final exams,
namely:
Q1: As a result of the weekly activities performed and
of the interactions with the junior tutors, is there an
improvement in the results of the questionnaires?
Q2: As a result of the participation in the tutoring
activities during the semester, is there an improvement
in the marks among the students who attended the tutoring, with respect to the average results of all students?
These research questions will be discussed in the following Section.

III.

METHODOLOGIES AND RESULTS

The average number of students who attended the tutoring sessions every week, as registered by the junior tutors, was 385: this was the sum of the 9 tutoring groups,
which means more or less 43 students per week per group.
These data are aggregate, so the number of presences was
not equally distributed in each group and the same students did not attend all sessions. Nonetheless these data
give an idea of the synchronous interactions which occurred during the tutoring. Interestingly, the number of
asynchronous interactions was far greater than the average number students attending (385): in fact by the end
of the summer exam session, we had registered about
9000 students on the Moodle platform. Even though the
tutoring ended at the beginning of June, students continued to use this platform after this date for the video
recordings of the tutoring sessions, for the solutions of
the problems proposed and for repeating the weekly questionnaires.
The following analysis refers to all data collected until
the end of September, after the end of the summer and
autumn exam sessions. Firstly, we analyse the weekly
questionnaires, in order to track improvements in the students’ performance. Subsequently we compare the exam
results of the students who attended the tutoring to those
achieved by all students.

A.

Weekly Questionnaires

The weekly questionnaires, one before the tutoring sessions, and one after the tutoring sessions, were completed
on a voluntary basis. Only one attempt was allowed for
both questionnaires. In Figure 2 we report the number of
students who filled out both questionnaires in each week.
This number is smaller than the number of students who
answered each single questionnaire. For instance, during
the first week 20% of students repeated the test after the
tutoring session; in the subsequent weeks the percentages
are 32%, 38%, 36%, 34%, 22%, 29% and 23%.
In Figure 3 we compare the percentages of correct answers of the pre and post tutoring questionnaires. To
measure the students’ performances after the tutoring
session, we calculated the Hake normalised gains (re-

4
• high, if g ≥ 0.7,
• medium, if 0.7 ≥ g ≥ 0.3,
• low, if g < 0.3.
The gain is defined as the ratio of the actual average
gain to the maximum possible average gain.

B.

Final Exams

FIG. 2: Number of students, per week, who carried out both
the pre and the post tutoring questionnaires.

More specific data about the tutoring were obtained
by an online survey administered to all students on the
Moodle platform: we collected 1209 answers. The survey
covered various areas, such as the numbers of sessions
attended, the most interesting topics for students, the
perceived effectiveness of the methods and informations
about the interactions with the junior tutors.

FIG. 3: Comparison between the percentage of correct answers in the pre and post tutoring questionnaires, together
with the corresponding gain (g).

FIG. 4: Description of the sample analysed: number of sessions attended.

ported below each column bar in Figure 3) defined as
[18]
g=

Pf − Pi
,
100 − Pi

where Pi , Pf are, respectively, the percentages of correct
answers before and after the tutoring sessions. In particular, the gain is

The number of attended sessions is shown in Figure
4. We see that 403 students did not take part in any
session: they did not attend the synchronous activities
but they attended the asynchronous ones, such as watching the video recordings, completing the questionnaires,
downloading the problems and so on. Hence, in the following analysis, the sample size is N = 1209 − 403 = 806
students, given by the number of students who attended
at least one tutoring session. We examined their performances in the exams of June, July and September.

In particular, we considered their performance in the first part of the exam (the preliminary test) which consisted
of a quiz with 15 multiple choice questions. A minimum of 8 correct answers was needed to access the second part of
the exam, which was an exercise to be solved on-line. A comparison between the results of our sample and those of
all students is carried out below. The (normalized) results of the statistical analysis are reported in Figure 5, while
the details are in Table I.
As we can see looking at the distributions in Figure 5 and Table I, the average mark in the preliminary multiple
choice test is higher for the sample of students who attended the tutoring sessions: this positive trend is evident in
all exam sessions. In order to quantify the statistical significance of the difference between the average marks, we
decided to perform a T-test and to evaluate the p-value. In our case the the null hypothesis is: there is no statistical
difference among the average marks of the two samples, their difference is due to a statistical fluctuation.

5
Session
June

Sample
Quizzes Attempted Quizzes Passed Percentage of Quizzes Passed Average Mark
Tutored Students
742
607
81.81
10.02
All Students
3522
2557
72.60
9.31
July
Tutored Students
411
354
86.13
10.04
All Students
2636
1908
72.38
8.99
September Tutored Students
195
157
80.51
9.72
All Students
1870
1325
70.86
9.02

TABLE I: Details of June, July and September exams.

FIG. 5: Comparison of the students results in June, July and September Physics 1 exams.

The T-test was carried out on the basis of the statistical parameters reported in Table II. In all cases (June,
July and September sessions) the resulting p-value is
smaller than 0.001, meaning that we have a confidence
level bigger that 99.9% to reject the null hypothesis. In
other words, the different average marks of the two samples are not due to statistical fluctuations.
From the data in table II, we see that the marks of the
students from tutoring are, on average, 0.8 points higher.
It is important to emphasise that, even if this result might
seem to be negligible, it has significantly decreased the
number of student failures (grade < 8) in the Physics I
course. By comparing the percentages of students with
a grade lower than 8, we can evaluate the improvement
in the rate of successful students (see Figure 6). In June

the percentage of Tutored students not passing the test
was lowered by 9%, in July by 14%, in September by
10%. If we apply the average 11% improvement to the
number of students attending the Physics I courses each
year (∼ 10000), the tutoring activities would lead to an
increase of about ∼ 1000 in the number of successful
students in the preliminary test.

IV.

DISCUSSION

Despite the low completion rate for the questionnaires,
a small improvement in the student marks was evident
(see Section III A). The average weekly attendance was
385 students and in the best case (Week 2), only 142 stu-

6
Session
June

Sample
Variance Standard Deviation Average Mark Sample Size
Tutored Students 7.43
2.73
10.02
742
All Students
8.56
2.92
9.31
3522
July
Tutored Students 5.33
2.31
10.04
411
All Students
7.27
2.69
8.99
2635
September Tutored Students 6.58
2.57
9.72
195
All Students
7.49
2.74
9.02
1870

TABLE II: Statistical parameters of the two samples.

dents (37 %) filled out both the pre and post questionnaires. Moreover, if we exclude the Week 1 questionnaire
which focused on mathematical prerequisites, attendance
decreased significantly between Week 2 and Week 6, and
then increased gradually over the last two weeks.
This variation in attendance could be due to a possible
correlation between the increasing difficulty of the topics
and the time required for study. Therefore, students may
have been unable to complete the post questionnaire in
due time. Furthermore, the growth in attendance for the
last two weeks could have been provoked by the approach
of the exam session.
If we consider the results summarised in Figure 3, according to the Hake scale, the gain is low even if there
is an improvement. As reported by Nissen et al. [19]
“Hake adopted this standardizing coefficient because it
accounted for the smaller shift in means that could occur in courses with higher pretest means”. On the other
hand, this coefficient tends to show a low student improvement when the pretest means are low. Furthermore, if we look at Figure 3, we see that in our case
the mean pretest results are around 50 %. However, if
pretest means are around 100%, then improvements are
also high.
We obtained better results for the second research
question, as reported in Section III B. In Figure 5 we
see that in all exam sessions the distribution of marks
for students who attended the tutoring were higher than
average. Moreover, Table I shows that the percentage of
students who passed the tests is noticeably greater in the
sample of students who attended the tutoring sessions.
The T-test analysis suggests that the improvements were
not due to statistical fluctuations.
Obviously, it is not possible to attribute these positive
results entirely to the tutoring intervention. However,
we suppose that students who took part in the tutoring
activities were more diligent than the others. Indeed, tutoring gave them continuous practice and revision of the
physics concepts, in addition to what they learned during the lectures. It is widely accepted that time-on-task
deeply influences learning outcomes [20, 21]. However,
tutoring can also be considered as important, since it
gives all students the possibility to revise difficult topics and to reach the required knowledge level for exam
success.

V.

CONCLUSIONS

Due to the lockdown provoked by the Covid-19 pandemic, schools and universities around the world made
huge efforts to adopt teaching methods based on distance
learning. Social distancing impacted also on laboratory
work and tutoring, which have an important role in the
peer instruction model. In particular, tutoring models
involving advanced students who meet small groups of
students, needed to be redesigned, to cope with the new
conditions determined by the pandemic. We have discussed the on line tutoring model developed for the introductory physics courses at Turin Polytechinc University,
and analysed its impact on the student learning process,
both during the tutoring activities and, at the end, during the exams. In this paper, we have focused on two
research questions to evaluate the effectiveness of the tutor activities, during the semester, by analysing the results of weekly questionnaires (Q1), and at the end of
the semester, during the exams in the summer and autumn sessions, by comparing the results of the students
who attended the tutoring with the results of all students
(Q2).
The results for Q1 showed that the improvement in the
student performances was low, as measured by the Hake
scale. However, it is important to emphasise that only
a small number of students involved in the tutoring activities completed both the weekly pre and post tutoring
questionnaires. We suggest that, due to the increasing
difficulty in the content of the lectures, students needed
more time to study, so they were unable to completethe
questionnaires in time.
The data collected during the June, July and September exam sessions showed that, in the preliminary tests,
the distribution of marks for the students who attended
the tutoring were better than the overall results; we performed a T-test analysis and showed that the improvement was not due to statistical fluctuations. We also
suggest that the time-on-task, due to the activities performed during the tutoring, contributed to this improvement. Moreover we estimated a 10% increase in the number of successful students in the preliminary tests due to
the tutoring activities.
In conclusion, even though we know that further
improvements are needed, for instance to stimulate a

7
greater participation, we believe that it was important to
give the students the possibility of experiencing the peer
education model through the tutoring activities, during
the lockdown. Moreover, the improvement in the students’ performances were encouraging and suggests the
effectiveness of this tutoring model.

FIG. 6: Comparison among the total percentage of rejected
students in the preliminary test. In all exams sessions, the
sample of students from Tutoring shows a lowered percentage.

[1] D. J. O’Brien, arXiv preprint arXiv:2008.07441 (2020).
[2] D. Y. Tan and J.-M. Chen, arXiv preprint
arXiv:2009.02705 (2020).
[3] M. Dew, J. Perry, L. Ford, D. Nodurft, and T. Erukhimova, arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.11393 (2020).
[4] P. Klein, L. Ivanjek, M. N. Dahlkemper, K. Jeličić, M.A. Geyer, S. Küchemann, and A. Susac, arXiv preprint
arXiv:2010.05622 (2020).
[5] M. G. Moore, The Journal of Higher Education 44, 661
(1973).
[6] N. Dietrich, K. Kentheswaran, A. Ahmadi, J. Teychené, Y. Bessière, S. Alfenore, S. Laborie, D. Bastoul,

[7]
[8]
[9]

[10]

K. Loubière, C. Guigui, et al., Journal of Chemical Education (2020).
W. Damon, Journal of applied developmental psychology
5, 331 (1984).
N. Lasry, E. Mazur, and J. Watkins, American journal
of Physics 76, 1066 (2008).
E. Mazur, Peer Instruction: Pearson New International Edition: A User’s Manual, Always learning (Pearson Higher Education & Professional Group, 2013),
ISBN 9781292039701, URL https://books.google.it/
books?id=OReioAEACAAJ.
C. H. Crouch and E. Mazur, American journal of physics

8
69, 970 (2001).
[11] D. Boud, R. Cohen, and J. Sampson, Peer learning in
higher education: Learning from and with each other
(Routledge, 2014).
[12] R. Collings, V. Swanson, and R. Watkins, Higher Education 68, 927 (2014).
[13] P. H. Sneddon, Journal of Learning Development in
Higher Education ISSN p. 667X (1759).
[14] F. Pols, The Electronic Journal for Research in Science
& Mathematics Education 24, 172 (2020).
[15] F. Bradbury and C. Pols,
arXiv preprint

arXiv:2006.06881 (2020).
[16] V. Otero, S. Pollock, and N. Finkelstein, American Journal of Physics 78, 1218 (2010).
[17] L. Galante and M. L. Ruggiero, in preparation (2020).
[18] R. R. Hake, American journal of Physics 66, 64 (1998).
[19] J. M. Nissen, R. M. Talbot, A. N. Thompson, and
B. Van Dusen, Physical Review Physics Education Research 14, 010115 (2018).
[20] J. B. Carroll, Teachers college record (1963).
[21] B. S. Bloom, American psychologist 29, 682 (1974).

