arXiv:2011.00377v2 [cs.IR] 3 Nov 2020

Leveraging Natural Language Processing to Mine
Issues on Twitter During the COVID-19 Pandemic
Ankita Agarwal§

Preetham Salehundam§

Swati Padhee

Department of Computer Science
Wright State University
Dayton, Ohio 45435 USA
agarwal.15@wright.edu

Department of Computer Science
Wright State University
Dayton, Ohio 45435 USA
salehundam.2@wright.edu

Department of Computer Science
Wright State University
Dayton, Ohio 45435 USA
padhee.2@wright.edu

William L. Romine

Tanvi Banerjee

Department of Biological Sciences
Wright State University
Dayton, Ohio 45435 USA
william.romine@wright.edu

Department of Computer Science
Wright State University
Dayton, Ohio 45435 USA
tanvi.banerjee@wright.edu

Abstract—The recent global outbreak of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) has spread to all corners of the globe. The
international travel ban, panic buying, and the need for selfquarantine are among the many other social challenges brought
about in this new era. Twitter platforms have been used in various
public health studies to identify public opinion about an event at
the local and global scale. To understand the public concerns and
responses to the pandemic, a system that can leverage machine
learning techniques to filter out irrelevant tweets and identify
the important topics of discussion on social media platforms
like Twitter is needed. In this study, we constructed a system to
identify the relevant tweets related to the COVID-19 pandemic
throughout January 1st , 2020 to April 30th , 2020 and explored
topic modeling to identify the most discussed topics and themes
during this period in our data set. Additionally, we analyzed the
temporal changes in the topics with respect to the events that
occurred during this pandemic. We found out that eight topics
were sufficient to identify the themes in our corpus. These topics
depicted a temporal trend. The dominant topics vary over time
and align with the events related to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Index Terms—Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), machine
learning, natural language processing, public health, social media,
topic modeling

I. I NTRODUCTION
Since December 2019, a series of acute atypical respiratory
disease outbreak in Wuhan, China, rapidly spread globally. It
was soon discovered that a novel coronavirus, “SARS-CoV-2”
was responsible for the outbreak. The disease caused by this
virus was called Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), and
a pandemic was declared by the World Health Organization
(WHO). The disease was found to be highly contagious,
with a reproduction rate of 2.2 (R0) [1]. As of August 21st ,
2020, a total of 22,864,873 people were infected globally,
and 797,787 deaths were confirmed in 188 countries [2].
With time, COVID-19 has turned out to be an economic and
social crisis, attacking societal structure at its core. The crisis
has affected all public segments, particularly detrimental to
§ co-first

authors

members of most vulnerable social groups like older adults
and people with weak immune systems. According to the UN
Department of Economic and Social Affairs (UN DESA1 ),
if not adequately addressed the social crisis created by the
COVID-19 pandemic may also increase inequality, exclusion,
discrimination and global unemployment in the medium and
long term.
Social media are often seen as fast and effective platforms
for searching, sharing, and distributing health information
among the general population. They play a pivotal role in
information dissemination and consumption during sudden
outbreaks for people to access timely and reliable information
about the disease symptoms and its prevention. However,
social media has both positive and negative social impacts
during the crisis, with increasing social distancing and growing
reliance on online communication. Recent studies [3]–[7] have
shown that social media can play an essential role as a source
of data for understanding public attitudes and behaviors during
a crisis. Also, in the case of strong emotional reactions, media
coverage of the pandemic may influence public sentiments [8].
Social media data can be used to quickly identify the main
thoughts, attitudes, feelings, and topics that are occupying
the minds of people about the COVID-19 pandemic. Such
data can help policymakers, health care professionals, and the
public identify primary issues that are of concern and address
them in a more appropriate manner [9]. Since January 2020,
the number of papers analyzing Twitter activity during the
COVID-19 pandemic has been increasing. Recent studies have
identified the topics of discussions, concerns, and controversies
surrounding COVID-19 in social media [10]–[13].
In this study, we seek to understand the extent to which
social media conversations are a part of the discourse for
different events unfolding during a pandemic. We investigated
1 https://www.un.org/development/desa/dspd/everyone-included-covid19.html

the effect of the events which occurred during the COVID-19
pandemic on major topics of discussion on Twitter over time.
We addressed the following research questions in this study:
1) Research Q1: What is the feasibility of differentiating
between relevant and non-relevant tweets with respect
to the COVID-19 pandemic?
2) Research Q2: What are the trending topics in public discussions on Twitter related to the COVID-19 pandemic?
3) Research Q3: What is the relationship between events
related to COVID-19 and the trending topics on Twitter
over time?
II. R ELATED W ORKS
Understanding the prevalent topics during COVID-19 involved two major tasks: (1) Filtering the relevant tweets
providing situational and actionable information about the
pandemic, and (2) Analyzing the latent topics and themes
with respect to the events which might have influenced public
opinion. We provide a literature survey of each of these steps.
A. Relevant Tweet Extraction
The preliminary research on analyzing social media data
related to the COVID-19 pandemic has increased almost daily.
Some works have focused on analyzing human behavior and
reactions to the spread of COVID-19 in the online world [11],
[14]–[16], or investigating the conspiracy theories and social
activism [17], [18]. Often studies ignore the need to preprocess
the tweets to filter out the tweets that do not pertain to the topic
under investigation. For example, in a drug-related Twitter
study [19], one of the keywords used to capture relevant tweets
was the word “spice”. However, tweets related to pumpkin
spice latte were collected, which were not relevant to the topic
under investigation. Relevant tweets provide both situational
and actionable information to extract requirement-specific information, decision-making, and immediate assistance to the
affected people [20]. Several studies have mainly focused on
identifying relevant information on Twitter. While [21] have
identified tweets relevant to influenza, [22] have worked on
filtering out noisy tweets by identifying relevant tweets for
the Zika virus using text-based features. Wahbeh et al. [23]
have utilized a qualitative approach to identify relevant tweets
during COVID-19. Although recent studies have used deep
learning methods for social media mining in natural disasters
[24], the same for pandemics is limited. In our work, we
experiment with a range of machine learning and deep learning
language models to filter out the relevant tweets for COVID19.
B. Topic Modeling and Analysis
Topic modeling has been applied in areas like health informatics [25], social media networks [26], telecommunication,
and digital payments [27] in order to organize and summarize
large textual information and to uncover hidden thematic
structures in a collection of documents [28]. Similarly, in the
case of crisis and pandemic scenarios, topic modeling has
played an important role in understanding the most prevalent

themes discussed on social media platforms. Recent works
include performing topic modeling on documents related to
disease outbreaks like the Ebola virus epidemic [29] , Zika
virus epidemic [30], dengue epidemic [31], and the seasonal
influenza [32]. Some studies have explored the feasibility
of topic modeling on documents extracted from other social
media platforms such as Facebook [33], Weibo [34] as well as
Google trends [35]. Additionally, Medford et al. [36] studied
the change in topics throughout January 14th to 28th , 2020
using Twitter data related to COVID-19. In addition, Ordun et
al. [37] explored a time series based analysis, and Yin et al.
[38] explored Dynamic Topic Modeling to study the trending
topics in tweets for the pandemic. However, to the best of
our knowledge, no work has discussed the influence of the
events related to COVID-19 on the trending topics over time
being discussed by the public on social media. We attempt
to understand how public discussions on social media about
COVID-19 resonate with the events related to this pandemic.
III. DATA
In this section, we describe our data collection, handannotated data and preprocessing steps involved in data cleaning.
A. Data Collection
We utilized the COVID-19 pandemic-specific keywords
like “coronavirus”, “covid-19”, “sars-ncov” to extract tweets
posted from January 1st 2020 to April 30th 2020. In early
January (January 9), the World Health Organization (WHO)
announced cases of coronavirus-related pneumonia in Mainland China2 . The WHO officially declared COVID-19 a global
pandemic on March 113 . By late April (April 29), the National
Institute of Health (NIH) announced that the medication,
remdesivir, performed better than placebo in treating COVID19 4 . An open-source crawler library, getOldTweets5 and
Twitter Streaming API were used to extract the tweets. The
getOldTweets library was used to overcome the daily quota
limitations of the Twitter API. Additionally, this study was
limited to English language tweets alone, and a total of
957,923 tweets were collected and preprocessed as described
in Section III-C. Consequently, 866,527 unique tweets were
obtained and serve as our dataset.
B. Data Annotation
When tweets were collected using keywords, often, there
were instances of the tweets not related to COVID-19 but
still containing the specified keywords. In Table I, we report
sample tweets that contain the keyword “coronavirus”, but
are not relevant to the domain of COVID-19 pandemic. We
randomly sampled 1,500 unique tweets out of 866,527 unique
2 https://www.who.int/china/news/detail/09-01-2020-who-statementregarding-cluster-of-pneumonia-cases-in-wuhan-china
3 https://www.who.int/dg/speeches/detail/who-director-general-s-openingremarks-at-the-media-briefing-on-covid-19—11-march-2020
4 https://www.nih.gov/news-events/news-releases/nih-clinical-trial-showsremdesivir-accelerates-recovery-advanced-covid-19
5 https://github.com/Mottl/GetOldTweets3

tweets, and three annotators labeled them as “Relevant” or
“Irrelevant”. A tweet was labeled as “Relevant” if it contained
information about the spread, cause, effect, opinion, sentiment,
emotion with regards to COVID-19, otherwise, it was labeled
as “Irrelevant”. Out of 1,500 tweets, 1,154 (77%) tweets were
labeled as “Relevant” and 346 (23%) as “Irrelevant,” which
served as our dataset for building a relevancy classifier.

performing model was selected to predict the labels of all
the unique 865,027 tweets. Furthermore, we performed topic
modeling on the predicted relevant tweets to estimate the
probability of a tweet belonging to a unique topic and understand the hidden semantic similarities between the tweets.
We discuss the details of the topic modeling algorithm further
in Section IV-C.

Table I
E XAMPLE OF R ELEVANT AND I RRELEVANT T WEETS

Tweet
another foolproof way of not dying
of coronavirus is to stick your head
in an oven lit on gas mark 8. I expect
there are loads more such as being
hit by an asteroid.
coronavirus live updates: cases up
nearly 60% as airports expand
screenings: ny times -

Label
Irrelevant

Relevant

C. Data Preprocessing
The tweets fed to the relevancy classifier and the topic
modeling were first pre-processed, as discussed in this section.
Usually, the language used in social media posts is very
informal. People use short words, self-curated abbreviations,
URLs, and multiple punctuations, periods, or exclamations.
To understand the context and semantics of the content, we
first converted the tweets to lowercase and then removed the
emoticons, stop words, punctuations, and URLs, including
symbols like “#” ,“@” as well as special characters. We also
removed the keywords used to collect the tweets to avoid
any bias introduced by them being present in most of the
tweets. Ten percent of the total collected data were duplicate
and empty. These tweets were filtered out to obtain 866,527
unique tweets. We further tokenized the tweets using the Penn
Treebank tokenizer which uses regular expressions to tokenize
texts similar to the tokenization used in the Penn Treebank6 .
These tokens were then passed through a Porter stemmer7 for
stemming to reduce inflected word forms to their word stem
for a reduction in the size of the vocabulary.

Figure 1. Overview of the Framework to explore most discussed topics about
the COVID-19 pandemic on Twitter.

In this study, two types of classifiers were trained using two
types of feature representations, and the best performing model
was used as a Relevancy Classifier to infer unlabelled tweets.
The performance of our supervised models was evaluated
using document embeddings based on (TF-IDF) and contextual language models. A document embedding is a learned
representation for a text document where words that have a
similar meaning have a similar representation.

A. Feature Representation
Feature representation in any text classification task plays
a crucial role. Traditional context-free representations such
as Bag-of-Words (BoW) or TF-IDF are known for wordlevel representation, and in recent years we have seen the
improvement in language models by including contextual
semantics. We discuss various representations as follows.
• Context-Free Embedding: In a BoW based feature vector,
each element in the vector represents a unique word or
n-gram from the entire data set. The most significant
limitation of such a representation is the inability to
encode word meaning or contextual information into the
vectors. TF-IDF attempts to evaluate the importance of a
word by reducing the weight of words that occur more
IV. M ETHODOLOGY
frequently in the data set and increasing the weight of
In this section, we discuss the steps and models involved in
words that are less frequent. The vector representation
our approach to filter the relevant tweets and understand the
of a word based on TF-IDF, thereby encodes a different
trending topics. Fig. 1 presents an overview of the sequence
weight depending on its frequency of occurrence rather
of steps involved in our analysis. After preparing a dataset as
than its raw count. However, even though TF-IDF repdiscussed in Section III, we used the 1,500 preprocessed and
resentations assign different weights to different words,
annotated tweets to build a relevancy classifier. Two baseline
they fail to capture the meaning (context) of the same
traditional machine learning algorithms using Term Frequency
word at different places (polysemy).
- Inverse Document Frequency (TF-IDF) embeddings and
• Language Models (Contextual Embedding): Dense districontextual language model embeddings were evaluated and
butional similarity based word embedding such as Glove,
further discussed in Sections IV-A and IV-B. Finally, the best
FastText, or Word2Vec bridge the gap by trying to capture
6 https://web.archive.org/web/19970614160127/http://www.cis.upenn.edu/∼treebank/ the neighboring words of a particular word as its context.
7 https://tartarus.org/martin/PorterStemmer/
However, neighboring words cannot necessarily capture

the context of a word given the complexity and variety
in a sentence. Recent developments in language modeling
and the release of Transformer models researchers were
able to capture the context of a given word by looking at
an input sequence and deciding at each step which other
parts of the sequence are essential. Bidirectional Encoder
Representations from Transformers (BERT) introduced a
novel technique of masked language models (MLM) and
next sentence prediction [39] to learn the distributional
contextual representation of words.
B. Relevancy Classification
We used the 1,500 annotated tweets to build a relevancy classifier. Due to class imbalance (Relevant:77%, Irrelevant:23%), we used synthetic minority over-sampling technique (SMOTE) [40] to generate synthetic samples of minority
class and train the relevancy classifier on 1,154 relevant and
346 irrelevant tweets. After oversampling, we split the dataset
into train, test, and validation subsets with a distribution of
75%, 15%, and 10%, respectively. We used a 5-fold crossvalidation technique to confirm the generalizability of the
model. Both the feature representations discussed in Section IV-A were used to train two traditional classification
algorithms: Support Vector Classification (Linear SVC) and
Logistic Regression (LR) to filter the relevant tweets for
COVID-19 from the collected tweets. We used the ScikitLearn8 pipeline to generate TF-IDF vector representations. For
generating contextual embeddings using pre-trained language
models, the default conversion process of tokenization, and
converting all sentences to a given sequence length (i.e., truncating longer sequences, and padding shorter sequences) were
followed. Sentence-Transformers9 was used to generate BERT
based sentence embeddings from the tweets. A pre-trained
‘bert-large-uncased’ [41] model with an embedding dimension
of 768 was used to generate the sentence embeddings. We
performed a Principal Component Analysis on the embeddings
to reduce the dimensionality of the feature space to 300 and
prevent the classifier from overfitting.
C. Topic Modeling
Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) [28] is an unsupervised probabilistic model to automatically identify the hidden
themes (topics) in documents like tweets. It classifies the documents (i.e., tweets) into topics that are the best representation
of the data set. After preprocessing the relevant tweets, as
discussed in Section III-C, we used a coherence score to find
the optimal number of topics. A coherence score provides the
score of the semantic similarity between the words in a given
topic [42]. The Coherence Model10 from Gensim11 package
was used for this purpose. An LDA model with the optimal
number of topics as eight was inferred by the coherence score
graph, as shown in Fig. 2. The topics thus obtained consisted
8 https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/classes.html
9 https://github.com/UKPLab/sentence-transformers

of the top representative words in each topic, along with their
probabilities. We publish the tweet IDs with relevance labels
and topics to be explored by the research community12 .
V. R ESULTS
A. Relevancy Classifier (Research Question 1)
The performance of Logistic Regression and Support Vector
Classifier with TF IDF and BERT embeddings are reported
in Table II. The performance of the SVC classifier with
BERT embedding was better than the other settings. The
best performing SVC classifier on BERT embeddings showed
precision and recall of 93% and classification accuracy of
93% in the test set and precision and recall of 95% with a
classification accuracy of 95% in the validation set. This model
was selected to generate predictions on the entire data set
of 865,027 remaining tweets (excluding the 1,500 annotated
tweets). A total of 688,825 (79.6%) tweets were classified as
relevant tweets, and the remaining 176,202 were classified as
irrelevant tweets. We used 689,979 relevant tweets (688,825
predicted by the relevancy classifier and 1,154 annotated as
relevant earlier) for topic modeling, visualization, and trend
analysis.
Table II
R ELEVANCY C LASSIFIER R ESULTS .
(ACC = ACCURACY, F1 = F1 SCORE , P = PRECISION , R= RECALL )
Test Set

Model
LR +
TFIDF
SVC +
TFIDF

Validation Set
TFIDF Vectors
Acc(%) F1(%) P(%) R(%) Acc(%) F1(%) P(%)

R(%)

90

90

87

87

91

90

93

93

92

93

88

87

89

89

89

88

Contextual BERT Embeddings
LR +
BERT
SVC +
BERT

88

87

87

88

89

89

89

88

93

92

93

92

95

95

95

95

B. Topic Analysis (Research Question 2 and 3)
The coherence score for varying numbers of topics for all
the predicted relevant tweets is shown in Fig. 2. As shown
in the figure, the coherence score increased until eight topics
and then gradually decreased; hence we chose eight to be the
optimal number of topics for our data set.
The percentage of tweets discussing about each topic in the
corpus is shown in Table III.
The results of running an LDA model on all the relevant
tweets for eight topics and manually curated themes summarizing the top ten most relevant terms along with some
representative tweets for each topic are discussed in Table IV.
We discuss the themes for each topic as curated based on
the top 10 relevant terms below.
• Pandemic impact and reopenings: As shown in Table
IV, the keywords and representative tweets for Topic
1 represent the major impact of the COVID-19 on the

10 https://radimrehurek.com/gensim/models/coherencemodel.html
11 https://radimrehurek.com/gensim/

12 https://github.com/preetham-salehundam/COVID-TOPIC-ANALYSIS

Table III
T OPIC DISTRIBUTION IN THE DATA SET
Topic
Number
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

•

Theme

Tweets(%)

Pandemic impact and reopenings
Government response
Health workers and authorities
Federal help and quarantine
Origin of novel coronavirus
People’s thoughts during COVID-19
Case statistics
Lockdown and stay at home

11.7
12.8
14.5
6.0
12.5
21.1
14.5
6.9

•

•

world.
People’s thoughts during COVID-19: Topic 6 represented a significant portion of the tweets discussing
various aspects of people’s thoughts during the COVID19 pandemic as it progressed.
Case statistics: We observed that Topic 7 could be
identified as case statistics during COVID-19 as it predominantly depicted the set of tweets discussing the
number of people affected by COVID-19, number of
deaths and number of recovered patients etc. due to this
pandemic.
Lockdown and stay at home: Lockdown and stay
at home advisories had been issued during COVID-19
pandemic to reduce the exponential spread of the virus.
Our topic model identified such tweets which talked about
these advisories as observed by the generated keywords
in Topic 8.

Figure 2. Coherence score graph for topic analysis with varying number of
Topics. Red line shows that the coherence score was the highest when the the
number of topics were 8

•

•

•

•

economy, businesses , education, employment and other
aspects of public life. It also contained tweets which
discussed the possibilities and consequences of reopening
certain businesses which were closed due to COVID-19
pandemic.
Government response: Topic 2 was identified as the
government response during COVID-19 pandemic which
might be an indicative of the social media discussions
about the response of all government agencies over
COVID-19 from all over the world during the press
briefings.
Health workers and authorities: During the COVID19 pandemic, the role of health officials, organizations
and workers has been prominent and the keywords in
Topic 3 imply the same. Moreover it also covered the
pharmaceutical interventions associated with COVID-19.
Federal help and quarantine: In order to facilitate the
multiple crisis scenarios caused by this global pandemic,
various federal organizations came up with relief plans
for proper pandemic disaster management and to help
their citizens. At the same time people were quarantined
to control the spread of the virus. The keywords in Topic
4 suggest the theme ‘Federal help and quarantine’ to
contain such tweets.
Origin of novel coronavirus: The keywords in Topic 5
mostly pointed towards the tweets mentioning the origin
of novel coronavirus which was believed to be the Hubei
province of China, from where it spreaded all across the

Figure 3. Topic Visualization depicting intertopic distance map.
PC1 and PC2 are the first two Principal Components

An interactive visualization of the topics generated by the
LDA model using pyLDAvis13 package as shown in Fig. 3
revealed that Topics 5 and 6 overlap with each other, which
indicated that people’s thoughts were circulating around the
novel coronavirus (COVID-19) from China and theories and
beliefs related to it. Topic 1, 4, and 8 also overlap with each
other as these collectively address the consequences of the
COVID-19 pandemic. Among all the topics, People’s thoughts
during COVID-19 (21.1%), Case statistics (14.5%), and Health
workers and authorities (14.5%) were the most discussed,
which is reflected from the size of the circles in Fig. 3.
13 https://github.com/bmabey/pyLDAvis

Table IV
T HEMES RELATED TO EACH TOPIC , W ORDS AND REPRESENTATIVE TWEETS FOR EACH TOPIC
Topic
Number

Theme

Words

1

Pandemic
impact
and
reopenings

president, lockdown, business,
american, reopen, economy,
close, school, child, leader

2

Government
response

trump, pandemic, people, governor, force, white, video, happen, america, donald

Health workers
and authorities

state,
pandemic,
health,
worker, response, american,
youtube, public, outbreak,
briefing

•

3

4

Federal
help
and quarantine

crisis, claim, give, federal,
quarantine, community, high,
help, life, provide

•
•

UK is badly prepared for recession
PANIC!!!THEIR GREATEST FEAR. PUBLIC AWAKENING Bill Gates said movements towards nationalism
worsened government response to the coronavirus crisis - Business Insider

•

5

Origin of novel
coronavirus

vaccine, house, virus, pandemic, china, april, never, social, medium, chinese

Appears the cause of the #Wuhanpneumonia is as suspected, a #novel coronavirus. Curious since it appears
to have connection to seafood market if it is zoonotic in etiology. Perfect example of why #OneHealth and
#healthsecurity are important.
Chinese government scientists have identified a new coronavirus as the cause of a mystery pneumonia outbreak
in Wuhan

6

People’s
thoughts during
COVID-19

people, go, think, thing, would,
everyone, really, get, right, still

•

3700 people were presumed dead from COVID-19 just like that. Something is fishy, are we just inflating
figures for political reasons...
We have more than enough data. We know that basically EVERY projection was wrong about the coronavirus.
So....now that we have MORE THAN ENOUGH INFO...IS THE CORONA VIRUS WORSE THAN THE
FLU?

7

Case statistics

death, case, test, report, number, patient, hospital, total, update, positive

•
•

At least 835 coronavirus cases diagnosed in China, 25 dead
#BREAKING UK virus death toll rises by 888 to 15,464: health ministry

•

8

Lockdown and
stay at home

realdonaldtrump,
order,
china,
record,
increase,
company, stayhome, south,
fight, lockdown

Coronavirus: China puts millions in lockdown amid rising deaths via @YouTube why Pakistan Govt does not
buy screening virus equipments from China and why let people die in large.
We may all have second and third waves. These can only be controlled by lockdown measures. Add the fact
that Covid19 may be endemic. So if we can’t find a vaccine, then we have to develop a new way of living.
A new world awaits and it’s not going to be good.

Representative tweets
•
•
•
•

•

•

•

•

WHO advice for international travel and trade in relation to the outbreak of pneumonia caused by a new
#coronavirus in #Wuhan, #China.
China businesses, markets reopen, but many people stay home as coronavirus cases on rise again
Unfortunately under this trump administration, I don’t believe anything they say¡No reason for Americans to
panic’: White House seeks to calm fears over coronavirus.
Xi Jinping has turned invisible during China’s coronavirus epidemic, likely to cover his back in case things
go badly wrong
As public health officials work to respond to the Coronavirus in Washington, the number of contacts the
patient came in close contact with rises to 50.
World Health Organization discusses the novel coronavirus USA TODAY

Based on the keywords in each topic, individual tweets were
labeled with the prominent topic using our LDA model, and
the percentage of tweets belonging to each topic for every
week was calculated. As shown in Fig. 4, we plotted the
percentage of tweets belonging to each theme against each
week. This was done in order to visualize the trend in each
topic being discussed over weeks.

Figure 5. Prominent topics trending with time

influence of these events. Additionally, Table V (third column)
summarises the prominent topics (in terms of the percentage of
tweets) each week. Such an analysis can help understand the
correlation between the events and the trending topics during
the COVID-19 pandemic.
Figure 4. Topic trend with time

VI. D ISCUSSION
In order to understand the trends in the topics reported
in Fig. 4, the events occurred during COVID-19 as listed
by The American Journal of Managed Care (AJMC)14 were
extracted as shown in Table V (second column). Fig. 5
shows the dominant topics every week, possibly due to the
14 https://www.ajmc.com/view/a-timeline-of-covid19-developments-in-2020

A. Principal Findings
1) Data Collection and Annotation Analysis: In the early
weeks of January, we observed that the tweets with keywords
like coronavirus and COVID-19 were very low compared to
later weeks. The volume of tweets increased from the 4th
week of January and continued to remain considerably high

Table V
P ROMINENT EVENT EACH CALENDAR WEEK ( ACCORDING TO COVID-19 TIMELINE AS MENTIONED BY AJMC) AND ITS IMPACT ON TRENDING TOPICS
EVERY WEEK
Weeks

COVID-19 timeline events

Trending Topics

Jan 01 to Jan 11

WHO announced mysterious coronavirus-related pneumonia in Wuhan, China. At that
time, there were 59 cases and travel precautions were already at the forefront of experts’
concerns.

People’s thoughts during COVID-19, Origin of novel coronavirus and
Case statistics

CDC began screening for coronavirus at three US airports as cases were reported in
Thailand and Japan. US also confirmed its first US coronavirus Case. Meanwhile,
chinese scientist confirmed the human transmission of COVID-19 and Wuhan was
placed under quarantine

Health workers and authorities, People’s thoughts during COVID-19
and Case statistics

Jan 12 to Jan 25

Jan 26 to Feb 01

WHO issued a global health emergency as the worldwide death toll reached more than
200 and there was an exponential jump to more than 9800 coronavirus related cases

Feb 02 to Feb 08

Global air travel was restricted and US declared public health emergency due to the
coronavirus outbreak.

Feb 09 to Feb 22

China’s COVID-19 deaths exceeded those of SARS crisis

Feb 23 to Feb 29

Mar 01 to Mar 07

Mar 08 to Mar 14

Mar 15 to Mar 21

Mar 22 to Mar 28

Mar 29 to Apr 04

Apr 05 to Apr 11

Apr 12 to Apr 18

Apr 19 to Apr 30

People’s thoughts during Covid-19, Health workers and authorities and
Case statistics
Case Statistics, People’s thoughts during COVID-19 and Health workers and authorities
People’s thoughts during Covid-19, Case statistics and Health workers
and authorities
People’s thoughts during Covid-19, Government response and Health
workers and authorities

CDC said that COVID-19 was heading toward pandemic status
Passengers on California cruise ship were tested positive

People’s thoughts during COVID-19, Health workers and authorities
and Government response

WHO Declared COVID-19 a pandemic while US president Donald Trump declared it a
national emergency.Travel Ban on non-US citizens traveling from Europe was enforced
CMS expanded the use of telehealth temporarily and US president Trump released an
economic stimulus plan to Americans. Further, California issued statewide stay-at-home
order.
Senate passed the coronavirus aid, relief, and economic security CARES Act with
Trump signing it into law

People’s thoughts during COVID-19, Government response and Pandemic impact and reopenings
People’s thoughts during COVID-19, Government response and Origin
of novel coronavirus
People’s thoughts during COVID-19, Government response and Origin
of novel coronavirus.

FDA authorized the use of Hydroxychloroquine for treatment of COVID-19.

People’s thoughts during COVID-19, Government response and Origin
of novel coronavirus

American Heart Association warned that the drug combination of hydroxycholorquine
and antibiotic, azithromycin were not meant for everyone.

People’s thoughts during COVID-19, Government response and Case
statistics

President Trump planned for the way to reopen the economy.

Peoples thoughts during COVID-19, Government response and Health
workers and authorities

As many as 26.5 million Americans had filed unemployment by this time and due to
cost concerns the poor and young people defered care for health related issues. National
Institutes of Health (NIH) showed early promise for drug Remdesivir for the treatment
of COVID-19

People’s thoughts during COVID-19, Case statistics and Health workers and authorities

throughout February and decreased during April. It was also
observed that the ratio of relevant to irrelevant tweets in the
entire dataset (3.9) was similar to the manually labeled dataset
(3.4), which shows that the distribution of the labeled data is
similar to the data annotated by the classifier.
2) Relevancy Classifier Analysis: It was observed that some
of the tweets collected using COVID-19 specific keywords
were irrelevant to the COVID-19 pandemic. We defined tweets
to be relevant if they provided information about the spread,
cause, effect, opinion, sentiment, emotion with regards to the
COVID-19 pandemic. We designed a relevancy classifier to
filter out the irrelevant tweets which was able to distinguish the
tweets like “olcokcevat malnla cmertsrrnla cimri olmal veren
azizsr veren zelil olur”, “nojo demais dessa pessoa” which
were tweeted using English alphabets.
3) Topic Analysis: Overall, among all the eight topics, People’s thoughts during COVID-19, Case statistics, and Health
workers and authorities were predominantly discussed. This
may be due to the fact that as COVID-19 has been declared

a pandemic by World Health Organization15 , rising cases and
the role of health agencies were the main concern over social
media. Several conspiracy theories were given by people [18],
and their reactions on economic, societal, and political areas
came to fore throughout the pandemic [43]. In this section,
we addressed the discussion on the trending topics over time
by taking into consideration the COVID-19 related timeline
events as listed in Table V. The key observations of the same
are as discussed below:
•

Jan 01 to Jan 11: During the first two weeks of January,
the World Health Organization had announced the news
about the clusters of pneumonia like cases of unknown
origin in Wuhan, China and travel restrictions was a
concern. As a result, among all the topics discovered on
our data set, “People’s thoughts during COVID-19” was
the most discussed one. Tweets on Twitter during this
week like “Only very limited information is available,
but this looks like an outbreak of what could be a

15 https://covid19.who.int/

•

•

•

•

•

new respiratory (corona?)virus” mainly talked about some
symptoms and general perceptions about this virus by the
people. Topics like “Origin of novel coronavirus” and
“Case statistics” were also prominent as a majority of
the tweets talked about the origin of this virus and the
number of people infected with it by that time.
Jan 12 to Jan 25: By the next two weeks of January,
according to the AJMC coronavirus timeline, when the
cases of novel coronavirus were reported outside China
in Thailand, Japan and the US, the national public health
institute of US, Centre for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC) began screenings for passengers at US airports.
Wuhan in China was also subsequently placed under
lockdown due to reports of human to human transmission
of this virus. At this time the topic, “Health workers
and authorities” emerged as the dominant topics as CDC
being a premier health institute started taking action to
stop the spread of coronavirus. As cases of this disease
started emerging in other countries outside China, the
topic, “Case statistics” was also predominantly discussed
at this time.
Jan 26 to Feb 01: During this week, as the number
of COVID-19 related cases and deaths were increasing,
the World Health Organization(WHO) declared a global
health emergency16 . So, the topic, “Health workers and
authorities” continued to be discussed more as WHO is a
major health organization. Tweets like “UN health agency
urges China to continue search for source of new virus,
as Thailand case emerges” depicted the role of health
agencies at this time. As there was also an exponential
rise in the case, “Case statistics” was also one of the
dominant topics.
Feb 02 to Feb 08: As the US declared a health emergency
due to the coroanvirus outbreak, the topic discussing
about the role of “health workers and authorities” was
still one of the prominent discussed topics. During this
time, the topic “Case statistics” continued to be trending
on Twitter at this time.
Feb 09 to Feb 22: During these two weeks, deaths
related to COVID-19 were increasing and people started
talking more about this novel coronavirus. Testing and
diagnosis of people for COVID-19 related symptoms by
health authorities became a concern. It was evident from
the tweet like “CDC Begins to Test Patients with Flulike Symptoms for Coronavirus”. Thus, the topics like
“Case statistics” and “Health workers and authorities”
were predominantly discussed at this point of time.
Feb 23 to Feb 29: According to CDC, as COVID-19
was heading towards a pandemic stage, “Government
response” topic emerged as one of the prominent topics.
Tweets like “Trump bashes media criticism over his
handling of coronavirus pandemic ” and “You thought
the coronavirus was bad? Just look forward to the next

16 https://www.statnews.com/2020/01/30/who-declares-coronavirusoutbreak-a-global-health-emergency/

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

8 months of it being a political weapon used by the US
presidential candidates” depicted the political impact of
COVID-19 at this time.
Mar 01 to Mar 07: In the first week of March, as
several passengers on a Califoria cruise ship were tested
positive and world wide cases had passed 100,000, “Case
statistics” topic was predominantly a topic of discussion.
Mar 08 to Mar 14: On March 11, WHO declared this
novel coronavirus as a global pandemic. As a result,
the topic, “Pandemic impact and reopenings” emerged
as one of the highly discussed topics of this time. People
started to discuss the effect of this pandemic as evident
by the tweet “Stock market news live: Oil crashes, stock
futures crater on coronavirus, crude war fears #stocks
#markets”. Press briefings by the government officials
and their response on COVID-19 became quite prominent
topic on social media.
Mar 15 to Mar 21: By this week, US president Donald
Trump signed a coronavirus relief package. Several parts
of the world entered into lockdown. So, “Government
response” topic was highly discussed in this week. There
were several conspiracy theories blaming China for such
worldwide spread of the virus as evident from the tweet
during this week “Is the Wuhan Coronavirus, A Bio
Weapon stolen from Canada And Intentionally Released
in China!”. So, the discussions about the “Origin of the
novel coronavirus” emerged once again as the trending
topic.
Mar 22 to Mar 28: When the third month of the global
pandemic ended, the White House and Senate leaders
reached an agreement on a $2 trillion stimulus deal. As
a result “Government response” towards COVID-19 was
a highly discussed topic.
Mar 29 to April 4: One of the United States federal
executive departments, Food and drug administration
(FDA) authorized the use of drug Hydroxychloroquine to
treat COVID-19 on March 30. So, more discussions on
“Government Response” towards COVID-19 continued
on Twitter.
April 5 to April 11: As American Health Association warned that Hydroxychloroquine along with the
combination of azithromycin drugs were not meant for
everyone, “People’s thoughts during COVID-19” and
“Case statistics” continued to trend high during this time.
Meanwhile, the US president Trump began promoting
this drug. Consequently, “Government response” was also
trending.
April 12 to April 18: Further, Trump started planning for
the reopening of the economy according to the “gating
criteria” . In addition, he announced the halt of funding to
World Health Organization (WHO) as he held the organization responsible for not giving proper information about
the pandemic earlier17 . As a result, “Health workers and
authorities” topic emerged once again as the dominant

17 https://www.bbc.com/news/world-us-canada-52289056

topics along with “Government response”.
April 19 to April 30: By the end of April, as 26.5 million
people had filed unemployment in the US18 . According to
AJMC COVID-19 timeline, people started deferring their
treatments due to “cost concerns”. “Health workers and
authorities” was still one of the predominantly discussed
topics as NIH trials had shown show the drug, remdesivir
to be effective for the treatment of COVID-19. Promotion
of telehealth as mentioned in the tweet “NEW: Bipartisan
lawmakers back efforts to expand telehealth services for
seniors to help combat the coronavirus” might have also
led to the increased discussion related to “Health workers
and authorities” topic during this time.
Such analysis could be useful for policymakers, government
authorities, and health officials to understand the public concerns on the events occurring during emergencies like pandemics. It could help them to provide correct and timely information on the events happening during emergencies. News
reports or magazine articles need to be careful in reporting the
events to the public as it might influence their discussions on
social media. Otherwise, there could be widespread fake news,
misinformation, and several conspiracy theories on social
media platforms.

but we cannot use these data to make causal claims.
Exploration of the usefulness of Twitter data for actual
detection of events related to COVID-19 is an important
next step.

•

C. Comparison with Prior Work
•

B. Strengths and Limitations
In this section, we would like to present some limitations we
faced in our analysis of social media posts during the COVID19 pandemic as below.
• Dataset: This study is limited to tweets in English. As the
COVID-19 pandemic is a global pandemic, the English
language constraint restricted our data collection to users
who tweeted in the English language alone, and as a
result, the findings of this study may not be generalized
worldwide. We could not evaluate our analysis on multilingual tweets such as Hindi, German, or French, and
we encourage the research community to address it in
future works. Future studies may also perform spatial
and temporal analysis to identify the events and topics
specific to a location.
• Geo-location: Due to the low volume of tweets that
include geotags, we have excluded it from the scope of
this study.
• Fake news and misinformation: The use of social
media platforms come with a known risk of fake news
and misinformation, which could affect the topics of
discussion over social media. Research focused on identifying fake news would have interesting applications for
understanding pandemics like COVID-19.
• Event detection: Another limitation that should be discussed is that we cannot make causal claims regarding
the alignment between certain topics and events. These
findings help describe the relationship between COVID19-related timeline events and discussions on Twitter,
18 https://www.cnn.com/world/live-news/coronavirus-pandemic-04-24-20intl/h 41202e644630af195f7adf074315e677

•

Relevancy Classifier: During crises like natural disasters
or pandemics, online social media can create noise which
can clutter the useful information. In most of the prior
works, the tweets collected using keywords were assumed
to be relevant, and studies were carried out. However,
we found that the tweets collected using keywords can
be irrelevant and contain no useful information. Twentyfive percent (175048) of the total collected tweets were
irrelevant. These kinds of tweets can often bias the
experiments. In order to mitigate this issue, we built a
relevancy classifier that can filter out the irrelevant tweets.
Most prior research has filtered out non-English tweets in
the process of data preparation. However, oftentimes, we
see foreign language tweets containing English alphabets
included, which can create noise in the experiments. In
this study, we observed that the majority of the foreign
language tweets were identified as irrelevant by the
relevancy classifier, and thus these were excluded from
our experiments.
Understanding of Events Over Time: Temporal trend
analysis on online social media data can be important to
identify how discussions over social media get influenced
over time by the news and information available to the
people during pandemics like COVID-19. During events
like natural disasters and pandemics, it is important
for the government and humanitarian organizations to
identify key factors that influence the topics of discussion
of the public over time. Prior works have not addressed
this problem. In this study, we identified various events
that may be linked to the topics of discussion during
the COVID-19 pandemic. These types of studies could
also be used to understand the influence of fake news
and other media sources on public discussions on social
media platforms. Hence, proactive actions could be taken
to stop the spread of fake news and misinformation, and
at the same time, the impact of influential and impact of
accurate news could be identified.
VII. C ONCLUSION

While urgent actions are needed to mitigate the potentially
devastating effects of COVID-19, they can be supported by
understanding the behavioral and social impact on the people. Because the pandemic imposes significant psychological
burdens on individuals, insights from analyzing public conversations’ trends can be used to help align public emotions with
the recommendations of epidemiologists and public health experts. To understand the possible effect of media coverage on
public emotions, we present an analysis of the trending topics
of conversations on Twitter to events during the pandemic.
Such analysis can provide insights so that a positive frame

could be designed in the media coverage of the pandemic
to educate the public and relieve negative emotions while
increasing compliance with public health recommendations.
The officials monitoring the spread of the pandemic can judge
the influence of some false news or rumors related to COVID19 as they could monitor the topics trending at a given
time and thus provide appropriate information to the people.
Particular sentiments like fear and misconceptions can also
be monitored similarly. Government officials can make better
decisions accordingly as their decisions will be reflected in the
news, which would impact people’s behavior and discussions.
Empirical and qualitative evaluations of our analysis indicated
that our analysis is trustworthy and can inform the design of
frameworks for more precise and definitive social data mining
to assist humanitarian organizations during global pandemics.
R EFERENCES
[1] T. P. Velavan and C. G. Meyer, “The COVID-19 epidemic,” Trop. Med.
Int. Health, vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 278–280, Mar. 2020.
[2] E. Dong, H. Du, and L. Gardner, “An interactive web-based dashboard
to track covid-19 in real time,” The Lancet infectious diseases, vol. 20,
no. 5, pp. 533–534, 2020.
[3] S. Jordan, S. Hovet, I. Fung, H. Liang, K.-W. Fu, and Z. Tse, “Using
twitter for public health surveillance from monitoring and prediction to
public response,” p. 6, 2018.
[4] Z. Shah, D. Surian, A. Dyda, E. Coiera, K. D. Mandl, and A. G. Dunn,
“Automatically appraising the credibility of Vaccine-Related web pages
shared on social media: A twitter surveillance study,” J. Med. Internet
Res., vol. 21, no. 11, p. e14007, Nov. 2019.
[5] L. Sinnenberg, A. M. Buttenheim, K. Padrez, C. Mancheno, L. Ungar,
and R. M. Merchant, “Twitter as a tool for health research: A systematic
review,” Am. J. Public Health, vol. 107, no. 1, pp. e1–e8, Jan. 2017.
[6] Z. Shah and A. G. Dunn, “Event detection on twitter by mapping
unexpected changes in streaming data into a spatiotemporal lattice,” pp.
1–1, 2019.
[7] M. S. Steffens, A. G. Dunn, K. E. Wiley, and J. Leask, “How organisations promoting vaccination respond to misinformation on social media:
a qualitative investigation,” BMC Public Health, vol. 19, no. 1, p. 1348,
Oct. 2019.
[8] J. J. Van Bavel, K. Baicker, P. S. Boggio, V. Capraro, A. Cichocka,
M. Cikara, M. J. Crockett, A. J. Crum, K. M. Douglas, J. N. Druckman
et al., “Using social and behavioural science to support covid-19
pandemic response,” Nature Human Behaviour, pp. 1–12, 2020.
[9] O. Belkahla Driss, S. Mellouli, and Z. Trabelsi, “From citizens to
government policy-makers: Social media data analysis,” Government
Information Quarterly, vol. 36, no. 3, pp. 560 – 570, 2019.
[Online]. Available: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0740624X18302983
[10] Q. Liu, Z. Zheng, J. Zheng, Q. Chen, G. Liu, S. Chen, B. Chu,
H. Zhu, B. Akinwunmi, J. Huang, C. J. P. Zhang, and W.-K. Ming,
“Health communication through news media during the early stage of
the COVID-19 outbreak in china: Digital topic modeling approach,” J.
Med. Internet Res., vol. 22, no. 4, p. e19118, Apr. 2020.
[11] A. Abd-Alrazaq, D. Alhuwail, M. Househ, M. Hamdi, and Z. Shah, “Top
concerns of tweeters during the COVID-19 pandemic: Infoveillance
study (preprint).”
[12] M. Dong, X. Cao, M. Liang, L. Li, G. Liu, and H. Liang, “Understand research hotspots surrounding COVID-19 and other coronavirus
infections using topic modeling.”
[13] L. Chen, H. Lyu, T. Yang, Y. Wang, and J. Luo, “In the eyes of the
beholder: Sentiment and topic analyses on social media use of neutral
and controversial terms for COVID-19,” Apr. 2020.
[14] L. Li, Q. Zhang, X. Wang, J. Zhang, T. Wang, T.-L. Gao, W. Duan,
K. K.-F. Tsoi, and F.-Y. Wang, “Characterizing the propagation of
situational information in social media during COVID-19 epidemic: A
case study on weibo,” pp. 556–562, 2020.
[15] M. T. Rashid and D. Wang, “CovidSens: a vision on reliable social
sensing for COVID-19,” Artificial Intelligence Review, Jun. 2020.

[16] L. Schild, C. Ling, J. Blackburn, G. Stringhini, Y. Zhang, and S. Zannettou, ““go eat a bat, chang!”: An early look on the emergence of
sinophobic behavior on web communities in the face of COVID-19,”
Apr. 2020.
[17] E. Ferrara, “What types of COVID-19 conspiracies are populated by
twitter bots?” Apr. 2020.
[18] S. Shahsavari, P. Holur, T. R. Tangherlini, and V. Roychowdhury,
“Conspiracy in the time of corona: Automatic detection of covid-19
conspiracy theories in social media and the news,” Apr. 2020.
[19] F. R. Lamy, R. Daniulaityte, R. W. Nahhas, M. J. Barratt, A. G. Smith,
A. Sheth, S. S. Martins, E. W. Boyer, and R. G. Carlson, “Increases in
synthetic cannabinoids-related harms: Results from a longitudinal webbased content analysis,” International Journal of Drug Policy, vol. 44,
pp. 121–129, 2017.
[20] S. Vieweg, A. L. Hughes, K. Starbird, and L. Palen, “Microblogging
during two natural hazards events,” 2010.
[21] E. Aramaki, S. Maskawa, and M. Morita, “Twitter catches the flu:
detecting influenza epidemics using twitter,” in Proceedings of the 2011
Conference on empirical methods in natural language processing, 2011,
pp. 1568–1576.
[22] R. Muppalla, M. Miller, T. Banerjee, and W. Romine, “Discovering
explanatory models to identify relevant tweets on zika,” Conf. Proc.
IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., vol. 2017, pp. 1194–1197, Jul. 2017.
[23] A. Wahbeh, T. Nasralah, M. Al-Ramahi, and O. El-Gayar, “Mining
physicians’ opinions on social media to obtain insights into COVID19: Mixed methods analysis (preprint).”
[24] S. Padhee, T. Saha, J. Tetreault, and A. Jaimes, “Clustering of social
media messages for humanitarian aid response during crisis,” 07 2020.
[25] A. Zalewski, W. Long, A. E. W. Johnson, R. G. Mark, and L.-W. H.
Lehman, “Estimating patient’s health state using latent structure inferred
from clinical time series and text,” IEEE EMBS Int Conf Biomed Health
Inform, vol. 2017, pp. 449–452, Feb. 2017.
[26] D. A. Ostrowski, “Using latent dirichlet allocation for topic modelling in
twitter,” in Proceedings of the 2015 IEEE 9th International Conference
on Semantic Computing (IEEE ICSC 2015), Feb. 2015, pp. 493–497.
[27] A. Agarwal, A. K. Kar, and P. V. Ilavarasan, “Factors affecting customer
service Engagement–Six cases assessing strengths and weaknesses for
telecom and payment service providers,” in Proceedings of ICETIT 2019.
Springer, 2020, pp. 775–784.
[28] D. M. Blei, A. Y. Ng, and M. I. Jordan, “Latent dirichlet allocation,” J.
Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 3, no. Jan, pp. 993–1022, 2003.
[29] A. J. Lazard, E. Scheinfeld, J. M. Bernhardt, G. B. Wilcox, and
M. Suran, “Detecting themes of public concern: a text mining analysis of
the centers for disease control and prevention’s ebola live twitter chat,”
Am. J. Infect. Control, vol. 43, no. 10, pp. 1109–1111, Oct. 2015.
[30] M. Miller, T. Banerjee, R. Muppalla, W. Romine, and A. Sheth, “What
are people tweeting about zika? an exploratory study concerning its
symptoms, treatment, transmission, and prevention,” JMIR Public Health
Surveill, vol. 3, no. 2, p. e38, Jun. 2017.
[31] P. Missier, A. Romanovsky, T. Miu, A. Pal, M. Daniilakis, A. Garcia,
D. Cedrim, and L. da Silva Sousa, “Tracking dengue epidemics using
twitter content classification and topic modelling,” in Current Trends in
Web Engineering. Springer International Publishing, 2016, pp. 80–92.
[32] I. Kagashe, Z. Yan, and I. Suheryani, “Enhancing seasonal influenza
surveillance: Topic analysis of widely used medicinal drugs using twitter
data,” J. Med. Internet Res., vol. 19, no. 9, p. e315, Sep. 2017.
[33] A. S. Raamkumar, S. G. Tan, and H. L. Wee, “Measuring the outreach
efforts of public health authorities and the public response on facebook
during the COVID-19 pandemic in early 2020: Cross-Country comparison (preprint).”
[34] X. Han, J. Wang, M. Zhang, and X. Wang, “Using social media to
mine and analyze public opinion related to COVID-19 in china,” Int. J.
Environ. Res. Public Health, vol. 17, no. 8, Apr. 2020.
[35] S. Bhattacharya and S. Singh, “Visible insights of the invisible pandemic: A scientometric, altmetric and topic trend analysis,” Apr. 2020.
[36] R. J. Medford, S. N. Saleh, A. Sumarsono, T. M. Perl, and C. U.
Lehmann, “An “infodemic”: Leveraging High-Volume twitter data to
understand public sentiment for the COVID-19 outbreak.”
[37] C. Ordun, S. Purushotham, and E. Raff, “Exploratory analysis of covid19 tweets using topic modeling, UMAP, and DiGraphs,” May 2020.
[38] H. Yin, S. Yang, and J. Li, “Detecting topic and sentiment dynamics
due to COVID-19 pandemic using social media,” Jul. 2020.

[39] J. Devlin, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova, “BERT: Pre-training
of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding,” Oct.
2018.
[40] N. V. Chawla, K. W. Bowyer, L. O. Hall, and W. P. Kegelmeyer,
“SMOTE: Synthetic minority over-sampling technique,” J. Artif. Intell.
Res., vol. 16, pp. 321–357, Jun. 2002.
[41] J. Devlin, M. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova, “BERT: pre-training
of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding,” CoRR,
vol. abs/1810.04805, 2018. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/
1810.04805
[42] M. Röder, A. Both, and A. Hinneburg, “Exploring the space of topic
coherence measures,” conference on Web search and data . . . , 2015.
[43] G. Bonaccorsi, F. Pierri, M. Cinelli, A. Flori, A. Galeazzi, F. Porcelli,
A. L. Schmidt, C. M. Valensise, A. Scala, W. Quattrociocchi, and
F. Pammolli, “Economic and social consequences of human mobility
restrictions under covid-19,” Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences, vol. 117, no. 27, pp. 15 530–15 535, 2020. [Online].
Available: https://www.pnas.org/content/117/27/15530

