NSF Convergence Approach to Transition Basic Research into Practice
Shelby Smith, Communications and Outreach, Convergence Accelerator, NSF
Chaitanya Baru, Senior Science Advisor, Convergence Accelerator, NSF

Abstract
The National Science Foundation Convergence Accelerator
addresses national-scale societal challenges through useinspired convergence research. Leveraging a convergence
approach the Convergence Accelerator builds upon basic
research and discovery to make timely investments to
strengthen the Nation’s innovation ecosystem associated with
several key R&D priority areas and practices to include the
coronavirus disease 2019, harnessing the data revolution,
the future of work, and quantum technology. Artificial
Intelligence is a key underlying theme across all of these
areas.

New Approach to Use-Inspired Research
Research is often driven by a compelling societal or
scientific challenge; however, it may take the researcher
community years to develop a solution. To deliver tangible
solutions at a faster pace, with potentially nation-wide
societal impact, the National Science Foundation (NSF) is
leveraging a convergence approach to transition basic
research into practice through a new capability called the
Convergence Accelerator [NSFCA 2019a]. Using the
innovation processes of human-centered design, user
discovery, and team science, and integrating a
multidisciplinary research approach, including Artificial
Intelligence (AI) and machine learning, the Accelerator is
making timely investments to solve high-risk societal
challenges through use-inspired convergence research.
The Convergence Accelerator aligns to U.S government
priorities outlined in the White House FY2020
Administration Research and Development (R&D) Budget
Priorities and the President’s Management Agenda [MK
2018, PMA 2019]. The strategy is to build upon basic
research and discovery to strengthen the Nation’s
innovation ecosystem. The program is associated with
several key R&D priority areas and practices including
artificial intelligence, information sciences and strategic
computing, security, manufacturing and medical innovation,
and education and training a workforce for the 21st-century

economy. The program requires public-private partnerships
across sectors including, government, industry, non-profit,
and academia.

Innovation Begins Here
Launched in 2019, the NSF Convergence Accelerator is
structured to support two thematic convergence research
“tracks” each year. AI is a key theme in three of the first four
tracks, with the fourth track being focused on Quantum
Technology. Additionally, the Accelerator is also funding
convergence research efforts to support solutions to bolster
the national response to coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID19).
The Convergence Accelerator employs a two-phase
approach, with the research activities of the teams being
proactively and intentionally managed. Phase I is a ninemonth planning effort where funding of up to $750,000 is
provided to further develop initial concepts; identify new
team members; participate in an innovation curriculum that
is provided by the program; and develop initial prototypes.
The innovation curriculum consists of training in the areas
of human-centered design, team science activities, interteam communications, and presentation coaching—all of
which are deemed essential to the success of Accelerator
projects. The training in Phase I prepares the teams for
success in the next phase. At the end of Phase I, teams
participate in a pitch competition as well as a proposal
evaluation. Selected teams from Phase I then proceed to
Phase II, with potential funding up to $5 Million for 24
months, where they are expected to provide high-impact
deliverables by the end of the second phase.
Open Knowledge Networks Track
To advance the progression from data to knowledge, and to
drive innovation across all areas of science and engineering
by fully harnessing the power of data and AI to achieve
scientific discovery and economic growth, the Convergence
Accelerator released an Open Knowledge Networks (OKN)
track in 2019 [NSFCA 2019b]. The Open Knowledge

Network ideas was introduced in NSF’s Harnessing the Data
Revolution Big Idea [HDR 2017] and discussed and refined
at workshops conducted by the federal Networking and
Information Technology R&D (NITRD) Big Data
Interagency Working Group, resulting in a report on the
topic [UCSF 2017, NITRD 2018]. The focus of the OKN
projects is on exploiting publicly available datasets,
especially U.S. Government and other public data. Some
projects are organized by “verticals”, i.e., by topic domains
and sectors such as biomedicine, hazards, smart health, and
court records. Other projects are organized by “horizontals”,
focusing on the development of software tools for data
ingestion, underlying representations of facts, including
geospatial and spatiotemporal information, and integrated
application development environments to enable
development of applications that use knowledge graphs.
Examples of “vertical” and “horizontal” projects include,
respectively:
Transforming the Transparency and Accessibility of
Court Records
The U.S. court system collects detailed records, however,
most of the information gathered is not publicly
accessible, either because the information is behind a
paywall or it is scattered across multiple systems. The
Transform the Transparency and Accessibility of Court
Records effort, created by Northwestern University, is
developing a suite of tools to enable access to court
records and to gather a better understanding of litigation
data. Using machine learning, the data gathered will
provide correlations and trends to inform a variety of endusers such as entrepreneurs for assessing litigation costs
and risk, journalists investigating equality in outcomes,
and the public becoming knowledgeable of judicial
processes.
Knowledge Network Programming System—with
Application to COVID-19 Science and Economics
Knowledge networks aid to transform data, however,
building applications on top of them is difficult, timeconsuming, and costly. The University of Michigan is
building a Knowledge Network Programming System to
allow application building ease, while also improving the
quality of knowledge resources. Focused on COVID-19
science and economics, the infrastructure will assist
stakeholders, such as policymakers and the medical
community, in addressing the virus and the economic
impact. The programming infrastructure will include an
intelligent knowledge compilation layer to help
programmers leverage rapidly changing knowledge
networks, as well as mechanisms to debug information,
share knowledge transparently, and to collect knowledge
provenance metadata. The long-term goal is to establish a

system that provides high accuracy knowledge with little
to no human oversight.
AI and Future of Work Track
The NSF Big Idea on the Future of Work at the HumanTechnology Frontier focuses on the workforce education
and training R&D priority and leverages convergence
research to understand and influence the impact of AI on the
workforce and on the nature of work itself. The
Convergence Accelerator track focuses on development of
the human-technology partnership, the design of new
technologies to augment human performance, to illuminate
the emerging socio-technological landscape, understand the
risks and benefits of new technologies, and to foster lifelong
and universal learning. Projects in this track focus on
mechanisms such as predictive AI tools, economic and labor
market analyses of needed skills for future work, and
education and training technologies to help connect workers
to jobs of the future, support workforce training and
education, and help employers develop a skilled workforce.
Project examples include:
The National Labor Exchange Research Hub
The National Labor Exchange Research Hub
(https://nlxresearchhub.org), developed by the National
Association of State Workforce Agencies is the first-ofits-kind national open ecosystem of real-time and
historical labor market information—connecting job
seekers with employers, and cost-efficient, timely, and
transparent data to researchers and practitioners
developing AI tools to help predict the work of the future.
The Research Hub will help plan careers, communicating
to jobseekers about what skills are transferrable across
industries, or how to transition from one career field to
another. Employers may use the research insight and tools
to improve job matching and ultimately increasing skillbased hiring. Over time the Research Hub is projected to
enhance the employment and talent pipeline.
Inclusion AI for Neurodiverse Employment
Yearly an estimated 70,000 autistic Americans enter
adulthood and an estimated 85% will be underemployed
relative to their skill levels, costing the U.S. an estimated
$175 billion annually. Social communications have been
a factor in preventing these individuals from finding and
keeping employment. Neurodiversity is an emerging
concept which considers certain neurological differences,
such as Autism, Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder,
Dyslexia, and others, as a natural part of the human
neurocognitive variation, associated not only with
impairments but also with unique strengths. The Inclusion
AI for Neurodiverse Employment project at Vanderbilt
University is developing AI-driven tools to mitigate these
challenges and empower neurodiverse individuals to gain

meaningful employment. A suite of AI-driven
technologies will be integrated within virtual
environments, robotic systems, human to human
interaction systems, and novel assessment tools will be
designed to facilitate the creation of a talent pipeline that
employs neurodiverse individuals.
Skill-XR: Skills Training and Analytics for the
Manufacturing Workforce
The manufacturing industry has experienced rapid
technology changes, increasing the need to reskill the
manufacturing workforce. Skill-XR, developed by
Purdue University, uses AI and Extended Reality (XR)
to transition the future workforce across the range from
apprenticeships to real-world profitable skills. The lowcost hands-on training capabilities that will be provided
will disrupt the current workforce development methods
by eliminating the current need for expensive software
development. Although the Skill-XR project is focusing
initially on the manufacturing sector, this technology
will be beneficial across multiple other industry sectors
like robotics, plant operations, and construction.
Enabling AI-Innovation via Data and Model Sharing
Track
Moving forward to 2020, in March 2020 the NSF
Convergence Accelerator released a new solicitation which
included a track on Enabling AI-Innovation via Data and
Model Sharing, recognizing that a critical bottleneck in
making rapid progress in AI is the lack of tools, platforms,
and curation protocols to enable robust and transparent
sharing of data and data-driven models [NSFCA 2020a]. A
total of 18 teams have been funded in Phase I, which was
launched in October 2020.
Coronavirus Disease 2019 Convergence Research
In light of the emergence and spread of the COVID-19, NSF
issued a letter on April 3, 2020 to the research community
for proposal ideas using the NSF Rapid Response Research
funding mechanism [NSF 2020]. Related to this request, the
Convergence Accelerator is funding 13 COVID-19 projects
to develop tools, technologies, and techniques to support
U.S. industries and sectors, the workforce, and the economy.
All are applying the Convergence Accelerator’s principles
to provide a rapid response.
Examples of use-inspired convergence research include
developing a pandemic response benefits distribution
system needed to meet the high demand of unemployment
insurance claims; creating an integrated knowledge graphic
to help government reopen the country; addressing the
shortage of medical supplies and equipment, as well as
identifying alternative hospital sites; and addressing the

pandemic impact on the food supply chain and
transportation sector.
Lastly, a COVID Information Commons website
(https://covidinfocommons.net) has been created to
facilitate knowledge sharing and collaboration across NSF
funded research efforts. Launched in July 2020, the COVID
Information Commons was created to facilitate
collaboration among the broad range of NSF-funded efforts
addressing COVID-19-related issues [Wing 2020]. The
website provides mechanisms to search for NSF COVID-19
related research projects. One of the search interfaces is
based on the Lingo4G large-scale document clustering
software which clusters projects based on their topics [Lingo
2020]. The CIC project has also launched a webinar series
where PI’s of funded efforts provide brief overviews of their
project via “lightning talks”.

New Innovation Model to Make Lasting Impacts
The NSF Convergence Accelerator is young—it launched as
a pilot program in 2019 and is now only in its second year
of implementation. The program is unique to NSF. It has
envisioned an innovation process that provides a positive,
nurturing environment for convergence research with a
curriculum whose objective is to assist multi-organization
teams to unify towards their own project objectives, thereby
resulting in high-impact solutions for society at scale. NSF
recently issued a Dear Colleague Letter requesting
information on future topics for the Convergence
Accelerator [NSFCA 2020b]. To engage or learn more
about
the
Convergence
Accelerator,
visit
https://www.nsf.gov/od/oia/convergenceaccelerator/index.jsp.

References
[HDR 2017] NSF Harnessing the Data Revolution,
https://www.nsf.gov/cise/harnessingdata/.
[Lingo
2020]
Lingo4G
Clustering
Engine,
https://carrotsearch.com/lingo4g/.
[MK 2018] Mulvaney and Kratsios 2018. Memorandum for the
Heads of Executive Departments and Agencies.
FY2020
Administration Research and Development Budget Priorities,
Washington, D.C.
[NITRD 2018] Open Knowledge Network: Summary of the
Federal NITRD Big Data IWG Workshop, November 20, 2018,
https://www.nitrd.gov/pubs/Open-Knowledge-NetworkWorkshop-Report-2018.pdf.
[NSF 2020] NSF 20-052, Dear Colleague Letter on the
Coronavirus
Disease
2019
(COVID-19),
https://www.nsf.gov/pubs/2020/nsf20052/nsf20052.jsp.
[NSFCA
2019a]
NSF
Convergence
Accelerator,
https://www.nsf.gov/od/oia/convergence-accelerator/index.jsp.

[NSFCA 2019b] NSF 19-050 Dear Colleague Letter: NSF
Convergence
Accelerator
Pilot
(NSF
C-Accel),
https://www.nsf.gov/pubs/2019/nsf19050/nsf19050.jsp.
[NSFCA 2020a] NSF 20-565 NSF Convergence Accelerator Phase
I and II, https://www.nsf.gov/pubs/2020/nsf20565/nsf20565.htm.
[NSFCA 2020b] RFI NSF 21-012 Request for Information on
Future Topics for the NSF Convergence Accelerator,
https://www.nsf.gov/pubs/2021/nsf21012/nsf21012.jsp.
[PMA 2019] President’s Management Agenda, Washington, D.C.:
Performance.gov.
[UCSF 2017] Third Workshop on an Open Knowledge Network:
Enabling the Community to Build the Network, Oct 4-5, National
Library
of
Medicine,
Bethesda,
MD,
Oct
2017,
https://bakarinstitute.ucsf.edu/open-knowledge-network/.
[Wing 2020] COVID Information Commons (CIC), PI: Jeannette
Wing,
Columbia
University,
https://www.nsf.gov/awardsearch/showAward?AWD_ID=20289
99&HistoricalAwards=false

