arXiv:2011.07887v3 [cs.CY] 22 Jan 2021

A Survey of Requirements
for COVID-19 Mitigation Strategies
Part I: Newspaper Clips
Wojciech Jamroga1,2
David Mestel1
Peter B. Roenne1
Peter Y. A. Ryan1
Marjan Skrobot1
1

Interdisciplinary Centre on Security, Reliability and Trust, SnT,
University of Luxembourg
2
Institute of Computer Science, Polish Academy of Sciences,
Warsaw, Poland

Contents
1 Introduction

2

2 Epidemiological and Health-Related Concerns
2.1 Epidemiological Goals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.2 Eﬀectiveness of Epidemic Response . . . . . . . .
2.3 Information Flow to Counter the Epidemic . . .
2.4 Tradeoﬀs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.5 Monitoring Pandemic and Containment Strategy
2.6 Speciﬁc Goals of Digital Contact Tracing . . . .
2.7 Prerequisites for Successful Contact Tracing . . .

.
.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.

3 Economic and Social Impact
3.1 Economic Stability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.2 Impact on Society . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.2.1 Disinformation and Information Abuse . . . . . . .
3.2.2 Potential for Discrimination and Creation of Social
3.3 Political Impact . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.4 Wellbeing, Mental Health, and Social Relationships . . . .
3.5 Costs, Human Resources, Logistics . . . . . . . . . . . . .

.
.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.

. . . .
. . . .
. . . .
Divides
. . . .
. . . .
. . . .

4
4
5
6
7
7
8
8
9
9
9
10
10
10
11
11

4 Compliance with Norms, Rights, and Obligations
12
4.1 Ethical Aspects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
4.1.1 Detailed Criteria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
4.2 Civil Rights and Fundamental Freedoms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15

1

4.3
4.4

Threats to Fundamental Freedoms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Legal Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

16
17

5 Privacy and Data Protection
17
5.1 Privacy-Related Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
5.1.1 Risks and Threats . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
5.1.2 Reasonable Privacy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
5.2 Data Protection and Potential Misuse of Data . . . . . . . . . . . 20
5.2.1 Risks and Threats . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
5.2.2 Impact on Society . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
5.3 Temporal Requirements, Safeguards and Limitations, Monitoring
of Privacy and Data Abuse . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
5.4 Impact of Privacy on Health Protection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
5.5 Impact on Psychological Wellbeing and Society . . . . . . . . . . 23
5.6 Privacy vs. Epidemiological Eﬃciency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
5.7 Privacy in Support of Epidemiological Eﬃciency . . . . . . . . . 24
6 User-Related Aspects
24
6.1 User Incentives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
6.2 User Experience . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
6.3 Adoption and Its Impact on Other Requirements . . . . . . . . . 26
7 Technological Requirements
27
7.1 Basic Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
7.2 Transparency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
7.3 Interoperability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
8 Evaluation and Learning for the Future
29
8.1 Evaluation-Related Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
8.2 Learning for the Future . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
9 Conclusions

1

29

Introduction

The COVID-19 pandemic has inﬂuenced virtually all aspects of our lives. Across
the world, countries have applied wildly varying mitigation strategies for the epidemic, ranging from minimal intrusion in the hope of obtaining “herd immunity”,
to imposing severe lockdowns on the other extreme. The strategies are based
on various social, political, and technological instruments. According to Digital
Rights Tracker, as of June 2020:
• Contact Tracing Apps were being used in 28 countries,
• Alternative digital tracking measures were active in 35 countries,
• Physical surveillance technologies were in use in 11 countries,

2

• COVID-19-related censorship had been imposed by 18 governments,
• Internet shutdowns continued in 3 countries despite the outbreak (Woodhams, 2020).
It seems clear at the ﬁrst glance what all those measures are trying to achieve,
and what the criteria of success are. But is it really that clear? Quoting an
oft-repeated phrase, with COVID-19 we ﬁght
an unprecedented threat to health and economic stability 1 (Soltani
et al., 2020)
While ﬁghting it, we must
Protect privacy, equality and fairness (Morley et al., 2020)
and
do a coordinated assessment of usefulness, effectiveness, technological
readiness, cyber security risks and threats to fundamental freedoms and
human rights (Stollmeyer et al., 2020)
Moreover, we should do it in a way that
needs to be ethical, trustworthy, locally rooted, and adaptive to new
data on what works. (Muscato, 2020)
Taken together, this is hardly a straightforward set of goals and requirements.
Thus, paraphrasing (Stollmeyer et al., 2020), one may ask:
What problem does a COVID mitigation strategy solve exactly?
Even a quick survey of news articles, manifestos, and research papers published since the beginning of the pandemic reveals a diverse landscape of postulates and opinions. Some authors focus on medical goals, some on technological
requirements; others are more concerned by the economic, social, or political
impact of a containment strategy. The actual stance is often related to the
background of the author (in case of a researcher) or their information sources
(in case of a journalist). We postulate that one should identify the relevant requirements before committing to a particular mitigation strategy. In fact, this
should be done before any informal or formal analysis and assessment of the
available strategies, with as little bias as possible.
One way to achieve it is through an overview of what is considered relevant by
the general public, and referred to in the media. To this end, we have collected
a number of quotes and “news clips” touching on the topic. We looked especially
at the most popular IT solution proposed to contain the epidemic, namely digital
contact tracing apps. The idea has generated a fair amount of controversy, and
1 The highlighting of selected words and phrases is due to the authors of this report throughout the text.

3

for a while virtually dominated the discussions and press coverage of COVID-19
containment strategies. Eventually contact tracing apps have been deployed on
a large scale, with several hundred million downloads across the world,2 leading
to the discovery of various ﬂaws and even more discussion on what characterizes
acceptable and eﬀective containment measures.
In this paper, we present some snippets from the press and Internet media,
published between March and June 2020, that mention the possible goals and
requirements for a mitigation strategy. The snippets are sorted thematically
into several categories, such as health-related goals, social and political impact,
civil rights, ethical requirements, etc. While most of the presented news clips
focus on digital contact tracing for COVID-19, it is easy to see that the relevance
of the requirements goes beyond contact tracing apps, and applies to any large
scale epidemic: also the ones that may happen in the future.
We emphasize that we do not endorse the opinions being presented in
the quotes. We also do not comment on their content. We merely use the
quotes to collect relevant keywords and conceptual categories. The assessment
of how the requirements are addressed by diﬀerent mitigation strategies, and
which strategy to select, is a matter for systematic analysis that should follow
in the next step.

2

Epidemiological and Health-Related Concerns

Clearly, an epidemic is ﬁrst and foremost a threat to people’s health and lives.
Accordingly, we begin with media clips related to this aspect of COVID-19
mitigation strategies.

2.1

Epidemiological Goals

Containment measures (and contact tracing apps in particular) should slow the
spread of the virus, decrease the transmission rate, and save lives:
Since the outbreak of COVID-19, governments around the world have
implemented a range of digital tracking, physical surveillance and censorship measures in a bid to slow the spread of the virus. (Woodhams,
2020)
Lockdowns prevented around 3.1 million deaths in 11 European countries, according to a new modelling study (AFP, 2020)
Researchers also calculated that the interventions had caused the reproduction number – how many people someone with the virus infects
– to drop by an average of 82 percent, to below 1.0. (AFP, 2020)
2 The Indian app Aarogya Setu alone has already had more that 100 million downloads (Tim, 2020).

4

Contact tracing can be an important component of an epidemic response especially when the prevalence of infection is low. Such efforts
are most effective where testing is rapid and widely available and when
infections are relatively rare. (Soltani et al., 2020)
To best meet public health needs, digital technology should be able to
trace the spread of the virus, identify dangerous Covid-19 clusters and
limit further transmission. The essential goal is to register contacts
between potential carriers and those who might be infected. (Ilves,
2020)
designed and built by the NHS to help slow the spread of the coronavirus
(NCS, 2020)
you’ll be helping to slow the transmission of the coronavirus. (NCS,
2020)
even finding a fraction of cases through contact tracing will help slow
the virus’s spread. (Steinhauer and Goodnough, 2020)
Contact tracing via smartphone is a powerful way to tackle the spread
of coronavirus, but it mustn’t be done at the expense of individual civil
rights. (Bicheno, 2020)
Smittestopp is an app that will help the health authorities to limit the
transmission of coronavirus and alert users with text messages about
close contact with infected persons. (hel, 2020)

2.2

Effectiveness of Epidemic Response

The measures should be eﬀective in containing the epidemic:
what’s missing in most debates is how effective the apps actually are
(Stollmeyer et al., 2020)
We and many others have pointed out a host of pitfalls for voluntary,
self-reported coronavirus apps of the kind Apple, Google, and others
contemplate. First, app notifications of contact with COVID-19 are
likely to be simultaneously both over- and under-inclusive. (. . . ) Individuals may be flagged as having contacted one another despite very low
possibility of transmission—such as when the individuals are separated
by walls porous enough for a Bluetooth signal to penetrate. Nor do the
systems account for when individuals take precautions, such as the use
of personal protective equipment, in their interactions with others. At
least as problematic is the issue of false negatives (. . . ) Contact-tracing
apps therefore cannot offer assurance that going out is safe, just because no disease has been reported in the vicinity. (Soltani et al., 2020)

5

Inaccurate results are likely to lead to a high number of false positives
and negatives that may adversely impact the relaxation of lockdown
measures. (Woodhams, 2020)
On the Isle of Wight, the NHS contact tracing app is making a difference. Around 25 people per day are being tested for coronavirus after
reporting it through their phones (Burgess, 2020)
Initially, the hope was that contact tracing apps would be a silver bullet
for contact tracing. Evidence shows this is not the case. Many European
countries have been using these apps for months with limited success.
(Redmiles, 2020)
Contact tracing apps have struggled with low adoption rates, issues with
the accuracy of the Bluetooth technology on which the apps rely to
detect when app users come into contact with each other, and ensuring
that app users remember to bring their phones with them and to upload
their coronavirus test results. (Redmiles, 2020)
Tracking those exposed is so far behind the virus raging in most places
that many public health officials believe the money and personnel involved would be better spent on other resources, like increasing test
sites, helping schools prepare for reopening and educating the public
about mask wearing. (Steinhauer and Goodnough, 2020)
This connects to timeliness which is an essential feature of an eﬀective response strategy:
It’s a race against time (Steinhauer and Goodnough, 2020)

2.3

Information Flow to Counter the Epidemic

The strategy should support rapid information ﬂow to the most concerned:
As the global fight against the COVID-19 pandemic continues, much
of the world is pinning its hopes of easing lockdowns on being able
to quickly identify people who might have been exposed to the virus.
(Zastrow, 2020)
Technologies to rapidly alert people when they have been in contact
with someone carrying the coronavirus SARS-CoV-2 are part of a strategy to bring the pandemic under control. (Morley et al., 2020)
some public health and consumer advocacy groups have urged the use
of apps that allow people who test positive for Covid-19 anonymously
message recent contacts. (POL, 2020)
a retired home-care nurse (. . . ) said she would welcome an app to help
spread word of possible exposure. (Timberg, 2020)
6

Smittestopp is an app that will help the health authorities to limit the
transmission of coronavirus and alert users with text messages about
close contact with infected persons. (hel, 2020)

2.4

Tradeoffs

Clearly, there are tradeoﬀs between epidemiological eﬃciency and other concerns, as we will also see in the subsequent sections:
The immediate goal for governments and tech companies is to strike the
right balance between privacy and the effectiveness of an application
to limit the spread of Covid-19. (Ilves, 2020)
So far the clear evidence is that greater control of populations has
worked better at stopping the coronavirus spread than a more relaxed
attitude (McCarthy, 2020)
Some states are raising concerns that the [Google and Apple] app
won’t allow them to collect enough information due to privacy concerns. (POL, 2020)
China’s Health Code system (...) records a user’s spending history in
order to deter them from breaking quarantine (Clarance, 2020)

2.5

Monitoring Pandemic and Containment Strategy

The containment strategy should enable monitoring the state of the pandemic,
the behavior of people, and the eﬀectiveness of the strategy itself:
Most states are waiting to see whether the Bluetooth-based release from
Apple and Google, which is supposed to automatically notify people
when they come close to someone who’s tested positive, will be an
effective way to monitor outbreaks. (POL, 2020)
These serology tests can provide important data on how COVID-19 is
spreading through a population. There is also hope that the presence
of certain antibodies may signify immunity to future infection (Frasier,
2020)
"The police won’t have to monitor the places of quarantine," said Mateusz Morawiecki, the Polish prime minister, when announcing the country’s coronavirus app would become mandatory. "We will know if people
are following the rules." (Scott and Wanat, 2020)
Eﬀective monitoring is often at odds with other requirements, especially privacy:
There are of course advantages to [the centralized] approach [of contact
tracing], models can be adapted quicker and additional analysis can be
performed, but the question which remains is whether this outweighs
the risk to security and privacy (Davies, 2020)
7

2.6

Specific Goals of Digital Contact Tracing

Digital measures for COVID-19 mitigation often have more speciﬁc goals and
desirable properties.
Ultimately, contact tracing is a public health intervention, not an individual health one. It can reduce the spread of disease through the
population (Soltani et al., 2020)
[Contact tracing apps are] a way to enhance traditional forms of contact
tracing to find potential new infections (Timberg, 2020)
The goal of contact tracing for Covid-19 is to reach people who have
spent more than 15 minutes within six feet of an infected person and
ask them to quarantine at home voluntarily for two weeks even if they
test negative, monitoring themselves for symptoms during that time.
(Steinhauer and Goodnough, 2020)
Traditional contact tracing works by interviewing those infected with
COVID-19 about whom they have encountered during the prior two
weeks. The contact tracers then contact those who have been exposed
to notify them of exposure. (Redmiles, 2020)

2.7

Prerequisites for Successful Contact Tracing

Contact tracing at scale works successfully only under certain conditions:
Contact tracing generally works best, public health experts say, when a
disease is easily detected from its onset. That is often impossible with
the coronavirus because a large percentage of those infected have no
symptoms. (Steinhauer and Goodnough, 2020)
Perhaps most harmful to the effort have been the persistent delays in
getting the results of diagnostic tests. Often by the time an individual
tests positive, it’s too late for the health care workers tracking that
person to do anything. In contrast, when sports teams and staff of
the White House test people constantly, with fast turnarounds, contact
tracing is instant and effective. (Steinhauer and Goodnough, 2020)
Contact tracing, a cornerstone of the public health arsenal to tamp down
the coronavirus across the world, has largely failed in the United States;
the virus’s pervasiveness and major lags in testing have rendered the
system almost pointless. In some regions, large swaths of the population
have refused to participate or cannot even be located, further hampering
health care workers. (Steinhauer and Goodnough, 2020)
Some public health experts now believe that, at the very least, testing
and contact tracing need to be scaled back in places with major outbreaks. In some places, they say the effort may never succeed. (Steinhauer and Goodnough, 2020)
8

3

Economic and Social Impact

Most measures to contain the epidemic are predominantly social (lockdown being a prime example), and have strong social and economic impact.

3.1

Economic Stability

The impact of the containment strategy on the economy is of prime importance:
The unprecedented threat from the novel coronavirus has confined many
Americans to their homes, distancing them from one another at great
cost to local economies and personal well-being. (Soltani et al., 2020)
In a separate study, also published in Nature, researchers from UC Berkeley used a different method – econometric modelling used to assess how
policies affect economic growth – to evaluate containment policies in
China, South Korea, Italy, Iran, France and the United States. (AFP,
2020)
[Contact tracing apps] help make resumption of economic and social
activities safer in the months ahead. (Timberg, 2020)
[Australian Prime Minister, Scott Morrison:] “If you want to return
to a more liberated economy and society, it is important that we get
increased numbers of downloads when it comes to the Covidsafe app.”
(Taylor, 2020)

3.2

Impact on Society

Regarding the available measures in general, and contact tracing apps in particular:
we know very little about them or how they could affect society. (O’Neill
et al., 2020)
As the global fight against the COVID-19 pandemic continues, much
of the world is pinning its hopes of easing lockdowns on being able
to quickly identify people who might have been exposed to the virus.
(Zastrow, 2020)
[The Covidsafe app] was sold as the key to unlocking restrictions (. . . )
but as the country begins to open up, the role of the Covidsafe app in
the recovery seems to have dropped to marginal at best. (Taylor, 2020)
The health minister, Greg Hunt, tweeted that [the Covidsafe app] was
the key to being allowed to go back to watching football. (Taylor, 2020)

9

3.2.1

Disinformation and Information Abuse
We worry that contact-tracing apps will serve as vehicles for abuse
and disinformation, while providing a false sense of security to justify
reopening local and national economies well before it is safe to do so.
(Soltani et al., 2020)
Since the outbreak of COVID-19 there has been a rapid acceleration
in the spread of mis- and disinformation. To control this, governments
and social media platforms have sought to stringently regulate online
content and promote official facts and figures from international health
organisations. (Woodhams, 2020)

3.2.2

Potential for Discrimination and Creation of Social Divides
There is also a very real danger that these voluntary surveillance technologies will effectively become compulsory for any public and social
engagement. (Soltani et al., 2020)
there is a real risk that these mobile-based apps can turn unaffected
individuals into social pariahs, restricted from accessing public and private spaces or participating in social and economic activities. (Soltani
et al., 2020)
protecting those communities who can be (. . . ) harmed by the collection and exploitation of personal data. (Soltani et al., 2020)
Protections need to be put in place to expressly prohibit economic and
social discrimination on the basis of information and technology designed to address the pandemic. (Soltani et al., 2020)

3.3

Political Impact

The pandemic creates new space for political manipulation and changes the
distribution of power:
the issue of malicious use is paramount—particularly given this current climate of disinformation, astroturfing, and political manipulation.
Imagine an unscrupulous political operative who wanted to dampen voting participation in a given district, or a desperate business owner who
wanted to stifle competition. Either could falsely report incidences of
coronavirus without much fear of repercussion. Trolls could sow chaos
for the malicious pleasure of it. Protesters could trigger panic as a
form of civil disobedience. A foreign intelligence operation could shut
down an entire city by falsely reporting COVID-19 infections in every
neighborhood. (Soltani et al., 2020)
In the long run, however, this poses a far more fundamental question:
how much can the decisions of sovereign democratic countries be overruled by technology companies [i.e., Google and Apple]? (Ilves, 2020)
10

3.4

Wellbeing, Mental Health, and Social Relationships
The unprecedented threat from the novel coronavirus has confined many
Americans to their homes, distancing them from one another at great
cost to local economies and personal well-being. (Soltani et al., 2020)
we all long for freedom from lockdowns and home confinement (Stollmeyer
et al., 2020)

3.5

Costs, Human Resources, Logistics

The ﬁnancial costs incurred by the containment measures, as well as the engaged
human resources, are another important factor.
The government has been forced to abandon a centralised coronavirus
contact-tracing app after spending three months and millions of pounds
on technology that experts had repeatedly warned would not work. (. . . )
[T]he health secretary said the government would not “put a date” on
when the new app may be launched, although officials conceded it was
likely to be in the autumn or winter. (Hern, 2020)
"The police won’t have to monitor the places of quarantine," said Mateusz Morawiecki, the Polish prime minister, when announcing the country’s coronavirus app would become mandatory. "We will know if people
are following the rules." (Scott and Wanat, 2020)
The lure of automating the painstaking process of [manual] contact
tracing is apparent. (Soltani et al., 2020)
In Michigan, Ottawa County’s public health department automated contact tracing symptom checks and follow-ups. (Redmiles, 2020)
As coronavirus cases reach new peaks, surpassing 200,000 cases a day
in the United States, public health departments are overwhelmed. Departments are racing to hire yet more contact tracers and some are
even asking people to do their own contact tracing and notification.
(Redmiles, 2020)
The logistics of the strategy (in particular, coordination and cooperation
between diﬀerent institutions and authorities) also plays a role:
U.S. efforts (. . . ) are running into an all-too-familiar problem that has
plagued the pandemic response: a lack of national coordination. (Tahir
and Lima, 2020)
the federal government has so far failed to institute concrete privacy
standards. (Tahir and Lima, 2020)
Similarly, the European Commission postulated
11

a set of technical specifications to ensure a safe exchange of information
between national contact tracing apps based on a decentralised architecture [to] work seamlessly when users travel to another EU country
which also follows the decentralised approach. (Eur, 2020)

4

Compliance with Norms, Rights, and Obligations

In this section, we look at requirements that aim at the long-term robustness
and resilience of the social structure, such as ethical and legal requirements.

4.1

Ethical Aspects

The mitigation strategy must be ethically justifiable (Morley et al., 2020). Importantly:
ethical and social considerations [other than privacy] must not be cast
aside in the rush to quell the pandemic. For instance, contact-tracing
apps should be available and accessible to anyone, irrespective of the
technology needed or their level of digital literacy.
(...) Even in a crisis, a ‘try-everything’ approach is dangerous when it
ignores the real costs, including serious and long-lasting harms to fundamental rights and freedoms, and the opportunity costs of not devoting
resources to something else. (Morley et al., 2020)
Some of these [mitigation measures] may well be proportionate, necessary and legitimate during these unprecedented times. However, others
have been rushed through legislative bodies and implemented without
adequate scrutiny. (Woodhams, 2020)
the data agency Datatilsynet (. . . ) said the restricted spread of coronavirus in Norway, as well as the app’s limited effectiveness due to the
small number of people using it, meant the invasion of privacy resulting
from its use was disproportionate. (Oslo, 2020)
Note that the ethical considerations do not necessarily oppose strict measures
of containing the epidemic. In particular:
Temporarily restricting some fundamental rights and freedoms might be
ethically justifiable in the context of hastening the end of the pandemic.
Quarantining individuals, for example, helps to prevent the spread of the
disease. Arguably, it might be unethical not to use digital tracing apps
when necessary. Nevertheless, much depends on the effectiveness of the
app, the goal pursued, the type of system and the context in which it
will be deployed.

12

(...) To be ethical, a contact-tracing app must abide by four principles:
it must be necessary, proportional, scientifically valid and time-bound.
These principles are derived from the European Convention on Human
Rights, the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR)
and the United Nations Siracusa Principles, which specify the provisions
in the ICCPR that limit how it can be applied. (Morley et al., 2020)
An app’s implementation strategy and impact must also be considered.
Something that looked good on paper can turn out to be ineffective
in practice. (. . . ) If an app fails, it becomes unnecessary, and thus
unethical. (Morley et al., 2020)
Moreover, the terms and conditions of such an app should be just (Scott
and Wanat, 2020). One must also keep in mind that ethical norms and their
interpretation vary depending on the actual place, time, and social context.
In practice, there will be trade-offs. These will depend on the laws, values, attitudes and norms in different regions, as well as on changes over
time in the spread and scale of the virus and the available technology.
(. . . ) Similarly, what was ethically justifiable in one place yesterday
might not be so tomorrow. (Morley et al., 2020)
4.1.1

Detailed Criteria

The detailed guidelines for ethical justiﬁability of a contact-tracing app from (Morley et al., 2020) are presented below.
Principles: is this the right app to develop?
1. Is it necessary?
• Yes, it must be developed to save lives (+).
• No, there are better solutions (–).
2. Is it proportionate?
• Yes, the gravity of the situation justifies the potential negative impact (+).
• No, the potential negative impact is disproportionate to the situation (–).
3. Is it sufficiently effective, timely, popular and accurate?
• Yes, evidence shows that it will work, is timely, will be adopted by enough
people and yields accurate data and insights (+).
• No, it does not work well, is available too late or too early, will not be
used widely, and is likely to collect data that have false positives and/or false
negatives (–).
4. Is it temporary ?
• Yes, there is an explicit and reasonable date on which it will cease (+).
• No, it has no defined end date (–).
Requirements: is this app being developed in the right way?

13

5. Is it voluntary ?
• Yes, it is optional to download and install (+).
• No, it is mandatory and people can be penalized for non-compliance (–).
6. Does it require consent?
• Yes, people have complete choice over what data are shared and when, and
can change this at any time (+).
• No, default settings are to share everything all the time, and this cannot be
altered (–).
7. Are the data kept private and users’ anonymity preserved ?
• Yes, data are anonymous and held only on the user’s phone. Others who
have been in contact are notified only that there is a risk of contagion, not
from whom or where. Methods such as differential privacy are used to ensure
this. Cyber-resilience is high (+).
• No, data are (re)identifiable owing to the level of data collected, and stored
centrally. Locations of contacts are also available. Cyber-resilience is low (–).
8. Can users erase the data?
• Yes, they can do so at will; all data are deleted at the end point (+).
• No, there is no provision for data deletion, nor a guarantee that it can ever
be deleted (–).
9. Is the purpose of data collection defined?
• Yes, explicitly; for example, to alert users that they have encountered a
potentially infected person (+).
• No, the purposes of data collection are not explicitly defined (–).
10. Is the purpose limited ?
• Yes, it is used for tracing and tracking of COVID-19 only (+).
• No, it can be regularly updated to add extra features that extend its functionality (–).
11. Is it used only for prevention?
• Yes, it is used only to enable people voluntarily to limit spread (+).
• No, it is also used as a passport to enable people to claim benefits or return
to work (–).
12. Is it used for compliance?
• No, it is not used to enforce behaviour (+).
• Yes, non-compliance can result in punishment such as a fine or jail time (–).
13. Is it open-source?
• Yes, the code is publicly available for inspection, sharing and collaborative
improvement (+).
• No, the source code is proprietary, and no information about it is provided
(–).
14. Is it equally available?
• Yes, it is free and distributed to anyone (+).
• No, it is arbitrarily given only to some (–).

14

15. Is it equally accessible?
• Yes, it is user-friendly, even for naive users, and works on the widest possible
range of mobile phones (+).
• No, it can be used only by those with specific devices and with sufficient
digital education (–).
16. Is there a decommissioning process?
• Yes, there is a process for shutting it down (+).
• No, there are no policies in place (–).

4.2

Civil Rights and Fundamental Freedoms

An important aspect of ethical requirements is to protect rights and liberties:
Contact tracing via smartphone is a powerful way to tackle the spread
of coronavirus, but it mustn’t be done at the expense of individual civil
rights. (Bicheno, 2020)
Is [the app] mandatory ? How private is the app? Are citizens’ rights
being safeguarded? (O’Neill et al., 2020)
According to a legal opinion on smartphone contact tracing and other data
driven proposals:
A de-centralised smartphone contact tracing system – the type contemplated by “DP-3T” and being considered by governments across
Europe and also Apple and Google – would be likely to comply with
both human rights and data protection laws. In contrast, a centralised
smartphone system – which is the current UK Government proposal –
is a greater interference with fundamental rights and would require significantly greater justification to be lawful. That justification has not
yet been forthcoming. (Mat, 2020)
Any attempt to introduce ‘immunity passports’ would be a dramatic
measure, both socially and legally. It would need a clear scientific basis
and would also have to address the significant impact on fundamental
rights including the risk of indirect discrimination. (Mat, 2020)
For instance, the designers of the NCSC app developed in the UK declared that:
[installing the app is] entirely voluntary (NCS, 2020)
and
You can decide if you want to tell the app that you’re suffering from
coronavirus symptoms. (NCS, 2020)

15

The reality, however, is often far removed from the intended properties, as the
same NCSC app illustrates:
as soon as someone agrees to share their information with UK government – by claiming to feel unwell and hitting a big green button – 28
days of data from the app is given to a central server from where it
can never be recovered. That data, featuring all the unique IDs you’ve
encountered in that period and when and how far apart you were, becomes the property of NCSC (. . . ) [The NCSC chief exec Matthew
Gould] also admitted that the data will not be deleted, UK citizens will
not have the right to demand it is deleted, and it can or will be used
for "research" in future. (McCarthy, 2020)

4.3

Threats to Fundamental Freedoms
In an attempt to slow the spread of COVID-19, governments around
the world are also adopting increasingly extensive physical surveillance
measures. These include the deployment of facial recognition cameras
equipped with heat sensors, surveillance drones used to monitor citizens’
movements, and extensive CCTV networks in a bid to help enforce
curfews. (Woodhams, 2020)
India has made it mandatory for government and private sector employees to download [its contact-tracing app]. (Clarance, 2020)
Using a phone’s Bluetooth and location data, Aarogya Setu lets users
know if they have been near a person with Covid-19 by scanning a
database of known cases of infection. The data is then shared with the
government. (Clarance, 2020)
To register, users have to give their name, gender, travel history, telephone number and location. (...) While your name and number won’t
be made public, the app does collect this information, as well as your
gender, travel history and whether you’re a smoker. (Clarance, 2020)
China’s Health Code system, which records a user’s spending history in
order to deter them from breaking quarantine, is invasive. (Clarance,
2020)
Many regions that have made contact tracing a key part of their COVID19 playbook — including China, South Korea, Taiwan and Israel — have
empowered contact tracers with sensitive details of infected people, including CCTV footage, credit-card transactions and location data from
mobile-phone carriers. (Zastrow, 2020)
several governments have also co-opted the rise of mis/disinformation
to justifying censorship practices which seek to silence critics and control
the flow of information. (Woodhams, 2020)
16

4.4

Legal Requirements
UK finds itself almost alone with centralized virus contact-tracing app
that (...) may be illegal (McCarthy, 2020)
The UK Government’s announcements in March and April for sharing
health data between the private and public sector appear to be flawed.
This means such data sharing is potentially not in compliance with
legal requirements. Further information needs to be provided to ensure
compliance and a data impact assessment should be conducted and
made public. (Mat, 2020)
the UK’s own contact-tracing app runs roughshod over regional [GDPR]
regulations and could, hypothetically, lead to a sweeping, NHS-widefine in its current state. (Wodinsky, 2020)

5

Privacy and Data Protection

Privacy-related issues for COVID-19 mitigation strategies have triggered heated
discussion, and at some point gained much of the media coverage. This is
understandable, since privacy and data protection is an important aspect of
medical information ﬂow, even in ordinary times:
While public-health and safety amidst the health crisis is imperative,
the data rights and privacy policy responses are critical, now, and after
the crisis. (Robertson, 2020)
Moreover, the IT measures against COVID-19 are usually designed by computer
scientists and specialists, for whom technological requirements (such as information security) are relatively easy to identify and understand. As the authors
of (Soltani et al., 2020) cautiously stated:
Some of the contact-tracing frameworks have been designed with security and privacy in mind, to some degree.

5.1

Privacy-Related Requirements

The designers of contact-tracing apps have sometimes made overly bold statements about their privacy level. Nevertheless, those indicate a general requirement that is clearly important for many users:
Any information you choose to submit is protected at all times. (NCS,
2020)
In particular:
developers of contact-tracing apps (. . . ) should include recommendations for how back-end systems should be secured and how long data
17

should be retained, criteria for what public health entities can qualify to use these technologies, and explicit app store policies for what
additional information, such as GPS or government ID numbers, can
be collected. They should adopt commonly accepted practices such
as security auditing, bug bounties, and abusability testing to identify
vulnerabilities and unintended consequences of a potentially global new
technology. Finally, app creators—as well as the platforms that enable
these applications—should make explicit commitments for when these
apps and their underlying APIs will be sunsetted. (Soltani et al., 2020)
The design is intended to mitigate privacy concerns inherent in a technological approach to identifying possible new infections, the tech companies have said. They say the apps would not collect location data
or save records to a central database and would instead rely on the
records saved and distributed across people’s phones, which would be
privacy-protected and periodically erased. (Timberg, 2020)
The app itself doesn’t collect information that would obviously reveal
someone’s identity (Burgess, 2020)
But under data protection laws the app isn’t anonymous. GDPR and the
UK’s data protection rules define ‘personal data’ as something that can
identify an individual. Under GDPR, an identifier assigned to a phone
can be considered personal data. (In the past a person’s IP address has
been ruled to be personal data). While the Bluetooth logging system
in the NHS app doesn’t collect location information, or other types of
data, it does create an identifier (known as InstallationID) for every
phone that uses the app. This counts as something that could lead to
the identification of an individual. (Burgess, 2020)
“The NHSX app does not preserve the anonymity of users, as it primarily processes pseudonymous, not anonymous, personal data,” Michael
Veale, a lecturer in digital rights and regulation at University College
London, wrote in an analysis of the NHS app. “Anonymous information
is only that which is not personal data”. (Burgess, 2020)
From the user perspective there is also the problem of informed consent.
(Ilves, 2020)
5.1.1

Risks and Threats

Alerts can be too revealing (BBC, 2020), e.g.,
it may be possible to work out who is associating with whom from the
app’s ID numbers. (McCarthy, 2020)
[the data from the app] may be linked to other datasets at some point
in future. (Wodinsky, 2020)
18

A direct exploitation of personal information is even more dangerous:
Kuwait and Bahrain have rolled out some of the most invasive Covid19 contact-tracing apps in the world, putting the privacy and security
of their users at risk, Amnesty International says. (Garthwaite and
Anderson, 2020)
The rights group found the apps were carrying out live or near-live
tracking of users’ locations by uploading GPS co-ordinates to a central
server. (...) The researchers say Bahraini and Kuwaiti authorities would
easily be able to link this sensitive personal information to an individual,
as users are required to register with a national ID number. (Garthwaite
and Anderson, 2020)
Bahrain’s app was linked to a television show called "Are You At Home?",
which offered prizes to users who stayed at home during Ramadan.
(Garthwaite and Anderson, 2020)
[Australian government] also has a history of ’mission creep’ regarding
tracking mechanisms such as the metadata retention regime, where it
allowed citizen’s data to be accessed by all sorts of law enforcement
mechanisms, contrary to initial intentions. (Robertson, 2020)
5.1.2

Reasonable Privacy

Most people accept that it might be necessary to waive users’ privacy in the short
term in order to contain the epidemic. However, one must look for mechanisms
that impact privacy to the least possible extent.
The [Apple and Google] approach is not without risk, researchers acknowledge, but exploiting that risk would require significant effort by
hackers for seemingly little reward. For example, they would have to
turn on a different phone every time they came near a different person and wait several days to see if it reported a positive test result.
(Zastrow, 2020)
Moreover, privacy-related requirements depend on the geographical and political
context:
The issues uncovered by Amnesty’s investigation are particularly alarming given that the human rights records of Gulf governments are poor.
(...) "If privacy is violated in a country like Norway, I can resort to
regional tools such as the European Court of Human Rights and European Committee of Social Rights. But in our region there is not any
such tool. On the contrary, resorting to local authorities may present
an additional risk" [Mohammed al-Maskati, a Bahraini activist said.]
(Garthwaite and Anderson, 2020)

19

5.2

Data Protection and Potential Misuse of Data

Here, the key questions are:
What data will they collect, and who is it shared with? (O’Neill et al.,
2020)
as well as
how data is collected, stored and deleted. (Robertson, 2020)
In particular, it is often postulated to have
less state access and control over user data (Bicheno, 2020)
the limits on the type of data collection are the core concern for states.
(Tahir and Lima, 2020)
In Singapore, for example, the TraceTogether app can be used only by
its health ministry to access data. It assures citizens that the data is to
be used strictly for disease control and will not be shared with law enforcement agencies for enforcing lockdowns and quarantine. (Clarance,
2020)
[In Australia,] Only health officials in the states can access the data,
and you can’t be forced to download it. (Taylor, 2020)
The app does not collect any of your personal data. (NCS, 2020)
5.2.1

Risks and Threats
the lack of clear privacy policies and the use of centralised data storage increases the possibility that the data may be vulnerable to abuse.
(Woodhams, 2020)
collection of data on centralised servers: Aside from the risk to privacy,
collecting millions of datasets of personal information in a single place
could be viewed as somewhat of a treasure trove. (Davies, 2020)
if the [central] database is hacked, the anonymity provided by rotating
pseudonyms is nullified, and individuals can be more easily tracked.
Plus, says Kreps, “there’s a risk of function creep and state surveillance”.
“I have little faith in government’s ability to keep data like this secure,”
says Green. (Zastrow, 2020)
data breaches can also come through cyberattacks or independent actors within an agency (Eisenberg, 2020)

In particular, the collected information should not be exploited for commercial
purposes:
20

existing regulations don’t address whether data can be shared across
agencies or if it can be sold by a third party for non-Covid-19 tracking.
(Eisenberg, 2020)
We found code relating to Google’s advertising and tracking platforms
in 17 contact tracing apps. (. . . ) Aside from the ethics of monetizing
public health in this way, the presence of such tracking code in contact
tracing apps raises privacy red flags due to the targeting options offered
by Google’s ad platforms.
(...) We also found code that enabled varying levels of integration
with Facebook in seven apps. This ranges from direct integration with
Facebook’s advertising platform to functionality allowing users of the
apps to link their Facebook accounts, or to share content from the
contact tracing apps to Facebook. (Woodhams, 2020)
A mistake in implementation can have serious privacy consequences in improperly tested software:
technical issues meant a person completing a form for the survey had
been able to view information previously submitted by other users.
(RTL, 2020b)
5.2.2

Impact on Society
Protections need to be put in place to expressly prohibit economic and
social discrimination on the basis of information and technology designed to address the pandemic. (Soltani et al., 2020)
protecting those communities who can be (. . . ) harmed by the collection and exploitation of personal data. (Soltani et al., 2020)

5.3

Temporal Requirements, Safeguards and Limitations,
Monitoring of Privacy and Data Abuse

In this respect, an important question is:
How will that information be used in the future? Are there policies in
place to prevent abuse? (O’Neill et al., 2020)
To capture this information, guided by principles put forward by the
American Civil Liberties Union and others, we asked five questions: Is
it voluntary ? Are there limitations on how the data gets used? Will
data be destroyed after a period of time? Is data collection minimized?
Is the effort transparent? (O’Neill et al., 2020)
Among temporal requirements, sunsetting is most often mentioned.

21

There is also a concern that the [surveillance] technology will continue
to be used after the threat of the coronavirus recedes (Garthwaite and
Anderson, 2020)
questions about privacy — including when the tracking will be switched
off. (Scott and Wanat, 2020)
"We need an independent state figure that’s not the government who
can guarantee this data will eventually be deleted," said Arnoldo Frigessi,
a professor at the University of Oslo (. . . )"We need to ask the questions: When will this stop, and who will get to decide? " (Scott and
Wanat, 2020)
Any information you submit is deleted once it is no longer needed to
help manage the spread of coronavirus. (NCS, 2020)
All the data will stay with the government for six years” (Scott and
Wanat, 2020)
For example, the Norwegian app Smittestopp explicitly promised the following
sunsetting requirements (hel, 2020):
• data from the last 30 days are constantly recorded and older data are
deleted
• one can delete one’s personal information at any time
• one can delete the app.
• the user can also choose whether to turn the logging features on or off
• one has the right to access the data that the Norwegian Institute of Public
Health stores about them.
Provisions for monitoring of privacy are also essential:
[Unlinkability] must be backed up with clear lines of accountability,
processes for evaluating linkage or export requests, and strong assurance
monitoring. (Wodinsky, 2020)
judicial oversight and sunset provisions (. . . ) safeguards with respect
to the privacy of data (Soltani et al., 2020)

5.4

Impact of Privacy on Health Protection
As the virus spreads rapidly, it’s vital that the public are giving the
information [people] need to protect themselves and others. (BBC,
2020)
Dr Lee says the public needs to remain mature with this information
- otherwise "people who fear being judged will hide and this will put
everyone in further danger ". (BBC, 2020)
22

5.5

Impact on Psychological Wellbeing and Society
the government is letting people know if they were in the vicinity of
a patient (. . . ) and now there is as much fear of social stigma as of
illness (BBC, 2020)
even if patients are not outright identified, they’re facing judgement or ridicule - online. (BBC, 2020)
A research team at Seoul National University’s Graduate School of Public Health (. . . ) found "criticisms and further damage" were more feared
than having the virus. (BBC, 2020)
Doctors warn that online pursuit of patients could have very serious
consequences. Malicious comments online have long been a problem in
South Korea, and in some cases have led to suicide. (BBC, 2020)

5.6

Privacy vs. Epidemiological Efficiency

Much of the debate of centralized vs. decentralized design for contact-tracing
apps follows the dilemma whether it is justiﬁed to sacriﬁce the users’ privacy
for the sake of eﬃciency in containing the epidemic:
[A centralized contact-tracing app] takes data from people’s phones and
saves it on a central system where experts are trusted to make the best
possible use of the data, including providing advice to people as and
when necessary. (McCarthy, 2020)
Some [centralized apps] store all users’ interaction data on government
servers that analyse the data and perform the contact matching. Proponents say that this ‘centralized’ model allows health authorities to
use the database to piece together a view of the network of contacts,
enabling further epidemiological insights such as revealing clusters and
superspreaders. (Zastrow, 2020)
[decentralized contact-tracing apps:] puts users in more control of their
information, and alerts them automatically with no intervention from a
third party. (McCarthy, 2020)
while the (. . . ) decentralized model protects people’s privacy, it leaves
the authorities blind. It puts a public health disaster outside the reach
of those who can help most thorough analysis of the population. (McCarthy, 2020)
Health experts are less in favour of [the decentralized] model because
it makes it harder to spot outbreaks and is harder to follow up for close
contacts, but privacy advocates insist it is the most secure. (Taylor,
2020)
23

5.7

Privacy in Support of Epidemiological Efficiency

As we have seen in Section 5.6, there is a tradeoﬀ between protecting privacy
vs. collecting and protecting all the information that can be useful in ﬁghting the
epidemic. The relationship is not that simple, though. Privacy provisions are
instrumental in building trust. Conversely, lack of privacy undermines trust, and
may weaken the epidemiological, economic, and social eﬀects of the mitigation
activities.
Privacy fears threaten New York City’s coronavirus tracing efforts (Eisenberg, 2020)
the de Blasio administration’s unwillingness to specify how privacy will
be protected will limit the tracing effort’s reach and potentially prolong
the need for strict lockdown (Eisenberg, 2020)
[Manual] Contact tracing relies on a city worker building trust with a
Covid-19-positive person, who then details where they’ve been and with
whom they’ve been in contact prior to the onset of symptoms (...) Contact tracing requires handing over intimate personal data — including
home addresses, names of friends and relations — to strangers, many
of whom were only recently trained and hired to collect the information.
(Eisenberg, 2020)
Hundreds of thousands of New Yorkers will be asked to disclose personal information this month as part of the city’s herculean Covid-19
tracing effort — but suspicions over how the government will use that
information are threatening the city’s best chance to crawl out of its
coronavirus lockdown. (Eisenberg, 2020)
“I did already hear rumors in Yiddish that they shouldn’t answer the
[contact tracing] calls,” said Yosef Hershkop, manager of Kāmin Health
Crown Heights Urgent Care. “There’s no way they’re going to get any
more cooperation from the Jewish community than the African American community or Arab community or Muslim community. Everyone is
suspicious.” (Eisenberg, 2020)

6

User-Related Aspects

The measures must be adopted and followed by the people, in order to make
them eﬀective.

6.1

User Incentives
The design, implementation and adoption of complex socio-technical
systems must be driven by the interests of users. (Robertson, 2020)

24

Ultimately, contact tracing (...) can reduce the spread of disease through
the population, but does not confer direct protection on any individual.
This creates incentive problems that need careful thought: What is in
it for the user who will sometimes be instructed to miss work and avoid
socializing, but does not derive immediate benefits from the system?
(Soltani et al., 2020)
A poll published last week by the Kaiser Family Foundation found the
nation similarly split on willingness to use an infection-alert app but
found much higher rates of acceptance — with 2 out of every 3 Americans willing — when they were told the technology was seen as assisting
in opening schools and businesses and helping revive the stalled national
economy. But fewer than 3 in 10 were willing to use an app if there
was a “chance the data could be hacked.” (Timberg, 2020)
The government (. . . ) didn’t exclude mandatory downloading [that]
stands in stark contrast to the ’smart lockdown’ with strong reliance on
personal responsibility (Stollmeyer et al., 2020)
Won’t this tool divert attention from more important measures, and
make people less alert? (Szymielewicz et al., 2020)
even with a very accurate test, the fewer people in a population who
have a condition, the more likely it is that an individual’s positive result
is wrong. If it is, people might think they have the antibodies (and thus
may have immunity), when in fact they do not. (Frasier, 2020)

6.2

User Experience
Since the app was released in mid-March people’s experiences have
varied, with many willing to give up their personal information to help
reduce the number of overall infections. Most said the app is prone
to failure, not a surprise as the Polish government created it in just
three days based on an out-of-the-box service offered by a third-party
developer. (Scott and Wanat, 2020)

Interoperability is an important aspect of user experience, so that:
Users of contact tracing and warning apps can now use a single app
when they travel cross-borders and still benefit from contact tracing.
(O’Donoghue and Bialowas, 2020)
This means a user of one of those apps who travels to any of the
other countries can expect their national app to send relevant exposure
notifications in the same way it should if they had not travelled —
without the need to download any additional software. (Lomas, 2020)

25

6.3

Adoption and Its Impact on Other Requirements

The aspects indicated in Sections 6.1 and 6.2 have impact on adoption of the
strategy:
How many people will download and use [the apps], and how widely
used do they have to be in order to succeed? (O’Neill et al., 2020)
Another challenge is ensuring that enough people download the app to
make it effective. (Zastrow, 2020)
For example, it was reported in (Bezat, 2020) that only 2% of people in France
installed the app as of 10/06. This has important consequences:
Reduced adoption [of the app] could limit its effectiveness in slowing
new infections and deaths. (Timberg, 2020)
The Oxford models3 found that "the app has an effect at all levels
of uptake" (...) The paper says that if 80% of all smartphone users
download the app—a number that excludes groups less likely to have
a smartphone and is equivalent to 56% of the overall population—this
would be enough to suppress the pandemic on its own, without any
other form of intervention. (O’Neill, 2020)
if fewer people download the app, say the researchers, other prevention
and containment measures will be required. These include social distancing, widespread testing, manual contact tracing, medical treatment,
and regional shutdowns (O’Neill, 2020)
Trust is an important issue (see also the connection between privacy provisions
and trust in Section 5.7).
For people to use the app, there needs to be trust. (Burgess, 2020)
[J.T. Lane, chief population officer at the Association of State and
Territorial Health Officials:] “You need to learn everything you can about
[the users’] culture and maybe even their previous relationship with
technology,” Lane said, including “how stigma and discrimination might
be playing a role in that particular group or culture.” (POL, 2020)
[Approach of] blending technology with manual contact tracing, solves
two key problems with contact tracing apps: trust and efficacy. Trust is
a key foundation of public health and a big problem for contact tracing
apps; (...) research shows that people are divided on whom they trust
to provide the apps as well as whether they trust the apps to actually
work and to protect their data. (Redmiles, 2020)
3 Hinch

et al. (2020)

26

7

Technological Requirements

The concrete measures have to work, in the most basic sense of the term.

7.1

Basic Requirements

First of all, this means that the design correctly addresses the desired functionalities, the implementation is correct with respect to the design, and the
measures have an acceptable level of usability.
UK finds itself almost alone with centralized virus contact-tracing app
that probably won’t work well, asks for your location, may be illegal
(McCarthy, 2020)
According to local reports from folks that have downloaded the program
thus far, not only is the app incompatible with a range of different
devices, but it’s also a battery-draining mess that can be confusing to
use. (Wodinsky, 2020)
Beyond concerns over privacy, one key practical challenge to phonebased contact tracing is making accurate measurements of how close
two devices are. (Zastrow, 2020)

7.2

Transparency

Moreover, the design and the implementation should be suﬃciently transparent.
The forthcoming challenge for the Australian government is to be open
and transparent about the app’s privacy implications. (...) the public
deserved to be fully informed about the cyber security implications.
(Robertson, 2020)
It’s essential to see transparency around encryption methods used by
the app, the potential blue tooth (sic) vulnerabilities related to the
collection of data, and how access to the data by state and territory
health officers will be audited. (Robertson, 2020)
Covid Tracing Tracker puts forward a number of “basic questions” related to the
transparency of the design and implementation:
Who is producing [the app]? Is it released yet? Where will it be available, and on what platforms? What technologies does it use? (. . . )
how many people have downloaded it and what level of penetration
it has achieved. How transparent are the makers about their work?
(O’Neill et al., 2020)
Other important aspects that help to build trust in digital solutions are: transparency of the code and the possibility to verify the code by the public and experts (SDZ, 2020), see also this quote on the Australian Government’s COVIDSafe application:
27

The code is not publicly available and open-source data is stored on
private, cloud-based web servers, which provides a honey-pot for cyberattacks on this highly sensitive information about the population. (Robertson, 2020)

7.3

Interoperability

An important technical goal that demands international cooperation in early
design phases is cross-border interoperability.
Many [EU] member states have implemented national contact tracing
and warning applications. It is now time to make them interact with
each other. (Staff, 2020)
The goals include relaxation of the economic and social restrictions, as well as
coordinated data protection:
In time, this will simplify cross-border contact tracing and allow our
people to visit our neighbours for work, trade or leisure. (Cyb, 2020)
This coordinated approach will also help to ensure that the same level
of data protection is given to users [across EU]. (O’Donoghue and
Bialowas, 2020)
Interoperability-related requirements concern data ﬂow, eﬃciency, and privacy:
Each [national] backend communicates only with the gateway, so you
don’t have a direct exchange between the different backends. (...) And
that keeps the data flow to a minimum and is much more efficient.
(Kobie, 2020)
No other information than arbitrary keys, generated by the apps, will
be handled by the gateway. (...) The information is pseudonymised,
encrypted, kept to the minimum and only stored as long as necessary to
trace back infections. It does not allow the identification of individual
persons, nor to track location or movement of devices. (Lomas, 2020)
Risks and threats:
Ensuring interoperability is technically difficult and may requirechanges
to existing national apps. (O’Donoghue and Bialowas, 2020)
Run from the European Commission’s data centre in Luxembourg, the
system was designed by SAP and T-Systems, using a (...) third-party
server dubbed a “gateway” to let [EU] member countries’ apps share
data. (Kobie, 2020)
As with the national contact tracing app and user adoption
The effectiveness of this interoperable gateway will depend on how many
[EU] Member States register their national contact tracing apps with
this new service. (O’Donoghue and Bialowas, 2020)
28

8

Evaluation and Learning for the Future

COVID-19 mitigation activities should be subject to rigorous assessment. Moreover, their outcomes should be used to extend our knowledge about this and
similar pandemics, and better defend ourselves in the future.

8.1

Evaluation-Related Requirements

Systematic evaluation of the adopted solutions is itself a requirement:
”After the spread of virus ends," [Mr Goh, from the Korea Centers for
Disease Control Prevention] says, "there has to be society’s assessment
whether or not this was effective and appropriate." (BBC, 2020)
A review and exit strategy must be in place to establish when and how
fast this should happen. These assessments should be conducted by
an independent body, such as a regulator or an ethics advisory board,
and not by the designers or the government itself. Circumstances and
attitudes are changing quickly, so the questions (...) must be asked
anew at regular intervals. (Morley et al., 2020)
Evaluation and assessment is bound to be multi-dimensional and complex:
Before rolling out any app, the EU needs to do a coordinated assessment
of usefulness, effectiveness, technological readiness, cyber security risks
and threats to fundamental freedoms and human rights. (Stollmeyer
et al., 2020)
it’s difficult to determine the effect of app use in combination with
early and extensive testing, the massive wearing of face masks and strict
enforcement at physical distance. (Stollmeyer et al., 2020)

8.2

Learning for the Future

Last but not least, we need to building scientiﬁc knowledge, and learn how to
better ﬁght pandemics in the future.
Anonymised data on movement patterns of the population collected
by the app are also supposed to be used to develop efficient infection
control measures. [They] will be used to gain insight into the effect of
changes to the measures for fighting the virus. (hel, 2020)

9

Conclusions

In this report, we make the ﬁrst step towards a systematic analysis of strategies
for eﬀective and trustworthy mitigation of the current pandemic. The strategies
may incorporate medical, social, economic, as well as technological measures.
29

Consequently, there is a large number of medical, social, economic, and technological requirements that must be taken into account when deciding which
strategy to adopt. Being computer scientists who specialize in information security, we ﬁnd the latter kind of requirements most obvious, especially with
respect privacy and security of information ﬂow. This is exactly the pitfall that
computer scientists must avoid. It is essential to realize that the goals (and
acceptability criteria) for a mitigation strategy are much more diverse, and consciously choose a solution that satisﬁes the multiple criteria to a reasonable
degree.
In a forthcoming companion paper, we will present a digest of the requirements, derived from the news clips, and a preliminary take on their formal
speciﬁcation.
Acknowledgments. The authors acknowledge the support of the Luxembourg National Research Fund (FNR) under the COVID-19 project SmartExit,
and the support of the National Centre for Research and Development Poland
(NCBR) and the Luxembourg National Research Fund (FNR), under the PolLux/FNRCORE project STV (POLLUX-VII/1/2019).

References
Coronavirus privacy: Are South Korea’s alerts too revealing?
BBC
News, 5 March 2020.
URL https://www.bbc.com/news/amp/
world-asia-51733145. Retrieved on 27.05.2020.
Cybernetica proposes privacy-preserving decentralised architecture for COVID19 mobile application for Estonia. Cybernetica, 6 May 2020. URL https:
//cyber.ee/news/2020/05-06/. Retrieved on 15.05.2020.

Coronavirus: Member States agree on an interoperability solution for mobile
tracing and warning apps. European Commission - Press release, 16 June
2020.
URL https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/news/
coronavirus-member-states-agree-interoperability-solution-mobile-tracing-and-warning-apps
Retrieved on 26.06.2020.
Legal advice on smartphone contact tracing published.
matrix chambers, 3 May 2020.
URL https://www.matrixlaw.co.uk/news/
legal-advice-on-smartphone-contact-tracing-published/. Retrieved
on 26.05.2020.
NHS COVID-19: the new contact-tracing app from the nhs.
NCSC,
14 May 2020.
URL https://www.ncsc.gov.uk/information/
nhs-covid-19-app-explainer. Retrieved on 15.05.2020.
Getting it right: States struggle with contact tracing push. POLITICO,
17 May 2020.
URL https://www.politico.com/news/2020/05/17/
privacy-coronavirus-tracing-261369. Retrieved on 17.05.2020.

30

German coronavirus tracing app now available in Luxembourg. RTL Today, 25 June 2020a. URL https://today.rtl.lu/news/luxembourg/a/
1539625.html. Retrieved on 25.06.2020.
Corona-app soll open source werden.
Süddeutsche Zeitung,
6 May 2020.
URL https://www.sueddeutsche.de/digital/
corona-app-tracing-open-source-1.4899711. Retrieved on 26.05.2020.
Aarogya Setu app enters 100 million users club. Times of India, 13 May
2020.
URL https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/gadgets-news/
aarogya-setu-app-enters-100-million-users-club/articleshow/
75709726.cms. Retrieved on 31.10.2020.
Together we can ﬁght coronavirus — Smittestopp. helsenorge, 28 April 2020.
URL
https://helsenorge.no/coronavirus/smittestopp?redirect=
false. Retrieved on 28.05.2020.
AFP. Major ﬁnding: Lockdowns averted 3 million deaths in 11 European nations: study. RTL Today, 9 June 2020. URL https://today.rtl.lu/news/
science-and-environment/a/1530963.html. Retrieved on 25.06.2020.
Françoise Baylis. Ten reasons why immunity passports are a bad idea. Nature Comment, 21 May 2020. URL https://www.nature.com/articles/
d41586-020-01451-0. Retrieved on 26.06.2020.
Jean-Michel Bezat.
L’application StopCovid, activée seulement par 2%
de la population, connaît des débuts décevants. Le Monde, 10 June
2020.
URL https://www.lemonde.fr/pixels/article/2020/06/10/
l-application-stopcovid-connait-des-debuts-decevants_6042404_
4408996.html. Retrieved on 26.06.2020.
Scott Bicheno.
Unlike France, Germany decides to do smartphone contact tracing the Apple/Google way.
telecoms.com,
27
April
2020.
URL
https://telecoms.com/503931/
unlike-france-germany-decides-to-do-smartphone-contact-tracing-the-apple-google-way/.
Retrieved on 24.06.2020.
Matt Burgess. Just how anonymous is the NHS Covid-19 contact tracing
app? Wired, 12 May 2020. URL https://www.wired.co.uk/article/
nhs-covid-app-data-anonymous. Retrieved on 25.06.2020.
Andrew Clarance. Aarogya Setu: Why India’s Covid-19 contact tracing app is
controversial. BBC News, 15 May 2020. URL https://www.bbc.com/news/
world-asia-india-52659520. Retrieved on 15.05.2020.
Jamie Davies. UK snubs Google and Apple privacy warning for contact tracing app. telecoms.com, 28 April 2020. URL https://telecoms.com/503967/
uk-snubs-google-and-apple-privacy-warning-for-contact-tracing-app/.
Retrieved on 27.05.2020.
31

Amanda Eisenberg.
Privacy fears threaten New York City’s coronavirus tracing eﬀorts.
Politico, 4 June 2020.
URL https:
//www.politico.com/states/new-york/albany/story/2020/06/04/
privacy-fears-threaten-new-york-citys-coronavirus-tracing-efforts-1290657.
Retrieved on 25.06.2020.
Sarah
Lewin
Frasier.
Coronavirus
antibody
tests
have
a
mathematical
pitfall.
Scientific
American,
1
July
2020.
URL
https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/
coronavirus-antibody-tests-have-a-mathematical-pitfall/.
Retrieved on 30.10.2020.
Rosie Garthwaite and Ian Anderson. Coronavirus: Alarm over ’invasive’
Kuwait and Bahrain contact-tracing apps. BBC News, 16 June 2020. URL
https://www.bbc.com/news/world-middle-east-53052395. Retrieved on
30.10.2020.
Alex
Hern.
UK
abandons
contact-tracing
app
for
Apple and Google model.
The Guardian,
18 June 2020.
URL
https://www.theguardian.com/world/2020/jun/18/
uk-poised-to-abandon-coronavirus-app-in-favour-of-apple-and-google-models.
Retrieved on 26.06.2020.
Robert Hinch, Will Probert, Anel Nurtay, Michelle Kendall, Chris Wymant,
Matthew Hall, Katrina Lythgoe, Ana Bulas Cruz, Lele Zhao, Andrea
Stewart, Luca Ferretti, Michael Parker, Ares Meroueh, Bryn Mathias,
Scott Stevenson, Daniel Montero, James Warren, Nicole K. Mather, Anthony Finkelstein, Lucie Abeler-Dörner, David Bonsall, and Christophe
Fraser. Eﬀective conﬁgurations of a digital contact tracing app: A report
to NHSX. Technical report, Oxford University, 2020. URL https://
github.com/BDI-pathogens/covid-19_instant_tracing/blob/master/
Report-EffectiveConfigurationsofaDigitalContactTracingApp.pdf.
Ieva Ilves.
Why are Google and Apple dictating how european
democracies ﬁght coronavirus?
The Guardian, 16 June 2020.
URL
https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2020/jun/16/
google-apple-dictating-european-democracies-coronavirus.
Retrieved on 24.06.2020.
Ella Jakubowska.
COVID-Tech: the sinister consequences of immunity passports.
EDRi, 10 June 2020.
URL https://edri.org/
covid-tech-the-sinister-consequences-of-immunity-passports/. Retrieved on 26.06.2020.
Nicole Kobie. The race is on to make contact tracing apps work across borders. Wired, 19-October 2020. URL https://www.wired.co.uk/article/
covid-contract-tracing-app-global-interoperability. Retrieved on
4.12.2020.
32

Karol Kunat.
Rzadowa aplikacja ma blad pozwalajacy na
sprawdzenie, czy nasi znajomi podlegaja kwarantannie.
Tabletowo,
29
April
2020.
URL
https://www.tabletowo.pl/
blad-aplikacji-karantanna-domowa-ujawnia-dane-z-bazy-rzadowej/.
Retrieved on 26.05.2020.

Natasha
Lomas.
EU
switches
on
cross-border
interoperability
for
ﬁrst
batch
of
COVID-19
contacts
tracing
apps.
TechCrunch, 19-October 2020.
URL https://www.
technologylawdispatch.com/2020/10/privacy-data-protection/
european-commission-implements-interoperable-gateway-for-covid-19-contact-tracing-and-war
Retrieved on 4.12.2020.
Kieren McCarthy. UK ﬁnds itself almost alone with centralized virus contacttracing app that probably won’t work well, asks for your location, may be
illegal. The Register, 5 May 2020. URL https://www.theregister.co.uk/
2020/05/05/uk_coronavirus_app/. Retrieved on 26.05.2020.
Jessica Morley, Josh Cowls, Mariarosaria Taddeo, and Luciano Floridi. Ethical
guidelines for COVID-19 tracing apps. Nature Comment, pages 29–31, 4 June
2020. URL https://www.nature.com/articles/d41586-020-01578-0. Retrieved on 9.06.2020.
Lindsay Muscato.
Why people don’t trust contact tracing apps, and
what to do about it.
MIT Technology Review, 12 November 2020.
URL
https://www.technologyreview.com/2020/11/12/1012033/
why-people-dont-trust-contact-tracing-apps-and-what-to-do-about-it/.
Retrieved on 26.12.2020.

Cynthia O’Donoghue and Angelika Bialowas. European Commission implements interoperable gateway for COVID-19 contact tracing and warning
apps.
Technology Law Dispatch, 28-October 2020.
URL https://
www.technologylawdispatch.com/2020/10/privacy-data-protection/
european-commission-implements-interoperable-gateway-for-covid-19-contact-tracing-and-war
Retrieved on 4.12.2020.
Patrick Howell O’Neill.
No, coronavirus apps don’t need 60% adoption to be eﬀective.
MIT Technology Review, 5 June 2020.
URL
https://www.technologyreview.com/2020/06/05/1002775/
covid-apps-effective-at-less-than-60-percent-download/.
Retrieved on 25.06.2020.
Patrick Howell O’Neill, Tate Ryan-Mosley, and Bobbie Johnson. A ﬂood of coronavirus apps are tracking us. now it’s time to keep track of them. MIT Technology Review, 7 May 2020. URL https://www.technologyreview.com/
2020/05/07/1000961/launching-mittr-covid-tracing-tracker/.
Retrieved on 25.06.2020.

33

AFP
Oslo.
Norway
suspends
virus-tracing
app
due
to
privacy
concerns.
The
Guardian,
15
June
2020.
URL
https://www.theguardian.com/world/2020/jun/15/
norway-suspends-virus-tracing-app-due-to-privacy-concerns.
Retrieved on 26.06.2020.
Imogen Parker and Elliot Jones.
Something to declare?
surfacing issues with immunity certiﬁcates.
Ada Lovelace Institute,
02 June 2020.
URL https://www.adalovelaceinstitute.org/
something-to-declare-surfacing-issues-with-immunity-certificates/.
Retrieved on 26.06.2020.
Elissa Redmiles. How to Fix COVID Contact Tracing. Scientific American,
7-December 2020. URL https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/
how-to-fix-covid-contact-tracing/. Retrieved on 8.12.2020.
Diana Robertson.
Transparency key to uptake of coronavirus tracing app.
RMIT news, 27-April 2020.
URL
https://www.rmit.edu.au/news/all-news/2020/april/
transparency-key-to-uptake-of-coronavirus-tracing-app. Retrieved
on 8.12.2020.
RTL. Bug found in contact tracing satisfaction survey. RTL, 10 September
2020b. URL https://today.rtl.lu/news/luxembourg/a/1577631.html.
Retrieved on 4.12.2020.
Mark Scott and Zosia Wanat.
Poland’s coronavirus app
oﬀers
playbook
for
other
governments.
POLITICO,
2
April
2020.
URL
https://www.politico.eu/article/
poland-coronavirus-app-offers-playbook-for-other-governments/.
Retrieved on 27.05.2020.
Ashkan Soltani, Ryan Calo, and Carl Bergstrom. Contact-tracing apps
are not a solution to the COVID-19 crisis.
Brookings Tech Stream,
27 April 2020.
URL https://www.brookings.edu/techstream/
inaccurate-and-insecure-why-contact-tracing-apps-could-be-a-disaster/.
Retrieved on 23.06.2020.
Reuters Staﬀ. EU tests platform to link up coronavirus tracing apps.
Reuters, 14 September 2020. URL https://www.reuters.com/article/
us-health-coronavirus-europe-tech-idUSKBN2651OD.
Retrieved on
4.12.2020.
Jennifer Steinhauer and Abby Goodnough. Contact tracing is failing in many
states. Here’s why. New York Times, 5 October 2020. URL https://www.
nytimes.com/2020/07/31/health/covid-contact-tracing-tests.html.
Retrieved on 26.11.2020.

34

Alice Stollmeyer, Marietje Schaake, and Frank Dignum. The dutch tracing app
’soap opera’ - lessons for europe. euobserver, 7 May 2020. URL https:
//euobserver.com/opinion/148265. Retrieved on 15.05.2020.
Katarzyna Szymielewicz, Anna Obem, and Tomasz Zieliński. Jak polska walczy
z koronawirusem i dlaczego aplikacja nas przed nim nie ochroni? Panoptykon, 5 May 2020. URL https://panoptykon.org/protego-safe-ryzyka.
Retrieved on.
Darius Tahir and Cristiano Lima.
Google and Apple’s rules for
virus tracking apps sow division among states.
Politico, 10 June
2020.
URL
https://www.politico.com/news/2020/06/10/
google-and-apples-rules-for-virus-tracking-apps-sow-division-among-states-312199.
Retrieved on 26.06.2020.
Josh Taylor.
How did the Covidsafe app go from being vital to almost irrelevant?
The Guardian, 23 May 2020.
URL
https://www.theguardian.com/world/2020/may/24/
how-did-the-covidsafe-app-go-from-being-vital-to-almost-irrelevant.
Retrieved on 26.05.2020.

Craig Timberg.
Most Americans are not willing or able to use an
app tracking coronavirus infections. that’s a problem for Big Tech’s
plan to slow the pandemic.
Washington Post, 29 April 2020.
URL
https://www.washingtonpost.com/technology/2020/04/29/
most-americans-are-not-willing-or-able-use-an-app-tracking-coronavirus-infections-thats-p
Retrieved on 17.05.2020.
Shoshana Wodinsky.
The UK’s contact-tracing app breaks
the UK’s own privacy laws (and is just plain broken).
Gizmodo,
13
May
2020.
URL
https://gizmodo.com/
the-uk-s-contact-tracing-app-breaks-the-uk-s-own-privac-1843439962.
Retrieved on 25.06.2020.
Samuel Woodhams. COVID-19 digital rights tracker. Top10VPN, 10 June
2020.
URL https://www.top10vpn.com/research/investigations/
covid-19-digital-rights-tracker/. Retrieved on 26.06.2020.
Mark Zastrow. Coronavirus contact-tracing apps: can they slow the spread of
COVID-19? Nature (Technology Feature), 19 May 2020. URL https://www.
nature.com/articles/d41586-020-01514-2. Retrieved on 25.06.2020.

35

