Australasian Conference on Information Systems
2020, Wellington

Frost & Duan
Virtual teams, technology and innovation

Rethinking the Role of Technology in Virtual Teams in
Light of COVID-19
Short Paper
Mark Frost

School of Management and Marketing
Charles Sturt University
Bathurst, Australia
Email: mfrost@csu.edu.au

Sophia Xiaoxia Duan
School of Accounting, Information Systems, and Supply Chain
RMIT University
Melbourne, Victoria
Email: sophia.duan2@rmit.edu.au

Abstract
The use of virtual teams by organisations has grown tremendously as a strategic response to COVID-19.
However, the concept of virtual teams is not something new, with many businesses over the past three
decades gradually incorporating virtual and/or dispersed teams into their processes. Research on
virtual teams has followed that of co-located face-to-face teams through lenses such as trust,
communication, teamwork, leadership and collaboration. This paper introduces a new paradigm for
examining the development of virtual teams, arguably one that would facilitate the consideration of
technology as part of a virtual team rather than simply as an alternate to face-to-face teams. That is,
viewing the development of virtual teams with embedded technology within an organisation through
an innovation framework.

Keywords

virtual teams, shared leadership, innovation, virtual organisations

1

Australasian Conference on Information Systems
2020, Wellington

Frost & Duan
Virtual teams, technology and innovation

1 Introduction
In today’s environment, one may never or seldom be physically co-located with other
members of a work unit but be part of a virtual work unit, often using sophisticated IT
systems such as cloud-based computing to coordinate and share projects, duties, and work-related
information. For example, in telecare Nickelsen and Elkjaer (2017) note that in the
ICT infrastructure dominated context of providing medical telecare, the ICT infrastructure
shapes the work unit community and interactions; thereby, challenging the hierarchy and
relationships of the work unit. (Arnold et al., 2019: 368)

One of the many impacts of COVID-19 has seen many organisations move their workforce to working
from home and the increasing use of technology. This has seen increased commentary from publications
such as the Economist, Guardian, UK Financial Times and the New York Times (to name a few) which
suggest the end of the traditional “office” through the adoption of hybrid type work arrangements, and
the benefits of utilising technology and the creation of virtual teams.
These changes are not new and have been occurring incrementally since the wider introduction of
computers and other technology into the workplace since the 1990s. For example, Hoch and Dulebohn
(2017) quote a 2014 RW3 survey of 3000 managers that 40% of their employees spend time working in
virtual teams. A 2012 survey of 379 HR professionals by the Society of Human Resource Management
finds that 46% of the participants reported their organizations to use virtual teams. Liao (2017) also
refers to this latter survey as well as suggesting that co-located teams have increasingly incorporated
technologies into work operations and to facilitate communication. Along similar lines, Cogliser et al.
(2012) conclude that teams have become more dispersed over both time and space and utilising
technology to facilitate this in varying degrees. In earlier research Siebdrat et al. (2009) conclude that
such dispersion is not necessarily detrimental but depends on team’s processes including team member
contribution and coordination.
Research on virtual teams has followed that of co-located face-to-face teams through lenses such as
trust, communication, teamwork, leadership and collaboration. In a report on developments in China
business in response to COVID-19 the McKinsey and Company (2020) suggest that many teams have
simply moved from face-to-face and co-located to virtual teams. In the majority of cases, these existing
teams have simply recreated their existing work processes through increased utilisation of virtual
technologies. While not suggested in the report this does raise the issue of the development of new
teams or even the re-purpose of existing teams in the new virtual environment.
This short paper introduces a new paradigm for examining the development of virtual teams, arguably
one that would facilitate the consideration of technology as part of virtual teams rather than simply as
an alternate to the face-to-face teams. That is, viewing the development of virtual teams with embedded
technology within an organisation through an innovation framework.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces related components of a good
virtual team. Section 3 presents theories from the innovation and entrepreneurship viewpoints that are
used to guide the discussion in Section 4. Section 5 raises some questions for further discussion. The
last section draws the conclusion.

2 What makes a good virtual team?
Virtual teams refer to the geographically distributed collaborations that rely on technology to
communicate and cooperate (Morrison-Smith & Ruiz, 2020). Existing literature on virtual teams is
comprehensive (Gilson et al., 2014; Morrison-Smith & Ruiz, 2020) and beyond the scope of this short
paper. The following section seeks to introduce some of the key concepts to generate discussion rather
than attempting to provide an extensive review of literature. Many of the concepts raised apply to both
virtual, dispersed and face-to-face teams. Virtual teams have an added layer of complexity related to the
use of technology within the team. The literature below focuses largely on the human behaviour
elements of virtual teams, with the role of technology introduced later.
Hoch and Dulebohn (2017) suggest that trust is an important component of any team. Shared leadership
and collaboration between members increase trust and knowledge sharing, improve functioning and
assist with the achievement of individual and unit goals. Shared leadership is considered a mutual
influence process to assist the achievement of objectives. However, the authors also conclude that colocated teams work more effectively as a lack of co-located interaction impacted trust, decision-making,

2

Australasian Conference on Information Systems
2020, Wellington

Frost & Duan
Virtual teams, technology and innovation

conflict management and the expression of opinions. This is consistent with the findings of Siebdrat et
al. (2009) above.
The human dimension is also important to the success of virtual teams. Such a dimension maximises
collegiality, engagement and civility (Arnold et al., 2019). For virtual teams, the composition of member
personality is important as is conscientiousness, agreeableness and emotional stability (Hoch and
Dulebohn, 2017). Conscientiousness implies a strong sense of direction, self-discipline and good selforganisation skills. Agreeableness is linked with being good-natured and cooperative. Emotional
stability suggests a calm, self-confident team member that possesses high self-efficacy, and could also
include tolerance of both ambiguity and uncertainty. Siebdrat et al. (2009) suggest that when selecting
members, it is important to consider member social skills and the underlying self-sufficiency. This is
important for all dispersed and virtual teams as the development of underlying group dynamics is not
as extensive as what usually occurs in a face-to-face or co-located setting.
Emotional intelligence is a significant predictor of unit effectiveness in face-to-face teams. However,
virtual teams observe fewer see verbal and nonverbal clues due to decreased social interaction and
emotional expression. Emotional intelligence is a critical driver in successful outcomes within a virtual
team. Similarly, this lack of social interaction sees team development occurring more slowly in virtual
teams (Pitts et al., 2012).
Gressgard (2011) concludes that highly functioning virtual teams facilitate flexible approaches to
product development, shortens innovation processes, which in turn speeds up the time to market,
thereby providing a competitive advantage. Furthermore, digital disruption now sees a merging of
information systems and processes such that production, distribution, information and communication
systems can now be linked together.
Leung et al. (2020) suggest that an emerging response from the COVD-19 is hybrid working
arrangements, i.e. spilt time between the workplace and home. This may see more discussion on
work/life integration as distinct from work/life balance. It will also mean that both existing and new
virtual teams may need to repurpose work processes rather than recreate existing processes in the
hybrid arrangements. This is consistent with Larson and DeChurch (2020) who suggest that we are now
entering a new phase of virtual teams. They suggest that there are four themes linking technology,
virtual teams and organisational processes. These are
(i) Technology as context – where technology is a fixed feature that sets the context for unit processes,
communication and information storage. An example is seen in the 1990s with the widespread
introduction of computers in organisations and the 2000s with the evolution and growth of virtual
teams. Figure 1 highlights the evolving use of technology since the 1990s.
(ii) Technology as socio-material – technology and units are mutually dependent. This is more for
sociological considerations that are outside the scope of this short paper.
(iii) Technology as a creation medium – where units are formed through technology such as flash teams,
project groups relating to the introduction of new automated processes or organisational systems, but
also sometimes outside of formal structures like Wikipedia.
(iv) Technology as a teammate – this is an emerging theme and occurs where technology has a distinct
role as an effective virtual team member or the core that the virtual team is built around. In the above
three themes, the virtual teams work with technology through either communication or process. In this
theme, technology has a distinct role as a distinct member and may include the use of robotics,
algorithms or artificial intelligence. The authors suggest that this may be the next major development
in the use of technology.
To date, the majority of technological improvement has allowed incremental change within
organisations, however disruptive and transformational change can also provide an opportunity for
organisations (Gressgard, 2011). Figure 1 shows the advancement of technologies in supporting virtual
teams.
In short, the notion of virtual teams is not something new that has simply emerged from COVID-19.
Rather there has been ongoing development of virtual and dispersed teams for nearly three decades,
with accompanying research on the performance, leadership and outcomes. Attributes of successful
virtual teams include shared leadership, emotional stability/intelligence, conscientiousness, and
agreeableness. Arguably most of this development has occurred in the theme of technology providing a
context. Much of the literature on virtual teams have utilised existing face-to-face team literature as a

3

Australasian Conference on Information Systems
2020, Wellington

Frost & Duan
Virtual teams, technology and innovation

framework, where teams have been re-creating existing processes and structures rather than as a tool
for re-purposing.
Utilising the theme of technology as a teammate may provide an opportunity for transformational
change within an organisation as it emerges from the impacts of COVID-19. It would see emerging
technologies such as robotics, automation and/or artificial intelligence be considered concurrently
when team development occurs and how team members could be built these technologies to maximise
opportunities. The question is how could organisations enable this?

1990s

2000s

 e-mail
 video
conferencing
 group decision
support
systems

 video
conferencing
 group decision
support
systems
 crowd
platforms


Figure 1.

2010s

2020
onwards

 crowd
platforms
 enterprise
social media
 recommender
systems

 Artificial
intelligence
 Social robots
 Intelligent
machines

Technology advancement in supporting virtual work units

3 Entrepreneurship and Innovation
To facilitate the development of a framework for understating the new paradigm of virtual teams post
COVID-19, the body of literature on entrepreneurship and innovation is reviewed. Existing literature
from these two streams has different viewpoints on virtual teams (Gilson et al., 2014; Larson and
DeChurch, 2020; Morrison-Smith & Ruiz, 2020).
The entrepreneurship literature is extensive and this short paper mainly investigates the organisational
process for facilitating the virtual team. Some seminal works on entrepreneurship and innovation are
introduced in the following commentary. Entrepreneurship can be considered a process of “creative
destruction”, where the entrepreneur displaces or destroys the existing methods of production and
replaces these with new ones, be it in new products or services, new methods of production, new
markets, new supply chains or new forms of production (Schumpeter 1934). Burgelman (1983) defines
corporate entrepreneurship as the process where firms (as distinct from individuals) engage in
diversification through new resource combinations that extend the firm’s activities into unrelated areas,
or marginally related to its current operations. Burgelman and Doz (2011) subsequently assed that firms
need both order and diversity in their strategy to survive. Order is provided in management and
structural processes while corporate entrepreneurship provides a diversity through experimentation
and selection. Covin and Slevin (1989) find that in hostile environments a more adaptive
entrepreneurial strategic posture can be useful. Covin and Miles (1999) coin the term organisational
rejuvenation as when an organisation alters its exiting processes, structures or capabilities in face of
such hostile environments. The authors identified that innovation underlies all forms of corporate
entrepreneurship, either through a product, service, or part of the wider organisational direction (Covin
& Miles, 1999).
The innovation literature primarily examines the adoption and diffusion of virtual teams in
organisations and the factors associated with the adoption and diffusion. Prominent theoretical
frameworks for investigating the adoption and diffusion of technologies in virtual teams include the
theory of reasoned action, the theory of planned behaviour, the diffusion of innovation theory, the
technology acceptance model, the unified theory of acceptance and use of technology, the motivational
model theory, and the technology-organisation-environment framework (Guth and Ginberg, 1990;
Zahra 1993; Covin and Miles, 1999: 2007; Venkatesh, et al., 2016; Kahn, 2018). The innovation in
virtual teams can be seen as an outcome from a goal (i.e. in process, output, or product, etc.); a mindset
(i.e. innovation at an individual level, a supportive team structure and /or culture); or a process (how
does it affect current processes) (Kahn, 2018). Therefore innovation can be internally focused and
include cost reduction, product improvement, new markets, efficiency in processes, amended supply
chains to name a few. While not stated perhaps technology could also be included in these items as it
links easily with all of these processes (Covin and Miles, 1999: 2007).

4

Australasian Conference on Information Systems
2020, Wellington

Frost & Duan
Virtual teams, technology and innovation

Both the entrepreneurship literature and the innovation literature provide rich information in
understanding different aspects of virtual teams. Considering the new role of technology being the
teammate in virtual teams, the overlap of the two streams of research sheds light on the key theories
and factors for constructing a framework for understating the new paradigm of virtual teams post
COVID-19. The next section will cover the initial discussion on constructing such a framework.

4 Discussion
As businesses emerge from their amended operational arrangements from COVID-19 they will face a
changing landscape to how they have operated pre COVID-19. The implementation of virtual teams,
while widely reported in media as a relatively new paradigm, has been incrementally occurring since
the 1990s. In many cases, existing teams have simply recreated existing processes to allow for amended
working practices, both within the organisation and also with external stakeholders. It is unlikely that
businesses will simply return to where they were pre COVID-19. For example, teams may retain an
element of dispersion and/or virtual components. The work-life integration of team members may
become more prevalent such that team members are working outside existing business hours in the
form of hybrid working arrangement.
There may be an opportunity to repurpose existing teams as well as develop new teams that also include
further adoption of technological features such that technology is considered an effective “teammate”.
This can include the use of existing tools for sharing resources and communication as well as the
increased potential use of robotics, automation and artificial intelligence. The creation of these teams
may require a different mindset around staff recruitment, performance and development, management
structures and ways to measure success. There is a general understanding that formal leadership in
dispersed and virtual teams require more focus on group and individual communication as well as a
focus of group outputs.
Recruitment may need to be adjusted to also include technological understanding, emotional
intelligence and self-efficacy. Furthermore, formal leaders may need to ensure strong communication
channels exist to develop team functioning such that trust and shared leadership emerge.
The characteristics for successful virtual team members include factors such as shared leadership,
emotional stability/intelligence, conscientiousness, and agreeableness. The majority of these attributes
match those of a successful entrepreneur, albeit some more directly than others. Entrepreneurial
attributes include independence, self-efficacy, a propensity for risk and opportunity, a drive to achieve,
a creative thinker, a problem solver with a high tolerance for ambiguity and/or failure, and have teambuilding skills. All of these attributes would be well suited within a virtual team environment. Figure 2
shows a framework for formulating a high performing virtual team post COVID-19.
This suggests that organisations looking to repurpose existing processes post COVID-19 with possible
more detailed engagement with technology could do so within an entrepreneurial framework. Namely
flexible and entrepreneurial organisational structures, a goal approach to success, and an acute
awareness of industry trends. Interestingly the two seminal pieces on entrepreneurship literature
occurred in response to significant economic upheavals. This is probably understandable as it links with
the commentary on succeeding in hostile environments. A key question is whether current
circumstances could be considered something familiar.

5

Australasian Conference on Information Systems
2020, Wellington

Frost & Duan
Virtual teams, technology and innovation

Shared
leadership

Corporate
flexibility

Goal driven

Virtual team:
technology as
a teammate

Team
member
attributes

Figure 2.

Innovation
/ Repurpose

An innovation framework for virtual team

From Figure 2 a few questions arise, namely:


Is this an opportunity to re-purpose existing processes and organisational structures?



If so, what is the role of technologies in virtual teams post COVID-19?



What will be the success factors for the high performing virtual teams post COVID-19?



What are the behaviours of high performing virtual teams post COVID-19?



How could organisations enable and empower the virtual team post COVID-19?



Will technology have a greater role than what currently exists?

5 Conclusion
This short paper introduces a new paradigm for examining the development of virtual teams post
COVID-19 with the consideration of technology as part of virtual teams. That is, rather than being an
enabler of process, can technology (and how it is utilised) influence the dynamics of a team, all people
and process activities related to the team, and the ability of the team to innovate more successfully.
Possible linkages between the development of successful virtual teams, and how the attributes of these
teams could assist corporate innovation and vice versa are discussed. To inspire further discussion on
the new paradigm of virtual teams, open questions are proposed in line with the goals of this paper.
Namely, the introduction of a possible framework that businesses could utilise as they grapple with the
amended demands of their environment post COVID-19.

6 References
Arnold, W., Arnold, D., Neher, A., & Miles, M. 2020, “Developing a contemporary measure of
employees perceptions of their work units psychological sense of community”, Journal of
Workplace Learning (32/1) pp 16-34.
Burgelman, R.A. 1983. “Corporate Entrepreneurship and Strategic Management: Insights from a
process study.” Management Science, (29), pp. 1349-1364.
Burgelman, R. A., & Doz, Y. L. 2001. “The power of strategic integration.” MIT Sloan Management
Review, (42).
Cogliser, C.C., Gardner, W.L., Gavin, M.B., & Broberg, J.C., 2012, “Big Five Personality Factors and
Leader Emergence in Virtual Teams: relationships with team trustworthiness, member

6

Australasian Conference on Information Systems
2020, Wellington

Frost & Duan
Virtual teams, technology and innovation

performance contributions and team performance” Group and Organisation Management
(37/6) pp 752-784.
Covin, J. G., & Miles. M.P. 1999. “Corporate entrepreneurship and the pursuit of competitive
advantage.” Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, (23), pp 47–64.
Covin, J. G., & Miles. M.P. 2007. “Strategic use of Corporate Venturing.” Entrepreneurship Theory and
Practice, (31), pp 183–207.
Covin, J. G., & Slevin, D. P. 1989. “Strategic management of small firms in hostile and benign
environments.” Strategic Management Journal, (10), pp 75-87.
Frederick, H., O’Connor, A., & Kuratko, D.F., 2018 “Entrepreneurship: Theory, Process, Practice” Fifth
Asia-Pacific Edition, Cengage Learning Australia.
Gilson, L. L., Maynard, M. T., Jones Young, N. C., Vartiainen, M., & Hakonen, M. 2015. “Virtual teams
research: 10 years, 10 themes, and 10 opportunities,” Journal of Management (41:5), pp. 13131337.
Gressgard, L.J., 2011, “Virtual team collaboration and innovation in organisations” Team Performance
Management (17 ½) pp 102-119.
Guth, W. D., & Ginsberg, A. 1990. “Guest editors' introduction: Corporate entrepreneurship.” Strategic
Management Journal, (11), pp 5-15.
Hoch, J.E. & Dulebohn,J.H., 2017, “Team personality composition, emergent leadership and shared
leadership in virtual teams: a theoretical framework: Human Resource Management Review
(27) pp 678-693.
Kahn, K.B., 2018 Understanding innovation Business Horizons (61) pp 453-460
Larson, L., & DeChurch, L. A. 2020. “Leading Teams in the Digital Age: Four Perspectives on
Technology and What They Mean for Leading Teams.” The Leadership Quarterly (31:1), pp.
101377.
Leiung, N., Ngai, J., Seong J., & Woetzel, J, 2020. “Fast forward China: 30 ways companies are
reactivating business and reimagining the future post COVID-19”, McKinsey, June 2020.
Liao. C., 2017, Leadership in virtual teams: a multilevel perspective Human Resource Management
Review (27), pp 648-659.
Morrison-Smith, S., & Ruiz, J. 2020. “Challenges and Barriers in Virtual Teams: A Literature
Review.” SN Applied Sciences 2, pp. 1-33.
Pitts,V.E., Wright, N.A, & Harkabus, L.C., 2012, “Communication in virtual teams: the role of emotional
intelligence”, Journal of Organisational Psychology (12 ¾) pp 21-34
Schumpeter, J. A. 1934. “Change and the Entrepreneur.” Essays of JA Schumpeter, (9).
Siebdrat, F., & Hoeglm, E.H., 2009 “How to manage virtual teams” MIT Sloan Management Review
(50/4) pp 63-68.
Venkatesh, V., Thong, J. Y., and Xu, X. (2016). Unified theory of acceptance and use of technology: A
synthesis and the road ahead. Journal of the Association for Information Systems, 17(5), 328376.
Zahra, S. A. 1993. “Environment, corporate entrepreneurship and financial performance: A taxonomic
approach.” Journal of Business Venturing, (8), pp 319–340.

Copyright © 2020 authors. This is an open-access article licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial 3.0 New Zealand, which permits non-commercial use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and ACIS are credited.

7

