Please Turn Your Cameras On: Remote Onboarding
of Software Developers during a Pandemic
Paige Rodeghero∗† , Thomas Zimmermann† , Brian Houck† , and Denae Ford†
∗ School

arXiv:2011.08130v1 [cs.SE] 16 Nov 2020

of Computing, Clemson University
Clemson, South Carolina 29631
Email: prodegh@clemson.edu
† Microsoft Corp.
Redmond, WA 98052
Email: {tzimmer, brian.houck, denae}@microsoft.com
Unfortunately, the onboarding techniques described in
the literature are largely not applicable to programmers
onboarding remotely. “Remote” is commonly used to describe a programmer that works away from their physical
office [10]. They may work at home, in a shared public
space, or any location of their choice. The idea of remote
work is that a programmer can work in any chosen location
and effectively contribute to a development team. Remote
onboarding presents unique challenges in comparison to
the local onboarding because new hires work off-site.
The traditional workplace changed overnight when the
COVID-19 pandemic spread [11]. Employees transitioned
to work from home (WFH), unless considered an essential
employee by the government (e.g., a respiratory therapist).
Many developers were hired by Microsoft before the lockdown but had not officially started their new job. Once
starting their job, most of these new hires went through a
remote onboarding process without meeting their team in
person or even stepping into the office.
At the time of submitting this research paper, we do not
have an end date for the COVID-19 pandemic. Furthermore, and unfortunately, we do not know how long the
pandemic will last. However, we do know that the future
of work has changed. For example, Twitter and Square
found that remote work was sufficient and announced that
employees could continue to WFH indefinitely [12]. This
means that remote onboarding will grow of importance in
the future as other companies move to remote work. Without multiple studies exploring the onboarding challenges
that new remote hires encounter, we do not know how best
to tailor the remote onboarding process. Most of the field
has become remote for the conceivable future.

Abstract—The COVID-19 pandemic has impacted
the way that software development teams onboard new
hires. Previously, most software developers worked in
physical offices and new hires onboarded to their teams
in the physical office, following a standard onboarding process. However, when companies transitioned
employees to work from home due to the pandemic,
there was little time to no time to develop new onboarding procedures. In this paper, we present a survey of 267 new hires at Microsoft that onboarded to
software development teams during the pandemic. We
explored their remote onboarding process, including
the challenges that the new hires encountered and their
social connectedness with their teams. We found that
most developers onboarded remotely and never had an
opportunity to meet their teammates in person. This
leads to one of the biggest challenges faced by these
new hires, building a strong social connection with their
team. We use these results to provide recommendations
for onboarding remote hires.
Index Terms—onboarding, remote, COVID-19

I. Introduction
“Onboarding” is the period of time when programmers
become familiar with a new project, its source code, and
the team. The onboarding process is a “necessary evil.”
This process is undesirable due to its extreme expense
and error proneness [1], [2]. In response to the expensive onboarding process, the software engineering research
community has responded by experimenting with methodologies, such as pair programming [3], to overcome the
barriers for onboarding. Most of the research efforts have
been focused on the human effort [1], [4], [5]. For example, mentoring during the onboarding process has been a
heavily researched area. Companies, such as Google, have
tried to improve the onboarding process using mentorship
programs [6]. Sim et al. found programmers had a shallow
understanding of projects they were working on even after
four months [7]. Even worse, Zhou and Mockus found that
programmers need a minimum of three years to become
fluent in a project [8]. It is important to note that the
average turnover rate at a large company such as Amazon
or Google is less than two years [9]. This means that many
programmers may never be fully onboarded.

The Problem:
In this paper, we address the following gap in
the current onboarding literature: there are no research studies on how software engineers onboard
to a team during a pandemic. This gap currently
presents a problem for software development companies hiring and onboarding new employees.

1

In this paper, we focus on improving the onboarding
process during the COVID-19 pandemic. We surveyed 267
new hires that remotely onboarded to their teams due
to WFH. We explored their onboarding process, their
connection with their team, and the challenges they encountered while onboarding. We found that the majority
of the new hires felt welcomed and supported by their
team. We also found that many new hires felt moderately
connected with their team, even though they may not
have had interaction with their team every day. Finally,
we found that the challenges new hires experienced while
onboarding included technology issues, finding useful documentation, communication and collaboration difficulties,
and difficulties building a strong connection with their
team. To conclude this paper, we provide extensive recommendations for managers and teams onboarding new
hires remotely and during a crisis.

In another holistic study by Britto et al., three separate
case studies were conducted to investigate the long-term
and short-term onboarding outcomes. These outcomes
were grouped into six different categories. They include
recruiting, orientation, training, coaching and supper, support tool and processes, and feedback. The results from the
case studies include recommendations and implications for
best practices while onboarding developers. These results
include the following: Explaining the expectations for
new hires during the recruitment process, have a written
onboarding plan that lays out objects, timelines, roles,
and responsibilities. Transparency must be provided into
the organization’s projects and the key roles other developers have across multiple locations of the organization.
Allowing developers to travel to met others if the project
is distributed across remote locations. Providing in-depth
coaching and support for legacy projects and tailoring each
onboarding program to suit the developers’ needs. It is important to note that are limitations to the different toolsets
each organization has available [13]. Finally, another study
of the remote onboarding process of remote teams concluded that remote onboarding processes were almost nonexisting because of the lack of opportunity for collocated
interactions [20]. Our work further explores the remote
onboarding process and we provide recommendations for
improving a multitude of areas of that process, including
the ways that teams interact and bond.

II. Background and Related Work
In this section, we cover the background and related
work on onboarding developers and remote work during
the COVID-19 pandemic.
A. Onboarding Software Developers
Onboarding is a key area for software companies’ success
because of the knowledge-intensive nature of work involved
with complex software projects [13]. The reasons for onboarding new developers can be from replacing retired
developers, replacing developers who left or will leave the
organization, scaling up the number of developers, or freeing up other developers to work on other tasks [13]. While
there is significant literature in general onboarding [14]–
[18], there is a lack of studies involving best practices and
strategies for the onboarding of remote hires. Additionally,
there is no research on onboarding published during the
pandemic, a time where the work has shifted overnight
into a new direction. Before the pandemic, researchers
had conducted case studies to explore the onboarding
of new hires at Google [6].The work studied Google’s
new employees’ onboarding process used benchmarks to
achieve desired goals and reduce isolation and increase new
employees’ collegiality [6].
In 2008, Hemphill and Begel studied remote onboarding
at a major software development company [19]. They conducted empirical case studies on five software development
teams within the company that had recently hired and
onboarded their first remote team member. The authors
conducted direct observations and interviews with the
managers, new hires, and mentors. They found that the
new remote hires desired a stronger social connection to
their team. Additionally, the new remote hires struggled
to understand the work process and find the needed
information when they had questions. Specifically, they
found a lack of documentation that the new hires needed to
understand their team’s work process their team follows.

B. Remote Work and Remote Work during the Pandemic
Even before the pandemic, remote work had a host of
advantages such as work autonomy, reduced interruptions,
and flexible schedules [21]. The advantages that remote
work provides have inspired many technologies, such as
Stack Overflow and GitLab, to support their employees
being remote-first [22] or even all-remote [23]. In fact,
this trend had become so popular that many companies
started providing reports and writing guides to help other
organizations to do the same [24]. These materials cite
recommendations to help make remote work a priority for
organizations, such as providing new employees with a
dedicated remote buddy whom they can go to with any
question [25]. Another recommendation is to have social
events to connect everyone (across remote and in-person
settings) intentionally. These pre-pandemic responses on
how to support remote work highlight the importance of
support, which is definitely important given the pandemic
stage of work we are currently in.
Although developers are working from home, it is important to note that remote work in a pandemic is not the
same as traditional remote work (before COVID-19) [26].
There are also a host of new challenges that the pandemic
brings. With COVID-19, many people are socially isolated
(e.g., living alone) [27]. There are no opportunities to
travel to the office and limited opportunities to form a
social connection with the team. There is also a new challenge for many of those with children. Many people have

2

to juggle homeschooling in addition to completing their
technical work [28]. Not to mention, traditional remote
work did not consider many experiencing trauma while
still working [29]. Since the pandemic, studies of software
developers have found that there is truly a dichotomy of
experiences impacting productivity [30], [31]. For example,
while some people find it easier to find more uninterrupted
focus time since no colleagues are stopping by their office,
others are finding it difficult to track down and communicate with colleagues [32]. But what about developers who
are new to the team, let alone the company? Our work
investigates the challenges that new developers face when
onboarding to a company.

March 4, 2020

Employees in King County instructed to
work from home [38]

April/early May

Most US states under stay at home orders
(94% of the US population) [39]

July 1–July 17

Survey sent to a total of 1,000 full-time
software engineers in the United States.
267 responses (response rate: 26.7%)

Fig. 1. Timeline of survey

B. Methodology
To understand the onboarding experience of new hires
during the COVID-19 pandemic, we designed and deployed an online survey within Microsoft (see Figure 1).
Microsoft employees in the location of the company headquarters (King County) were instructed to work from
home on March 4, 2020. The design of the survey was
based on the related work of remote work in general and
software development during COVID-19 (see Section II).
We used piloting to test earlier versions of the survey.
The final online survey consisted of 50 questions that
we deployed using Qualtrics [40] and distributed in the
first weeks of July. Our questions explored the new hires’
onboarding experience, their interaction with their team
during the onboarding process, their perceived productivity, and the overall degree of connection they felt with their
team. Most questions were optional in the survey. For this
paper, we analyzed a subset of the questions asked.

III. Remote Onboarding Survey Design
In this section, we describe our research questions and
the methodology of our onboarding survey.
A. Research Questions
Our goal is to understand better the developers’ remote
onboarding process, and the challenges encountered onboarding in a pandemic. Towards this goal, we highlight
four areas of onboarding and remote work that previous
studies have explored before the pandemic. We study these
areas by posing the following Research Questions (RQs):
RQ1 What are the challenges that developers encountered when onboarding during the pandemic?
RQ2 What are teams doing to onboard new hires?
RQ3 How do team members interact with new hires
during the pandemic?
RQ4 Do new hires feel socially connected to their
team?

Participants: We sent recruitment emails to 1000 new
hires who started at Microsoft between January and June
2020. We received 267 responses to the survey (26.7%
response rate). The respondents were professional developers, all new hires, and full-time employees at Microsoft.
Of the participants, 57 identified as women, 162 participants as men, and one participant identified as nonbinary/gender diverse. (47 participants did not respond
to the gender question). The participants were a mix of
hire types: 140 were industry hires, 14 were industry hires
with previous experience working at Microsoft, 38 of the
participants were college hires, and 26 had recently graduated from college and previously interned or consulted
at Microsoft. We only surveyed employees in the United
States due to the lock downs and reopenings occurring at
different times throughout the world. All of the participants surveyed were working from home at the time of
completing the survey. Once participants completed the
survey, they could enter into a sweepstakes to win one of
four $100 USD Amazon gift certificates.

The rationale behind RQ1 is that no software development company has onboarded employees during a
pandemic. Software development companies did not have
an onboarding process or plan for when a pandemic
would happen. Similar to many software development
companies, Microsoft had hired software developers before
WFH and those new hires expected to onboard in the
physical office. Unfortunately, due to the lockdown, most
of those new hires remotely onboarded from their home.
We ask this research question in order to understand
better the challenges that these developers faced while
onboarding remotely. Next, we ask RQ2 to explore the
efforts that teams made towards remotely onboarding new
employees during their own transition to WFH. We ask
RQ3 to understand the types of interactions that occurred
between the new hires and their teammates. Finally, we
ask RQ4 to understand the new hires and their team’s
social connection. Social connection is essential for team
productivity [33], [34] and job satisfaction [35], [36]. Also,
we ask this question because studies in organizational psychology literature report challenges in building trust and
connection between teammates in distributed teams [37].

Data Analysis: For the open-ended survey questions,
we followed an open-coding approach to analyze the responses [41], [42]. Three of the authors coded a random
sample of the data for each question. Once the data
was coded, the authors discussed the resulting codes and

3

themes and through negotiated agreement [43] compiled
a code book for each question. This approach allowed us
to find commonalities in the responses and form themes,
which we will discuss in the later sections of this paper.

Communication and Collaboration. Communication
and collaboration challenges were a common theme in
the data. By communication, we mean connecting with
teammates for scheduled and unscheduled meetings or
chat messages. By collaboration, we mean brainstorming
and working together.
7 During meetings, most teammates keep the camera off.
This makes collaboration and remote experience difficult.
(S228)
7 There could’ve been more communication in the first
2-3 weeks for me to be more productive. (S257)
7 Not enough communication due to WFH (S58)

C. Limitations / Threats to Validity
Any empirical study has limitations. First, our participants onboarded in different weeks, during different
months, to various teams throughout North America. This
means that they interacted with different managers, and
the onboarding process that employees went through is
most likely unique from one another. This also means
that the participants filled out the survey during different
stages of their onboarding process. A survey could control
for this aspect in normal times, for example, by sending
out the survey invitation three months after each new
hire’s start date. We considered such a survey design,
however, it would not have been able to control for the
different stages of the pandemic as the lock downs rules
have often been evolving on a weekly basis. Instead, we
decided to contact all new hires at the same time (first
weeks of July) during the pandemic.
Second, we studied only employees at a single company.
Employees at other companies may have a different onboarding experience, especially if the company is different
in size or had a remote work culture before the pandemic.
However, by studying new hires in a single company, as
opposed to new hires in many different companies, we
could control for aspects such as the company’s pandemic
response, which would be different across companies. We
are confident that most of our recommendations are useful
for most software companies.
Finally, due to the stress of the pandemic, our results
may be impacted by outside stress. Once the pandemic is
over, this outside stress will hopefully disappear. While
pandemic stress may have influenced the challenges reported in this paper, we know that the future of work has
been changed, and the current experiences will impact how
remote onboarding will take place in the future.

Asking for Help. We found that participants struggled
to ask for help while working remotely. We found that the
reasons for this varied from isolation between teammates
due to the nature of remote work, scheduling difficulties,
the lack of running into peers in the hallway, etc.
7 starting remotely has certainly been a disadvantage
in getting to know people enough to be comfortable with
randomly interrupt them multiple times a day for help.
(S34)
7 Because everyone is working from home I don’t run
into people randomly or walk by their office, which has led
me to ask for less help than I usually would have because
I don’t like asking small, half-thought out questions
virtually. (S106)
7 I haven’t been able to get enough help or specific
feedback on the tasks I’m working on. I can ask questions
and talk but quick emails and chats don’t give me enough
clarity. I lack confidence that my work is actually what
it’s supposed to be. I’ve had to scrap some things and
do them over differently because there was accidental
miscommunications and that’s made me move forward
more slowly now. (S18)
Building Team Connections. We found that respondents often mentioned that they struggled to build connections within their team.
7 Onboarding remotely is definitely more challenging.
The inability to truly interact with coworkers, the inability to really have traditional team building, and the
disconnection from everyone contributes to feeling like
my work is kind of isolated from everyone else. It also
makes it harder to get a broader, high level understanding
of the team and organization. (S91)
Respondents also discussed barriers to building a connection to their team. Respondents noted that when their
team did not use their videos in calls, it created a challenge
in understanding their new team’s dynamics, and it was
hard to bond with them.
7 This being a remote joining, it is difficult to connect
to the team and not having daily stand ups or a weekly
team meeting where the videos are on makes it difficult to
know the team dynamics. Also, there is no teams channel

IV. Remote Onboarding Survey Results
We present our answers to each research question and
our data, rationale, and interpretation of the answers.
A. Pandemic Onboarding Challenges (RQ1 )
We first asked participants “What challenges have
you faced while onboarding to your team and
project?” We followed up the open-ended question with
a question to ask the participants if the challenges reported
were specific to COVID-19 and 61.9% of the participants
who responded, selected “Definitely yes” or ‘Probably yes.”
We found that participants had various responses to
the first question about what challenges they faced during
the onboarding process. We found six common onboarding
challenges that emerge from the data:

4

7 Some of the onboarding documentation was outdated.

where all the communication happens where a new hire
can at least watch and learn (something that is similar
to listening to peers talk if we were in office) instead
of the team having one to one conversations on private
messaging (S76)
7 ...People generally are not comfortable using the video
during meetings (plus video takes up more bandwidth),
so it rarely is used. As a result it has been challenging to
get to know people. (S36)
In general, we found that new hires commonly noted that
onboarding and working remotely were very difficult for
building a connection with their team.
7 Onboarding remotely is definitely more challenging.
The inability to truly interact with coworkers, the inability to really have traditional team building, and the
disconnection from everyone contributes to feeling like
my work is kind of isolated from everyone else. It also
makes it harder to get a broader, high level understanding
of the team and organization. Switching to remote right
when I started working on feature development in a new
language and environment. Support for learning was all
of a sudden much harder. (S91)
7 It’s hard to gauge if I’m really meshing with the team
working remotely. It’s also a little bit harder to get help
with questions because I can’t just walk to someone’s
desk. (S9)

(S130)
Finally, we found that participants reported that their
challenge onboarding was searching for the internal documentation itself.
7 It is difficult to search for internal wikis and documentation. This slowed the velocity of onboarding a lot.
(S147)
Technical Issues. New hires found that they encountered technical issues. The technical issues ranged from
challenges with setting up development environments to
issues with remote restarts.
7 At first issues with Bitlocker and restarting my
computer, which I had to do a number of times in
the beginning. I didn’t realize you could suspend your
protection and restart it. (S95)
Hardware and Permissions. Some new hires reported
difficulty in quickly acquiring the needed hardware for
their job because they had to have the equipment shipped
to them. We found that this challenge prevented them
from starting work quickly.
7 Getting all of the software/hardware I need while being
remote. Sometimes I need to wait for hardware to be
delivered. Other times I need to get software that I can’t
easily access from home. I often don’t know what software
I need until someone can get back to me. (S19)

Finding Documentation. New hires reported difficulty
finding needed resources (e.g., wikis).
7 There was not enough documentation on the projects
I’ve been working on. I had to ask a lot of questions
to my coworkers to be able to work efficiently. Most
of these questions could have been written in some
documentation. (S68)
Additionally, some new hires reported documentation
missing, which caused delays in starting work.
7 Setting up the development environment had taken
me close to 2 weeks and I feel there should have been
a stackoverflow sort of internal tool to help us out on
common issues. These common issues have not been
documented anywhere and so more often than not a
team member had to help me out. I feel teams should
have proper onboarding guide/documentation detailing
the steps to setup the environment and also steps to
verify if everything is working. (S13)
Others reported excessive information spread out in multiple locations.
7 A lot of information spread out in too many places.
Not easy to find certain information (S44)
7 ...there is both an information glut and an indexing
dearth. (S81)
New hires found that some documentation was outdated,
a common complaint among the majority of software
developers in industry [44], [45].

B. Team Onboarding Efforts (RQ2 )
Teams have had to re-imagine their efforts when onboarding new hires due to WFH. We asked participants
“What has the team done to make you feel connected to the team?” We found that some new hires
had frequent 1:1 meetings with their manager.
7 My manager did 1:1 every single day for first two
weeks. There was introduction email send out broad
audience. Also had introduction meeting. There is teams
chat group for regular conversation. Overall it was great
experience. (S250)
We also found that multiple teams held a remote meeting
for new hires to meet their new team on their first day.
7 The team has been extremely welcoming. My very
first day we met over teams and each person introduced
themselves and welcomed me personally. Several people
have reached out to ask how my onboarding is going and
offered to answer any questions I have. Several members
of my team invited me to join them in a hackathon. Generally everyone has been incredibly helpful and patient
when teaching me. (S191)
Some participants noted their team’s efforts to ensure they
were not blocked on a task and assisted in networking.
7 They constantly check if I need anything. They are
assigning me the work such that I will be able to connect
with different people in the team. (S192)

5

We also found that teams were holding social virtual
events to bond and get to know one another. These events
varied from a casual reoccurring meeting to playing online
games with one another.
7 The team has set up a reoccurring meeting to just
relax and chat with each other. It is a nice event for me
to meet and start to get to know my teammates better.
(S125)
Finally, we found that teams assigned onboarding buddies
to assist in the onboarding process.
7 My manager assigned a buddy within my team. I
connect with him more often. Also, about 4 of us in the
team meet 3 days a week to share our status. I work
closely with them and they are very responsive in Teams.
(S162)
7 I had an onboarding buddy which was very helpful. I
still go to him for onboarding type questions (they still
come up), especially if there is a tool or resource I run
into that I haven’t used yet. (S36)
We found that 151 (67.7%) respondents were assigned a
mentor and 72 were not assigned a mentor.

7 We have a weekly ‘game night’ where we meet and play

online games together. It’s probably the favorite part of
my week! (S8)
We found a few instances where the new hires mentioned
their efforts to main social connection during technical
meetings with their team and peers.
7 I try to reach out to random team members. I’m soon
going to ask my manager if people can start turning on
their cameras so I can see facial expressions. (S75)
7 When opportunities arise (such as 1:1 technical discussions) I try to deviate from the work related item
under discussion. (S33)
A few new hires reported struggles with staying connected
with their team.
7 It’s been difficult to stay socially connected with my
team due to WFH situation. There has been some effort
recently to increase social interactions by setting up time
to vent about any issues we are facing with teammates.
(S52)
Finally, a few survey respondents had not yet made actively efforts to stay connected with their teammates.
7 I met with my manager in person twice. Beside that
I don’t stay socially connected with others. (S194)
7 Unfortunately I guess I haven’t taken active steps to
do so since I feel like I’m spending all of my time trying
to ramp up and learn. (S92)

C. Team Interaction (RQ3 )
We found that the interactions varied between new
hires and their teams. For example, 129 (58.1%) new
hires reported having 1:1 meetings daily with someone
from their team, while 93 new hires did not have daily
1:1s with other team members. We asked participants
“What does your typical daily informal and formal
communication with your team look like?” We found
similar responses from new hires to this question.
7 It’s all formal communication via Teams. Every once
in a while a small subset of us newer engineers will banter
with each other. (S173)
7 Formally there are scheduled meetings - mostly with
the whole team, but I do have a scheduled 1:1 with
my manager. There are informal chats and some email
exchanges between me and individuals to help me. (S18)
We also asked “What does that communication
look like? What content is typically discussed?” We
found that most communication occurred using Microsoft
Teams and the majority of the communication is focused
on work related topics. We followed this question up by
asking “On average, how long does the communication last?” We found that 72.9% of the reported
communication lasted less than 30 minutes and 43.4% of
communication was less than 15 minutes.

E. Summary of Onboarding Survey Results
We derive three main interpretations of our qualitative
and quantitative results. First, there are many challenges
with remote onboarding. Some of these challenges, such
as documentation, are not unique to the remote setting.
However, it is possible that these challenges, such as
documentation, are more impactful and amplified due
to other challenges, such as difficulties with communication. The many challenges suggested by our data, such
as communication and collaboration challenges, are most
likely challenges related to COVID-19 pandemic and WFH
orders. Second, our results show teams hold social events
to build a social connection with new hires. However, our
results do suggest that some new hires do not feel socially
connected to their team. We found many participants
responded that they did not have the same opportunities
to meet with their peers that they would have had if they
had onboarded in the physical office. Finally, we found new
hires desired more meetings with their managers and more
overall interaction with their team.

D. Social Connection to Team (RQ4 )
When asked “How socially connected do you feel
to your team?” we found that 83.3% of the new hires reported a connection with their team. To learn more about
the strategies of new hires to stay socially connected, we
additionally asked “How do you stay socially connected with your team?” Many respondents expressed
excitement over team bonding activities.

V. Discussion of Results
Our paper advances the software engineering literature
on onboarding in two key directions. First, we contribute
to the literature with empirical evidence of unique challenges that new hires encountered during onboarding in
the COVID-19 pandemic. We surveyed 267 professional

6

developers at Microsoft that had recently onboarded during the pandemic. We release our survey questions via an
online appendix [46]. We have analyzed the responses to
this survey and found that new hires struggled with communication and bonding with their team. We found that
1:1 meetings can help new hires and that finding useful
documentation can be difficult. These results confirm some
of the challenges of a previous study on onboarding [47].
However, this work sheds light on the challenges that come
from onboarding during a pandemic. We focus on the
remote onboarding of developers to teams that worked in
a physical location and quickly transitioned to working
from home. This, in itself, is a unique situation for both
onboarding and the field of software development.
In addition to our survey, we conducted 8 interviews
with new hires and early-career employees at Microsoft.
The confirmatory interviews were conducted to understand the remote onboarding experience further and validate our survey. We conducted open-ended interviews
where we listened to stories of remote onboarding and the
challenges that were faced.
Although this work contributes important evidence of
the challenges and needs of new hires onboarding, there
are some limitations that we plan to address in future
work. We focused our efforts on exploring the process and
experiences that new hires had at Microsoft. For future
work, we plan to explore the remotely onboarded new
hires’ productivity and job satisfaction. We will investigate
how the team connection new remote hires formed with
their team impacts their productivity and job satisfaction. It is important to understand the challenges that
new hires, teams that are hiring remote developers, and
managers face. It is also important to note that the type
of work currently occurring during the pandemic (e.g.,
the WFH transition) is not an example of the traditional
remote work [26]. The difficulties of day to day life are
unique (e.g., the lack of human connection due to social
distancing) and may greatly impact remote workers and
new hires onboarding.

Promote communication and asking for help. Some
new hires reported that they feel that they are bothering
or interrupting their teammates when they reach out to
ask a question. Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, it may
be that people are worried about bothering others at
home while they juggle work and family. The anxiety of
asking for help may have increased with the work from
home transition. Interviewees reported anxiety around
communication. They reported not knowing when to communicate and how to communicate with their team. First,
we recommend that new hires be provided with guidance
and “best practices” to reach out to their managers and
team members. We also recommend that managers and
team members encourage new hires to reach out for help
and ask questions when they arise. Another solution is for
managers to meet with new hires daily for short periods
of time to make sure that they can ask questions.
Encourage team members to turn cameras on. We
found that multiple participants desired their teammates
to turn on their video cameras during video calls. They
reported that this would help them better understand the
dynamics of the team. They also mentioned that it would
help them bond and form connections with their peers.
We recommend that managers encourage teams to turn
their cameras on in all meetings. Additionally, we highly
encourage and recommend that managers also turn on
their cameras to set an example for their team.
Schedule 1:1 meetings. Both survey participants and
interviewees reported that 1:1 meetings with both their
teammates and manager were helpful. We also found that
new hires desired short but frequent, one on one meetings
throughout the week. We recommend that managers have
formalized and consistent short daily meetings with new
hires to ensure that they are not blocked on tasks. In
the interviews, we found that managers found their new
hires’ onboarding process to be more positive if they had
formalized, consistent, and sustained 1:1 interactions. In
addition to the manager holding 1:1s, we also recommend
that team members reach out to new hires and meet with
them individually. This may help new hires feel more
comfortable asking for help and feel more part of the team.
We also found that participants desired to meet with their
skip-level manager (the new hire’s manager’s manager).
We recommend that managers assist in setting up a
meeting between new hires and the skip-level manager,
which helps to better understand the company’s strategy,
organization, and culture.

VI. Recommendations for Onboarding
Recommendations for Remote Onboarding:
 Promote communication & asking for help.
 Encourage teams to turn cameras on.
 Schedule 1:1 meetings.
 Provide information about the organization.
 Emphasize team building.
 Assign an onboarding buddy.
 Assign an onboarding technical mentor.
 Support multiple onboarding speeds.
 Assign a simple first task.
 Provide up-to-date documentation.

Provide information about the organization. We
found that the new hires reported that they did not fully
understand the company’s organization. By understanding
the broader business context and opportunities of the organization, so they could understand how their individual
role and their team’s role fit within that. We recommend
that managers provide information to new hires early on
about the company and team organization.

Based upon our results, we recommend the following
tasks to improve the remote onboarding process.

7

Emphasize team building. Based upon both the survey
responses and interviews, we found new hires desired a
stronger social connection with their team. We recommend
having regular social activities for team bonding and, later,
for maintaining social team connection. Team connection
is directly related to job satisfaction and productivity [48].
Therefore, we emphasize the need for new hires to build
strong connections to their team. These activities should
be inclusive. This includes teams with hybrid workers
where some team members are remote while others are in
person. Due to the current pandemic, we recommend holding activities virtually since most developers are working
remotely. This will allow all team members to participate.
Some examples of remote team activities we recommend
include happy hours, a workout class such as yoga, coffee
chats, or playing online games together.

may have less workflow experience than an industry hire.
Industry hires may quickly join a new team and create a
pull request in the first week. They may need less guidance.
However, this is not necessarily the case and may need to
be evaluated on a case by case basis. Organizations could
offer a normal onboarding track and a fast track, and new
hires could switch between tracks as they get more familiar
with the company. We believe new hires will have a higher
level of job satisfaction if the onboarding process is not a
one-size-fits-all process.
Assign a simple first task. The first task that new
hires work on can be daunting. New hires need to learn
how the software functions, the architecture of the project
they have been assigned to, the coding and documentation
standards that the team follows, the workflow, and much
more. We found that new hires often take a few weeks to
create their first pull request. This means that they may
not understand the workflow quickly and, therefore, they
may not understand some of the discussions had during
team meetings until after they have gone through the
process of creating their first pull request. We recommend
new hires complete a simple task, such as fixing a spelling
error. This allows new hires to quickly go through the
process of building a project, creating a pull request,
submitting it, and having it reviewed.

Assign an onboarding buddy. New hires found that
their onboarding buddy was helpful to their onboarding.
7 My manager and new hire buddy was very helpful in
getting me oriented with the team and the work. (S262)
However, those who did not have an onboarding buddy
suggested that having one could improve the onboarding
process. The onboarding buddy’s goal is to help new hires
find resources they need, connect the new hire with others
within the company, and be a source for asking questions.
The onboarding buddy helps to see that the new hire’s
process is smooth and ensures that the new hire feels
welcome. We recommend that the onboarding buddy does
not come from within the new hire’s direct team but rather
a team in the same organization. When the buddy is
outside of the direct team, the buddy can help the new
hire network outside the new hire’s team, discuss career
growth, and any problems during the onboarding process.

Provide up-to-date documentation. We found that
new hires that had ample documentation reported that
they had a smooth onboarding process. These new hires
were able to find the resources that they needed. However,
we found that many new hires found the documentation
to be overwhelming. Others reported that documentation
was many times outdated or nonexistent. The survey
responses on documentation were similar to the findings in
our interviews. It is important to note that new hires need
context to understand the documentation. They need upto-date documentation, and they need to know where they
fit into the project in relation to the documentation. With
remote work, because communication may be delayed
and questions may not be answered as quickly to the
traditional office work, ideally, documentation provides a
resource for remote hires to access easily. For example,
one survey participant talked about the challenges they
encountered with the documentation.

Assign an onboarding technical mentor. We recommend that each new hire is assigned an onboarding
technical mentor. The technical mentor is a mentor that
helps new hires with the low-level details of their work.
The mentor should come from within the new hire’s team
and assist the new hire with technical issues (e.g., code
questions). We recommend that the mentor be on the same
team and work with the code for a significant period of
time so that they can answer specific detailed questions.
This mentor should be available to assist and respond
promptly. We note that mentors need to sustain long
enough connections with the new hire and avoid dropping
out of the mentor role too early. By making the mentor role
a normal job function, managers can alleviate the anxiety
around sending multiple and frequent questions.

7 There are a lot of small hitches in the documentation

for setting up the dev environment, a lot of small ways
things can go wrong, that are the sort that can be easily
fixed by finding anyone who has ever done them before
and going [to ask questions] at them. When those people
are all busy and miles away, and you need to interrupt
them by texting them while their Teams status is red, that
gets harder. (S45)

Support multiple onboarding speeds. From the interviews, we found that some hires may prefer different
onboarding or ramping-up speeds. Because each new hire
has a unique background before joining a new team or
company, their needs may differ from their onboarding
peers concurrently. For example, a new hire from college

Finally, we also recommend providing documentation that
provides new hires with workflow information, allowing
new hires to understand the team’s day-to-day language.

8

To summarize our recommendations, we recommend
creating a clear onboarding process that is easily modifiable based on the new hires’ needs. The process should
integrate important technical aspects early on (e.g., introducing the workflow) and social aspects (e.g., team
bonding activities). We also suggest providing new hires
with both an onboarding mentor and a technical mentor.
In general, due to the pandemic and the shift to remote
work, we suggest building a culture of allyship for remote
workers [49]. The recommendations that we provide are
primarily for onboarding new hires remotely due to the
current crisis. We note that this work has focused primarily on new remote hires. We know that the future of
work has drastically changed [50]. We believe that these
recommendations will help those who continue to hire
during the current pandemic and remote developers in
general. Finally, we believe that these recommendations
(e.g., team bonding activities and co-working) will also
benefit all remote workers and teams as a whole.

[5] I. Steinmacher, T. Conte, M. A. Gerosa, and D. Redmiles, “Social barriers faced by newcomers placing their first contribution
in open source software projects,” in Proceedings of the 18th
ACM conference on Computer supported cooperative work &
social computing, 2015, pp. 1379–1392.
[6] M. Johnson and M. Senges, “Learning to be a programmer in a
complex organization: A case study on practice-based learning
during the onboarding process at google,” Journal of Workplace
Learning, vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 180–194, 2010.
[7] S. E. Sim and R. C. Holt, “The ramp-up problem in software
projects: A case study of how software immigrants naturalize,”
in Software Engineering, 1998. Proceedings of the 1998 International Conference on. IEEE, 1998, pp. 361–370.
[8] M. Zhou and A. Mockus, “Developer fluency: Achieving true
mastery in software projects,” in Proceedings of the eighteenth
ACM SIGSOFT international symposium on Foundations of
software engineering. ACM, 2010, pp. 137–146.
[9] B. Peterson, “Travis kalanick lasted in his role for 6.5
years - five times longer than the average uber employee,”
Aug 2017. [Online]. Available: http://www.businessinsider.
com/employee-retention-rate-top-tech-companies-2017-8
[10] E. J. Hill, B. C. Miller, S. P. Weiner, and J. Colihan, “Influences
of the virtual office on aspects of work and work/life balance,”
Personnel psychology, vol. 51, no. 3, pp. 667–683, 1998.
[11] G. Chowell and K. Mizumoto, “The covid-19 pandemic in the
usa: what might we expect?” The Lancet, vol. 395, no. 10230,
pp. 1093–1094, 2020.
[12] D. Brownlee, “Twitter, square announce work from home forever
option: What are the risks?” May 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://www.forbes.com/sites/danabrownlee/2020/05/18/
twitter-square-announce-work-from-home-forever-optionwhat-are-the-risks/
[13] R. Britto, D. S. Cruzes, D. Smite, and A. Sablis, “Onboarding
software developers and teams in three globally distributed
legacy projects: A multi-case study,” Journal of Software: Evolution and Process, vol. 30, no. 4, p. e1921, 2018.
[14] J. A. Gruman, A. M. Saks, and D. I. Zweig, “Organizational
socialization tactics and newcomer proactive behaviors: An integrative study,” Journal of vocational behavior, vol. 69, no. 1,
pp. 90–104, 2006.
[15] H. J. Klein, B. Polin, and K. Leigh Sutton, “Specific onboarding
practices for the socialization of new employees,” International
Journal of Selection and Assessment, vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 263–283,
2015.
[16] K. Lynch and G. Buckner-Hayden, “Reducing the new employee
learning curve to improve productivity,” Journal of healthcare
risk management, vol. 29, no. 3, pp. 22–28, 2010.
[17] L. Johnson, “Get your new managers moving,” Harvard Management Update, vol. 10, no. 6, 2005.
[18] S. Moyson, N. Raaphorst, S. Groeneveld, and S. Van de Walle,
“Organizational socialization in public administration research:
A systematic review and directions for future research,” The
American Review of Public Administration, vol. 48, no. 6, pp.
610–627, 2018.
[19] A. Begel and N. Nagappan, “Pair programming: what’s in it
for me?” in Proceedings of the Second ACM-IEEE international
symposium on Empirical software engineering and measurement. ACM, 2008, pp. 120–128.
[20] L. Hemphill and A. Begel, “Not seen and not heard: Onboarding
challenges in newly virtual teams,” 131.107, vol. 65, 2011.
[21] D. Ford, R. Milewicz, and A. Serebrenik, “How remote
work can foster a more inclusive environment for transgender
developers,” in Proceedings of the 2nd International Workshop
on Gender Equality in Software Engineering, ser. GE ’19.
IEEE Press, 2019, p. 9–12. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/
10.1109/GE.2019.00011
[22] A. Mazzina, “What it means to be a remote-first company,” February 2017, retrieved June 4, 2020 from https://
stackoverflow.blog/2017/02/08/means-remote-first-company/.
[23] GitLab, “The remote work report by gitlab: The future of work is remote,” March 2020, retrieved June 4,
2020 from https://page.gitlab.com/rs/194-VVC-221/images/
the-remote-work-report-by-gitlab.pdf.

VII. Conclusion
We have presented a study of remote onboarding during
the COVID-19 pandemic. We surveyed 267 professional
developers at Microsoft. We explored several research
questions to understand the remote onboarding process
and the challenges that new hires faced during the process.
We showed the challenges newly hired developers encountered included difficulties finding documentation, communication, asking for help, and bonding with teammates.
We also explored the new hires’ connections within their
teams and how teams bonded. Finally, we provide recommendations to assist managers and teams in developing a
remote onboarding process during a crisis.
Acknowledgments
We thank and acknowledge Tony Hernandez for his
discussion with us about his experience of onboarding
new hires remotely to software development teams. We
also thank Andrew Begel and Simina Pasat for discussing
their previous experience researching software developers’
onboarding experience at Microsoft and GitHub. We also
thank Caroline Davis, Susan Hastings Tiscornia, Kanwal
Safdar, Tanya Platt, Angie Anderson, and Kelly Sieben
for the privacy and ethics review of these studies.
References
[1] A. Labuschagne and R. Holmes, “Do onboarding programs work?” in Mining Software Repositories (MSR), 2015
IEEE/ACM 12th Working Conference on. IEEE, 2015, pp.
381–385.
[2] J. Bonar and E. Soloway, “Uncovering principles of novice
programming,” in Proceedings of the 10th ACM SIGACTSIGPLAN symposium on Principles of programming languages.
ACM, 1983, pp. 10–13.
[3] L. Williams, A. Shukla, and A. I. Anton, “An initial exploration
of the relationship between pair programming and brooks’ law,”
in Agile Development Conference, 2004. IEEE, 2004, pp. 11–
20.
[4] F. Fagerholm, A. S. Guinea, J. Münch, and J. Borenstein, “The
role of mentoring and project characteristics for onboarding
in open source software projects,” in Proceedings of the 8th
ACM/IEEE international symposium on empirical software
engineering and measurement. ACM, 2014, p. 55.

9

[24] ——, “The remote playbook from the largest all-remote
company in the world,” March 2020, retrieved June 4,
2020 from https://about.gitlab.com/resources/downloads/
ebook-remote-playbook.pdf.
[25] J. Pardue, “Making remote work: Behind the scenes
at stack overflow,” September 2017, retrieved June
4,
2020
from
https://stackoverflow.blog/2017/09/29/
making-remote-work-behind-scenes/.
[26] S. Hanselman, “Quarantine work !== remote work. i’ve
been working remotely with success for 13 years, and
i’ve never been close to burn out. i’ve been working
quarantined for over a month and i’m feeling a tinge
if burn out for the first time in my life. take care
of yourself folks. really.” Apr 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://twitter.com/shanselman/status/1252040170783641600
[27] K. Usher, N. Bhullar, and D. Jackson, “Life in the pandemic:
Social isolation and mental health,” Journal of Clinical Nursing,
2020.
[28] L. Cluver, J. M. Lachman, L. Sherr, I. Wessels, E. Krug,
S. Rakotomalala, S. Blight, S. Hillis, G. Bachmand, O. Green
et al., “Parenting in a time of covid-19,” The Lancet, 2020.
[29] D. Horesh and A. D. Brown, “Traumatic stress in the age of
covid-19: A call to close critical gaps and adapt to new realities.”
Psychological Trauma: Theory, Research, Practice, and Policy,
vol. 12, no. 4, p. 331, 2020.
[30] L. Bao, T. Li, X. Xia, K. Zhu, H. Li, and X. Yang, “How does
working from home affect developer productivity? – a case study
of baidu during covid-19 pandemic,” 2020.
[31] P. Ralph, S. Baltes, G. Adisaputri, R. Torkar, V. Kovalenko,
M. Kalinowski, N. Novielli, S. Yoo, X. Devroey, X. Tan,
M. Zhou, B. Turhan, R. Hoda, H. Hata, G. Robles, A. M. Fard,
and R. Alkadhi, “Pandemic programming: How covid-19 affects
software developers and how their organizations can help,” 2020.
[32] D. Ford, M.-A. Storey, T. Zimmermann, C. Bird, S. Jaffe,
C. Maddila, J. L. Butler, B. Houck, and N. Nagappan, “A tale
of two cities: Software developers working from home during the
covid-19 pandemic,” 2020.
[33] R. Reagans and E. W. Zuckerman, “Networks, diversity, and
productivity: The social capital of corporate r&d teams,” Organization science, vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 502–517, 2001.
[34] M. Yilmaz, R. V. O’Connor, and P. Clarke, “Effective social
productivity measurements during software development—an
empirical study,” International Journal of Software Engineering
and Knowledge Engineering, vol. 26, no. 03, pp. 457–490, 2016.
[35] G. Ayazlar and B. Güzel, “The effect of loneliness in the
workplace on organizational commitment,” Procedia-Social and
Behavioral Sciences, vol. 131, pp. 319–325, 2014.
[36] R. Lopes Morrison, “Informal relationships in the workplace:
Associations with job satisfaction, organisational commitment

[37]
[38]

[39]

[40]
[41]
[42]
[43]

[44]

[45]
[46]

[47]
[48]

[49]

[50]

10

and turnover intentions,” Ph.D. dissertation, Massey University,
2005.
K. Dery and E. Hafermalz, “Seeing is belonging: Remote working, identity and staying connected,” in The impact of ICT on
work. Springer, 2016, pp. 109–126.
K. DelBene, “Kurt delbene’s march 4 guidance to
king county employees,” March 2020, retrieved July
27, 2020 from https://news.microsoft.com/2020/03/04/
kurt-delbenes-march-4-guidance-to-king-county-employees/.
H. Secon, “An interactive map of the us cities and states still
under lockdown — and those that are reopening,” June 2020,
retrieved July 27, 2020 from https://www.businessinsider.com/
us-map-stay-at-home-orders-lockdowns-2020-3.
“Qualtrics xm.”
P. Mayring, “Qualitative content analysis,” A companion to
qualitative research, vol. 1, no. 2004, pp. 159–176, 2004.
D. Spencer and T. Warfel, “Card sorting: a definitive guide,”
Boxes and arrows, vol. 2, pp. 1–23, 2004.
D. R. Garrison, M. Cleveland-Innes, M. Koole, and J. Kappelman, “Revisiting methodological issues in transcript analysis:
Negotiated coding and reliability,” The Internet and Higher
Education, vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 1–8, 2006.
G. Garousi, V. Garousi, M. Moussavi, G. Ruhe, and B. Smith,
“Evaluating usage and quality of technical software documentation: an empirical study,” in Proceedings of the 17th International Conference on Evaluation and Assessment in Software
Engineering, 2013, pp. 24–35.
T. C. Lethbridge, J. Singer, and A. Forward, “How software
engineers use documentation: The state of the practice,” IEEE
software, vol. 20, no. 6, pp. 35–39, 2003.
P. Rodeghero, D. Ford, and T. Zimmermann, “Survey
on onboarding during a pandemic,” Microsoft, Tech.
Rep. MSR-TR-2020-36, October 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/publication/
survey-on-onboarding-during-a-pandemic/
L. Hemphill and A. Begel, “Not seen and not heard: Onboarding
challenges in newly virtual teams,” 131.107, vol. 65, 2011.
D. Boland and B. Fitzgerald, “Transitioning from a co-located
to a globally-distributed software development team: A case
study at analog devices inc,” in 3rd Workshop on Global Software Development. IET, 2004.
P. Rodeghero and T. Hernandez, “Empowering and supporting
remote software development team members through a
culture of allyship,” August 2020, microsoft Research
Symposium on the New Future of Work. [Online]. Available:
https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/publication/
empowering-and-supporting-remote-software-development-team-members-th
G. Press, “The future of work post-covid-19,” Jul 2020. [Online].
Available: https://www.forbes.com/sites/gilpress/2020/07/15/
the-future-of-work-post-covid-19/

