1

Infectious Disease Transmission via Aerosol
Propagation from a Molecular Communication
Perspective: Shannon Meets Coronavirus

arXiv:2011.00290v3 [eess.SP] 3 Feb 2021

Max Schurwanz, Peter Adam Hoeher, Sunasheer Bhattacharjee, Martin Damrath, Lukas Stratmann,
and Falko Dressler,

Abstract—Molecular communication is not only able to mimic
biological and chemical communication mechanisms, but also
provides a theoretical framework for viral infection processes.
In this tutorial, aerosol and droplet transmission is modeled as a
multiuser scenario with mobile nodes, related to broadcasting
and relaying. In contrast to data communication systems, in
the application of pathogen-laden aerosol transmission, mutual
information between nodes should be minimized. Towards this
goal, several countermeasures are reasoned. The findings are
supported by experimental results and by an advanced particle
simulation tool. This work is inspired by the recent outbreak
of the coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic, but also applicable to
other airborne infectious diseases like influenza.
Index Terms—Aerosols, biological system modeling, computer
simulation, fluid flow measurements, fluorescence, infectious
diseases, molecular communication, multiuser channels, mutual
information

I. I NTRODUCTION

M

OLECULAR communication (MC) aims at providing
technical solutions to real-world problems using techniques borrowed from nature, that have been adapted over the
course of evolution [1]. Even in the very beginning of MC
research, networking foundations have been considered [2].
Communication links can be established in situations, where
traditional electromagnetic communication techniques pose a
challenge. In contrast to classical communication paradigms,
molecules are used as information carriers, enabling biocompatible solutions. In the past decade, various MC applications have been identified, both in the microscopic and
the macroscopic domain [3]. Examples include sensing of
target substances in biotechnology, smart drug delivery in
medicine, and monitoring of oil pipelines or chemical reactors
in industrial settings [4].
The global pandemic of the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) inspires researchers from
numerous disciplines to combine different areas to find new
and innovative solutions to urgent problems. The need for
novel solutions has already created rapid infection control
solutions during the pandemic. These include “social distancing” rules [5], mouth and nose protection in public spaces,
M. Schurwanz, P. A. Hoeher, S. Bhattacharjee, and
with the Faculty of Engineering, Kiel University, Kiel,
{masc,ph,sub,md}@tf.uni-kiel.de.
L. Stratmann and F. Dressler are with the School
gineering and Computer Science, TU Berlin, Berlin,
{stratmann,dressler}@ccs-labs.org.

M. Damrath are
Germany, e-mail:
of Electrical EnGermany, e-mail:

and large-scale disinfection measures as suggested by the
various institutes of health care and virology around the world.
Since MC combines biological/chemical and communication/
information theoretical approaches, a common framework can
be established between MC and infectiology to apply known
techniques from information engineering to the field of health
care and infection prevention. Findings from health research
dealing with the spread of aerosols and the viruses they may
contain, can be joined with insights from MC in order to
predict infection processes and to identify more sophisticated
and safer protective measures.
Recent research in combining these areas has dealt with
possible use cases for aerosol communications [6], and with
channel modeling considering infectious aerosols in point-topoint scenarios [7], [8]. An infected person acts as a transmitter
of pathogen-laden aerosols and a device or another person acts
as a receiver of the infectious particles. The close relation
to macro-scale MC, where a transmitter emits molecules
into a fluid environment and an absorbing receiver recovers
the information, is exploited. In [9], the concept has been
expanded to include several features:
•
•

•

•

The transmission of infectious aerosols is suggested to be
a multiuser MC scenario.
In each MC transmitter, the modulator is modeled by
respiratory-event-driven higher order molecular variableconcentration shift keying (MoVCSK) [10].
Channel modeling is aided by air-based human experiments using a fluorescence dye in conjunction with
optical detection, motivated by the air-based macro-scale
MC testbed published in [11].
An advanced computer simulation tool is designed based
on the work in [12]. Parameters feeding this tool were
obtained by own experiments, among other established
sources.

The missing link between macro-scale MC and infection
prevention can be closed by the fields of multiuser communication and dynamic scenario modeling. Only when multiple
users exchange particles in a dynamically changing way,
reproduction – the root of the pandemic – can occur. Reproduction involves infection chains and coronavirus clusters.
A large variety of safety measures can be rethought from a
communication and information theory perspective to optimize
the goal of infection prevention.
Building on the novel contributions in [9], this tutorial

2

presents the following communication aspects in greater depth:
• The transmission of infectious particles is modeled as
a multiuser MC scenario with mobile nodes in a timevarying environment. Infected users are transmitters that
broadcast pathogen-laden particles, while the remaining
users are potential receivers. After infection plus incubation times, some receivers may become active transmitters, like in relaying. During this expected long delay, the
environmental setup is likely to change completely.
• Infection is considered to be a generalized threshold
detection problem: if the density of infectious particles
received exceeds a user-dependent threshold, an infection
is likely to occur. Furthermore, the viral load may also
affect the course of the disease. In the field of MC, the
corresponding analogy is reliability information.
• The viral infection rate is modeled by the concept of
mutual information [13], [14]. Contrary to data transmission, the aim is to minimize the mutual information
between an infected user and the healthy ones.
The remainder of this tutorial paper is structured as follows:
Section II describes the duality between MC (comprising
communication and information theory) on the one hand
and the field of airborne aerosol infection on the other. In
Section III, the concept of mutual information is introduced
to the area of infectious disease transmission. Prevention
techniques from different areas are discussed to minimize the
mutual information in order to reduce the risk of infection.
Section IV presents a particle simulation tool suitable for
the problem under investigation, and corresponding simulation
results for a multiuser scenario. Section V discusses the
prospects and challenges that arise from the duality concept.
Finally, conclusions are drawn in Section VI.
II. D UALITY A SPECTS
In the area of wireless communications, a general multiuser
scenario consists of mobile nodes spatially distributed in a
three dimensional (3D) environment, acting as transmitters
and/or receivers. The communication links between all users
are affected by environmental parameters, signal powers, and
random distortions. In the scenario under consideration, the
channel characteristics are determined by the environment
and the statistics of the aerosols and droplets emitted by the
different users. The term aerosols is used in the literature for
various particles sizes between approximately 1 µm and several 1000 µm. In this paper, aerosols describe smaller particles
that experience negligible influence from gravitational forces
whereas droplets describe larger particles that are forced to the
ground relatively quickly by gravitational forces. Analogous
to the understanding in infectiology, it is assumed in this
multiuser scenario that at least one transmitter emits infectious
aerosols and droplets. This situation can be understood as
a point-to-multipoint communication scenario at the physical
layer, related to broadcasting and relaying. In case of a
successful transmission – a necessary condition is that the
ingested amount of infectious aerosols exceeds the infection
threshold – the receiver itself becomes an active transmitter
after infection plus incubation period. The infection time can

Breathing

Speaking/ Coughing/
singing
sneezing

Respiratory
event
Infectious
Infection
state

Amount
Diameter

Aerosol
Aerosolclouds
clouds

Velocity
Temperature

Uninfected

Viral load
Mouth,
nose, eyes
Hands
Feet
Fig. 1. Aerosol emission through a respiratory event and reception of aerosol
clouds by other users. The aerosol distribution parameters (right-hand side)
are influenced by the type of respiratory event (top part) and the infection
state of the user (left-hand side). The uninfected users (bottom part) receive
the pathogen-laden aerosols by their reception areas.

be on the order of minutes, but the time required for a human
to become an active transmitter can be up to several days. The
agile relays act as virus spreaders or even superspreaders, i.e.,
they boost the viral load.
Table I features some duality aspects between air-based MC
and infectious particle transmission.
A. Aerosol Emission
The emission of aerosols and droplets is triggered by respiratory events such as breathing, speaking, singing, coughing,
or sneezing. These actions can be divided into three categories
according to their type of occurrence, which can be seen in
the top part of Fig. 1:
1) Breathing can be modeled as continuous emission, following a breathing pattern, mainly influenced by the
physical stress on the human body. Other factors like
size of the body or age may also be considered.
2) Speaking/singing can be described as a two-state Markov
process with the two states being either silence or
singing/speaking. The model is defined by the transition probabilities between the two states and retention
probabilities for staying in the current state.
3) Coughing/sneezing can be emulated as a Poisson random
process. The density parameters are influenced by the
user’s infection state, resulting in a higher probability
for an infected user to cough or sneeze than for a healthy
user.
Based on these events, aerosols are emitted into the environment, the main parameters of which are determined by the
type of event. These parameters are
• the number of emitted particles,

3

TABLE I
S ELECTED DUALITY ASPECTS .

•
•
•
•

the
the
the
the

Device

Air-based Molecular Communication

Infectious Particle Transmission

Transmitter
Modulation scheme
Signal power
Events
Information content
Channel model
Network topology
Receiver
Efficiency measure
Goal

Sprayer
Intensity-based modulation
Number of molecules
Clock synchronized
Data bits
Turbulent atmospheric channel
Point-to-point or point-to-multipoint
Absorbing or non-absorbing sensor
Reliability information
Maximization of mutual information

Mouth, nose
Respiratory-event-driven MoVCSK
Number of particles
Random respiratory events
Pathogens vs non-infected particles
Turbulent atmospheric channel
Point-to-multipoint; store and forward relaying
Absorbing body parts (incl. mouth, nose, and hands)
Viral load
Minimization of mutual information/infection rate

diameter distribution,
initial velocity distribution,
temperature distribution, and
viral load or viral distribution.

Each respiratory event causes a time-varying particle cloud,
even in the absence of air movement. Due to a counteraction
between air drag, buoyancy, and gravity, aerosols survive for
a longer period than droplets [7], [8]. The particle clouds
of different respiratory events overlay and may react with
each other. All parameters are of stochastic nature. The actual
emitted aerosol distribution is user-dependent and may vary for
each emission. Larger droplets may shrink in dry air or split
into smaller ones. The infection state of the human influences
the viral load and ultimately decides if an emission contains
pathogens or not, so every healthy user emits aerosols, but
these have no influence on the infection status of the other
users when received.
As an alternative to the human experiments conducted
in [9], the mentioned respiratory events can be emulated in
the air-based macro-scale testbed introduced in [11]. Mouth
and nose are replaced by transmitter-side sprayers. In order
to visualize particles, a fluorescent dye solution is emitted.
Intensity and duty cycle are software-controlled. The angle
of departure is adjustable. All mentioned actions can be
emulated by respiratory-event-driven higher order MoVCSK
modulation [9]. In this context, an MoVCSK sender is capable
to mimic infected and non-infected particles. This can be
further refined by distinguishing between particles of different
sizes. The intensities of the respiratory events are mapped to
the different concentration levels. The random occurrence of
the events over time can be represented by a sequence of
MoVCSK symbols.

The reception-sensitive body areas can be interpreted as
effective apertures, similar to spatially distributed antennas,
with individual antenna gains and sensitivity levels. Starting
with the highly sensitive body regions in the face, which
can trigger an infection even at a low viral load, to the
feet or shoes, which collect viruses settled at the floor. The
sensitivity levels of the individual sensors can be modeled
as user-dependent infection thresholds, which rely upon other
criteria as well including the health conditions and individual
and cultural hygiene habits.
The amount of viral molecules that the receiver absorbs
per time unit, i.e., the viral load, has an impact on the
probability of infection. According to the state-of-the-art, the
human-dependent infection threshold is checked by hypothesis
testing [7], [8]: the probability of infection corresponds to the
situation where the viral load exceeds the threshold. However,
the viral load additionally is likely to have an influence on the
severity of the course of the disease. This situation is related
to reliability information. In communication and information
theory, receiver-side reliability information describes the quality of information transmission in terms of the error rate.
From the perspective of our testbed [11], the water-based
dye solution from the sprayer is monitored and recorded by
a digital camera at the receiver side under the influence of
an ultraviolet (UV-A) light source. The intensity recorded by
the camera can be interpreted as the viral load carried by
the transmitted droplets over a certain distance through active
transmission. The region between the sprayer and the camera
contains those droplets which settle down under the influence
of gravity. The intensities from these droplets can be recorded
to formulate a model for air-based transmission of pathogens.
C. Turbulent Atmospheric Channel

B. Aerosol Reception
Several parts of the human body are actively or passively
involved in the absorption of aerosols, as depicted in the
bottom part of Fig. 1. The facial region with the mouth, the
nose and the eyes is the most sensitive receiving area [8],
implying that a small amount of received aerosols can lead to
an infection of the user. Other parts of the body like hands
and feet or shoes are passively involved by receiving infected
aerosols and either transferring them to more sensitive parts of
the user by smear infection or contaminating other surfaces,
which in turn can cause infection.

The spatially-distributed time-varying aerosol clouds that
are emitted into the environment from the various users, are
subject to a dynamic channel with turbulences and changing
parameters. Various effects change the channel and cause
the aerosols to propagate through the space with different
velocities and ranges. The turbulences in the air are caused
by the movement of the users, ventilation devices, air streams
introduced through windows and doors, temperature gradients,
and weather phenomena. Turbulence can either increase the
range of the aerosols by constructively influencing the propagation vector, or reduce it when the particles are forced to
the ground. Depending on the initial conditions in the envi-

4

ronment, the range of the emitted aerosols can be influenced
from the beginning. In the testbed environment, turbulence can
be introduced by introducing an external fan into the setup to
cause an artificial air movement.
D. Multiuser Scenario
The scenario under investigation comprises multiple users
in a predefined environment. The users are stationary or move
along random trajectories while aerosols are continuously
emitted due to the aforementioned respiratory events.
Initially, at the physical layer level, the multiuser scenario
can be described by a point-to-multipoint network, the nodes
of which comprise of the entire set of users. The infectious
user broadcasts pathogens. Some of these can be absorbed by
one or more healthy users. Those users can be modeled as
store and forward relays, which after some delay (as detailed
in Sections I and II) may broadcast even more pathogens. Accordingly, the number of transmitters is randomly distributed.
When the number of infectious users increases on average, the
reproduction factor is said to be greater than one.
In our testbed [11], a point-to-multipoint scenario can be
emulated by a network of pipelines with multiple camera
receivers placed along their lengths with stationary or mobile sprayers releasing the water-based dye solution. If the
intensities recorded by the cameras breach a certain threshold
level, the receivers may be termed as “infected” actuating new
sprayers after a certain delay, mimicking a relay mechanism.
The users are able to dynamically move and change their
absolute and relative positions. The absolute position affects
the random emission pattern and causes spatially distributed
aerosol clouds. Depending on the channel characteristics, the
aerosols are able to stay suspended in the air for some time,
resulting in a risk of infection for other users that move with
their apertures through the aerosol clouds or that are hit by
moving clouds.
Infection prevention by means of “social distancing” is
focused on the relative positions among the users. Keeping appropriate relative distances may lead to a reduction in infection
count, but ignores the possibility of the presence of suspended
aerosols in the environment from previous respiratory events
from other users at the same absolute position.
In addition, the movement of the users create movement
and turbulence of the surrounding air, which in itself results
in a change of aerosol movement.
III. M INIMIZATION OF M UTUAL I NFORMATION
In this section, we apply the concept of mutual information
to the area of infectious disease transmission. Contrary to a
maximization of mutual information in data communication
systems, the aim of infection prevention is to minimize the
infection rate between nodes. This can be accomplished by
employing several methods that are discussed afterwards.
A. Mutual Information in Pathogen-laden Transmission
Infection is strongly related to the probability that a certain
density of pathogen-laden particles successfully come into

Transmitter
9,000
non-infectious
particles
1,000
infectious
particles

Receiver
100 %
95 %
5%

9,950
particles not
causing infection
50
infection-causing
particles

Fig. 2. A point-to-point system can be simplified by the depicted discrete
memoryless channel model, known as Z channel. Models like this serve as a
basis for calculating the mutual information and the infection rate.

contact with the effective aperture area of the receiver. If
the receiver-side density exceeds the user-dependent infection threshold, after a certain incubation time, the receiver
will become infected with a certain probability. In terms of
Shannon information theory, this situation can be modeled
mathematically by means of mutual information.
The mutual information of a point-to-point communication
channel is determined by the distribution of the channel
input events as well as by the transition probabilities between channel input and channel output events [13]. In the
scenario under investigation, the channel input distribution
depends on the respiratory events. The transition probabilities
depend on the statistics of the turbulent atmospheric channel,
including receiver-side properties like the sensitive area [14].
An intuitive example is shown in Fig. 2. Out of 10,000
emitted particles, 10 % are infectious. This stipulates the
input distribution. Just 50 of the 1,000 emitted infectious
particles hit the sensitive area of the receiver, corresponding
to a transition probability of 5 %. This concept can be
generalized to multipoint-to-multipoint channel models. For
details and a critical review of infection rate measures see
[14]. The analogy between aerosol-based infection and mutual
information demonstrates three important facts: the risk of
infection depends on the channel input distribution including
number of events, the turbulent channel, and the infection
threshold. Although a minimization of mutual information is
counterproductive in classical communication scenarios, it is
a common design objective in crypto systems.
B. Preventive Approaches to Reduce the Mutual Information
Fig. 3 summarizes several techniques/approaches that reduce the risk of infection. These are described next in connection with mutual information.
Spatial actions: Maximization of Euclidean distances between the users in the multiuser scenario under investigation,
i.e., “social distancing”, aims to reduce the probability of
direct infection caused by respiratory events. Other techniques
like pruning/thinning the user density in a certain space as
well as route optimizations to reduce the interference of
users trajectories with infectious aerosol clouds have a similar
impact on the propagation conditions.
Despite these spatial actions, sometimes it is desirable that
the users are still able to communicate with each other. Hence,
the goal is to enable communication to some extent while
keeping the probability of infection at a tolerable level. This
objective can be formulated as a constraint in an overall
optimization problem.

5

Spatial
(distance)

Physical

Biological

(barriers)

(vaccination)

Mutal
information
reduction
techniques
Optical

Temporal

(UV irradiation)

(access times)

Chemical
(disinfection)

Fig. 3. Possible mutual information minimization techniques to reduce the
risk of infection.

Physical actions: Barriers and obstructions like face masks,
face shields, and respirators or protective precautions like
protective glasses or spit protections are widely applied techniques during the coronavirus pandemic. These actions have
an impact on the channel input distribution, by reducing the
amount of particles and the velocity of expelled air.
Another physical approach is air humidification. If the
relative humidity of the room air is below 40 percent, the
emitted particles absorb less water, stay lighter and move
around the room for a longer period. In addition, the nasal
mucous membranes in our noses become drier and more
permeable to viruses when the air is dry. This has an impact
on the infection threshold. Additional precautions like indoor
fans, air ventilation, and air purification devices are also useful,
as well as fresh air through open windows to prevent an
accumulation of infectious aerosols in the ambient air.
Temporal actions: The allocation of individual time slots
on user or group level leads to a more orderly procedure
and this results in a lower probability of infection. This
technique is called time-division multiple access and is widely
used in communication engineering. Increasing the time between respiratory events reduces the likelihood of infection by
pathogen-laden aerosols. An example is shift work.
Chemical actions: Reducing the viral load on surfaces is a
key factor in infection prevention. This can be accomplished
by cleaning of shoes or disinfection of the hands, as they are
part of the effective aperture of the receiver. Household bleach
solution containing 5.25 to 8.25 percent sodium hypochlorite
could be used to disinfect surfaces while at least a 70 percent
ethyl/isopropyl alcohol solution proves to be effective when
it comes to proper disinfection of hands. Disinfection and
purifying sprays are a good alternative, as they can eliminate
different kinds of viruses quickly. They might also stay suspended in air to further reduce the infectious particles over a
longer period of time.
Optical actions: The viral load in airborne aerosols that
were expelled into the air can be reduced by ultraviolet germicidal irradiation. This technique can be used in air purifiers
to filter stale air, to clean handles, and other surfaces. It is

essential to ensure that the skin and eyes are protected from
radiation. Furthermore, UV-C irradiation can be employed for
cleaning protection masks, even online when integrated into
exhalation valves embedded in medical masks.
Biological actions: Medical methods with a direct effect
on the receiver’s detection mechanism provide the best protection against transmission of infection. At the same time, a
biological solution is also the most difficult to apply to a wide
range of users. An example of a biological action would be
vaccination. At the same time, this is also the least broadly
based mechanism, as vaccination usually only protects against
a specific pathogen which is subject to a possible mutation.
Ongoing research on biochemical nose sprays and mouthrinses
is aimed at improving the infection threshold as well.
Note that all these techniques/approaches have an influence
on the mutual information. Some target the propagation conditions while others affect either the particle emission or the
infection threshold, respectively.
IV. A DVANCED A EROSOL S IMULATION
To gain further insight into such multiuser scenarios as
described above, computer simulations can be used. Compared
to pure mathematical analysis, simulations afford flexibility
in placing transmitters, receivers, and obstacles at arbitrary
positions. Simulations also offer expandability in keeping the
door open for future implementations of additional physical
phenomena such as Brownian motion or other mobility pattern.
The propagation of aerosols can be simulated with high
accuracy with the help of existing computational fluid dynamics (CFD) tools [15]. This approach, however, is very
demanding on computational resources. If the goal is to
simulate the spreading of disease in a multiuser scenario
with mobility and over longer periods of simulated time, MC
simulation tools optimized for the simulation of pathogenladen particle transfer may become useful. Using a state of
the art particle simulator (e.g., [9]), however, comes with a
trade-off in physical accuracy as, for example, air movement
and turbulence due to ventilation or convection is treated in an
abstract way. In contrast, CFD helps to accurately assess the
way in which infectious aerosols spread in an enclosed space
(e.g., to investigate the effectiveness of ventilation).
In previous work [9], we have extended the Pogona1 MC
simulator presented in [12] aiming to replicate a coughing
event. In this paper, this scenario is extended further towards a
multiuser network. An emitter as presented in [9] is an object
which can be freely moved or duplicated in the simulation
space. At a specified time, the emitter releases particles in
intervals for a fixed total duration. The angle and velocity of
emission are determined based on the configured probability
distribution. After emission, the trajectory of each particle
is guided by its inertia and the forces acting on it, namely
air drag, buoyancy, and gravity. When a particle eventually
collides with an absorbing receiver such as the ground or a
spherical shape, it will be removed from the simulation and
the position and speed of collision can be logged.
1 https://www2.tkn.tu-berlin.de/software/pogona/

6

1

C

0

B

0.003
A

0.001

−1
−2

0.002

Density

X in m

2

0.000
0
1
2
Y in m
Fig. 4. Density map of simulated particles intersecting with a horizontal
plane at a height of 0.65 m just below the hands. White circles represent
the positions of the mouth regions and red circles represent the hands of the
receivers.
−2

−1

Example: Let us consider a scenario with three people. Each
of the three people is modeled as having one point emitter at
mouth height (1.65 m), one absorbing spherical receiver with
a radius of 5 cm immediately behind the point of emission, as
well as two additional spherical receivers of the same size to
model the hands at a height of 70 cm with a lateral offset of
30 cm. The emitter releases 20 particles in intervals of 0.25 ms
for a fixed duration of 100 ms. Initially, person A represents
an emitter and coughs with the parameters we determined
experimentally in [9]. As one alteration to these parameters,
the emission opening angle is now sampled randomly for each
ejected particle based on the empirical cumulative distribution
function of observed emission angles. Previously, the emission
opening angle was approximated with a normal distribution.
At a distance of 2 m opposite of person A, person B is a
passive receiver. 75 cm to the left of person B is person C,
who acts as both a receiver as well as a second transmitter
with a delay of 3 s. In our previous work, the trajectory
of simulated particles was only determined by their initial
velocity vector at the time of emission and the forces acting
on them, assuming a completely stationary volume of air
for computing the drag force. In order to emulate the initial
ejection of air in a coughing event in a simplified fashion, we
can emit the simulated particles inside a volume of constant air
speed. For this demonstration, we chose a 3 m long and 1 m
wide cylindrical volume aligned with the vector of emission
at the mouth, and an air speed of 5 m s−1 .
As shown in Fig. 4, the receiving person B standing 2 m in
front of the emitter A is surrounded by the bulk of particles
that have been emitted. This receiver’s facial region has
received 112 simulated particles and the hands have received
14 particles, out of a total of 8000 emitted particles per cough.
The second receiver, offset by 75 cm to the left of the first
receiving person, did not receive any particles from the cough.
When this receiver C becomes the second emitter, the situation
is mirrored and the first emitter A, now a receiver, is only
reached by two particles at the closest hand.
In future work, this simulation concept can be extended
further to account for both the aspect of mobility and the
remaining types of aerosol emissions outlined in Section II.
Mobility can be realized, for example, by letting simulated
persons follow predetermined paths collected from mobil-

ity models or traces. When incorporating other emission
types, e.g., using the air-based testbed outlined in Section II,
MoVCSK can be used as a modulation scheme to control
the emission of particles. In this context, it will also be
important to support aerosol particles with diameters smaller
than 50 µm. Doing this accurately is difficult without resorting
to computation-intensive multiphysics and CFD simulations.
A sufficiently accurate approximation could be obtained by
expanding the original concept of the Pogona simulator [12]
and to guide aerosol particles through a sequence of samples
of a time-varying pre-computed and locally constrained vector
field. Also, particle simulation tools could be used to support
simulation tools on social (“networking”) layer.
V. P ROSPECTS AND C HALLENGES
Over time, much research has been done in the field of
infection prevention. It is already possible to predict the
course of infections in defined scenarios and to estimate the
consequences of a certain number of infections. Techniques
such as “social distancing” are results of this work.
The use of mutual information as a measure of the infection
rate provides a common framework for different areas including engineering and infectiology. Emphasis is on a conceptual
level by pointing out dualities and similarities between these
fields in order to widen the view. New findings from existing
and refined MC techniques can be applied in infectiology and
evaluated from a health care point of view. These may include
improved distance rules for certain situations or guidance on
placing novel sensors. Under the premise of enabling everyone
to “live with the virus” with as few restrictions as possible,
it is desirable to adapt the infection control solutions more
precisely to the circumstances in specific situations.
Furthermore, a reverse check of established infection prevention techniques can be accomplished by means of tools
established in communication and information theory. Nevertheless, especially when combining different disciplines like
engineering and health care, it should be checked whether the
proposed approaches are fundamentally correct, which in turn
might lead to new prevention approaches being useful in the
real world and thus reducing the incidence of infection.
Air-based MC offers new possibilities regarding the investigation of aerosol propagation. Testbeds and measurement
tools can be used to verify precautions and to gain further
insights into infection paths. Society would benefit from a
better understanding of the spread of virus infections, not just
Corona.
VI. C ONCLUSION
This article extends recent advancements with respect to the
symbiosis of air-based macro-scale MC and infectious particle
transmission [6]–[9]. Emphasis is on a conceptual level by
pointing out dualities and similarities between these fields. In
our concept, users are modeled as mobile nodes in a multiuser
scenario. Infected users emit aerosol clouds in the sense of
broadcasting, whereas healthy users may become infected
with a certain probability if they absorb a sufficient viral
load by viral-sensitive aperture areas, like spatially distributed

7

antennas in the area of wireless communications. In turn, after
some incubation time, these users may become pathogen-laden
aerosol spreaders or superspreaders as well, related to store
and forward relaying. Apart from being a pure binary problem
of getting infected or not, the viral load frequently has an
impact on the course of the disease, similar to reliability information in MC. In the sense of Shannon information theory, the
goal is to minimize the mutual information between infected
and non-infected users, where the information corresponds to
infected and non-infected particles.
In this stochastic approach of infection prevention, numerous actions are discussed regarding channel input distribution,
channel propagation, and channel output characteristic. For
example, protective masks affect the channel input distribution.
Spatial and temporal actions mainly have an impact on the
channel propagation. Biochemical actions as well as health
conditions affect the infection threshold at the channel output.
Additionally, challenges regarding the objective to “live with
the virus” are discussed. The conceptual approach is supported
by an experimental macro-scale molecular communication
testbed and by an advanced simulation tool. As an example,
simulation results are presented for a 3D environment with
three users who emit aerosols that are subject to air movement
due to the ejection action.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Reported research was supported in part by the project
MAMOKO funded by the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF) under grant numbers 16KIS0915
and 16KIS0917.
R EFERENCES
[1] T. Nakano, A. W. Eckford, and T. Haraguchi, Molecular Communication. Cambrigde: Cambridge University Press, 2013.
[2] I. F. Akyildiz, F. Brunetti, and C. Blázquez, “Nanonetworks: A new
communication paradigm,” Computer Networks, vol. 52, no. 12, pp.
2260–2279, Aug. 2008.
[3] N. Farsad, H. B. Yilmaz, A. Eckford, C.-B. Chae, and W. Guo, “A comprehensive survey of recent advancements in molecular communication,”
IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 1887–1919, 2016.
[4] V. Jamali, A. Ahmadzadeh, W. Wicke, A. Noel, and R. Schober,
“Channel modeling for diffusive molecular communication — A tutorial
review,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 107, no. 7, pp. 1256–1301, Jul. 2019.
[5] R. J. Glass, L. M. Glass, W. E. Beyeler, and H. J. Min, “Targeted
social distancing designs for pandemic influenza,” Emerging Infectious
Diseases, vol. 12, no. 11, pp. 1671–1681, Nov. 2006.
[6] M. Khalid, O. Amin, S. Ahmed, B. Shihada, and M.-S. Alouini,
“Communication through breath: Aerosol transmission,” IEEE Commun.
Mag., vol. 57, no. 2, pp. 33–39, Feb. 2019.
[7] M. Khalid, O. Amin, S. Ahmed, B. Shihada, and M. Alouini, “Modeling
of viral aerosol transmission and detection,” IEEE Transactions on
Communications, vol. 68, no. 8, pp. 4859–4873, 2020.
[8] F. Gulec and B. Atakan, “A molecular communication perspective on
airborne pathogen transmission and reception via droplets generated by
coughing and sneezing,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.07598, Jul. 2020.
[9] M. Schurwanz, P. A. Hoeher, S. Bhattacharjee, M. Damrath, L. Stratmann, and F. Dressler, “Duality between coronavirus transmission
and air-based macroscopic molecular communication,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2009.04966, Sep. 2020.
[10] S. Bhattacharjee, M. Damrath, and P. A. Hoeher, “EXIT chart analysis
of higher order modulation schemes in molecular communications,” in
Proc. ACM Int. Conf. on Nanoscale Computing and Communication
(NANOCOM), Dublin, Ireland, Sep. 2019, pp. 1–6.

[11] S. Bhattacharjee, M. Damrath, F. Bronner, L. Stratmann, J. P. Drees,
F. Dressler, and P. A. Hoeher, “A testbed and simulation framework
for air-based molecular communication testbed using fluorescein,” in
Proc. ACM Int. Conf. on Nanoscale Computing and Communication
(NANOCOM), Sep. 2020, pp. 1–6.
[12] J. P. Drees, L. Stratmann, F. Bronner, M. Bartunik, J. Kirchner, H. Unterweger, and F. Dressler, “Efficient simulation of macroscopic molecular
communication: The Pogona simulator,” in Proc. ACM Int. Conf. on
Nanoscale Computing and Communication (NANOCOM), Sep. 2020,
pp. 1–6.
[13] I. F. Akyildiz, M. Pierobon, and S. Balasubramaniam, “An information
theoretic framework to analyze molecular communication systems based
on statistical mechanics,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 107, no. 7, pp. 1230–1255,
Jul. 2019.
[14] P. A. Hoeher, M. Damrath, S. Bhattacharjee, and M. Schurwanz,
“On mutual information analysis of infectious disease transmission via
particle propagation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.12121, Jan. 2021.
[15] M. Abuhegazy, O. Anderoglu, and S. V. Poroseva, “Numerical investigation of aerosol transport in a classroom with relevance to COVID-19,”
Physics of Fluids, vol. 32, no. 10, 2020.

Max Schurwanz received the M.Sc. degree in electrical engineering from
Kiel University, Germany, in 2020, where he is currently pursuing the Dr.Ing. (Ph.D.) degree at the Faculty of Engineering. Since 2020, he is a Research
Assistant at the Chair of Information and Coding Theory, Kiel University. His
current research interests include air-based macroscopic molecular communication and radar signal processing.

Peter Adam Hoeher received the Dipl.-Ing. (M.Sc.) degree in electrical
engineering from RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany, in 1986, and
the Dr.-Ing. (Ph.D.) degree in electrical engineering from the University of
Kaiserslautern, Kaiserslautern, Germany, in 1990. From 1986 to 1998, he was
with the German Aerospace Center (DLR), Oberpfaffenhofen, Germany. From
1991 to 1992, he was on leave at AT&T Bell Laboratories, Murray Hill, NJ.
Since 1998 he is a Full Professor of electrical and information engineering at
Kiel University, Kiel, Germany. His research interests are in the general area
of wireless communications and applied information theory.

Sunasheer Bhattacharjee received the M.Sc. degree in digital communications from Kiel University, Germany, in 2018, where he is currently pursuing
the Dr.-Ing. (Ph.D.) degree at the Faculty of Engineering. Since 2019, he
has been a Research and Teaching Assistant at the Chair of Information and
Coding Theory, Kiel University. His current research interests include physical
layer issues of molecular communication and testbed design.

Martin Damrath received the M.Sc. degree in electrical engineering from
Kiel University, Germany, in 2014. Since 2014, he has been a Research
and Teaching Assistant at the Chair of Information and Coding Theory,
Kiel University. In October 2020, he defended his Dr.-Ing. (Ph.D.) thesis
at the Faculty of Engineering. His current research interests include physical
layer issues in the area of molecular communications, including high-order
modulation schemes, channel coding, advanced detection, and multiple access.

Lukas Stratmann is pursuing his Ph.D. degree with focus on the simulation
of macroscopic molecular communication. He began his Ph.D. studies at
Paderborn University in 2019, where he also completed his M.Sc. degree
with a thesis on visual attention in a virtual cycling environment in 2019 and
his Bachelor degree in 2017. In 2020, he joined his colleagues in merging
with the Data Communications and Networking group at TU Berlin.

Falko Dressler is full professor and Chair for Data Communications and
Networking at the School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, TU
Berlin. He received his M.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees from the Dept. of Computer
Science, University of Erlangen in 1998 and 2003, respectively. His research
objectives include adaptive wireless networking (sub-6GHz, mmWave, visible
light, molecular communication) and wireless-based sensing with applications
in ad hoc and sensor networks, the Internet of Things, and cyber-physical
systems.

