Using Vision Videos in a Virtual Focus Group:
Experiences and Recommendations
Oliver Karras1 , Svenja Polst2 , and Kathleen Späth2

arXiv:2011.00965v1 [cs.SE] 30 Oct 2020

1

1

Leibniz Universität Hannover, Software Engineering Group, 30167 Hannover, Germany
Email: oliver.karras@inf.uni-hannover.de
2
Fraunhofer IESE, 67663 Kaiserslautern, Germany
Email: {svenja.polst, kathleen.spaeth}@iese.fraunhofer.de

Introduction

Facilitated meetings are an established practice for
the requirements engineering activities elicitation and
validation [6]. Focus groups are one well-known technique to implement this practice. Several researchers
[1, 2, 5] already reported the successful use of vision
videos to stimulate active discussions among the participants of on-site focus groups, e.g., for validating
scenarios and eliciting feedback. These vision videos
show scenarios of a system vision. In this way, the
videos serve all parties involved as a visual reference
point to actively disclose, discuss, and align their mental models of the future system to achieve shared understanding [3]. In the joint project TrUSD1 , we had
planned to conduct such an on-site focus group using a
vision video to validate a scenario of a future software
tool, the so-called Privacy Dashboard 2 . However, the
COVID-19 pandemic and its associated measures led
to an increase in home and remote working, which also
affected us. Therefore, we had to replan and conduct
the focus group virtually. In this paper, we report
about our experiences and recommendations for the
use of vision videos in virtual focus groups.

2

Setting of the Virtual Focus Group

The goal of the virtual focus group was to validate
whether the current Privacy Dashboard concepts reflect the users’ needs and are consistent with their
workflows. Therefore, we focused on use cases and not
on design decisions. In a previous on-site focus group,
we presented the Privacy Dashboard as a slide show
consisting of static images of mockups. We had the
impression that the participants of the on-site focus
group had difficulties following the moderator’s verbal
descriptions of the scenario. For this reason, we decided to present the scenario as a vision video depicting animations such as typing and cursor movements.
We produced the vision video by using the Mockup
Recorder [4]. The Mockup Recorder allows producing
vision videos of scenarios by interacting with static
images of mockups without any implementation [4].
1 https://www.trusd-projekt.de/
2 https://www.trusd-projekt.de/wp/motivation-loesungsidee/

The virtual focus group took place on 05th August 2020 with two future users, one moderator, and
two researchers as observers. The procedure of the
virtual focus group was as follows: (1) The focus
group started with an introduction to the idea behind the Privacy Dashboard. For this purpose, a video
was shown that originally had been produced for another workshop, hereinafter referred to as the introduction video. Then, (2) the moderator played the
vision video in the Mockup Recorder that was presented to the participants via screen sharing. The
vision video showed navigation through the Privacy
Dashboard and the specified scenario on several mockups. The moderator commented on the vision video
live. Afterward, (3) the participants watched the vision video a second time on their own without the
explanations of the moderator. Next, (4) the moderator played parts of the vision video again to discuss
them in the group. One of the observers collected
feedback on the mockups and their interaction processes. The participants also provided feedback to the
virtual focus group and vision video. In the end, (5)
the participants completed a questionnaire regarding
the application and quality of the vision video.

3

Experiences and Recommendations

In the following, we report about our experiences and
recommendations for the use of a vision video in a
virtual focus group to validate a scenario.
Video Production. Despite the prototypical implementation of the Mockup Recorder and its moderate usability, we were able to produce the 2-minute
vision video in about 90 minutes. The current version
of the Mockup Recorder produces only vision videos
without sound. However, this function is under development. In the third step, the participants asked
several questions about the vision video while watching it alone. Although they watched the vision video
with the moderator and her explanations right before,
they lacked explanations on the second viewing. We
recommend to include texts in the vision video or an
audio track so that participants have more explanations when they watch the vision video alone.

In the fifth step, we investigated the quality of the
vision video with the questionnaire. The results show
that the participants found the overall quality of the
vision video to be good. Despite the currently missing function to add sound, we recommend the Mockup
Recorder to quickly produce a vision video at moderate costs and with sufficient quality.
Video Streaming. As the communication platform, we used Microsoft Teams 3 . In the first step, the
moderator used the introduction video to explain the
idea behind the Privacy Dashboard. During playback,
however, the platform did not transmit the sound of
the introduction video, and the moderator was unable
to solve the problem immediately. The video transmission was also subject to some delays that caused
the image to pause. We counteracted these issues
by offering both videos (introduction video and vision video) as downloadable files for the participants
so that they could watch the videos locally on their
computers. Based on this experience, we recommend
to offer the videos used as separate files for download.
Video Presentation. In the second step, it was a
challenge for the moderator to adapt her live explanations to the pace of the video. However, instead of
adding sound separately, we consciously decided that
the moderator comment on the vision video live to
save effort. In the vision video, each mockup is shown
for as long as the associated interaction process lasts.
We assumed that the realistic pace would be necessary
for a realistic representation of the Privacy Dashboard.
However, the duration that some mockups were shown
was sometimes too short, i.e., less than 5 seconds,
to perceive and explain the details. Furthermore, we
did not get the impression that a realistic representation was important for the participants. For example,
typing texts in the vision video was not displayed as
smooth as in reality since the Mockup Recorder simulates the interaction processes to generate the vision
video. However, no participant was bothered by it.
Therefore, we recommend to extend the duration of
the interaction process to stay longer on the individual mockups. We also expected that the participants
would use a large enough screen to participate in the
virtual focus group. Although the participants had
larger screens at their disposal, they only used small
laptop screens. We assume that the participants deliberately chose the smaller screen to look directly into
the integrated webcam. However, the small screens
made it difficult for the participants to recognize the
details in the vision video. We recommend to actively
ask the participants to use a sufficiently large screen
and the full-screen view.
In the fourth step, we planned to show the vision
video section by section and discuss each section with
the participants. However, the comments and ques-

tions of the participants did not follow the sequence
of the vision video. The moderator had to jump back
and forth several times in the video. The moderator
used the Mockup Recorder for the presentation of the
vision video. The Mockup Recorder allowed her to select every single static mockup in the video and start
the video from the selected mockup. This functionality was useful since it would have been much more
difficult to find the corresponding mockup in the mere
video. Another solution could be to divide the scenario into smaller units of meaning and produce one
vision video for each unit. In this way, the moderator
has more control over the focus group making it easier to elicit specific feedback from the participants on
the particular video. We recommend to either use a
software tool with similar functionality as the Mockup
Recorder, prepare several short videos according to the
units of meaning in the scenario, or prepare an additional slide show as in our on-site focus group.

4

Future Work

We presented our experiences and recommendations
for the use of vision videos in virtual focus groups. So
far, we only conducted a single focus group with two
participants. We plan to repeat the validation of scenarios using vision videos in virtual focus groups with
more participants. In this way, we hope to gain further insights into the technique of using vision videos
in virtual focus groups. Based on our observations, we
also want to investigate the hypothesis that the use of
a vision video leads to more feedback on functionality
and less feedback on design decisions.

Acknowledgment
This work was supported by the German Ministry
of Education and Research (BMBF) under Reference No.: 16KIS0896K, 16KIS0898 and the Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) under Grant No.:
289386339, (2017 – 2019).

References
[1] Bennaceur, A.; McCormick, C. ; et al.: Feed Me, Feed Me: An
Exemplar for Engineering Adaptive Software. In: IEEE/ACM
11th International Symposium on Software Engineering for
Adaptive and Self-Managing Systems, 2016
[2] Darby, A. ; Tsekleves, E.; Sawyer, P.: Speculative Requirements: Design Fiction and RE. In: IEEE 26th International
Requirements Engineering Conference, 2018
[3] Karras, O.; Schneider, K.; Fricker, S. A.: Representing Software Project Vision by Means of Video: A Quality Model for
Vision Videos. In: Journal of Systems and Software 162 (2020)
[4] Karras, O.; Unger-Windeler, C.; et al.: Video as a ByProduct of Digital Prototyping: Capturing the Dynamic Aspect
of Interaction. In: IEEE 25th International Requirements Engineering Conference Workshops, 2017
[5] Rodden, T. A.; Fischer, J. E.; et al.: At Home with Agents:
Exploring Attitudes towards Future Smart Energy Infrastructures. In: SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 2013
[6] Wagner, S.; Fernández, D. M.; et al.: Status Quo in Requirements Engineering: A Theory and a Global Family of Surveys.
In: ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology 28 (2019), Nr. 2

3 https://www.microsoft.com/de-de/microsoft-365/microsoft-teams/group-chat-software

