Optimal Minimal-Contact Routing of Randomly Arriving Agents
through Connected Networks

arXiv:2011.00472v2 [math.OC] 15 Jun 2021

Diptangshu Sena , Varun Ramamohana , and Prasanna Ramamoorthyb
a

Department of Mechanical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, Hauz Khas,
New Delhi 110016, India.
b
Department of Management Studies, Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, Hauz Khas, New
Delhi 110016, India.
ARTICLE HISTORY
Compiled June 16, 2021
ABSTRACT
Collision-free or contact-free routing through connected networks has been actively
studied in the industrial automation and manufacturing context. Contact-free routing of personnel through connected networks (e.g., factories, retail warehouses) may
also be required in the COVID-19 context. In this context, we present an optimization framework for identifying routes through a connected network that eliminate
or minimize contacts between randomly arriving agents needing to visit a subset of
nodes in the network in minimal time. We simulate the agent arrival and network
traversal process, and introduce stochasticity in travel speeds, node dwell times,
and compliance with assigned routes. We present two optimization formulations for
generating optimal routes - no-contact and minimal-contact - on a real-time basis
for each agent arriving to the network given the route information of other agents
already in the network. We generate results for the time-average number of contacts
and normalized time spent in the network.
KEYWORDS
Traveling salesman problem, mixed integer programming, collision-free routing,
connected networks

1. INTRODUCTION
Collision-free or contact-free routing of agents needing to navigate a connected network has been the subject of active research in recent years. This problem becomes
particularly important in the manufacturing and logistics industry where a set of automated guided vehicles (AGVs) or robots are deployed in, for example, an assembly
line manufacturing layout or a goods warehouse, to perform a set of tasks. For example, Spensieri, Carlson, Ekstedt, and Bohlin (2015) consider the problem of planning
the collision-free movement and scheduling of welding tasks performed in an automotive assembly line, and Xin et al. (2020) consider the problem of collision-free path
planning and routing of multiple robotic effectors at an assembly line. In this work,
we consider a related, but different problem: the real-time collision-free or contact-free
route generation for an agent arriving randomly to a connected network, who is tasked
with visiting a subset of nodes of the network in minimal time.
CONTACT Varun Ramamohan. Email: varunr@mech.iitd.ac.in

We define a contact as a non-zero overlap between the time intervals during which
two or more agents are present at a network node. This implies that we consider
contacts only at the nodes, and do not consider contacts between agents on the paths
between nodes - we assume the paths have sufficient space to preclude catastrophic
collisions or contacts between agents. Further, given the availability of free-ranging
AGVs (i.e., AGVs that do not require preinstalled guide paths), collision avoidance
along network edges is less likely to be a cause for concern Duinkerken, Ottjes, and
Lodewijks (2006); Xin et al. (2020). The problem of generating such a contact-free
route for an agent needing to visit a subset of nodes (hereafter referred to as the
agent’s node set) in minimal time when a set of agents are already present in the
network may arise in the context of AGVs deployed - one by one as the demand arises
- to retrieve or deliver items from/to a set of stock points in a goods warehouse or
machining stations in a factory layout. Similarly, this situation may also arise in the
context of the COVID-19 pandemic. For example, it may be desirable to minimize
contacts between human workers in a manufacturing/logistics context tasked with
visiting and performing tasks at a set of destinations so as to minimize risk of infection
transmission at said destinations. In this paper, we develop an optimization framework
for assigning minimal contact routes to such agents and evaluate the framework - in
terms of the number of contacts between agents and their time spent in the network using a simulation wherein stochasticity is introduced in various aspects of the network
traversal process of agents.
Our approach first involves constructing a simulation of the agent arrival and network traversal process. We then formulate the problem of assigning routes to each agent
such that contacts are eliminated and/or minimized and shopping time is minimized
as extensions of the Miller-Tucker-Zemlin (MTZ) integer programming formulation of
the traveling salesman problem (TSP) Miller, Tucker, and Zemlin (1960). The formulations are deterministic, and are parameterized using the expected values of the agent
network traversal parameters, such as agent speed of movement from node to node,
and the dwell time of an agent at each node.
Given that we consider potential applications involving routing of human agents
through a connected network, considering the impact of variation in the speed of agent
movement and node dwell times (which may be variable for robotic agents as well)
on the number of contacts becomes important. Further, compliance with the assigned
no-/minimal-contact routes may also be of concern, and hence we model scenarios
where agents can choose to deviate from their assigned routes in one of three ways.
The need for a simulation to determine how these different forms of stochasticity in the
network traversal process interact in terms of the number of contacts between agents
thus becomes evident.
We now discuss the relevant literature and research contributions of our work. We
focus our survey of the literature on extensions of TSP and multi-agent routing problems that attempt to minimize contacts or collisions. There appears to be limited
work in contact-free or collision-free routing from a stochastic simulation standpoint,
likely because the majority of the work in this field has been carried out regarding
collision-free routing for robotic systems, implying an assumption in these studies that
uncertainty in network traversal aspects is likely to be minimal.
A variant of the TSP similar to our current work is the m-TSP, wherein m agents
start and end their tour at the same node after visiting a set of nodes Bektas (2006).
Here, each node can be visited by only one agent. The objective of an m-TSP is to
minimize the total tour length of all agents. Our problem differs from this problem in
two respects: i) In m-TSP, all agents start out at the same time, while in our proposed
2

formulations, the agents start at their simulated arrival times. ii) Second, in m-TSP
each node is visited by only one agent, whereas in our case a particular node can be
in the node set of multiple agents. More comprehensive discussions of the TSP and
related variants can be found in the reviews by Applegate, Bixby, Chvatal, and Cook
(2006); Cook (2011); Reinelt (1991); Toth and Vigo (2014).
As mentioned earlier, collision-free path planning of multiple robots or collision
avoidance in AGV systems has been an active area of research. In many studies, the
objective is to minimize the total cycle time of performing a set of tasks to be assigned
to a set of robots/AGVs. Given a set of tasks to be performed by a set of agents, three
problems are of interest: i) task allocation to multiple robots in the station HerreroPerez and Martinez-Barbera (2010); Korsah, Stentz, and Dias (2013); Lee, Zaheer,
and Kim (2014); (ii) routing problems to decide on the sequence in which the tasks
are to be completed by each robot Bullo, Frazzoli, Pavone, Savla, and Smith (2011);
Spensieri et al. (2015); (iii) path planning to decide on the path taken by the robots
while accomplishing their tasks Guillaume, Michael, Abdelghani, Damien, and Mohamed (2017). Recent studies combine both routing and path planning Miyamoto and
Inoue (2016); Xin et al. (2020); Xin, Negenborn, Corman, and Lodewijks (2015), and
incorporate collision-free constraints in their analyses. Most studies in this area consider a static problem, as described above. A few studies consider dynamic problems,
in terms of either the dynamic arrival of tasks Duinkerken et al. (2006); Smolic-Rocak,
Bogdan, Kovacic, and Petrovic (2009) or, to a limited extent, a dynamic environment
Duinkerken et al. (2006); Shi and Ng (2018). Duinkerken et al. (2006) - the only study
we identified that explicitly used stochastic simulation in this context - explore routing strategies for free-ranging AGVs to avoid collisions with obstacles that arise on a
stochastic basis; Shi and Ng (2018) also use simulation - for deterministically arriving
agents - in a similar manner to evaluate their algorithm to find a feasible collision-free
path. Smolic-Rocak et al. (2009) consider finding the shortest path for an AGV to a
single destination for dynamically arriving tasks, and avoid collisions by examining
time windows in potential paths when other agents cross potential paths for the AGV
under consideration. However, they do not simulate the dynamic arrival of tasks itself.
In relation to the above studies, our contributions are as follows. (i) We consider
real-time generation of no-/minimal-contact routes for randomly arriving agents with
independent sets of tasks (i.e., node sets). (ii) We propose generating no-/minimalcontact routes via an extension of the MTZ formulation of the TSP, yielding an exact
solution. (iii) We explicitly consider the impact of uncertainty in agent speed, node
dwell time, and compliance with the assigned route on the number of contacts via
simulation.
We now describe the development of the agent arrival and network traversal simulation.

2. AGENT ARRIVAL AND NETWORK TRAVERSAL SIMULATION
In this section, we describe the development of the simulation of the agent arrival and
network traversal process.
2.1. Network Layout Description
Without loss of generality, we model the connected network as a rectangular layout
composed of identical unit square grids. The network we model has 70 grids, with
3

10 rows consisting of 7 grids each. Half of these 70 grids are nodes which the agents
can visit, and the rest represent aisles through which agents can traverse the grid
(move through the store) and access the nodes. Visualizations of the network along
with example agent routes are provided in Figure 1. We develop this type of layout
to represent, for example, a warehouse with rows of stock points modelled as rows (or
columns) of nodes and the grids between the nodes representing aisles through which
a warehouse worker or an AGV can move from one stock point (node) to another.
The nodes in the network are categorized into different sections, keeping with the
warehouse analogy where each section of a warehouse may contain a particular class
of items. There is a fixed entry and exit node - in the simulation, the node [1,1] in
Figure 1 represents both the entry and exit node. Based on an agent’s node set, a
feasible tour is one that starts at the entry node, visits all nodes in the agent’s set at
least once, and exits.
2.2. Simulation Details
Even though simulating the stochastic arrival of agents is typical of discrete event
simulation, our implementation of agent arrival and network traversal is more in line
with a Monte Carlo simulation.
We first generate a set of interarrival times for agents until the time of arrival of
an agent exceeds the time horizon of the simulation. Once the arrivals of this set of
agents are generated, we assign node sets to each agent (more details regarding this
process is provided below). Routes to be assigned to each agent are generated based
on their node set, their expected traversal speeds, expected node dwell times, and
traversal pattern. The different types of traversal patterns we simulate for agents are
described subsequently, including those based on the proposed TSP-NC and TSPMC formulations. Stochasticity in traversal is introduced at three levels: (a) speed
of movement of agents between nodes, (b) amount of time spent at each node (node
dwell time), and (c) the compliance of an agent with the assigned route. Once a route
is assigned to an agent, the set of actual speeds of movement between each pair of
nodes on the route and the set of dwell times at each node are sampled from their
respective distributions. Using the above set of information, the entry and exit times
at each node are recorded for every agent. Contacts are determined by counting the
number of overlaps between the entry and exit times of agents visiting each node.
We now describe each aspect of the simulation in greater detail.
Arrival of Agents : We assume that agent arrival follows a Poisson distribution, i.e.,
the inter-arrival times are exponentially distributed. For the rest of the analysis, we
take the mean of the Poisson arrival distribution as λ = 40 agents/hour.
Node Set Generation for an Agent : We consider a network traversal scenario where
each agent has a predetermined set of nodes to visit. In a warehouse situation, this can
represent a set of items that a worker or an AGV has to retrieve from various nodes
in the warehouse. Each node is associated with a probability of featuring in an agent’s
node set. In a practical scenario (e.g., warehouse), this probability can be estimated
from historical data regarding the frequency with which different nodes are visited.
We set p = 0.3 for all nodes.
Traversal Patterns: In the real world, warehouse workers or AGV programmers
may have a variety of ways in which they traverse their node set. In order to capture
this diversity of traversal patterns, we assume (and simulate) two principal traversal
patterns against which we benchmark our optimal routes.

4

The first type is a greedy traversal pattern where an agent chooses which section
to visit and subsequently how to traverse all required nodes in that section, greedily.
Upon entry, the said agent quickly identifies which section is the closest of all sections
he needs to visit and proceeds there. Within the section, he also follows a greedy
approach, moving to the next nearest node until he has visited all required nodes in
that section. The next section is again chosen in a greedy manner, based on which of
the remaining sections are closest from his current position.
The second type is a preferential traversal pattern, based on agents who have a
predetermined order in which they wish to visit different sections in the network.
However, we assume that inside a section, they visit nodes in a greedy manner, always
moving to the next closest node. In a warehouse setting, this can represent a worker
choosing to visit a section with heavier items that can be loaded on the bottom of a
forklift pallet and then visiting a section with lighter items that can be loaded on top
of the heavier items on the pallet.
Node Dwell Time: We assume that the time spent by an agent at a node is exponentially distributed with a mean of 2 minutes. We choose the exponential distribution
as a worst-case scenario where the amount of time an agent has spent at a node does
not provide any information regarding the completion of the dwell time of the agent
at the node.
Agent Speed : We assume that the speed of agent movement v between nodes is a
random variable given by v = 10(1+x), where x is a beta random variable with α = 0.5
and β = 1.5. v is thus distributed in the range 10 meters/minute to 20 meters/minute,
with a mean speed of 12.5 meters/minute.
In addition to the above aspects of the simulation, we also introduce stochasticity
in terms of the compliance of agents with assigned routes; however, we discuss this in
detail after we present the TSP-NC and TSP-NC optimization formulations given that
the notion of compliance becomes of interest when routes are assigned or recommended
to an agent as opposed to when an agent chooses their own routes.
In Figure 1 below, we depict the paths of both agent traversal patterns. The grey
grids represent nodes and the white grids represent paths (e.g., aisles in a warehouse)
for movement for the agents. There are a total of nine sections available in the network,
a through i. Each grid is of size 5m × 5m. We use the same specifications of the network
throughout our analysis.
In each case in Figure 1, we assume the agent’s node set consists of six nodes,
corresponding to nodes at positions (1, 5), (3, 2), (4, 4), (6, 2), (6, 4) and (8, 4) in the
network. For the preferential node set traversal pattern (the figure on the right), the
order in which the agent prefers to visit the sections associated with their list is given
by B− > F − > G− > C− > A.
We present the simulation results for the greedy and preferential node set traversal
patterns along with the results from the extended TSP formulations.

3. NO-CONTACT/MINIMAL-CONTACT ROUTE GENERATION
For a given agent arrival rate, the greedy and preferential traversal patterns lead to a
large number of contacts among agents. Here a contact is defined as the event where at
least two agents are present at the same node at the same time. Further, these traversal
patterns are also non-optimal in terms of minimizing the time spent in the network.
Hence we propose to generate a customized route for each agent, based on his node set,
that eliminates or minimizes contacts with other agents and also minimizes the time
5

Figure 1.: Example routes for greedy (left) and preferential (right) agents.
spent in the network. Our optimization framework builds on the MTZ formulation of
the TSP Reinelt (1991). We present the no-contact formulation (referred to hereafter
as the TSP-NC formulation hereafter) first.
3.1. No-contact TSP Formulation
This formulation is a mixed-integer program that provides an exact solution. The formulation is based on recognizing that in order to avoid contacts, an agent should avoid
reaching a node when it is already occupied by another agent. To implement this, we
introduce a set of continuous time variables that capture the time points when an agent
reaches the different nodes on their tour. These time variables are then constrained to
avoid overlap with the time windows when the nodes are occupied/blocked by other
agents. The blocked time windows for each node are provided as input data to the
formulation based on the routes generated for agents already present in the network.
The formulation is provided below.
Parameters
• cij : Length of shortest path joining nodes i and j. Here i, j ∈ {1, 2, ..., n}, where
n is the number of nodes.
• E[v]: Expected node-to-node speed of movement for an agent.
• E[b]: Expected node dwell time.
• di = {di1 , di2 , ..., diKi }: A set of Ki time points indicating the time points dik ∈ di
at which node i will start to be occupied for the next E[b] minutes by Ki other
agents in the network, i ∈ N . Note that Ki will be dependent on each node i,
and hence the subscript.
• t0 : The time instant when a new agent arrives.
• M : A large positive number.
Decision Variables
• xij ∈ {0, 1}: Boolean variable with value 1 if the tour includes travel from node
i to node j; 0 otherwise.
• ui ∈ Z+ ∀ i ∈ N : Dummy variable indicating the index at which node i features
in the ordered tour.
6

• ti ∈ R+ ∪ {0} ∀ i ∈ N : Time at which node i is reached.
• yik ∈ {0, 1} ∀ i ∈ N, k ∈ Ki : Dummy Boolean variable for either-or constraints.

min

n X
n
X

cij xij

subject to :

i=1 j=1

MTZ formulation constraints:
xii = 0, ∀ 1 ≤ i ≤ n
n
X
xij = 1, ∀ 1 ≤ j ≤ n
i=1
n
X

xij = 1, ∀ 1 ≤ i ≤ n

j=1

u1 = 1
2 ≤ ui ≤ n, ∀ 2 ≤ i ≤ n
ui − uj + nxij ≤ n − 1, ∀ 1 ≤ i ≤ n, 2 ≤ j ≤ n, i 6= j
Time constraints:
t1 = t0
cij
, ∀ 1 ≤ j 6= i ≤ n
tj − ti ≤ M (1 − xij ) + E[b] +
E[v]
cij
tj − ti ≥ −M (1 − xij ) + E[b] +
, ∀ 1 ≤ j 6= i ≤ n
E[v]

TSP-NC constraints:
ti + E[b] ≤ dik + M yik , ∀ 2 ≤ i ≤ n, 1 ≤ k ≤ Ki ;
ti + M (1 − yik ) ≥ dik + E[b], ∀ 2 ≤ i ≤ n, 1 ≤ k ≤ Ki
The first (bookkeeping) constraint prevents an edge looping into the same node. The
second and third constraints allow only one edge to be directed towards and away
from a given node, forcing the fact that each node is visited only once. u1 = 1 and
t1 = t0 initialize that the tour starts at the entry node at time t0 . The purpose of the
constraints involving ui and uj is to eliminate subtours. The new ti , tj constraints are
cij
if an edge exists between nodes i and j. If an
in place to force tj = ti + E[b] + E[v]
edge does not exist between nodes i and j, then the constraints ensure enough slack
between ti and tj in either direction to allow for sufficiently large differences between
|ti −tj |. The last two no-contact constraints ensure elimination of overlaps between the
intervals when the current customer occupies the ith node (the interval [ti , ti + b]) with
the interval [dik , dik + b] during which node i is expected to be occupied by another
agent in the network.
Thus the formulation accounts for the fact that there can be multiple time windows
during which a node is blocked. The no-contact path generation exercise is carried
out when a new agent arrives at the network with a predetermined set of nodes they
wish to visit. Their assigned path avoids contacts with all agents already present in
the network. A sample optimal route generated for an agent under this formulation is
depicted in Figure 2.

7

Figure 2.: Depiction of a sample optimal no-contact route. The flowchart indicates the
recommended order of traversal of nodes. For a given node, the red blocks denote the
time windows during which the node is occupied while the green block denotes the
assigned time window for visiting said node (as per TSP-NC formulation). Observe
that there is no overlap with a blocked window, indicating zero contacts.
Finding an optimal or even a feasible no-contact solution within reasonable runtimes
can be challenging under certain conditions. In some cases, for a new agent who has
just arrived, all the nodes in their node set may be blocked such that an optimal
no-contact route cannot be generated without a change in the state of the network
(e.g., an agent leaving the network after finishing their tour). In the framework of the
above formulation, this implies infeasibility. To address this, in the next subsection,
we present a relaxation of the TSP-NC formulation that generates a route which is
time-efficient and also minimizes contacts to the extent possible.
3.2. Minimal-contact Formulation
We refer to this relaxation of the TSP-NC formulation as the TSP-MC formulation
(the ‘MC’ stands for minimal contact). This formulation will yield a route with zero
contacts if such a route is feasible and yields a lower objective function value when
compared to a route with one or more contacts. However, if such a route is not feasible,
it will yield an optimal route with as few contacts as possible.
For this formulation, in addition to the parameters and decision variables introduced
for the TSP-NC formulation, we introduce the penalty parameter Pe , to be applied each
time a contact occurs between agents. We also introduce two new decision variables
as given below. The variables yik from the TSP-NC formulation are not used in the
TSP-MC formulation below. In the formulation below, due to space limitations, we
only present the objective function and the minimal-contact constraints. The MTZ
TSP and time constraints remain the same as in the TSP-NC formulation, and the
non-negativity constraints follow from the definition of the decision variables.
• δik ∈ {0, 1}, ∀ i ∈ N, k ∈ Ki : Boolean variable that records contacts between a
pair of agents (i.e., δik = 1 if a contact occurs between two agents at node i, 0
otherwise).
• zik : continuous non-negative variable used to determine whether contacts between the current agent and another agent occur at node i based on the absolute
8

value of the difference between ti and dik . The value of zik is determined by the
value of ti .

min

n X
n
X

cij xij + Pe

i=1 j=1

Ki
n X
X

δik

subject to :

i=1 k=1

TSP-MC constraints :
zik = |(ti − dik )/b|, ∀ 1 ≤ i ≤ n, 1 ≤ k ≤ Ki
M δik + zik ≥ 1, ∀ 1 ≤ i ≤ n, 1 ≤ k ≤ Ki
− M (1 − δik ) + zik ≤ 1, ∀ 1 ≤ i ≤ n, 1 ≤ k ≤ Ki
The first constraint, via the variable zik , records the extent of overlap between the
time spent by the current agent at the ith node and the time spent by any other agent
at the same node. If zik > 1, then there is no overlap, and hence no contact occurs;
otherwise there is a contact. The last two TSP-MC constraints ensure that if a contact
occurs, then the δik variable is set to 1, thus recording the contact.
Note that Pe can serve as a tuning parameter for the network administrator. A
higher value of the penalty lowers the number of contacts at the expense of timeefficiency.
3.3. Noncompliance with Assigned TSP-NC/TSP-MC Routes
The TSP-NC and the TSP-MC routes are assigned to agents based on the expected
values of the node-to-node speed and node dwell time random variables. Therefore,
the number of contacts recorded during the simulation due to uncertainty in these
parameters will be higher than those promised by the formulations. Another source
of increased contacts when deploying these formulations in practice will involve noncompliance on part of the agents with assigned TSP-NC/TSP-MC routes. We describe
our approach towards modelling noncompliance with the assigned routes now.
The issue of noncompliance may be particularly relevant where the agents are human
workers navigating a network such as a warehouse; in the case of AGVs, this is likely
to be less of an issue, unless they are under real-time control by a human programmer.
We consider three types of noncompliance.
Type A noncompliance. This type of noncompliance can occur in the following situation. Consider an agent currently at node i in their assigned route, with node j
being next in their assigned route. We refer to this node as the next assigned node.
Let another node k (distinct from node j), also in the node set of the agent, be located
at a smaller distance from node i (we refer to this node as the greedy node). In this
situation, an agent may deviate, with probability pijk , from their assigned route by
moving to the greedy node k instead of the next assigned node j. We assume that
pijk is a function of the distances between node i and nodes j and k (dij and dik ,
respectively). We model pijk as follows:


pijk =

0
1−

dik
dij

if dij ≤ dik
otherwise

Thus the probability that an agent is noncompliant with their assigned route when at
a given node, depends on the extent of the difference in the distances between their
9

current node and the greedy and next assigned nodes, respectively. Finally, we assume
that once an agent engages in this type of noncompliance, they abandon the assigned
route completely, and visit the remainder of their nodes in a greedy manner.
Type B noncompliance. This type of noncompliance is similar to type A noncompliance; however, once the agent deviates to the greedy node, they return to the TSPNC/TSP-MC route by moving back to the originally next assigned node from the
greedy node. Subsequently, they follow the assigned route, skipping over the greedy
node (that was visited out of turn) when it appears in the route. Note that once the
agent returns to the assigned route from the greedy node, they can still engage in
noncompliance with regard to each next assigned node with probability pijk .
Type C noncompliance. This type of noncompliance is different from types A and
B. At each node, an agent may choose to visit one of the neighboring nodes not in
their node set with a certain probability (equal for each of a node’s neighbors). For the
network under consideration, because of its rectangular grid-like structure, we define
the neighbors of a node as the set of nodes that share an edge (as opposed to a vertex)
with said node. At an assigned node, the agent may visit any one of its neighbors not
in its node set with a total probability equal to 0.2. Once the agent visits a neighbor,
the agent does not return to the assigned node; instead, they directly move to the next
node on the assigned route. We incorporate this type of noncompliance to represent
situations wherein a worker (human or AGV) in a warehouse may receive impromptu
instructions to retrieve an item from a neighboring stock point that was not originally
in their node set.
Noncompliance of types A and B are depicted in Figure 5 below (we do not depict
Type C noncompliance due to space limitations). We now present the numerical results
from implementing these formulations within the simulation.
3

G

TSP-NC

4

2
G

TSP-NC

4
TSP-NC

G

3

2
TSP-NC

TSP-NC

Return to
TSP-NC path

1
G

Direct to
Node 6

5
G

TSPNC

5

TSP-NC

G

6

1

TSP-NC

6
0

TSP-NC

Figure 3.: Type A noncompliance.

0

Figure 4.: Type B noncompliance.

Figure 5.: Type A and B noncompliance examples. Solid lines in the figure denote the
actual route taken by the agent; dotted lines denote the assigned TSP-NC path. ‘G’
denotes the greedy path taken at that node.

4. SIMULATION OUTCOMES
In Table 1, we present summary statistics for relevant outcomes - the number of contacts and mean normalized time spent in the network for an agent - for all node
traversal patterns when noncompliance is not involved. The mean normalized net10

work time (MNNT) for an agent is calculated as the ratio of the total time spent in
the network for an agent to the cardinality of its node set. Under this scenario (no
noncompliance), we explore two possible sub-scenarios. The first involves a situation
where only agent arrivals to the network are random, and the speed of movement and
node dwell times are deterministic. This can represent a scenario wherein the agents
in question are AGVs deployed to retrieve a set of items from a warehouse, as AGVs
are likely to have nearly constant movement speeds and item retrieval times at stock
points. The second sub-scenario involves incorporating uncertainty in agent speed of
movement as well as node dwell times, which can model a scenario wherein workers in
a warehouse have strong disincentives for deviating from the assigned route, but their
speeds of movement and dwell times at a stock point are variable. We do not consider
a scenario wherein uncertainty is incorporated in the agent speed of movement alone
or in the node dwell time alone because it is unlikely that uncertainty in only one of
the parameters will be present. Further, even if uncertainty is present in only one of
these parameters (but not both), this scenario can easily be incorporated within our
framework.
The results in Table 1 are generated based on three hours of simulation time (i.e.,
three hours of network operation), wherein the first one hour is considered as a warmup period, and outcomes are collected for agents arriving from the beginning of the
second hour onwards (i.e., the number of contacts reported are those observed over
these two hours). The summary statistics are obtained from 30 replications for each
node traversal pattern. The simulation was programmed in Python, and the Gurobi
optimization suite Gurobi Optimization (2021) was used to solve the TSP-NC/-MC
formulations. The majority of the numerical experiments were performed on an Intel
Xeon workstation with 4 cores and 32 gigabytes of memory. The MNNT reported in
Table 1 is associated with the case when only arrivals are random; we do not report
the MNNT for the scenario with random agent arrivals, node dwell time, and agent
speed as it remains approximately the same as that observed in the scenario with only
random agent arrivals.
Table 1.: Simulation outcomes without considering noncompliance. The mean and
standard deviation of the number of contacts are reported; SE = standard error of the
mean.
Node traversal
pattern

Contacts (random
arrivals)

MNNT (SE)

Contacts (random arrivals,
dwell time, speed)

Greedy

740.10 (192.72)

3.51 (0.04)

660.07 (126.37)

Preferential

697.10 (133.85)

4.01 (0.04)

706.8 (144.84)

TSP

992.1 (280.60)

3.15 (0.04)

Not relevant

TSP-NC

0

3.25 (0.08)

293.3 (60.79)

TSP-MC

0

3.36 (0.04)

293.7 (59.61)

It is evident from Table 1 that the TSP-NC and TSP-MC routes yield a significant reduction in the number of contacts when compared to the no-/minimal-contact
node traversal patterns. This is particularly evident when only stochastic arrivals are
considered, and hence this indicates that this approach could be particularly relevant
when variation in node dwell times and agent speeds is minimal. Even with stochastic
dwell times and agent speeds, we see that the reduction in the number of contacts is
11

substantial. Interestingly, with the greedy and preferential node traversal patterns, we
see that the number of contacts do not increase with stochastic node dwell times and
agent speeds in comparison to the situation with only stochastic agent arrivals; this
implies an effect akin to ‘destructive interference’ between the stochasticity in different
parameters.
With regard to MNNT, it can be seen that the TSP-NC and TSP-MC routes yield
reductions between 4.27% - 18.95% when compared to the greedy and preferential
node traversal patterns. Note that the increase in MNNT of the TSP-NC pattern when
compared to the MTZ TSP without no-/minimal-contact constraints is not statistically
significant at a 5% level of significance. In comparison to the TSP-MC pattern, the
increase of 6.67% is statistically significant at a 5% level of significance.
The mean computational runtimes of the TSP-NC and TSP-MC models for generating no-/minimal-contact routes are 55.82 (standard error [SE] = 22.91) seconds,
and 3.88 (SE = 3.26) seconds. The runtimes for the TSP-NC formulation vary widely
depending upon: (a) the cardinality of the agent’s node set, (b) the average cardinalities of the node sets of the agents that are taken into account for the generation of
the TSP-NC route for the agent under consideration node sets, and (c) the extent to
which the nodes in the node set of the agent under consideration are occupied by other
agents during the time likely to be spent in the network by the agent under consideration. These conditions can even lead to infeasibilities when the TSP-NC formulation
is used to generate routes for arriving agents. However, this occurs infrequently, and
we observe an average number of 4.5 (SD = 2.88) infeasibilities (out of approximately
80 agents) for the TSP-NC formulation for the two cases considered in Table 1. Note
that the number of infeasibilities is not affected by the extent of stochasticity (e.g., in
agent arrivals only, or in agent speed and node dwell times as well) in the simulation as
the TSP-NC/-MC formulations are solved using expected values of these parameters.
We also note that in the stochastic arrivals only scenario the TSP-MC formulation also yields zero contacts but with substantially lesser runtimes and a marginally
higher MNNT. A similar trend is also observed with stochastic node dwell times and
agent speeds, with the average number of contacts nearly equal to that under the
TSP-NC node traversal pattern. This indicates that the TSP-MC formulation may be
particularly suited for this purpose; however, the extent of the increase in the number
of contacts when the agent arrival rate increases must be ascertained prior to choosing one formulation over the other if only a single formulation can be deployed in a
practical setting.
We present the results for a scenario where all types of noncompliance are incorporated along with stochasticity in agent arrivals, node dwell times, and in agent speed.
This scenario may also apply to the warehouse setting with human workers or in a
setting with real-time programming and/or control of AGVs by human operators. We
present the results in Table 2 for a scenario where each agent has an equal probability
of engaging in type A, B or C noncompliance.
Table 2.: Simulation outcomes with agent noncompliance with assigned routes. SD =
standard deviation; SE = standard error.
Node traversal pattern

Contacts: mean (SD)

MNNT (SE)

TSP-NC

390.7 (61.1)

3.58 (0.09)

TSP-MC

344.9 (84.51)

3.58 (0.09)

12

From Table 2, it is clear that introducing noncompliance increases both the number
of contacts and the MNNTs; however, the average number of contacts with the TSPNC/-MC routes are still substantially lesser when compared to greedy and preferential
node traversal patterns. Reductions in the average number of contacts range from 4150%. This result can be considered to a ‘worst-case’ scenario, given that we assume
that every agent engages in noncompliance; further reductions in the average number
of contacts are possible if this assumption is relaxed.
We also see from the above results that generating TSP-NC/-MC routes for agents
also yields a substantial reduction in the variances of the number of contacts, even
with noncompliance and stochasticity introduced in all possible parameters associated
with agent node traversal.
The above results are generated for a case with the probability of an agent engaging
in a type of noncompliance being equal for all types; however, all types of noncompliance do not appear to yield the same outcome in terms of the average number of
contacts. Simulation experiments performed with stochastic arrivals and agents engaging in only one type of noncompliance yielded the following number of contacts:
(a) 209.2 (SD = 36.17) contacts with type A; (b) 314.7 (SD = 78.65) contacts with
type B, and (c) 373.3 (SD = 125.49) contacts with type C noncompliance. Note that
the variance in the number of contacts also changes with the type of noncompliance.
Hence instituting stronger disincentives to engage in one type of noncompliance over
another may be worth considering for the network administrator.
We now conclude the paper with a summary of the work, its potential impact and
a discussion of study limitations.

5. CONCLUSIONS & DISCUSSION
In this study, we present optimization formulations for assigning contact-free routes
to agents arriving randomly to a connected network. We evaluate - via a Monte Carlo
simulation - the efficiency of the assigned routes in terms of the number of collisions/contacts between agents traversing their node sets in the network under stochasticity in various parameters associated with traversal. Under all scenarios, we demonstrate that our formulations yield significant reductions in contacts between agents
with only marginal increases in shopping time when compared to multiple commonly
used but sub-optimal (in terms of minimizing contacts) network traversal patterns.
Among the two formulations that we propose, it is evident that the TSP-MC formulation is computationally more efficient than the TSP-NC formulation while yielding
the same or marginally higher number of contacts. However, we have presented results
only for a single agent arrival rate in this paper. Preliminary experiments indicate an
increase in the number of contacts with an increase in the arrival rate with the TSPMC formulation (while remaining computationally efficient); however, the increase is
marginal when compared to the overall jump in contacts that would result from higher
arrival rate in the absence of an organized route-planning framework like ours.
A limitation of this work is that the construction of the network, specification of
traversal patterns, types of noncompliance, and the parameterization of the simulation and optimization framework is not based on data from the real-world; hence
an immediate avenue of future research involves developing a version of the simulation and optimization framework using data from a real-world scenario. Further, the
no-/minimal-contact optimization frameworks are based on extensions to the MTZ
formulation of the TSP, and hence they may be inefficient when deployed for networks
13

of substantially larger size than what is considered in this paper. Hence another direction of future research involves development of the TSP-NC/-MC equivalents with
more efficient versions of the TSP, such as the TSP with time windows.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors gratefully acknowledge S.G. Deshmukh and Subhangshu Sen for their
useful suggestions during the course of the work.

References
Applegate, D. L., Bixby, R. E., Chvatal, V., & Cook, W. J. (2006). The traveling salesman
problem: A computational study. Princeton University Press.
Bektas, T. (2006). The multiple traveling salesman problem: An overview of formulations and
solution procedures. Omega, 34 (3), 209–219.
Bullo, F., Frazzoli, E., Pavone, M., Savla, K., & Smith, S. L. (2011). Dynamic vehicle routing
for robotic systems. Proceedings of the IEEE , 99 (9), 1482–1504.
Cook, W. J. (2011). In pursuit of the traveling salesman: Mathematics at the limits of computation. Princeton University Press.
Duinkerken, M. B., Ottjes, J. A., & Lodewijks, G. (2006). Comparison of routing strategies
for agv systems using simulation. In Proceedings of the 2006 winter simulation conference
(pp. 1523–1530).
Guillaume, D., Michael, D., Abdelghani, B., Damien, T., & Mohamed, D. (2017). Decentralized
motion planning and scheduling of agvs in fms. Transactions on Industrial Informatics.
Gurobi Optimization, L. (2021). Gurobi optimizer reference manual. Retrieved from http://
www.gurobi.com
Herrero-Perez, D., & Martinez-Barbera, H. (2010). Modeling distributed transportation systems composed of flexible automated guided vehicles in flexible manufacturing systems.
IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, 6 (2), 166–180.
Korsah, G. A., Stentz, A., & Dias, M. B. (2013). A comprehensive taxonomy for multi-robot
task allocation. The International Journal of Robotics Research, 32 (12), 1495–1512.
Lee, D.-H., Zaheer, S. A., & Kim, J.-H. (2014). A resource-oriented, decentralized auction
algorithm for multirobot task allocation. IEEE Transactions on Automation Science and
Engineering, 12 (4), 1469–1481.
Miller, C. E., Tucker, A. W., & Zemlin, R. A. (1960). Integer programming formulation of
traveling salesman problems. Journal of the ACM , 7 (4), 326–329.
Miyamoto, T., & Inoue, K. (2016). Local and random searches for dispatch and conflict-free
routing problem of capacitated agv systems. Computers & Industrial Engineering, 91 , 1–9.
Reinelt, G. (1991). Tsplib—a traveling salesman problem library. ORSA Journal on Computing, 3 (4), 376–384.
Shi, Z., & Ng, W. K. (2018). A collision-free path planning algorithm for unmanned aerial
vehicle delivery. In 2018 international conference on unmanned aircraft systems (icuas)
(pp. 358–362).
Smolic-Rocak, N., Bogdan, S., Kovacic, Z., & Petrovic, T. (2009). Time windows based
dynamic routing in multi-agv systems. IEEE Transactions on Automation Science and
Engineering, 7 (1), 151–155.
Spensieri, D., Carlson, J. S., Ekstedt, F., & Bohlin, R. (2015). An iterative approach for collision free routing and scheduling in multirobot stations. IEEE Transactions on Automation
Science and Engineering, 13 (2), 950–962.
Toth, P., & Vigo, D. (2014). Vehicle routing: Problems, methods, and applications. SIAM.

14

Xin, J., Meng, C., Schulte, F., Peng, J., Liu, Y., & Negenborn, R. R. (2020). A time-space
network model for collision-free routing of planar motions in a multirobot station. IEEE
Transactions on Industrial Informatics, 16 (10), 6413–6422.
Xin, J., Negenborn, R. R., Corman, F., & Lodewijks, G. (2015). Control of interacting
machines in automated container terminals using a sequential planning approach for collision
avoidance. Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies, 60 , 377–396.

15

