1

COVID-19 Epidemic in Mumbai:
Projections, full economic opening,
and containment zones versus contact tracing

arXiv:2011.02032v1 [physics.soc-ph] 29 Oct 2020

and testing: An Update
TIFR Covid-19 City-Scale Simulation Team
Prahladh Harsha, Sandeep Juneja, Daksh Mittal, Ramprasad Saptharishi
October 29, 2020
I. S UMMARY
Mumbai, amongst the most crowded cities in the world, has witnessed the fourth largest
number of cases and the largest number of deaths among all the cities in India. The first case
in Mumbai was detected on 11 March 2020, and the first fatality was recorded on 17 March
2020. Currently, as of 26 October, 2020, Mumbai has reported 252,087 cases and 10,099
fatalities, thus contributing disproportionate share to India’s tally of 7.94 million reported
cases and 119,014 deaths. Mumbai, along with the rest of India has been in a lockdown since
March 25, 2020. Initially imposed for three weeks, this lockdown was extended in Mumbai
and other parts of India till May 17, 2020. Thereafter, Mumbai has seen gradual relaxations
in population movement. In particular, in the “Mission Begin Again” order dated 31st August
2020 [1], the Government of Maharashtra has allowed 20% attendance in workplaces.
As per the release by the government, the Indian economy contracted by 23.9% in the first
quarter of the fiscal year 2020-21. Given the large economic toll on the country from the
lockdown and the related restrictions on mobility of people and goods, swift opening of the
economy especially in a financial hub such as Mumbai becomes critical. However, opening
up of Mumbai is crucially linked to opening its crowded public transit systems, especially
the crowded suburban trains. Too swift an opening may lead to a sudden increase in the
spread of the epidemic leading to a ‘difficult to manage’ second wave of hospitalisations.
Fortunately, the curve of medical indicators for Mumbai such as hospitalisations, critical
patients, reported cases and fatalities at any time, had begun to stabilize or ‘flatten’ over the
Source code available at https://github.com/dasarpmar/epidemics-simulator-mumbai/releases/tag/v4.0

2

months of June and July and further reduced in August. There was some increase in medical
indicators from late August onwards which appears again to be stabilizing by mid-October.
This was very likely due to the increased intermingling due to the Ganpati festival combined
with the opening up of the economy. Mumbai Sero-Survey [2] indicated high prevalence in the
city and particularly in the slums in early July. Given the increase in reported cases from the
city especially from the non-slum areas since then, the overall prevalence in Mumbai is likely
to be quite high, thus allowing the city room to further open up. In this report, we use our
IISc-TIFR agent based simulator described in detail in [3] to develop long term projections
for Mumbai under realistic scenarios related to Mumbai’s opening of the workplaces, or
equivalently, the economy, and the associated public transportation through local trains and
buses.
These projections were developed taking into account a possible second wave if the
economy and the local trains are fully opened either on November 1, 2020 or on January 1,
2021. The impact on infection spread in Mumbai if the schools and colleges open on January
first week 2021 is also considered. We also capture the increased intermingling amongst the
population during the Ganpati festival as well as around the Navratri/Dussehra and Diwali
festival. Our conclusion, based on our simulations, is that the impact of fully opening up
the economy on November 1 is manageable provided reasonable medical infrastructure is
in place. Further, schools and colleges opening in January do not lead to excessive increase
in infections. While Ganpati festival had a substantial impact on medical indicators, if the
intermingling level during Navratri/Dussehra and Diwali festival is similar, then, since these
festivals occur later when a larger fraction of the population has already been infected,
the resulting infections are likely to be less, and thus the overall impact on city’s medical
infrastructure also relatively less. Though not explicitly modelled, we expect similar conclusions to hold for the Chat festival and Christmas later in the year. Of course, if there is a
substantial increase in interaction amongst the population during the upcoming festivals and
the social distancing/masks related precautions are relatively weakened, then one may again
see a significant rise in infections.
Changes from the earlier report [4].: This report is an update of an earlier one we released
in early September [4]. The key changes, and the explanation for the modifications, are given
below:
•

To improve the modelling of the infection in high-density areas (slums) to better match
the observed prevalence data [2], we increase the high-density transmission rate (HD-FACTOR
set to 3, instead of 2).

3

•

We use the data from [5] for age distribution in high-density areas and low-density areas
to capture the fact that the high-density areas have a younger population (see Figure 1) .
This results in a lower fatality rate per infection within the high-density areas, and also
an increase in spread within the high-density areas since there are more individuals in
the working age-group.

•

The population of Mumbai is taken to be 12.8 million as opposed to 12.4 million. This
in consonance with mid-year estimated population 2019 data with MCGM that updates
the 2011 census data [6], [7].

•

The intervention modelling includes lower compliance and higher community level interactions during the festive seasons. The details of this are explained in subsection II-A.

The net result of these changes is that in our model slums see high infections early on
largely during April to June. Infections thereafter are primarily from non-slums. This matches
the Mumbai scenario much better. Later in this report we also conduct some rudimentary
experiments to ball park gauge the benefits and the costs of introducing perfect vaccines
amongst the older population of Mumbai.
Our simulations further suggest that by mid-January 2021, the prevalence (fraction of the
population infected) can be seen to be stabilising close to 80% in slums and 55% in nonslums. This stabilisation and high prevalence indicates that Mumbai city may have more or
less reached “herd immunity” by then. By this we mean that the new infections and related
medical indicators in the city will be substantially reduced compared to their peak values in
mid-May and June 2020.
In these simulations we also conduct counterfactual experiments where the containment
efforts as well as the contact tracing and testing efforts are varied and their impact on the
health indicators is measured. Our simulations suggest that containment efforts do a better
job of slowing infection spread compared to increasing the contact tracing and testing efforts.
Increase in the latter leads to only marginal improvement in slowing the infection.
Below, we list some policy recommendations for opening up the workplaces and schools
and colleges in Mumbai that incorporates above considerations.
A. Policy Recommendations
•

We had in the earlier version of this report [4], recommended gradual opening of the
workplaces so that the increase in infections that may result from increased occupancy
in local trains and other public transport is manageable. We continue to recommend

4

similar gradual opening up of the city and that the economy may be fully opened up
by November 1 or soon thereafter, again with the opening up process carefully based
on observed infections.
•

Schools and colleges may be opened by first week of January 2021. As mentioned
earlier, our simulations suggest that the resulting second wave from this opening up is
minimal.

•

Social distancing in public transport, staggering of office times, use of shifts to the extent
feasible is recommended.

•

Prevailing hygiene measures such as mandatory use of masks/face-covers, encouragement of regular hand-hygiene, regular disinfection of “high-touch surfaces” in trains and
workplaces [8] etc. should continue as before.

•

Our analysis of containment zones vis-a-vis contact tracing and testing suggests that
wherever feasible and when the economic costs are not prohibitive, containment in
regions where infection is seen to be present is a desirable option to slow the infection
spread.

In addition to the various modeling assumptions listed in our previous reports [3], [9], our
recommendations rely on two important assumptions.
1) Our first assumption is that the population, by and large, will continue to observe
social distancing precautions including wearing of masks. This could change as public
perception of risk changes over time. This may lead to increase in infections not
accounted for in our projections.
2) Our second assumption is that the reinfection probability is sufficiently small for that
population of Mumbai that it can be ignored in opening up of the city. We note that
cases of reinfection have recently been reported. However, the number of such reports
continues to be very few. If this changes and reinfection happens to a non-negligible
proportion of the population, then our projections become less valid.
Vaccines: It is believed that a COVID-19 vaccine will become available sometime in 2021.
Important decisions related to prioritising people to vaccinate and to manage the storage and
distribution of vaccines would require careful analysis. This analysis would also include the
cost and time taken in vaccine production, the effectiveness of the vaccines, the frequency of
administering them to each person, the time that a vaccine takes to provide immunity, and the
duration for which the immunity is provided. These are complex issues that require detailed
analysis. Later in this report we conduct some very rudimentary simulation experiments

5

related to administering vaccines under simplified assumptions to get a ball park idea of the
potential costs and benefits, in terms of number of fatalities and the load on medical facilities,
of administering vaccines to relatively older population in Mumbai.
Our broad conclusions are that Greater Mumbai has an estimated 13.1 lakh people aged 60
and older. If these are all vaccinated by February 1 with a vaccine that provides instantaneous
and perfect immunity, then the number of fatalities post February 1 will reduce by estimated
53% from around 950 to 450 in the next six months. The hospitalisations (including critical
cases) will reduce by estimated 40% from around 8840 to 5340 in the next six months.
Similarly, if estimated 29.3 lakh 50 years and older Greater Mumbai residents are vaccinated
on February 1, then the number of fatalities post February 1 will reduce by estimated 64%
from around 950 to 340 in the next six months. The hospitalisations (including critical cases)
will reduce by estimated 67% from around 8840 to 2910 in the next six months.
There have been varying news-reports on the differences among the population in how the
disease spreads with respect to age, especially among the younger population. In particular,
the role of the younger population in the transmission of the disease is not well-understood.
In our earlier report [4], we took a cautious view and recommended opening of schools and
colleges only as late as January 1, 2021, several months after the opening of the economy.
Recent studies in the Indian states of Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu [10] suggest that
children in the age group of 0–14 pose a significant transmission risk, corroborating our
recommendation.
Caveats: We emphasize that our simulator is intended primarily as a tool for comparing the
effectiveness of different non-medical interventions to assist decision making. In particular,
the simulator, due to the inherent model uncertainty, is not intended as a tool for predicting
absolute numerical values of COVID-19 cases. In our informal view (which is difficult to
validate scientifically), a confidence interval of ± 20% to 30% around the projected numbers
may be reasonable to capture the model uncertainty. This number may be larger when
estimates with small values are considered. On the other hand, the statistical error due to the
random noise in the simulations is much smaller and is easily controlled.
We also recognize that many of the non-pharmaceutical interventions considered in our
study, especially when they remain implemented over a long duration, may lead to important
social and economic concerns and consequences, beyond their effect on the evolution of the
epidemic. Prolonged restrictions, besides economic concerns, may also lead to disruption of
many essential supply chains and medical services. The World Health Organisation Pulse

6

report [11], based on responses from over 100 countries, show significant reductions in
routine vaccinations, diagnosis and treatment of noncommunicable diseases, antenatal care,
cancer diagnosis and treatment, and many others. These are important factors that must be
taken into consideration when implementing any prolonged restrictions. However, we do not
know how to quantitively project many of the socio-economic effects of a non-pharmaceutical
intervention. The scope of our simulator is to project purely COVID-19 related stresses on
the medical infrastructure. The modelling of such socio-economic effects, though important,
remains beyond the scope of our simulator.
Similar to our previous report, we emphasize that this report has been prepared to help
researchers and public health officials understand the effectiveness of social distancing interventions related to COVID-19 in terms of the stresses on the medical infrastructure. The
report should not be used for medical diagnostic, prognostic or treatment purposes or for
guidance on personal travel plans.
II. T OWARDS FULLY OPENING M UMBAI
Greater Mumbai (consisting of Mumbai and Suburban Mumbai) has a population of about
1.28 crores (12.8 million) and a population density of roughly 21,000 per km2 making it
one of the densest cities in the world1 . Further, about 53% [12] of Mumbai lives in cramped
dwellings with shared sanitation facilities where the population density may be 5 to 10 times
larger than other parts of the city. In addition, crowded suburban trains are the lifeline of the
city where the suburban railway system serves more than 80 lakh (8 million) passengers on
a weekday, in normal times [13]. It is generally believed that the infection spreads faster in
denser areas, due to increased contacts in these areas. Given these factors, the public health
threat in Mumbai is particularly acute. The importance of modelling the effect of infection
spread arising from the gradual opening and relaxation of lockdown measures, for a city like
Mumbai, cannot then be over-emphasized. We model the spread of infection in the city using
our IISc-TIFR agent-based city simulator [3]. For completeness, we briefly review it below.
Agent-based city simulator (ABCS): As described in detail in [3], our agent-based simulator
creates a synthetic model of about 1.28 crore (12.8 million) residents of Mumbai that
matches the city population ward-wise, and matches the numbers employed, numbers in
schools, commute distances, etc. This is done by suitably populating households, schools, and
workplaces with people. Several interaction spaces including households, local communities,
1

Some of the discussion in the Introduction first appeared in [9]

7

schools, workplaces, trains, etc. are then modelled to realistically capture the spread of
infection. The synthetic city is then seeded with infections to match the observed fatalities till
April 10. The infective individuals expose the susceptible individuals to the disease through
their interactions in the various interaction spaces. The disease then incrementally evolves
in time. The tool helps keep track of the number infected in the city as well as the disease
progression within an infected individual. A person infected by the disease may remain
asymptomatic and recover, or may develop symptoms. A symptomatic person may recover
or may develop severe symptoms and be hospitalised. A patient hospitalised may recover or
may become critical. A critical patient may recover or may become deceased. The disease
progression parameters are based on [14].
A. Scenarios considered
In this work we report the following scenarios:
•

Long term forecasts: We develop long term forecasts till March 15, 2021 under the
following six scenarios:
– Containment effort set at 75% and at 60%. Exact modelling of containment effort
relies on the modelling feature ‘neighbourhood containment zones’ introduced in
[3] and is discussed later in Section III.
– Train infection levels are set at normal βT = 0.19 × βH (see [9] for detailed calculations to arrive at this number; that report also discusses the household transmission
parameter βH and the rationale that relates it to βT . The value of βH used is
calibrated primarily to fatality data, and is given in Figure 2.) as well as to the larger
value of βT = 0.30 × βH to account for the additional infections that may occur
in trains through passengers coming to Greater Mumbai through the neighbouring
areas in the Mumbai Metropolitan Region (MMR). We further consider a more
pessimistic higher value of βT = 0.40 × βH to account for the inherent uncertainty
in estimating βT without availability of relevant data on infection spread through
trains.
The workplace attendance is a good measure of economic activity. It is set in our model
as follows: Lockdown till May 17. Mobility to workplaces set at 5% from May 18 to
May 31. In June this is set at 15% and it increases to 25% in July. It is set at level 33%
in August. For September and October it is set at 50%. And thereafter it fully opens
(100% attendance) from November onwards.

8

Festivals in Mumbai are a time for increased intermingling amongst the population, and
during this time compliance on wearing masks, maintaining social distance, etc. is likely
to be less. We account for this in our model as follows:
– To account for increased intermingling due to the Ganpati festival, from August 20
to September 1, we increase β for community by 2/3, and we reduce compliance
from 60% in non-slums and 40% in slums to 40% in non-slums and 20% in slums.
With this adjustment we observe that the fatality data from the model is fairly close
to the actual observed fatalities in months of September and October.
– We do a similar adjustments for Navaratri and Dussehra for the period October 19
to October 25. For Diwali we conduct similar adjustments for the period November
8 to November 14.
The developed model is validated by comparing the model projections with the observed
health data, that is, observed number of fatalities, hospitalisations and critical cases.
As in [9], in all our simulations we continue to assume that outside the festival times,
60% of households are compliant in residential, relatively low density areas (non-slums),
while 40% of households are compliant in slums or high density areas.
•

Fully operational economy: We consider the following three scenarios:
1) The workplaces fully operational on November 1 and school/colleges open on
January 1,
2) workplaces fully operational on November 1 and school/colleges remain closed,
3) workplaces and school/colleges fully operational from January 1.
Fully opening workplaces or the economy implies that the trains are back to the capacity
as in normal pre-covid times. To err on the side of caution, we keep the train beta at a
high risk level, that is, βT = 0.4 × βH , in these scenarios.

•

Containment zones and contact tracing and testing are regarded as two important
policy tools available to decision makers in slowing the epidemic spread. Our small
network framework (introduced in [3]) through the neighbourhood cells allows us to
model neighbourhood containment efforts with reasonable accuracy. Further, the small
network framework with the introduction of the community of friends and neighbourhood
community, allows us to plausibly model the contact tracing and testing efforts. The
methodology to aid in measuring contract tracing and testing in our model is introduced
in [3]. This modelling feature is further discussed in Section IV. Through our model we
evaluate the performance of containment efforts by measuring the health indicators as a

9

Age Group

Slum age Distribution

Non Slum Age Distribution

Upto 10 yrs

15.82%

15.82%

11-20 yrs

18.38%

12.77%

21-30 yrs

18.51%

13.98%

31-40 yrs

17.70%

14.94%

41-50 yrs

11.35%

14.27%

51-60 yrs

11.35%

14.27%

61-70 yrs

5.48%

9.40%

71-80 yrs

1.17%

3.63%

81 yrs and above

0.21%

0.94%

Figure 1: Age Distribution for Greater Mumbai. Age distribution for slums and non-slums
for 12 years and above is obtained from [5]. We combine this with [6] and [7], assuming that
both slums and non-slums have the same percentage of population younger than 12 years,
to arrive at the overall age distribution for Greater Mumbai.

function of varying containment efforts. We similarly evaluate the the impact of varying
level of contact tracing and testing efforts on the health indicators. While containment
zones are relatively easier to administer compared to contact tracing and testing, our
simulations suggest that the former may also be more effective in slowing the spread
of the infection in the city. A caveat to keep in mind is that containment zones lead
to restricting movements of relatively large number of people, and so may come at a
significant economic and social cost.
•

Impact of Vaccination: We consider the following simplistic scenarios: Population
above the age of 60 is vaccinated on February 1. The vaccine comes into effect immediately and is 100% effective so that the vaccinated population instantly becomes immune.
We also consider the scenario where population above the age of 50 is vaccinated on
February 1. Medical statistics under both these scenarios are compared to the statistics
under the no vaccine setting.
III. S MALL NETWORKS AND CONTAINMENT

A. Smaller networks
As detailed in our previous report, each of the interaction spaces is further broken down
in subnetworks that corresponds to most of the interactions that an agent has within that

10

Subnetwork

Larger interaction space

Description

Project

Workplace

Clusters of size 3–10 (uniformly chosen)

Class

School

All students of a specific age

Neighbourhood

Community

Grid cells of side length 178 mts

Close friends

Community

2–5 households randomly chosen for each household

Interaction space

Comment

β value

Home

(calibrated)

1.93651

Workplace

(calibrated)

0.26862

Community

(calibrated)

0.02152

School

2 · βworkplace

0.53723

Project

9 · βworkplace

2.41758

Class

9 · βschool

4.83507

Neighbourhood

9 · βcommunity

0.19368

Close friends

9 · βcommunity

0.19368

Figure 2: Interaction spaces, subnetworks and contact rates

interaction space (for instance, 90% of an agent’s interactions in the workplaces are within
their “project” subnetwork). The subnetworks are listed as follows.
As in the earlier report [3], the contact rates are calibrated to match the observed growth of
fatalities, and to have roughly equal contribution of infections from the household, community
and workplace networks (including the subnetworks) in the “no-intervention” scenario.
B. Containment strategy
While in [9] the containment zones were modelled at the ward level for computational
ease, in the current implementation we aim for more accuracy through a finer and more
accurate model of containment. In particular, we model containment at a neighbourhood cell
level. Recall that our synthetic city is divided into a grid of square cells where length of
each cell is 178 meters. Containment effort is modeled as an increasing adaptive function
of the active hospitalisations observed in the neighbourhood cell. Number of hospitalisations
is taken as the decision variable since it is easily observable as compared to tracking the
number of positive cases in a cell, which may be harder to estimate accurately without
extensive testing, and the two are highly correlated. The cell is incrementally closed as more
number of hospitalisations are observed in it.

11

Specifically, suppose that the containment effectiveness (CE) =75% and there are 3,000
residents in a neighbourhood cell. Then, first hospitalisation leads to movement restriction of
25% internally amongst the residents as well as to and fro from the cell; second hospitalisation
leads 50% movement restriction, and third hospitalisation onwards leads to 75% movement
restriction. If, on the other hand, the neighbours in the cell are less than a thousand, then as
long as there exists a hospitalised person in the cell, movement of every resident within the
cell, as well as movements into and out of the cell are restricted by 75%.
More precisely, If containment effectiveness is set to a fraction y, and the neighbours in a
cell equal n thousand, then every hospitalisation leads to y/n restriction in movement, and
total movement restriction is capped at y. Thus, percentage of activity restriction (internally
as well as in entering and leaving the cell), or containment effectiveness, is our control and
we set it to
min (hy/n, y) ,
where h denotes the number of people in the neighbourhood cell that are hospitalised2 .
IV. S IMULATION RESULTS
As in [9], in all our simulations, outside of festival times, we set the compliance levels
to 60% in residential or non-slum areas, and at 40% in high density or slum areas. This
level of compliance with additional measures such a mask usage, case-isolation and home
quarantine post lock-down, restriction on those above 65 to stay home, closed school and
colleges match reasonably well the observed data on fatalities.
Further, accounting for the results of the Mumbai SeroSurvey [2], and in deviation from
our earlier analysis in [9], we reduce the proportion of symptomatic population amongst
those exposed to the Covid-19 disease to 40% from the earlier 66.67%. In addition, in our
earlier simulation runs for Mumbai in [3], [9], [4] β values for homes and communities in
slums were kept at two times the values for non-slums. In the current simulations this factor
is increased to 3. As mentioned earlier, this better matches the observed prevalance estimates
for Mumbai. The model is recalibrated to data using these adjustments.
A. Long term projections
We first discuss the long term projections. As mentioned earlier, we consider these under
the workplace attendance scenario where after lockdown till May 17, there is 5% attendance
2

In our current implementation, the number of hospitalized cases excludes those who are currently in critical care facilities.

12

from May 18 to May 31st. This increases to 15% attendance in June, 25% in July, 33% in
August, 50% in September and October and fully opens November onwards. In addition, as
discussed earlier, we adjust for increase intermingling in population during the three festival
times. These projections are developed till March 15, 2021 under the following six scenarios.
•

The containment effectiveness kept at 75% as well as 60%.

•

The infection rate from trains kept at base risk level βT = 0.19 × βH (recall that βH
corresponds to the household transmission parameter). This was derived as a plausible
rate of infection in trains in [9]. To account for the uncertainty in such calculations
and population from outside Greater Mumbai using Mumbai locals, we also consider
the more pessimistic medium risk setting of βT = 0.30 × βH and high risk setting of
βT = 0.40 × βH .

As in Reports [3] and [9], in our simulations, a synthetic city is created that match the
aggregate Mumbai demographic data. For this city we run 5 independent simulations. The
reported results are the average of these five runs.
In Figures 3a and 3b, we show the daily as well as the cumulative number of infections
under the six scenarios. These results suggest that the growth of infections in Mumbai started
to slow down from June, with slight increase every time the economy opened further or due
to the festival season. From January 1 onwards the number of new infections becomes very
small indicating that by and large herd immunity has been reached by the city. Furthermore,
this suggests that city will stabilize with close to 8-9 million residents infected.
In Figure 4, we map the prevalence for all of Mumbai suggested by the model when CE
is set to 0.60 and βT is set at 0.4 × βH . We also separately plot the prevalence for slums
and non-slums. The salient observations are that herd immunity is reached at different level
of prevalence in slums and non-slums. In slums this is attained at around 85%, while in
non-slums the number is closer to 60%. The Mumbai SeroSurvey [2] suggested around 55%
prevalence in slums and 15% prevalence in non-slums of the three wards of Mumbai that
were sampled around the first two weeks of July. Due to a typical gap of 1-2 weeks between
the time the infection happens and it can be detected by a serological test, we compare this
with our model output on July 1. Our respective numbers on July 1 of 55% and 15% are
more or less identical to theirs.
Figure 5a shows the daily number of the hospitalised patients as per our model under the
six scenarios. In Figure 5b, we compare our hospitalisation numbers to the hospitalisation
numbers reported by BMC in their Dashboard [15]. The BMC dashboard reports Dedicated
Covid Hospital (DCH) as well as Dedicated Covid Health Centre (DCHC) aggregated together

13

and these are reported as hospitalisations under DCH and DCHC. We make the following
adjustments to the data series from our model as well as from the BMC Dashboard to make
the comparison between them more apples to apples.
1) As per personal communication with BMC, from mid-July onwards many of the
hospital beds are taken up by patients coming from outside of Greater Mumbai (Greater
Mumbai denotes the area that comes under the jurisdiction of BMC). These include
patients coming from other areas in Mumbai Metropolitan Region (MMR) including
Thane, Navi Mumbai and Vasai-Virar as well as from somewhat further regions such
as Nasik. These are roughly estimated to equal 30% (based on feedback from a BMC
official). To account for these, we increase our hospital patient projections by 30%,
with the understanding that this increase is reasonable for comparison with observed
data beyond mid-July.
2) The DCH and DCHC numbers reported by the BMC Dashboard include patients under
ICU. In our model we report patients under ICU (critical patients) separately. Thus,
we remove the ICU patients in the Dashboard data from the DCH and DCHC data.
3) Further, based on the snapshot data provided by BMC on August 1 and August 20, we
inferred that about 13% of patients in DCH and DCHC are asymptomatic. The disease
progression data in our model is taken from [16] and [14], and here hospitalised patients
correspond to those with serious symptoms. Thus, to compare our projections with the
observed data, we further reduce the DCH and DCHC reported numbers by 13%.
It can be seen from Figure 5b that with the above corrections, post mid-July, our projections
are reasonably close to the adjusted DCH and DCHC numbers.
In Figure 6a, the projected daily number of the critical cases under the six scenarios are
shown. Again, to compare with the Mumbai ICU numbers as per the BMC Dashboard, we
scale our numbers by 41% in Figure 6b. These again our based on a snapshot input provided
by BMC where 41% of the critical beds used by the Mumbai population were in use by
population from outside the city. Here too, the match between the adjusted model and data
after mid-July appears reasonable. From May 27 to June 16 the occupancy of reported ICUs
was seen to be above 98% as per the BMC Dashboard (except on May 29, when it was
97%). This may at least partially explain why the model numbers for critical cases in this
period are much higher than the actual numbers.
Figure 7a shows the projected fatalities based on our model and compares them to the
fatality data as reported by BMC through their Dashboard. Figure 7b shows cumulative
number of fatalities as a function of time. As pointed out in earlier reports [3] and [9], in

14

our model the key transmission rates are calibrated to primarily match the initial observed
fatality data in Mumbai as well as in the rest of India. Further, the compliance parameters
used in the model are fine tuned so that the model fatalities are close to the reported fatality
data (as reported by BMC through their Dashboard [15]). As evident from the two figures,
the match between the model generated fatality and the reported fatality data appears to be
quite good. Few points are in order.
•

BMC in mid-June had updated the reported deaths data. Figure 7b shows both the
original and the updated reported fatality data. Observe, that our model (the data series
corresponding to CE 0.60 and base or medium train risk βT level) slightly underestimates
this series from mid-May to mid-June. One reason for this may be that while in our
model there is no limit on ICUs for critical patients, the city of Mumbai did observe
this shortage around that period.

•

Our model reports higher number of deaths (under CE 60%, and high train risk βT
value) compared to the reported from July onwards. This may be partially explained by
the fact that around mid-June BMC stopped testing dead bodies for covid [17].

A broad conclusion suggested by our model is that the fatalities in the city will stabilize
within 13,000 to 14,000 by March 2021.
In Figures 8a and 8b, we report the observed daily and the cumulative cases in Mumbai.
In Figure 8a we also report the daily tests conducted to illustrate the correlation between
these and the observed cases. This correlation is especially strong from September first week
to mid-October. Since these numbers are a function of the testing strategy followed, they are
difficult to estimate. Later, in Section VI, we discuss our contact testing and tracing strategy
that was tailored to the case data from mid-May onwards until the last ten days of August.
However, since then the amount of testing in Mumbai has significantly increased and we do
not have an accurate model to estimate the number of positive cases thereafter.
In Figure 9 we report the time series of fatalities in slums and non-slums as per our model
(the actual data is not available). The model result suggest that fatalities in slums peaked
during the months of May and June. They plateau around their peak from July to October
in non-slums.

15

(a) Daily new infections under the workplace opening schedule 5% attendance,
May 18 to May 31st, 15% attendance in June, 25% in July, 33% in August,
50% in September and October and fully open November onwards. Includes
Ganpati, Navratri/Dussehra and Diwali relaxations.

(b) Cumulative infection growth under the workplace opening schedule 5%
attendance, May 18 to May 31st, 15% attendance in June, 25% in July,
33% in August, 50% in September and October and fully open November
onwards. Includes Ganpati, Navratri/Dussehra and Diwali relaxations. Under
this schedule as per simulations the city stabilizes with 8 to 9 million of the
population infected.

Figure 3

16

Figure 4: Simulated prevalence in Mumbai slums (HD areas) and non-slums under the
workplace opening schedule 5% attendance, May 18 to May 31st, 15% attendance in June,
25% in July, 33% in August, 50% in September and October and fully open November
onwards. Includes Ganpati, Navratri/Dussehra and Diwali relaxations. The herd immunity in
slums is attained at around 80%, while in non-slums it is attained at prevalence close to 55%.

17

(a) Simulated daily hospitalised patients in the city under the workplace opening schedule 5% attendance, May 18 to May
31st, 15% attendance in June, 25% in July, 33% in August, 50% till October and 100% from Nov. Includes Ganpati,
Navratri/Dussehra and Diwali relaxations.

(b) Comparison of simulated daily hospitalised patients in the city with the DCH and DCHC numbers reported by BMC.
The simulated numbers are increased by 30% to account for estimated patients coming from the other MMR areas. These
cases came to Mumbai mainly from around mid-July. The ICU numbers are removed from the reported DCH and DCHC
numbers. These numbers are further reduced by 13% to remove the estimated asymptomatic patients in DCH and DCHC
to facilitate comparison.

Figure 5

18

(a) Simulated daily critical patients in the city under the workplace opening schedule 5% attendance, May 18
to May 31st, 15% attendance in June, 25% in July, 33% in August, 50% in September and October and fully
open November onwards. Includes Ganpati, Navratri/Dussehra and Diwali relaxations.

(b) Comparison of simulated daily critical patients in the city with the DCH and DCHC numbers reported by
BMC. The simulated numbers increased by 41% to account for estimated patients coming from the other MMR
areas. These cases came to Mumbai from around mid-July.

Figure 6

19

(a) Simulated daily deaths in the city under the workplace opening schedule 5% attendance, May 18 to May
31st, 15% attendance in June, 25% in July, 33% in August, 50% in September and October and fully open
November onwards. Includes Ganpati, Navratri/Dussehra and Diwali relaxations.

(b) Simulated cumulative fatalities in the city under the workplace opening schedule 5% attendance, May 18
to May 31st, 15% attendance in June, 25% in July, 33% in August, 50% in September and October and fully
open November onwards. Includes Ganpati, Navratri/Dussehra and Diwali relaxations. As per the simulations,
the fatalities in the city stabilize around 14,000 by March, 2021.

Figure 7

20

(a) Daily reported cases and tests in the city.

(b) Cumulative reported cases in the city.

Figure 8

21

Figure 9: Simulated fatalities in Mumbai slums (HD areas) and non-slums under the
workplace opening schedule 5% attendance, May 18 to May 31st, 15% attendance in June,
25% in July, 33% in August, 50% in September and October and fully open November
onwards. Includes Ganpati, Navratri/Dussehra and Diwali relaxations.

22

V. F ULLY OPERATIONAL OF ECONOMIC ACTIVITY
In Figure 10, we plot the simulated hospitalisations as well as critical cases where we
compare the following three scenarios
•

Workplaces fully open on November 1 and School/Colleges open from January 1.

•

Both Workplaces and School/Colleges fully open on January 1.

•

Workplaces fully open on November 1 and School/Colleges remains closed.

All the scenarios include Ganpati, Navratri/Dussehra and Diwali relaxations. The simulated
hospitalised numbers and critical numbers are increased by 30% and 41%, respectively, to
account for estimated patients coming from the other MMR areas. The ICU numbers are
removed from the reported DCH and DCHC numbers. These numbers are further reduced
by 13% to remove the estimated asymptomatic patients in DCH and DCHC. The train βT is
set at high risk, that is βT = 0.4 × βH .
Our key observations are that the second wave of hospitalisations and critical cases is
much higher with the November 1 opening compared to the January 1 opening. While the
projected hospitalisations increase from around 2,300 a day to a peak of about 3,200 a day
with the November 1 opening, the increase is from about 200 a day to around 2,000 a day
on January 1 opening. Further, the opening of the schools on January 1 lead to only a small
increase in hospitalisations and critical cases.
Under the November 1 opening the daily critical cases peak at around 700 in mid-December
under November 1 opening. These peak at around 400 in mid-March after January 1 opening.
Figure 11 reflects a similar pattern in fatalities observed under these fully operational
scenarios. While the projected daily fatalities increase from around 20 a day to a peak of
about 30 a day with the November 1 opening, the increase is from about 4 a day to a peak
of around 20 a day on January 1 opening.
Figure 12 show a similar pattern in number infected observed under these fully operational
workplace scenarios.

23

Figure 10: Simulated number of daily hospitalized patients and daily critical cases under the workplace opening schedule
5% attendance, May 18 to May 31st, 15% attendance in June, 25% in July, 33% in August, 50% in September and October
and fully open November onwards with School/Colleges opening from January 1. This schedule is overlaid with scenarios
of 1) workplace and s/c opening from January 1, 2) Workplace open from November 1 and s/c remaining closed. All
the scenarios include the three festival relaxations. The simulated hospitalised numbers and critical numbers are increased
by 30% and 41% respectively to account for estimated patients coming from other MMR areas. The ICU numbers are
removed from the reported DCH and DCHC numbers. These numbers are further reduced by 13% to remove the estimated
asymptomatic patients in DCH and DCHC.

24

Figure 11: Simulated number of daily and cumulative fatalities under the workplace opening schedule 5%
attendance, May 18 to May 31st, 15% attendance in June, 25% in July, 33% in August, 50% in September
and October and fully open November onwards with School/Colleges opening from January 1. This schedule
is overlaid with scenarios of 1) workplace attendance of 100% and school/colleges opening from January 1,
2) Workplace fully open from November 1 and school/colleges remaining closed. All the scenarios include the
three festival relaxations.

25

Figure 12: Simulated number of daily and cumulative infections under the workplace opening schedule 5%
attendance, May 18 to May 31st, 15% attendance in June, 25% in July, 33% in August, 50% in September
and October and fully open November onwards with School/Colleges opening from January 1. This schedule
is overlaid with scenarios of 1) workplace attendance of 100% and school/colleges opening from January 1,
2) Workplace fully open from November 1 and school/colleges remaining closed. All the scenarios include the
three festival relaxations.

26

VI. C OMPARING CONTAINMENT ZONES WITH CONTACT TRACING AND TESTING
For the comparison between the two strategies, containment zones are implemented as
explained in Section III, while contact tracing and testing strategy designed to reflect the
testing strategy and data from mid-May to mid-August is explained below.
A. Contact tracing and testing
The contact tracing machinery can be briefly described as follows:
1) An individual that the simulator deems as a hospitalised case undergoes a COVID19 test with some probability (specified by the protocol given in Figure 13). If the
test turns out to be positive, this agent is deemed as a hospitalised index case. This
hospitalised case is typically tested with probability 1, although later in Section VI
when we evaluate medical statistics under different testing protocols, we allow this
probability to take lower values of 0.66 and 0.8 as well.
2) When an index case is identified, a fraction of agents from their subnetworks (specified
by the protocol) are quarantined and marked as primary contacts.
3) Each primary contact is tested with some probability (specified by the protocol). If
the test is positive, then such agents are marked as positive index cases. The newly
discovered positive index cases would additionally initiate contact trace around this
agent like in the hospitalised index cases.
In the current implementation, 0.5% of the neighbourhood cell (which is 5 agents on
average) and 100% of all other subnetworks are deemed as the agent’s primary contacts.
Furthermore, the testing probabilities in our current implementation are set to match a rough
test positivity rate of 30% to 40%, which is the observed test positivity rate during the months
of June and July in Mumbai [15].
Figures 14 and 15 show the impact of increasing containment effort on the resulting city
medical statistics. Recall that containment efforts reduce the movement of individuals within
the neighbourhood containment cell as well as those going out from or coming into the
containment cell. The graphs indicate that containment efforts go a long way in slowing the
infection. Thus, containment is an effective tool available to policy makers for slowing down
the infection spread.
Figures 16 and 17 show the impact of increasing contact tracing and testing on the resulting
city medical statistics. To test the intensity of contact tracing and testing, we consider three
scenarios where the hospital index probability (the probability with which a hospitalised case
is tested) takes values 0.66, 0.80 and 1.0.

27

Subnetwork

Type of index case

Status of primary contact

Test probability

Household

Hospitalised

Symptomatic

1

Hospitalised

Asymptomatic

0.45

Positive

Symptomatic

1

Positive

Asymptomatic

0.45

Hospitalised

Symptomatic

0.5

Hospitalised

Asymptomatic

0.225

Positive

Symptomatic

0.25

Positive

Asymptomatic

0.1125

Hospitalised

Symptomatic

0.25

Hospitalised

Asymptomatic

0.2

Positive

Symptomatic

0.125

Positive

Asymptomatic

0.06

Hospitalised

Symptomatic

0.25

Hospitalised

Asymptomatic

0.2

Positive

Symptomatic

0.125

Positive

Asymptomatic

0.06

Project

Close friends

Neighbourhood cell

Figure 13: Testing protocol

In these comparisons we have set the train transmission parameter βT to 0.3 ∗ βH . Further
the relaxations due to the festivals are not considered.
The conclusion is that while contact tracing and testing does help in slowing the spread of
the infection, the amount of reduction appears much less compared to that achieved through
containment efforts, particularly since the latter appears to be cheaper and easier to implement.
The comparison between benefits of containment vis-a-vis contact tracing and testing
is crystallised in Figure 18 where we plot the peak of moving ten day average of daily
hospitalised patients as a function of these efforts. The contact tracing and testing effort
measured on the x axis of the right hand figure corresponds to the hospital index probability
for values 0.66, 0.80 and 1.0. We also consider the two higher contact tracing and testing cases
where the hospital index probability is kept fixed at 1 but the remaining testing probabilities in
the protocol are increased by 25% in one case and 50% in the other. These cases correspond
to x-axis values of 1.25 and 1.5 in Figure 18.

28

Figure 14: Simulated number of daily hospitalised patients and critical patients under varying
level of containment efforts. Workplace opening schedule is set at 5% attendance, May 18
to May 31st, 15% attendance in June, 25% in July, 33% in August, 50% in September and
October and fully open November onwards.

29

Figure 15: Simulated number of daily fatalities under varying level of containment efforts.
Workplace opening schedule is set at 5% attendance, May 18 to May 31st, 15% attendance in
June, 25% in July, 33% in August, 50% in September and October and fully open November
onwards.

30

Figure 16: Simulated number of daily hospitalised patients and critical patients under varying
level of contact tracing and testing strategies. Workplace opening schedule is set at 5%
attendance, May 18 to May 31st, 15% attendance in June, 25% in July, 33% in August, 50%
in September and October and fully open November onwards.

31

Figure 17: Simulated number of daily fatalities under varying level of contact tracing and
testing strategies. Workplace opening schedule is set at 5% attendance, May 18 to May 31st,
15% attendance in June, 25% in July, 33% in August, 50% in September and October and
fully open November onwards.

Figure 18: Comparison between benefits of containment effort vis-a-vis contact tracing and
testing. The left figure reports the peak of moving ten day average of daily hospitalised
patients as a function of containment effort. The right figure reports the same peak as a
function of contact tracing and testing efforts.

32

VII. I MPACT OF VACCINATION
Figures 19 and 21 show the impact of introducing vaccination on the resulting city medical
statistics. The three festival relaxations are included in these simulations. The train transmission parameter βT is set to its medium value 0.3 ∗ βH . As mentioned earlier, to keep
the discussion simple, we assume vaccines are administered to the specified population on
February 1. They work instantly and provide complete immunity at least for the next six
months.
Figure 20 suggests that by vaccinating people aged 60 years and above on Feb 1, 2021,
around 498 lives (appx. 53%) can be saved in the next six months whereas vaccinating people
aged 50 years above saves around 607 lives (appx. 64%) over the same period. It can also be
seen from the simulation results that introducing vaccination significantly reduces the load
on medical facilities. By vaccinating people aged 60 years and above on Feb 1, 2021, the
hospitalisations (including critical cases) reduces to 5342 (from 8840 in the no vaccination
case) which amounts to appx. 39.6% reduction. Similarly, by vaccinating people aged 50
years and above, the hospitalisations (including critical cases) reduces to 2908 (appx. 67%
reduction).
The demographics of Greater Mumbai as estimated from Figure 1 suggests that approximately 13.1 lac Mumbai residents are aged 60 years or above. According to our simulations,
out of these 13.1 lac, approximately 5.6 lac will be susceptible on Feb 1. Similarly, the
total number of residents aged 50 and above is 29.4 lac whereas around 10.3 lac will be
susceptible on Feb 1. Since, we may not be able to, or it may not even be desirable to,
separate the susceptibles from the recovered population from vaccination viewpoint, we may
have to vaccinate everyone in the respective age group to provide them immunity.

33

Figure 19: Simulated number of daily hospitalised patients and critical patients under
scenarios of no vaccination, vaccinating people aged 50 years and above 60 years and above
on Feb 1. Workplace opening schedule is set at 5% attendance, May 18 to May 31st, 15%
attendance in June, 25% in July, 33% in August, 50% in September and October and fully
open November onwards. All the scenarios include the three festival relaxations.

34

Scenario

Fatalities

Hospitalisations (including critical cases)

No Vaccination

947

8840

Vaccination of people aged 50 yrs and above

340

2908

Vaccination of people aged 60 yrs and above

449

5342

Figure 20: Fatalities and hospitalisations (including critical cases) under scenarios of no
vaccination, vaccination of people 50 years and above from Feb 1 and vaccination of people
60 years and above from Feb 1. Numbers shown are for a period of 6 months after Feb 1.

Figure 21: Simulated number of daily fatalities under scenarios of no vaccination, vaccinating
people aged 50 years and above, and 60 years and above on Feb 1. Workplace opening
schedule is set at 5% attendance, May 18 to May 31st, 15% attendance in June, 25% in July,
33% in August, 50% in September and October and fully open November onwards. All the
scenarios include the three festival relaxations.

35

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank our colleague Piyush Srivastava for many useful suggestions that helped our
analysis. We thank Piyush as well as our IISc collaborators R. Sundaresan, P. Patil, N.
Rathod, A. Sarath, S. Sriram, and N. Vaidhiyan for their tireless efforts in developing the
IISc-TIFR Simulation model [3] and their key role in our earlier report on Mumbai [9].
We thank Mrs. Ashwini Bhide, AMC, MCGM for her insights and for her crucial data
inputs. We also thank Bhaskaran Raman for his critical inputs on the socio-economic effects
of prolonged non-pharmaceutical interventions. We thank Siddarth Raman, a volunteer at
BMC, for his help with data.
Authors acknowledge support of the Department of Atomic Energy, Government of India,
to TIFR under project no. 12-R&D-TFR-5.01-0500. RS is also supported by the Ramanujan
Fellowship of DST. We also acknowledge the support of A.T.E. Chandra Foundation for this
research.
R EFERENCES
[1] Government of Maharashtra, “Easing of restrictions and phase-wise opening of lockdown. (Mission Begin
Again),” No. DMU/2020/CR. 92/DisM-1, Aug. 2020, available at https://twitter.com/CMOMaharashtra/status/
1300420569863659522.
[2] A. Malani, D. Shah, G. Kang, G. N. Lobo, J. Shastri, M. Mohanan, R. Jain, S. T. Agrawal, S. Juneja, S. Imad,
and U. Kolthur-Seetharam, “Seroprevalence of SARS-CoV-2 in slums and non-slums of Mumbai, india, during June
29–July 19, 2020,” Aug. 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.08.27.20182741v1
[3] S. Agrawal, S. Bhandari, A. Bhattacharjee, A. Deo, N. Dixit, P. Harsha, S. Juneja, P. Kesarwani, A. Swamy, P. Patil,
N. Rathod, R. Saptharishi, S. Shriram, P. Srivastava, R. Sundaresan, N. K. Vaidhiyan, and S. Yasodharan, “City-scale
agent-based simulators for the study of non-pharmaceutical interventions in the context of the covid-19 epidemic,”
Aug. 2020. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2008.04849
[4] P. Harsha, S. Juneja, and R. Saptharishi, “Covid-19 epidemic in mumbai: Long term projections, full economic opening,
and containment zones versus contact tracing and testing,” Preprint, http:// www.tcs.tifr.res.in/ ∼sandeepj/ avail papers/
Mumbai September Report.pdf , 2020.
[5] A. Malani, D. Shah, G. Kang, G. Lobo, J. Shastri, M. Mohanan, R. Jain, S. Agrawal, S. Juneja, S. Imad, and U. KolthurSeetharam, “Seroprevalence of SARS-CoV-2 in slums and non-slums of Mumbai, India, during June 29-July 19, 2020,”
medRxiv, 2020.
[6] “District Census Handbook 2011 - Mumbai,” https://censusindia.gov.in/2011census/dchb/DCHB A/27/2723 PART
A DCHB MUMBAI.pdf, 2014.
[7] “District Census Handbook 2011 - Suburban Mumbai,” https://censusindia.gov.in/2011census/dchb/DCHB A/27/2722
PART A DCHB MUMBAI%20SUBURBAN.pdf, 2014.
[8] WHO, “Q&A: Considerations for the cleaning and disinfection of environmental surfaces in the context
of covid-19 in non-health care settings,” May 2020, available at https://www.who.int/news-room/q-a-detail/
q-a-considerations-for-the-cleaning-and-disinfection-of-environmental-surfaces-in-the-context-of-covid-19-in-non-health-care-settings.

36

[9] P. Harsha, S. Juneja, P. Patil, N. Rathod, R. Saptharishi, A. Sarath, S. Sriram, P. Srivastava, R. Sundaresan, and
N. Vaidhiyan, “Covid-19 epidemic study ii: Phased emergence from the lockdown in mumbai,” Jun. 2020. [Online].
Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2006.03375
[10] R. Laxminarayan, B. Wahl, S. R. Dudala, K. Gopal, C. Mohan, S. Neelima, K. S. Jawahar Reddy, J. Radhakrishnan,
and J. A. Lewnard, “Epidemiology and transmission dynamics of COVID-19 in two Indian states,” Science, 2020.
[Online]. Available: https://science.sciencemag.org/content/early/2020/09/29/science.abd7672
[11] World Health Organisation, “Pulse survey on continuity of essential health services during the COVID19 pandemic: interim report, 27 August 2020,” https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/WHO-2019-nCoV-EHS
continuity-survey-2020.1, 08 2020.
[12] P. H. D. Municipal Corporation of Greater Mumbai, “Census 2011, FAQ Answers,” https://portal.mcgm.gov.in/irj/go/
km/docs/documents/MCGM%20Department%20List/Public%20Health%20Department/Docs/Census%20FAQ%20%
26%20Answer.pdf.
[13] M. R. V. C. Ltd., “Mumbai Sub-urban Rail Passenger Surveys and Analysis,” https://mrvc.indianrailways.gov.in/works/
uploads/File/ExecutiveSummarywilber%20FINAL.pdf, 2013.
[14] R. Verity, L. C. Okell, I. Dorigatti, P. Winskill, C. Whittaker, N. Imai, G. Cuomo-Dannenburg, H. Thompson, P. G.
Walker, H. Fu et al., “Estimates of the severity of coronavirus disease 2019: a model-based analysis,” The Lancet
Infectious Diseases, 2020.
[15] “BMC COVID-19 Response War Room Dashboard,” http://stopcoronavirus.mcgm.gov.in/assets/docs/Dashboard.pdf,
04 2020.
[16] N. Ferguson, D. Laydon, G. Nedjati Gilani, N. Imai, K. Ainslie, M. Baguelin, S. Bhatia, A. Boonyasiri, Z. Cucunuba Perez, G. Cuomo-Dannenburg et al., “Report 9: Impact of non-pharmaceutical interventions (NPIs) to reduce
COVID19 mortality and healthcare demand,” Tech. Report, 2020.
[17] “Maharashtra stop testing dead bodies to ease painful delays for kin,” https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/mumbai/
maharashtra-stops-testing-bodies-says-will-ease-painful-delays-for-kin/articleshow/76474747.cms, 06 2020.

