Virufy: Global
Applicability of
Crowdsourced and
Clinical Datasets for AI
Detection of COVID-19
from Cough
Gunvant Chaudhari, Xinyi Jiang, Ahmed Fakhry, Asriel
Han, Jaclyn Xiao, Sabrina Shen, Amil Khanzada​1

Abstract—
​ Rapid and affordable methods of testing for
COVID-19 infections are essential to reduce infection rates and
prevent medical facilities from becoming overwhelmed. Current
approaches of detecting COVID-19 require in-person testing with
expensive kits that are not always easily accessible. This study
demonstrates that crowdsourced cough audio samples recorded
and acquired on smartphones from around the world can be used
to develop an AI-based method that accurately predicts
COVID-19 infection with an ROC-AUC of 77.1%
(75.2%-78.3%). Furthermore, we show that our method is able to
generalize to crowdsourced audio samples from Latin America
and clinical samples from South Asia, without further training
using the specific samples from those regions. As more
crowdsourced data is collected, further development can be
implemented using various respiratory audio samples to create a
cough analysis-based machine learning (ML) solution for
COVID-19 detection that can likely generalize globally to all
demographic groups in both clinical and non-clinical settings.
Impact Statement — With the spread of COVID-19, more
than 73M COVID-19 cases have been found across the world. At
the same time, the clinical diagnosis of COVID-19 can be time
exhaustive and financially expensive for people, especially those
in distant areas where COVID-19 clinical resources are limited.
The ML model we introduce in this paper attempts to mediate
this issue by presenting a system for detecting COVID-19
infection using cough audio recordings. Our model shows that it
can be generalized to audio samples from other sources with the
current training datasets. With an ROC-AUC of 77.1%, the
technology can be utilized by people from different regions.
Specifically, the Virufy model could offer an initial screening
process for COVID-19 that individuals can access directly from
1
The code and data used in this paper can be found:
https://github.com/virufy/covid​.
Gunvant Chaudhari is with the Virufy AI Research Group and University
of California San Francisco, School of Medicine.
Xinyi Jiang is with the Virufy AI Research Group.
Ahmed Fakhry is with the Virufy AI Research Group and University of
Alexandria.
Asriel Han is with the Virufy AI Research Group and Stanford University.
Jaclyn Xiao is with the Virufy AI Research Group and Duke University.
Sabrina Shen is with the Virufy AI Research Group and Harvey Mudd
University.
Amil Khanzada is with the Virufy AI Research Group and Stanford
University (e-mail: ​amil@virufy.ai​).

their smartphones. This model would provide a cheap and free
suggestion for those who do not have the resources necessary for
COVID testing.
Index Terms​—Artificial Intelligence in Health, Accountable
Artificial Intelligence, Neural Networks, Machine Learning

I.

I​NTRODUCTION

As of December 16th, 2020, there were more than 73M
cases of COVID-19 worldwide [1]. Widespread testing and
isolation of individuals infected with COVID-19 is necessary
to control infection rates and optimize healthcare resources
[2]. The current gold standard of Reverse Transcription
Polymerase Chain Reaction (RT-PCR) testing requires person
to person contact to administer, has variable turnaround time,
is expensive, and not easily accessible for the global
population[3]. With cases still increasing and vaccine approval
and distribution still on the horizon, accessible and affordable
testing is critical to limit the pandemic.
Artificial Intelligence (AI) algorithms can be a powerful
tool for a preliminary indication of a person’s COVID-19
status and have been developed to accurately predict
COVID-19 infection from smartphone-acquired cough sounds.
With smartphone usage high and continually rising in
developing countries, these devices are an ideal platform for a
widespread low-cost collection of respiratory audio recordings
and for implementing audio-based COVID-19 testing.
A variety of COVID-19 cough recording datasets have been
collected by various groups and used to train machine learning
models for COVID-19 detection. However, each of these
models has been trained on data of a variety of formats and
recording settings. While some, such as Coswara, collect
additional counting and vowel recordings [9], others gather
cough recordings exclusively [10]. Furthermore, these datasets
come from various sources, such as clinical setting recorded
data [10], crowdsourcing [9], and extraction from public
media interviews [11]. Recordings utilize different
compression formats and so far, no formal standard for
gathering COVID-19 cough data has yet been defined.
Variations of sources, contents and formats of datasets present
a significant challenge for the ML model developers.
Research groups have explored the prediction of COVID-19
status from cough sounds, but there is still doubt about the
generalizability of such models across various environments
and collection methods. The largest obstacle to
implementation of machine learning algorithms is their
reliability on unseen data [8]. Therefore, a globally deployable
ML solution needs to be trained and tested on global data to
ensure high performance in all locations and situations. We
present the first study showing generalizability of a
multimodal deep learning model in detecting COVID-19
status on crowdsourced and clinical cough datasets from
around the world, using five distinct datasets from multiple
sources. As shown in Fig. 1 below, our approach consists of
collecting coughs and demographics information using
smartphones, extracting features, and using our ensemble

ML-model to predict COVID-19 status.
Our group, Virufy, is uniting the world to build a global
artificial intelligence database of crowdsourced cough sounds
to identify patterns that signify respiratory diseases such as
COVID-19. The authors of this paper are current students and
alumni from various institutions who have come together to
tackle the pandemic.

Fig. 1. Overview of our proposed cough-based COVID-19 detection system.
After recordings are collected from the mobile app, the related audio features
are extracted and fed into our ML model to generate probabilities of whether
the person recording cough/speech is infected with COVID-19 or not.

II.

B​ACKGROUND

The clinical presentation of COVID-19 can be highly
variable, but multiple common symptoms of the illness impact
the human airway and lungs [4, 5]. Dry cough is a distinctive
feature of most cases along with more severe symptoms such
as pneumonia and ground-glass opacities [5]. Because of the
virus’s effects on the respiratory system, COVID-19 has been
theorized to create unique audio signatures that are distinct
from those associated with other respiratory infections. Thus,
sounds such as coughing could be analyzed to detect the
illness. Although these differences are difficult or impossible
to detect with the human ear, ML algorithms have already
shown promise in classifying cough sounds to identify
respiratory diseases including pertussis, asthma, and
pneumonia by using various audio features [6,7].
Various groups across the world have been focused on
collecting copious high-quality data to train cough-based
machine learning models, including Cambridge University in
England, Carnegie Mellon University and the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology (MIT) in the US, and Afeka College
of Engineering in Israel. Others, such as Coswara, are focused
on gathering large datasets of cough and various other human
audio sounds [9]. In addition to our open dataset, Coughvid
and Coswara have also open-sourced their datasets [9,10].
Work done by Cambridge University [12] and MIT [13]
shows the potential of ML to detect a COVID-19 infection
status. Cambridge uses mel-frequency cepstral coefficients
(MFCC) and other audio statistics, such as duration, onset and
zero-crossing and VGG features such as starting features [13].
The features are then further processed by Principal
Component Analysis and used as input to a simple binary
classifier [13]. The researchers are able to achieve an AUC of
0.82 but their dataset only has a size of 86 coughs [13].
Another approach includes using mel-Spectrogram as input to

the model. A pre-trained deep convolutional neural network,
ResNet-18 [16], is used and ensembles of both shallow and
deep networks are explored [14]. The model is also pretrained
on a larger dataset using cough/non-cough labels and
techniques, such as noise augmentation, audio segmentation
and time and frequency masking, are applied [14]. Both
models have shown promising preliminary results in the
COVID-19 classification task on Cambridge’s own dataset
[13] and, independently, in the Coswara dataset [9]. MIT
researchers, who created a model with significant performance
improvement, utilized a biomarker layer with ResNet-50 [16]
based models [14]. Their best performing model inputs
mel-frequency cepstral coefficients (MFCC) and uses transfer
learning to output three separate biomarkers to be used as
inputs to the three parallel ResNet-50 convolutional neural
networks [14].
However, research published to date shows results restricted
to datasets which are often not open-source, so it is difficult to
judge the ability of these models to identify COVID-19 using
arbitrary cough recordings. Especially in the case of using
crowdsourced data as testing data where the audio samples are
recorded from various environments usually with background
noise, models trained on clinical data have a high possibility
of not being able to generalize. In addition, prior research
highlights the importance of using transfer learning and
pretraining to enlarge the training data size, because the size of
a single dataset may not be big enough to train deep neural
networks. In this paper, we show that our model can adapt to
enlarged training and testing datasets from various sources.
III.
A.

M​ETHODS

Crowdsourced COVID-19 Training Data
We trained a deep neural network using the openly
available Coswara (n=1,543) and Coughvid (n=20,072)
datasets of cough sounds, with COVID status labels. From the
Coswara datasets, samples with ‘covid-status’ of
‘positive_mild’, ‘positive_moderate’, and ‘positive_asymp’
were classified in the positive class (n=1,334), and all other
statuses were classified as negative (n=98). Only shallow
cough files were used. All were uncompressed audio files.
From the Coughvid dataset, samples with the ‘COVID-19
Positive’ label were classified in the positive class (n=441)
and 1,000 other random samples were selected to be in the
negative class to maintain data balance. The distribution of
this data is shown in Fig. 2 below.

Fig. 2. Distribution of samples in the training dataset. PCR negative labels
were not clearly indicated in either crowdsourced dataset. The Coswara
dataset shows a heavy skew with mostly negative data.

B.

Virufy Test Datasets

To verify our model’s performance beyond the Coswara and
Coughvid crowdsourced data, we compiled two additional
datasets with more detailed labels. All data had COVID-19
PCR labels and was acquired in conditions that were meant to
simulate real-world usage. Audio files were a mixture of
compressed and uncompressed files (e.g. wav and mp3 files)
depending on the mode of data acquisition. We addressed
potential privacy risks and security threats through localized
privacy policies and patient consent forms, along with a Data
Protection Impact Assessment (DPIA) and several internal
information security policies.
1)

Virufy Latin American Crowdsourced Test Dataset
To mimic one potential use case of COVID-19 detection
from cough by smartphone users in the general public,
samples used within the models were crowdsourced using the
Virufy mobile data collection app (Fig. 1). For our analysis,
we considered n=178 smartphone-recorded coughs from Peru,
Brazil, and Colombia. Each cough sample was accompanied
with specific labels of COVID-19 status based on PCR and
antibody testing, demographics, past medical history, current
symptoms, and a corresponding speech sample of counting
from 1 to 10 (A.2). After excluding untested individuals and
samples with poor audio quality, n=32 samples of
PCR-negative and -positive individuals were aggregated to
evaluate our algorithm’s generalizability (Table. I).
2)

Virufy South Asian Clinical Test Datasets
To determine performance of a COVID-19 detection
algorithm in a busy clinical setting, we also collected samples
in hospital clinics using smartphones. The explicit patient

consent forms electronically accepted by all patients were
originally drafted by Virufy clinical researchers and reviewed
by our medical advisors. The data was captured directly from
patients under the hospitals’ Institutional Review Board (IRB)
approved clinical research study protocols.
We collected Clinical dataset 1 from a South Asian
hospital clinic from 04/13/2020 to 05/21/2020. It consists of
cough recordings and labels from a total of 362 unique
patients. Personal protective equipment and strict sanitation
procedures were used to prevent disease transmission during
this data acquisition. All patients were also simultaneously
PCR tested for COVID-19 infection. Other demographics,
medical history, and current symptoms information were also
recorded (A.2).
As this data was acquired in a busy clinic, many
samples had background noise, including clinician
conversations, equipment sounds, ambient environmental
noise, and vehicular traffic. In a manual survey of 50 random
samples, 41 (82%) samples had at least one instance of
distinctive noise.
We collected Clinical dataset 2 at a second hospital in
a different country in South Asia from patients who had been
PCR tested for COVID-19 with the same data points as in
dataset 1. The data was collected from patients being screened
at the fever clinic as well as from COVID-19 general and ICU
wards.
These datasets were collected from a variety of
smartphone types with different audio sampling frequencies,
compression artifacts, and background noises.
C.

Audio and Clinical Features
We used multiple features from the crowdsourced datasets
to train our network. After searching on various features and
architectures using grid search, we found that an ensemble
model of three features with the following parameters showed
the best performance. The first feature was mel-frequency
cepstral coefficients (MFCCs), a commonly used audio feature
derived from the short-term power spectrum [17]. Each cough
audio file was resampled to 22.5 kHz and the first 39 MFCCs
were extracted using the librosa package [18], with a sampling
rate of 22.5 kHz, hop length of 23ms, window length of 93ms,
and a Hann window type. Outputs were averaged across the
time-axis to yield mean 39 MFCCs features for each audio
file.
The next extracted feature is the mel-frequency
spectrogram, another common audio feature. Though MFCCs
are derived from the spectrogram, the spectrogram encodes
raw power information without any transformations.
Spectrograms were extracted using the librosa package with
the same parameters as for the MFCCs and interpolated to size
(64,64).
Beyond audio files, each sample also contained
additional rich information that has potential to enhance
prediction accuracy. We chose to add two additional features
for each cough file that reflect the clinical picture of the
patient. Detectable changes in cough sounds have been shown
to occur with diseases other than COVID-19 [19]. Therefore, a
binary label about the presence or absence of current
respiratory diseases was aggregated to feed into our algorithm
as one extra feature. Next, COVID-19 also presents with other

symptoms than cough, with some of the most common being
fever and myalgia (muscle pain) [20]. The presence or absence
of these symptoms may also impact the probability of having
COVID-19. To develop as accurate a model as possible, a
second binary label of fever or myalgia status was also
aggregated from all datasets and fed into the model as a
second extra feature. The distribution of each of these two
extra features is shown in Fig. 3 below.

convolutional neural network with the mel-spectrogram image
as input of size (64,64,1). It consists of three 2D convolution
layers, with a kernel size of 3 and a stride size of 2 for the first
convolution layer and a kernel size of 3 and a stride size of 1
for the rest two convolution layers, each followed by a 2D
average pooling, a batch normalization, and a ReLU
activation. The last network is for each sample’s two extra
features of fever/myalgia and respiratory conditions. Similar
to the first network, it consists of two hidden layers with
ReLU activations, each followed by a dropout layer. Outputs
from each network were aggregated, fed through two
additional hidden layers, each followed by a ReLU activation
function, and combined into a final sigmoid output decision
layer.
The ensemble network was trained using cross
entropy loss, an Adam optimizer, and learning rate of 0.001.
The training data was randomly split into train-validation-test
datasets using a 70-15-15 split. Every experiment was
repeated five times, each with a different random data split.
The mean statistical values and 95% confidence intervals are
reported, unless otherwise specified.
IV.

Fig. 3. Distribution of extra features in training set (n=3349). Fever/myalgia
and medical history of respiratory disease were aggregated into two extra
features. This figure shows the distributions for negative and positive samples
separately for all patterns of these features.

D.

Ensembled Deep Neural Networks

After experimentation with 1D and 2D CNNs, LSTM, and
CRNN architectures, the best performing network was an
ensemble of 3 separate networks whose structure and
hyperparameters were fine-tuned using grid search to
minimize overfitting. Outputs from each network were
aggregated to predict the probability of having COVID-19
(Fig. 4 below).

Fig. 4. Ensemble Model Structure.

The first network is for the MFCCs with input size of
(39,) and consists of two hidden layers with ReLU activation,
each followed by a dropout layer. The second network is a

R​ESULTS

Table. II contains the test results on the four test datasets
that are discussed above. We used both accuracy and Area
under the ROC Curve (AUC) as evaluation metrics. As the
data is unbalanced, we believe that AUC would be a better
presentation of how the model is working. The model is robust
enough that the test results on the Virufy Crowdsourced
dataset, Clinical Dataset 1 and Clinical Dataset 2 are not
significantly impacted by the change of the dataset. As the
datasets are a mixture of compressed and uncompressed files
and the compression downgrades the audio quality, a decrease
in performance was expected. However, the Virufy
Crowdsourced dataset and the Clinical Dataset 2 have both
shown AUC results higher than 0.7, indicating that the model
is generalizable to all four test datasets. The Clinical Dataset 1
demonstrates an AUC of 0.59, which correlates with the fact
that the samples are noisy compared to the others but also
shows promise in extremely noisy samples. Fig. 5 below
illustrates the ROC curves of results on the four test datasets,
which further confirms that our model generalizes to different
datasets.

Fig. 5. ROC curves show high transfer learning of model to outside
crowdsourced and clinical data. ROC curves of Virufy Crowdsourced Dataset,
the Coswara/Coughvid subset, Clinical Dataset 1, and Clinical Dataset 2 are
compared.

To prove our model is able to distinguish the difference
between coughs from COVID-19 patients and normal coughs,
we conducted a t-test on the AUC scores with the null
hypothesis that the model can’t differentiate between
COVID-19 and non-COVID-19 recordings at a confidence
level of 95%. Table. II shows all the P-Values calculated with
the four test datasets and all of them show a result smaller than
𝛼​ = 0.05. As exhibited, our tests have shown evidence that
there is a significant statistical difference for all our datasets.
V.

C​ONCLUSIONS​ ​AND​ D​ISCUSSION

Using relevant audio features, the ensemble deep learning
model was successful in identifying COVID-19 positive
patients. We verified that a crowdsourced approach to
collecting data can yield an accurate COVID-19 detection
algorithm from cough. Since crowdsourced data is publicly
available, we anticipate future work to build on our deep
learning approaches and results.
We also demonstrate that our detection algorithm
maintains its performance on external crowdsourced and
clinical datasets which were collected using slightly different
instructions in environments that were less than ideal and at
different stages of infection. This demonstration gives
credence to the hypothesis that COVID-19 can be reliably
detected from cough sounds, as the virus signature appears to
generalize.
Recording cough samples with no audio pollution in
a clinical setting, especially in underserved countries, is not
easily accomplished. In this study, we demonstrate that a
cough-based COVID-19 detection algorithm can perform
adequately well on noisy clinical data like our Clinical Dataset

2 (AUC=0.72), but has some limitations as demonstrated by
its performance on Clinical Dataset 1 (AUC=0.59). We aim to
continue technical work on improving performance on noisy
data, with the hope that the eventual algorithm will work on
cough data with often unavoidable background noise from
hospital wards.
A limitation of this study is sample size: the datasets
with detailed labels we selected for this study were not large
enough to train the best performing algorithm or to conduct
thorough subgroup and longitudinal analyses. To improve the
performance of future machine learning algorithms, Virufy
intends to collect larger quantities of high-quality cough data
around the world to represent a wide range of ethnicities and
community-specific
phonological
differences
across
populations. Most existing crowdsourced COVID-19 audio
data collection efforts have been focused in Asia, Europe, and
the United States. Although Latin America currently has
among the highest rates of COVID-19 globally and accounts
for 17.3% of current COVID-19 infections at the time of
writing this manuscript [21], less than 5% of openly available
cough samples are from Latin America [9,10]. We aim to
continue our efforts for targeted data collection in Latin
America to prevent the exclusion of this community from an
ML-based solution.
However, most current approaches of data collection
do not adequately account for variability, such as various
settings, COVID-19 status labels, past medical history, and
stage and severity of COVID disease. As COVID-19 has a
highly variable presentation, including various combinations
of anosmia, fever, asymptomatic low oxygen saturation,
pneumonia, conjunctivitis, and heart injury [22,23], it is an
open question whether any cough-based machine learning
algorithm will be equally accurate for the entire spectrum of
manifestations. However, a well-validated COVID-19
detection algorithm from cough has broad global applicability
and can be instrumental in controlling the spread of the
disease.
VI.

F​UTURE​ ​WORK

A key challenge of clinical COVID-19 diagnosis is that its
symptoms mimic those of other common respiratory,
pulmonary, and cardiac conditions [24]. Therefore, further
sub-analyses testing is necessary to determine the ability of
machine learning algorithms to distinguish COVID-19 from
other illnesses, such as non-COVID-19 pneumonia,
upper/lower respiratory infections, asthma, and chronic lung
disease exacerbations [19].
We are currently conducting longitudinal crowdsourced
studies and clinical studies across various countries. Our goal
is to train a machine learning algorithm with more information
about human respiratory sound features, including cough and
speech, both before symptom onset and over the course of
COVID-19 infection. After gathering more audio data in
association with PCR and evolving in vitro COVID-19
diagnostics, demographics, and disease course labels, we
intend to conduct thorough sub-analyses that can validate an
ML solution’s performance in a multitude of conditions and

demographic groups. As our current models are relatively
shallow, we plan to develop deeper models as we collect more
data from various contexts.
Although many groups worldwide are collecting various
respiratory audio data with COVID-19 labels [9-15], at the
time of this writing, most data is not openly available. To our
knowledge, only Coswara [9] and Coughvid [10] have
released open crowdsourced datasets, while only Virufy has
released open clinical data. This confidentiality among groups
working on the same technical challenge has hampered
collaboration, reproducibility of results, and development of a
widely available solution. Moving forward, broad
collaboration and data sharing could promote the rapid
development of AI-based COVID-19 detection tools.
To facilitate that effort, Virufy aims to establish a global
consortium, bringing together research groups from around the
world to share knowledge and datasets to build and rapidly
refine AI algorithms to address the COVID-19 pandemic.
A​PPENDIX
A.

Data Global distribution of training data (n=2748)
The crowdsourced datasets we used had cough samples
from all around the world. Graph A below depicts this
distribution for the subset of our training data that had location
labels. The vast majority of Coswara dataset samples were
from India, and most Coughvid dataset ones were from
Europe and the United States. Notably, fewer samples were
from Latin American and African countries. Fig. 6 and Fig. 7
below shows the number of samples from the top 20 countries.

Fig. 5. Country of origins distributions.

Fig. 6. Distribution Map.

B.

Detailed Characteristics of Test Datasets
Table. III contains several demographic and medical
characteristics for the three test datasets used to show model
generalizability. People may have several symptoms and
medical conditions. (n.c. = not collected)
A​CKNOWLEDGMENT
We are very grateful to Kara Meister, M.D., Stanford
University Clinical Assistant Professor of Otolaryngology, and
Mary L. Dunne, M.D., Stanford University Distinguished
Career Institute Fellow, for their kind guidance on our clinical
data collection procedures and analysis.
We are indebted to Dr. Jure Leskovec, Associate Professor
of Computer Science at Stanford University, and Dr. Rok
Sosic for their guidance on crowdsourcing and academic
collaboration in the AI domain.
We appreciate Siddhi Hedge and Shreya Sriram for their
amazing enthusiasm and hard work in facilitating clinical
cough data collection from COVID-19 tested patients.
Furthermore, we thank the Coswara and Coughvid
groups for open sourcing their COVID-19 datasets. We also
thank everyone who has contributed their cough data to
Virufy.

R​EFERENCES
[1]“Coronavirus (COVID-19),” ​Google News.​
https://news.google.com/covid19/map?hl=en-US&gl=US&ceid=US:en
(accessed Dec. 14, 2020).
[2]CDC, “Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19),” ​Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention,​ Feb. 11, 2020.
https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/hcp/non-us-settings/overview/
index.html (accessed Dec. 14, 2020).
[3]B. Udugama ​et al.,​ “Diagnosing COVID-19: The Disease and Tools for
Detection,” ​ACS Nano​, vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 3822–3835, Apr. 2020, doi:
10.1021/acsnano.0c02624.
[4]M. C. Grant ​et al.,​ “The prevalence of symptoms in 24,410 adults infected
by the novel coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2; COVID-19): A systematic review
and meta-analysis of 148 studies from 9 countries,” ​PLOS ONE,​ vol. 15,
no. 6, p. e0234765, Jun. 2020, doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0234765.
[5]A. Mahashur, “Chronic dry cough: Diagnostic and management
approaches,” ​Lung India,​ vol. 32, no. 1, p. 44, Jan. 2015, doi:
10.4103/0970-2113.148450.
[6]R. X. A. Pramono, S. A. Imtiaz, and E. Rodriguez-Villegas, “A
Cough-Based Algorithm for Automatic Diagnosis of Pertussis,” ​PLOS
ONE​, vol. 11, no. 9, p. e0162128, Sep. 2016, doi:
10.1371/journal.pone.0162128.
[7]Y. Amrulloh, U. Abeyratne, V. Swarnkar, and R. Triasih, “Cough Sound
Analysis for Pneumonia and Asthma Classification in Pediatric
Population,” in ​Modelling and Simulation 2015 6th International
Conference on Intelligent Systems​, Feb. 2015, pp. 127–131, doi:
10.1109/ISMS.2015.41.
[8]M. M. Najafabadi, F. Villanustre, T. M. Khoshgoftaar, N. Seliya, R. Wald,
and E. Muharemagic, “Deep learning applications and challenges in big
data analytics,” ​J. Big Data​, vol. 2, no. 1, p. 1, Feb. 2015, doi:
10.1186/s40537-014-0007-7.
[9]N. Sharma ​et al.,​ “Coswara -- A Database of Breathing, Cough, and Voice
Sounds for COVID-19 Diagnosis,” ​ArXiv200510548 Cs Eess,​ Aug. 2020,
Accessed: Dec. 14, 2020. [Online]. Available:
http://arxiv.org/abs/2005.10548.
[10]
L. Orlandic, T. Teijeiro, and D. Atienza, “The COUGHVID
crowdsourcing dataset: A corpus for the study of large-scale cough analysis
algorithms,” ​ArXiv200911644 Cs Eess​, Sep. 2020, Accessed: Nov. 11,
2020. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/2009.11644.
[11]
M. Cohen-McFarlane, R. Goubran, and F. Knoefel, “Novel
Coronavirus Cough Database: NoCoCoDa,” ​IEEE Access,​ vol. 8, pp.
154087–154094, 2020, doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2020.3018028.
[12]
C. Brown ​et al.,​ “Exploring Automatic Diagnosis of COVID-19
from Crowdsourced Respiratory Sound Data,” in ​Proceedings of the 26th
ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data
Mining,​ New York, NY, USA, Aug. 2020, pp. 3474–3484, doi:
10.1145/3394486.3412865.
[13]
J. Laguarta, F. Hueto, and B. Subirana, “COVID-19 Artificial
Intelligence Diagnosis using only Cough Recordings,” ​IEEE Open J. Eng.
Med. Biol.,​ pp. 1–1, 2020, doi: 10.1109/OJEMB.2020.3026928.
[14]
P. Bagad ​et al.​, “Cough Against COVID: Evidence of COVID-19
Signature in Cough Sounds,” ​ArXiv200908790 Cs Eess,​ Sep. 2020,
Accessed: Nov. 11, 2020. [Online]. Available:
http://arxiv.org/abs/2009.08790.
[15]
S. Hershey ​et al.​, “CNN architectures for large-scale audio
classification,” in ​2017 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics,
Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP),​ Mar. 2017, pp. 131–135, doi:
10.1109/ICASSP.2017.7952132.
[16]
K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep Residual Learning for
Image Recognition,” in ​2016 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition (CVPR),​ Jun. 2016, pp. 770–778, doi:
10.1109/CVPR.2016.90.
[17]
S. W. Davis and P. Mermelstein, “Comparison of Parametric
Representations for Monosyllabic Word Recognition in Continuously
Spoken Se,” 1980, doi: 10.1109/TASSP.1980.1163420.
[18]
B. McFee ​et al.,​ “librosa: Audio and Music Signal Analysis in
Python,” ​Proc. 14th Python Sci. Conf.​, pp. 18–24, 2015, doi:
10.25080/Majora-7b98e3ed-003.
[19]
J. Korpás, J. Sadlonová, and M. Vrabec, “Analysis of the cough
sound: an overview,” ​Pulm. Pharmacol.​, vol. 9, no. 5–6, pp. 261–268, Dec.
1996, doi: 10.1006/pulp.1996.0034.
[20]
S. A. Gómez-Ochoa ​et al.​, “COVID-19 in Health-Care Workers: A
Living Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of Prevalence, Risk Factors,

Clinical Characteristics, and Outcomes,” ​Am. J. Epidemiol.​, no. kwaa191,
Sep. 2020, doi: 10.1093/aje/kwaa191.
[21]
E. Dong, H. Du, and L. Gardner, “An interactive web-based
dashboard to track COVID-19 in real time,” ​Lancet Infect. Dis.​, vol. 20, no.
5, pp. 533–534, 2020, doi: 10.1016/S1473-3099(20)30120-1.
[22]
S. Zaim, J. H. Chong, V. Sankaranarayanan, and A. Harky,
“COVID-19 and Multiorgan Response,” ​Curr. Probl. Cardiol.,​ vol. 45, no.
8, p. 100618, Aug. 2020, doi: 10.1016/j.cpcardiol.2020.100618.
[23]
L. Loffredo, F. Pacella, E. Pacella, G. Tiscione, A. Oliva, and F.
Violi, “Conjunctivitis and COVID-19: A meta-analysis,” ​J. Med. Virol.,​
vol. 92, no. 9, pp. 1413–1414, 2020, doi:
https://doi.org/10.1002/jmv.25938.
[24]
K. K. Sahu, A. K. Mishra, K. Martin, and I. Chastain, “COVID-19
and clinical mimics. Correct diagnosis is the key to appropriate therapy,”
Monaldi Arch. Chest Dis.,​ vol. 90, no. 2, Art. no. 2, May 2020, doi:
10.4081/monaldi.2020.1327.

TABLE I
T​ABLE​ ​FOR​ ​TEST​ ​DATA​ ​DISTRIBUTION

Composition of label distribution and counts of Test Datasets

TABLE II
T​ABLE​ ​FOR​ ​EXPERIMENT​ ​RESULTS

Experiment Results, including AUC scores, P-Values, Confidence Intervals
(CI) on various datasets: Coswara/Coughvid subset, Virufy Crowdsourced,
Clinical Dataset 1 and Clinical Dataset 2.

TABLE III
T​ABLE​ ​FOR​ ​DEMOGRAPHIC​ ​AND​ ​MEDICAL​ ​DISTRIBUTION

