1

Assessing Road Traffic Safety During COVID-19:
Inequality, Irregularity, and Severity

arXiv:2011.02289v2 [physics.soc-ph] 7 Nov 2020

Lei Lin1 , Feng Shi2 , Weizi Li3

Abstract—COVID-19 is affecting every social sector significantly, including human mobility and subsequently road traffic
safety. In this study, we analyze the impact of the pandemic
on traffic accidents using two cities, namely Los Angeles and
New York City in the U.S., as examples. Specifically, we have
analyzed traffic accidents associated with various demographic
groups, how traffic accidents are distributed in time and space,
and the severity level of traffic accidents that both involve and
do not involve other transportation modes (e.g., pedestrians and
motorists). We have made the following observations: 1) the
pandemic has disproportionately affected certain age groups,
races, and genders; 2) the “hotspots” of traffic accidents have
been shifted in both time and space compared to time periods
that are prior to the pandemic, demonstrating irregularity; and
3) the number of non-fatal accident cases has decreased but the
number of severe and fatal cases of traffic accidents remains the
same under the pandemic.
Index Terms—Traffic Accident, Road Traffic Safety, Human
Mobility, COVID-19, Difference-In-Differences, Kernel Density
Estimation

I. I NTRODUCTION
The novel coronavirus 2019 (COVID-19) has undoubtedly
impacted all aspects of our society [1], [2], with human
mobility taking a big drop due to either voluntary isolation
or governmental stay-at-home orders. A direct consequence
of the reduced human mobility is reduced traffic, and hence
a seemingly straightforward question follows: How is road
safety affected by COVID-19? This simple question turns out
to have conflicting answers.
On one hand, the number of traffic accidents is positively
correlated with the amount of traffic flows [3]. Therefore,
reduced mobility should result in a decreased number of
accidents, which is confirmed by a few recent studies. On the
other hand, researchers and authorities both find that the new
traffic pattern and the pandemic can lead to frequent speeding,
careless driving, and even “revenge driving,” hence worsening
road safety.
Here we take a systematic and data-driven approach to
assessing road traffic safety during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Road traffic safety is one of the most concerning topics in
modern society. The total value of societal damage from motor
vehicle crashes is estimated at $871 billion dollars annually
in the United States [4]. COVID-19 provides a natural experiment that greatly reduces traffic flows, and understanding
how traffic accidents change accordingly will help us design

more effective road safety interventions. Furthermore, similar
to COVID-19 cases which are disproportionately distributed
among different demographic groups [5], the traffic accidents
during COVID-19 are likely to show variations in various
demographic factors, different times of day, and multiple
severity levels. Knowing these variations also sheds a light on
the heterogeneous impacts of COVID-19 and more generally,
the transportation inequity analysis.
Previous studies have mainly focused on descriptive analysis
using traffic accident data and used dates of government orders
as the mobility change-point [6]–[8]. We, instead, use mathematical models and statistical tests analyzing the impact of
the pandemic on road safety based on systematically detected
mobility change-point in two cities: Los Angeles and New
York City. We compare accidents before and after the mobility
change-point using various demographic factors. We analyze
the shift of accident “hotspots” in time and space. We also
study the accident severity both involving and not involving
other transportation modes. We extract three studying periods,
namely 15-day, 30-day, and 60-day, before and after the
mobility change-point to show the evolution of traffic accidents
in terms of both absolute counts and fractions grouped by
the aforementioned factors. In summary, we have made the
following observations:
•

•

•

1 University

of Rochester (E-mail: lei.lin@rechester.edu)
of North Carolina at Chapel Hill (E-mail:
son10@gmail.com)
3 University of Memphis (E-mail: wli@memphis.edu)
2 University

billan•

Although geographically distant, the detected mobility
change-point of both Los Angeles and New York city,
using Google Community Mobility Reports [9], is March
15, 2020.
The pandemic is likely to affect different demographic
groups unequally. We have analyzed the traffic accidents
associated with age, race, and gender, both in terms of
the counts and fractions under the pandemic. In terms
of the age, all age groups except “70–79,” “80–89,” and
“90–99” have significant reductions in accident counts.
The groups “20-29” and “30-39” have the largest reductions. Regarding the fractions, only the groups “10–19,”
“20–29,” and “90–99” in certain studying periods show
significant changes. The largest reduction in fraction is
seen in the youngest group “10–19.”
In terms of race, all groups have seen a reduction in
accident counts. The “Asian” group has the lowest reduction but also the lowest daily accident counts, while
the “Hispanic” group has the largest reduction but also
the largest daily accident counts. Analyzing the fraction,
the “White” group is the only group to have a reduction
in all three studying periods.
In terms of gender, we have three groups: “Male”, “Fe-

2

•

•

•

male”, and “Other”. The accident counts of the “Male”
and “Female” groups are reduced, while the “Other”
remains the same. “Female” is the only group that has
reduced accident fractions under the pandemic.
Traffic accident counts have been reduced over most
daytime and evening hours (i.e., between 6AM and
10PM) within 60 days after the mobility change-point.
The fraction analysis shows that the “peak hours” of
traffic accidents have shifted from morning (around 8AM)
and afternoon (around 5PM) rush hours to late-evening
hours (after 7PM).
In addition to time irregularity, we also find spatial
irregularity as the traffic accident hotspots have shifted
from their previous locations to different locations in both
cities under the pandemic.
In terms of severity, for accidents that either involve
or do not involve pedestrians or motorists, the overall
counts are lower after the mobility change-point. However, surprisingly, the fatality counts remain the same,
while the number of “no injury” and “injury” cases are
reduced except for accidents that involve pedestrians. The
fraction analysis shows that within all traffic accidents the
“no injury” cases are proportionally higher than “injury”
cases, but the difference becomes smaller or negligible
60 days after the mobility change-point.
II. R ELATED W ORK

We first review studies that analyze spatial-temporal characteristics of traffic accidents. Following that, we discuss recent
work that assesses the impact of COVID-19 on road traffic
safety.
A. Spatial and Temporal Traffic Accident Analysis
The spatial-temporal analysis of traffic accidents aims to
understand how, where, and when traffic accidents occur so
that preventative actions can be executed to improve road
traffic safety. From the spatial perspective, a group of studies
has focused on identifying accident hotspots, i.e., locations
where accidents occur frequently [10], [11], using various
methods. For example, K-Means clustering algorithm is implemented to discover hotspots of pedestrian-involved crashes
in Honolulu, Hawaii [12]. Community detection algorithm is
adopted to reveal spatial-temporal features of accident hotspots
by first segmenting and then analyzing traffic accident data in
heterogeneous groups [13]. Kernel Density Estimation (KDE),
which can be used to estimate a spatial distribution of traffic
accidents, has also been used for hotspot detection and visualization [14], [15]. Compared to hard clustering algorithms
such as K-Means, KDE can provide the likelihood of an event,
thus modeling the uncertainty of an accident occurring at a
location [14].
From the temporal perspective, many studies have evaluated
the effectiveness of various traffic safety interventions [16]–
[20]. For example, Wahl et al. evaluate the efficacy of installing red light cameras (RLC) at intersections for traffic
management. They find that RLC do not effectively prevent
traffic accidents because of red-light running [17]. Gree et al.

demonstrate the effectiveness of a policy designed to reduce
the number and severity of traffic accidents at London, which
is to impose charges for traveling by car to the central city
during peak hours [19].
B. COVID-19’s Impact on Road Traffic Safety
Due to the lockdown measures to contain and reduce the
spread of COVID-19, domestic travel in the U.S. dropped 71%
in mid April compared to early March, 2020 [21]. Although
the number of accidents is in general positively correlated
with the amount of traffic flows [3], the number of fatalities,
surprisingly, is observed to experience an increase at some
states during this special time [22]. In particular, a report from
the National Safety Council shows that the traffic accident
fatality rate increased by 14% in March 2020 compared to the
same period in 2019 [23].
Besides descriptively analyzing traffic accident rates [3],
[21], [23], other studies have mathematically modeled the
effect of lockdown as a safety intervention [6]–[8]. To provide
some examples, Barnes et al. adopt regression discontinuity
design and find that, in Louisiana, U.S., while the overall
number of accidents is reduced, more accidents are involving
individuals from age 25 to 64, male, and nonwhite drivers [7].
Brodeur et al. use difference-in-differences to evaluate the
impact of Stay-at-Home orders on traffic collisions for five
states in the U.S. and find about 50% reduction in traffic
accidents after the implementation of the orders [8].
The aforementioned studies all assume that people will
adjust their mobility after governments issue guidelines and
orders. However, depending on the study region and spatial granularity (e.g., state-level or nationwide), the mobility
change could have an early response [24]. Currently, there
lacks a systematic approach to detect the mobility changepoint in existing studies and ignoring this aspect may lead
to erroneous analysis of the pandemic’s impact. In addition,
none of the previously mentioned studies has explored the
spatial distribution of accident hotspots during COVID-19,
which knowledge could not only assist in designing more
effective road safety interventions but also shed a light on
transportation inequity analysis.
To overcome the limitations of the existing studies, we
develop a change-point detection algorithm to capture when
people change their mobility patterns in the pandemic. We also
analyze the spatial distribution shift of traffic accidents, before
and after the change-point date. Rigorous statistical tests are
conducted in all our analyses.
III. M ETHODS
In this section, we introduce the main methods adopted in
our analysis.
A. Change-point Detection
Consider a non-stationary time series m = {mt }Tt=1 , which
may have abrupt changes at K unknown time steps 1 < t1 <
t2 < · · · < tK < T . The goal of a change-point detection

3

(a)

(b)

Fig. 1: Daily traffic accident count of (a) Los Angeles and (b) New York City, between January 1 and August 1, 2020. Both
cities have observed a significant deduction in traffic accidents in March.

algorithm is to find these unknown time steps via solving the
following optimization program:
min V (τ ) + βK,
τ

(1)

where β is the weighting factor; τ = {t1 , t2 , · · · , tK } represents the segmentation of the time series. Both τ and K are
unknown and will be identified by the change-point detection
algorithm. V (τ ) is defined as:
V (τ ) =

K
X

c(mtk ..mtk+1 ),

(2)

k=0

where we additionally set t0 = 1 and tK+1 = T ; c(·) is the
cost function that measures the similarity of the elements in
t
the time series segment mtk ..mtk+1 = {mt }tkk+1 . In this study,
we choose c(·) to be the radial basis function [25] and use the
default value of β as set in the ruptures Python package [25].
B. Difference-in-differences Analysis
In order to statistically test the effect of lockdown on traffic
accidents and the heterogeneity across different demographic
groups, we perform difference-in-differences (DID) regression
analyses. The data under study consist of daily accident counts
of various demographic groups. We consider 15 days, 30 days,
and 60 days before and after the detected mobility changepoint as studying periods. In order to control seasonality
patterns of traffic accidents, we also include data over the same
periods in 2019 as the baseline.
Next, we quantify the relationship between daily accident
counts and lockdown for different demographic groups using
the following regression model:
y ∼ year ∗ lockdown ∗ x

(3)

where y denotes daily accident count; year indicates either
2019 or 2020; lockdown indicates whether a day is before
or after the mobility change-point; and x is a demographic

variable (e.g., age, gender, race). Using gender as an example, x can be either Male, Female, or Other in this study.
All three independent variables are categorical. The formula
year ∗ lockdown ∗ x considers not only individual variables
but also their two-way and three-way interactions, i.e., year +
lockdown+x+year×lockdown+· · ·+year×lockdown×x.
Following the convention of categorical variable analysis, the
independent variables are converted into dummy variables, and
the reference category is set to year = 2019, lockdown =
N o, and x = M ale.
The results of the analysis are comprised of the coefficient
of each three-way interaction term, which captures the difference in accident counts before and after the mobility changepoint for each demographic group, subtracting the seasonality
difference in 2019. We also report the confidence intervals
of the coefficients for statistical significance. In general, a
positive (negative) coefficient suggests an increase (decrease)
of accidents with the value indicates the magnitude of change
on average. In particular, if the confidence interval of a
coefficient does not cover 0 or the corresponding p-value
is less than or equal to 0.05, this coefficient is considered
statistically significant; otherwise, insignificant.
As the number of accidents is found to be correlated with
the amount of traffic flows in general and decreasing after
the mobility change-point, we further investigate whether the
number of accidents changes disproportionally across various
demographic groups. Specifically, the dependent variable is
chosen to be either the daily accident count per group, or the
fraction of daily accidents per group among all groups. We also
report the resulting coefficients along with their confidence
intervals.
C. Kernel Density Estimation
To study whether the locations of accidents have shifted as
a result of changes in traffic patterns, we construct spatial
distribution of the accidents by performing kernel density
estimation on the accidents’ locations.

4

Taking the 30-day analysis as an example, we first split the
data into four periods: 30 days before the mobility changepoint in 2020, 30 days after the mobility change-point in 2020,
and the corresponding periods in 2019. The two periods in
2019 serve as baselines to account for any seasonal shift of
accidents’ locations. Next, in each period, we fit the bivariate
normal kernel to the (longitude, latitude) pairs of the accident
data to pursue the estimation.
We provide both qualitative results through visualizing the
resulting distributions and quantitative results in terms of
statistical comparisons of the distributions. In particular, for
the quantitative results, we conduct a global two-sample test on
the accidents’ locations with respect to the integrated squared
error (ISE) between two density functions f1 and f2 [26]:
Z
ISE = (f1 (x) − f2 (x))2 dx,
(4)

Stay-at-Home orders are issued, the daily Google mobility
index, and the number of confirmed COVID-19 cases in Los
Angeles and New York City. As a result, for both cities, the
detected mobility change-point date is March 15, 2020, which
is prior to the announcement of the Stay-at-Home orders.
This result indicates people’s early response to the pandemic,
which coincides with some previous findings for example by
Villas-Boas et al. [24] but contradicts to other findings where
people are observed to adjust their mobility after government
announcing guidelines and orders [2], [29]. The inconsistency
of the mobility change-point at different regions highlights the
necessity of a systematic approach, such as ours, especially
consider the change-point is the cornerstone for assessing the
impact of the pandemic on various social sectors.

where the null hypothesis is H0 : f1 = f2 .

The pandemic is likely to affect different demographic
groups unequally. In this section, we analyze traffic accidents
grouped by various demographic factors, including age, race,
gender, etc., before and after the detected mobility changepoint, i.e., March 15. Two types of studies are conducted: one
associated with traffic accident counts and the other associated
with traffic accident fractions. Three study periods are being
analyzed, namely 15 days, 30 days, and 60 days before and
after the detected mobility change-point in both Los Angeles
and New York City. In order to account for possible seasonal
shifts in traffic accidents, we also use traffic accident data of
both cities during the same time periods in 2019 as references.
All analyses reported in this section are conducted via the DID
method introduced in Sec. III.
Fig. 3(a) shows the analysis results regarding different age
groups. All age groups except “70–79”, “80–89”, and “90–99”
have significant negative coefficients, indicating reductions of
daily traffic accidents in these groups. For seniors older than
70, the coefficient changes are insignificant, showing virtually
no reduction of traffic accidents among them. This may due
to that seniors in general travel less, hence are involved in
fewer accidents regardless of the reduction in overall traffic.
Examining the coefficient magnitudes, the age groups “20-29”
and “30-39” have relatively larger reductions compared to the
other age groups.
The analysis results regarding accident fractions are shown
in Fig. 3(b). The changes of the coefficients are much milder
compared to the analysis results regrading accident counts.
Only the age groups “10–19”, “20–29”, and “90–99” in the 60day analysis (for age group “90–99”, also the 30-day analysis)
show significant changes in fractions. This result indicates
that the ratio of traffic accidents between different age groups
largely remained the same under the pandemic. Nevertheless,
the daily fraction of traffic accidents in the “10–19” group is
the largest and reduced by 3.2%.
Fig. 4 shows the analysis results of traffic accidents grouped
by race. First, all groups, except “Asian”, experience significant reduction after the mobility change-point. Second, the
“Asian” group has the lowest reduction of the coefficients
and also the lowest averaged daily traffic accident counts. In
comparison, the “Hispanic” group has the largest reduction

IV. DATASETS
We use multiple datasets in this study. For detecting the
mobility change-point, we use Google Community Mobility
Reports [9]. The dataset contains daily percentage changes
of traffic with various purposes, including retail, recreation,
grocery, pharmacy, and parks, at different regions. We use the
combined percentages of all traffic as the metric to study the
mobility trend of a region.
Regarding traffic accidents, we use two datasets: one from
Los Angeles [27] and the other from New York City [28].
Fig. 1 shows daily traffic accident counts of both cities
between January 1 and August 1, 2020. We can see that both
cities experience a reduction of traffic accidents in March
2020. Additionally, the dataset of Los Angeles records the
time and location of each accident as well as demographic
attributes such as age, severity, race, and gender. This enables
us to study traffic accidents in different demographic groups.
The studying periods are chosen to be 15 days, 30 days, and
60 days before and after the detected mobility change-point,
i.e., March 15, 2020 (see next section for details). The dataset
of New York City contains the time, location, and severity
level of each accident. The severity is associated with two
transportation modes, namely pedestrian and motorist, at three
levels: no injury, injury, and fatality. Having this information,
we can analyze the impact of COVID-19 on traffic accident
severity. The same studying periods as before are adopted for
analysis.
V. R ESULTS
In this section, we first show the detected mobility changepoints and then discuss our analysis of COVID-19’s impact
on traffic accidents from three perspectives: inequality, irregularity, and severity.
A. Change-point Detection
The change-point detection is conducted via solving the
optimization function defined in Equation 1. Fig. 2 shows
the detected mobility change-point dates, the dates when

B. Inequality

5

(a)

(b)

Fig. 2: Detected mobility change-points, Stay-at-Home order dates, daily new COVID-19 cases, and Google Mobility Index
in (a) Los Angeles and (b) New York City.

(a)

(b)

Fig. 3: The analysis results of traffic accidents by age. In (a), we can see that all age groups except “70–79”, “80–89”, and
“90–99” have significant reductions in accident counts. The groups “20-29” and “30-39” have the largest reductions compared
to the other groups. In (b), we can observe that the changes of fractions are more balanced. Only the groups “10–19”, “20–29”,
and “90–99” in certain studying periods show significant changes. Lastly, the youngest group “10–19” has seen the largest
reduction.

in terms of the coefficients and also the largest averaged daily
traffic accident counts. From the fraction analysis, the “White”
group has a reduction in both the 30-day and 60-day analysis,
while the “Black”, “Hispanic”, and “Others” have an increase
in nearly all studying periods.
The analysis results of daily traffic accidents grouped by
gender are shown in Fig 5. Regarding the accident counts,
both “Male” and “Female” groups have significant reductions.
However, in terms of the fractions, the “Male” group has
increased around 4%, while the “Female” group has decreased
around 5%. This highlights the unbalanced ratio between
different gender groups in traffic accidents under the pandemic.

C. Irregularity
Fig. 6(a) shows the analysis results of daily traffic accident
counts grouped by different hours of the day. For the most
part, the hours between 06:00 and 22:00 have seen significant decreases in terms of averaged daily accident account.
Fig. 6(b) shows the analysis results of daily traffic accident
fractions grouped by different hours of the day. We can see
that the fractions are reduced during the regular morning and
afternoon peak hours such as 08:00, 17:00, and 18:00; while
the fractions after 18:00 are increased. These irregularities
showing mobility patterns persistently deviate from commonly
observed accident patterns over the daytime hours and peak

6

Fig. 4: The analysis results of traffic accidents by race.
First, there exist reductions in accident counts for all groups.
The “Asian” group has the lowest reduction in counts and
the lowest averaged daily traffic counts. In comparison, the
“Hispanic” group has the largest reduction in counts and the
largest averaged daily counts. In terms of the fractions, the
“White” group has a reduction in both the 30-day and 60-day
analysis, while the “Black”, “Hispanic”, and “Others” have an
increase in nearly all studying periods.

hours prior to the pandemic.
In order to test any irregularity of traffic accidents in space,
we conduct Kernel Density Estimation (KDE) over a 30-day
period before and after the detected mobility change-point,
in Los Angeles and New York City, respectively. The 2019
data are also used to account for the seasonal shift of traffic
accident patterns.
The analysis results of Los Angeles are shown in Fig. 7
TOP. There are two main traffic accident hotspots in Los
Angeles prior to the pandemic: one around the Hollywood
area and the other around northern Downtown Los Angeles.
The total monthly traffic accidents are as high as 80 cases.
Some less apparent hotspots are scattered in southern Los
Angeles. In contrast, under the pandemic, the most prominent
hotspot has shifted from northern Los Angeles to southern Los
Angeles, with the number of traffic accidents increased to 110.
The results of New York City are shown in Fig. 7 BOTTOM. Prior to the pandemic, the accident hotspots appear at
Midtown Manhattan and Lower Manhattan. Due to the impact
of the COVID-19, Upper East Side, West Bronx, and southern
Brooklyn now show more traffic accidents.
In addition to the visualization of the KDEs, we conduct the
global two-sample comparison test [26] defined in Equation 4
to quantitatively compare the KDE results. Fig. 8 shows the
p-values of our statistical tests in both cities. The p-values
between the time period after the detected mobility changepoint and all other time periods are significantly lower than the
rest of the p-values, which indicates the corresponding KDE
distributions are different and confirms our qualitative visual
inspection results.
D. Severity
In this section, we report our analysis results of the pandemic’s impact on accident severity. First, Fig. 9(a) shows
that the coefficients of “Fatality” are insignificant over all
three study periods, which implies no change of the fatality
rate in traffic accidents even the total number of accidents
has decreased. In addition, both the “No Injury” and “Injury”
categories have seen a reduction, while the former decreases
more than the latter. Similar patterns are observed in Fig. 9(b)
and Fig. 9(c): the “No Injury” category experiences larger
decreases compared to the “Injury” category, and no change
of the “Fatality” category is observed. The fraction analysis
shows that the no-injury cases in the 15-day and 30-day
analyses are higher than the injury cases. Such a difference
disappears in the 60-day analysis.
VI. C ONCLUSION

Fig. 5: The analysis results of daily traffic accidents by gender.
In terms of the counts, both “Male” and “Female” groups have
significant reductions. However, in terms of the fractions, the
“Male” and “Other” groups have increased around 4%, while
the “Female” group has decreased around 5%.

The ongoing pandemic has significantly impacted every
aspect of our society. In this study, we analyze the influence
of COVID-19 on road traffic safety through the example cities
Los Angeles and New York City. Specifically, we have analyzed traffic accidents associated with different demographic
groups, different times of the day, spatial distribution, and
severity levels of accidents that involve or do not involve
pedestrians and motorists. We have found that 1) the pandemic
has disproportionately affected certain age groups, races, and

7

(a)

(b)

Fig. 6: The analysis results of daily traffic accidents grouped by different hours of the day in Los Angeles. In (a), we can see
that the accident count has reduced over most daytime and evening hours between 06:00 and 22:00. In (b), we can observe that
the traffic accident “peak” hours have shifted from usually morning and afternoon hours to late-evening hours. These results
demonstrate the time irregularity of traffic accidents during COVID-19.

Fig. 7: The KDE results of traffic accidents in Los Angeles (TOP) and New York City (BOTTOM). Four 30-day analyses are
shown before and after the mobility change-point, i.e., March 15, in 2019 and 2020, respectively. In Los Angeles (L.A.), the
accident hotspots have shifted from the Hollywood area and northern L.A. to southern L.A. In New York City, the accident
hotspots have shifted from Midtown and Lower Manhattan to Upper East Side, West Bronx, and southern Brooklyn. These
results have demonstrated the spatial irregularity of traffic accidents under the pandemic.

genders; 2) the accident “hotspots” have been shifted in both
time and space compared to prior-pandemic time periods; and
3) the number of non-fatal accident cases has seen a reduction,
however the number of fatal accident cases remains the same
under the pandemic.
We are mainly interested in exploring two research directions in the future. The first direction is to be able to simulate
traffic accidents under the pandemic. In this way, we can
test safety intervention policies effectively and efficiently. To
facilitate this research direction, we can leverage existing data
processing techniques [30], [31], estimation and prediction
methods [32], [33], and simulation algorithms [34], [35]. The
other research direction is to study when traffic flows are

undergoing a drastic change, how can shared mobility and/or
autonomous vehicles be used to reduce traffic accidents. The
analyses conducted in this study can provide some insights on
how to distribute and allocate new transportation modalities.
The proposed strategies can be evaluated and tested via recent
advances in autonomous driving modeling and simulation [36],
[37].

8

(a)

(b)

Fig. 8: The global two-sample comparison test [26] of our KDE results in two cities. The p-values after the detected mobility
change-point are lower than the p-values of other time periods, indicating the irregularity of traffic accident patterns during
COVID-19.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Fig. 9: The analysis results of accident severity in New York City: (a) accidents that do not involve other transportation modes;
(b) accidents that involve pedestrians; and (c) accidents that involve motorists. For all three cases, the number of no-injury
and injury cases are decreased. However, the number of fatality cases remains the same. The fraction analysis shows that the
no-injury cases are relatively higher than the injury cases, until 60 days after the mobility change-point.

R EFERENCES
[1] G. Bonaccorsi, F. Pierri, M. Cinelli, A. Flori, A. Galeazzi, F. Porcelli,
A. L. Schmidt, C. M. Valensise, A. Scala, W. Quattrociocchi et al.,
“Economic and social consequences of human mobility restrictions
under covid-19,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, vol.
117, no. 27, pp. 15 530–15 535, 2020.
[2] S. Wang, K. Wei, L. Lin, and W. Li, “Spatial-temporal analysis of covid19’s impact on human mobility: the case of the united states,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2010.03707, 2020.
[3] F. Shilling and D. Waetjen, “Special report (update): Impact of covid19
mitigation on numbers and costs of california traffic crashes,” 2020.
[4] L. Blincoe, T. R. Miller, E. Zaloshnja, and B. A. Lawrence, “The
economic and societal impact of motor vehicle crashes, 2010 (revised),”
Tech. Rep., 2015.
[5] “Location data says it all: Staying at home during coronavirus is a luxury,” https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2020/04/03/us/
coronavirus-stay-home-rich-poor.html, 2020, accessed: 2020-04-03.

[6] U. Oguzoglu, “Covid-19 lockdowns and decline in traffic related deaths
and injuries,” 2020.
[7] S. R. Barnes, L.-P. Beland, J. Huh, and D. Kim, “The effect of covid-19
lockdown on mobility and traffic accidents: Evidence from louisiana,”
GLO Discussion Paper, Tech. Rep., 2020.
[8] A. Brodeur, N. Cook, and T. Wright, “On the effects of covid-19 saferat-home policies on social distancing, car crashes and pollution,” 2020.
[9] “COVID-19-community mobility reports,” https://www.google.com/
covid19/mobility/, 2020, accessed: 2020-08-15.
[10] Z. Xie and J. Yan, “Kernel density estimation of traffic accidents in a
network space,” Computers, environment and urban systems, vol. 32,
no. 5, pp. 396–406, 2008.
[11] Y. Kang, N. Cho, and S. Son, “Spatiotemporal characteristics of elderly
population’s traffic accidents in seoul using space-time cube and spacetime kernel density estimation,” PLoS one, vol. 13, no. 5, p. e0196845,
2018.
[12] K. Kim and E. Y. Yamashita, “Using ak-means clustering algorithm to

9

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]

[21]

[22]

[23]

[24]
[25]
[26]

[27]

[28]

[29]

[30]

[31]

[32]

[33]

[34]

examine patterns of pedestrian involved crashes in honolulu, hawaii,”
Journal of advanced transportation, vol. 41, no. 1, pp. 69–89, 2007.
L. Lin, Q. Wang, and A. W. Sadek, “Data mining and complex network algorithms for traffic accident analysis,” Transportation Research
Record, vol. 2460, no. 1, pp. 128–136, 2014.
T. K. Anderson, “Kernel density estimation and k-means clustering to
profile road accident hotspots,” Accident Analysis & Prevention, vol. 41,
no. 3, pp. 359–364, 2009.
B. Romano and Z. Jiang, “Visualizing traffic accident hotspots based
on spatial-temporal network kernel density estimation,” in Proceedings
of the 25th ACM SIGSPATIAL International Conference on Advances in
Geographic Information Systems, 2017, pp. 1–4.
L. S. Robson, “Guide to evaluating the effectiveness of strategies for
preventing work injuries; how to show whether a safety invervention
really works,” 2001.
G. M. Wahl, T. Islam, B. Gardner, A. B. Marr, J. P. Hunt, N. E. McSwain,
C. C. Baker, and J. Duchesne, “Red light cameras: do they change driver
behavior and reduce accidents?” Journal of Trauma and Acute Care
Surgery, vol. 68, no. 3, pp. 515–518, 2010.
E. Missoni, B. Bozic, and I. Missoni, “Alcohol-related road traffic
accidents before and after the passing of the road traffic safety act in
croatia,” Collegium antropologicum, vol. 36, no. 4, pp. 1483–1489, 2012.
C. P. Green, J. S. Heywood, and M. Navarro, “Traffic accidents and the
london congestion charge,” Journal of public economics, vol. 133, pp.
11–22, 2016.
H. Haghpanahan, J. Lewsey, D. F. Mackay, E. McIntosh, J. Pell,
A. Jones, N. Fitzgerald, and M. Robinson, “An evaluation of the effects
of lowering blood alcohol concentration limits for drivers on the rates of
road traffic accidents and alcohol consumption: a natural experiment,”
The Lancet, vol. 393, no. 10169, pp. 321–329, 2019.
Transportation Research Board Webinar, “Traffic trends and safety in
a covid-19 world,” 2020, http://www.trb.org/ElectronicSessions/Blurbs/
180648.aspx, Last accessed on 2020-08-28.
E. Vingilis, D. Beirness, P. Boase, P. Byrne, J. Johnson, B. Jonah, R. E.
Mann, M. J. Rapoport, J. Seeley, C. M. Wickens et al., “Coronavirus
disease 2019: What could be the effects on road safety?” Accident
Analysis & Prevention, vol. 144, p. 105687, 2020.
National
Safety
Council,
“Motor
vehicle
fatality
rates
jump
14%
in
march
despite
quarantines,”
2020,
https://www.nsc.org/in-the-newsroom/
motor-vehicle-fatality-rates-jump-14-in-march-despite-quarantines,
Last accessed on 2020-08-28.
S. B. Villas-Boas, J. Sears, M. Villas-Boas, and V. Villas-Boas, “Are
we# stayinghome to flatten the curve?” 2020.
C. Truong, L. Oudre, and N. Vayatis, “Selective review of offline change
point detection methods,” Signal Processing, vol. 167, p. 107299, 2020.
T. Duong, B. Goud, and K. Schauer, “Closed-form density-based
framework for automatic detection of cellular morphology changes,”
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, vol. 109, no. 22,
pp. 8382–8387, 2012.
“Traffic collision data from 2010 to present,” https://data.lacity.org/
A-Safe-City/Traffic-Collision-Data-from-2010-to-Present/d5tf-ez2w,
2020, accessed: 2020-08-15.
“Motor vehicle collisions - crashes,” https://data.cityofnewyork.us/
Public-Safety/Motor-Vehicle-Collisions-Crashes/h9gi-nx95, 2020, accessed: 2020-08-15.
S. Ghader, J. Zhao, M. Lee, W. Zhou, G. Zhao, and L. Zhang, “Observed
mobility behavior data reveal social distancing inertia,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2004.14748, 2020.
W. Li, D. Nie, D. Wilkie, and M. C. Lin, “Citywide estimation of
traffic dynamics via sparse GPS traces,” IEEE Intelligent Transportation
Systems Magazine, vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 100–113, 2017.
L. Lin, W. Li, and S. Peeta, “Efficient data collection and accurate
travel time estimation in a connected vehicle environment via real-time
compressive sensing,” Journal of Big Data Analytics in Transportation,
vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 95–107, 2019.
W. Li, M. Jiang, Y. Chen, and M. C. Lin, “Estimating urban traffic
states using iterative refinement and wardrop equilibria,” IET Intelligent
Transport Systems, vol. 12, no. 8, pp. 875–883, 2018.
L. Lin, Z. He, and S. Peeta, “Predicting station-level hourly demand in a
large-scale bike-sharing network: A graph convolutional neural network
approach,” Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies,
vol. 97, pp. 258–276, 2018.
D. Wilkie, J. Sewall, W. Li, and M. C. Lin, “Virtualized traffic at
metropolitan scales,” Frontiers in Robotics and AI, vol. 2, p. 11, 2015.

[35] W. Li, D. Wolinski, and M. C. Lin, “City-scale traffic animation using
statistical learning and metamodel-based optimization,” ACM Trans.
Graph., vol. 36, no. 6, pp. 200:1–200:12, Nov. 2017.
[36] ——, “ADAPS: Autonomous driving via principled simulations,” in
IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA),
2019, pp. 7625–7631.
[37] Q. Chao, H. Bi, W. Li, T. Mao, Z. Wang, M. C. Lin, and Z. Deng, “A
survey on visual traffic simulation: Models, evaluations, and applications
in autonomous driving,” Computer Graphics Forum, vol. 39, no. 1, pp.
287–308, 2019.

