arXiv:2011.04763v2 [cs.CY] 13 Nov 2020

Pandemic Policymaking: Learning the Lower Dimensional Manifold
of Congressional Responsiveness
Philip D. Waggoner
University of Chicago
pdwaggoner@uchicago.edu

Abstract
A recent study leveraging text of pandemic-related policymaking from 1973–2020 explored
whether pandemic policymaking has evolved, or whether we are witnessing a new, unique era
of policymaking as it relates to large-scale crises like COVID-19. This research picks up on
this approach over the same period of study and based on the same data, but excluding text.
Instead, using high dimensional manifold learning, this study explores the latent structure of
the pandemic policymaking space based only on bill-level characteristics. Results indicate the
COVID-19 era of policymaking maps extremely closely onto prior periods of related policymaking. This suggests that there is less of an “evolutionary trend” in pandemic policymaking,
where instead there is striking uniformity in Congressional policymaking related to these types
of large-scale crises, despite being in a unique era of hyperpolarization, division, and ineffective
governance.

Keywords: manifold learning, computational social science, Congress, policymaking, COVID-19

This is a working paper. Please contact the author prior to use or citation.

1

Introduction

COVID-19 has rattled the world with far reaching consequences from social [1] and political [2],
to epidemiological [3] and emotional [4]. Though unprecedented on a number of dimensions, such
large-scale societal crises require formalized responses to protect the vulnerable and needy in society.
In the American context, when epidemics like COVID-19 occur, the clearest avenue for action that
affects the broadest slice of the population is governmental action. The government, empowered
by the constitution as well as the representational responsibility of political elites to respond to
constituents [5], has the duty to act for the people by protecting, providing, and serving, especially
when the country is facing a common threat, which currently is COVID-19. Governmental action in
general can take many forms, such as court rulings, resource provision to workers on the “front lines,”
military intervention, and support to those who need it most. While manifestations of governmental
action vary, the most common avenue through which such large-scale governmental action takes
shape, or is possible, is through policymaking. That is, writing legislation and passing bills into
law reflect the government’s prime means of action, distribution of resources, and mobilization of
a unified response.1 In sum, policymaking by elected officials in Congress is one of the clearest
avenues for governmental action, and especially in times of crisis.
COVID-19 is not the first large-scale crisis in America requiring a consolidated governmental
response. Indeed many crises, both public health-related and otherwise, have littered America’s
past, from HIV/AIDS and the opioid epidemic, to urban crime, climate change, and public education. Yet, though the subject of the crisis might vary, there are several common threads underlying
crises: 1) they affect a large portion of the population in some way (e.g., they are not geographically
isolated), 2) the effects are negative in some measurable way, and 3) they require governmental policymaking to offer solutions, resources, and support to mitigate their effects. The result is these
large-scale crises rise to the level of an “epidemic” or “pandemic,” depending on the scope of the
issue.2
1
This is most simply seen through the Constitutional provision for Congress to “hold the purse strings” as it relates
to monetary appropriations for governmental action [6]. This monetary control and disbursement takes shape through
policymaking, e.g., passing the federal budget bill.
2
Use of these terms is discussed at length below in the Empirical Strategy section.

1

Yet, the current climate of policymaking is different today than it was even a few decades ago.
Though government need and responsibility have remained unchanged, the context and institution
allowing for action taken through policymaking has drastically changed in several ways. Of note,
the major political parties are extremely polarized and ideologically distinct [7, 8]; the country,
comprised of a voting electorate, is deeply politically fractured [9]; driven largely by political activism, the alignment between the two major parties (Democrat and Republican) and the two major
political ideologies (liberal and conservative) is stronger than ever before in American history [10];
enactment of major rules changes has altered fundamental institutional processes, deepening elite
political division [11]; and Congressional policymaking is increasingly negative and intense [12].
These recent and disheartening developments suggest America is experiencing a unique political
period, at both the elite and mass levels.
In light of the COVID-19 pandemic, the relatively common occurrence of epidemics throughout
American history, and the current era of hyper-polarization and division, a question emerges: is
policymaking in response to COVID-19, which is occurring in this divided era, substantively different from policymaking in response to similar epidemics in the past? This question assumes the
occurrence of epidemics as well as the need for governmental response through policymaking are
both constant. The question, then, centers on the nature of policymaking and how it is currently
taking shape, compared to recent history. There are a couple of ways one could approach addressing
such a question: causal, requiring theoretical innovation and development of testable expectations;
or exploratory, where nothing is assumed of the drivers of patterns in the data, seeking instead to
learn from natural structure underlying the data.
In a recent paper, [12] addressed a similar question using an exploratory framework, has governmental policymaking in response to epidemics and pandemics evolved, or are we witnessing a
unique period of policymaking in the era of COVID-19? To explore this question, [12] built and
mined a set of the text data comprised of long bill titles, which can be dozens of words in length,
and thus act as summaries and signals of the bill sponsor’s intent. Results suggest that while the
topics of epidemic-related bills historically remained focused on epidemics at respective moments in
time (and are thus not “evolutionary”), the general sentiment, or the “how” of the bills has substan-

2

tially evolved, growing in both positive and negative sentiment over time. The increasingly intense
tone defining the policymaking approach on these consequential, yet apolitical issues suggests the
current COVID-19 era is indeed a distinct period of policymaking. Intensity and extremism are
used to characterize proposed legislation in the current COVID-19 period, which is a marked shift
from historical approaches to policymaking on similar issues.
Yet a limitation of [12] is in the unit of analysis. While bill titles are useful mechanisms for
“bill branding,” they are nonetheless a biased look at policymaking. In addition to numerous
players contributing to crafting legislation (e.g., party leadership, multiple prime sponsors, and
special interest groups), legislators themselves are inherently biased actors who have unique bases
of support [13], political agendas to realize while in office [14], a party brand to maintain and support
[15], party leadership to satisfy [16], and unique career concerns [17]. Further, legislators are ranked
and rated by many special interest groups based on their policy portfolios [18, 19], suggesting they
may be biased [20] or at least influenced to write a bill that does not purely address the epidemic or
issue in question, while instead posturing to obtain a better rating. In short, while the bill title is
a useful summary and signal of the policy, and thus a good starting place to explore the historical
contours of pandemic policymaking, this approach remains a tainted signal of a broader pattern of
Congressional policymaking.
As such, this research picks up on this limitation, and is similarly motivated on the basis of
the representational arrangement between policymakers and their constituents [5, 21]. Indeed,
citizens of a representative democracy rightly expect policymakers who have been elected to serve
an electing population to respond to large-scale issues like COVID-19. And accordingly, one of
the most common avenues for responsiveness by Congressional lawmakers is proposing and passing
legislation, however tainted it may be, to address a problem from a variety of angles.
Building on the growing body of research on COVID-19 and policymaking [22, 23, 24], and
specifically the evolutionary question of pandemic policymaking explored in [12], I approach this
question from a different angle, but using the same data set as [12]. I am interested in whether
patterns of policymaking are distinct or not. Put differently, are characteristics of bills addressing
epidemics throughout recent history similar or different in meaningful ways? “Meaningful ways”

3

in this context refers to structural similarity between the pre-COVID and COVID periods, e.g.,
similar or different cosponsor configurations and committee paths. The goal here is to understand
patterns of pandemic policymaking, but from an institutional perspective, where characteristics of
proposed bills, absent the text itself, reveal structural characteristics of the institutions in which
these actors are acting. By exploring these patterns, whether similar or not, a deeper understanding
of pandemic policymaking is possible.
In this exploration, I leverage unsupervised manifold learning to uncover the structure of policymaking on all bills related to epidemics from 1973–2020.3 To do so, I employ uniform manifold
approximation and projection (UMAP) to explore pandemic policymaking, and so recover to the
latent manifold of this space. As I am interested in the characteristics of the bills, rather than
the text of the bill, I rely only on bill-level metadata (e.g., cosponsors, party of primary sponsor,
committee assignments, etc.). My goal, then, is to understand whether characteristics of bills on
similar topics are stable over time, or whether they shift in detectable ways. If stable, then this
would suggest we are not witnessing a unique period in policymaking during COVID-19, as the
manifolds would map well onto each other. On the other hand, if the structure is unstable and
shifting over time, then this would suggest the current era of COVID-19 policymaking is indeed
unique, relative to historical policymaking on similar issues.
Across several stages, results point to remarkable stability in the pandemic policymaking space,
such that the current COVID-19 era maps extremely closely onto prior periods. Indeed, the manifolds are nearly identical, based on bill characteristics, after accounting for time. This suggests
that there is less of an “evolutionary trend” in pandemic policymaking, where instead there is striking uniformity in this type of Congressional policymaking, despite currently operating an era of
hyperpolarization [25], deepening mass political polarization [26], and ineffective governance [27].
Implications of these findings and next steps are discussed in the concluding remarks.
3

As addressed and justified below, and in line with [12], I use “epidemic” and “pandemic” as policy heuristics
interchangeably throughout, allowing for cross-temporal comparability.

4

2

Empirical Strategy

As this project is interested in uncovering latent structure in a common space, but with no expected
outcome, this is an unsupervised problem. Further, I assume configurations of pandemic-related
bill metadata should reflect substantive patterns of aggregate policymaking, and thus point to
institutional characteristics underlying pandemic policymaking. Such an assumption, in technical
terms, is that these observations (bills) lie on a common manifold, and are thus structurally related.
While this manifold need not be fully connected, such that each bill to every other bill along the
manifold, the expectation rather is that the bills came from a common space, which mirrors reality.
Put differently, there is a common data generating process, where all legislators who author bills
are acting in a common space, under common constraints, and on average, have a largely common
set of goal as they author legislation [28]. Taken together, the unsupervised nature of the task and
the assumption of a common manifold underlying these pandemic policies, the core assumption
of this project is that there is latent, non-random underlying the pandemic policymaking space.
The task, then, is to recover this manifold, and then compare versions of it over time, to address
whether periods of pandemic policy are similar or different. As this is an exploratory project, results
revealing either similarity in contours of pandemic policymaking or not, will nonetheless deepen an
understanding on aggregate elite approaches to responding to major, national crises.
Importantly, the terms “pandemic” and “epidemic” often refer to instances of disease outbreak,
with the former being wider spread than the latter [29]. Yet, [12] demonstrated that when a wide
array of problems, disease or otherwise, become widespread and capture national or international
attention, these types of problems are often branded as “epidemics” by policymakers. As such, in this
research I too use these terms as policy heuristics for widespread problems requiring governmental
action at some level. Indeed, use of the word “pandemic” is largely unique to COVID-19 in the
context of American policymaking, as politicians do not typically author legislation on international
issues. Yet, the COVID-19 pandemic, though ultimately unparalleled in scope and impact, is
related to other more commonly dubbed “epidemics” in America, such as the opioid epidemic or
the HIV/AIDS epidemic in the 1980s, both affecting the nation and thus requiring governmental
policymaking responses. As such, the loose definition of the terms found in [12] is based more on
5

a policy-focused heuristic, rather than a formal public health definition. I follow the same logic in
this research, and use “pandemic” and “epidemic” interchangeably to allow for a collection of a set
of policies that are generally comparable over a long period of time.
2.1

Data

The data were scraped from congress.gov, and include all bills related to epidemics introduced in
the American Congress from 1973 to 2020 [12]. The data include several bill-level features: the
chamber in which the bill was introduced (House or Senate), the canonical designation of the bill
(e.g., resolution, joint resolution, bill, concurrent resolution)4 , the Congress (two-year period) in
which the bill was introduced ranging from the 93rd (1973-1974) to the 116th (2019-2020), the date
of bill introduction, the long title of the bill, the party of the prime sponsor, the representing state
of the prime sponsor, the representing district of the prime sponsor5 , number of cosponsors on the
bill (non-negative integer), configuration of committees in which the bill was read6 , the date of last
action, and finally the last action (e.g., read in committee or signed into law).
The data are split into two periods for analysis: pre-COVID (1973–2018) and COVID (2019–
2020). Time is explicitly addressed in a later stage of analysis below.
For this application, I focus only on the features that can be included in the specification,
which is a subset of the full feature space (e.g., raw text cannot yet be included and treated
like quantitative features in UMAP applications): bill type, committee configuration for each bill,
state of prime sponsor, chamber of prime sponsor, date of introduction, and date of final action.
Importantly, party of the prime sponsor is omitted to allow for conditioning visualizations of the
lower dimensional space on party to understand whether the lower dimensional manifold finds any
discernable differences between policymaking on a partisan basis. This decision, similar to [12],
makes results more substantive interpretable (e.g., we can understand that Republicans may be
different Democrats, compared to plots with only black dots in a two-dimensional setting).
4
It’s important to note that naming conventions vary by chamber. For example, a resolution might be a declaration
of an idea, whereas a bill might be more substantive.
5
dist = 0∀Senate
6
This could be a single committee or many. For example, HB 6311 in the 116th Congress, Care for COVID-19
Act, was read in three committees (Energy and Commerce, Ways and Means, Education and Labor), whereas HB
6623, COVID-19 Language Access Act, from the same Congress was only read in a single committee (Oversight and
Reform).

6

2.2

Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection

Uniform manifold approximation and projection (UMAP) [30] is a recent approach to dimension
reduction, which is particularly well suited for high dimensional (e.g., p > 4) contexts. As in
other dimension reduction approaches such as principal components analysis (PCA), the goal is
to make a complex, high dimensional space more interpretable and manageable by intentionally
discarding some information, but for the benefit of honing in on the most interesting variation that
characterizes the data well. UMAP, though, joins this common statistical learning approach to
dimension reduction with a formal mathematical foundation, based in topological data analysis (e.g.,
simplicial subspaces), manifold learning, and graph theory. The result is a scalable, computationally
efficient (extremely fast), and mathematically grounded approach to dimension reduction. The goal
of UMAP, then, is to learn a lower dimensional version of the data (i.e., low dimensional embedding,
as in PCA), but assuming the data exist along a common manifold. If the manifold is recovered, a
better, but more parsimonious understanding of the data can also be recovered.
UMAP finds a lower dimensional manifold, wij , that captures both local structure in such a
way that retains spatial relationships among observations i and j (via d(i, j), where d(·) is some
measure of distance) in the original high dimensional setting, vij . The goal is to do this, but while
also retaining global structure to understand the full shape of the manifold, compared to PCA,
that seeks only to maximize variance in the raw data space to give a lower dimensional summary of
that space. UMAP accomplishes retention of both global and local structure, instead, minimizing
information loss across the high (vij ) and low (wij ) dimensional versions of the data by optimizing
a cross-entropy cost function,

X
i6=j

vij log(

1 − vij
vij
) + (1 − vij )log(
).
wij
1 − wij

(1)

The full cost function in equation 1 can be rearranged into two components, which are typically
optimized by stochastic gradient descent [30],

X

vij log(vij ) + (1 − vij )log(1 − vij ) − vij log(wij ) − (1 − vij )log(1 − wij ).

i6=j

7

(2)

As such, the goal is minimize differences of local and global structure in the raw high-dimensional
setting, vij , and the lower dimensional manifold, wij .
To underscore the graph-based approach of search for an optimal manifold that underlies, and
thus connects points that lie along it (i.e., a graph), the task is to search at each point for the
nearest neighbor, and then connect neighbors with an edge in a smooth way, such that the density
of some region determines the decay, which moves outward from the point of interest, i, in a fuzzy
way. In other words, higher density regions have smaller radius around each point, compared to
less dense regions, which have a wide radius of decay, allowing for the manifold to connect. This
satisfies the previously mentioned assumption of UMAP, which is that all points exist along a
common manifold, though are not necessarily locally connected. As such, the cost function can be
re-written in graph notation as,

X
e∈G

where, the first term,

wh (e)log(

1 − wh (e)
wh (e)
)(1 − wh (e))log(
),
wl (e)
1 − wl (e)

wh (e)
e∈G wh (e)log( wl (e) ),

P

(3)

allows for optimal recovery of the local neighbor-

h (e)
hoods, and the second term, (1 − wh (e))log( 1−w
1−wl (e) ), allows for optimal recovery of the spacing

between the local neighborhoods, thus allowing for consistent global structure, based on consistent
local structure.
The term “consistent” points to vastly important aspect of UMAP, which is one of the several
improvements to t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding (t-SNE, [31]). That is, the first
P
(e)
term in equation 3, e∈G wh (e)log( wwhl (e)
), is essentially what t-SNE is interested in doing, that
is, capturing local behavior. Yet, t-SNE does so in a probabilistic way, by drawing miniature tdistributions around each point, and calculating the probability that a certain number of points
should be nearest neighbors, with some degree of uncertainty. Yet, by leaving out the second term,
h (e)
(1−wh (e))log( 1−w
1−wl (e) ), t-SNE is unable to project new data onto the lower dimensional embedding,

as the lower dimensional embedding can change at each iteration, and is thus not reproducible.
As such, a major advantage of UMAP over t-SNE and other manifold-based dimension reduction
techniques, is the ability to reproduce the same lower dimensional embedding, and thus opening up

8

the possibility of supervised projection of new points onto the learned manifold. I take advantage of
this feature in the second stage below, to directly compare pre-COVID policymaking with COVIDera policymaking.
Further, it is important to note that while t-SNE finds nearest neighbors by calculating a
series of N pointwise conditional probability distributions, similarity in the context of UMAP, thus
defining nearest neighbors, vj|i , is calculated by a measure of smoothed nearest neighbor distances
based on spatial proximity to each other [30], e.g.,

vj|i = exp[(−d(i, j) − ρi )/σi ]

(4)

where, as before, d(·) is some measure of distance, not necessarily Euclidean, and ρ (minimum
distance to the nearest point) and σ (some normalization factor controlling smoothness) are hyperparameters affecting smoothness of the solution [30]. In practice, tuning these hyperparameters
affects the tradeoff between local and global structure, in addition to several other hyperparameters
discussed more in the following subsection.
2.3

Hyperparameter Tuning

There are five major hyperparameters that must be tuned when applying UMAP to a dimension
reduction task of this sort: k (the number of neighbors considered in each neighborhood search),
ρ (the minimum distance to the nearest point), number of epochs (number of times the algorithm
sees the data), d (which is the number of dimensions constraining the lower dimensional embedding;
this is usually 2 in most cases, as well as in this research), and dist (distance metric for pairwise
distance calculations).
As with many learning algorithms, a common approach to hone in on final values for the
hyperparameters is to conduct a grid search across multiple values of each. I do so across the
two main hyperparameters, k neighborhood size and number of epochs, and present the results in
Figure 1.
From Figure 1, a few patterns stand out. First, as expected, the more the algorithm sees the
data (as the epochs increase), the clearer and more stable the patterns in the lower dimensional

9

Hyperparameter Grid Search
Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection
50

150

250

350

450

20
10
5

0
−10
20
15

10
0

20
10

25

Second Dimension

−10

0
−10
20
35

10
0
−10
20

45

10
0
−10
−20

−10

0

10

20 −20

−10

0

10

20 −20

−10

0

10

20 −20

−10

0

10

20 −20

−10

0

10

20

First Dimension
Columns are Epochs
Rows are Neighborhood Sizes

Figure 1: Grid Search of UMAP Hyperparameters
manifold become. Moving from left to right across the column facets in Figure 1, the separation
between smaller subgroups in the data, become starker. This suggests that there is indeed some
level of difference in pandemic policymaking over the full study period. These differences will be
pull apart in the following analysis.
A second notable pattern in the grid search in Figure 1 is the further clarity moving from top to
bottom of the figure across the row facets, showing that as the size of the neighborhood increases
from 5 (top row) to 45 (bottom row), additional clarity is gained.
Related, and substantively, as we inspect the highest values from each of these hyperparameter
values in the lower right plot in Figure 1, it becomes increasingly clear that two distinct groups of
pandemic-related policies take shape. Precisely what these groups are and how they are comprised
is the task of the later stages of analysis below.

10

But, importantly, it is worth point out that the features have been scaled and standardized,
meaning the axis values have no substantive meaning, as in other similar dimension reduction
techniques like t-SNE. Therefore, the greatest strength of these types of manifold-based dimension
reduction techniques is to visualize the reduced data space, which allows for greater insight into
substantive differences that naturally exist in the higher dimensional space. Here, the first conclusion we can draw from the single Figure 1, is that there seem to be two groups of pandemic-policies
characterizing this space. I transition now to pull this apart more overtly, by proceeding with
hyperparameter values k = 45, epochs = 450, d = 2, dist = Euclidean, and ρ = 0.1.

3

Learning the Manifold of Pandemic Policymaking

I first present the results in Figure 2 from fitting UMAP to the COVID period of policymaking.
Point colors correspond with the party of the prime sponsor on the bill. This condition allows
for understanding whether partisan differences exist in pandemic policymaking, in addition to the
vector of additional features on which the UMAP fit is based.

Building on the patterns from the grid search in Figure 1, it seems as though the distant cluster of points, apart from the “C”-shaped cluster, is the COVID period. Again, as the key value
of UMAP, and visualization of this sort is to observe where observations lie in high dimensional
space, as recovered in a lower dimensional setting, the main take away from Figure 2 is that there
seems to be a distant pocket of Democratic (blue) bills, with only a few Republican bills in the
upper left of the plot, which is distant from the remainder of the policies in the lower right of the
plot. In the lower right, there is a blend of Democratic (blue) and Republican (red) bills mixed
together, implying, for the most part, there are no major differences between the parties in the
approach pandemic policymaking. While the distant group of mostly Democratic bills to the upper
left is interesting, explicit probing of that group is beyond the scope of this analysis. Rather, I
am interested in exploring whether differences exist across the two major time periods of pandemic
policymaking. To this end, I turn now to present results from the UMAP fit on the pre-COVID
set of policies, shown in Figure 3.

11

COVID
Neighborhood size: 45; Epochs = 450

Second Dimension

5

Party
Dem
Ind
Rep
0

−5

−6

−3

0

3

6

First Dimension

Figure 2: COVID Policymaking Structure
Here, we can confirm that the “C”-shaped cluster of points indeed captured the pre-COVID era
of policymaking. The distribution of political parties in this cluster over a long period of time is
relatively uniform, with no major partisan differences emerging.
Of note, though, is the unique shape of the cluster, compared to the COVID period in Figure 2.
It seems as though the structure is more clearly segmented, with those existing in a given cluster
(e.g., the first group in the lower left of the plot) being explicitly in that cluster, compared to the
rest of the space, which is also clearly and explicitly grouped. In sum, this suggests that there is
some aspect of this policymaking space that clearly sorts policies into bins that do not blend for
the most part.
Stepping back and comparing trends across the COVID (Figure 2) and pre-COVID (Figure 3)
periods, the patterns in the data seem to suggest that these periods of pandemic policymaking are

12

Pre−COVID
Neighborhood size: 45; Epochs = 450
10

Second Dimension

5

0

Party
Dem
Ind
Rep

−5

−10

−10

−5

0

5

10

First Dimension

Figure 3: Pre-COVID Policymaking Structure
indeed distinct. This gives credence to the notion that we are indeed witnessing a truly unique
moment in American policymaking, where political elites are engaging in policymaking in some
fundamentally different way than ever before.

4

An Alternative Approach: Supervised Projection

At this point on visual inspection of the two periods of pandemic policymaking, it seems as though
the periods are indeed distinct in some structural, high-level way. Further, there seems to be a lack
of clear partisan distinction between the periods, resulting in a lot of party overlap across both
periods on average. Even still, exploration has been centered on observation and comparison of
patterns in a descriptive way.
Yet, recall one of the prime benefits of UMAP is to learn a lower dimensional representation
of the data that retains and balances global and local structure in a reproducible way given the

13

lack of reliance on a probabilistic neighbor search as in t-SNE. In practice, this feature of a reproducible solution from a UMAP fit allows for supervised dimension reduction, where new data can
be projected onto the learned manifold, and the two are able to be compared directly. If there is
stability in the structure across the sets of data, then the learned manifold is likely capturing true,
unique features of the data, such that new, unseen data can be mapped closely onto that manifold.
Yet, if there is a lack of structure in the space, then the learned manifold will be different from the
manifold found when mapping new data to it.
For current purposes, this benefit of UMAP helps with a more direct comparison of the two eras,
beyond simply visually exploring two fits of UMAP as has been done to this point. As such, in this
section, a fit UMAP on the pre-COVID era and learn the manifold, and then project the COVID
era data onto the learned manifold from the pre-COVID era. In so doing, I treat the COVID era
as “new” or “testing” data, and the pre-COVID data as “training” data.7
First, I present the UMAP results on the full feature space in Figure 4. Here, all features,
including time-dependent features (e.g., date of introduction, Congressional period), are included.
The circle points in the figure represent the learned manifold from the training/pre-COVID set.
The X’s represent the projection of the test/COVID period.
This view of the two periods is in line with findings to this point, where the COVID period
(denoted by the green box) seems to be a very unique period of policymaking different from nearly
every other period in pandemic policymaking. This is seen by the tiny position of COVID onto the
full manifold, suggesting it projects very poorly onto this space.
If the COVID period were truly different from the pre-COVID period, then we might expect to
see the COVID period project poorly onto the manifold from the pre-COVID period, e.g., a cluster
of points distant from the main cluster of the pre-COVID period, which would be different from
the pattern in the grid search in Figure 1, as the grid search was not based on projection. Yet, we
see the COVID period very clearly and precisely projecting onto a very small, but specific part of
the pre-COVID manifold. While not spread across the full pre-COVID period, the COVID period
7

Though this strategy is substantively motivated for present purposes, as a check on these findings, I also randomly
split the data in training and testing sets and proceed with the same supervised task in the following subsection and
discuss results, which are strongly supportive of patterns found at this stage.

14

Projecting COVID onto Pre−COVID Embedding
D 3
I 1
R 2

D 3 (X = covid)
I 1 (X = covid)
R 2 (X = covid)

Figure 4: Projecting COVID onto Pre-COVID Period
nonetheless clearly maps onto a the lower dimensional manifold. Given the previous pattern in
Figure 3 of precise, but still distinct clusters of policies very clearly spread out in the same space,
the inclusion of time-dependent features is likely influencing the shape of the manifold. This is
likely the case, because, for example, bills sponsored in 1980 will be treated very differently than
bills sponsored in 2020, given their different values along this feature. The same is true for other
time-dependent features, like the Congressional period feature, which is treated as a non-negative
integer (e.g., ranging from 93-116).
To explore whether this is the case, I turn now to fit a new version of UMAP on a subset
of the feature space, excluding all time-dependent features. We are left with five features, still
withholding party affiliation to allow for conditioning the points on the plot: bill type, cosponsors,
committee configurations, state of primary sponsor, and the chamber of the primary sponsor.

15

Though significantly pairing down the space, we are still left with a high dimensional problem, as
we are consider a five-dimensional feature space.
As before, upon learning the lower dimensional manifold of the pre-COVID period (minus timedependent features), I project the COVID period onto the manifold to explore whether and to
what degree the manifolds align. Results are presented in Figure 5, where again, circle points are
pre-COVID bills, X’s are COVID bills projected onto the space, and colors vary by party of the
prime bill sponsor.
Projecting COVID onto Pre−COVID Embedding (Excluding Time−Related Features)
D 3
I 1
R 2

D 3 (X = covid)
I 1 (X = covid)
R 2 (X = covid)

Figure 5: Projecting COVID onto Pre-COVID Period: Addressing Time-Related Features
We now get a very different view of the pandemic policymaking space. Now, considering the
role of time by dropping the time-dependent features from the fit, the patterns of pre-COVID and
COVID map extremely closely on each other. Substantively, this suggests that the two periods,
spanning a near 50-year period of Congressional policymaking, look very similar to each other.

16

Further, the structure shrinks as well, with the “C”-shape of the manifold disappearing, and the
precise grouping (presumably by time) from the earlier patterns in Figures 3 and 4, now disappears.
Indeed, if the COVID period of policymaking were truly unique, we might expect poor projection
and no evidence of clear mapping across the periods. Yet, as clearly shown in Figure 5, the configuration of pandemic-sponsoring legislators look quite similar to each other over time. Importantly,
from these results, as they are exploratory, it is impossible to say whether the patterns we see today
are a function of the historical approach to pandemic policymaking. Target causal methods would
be required for that conclusion. But what is very clear from these results is that not much has
changed over 50 years regarding how legislators approach pandemic policymaking.
4.1

Random Data Splitting for Supervised Projection

Even though the choice of setting the pre-COVID era as the training set and the COVID era as the
testing set was substantive motivated, to directly compare the patterns of pandemic policymaking
across the two periods, I offer a final check on these patterns in this section. To do so, and
thus validate the patterns found thus far, particularly those in Figure 5, I randomly split the full
data space into training and testing sets, regardless of whether policies were in the COVID or
pre-COVID periods. Note, I retain the same proportion of bills in each major period for direct
comparison (≈ 0.66 in the training/pre-COVID set and ≈ 1 − 0.66 in the testing/COVID set).
Further, building on the findings showing striking similarity across the periods in Figure 5, here
I also exclude time-specific features (e.g., Congress period, date of introduction). Results are
presented in Figure 6.
In Figure 6, as before in Figure 5, the circles represent the manifold learned on the training
set, and the X’s represent the projection from the testing set. Also, colors are still conditioning on
party of the prime bill sponsor. The key take away is that the patterns are extremely similar, with
the projection of a random set of test points mapping strikingly closely onto the manifold learned
from the training set. This strengthens the findings and conclusions drawn from the previous
section that, indeed, the two periods of pandemic policymaking are virtually indistinguishable, as
it relates to partisan patterns, committee configurations of bills, cosponsorship, and so on for all
features included in the UMAP procedure. Ultimately, this suggests that pandemic policymaking,
17

Projecting Random Test Set onto Training Set Embedding

D

1 (X = test set)

I

3 (X = test set)

R

2 (X = test set)

D

1

I

3

R

2

Figure 6: Pandemic Policymaking Structure with Random Data Split
though we are in a current period of hyperpolarization and political division, is a relatively stable
phenomenon. This conclusion, though made on the basis of an exploratory study, provides a
glimmer of hope in a current American political climate marked by bitter division and dislike for
members of opposing political parties, such that when crisis strikes, politicians seem to have an
informal code of policymaking, which seems to be closely adhered to over a near 50 year period of
pandemic policymaking.

5

Concluding Remarks

In this paper, I set out to explore and uncover the lower dimensional manifold of American policymaking related to “epidemics” broadly defined. In so doing, a second order goal was to understand
whether the unique institutional context of political division and polarization also influence the
types of policies aimed at addressing COVID-19. By focusing on COVID-19 and institutional

18

structure, the concept of pandemic policymaking places COVID-19 legislation into historical context. The result is a comparison of patterns of policymaking over time, to explore whether past
approaches to epidemic-related policymaking map onto the current approach of policymaking on
COVID-19.
Overall, though the initial stages of the exploration seemed to suggest the current era of COVID19 pandemic policymaking is distinct from prior periods, a more targeted exploration showed that
once explicitly accounting for time, COVID-19 policymaking mapped extremely closely onto prior
periods of pandemic and epidemic-related policymaking. This suggests, then, that though the
political and institutional contexts have changed, becoming increasingly bitter and divided, the
approaches to and patterns of pandemic policymaking have remained largely stable over time.
The substantive conclusion, then, is that the current era of COVID-19 policymaking looks very
similar to prior eras of policymaking on a host of epidemics, all at varying scales, implying a degree
of (restored) hope in the prime institution for policymaking in America. Indeed, a more stable,
and perhaps even formulaic approach seems to characterize Congressional pandemic policymaking,
regardless of the surrounding political and institutional context as well as the nature and scope of
the epidemic(s) in question. These patterns were corroborated using random data splitting and then
replicating the supervised projection task. Results remained strikingly similar across all periods,
regardless of the cases ending up in the training or testing test, thereby strengthening conclusions
of uniformity in pandemic policymaking.
Future work might pick up on these results by considering either different periods of political history, different substantive topics (e.g., the economy, elections, and so on), or different governments
around the world beyond the American case.
On the technical side, future work might pick up on the methodological approach (UMAP), but
relaxing the strong assumption that all observations exist along a common manifold, though sparse
connections are still possible. A common manifold simply may not capture reality, where different
data generating processes may result in actors in a common space acting fundamentally differently
from others. Such an extension of UMAP would be akin to anomaly detection, but in the context
of, e.g., deriving multiple manifolds from a common space to explain such sparsity.

19

References
[1] T. M. Alon, M. Doepke, J. Olmstead-Rumsey, and M. Tertilt, “The impact of covid-19 on
gender equality,” National Bureau of Economic Research, Tech. Rep., 2020.
[2] J. Druckman, S. Klar, Y. Kkrupnikov, M. Levendusky, and J. B. Ryan, “The political impact
of affective polarization: How partisan animus shapes covid-19 attitudes,” 2020.
[3] M. Park, A. R. Cook, J. T. Lim, Y. Sun, and B. L. Dickens, “A systematic review of covid-19
epidemiology based on current evidence,” Journal of Clinical Medicine, vol. 9, no. 4, p. 967,
2020.
[4] C. K. T. Lima, P. M. de Medeiros Carvalho, I. d. A. S. Lima, J. V. A. de Oliveira Nunes,
J. S. Saraiva, R. I. de Souza, C. G. L. da Silva, and M. L. R. Neto, “The emotional impact of
coronavirus 2019-ncov (new coronavirus disease),” Psychiatry research, p. 112915, 2020.
[5] H. Eulau and P. D. Karps, “The puzzle of representation: Specifying components of responsiveness,” Legislative Studies Quarterly, pp. 233–254, 1977.
[6] U. S. Constitution, “Article 1.”
[7] N. McCarty, K. T. Poole, and H. Rosenthal, Polarized America: The dance of ideology and
unequal riches. mit Press, 2016.
[8] P. Pierson and E. Schickler, “Madison’s constitution under stress: A developmental analysis
of political polarization,” Annual Review of Political Science, vol. 23, pp. 37–58, 2020.
[9] A. Abramowitz and K. Saunders, “Why can’t we all just get along? the reality of a polarized
america,” in The Forum, vol. 3, no. 2. De Gruyter, 2005.
[10] H. Noel, Political ideologies and political parties in America.

Cambridge University Press,

2014.
[11] P. Kane, “Reid, democrats trigger ‘nuclear’option; eliminate most filibusters on nominees,” The
Washington Post, vol. 21, 2013.
20

[12] P. D. Waggoner, “A computational exploration of the evolution of governmental policy responses to epidemics before and during the era of covid-19,” The Year in C-SPAN Archives
Research, vol. 7, Forthcoming.
[13] M. Grossmann and D. A. Hopkins, Asymmetric politics: Ideological Republicans and group
interest Democrats. Oxford University Press, 2016.
[14] J. Grimmer, “A bayesian hierarchical topic model for political texts: Measuring expressed
agendas in senate press releases,” Political Analysis, vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 1–35, 2010.
[15] D. M. Butler and E. N. Powell, “Understanding the party brand: experimental evidence on
the role of valence,” The Journal of Politics, vol. 76, no. 2, pp. 492–505, 2014.
[16] S. Ansolabehere, J. M. Snyder Jr, and C. Stewart III, “The effects of party and preferences on
congressional roll-call voting,” Legislative Studies Quarterly, pp. 533–572, 2001.
[17] J. A. Jenkins, M. H. Crespin, and J. L. Carson, “Parties as procedural coalitions in congress:
An examination of differing career tracks,” Legislative Studies Quarterly, vol. 30, no. 3, pp.
365–389, 2005.
[18] K. T. Poole, “Dimensions of interest group evaluation of the us senate, 1969-1978,” American
Journal of Political Science, pp. 49–67, 1981.
[19] J. M. Snyder Jr, “Artificial extremism in interest group ratings,” Legislative Studies Quarterly,
pp. 319–345, 1992.
[20] K. Kollman, “Inviting friends to lobby: Interest groups, ideological bias, and congressional
committees,” American Journal of Political Science, pp. 519–544, 1997.
[21] P. D. Waggoner, “Do constituents influence issue-specific bill sponsorship?” American Politics
Research, vol. 47, no. 4, pp. 709–738, 2019.
[22] P. Cairney and A. Wellstead, “Covid-19: effective policymaking depends on trust in experts,
politicians, and the public,” Policy Design and Practice, pp. 1–14, 2020.

21

[23] K. Hartley and D. S. Jarvis, “Policymaking in a low-trust state: legitimacy, state capacity, and
responses to covid-19 in hong kong,” Policy and Society, vol. 39, no. 3, pp. 403–423, 2020.
[24] S. Roy and P. Ghosh, “Factors affecting covid-19 infected and death rates inform lockdownrelated policymaking,” PloS one, vol. 15, no. 10, p. e0241165, 2020.
[25] A. J. Gaughan, “Illiberal democracy: The toxic mix of fake news, hyperpolarization, and
partisan election administration,” Duke J. Const. L. & Pub. Pol’y, vol. 12, p. 57, 2016.
[26] E. N. Simas, S. Clifford, and J. H. Kirkland, “How empathic concern fuels political polarization,” American Political Science Review, vol. 114, no. 1, pp. 258–269, 2020.
[27] R. Brownstein, The second civil war: How extreme partisanship has paralyzed Washington and
polarized America. Penguin, 2008.
[28] P. D. Waggoner, “Bill sponsorship in congress,” Ph.D. dissertation, 2018.
[29] W. H. Organization, “Humanitarian health action: Definitions: Emergencies,” https://www.
who.int/hac/about/definitions/en/.
[30] L. McInnes, J. Healy, and J. Melville, “Umap: Uniform manifold approximation and projection
for dimension reduction,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.03426, 2018.
[31] L. v. d. Maaten and G. Hinton, “Visualizing data using t-sne,” Journal of machine learning
research, vol. 9, no. Nov, pp. 2579–2605, 2008.

22

