Short communication
Calotropin from milk of Calotropis gigantean a potent inhibitor of COVID 19 corona virus
infection by Molecular docking studies
Arun Dev Sharma* and Inderjeet Kaur

PG dept of Biotechnology, Lyallpur Khalsa College Jalandhar
*Corresponding author, e mail: arundevsharma47@gmail.com

1

ABSTRACT

SARS-CoV-2 (COVID-19), a positive single stranded RNA virus, member of corona virus
family, is spreading its tentacles across the world due to lack of drugs at present. Being
associated with cough, fever, and respiratory distress, this disease caused more than 15 %
mortality worldwide. Due to its vital role in virus replication, Mpro/3CLpro has recently been
regarded as a suitable target for drug design. The current study focused on the inhibitory activity
of Calotropin, a component from milk of Calotropis gigantean, against Mpro protein from
SARS-CoV-2. Till date there is no work is undertaken on in-silico analysis of this compound
against Mpro of COVID-19 protein. In the present study, molecular docking studies were
conducted by using Patchdock tool. Protein Interactions tool was used for protein interactions.
The calculated parameters such as docking score indicated effective binding of Calotropin to
Mpro protein. Interactions results indicated that, Mpro/ Calotropin complexes forms hydrophobic
interactions. Therefore, Calotropin may represent potential herbal treatment to act as COVID-19
Mpro inhibitor. However, further research is necessary to investigate their potential medicinal use.

Keywords: COVID-19, Calotropin , Molecular docking

2

INTRODUCTION
COVID-19 is easily transmissible and it has already been spread worldwide. Symptoms are flulike and can include fever, muscle and body aches, coughing, and sore throat. Symptoms may
appear 5-6 days after infection. As of March 20h, 2020, over 243,000 cases of COVID-19 have
been confirmed worldwide, over 10,000 of which have resulted in death. At present, no specific
therapies for COVID-19 are available and research regarding the treatment of COVID-19 is
infancy1. Some preliminary studies have investigated potential combinations that include anti
malarial drug hydroxychloroquine, and anti-HIV vaccines can be used to treat COVID-19
infections. A separate investigation indicated that among 4 tested drugs Ritonavir was identified
as the best potential inhibitor against COVID-192. Mpro also named as 3CLpro, from SARS-CoV2, represents a potential target for the inhibition of CoV replication [1]. Mpro/3CL is involved in
spike, membrane, envelop, nucleoprotein, replicase, and polymerase activity of viruses.
Therefore, by virtue of its key role in polyprotein processing and virus maturation, Mpro is
considered to be a suitable target for viral inhibitor development. In drug discovery processes, in
silico drug designing is a form of computer-based modeling which is very useful. This method
offers advantage to deliver a new drug in fast and cost-effective manner. As of this date, the
process of drug designing has been advanced with various bioinformatics tools which helps in
molecular docking analysis, protein- protein/ligand interaction, virtual screening and de-novo
synthesis and in silico ADMET prediction [2]. From ancient time, medicinal plants are beneficial
in the field of drug therapeutics as they are safer alternatives being utilized by humans for
centuries. Previously, many of the new drug formulations are derived from natural products. Our
present study focuses on the in silico analysis of Calotropin from milk of Calotropis gigantean.
Calotropis, a member of Apocynaceae family, is a poisonous plant [3]. The active principles are
uscharin, calotoxin, calactin, and calotropin. The leaves and stem when incised yield thick milky
juice. Calotropis gigantea, the crown flower, is a species of Calotropis native to Cambodia,
Bangladesh, Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Thailand, Sri Lanka, India, China, Pakistan,
Nepal, and tropical Africa. It is a large shrub growing to 4 m (13 ft) tall. Milk of this plant has
been used in various system of medicine for the past 2000 years. Bioactive components from
leaves, flowers, fruits and roots of Calotropis gigantean are used as pesticide, insecticide,
fungicide and Nematicidal/Schistosomicidal/Antihelminthic Activity, but little is known about its
antiviral potential. We hypothesize that Calotropin from Calotropis gigantean has the capability
3

to prevent infection of COVID-19. However, in the present study, we investigated Calotropin as
potential inhibitor candidates for COVID-19 Mpro. Therefore the research objective of the present
study was in-silico analysis and comparative molecular docking studies pertain to Calotropin in
relation with Mpro protein. The findings of the present study will provide other researchers with
opportunities to identify the right drug to combat COVID-19.
MATERIAL AND METHODS
Proteins/Macromolecules
COVID-19 3CLpro/Mpro structures were obtained from PDB (https://www.rcsb.org/). The
native ligand for 3clpro/Mpro structures was Calotropin

Fig 1: Pictorial image of Calotropis gigantea

Ligand and Drug Scan
The

3-dimensional

(3D)

structure

of

Calotropin,

were

obtained

from

PubChem

(https://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/). PubChem is a chemical substance and biological activities
repository consisting of three databases, including substance, compound, and bioassay databases.
Binding Mode of Docked Complexes
4

The docked complex structure output format was submitted into the Protein Interactions
Calculator (PIC) webserver (https://projects.biotec.tu-dresden.de/plip-web/plip/index/) in order
to map the interaction of the resulting docked complex. The parameters such as number of
hydrogen bonds, number of hydrophobic residues, and number of aromatic and ionic interactions
were considered in interpreting the strength of the interaction
Determination of Active Sites
The amino acids in the active site of a protein were determined using the Computed Atlas for
Surface Topography of Proteins (CASTp) (http://sts.bioe.uic.edu/castp/index.html?201l).
Molecular Docking
PatchDock tool was used for docking study of the compounds over COVID-19 S-protein
(https://bioinfo3d.cs.tau.ac.il/PatchDock/).
Admet SAR
AdmetSAR is a comprehensive web-based tool for predicting ADMET properties of candidate
molecules (http://lmmd.ecust.edu.cn/admetsar2/). It predicts the pharmacokinetic properties such
as Absorption, Distribution, Metabolism, Excretion and Toxicity.
RESULT AND DISCUSSION
SARS-CoV-2, member of corona viruses (CoVs) family, is enveloped, positive single stranded
RNA viruse. Mpro) found in the SARS-Co-V-2 can be accessed in PDB and was suggested to be
a potential drug target for 2019-nCov [1]. In many viruses, proteases play essential roles in viral
replication; therefore, proteases are often used as protein targets during the development of
antiviral therapeutics. In SARS-CoV-2, the Mpro protein is involved in virus proteolytic
maturation and has been examined as a potential target protein by inhibiting the cleavage of the
viral polyprotein to prevent the spread of infection. The invention of the Mpro/3CLpro protease
structure in COVID-19 provides a nice path to identify potential drug candidates to prevent
infection. As cited earlier [2] , proteases represent key targets for the inhibition virus replication,
and the protein sequences of the SARS-CoV-2 Mpro and the 2019-nCoV Mpro are 96% identical,
hence host proteases can be used as potential therapeutic targets.
5

Traditionally, the discovery of new therapeutic drugs is a tedious and expensive process which
generally takes 12-14 years with a lot of money to bring drug from discovery to market. In order
to overcome these problems a lot many multidisciplinary approaches are used to discover new
drug. In drug discovery processes, in silico drug designing is a form of computer-based modeling
which is very useful. In the field of drug discovery, medicinal plants are advantageous as they
are utilized as a safe herbal alternative by humans for centuries. The sources of many of the new
drugs and active ingredients of medicines are derived from natural products. In the present study,
we performed in silico analysis of Calotropin from Calotropis gigantean against Mpro protein of
SARS-CoV-2.

In modern drug discovery process, molecular docking is a widely used

computational method to predict the binding mode and binding affinity of ligands with the target
receptor protein. The efficacy of the docked complex was evaluated on the basis of two essential
criteria’s: The minimum binding energy and the interaction of the ligand with the active site
residues. A ligand undergoes either hydrogen bonding or hydrophobic interactions or both while
docking into the active site. The results of docking can be used to find the best inhibitors for
specific target proteins and thus to design new drugs. We followed the structural biology aspects
which focus on the availability and retrieval of a main protease (Mpro) or 3C-like protease
(3CLpro) receptor structure from PDB database. The ligand Calotropin from Calotropis gigantean
was docked to main protease (Mpro) or 3C-like protease (3CLpro). Previously several ligands
and drug candidate compounds have been selected, as per criteria of Lipinski’s rule of five. So
the Calotropin that did not incur more than 2 violations of Lipinski’s rule could be used in
molecular docking experiments with the target protein. The drug scanning results (data not
shown) showed that Calotropin from Calotropis gigantean, herbal ligand used in this study, was
accepted by Lipinski’s rule of five.
Molecular docking using 1-click docking tool that was used to find out interaction of inhibitor i.e
Calotropin from Calotropis gigantean with Mpro/3CLpro protein revealed 10 different poses

6

7

Fig 1: Molecular docking pose and interactions of ligand with Mpro protein and 2D interactions of
Calotropin

Table 1. Binding Energy and full fitness values of Docked complex and interaction values
Inhibitor

Dock pose

Dock score

Calotropin

1

-253.66

Active site residues
H-bond
Hydrophobic
interactions
interactions
LYS10,
PRO7,122,
GLU14,GLY71
GLU114,
ILE150,
VAL301

based on the dock score and the pose with highest negative values indicated maximum binding
affinity. Best docking pose and molecular interactions of Calotropin in Fig. 1. Calotropin was
successfully docked with Mpro protein at binding pocket S1 with dock score -253.66 (Table 1).
The interaction of Calotropin in the binding pocket of Mpro protein was mediated by two
hydrophobic interactions and hydrogen bond interactions (Table 1). The Calotropin showed full
fitness within active site amino acids of Mpro/3CLpro proteins of COVID-19 (Fig. 1). We
investigated that Calotropin as potential inhibitor of the SARS-CoV-2 Mpro. Hydroxy groups (OH), ketone groups (=O) and ether groups (-O-) in Calotropin compounds are predicted to play
roles amino acid residue interactions at the active site of SARS-CoV-2 Mpro. Finally, lack of wetlab validation is a drawback in our research and we expect computational biology analysis and
its integration with wet-lab data can be productive in the determination of potential antiMpro/3CLpro components. In silico pharmacokinetic analysis of eucalyptus was conducted
using Admet SAR. The pharmacokinetics of a drug depends on its absorption, distribution,
metabolism, excretion and toxicity. Calotropin molecule showed positive results for for BBB
profiles. Calotropin compound was non-substrate to Pgp (data not shown)
CONCLUSION
Due to non approved drugs at present Currently, SARS-CoV-2 has emerged in the human
population, in China, and is a potential threat to global health, worldwide. Currently, the main
target for SARS-CoV-2 treatment primarily act on the main protease (Mpro). The aim of this
study was to examine Calotropin that may be used to inhibit the SARS-CoV-2 infection
8

pathway. Therefore, we suggested that Calotropin may represent potential herbal treatment
options, and found in medicinal plants that may act as potential inhibitors of SARS-CoV-2 Mpro.
However, further studies should be conducted for the validation of these compounds using in
vitro and in vivo models to pave a way for these compounds in drug discovery.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
ADS want to thank management for this support.
CONFLICT OF INTEREST
Authors declares no conflict of interest
COMPLIANCE WITH ETHICAL STANDARDS
The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest. This article does not contain any
studies involving animals or human participants performed by any of the authors
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
ADS: designed the study and prepared manuscript
IJK: designed the study and prepared manuscript

REFERENCES

1. Lu H. Drug treatment options for the 2019-new coronavirus (2019-nCoV),

Biosci.

Trends, (2020), doi:10.5582/bst.01020.
2. Liu X. and Wang X.J., Potential inhibitors against 2019-nCoV coronavirus M protease
from clinically 13 of 14 approved medicine, J. Genet. Genomics, (2020), doi:
10.1016/j.jgg.2020.02.001.
3. Wang, Shih-Chung; Lu, Mei-Chin; Chen, Hsiu-Lin; Tseng, Hsing-I; Ke, Yu-Yuan; Wu,
Yang-Chang; Yang, Pei-Yu (2009). "Cytotoxicity of calotropin is through caspase
activation and down regulation of anti-apoptotic proteins in K562 cells". Cell Biology
International. 33 (12): 1230–1236.

9

4. Im K., Kim J. and Min H. Ginseng, the natural effectual antiviral: Protective effects of
Koran

Red

Ginseng

against

viral

infection,

Retrieved

from

https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5052424/, (2015).
5. Rodríguez-Morales P., Alfonso J., MacGregor K., Kanagarajah S. and Dipti P. Going

global – Travel and the 2019 novel coronavirus, Travel Med. Infect. Dis., 33, (2020), doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tmaid.2020.101578.

10

