arXiv:2012.01953v1 [cs.CL] 3 Dec 2020

Drugs4Covid: Drug-driven Knowledge
Exploitation based on Scientific Publications
Carlos Badenes-Olmedo1 , David Chaves-Fraga1 , Marı́a Poveda-Villalón1 , Ana
Iglesias-Molina1 , Pablo Calleja1 , Socorro Bernardos1 , Patricia Martı́n-Chozas1 ,
Alba Fernández-Izquierdo1 , Elvira Amador-Domı́nguez1 , Paola
Espinoza-Arias1 , Luis Pozo1 , Edna Ruckhaus1 , Esteban González-Guardia1 ,
Raquel Cedazo2 , Beatriz López-Centeno3 , and Oscar Corcho1
1

3

Ontology Engineering Group, Universidad Politécnica de Madrid, Boadilla del
Monte, Spain
2
High School of Technical Industrial and Design Engineering, Universidad
Politécnica de Madrid, Madrid, Spain
Subdirección General de Farmacia y Productos Sanitarios, Servicio Madrileño de
Salud, Madrid, Spain

Abstract. In the absence of sufficient medication for COVID patients
due to the increased demand, disused drugs have been employed or the
doses of those available were modified by hospital pharmacists. Some evidences for the use of alternative drugs can be found in the existing scientific literature that could assist in such decisions. However, exploiting
large corpus of documents in an efficient manner is not easy, since drugs
may not appear explicitly related in the texts and could be mentioned
under different brand names. Drugs4Covid combines word embedding
techniques and semantic web technologies to enable a drug-oriented exploration of large medical literature. Drugs and diseases are identified
according to the ATC classification and MeSH categories respectively.
More than 60K articles and 2M paragraphs have been processed from
the CORD-19 corpus with information of COVID-19, SARS, and other
related coronaviruses. An open catalogue of drugs has been created and
results are publicly available through a drug browser, a keyword-guided
text explorer, and a knowledge graph.
Keywords: Ontology-based technologies · NLP · Bio-annotations · Drugscatalogue · Knowledge Graph · COVID-19.

1

Introduction

News on the scarcity of medicines to treat COVID-19 have appeared in many
countries around the world over the past months. Due to the increasing demand during the peaks of infections worldwide and other problems associated
to logistics, doctors and pharmacists were struggling to treat their patients. We
confirmed this situation after a series of interviews with doctors, pharmacists
and other people from regional Health Services. In the absence of sufficient medication for such a large amount of patients, practitioners started applying disused

Drugs4Covid

vector space
modeller
TOPIC W2V
MODEL

ATC

TF/IDF

S

MeSH
space
partitioner

bioannotator

Search
engine
text, drugs, diseases
Groups

text, drugs, diseases
Indexes

2

Badenes-Olmedo et al.

CORD-19
Documents

Drugs4Covid
Ontology

S
KG
construction

Drugs4Covid
KG

drugs that were available in hospital pharmacies and modifying the usual doses
Process
External resource
Internal resource
KG
KG
S Service
of those available.
KG

vector space
modeller

ATC

Drugs4Covid
TOPIC W2V
MODEL

TF/IDF

S

MeSH
Search
engine

space
partitioner

bioannotator

text, drugs, diseases
Groups

text, drugs, diseases
Indexes

S

CORD-19
Documents

Drugs4Covid
Vocabulary

Process

External resource

KG
construction

Internal resource

Drugs4Covid
KG

S Service

KG

KG

KG

Fig. 1: Creation workflow of a search engine and a knowledge graph through
annotations created from the CORD-19 dataset.

However, identifying which drugs can be used as replacements for others to
treat this little-known disease and its associated symptoms is a difficult challenge.
New experiments and results are continually being published, and people in
charge of clinical protocols cannot keep up to date with all of them [5]. This
situation calls for solutions that help health care providers and researchers easily
extract such knowledge from the enormous scientific corpus that is being created.
Several initiatives have emerged to bring together scientific publications in
this domain. For instance, the COVID-19 Data Portal maintained by the EU, or
those published by Humandata focused on COVID-19 cases around the world.
Similarly, other research groups and universities have also published valuable
datasets, such as the Open COVID-19 Data Working Group4 , the DisGeNET
COVID-19 dataset5 or the data gathered by John Hopkins University6 , among
others.
The Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence created the COVID-19 Open
Research Dataset (CORD-19) [22]. It is a continuously growing corpus with
all publicly available COVID-19 and coronavirus-related research (e.g. SARS,
MERS, etc.) in the last fifty years. This dataset can be used as a source of
information to extract knowledge related to the disease. At the time of this
study, it is composed of 23,428 open access articles from PubMed Central, 35,240
research articles from a corpus maintained by the World Health Organization
(WHO), and 1,945 bioRxiv and medRxiv pre-prints.
4
5
6

https://github.com/beoutbreakprepared/nCoV2019
https://www.disgenet.org/covid/diseases/summary/
https://github.com/CSSEGISandData/COVID-19

Drugs4Covid

3

Given that volume, a combined used of natural language processing with
word embeddings techniques and knowledge extraction technologies can provide doctors and medical researchers with tools that make their work easier by
structuring the information contained within the papers. Our goal is to automatically extract, organize and publish the drug-oriented knowledge from the
medical literature needed to answer common questions posed by domain experts such as What are the effects of using chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine
to treat COVID-19 patients? Have drugs that combine immunosuppressive and
antimalarial activity with macrolide antibiotics been used? In which experiments
have mefloquine and azithromycin been used and related to which diseases?
We processed more than 60k medical publications to discover relations amongst
drugs and diseases. The tools created from our workflow help to quickly create
domain-specific search engines and knowledge graphs (KG) (Fig. 1) over any corpus of scientific documents. Such techniques can be reused for other similar crisis
in the future, and in any other situation where these tools could be valuable. All
the work presented in this paper is available in a GitHub repository7

2

Related Work

Due to the fast evolution of the SARS-COV-2, worldwide scientists have been
working as fast as possible to provide tools that help health professionals treat
patients during this pandemic. Most of the ongoing work has been shared inside
research communities (e.g. W3C Semantic Web and W3C Healthcare and Life
Sciences), in hackathons (e.g. the European Commission hosted EUvsVirus 8 ,
VenceAlVirus 9 in the region of Madrid), and in preliminary reports in blogs and
archival services. Multiple datasets10 have been provided for finding new insights
about the novel coronavirus.
Semantic Web technologies have been traditionally used to publish many data
sources in the biomedical domain such as Bio2RDF that provides a network of
linked data for the biomedical domain, DisGeNET RDF that relates diseases
and genes, or SNOMED Clinical Terms that provides a clinical healthcare terminology. Some of this earlier work has been used by language technologies to
add semantic annotations to scientific literature. The CORD19-Named Entities
Knowledge identified and disambiguated named entities in CORD-19 using DBpedia Spotlight and the NCBO BioPortal annotator. Similarly, a Linked Data
version of the CORD-19 data is provided by the CORD-19-on-FHIR project
introducing semantic annotations on conditions, medications, and procedures.
Some knowledge graphs have also been created such as the Knowledge4COVID19 11 that integrates knowledge from scientific literature and databases, and uses
predictive models to derive interactions among drugs used in the treatment
7
8
9
10
11

https://github.com/oeg-upm/drugs4covid19
https://www.euvsvirus.org
https://vencealvirus.org
https://data.world/resources/coronavirus/
https://devpost.com/software/covid-19-kg

4

Badenes-Olmedo et al.

of COVID-19. Others are mainly focused on a collective generation of knowledge such as KG-COVID-19 Hub 12 or the Covid Graph project 13 . Both seek
to build collaboratively a KG hub for COVID-19 so that developers can ingest
new sources into this hub. And there are also initiatives focused on particular
domains such as the SIB COVID-19 Integrated Knowledgebase that is specialized on genetic information, and the COVID-19 by STKO Lab that combines
recorded cases and suspensions of commercial airline routes.
However, none of these approaches provide sufficient information on how
the knowledge is generated. When two drugs are related through an interaction
in the knowledge graph, the information used to induce that kind of relation
is missing and would be very relevant for its potential users. We believe that
conclusions are as important as the data that led to them during the learning
process. Hence, in this paper we describe a process to create a knowledge graph
that, together with the diseases and drugs identified in the CORD-19 corpus,
links to the texts (i.e paragraphs, sentences or even full articles) that support
the inferred knowledge.

3

Drug and Disease Annotations

Searching for similar drugs and exploring major diseases covered by different
publications are key activities when browsing medical papers. This manual knowledge-intensive task becomes less tedious and even leads to unexpected relevant
findings when applying unsupervised algorithms to help researchers.
In this work we have addressed the problem of generating drug- and diseasebased annotations for the documents within a large collection of research articles.
We have created vectorial representations of each of them using state-of-the-art
techniques based on word embeddings and probabilistic topic models. Then,
diseases and drugs have been related to each other and suggested drugs that
may be considered as replacements for others.
More than 60k scientific papers were analyzed from the CORD-19 dataset.
Around 5M sentences and 2M paragraphs were annotated with the drugs and
diseases mentioned in them. A total of 6,400 diseases and 2,400 drugs were
characterized to enrich the searches on the corpus and the knowledge graph.
3.1

Taxonomies used for annotation

Textual searches on a collection like CORD-19 bring accuracy issues since the terminology associated with drugs and diseases varies between countries. A search
based on an active substance should lead to the drugs that contain it. Such
drugs can be traded under different brand names among countries, hence appearing with different names in different papers. For example, the active substance
Enalapril/Hydrochlorothiazide is distributed in Spain under the trade names CoRenitec, Crinoretic or Dabond Plus, while its trade name is Renidur in Portugal,
12
13

https://github.com/Knowledge-Graph-Hub/kg-covid-19
https://live.yworks.com/covidgraph

Drugs4Covid
Top-Word P01BA01
1
2
3
4
5

P01BA02

5

J05AR10

chloroquine
chloroquine
mer
chikv
hydroxychloroquine camel
autophagy
glycosylation
cov
endosome
analog
mild
cathepsin
rheumatoid
lopinavir

Table 1: Top5 words related to Chloroquine (P01BA01), Hydroxychloroquine
(P01BA02) and Lopinavir/Ritonavir (J05AR10) according to the PTM created
from the active substances discovered in the CORD-19 corpus.
and Corodil in Denmark. Thus, we need to unify drugs and diseases with codes
that abstract them from their particular names or textual representations.
We have used the trade names published by the Spanish Agency of Medicines
and Health Products (AEMPS) and considered the Anatomical Therapeutic
Chemical (ATC) classification system to annotate drugs. The ATC is supported
by the World Health Organization (WHO) and widely used in hospital pharmacies to identify drug components. It groups active substances according to the
organ or system on which they act and their therapeutic, pharmacological, and
chemical properties. Drugs are classified into groups at five different levels. The
first one corresponds to main groups, the second one to pharmacological or therapeutic subgroups, the third and the fourth one are chemical-pharmacologicaltherapeutic subgroups and the last one is the chemical substance.
Diseases have been annotated with the Medical Subject Headings (MeSH)
vocabulary, which is used for indexing, cataloging, and searching biomedical
information by the MEDLINE/PubMed article database, the NLM´s books catalog, and ClinicalTrials.gov among others. This vocabulary is organized in a
hierarchical, numbered tree structure that enables browsing from broader to
narrower topics.
Our goal is not to annotate according to a single classification system, but
to integrate different classification codes suggested by our users to allow crosssearching from their terminologies.
3.2

Annotation techniques

Common entities identified in medical literature are diseases, drugs and chemical names among others [20,10,19,6]. These named entities can also be used to
discover relations between them. We created a pipeline to prepare the textual
content from the CORD-19 dataset [22] and index it together with some additional information in a document-oriented database. It is based on the librAIry
framework [2], which provides a high-performance infrastructure for text mining
tasks. We focused on the following data for this task:
–
–
–
–

id: unique identifier for each research article.
name: publication title.
abstract: brief summary made by the author.
text: full textual content of the article.

6

Badenes-Olmedo et al.

Fig. 2: Documents described by a PTM from the active substances (ATC-code
level5) in the CORD-19 corpus and organized by similar topic distributions.
– url: online resource available from Allen AI repository.
The Named Entity Recognition (NER) task was performed combining different state-of-the-art methods such as scispaCy [14] and CliNER [4]. After they
were tested to identify disorders, substances, trials and treatments from texts,
we realized the methods did not unify the identification of drugs and diseases as
described in the ATC or MeSH classifications. Sometimes they are identified as
different drugs or diseases, since they are referred by different names, when in
fact they correspond to the same element. To adjust this behavior we have developed Bio-NLP14 , a NER service built on top of scispaCy that uses the MeSH
vocabulary and the ATC codes as gazetteers of terms respectively to identify
named entities.

4

Drug and Disease Representational Models

In order to establish relations among drugs or diseases, so as to improve searches
on the corpus, we have created representational models capable of abstracting
the entities from their textual forms and relating them to each other.

4.1

Identifying Related Texts

Some text mining algorithms represent documents in a common feature space
that abstracts away from the specific sequence of words used in each of them.
That is, they treat documents as bags-of-words. With appropriate representations, they ease the analysis of relationships between documents, even when
written using different vocabularies.
14

https://github.com/librairy/bio-nlp

Drugs4Covid

7

– Representational Model: We have used topic models, which are widely
used to uncover the latent semantic structure from text corpora. In particular, Probabilistic Topic Models (PTM) represent documents as a mixture
of topics, where topics are probability distributions over words. This eases
the exploitation of large document collections, since documents are mapped
into a low-dimensional latent space (i.e they are described by a small number of topics). It also abstracts the representation of the documents from
the words themselves. Topics emerge as density distributions on the vocabulary to define the dimensions of the vectors that represent the documents.
We used librAIry[2] to create and fine-tune a PTM that describes the annotated drugs as probability distributions on the vocabulary of the corpus.
Each topic matches an active substance (see Table 1), avoiding distinctions
between different drug names by country. The model is created and distributed as a Rest-API to facilitate its reuse.
– Similarity Metric: Due to low storage cost and fast retrieval speed, hashing
is a popular solution for the calculation of approximate nearest neighbors
in the probability simplex space created from topic models. We opted for a
density-based hierarchical hashing method [3] to compare the texts contained
in CORD-19. This approach has proven to obtain high-precision results and
can accommodate additional query restrictions.
– Space Partitioning: Since documents are compared from sets of topics distributed in levels according to their relevance, the representational space can
be organized in k-d trees. The most discriminating topics and levels define
the branches of the tree and each text is organized among them according
to its topic distributions. We created a web-based document browser15 to
navigate through the corpus using the active substances and content-based
relations (Figure 2).
4.2

Finding Related Drugs

Drugs were described by the diseases with which they are mentioned in texts (e.g
sentence, paragraph, or full-text). Paragraphs showed an appropriate balance
between generality and particularity to describe drugs, since their content is
more strongly related than the full-text, and less incomplete than the sentences.
– Representational Model: A drugs-diseases matrix was created with the
times a disease appears in the same paragraph than a drug. Then, we used
Term Frequency-Inverse Document Frequency (TFIDF) to transform drugs
into numeric vectors. Two drugs described by TFIDF will be similar if they
share rare, but informative, diseases.
– Similarity Metric: Cosine similarity was adopted as the measure of interest
as it is well-known and frequently-used in vector space models [18].
– Space Partitioning: Similar drugs are organized into the same groups to
suggest their use as replacements. Since the number of groups is unknown,
15

https://librairy.github.io/covid19/explorer

8

Badenes-Olmedo et al.

(a) Silhouette analysis

(b) Two-dimensional space

Fig. 3: Validation of the 120 clusters of drugs.
we created a dendrogram based on simple linkage from their vectorial representations. As a result we obtained a hierarchical aggregation of drugs that
suggests an optimal number of groups according to the Silhouette coefficient. Several settings were tested and finally 120 clusters offered the best
performance (Fig. 3). We developed a Rest-API, Bio-API16 , that makes use
of the Annoy17 method to index drugs in a kd-tree. It allows queries like
bio-api/replacements?keywords=chloroquine to retrieve related drugs.
4.3

Finding Related Diseases

In order to measure the similarity amongst diseases, a three-step procedure was
followed: 1) Creation of disease-focused word embedding models, 2) Generation
of a terminology representing the whole corpus, used to align the compared
diseases, 3) Disease similarity calculation from the identified key terms.

T cell
public health
amino acid
immune response
influenza virus

CORD-19 top 25 terms
respiratory tract viral replication
infected cell
health care
infectious disease
viral RNA
cell lines
RNA viruses
immune responses epithelial cell respiratory syndrome
nucleic acid
accute respiratory
E. coli
virus infection
acute respiratory syndrome
gene expression viral infection
immune system
respiratory viruses

Table 2: Main terms discovered in the CORD-19 corpus

– Terminology Generation: The aim of this step was to discover common
terminology amongst diseases. We extracted the most frequent terms from
a representative sample of 100.000 paragraphs from CORD-19. Given the
complex nature of the source texts (full of technical expressions, numbers,
16

17

https://librairy.linkeddata.es/bio-api/replacements?keywords=
chloroquine
https://github.com/spotify/annoy

Drugs4Covid

9

figures, symbols) this task presented a challenge when tested with two terminology extraction methods: Rake [17] and TBXTools[21]. While the former
did not solve many of the above mentioned hindrances and some extracted
terms were linguistically incorrect, the latter gave good results that needed
only some post-processing work (Table 2).
– Representational Model: Out of the existing state-of-the-art word embedding models, Word2Vec [13] was selected to generate a representational
model for each disease. To ensure comparability between models, the same
initialization values were used from the pre-trained BioWordVec model [23].
Using a proper initialization not only enables direct comparability between
disease models, but eases the convergence of the model.
– Similarity Metric: Diseases were represented as vectorial models, where
each word featured in the training corpus found a corresponding embedding. However, not all words in the resulting vocabulary were equally explanatory of the disease, and thus comparisons between models should not
be established using the totality of the embedded words. We retrieved the
25 most frequent terms in CORD-19 with the aim of discovering common
terms amongst diseases (Table 2). They were used as reference points to
compare models that visually represent each disease, considering each term
as a node, and the distance between each pair of nodes as edges. Similarity
between diseases is obtained by averaging individual distances between the
representations of the same term on each disease model. Word Mover’s Distance [12] was used to measure the distance between terms, as it captures
the underlying semantics between the resulting word representations.
– Space Partitioning: Disease models were initialized using the same values,
meaning that the initial embedding of each term was the same across every
disease. During training, these embeddings evolve, or move throughout the
vectorial space to fit the context constraints from the disease-specific training corpus. Therefore, while the initial representations were equal, the final
representations differ, as they also embedded specific information about the
disease. However, the resulting representations can still be compared. Pairwise comparison between diseases can be established by measuring the Euclidean distance between the embeddings of same terms on each model. Small
distances between term representations mean that they occur in a similar
context, thus their final embeddings remain close. Figure 4 illustrates pairwise comparison between three diseases. According to the obtained results,
COVID-19 is closer to Malaria than to Conjunctivitis, as the cumulative distance of all pairwise term distances is lesser in that case. This functionality
was also added to our Bio-API service.

5

Drugs4Covid Knowledge Graph

All the work described in previous sections allowed us to create the knowledge
to enable the search and navigation over the corpus. To facilitate its (re)use, we

10

Badenes-Olmedo et al.

(a) COVID-19 and Malaria

(b) COVID-19 and Conjunctivitis

Fig. 4: Comparison of diseases based on distances among common terminology
described in the embedding spaces created for each of them.
created a graph that contains this knowledge. This section describes the development of the vocabulary and details the steps followed to build the Drugs4Covid
Knowledge Graph (D4C-KG) by combining the drug and disease annotations
inferred from the CORD-19 corpus with external resources.
5.1

The Drugs4Covid vocabulary

The vocabulary defined to support the D4C-KG was developed following the
LOT methodology [16], relying heavily in the communication with users (i.e.
developers generating annotations and KG developers) and domain experts (i.e.
biologists and pharmacists) throughout the ontology development process. The
main goals of the vocabulary were to represent and relate some parts of the
papers analyzed with biomedical concepts, as obtained with the application of
language technologies.
The process started with a meeting where the potential annotations, based
on drugs and diseases, were analyzed. A first set of requirements was extracted:
1) A paper contains paragraphs and sentences; 2) A paragraph and a sentence
can mention chemical substances and disorders; 3) A paper mentions a drug;
4) A drug has active substances, which are a type of chemical substances; 5) A
drug treats a disorder; 6) A disease has symptoms. The vocabulary requirements
evolved throughout the development of the project.
The vocabulary conceptualization was carried out following the guidelines
for ontology diagrams presented in [9] and splitting the team into the two main
domains involved in the data, namely “publications” and “biomedical” domains.
Figure 5 depicts the vocabulary conceptualization, whose main concepts are:
– Paper: A document of the corpus, subject of annotations. It can contain
paragraphs (one of a series of subsections each usually devoted to one idea)
and sentences (a sequence of words capable of standing alone to make an
assertion, ask a question, or give a command). These concepts can mention
disorders and/or chemical substances.

Drugs4Covid

11

– Disorder: A disruption to regular bodily structure and function. A disease
is often known to be a medical disorder that is associated with specific symptoms, while a symptom refers to a physical or mental feature that is regarded
as indicating a condition of disease.
– Chemical substance: A substance produced by or used in a chemical process. Active substances are chemical substances that are the main ingredients
of drugs used to treat or prevent a disorder. Each active substance matches
an ATC code as described in the Annotation Section.

mentions
mentions

db:BibliographicResource

isTreatedWithDrug

dc:abstract:
dc:source

treatsDisorder

Disorder

isContraindicatedTo
Paper
identiﬁer: string
dc:title
dc:license
problem: string
dc:date
rdfs:seeAlso

mentions
prevents
causedByDrug
Effect

Drug
hasEffect

Paragraph

contains

identiﬁer: string
text: string

Legend
Scientiﬁc literature
sub-domain

scientiﬁcName: String
drugName: String
rdfs:seeAlso
hasActiveSubstance

ChemicalSubstance

Disease
codeSNOMED: String
codeMESH: String
levelMESH: Integer
synonyms: String
mapsTo

mentions

ActiveSubstance
activeSubstanceName: String
codeATC: String
levelATC: Integer

contains (1..N)

Sentence

hasSymptom

mentions

contains

identiﬁer: string
text: string
section:string

disorderName: String

Symptom
isBroader
Than
isNarrowerThan
isSymptomOfDesease

isActiveSubstanceOfDrug

isBroader
Than

mentions
isNarrowerThan
mentions

Drug
sub-domain

Class

subClassOf

attribute applicable to the
class

relation applicable
to the classes

Namespaces:
base: https://w3id.org/def/DRUGS4COVID19
dc: http://purl.org/dc/terms/

Fig. 5: Main classes, properties and attributes of the Drugs4Covid vocabulary.

The vocabulary reuses some Dublin-Core Metadata Terms18 for bibliographic
resources such as abstract, license, and source. Since we are pursuing a progressively more complex construction of the knowledge graph, we decided to initially
create a basic model that allows easy alignment with existing ontologies in the
biomedical domain later on. However, some modeling decisions were already
taken in this direction, by aligning the active substance class attributes to the
ATC annotations from bioontology19 .
We carried out a twofold evaluation: (1) quality and correctness of the ontology using OOPS![15], and (2) a data-directed evaluation where we checked
that the data in the indexed corpus can be transformed, annotated and queried
with the vocabulary. Finally, the HTML documentation of the vocabulary was
generated with Widoco [8] and published20 using OnToology [1].
18
19
20

https://dublincore.org/
https://bioportal.bioontology.org/ontologies/ATC
https://w3id.org/def/DRUGS4COVID19

12

Badenes-Olmedo et al.

5.2

Knowledge Graph Construction

The D4C-KG contains RDF annotations extracted from the CORD-19 dataset
that are described by the D4C vocabulary. The relations between the source data
(annotations) and the developed ontology were declared using the RML mapping
language [7]. We used YARRRML21 , a human-friendly RML serialization in
YAML format, to define 44 subject and 150 predicateObject mappings. The
rules created by this technique were easy to define and not time-consuming.
The building process was automated and modular, based on standard W3C
technologies in order to ensure the maintainability of the KG construction process. The following steps were performed:
– Data Preparation: Annotations from the CORD-19 corpus were exported
into CSV files, cleaned and normalized exploiting CSVW annotations.
– Mapping Definition: RML mapping rules between the data and the ontology were defined, as well as the rules to link other KGs.
– RDF Generation: The cleaned data and mapping rules were processed
with SDM-RDFizer [11] to generate the corresponding RDF dataset.
– Publication: The resulting RDF, along with the ATC data available in
BioPortal, were published through a Virtuoso SPARQL endpoint22 . In addition, federated queries across different datasets can be performed to external
knowledge graphs to enhance the completeness of the provided knowledge.

6

Use Cases

As a result of our work, users can quickly locate the paragraphs in the articles
where immunosuppressive and antimalarial activity with macrolide antibiotics
are discussed ; or have a list of related diseases to mefloquine and azithromycin
when used to treat the COVID-19.
All this information is available for end users through our search engine, and
for anybody who wants to reuse the results through the restful Bio-API and the
open knowledge graph described above. The main use scenarios are:
– Drug-oriented Search: Our search engine23 provides the paragraphs of the
articles where the drug is mentioned, either by its trade name, its generic
name or its ATC classification; and a list of related drugs and related diseases
inferred from the representational models created for each of them (Fig.6).
– Keyword-oriented Search: Our RESTful API24 browses scientific literature through the relations inferred among drugs25 and diseases26 . The
drugs used in conjunction with lopinavir (e.g. /bio-api/drugs?keywords=
lopinavir), or the diseases treated with chloroquine (e.g. /bio-api/diseases?
keywords=chloroquine) can be easily explored.
21
22
23
24
25
26

https://rml.io/yarrrml
https://kg.drugs4covid.oeg-upm.net/sparql
https://search.drugs4covid.oeg-upm.net
https://search.drugs4covid.oeg-upm.net/customsearch
https://librairy.linkeddata.es/bio-api/drugs
https://librairy.linkeddata.es/bio-api/diseases

Drugs4Covid

13

Fig. 6: Drugs-oriented search interface showing drugs and diseases related
to lopinavir.
– Pattern-oriented Search: Our SPARQL endpoint27 offers a semantic interface for exploration. The most representative/descriptive questions asked
by practitioners, pharmacists and general public in natural language were
translated into SPARQL. Listing 1.1 shows one of them. It retrieves the
diseases related to drugs that combine immunosuppressant and antimalarial
activities with macrolide antibiotics.

Listing 1.1: List of drugs by a SPARQL query
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17

27

PREFIX onto: <https://w3id.org/def/DRUGS4COVID19#>
SELECT DISTINCT ?section ?paperTitle ?notation2 ?titleDisease WHERE {
?paragraph a onto:Paragraph .
?paragraph onto:section ?section .
?paper onto:contains ?paragraph .
?paper dc:title ?paperTitle .
?paragraph onto:mentions ?activeSubstance1 .
?paragraph onto:mentions ?activeSubstance2 .
?activeSubstance1 skos:notation "P01BA02"^^xsd:string .
?activeSubstance2 skos:notation ?notation2 .
?paragraph onto:mentions ?disease .
?disease a onto:Disease .
?disease onto:MESHCode ’C000657245’ .
?disease dc:title ?titleDisease .
FILTER (STRSTARTS(?notation2,"J01FA"))
}

https://kg.drugs4covid.oeg-upm.net

14

7

Badenes-Olmedo et al.

Lessons Learned and Future Work

This paper presents our work to create a knowledge graph and a search engine
to facilitate the exploration of the CORD-19 corpus through the relations discovered between drugs, diseases and texts. It required an effective collaboration
between language technology and semantic web researchers, and with domain
experts (doctors and pharmacists) who helped us to resolve doubts and guide
functional decisions. The obtained results, software, models and resources are
publicly available for anyone to use.
After the initial release of our services and the creation of a knowledge graph
together with its associated vocabulary, we have received numerous requests to
continue expanding the types of annotations and the information offered by the
knowledge graph. Our results are also being used by third parties, e.g. to obtain
”therapeutic targets”. The relations sought in this case arise from the proteins
described in articles, with the added difficulty that they are usually mentioned
by acronyms. Their feedback is promising, and they encourage us to continue
incorporating also the management of genes and biological pathways.
This would lead to an increment of the possibilities offered to users when
browsing the corpus. Moreover, the exploitation of these annotations in the
knowledge graph leads us to increase the reuse of existing biomedical ontologies and terminologies.
We are also working on a Citizen Science initiative with students of Pharmacy and Medicine to validate our annotations and help understand the type
of relations that may exist between drugs and diseases. The consensus acquired
from the contributions made by these citizen scientists will serve to measure
the quality of the results and improve the system as a whole. As in many other
Citizen Science projects, a score-based system will be created using parameters
such as user participation, quality of contributions (based on gold standards and
community contributions), etc. And finally, a helpdesk will allow us receiving
feedback from users to continue improving the results that we provide.
Other more general functionalities that have been already requested by end
users are related to usability and to the creation of alerts when a drug, protein
or combinations of them appear in the corpus.

References
1. Alobaid, A., Garijo, D., Poveda-Villalón, M., Santana-Perez, I., FernándezIzquierdo, A., Corcho, O.: Automating ontology engineering support activities with
OnToology. Journal of Web Semantics (2018)
2. Badenes-Olmedo, C., Redondo-Garcia, J.L., Corcho, O.: Distributing Text
Mining tasks with librAIry. In: Proceedings of the 2017 ACM Symposium
on Document Engineering - DocEng ’17. pp. 63–66. ACM Press (2017).
https://doi.org/10.1145/3103010.3121040
3. Badenes-Olmedo, C., Redondo-Garcı́a, J.L., Corcho, O.: Large-scale semantic exploration of scientific literature using topic-based hashing algorithms. Semantic
Web pp. 1–16 (2020). https://doi.org/10.3233/SW-200373

Drugs4Covid

15

4. Boag, W., Sergeeva, E., Kulshreshtha, S., Szolovits, P., Rumshisky, A., Naumann,
T.: Cliner 2.0: Accessible and accurate clinical concept extraction. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1803.02245 (2018)
5. Brainard, J.: Scientists are drowning in COVID-19 papers. Can new tools
keep them afloat? Science (2020), https://www.sciencemag.org/news/2020/05/
scientists-are-drowning-covid-19-papers-can-new-tools-keep-them-afloat
6. Cho, H., Lee, H.: Biomedical named entity recognition using deep neural networks
with contextual information. BMC bioinformatics 20(1), 735 (2019)
7. Dimou, A., Sande, M.V., Colpaert, P., Verborgh, R., Mannens, E., de Walle, R.V.:
RML: A Generic Language for Integrated RDF Mappings of Heterogeneous Data.
In: LDOW. CEUR Workshop Proceedings, vol. 1184. CEUR-WS.org (2014)
8. Garijo, D.: WIDOCO: a wizard for documenting ontologies. In: International Semantic Web Conference. pp. 94–102. Springer (2017)
9. Garijo, D., Poveda-Villalón, M.: Best Practices for Implementing FAIR Vocabularies and Ontologies on the Web (2020)
10. Goulart, R.R.V., de Lima, V.L.S., Xavier, C.C.: A systematic review of named
entity recognition in biomedical texts. Journal of the Brazilian Computer Society
17(2), 103–116 (2011)
11. Iglesias, E., Jozashoori, S., Chaves-Fraga, D., Collarana, D., Vidal, M.E.: SDMRDFizer: An RML interpreter for the efficient creation of rdf knowledge graphs. In:
ACM Intern. Confer. on Information and Knowledge Management, CIKM (2020)
12. Kusner, M., Sun, Y., Kolkin, N., Weinberger, K.: From Word Embeddings To
Document Distances. In: Bach, F., Blei, D. (eds.) Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference on Machine Learning. Proceedings of Machine Learning
Research, vol. 37, pp. 957–966. PMLR (2015)
13. Mikolov, T., Sutskever, I., Chen, K., Corrado, G.S., Dean, J.: Distributed Representations of Words and Phrases and their Compositionality. In: Burges, C.J.C.,
Bottou, L., Welling, M., Ghahramani, Z., Weinberger, K.Q. (eds.) Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems 26, pp. 3111–3119. Curran Associates, Inc.
(2013)
14. Neumann, M., King, D., Beltagy, I., Ammar, W.: ScispaCy: Fast and Robust
Models for Biomedical Natural Language Processing. In: Proceedings of the 18th
BioNLP Workshop and Shared Task. pp. 319–327. Association for Computational
Linguistics (2019)
15. Poveda-Villalón, M., Gómez-Pérez, A., Suárez-Figueroa, M.C.: OOPS! (OntOlogy
Pitfall Scanner!): An On-line Tool for Ontology Evaluation. International Journal
on Semantic Web and Information Systems (IJSWIS) 10(2), 7–34 (2014)
16. Poveda-Villalón, M., Fernández-Izquierdo, A., Garcı́a-Castro, R.: Linked Open
Terms (LOT) Methodology (2019). https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.2539305
17. Rose, S., Engel, D., Cramer, N., Cowley, W.: Automatic keyword extraction from
individual documents. Text mining: applications and theory 1, 1–20 (2010)
18. Shahmirzadi, O., Lugowski, A., Younge, K.: Text Similarity in Vector Space Models: A Comparative Study. ArXiv (2018)
19. Song, H.J., Jo, B.C., Park, C.Y., Kim, J.D., Kim, Y.S.: Comparison of named entity
recognition methodologies in biomedical documents. Biomedical engineering online
17(2), 158 (2018)
20. Tsai, R.T.H., Wu, S.H., Chou, W.C., Lin, Y.C., He, D., Hsiang, J., Sung, T.Y., Hsu,
W.L.: Various criteria in the evaluation of biomedical named entity recognition.
BMC bioinformatics 7(1), 92 (2006)
21. Vàzquez, M., Oliver, A.: Improving term candidates selection using terminological
tokens. Terminology. International Journal of Theoretical and Applied Issues in
Specialized Communication 24(1), 122–147 (2018)

16

Badenes-Olmedo et al.

22. Wang, L.L., Lo, K., Chandrasekhar, Y., Reas, R., Yang, J., Eide, D., Funk, K.,
Kinney, R., Liu, Z., Merrill, W., et al.: CORD-19: The Covid-19 Open Research
Dataset. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.10706 (2020)
23. Zhang, Y., Chen, Q., Yang, Z., Lin, H., Lu, Z.: BioWordVec,improving biomedical
word embeddings with subword information and MeSH. Scientific Data 6(1), 52
(2019). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41597-019-0055-0

