From #Jobsearch to #Mask: Improving COVID-19 Cascade Prediction
with Spillover Effects
Ninghan Chen1 , Zhiqiang Zhong1 , Jun Pang1,2
1

arXiv:2012.07088v2 [cs.SI] 15 Dec 2020

Faculty of Sciences, Technology and Medicine,
University of Luxembourg, L-4364 Esch-sur-Alzette, Luxembourg
2
Interdisciplinary Centre for Security, Reliability and Trust,
University of Luxembourg, L-4364 Esch-sur-Alzette, Luxembourg
Abstract
As the pandemic of social media panic spreads faster than
the COVID-19 outbreak, an urgent challenge arises: a prediction model needs to be developed to predict the future diffusion size of a piece of COVID-19 information at an early
stage of its emergence. In this paper, we focus on the cascade
prediction of COVID-19 information with spillover effects.
We build the first COVID-19-related Twitter dataset of the
Greater Region from the cascade perspective and explore the
structure of the cascades. Moreover, the existence of spillover
effects is verified in our data and spillover effects for information on COVID-19 symptoms, anti-contagion and treatment
measures are found to be from multiple topics of other information. Building on the above findings, we design our SECGNN model (CoupledGNN with spillover effects) based on
CoupledGNN for cascade prediction. Experiments conducted
on our dataset demonstrate that our model outperforms the
state-of-the-art methods for COVID-19 information cascade
prediction.

Introduction
The outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic leads to an
outbreak of information in major online social networks (OSNs), including Twitter, Facebook, Instagram, and
YouTube (Cinelli et al. 2020). Facing this massive COVID19 outbreak and constantly changing situation, OSNs have
become an essential platform for people to seek up-to-theminute and local information. Moreover, due to physical isolation and social distancing, people spend much more time
on OSNs — engaging in expressing opinions, encouraging
others, openly lambasting mismanagement, and voicing vitriol, etc. Discussions on OSNs can be a reflection of reality,
and topics about the pandemic mirror the public concerns in
real-time.
As noted by the World Health Organisation (WHO),
“countering fake news or rumours is actually only responding or mitigating when it’s too late”,1 urgent actions should
be taken to solve the coronavirus infodemic, as large-scale
dissemination of misinformation and fake news can mislead
people and make them panic. This infodemic also hinders
outbreak response and increases public confusion about who
and what information sources to trust, and it even promotes
1
https://www.who.int/news-room/featurestories/detail/immunizing-the-public-against-misinformation

racial abuse and bullying. As the pandemic of social media panic spreads faster than COVID-19 outbreak (Depoux
et al. 2020) and new misinformation and rumours are persistent though the whole pandemic, an urgent challenge arises.
A prediction model needs to be developed to predict the
future diffusion size of a piece of COVID-19 information
at an early stage of its emergence. Predicting the diffusion
size, formally known as information cascade prediction, can
significantly improve our understanding of the people’s behaviours on social media and in reality, as well as anticipate
how people will react to new pandemic information in advance.
In the past years, researches on cascade prediction have
been sustained, a large number of prediction models have
been developed, ranging from statistical prediction models (Zhao et al. 2015; Yu et al. 2015; Yan et al. 2016) to machining learning-based methods (Weng, Menczer, and Ahn
2014; Cheng et al. 2014; Cui et al. 2013; Jenders, Kasneci,
and Naumann 2013), which comprise many hand-crafted
features and are heavily restrained by feature representation
and platforms, and now to deep learning-based methods (Li
et al. 2017; Cao et al. 2020) with higher generalisability on
different scenarios.
However, none of these existing models takes into account
the unique influence of spillover effects in the COVID-19
information. Spillover effects are defined as an event in one
context that occurs because of something else in a seemingly unrelated context (Zhang et al. 2008). Spillover effects
in the diffusion of COVID-19 information is manifested in
a variety of ways. For instance, Park et al. (Park, Park, and
Chong 2020) demonstrate that information with medically
oriented thematic framework has a wider spillover effect on
COVID-19 issues in a Twitter context. Racist information
can have a spillover effect on the mistrust of medical system (Alang, McAlpine, and Hardeman 2020) and lead to a
lack of trust in the information released by these systems. As
a more grounded sample, tweets about unemployment and
job-searching might have a spillover effect on a user receiving them, causing him or her to perceive the severity of the
pandemic and take the next step such as retweeting stay-athome tweets or participating in discussions about lockdown
protest marches. Since spillover effects are spread based on
the text content, it is of great importance to capture spillover
effects from the text content of tweets posted and received

by the users.
In this paper, we focus on the cascade prediction of
COVID-19 information from the perspective of spillover effects. The main contributions in this paper are fourfold.
(I) We build a novel Twitter dataset of 2020/01/022 to
2020/07/18 which contains the metadata of COVID-19
related tweets posted by users in the Greater Region
(GR),2 which are geocoded and screened from Chen et
al’s dataset (Chen, Lerman, and Ferrara 2020). As a result, we retrieved a completely new dataset which consists of the user’s social network as well as the cascade of tweets. This is currently the first Twitter COVID19-related dataset from the cascade perspective and this
dataset will be shared with the public for advance related
research.
(II) After exploring the dataset and building the most frequent
graph structure of cascades, we define the depth and width
of the cascade and find that the cascades tend to get a
larger width than a larger depth. The data also contains a
large number of chain-like cascades, which are unique to
the regional data.
(III) The existence of spillover effects is verified in our data
and spillover effects for information including COVID19 symptoms, anti-contagion and treatment measures are
found to be from multiple topics of other information,
rather than one.
(IV) To effectively predict the future size of the cascades, we
design our SE-CGNN (CoupledGNN with spillover effects) based on CoupledGNN, which is designed to capture the iterative interaction between the state of the node
and the influence spread, i.e., cascading effect, by leveraging early adopters and network structure. A state-of-theart text embedding model is fine-tuned and utilised in SECGNN to represent users’ historical tweet content. The
historical tweet content and temporal information of the
COVID-19 pandemic are further utilised for cascade prediction.
The results of our prediction model are compared with
multiple baselines. We find that SE-CGNN can effectively
capture spillover effects, greatly improving the performance
of predicting COVID-19 information on Twitter, especially
regarding symptoms, preventive and treatment measures information of COVID-19. Moreover, our experiments reveal
that temporal information of the COVID-19 pandemic can
hardly improve the results of prediction.

Related Work
Past views on cascade prediction often considered that the
eventual scope of a cascade may be an inherently unpredictable property (Salganik, Dodds, and Watts 2006), but after studies shed light on the predication of key properties in
an information cascade (Cheng et al. 2014; Yu et al. 2015),
2

The Greater Region of Luxembourg is composed of the Grand
Duchy of Luxembourg, Wallonia, Saarland, Lorraine, RhinelandPalatinate and the German-speaking community of Belgium.

cascade prediction has become an attractive research question. The issue of cascade prediction problem can be formulated at two different levels: macro-level and micro-level.
Micro-level prediction models focus on the prediction of
user activation state. Among these are three major categories, the initial methods based on the Independent Cascade model (IC) (Kempe, Kleinberg, and Tardos 2003), the
representation learning methods and the deep learning-based
methods. The IC model and its extensions (Gruhl et al. 2004;
Goldenberg, Libai, and Muller 2001; Gomez-Rodriguez,
Leskovec, and Krause 2012) assume that the probability of
influence is independent between two linked users, and they
perform predictions by generating a sequence of users in a
Monte Carlo simulation cascade (Mooney 1997). The representation learning methods (Bourigault, Lamprier, and Gallinari 2016; Gao et al. 2017) encode each user as a parametric vector and model the probability of information diffusion between two users. However, as these methods are
based on assumptions and are highly simplified versions
of the actual situation, they do not obtain sufficiently robust results for practical prediction tasks. For deep learningbased methods, both DeepDiffuse (Islam et al. 2018) and
CYAN-RNN (Wang et al. 2017b) use long short-term memory (LSTM) and attentional mechanisms to exploit timestamp information for prediction. TopoLSTM (Wang et al.
2017a) replaces the sequence structure of the hidden dimension in the Recurrent neural network (RNN) with a directed
acyclic diagram extracted from the social network to acheive
more accurate prediction.
Macro-level cascade predictions are generally focused on
predicting the size or the growth trend of a cascade at a
certain point of time in the future. Macro-level prediction
methods can be divided into three categories as a result of
technological evolution. The development starts with statistical prediction model such as SEISMIC (Zhao et al. 2015),
Weibull (Yu et al. 2015), and Bass (Yan et al. 2016); and
then, machine learning-based methods with manually designed features extracted from text content, temporal, demographic and network structure information (Yu et al.
2015; Cheng et al. 2014; Cui et al. 2013; Tsur and Rappoport 2012), and finally arrives at the current deep learningbased methods. While Deepcas (Li et al. 2017) and DeepHawkes (Cao et al. 2017) use RNN to capture cascading
sequences in place of manually designed features, CoupledGNN (Cao et al. 2020) (CGNN) uses two GNNs to
enhance the accuracy of prediction through capturing cascading effects. CoupledGNN effectively addresses cascade
prediction by capturing the cascading effect which indicates
that the activation of one user will trigger its neighbours in
a successive manner, forming an information cascade over
social networks (Guille et al. 2013).
In general, while the deep learning-based methods have
achieved relatively good results in cascade prediction based
on network structure and cascading sequences, less research
has been conducted on incorporating text content into models to learn the whole graph representation and cascade prediction. In fact, text content information represents an important part of social media, but research is currently limited
to incorporating text content into the learning of node repre-

sentations (Yang et al. 2015). Furthermore, due to the richness of the text content and the remarkable performance of
CoupledGNN, we narrow the focus in this article to macrolevel cascade prediction from the perspective of spillover effects that are evident in the COVID-19 information as opposed to general information (Park, Park, and Chong 2020;
Alang, McAlpine, and Hardeman 2020).

Problem Definition
In this section, we formally define social networks, information cascade and the problem of cascade prediction.
Definition 1 (Social Network) Given a social network
G = (V, E), where V denotes the set of nodes and E ⊆
V × V is the set of edges connecting the nodes. A node
u ∈ V represents an actor (e.g., a Twitter user) and an edge
e = (ua , ub ) ∈ E represents a direct following relationship
from node ua to node ub .
Definition 2 (Cascade) Let I be a set of information pieces
(i.e., a set of original tweets). The cascade of information
i ∈ I is defined as a node set ciT = {ua , ub , · · · , un }, that
have adopted i within the observation time window T .
Definition 3 (Cascade Prediction) Given the underlying
social network G = (V, E) and the observed cascades ciT ,
the goal of the cascade prediction problem is to learn a function θ to predict the final size of the information i.

Data
Twitter, one of the most prominent online social media platform, has been used extensively during the COVID-19 pandemic. In this section, we briefly describe how we collect
the GR COVID-19 Twitter dataset, build the cascades and
explore spillover effects in the dataset.

Data Collection and Processing
Twitter allows users to perform two types of actions, posting
and retweeting. In detail, for users ua and ub , when ub posts
a tweet i, with a unique tweet IDi , ua can retweet i from
ub . This retweeting action also generates a new tweet j, with
another unique tweet IDj , and tweet i is called the original
tweet of j. In other words, both i and j are called tweets, but
their status can be either retweeted or original.

The construction of our dataset is divided into the following steps. Figure 1 shows the pipeline of the construction.
First, as our study is mainly focused on the Greater Region (GR), we collect tweets from this region. Meta tweet
data with COVID-19 related keywords from 2020/01/22 to
2020/07/18 are collected based on Chen et al.’s work (Chen,
Lerman, and Ferrara 2020) via the Twitter Streaming API
(Figure 1 (a)). The dataset collects tweets with specific keywords including ‘COVID-19’, ‘coronavirus’, ‘lockdown’,
‘social distancing’, etc.
Second, as the user location information in the metadata
so far is user-defined, which is probably not a true location,
nor machine-parseable, the fuzzy location context is processed into real location information by leveraging geocoding APIs, Geopy3 and ArcGis Geocoding4 . After getting the
valid geographic location of each user, we select users located in the GR and the tweets them posted. Table 1 gives an
example of the data we collected. In this step (Figure 1 (b)),
we acquired 8,872 GR users and 247,086 tweets. The original information set I0 is created based on the above data,
and the user who publishes the original information i ∈ I0
is called the original user. In detail, from all the tweets we
get from the previous step, if a tweet has the status being
original, this tweet is added to I0 and if a tweet has the status of retweeted, the corresponding original tweet is added
to I0 . After this step, we construct the I0 set containing a
total of 60,035 tweets.
Third, the construction of the cascades (Figure 1 (d)) and
the building of the underlying social network (Figure 1 (c))is
completed in this step. In order to build our social network
in GR, we carry out a user search process as follows. Those
8,872 GR users are treated as seed users. We scrape all the
followers and friends of the seed users and screen users who
mutually follow each other. Next, the geographic location
information of these users is collected in the same way as
in the second step. Consequently, we screen the follower
and friends of these new users to identify more GR users.
We conducted 5 rounds of this search process until no new
GR users can be found. In this step, we collected a total
of 12,256,152 users, including seed users, and 21,203,130
following relationships (edges in the social network), which
3
4

https://bit.ly/3gfW2PP
https://bit.ly/3f9OUDa

Attribute
Time
Status
Tweet id

Description
Time of the tweet
The status of the tweet: Original/ Retweeted
A unique identifier for a tweet

Full text

Text of a tweet

User id
User geo orginal
User geo
Original tweet id
Original user id

Unique identifier for this user
User-defined location information
Geocoded user location
A unique identifier for the original tweet
A unique identifier for the original user

Example
2020-04-28 17:00:09+00:00
Retweeted
12319668395******
RT @******:The Diamond princess is
a UK ship managed by the US.#coronavirus
u9181074902*****
Moselle
Moselle, Lorraine, France
134515******
103*****

Table 1: A sample of the GR tweet dataset

Tweet
screening

I0

Reweet user
searching

Cascade
construction

C0

Cascade
screening

Information set
(I)

I0
Twitter
metadata
collection

(d)

Geocoding
& user
screening

C
G0
Seed user

(a)

(b)

Social network
construction

Cascade set
(C)

Subgraph
generation

G0

Soical netwok
(G)

(e)

(c)

Figure 1: Pipeline of data collection

5

https://www.aminer.cn/influencelocality
6
https://www.aminer.org/citation

in a final original information set I. Finally, there are 10,579
tweets in I and the same number of cascades in C, with an
average of 4.78 nodes.
Similarly, in the construction of the social network, as not
all users u ∈ V0 participate in C, in order to better analyse the retweeting behaviour of users, we have constructed
a subgraph called GR social network G from the G0 . In detail, we remove all users who never post or retweet tweet
i ∈ I, but we exclude cases in which networks are no longer
weakly connected after removal of a certain user. (West et al.
1996). Eventually, the GR social network G is obtained, Table 2 shows the statistics summary of G. Its degree distribution is shown in Figure 2.

Degree Distribution

104

103

p(k)

make up the preliminary social network G0 = (V0 , E0 ).
Since the metadata of tweets does not show the full cascade path of each tweet, we choose to follow the construction method of building the cascades from previous
work (Kupavskii et al. 2012; Tsur and Rappoport 2012).
We pick out users sharing a following relationship from all
users who tweet or retweet the same tweet, ending up in
the cascade of the given tweet. For a tweet i ∈ I0 posted
by user uv , users ua , ub , uc , ud ∈ V0 retweet i and there
exist edges (ub , ua ), (ud , ub ), (ub , ud ) ∈ E0 . ub retweets
later than ua and ud retweets later than ub , a cascade ciT =
{uv , ua , ub , ud } is built according to Definition 2. Note that
uc is not included in ciT as there are no edges between uc
and other users.
Fourth, due to the limitations of Chen et al’s dataset that
it contains only about 1% of the total number of Tweets that
actually occurred (Chen, Lerman, and Ferrara 2020). When
only data collected from their dataset is used to construct the
cascades, the following situation may arise: some GR users
have retweeted a tweet i, but their tweets are not included in
the dataset because of the limitations of (Chen, Lerman, and
Ferrara 2020), which leads to the incompleteness of the cascades. This problem is insignificant for datasets at the global
level5,6 , which can have sufficient data to build cascades.
But for a region with fewer users, it can result in cascades
containing too few users for the model to learn. In order to
include as many engaged users as possible in the cascades,
we collect every user who retweets i ∈ I0 and construct our
cascades according to the construction method in the third
step (Figure 1 (e)).
The constructed cascades constitute a preliminary cascade
set C0 . We find that 82.38% of the cascades in C0 contain
only an original user and one another retweet user and do
not grow at all after the observation time window T . We
remove cascades in C0 with less than 3 users, following the
existing works (Li et al. 2017; Cao et al. 2020) to form the
cascades set C. At the same time, the tweets corresponding
to the removed cascades are also removed from I0 , resulting

102

101

100
100

101

k

102

103

Figure 2: Degree distribution of the GR social network
dataset

In the end, we are able to obtain a completely new dataset
that includes the user’s social network G as well as the cascade of tweets C.

Data Analysis and Classification
In this section, an exploration of spillover effects is conducted in our dataset. We classify I and C into two categories, one is information and corresponding cascades
about symptoms, anti-contagion and treatment measures
of COVID-19 (‘measures’), another is others information.
Then, cascade shapes with high frequency in ‘measures’ cascades and C are presented and analysed. Next, to verify that
other information has spillover effects on ‘measures’ information, we make a hypothesis and test it.
First, a simple classification of the text content of I is carried out using the SVM classifiers trained in our previous
study (Chen, Zhong, and Pang 2020) to investigate spillover
effects on ‘measures’ information from other information.
The classifier divides I into two categories:
1. ‘Measures’: Information about symptoms, anti-contagion
and treatment measures of COVID-19. The set of this category of information is denoted as IM ⊆ I.
2. ‘Other’: Other information, denoted as IO ⊆ I, and IO =
I − IM .
After classifying the I, CM ⊆ C denotes the cascade
subset corresponding to IM , which contains 908 cascades
(8.58%).
Second, we define the depth and width of the cascade
based on previous work (Zhou et al. 2010). For each cascade,
we sample a subgraph Gc of G with the users it contains.
The largest value of all the shortest path length from the
original user to any other users is defined as the depth d of
the cascade. A set consisting of users who are one step away
from the original user is called the depth-1 user set, and so
on. For the depth-n set containing the most users, the number of users it contains is defined as the width w of the cascade. The top five most frequent cascade shape of C and
CM is presented in Table 4. Figure 3(a) and 3(b) plots the

Unemployment
Panic buying
School closures

12

12

10

10

8

8

Cascade depth

Table 2: Statistics of the GR social network

distribution of d and w for C, and Figure 3(c) shows the
distribution of cascade size of C.
The result shows that both categories of cascades tend to
have a larger w rather than a larger d. The result also shows
that 81.09% of cascades have d = 2, and 16.44% of cascades have d = 3. Moreover, it can be observed that cascades with d = 3 reach the largest w. Only 6.88% of the
cascades have w ≥ 10, and 51.79% of them have d = 3.
Similar to the previous study (Zhou et al. 2010), the cascades tend to spread with certain shapes. Zhou et al.’s work
concludes that most cascades have a central hub, and users
are more likely to receive information directly from the same
user in the network. This can be observed in the fifth rank
graphs in Table 4. However, the shapes of both C and CM
are different from the cascade shapes in (Zhou et al. 2010).
In our study, a large number of chain-like cascades emerged.
The most frequent shapes of CM contain more nodes compared to C’s and also tends to reach a larger d and w. This
suggests that information about a particular kind of content

6
4
2
0

6
4
2

0

10

20

30
40
50
Cascade width

60

70

80

0

(a) C

0

10

20

30
40
50
Cascade width

60

70

80

(b) CM
Cascade

5000
number of cascade

21,339
214,962
4.757
10.0737
0.18

Cascade depth

#node
#edge
Average path length
Average degree
Average clustering coefficient

4000
3000
2000
1000
0

3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21
number of nodes

(c) Distribution of cascade size n of C

Figure 3: Distribution of cascade depth, width and size

Keywords
jobs, job, jobsearching, jobsearch, unemployment, employment, careers, career,
resume, recruitment, recession, economy, economic emploi, stelle, employ,
arbeitslos, chômeurs
panicbuying, panicshopping, panicbuyers, toiletpaper, notoiletpaper, handsanitizer,
toiletpaperpanic, toiletpapercrisis, toiletpapershortage, howmuchtoiletpaper,
toiletpaperapocalypse, coronashopping
schoolclosures, closenypublicschools, closenycschools, closenyschools, suny,
cuny, homeschool, homeschooling, homeschool2020, schoolsclosed, noschool,
closetheschools, shutdownschools, closethepublicschools, schoolsclosing
Table 3: Keywords for the topic categories

C
Graph

w

d

Size

Frequency

1

1

2

3

2

2

2

3

2

4

5

Rank

CM
Graph

w

d

Size

Frequency

5,552

1

2

3

458

4

7,65

1

3

4

63

2

4

511

2

2

4

40

1

3

4

482

4

1

5

35

2

3

5

368

3

4

6

33

Table 4: Shape of cascades
may have a greater cascade. In addition, graphs in rank 3
show a different shape from Zhou et al.’s work. This graph
suggests that a user may be influenced by users from multiple neighbours and end up being activated.
Third, to further explore spillover effects manifested in
the text content, we make the following hypothesis:
H There is at least one type of information in the IO that will
have spillover effects on the spreading of IM .
We empirically identify unemployment, panic buying,
and school closures as the three topics of information that
may have spillover effects on the spreading of IM , based on
the previous research (Mamun and Ullah 2020; Shanthakumar, Seetharam, and Ramesh 2020).
We search for keywords (Table 3) corresponding to each
topic category in IO to classify IO . The neighbours of users
who post or retweet content on a certain topic category form
the set Vn . If a user u ∈ Vn has also participated in any
c ∈ Cm , then u is considered to be activated by the ‘measures’ information with the influence of the topic information. The percentage of activated users to total users in Vn
is shown in Table 5 along with the percentage of activated
users to total users in V .
Unemployment
% in whole users
% in category

2.30%
14.03%

Panic
buying
6.94%
5.81%

School
closures
2.61%
9.71%

Table 5: Percentage of activated user
The result shows that users who received information on
unemployment, and school closures from their neighbours
are more likely to diffuse IM , but this effect does not occur with panic buying. Therefore, information on unemployment and school closures has clear spillover effects on IM .

The hypothesis (H) is accepted. We also found that spillover
effects are integrated and multi-sourced, so the historical text
content of users needs to be considered in the cascade prediction.

Cascade Prediction Model
In this section, we introduce our cascade prediction model
SE-CGNN, which is based on the current state-of-the-art
cascade prediction model CoupledGNN to capture spillover
effects. We first briefly describe the basic framework of CoupledGNN, and then explain in detail how we embed Twitter
content, obtain the user’s historical content and add them
to CoupledGNN along with the temporal information of the
pandemic as node features to obtain our SE-CGNN model.
CoupledGNN (Cao et al. 2020). This model is designed
to capture the iterative interaction between the state of the
node and the influence spread. CoupledGNN consists of two
GNNs, the State GNN (Figure 4 (c)) and the Influence GNN
(Figure 4 (d)). These two GNNs are coupled by two gating
mechanisms. In GNN, nodes learn their own representations
by aggregating the characteristics of their neighbours, i.e.,
following the “neighbourhood aggregation” scheme. When
given a social network G and a cascade ciT of information i,
the users u in the social network has a state s ∈ [0, 1]. When
s = 1, the user state is active, i.e. u ∈ ciT , otherwise s = 0,
it is inactive.
The role of the Influence GNN is to model the diffusion
of influence in the social network. In detail, each user has
(0)
an initial influence representation ru , which is made up of
two components, node embeddings and node features. The
node features of original CoupledGNN includes coreness,
Pagerank, hub score, authority score, eigenvector centrality,
and clustering coefficient. The initial influence of a user is
mainly determined by its network structure information. The
influence of an activated user is propagated to other users

A

B

C
F

E

(b) User embedding

D

(a) Text embedding

DeepWalk

Tweet text
content

RoBERTa

G

(c) State Gr aph Neur al Networ k
SA A

D SD

SC C
SF
F

SA A

B SB

E

G SG

SE

rA A

B

GNN L ayer

I nfluence Gate

D SD

SC C
SF
F

E
SE

rA A

rB

SA A

B SB

SF
F

G SG

B

State Gate

rC C
F

D

E

rE

rA A

rB

rG

Predicted
Cascade Size

G SG

B

Sum Pooling

rB

? ?

rC C

rD
F

G

E
SE

D

rC C

rD

D

rD

rF

rF

rF

D SD

SC C

? ?

GNN L ayer

B SB

E

rE

F
G

E

rE

rG

G

rG

(d) I nfluence Gr aph Neur al Networ k

Figure 4: Pipeline of SE-CGNN
along with the network structure. This spread of influence
is achieved through the neighbourhood aggregation of GNN
and is controlled by the gating mechanism from the State
GNN. In other words, by means of the gating mechanism, the
impact of node state on the diffusion of influence is realised.
The goal of the State GNN is to model the activation state
of each user. Following the same principle of the Influence
GNN, the activation status of a user is influenced by the activated users in his neighbourhood. The State GNN is implemented by the neighbour aggregation and the gating mechanism from the Influence GNN.
Ultimately, after K layers of coupled Influence GNN and
(k)
State GNN, the final activation state for each user su ∈
[0, 1] will be determined. The size of the final cascade is
obtained by a sum pooling mechanism.
SE-CGNN. Spillover effects are defined as an event in one
context that occurs because of something else in a seemingly unrelated context (Zhang et al. 2008). Spillover effects in this paper indicate that a user’s activation state is
directly or indirectly influenced by historical text content
posted by themselves and other neighbours in the social network. Since spillover effects are spread based on the text
content, it is of great importance to capture spillover effects
from the text content of tweets posted and received by the
users. In other words, spillover effects refer to the iterative
interaction between the state of the node and the spread of
influence that takes the text content into account. In order
to capture the above spillover effects, we propose our SECGNNN model based on CoupledGNN. Figure 4 shows the
pipeline of SE-CGNN.
The first step of SE-CGNN is to embed the text content
of tweets that each user has tweeted or retweeted, to obtain

a representation of that user’s historical information content
(Figure 4 (a)). RoBERTa (Liu et al. 2019), a language pretrained transformer, is utilised in this pipeline as the text
encoder. RoBERTa is chosen because our tweet text contents are multilingual. There are already a number of pretrained RoBERTa models that are adept at multilingual content. Here, we have chosen a widely used multilingual pretrained RoBERTa model called XLM-RoBERTa (Conneau
et al. 2019). We fine-tune XLM-RoBERTa using the Masked
Language Modeling task (MLM) (Liu et al. 2019), which
is a self-supervised task and is widely used in fine-tuning
RoBERTa models. The MLM starts by replacing random
words (tokens) in the input sentence with a special token
[MASK] and then trains the model to predict the replaced
words based on the remaining words. Here, we randomly
mask 15% of the tokens in each tweet content and predict the
replaced words. Perplexity scores (Chen, Beeferman, and
Rosenfeld 1998), a generic metric for evaluating language
model, is used as the evaluation metric for fine-tuning (Liu
et al. 2019). Perplexity is an evaluation of the model’s ability to predict among the set of specified tokens in the content (corpus) (Wolf et al. 2019). Basically, a lower perplexity
score indicates a better language model. The result displayed
in Table 6 shows that the fine-tuned XLM-RoBERTa model
can have a better representation of our data.
Embedding of each tweet text is represented by a vector ~e
Model
XLM-RoBERTa
Fine-tuned XLM-RoBERTa

Perplexity scores
4.512
3.970

Table 6: Perplexity scores for XLM-RoBERTa for MLM

generated from the fine-tuned XLM-RoBERTa model. The
historical text content of a user is represented by a vector
built over all the tweets that they have shared ~ē = n1 (e~1 +
e~2 + . . . + e~n ).
The temporal feature is the value d = d0 − d1 represents
the difference between the date when a tweet is posted d1 ,
and the date of the outbreak day d0 (Chen, Zhong, and Pang
2020) in that country or region.
Secondly, node embedding is generated by DeepWalk
without further fine-tuning in both CoupledGNN and SECGNN. We concatenate the user embedding, historical text
content ~ē, temporal feature, and node features in CoupledGNN. The concatenate vector is utilised as an initial
(0)
influence representation ru of the user u in the Influence
GNN.
In the Influence GNN of CoupledGNN, each user u is associated with an influence representation ru . The influence
(k+1)
representation ru
of user u at (k + 1)-th layer is:


(k)
ru(k+1) = σ ζr(k) W (k) rv(k) + ζb b(k)
(1)
v
(k)

Here, bu is the neighborhood aggregation of user u,
∈ R is weight parameters, σ is a exponential linear
activation function.
Thirdly, we predict our cascade based on the framework
of CoupledGNN. Likewise, the final cascade size is obtained
by a sum pooling mechanism.
(k) (k)
ζr , ζb

Experiments
We present comparative empirical experiments using our
dataset to evaluate the performance of SE-CGNN in capturing spillover effects.

Evaluation Metrics
As I is the total number of pieces of information, ni∞ is the
true final popularity of information i.
Mean Relative Square Error (MRSE):
I

1X
MRSE =
I i=1



n̂i∞ − ni∞
ni∞

2
(2)

Mean Absolute Percentage Error (MAPE): MAPE reflects
the average deviation between the real and predicted values.
I

MAPE =

1 X |n̂i∞ − ni∞ |
.
I i=1
ni∞

(3)

Wrong Percentage Error (WroPerc): WroPerc measures the
percentage of i ∈ I that are incorrectly predicted with a
given error tolerance :
I

1 X |n̂i∞ − ni∞ |
I[
≥ ].
WroPerc =
I i=1
ni∞
 = 0.5 is set in this paper.

(4)

Baseline Methods
Feature-based method. A linear regression model (Cao
et al. 2020) with L2 regularisation with features is used as
a baseline. For better comparison, we use the same features
mentioned in the past studies (Cao et al. 2020; Li et al.
2017). Three types of graphs are utilised in this method: the
global graph G, the cascade graph g, and the frontier graph
gf , which contains nodes that are not in g but are neighbours of nodes in g. The included features fall into three categories, centrality and density, substructures and communities and node identity. The average and 90th percentile of the
degree of nodes in g and G, the number of leaf nodes, edge
density in g, and the number of nodes and edges in gf are
included in the centrality and density features. For Substructures and communities features, we calculate the number of
substructures (Ugander et al. 2012), including nodes, edges
and triangles and the number of communities and the corresponding coverage of the partition of these communities in
both g and gf (Weng, Menczer, and Ahn 2014). The node
ids, historical text content and temporal feature for users in
G and g are included as node identity features.
SEISMIC (Zhao et al. 2015). SEISMIC is a framework
for predicting the final size of an information cascade. The
Hawkes self-activation point process is implemented to estimate or approximate the impact of cascading effect by their
average number of followers.
DeepCas (Li et al. 2017). DeepCas is an end-to-end deep
learning method for information cascades prediction. It
mainly utilises the information about the structure of the cascade graph and node identities for prediction. An attention
mechanism is designed to assemble a cascade graph representation from a set of random walk paths. DeepCas is used
as a baseline as it tremendously improves the performance of
cascade prediction compared to hand-crafting feature-based
methods.
CoupledGNN. As the basis for our SE-CGNN, CoupledGNN is also used as a baseline to compare with the performance of SE-CGNN, especially with regard to capturing
spillover effects.

Implementation Details
This section first describes in detail the way in which the
individual models are tuned and the determination of the
hyper-parameters. It goes on to demonstrate how we classify tweets and design comparative experiments to verify the
effectiveness of SE-CGNN in capturing the spillover effect.
We tune all the hyper-parameters whether in the Featurebased methods, DeepCas, CoupledGNN or our SE-CGNN
to obtain the best results.
As the output of the RoBERTa is a high-dimensional
and sparse vector, the node feature vectors are linearly
transformed and tuned, which we take to be 128. All
models, all hyper-parameters are tuned in order to obtain
the best outcome for the validation set corresponding to
each configuration. The L2-coefficients are chosen from
{0.5, 0.1, 0.05, · · · , 10−8 }. For all the neural network models, the learning rate is chosen from {0.1, 0.05, · · · , 10−5 },
the mini-batch size is chosen from {15, 10, 5}, and number

Evaluation Metric
Feature-based
SEISMIC
DeepCas
CoupledGNN
SE-CGNN
Temporal-CGNN
Content-CGNN

MRSE
0.3611
0.5580
0.2837
0.2678
0.2514
0.2712
0.2581

C
MAPE
0.4018
0.5104
0.3959
0.3861
0.3803
0.3911
0.3796

WroPerc
41.31%
56.35%
37.71%
35.19%
33.65%
35.19%
33.75%

MRSE
0.4403
0.5899
0.2847
0.2769
0.2370
0.2751
0.2320

CM
MAPE
0.4049
0.5265
0.3724
0.3920
0.3327
0.3863
0.3356

WroPerc
46.08%
55.88%
38.67%
34.44%
30.76%
34.15%
31.90%

Table 7: Prediction results
of GNN layers k is chosen from {5, 4, 3, 2}. As for DeepCas, the number of walk sequences with walk length is set
as 100 and 8 respectively. Regarding SEISMIC, we follow
the parameters from the original study, i.e. setting the constant period s0 = 5 minutes and power-law decay parameters θ = 0.242.
Since our cascade data is regional and information
spreads over a longer interval, we set the observation time
window T = 3 hours for the experiments in this study.
To verify the validity of SE-CGNN, we make separate
predictions for C and CM . On retrieving historical content
text, we use different information set for C and CM . For the
prediction of the C, we use the tweet content texts of each
corresponding user in I as historical content text. For CM ,
the historical content text of users is obtained from IO .

SE-CGNN and Variants
We also compare two variants of SE-CGNN with the 4 baselines. Temporal-CGNN and Content-CGNN denote two
version of SE-CGNN. Temporal-CGNN only adds the temporal information d to the node features of CoupledGNN,
correspondingly, Content-CGNN only adds ē to the node
features.

Experiment Results
The overall performance of all prediction models is displayed in Table 7.
First of all, DeepCas and CoupledGNN, which take network structure information into account, achieve relatively
good results. It shows that the accuracy of cascade predictions can be improved by better capturing network structure information. CoupledGNN, which capture the cascading effect through GNNs additionally, outperforms Deepcas.
The SE-CGNN, which takes into account spillover effects,
achieves the best performance in both experiments. The results clearly demonstrate that the cascade prediction can
be significantly improved when spillover effects are taken
into account. Interestingly, compared with SE-CGNN and
Content-CGNN, the temporal information is found to have
little effect on the prediction results, implying that temporal
information is not an important feature for cascade prediction in this study, contrary to our initial expectations.
Second, since SEISMIC is overly sensitive to outliers, it
performs poorly in the experiments. The same poor performance is obtained for the feature-based models. However,

among the two non-deep-learning methods, the linear regression model performs better than SEISMIC, showing that
given the right features, linear regression can be used as a
quick and simple model to make cascade predictions.
Third, in comparison experiments, we find a significant
improvement in the performance of SE-CGNN on CM ,
while the performance of the other models remained unchanged or decreased slightly. It is found that SE-CGNN
is effective in improving predicting COVID-19 information
on Twitter, especially the information of ‘measures’ about
COVID-19.

Conclusion & Discussion
In this paper, we concentrated on the problem of cascade
prediction of COVID-19 information from the perspective
of spillover effects on online social media.
We first built a novel and informative dataset focusing on
the GR region including social network, cascades and its
corresponding information. This is the first COVID-19 related Twitter dataset from a cascade perspective.
Secondly, We classified the information and cascades in
the dataset into information about symptoms, and preventive and treatment measures information (‘measure’ information) and others. We find that in both cases, the cascades
tend to be wider rather than being deeper, and they reach
their maximum width mostly at a depth of 3. Moreover, we
studied the most frequent graph structures of the cascades
and found that information about ‘measure’ may receive a
larger size cascade. We also discovered that, unlike the previous study, the number of chain-like cascades is higher in
the GR dataset.
Thirdly, we classified information on different topics according to keywords and found that information about unemployment and school closures have spillover effects on
‘measure’ information. We also found that spillover effects
for a particular topic of information are from multiple topics rather than one. So capturing spillover effects from other
information on this particular topic is critical to accurately
predict the future size of the cascades.
Fourthly, we developed our SE-CGNNN model based on
the state-of-the-art cascade prediction model CoupledGNN.
The experimental results showed that SE-CGNN can capture spillover effects effectively and improve the accuracy
of cascade prediction results of COVID-19 information on
Twitter, especially the ‘measure’ information.

However, there are still several limitations in our research.
When representing the users’ historical text content, we took
the mean value of all vectors, which does not fully represent the actual content of the user’s historical information.
This will be improved in future research. Second, our current approach is based on an existing model, we will design
an end-to-end GNN model for cascade prediction that better
fits the COVID-19 information in our future work. Last but
not least, as our dataset contains a wide range of semantic
and network information on which future researches, including the identification of rumours and misinformation, can be
carried out.
Acknowledgements. This work was partially supported by
Luxembourg’s Fonds National de la Recherche, via grant
COVID-19/2020-1/14700602 (PandemicGR).

References
Alang, S.; McAlpine, D. D.; and Hardeman, R. 2020. Police brutality and mistrust in medical institutions. Journal of
Racial and Ethnic Health Disparities 1–9.
Bourigault, S.; Lamprier, S.; and Gallinari, P. 2016. Representation learning for information diffusion through social
networks: an embedded cascade model. In Proceedings of
the 9th ACM International Conference on Web Search and
Data Mining (WSDM), 573–582.
Cao, Q.; Shen, H.; Cen, K.; Ouyang, W.; and Cheng, X.
2017. Deephawkes: Bridging the gap between prediction
and understanding of information cascades. In Proceedings
of the 2017 ACM on Conference on Information and Knowledge Management (CIKM), 1149–1158.
Cao, Q.; Shen, H.; Gao, J.; Wei, B.; and Cheng, X. 2020.
Popularity prediction on social platforms with coupled graph
neural networks. In Proceedings of the 13th ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining
(WSDM), 70–78.
Chen, E.; Lerman, K.; and Ferrara, E. 2020. COVID-19:
The first public coronavirus Twitter dataset. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2003.07372 .
Chen, N.; Zhong, Z.; and Pang, J. 2020. An exploratory
study of COVID-19 information on Twitter in the Greater
Region. arXiv preprint arXiv:2008.05900 .
Chen, S. F.; Beeferman, D.; and Rosenfeld, R. 1998. Evaluation metrics for language models.
Cheng, J.; Adamic, L.; Dow, P. A.; Kleinberg, J. M.; and
Leskovec, J. 2014. Can cascades be predicted? In Proceedings of the 23rd international conference on World wide web
(WWW), 925–936.
Cinelli, M.; Quattrociocchi, W.; Galeazzi, A.; Valensise,
C. M.; Brugnoli, E.; Schmidt, A. L.; Zola, P.; Zollo, F.; and
Scala, A. 2020. The COVID-19 social media infodemic.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.05004 .
Conneau, A.; Khandelwal, K.; Goyal, N.; Chaudhary, V.;
Wenzek, G.; Guzmán, F.; Grave, E.; Ott, M.; Zettlemoyer, L.; and Stoyanov, V. 2019. Unsupervised crosslingual representation learning at scale. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1911.02116 .

Cui, P.; Jin, S.; Yu, L.; Wang, F.; Zhu, W.; and Yang, S.
2013. Cascading outbreak prediction in networks: a datadriven approach. In Proceedings of the 19th ACM International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (SIGKDD), 901–909.
Depoux, A.; Martin, S.; Karafillakis, E.; Preet, R.; WilderSmith, A.; and Larson, H. 2020. The pandemic of social
media panic travels faster than the COVID-19 outbreak.
Gao, S.; Pang, H.; Gallinari, P.; Guo, J.; and Kato, N. 2017.
A novel embedding method for information diffusion prediction in social network big data. IEEE Transactions on
Industrial Informatics 13(4): 2097–2105.
Goldenberg, J.; Libai, B.; and Muller, E. 2001. Talk of the
network: A complex systems look at the underlying process
of word-of-mouth. Marketing letters 12(3): 211–223.
Gomez-Rodriguez, M.; Leskovec, J.; and Krause, A. 2012.
Inferring networks of diffusion and influence. ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data (TKDD) 1–37.
Gruhl, D.; Guha, R.; Liben-Nowell, D.; and Tomkins, A.
2004. Information diffusion through blogspace. In Proceedings of the 13th International Conference on World Wide
Web (WWW), 491–501.
Guille, A.; Hacid, H.; Favre, C.; and Zighed, D. A. 2013.
Information diffusion in online social networks: A survey.
ACM Sigmod Record 42(2): 17–28.
Islam, M. R.; Muthiah, S.; Adhikari, B.; Prakash, B. A.; and
Ramakrishnan, N. 2018. DeepDiffuse: Predicting the ‘who’
and ‘when’ in cascades. In Proceedings of the 2018 IEEE
International Conference on Data Mining (ICDM), 1055–
1060.
Jenders, M.; Kasneci, G.; and Naumann, F. 2013. Analyzing and predicting viral tweets. In Proceedings of the 22nd
International Conference Companion on World Wide Web
(WWW), 657–664.
Kempe, D.; Kleinberg, J.; and Tardos, É. 2003. Maximizing
the spread of influence through a social network. In Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on Knowledge
Discovery and Data Mining (SIGKDD), 137–146.
Kupavskii, A.; Ostroumova, L.; Umnov, A.; Usachev, S.;
Serdyukov, P.; Gusev, G.; and Kustarev, A. 2012. Prediction of retweet cascade size over time. In Proceedings of
the 21st ACM international conference on Information and
knowledge management (CIKM), 2335–2338.
Li, C.; Ma, J.; Guo, X.; and Mei, Q. 2017. Deepcas: An
end-to-end predictor of information cascades. In Proceedings of the 26th International Conference on World Wide
Web (WWW), 577–586.
Liu, Y.; Ott, M.; Goyal, N.; Du, J.; Joshi, M.; Chen, D.;
Levy, O.; Lewis, M.; Zettlemoyer, L.; and Stoyanov, V.
2019. Roberta: A robustly optimized bert pretraining approach. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.11692 .
Mamun, M. A.; and Ullah, I. 2020. COVID-19 suicides in
Pakistan, dying off not COVID-19 fear but poverty?–The
forthcoming economic challenges for a developing country.
Brain, behavior, and immunity .

Mooney, C. Z. 1997. Monte carlo simulation, volume 116.
Sage publications.
Park, H. W.; Park, S.; and Chong, M. 2020. Conversations
and medical news frames on Twitter: Infodemiological study
on covid-19 in South Korea. Journal of Medical Internet
Research 22(5): e18897.
Salganik, M. J.; Dodds, P. S.; and Watts, D. J. 2006. Experimental study of inequality and unpredictability in an artificial cultural market. science 311(5762): 854–856.
Shanthakumar, S. G.; Seetharam, A.; and Ramesh, A. 2020.
Understanding the socio-economic disruption in the United
States during COVID-19’s early days. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2004.05451 .
Tsur, O.; and Rappoport, A. 2012. What’s in a hashtag? Content based prediction of the spread of ideas in microblogging
communities. In Proceedings of the 5th ACM International
Conference on Web Search and Data Mining (WSDM), 643–
652.
Ugander, J.; Backstrom, L.; Marlow, C.; and Kleinberg, J.
2012. Structural diversity in social contagion. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences 109(16): 5962–5966.
Wang, J.; Zheng, V. W.; Liu, Z.; and Chang, K. C.-C. 2017a.
Topological recurrent neural network for diffusion prediction. In Proceedings of the 2017 IEEE International Conference on Data Mining (ICDM), 475–484.
Wang, Y.; Shen, H.; Liu, S.; Gao, J.; and Cheng, X. 2017b.
Cascade dynamics modeling with attention-based recurrent
neural network. In Proceedings of the 2017 International
Joint Conferences on Artifical Intelligence (IJCAI), 2985–
2991.
Weng, L.; Menczer, F.; and Ahn, Y.-Y. 2014. Predicting successful memes using network and community structure. In
Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Weblogs
and Social Media (ICWSM).
West, D. B.; et al. 1996. Introduction to graph theory, volume 2. Prentice hall Upper Saddle River.
Wolf, T.; Debut, L.; Sanh, V.; Chaumond, J.; Delangue, C.;
Moi, A.; Cistac, P.; Rault, T.; Louf, R.; Funtowicz, M.; et al.
2019. HuggingFace’s transformers: State-of-the-art natural
language processing. ArXiv arXiv–1910.
Yan, Y.; Tan, Z.; Gao, X.; Tang, S.; and Chen, G. 2016. STHBass: A Spatial-temporal heterogeneous bass model to predict single-tweet popularity. In Proceedings of the 21st International Conference on Database Systems for Advanced
Applications(DASFAA), 18–32.
Yang, C.; Liu, Z.; Zhao, D.; Sun, M.; and Chang, E. Y. 2015.
Network representation learning with rich text information.
In Proceedings of the 2015 International Joint Conferences
on Artifical Intelligence (IJCAI), volume 2015, 2111–2117.
Yu, L.; Cui, P.; Wang, F.; Song, C.; and Yang, S. 2015. From
micro to macro: Uncovering and predicting information cascading process with behavioral dynamics. In Proceedings
of the 2015 IEEE International Conference on Data Mining
(ICDM), 559–568.

Zhang, Y.-J.; Fan, Y.; Tsai, H.-T.; and Wei, Y.-M. 2008.
Spillover effect of US dollar exchange rate on oil prices.
Journal of Policy Modeling 30(6): 973–991.
Zhao, Q.; Erdogdu, M. A.; He, H. Y.; Rajaraman, A.; and
Leskovec, J. 2015. Seismic: A self-exciting point process
model for predicting tweet popularity. In Proceedings of the
21th International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and
Data Mining (SIGKDD), 1513–1522.
Zhou, Z.; Bandari, R.; Kong, J.; Qian, H.; and Roychowdhury, V. 2010. Information resonance on Twitter: watching
Iran. In Proceedings of the 1st workshop on social media
analytics, 123–131.

