Plasmonic metamaterial based virus detection system: a review
Mohammad Muntasir Hassana,b , Farhan Sadik Siuma,c , Fariba Islama and Sajid
Muhaimin Choudhurya,∗
a Department

of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Bangladesh University of Engineering and Technology, Dhaka.
of Information and Communication Technology, Bangladesh University of Engineering and Technology, Dhaka.
c Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Daffodil International University, Dhaka.

arXiv:2012.00551v2 [q-bio.QM] 19 Dec 2020

b Institute

ARTICLE INFO

ABSTRACT

Keywords:
surface plasmon resonance
metamaterials
plasmonics
biosensor
virus detection
nano particle
optofluidic
quantum dot
Coronavirus
metamaterial
fluorescence
nanowire
meta-surface

Our atmosphere is constantly changing and new pathogens are erupting now and then and the
existing pathogens are mutating continuously. Some of these pathogens, such as SARS-CoV-2,
become so deadly that they put the whole technological advancement of healthcare under challenge. Within this very decade several other deadly virus outbreaks were witnessed by humans
such as Zika virus, Ebola virus, MERS-coronavirus etc. Though conventional techniques have
succeeded in detecting these viruses to some extent, these techniques are time-consuming, costly,
and require trained human-resources. Plasmonic metamaterial based biosensors might pave the
way to low-cost rapid virus detection. So this review discusses in details the latest development
in plasmonics and metamaterial based biosensors for virus, viral particles and antigen detection
and the future direction of research in this field. Emergence of quantum properties in biosensing,
application of machine learning, artificial intelligence and novel materials in biosensing is also
discussed in brief.

1. Introduction
In late 2019, a unprecedented case of pneumonia was diagnosed in China which later was proved to be caused by
a novel severe acute respiratory syndrome -coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2) or novel coronavirusHuang et al. (2020); Lu
et al. (2020). This novel coronavirus disease (COVID- 19) spread throughout the world in a very short time and was
declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization (WHO)Organization et al. (2020). It is to be noted that this is the
third large scale outbreak of coronavirus associated disease within a very short period after Severe Acute Respiratory
Syndrome (SARS) in 2003Zhong et al. (2003) and Middle East Respiratory Syndrome (MERS) in 2012Alhamlan et al.
(2017). Apart from novel Coronavirus, a number of other virus related diseases also cause significant damage to the
global population and it is needless to say that a rapid, reliable and accurate detection of viruses can contribute greatly
to control the spread of the disease and prevent future pandemics like COVID-19.
Currently, several common methods are used for detecting infectious viruses. Serological testing Bastos et al.
(2020), Immunofluorescence, Nucleic Acid Amplification Test (NAAT) are the most common genre of diagnosis
Vemula et al. (2016). Hemagglutination inhibition assay (HI) and Enzyme Linked Immunosorbent Assay (ELISA)
are the major serological testing Souf (2016). However, they have some major drawbacks which have hindered their
ubiquitous usage for virus detection. For instance, preparation of antibody for ELISA is a costly technique and requires
∗ Corresponding

author
hmuntasir@iict.buet.ac.bd (M.M. Hassan); sium1093@gmail.com (F.S. Sium); faribaislam3011@gmail.com (F. Islam);
sajid@eee.buet.ac.bd (S.M. Choudhury)
ORCID (s): 0000-0001-7235-0710 (M.M. Hassan)

M M Hassan et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 1 of 33

Plasmonic metamaterial based virus detection systems: a review

expert manpowerSakamoto et al. (2018). On the other hand, HI has low specificity under certain levels of agglutination and the sample may contain non-specific hemagglutinating factors Soares et al. (1999). Nucleic acid amplification
based Reverse Transcription Polymer Chain Reaction (RT PCR) test is another technique to detect virus and till date
it is the most widely used technique to detect novel CoronavirusCorman et al. (2020). RT–PCR technique is highly
sensitive, specific and reliable diagnostic method. But this test typically takes longer than other detection methods
and requires expert manpower and hence is expensive. Nucleic acid sequence-based amplification (NASBA), Loopmediated iso-thermal amplification (LAMP), RT–PCR and q-PCR are in the genre of Nucleic Acid Amplification
Test (NAAT). Most of these testing schemes are costly and require a lot of time and highly trained manpower. Other
methods to detect viruses such as CRISPR Qin et al. (2019) and culture methods have apparently also failed to be a
rapid and reliable method for satisfactory diagnosis of different viruses as they are not widely used yet. In such circumstances, real time and label-free biosensors have recently emerged as auspicious diagnostic tools for different infectious
diseases. These sensors overcome the need for fluorescence or radioactive tagging for virus detection, thus enabling
compact, robust, cost-effective point-of-care diagnostics. Different bio-sensing platforms based on optical, electrical
Luo and Davis (2013), and mechanical Savran et al. (2004) signal transduction have been rendered for applications
ranging from laboratory investigation to clinical diagnostics and drug development to combating emerging infectious
diseases. Among these different genre of biosensors, optical detection platforms have gained considerable interest in
recent years. Optical biosensors allow remote diagnosis scheme of the bio-molecular binding signal from the sensing
volume without any physical connection between the excitation source and the detection media. Unlike mechanical
and electrical sensors, these optical sensors are also compatible with physiological solutions and are not sensitive to
the changes in the ionic strengths of the solutions. Among different optical biosensors plasmonic and metamaterial
based plasmonic biosensors are highly potential in this regard due to their exotic properties like miniaturized sensor
chipYesilkoy et al. (2018), real-time sensing Guner et al. (2017), label-free sensing mechanism Maalouf et al. (2007).
The aim of this comprehensive review is to present the advances in plasmonic and metamaterial based plasmonic
biosensors for virus or viral particles detection and highlight the scopes of future work in this field. There have been
some recent review papers on plasmonic biosensors for virus detection Mauriz (2020), different methods of Coronavirus detection Samson et al. (2020); Yüce et al. (2020); Ji et al. (2020); Antiochia (2020) and recent progress in
nanophotonic biosensors to combat the COVID-19 pandemic Soler et al. (2020). In this review, metamaterial based
virus detection methods are discussed in details which is unprecedented and different plasmonic biosensors are classified in five broad fields on the basis of the detection technique and structure of the biosensors. Due to the ongoing
COVID-19 pandemic, emphasis is given to the family of Coronavirus detection techniques and performance of different biosensors for different virus detection are also compared and summarized. Moreover, we have discussed the
future trends in plasmonic and metamaterial based biosensing such as surface plasmon resonance imaging (SPRi),

M M Hassan et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 2 of 33

Plasmonic metamaterial based virus detection systems: a review

Virus
Virus Capturing layer
Metal layer

Virus

Virus
Metal

Capturing
Molecule
Nano
aperture

(h)Meta-surface based

(a) Planar structure

(b) Opto-fluidic

Virus
Virus
Capturing
Molecule
Au/Ag NP

(c) Nano particle based

Plasmonic
biosensors for
virus detection

Metamaterial
based biosensors

3D metamaterial
structure

(g) 3D metamaterial based
Quantum
Dot

Nano wire
Virus

Virus
Capacitance
Metal

Virus
Au NP

(d) QD enhanced
fluorescent LSPR

(e) Nano wire based

(f) 2D metamaterial based

Figure 1: Schematic of different plasmonic and metamaterial based virus-sensing structures; (a)Planar structure : Surface
plasmon is generated in between dielectric and metal; (b)Opto fluidic structure: nano aperture holding antibody increasing
binding potential for flowing virus antigen; (c) Nano particle: localized surface plasmon around NPs enhances the sensitivity
(d) Quantum dots attachment with NPs: Binding QD with NP enables enhanced fluorescent LSPR sensing; (e) Nano
wire : Plasmons are generated around nano wires increasing the sensitivity; (f) 2D metamaterial: virus attachment in
metamaterial changes capacitance which changes the resonant frequency; (g) 3D metamaterial: 3D shaped metamaterial
can mend magnetic field of light more efficiently which has the potential to materialize ultra-sensitive biosensors; (f)
Metasurface: Unusual patterns of metasurface performs as an efficient virus sensing platform.

incorporating quantum properties of materials in biosensing, novel materials based biosensors, artificial intelligence,
and machine learning application in biosensing. As a non-destructive virus sensing platform, potential application
of plasmonic and metamaterial based biosesnors for rapid, multiplexed, point-of-care detection of virus is also highlighted.

2. Evaluation of plasmonic biosensors
To evaluate the performance of biosensors several figures of merit are widely used. Among them detection limits
or limit of detection (LOD), sensitivity, selectivity or specificity are the most popular. Selectivity or specificity (S) is
defined as the ability of a sensor to detect a particular virus from a sample containing admixtures of similar or other
materials. Sensitivity and detection limit are two significant metrics that can be used to compare biosensors of different
platforms. Sensitivity in the case of virus detection expresses how a sensor interacts in the presence of virus. For virus
detection generally sensitivity of plasmonic biosensor is defined as-

M M Hassan et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 3 of 33

Plasmonic metamaterial based virus detection systems: a review

S=

Δ𝜆
𝐶ℎ𝑎𝑛𝑔𝑒𝑖𝑛𝑣𝑖𝑟𝑢𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛

Here Δ𝜆 is the change in reflection/transmission wavelength of the plasmonic biosensor.
Another important FOM limit of detection (LOD) or detection limit (DL) is defined as the minimum virus concentration that can be detected by the sensor. In other words, LOD is the minimum number of virus necessary to
cause a detectable change in the output signal of the sensor. For determination of LOD a formula commonly used isShrivastava et al. (2011); Suthanthiraraj and Sen (2019)
LOD =

3𝜎
𝑆

Here 𝜎 is standard deviation of the control without virus which is basically the system noise floor and S is the slope
of the linear fit for wavelength shift versus virus concentration plot which is basically the sensitivity of the sensor.
LOD for virus detection can be specified in different units. But commonly used units are: (1) ng/mL (2) copies of
virus/mL (3) PFU/mL (4) pg/𝑚𝑚2 (5) EID/mL

3. From plasmonic to metamaterial based biosensor
3.1. Plasmonic excitation in biosensing
In 1902 Wood observed an unusual distribution of light in diffraction grating. He introduced the idea of plasmonic
excitation Wood (1902). Metal-dielectric contact has been one of the primary methods of generating excitation. Generally, it is a guided mode that propagates along metal/dielectric interfaces. Plasmonic excitations are characterized
into two segments, namely Surface Plasmon (SP) and Localized Surface Plasmon (LSP). SP that propagates at the
flat interface between a conductor and a dielectric are two-dimensional electromagnetic waves. It is the collective
resonant oscillation of conduction electrons and incoming photons at the interface between metal and dielectric. On
the other hand, LSPR is generated by a light wave trapped within conductive nanoparticles (NPs) smaller than the
wavelength of light. The size of the NPs is typically in the region of Mie scattering. When an external electric field
is applied to metallic NPs, the conduction electrons encounter combined harmonic oscillations causing strongly localized electromagnetic field which has very high intensity. Ever since the discovery of this unique characteristic, many
exciting researches of biosensing has been conducted using this exotic property and it has been used in virus detection
as well. Viruses like HIV, Coronavirus, Influenza, dengue, Adeno virus, Zika virus, hepatitis, Norovirus etc. have
been reported to be successfully detected by employing various kinds of plasmonic biosensors.
To induce SPR in the boundary between metal and dielectric, the momentum of the incident photon must be
matched with the momentum of the conduction band electrons. If the matching condition is met light can be coupled
in the interface between metal and dielectric plane. For flat planar surfaces, this phase matching is fulfilled by the

M M Hassan et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 4 of 33

Plasmonic metamaterial based virus detection systems: a review

attenuated total reflection (ATR). This usually requires a media of higher refractive index (RI). The matching condition
can be interpreted from the dispersion relation given below Raether (1988):

𝐾𝑠𝑝𝑝

2𝜋
=
𝜆𝑜

√

𝜀𝑚 𝜀𝑑
2𝜋
=
𝑛 𝑠𝑖𝑛Θ𝑖
𝜀𝑚 + 𝜀𝑑
𝜆𝑜 𝑝

(1)

where 𝑛𝑝 is the refractive index of the coupling prism, Θ𝑖 is the incident angle of light, 𝜀𝑚 is the dielectric constant
of metal, 𝜀𝑑 is the dielectric constant of dielectric, 𝐾𝑠𝑝𝑝 is the wave vector of surface plasmon.
As the refractive index of the analyte media changes, 𝜀𝑑 also changes, eventually altering the wave vector k. When
𝜀𝑚 and 𝜀𝑑 are equal and opposite of each other, the wave vector is maximum which results in resonance. Here 𝜀𝑚
depends on the wavelength of incident light and 𝜀𝑑 depends on the refractive index of the dielectric environment.
Diverse configurations are used to generate SPR or LSPR for bio-sensing. In this review, these plasmonic biosensors
are broadly classified into five different groups based on their structure and sensing principle namely planar structure,
opto-fluidic structure, nano particle based structure, quantum dot based structure and nano rod-based structure.

3.2. Emergence of metamaterials in biosensing
In recent years, to increase the sensitivity of plasmonic biosensors metamaterial based plasmonic biosensors have
been employed. Advantages of using metamaterial based sensors are that a variety of geometric structures and different
sensing principles can be utilized which were not feasible with conventional plasmonic biosensors.
In 1968, Russian physicist Victor Veselago first came up with the theoretical concept of left-handed materials
Veselago (1968) which shows unusual refraction of light. Then in 1999, Pendry et al. theoretically showed that
microstructures built from nonmagnetic conducting sheets which are much smaller than the wavelength of radiation
exhibits an effective magnetic permeability and these structures can be tuned to show varying magnetic permeability
Pendry et al. (1999) including imaginary component. Rodger Walser termed this type of substances as metamaterials in 1999. Smith with his colleagues experimentally demonstrated the first left-handed metamaterial at microwave
frequency in the year of 2000 Smith et al. (2000). From then on metamaterials have been explored extensively for
possible applications in optics Pendry (2000), photonics Fang et al. (2020), energy harvesting Yu et al. (2019), communication Turpin et al. (2014), sensing Chen et al. (2012); Beruete and Jáuregui-López (2020), biological imaging and
spectroscopy Zhou et al. (2019). Primarily, electromagnetic metamaterials are utilized in biosensing applications and
metamaterials based biosensors can be classified in three different groups based on their structure- two dimensional,
three dimensional and meta-surface biosensors. Among them two dimensional and meta-surface biosensors have been
successfully employed in virus sensing. Though usage of metamaterial in biosensing is still in its early stage, already
detection of viruses like HIVAhmed et al. (2020), Zika virus Ahmadivand et al. (2018), Avian Influenza Virus Lee
M M Hassan et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 5 of 33

Plasmonic metamaterial based virus detection systems: a review

Figure 2: Different stages of a bio-molecular reaction which can be observed by a planar SPR sensor. (A)Immobilized
capturing molecules attach with sensor chip surface; (B) Association: Pumped viral surface protein starts to bind with
capturing molecule; (C) Equilibrium: Almost all binding molecules binds with respective viral body; (D) Disassociation:
After certain time viral bodies starts to unbind with capturing probes; (F)With proper treatment the chip is ready for reuse

et al. (2017a), CPMV Sreekanth et al. (2017), PRD1 Park et al. (2017) using metamaterial based sensors have been
reported and sensitivity has improved by approximately an order of magnitude Hong et al. (2018). Metamaterial based
plasmonic biosensors have the potential to be a game changer in the field of label-free point of care virus detection.

4. Diverse plasmonic structures for biosensing
4.1. Bio sensing principle of plasmonic biosensors
Biosensor-based detection methods always utilize a specific bio-receptor surface to analyze either intact viruses
or viral proteins. A common and widely explored bio-receptor is antibodies that originates in animal bodies against
specific viral surface proteins or antigens. There are also diverse types of artificial capturing molecules that are developed in laboratory to capture certain virus. For example, laboratory made DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) or RNA
(ribonucleic acid) aptamers D’Agata and Spoto (2012), Hairpin type mRNA Liu and Wilson (2010). The SPR system
authorizes characterization of the binding kinetics of biomolecular interactivity in real time. To analyze the reaction
between biomolecules, generally one interacting molecule is immobilized on the surface of sensor chip, and its binding
partner (sample analyte) is injected constantly into the solution through the flow cell, resulting in analyte flowing over
the capturing surface. As a result of the analyte reaction with the binding molecule, the analyte accumulates on the

M M Hassan et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 6 of 33

Plasmonic metamaterial based virus detection systems: a review

surface and increases the refractive index. The change in refractive index is measured in real time, generating a plot
of the response unit (RU) versus time. This entire process is depicted in figure 2. The resulting responses obtained
at different analyte concentrations are integrated to derive the rate constants (association, 𝐾𝑎 ; dissociation,𝐾𝑑 ; and
equilibrium, 𝐾𝑒 ). Thus, by using the SPR signal, amount, and condition of analyte in the sample is diagnosed. SPR
signal is usually measured in two ways for planar structures. Firstly, the change of incident angle with respect to generation of SPR. Secondly, change of wavelength about SPR occurrence. SPR sensors are also categorized in this regard
as incident angle modulated SPR sensor Zhou et al. (2017) and wavelength modulated SPR sensor Liu et al. (2005)
respectively.

4.2. Planar structure
Many recent studies with SPR based planar structured virus detectors are in the spotlight of research. Mosquito
borne dengue virus is a life-threatening pathogen. In 2020 Dengue Virus Type (DENV) 2 E-Proteins with high sensitivity and accuracy was successfully detected Omar et al. (2020). A SPR sensor based on self-assembled monolayer/reduced graphene oxide- polyamidoamine dendrimer (SAM/ NH2rGO/ PAMAM) thin film was developed which
detected the DENV-2 E-proteins with the lowest detection of 0.08 pM. This same research group also developed another sensor chip back in 2018 to detect dengue virus Omar et al. (2018). But in the later work they introduced a
graphene-oxide(GO) layer in the sensor chip which significantly enhanced the overall performance of the sensor. In a
similar work graphene-based material sensor chips were investigated for real time and quantitative detection of DENV
protein. In this study the sensor chip was developed by accumulating cadmium sulfide quantum dots-reduced GO
upon a thin gold plate. By changing the angle of incident light this graphene-based chip was able to detect DENV
protein as low as 0.1 pM. Like dengue another deadly disease that causes hemorrhagic fever is ebola. Certainly, this
virus has the full potential to create global pandemic. Recently a SPR chip was developed to diagnosis ebola virus
with high specificity and sensitivity Sharma et al. (2020). To develop the sensor a gold SPR chip was modified with
4-mercaptobenzoic acid (4-MBA). Three different monoclonal antibodies (mAb1, mAb2 and mAb3) of Ebola virus
were in the race. The interactions of antibodies were then investigated to determine the best mAb based on the affinity
constant (𝐾𝑑 ). After the screening mAb3 showed the highest affinity which was also confirmed by ELISA. This study
also suggested the interaction was spontaneous, endothermic, and driven by entropy.
In 2013 a new type of avian influenza H7N9 virus emerged in China, causing human infection with high mortality
taking 612 lives. A quantitively and real time diagnosis was crucial for eradicating the outbreaks of this emerging
disease. A straightforward strategy for rapidly and sensitively detecting the H7N9 virus using an intensity-modulated
surface plasmon resonance (IM-SPR) biosensor integrated with a new generated monoclonal antibody was proposed
Chang et al. (2018). In another study a similar structure was developed to detect different respiratory viruses. In this

M M Hassan et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 7 of 33

Plasmonic metamaterial based virus detection systems: a review

Figure 3: (A) General Total Reflection experimental set-up in Kretschmann configuration for sensing (reproduced from
Manera et al. (2012)); (B)SPR signal amplitude varies based on number viral bodies (reproduced from Chang et al.
(2018)); (C)Antigen-antibody binding changes SP resonance condition (reproduced from Omar et al. (2020)); (D) Viral
pathogen determining by SPR signal intensity with high specificity (reproduced from Shi et al. (2015)).

Figure 4: (A) Portable small optofluidic biosensor; (B)Schematic diagram of portable biosensor using different wavelength
LED; (C) Photography of the wafer after deep-UV and dry etching steps; (D) Single plasmonic chip containing eight
plasmonic pixels; (E) SEM image of the nanohole array with a hole diameter of 200 nm and an array period of 600 nm
(reproduced from Coskun et al. (2014));(F) the illustration of LSPR sensor chip integrated with programmable microfluidics(reproduced from Geng et al. (2014)); (G) Nano apertures holding antibodies; (H) Fluidic viral bodies being captured
by immobilized antibody (reproduced fromYanik et al. (2010)).

work a SPR-based biosensor was developed for specific detection of nine common respiratory virus including influenza
A and influenza B, H1N1, respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), parainfluenza virus 1-3 (PIV1, 2, 3), adenovirus, and
severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS) Shi et al. (2015). A significant challenge in this work was
amplifying viral bodies by PCR (Polymerase chain reaction). But an advantage was the same sensor chip could be
used to diagnose multiple times after washing with NaOH solution.
In a recent study HIV virus was also successfully detected by commercially available simple planar SPR biosensor.
HIV-related DNA with hairpin type DNA aptamers was diagnosed. The proposed SPR biosensor could detect target
DNA sensitively in a linear range from 1 pM to 150 nM with a detection limit of 48 fM. Diao et al. (2018). Lately
a typical planar SPR biosensor for medical diagnostics of human hepatitis B virus (hHBV) has been developed Tam
M M Hassan et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 8 of 33

Plasmonic metamaterial based virus detection systems: a review

et al. (2017). A 7-fold higher limit of detection and 2-fold increase in coefficient of variance (CV) of the replicated
results, were shown as compared to typical enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) testing.

4.3. Optofluidic systems
Another commonly used compact portable plasmonic bio sensing platform is optofluidic media. Itis the combination of optoelectronics, optics and nanophotonic with fluidics. Such concoction constitutes a new perspective for
manipulation of optical properties which incessantly scales the wavelength of light with applications ranging from fluidically adaptable optics to high sensitivity bio-detection. Many optofluidic plasmonic biosensors are based on nano
apertures to enhance plasmonic sensing capabilities of fluidic viral analytes. These nano apertures hold capturing
molecules (e.g., Antibody, aptamers ) which increases binding potential between viral antigens and antibodies.One of
the major recent break through in this regard is the detection of COVID 19 virusFunari et al. (2020). In this device
the opto-microfluidic property is combined with plasmonic property. A serological testing with high specificty was
devised. The refractive index (RI) sensitivity of the pure Au nanospikes in the opto-microfluidic device was precisely
calculated by measuring the wavelength shift in the LSPR peak position when solutions with different refractive indexes (RI) are delivered to the microfluidic chip. The COVID 19 antibody presence was correlated with the LSPR
wavelength peak shift of gold nanospikes caused by the local refractive index change due to the antigen–antibody
binding.
In 2010 nano plasmonic biosensor chips was introduced which operated by utilizing the fluidic property of sample.
Here the fluidic property was holding binding molecules by nano apertures. Detection and recognition of small enveloped RNA viruses (vesicular stomatitis virus and pseudo typed Ebola) and large enveloped DNA viruses (vaccinia
virus) was demonstrated. This platform opened opportunities for detection of a broad range of pathogens in typical biology laboratory settings. 220nm radius aperture was formed in a metal-dielectric layer. These apertures hold capture
molecules for selective viral detectionYanik et al. (2010). Figure 4 illustrates various aspects of optofluidic plasmonic
biosensor. In a more advanced work, programmable control systems for microfluidic analytes flow were used to develop
a more efficient and portable plasmonic biosensor. In this study the 9 kinds of samples with different reflective index
and antigen/antibody systems were utilized for characterization. By using these programmable optofluidic arrays, the
biomarker of the liver cancer was tested in situ and real time.Geng et al. (2014).

4.4. Nano particle enabled plasmonic structures
Nano particles (NP) are most used for development plasmonic sensor due to their easy fabrication process and
cost-effectiveness. Gold (Au) and silver (Ag) nano particles are used for this purpose. Au NPs’ SPR wavelength is
found around 520nm and Ag NPs show LSPR usually around 400nmJans and Huo (2012). However, by changing the
shape and size of the NPs, the SPR wavelength can be tunedLee et al. (2011). NP based plasmonic biosensors play
M M Hassan et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 9 of 33

Plasmonic metamaterial based virus detection systems: a review

A .

C .

B .

D .

E .

Figure 5: (a) Nanoplasmonic biosensing platform for HIV detection Reproduced with permission from Inci et al. (2013)
(b) Schematic diagram of optical set-up to detect adenovirus particles using gold nano island based plasmonic sensor
reproduced with permission from Yu et al. (2013); Absorbance spectra of the biosensor immobilized with anti-NS1 antibody
(red dashed line) exhibiting wavelength shift of peak absorbance after incubation with plasma separated on-chip from whole
blood samples containing (c) 0.25 µg/mL and (d) 2 µg/mL of dengue NS1 antigen (green solid line). (e) Plot of variation
of wavelength shift with concentration of NS1 spiked into whole blood showing linearity with R2 value of 0.84 reproduced
with permission from Suthanthiraraj and Sen (2019)

a crucial role in virus sensing as they make label free detection possible. As a result, no fluorescence or colorimetric
biomarker is required. Different immobilizing antibodies are used on to capture the viral particles or proteins.
The first virus detection using nano particle based plasmonic sensor was reported by Fatih Inci et. al. in 2013Inci
et al. (2013). They used Au nano particles with immobilized antibodies to detect and quantify different subtypes of
HIV viruses from unprocessed whole blood. Their limit of detection was 98 ± 39 copies/mL for HIV subtype D. They
measured the shift in resonant wavelength when HIV virus was captured on the antibody immobilized biosensing
surface as shown in fig. 5. Maximum wavelength shift of 9.3nm was reported for HIV subtype A virus concentration
of 6.5 x 105 copies/mL.
During the same time, Yu et. al. detected adenovirus particles by using Ag nanoisland-based localized surface
plasmon resonanceYu et al. (2013). It is to be noted that this was non-specific detection of Adenovirus particles but
based on numerical results they proposed specific detection models. They used rigorous couple wave analysis and
transfer matrix method using effective medium theory for numerical analysis. Change in reflectivity was measured to
M M Hassan et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 10 of 33

Plasmonic metamaterial based virus detection systems: a review

detect adenovirus particles and the limit of detection was 109 viruses/mL.
In 2013, Jahanshahi et.al. detected four diverse types of dengue virus using Immunoglobulin (Ig-M) based diagnostic testJahanshahi et al. (2014). They used Au coating on glass substrate to excite surface plasmons. Antigens and
amines in the form of NPs were used to immobilize four different types of dengue virus. Change in reflection angle
of SPR was measured to detect the viruses. They achieved sensitivity of 83-89% and specificity of 100%. Their LOD
was 10 antibody titres. In 2016, Valdez and his colleagues used LSPR shift to detect respiratory syncytial virus (RSV)
using gold, silver and copper nano particles Valdez et al. (2016). They used anti-RSV polyclonal antibody to bind the
virus with metallic NPs and they found copper NPs perform better in detecting RSV with LOD of 2.4 PFU.
A year later, Lee et. al.Lee et al. (2017b) used Au NP and magnetic nano particle (MNP) decorated graphene
(GRP) based hybrid structure to detect norovirus like particles (NoV-LP). Enhanced plasmonic and electrical properties
exhibited by this hybrid structure were used to detect NoV-LP. The surface of Au/MNP-GRPs was functionalized with
norovirus antibody to detect NoV-LPs and it performed well with high sensitivity and specificity. The change in
resistivity was measured to detect NoV-LP in a concentration range from 0.01 pg/mL to 1 ng/mL and LOD was found
to be 1.16pg/mL. At the same time, Kim and his group used gold nano particles in heteroassembled sandwich format
to detect hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) using anti-HBsAg antibody as the binding antibody Kim et al. (2018).
These sensor was very specific to HBsAg and the LOD was 100 fg/mL.
In 2019, Heo et. al.Heo et al. (2019) used gold nano particle based LSPR biosensor to detect noroviral protein
and human norovirus. They used for the first time norovirus recognizing affinity peptides to bind noroviral proteins
which is relatively inexpensive compared to the binding antibodies. From the change in absorption value they detected
the presence of the virus. Their detection limit for noroviral capsid protein was 0.1 ng/mL and limit of detection for
human norovirus was 9.9 copies/mL. Lee and his group utilized LSPR method using Au spike like NPs to detect avian
influenza virus using a multi-functional DNA 3 way-junction Lee et al. (2019). They employed hemagglutinin (HA)
binding aptamer and thiol group to bind the virus with NPs and achieved a LOD of 1 pM in two different enviorment
of PBS buffer and diluted chicken serum.
At the same time Sen et. al. Suthanthiraraj and Sen (2019) used thermally annealed thin silver film deposited onto
silicon substrate to detect NS1 antigen of dengue virus in whole blood. Refractive index sensitivity of the biosensor
was 10− 3. A polyethersufone membrane filter was used at the inlet of the sensor to separate blood cells from plasma
and anti NS1 antibody was used to ensure specific binding of the NS1 antigen. Increase in absorption was found for
antigen binding and for the highest 50 𝜇g/mL concentration 108nm redshift in peak absorption wavelength was found.
Sensitivity of this LSPR sensor was found to be 9nm/(𝜇g/mL) and limit of detection was .06 𝜇g/mL. Recently in
2020, Qiu et. al. used dual functional plasmonic biosensor combining LSPR with plasmonic photothermal (PPT)
effect to detect SARS Coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2)Qiu et al. (2020). They used functionalized two dimensional gold

M M Hassan et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 11 of 33

Plasmonic metamaterial based virus detection systems: a review

A .

C .

B .

D .

Figure 6: (a) Schematic diagram of an optical system of a V-trench biosensor to detect norovirus like particles reproduced
with permission from Ashiba et al. (2017); (b) Calibration curves of ZIKV detection using 4 kinds of thiol-functionalized
AuNPs. The LSPR signal amplifiers of L-cyst-AuNPs (red closed circles) and Ab-MPA-AuNPs (black closed circles) showed
higher correlation coefficients than those of Ab-GSH-AuNPs (black open circles) and Ab-TGA-AuNPs (yellow open circles)
reproduced with permission from Takemura et al. (2019); (c) Infectious bronchitis virus (Coronavirus) concentration
dependent PL intensity of QD fluorescence biosensor reproduced with permission from Ahmed et al. (2018); (d) Selectivity
of the plasmonic alloyed AuAgNP-Qdot646-MB biosensor probe toward ZIKV RNA in the presence of the negative controls
(influenza virus (IV) H3N2 and norovirus (NV)) reproduced with permission from Adegoke et al. (2017)

nano islands for sequence specific viral nucleic acid detection. Local PPT heat generated from Au NIs is used to
transduce the in-situ hybridization for highly sensitive SARS CoV-2 detection and they achieved a detection limit of
0.22pM. During the same time, Rippa et.al. used two dimensional gold nano structures based on octupolar geometry
to detect low concentration of rotavirus in water Rippa et al. (2020). They used rotavirus capsid (2B4) antibody to
capture rotavirus for specific binding and detected the virus through change in LSPR extinction wavelength shift.
They achieved maximum wavelength shift of 46nm for a virus concentration of 105 PFU/mL and they acieved LOD
of 126 ± 3 PFU/mL.

M M Hassan et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 12 of 33

Plasmonic metamaterial based virus detection systems: a review

4.5. Quantum dots in plasmonic structures
Quantum dots(QDs) are used as fluorescence signal amplifier to enhance the luminescent signals generated from
the fluorescence probes attached to affinity reagents or viral targets. QDs generally have core-shell structure and are
made of inorganic substances like CdSe as core and ZnS as shell. QDs possess exquisite optical properties and they
exhibit stokes shift quantified up to hundreds of nanometers. Stokes shift is the difference between the maximum
absorption wavelength and the maximum emission wavelength. QDs also have tunable broad absorption and narrow
emission spectra and unlike traditional fluorescent dyes they can detect multiple signals simultaneously. Xuepu Li et.
al.Li et al. (2012) used quantum dot fluorescence along with gold nano particles to detect Avian Influenza Virus (AIV).
They didn’t used plasmonic biosensor here but from then on QDs have been used in plasmonic biosensors to detect
viruses as fluorescent signal enhancer.
In 2016, Takemura et.al. reported LSPR induces immunofluorescence nano biosensor by using CdSeTeS QDs
with Au NPs to detect influenza virus Takemura et al. (2017). Here quaternary CdSeTeS QDs were used to enhance
the fluorescent signal generated from the antibody antigen interaction on the thiolated Au NPs. Anti-neuraminidase
antibody and anti-hemaggluitinin antibody was conjugated with thiolated Au NPs and quaternary QDs respectively.
They achived limit of detection of 0.03 pg/mL for H1N1 influenza virus in deionized water, 0.4 pg/mL for influenza
H1N1 virus in human serum and 10 PFU/mL for clinically isolated H3N2 virus. During the same time, surface
plasmon resonance assisted CdSe-ZnS based quantum dots was first used to detect norovirus like particles Ashiba et al.
(2017).Excitation wavelength of 390nm to excite SPR on an Al film of the sensor chip equipped with a V-shaped trench
was used. To immobilize proteins a self-assembled monolayer (SAM) of phosphonic acid derivative was used. Then
gold and silver plasmonic nano particles with semiconductor quantum dots were used by Adegoke et. al Adegoke et al.
(2017) to detect Zika virus RNA. They used four different plasmonic NPs functionalized with 3-mercaptopropionic
acid (MPA). MPA-AgNPs, MPA-AuNPs, core/shell (CS) Au/AgNPs, and alloyed AuAgNPs along with CdSeS alloyed
Qdots were used to form the respective LSPR-mediated fluorescence nano biosensor. They achieved minimum LOD
for alloyed Au Ag NP which is 1.7 copies/mL and it was very selective toward Zika virus RNA.
In 2018, Ahmed and his colleagues Ahmed et al. (2018) proposed and demonstrated a novel method by using
Zr NPs with Zr QDs to detect Coronavirus. Zr QDs show blue fluorescence emission and by functionalizing them
with anti-infectious bronchitis virus (IBV) antibodies, anti-IBV antibody-conjugated magneto-plasmonic nanoparticles
(MPNPs) are formed. From the change in photo luminescence intensity they detected Coronavirus and their LOD was
79.15 EID/50𝜇L. In another work, an immunofluorescence biosensor for the detection of nonstructural protein 1 (NS1)
of the ZIKV by using gold NPs and QDs was made Takemura et al. (2019). The LSPR signal from the Au NPs was
used to amplify the fluorescence signal intensity of quantum dots (QDs) from the antigen-antibody detection process.
CdSeTeS QDs were used with four different thiol capped Au NPs. The biosensor achieved a LOD of 8.2 copies/mL

M M Hassan et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 13 of 33

Plasmonic metamaterial based virus detection systems: a review

and could detect the virus within the concentration range 10 − 107 RNA copies/mL. It could detect the ZIKV in human
serum and showed good specificity for NS1 antigen against other negative control targets. At the same time, Omar
et. al used CdS QDs with amine functionalized graphene oxide thin film to detect dengue virus E-protein Omar et al.
(2019). They used used monoclonal antibodies (IgM) to bind the protein and achieved an outstanding LOD of 1pM.
Very recently, Nasrin and her group Nasrin et al. (2020) employed CdZnSeS/ZnSeS QD-peptide and gold nano
particle composites to enhance the LSPR signal to detect different concentrations of influenza virus from 10− 14 to
10− 9 g/mL. They varied fluorescence intensity by changing the distance between the QD and NP by using different
peptide chain lengths to find the optimized condition to detect the virus and achieve a detection limit of 17.02 fg/mL.
Previously, the same group detected norovirus Nasrin et al. (2018) using the same mechanism and their LOD was
95 copies/mL. However, this system could not detect the small change in norovirus concentration due to the smaller
crosslinker between two NPs.

4.6. Nanowire and nanorod based plasmonic biosensor
Nanowires and nanorods are usually used to enhance the properties of existing biosensors due to their ability of
confining electromagnetic fields in a superior way.
Das and his colleagues designed and simulated a plasmonic immunoassay, in 2020, which comprised of sandwich
plasmonic biosensor whose sensitivity was enhanced by using gold nanorod. They have varied the prismatic configuration and found that the BK-7 glass based sensor has sensitivity of 111.11 deg/RIU Das et al. (2020). They also
varied the distance of the gold NRs and their aspect ratio and recorded their observations. This sensor was desgined
for SARS-COV-2 detection, the gold NRs and gold nanosheets are functionalised with SARS-COV-2 spike-protein
antibody and shift is observed in the SPR angle. In 2010, A biosensor by functionalizing gold nanorods with monoclonal hepatitis B surface antibody (HBsAb) through physical adsorption was devised. The characteristic plasmon
absorption spectra is then measured after placing these nanorods in the vial containing blood serum. The LOD of the
sensor is 0.01 IU/ml Wang et al. (2010).
In 2006, a biosensor was fabricated by Shanmukh et al. where they obliquely deposited silver nanorods on surface.
Three different human viruses were detected by the device namely adenovirus, rhinovirus and HIV. After depositing
the virus Raman Spectrum is measured and from the change in the spectra viruses can be detected. This sensor mainly
results in improved SERS detection;Ag nanorod substrates exhibit extremely high (∼108 ) SERS enhancement factors.
The vibrational spectra of the molecule adsorbed on the sensor surface is enhanced as incoming laser beam interacts
with the electrons in the plasmonic oscillation in the nanorodsShanmukh et al. (2006). In 2018, Hong et al. developed
hybrid slot antenna structures in the THz frequency range, where silver nanowires (AgNWs) were employed to increase
the sensitivity. They used this structure for virus detection. PRD1 bacteriophage virus was detected using this sensor.

M M Hassan et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 14 of 33

Plasmonic metamaterial based virus detection systems: a review

A.

B.

C.

D.

Figure 7: (a) Schematic representation of the synthesis of HBsAb antibody-functionalized GNRs and the detection mechanism for the biosensor immunoassay in capturing targets in different matrices reproduced with permission from Wang
et al. (2010). (b) Representative scanning electron micrographs of the Ag nanorod arrays deposited with different lengths,
(A) h= 868 nm and (B) h ) 2080 nm. The typical SERS substrate used for virus detection is represented in (A) i.e. 870
nm reproduced with permission from Shanmukh et al. (2006). (c) Representative SERS spectra of RSV, HIV, adenovirus
and rhinovirus reproduced with permission from Shanmukh et al. (2006). (d) Normalized transmission amplitudes through
hybrid slot antenna (lNW= 1𝜇m) with (red) and without (black) PRD1 viruses reproduced with permission from Hong
et al. (2018)

The THz spectrum before and after placing the virus was used for the detection purpose Hong et al. (2018).

5. Metamaterial based biosensors
5.1. Bio sensing principle of metamaterial based plasmonic biosensors
Metamaterials are engineered materials; they possess properties which are not found in naturally occurring elements Kshetrimayum (2004). These exotic properties depend on the geometry of the material hence can be tuned as
M M Hassan et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 15 of 33

Plasmonic metamaterial based virus detection systems: a review

Figure 8: LC equivalent circuit for a metamaterial reproduced from Withayachumnankul et al. (2010)

per requirement. Usually specific repeating patterns are created on the material and each pattern has size smaller than
the wavelength they need to have an effect on.
Metamaterials enable the detection of biomeolecules in THz-GHz frequency regimes which is difficult otherwise,
as microorganisms such as fungi, bacteria, and viruses have scattering cross-sections which are much smaller than
THz/GHz wavelengths. Sensing biomolecules in the THz-GHz electromagnetic spectra has several advantages as it
provides label-free, non-contact and non-destructive sensing.
Metamaterial was first used in biosensing by Lee et al. In 2008 Lee and Yook (2008). They used gold split ring
resonator (SRR) array to detect biotin and streptavidin to show the biosensing capability of the metamaterial. SRR
worked as biosensor as it can be considered as a simple LC circuit with simple resonant frequency of

𝑓0 ≈

1
2∗𝜋∗

√
𝐿𝐶

(2)

. So, the resonant frequency of the system changes as the capacitance or inductance changes. As biotin and streptavidin
binds to the system the capacitance of the SRR changes which is reflected in the resonant frequency thus it can be used
as a biosensor. In 8 the equivalent LC representation of a specific metamaterial with rectangular geometry with a split
is shown. In this way the metamaterials with nanogaps can be modeled and their sensing mechanism can be understood
using 2.

5.2. Different metamaterial based biosensors for virus detection
In 2017, S.J. Park and his group created a metamaterial surface using gold rectangular structure on quartz. Metamaterial has certain capacitance and inductance equivalent parameters. Presence of virus particles within the capacitor
gap changes the resonance frequency which can be explained by a simple LC circuit. Hence different viruses were
detected by observing the THz transmission spectra. They detected bacteriophage viruses PRD1 (60 nm) and MS2
(30 nm). Sensitivity was 80 GHz/ particle Park et al. (2017). Ahmadivand and his colleagues designed a toroidal
metamaterial based biosensor they sensed zikavirus envelope protein by measuring the spectral shifts of the toroidal
resonance in 2018. They also added gold nanoparticles to see the effect in the sensitivity and observed enhancement
in the performance of the sensitivity Ahmadivand et al. (2018). In 2018, A THz biosensing metamaterial absorber for
M M Hassan et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 16 of 33

Plasmonic metamaterial based virus detection systems: a review

A.

D.

B.

C.

E.

F.

Figure 9: (a) Schematic of THz nano-gap Au metamaterial sensing of viruses reproduced with permission from Park et al.
(2017). (b) Normalized THz transmission amplitudes of THz metamaterials after deposition of PRD1 at various surface
densities for gap width of 200 nm reproduced with permission from Park et al. (2017). (c) 3D schematic diagram of
the THz biosensing metamaterial absorber for AI virus detection reproduced with permission from Cheng et al. (2018).
(d) Schematic demonstration of ZIKV envelope protein binding with respective antibody on the toroidal THz plasmonic
metasurface reproduced with permission from Ahmadivand et al. (2017). (e) Schematic of THz detection of virus samples
in liquid state using a nano slot-antenna array based sensing chip reproduced with permission from Lee et al. (2017a). (f)
Transmittance spectra through multi-resonance nano-antenna with and without virus sample onto the antenna reproduced
with permission from Lee et al. (2017a).

virus detection based on Spoof Surface Plasmon Polariton (SSPP) Jerusalem cross apertures metamaterial absorber
was devised. They determined the shift in absorption and resonant frequency as the alpha beta parameters of the viruses
were changed. Analyte thickness of H9N2 was also changed to see the variation in resonant frequency and absorption. From these they claimed that virus subtypes can be uniquely identified using this sensor. H5N2, H1N1, H9N2
viruses were detected Cheng et al. (2018). In 2017, Ahmadivand and his group used 2D micro-structures composed of
iron (Fe) and titanium (Ti) for the magnetic and electric resonators (torus), respectively to design a set of asymmetric
split resonators as meta-atoms to support ultra-strong and narrow magnetic toroidal moments in the THz spectrum.
Limit of detection of 24.2 pg/mL and sensitivity of 6.47 GHz/log(pg/mL) their system resulted in toroidal response
M M Hassan et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 17 of 33

Plasmonic metamaterial based virus detection systems: a review

lineshape extremely sharp, narrow and deep. They analyzed the sensitivity of the dip with Zika virus envelope protein
attached to the system Ahmadivand et al. (2017). In 2017, Lee et. al. used a multi-resonance and single resonance
nano antenna sensing chip which was fabricated using gold nano antennas printed on silicon wafer to sense different
types of Avian Influenza viruses. H9N2 was sensed using a multi resonance sensor. By using a single resonance nano
antenna they demonstrated that viruses can be classified in terms of resonance frequency and decreased transmission
ratio Lee et al. (2017a). In 2019 Vafapour and his colleagues developed a biosensor using metamaterial comprising
of H-shaped graphene resonator on a semiconductor film which they used to detect Avian Influenza Keshavarz and
Vafapour (2019). Ahmed et al. developed a cost-effective metasurface based biosensor in 2020. They used a Digital
Versatile Disc which already has built-in periodic grating where they deposited multilayers of gold, silver and titanium
and showed that the device exhibits fano-resonance. When the HIV virus particles were captured they observed a shift
in the fano resonance peak from which HIV can be detected Ahmed et al. (2020)
In 2016, Aristov et al. devised a 3D metamaterial based biosensor composed of woodpile structure which has not
yet been used in virus detection but showed sensitivity greater than 2600nm/RIU and phase sensitive response is more
than 3 × 104 degrees/RIU for analytes which is very high. In the same year Sreekanth et al. designed a biosensor with
grating coupled hyperbolic metamaterial which is a bulk 3D sub-wavelength structure that enhances angular senistivity
of plasmonic biosensor.They detected cowpea virus with it and obtained a mximum sensitivity of 7000deg per RIU
Sreekanth et al. (2016)

6. Plasmonic Biosensors for Coronavirus Detection
Currently, diagnosis of COVID-19 is primarily accomplished by three techniques- quantitative reverse-transcription
polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR) Corman et al. (2020) and gene sequencing, a lateral flow immunoassay, which
is a common point-of-care (POC) diagnostic approach that detects antibodies against SARS-CoV-2 in patient samples
Böger et al. (2020); Bastos et al. (2020), and chest computed tomography (CT) Zhang et al. (2020). Quantitative reverse
transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR) is widely used as the confirmatory test for COVID-19 detection
and it is considered as the gold standard in this regard. However, RT-qPCR method requires long and difficult processing method. It also demands highly trained manpower and cost which hinder the large scale testing for COVID- 19.
Although RT-qPCR test is highly sensitive, may give false negative reports especially if the specimen is collected from
the upper respiratory tract after a certain period from the onset of symptoms Tahamtan and Ardebili (2020). Therefore,
there is an ongoing demand for an alternative detection method for novel coronavirus.
Plasmonic biosensing is a promising field for the detection of Coronavirus, as it can enable rapid testing and also
reduce the manpower needed for performing the diagnosis. There are already many ongoing and reported works on
plasmonic detection of novel Coronavirus. The schemes that were developed for detecting other Cornaviruses can be
M M Hassan et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 18 of 33

Plasmonic metamaterial based virus detection systems: a review

useful for SARS-CoV-2 detection as well. Commercially available surface plasmon resonance (SPR) and localized
surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) sensors are already being used for viral strains detection such as SARS, MERS and
influenza Bhalla et al. (2020). In May,2020 Moitra et. al. reported a work on COVID-19 detection using plasmonic
nanoparticles which produced result within 10 minutes Moitra et al. (2020). Ahmadivand et. al. reported in June,
2020 their work using toroidal plasmonic metasensor for femto-molar detection of COVID-19 spike protein. They
claimed that their sensor had a limit of detection of around 4.2 fmol and sample to result duration was around 80
minutes Ahmadivand et al. (2020). In the same year Das et al designed a gold nanorod-based plasmonic sensor to
detect COVID-19 with a sensotivity of 111.11 deg/ RIU Das et al. (2020). In 2018, Ahmed et. al. devised a sensor
using magneto-plasmonic nanoparticle for coronavirus detection. The fluorescence properties of immuno-conjugated
QD MP NPs nanohybrids through separation by an external magnetic field enabled biosensing of Coronavirus with
a limit of detection of 79.15 EID/50 mL Ahmed et al. (2018). In August, 2020 Uddin et. al. proposed a surface
plasmon resonance sensor for COVID-19 detection which they claimed to have a sensitivity of 130.3 degrees/RIU
Uddin et al. (2020). Previously, in 2009, Huang et. al developed a localized surface plasmon coupled fluorescence
fiber-optic biosensor for the detection of SARS-CoV Huang et al. (2009). Funari et al. devised a detection system
which combined opto-microfluidic chip with lspr to detect antibodies against SARS-COV-2 spike protein in December,
2020 Funari et al. (2020). In addition to that, several works have been mentioned in this article in which viruses with
diameter smaller than coronavirus (120 nm) are detected e.g. PRD1 (60 nm) MS2 (30 nm), Avian Influenza Virus (80
nm - 120 nm), Zika Virus (50 nm) etc. using plasmonic and metamaterial based biosensors with promising sensitivity,
these schemes might be useful for the detection of Coronavirus as well and further investigation can be done to prove
their usefulness in coronavirus detection. It is noteworthy that there is still no reported work of Coronavirus detection
using metamaterial based biosensors.
Table 1: Performance comparison of plasmonic biosensors for virus detection.

Sensor type

Sensor configuration

Binding molecule/

Virus detected

antibody

Au/DSU/NH2rGOPAMAM

DENV-2

Omar et al. (2020)

proteins

E-

DENV-2 E-proteins
monoclonal antibody

LOD/Sensitivity

0.08 pM

Planar structure

M M Hassan et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 19 of 33

Plasmonic metamaterial based virus detection systems: a review

Sensor type

Sensor configuration
Au/CdSQDs-rGO
Omar et al. (2018)

Au(plate)

Chang

et al. (2018)

DENV-2

Shi et al. (2015)

E-

DENV IgG
(developed in Rabbit)

Avian Influenza

Monoclonal

H7N9

Antibody(IgM)

H1N1,RSV,
PIV1, 2, 3,
Adenovirus,
SARS

Au/4-MBA Sharma

antibody

proteins

Influenza A,B
Cr(1.7nm)/Au (47nm)

Binding molecule/

Virus detected

Ebola Virus

et al. (2020)

LOD/Sensitivity

2ng/mL

144 copies/mL

No antibody was used
as viral bodies
was amplified

-

by PCR

Three Monoclonal anti-

0.5 pg/ml

body(mAb1, mAb2 and
mAb3)

Biacore X (Commer-

HIV

cial name) Diao et al.

Hairpin DNA
captureprobes

48 fM

(2018)

HBsAg
Biacore CM5 (Commercial

Hepatitis B

name)Tam

(derived from

980ng/L

Pichia pastoris)

et al. (2017)

M M Hassan et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 20 of 33

Plasmonic metamaterial based virus detection systems: a review

Sensor type

Sensor configuration
Au/SiNx(with nano
holes)/Si
Yanik et al. (2010)

Optofluidic
Structure

Virus detected

Binding molecule/
antibody

VSV,

8G5 antibodies,

vaccinia virus

A33L antibodies.

protein A/G

IgG

Liver cancer

Liver cancer

antigen

antibody

LOD/Sensitivity

0.5mg/mL

Au/SiNx(with nano
holes)/Si/SiNx

0.055M

Coskun et al. (2014)

Au NPs on Si inside
PDMS pipe
Geng et al. (2014)

25 to 42ng/ml

1346 ± 257 copies/mL
for HIV A
10609 ± 2744 copies/mL
for HIV B
14942 ± 1366 copies/mL
Au NPs
Inci et al. (2013)

HIV

Immobilizing antibody

for HIV C

with NeutrAvidin

98 ± 39 copies/mL
for HIV D
120159 ± 15368 copies/mL
for HIV E
404 ± 54copies/mL

NP based

for HIV G

Ag nanoislands
Yu et al. (2013)

Adenovirus

M M Hassan et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

pDE1sp1A/GFP
adenovirus shuttle vector

109 viruses/mL

Page 21 of 33

Plasmonic metamaterial based virus detection systems: a review

Sensor type

Sensor configuration

Virus detected

Au coating on glass

Dengue virus

Binding molecule/

LOD/Sensitivity

antibody

Amine NPs

10 antibody titre

anti-RSV polyclonal an-

2.4 PFU

substrate Jahanshahi
et al. (2014)

Au, Ag and Cu NPs

respiratory

syn-

Valdez et al. (2016)

cytial virus

tibody

Au NP and Mag-

Norovirus

Norovirus antibody

1.16pg/mL

Au NP monolayer

Hepatitis B virus

anti-HBsAg antibody

100 fg/mL

Kim et al. (2018)

antigen

Au NP Heo et al.

Norovirus

Norovirus

9.9 copies/mL

neto NP decorated
graphene Lee et al.
(2017b)

(2019)

recognizing

affinity peptide

Au spike like NP Lee

Avian

influenza

Hemagglutinin

(HA)

1 pM

et al. (2019)

virus

binding aptamer

Thermally annealed

Dengue virus

NS1 antibody

0.06𝜇g/mL

SARS CoV-2

Thiol cDNA receptor

0.22 pM

silver film Suthanthiraraj and Sen (2019)

Au Nanoislands Qiu
et al. (2020)

M M Hassan et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 22 of 33

Plasmonic metamaterial based virus detection systems: a review

Sensor type

Sensor configuration

Virus detected

Au nanostructure in

Rotavirus

octupolar geometry

Binding molecule/

LOD/Sensitivity

antibody

Rotavirus capsid (2B4)

126 ± 3 PFU/mL

antibody

Rippa et al. (2020)

CdSeTeS QDs with

Influenza virus

0.03 pg/mL for H1N1

anti-neuraminidase

Au NPs Takemura

antibody

anti-

in deionized water; 0.4

et al. (2017)

hemaggluitinin antibody

pg/mL for H1N1 in hu-

and

man serum;10 PFU/mL

QD fluorescence

for

clinically

isolated

H3N2

CdSe-ZnS based QD

Norovirus

SAM phosphonic acid

.01ng/mL

Zika virus

3-mercaptopropionic

1.7 copies/mL

on Al film with V
shaped trench Ashiba
et al. (2017)

Gold and silver plasmonic NP with Cd-

acid (MPA)

SeS QDs Adegoke
et al. (2017)

Zr NPs with Zr QDs

Coronavirus

Ahmed et al. (2018)

M M Hassan et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

anti-infectious bronchitis

79.15 EID/50𝜇L

virus (IBV) antibodies

Page 23 of 33

Plasmonic metamaterial based virus detection systems: a review

Sensor type

Binding molecule/

LOD/Sensitivity

Sensor configuration

Virus detected

Gold

Zika virus

Anti-NS1 antibody

8.7 copies/mL

Norovirus

11-mercaptoundecanoic

95 copies/mL

NPs

with

antibody

CdSeTeS QDs Takemura et al. (2019)

CdSeTeS QD with
Au NP Nasrin et al.

acid

(2018)

CdS

QDs

with

graphene oxide thin

Dengue virus E

Monoclonal

antibodies

protein

(IgM)

Influenza virus

aspartic acid residue and

1pM

flim Omar et al.
(2019)

CdZnSeS/ZnSeS
QD-peptide-Au
composite

17.02 fg/mL

anti HA antibody

NP

Nasrin

et al. (2020)

SSPP Jerusalem
Metamaterial based

Cross Aperture

AIV

Not Stated

0.5 THz/RIU

PRD1,MS2

Not Stated

80 GHz/particle/𝜇m2

Cheng et al. (2018)

Rectangular
Au metamaterial
Park et al. (2017)

M M Hassan et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 24 of 33

Plasmonic metamaterial based virus detection systems: a review

Sensor type

Sensor configuration

Virus detected

Toroidal metasensor

Zika Virus

Binding molecule/
antibody

LOD/Sensitivity

Immobilized antibody

6.47 GHz/log (pg/mL)

Not Stated

0.35 THz/RIU

cowpea virus

Not Stated

7000◦ per RIU

Zika Virus

Immobilized antibody

5.81 GHz/log(pg/mL)

Hepatitis B virus

HBsAB

Shift in LSPR of upto

Ahmadivand et al.
(2017)

Au nano-antenna
with 2D punctured
rectangular slots
Lee et al. (2017a)

H1N1,

H9N2,

H5N2

Hyperbolic
metamaterial
with alternating
layers of
gold and 𝐴𝑙2 𝑂3
Sreekanth et al. (2016)

Toroidal metasensor
Ahmadivand et al.
(2018)

Au NR
Wang et al. (2010)

30nm

Nanorod/Nanowire
Ag NR Arrays
Zhao et al. (2006)

Ag NR
Das et al. (2020)

RSV,HIV

Not Stated

Not Stated

SARS=COV-2

COVID-19 spike-protein

111.11 deg/RIU

M M Hassan et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

antibody

Page 25 of 33

Plasmonic metamaterial based virus detection systems: a review

Sensor type

Sensor configuration

Virus detected

Binding molecule/
antibody

LOD/Sensitivity

Rectangular Slot
antenna with silver
nanowire

PRD1

Not Sated

32.7GHz·𝜇m2 /particle

Hong et al. (2018)

7. Future perspective
Researchers are always on the quest of finding new methods of pathogen detection which is faster, accurate and
sensitive and also can be used as POC device because the population is increasing at a fast pace and epidemics are
materialising more frequently than ever. Relatively newly discovered materials like graphene Cucci et al. (2019); Gong
et al. (2019), carbon nanotubeWang et al. (2020), and nanodiamond Miller et al. (2020) are being used in the sensing.
Researchers are also using machine learning in sensing to get better results Moon et al. (2020). In addition to that,
topological insulator has been used to enhance the sensitivity and detection limit of surface plasmon resonance based
sesnor Zhu et al. (2019). These methods and many others are yet to be explored extensively in biosensing field.
Almost all plasmonic biosensors works on the basis of antigen-antibody binding. Though there has been much
research on antigen antibody binding but there was very little focus on antibody adsorption with the sensor chip. Typically metallic plasmonic materials like Au, Ag are used on the top layer sensor chip. Therefore, capturing molecules
like antibody is adsorbed onto the plasmonic materials. Systematic numerical model of adsorption might open up new
possibilities in this regard Osborne (2018). Quantum enhanced plasmonic sensing is an state of the art idea which can
be explored as well. Quantum properties can amplify the sensitivity of a sensor and thus has the potential to shake up
the plasmonic sensing scheme through the development of quantum-enhanced sensors.Dowran et al. (2018). Machine
learning and artificial intelligence assisted plasmonic biosensing can be also applied for virus sensing. Recently researchers has started to blend neural network algorithms with plasmonic diagnosis.Li et al. (2019). Surface plasmon
resonance imaging (SPRi) is another emerging field that has been applied in detection and monitoring of biomolecular
events Puiu and Bala (2016). There has been a study of apple stem pitting virus (ASPV) by imaging the aptamer binding with the coat protein using SPR Lautner et al. (2010). Recently, researchers have achieved sub-100nm resolution
using this technique Ohannesian et al. (2020) which can be applied for virus detection as well.
Finally, sensitivity of plasmonic and metamaterial based biosensors have reached femtomolar detection limit but

M M Hassan et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 26 of 33

Plasmonic metamaterial based virus detection systems: a review

here limiting factor is the specificity of the biosensors which requires attention. Although employing aptamer and
peptide based binding molecules specificity has improved significantly their application is still not suitable for all
biosensors. Moreover, the biosensors may detect viruses successfully in laboratory environment, their performance
need to be evaluated from clinical samples. Another problem for metamaterial based biosensors can be mass production for which the sensing platform needs to be compact. Multiplexing capability for detecting multiple viruses
Sánchez-Purrà et al. (2017) using the same sensing platform using plasmonic and metamaterial based biosensors can
be developed as well.

8. Conclusion
The world is currently fighting with the pandemic caused by SARS-CoV-2, there is no assurance when will this
pandemic end let alone the next one. Disease diagnosis in the early stage is one of the main weapon in this ongoing
fight against the pandemic. Though during last few years there has been significant improvement in disease diagnosis
by optical biosensors, even COVID-19 has been successfully detected by LSPR based biosensors there is still room
for development. Plasmonic and metamaterial based biosensors exist in many different forms and each form has one
or more supremacy over conventional techniques, some are already being used in laboratories for drug and vaccine
developments Myszka and Rich (2000). Some of the plasmonic biosensors like planar metal-dielectric interface based
biosensors have simple fabrication techniques and give pretty good sensitivity and low LOD. Plasmonic biosensors like
those based on metamaterial allow label-free, non-destructive sensing. Nanoparticle based plasmonic biosensors allow
a broad-range of antibody binding. Addition of metamaterials in plasmonic biosensors have increased the sensitivity
manifolds. Most importantly all the biosensors make rapid detection possible. However, plasmonic and metamaterial
based biosensors need to be robust and reproducible to become mainstream virus caused disease diagnosis method.
Also biosensors need to be developed as a lab-on-a-chip system in order to make them ubiquitous. Many of the
researchers are already working on lab-on-a-chip configuration of plasmonic biosensors. If these shortcomings can
be overcome in near future then plasmonic and metamaterial based biosensors will enable faster and more accurate
detection of pathogens which will greatly help to prevent outbreaks in future.

References
Adegoke, O., Morita, M., Kato, T., Ito, M., Suzuki, T., Park, E.Y., 2017. Localized surface plasmon resonance-mediated fluorescence signals
in plasmonic nanoparticle-quantum dot hybrids for ultrasensitive zika virus rna detection via hairpin hybridization assays. Biosensors and
Bioelectronics 94, 513–522.
Ahmadivand, A., Gerislioglu, B., Manickam, P., Kaushik, A., Bhansali, S., Nair, M., Pala, N., 2017. Rapid detection of infectious envelope proteins
by magnetoplasmonic toroidal metasensors. ACS sensors 2, 1359–1368.

M M Hassan et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 27 of 33

Plasmonic metamaterial based virus detection systems: a review
Ahmadivand, A., Gerislioglu, B., Ramezani, Z., Kaushik, A., Manickam, P., Ghoreishi, S.A., 2020. Femtomolar-level detection of sars-cov-2 spike
proteins using toroidal plasmonic metasensors. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.08536 .
Ahmadivand, A., Gerislioglu, B., Tomitaka, A., Manickam, P., Kaushik, A., Bhansali, S., Nair, M., Pala, N., 2018. Extreme sensitive metasensor
for targeted biomarkers identification using colloidal nanoparticles-integrated plasmonic unit cells. Biomedical Optics Express 9, 373–386.
Ahmed, R., Ozen, M.O., Karaaslan, M.G., Prator, C.A., Thanh, C., Kumar, S., Torres, L., Iyer, N., Munter, S., Southern, S., et al., 2020. Tunable
fano-resonant metasurfaces on a disposable plastic-template for multimodal and multiplex biosensing. Advanced Materials 32, 1907160.
Ahmed, S.R., Kang, S.W., Oh, S., Lee, J., Neethirajan, S., 2018. Chiral zirconium quantum dots: a new class of nanocrystals for optical detection
of coronavirus. Heliyon 4, e00766.
Alhamlan, F., Majumder, M., Brownstein, J., Hawkins, J., Al-Abdely, H., Alzahrani, A., Obaid, D., Al-Ahdal, M., BinSaeed, A., 2017. Case
characteristics among middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus outbreak and non-outbreak cases in saudi arabia from 2012 to 2015. Bmj
Open 7, e011865.
Antiochia, R., 2020. Developments in biosensors for cov detection and future trends. Biosensors and Bioelectronics 173, 112777.
Ashiba, H., Sugiyama, Y., Wang, X., Shirato, H., Higo-Moriguchi, K., Taniguchi, K., Ohki, Y., Fujimaki, M., 2017. Detection of norovirus viruslike particles using a surface plasmon resonance-assisted fluoroimmunosensor optimized for quantum dot fluorescent labels. Biosensors and
Bioelectronics 93, 260–266.
Bastos, M.L., Tavaziva, G., Abidi, S.K., Campbell, J.R., Haraoui, L.P., Johnston, J.C., Lan, Z., Law, S., MacLean, E., Trajman, A., et al., 2020.
Diagnostic accuracy of serological tests for covid-19: systematic review and meta-analysis. Bmj 370.
Beruete, M., Jáuregui-López, I., 2020. Terahertz sensing based on metasurfaces. Advanced Optical Materials 8, 1900721.
Bhalla, N., Pan, Y., Yang, Z., Payam, A.F., 2020. Opportunities and challenges for biosensors and nanoscale analytical tools for pandemics: Covid19. ACS nano 14, 7783–7807.
Böger, B., Fachi, M.M., Vilhena, R.O., de Fátima Cobre, A., Tonin, F.S., Pontarolo, R., 2020. Systematic review with meta-analysis of the accuracy
of diagnostic tests for covid-19. American journal of infection control .
Chang, Y.F., Wang, W.H., Hong, Y.W., Yuan, R.Y., Chen, K.H., Huang, Y.W., Lu, P.L., Chen, Y.H., Chen, Y.M.A., Su, L.C., et al., 2018. Simple
strategy for rapid and sensitive detection of avian influenza a h7n9 virus based on intensity-modulated spr biosensor and new generated antibody.
Analytical chemistry 90, 1861–1869.
Chen, T., Li, S., Sun, H., 2012. Metamaterials application in sensing. Sensors 12, 2742–2765.
Cheng, D., He, X., Huang, X., Zhang, B., Liu, G., Shu, G., Fang, C., Wang, J., Luo, Y., 2018. Terahertz biosensing metamaterial absorber for virus
detection based on spoof surface plasmon polaritons. International Journal of RF and Microwave Computer-Aided Engineering 28, e21448.
Corman, V.M., Landt, O., Kaiser, M., Molenkamp, R., Meijer, A., Chu, D.K., Bleicker, T., Brünink, S., Schneider, J., Schmidt, M.L., et al., 2020.
Detection of 2019 novel coronavirus (2019-ncov) by real-time rt-pcr. Eurosurveillance 25, 2000045.
Coskun, A.F., Cetin, A.E., Galarreta, B.C., Alvarez, D.A., Altug, H., Ozcan, A., 2014. Lensfree optofluidic plasmonic sensor for real-time and
label-free monitoring of molecular binding events over a wide field-of-view. Scientific reports 4, 6789.
Cucci, L.M., Naletova, I., Consiglio, G., Satriano, C., 2019. A hybrid nanoplatform of graphene oxide/nanogold for plasmonic sensing and cellular
applications at the nanobiointerface. Applied Sciences 9, 676.
D’Agata, R., Spoto, G., 2012. Artificial dna and surface plasmon resonance. Artificial Dna: Pna & Xna 3, 45–52.
Das, C.M., Guo, Y., Yang, G., Kang, L., Xu, G., Ho, H.P., Yong, K.T., 2020. Gold nanorod assisted enhanced plasmonic detection scheme of
covid-19 sars-cov-2 spike protein. Advanced theory and simulations 3, 2000185.
Diao, W., Tang, M., Ding, S., Li, X., Cheng, W., Mo, F., Yan, X., Ma, H., Yan, Y., 2018. Highly sensitive surface plasmon resonance biosensor for

M M Hassan et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 28 of 33

Plasmonic metamaterial based virus detection systems: a review
the detection of hiv-related dna based on dynamic and structural dna nanodevices. Biosensors and Bioelectronics 100, 228–234.
Dowran, M., Kumar, A., Lawrie, B.J., Pooser, R.C., Marino, A.M., 2018. Quantum-enhanced plasmonic sensing. Optica 5, 628–633.
Fang, Y., Ge, Y., Wang, C., Zhang, H., 2020. Mid-infrared photonics using 2d materials: Status and challenges. Laser & Photonics Reviews 14,
1900098.
Funari, R., Chu, K.Y., Shen, A.Q., 2020. Detection of antibodies against sars-cov-2 spike protein by gold nanospikes in an opto-microfluidic chip.
Biosensors and Bioelectronics 169, 112578.
Geng, Z., Kan, Q., Yuan, J., Chen, H., 2014. A route to low-cost nanoplasmonic biosensor integrated with optofluidic-portable platform. Sensors
and Actuators B: Chemical 195, 682–691.
Gong, S., Xiao, B., Xiao, L., Tong, S., Xiao, S., Wang, X., 2019. Hybridization-induced dual-band tunable graphene metamaterials for sensing.
Optical Materials Express 9, 35–43.
Guner, H., Ozgur, E., Kokturk, G., Celik, M., Esen, E., Topal, A.E., Ayas, S., Uludag, Y., Elbuken, C., Dana, A., 2017. A smartphone based surface
plasmon resonance imaging (spri) platform for on-site biodetection. Sensors and Actuators B: Chemical 239, 571–577.
Heo, N.S., Oh, S.Y., Ryu, M.Y., Baek, S.H., Park, T.J., Choi, C., Huh, Y.S., Park, J.P., 2019. Affinity peptide-guided plasmonic biosensor for
detection of noroviral protein and human norovirus. Biotechnology and Bioprocess Engineering 24, 318–325.
Hong, J., Jun, S., Cha, S., Park, J., Lee, S., Shin, G., Ahn, Y., 2018. Enhanced sensitivity in thz plasmonic sensors with silver nanowires. Scientific
reports 8, 1–8.
Huang, C., Wang, Y., Li, X., Ren, L., Zhao, J., Hu, Y., Zhang, L., Fan, G., Xu, J., Gu, X., et al., 2020. Clinical features of patients infected with
2019 novel coronavirus in wuhan, china. The lancet 395, 497–506.
Huang, J.C., Chang, Y.F., Chen, K.H., Su, L.C., Lee, C.W., Chen, C.C., Chen, Y.M.A., Chou, C., 2009. Detection of severe acute respiratory
syndrome (sars) coronavirus nucleocapsid protein in human serum using a localized surface plasmon coupled fluorescence fiber-optic biosensor.
Biosensors and Bioelectronics 25, 320–325.
Inci, F., Tokel, O., Wang, S., Gurkan, U.A., Tasoglu, S., Kuritzkes, D.R., Demirci, U., 2013. Nanoplasmonic quantitative detection of intact viruses
from unprocessed whole blood. ACS nano 7, 4733–4745.
Jahanshahi, P., Zalnezhad, E., Sekaran, S.D., Adikan, F.R.M., 2014. Rapid immunoglobulin m-based dengue diagnostic test using surface plasmon
resonance biosensor. Scientific reports 4, 3851.
Jans, H., Huo, Q., 2012. Gold nanoparticle-enabled biological and chemical detection and analysis. Chemical Society Reviews 41, 2849–2866.
Ji, T., Liu, Z., Wang, G., Guo, X., Lai, C., Chen, H., Huang, S., Xia, S., Chen, B., Jia, H., et al., 2020. Detection of covid-19: A review of the
current literature and future perspectives. Biosensors and Bioelectronics 166, 112455.
Keshavarz, A., Vafapour, Z., 2019. Sensing avian influenza viruses using terahertz metamaterial reflector. IEEE Sensors Journal 19, 5161–5166.
doi:10.1109/JSEN.2019.2903731.
Kim, J., Oh, S.Y., Shukla, S., Hong, S.B., Heo, N.S., Bajpai, V.K., Chun, H.S., Jo, C.H., Choi, B.G., Huh, Y.S., et al., 2018. Heteroassembled
gold nanoparticles with sandwich-immunoassay lspr chip format for rapid and sensitive detection of hepatitis b virus surface antigen (hbsag).
Biosensors and Bioelectronics 107, 118–122.
Kshetrimayum, R.S., 2004. A brief intro to metamaterials. IEEE Potentials 23, 44–46.
Lautner, G., Balogh, Z., Bardóczy, V., Mészáros, T., Gyurcsányi, R.E., 2010. Aptamer-based biochips for label-free detection of plant virus coat
proteins by spr imaging. Analyst 135, 918–926.
Lee, D.K., Kang, J.H., Kwon, J., Lee, J.S., Lee, S., Woo, D.H., Kim, J.H., Song, C.S., Park, Q.H., Seo, M., 2017a. Nano metamaterials for
ultrasensitive terahertz biosensing. Scientific reports 7, 1–6.

M M Hassan et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 29 of 33

Plasmonic metamaterial based virus detection systems: a review
Lee, H.J., Yook, J.G., 2008. Biosensing using split-ring resonators at microwave regime. Applied Physics Letters 92, 254103.
Lee, J., Takemura, K., Kato, C.N., Suzuki, T., Park, E.Y., 2017b. Binary nanoparticle graphene hybrid structure-based highly sensitive biosensing
platform for norovirus-like particle detection. ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces 9, 27298–27304.
Lee, J., Zhou, H., Lee, J., 2011. Small molecule induced self-assembly of au nanoparticles. Journal of Materials Chemistry 21, 16935–16942.
Lee, T., Kim, G.H., Kim, S.M., Hong, K., Kim, Y., Park, C., Sohn, H., Min, J., 2019. Label-free localized surface plasmon resonance biosensor
composed of multi-functional dna 3 way junction on hollow au spike-like nanoparticles (hausn) for avian influenza virus detection. Colloids and
Surfaces B: Biointerfaces 182, 110341.
Li, X., Lu, D., Sheng, Z., Chen, K., Guo, X., Jin, M., Han, H., 2012. A fast and sensitive immunoassay of avian influenza virus based on label-free
quantum dot probe and lateral flow test strip. Talanta 100, 1–6.
Li, X., Shu, J., Gu, W., Gao, L., 2019. Deep neural network for plasmonic sensor modeling. Optical Materials Express 9, 3857–3862.
Liu, X., Song, D., Zhang, Q., Tian, Y., Ding, L., Zhang, H., 2005. Wavelength-modulation surface plasmon resonance sensor. TrAC Trends in
Analytical Chemistry 24, 887–893.
Liu, Y., Wilson, W.D., 2010. Quantitative analysis of small molecule–nucleic acid interactions with a biosensor surface and surface plasmon
resonance detection, in: Drug-DNA Interaction Protocols. Springer, pp. 1–23.
Lu, R., Zhao, X., Li, J., Niu, P., Yang, B., Wu, H., Wang, W., Song, H., Huang, B., Zhu, N., et al., 2020. Genomic characterisation and epidemiology
of 2019 novel coronavirus: implications for virus origins and receptor binding. The Lancet 395, 565–574.
Luo, X., Davis, J.J., 2013. Electrical biosensors and the label free detection of protein disease biomarkers. Chemical Society Reviews 42, 5944–5962.
Maalouf, R., Fournier-Wirth, C., Coste, J., Chebib, H., Saïkali, Y., Vittori, O., Errachid, A., Cloarec, J.P., Martelet, C., Jaffrezic-Renault, N., 2007.
Label-free detection of bacteria by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy: comparison to surface plasmon resonance. Analytical chemistry
79, 4879–4886.
Manera, M., Colombelli, A., Rella, R., Caricato, A., Cozzoli, P.D., Martino, M., Vasanelli, L., 2012. Tio2 brookite nanostructured thin layer on
magneto-optical surface plasmon resonance transductor for gas sensing applications. Journal of Applied Physics 112, 053524.
Mauriz, E., 2020. Recent progress in plasmonic biosensing schemes for virus detection. Sensors 20, 4745.
Miller, B.S., Bezinge, L., Gliddon, H.D., Huang, D., Dold, G., Gray, E.R., Heaney, J., Dobson, P.J., Nastouli, E., Morton, J.J., et al., 2020. Spinenhanced nanodiamond biosensing for ultrasensitive diagnostics. Nature 587, 588–593.
Moitra, P., Alafeef, M., Dighe, K., Frieman, M., Pan, D., 2020. Selective naked-eye detection of sars-cov-2 mediated by n gene targeted antisense
oligonucleotide capped plasmonic nanoparticles. ACS nano .
Moon, G., Choi, J.r., Lee, C., Oh, Y., Kim, K., Kim, D., 2020. Machine learning-based design of meta-plasmonic biosensors with negative index
metamaterials. Biosensors and Bioelectronics , 112335.
Myszka, D.G., Rich, R.L., 2000. Implementing surface plasmon resonance biosensors in drug discovery. Pharmaceutical science & technology
today 3, 310–317.
Nasrin, F., Chowdhury, A.D., Takemura, K., Kozaki, I., Honda, H., Adegoke, O., Park, E.Y., 2020. Fluorometric virus detection platform using
quantum dots-gold nanocomposites optimizing the linker length variation. Analytica Chimica Acta .
Nasrin, F., Chowdhury, A.D., Takemura, K., Lee, J., Adegoke, O., Deo, V.K., Abe, F., Suzuki, T., Park, E.Y., 2018. Single-step detection of
norovirus tuning localized surface plasmon resonance-induced optical signal between gold nanoparticles and quantum dots. Biosensors and
Bioelectronics 122, 16–24.
Ohannesian, N., Misbah, I., Lin, S.H., Shih, W.C., 2020. Plasmonic nano-aperture label-free imaging (panorama). Nature communications 11,
1–10.

M M Hassan et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 30 of 33

Plasmonic metamaterial based virus detection systems: a review
Omar, N.A.S., Fen, Y.W., Abdullah, J., Chik, C.E.N.C.E., Mahdi, M.A., 2018. Development of an optical sensor based on surface plasmon resonance
phenomenon for diagnosis of dengue virus e-protein. Sensing and bio-sensing research 20, 16–21.
Omar, N.A.S., Fen, Y.W., Abdullah, J., Kamil, Y.M., Daniyal, W.M.E.M.M., Sadrolhosseini, A.R., Mahdi, M.A., 2020. Sensitive detection of
dengue virus type 2 e-proteins signals using self-assembled monolayers/reduced graphene oxide-pamam dendrimer thin film-spr optical sensor.
Scientific Reports 10, 1–15.
Omar, N.A.S., Fen, Y.W., Abdullah, J., Zaid, M.H.M., Daniyal, W.M.E.M.M., Mahdi, M.A., 2019. Sensitive surface plasmon resonance performance of cadmium sulfide quantum dots-amine functionalized graphene oxide based thin film towards dengue virus e-protein. Optics & Laser
Technology 114, 204–208.
Organization, W.H., et al., 2020. Who director-general’s opening remarks at the media briefing on covid-19-11 march 2020.
Osborne, I.S., 2018. A quantum enhancement for plasmonic sensors. Science 360, 1199–1200.
Park, S., Cha, S., Shin, G., Ahn, Y., 2017. Sensing viruses using terahertz nano-gap metamaterials. Biomedical optics express 8, 3551–3558.
Pendry, J.B., 2000. Negative refraction makes a perfect lens. Physical review letters 85, 3966.
Pendry, J.B., Holden, A.J., Robbins, D.J., Stewart, W., 1999. Magnetism from conductors and enhanced nonlinear phenomena. IEEE transactions
on microwave theory and techniques 47, 2075–2084.
Puiu, M., Bala, C., 2016. Spr and spr imaging: Recent trends in developing nanodevices for detection and real-time monitoring of biomolecular
events. Sensors 16, 870.
Qin, P., Park, M., Alfson, K.J., Tamhankar, M., Carrion, R., Patterson, J.L., Griffiths, A., He, Q., Yildiz, A., Mathies, R., et al., 2019. Rapid and
fully microfluidic ebola virus detection with crispr-cas13a. ACS sensors 4, 1048–1054.
Qiu, G., Gai, Z., Tao, Y., Schmitt, J., Kullak-Ublick, G.A., Wang, J., 2020. Dual-functional plasmonic photothermal biosensors for highly accurate
severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 detection. ACS nano 14, 5268–5277.
Raether, H., 1988. Surface plasmons on smooth surfaces, in: Surface plasmons on smooth and rough surfaces and on gratings. Springer, pp. 4–39.
Rippa, M., Castagna, R., Brandi, S., Fusco, G., Monini, M., Chen, D., Zhou, J., Zyss, J., Petti, L., 2020. Octupolar plasmonic nanosensor based on
ordered arrays of triangular au nanopillars for selective rotavirus detection. ACS Applied Nano Materials 3, 4837–4844.
Sakamoto, S., Putalun, W., Vimolmangkang, S., Phoolcharoen, W., Shoyama, Y., Tanaka, H., Morimoto, S., 2018. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent
assay for the quantitative/qualitative analysis of plant secondary metabolites. Journal of natural medicines 72, 32–42.
Samson, R., Navale, G.R., Dharne, M.S., 2020. Biosensors: frontiers in rapid detection of covid-19. 3 Biotech 10, 1–9.
Sánchez-Purrà, M., Carrè-Camps, Marc an dePuig, H., Bosch, I., Gehrke, L., Hamad-Schifferli, K., 2017. Surface-enhanced raman spectroscopybased sandwich immunoassays for multiplexed detection of zika and dengue viral biomarkers. ACS infectious diseases 3, 767–776.
Savran, C.A., Knudsen, S.M., Ellington, A.D., Manalis, S.R., 2004. Micromechanical detection of proteins using aptamer-based receptor molecules.
Analytical chemistry 76, 3194–3198.
Shanmukh, S., Jones, L., Driskell, J., Zhao, Y., Dluhy, R., Tripp, R.A., 2006. Rapid and sensitive detection of respiratory virus molecular signatures
using a silver nanorod array sers substrate. Nano letters 6, 2630–2636.
Sharma, P.K., Kumar, J.S., Singh, V.V., Biswas, U., Sarkar, S.S., Alam, S.I., Dash, P.K., Boopathi, M., Ganesan, K., Jain, R., 2020. Surface plasmon
resonance sensing of ebola virus: a biological threat. Analytical and Bioanalytical Chemistry , 1–12.
Shi, L., Sun, Q., He, J., Xu, H., Liu, C., Zhao, C., Xu, Y., Wu, C., Xiang, J., Gu, D., et al., 2015. Development of spr biosensor for simultaneous
detection of multiplex respiratory viruses. Bio-medical materials and engineering 26, S2207–S2216.
Shrivastava, A., Gupta, V.B., et al., 2011. Methods for the determination of limit of detection and limit of quantitation of the analytical methods.
Chronicles of young scientists 2, 21.

M M Hassan et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 31 of 33

Plasmonic metamaterial based virus detection systems: a review
Smith, D.R., Padilla, W.J., Vier, D., Nemat-Nasser, S.C., Schultz, S., 2000. Composite medium with simultaneously negative permeability and
permittivity. Physical review letters 84, 4184.
Soares, R.M., Durigon, E.L., Bersano, J.G., Richtzenhain, L.J., 1999. Detection of porcine parvovirus dna by the polymerase chain reaction assay
using primers to the highly conserved nonstructural protein gene, ns-1. Journal of virological methods 78, 191–198.
Soler, M., Estevez, M.C., Cardenosa-Rubio, M., Astua, A., Lechuga, L.M., 2020. How nanophotonic label-free biosensors can contribute to rapid
and massive diagnostics of respiratory virus infections: Covid-19 case. ACS sensors 5, 2663–2678.
Souf, S., 2016. Recent advances in diagnostic testing for viral infections. Bioscience Horizons: The International Journal of Student Research 9.
Sreekanth, K.V., Alapan, Y., ElKabbash, M., Wen, A.M., Ilker, E., Hinczewski, M., Gurkan, U.A., Steinmetz, N.F., Strangi, G., 2016. Enhancing
the angular sensitivity of plasmonic sensors using hyperbolic metamaterials. Advanced optical materials 4, 1767–1772.
Sreekanth, K.V., ElKabbash, M., Alapan, Y., Ilker, E.I., Hinczewski, M., Gurkan, U.A., Strangi, G., 2017. Hyperbolic metamaterials-based plasmonic biosensor for fluid biopsy with single molecule sensitivity. EPJ Applied Metamaterials 4, 1.
Suthanthiraraj, P.P.A., Sen, A.K., 2019. Localized surface plasmon resonance (lspr) biosensor based on thermally annealed silver nanostructures
with on-chip blood-plasma separation for the detection of dengue non-structural protein ns1 antigen. Biosensors and Bioelectronics 132, 38–46.
Tahamtan, A., Ardebili, A., 2020. Real-time rt-pcr in covid-19 detection: issues affecting the results.
Takemura, K., Adegoke, O., Suzuki, T., Park, E.Y., 2019. A localized surface plasmon resonance-amplified immunofluorescence biosensor for
ultrasensitive and rapid detection of nonstructural protein 1 of zika virus. Plos one 14, e0211517.
Takemura, K., Adegoke, O., Takahashi, N., Kato, T., Li, T.C., Kitamoto, N., Tanaka, T., Suzuki, T., Park, E.Y., 2017. Versatility of a localized
surface plasmon resonance-based gold nanoparticle-alloyed quantum dot nanobiosensor for immunofluorescence detection of viruses. Biosensors
and Bioelectronics 89, 998–1005.
Tam, Y.J., Zeenathul, N.A., Rezaei, M.A., Mustafa, N.H., Azmi, M.L.M., Bahaman, A.R., Lo, S.C., Tan, J.S., Hani, H., Rasedee, A., 2017. Wide
dynamic range of surface-plasmon-resonance-based assay for hepatitis b surface antigen antibody optimal detection in comparison with elisa.
Biotechnology and applied biochemistry 64, 735–744.
Turpin, J.P., Bossard, J.A., Morgan, K.L., Werner, D.H., Werner, P.L., 2014. Reconfigurable and tunable metamaterials: a review of the theory and
applications. International Journal of Antennas and Propagation 2014.
Uddin, S.M.A., Chowdhury, S.S., Kabir, E., 2020. Numerical analysis of a highly sensitive surface plasmon resonance sensor for sars-cov-2
detection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2008.10354 .
Valdez, J., Bawage, S., Gomez, I., Singh, S.R., 2016. Facile and rapid detection of respiratory syncytial virus using metallic nanoparticles. Journal
of nanobiotechnology 14, 1–12.
Vemula, S.V., Zhao, J., Liu, J., Wang, X., Biswas, S., Hewlett, I., 2016. Current approaches for diagnosis of influenza virus infections in humans.
Viruses 8, 96.
Veselago, V.G., 1968. The electrodynamics of substances with simultaneously negative values of 𝜖 and 𝜇. Physics-Uspekhi 10, 509–514.
Wang, R., Xu, W., Chen, D., Zhou, R., Wang, Q., Gao, W., Kono, J., Xie, L., Ying, Y., 2020. Ultrahigh-sensitivity molecular sensing with carbon
nanotube terahertz metamaterials. ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces 12, 40629–40634.
Wang, X., Li, Y., Wang, H., Fu, Q., Peng, J., Wang, Y., Du, J., Zhou, Y., Zhan, L., 2010. Gold nanorod-based localized surface plasmon resonance
biosensor for sensitive detection of hepatitis b virus in buffer, blood serum and plasma. Biosensors and Bioelectronics 26, 404–410.
Withayachumnankul, W., Fumeaux, C., Abbott, D., 2010. Compact electric-lc resonators for metamaterials. Opt. Express 18, 25912–25921. URL:
http://www.opticsexpress.org/abstract.cfm?URI=oe-18-25-25912, doi:10.1364/OE.18.025912.
Wood, R.W., 1902. Xlii. on a remarkable case of uneven distribution of light in a diffraction grating spectrum. The London, Edinburgh, and Dublin

M M Hassan et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 32 of 33

Plasmonic metamaterial based virus detection systems: a review
Philosophical Magazine and Journal of Science 4, 396–402.
Yanik, A.A., Huang, M., Kamohara, O., Artar, A., Geisbert, T.W., Connor, J.H., Altug, H., 2010. An optofluidic nanoplasmonic biosensor for direct
detection of live viruses from biological media. Nano letters 10, 4962–4969.
Yesilkoy, F., Terborg, R.A., Pello, J., Belushkin, A.A., Jahani, Y., Pruneri, V., Altug, H., 2018. Phase-sensitive plasmonic biosensor using a portable
and large field-of-view interferometric microarray imager. Light: Science & Applications 7, 17152–17152.
Yu, H., Kim, K., Ma, K., Lee, W., Choi, J.W., Yun, C.O., Kim, D., 2013. Enhanced detection of virus particles by nanoisland-based localized
surface plasmon resonance. Biosensors and Bioelectronics 41, 249–255.
Yu, P., Besteiro, L.V., Huang, Y., Wu, J., Fu, L., Tan, H.H., Jagadish, C., Wiederrecht, G.P., Govorov, A.O., Wang, Z., 2019. Broadband metamaterial
absorbers. Advanced Optical Materials 7, 1800995.
Yüce, M., Filiztekin, E., Özkaya, K.G., 2020. Covid-19 diagnosis—a review of current methods. Biosensors and Bioelectronics , 112752.
Zhang, K., Liu, X., Shen, J., Li, Z., Sang, Y., Wu, X., Zha, Y., Liang, W., Wang, C., Wang, K., et al., 2020. Clinically applicable ai system for
accurate diagnosis, quantitative measurements, and prognosis of covid-19 pneumonia using computed tomography. Cell .
Zhao, Y.P., Shanmukh, S., Liu, Y.J., Chaney, S., Jones, L., Dluhy, R., Tripp, R., 2006. Silver nanorod arrays as highly sensitive sers substrates for
viral detection 6324, 63240M.
Zhong, N., Zheng, B., Li, Y., Poon, L., Xie, Z., Chan, K., Li, P., Tan, S., Chang, Q., Xie, J., et al., 2003. Epidemiology and cause of severe acute
respiratory syndrome (sars) in guangdong, people’s republic of china, in february, 2003. The Lancet 362, 1353–1358.
Zhou, R., Wang, C., Xu, W., Xie, L., 2019. Biological applications of terahertz technology based on nanomaterials and nanostructures. Nanoscale
11, 3445–3457.
Zhou, X., Chen, K., Li, L., Peng, W., Yu, Q., 2017. Angle modulated surface plasmon resonance spectrometer for refractive index sensing with
enhanced detection resolution. Optics Communications 382, 610–614.
Zhu, J., Ke, Y., Dai, J., You, Q., Wu, L., Li, J., Guo, J., Xiang, Y., Dai, X., 2019. Topological insulator overlayer to enhance the sensitivity and
detection limit of surface plasmon resonance sensor. Nanophotonics 1.

M M Hassan et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 33 of 33

