Gandhi et al.

RESEARCH

arXiv:2012.01772v1 [cs.CY] 3 Dec 2020

Digital Landscape of COVID-19 Testing:
Challenges and Opportunities
Darshan Gandhi1 , Rohan Sukumaran1 , Priyanshi Katiyar1 , Alex Radunsky1,6 , Sunaina Anand1 , Shailesh
Advani1,7 , Jil Kothari1 , Kasia Jakimowicz1,3,5 , Sheshank Shankar1 , Sethuraman T. V.1 , Krutika Misra1 ,
Aishwarya Saxena1,8 , Sanskruti Landage1 , Richa Sonker1 , Parth Patwa1 , Aryan Mahindra1 , Mikhail
Dmitrienko1 , Kanishka Vaish1 , Ashley Mehra1 , Srinidhi Murali1 , Rohan Iyer1 , Joseph Bae1,9 , Vivek
Sharma2,3,4 , Abhishek Singh2,3 , Rachel Barbar2,3 and Ramesh Raskar1,2,3*
1

PathCheck Foundation, 02139 Cambridge, USA.
MIT Media Lab, 02139 Cambridge, USA.
3
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 02139 Cambridge, USA.
4
Harvard Medical School, 02115 Boston, USA.
5
Ash Center for Democratic Governance and Innovation, Harvard Kennedy School, 02138 Cambridge, USA.
6
Institute for Technology and Global Health, 02139 Cambridge, USA
7
National Human Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of Health, 20892 Bethesda, USA
8
University of California, Berkeley School of Law, 94720 Berkeley, USA.
9
Renaissance School of Medicine, Stony Brook University, 11794 Stony Brook, USA
2

*

Correspondence:
https://web.media.mit.edu/∼raskar/
2
MIT Media Lab, 02139
Cambridge, USA
Full list of author information is
available at the end of the article

Abstract
The COVID-19 Pandemic has left a devastating trail all over the world, in terms
of loss of lives, economic decline, travel restrictions, trade deficit, and collapsing
economy including real-estate, job loss, loss of health benefits, the decline in
quality of access to care and services and overall quality of life. Immunization
from the anticipated vaccines will not be the stand-alone guideline that will help
surpass the pandemic and return to normalcy. Four pillars of effective public
health intervention include diagnostic testing for both asymptomatic and
symptomatic individuals, contact tracing, quarantine of individuals with
symptoms or who are exposed to COVID-19, and maintaining strict hygiene
standards at the individual and community level. Digital technology, currently
being used for COVID-19 testing include certain mobile apps, web dashboards,
and online self-assessment tools. Herein, we look into various digital solutions
adapted by communities across universities, businesses, and other organizations.
We summarize the challenges experienced using these tools in terms of quality of
information, privacy, and user-centric issues. Despite numerous digital solutions
available and being developed, many vary in terms of information being shared in
terms of both quality and quantity, which can be overwhelming to the users.
Understanding the testing landscape through a digital lens will give a clear
insight into the multiple challenges that we face including data privacy, cost, and
miscommunication. It is the destiny of digitalization to navigate testing for
COVID-19. Block-chain based systems can be used for privacy preservation and
ensuring ownership of the data to remain with the user. Another solution involves
having digital health passports with relevant and correct information. In this early
draft, we summarize the challenges and propose possible solutions to address the
same.
Keywords: COVID-19; Vaccines; Healthcare information management; Privacy

Gandhi et al.

Page 2 of 28

1 Introduction and Related Work
COVID-19, a global pandemic has high transmission and mortality rate, especially
among the elderly, healthcare workers and those with underlying comorbidities.
With the vaccines still undergoing final approvals, the mainstay of pandemic management depends on key public health intervention including early detection, mitigation through isolation and contact tracing. Countries across the world are taking
strict measures to manage the overwhelming and unprecedented impact of the pandemic Digital health technology, the mainstay of pandemic strategy can achieve
superior outcomes that are difficult to achieve otherwise. Integrating these digital tools into public health interventions has revolutionized surveillance, testing,
contact tracing, healthcare access and quarantine measures aimed at control and
mitigating COVID-19 spread thereby aiming to reduce COVID-19 infection and
deaths Big data and artificial intelligence (AI), used widely in healthcare, have also
helped in tracking people and thereby reducing the spread of infection. Migration
maps including mobile phones, mobile payment applications and social media are
used to collect real-time data on the location of people. Machine learning and disease spread models were developed to predict the regional transmission of the virus
that help guide policy and containment measures. Efficient use of big data has contributed to reduced spread and early detection, thereby saving thousands of lives.
The need to track the spread of COVID-19 has fuelled the innovation of data containing dashboards that display variables such as disease burden including number
of cases, deaths, recovered, and active patients.s. Some dashboards could plot trends
according to demographic and geographical characteristics. The limitations of AI
need to be addressed and requires training with COVID-19 datasets. The accuracy,
validity and reliability of these digital tools are a concern. This viewpoint provides
an outline for the application of digital technology in the landscape of pandemic
management and response. Also, highlighting the challenges and success of various
digital technologies used by countries to manage the pandemic.
Since December 2019, the COVID-19 pandemic has contributed to an exponential
growth in the development of diagnostic technologies and interdisciplinary and intercountry scientific data sharing. A recent bibliometric study has shown that the
availability of evidence in response to the COVID-19 pandemic has been much more
efficient than other recent epidemic events, such as the 2015–16 Zika virus epidemic
and the 2014–16 Ebola virus outbreak due to technology and science advancements
and rapid sharing of information. More than 2,500 articles related to COVID-19
were published in the first 4 months of the pandemic, compared to only 88 articles
related to both Zika and Ebola viruses in the same epidemiological period. [1]
The pace at which viral genomic sequences have been available to the public
during the COVID-19 pandemic also illustrates the rapid pace of data sharing over
time. [2] As of 31st December 2019, 19 gene sequences of the SARS-CoV-2 virus
were already obtainable through the GISAID database (gisaid.org), which now has
over 40,000 viral genome sequences shared by laboratories around the globe. As a
comparison, it took almost 3 years for the number of sequential viral genomes to
reach 1,500 sequences during the Ebola virus outbreak. The rapid developments
of SARS-CoV-2 genomic sequences contributed to both the rapid development of
the gold standard molecular diagnostic tests for COVID-19 and to the development

Gandhi et al.

Page 3 of 28

of simplified protocols for complete viral genome sequencing and analysis and labbased serology assays using recombinantly produced SARS-CoV-2 proteins.
In this early draft, we aim to understand the digital landscape of the current
testing scenarios. We go to the granularity of understanding the User agency and
control, understanding the digital workflow of testing, how various organisations
(or governments) are using the digital solutions for testing. Furthermore we look
into understanding the major challenges in the current workflow including but not
limited to - privacy, security, miscommunication, trust and laws. We look at various
case studies across countries to understand the effects of different digital solutions
and leave an open thread for the solutions.
1.1 User Agency and Control of Data
One of the key challenges in the digital management of testing has been how the
agencies acquire and control the data or the users for their use and the privacy policies they follow. Confidentiality has been one of the most important issues and concerns of the digital revolution and given rapid use of digital platforms on COVID-19
management. Increased privacy concerns are attributed to several health platforms
requiring patients to share their personal protected health information, including
but not limited to the patient’s name, phone number, email, race, country of birth,
SSN, residential address and even travel history. This is problematic because of the
lack of policies and regulations about the use of personal data. [3] Further, due
to the sensitive nature of the data, users face the security risk of being tracked,
man-in-middle attack and data snooping by a third party.
Thus, it becomes very important to have the right policies set which inform the
user about the need for their data and consent of use from the patient is a must.
1.2 How other epidemic tests are managed (Ebola, HIV, malaria, Swine flu, zika, etc)
The Zika outbreak in 2016 was a global public health concern and digital technology
played a vital role alongside traditional public health approaches. Mathematical
modelling helped in understanding the Aedes spp. Vectors in terms of transmission, host-virus interaction, and effectiveness of potential interventions. Geographical information systems (GIS) including epidemiological maps were used to estimate magnitude, transmission and spread of the Zika outbreak. The category of big
data included social media analytics and web-based surveillance particularly on the
OpenZika project, Digital Participatory Surveillance (DPS), and ProMED. DPS is
a form of digital surveillance where the public reports signs and symptoms through
a structured electronic form and the data is summarized via epidemiological maps.
Zika tracker, a smartphone-based diagnostic platform could be used anywhere in
the world to report suspected or confirmed cases of Zika. WHO‘s Zika App is a
similar app that provides real-time data to all users. Researchers in Brazil developed MinION that is a novel real-time genome-sequencing device. An insecticide
wearable device that releases Metofluthrin (traditional repellant of Aedes aegypti)
reduced the number of mosquitoes attracted. [4]
During the Ebola outbreak, diagnosis was difficult especially in asymptomatic
people. The gold-standard diagnostic test for Ebola virus, the real-time RT-PCR
needed substantial infrastructure, operation and maintenance of complex equipment, and expertise in molecular techniques. Limitations of the diagnostic tests were

Gandhi et al.

Page 4 of 28

addressed by digital solutions. The Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) used the
National Health Information System to create a dashboard called PATH for monitoring Ebola cases. The US Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC),
World Health Organization (WHO) and other organizations worked together to develop digital maps and graphs. In 2019, the Ministry of Health of DRC launched a
national agency for clinical information and health informatics (ANICiiS). During
the 2014-2016 epidemic, mHERO, an SMS system was set-up to share information
with health workers. UNICEF also launched the Rapidpro free source platform that
provided SMS messaging in Sierra Leone where it was rare to possess a smart-phone,
internet, or even phone credit. [5][6][7]
HIV/AIDS control strategies included digital solutions such as mapping and maintaining surveillance of high risk behaviors, individual level intervention that targets
key populations (during a low-level epidemic), providing voluntary testing and counseling (VTC) and screening for sexually transmitted infections (STIs).
Malaria remains endemic in several countries despite multiple interventions. Containing malaria outbreaks remained a challenge because it was difficult to predict
who would contract the disease. As a result, resources were not deployed in the correct region. This caused the outbreak to grow. A quick and reliable digital solution
was required. The National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) used
satellite data to help forecast malaria outbreaks by identifying areas of prime breeding grounds for these mosquitoes that overlapped with human population. They use
the information on precipitation, temperature, soil moisture, and vegetation around
the world and feed it into a prediction model and tell where a puddle is most likely
to form. Simply mapping where people reported malaria is not enough as the place
of infection is usually different. They also track humans to see where most people are
getting infected i.e hotspots. But for the purposes of predicting a malaria outbreak,
the map did not tell a complete story. They could successfully make projections
down to the household level, allowing for resources to go where they’re needed. The
population models could be used for tracking not only malaria, but Zika and Dengue
as well. [8] The Digital Solutions for Malaria Elimination (DSME) Community of
Practice (COP) helped in building malaria surveillance systems that made accurate
data reporting easier and thus improved decision-making processes. [9]

2 Testing Workflows
2.1 User experience
The rapid spread of COVID-19 has been worrisome for many individuals across the
globe with respect to the safety of security, workflows and measures being taken
to overcome these issues. There is an increasing emphasis on providing great user
experience and information to the citizens so they stay informed and aware of the
recent developments, policies, precautions and measures that have been taken up
to fight the virus.
2.1.1 User engagement summary table
In this table, we highlight the similarities and differences in user engagement within
public/government sites, private clinics, employee/campus organizations, and entering venues (such as flights). It is important to understand the different facilities

Gandhi et al.

Page 5 of 28

which are provided by the different organizations and institutions and how the public and government sites can be modified more to support the facility of giving out
reminders and covering the insurances for the patients. Also the entry pass system
at the public/ government sites should be more digitised to avoid the issues of data
privacy and spoofing. Adding on, it is most important to provide the scheduling
facility across all the different organizations to avoid the issue of overcrowding and
have a systematic approach in place. Even the test results should be supported
with a detailed report covering points ranging from a detailed analysis of virus to
the precautionary measures that need to be taken by the patient to avoid getting
infected in future, in case they are affected a report needs to be shared to indicate
the exact steps the patient should take in order to stay protected and at the same
time not transmit the infection to others.
Public/Government
Sites

Private Clinics

Employee/campus
organizations

Entering Venues
(ﬂights, etc)

Examples

MA, Singapore, HHS,
HRSA

CareWell Urgent Care,
MD Now Urgent Care

MIT, Ford, Infosys

Access to Testing Sites

Map of sites

Walk in clinics

Email campaign

At the airport

Scheduling

Available

Available

Available

Available

Hawaii Airlines, United
Airlines NY to London

Reminders

Not Available

Not Available

Available

Available

Covered by Insurance

No, in most cases

Yes, conditional upon if
one has symptoms

Yes, conditional upon if
one has symptoms

No, in most cases

Get Directions

Available

Available

Available

Available

Call

Available

Available

Available

Available

Test Results

Need to log into the
website to get results

Need to log into the
website/patient portal
to get results

Embedded worksite
portal

Need to log into
personal account of
respective public venue

Entry Pass or Health
Veriﬁcation

Take a print out and
show it for entering
public venues

Appointment and
bookings

Results are
automatically
connected to one’s
employee access card

Report of results
showing if one has no
recent signs of the
virus

Figure 1 User engagement summary table

2.1.2 User Journey Table
It is also important to understand more about the user’s journey and the steps
taken by them in order to get tested. First via social media campaigns, televisions
and youtube videos the end user is educated about the different COVID-19 testing
centres and sites. Using this information the user tries to explore more about the different sites which may be public, private, educational sites and draws a comparative
analysis between them. Once they are certain about the type of site/ organisation
they would want to visit next they analyse the different centres and hospitals available for them to visit and this decision is taken based on several parameters such
as the type of testing available, cost of testing, time to get the results and one of
the crucial points would be the location of thee testing sites. Lastly, once tested the
patient/user tends to receive more updates and reminders on taking the necessary
dosage and also receive timely reminders via messages.

Gandhi et al.

Page 6 of 28

Figure 2 User journey table

2.1.3 Test site logistics (LIMS systems, Lab Info Management Systems) (Quest,
LabCorp, Verily, etc)

Figure 3 CDC recommended COVID-19 Flow Screening Process [10]

Figure 3 illustrates the standardised process flow for COVID-19 testing. The participants should flow in one direction and each of the stations should be separated
by at least 6 feet. Participants begin with a temperature and symptom check. This
is also where participants are given a face covering if they don’t already have one.
Then, they fill out all the necessary paperwork (pens and clipboards are disinfected
in between participants). Participants proceed to the interview stations where they
are screened for symptoms, after which they are put in testing stations where they
are given a swab to collect their specimen. The specimen is then put into a vial and
dropped into a transport bag. Lastly, participants are then given the information
needed to receive their results [11].

Gandhi et al.

Page 7 of 28

There are many software and data management systems in use as well. Data
management systems are essential during COVID-19 case investigations and contact tracing. This data is stored in different ways based on the guidelines of the
local jurisdiction or testing sites, but typically is stored in storage platforms like
cloud. It is important for the data to be stored in a way that preserves anonymity
and protection of Personal Health Information (PHI). In addition, Lab Information
Management Systems (LIMS), a type of software present in most modern laboratories, can be used at COVID-19 testing sites. LIMS could improve productivity and
efficiency of laboratories by increasing the speed of test processing, reducing costs
by automating, and streamlining lab workflows.
Test sites should be in large open areas (preferably outside) to allow for effective
social distancing. It is also important for test sites to have centers to isolate patients who test positive for COVID-19. In a test site, keeping staff members safe
is extremely important. The CDC recommends gloves and face masks for all staff
members present at a test site, and gowns and N95 (or equivalent) masks for anyone
who will be within 6 feet of any person being tested. The person being tested should
also wear a face mask. Aggressive sanitation is necessary, including changing gowns,
respirators, and face masks if they are soiled. In addition, these should be replaced
in case they are accidentally touched or if they come in close contact with a person
being tested.
2.1.4 Dissemination of results to the user (website, app, phone call, email, text)
(Comcare, Salesforce)
Testing forms a crucial point of intervention for mitigating the COVID-19 pandemic. The results of one’s COVID-19 test along with other relevant information
will assist one’s healthcare provider to make informed decisions regarding patient’s
health including recommending treatment and mitigation strategies. Timely and
proper communication of results will also help in limiting the spread of COVID-19
to one’s family and the larger community. The mechanism of disseminating results
varies greatly across countries and can be through web based secure file transmission, an SMS, phone call, email or within an embedded app portal. Digital or
electronic-based reporting would reduce unnecessary travel and risk of exposure.
The timeframe for tests to be made available depends upon the type of test and
the area it was done. The process for Rapid antigen tests is faster than RT-PCR.
Point of care testing in community settings like schools, college campuses, nursing homes and employer organisations remain crucial for public health mitigation
strategies.Testing sites ,generally employ the following methods for results notification:
• Electronic laboratory reporting:It refers to automated messaging of reports
sent using one or more electronic communication portals like SMS, email etc.
ELR ensures that health departments and patients receive timely, accurate,
complete and consistent information and improve the deployment of public
health responses to outbreaks and cases of notifiable conditions.
• Point of Care-Test reporting: it refers to rapid testing where results can be
provided within minutes of the test being administered, thus, allowing for
rapid decisions about patient care. However, results of these tests cannot be

Gandhi et al.

Page 8 of 28

completely said to be reliable.The test results are also required to be notified
to local and state health departments.
• Through fax the test results should include:test performing facility name, type
of test used, explanation of results,patients particulars etc.
Here, below are few of the COVID-19 testing sites by public , private and employer
organisations to illustrate test results dissemination process:
• NHS COVID-19 (Public or gov. testing site): It is a U.K. government
testing site [12], funded by the Department of Health and Social Care (DHSC).
Test results are communicated through text or email. If one uses the NHS
COVID-19 -19 app, tests are accessible there only. The results are provided
the very next day but at most, it may take up to 3 days. If one tests positive,
one may be contacted by the NHS and asked for further information
• MIT COVID-19 Pass (Campus Testing Site): Covid Pass is an application for the MIT community members to use in order to complete requirements
for entering the MIT campus and using the resources which they have access
to [13]. In order to gain access to the campus, one must agree to conditions like
daily health attestation, and regular COVID-19 testing. Testing frequency is
contingent on how often the person is on campus. COVID-19 Pass will notify
( through the email and mobile push notification) about testing status early
each morning. This will help to keep track of when individuals need testing.
Test results are generally provided within 1-2 days which will be available
in COVID-19 Pass App on MIT Atlas and not in HealthElife. Though, tests
done through appointments will have their results visible in HealthElife. If an
individual does not yet have full authorization to use the COVID-19 Pass app,
they may still see results at covidpass.mit.edu using MIT Kerberos authentication. A physical document of the result can also be requested by call at MIT
Medical COVID-19 hotline. If tested positive, MIT Medical will contact the
individual directly and the contact tracing process will begin. If no communication is made within 48 hours, we can presume tests are negative. Amidst
a global pandemic, the MIT COVID-19 Pass is an efficient and time saving
digital solution. In the hassle and rush of getting work done in the morning,
when someone may forget that they need to be tested, the COVID-19 Pass
app will notify them.
• Minnesota Department of Health: It is a public health department that
provides community testing [14]. If the test comes negative, one will receive a
text and/or email notifying that one can access results online. If there is no
access to the internet, there will be a number on which calls can be made for
results. In case it is positive, one will receive a phone call from the triage line.
• Henry Ford Health System: The Henry Ford Health System has provided
an online COVID-19 screening tool to assess risk [15]. Remote monitoring and
virtual consultation in the form of E-visits and video visits has been made
possible. The Henry Ford Health System has provided an online COVID-19
screening tool to assess risk. Remote monitoring and virtual consultation in
the form of E-visits and video visits has been made available.
• Carewell Urgent Care: Carewell [16] is a community-based health care system that provides both patients and employers COVID-19 testing services.For

Gandhi et al.

Page 9 of 28

employers, results will be communicated through fax. For others, in the case
of the PCR test, results are displayed on the Quest Diagnostics Website while
antigen test results are posted on carewell urgent care website itself. The dissemination of results is a crucial step in the user experience since it plays an
important role to make sure the user is aware of the precautionary measures to
be taken, will help make more informed decisions and also keep them updated
about the current testing workflows and practices.
2.1.5 Efficacy, ethical and privacy concerns
An immunity passport based on vaccine-induced immunity would eliminate some
of the moral hazards and ethical concerns raised by experts: that some non-infected
individuals would see it as an incentive to expose themselves to the virus in order
to develop antibodies [ref] (needs fix) as a way of receiving immunity passports
and practice herd immunity. There’s also a concern people would be penalized for
low-risky behavior resulting in a lack of exposure to the virus, which would make
them ineligible for a card based on infection-related immunity.
Yet, other efficacy, ethical and privacy concerns remain relevant to digital passports based on vaccine-induced immunity. Evidence suggests [17] that, despite being immune, an individual might still transmit disease and infect others. Though
different places are planning for non-discriminatory and equal access vaccine distribution, there are multiple unknown challenges along these lines. This could hinder
the effectiveness of digital immunity passports . Otherwise, according to ethicists,
digital immunity passports might increase racial and social inequalities [18] already
exacerbated by the pandemic, repeating the history of immunity passports during
“yellow fever” epidemics at the beginning of the 20th century. These were used as
a means of racial discrimination, and oppression. Digital immunity passports could
also facilitate social exclusion [19] and discriminatory work environments, where
“an official stamp of immunity to COVID-19, or personal willingness to risk the
disease” would “... become a prerequisite for employment”. [18]
Finally, the immunity certificates’ credentials could create privacy and security
risks. And the centralized nature of a digital credential system, where a single
institution would be responsible for data collection and credential management,
could lead to privacy violations and abuse of power. Dakota Greuner from Harvard
Edmond J. Safra Centre for Ethics’ COVID-19 Rapid Response Impact Initiative
argues [20] that for any digital health passports to be effective, it should possess
three features:
1 Be privacy-preserving - Personal data should only be managed by the user,
stored on the device, and shared only after explicit user consent. It also should
be encrypted and secured by biometrics. Selective disclosure of identifiers
should be incorporated in the design (for example, age but not birth date
etc.) [20]
2 Be portable and widely adopted – It should be based on open standards,
so it is broadly usable across systems and devices.
3 Be trustworthy – This could be achieved with a digital signature of authenticity secured by the use of cryptography, so that information on the date and
the credential could not be changed or hacked.

Gandhi et al.

Page 10 of 28

Decentralized systems of credentials deployed at a large scale are being
suggested as a “privacy-protecting model of immunity certificates.” [20] Owing to
the decentralised and trustworthy framework, block chains have come across as a
solution to deliver critical information in a secure and privacy preserving way.
With the nature of health records and issues like record linkage, privacy and misinterpreted results (due to false positives or miscommunication) it becomes difficult
do extract insights from them. This coupled with the lack of trust (as health information is very personal) makes it difficult to have data shared. This results in data
silos and many missed opportunities of information sharing and understanding of
health information. Blockchain based solutions can help to mitigate some of these
issues as the data ownership is still will the respective person (or hospital) and it
ensures security and reliability. A few of the impactful applications for COVID-19
response which are contact tracing, sharing and handling patients data employ the
use of Blockchain.

2.1.6 Digital Health Verification
From Ireland to Chile, efforts are underway worldwide to introduce health immunization passports as a way of easing out social distancing rules and allowing for
individuals to go back to work, travel or go out to public venues, such as restaurants and sports events [21][22]. These digital immunization passports are meant
to be a digital equivalent of paper certificates [20], indicating the holder is at low
risk of transmitting the coronavirus, providing evidence of acquired immunity to
the virus, by having recently tested negative to the virus, having antibodies or
been vaccinated. Immunity passports have been compared to international certificates of vaccination, such as the “Carte Jaune” for yellow fever. However, there are
significant differences between the two types of documents to be noted. Such credentials could take the form of a wristband / wearable device, a digital certificate via
smartphone application [17] or a biometric ID card, among others. The majority of
initiatives focus on digital credentials that could be carried on users’ smartphones
(for instance in the form of the QR code). Individuals with an immunity passport
could be exempt from physical restrictions and could return to work, school, and
daily life. However, immunity passports pose considerable risks including, by not
limited to, scientific risk, practical risk, equitable risk and legal challenges. Considering all these risks , the users should be wearing masks and follow minimum safety
standards.
The immunity passports rely on two concepts: infection-related immunity and
vaccine-induced immunity. Both raise issues of “the degree of immunity induced
and the duration of immunity” [17]. WHO is not recommending [23] an introduction
of infection-related immunity passports based on “the lack of sufficient evidence that
people with COVID-19 antibodies are immune to new COVID-19 infections.” [24]
Vaccine-induced immunity as a basis for immunity passports is more promising,
with recent results in animal trials revealing a correlation between vaccines and
protection. A uniform vaccination, experts say, could provide a more “predictable
pattern and duration of immunity.”

Gandhi et al.

Page 11 of 28

2.1.7 Examples of digital health passports
As early as April 2020, countries and companies have started to look into digital
health passports based on potential infection-related immunity. They did so in an
effort to speed up economic recovery and help people to come back to work, travel
or participate in sports. These and others are expected to be expanded to certify
vaccination once it is available.
The list of available solutions is growing day-by-day with companies rushing to
conquer the safe-back-to-work market, including IBM Watson Digital Health Passport [25], VHealth Passport by VST Enterprises [26], WIShelter by WISeKey [27],
COVI-Pass by Tento Health [28], and other solutions introduced by German IDNow
and UK companies Onfido and Yoti.
1 Chile released certificates: Chile has started a roll out of smartphonebased “release certificates” instead of “immunity passports,” currently valid
for 3 months and shared in the form of the QR codes [29] issued to people that
did not have any symptoms for 14 days after testing positive for COVID-19.
2 Estonia digital immunity passport: In Estonia [30], a digital immunity passport developed by the “MTÜ Back to Work” non-profit formed by
tech companies such as Transferwise, Guardtime or and Bolt. Similarly, to
a Chilean solution, users share the information about their test results and
medical certificates via a QR-code generated after digital authentication.
3 Health Passport Ireland: Ireland began a digital health passport pilot
in August [31]. It is based on privacy-preserving technologies, with only an
authorized medical administrator allowed to create Health Passport Ireland
accounts and make updates of the test results. The app displays green status if
the test result was negative, red if positive and amber if a new test is required
[21]. The color-code certification system is somewhat similar to the apps that
have been introduced in China [22] and the UAE’s Alshosn app [32].
4 COVID-19 Vaccination Certificate pilot: Most recently, WHO established an international partnership between Estonia on WHO Digital COVID19 Vaccination Infrastructure [33] based on blockchain technology for a decentralized and secure data management and authentication of an digital International COVID-19 vaccination certificate based on the vaccine-related immunity. The system, based on a web platform and an app, will be tested via a
12-week pilot in Estonia, and if successful, it might become a standard of the
future when the vaccine is available on a large-scale and vaccine-immunity is
proven to be effective.
5 COVID Credentials Initiative: The COVID-19 Credentials Initiative
(CCI) [34] is an international community of more than 300 members from
over 100 organizations hoping to deploy and/or help deploy privacy-preserving
verification-based credential projects in order to reduce the spread of COVID19 and strengthen our societies and economies. The CCI has launched the
usage of digital identity in order to curb the spread of COVID-19. Their aim
involves developing “immunity passports” and much more. In this, The CCI
uses verifiable credentials. Inspired by the functional utility of a physical credential (e.g. the cards in one’s wallet), a verifiable credential (VC) is a declared
assertion that contains documented claims about a person or a particular organization. The niche of VCs that make them so pivotal is that they’re digitally

Gandhi et al.

Page 12 of 28

6

native and cryptographically secure, providing a great privacy-preserving alternative to other types of credentials, if used responsibly. Upon accepting a
VC (e.g. a driver’s license) from a trusted issuer (e.g. a government body),
holders can generate proof with minimal information (e.g. over 18) to validate
to a verifier (e.g. a liquor store ) that they posses their own VCs with specific
information (e.g. age), qualifying them for particular types of access defined
by the verifier. And there is no need for direct contact between the issuer and
verifier throughout the process.
Travel health passports: Airlines and tourism organizations are also introducing digital health passports for travelers to enable safer cross-border
travel. United and Cathay Pacific [35] are piloting a program called CommonPass [36], a privacy-by-design, globally interoperable platform developed
by The Commons Project in collaboration with The World Economic Forum
and other public and private partners. It allows individuals to access via app
their test results. In the future, they also will be able to access their vaccination records, available from trusted sources [37] and give consent to use
those records to validate their COVID-19 status. ClearMe, a biometric identification solution developed by Secure Identity LLC, currently used by Delta
and United Airlines as well as numerous sporting facilities, includes Health
Pass [38] as a free feature. It allows for real-time screening for possible symptoms via surveys on the app and temperature-checks at kiosks installed at
the venues and generates a QR-code with a verified identity and health-check
status. In July, the Tourism Data Driven Solutions (TDDS), a Spanish software company, developed Hi+ Card [39], a mobile app supported by the UN
World Tourism Organization (UNWTO), that is meant to serve as an international health identification card. The solution uses blockchain technology and
encryption and is General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) compliant.
Digital Health Verification is one of the most factors that needs to be addressed
to ensure the ethical, political and social concerns. The health passports might
not eliminate the threat completely, but is an essential tool in this pandemic.
Furthermore, these health passports should be privacy preserving, trustworthy
and widely accepted. It is also important to be mindful of the potential social
and racial discrimination that might entail a health passport based solution.

2.2 Dashboards and Tools for Public Health
Dashboards and other web tools play a very important role in sharing the message
about the magnitude, severity of the COVID-19 crisis and its impact on health.
There are numerous key testing players which are leading the way and helping
significantly with testing and analysing the pandemic situation. Combined with
the testing efforts, having a visual representation of the number of country-wise
cases along with a wide array of filters to study socio-demographic and geographical
variations can be of great use. Dashboards enable us to serve this very purpose. With
the purpose of getting a grasp on the COVID-19 pandemic, numerous dashboards
have been created at university level, regional, national and global level.
2.2.1 Dashboard tools for labs
The COVID-19 diagnostic testing is carried out to check if an individual is infected
with the SARS-CoV-2 (the virus that causes COVID-19), a detailed overview about

Gandhi et al.

Page 13 of 28

the clinical landscape of testing has been covered by Gandhi et. al [40]. Mainly two
tests were aproved by The US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for detecting
of COVID-19, which is the PCR test and the Rapid Antigen test. All the testing laboratories are CLIA certified. CLIA, The Clinical Laboratory Improvement
Amendments are United states federal regulations and regulatory standards that
are applicable to every clinical laboratory testing, except clinical trials and basic
research which are carried out on humans in the United States of America.[41] Testing is of utmost importance in current times and some of the leading players when it
comes to testing include Quest Diagnostics [42] which handles approximately 20% of
the testing efforts across the USA with over 40 years of proven effectiveness and experience in handling infectious disease testing, Medpace Central Labs [43] who have
been committed to assisting in fighting against the COVID-19 pandemic, Icon [44]
who offer a wide array of services right from testing to maintaining a coronavirus
observatory which is a powerful dashboard which provides updates regarding the
vaccine trails, regulatory updates, diagnostics and much more related to COVID19 via Twitter, Syneos Health, [45] the only fully integrated biopharmaceutical
solutions organizations have been taking extensive measures in helping battle the
pandemic. Some other leading names when it comes to testing are Verily, BioReference Laboratories, and Mayoclinic to name a few. Verily [46] has introduced Project
Baseline which is designed to support people right from screening through testing
at respective community-based testing sites and receipt of individual test results.
As of September 2020, 6L people have been tested through the Baseline COVID-19
program. BioReference Laboratories [47] have played a key role in the crisis as well
as provided support to various patients as well as government agencies. Mayoclinic
[48] which is an American non-profit organization focused on patient care, research
and education has also played a significant role in terms of testing. It is crucial to
understand about the various individuals who are involved in the testing workflow
and how their contribution is vital to the success of preventing the spread of the
virus and carrying out tests effectively and optimally.
2.2.2 Dashboard tools and software for public health, govt, and CDC/WHO
Dashboards are the landing pages for interactive maps and visuals showing where
the virus has spread. It gives a breakdown of which nations, states, cities, and
neighboring areas have positive cases and could predict which regions are likely to
see new outbreaks. This helps in predicting future trends and taking action such as
putting area restrictions or a complete lockdown. Data dashboards provide latest
figures on the number of positive cases (mild, moderate and severe), recoveries,
deaths, infection rate, and cases per million of the population in that area. While
some of them also give resource-related information that includes availability of
beds, testing kits, PPEs, masks, and ventilators, dashboards also give diagnostic
test-related information including number of tests and positivity rate.
Government: The World Health Organization (WHO) dashboard is one of the
most broadly-accessed and predicated on visualization techniques of the COVID-19
pandemic. The general populace can navigate this dashboard easily by discovering
numbers across the world, such as infected, dead, and recoveries. In addition, the
WHO dashboard assists users in evaluating COVID-19 data in real-time as graphics

Gandhi et al.

Page 14 of 28

change based on the ever-changing situation. It gives information regarding COVID19 cases globally in the form of Choropleth and bubble maps. It gives information
on new cases, confirmed cases, and number of deaths. The data table covers different regions, states, and areas which also deals with transmission classification.
The group demonstrated of COVID-19 on the WHO dashboard provides data on
the follow-up guidance for comprehending the pandemic. For example, users can
understand the method used to determine the COVID-19 information and to update the dashboard in real-time. The Explorer section directs the public on trying
to navigate through the dashboard and offering to help them to make sense of the
COVID-19 statistics.
The Centers For Disease Control And Prevention (CDC) COVID-19 data tracker
gives information about the total number of positive cases, deaths, trends including
demographics and population factor. It also compares the trend in different states
and helps in forecasting future trends for the United States. Interestingly, it also
includes community impact of the pandemic in terms of mobility of individuals and
social impact such as news reports on school closures, localized outbreaks, state of
emergency declarations, etc. The CDC dashboard persists to be one of the most
frequented systems, as the COVID-19 pandemic continues with the community
using dashboard updated information to comprehend the virus. Unlike others, the
CDC supports a framework of all factors necessary for the Pandemic Assessment,
including the dates of infection and the racial groups affected. This dashboard
comprises a segment at the top in which users could see a preview of existing
COVID-19 data prior to actually moving ahead to other areas.
University level: The only way to grasp and understand the magnitude of the
COVID-19 pandemic for the masses is through visualizing the data pertaining to
the crisis. People, in general, can be overwhelmed by huge numbers and may find
the patterns contradicting. Visualization of the COVID-19 scenario makes it easier
for everyone to analyze and understand the situation in a better way. Experts at
all levels, right from university-level to government organizations have published
COVID-19 dashboards at global, country, state, and regional levels showcasing an
array of parameters right from a comparative analysis of the COVID-19 cases in the
previous day or month to the number of recovered patients and much more. At the
University level, the dashboard visualized by Amherst College [49] has made much
noise by being the only college to receive an A++ rating by We Rate COVID-19
Dashboards [50] which is a panel of academic and medical experts who rate dashboards created by universities and colleges across the country. The top 5 universities
who have excelled at providing data of the vicinity via dashboards according to the
ratings are Amherst College [49], Wagner College [51], Tulane University [52], Ohio
State University [53], and George Mason University [54] as of 12th November 2020.
These dashboards provide an overview of the key metrics for their vicinity. The daily
cases, hospital capacity among them, average positive cases, and many other parameters are included, The student/faculty and in the campus cases are also displayed
at a daily, weekly, and monthly level along with the number of isolation cases. These
parameters combined with the many other parameters can help anyone visiting the
vicinity to analyze the scenario and make an informed decision accordingly.
National level: The government, administration and healthcare experts need
to keep an eye on the overall COVID-19 situation in the country. A dashboard,

Gandhi et al.

Page 15 of 28

at the national level remains the cornerstone to monitor long term impacts and
trends, quantify the burden and assist in decision and policy making. The CDC
COVID-19 Dashboard [55] is easily one of the most visited dashboards across the
United States of America with the public using it to understand the virus better
as the pandemic continues to accelerate. The CDC Dashboard stands out amongst
other dashboards since it considers all the factors which are necessary for pandemic
evaluation like racial groups affected and infection dates as well. The dashboard by
Carnegie Mellon University [56], CovidCast is another national level dashboard that
shows a Mapbox level overview which is based on survey data. They show numerous
parameters like hospitalized cases, percentage of the population with symptoms,
etc. This data doesn’t include the statistics for individual tests but has a view
of the percentage of the population(corresponding to the survey) who have been
tested and are positive/negative, based on antigen tests. However, the point that
needs to be taken into account here is that this dashboard is based on survey data
and not validated by the government or any other facility. Similarly, governments
worldwide have shared public dashboards for effective analysis of the situation. The
Canadian government website [57] can be used to analyze the general trend of the
COVID-19 situation and shares immense knowledge right awareness resources to
symptoms and treatments. Radio Canada [58] is another dashboard that provides
a nationwide view of Canada in terms of COVID-19 along with the testing figures.
The Government of India’s Ministry of Health and Family Welfare’s website [59] also
provides nationwide data including daily active cases, discharged cases, deaths along
with other information. New Zealand’s Ministry of Health [60] also displays data
related to the confirmed cases, a brief analysis of the current scenario, location wise
distribution of cases, the tests data and much more. Etalab [61] offers a consolidated
view of the official data provided by Public Health France for understanding the
COVID-19 pandemic better in France. Furthermore, numerous dashboards have
been developed at the local and district level to monitor community trends.
Global level: Since the epidemic of COVID-19, the John Hopkins dashboard
has demonstrated clear and real-time updated information on the coronavirus. This
dashboard offers insight into the information from countries accumulated by John
Hopkins University including a rational view of the transmission of the disease
from each location. This COVID-19 varies from country to country as seen on the
dashboard and thus it helps us to compare trends across countries. Instances, deaths,
and recoveries are confirmed on the side panel of the John Hopkins dashboard.
Automatic virus dashboard updates encourage people to identify the nature of the
virus and the spread of COVID-19. The John Hopkins chart provides virus hotspots
through red marks around the world on various continents.
The Washington University dashboard gives an outline of COVID-19 infections
worldwide by using confirmed cases and remaining infections to assess explanatory
variables. Identifying an outbreak like COVID-19 includes the definition of an inflection point and the advantage of the public in comprehending the metamorphosis
of the disease outbreak. The seafoam green slash texture on the dashboard enables
users to see the movement of the pandemic and to estimate peak and curve levels. This dashboard produces information from diverse sources, including CDC and
WHO, in relaying of coronavirus relevant information to the public. The simplified

Gandhi et al.

Page 16 of 28

user design of this panel enables users to create a split second about disease outbreak by trying to compare figures. Infection, mortality, and recovery numbers on
the dashboard guide users to explore the extent of the disease outbreak and to get
a clear understanding of the geographical environment. The Washington University
dashboard uses computational resources and technology to enhance the precision of
observed trends.
Worldometer [62], another powerful global dashboard goes the extra mile and
shows the number of serious/critical cases, total cases per million population, deaths
per million population. The dashboard also gives updated country-wise information
on total tests conducted and tests per 1 million population. It gives visual representation of newly infected vs newly recovered, death rate vs recovery rate, growth
factor of daily new cases and trends based on age and gender. Interestingly, it
gives information on fatality rate by age, sex and comorbidity. The dashboard is
very exhaustive since it provides various important graphs for all countries. The
Worldometer and other dashboards immensely contribute in taking into account
and understanding the depth of the COVID-19 pandemic in our area, city, region,
country, and even our respective continent
Microsoft’s Bing team has launched a website to follow the status of coronavirus
outbreaks worldwide. The system provided all up-to-date infection statistics for
each country. As an interactive map, the tracker allows people to browse the nation
to see a particular number of cases and related articles from different publishers.
Data are reported to be grouped from sources including WHO, the US Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), and the European Center for Disease
Prevention and Control (ECDC).
The Coronavirus dashboard is developed by Thebaselab, and benefits by bringing
a near-real-time, broad perspective of coronavirus. The color red is a tad alarmist,
however, the white background is pretty well balanced. Like the JHU dashboard,
The Coronavirus developed by Thebaselab [63] summarises known case stats on
every country which has been affected so far. Thebaselab also began publishing
stories to show how the dashboard tends to work and how coronavirus compares
with other major epidemics. BBC is trying to offer a good highlighter on how
coronavirus has spread in the last few months. Visuals are static and the BBC also
remains an important source of assessing burden of COVID-19 among the most
remote and inaccessible areas globally including regions of Iran, South Korea and
Italy, Comparable to the BBC, the Gray Lady’s very own dashboard is doing what
the New York Times does better: it gives the public an easy-to-understand education
about what’s going on. There are no neat looking graphics or interactive charts, but
there is still a useful breaking down of how each major continent has been affected
and how they are struggling to contain the virus.
Websites related to COVID-19 testing: Many organizations have come forward to establish an online platform to cater to COVID-19 -19 related help. While
plenty of them are involved in contact tracing, there are many other websites focusing on other aspects of COVID-19 services.
These websites provide common people a user-friendly, mobile means to gather
the information they are on the lookout for. For example, some websites serve the
purpose of self-assessment of COVID-19 for users. Coronavirus Self Checker [64] by

Gandhi et al.

Page 17 of 28

CDC on Microsoft Azure platform employs an interactive tool where individuals
respond to COVID-19 related questions. Based on the responses, individuals are
provided advice on seeking medical care. COVID-19 Screening tool [65] by Apple
helps identify COVID-19 related signs and suggests the next steps of action.
Some websites help users find COVID-19 test centers in their locality. Castlight
came up with COVID-19 Test Site Finder [66] to provide users with information on
test centers in their geographical area of interest. The website also includes a selfassessment provision. A government website [67] offers details about testing sites
in each state. Verily has eased the process of booking appointments for COVID-19
tests through its website Project Baseline. [68]
Hence, the need for a dashboard which provides granular, structured and well
formatted information without overloading the user (public, organisations, governments etc) is increasing exponentially. The dashboards can further help to understand the trends and patterns of the virus and how it has been affecting the various
regions and places around the world, at the level of a university, state, nation or
even global.

3 Approaches and Challenges
With the introduction of different solutions digital or otherwise, we are bound to
come across multiple challenges that impact both the individual and community
as a whole. There are several challenges, regulations, norms and solutions which
govern aspects of healthcare data collection, dissemination, analysis and its use in
designing interventions or making policies which impact communities. These challenges transcend the means (physical or digital), space (geographical locations) and
stakeholders (individuals, companies, governments, etc) by having effects on people
who share the data, governments, healthcare providers etc. We set out to look at the
different approaches currently in motion for protecting healthcare data and look at
the various challenges that arise. Some of the challenges are partially addressed by
existing solutions, while a large number of them still need improvisation. We examine scenarios at different socio-political levels where these challenges have unravelled
differently, followed by a brief overview of their unintended consequences.
3.1 Current Techniques
3.1.1 Privacy Policies
Healthcare data in the US is protected primarily by the provisions of Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act, 1996 ( “HIPAA” ) which operates on a
federal level. Several states and sectors have their own laws which operate in tandem
with HIPAA. The strongest of them being the recent California Consumer Protection Act 2018 ( “CCPR”).[69] HIPAA regulations even allow for the Preemption of
State Law, wherein if a state law sets more stringent standards of protecting data
and its disclosure, then the state law prevails over HIPAA. [70]
The Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act of 1974 ( “FERPA” ), The Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 ( “ADA” ) are some examples of sector specific
laws which also operate on a federal level.
The General Data Protection Regulation ( “GDPR” ) by virtue of its extraterritorial effect [71] is also relevant in this scenario since it is applicable to any
entity that collects or controls the healthcare data of EU citizens in the US.

Gandhi et al.

Page 18 of 28

3.1.2 Data breach/rogue employee (security protocols)
The pie chart represents the type of breaches occurred in 2019 alone according to
the information provided in [72]

Types of Healthcare breaches in 2019
Improper disposal of PHI
1.2%
Theft
10.6%

Unauthorised Access
28.8%

Hacking IT/Incidents
59.4%

Figure 4 Reasons for IT breaches in 2019 according to [72]

In the past 10 years there has been an upward trend in the number of breaches
which have happened. The breaches in 2019 were approximately twice more than
the average number of breaches in the previous 9 years. A major cause of these
breaches is owing to unauthorized access of confidential information, information
technology incidents like Anthem Inc and data theft incidents, thefts etc. A brief
distribution of incidents of data breach based on the type of breach is shown in the
above pie chart. This is in accordance with the reports from [72]. The rapid use of
digital technology to manage COVID-19 data provides a unique platform for data
driven loss of privacy information through multiple channels.
The unauthorized entries from employees could be due to negligence, errors,
or malicious intent. Furthermore, often the loss of information happens through
stolen physical records or misplaced patient records which contain a lot of PII
(“Personally Identifiable Information”) and PHI (“Protected Healthcare
Information”). The fact that medical data is more life-long and cannot be changed
exacerbates the issues associated, unlike in the case of any financial data breaches.
This longevity makes it a long-term threat for the person whose data was compromised. Another fact to consider is that the highly interconnected nature of health
care devices like - insulin pumps, pacemakers, scanning devices, etc could leave
threats open to not just the leakage of information but also on the medical health
of people relying on such medical aids. [72]
A survey from Accenture [73] in Feb 2017 revealed that 26% of U.S. consumers or
more than one in every four Americans are a victim of the healthcare data breaches.
Furthermore, a large percentage of the people who took the survey (about 50% of

Gandhi et al.

Page 19 of 28

breach victims) suffered from medical identity theft, with an average of $2,500 outof-pocket costs due to the healthcare data breaches. To make matters worse, about
50% of the respondents shared that they were not informed by the company/legal
institution about the breach, i.e., they learned of the breach themselves after they’d
been alerted to an error on their benefits explanation, credit card statement, or
similar documents. [74] These are possible pitfalls that will be accompanied by
mismanagement of the large scale data collection happening in light of the COVID19 pandemic.
3.1.3 Case studies
To inform our analysis we have conducted a few case-studies on the management of
COVID-19 tests around the world with a special focus on South Korea, China, India,
Vietnam, and Germany. Each of these countries has adopted different approaches to
handling the pandemic and the sections below cover the approaches and measures
taken by each of them to tackle the virus.
• India: India remains one of the world’s hotspots for COVID-19 with rapid rise
in infections (more than 9 million) [75] and high recovery rates. It also provides
an interesting dynamic of constitutional, intellectual and social challenges. For
eg. India is very densely populated constituting several religions, and has an
already volatile economy. Beyond this, India is also a big exporter of pharmaceutical and medical equipment. Further, speaking at a press briefing in
Geneva, Switzerland on Monday, Mike Ryan, WHO Emergencies Programme
Director, said that it was essential for India to introduce ramped up measures
at a public health and societal level, to control and suppress the disease. “India is a hugely populous country”, he said. “The future of this pandemic will
be determined by what happens to densely-populated countries”. [76]
India at the moment has no legislation that requires the protection of healthcare data and data protection in general. Within the Constitution however,
the right to privacy has been found to be a fundamental right [77] under the
Right to Life and Liberty [78], as declared by the Supreme Court. The Information Technology Act, 2000 read with the Information Technology Rules
2011 - providing context of procedures, sensitive personal data and information reasoned with security practices - have been found to be inept. Nevertheless, there are two draft legislation: Personal Data Protection Bill,2019
(pending in Parliament) and Digital Information Security in Health Care Act
(put out by the Health Ministry and specifically deals with sharing of healthcare data). These new pieces of legislation hope to bridge the gap between
privacy considerations and public health.
On account of the pandemic, the Indian Government launched a contact tracing app “Aarogya Setu” to tackle COVID-19. The software application clearly
mentions data sharing upfront in a conspicuous place when consent is gained
during user registration in the Application. This helps informs the potential
users about data sharing through this Application. The details of the personal
information gathered, the method in which it is gathered, and by whom as
well as the purpose for which it will be used is set out in its Privacy Policy
[79]. Besides, the Government has initiated a National Digital Health Mission as a part of which unique digital IDs will be provided as a single source

Gandhi et al.

Page 20 of 28

of health information for the patients, government, and healthcare providers
through interoperable health records. The NHA (National Health Authority)
will play a crucial role in the development of these policies and managing
NDHM. However, the lack of a legal framework for data protection in the
country has increased the risks related to digitization.
Privacy issues with Aarogya setu: 1) App fails to clarify which ministry
or department will be accessing data suggesting interdepartmental exchanges
of personal information. This makes ensuring accountability challenging. 2)
No legal framework to regulate the application forcing users to accept T&C
and privacy policy given by the government. 3) Uses location data via GPS
trails in addition to Bluetooth, deviating from “privacy-focused global standards” which are confined to Bluetooth-based technology like TraceTogether
app(Singapore) and framework suggested by MIT as a tool to monitor movement of patients and contact tracing. 4) The unique digital identity in Aarogya
Setu is a static number, which increases the probability of identity breaches.
• Vietnam: Vietnam lacks a unified comprehensive data protection legislation.
Instead, it has a very fragmented mechanism for regulating data privacy and
required levels of protection through a number of laws like Civil Code, Penal
Code, Law on Cyber Information Security, Law on Information Technology,
Law on Cybersecurity, and sector-specific laws (“Vietnamese Data Privacy
Laws”). These legal instruments, as a general principle, are personal data of
individuals. While the laws fail to define the scope of personal data and the
definition also varies between sectors, the laws are interpreted to protect, at a
minimum, information that would enable the identification of an individual.
The primary legislation regulating data protection is Cybersecurity law. It is
to be noted that unlike cybersecurity laws in other jurisdictions (inspired by
the GDPR of the EU) the Cybersecurity Law of Vietnam shares similarities
with China’s Cybersecurity Law enacted in 2017. Such legal precedents focus
on providing the government with the ability to control the flow of information, instead of enforcing data privacy rights for individual data subjects. [80]
In addition, the Law on Information Technology requires that the entity collecting personal data must provide data subjects with information about the
form, scope, place, purpose of collecting, processing, and using personal data.
Further, the collection, storage, use, and transfer of such data must have the
consent of such a person [81]. Vietnam’s Law on Information Technology (IT
Law) requires organizations and individuals that collect, process and use personal information of other people in the network environment to obtain the
consent of those people unless otherwise provided by law.Severe or Emerging
Contagious Diseases fall within the definition of “Class A Infectious Diseases”
under the Law on Prevention and Control of Infectious Diseases (LPCID)
and individuals/ organizations in Vietnam are required to take sanitation,
disinfection and sterilization measures according to instructions of competent
health agencies. As a general principle, Vietnamese Data Privacy Laws protect
information pertaining to or belonging to individuals or (to a lesser degree,
organizations) that can serve to personally identify individuals (i.e., personal
data). While Vietnamese Data Privacy Laws do not consistently define what

Gandhi et al.

Page 21 of 28

information constitutes personal data and the definition also varies between
sectors, the laws are interpreted to protect, at a minimum, information that
would enable the identification of an individual. Specifically, the Law on Information Technology requires that the entity collecting personal data must
provide data subjects with information about the form, scope, place, purpose
of collecting, processing, and using personal data. Further, the collection, storage, use, and transfer of such data must have the consent of such a person. In
the backdrop of COVID-19 , the Vietnamese gov. launched “BlueZone” (Vietnam’s Ministry of Information and Communications and Ministry of Health)
[82]. The following are some of the main privacy protection features of Blue
Zones: Data security: The Bluezone app stores data locally and doesn’t
send any data to the system, No location data collection: The Bluezone
app does not collect geo-location data, Anonymity: All Bluezone app users
are anonymous to each other. Only competent and verified health authorities
know those whose infected and who are suspected of infection due to close contact with COVID-19 cases, Transparency: The Bluezone Project codebase
is completely open source.
• South Korea: The pandemic response of South Korea has been touted as
an example to be followed by other nations. Nevertheless, its excessive testing
and tracing strategy has come under the radar of privacy-related scrutiny. The
data privacy in South Korea is regulated by three major legislations: Private
Information Protection Act (PIPA), the Act on the Use and Protection of
Credit Information (‘Credit Information Act’), and the Act on the Promotion
of Information and Communications Network Utilization, these amendments
were to which were made recently. The Personal Information Protection Act
(PIPA) implemented in South Korea imposes strict compliance requirements
on entities that collect any potential information that can be used for identifying a specific person. Citizens also have the right to be forgotten, among
other data ownership right. While organizations in the private and public sectors are legally obliged to comply with the PIPA, government agencies that
require personal data for public interest purposes can collect and use data
without the need to obtain consent. [83] Although it is expected that organizations will use personal information on justifiable grounds by evaluating the
‘reasonable relevance’ of personal data and information that they intend to
use and maintaining and preserving relevant records. Countries that sought
to follow this model can face challenges by their own domestic data privacy
laws especially those subjected to GDPR.The mobile application South Korea is using monitors and tracks the location of all visitors to the country, as
well. Individuals, including tourists, wear a location-tracking bracelet which
is referred to as “smart city tech.” The smart city tech platform shares information between cities on various things including traffic and pollution to find
vulnerabilities and congestion, which makes it easier to identify hot spots for
COVID-19. [84] The PIPA required data to be deleted post its utilization for
the purpose it is collected.But the government has admitted that it will be
permanently storing data of patients from the previous epidemic.
• Germany: The German “Datenschutzkonferenz” which is a collective body
composed of independent federal and state data protection authorities notified

Gandhi et al.

Page 22 of 28

guidelines regarding COVID-19 and data protection. According to guidelines,
sharing personal information of individuals infected with COVID-19 or those
suspected of it would be lawful provided revealing their identity is exceptionally crucial for protecting people they were in contact with. Also, in such
cases, reference should be taken to article 6(1)9c) or (f) of GDPR.For other
instances, health data must be kept confidential and only be used for the
purpose it was collected in the first place.Consent of data subject must be
taken. To keep track of the number of lab tests regarding SARS-COV-2 carried out per week in Germany and how many among them are positive and
negative , the RKI has initated a country-wide laboratory query in Germany.
However, the quantity of laboratories reporting data seems to vary week to
week. And by subtracting each change (per week) from the cumulative total,
we retrospectively work out the cumulative totals at the end of each week.
Because labs are able to post-check the tests of previous calendar weeks in
the test number query of RKI, the initial figures may be revised upwards to
a slight extent in subsequent reports. These sources explicitly state that the
figures refer to tests conducted and that this wouldn’t eqaute to the number
of people tested, because of multiple tests can be done on one person. [85]
Germany launched an official coronavirus tracing app in June 2020 which is
touted to be so secure that even government ministers can use it, though developers acknowledged few discrepancies. Germany like other EU nations have
chosen against centrally storing data through its tracing app. [86] This step
was taken in compliance with data privacy standards. [87] Smartphone apps
have been claimed as a high-tech tools for tracking down potential COVID-19
infections. Experts state that finding new cases quickly is key to clamping
down fresh clusters of cases, especially as countries progressively emerge from
lockdowns and try to avoid a second wave of deaths and infections. But governments and legislative authorities in Europe have run into hurdles of legal
and cultural restrictions and are trying to reconcile the necessity for effective
contact tracing with the continent’s strict data privacy and digital security
standards. Germany - where a person’s right to their own data even after death
is rooted in the constitution - has proven to be a particular challenge. Early
government suggestions to use cell tower information and GPS coordinates
for the app prompted a swift backlash.
• China: Several legislations are in shape in the Republic of China for personal data protection such as National security law of the people’s republic of
china, General provision of the civil law of the people’s republic of china, and
cybersecurity law which in some way similar to General Data Protection Regulations by European Union. In addition, China has also introduced a draft
data protection legislation recently. The CAC (Cyberspace Administration
of China) released a notice on the protection of personal information when
using big data joint support and defense [88]. The prime objective of this notice was to set some ground rules for the use of personal information of the
users to control the spread of COVID-19. Specifically, this notice addresses
Limiting Entities: Multiple entities dealing with personal data also raises
privacy issues. Only entities authorized by the National Health Commission,

Gandhi et al.

Page 23 of 28

in accordance with cybersecurity law, should be allowed to collect personal
information for public health purposes, Data collected should have a targeted approach: Personal information which is collected for the purpose of
COVID-19 tracing should not be used for any other purpose, Data minimization: Limited amount of data should be collected to prevent any further
breach of privacy or misuse of that data collected, and Cybersecurity requirements: A strict and effective implementation of cybersecurity law will
help to prevent personal information from being misused.
From the above case-studies it is more than evident that we need different
strategies to curb this virus across the globe, to ensure the citizens of the
respective country stay safe and protected. Also, we can see the different
measures taken to address the concerns of data privacy and protection, risk
profiling analysis, social and racial discrimiation and economic development.
These measures could help inform the decisions of countries or regions in
similar situations.
3.2 Data silos: Missed opportunity: Due to anonymization, not possible to conduct
detailed analysis
Arising from anonymization efforts in medical centers is the existence of data silos,
a collection of data that is accessible by only one group or organization. As a
solution for data privacy of individuals testing at medical centers, data silos may be
effective, yet they bring about additional problems. Data silos prevent a possibility
to conduct detailed analysis of COVID-19 testing data, which would be effective
in multiple ways, including evaluating the efficacy of testing methods in different
demographics. Such analysis is made impossible by data silos’ insularity, preventing
health officials from seeing the bigger picture. [89][90] A solution, as part of our
wishlist, is to create a data lake instead; a centralized data repository optimized for
analysis. Data silos are by nature decentralized, which makes it difficult to enforce
a uniform protocol for data governance. A data lake fixes this additional problem
due to its centralized nature. [91] Rather than achieving anonymization through
insularity, a more intelligent approach can be taken by protecting data privacy
with fine-grained, data-centric control. Furthermore, one of the primary motives
of sharing the data is to learn representations and draw insights from it. Privacy
preserving machine learning has been on the rise in recent times. [92] Strategies
like federated learning - a machine learning setting in which a centralized model is
brought to localized data for training rather than data being brought to the model
- can be used to ensure no explicit sharing of raw data. Split learning may also be
used for this purpose; split learning is a specialized neural network method in which
a designated layer in a neural network, the cut layer, ‘splits’ the network between
client and server. These privacy solutions, among others, support data lakes as the
best of both worlds in efficacy and privacy.

4 Solutions that overcome privacy, mismanagement and
miscommunication
Many governments around the world have suggested a scheme of health passports/immunity passports since a clear solution for COVID-19 management including vaccine distribution remains in its early stages and will take months before

Gandhi et al.

Page 24 of 28

it reaches the common man globally. It is proposed that the identification of antibodies in COVID-19 virus-causing persons, the SARS-CoV-2 virus, may be used as
the basis for health/immunity passports globally [17]. Owing to the transient nature
in terms of presence of antibodies, looking at the presence/absence of it alone could
lead to issues. It might be a better option to look into vaccine based immunisation
as an indicator. Adding on, we believe that a random number index is the best
way to connect a user to their data, rather than a name, phone number, or email
address. Later, the user will use a random number to validate their test results. The
research needs to be done to understand the participant’s knowledge about various
aspects such as the use of masks, the use of hand sanitizer, avoiding going to school,
and college for work can prevent the spread of viruses. There are a lot of upcoming
strategies and areas in which scientists and researchers are trying to explore and
venture to track and avoid the exponential spread of the virus [93]. These methods
help to improve performance, shorten the timeline for obtaining outcomes, reduce
costs and reduce the complexity involved in carrying out these studies. Some of the
prominent references to current and upcoming test activities are STOPCovid [94]
an initiative by MIT researchers and scientists to provide test facilities at a cheaper
cost to non-laboratory experts to perform experiments in their home or private
premises. Next, leveraging AI for testing, where simpler forms could be used to
detect COVID, such as cough [95], breadth, and saliva. The use of these facilities
will not only make the process simpler and easier to carry out, but will also allow
the authorities to expand the reach of the testing and in turn, help control the
available capital and supplies, but will also extend the testing to the community
level, including mass population testing.
A few of the most important points to be addressed while developing the solutions
are as follows:
1

2

3

4
5

6

Consent of the individual: It should be a practice to always obtain consent
of the person whose data is being collected. Also, it is the right of the individual to know about the reason and time period for the data to be utilised.
Avoid collecting unnecessary data: It is also suggested to avoid collecting
irrelevant information while carrying out the tests such as getting information
about their location, previous health history
Authorized use of data by health officials: The data collected should be
used by the public health authorities on a need base purpose only and who
are trained for the same.
Minimize sharing: One should ensure sharing of data is minimized and is
strictly limited by drafting appropriate laws and policies.
Decentralization: The data should be stored in a decentralised fashion using
appropriate safeguarding techniques such as encryption, decentralization or
de-identification to avoid or prevent any attempts to hack the data.
Training of the staff : The staff of the organization should be trained to
take the precautionary measures for containing the virus such as checking
the temperature of the employees, check if they have worn masks and are
maintaining a social distance, maintaining the hygiene of the food and utensils
being used.

Gandhi et al.

Page 25 of 28

5 Conclusion
The explosive growth of diagnostic technology is a necessary component of the
Strategic Emergency Preparedness Plan for Epidemic. Subsequently, the technological landscape of the development of the diagnosis of COVID-19 is rapidly coming
up with new knowledge that is formed on a daily basis. Numerous platforms for
Open and rapid sharing of data has contributed to this rapid diagnostic development. In this early draft we have introduced the digital landscape of the testing
workflows, the user centric issues and the challenges and consequences associated
with each of these. Further we have enumerated multiple major dashboards contributing to the surveillance of COVID-19 and case studies pertinent to the digital
management of resources from different countries. We have mapped the landscape
of current testing systems, challenges and potential solutions.

Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Acknowledgements
We are grateful to Riyanka Roy Choudhury, CodeX Fellow, Stanford University, Adam Berrey, CEO of PathCheck
Foundation, Dr. Brooke Struck, Research Director at The Decision Lab, Canada, Vinay Gidwaney, Entrepreneur and
Advisor, PathCheck Foundation, and Paola Heudebert, co-founder of Blockchain for Human Rights, Alison Tinker,
Saswati Soumya, Sunny Manduva, Bhavya Pandey, and Aarathi Prasad for their assistance in discussions, support
and guidance in writing of this paper.
Author details
1
PathCheck Foundation, 02139 Cambridge, USA. 2 MIT Media Lab, 02139 Cambridge, USA. 3 Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, 02139 Cambridge, USA. 4 Harvard Medical School, 02115 Boston, USA. 5 Ash Center for
Democratic Governance and Innovation, Harvard Kennedy School, 02138 Cambridge, USA. 6 Institute for
Technology and Global Health, 02139 Cambridge, USA. 7 National Human Genome Research Institute, National
Institutes of Health, 20892 Bethesda, USA. 8 University of California, Berkeley School of Law, 94720 Berkeley, USA.
9
Renaissance School of Medicine, Stony Brook University, 11794 Stony Brook, USA.
References
1. Aguiar, E.R.G.R., Navas, J., Pacheco, L.G.C.: The covid-19 diagnostic technology landscape: Efficient data
sharing drives diagnostic development. Frontiers in Public Health 8, 309 (2020). doi:10.3389/fpubh.2020.00309
2. Moorthy, V., Henao Restrepo, A.M., Preziosi, M.-P., Swaminathan, S.: Data sharing for novel coronavirus
(covid-19). Bulletin of the World Health Organization 98(3), 150–150 (2020-3-01)
3. Cosgrove, C.: Privacy questions for COVID-19 testing and health monitoring (2020).
https://iapp.org/news/a/privacy-questions-for-covid-19-testing-and-health-monitoring/
4. Ahmadi, S., Bempong, N.-E., Santis, O.D., Sheath, D., Flahault, A.: The role of digital technologies in tackling
the zika outbreak: a scoping review. Journal of Public Health and Emergency 2(6) (2018)
5. Volbrecht, A.: The promise of a digitally connected DR Congo (2019).
https://www.path.org/articles/digital-congo-ebola/
6. Bempong, N.-E., Ruiz de Castaneda, R., Schütte, S., Bolon, I., Keiser, O., Escher, G., Flahault, A.: Precision
global health - the case of ebola: A scoping review. Journal of Global Health 9 (2019).
doi:10.7189/jogh.09.010404
7. Tambo, E., Adama, K., Talla, M., CF, C., C., F.: Digital technology and mobile applications impact on zika
and ebola epidemics data sharing and emergency response. J Health Med Informatics 8, 254 (2017).
doi:10.4172/2157-7420.1000254
8. Reiny, S.: Using NASA Satellite Data to Predict Malaria Outbreaks (2017). https:
//www.nasa.gov/feature/goddard/2017/using-nasa-satellite-data-to-predict-malaria-outbreaks
9. Digital solutions for malaria elimination community of practice (2017)
10. Example of layout and flow of individuals being screened (2020).
https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/images/hcp/figure-layout-flow-screening.png
11. Performing Broad-Based Testing for SARS-CoV-2 in Congregate Settings (2020).
https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/hcp/broad-based-testing.html
12. NHS Testing and tracing for coronavirus (2020).
https://www.nhs.uk/conditions/coronavirus-covid-19/testing-and-tracing/
13. MIT Medical FAQ Testing for COVID-19 (2020). https://medical.mit.edu/faqs/faq-testing-covid-19
14. Minnesota Community Testing (2020).
https://www.health.state.mn.us/diseases/coronavirus/testsites/community.html
15. Henry Ford COVID-19 Symptoms Testing (2020).
https://www.henryford.com/coronavirus/covid19-symptoms-testing-treatment
16. CareWell COVID-19 Testing (2020).
https://www.carewellurgentcare.com/covid-19-response-at-carewell/

Gandhi et al.

Page 26 of 28

17. Brown, B., Kelly, D., Wilkinson, D., Savulescu, J.: The scientific and ethical feasibility of immunity passports.
The Lancet Infectious Diseases (2020). doi:10.1016/S1473-3099(20)30766-0
18. Olivarius, K.: The Dangerous History of Immunoprivilege (2020).
https://www.nytimes.com/2020/04/12/opinion/coronavirus-immunity-passports.html#click=https:
//t.co/QcXDROj5IL
19. Kind, C.: Exit through the app store? Patterns 1(3), 100054 (2020). doi:10.1016/j.patter.2020.100054
20. Gruener, D.: Immunity Certificates: If We Must Have Them, We Must Do It Right (2020).
https://ethics.harvard.edu/files/center-for-ethics/files/12immunitycertificates.pdf
21. Health Passport Europe (2020). https://www.healthpassportireland.ie/
22. Paul Mozur, R.Z., Krolik, A.: In Coronavirus Fight, China Gives Citizens a Color Code, With Red Flags (2020).
https://www.nytimes.com/2020/03/01/business/china-coronavirus-surveillance.html
23. Jr., B.L.: WHO doesn’t recommend coronavirus passports, because immunity remains questionable (2020).
https://www.cnbc.com/2020/09/16/
who-doesnt-recommend-coronavirus-passports-because-immunity-remains-questionable.html
24. WHO: ”Immunity passports” in the context of COVID-19 (2020).
https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/immunity-passports-in-the-context-of-covid-19
25. IBM Digital Health Pass (2020). https://www.ibm.com/products/digital-health-pass
26. V-Health: The People’s Passport (2020). https://v-healthpassport.co.uk/
27. WISeKey’s WIShelter Covid-19 Platform Using Digital IDs and Blockchain to Help Tourist Destinations Certify
Travelers are not Infected (2020). https://www.wisekey.com/press/
wisekeys-wishelter-covid-19-platform-using-digital-ids-and-blockchain-to-help-tourist-destin\
ations-certify-travelers-are-not-infected/
28. COVI-Pass by Tento Health (2020). https://tentohealth.com/
29. SecureIdNews: Digital ID immunity passports gain steam around the globe (2020). https:
//www.secureidnews.com/news-item/digital-id-immunity-passports-gain-steam-around-the-globe/
30. International monitor: public health identity systems, Ada Lovelace Institute (2020). https:
//www.adalovelaceinstitute.org/project/international-monitor-public-health-identity-systems/
31. PRNewswire: Irish-based ROQU Group launches world-first ’Health Passport’ digital platform to support
increased global COVID-19 testing (2020). https://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/
irish-based-roqu-group-launches-world-first-health-passport-digital-platform-to-sup\
port-increased-global-covid-19-testing-301120037.html
32. ALHOSN: Protecting yourself protects your community (2020). https://www.alhosnapp.ae/en/home/
33. WHO Digital COVID-19 Vaccination Infrastructure (2020).
https://guardtime.com/blog/who-digital-covid-19-vaccination-infrastructure
34. COVID-19 Credentials Initiative (2020). https://www.covidcreds.com/
35. SMITS, J.: Digital health passports roll out for air travelers tracking COVID status, vaccination proof (2020).
https://www.lifesitenews.com/blogs/
digital-health-passports-roll-out-for-air-travelers-tracking-covid-status-vaccination-proof
36.
37.
38.
39.
40.

41.
42.
43.
44.
45.
46.
47.
48.
49.
50.
51.
52.
53.
54.
55.

56.

CommonPass by The Commons Project (2020). https://thecommonsproject.org/commonpass
CommonPass (2020). https://commonpass.org/
Health Pass by CLEAR (2020). https://www.clearme.com/healthpass
Hi+ Card by TDDS (2020). https://hicard.travel/
Gandhi, D., Landage, S., Bae, J., Shankar, S., Sukumaran, R., Patwa, P., au2, S.T.V., Katiyar, P., Advani, S.,
Iyer, R., Anand, S., Mahindra, A., Barbar, R., Singh, A., Raskar, R.: Clinical Landscape of COVID-19 Testing:
Difficult Choices (2020). 2011.04202
Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments (CLIA) (2020). https://www.cdc.gov/clia/index.html
Quest Diagnostics, COVID-19 (2020). https://www.questdiagnostics.com/home/Covid-19/
COVID-19 Laboratory Testing: Medpace Central Labs (2020).
https://www.medpace.com/covid-19-laboratory-testing/
Flexible, agile and proactive laboratory services dedicated to global clinical development (2020).
https://www.iconplc.com/services/laboratories/
Syneos Health - Collaborating to Address the Challenge of COVID-19 (2020).
https://www.syneoshealth.com/covid-19-resource-center
Verily: Delivering COVID-19 screening and testing through Project Baseline and community-based sites (2020).
https://verily.com/solutions/covid-19-testing/
2019 Novel Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19) (2020). https://www.bioreference.com/coronavirus/
Find Diseases & Conditions (2020). https://www.mayoclinic.org
Amherst College COVID-19 Dashboard (2020). https://www.amherst.edu/news/covid-19/dashboard
We Rate COVID-19 Dashboards (2020). https://www.ratecoviddashboard.com/
Wagner College COVID-19 Dashboard (2020).
https://sites.google.com/wagner.edu/covid-19casetracker
Tulane University COVID-19 Dashboard (2020). https://tulane.edu/covid-19/dashboard
Ohio State University COVID-19 Dashboard (2020). https:
//news.osu.edu/a-deeper-dive-into-ohio-states-top-rated-covid-19-testing-data-dashboard/
George Mason University COVID-19 Dashboard (2020). https://www2.gmu.edu/campus-covid-19-data
CDC COVID Data Tracker (2020).
https://covid.cdc.gov/covid-data-tracker/?CDC_AA_refVal=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.cdc.gov%
2Fcoronavirus%2F2019-ncov%2Fcases-updates%2Fcases-in-us.html#cases_casesper100klast7days
Carnegie Mellon University COVID-19 Dashboard (2020).
https://covidcast.cmu.edu/?sensor=doctor-visits-smoothed_adj_cli&level=county&date=20201027&

Gandhi et al.

Page 27 of 28

signalType=value&encoding=color&mode=single&region=42003
57. Coronavirus disease (COVID-19): Outbreak update, Government of Canada (2020). https://www.canada.ca/
en/public-health/services/diseases/2019-novel-coronavirus-infection.html?topic=tilelink
58. Evolution of COVID-19, CBC Radio-Canada (2020). https://ici.radio-canada.ca/info/2020/
coronavirus-covid-19-pandemie-cas-carte-maladie-symptomes-propagation/index-en.html
59. COVID-19 State wise Status, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, India (2020).
https://www.mohfw.gov.in/
60. COVID-19 : Current cases, New Zealand Ministry of Health (2020).
https://www.health.govt.nz/our-work/diseases-and-conditions/covid-19-novel-coronavirus/
covid-19-data-and-statistics/covid-19-current-cases
61. France COVID-19 Dashboard (2020).
https://dashboard.covid19.data.gouv.fr/vue-d-ensemble?location=FRA
62. Worldometer (2020). https://www.worldometers.info/coronavirus/
63. thebaselab (2020). https://coronavirus.thebaselab.com
64. CDC COVID-19 Testing Overview (2020).
https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/symptoms-testing/testing.html
65. Apple COVID-19 Screening Tool (2020). https://covid19.apple.com/screening#donotlink
66. Castlight Inc. COVID-19 Test Site Finder: Get Information on Coronavirus Testing Near You (2020).
https://my.castlighthealth.com/corona-virus-testing-sites/
67. Community-Based Testing Sites for COVID-19 (2020).
https://www.hhs.gov/coronavirus/community-based-testing-sites/index.html
68. Project Baseline by verily (2020). https://www.projectbaseline.com/study/covid-19/
69. Comparing privacy laws: GDPR v. CCPA (2020).
https://fpf.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/11/GDPR_CCPA_Comparison-Guide.pdf
70. Deliberation on HIPAA Privacy Rule (2020). https://www.hhs.gov/hipaa/for-professionals/faq/405/
is-this-more-protective-state-law-preempted-by-the-privacy-rule/index.html
71. Does the GDPR apply to companies outside of the EU? (2020).
https://gdpr.eu/companies-outside-of-europe
72. Healthcare Data Breach Statistics, HIPAA Journal (2020).
https://www.hipaajournal.com/healthcare-data-breach-statistics/
73. One in Four US Consumers Have Had Their Healthcare Data Breached, Accenture Survey Reveals (2020).
https://newsroom.accenture.com/subjects/technology/
one-in-four-us-consumers-have-had-their-healthcare-data-breached-accenture-survey-reveals.
html
74. Top 10 Biggest Healthcare Data Breaches of All Time (2020).
https://digitalguardian.com/blog/top-10-biggest-healthcare-data-breaches-all-time
75. John Hopkins University Mortality Analyses (2020). https://coronavirus.jhu.edu/data/mortality
76. COVID-19: Lockdown across India, in line with WHO guidance (2020).
https://news.un.org/en/story/2020/03/1060132
77. Grover, A.: COVID-19 in India: Lockdown, Legal Challenges, and Disparate Impacts (2020).
https://blog.petrieflom.law.harvard.edu/2020/05/18/india-global-responses-covid19/
78. THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA (2020).
https://www.india.gov.in/sites/upload_files/npi/files/coi_part_full.pdf
79. Frequently Asked Questions on Aarogya Setu App (2020).
https://covid19.assam.gov.in/wp-content/uploads/2020/05/Aarogya_Setu_FAQ.pdf
80. DATA PROTECTION LAWS OF THE WORLD (2020).
https://www.dlapiperdataprotection.com/index.html?t=law&c=VN
81. McKenzie, B.: Data Privacy & Security Survey (2020). https://www.bakermckenzie.com/-/media/files/
insight/publications/2020/04/covid19-data-privacy--security-survey17-april.pdf
82. ”Protect yourself” Ministry of Health Vietnam (2020). https://bluezone.ai
83. Helen Chan, R.I.E.: Pervasive personal data collection at the heart of South Korea’s COVID-19 success may not
translate (2020). https://blogs.thomsonreuters.com/answerson/south-korea-covid-19-data-privacy/
84. Panakal, D.D.: Privacy vs. pandemic control in south korea (2020)
85. Frank Jordans, A.P.: Coronavirus tracing app a test for privacy-minded Germany (2020). https://abcnews.
go.com/Health/wireStory/coronavirus-tracing-app-test-privacy-minded-germany-71270334
86. Mobile applications in support of contact tracing for COVID-19, European Centre for Disease Prevention and
Control (2020). https://www.ecdc.europa.eu/sites/default/files/documents/
covid-19-mobile-applications-contact-tracing.pdf
87. Lothar Wieler, R.G. Ute Rexroth: Emerging covid-19 success story: Germany’s strong enabling environment
(2020)
88. Carolyn Bigg, F.S. Venus Cheung: Navigating China Episode 14: New draft national, harmonised data
protection law for Mainland China Navigating China: The digital journey (2020).
https://www.dlapiper.com/en/us/insights/publications/2020/10/navigating-china-episode-14/
89. Alienor: What is a Data Silo and Why is It Bad for Your Organization? (2020).
https://www.plixer.com/blog/data-silo-what-is-it-why-is-it-bad/
90. What are Data Silos? (2020). https://www.talend.com/resources/what-are-data-silos/
91. Turajski, N.: Operationalizing Data Lake Privacy Governance for Value Creation (2020).
https://www.talend.com/resources/what-are-data-silos/
92. Vepakomma, P., Swedish, T., Raskar, R., Gupta, O., Dubey, A.: No Peek: A Survey of private distributed deep
learning (2018). 1812.03288
93. Nguyen, T.T.: Artificial Intelligence in the Battle against Coronavirus (COVID-19): A Survey and Future
Research Directions (2020).

Gandhi et al.

Page 28 of 28

https://www.researchgate.net/publication/340487417_Artificial_Intelligence_in_the_Battle_
against_Coronavirus_COVID-19_A_Survey_and_Future_Research_Directions
94. Joung, J., Ladha, A., Saito, M., Segel, M., Bruneau, R., Huang, M.-l.W., Kim, N.-G., Yu, X., Li, J., Walker,
B.D., Greninger, A.L., Jerome, K.R., Gootenberg, J.S., Abudayyeh, O.O., Zhang, F.: Point-of-care testing for
covid-19 using sherlock diagnostics. medRxiv (2020). doi:10.1101/2020.05.04.20091231.
https://www.medrxiv.org/content/early/2020/05/08/2020.05.04.20091231.full.pdf
95. Chu, J.: Artificial intelligence model detects asymptomatic Covid-19 infections through cellphone-recorded
coughs (2020). https://news.mit.edu/2020/covid-19-cough-cellphone-detection-1029

