W HEN P HYSICAL U NCLONABLE F UNCTION M EETS
B IOMETRICS

arXiv:2012.07916v1 [cs.CR] 14 Dec 2020

A P REPRINT
Kavya Dayananda
Department of Computer Engineering
San Jose State University
San Jose, CA 95119
kavya.dayananda@sjsu.edu

Nima Karimian
Department of Computer Engineering
San Jose State University
San Jose, CA 95119
nima.karimian@sjsu.edu

December 16, 2020

A BSTRACT
As the Covid-19 pandemic grips the world, healthcare systems are being reshaped, where the e-health
concepts become more likely to be accepted. Wearable devices often carry sensitive information from
users which are exposed to security and privacy risks. Moreover, users have always had the concern
of being counterfeited between the fabrication process and vendors’ storage. Hence, not only securing
personal data is becoming a crucial obligation, but also device verification is another challenge. To
address biometrics authentication and physically unclonable functions (PUFs) need to be put in place
to mitigate the security and privacy of the users. Among biometrics modalities, Electrocardiogram
(ECG) based biometric has become popular as it can authenticate patients and monitor the patient’s
vital signs. However, researchers have recently started to study the vulnerabilities of the ECG
biometric systems and tried to address the issues of spoofing. Moreover, most of the wearable is
enabled with CPU and memories. Thus, volatile memory-based (NVM) PUF can be easily placed in
the device to avoid counterfeit. However, many research challenged the unclonability characteristics
of PUFs. Thus, a careful study on these attacks should be sufficient to address the need. In this paper,
our aim is to provide a comprehensive study on the state-of-the-art developments papers based on
biometrics enabled hardware security.
Keywords Biometrics, Key Genertion, PUFs, Hardware Security, Blockchain

1

Introduction

As the Covid-19 pandemic grips the world, Telehealth, and Telemedicine play crucial roles to provide a better quality of
care and patient monitoring as they do not rely on in-person services. According to CDC [1], Telemedicine minimizing
the spread of SARS-CoV-2 while it provides necessary care to patients. Although there are many benefits of healthcare
application, there has always been a threat of hackers getting access to the sensitive information of the patients
that can make misuse that information leading to problems [2, 3]. Telemedicine and its intersection with wearable
devices accelerate patient insights. Therefore, the increased usage of biometric technologies raises security and patient
privacy risks, especially in unprotected and hostile environments. In addition, cybercriminals around the world work
continuously to discover new techniques to invade the systems. There is a need for patient authentication such that
it can protect the user’s privacy and their sensitive personal data. To address this issue, biometric technology such
as electrocardiogram (ECG) and photoplethysmogram (PPG) are the best candidates [4]. Apart from its features for
extracting health data insights and diagnosis through healthcare monitoring [5, 6], ECG enables user authentication

A PREPRINT - D ECEMBER 16, 2020

based on physiological signals[7, 8, 9]. Moreover, consumer electronics such as wearable devices have always had the
concern of being counterfeited between the fabrication process and vendors’ storage [10]. Hence, it is necessary for the
hospital and user to verify the devices. To address this concern, some of the existing components in the wearable devices
such as memory can make a security layer on top of the system gathering signals from a patient. Physical Unclonable
Functions (PUFs) are one of the hardware solutions commonly used to authenticate with any given device [11, 12, 2].
In the continuation of this article, we will discuss current challenges of biometric, PUFs, and future possibilities in
combining two advances in physical unclonable functions (PUFs) and biometrics systems.

2

Background on ECG Biometric

The work of Odinaka et al. [13] presents a unique short-time frequency method for ECG biometric. A large dataset
with a sample size of 269 was obtained from the general population. These single lead ECG samples were collected
over a time period of seven months at different days and times. Also, care was taken to choose subjects from different
geographical regions and health statuses. Additionally, the samples were collected in a manner that presented least
discomfort to the subjects by placing the electrodes bilaterally on the lower ribcage. After collecting the data samples,
filtering and preprocessing techniques were applied on them to reduce the effect of noise on the input sample. First the
signals were digitally notch filtered to remove the interference from the power line. After filtering, the R-wave peaks of
the signal are detected and the signal is segmented and aligned with respect to the obtained R-wave peak. The other
fiducial points P, Q, S, T are neither detected nor used in this method. Finally each of the ECG signals is normalized.
Normalization is done by subtracting the sample mean of the pulse, and dividing by the sample standard deviation.
Finally for selecting the features, the authors propose a novel method for feature selection based on the distinguishability
and stability of features. From each ECG pulse signal, a spectrogram value is calculated .It is computed by considering
the logarithm of the square of the magnitude of the short-time Fourier transform of a normalized ECG heart pulse. This
method achieved an accuracy of upto 93.5%. Furthermore, the presented an 5.58% error and 76.9% accuracy during
train-test phases for heartbeats from different days. For data from a single day, the train-test error rate achieved was
0.37% and 99% accuracy for decisions based on a single heartbeat.
Li et al. [14] propose an alternative approach to perform analysis of the signals in temporal and spatial domains. They
extract ECG features from time slices that make up the signal known as spectrum. The features extracted are then used
with the temporal information to derive a heterogenous model to determine the heart rate and fiducial characteristics.
They achieve up to 99% on the MIT-NIH database. They show that identification of spatio-temporal characteristics
using gaussian mixture method (GMM) and support vector machine based temporal analysis improve the accuracy to
98% from 89% that uses traditional techniques. On the other hand , Labati et al. [9] use convolutional neural networks
to predict ECG signal characteristics. They use ECG signals from the ECG E-HOL-03-0202-003 database to derive
the test and train data for the neural networks. They preprocess the ECG data from the database and then use it for
feature extraction using the neural network. The preprocessing consists of filtering the noise and deriving a subset of the
input sample called feature vector that is used for all subsequent processing. They have a 12-layer convolutional neural
network to identify the features from the feature vector for the given test and train samples. This method achieved an
accuracy of up to 97% and an error rate of 2.90%.

3

Background on Biometric Key Generation

There have been numerous proposals for generating keys from biometrics. The key requirements for biometic key is to
meet the requirement such as randomness and uniqueness [15, 16]. Generally, biometric features will be transformed
into a binary string of various lengths to represent biometric keys. Biometric keys generated should be uniformly
random in order to remain resistant to attack. There have been many research on biometric key generation developed
such fingerprint [17, 18], face [19], hand geometry [20], and iris [21]. Not only the aforementioned biometric keys are
vulnerable to spoofing attacks, but also implementing biometric key based on iris, face is not feasible in Telemedicine.
Thus, ECG based biometric key generation has been introduced. ECG based bio-key not only offers liveness and
are difficult to spoof, but also it is more feasible to be implemented in Telemedicine systems as its extracting health
data insights and diagnosis through healthcare monitoring. Early works proposed interpulse intervals (IPIs) to use
electrocardiograms (ECGs) as an entropy source for generating random binary sequences [22, 23, 24, 25, 23]. The IPI
2

A PREPRINT - D ECEMBER 16, 2020

Figure 1: ECG Key generation using the interpulse intervals (IPIs) [28].
is defined as the time interval between two successive R peaks. First steps is to clean the ECG signal from noise sources.
To eliminate the noise, the ECG signal is passed through a Butterworth pass-band filter. Second, using Pan–Tompkins
algorithm, R peak will be identified. Second, the time difference between two consecutive R-peaks are computed to
generate IPIs. Each IPI will be converted into values between 0 and 1. The 128 key bits will be generated based on LSB
of each IPIs. The drawback of this technique is that it requires a long period of IPIs [26, 22]. The example of IPI key
generation is demonstrated in the Fig 1. As can be seen in this figure, due to low entropy of the most-significant bits
(MSB), only least significant bit (LSB) are considered and MSB bits are discarded.
While biometrics have their advantages, keys generated from biometrics may suffer from environment noise. These
limitations could introduce binary errors during key generation and make it impossible for even the system owner to
access/use the system. Thus, IPI techniques heavily rely on error correction. In order to overcome these detriments, a
statistical approach to mitigate or eliminate the intra-subject variance while preserving privacy and generating long keys
have been developed [16, 27]. The statistical approach begins with an initialization phase. ECG Features are extracted
from ECG signals from a large population of users. Statistics for each feature are used to determine thresholds and
boundaries to quantize the feature into one or more key bits. The number of bits depends on the parameters and statistics,
and can vary from feature to feature. Compared to IPI methods, statistics approach use single heartbeat to generate 128
key bits. The proposed system containing biometric pre-processing, feature extraction, etc. and reconfigurable logic to
act as the permutation block. The reconfigurable logic forms is programmed according to the operators biometric. They
used permutation chip to insert a binary key bits and lock the system. If the correct biometric which belongs to the
authorized owner is asserted, the system will unlock allowing the inputs pass to the correct outputs of the permutation
chip. Otherwise, the system will not work.

4

Background on PUFs

PUFs take advantage of the unique physical characteristics of an integrated circuit (IC) that result from manufacturing
and process variation in nanoscales, giving each its own fingerprint. A PUF relies on inherent entropy as well as
stability/reliability to provide uniquely secure, yet consistent operation based on a unique set of challenge (input) and
response (output) pairs. PUF’s uniqueness involves determining whether or not it provides a different enough signature
for its given IC to clearly differentiate it from other ICs of the same kind. Computing the Hamming distance (HD)
between a pair of PUF identifiers (or the number of bit positions that differ in value) is one way this can be done.
Reliability refers to how well a PUF is able to provide a consistent response to the same challenge. This is crucial
since a PUF should not be easily worn out or affected by environmental factors. There are many forms of existing
PUFs, including delay-based PUFs such as arbiter PUFs [29, 30], ring-oscillator PUFs [31, 32, 33, 34]; memory-based
PUFs such as DRAM PUFs [35, 36, 37, 38] and SRAM PUFs [39, 40, 41], etc. “Weak and Strong PUFs" are the two
3

A PREPRINT - D ECEMBER 16, 2020

Figure 2: ECG Key generation using the statistical approach [16].
subtypes of PUFs. Weaks PUFs are used for storing secret keys to non-volatile memories since they show some internal,
unclonable physical disorder, and they are involved in some form of challenge-response mechanism which should be
access-restricted. It is considered that even by having the PUF-carrying hardware, the adversaries cannot access the
Weak PUF’s responses. Formerly, weak PUFs were toward special purpose circuits, now they are based on intrinsic
PUFs built from CMOS parts which are more affordable. Strong PUFs have numerous CPRs which each time provide a
new CPR for the procedure of authentication. They exhibit a more complex challenge-response pair. They are much
harder to be predicted since if an adversary knows a large subset of CRPs, it is almost impossible for them to predict the
other unknown CRPs. Strong PUFs have public access for challenge-response mechanisms that allow everyone with
physical possession of the PUF to apply challenges to the Strong PUF which leads to some downsides such as the need
for many CRPs to remain secure [42].

5

Combining Hardware Security and Biometric Systems

Since unique signature of the wearable device using PUF do not vary for different users and unique signature of
a user using biokeys do not vary across multiple devices, Cherupally et al. [44] combined ECG biokey, heart rate
variability (HRV), and SRAM-based physical unclonable function (PUF) to perform real-time authentication and
generate unique/random signatures. The purpose of the proposed work was to enhance randomness. As can be seen in
Fig4, 256 key bits from individual’s ECG and HRV are combined with 256 key bits of each device’s PUF using bitwise
XOR to generate a 256-bit secret key. Then this key will be used as one-time key for authentication. This methods will
reduce attack scenario to know both the PUF as well as the user’s ECG/HRV features to uncover the root of trust [44].
Guo et al. [45] combined ECG biokey and physical obfuscation/locking to protect electronic system by physical
obfuscation/locking. The purpose of the proposed work is avoid fault injection, and reverse engineering. They have
considered two approaches for users enrollment. In the first approach authorized user could present his/her biometric
to the system.Alternatively, a database containing biometric keys from authorized user can be used to configure the
system. The second approach has the advantage that the user need not be present during enrollment. To that, the system
could be enrolled in a secure location and then sent to the user. In that case, if the device is captured by unauthorized
user, it could not be used until it reaches its enrolled user.
4

A PREPRINT - D ECEMBER 16, 2020

Figure 3: PUFs Taxonomy [43].

Figure 4: Combining hardware security with biometric system. Features based ECG, HRV and SRAM PUF are
extracted and combined to form a 256-bit secret key [44].

5

A PREPRINT - D ECEMBER 16, 2020

Karimian et al. [46], combined ECG key bits, physical unclonable functions (PUFs) and hardware obfuscation to
provides non-invertibility and non-linkability charchtestics of biometric systems. The purpose of using PUF is to
avoid permanently storing the human biometric and/or cryptographic keys on the device. The PUF also provides a
non-invertible transform to the biometric in order to protect the biometric template and make the biometric/obfuscation
non-linkable to different devices. The hHardware obfuscation has been replace in the biometric matching systems. The
users ownership is taken by presenting his/her biometric signal to the device. A preprocessing algorithm is applied on
the received biometric to extract the binary bio key. A PUF is used as a one-way transform on the quantized biometric.
In order to generate the PUF challenge, the bio key is processed by a hardware hash function to the desired length. An
obfuscated bitstream is produced that will exploit this obfuscation key to lock the system. During the authentication
process, the user provides his/her biometric as input. The same pre-processing algorithm as the enrollment process is
applied to generate the bio − key. Potential errors are corrected with the helper data. Next, the hash function creates
the challenge. The obs − key is then generated by injecting this challenge into the strong PUF. Different from the
enrollment process, this obfuscation key is generated on the physical device instead of its mathematic model. A correct
obs − key unlocks the obfuscated bitstream and brings the device into functional (unlocked) mode. Without the correct
key, the device will simply not work correctly. Arjona et al. [47] obfuscated the biometric data with PUFs based
on dual-factor authentication protocol to avoid storage of secret keys for IoT application. They propose fingerprint
recognition solution to identify the user and that protects biometric data with the PUF response at the sensor node.
5.1

ECG based Biometric and Blockchain

The advancement of microfabrication has led to every small device having its own way of establishing network
connectivity and access to the internet. This ecosystem of interconnected devices is known as the Internet of Things
(IoT). IoT has paved the way for a wide range of applications in several fields. Wearable health monitoring devices
like smartwatches and Fitbit are one such application of IoT. These portable devices use various sensors to measure
vital information of the human body like the pulse rate, heart rate, and other useful personal health metrics. So with
the easy access of ECG information from these smart devices, there has been increasing interest in using ECG data as
biometrics in a variety of applications. Also, ECG signals, similar to fingerprints, are unique to the individual and are
very difficult to alter or replicate by external means thereby making them a perfect candidate for biometric especially
for security applications. However, a major concern for these applications is the need for transmitting these sensitive
medical data and ECG signals securely across the decentralized IoT ecosystem. Blockchain technology provides a
promising solution in this regard. Blockchain provides a decentralized reliable and secure mechanism for transmitting
the data. Furthermore , blockchain is immutable , thus ensuring that there is no tampering of the data. Blockchain has
been historically used by crypto currency coin base for distributed management of assets across the world in a safe and
secured manner. Such a system has been considered in reference to medical data so that different stakeholders such as
pharmacies, doctors and health care providers can integrate to a comprehensive and unified health care system. One
such effort is provided by Vazirani et al. [48] towards effective healthcare record management. They create a blockchain
for pertinent data ownership by associated stakeholders. This way they allow distributed ownership of patient data
without compromising on privacy. For example : the lab testing units own the measured data , whereas the doctors
will own the medicine prescription and the pharmacist will monitor the prescription data to pack the medicines for the
patient. This way, they securely decentralize the patient’s medical history and use the block chain as a distributed ledger
to make medical history as a unifying factor for the british healthcare system. In their study , they have shown that such
a distributed ledger can support high throughput machine learning based analysis for better healthcare and also provide
secured personalised healthcare pathways.

6

Conclusions

The advancement of microfabrication has led to every small device having its own way of establishing network
connectivity and access to the internet. This ecosystem of interconnected devices is known as the Internet of Things
(IoT). IoT has paved the way for a wide range of applications in several fields. Wearable health monitoring devices like
smartwatches and Fitbit are one such application of IoT. These portable devices use various sensors to measure vital
information of the human body like the pulse rate, heart rate, and other useful personal health metrics. So with the easy
access of ECG information from these smart devices, there has been increasing interest in using ECG data as biometrics
6

A PREPRINT - D ECEMBER 16, 2020

in a variety of applications. Also, ECG signals, similar to fingerprints, are unique to the individual and are very difficult
to alter or replicate by external means thereby making them a perfect candidate for biometric especially for security
applications. However, a major concern for these applications is the need for transmitting these sensitive medical
data and ECG signals securely across the decentralized IoT ecosystem. Blockchain technology provides a promising
solution in this regard. Blockchain provides a decentralized reliable and secure mechanism for transmitting the data.
Furthermore , blockchain is immutable , thus ensuring that there is no tampering of the data. The below section presents
different techniques to leverage ECG data for biometric and blockchain technology. Moreover, Wearable devices often
carry sensitive information from users which are exposed to security and privacy risks. Moreover, users have always
had the concern of being counterfeited between the fabrication process and vendors’ storage. Hence, not only securing
personal data is becoming a crucial obligation, but also device verification is another challenge. To address biometrics
authentication and physically unclonable functions (PUFs) need to be put in place to mitigate the security and privacy
of the users.

References
[1] Telehealth to Expand Access to Essential Health Services during the COVID-19 Pandemic.
[2] Fatemeh Tehranipoor, Nima Karimian, Paul A Wortman, and John A Chandy. Low-cost authentication paradigm
for consumer electronics within the internet of wearable fitness tracking applications. In 2018 IEEE International
Conference on Consumer Electronics (ICCE), pages 1–6. IEEE, 2018.
[3] Ankur Limaye and Tosiron Adegbija. Hermit: A benchmark suite for the internet of medical things. IEEE Internet
of Things Journal, 5(5):4212–4222, 2018.
[4] Nima Karimian, Mark Tehranipoor, Damon Woodard, and Domenic Forte. Unlock your heart: Next generation
biometric in resource-constrained healthcare systems and iot. IEEE Access, 7:49135–49149, 2019.
[5] Shihui Yin, Minkyu Kim, Deepak Kadetotad, Yang Liu, Chisung Bae, Sang Joon Kim, Yu Cao, and Jae-sun
Seo. A 1.06-µw smart ecg processor in 65-nm cmos for real-time biometric authentication and personal cardiac
monitoring. IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits, 2019.
[6] Renato Cordeiro, Dhruv Gajaria, Ankur Limaye, Tosiron Adegbija, Nima Karimian, and Fatemeh Tehranipoor.
Ecg-based authentication using timing-aware domain-specific architecture. IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided
Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems, 39(11):3373–3384, 2020.
[7] Mohit Ingale, Renato Cordeiro, Siddartha Thentu, Younghee Park, and Nima Karimian. Ecg biometric authentication: A comparative analysis. IEEE Access, 8:117853–117866, 2020.
[8] Ikenna Odinaka, Po-Hsiang Lai, Alan D Kaplan, Joseph A O’Sullivan, Erik J Sirevaag, and John W Rohrbaugh.
Ecg biometric recognition: A comparative analysis. IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security,
7(6):1812–1824, 2012.
[9] Ruggero Donida Labati, Enrique Muñoz, Vincenzo Piuri, Roberto Sassi, and Fabio Scotti. Deep-ecg: convolutional
neural networks for ecg biometric recognition. Pattern Recognition Letters, 126:78–85, 2019.
[10] Lydia Negka, Georgios Gketsios, Nikolaos A Anagnostopoulos, Georgios Spathoulas, Athanasios Kakarountas,
and Stefan Katzenbeisser. Employing blockchain and physical unclonable functions for counterfeit iot devices
detection. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Omni-Layer Intelligent Systems, pages 172–178,
2019.
[11] Saraju P Mohanty, Venkata P Yanambaka, Elias Kougianos, and Deepak Puthal. Pufchain: A hardware-assisted
blockchain for sustainable simultaneous device and data security in the internet of everything (ioe). IEEE
Consumer Electronics Magazine, 9(2):8–16, 2020.
[12] Venkata P Yanambaka, Saraju P Mohanty, Elias Kougianos, and Deepak Puthal. Pmsec: Physical unclonable
function-based robust and lightweight authentication in the internet of medical things. IEEE Transactions on
Consumer Electronics, 65(3):388–397, 2019.
[13] Ikenna Odinaka, Po-Hsiang Lai, Alan D Kaplan, Joseph A O’Sullivan, Erik J Sirevaag, Sean D Kristjansson,
Amanda K Sheffield, and John W Rohrbaugh. Ecg biometrics: A robust short-time frequency analysis. In 2010
IEEE International Workshop on Information Forensics and Security, pages 1–6. IEEE, 2010.
7

A PREPRINT - D ECEMBER 16, 2020

[14] Ming Li and Shrikanth Narayanan. Robust ecg biometrics by fusing temporal and cepstral information. In 2010
20th International Conference on Pattern Recognition, pages 1326–1329. IEEE, 2010.
[15] Lucas Ballard, Seny Kamara, and Michael K Reiter. The practical subtleties of biometric key generation. In
USENIX Security Symposium, pages 61–74, 2008.
[16] Nima Karimian, Zimu Guo, Mark Tehranipoor, and Domenic Forte. Highly reliable key generation from
electrocardiogram (ecg). IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering, 64(6):1400–1411, 2016.
[17] Nalini K Ratha, Sharat Chikkerur, Jonathan H Connell, and Ruud M Bolle. Generating cancelable fingerprint
templates. IEEE Transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence, 29(4):561–572, 2007.
[18] Zhe Jin, Andrew Beng Jin Teoh, Bok-Min Goi, and Yong-Haur Tay. Biometric cryptosystems: a new biometric
key binding and its implementation for fingerprint minutiae-based representation. Pattern Recognition, 56:50–62,
2016.
[19] Alwyn Goh and David CL Ngo. Computation of cryptographic keys from face biometrics. In IFIP International
Conference on Communications and Multimedia Security, pages 1–13. Springer, 2003.
[20] Blayn Beenau, David Bonalle, Seth Fields, William Gray, Carl Larkin, Joshua Montgomery, and Peter Saunders.
Method and system for hand geometry recognition biometrics on a fob, November 25 2004. US Patent App.
10/708,831.
[21] Youn Joo Lee, Kwanghyuk Bae, Sung Joo Lee, Kang Ryoung Park, and Jaihie Kim. Biometric key binding: Fuzzy
vault based on iris images. In International Conference on Biometrics, pages 800–808. Springer, 2007.
[22] Masoud Rostami, Ari Juels, and Farinaz Koushanfar. Heart-to-heart (h2h) authentication for implanted medical
devices. In Proceedings of the 2013 ACM SIGSAC conference on Computer & communications security, pages
1099–1112, 2013.
[23] Sandeep Pirbhulal, Heye Zhang, Wanqing Wu, Subhas Chandra Mukhopadhyay, and Yuan-Ting Zhang. Heartbeats
based biometric random binary sequences generation to secure wireless body sensor networks. IEEE Transactions
on Biomedical Engineering, 65(12):2751–2759, 2018.
[24] Sanaz Rahimi Moosavi, Ethiopia Nigussie, Seppo Virtanen, and Jouni Isoaho. Cryptographic key generation using
ecg signal. In 2017 14th IEEE Annual Consumer Communications & Networking Conference (CCNC), pages
1024–1031. IEEE, 2017.
[25] Guang-He Zhang, Carmen CY Poon, and Yuan-Ting Zhang. Analysis of using interpulse intervals to generate
128-bit biometric random binary sequences for securing wireless body sensor networks. IEEE Transactions on
Information Technology in Biomedicine, 16(1):176–182, 2011.
[26] Duygu Karaoğlan Altop, Albert Levi, and Volkan Tuzcu. Deriving cryptographic keys from physiological signals.
Pervasive and Mobile Computing, 39:65–79, 2017.
[27] Nima Karimian, Fatemeh Tehranipoor, Zimu Guo, Mark Tehranipoor, and Domenic Forte. Noise assessment
framework for optimizing ecg key generation. In 2017 IEEE International Symposium on Technologies for
Homeland Security (HST), pages 1–6. IEEE, 2017.
[28] Robert M Seepers, Christos Strydis, Ioannis Sourdis, and Chris I De Zeeuw. Enhancing heart-beat-based security
for mhealth applications. IEEE journal of biomedical and health informatics, 21(1):254–262, 2015.
[29] Gabriel Hospodar, Roel Maes, and Ingrid Verbauwhede. Machine learning attacks on 65nm arbiter pufs: Accurate
modeling poses strict bounds on usability. In 2012 IEEE international workshop on Information forensics and
security (WIFS), pages 37–42. IEEE, 2012.
[30] SV Sandeep Avvaru, Chen Zhou, Saroj Satapathy, Yingjie Lao, Chris H Kim, and Keshab K Parhi. Estimating
delay differences of arbiter pufs using silicon data. In 2016 Design, Automation & Test in Europe Conference &
Exhibition (DATE), pages 543–546. IEEE, 2016.
[31] Dominik Merli, Frederic Stumpf, and Claudia Eckert. Improving the quality of ring oscillator pufs on fpgas. In
Proceedings of the 5th workshop on embedded systems security, pages 1–9, 2010.
[32] Wei Yan, Chenglu Jin, Fatemeh Tehranipoor, and John A Chandy. Phase calibrated ring oscillator puf design and
implementation on fpgas. In 2017 27th International Conference on Field Programmable Logic and Applications
(FPL), pages 1–8. IEEE, 2017.
8

A PREPRINT - D ECEMBER 16, 2020

[33] Abhranil Maiti, Jeff Casarona, Luke McHale, and Patrick Schaumont. A large scale characterization of ro-puf.
In 2010 IEEE International Symposium on Hardware-Oriented Security and Trust (HOST), pages 94–99. IEEE,
2010.
[34] Qingqing Chen, György Csaba, Paolo Lugli, Ulf Schlichtmann, and Ulrich Rührmair. The bistable ring puf: A
new architecture for strong physical unclonable functions. In 2011 IEEE International Symposium on HardwareOriented Security and Trust, pages 134–141. IEEE, 2011.
[35] Fatemeh Tehranipoor, Nima Karimian, Kan Xiao, and John Chandy. Dram based intrinsic physical unclonable
functions for system level security. In Proceedings of the 25th edition on Great Lakes Symposium on VLSI, pages
15–20, 2015.
[36] Wenjie Xiong, André Schaller, Nikolaos A Anagnostopoulos, Muhammad Umair Saleem, Sebastian Gabmeyer,
Stefan Katzenbeisser, and Jakub Szefer. Run-time accessible dram pufs in commodity devices. In International
Conference on Cryptographic Hardware and Embedded Systems, pages 432–453. Springer, 2016.
[37] Fatemeh Tehranipoor, Nima Karimian, Wei Yan, and John A Chandy. Dram-based intrinsic physically unclonable
functions for system-level security and authentication. IEEE Transactions on Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI)
Systems, 25(3):1085–1097, 2016.
[38] Nima Karimian and Fatemeh Tehranipoor. How to generate robust keys from noisy drams? In Proceedings of the
2019 on Great Lakes Symposium on VLSI, pages 465–469, 2019.
[39] Daniel E Holcomb, Wayne P Burleson, and Kevin Fu. Power-up sram state as an identifying fingerprint and source
of true random numbers. IEEE Transactions on Computers, 58(9):1198–1210, 2008.
[40] Geert-Jan Schrijen and Vincent Van Der Leest. Comparative analysis of sram memories used as puf primitives. In
2012 Design, Automation & Test in Europe Conference & Exhibition (DATE), pages 1319–1324. IEEE, 2012.
[41] Achiranshu Garg and Tony T Kim. Design of sram puf with improved uniformity and reliability utilizing device
aging effect. In 2014 IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and Systems (ISCAS), pages 1941–1944. IEEE,
2014.
[42] Nikolaos Athanasios Anagnostopoulos, Stefan Katzenbeisser, John Chandy, and Fatemeh Tehranipoor. An
overview of dram-based security primitives. Cryptography, 2(2):7, 2018.
[43] Fatemeh Tehranipoor. Design and architecture of hardware-based random function security primitives. 2017.
[44] Sai Kiran Cherupally, Shihui Yin, Deepak Kadetotad, Chisung Bae, Sang Joon Kim, and Jae-sun Seo. A smart
hardware security engine combining entropy sources of ecg, hrv, and sram puf for authentication and secret key
generation. IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits, 55(10):2680–2690, 2020.
[45] Zimu Guo, Nima Karimian, Mark M Tehranipoor, and Domenic Forte. Hardware security meets biometrics for
the age of iot. In 2016 IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and Systems (ISCAS), pages 1318–1321. IEEE,
2016.
[46] Nima Karimian, Zimu Guo, Fatemeh Tehranipoor, Damon Woodard, Mark Tehranipoor, and Domenic Forte.
Secure and reliable biometric access control for resource-constrained systems and iot. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1803.09710, 2018.
[47] Rosario Arjona, Miguel Ángel Prada-Delgado, Javier Arcenegui, and Iluminada Baturone. A puf-and biometricbased lightweight hardware solution to increase security at sensor nodes. Sensors, 18(8):2429, 2018.
[48] Anuraag A Vazirani, Odhran O’Donoghue, David Brindley, and Edward Meinert. Blockchain vehicles for efficient
medical record management. npj Digital Medicine, 3(1):1–5, 2020.

9

