Market-level Analysis of Government-backed
COVID-19 Contact Tracing Apps
Huiyi Wang

Beijing University of Posts and
Telecommunications, China

Liu Wang∗

Beijing University of Posts and
Telecommunications, China

arXiv:2012.10866v1 [cs.SE] 20 Dec 2020

ABSTRACT
To help curb the spread of the COVID-19 pandemic, governments and public health authorities around the world have
launched a number of contact-tracing apps. Although contact tracing apps have received extensive attentions from the
research community, no existing work has characterized the
users’ adoption of contact tracing apps from the app market
level. In this work, we perform the first market-level analysis
of contact tracing apps. We perform a longitudinal empirical
study (over 4 months) of eight government-backed COVID19 contact tracing apps in iOS app store. We first collect all
the daily meta information (e.g., app updates, app rating,
app comments, etc.) of these contact tracing apps from their
launch to 2020-07-31. Then we characterize them from release practice, app popularity, and mobile users’ feedback.
Our study reveals various issues related to contact tracing
apps from the users’ perspective, hoping to help improve
the quality of contact tracing apps and thus achieving a high
level of adoption in the population.
ACM Reference Format:
Huiyi Wang, Liu Wang, and Haoyu Wang. 2020. Market-level Analysis of Government-backed COVID-19 Contact Tracing Apps. In
35th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software
Engineering Workshops (ASEW ’20), September 21–25, 2020, Virtual Event, Australia. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 6 pages. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3417113.3422186

1

INTRODUCTION

The coronavirus pandemic (COVID-19) has quickly became
a world-wide crisis. To help curb the spread of the COVID-19
pandemic, government and public health authorities around
∗ Co-first

author.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not
made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear
this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components
of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with
credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to
redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request
permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ASEW ’20, September 21–25, 2020, Virtual Event, Australia
© 2020 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-8128-4/20/09. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3417113.3422186

Haoyu Wang

Beijing University of Posts and
Telecommunications, China

the world have adopted numerous measures, including lockdowns, social distancing, and contact tracing. In general,
contact tracing is the process of identification of persons who
may have come into contact with an infected person (“contacts”) for identifying and supporting exposed individuals to be
quarantined on time [1]. Past experience suggested that Contact tracing is the key to slowing the spread of contagious
diseases, including COVID-19 [2].
As a result, governments and public health authorities
around the world have launched a number of contact-tracing
mobile apps. By the time of this study, there are at least
50 contact tracing apps in both Google Play and iOS App
Store. For example, TraceTogether was released on March
18, which is the first Bluetooth based COVID-19 contact tracing app released by the Singapore government. After that,
a number of government-backed COVID-19 contact tracing
smartphone apps have been launched, e.g., AarogyaSetu
(India), COVIDSafe (Australia), StopCovid France (France),
Immuni (Italy), Corona Warn App (Germany), etc. Besides,
Apple and Google have collaborated to launch a framework
that includes APIs and system-level supports to assist in enabling contact tracing. Although different techniques (e.g.,
GPS and Bluetooth), architectures (e.g., centralized and decentralized) and protocols are used in these contact tracing
apps, the general ideas are similar, i.e., by recording close proximity interactions between individuals. Ideally, once found a
new infected person, notifications can be sent to persons of
a potential exposure to COVID-19, i.e., all the smartphones
running the same contact tracing app that indicated the close
proximity to the infected person.
Contact tracing apps have attracted extensive attentions
from the research community. A number of papers have
been focused on the privacy and security issues of the contact tracing apps [4, 8], the comparison of centralized and
decentralized solutions [5], new protocols [6], etc.
Mobile user’s adoption is the key to the success of contact
tracing. In short, to achieve accurate contact tracing and
provide timely exposure notice, a high level of adoption in
the population is a must. Although previous studies have
revealed some obstacles (e.g., privacy concern) leading to
the ineffectiveness of contact tracing, no existing work has
systematically characterized the user’s adoption from market level. App markets allow users to leave their ratings

ASEW ’20, September 21–25, 2020, Virtual Event, Australia

and comments after downloading and using each app [10].
These comments can be considered as the direct feedback
from users who have experienced the apps, which can help
developers address the issues. However, to the best of our
knowledge, existing research papers have not studied the
user comments of contact tracing apps in details.
This Paper. In this work, we perform the market-level
analysis of contact tracing apps, in order to understanding
mobile users’ adoption of them. To be specific, we focus on
eight government-backed COVID-19 contact tracing apps in
the iOS App Store. We perform a longitudinal study of these
apps from the perspective of app market, by first collecting all the daily information of these apps (see Section 3.2),
including app updates, app ranking, app rating, and user comments, from the day of their launch to July 31, 2020. We then
characterize them from 1) release practice (see Section 4.1),
including the release time and release frequency, especially
correlating with the trends of the COVID-19 (i.e., infected
people) in the corresponding country; 2) app popularity (see
Section 4.2), i.e., the rankings of these contact tracing apps
across countries, which can reflect users’ adoption to some
extent; and 3) mobile users’ feedback (see Section 4.3), including app ratings and user comments.
Our work revealed that although it shows the promising
beginning of contact tracing apps across the eight countries
we studied, there remain a number of emerging obstacles
leading to the ineffectiveness of contact tracing, including
Bluetooth Conflict, Compatibility Issue, Energy Issue, Privacy
Issue, Accuracy and Usability issues, etc. We hope this paper
can serve as indicators from mobile users to help improve the
quality of contact tracing apps, thus enhancing the adoption
rate and effectiveness of contact tracing.

2

RELATED WORK

A number of studies [4, 5, 8] have analyzed the contact tracing apps, mainly from the perspective of security and privacy.
Li et al. [5] presented a survey study to analyze the user’s
perceptions of the utility of contact tracing apps and the
potential privacy risks due to the collection and releasing of
sensitive user data. Sun et al. [8] analyzed the security and
privacy of 34 contact tracing apps, including potential vulnerabilities, privacy leaks, and the robustness of privacy protection approaches. Besides, new solutions and protocols [6]
are proposed to enhance existing contact tracing techniques.
Beyond these studies, a few studies have performed general
analysis of COVID-19 themed apps and threats. For example,
He et al. [3] is the first to study COVID-19 themed mobile
malware. Xia et al. [11] characterized COVID-19 themed
cryptocurrency scams. Although several research proposed
to study users’ concerns of contact tracing apps [5, 7], none of
existing approaches have systematically analyzed the mobile
users’ feedback in app markets.

Huiyi Wang, Liu Wang, and Haoyu Wang

3 STUDY DESIGN
3.1 Research Questions
Our study is driven by the following research questions:
RQ1 What is the release practice of contact tracing apps? We
seek to study: 1) when are these contact tracing apps
released? Especially when correlating with the trend of
the COVID-19 in corresponding countries; and 2) How
frequently do contact tracing apps update? As contact
tracing is the key to slowing the spread of COVID-19,
we are wondering whether the apps evolve frequently
to address bugs and demanding issues.
RQ2 What is the popularity of contact tracing apps? We want
to study the popularity (i.e., the app ranking and app
downloads) of contact tracing apps, which can reflect
the mobile users’ early adoption of these apps.
RQ3 What are users’ concerns of contact tracing apps? Use
ratings and comments can be considered as the direct
feedback from users who have experienced contact
tracing apps. Thus, we want to study users’ concerns
from their comments.

3.2

Data Collection

As aforementioned, there are dozens of contact tracing apps
in the app market. In this paper, we consider 8 governmentbacked contact tracing apps, as they are the most widely used
COVID-19 apps in the corresponding countries. In this way,
we can gain the overall understanding of the users’ concerns
of contact tracing in the country. For the app market, we
select iOS App Store, one of the most popular app markets.
The basic information of the selected 8 apps is shown in
Table 1. By the time of this study, these eight apps are the only
available government-backed contact tracing apps in iOS app
store. We have collected the daily market-level information
of them, include app ranking (in both its category ranking
and the overall ranking), app updates, app ratings, and all
the app comments, from their launch to 2020-07-31.

4 EMPIRICAL STUDY
4.1 RQ1: Release Practice
4.1.1 Release Time of Contact Tracing Apps. As shown in
Figure 1, TraceTogether is the first contact tracing app
launched by the Singapore government at March 18, 2020.
After that, Stopp Corona was launched by the Austria government at March 27 and AarogyaSetu was released by the
India government at April 2. It is obvious to see that, Singapore and India have released their contact tracing apps
before the break of COVID-19 in their countries, and Austria launches the contact tracing app during the peak of the
COVID-19 infection in the country. While for the remaining
studied countries (Japan, France, Australia, Germany, Italy),

Market-level Analysis of Government-backed COVID-19 Contact Tracing Apps

ASEW ’20, September 21–25, 2020, Virtual Event, Australia

Table 1: The 8 government-backed COVID-19 contact tracing apps studied in this paper.
Country

App Name

Japan
Germany
France
Italy
Australia
India
Austria
Singapore

COCOA
Corona-Warn-App
StopCovid France
Immuni
COVIDSafe
AarogyaSetu
Stopp Corona
TraceTogether

Category

Bundle ID

Medical
jp.go.mhlw.covid19radar
Health& Fitness
de.rki.coronawarnapp
Health & Fitness
fr.gouv.stopcovid.ios
Medical
it.ministerodellasalute.immuni
Health & Fitness
au.gov.health.covidsafe
Health & Fitness
in.nic.arogyaSetu
Medical
at.roteskreuz.stopcorona
Medical
sg.gov.tech.bluetrace

Developer

Launch Time Compatibility

Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare - Japan
Robert Koch-Institut
Gouvernement Francais
Ministero della Salute
Department of Health, Australian Capital Territory
NATIONAL INFORMATICS CENTRE
Osterreichisches Rotes Kreuz
Government Technology Agency

2020-06-18
2020-06-15
2020-06-02
2020-06-01
2020-04-25
2020-04-01
2020-03-27
2020-03-18

COCOA (Japan)

Corona Warn App (Germany)

StopCovid France (France)

Immuni (Italy)

COVIDSafe (Australia)

Stopp Corona (Austria)

AarogyaSetu (India)

TraceTogether (Singapore)

≥ iOS 13.5
≥ iOS 13.5
≥ iOS 11.4
≥ iOS 13.0
≥ iOS 10.0
≥ iOS 10.3
≥ iOS 13.5
≥ iOS 10.0

Figure 1: The Release Time of Contact Tracing Apps across Different Countries. The Y-axis suggests the newly reported infected COVID-19 cases in each country (data from https://covid19.who.int/). The blue columns represent
the launch time/update time of the corresponding contact tracing app.
their government-backed contact tracing apps are only available after the first first wave of the COVID-19 pandemic in
their countries. The release time can reflect that, for most countries, the contact tracing apps have not been timely launched
to help curb the spread of COVID-19 pandemic.

4.1.2 Release Frequency of Contact Tracing Apps. We further
study the release frequency of contact tracing apps. As shown
in Figure 2, most of contact tracing apps update frequently,
i.e., the median time between two releases is less than 10
days in general. From Figure 1 we can further observe that,
during the early stage after the launch of contact tracing
apps, they usually update in a rapid manner (e.g., 2 or 3 days
to update a new version). As a comparison, Wang et al. [9]
found that more than 60% apps did not release new versions
for almost four years during their study. Thus, contact tracing
apps are usually updated frequently in general.

4.2

RQ2: App Popularity

Next, we study app popularity. As we cannot get the number
of app installs from iOS App Store, we refer to the daily app
ranking as the indicator of app popularity. We have studied
two kinds of app rankings: 1) app ranking in its category
and 2) the overall app ranking in iOS app market.
As shown in Figure 3, most of contact tracing apps remain the top-1 in their categories (Medical or Health & Fitness). Among them, five apps (COCOA, Corona-Warn-App,
Immuni, COVIDSafe, and Aarogyasetu) always rank first
since their launch. As to the overall app ranking, most of
the apps can rank top-100 or even top-10 (e.g., COCOA and
Corona-Warn-App) all the time. The only exception is Stopp
Corona in Austria, i.e., its ranking fluctuates greatly. It ranks
beyond 500 for some days. Nevertheless, the app ranking
shows the promising beginning of contact tracing apps.

ASEW ’20, September 21–25, 2020, Virtual Event, Australia

Figure 2: Release Frequency of Contact Tracing Apps.

Huiyi Wang, Liu Wang, and Haoyu Wang

Figure 4: Overall Ranking of Contact Tracing Apps
across Time (from launch to 2020-07-31).

Figure 3: Ranking of Contact Tracing Apps in the Corresponding Categories.

4.3

RQ3: Mobile Users’ Feedback

Then we study mobile users’ feedback of these contact tracing apps, including app ratings and user comments.
4.3.1 App Ratings. As shown in Figure 5, most apps receive
high app ratings, i.e., 5 of them have received ratings higher
than 4. It suggests that most users are positive towards these
contact tracing apps. Corona-Warn-App receives the highest
rating (4.6). TraceTogether has the lowest app rating (3.1).
4.3.2 Taxonomy of User Comments. We further analyze user
comments to understand their concerns. As shown in Table 2,
we have collected 23,257 user comments in total1 . To investigate user concerns, we focus only on the 1-star comments
1 We

collect all the non-empty comments. As some users only rate the app
without comments, the number might be different with that of app rating.

Figure 5: App Ratings of Contact Tracing Apps.
Table 2: The Collected User Comments.
Country

App Name

Japan
COCOA
Germany Corona-Warn-App
France
StopCovid France
Italy
Immuni
Australia
COVIDSafe
India
AarogyaSetu
Austria
Stopp Corona
Singapore
TraceTogether
Overall

#Comments

#1-star Comments (%)

1,950
8,983
850
3,107
3,402
3,691
499
775
23,257

720 (36.9%)
2,259 (25.1%)
319 (37.5%)
940 (30.3%)
1,200 (35.3%)
1,260 (34.1%)
300 (60.1%)
360 (46.5%)
7,358 (31,6%)

(7,358), which are in general mainly user complaints. To make
an accurate classification of these comments, the first two
authors examined 1,000 randomly selected comments and

Market-level Analysis of Government-backed COVID-19 Contact Tracing Apps

summarized the following 9 categories of complaints (including “others” category). Then, based on this taxonomy, the
first two authors manually label the category of each 1-star
comments independently. For the disagreements of category
labelling, a further discussion is performed. Note that there
are multiple languages in the comments, e.g., Japanese for
COCOA, and Italian for Immuni. Thus, we take advantage of
Google Translation to convert all the comments into English
before manually labelling. It takes two people three (3) days
to label all the 7,358 1-star comments. We know this process
might not be scalable. However, our sole purpose is to accurately understand users’ concerns and measure the proportion
of these concerns, while this is the most accurate approach.
We next describe each category and will further measure
their proportion in Section 4.3.3.
1) Bluetooth Conflict. Bluetooth techniques are widely
used as the proximity sensing method to identify close proximity interactions between individuals. However, it may introduce Bluetooth conflict issue. We have identified hundreds of complaints. For example, some users complain that
it breaks Bluetooth connections to Apple Watch (see Comment Example #1). This issue leads to the uninstallaton of
contact tracing apps for many people.
Example #1 Bluetooth Conflict (from COVIDSafe):
“The app is a good idea, but it breaks Bluetooth connections
to other devices, Apple Watch in particular. I had to delete
the app because of this. I had a friend tell me they were
going to take their Apple Watch in for a battery replacement until I asked if they were running COVIDSafe. Once
they deleted the app their problems went away.”
2) Compatibility Issue. To achieve a high level of adoption in the population, the contact tracing app should have
good compatibility, i.e., supporting most devices. However,
we find that the compatibility issue is a serious problem in
contact tracing apps. As summarized in Table 1, many of
them support only high level iOS versions. Three contact
tracing apps require iOS 13.5 or later. Many users complain
about it (see Example # 2). We think it might be a great
obstacle leading to the ineffectiveness of contact tracing.
Example #2 Compatibility Issue (from CoronaWarn-App): “The app cannot be loaded on an iPhone 6
with the current software (12.4.7), there is no more up-todate software. What a pity!”
3) Google/Apple Framework Support. As aforementioned,
Google and Apple have launched a comprehensive Bluetooth
based framework that includes APIs and system-level techniques to enable contact tracing. However, by the time of

ASEW ’20, September 21–25, 2020, Virtual Event, Australia

Figure 6: Distribution of User Complaints across Eight
Contact Tracing Apps.
this study, only four apps (COCOA, Immuni, Stopp Corona
and Corona-Warn-App) have supported such contact tracing framework. Thus, some users complained that contact
tracing apps should support this unified framework, otherwise the app is useless (see Comment Example # 3). Besides,
without using this system-level supported framework, the
energy/battery issue might be serious.
Example #3 Framework (from COVIDSafe): “iOS
13.5 includes a contact tracing API. This app in its current
form is useless, unless it takes advantage of the new API.”
4) Energy Issue. As the contact tracing apps should continuous record the close proximity interactions between individuals, the energy issue is a big problem. It is no doubt that
many users complain it (see Comment Example #4). It might
be annoying to many people that they have to uninstall the
contact tracing app.
Example #4 Energy Issue (from TraceTogether):
“It wasting my iPhone battery life is draining fast when I
turn on Bluetooth and do nothing at all.”
5) Privacy Issue. Privacy remains a obstacle in the contact tracing app. Although many previous work discussed
the privacy issue and proposed various privacy-preserving
approaches, we are unaware users’ concerns. We indeed find
privacy complaints in the apps, however, the proportion is
not high. We will discuss it in the following.
Example #5 Privacy Issue (from AarogyaSetu):
“This app gathers your location 24/7 and even through
Bluetooth. Please note that by signing up on this app you

ASEW ’20, September 21–25, 2020, Virtual Event, Australia

will be giving out your personal information and location
of all times to the developer.”
6) Bug/Crash. Although bug and crash can be observed in
any app, the impact to contact tracing might be more serious.
It directly stops users from using the app. The following is
an example comment from COVIDSafe.
Example #6 Crash (from COVIDSafe): “Have tried
to register twice but it keeps crashing.”
7) Functionality Issue. We further observe a large portion of functionality issues. For example, many users of
COVIDSafe complain that only when the app is running
in the foreground can it work (see Comment Example #7).
Example #7 Functionality Issue (from COVIDSafe): “Endless notifications reminding me to use it - but
none of them mention that the app needs be be running
in the foreground of an unlocked phone to work.”
8) Accuracy/Usability. Many users question the accuracy and usability. As we all know, the effectiveness of the
contact tracing relies on the high percentage adoption of
users. However, although these apps are quite popular in the
app markets, the adoption rate is far less than adequate. Thus,
some users raise such concerns (see Comment Example #8).
Example #8 Accuracy/Usability (from COCOA):
“For more than 6 million downloads, I don’t think I can
confirm contact with three people who are positive.”
9) Others. Besides, a number of comments we cannot
classify them into the above categories. Some of are too short
(e.g., less than 5 words), thus we cannot extract the semantic
information. Some of them are related to the trust or political
concerns, e.g., “Do you trust the Japanese government?”.
4.3.3 Distribution of User Complaints. We further measure
the distribution of different kinds of user complaints, as
shown in Figure 6. It is interesting to see that, the distribution of user concerns varies greatly across apps (countries).
Bug and crash issues are prevalent in StopCovid (54.9%)
and Corona-Warn-App (53.8%), while they only account for
a small proportion in AarogyaSetu (7.5%) and COVIDSafe
(8.3%). Bluetooth Conflict complaints are only found in COVID
Safe (4.8%), TraceTogether (1.1%) and StopCovid (0.6%).
Mobile users of Stopp Corona care most of privacy issues,
with 22% of complaints are related to privacy. Accuracy and
Usability concerns are mostly found in AarogyaSetu (40.6%).

Huiyi Wang, Liu Wang, and Haoyu Wang

Functionality issues are dominant in TraceTogether (55.3%)
and COVIDSafe (67.4%), while they only account for 3.8%
in StopCovid. This result suggests that there are many demanding issues waiting to be addresses in contact tracing apps,
which may lead to the ineffectiveness of contact tracing.

5

CONCLUSION

In this paper, we study the government-backed COVID-19
contact tracing apps from the perspective of app markets.
Our longitudinal study includes app popularity analysis, app
popularity analysis and user feedback characterization. Although these contact tracing apps show early promising
ranking in app market, there are a number of unsolved emerging issues. We believe that our research efforts can positively
contribute to the development of contact tracing apps, and
boost the focus of related topics for the research community.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China (No. 61702045). Haoyu Wang is the
corresponding author (haoyuwang@bupt.edu.cn).

REFERENCES
[1] Contact tracing. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Contact_tracing, 2020.
[2] Contact tracing. https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/dailylife-coping/contact-tracing.html, 2020.
[3] Ren He, Haoyu Wang, Pengcheng Xia, Liu Wang, Yuanchun Li, Lei
Wu, Yajin Zhou, Xiapu Luo, Yao Guo, and Guoai Xu. Beyond the virus:
A first look at coronavirus-themed mobile malware. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2005.14619, 2020.
[4] Stacy Hobson, Michael Hind, Aleksandra Mojsilovic, and Kush R.
Varshney. Trust and transparency in contact tracing applications.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.11356, 2020.
[5] Tianshi Li, Jackie, Yang, Cori Faklaris, Jennifer King, Yuvraj Agarwal,
Laura Dabbish, and Jason I. Hong. Decentralized is not risk-free:
Understanding public perceptions of privacy-utility trade-offs in covid19 contact-tracing apps. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.11957, 2020.
[6] Joseph K. Liu, Man Ho Au, Tsz Hon Yuen, Cong Zuo, Jiawei Wang,
Amin Sakzad, Xiapu Luo, and Li Li. Privacy-preserving covid-19
contact tracing app: A zero-knowledge proof approach. Cryptology
ePrint Archive, Report 2020/528, 2020. https://eprint.iacr.org/2020/528.
[7] Elissa M. Redmiles. User concerns & tradeoffs in technology-facilitated
contact tracing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.13219, 2020.
[8] Ruoxi Sun, Wei Wang, Minhui Xue, Gareth Tyson, Seyit Camtepe, and
Damith Ranasinghe. Vetting security and privacy of global covid-19
contact tracing applications. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.10933, 2020.
[9] Haoyu Wang, Hao Li, and Yao Guo. Understanding the evolution of
mobile app ecosystems: A longitudinal measurement study of google
play. In The World Wide Web Conference, page 1988–1999, 2019.
[10] Haoyu Wang, Zhe Liu, Jingyue Liang, Narseo Vallina-Rodriguez, Yao
Guo, Li Li, Juan Tapiador, Jingcun Cao, and Guoai Xu. Beyond google
play: A large-scale comparative study of chinese android app markets.
In Proceedings of IMC 2018, pages 293–307, 2018.
[11] Pengcheng Xia, Haoyu Wang, Xiapu Luo, Lei Wu, Yajin Zhou, Guangdong Bai, Guoai Xu, Gang Huang, and Xuanzhe Liu. Don’t fish in
troubled waters! characterizing coronavirus-themed cryptocurrency
scams. arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.13639, 2020.

