This paper introduces a general framework to quantify the reliability of the predictions of

arXiv:2012.00443v2 [physics.soc-ph] 15 Jan 2021

a dynamical model in the presence of unmeasurable variables, and presents an application to
COVID-19.

1

Lack of practical identifiability may hamper reliable
predictions in COVID-19 epidemic models
L. Gallo1,2 , M. Frasca3 , V. Latora1,2,4, G. Russo5
1

Department of Physics and Astronomy,

University of Catania, 95125 Catania, Italy
2
INFN Sezione di Catania,
3

Via S. Sofia, 64, 95125 Catania, Italy
Department of Electrical, Electronics and Computer Science Engineering,
University of Catania, 95125 Catania, Italy
4
School of Mathematical Sciences,
Queen Mary University of London, London E1 4NS, UK
5
Department of Mathematics and Computer Science,
University of Catania, 95125 Catania, Italy

Compartmental models are widely adopted to describe and predict the spreading of infectious diseases. The unknown parameters of such models need to be
estimated from the data. Furthermore, when some of the model variables are
not empirically accessible, as in the case of asymptomatic carriers of COVID19, they have to be obtained as an outcome of the model. Here, we introduce
a framework to quantify how the uncertainty in the data impacts the determination of the parameters and the evolution of the unmeasured variables of
a given model. We illustrate how the method is able to characterize different
regimes of identifiability, even in models with few compartments. Finally, we
discuss how the lack of identifiability in a realistic model for COVID-19 may
prevent reliable forecasting of the epidemic dynamics.
2

Introduction
The pandemic caused by SARS-CoV-2 is challenging humanity in an unprecedented way (1),
with the disease that in a few months has spread around the world affecting large parts of the
population (2, 3) and often requiring hospitalization or even intensive care (4, 5). Mitigating
the impact of COVID-19 urges synergistic efforts to understand, predict and control the many,
often elusive, facets of the complex phenomenon of the spreading of a new virus, from RNA
sequencing to the study of the virus pathogenicity and transmissibility (6, 7), to the definition
of suitable epidemic spreading models (8) and the investigation of non-pharmaceutical intervention policies and containment measures (9–12). In particular, a large number of epidemic
models has been recently proposed to describe the evolution of COVID-19 and evaluate the
effectiveness of different counteracting measures, including social distancing, testing and contact tracing (13–18). However, even the adoption of well-consolidated modeling techniques,
such as the use of mechanistic models at the population level based on compartments, poses
fundamental problems. First of all, the very same choice of the dynamical variables to use in
a compartmental model is crucial, as such variables should adequately capture the spreading
mechanisms and need to be tailored to the specific disease. This step is not straightforward,
especially when the spreading mechanisms of the disease are still unknown or only partially
identified. In addition, some of the variables considered might be difficult to measure and track,
as, for instance, it occurs in the case of COVID-19 for the number of individuals showing mild
or no symptoms. Secondly, compartmental models, usually, involve a number of parameters,
including the initial values of the unmeasured variables, which are not known and need to be
estimated from data.
Having at disposal large amount of data, unfortunately, does not simplify the problem of
parameter estimation and prediction of unmeasured states. In fact, once a model is formulated,

3

it may occur that some of its unknown parameters are intrinsically impossible to determine
from the measured variables, or that they are numerically very sensitive to the measurements
themselves. In the first case, it is the very same structure of the model to hamper parameter
estimation, as the system admits infinitely many sets of parameters that fit the data equally well;
for this reason, this problem is referred to as structural identifiability (19, 20). In the second
case, although, under ideal conditions (i.e., noise-free data and error-free models) the problem
of parameter estimation can be uniquely solved, for some trajectories it may be numerically
ill-conditioned, such that, from a practical point of view, the parameters cannot be determined
with precision even if the model is structurally identifiable. This situation typically occurs when
large changes in the parameters entail a small variation of the measured variables, such that
two similar trajectories may correspond to very different parameters (21). The term practical
identifiability is adopted in this case.
Identifiability in general represents an important property of a dynamical system, as in a
non-identifiable system different sets of parameters can produce the same or very similar fits
of the data. Consequently, predictions from a non-identifiable system become unreliable. In
the context of epidemics forecasting, this means that even if the model considered is able to
reproduce the measured variables, a large uncertainty may affect the estimated values of the
parameters and the predicted evolution of the unmeasured variables (22). Although the problem of structural identifiability has been investigated already for a large number of COVID-19
epidemic models (23), the more subtle problem of the practical identifiability of such models
has not been faced yet. Moreover, in the few existing studies on the practical identifiability
of epidemiological models, only the sensitivity of measured variables to the parameters of the
model has been considered, and mainly through numerical simulations (24, 25).
In this paper we investigate the problem of the practical identifiability of dynamical systems
whose state includes not only measurable but also hidden variables, as is the case of compart4

ment models for COVID-19 epidemic. We present a novel and general framework to quantify
not only the sensitivity of the measured variables of a given model on its parameters, but also
the sensitivity of the unmeasured variables on the parameters and on the measured variables.
This will allow us to introduce the notion of practical identifiability of the hidden variables of
a model. As a relevant and timely application we show the variety of different regimes and
levels of identifiability that can appear in epidemic models, even in the simplest case of a four
compartment system. Finally, we study the actual effects of the lack of practical identifiability
in more sophisticated models recently introduced for COVID-19.

Results
Dynamical systems with hidden variables
Consider the n-dimensional dynamical system described by the following equations
ṁ = f(m, h, q),
ḣ = g(m, h, q),

(1)

where we have partitioned the state variables into two sets, the variables m ∈ Rnm that can
be empirically accessed (measurable variables), and those, h ∈ Rnh , with nm + nh = n, that
cannot be measured (hidden). The dynamics of the system is governed by the two Lipschitzcontinuous functions f and g, which also depend on a vector of structural parameters q ∈ Ωq ⊂
Rnq . The trajectories m(t) and h(t) of system (1) are uniquely determined by the structural
parameters q and by the initial conditions m(0) = m0 , h(0) = h0 . Here, we assume that some
of the quantities q are known, while the others are not known and need to be determined by
fitting the trajectories of measurable variables m(t). We denote by p ∈ Ωp ⊂ Rnp the set of
unknown parameters that identify the trajectories, which comprises the unknown terms of q and
the unknown initial conditions h0 . The initial values of the hidden variables are not known, and
act indeed as parameters for the trajectories generated by system (1). The initial conditions of
5

the measurable variables m0 may be considered fitting parameters as well.
System (1) is said to be structurally identifiable when the measured variables satisfy (20)
m(t, p̂) = m(t, p), ∀t ≥ 0 ⇒ p̂ = p

(2)

for almost any p ∈ Ωp . Notice that, as a consequence of the existence and uniqueness theorem
for the initial value problem, if system (1) is structurally identifiable, also the hidden variables
can be uniquely determined.
Structural identifiability guarantees that two different sets of parameters do not lead to the
same time course for the measured variables. Clearly, when this condition is not met, one
cannot uniquely associate a data fit to a specific set of parameters or, equivalently, recover the
parameters from the measured variables (21).

Assessing the practical identifiability of a model
Structural identifiability, however, is a necessary but not sufficient condition for parameters
estimation, so that, when it comes to use a dynamical system as a model of a real phenomenon,
it is fundamental to quantify the practical identifiability of the dynamical system.
To do this, we consider a solution, m̄(t) = m(t, p̄) and h̄(t) = h(t, p̄), obtained from
parameters p = p̄, and we explore how much the functions m(t) and h(t) change as we vary
the parameters p̄ by a small amount δp. To first order approximation in the perturbation of
+ O(kδpk2 ) and δh = ∂h
δp + O(kδpk2 ). Hence,
∂p
R∞
by dropping the higher order terms we have kδmk2 = |δm|2 dt = δpT Mδp and kδhk2 =
the parameters, we have δm =

R∞

∂m
δp
∂p

0

T

|δh|2 dt = δp Hδp, where the entries of the sensitivity matrices M = M(p̄) ∈ Rnp ×np and

0

H = H(p̄) ∈ Rnp ×np for the measured and unmeasured variables are defined as
(M)ij =

Z∞
0

∂mT ∂m
dt;
∂pi ∂pj
6

(H)ij =

Z∞
0

∂hT ∂h
dt
∂pi ∂pj

(3)

Note that these matrices are positive semidefinite by construction. The smallest change in the
measured variables m(t) will take place if δp is aligned along the eigenvector v1 of M correp
sponding to the smallest eigenvalue λ1 (M). Hence, we can consider σ = λ1 (M) to quantify
the sensitivity of the measured variables to the parameters. Practical identifiability requires

high values of σ, as these indicate cases where small changes in the parameters may produce
considerable variations of the measurable variables, and therefore the estimation of the model
parameters from fitting is more reliable.
Suppose now we consider a perturbation, δp1 , of the parameters aligned along the direction
of v1 . We can evaluate the change in h(t) due to this perturbation by
δpT1 Hδp1
η =
.
δpT1 δp1
2

(4)

The value of η quantifies the sensitivity of the hidden variables to the parameters of the model,
when such parameters are estimated from the fitting of the observed variables, since kδhk =
ηkδp1 k. Notice that in this case and differently from σ, lower values of η are desirable because
imply a better prediction on the hidden variables.
Finally, with the help of the sensitivity matrices defined above, we can also evaluate the
sensitivity of the hidden variables to the measured variables as
δpT Hδp
µ = max
.
kδpk=1 δpT Mδp
2

(5)

This parameter is of particular relevance here, since it provides a bound on how the uncertainty on the measured variables affects the evolution of the hidden variables. In addition,
the parameter µ2 can be efficiently computed, as it corresponds to the maximum generalized
eigenvalue of matrices (H, M), as shown in Methods.
The sensitivity matrices are useful in studying the effect of changing the number of hidden
variables and unknown parameters on the practical identifiability of a model. Assume we have
access to one more variable, thus effectively increasing the size of the set of measured variables
7

to n′m = nm +1 and, correspondingly, reducing that of the unmeasured variables to n′h = nh −1.
This corresponds to consider new variables m′ and h′ . From the definition in Eq. (3), the new
′

sensitivity matrix can be written as M = M + M1 , where M1 is the sensitivity matrix for
the newly measured variable. Given Weyl’s inequality ( (26), p. 239) we have that λ1 (M′ ) ≥
λ1 (M) + λ1 (M1 ) and, since M1 is also positive semi-definite, λ1 (M′ ) ≥ λ1 (M). This means
that measuring one further variable (or more than one) of the system increases the practical
identifiability of a model, as expected. As H′ = H − M1 , it is also possible to demonstrate
that µ(M′ ) ≤ µ(M) (see Materials and Methods). Let us now consider a different scenario:
suppose we have a priori knowledge on one of the model parameters, so that we do not need to
estimate its value by fitting the model to the data. In this case, we can define new sensitivity
e H
e ∈ R(np −1)×(np −1) for the measured and unmeasured variables respectively. Given
matrices M,

e ≥ λ1 (M), which implies
the Cauchy’s interlacing theorem ( (26), p. 242), we have that λ1 (M)
that practical identifiability is improved by acquiring a priori information on some of the model

parameters. For instance, in the context of COVID-19 models, one may decide to fix some
of the parameters, such as the rate of recovery, to values derived from medical and biological
knowledge (22, 27–29) and to determine from fitting the more elusive parameters, such as the
percentage of asymptomatic individuals or the rates of transmission.

The sensitivity measures reveal different regimes of identifiability
As a first application we study the practical identifiability of a four compartment mean-field
epidemic model (30), in the class of SIAR models (31), developed to assess the impact of
asymptomatic carriers of COVID-19 (8, 32, 33) and other diseases (34–36). In such a model
(Fig. 1), a susceptible individual (S) can be infected by an infectious individual who can either
be symptomatic (I) or asymptomatic (A). The newly infected individual can either be symptomatic (S → I) or asymptomatic (S → A). Furthermore, we also consider the possibility that

8

Figure 1: Graphical representation of a SIAR model in which infectious individuals can either
be symptomatic (I) or asymptomatic (A) (see also Eq. (21) in Materials and Methods).
asymptomatic individuals develop symptoms (A → I), thus accounting for the cases in which
an individual can infect before and after the onset of the symptoms (37). Finally, we suppose
that individuals cannot be re-infected, as they acquire a permanent immunity (R).
One of the crucial aspects of COVID-19 is the presence of asymptomatic individuals, which
are difficult to trace, as the individuals themselves could be unaware about their state. Consequently, we assume that the fraction of asymptomatic individuals, a(t), is not measurable,
while the fractions of symptomatic, ι(t), and recovered, r(t), are measured variables, that is
m ≡ [ι, r] and h ≡ [s, a]. As mentioned above, practical identifiability is a property of the trajectories of the system, which are uniquely determined by the values of the unknown parameters
p. Here, we illustrate how the sensitivity of both measured and unmeasured variables change
with the probability γ that a newly infected individual shows no symptoms, when all the other
parameters of the model are fixed (to the values reported in Materials and Methods).
9

Figure 2: Practical identifiability of the SIAR model in Fig. 1 as a function of the fraction γ
of asymptomatic new infectious individuals. (a) Sensitivity σ and η of measured and hidden
variables respectively to the parameters of the model. (b) Sensitivity µ of the hidden variables
to the measured ones. (c) State variables for unperturbed values of parameters (with γ = 0.86,
solid line) and for a perturbation with kδpk = 0.3kpk along the first eigenvector of M (dashed
lines).
Fig. 2(a) shows a non-trivial non-monotonic dependence of our sensitivity measures, σ and
η, on γ. The value of σ has a peak at γ = 0.51, in correspondence of which η takes its minimum
value. This represents an optimal condition for practical identifiability, as the sensitivity to
parameters of the measured variables is high, while that of the unmeasured ones is low, and this
implies that the unknown quantities of the system (both the model parameters and the hidden
variables) can be estimated with small uncertainty. On the contrary, for γ = 0.86, we observe
a relatively small value of σ and a large value of η, meaning that the measured variables are
poorly identifiable, and the unmeasured variables are sensitive to a variation of parameters. This
is the worst situation in which the estimated parameters may significantly differ from the real
10

values and the hidden variables may experience large variations even for small changes in the
parameters. Furthermore, the quantity µ, which measures the sensitivity of the hidden variables
to the measured ones, reported in Fig. 2(b), exhibits a large peak at the value of γ for which σ
is minimal. This is due to the fact that the vector that determines µ is almost aligned with v1 .
When this holds, we have that µ = η/σ, which explains the presence of the spike in the µ curve.
Similarly, the sensitivity µ takes its minimum almost in correspondence of the maximum of σ.
The behavior of the model for γ = 0.86 is further illustrated in Fig. 2(c), where the trajectories
obtained in correspondence to the unperturbed values of the parameters, i.e., m(t, p) and h(t, p)
(solid lines), are compared with the dynamics observed when p undergoes a perturbation with
kδpk = 0.3kpk along v1 (dashed lines). The small sensitivity σ of the measured variables
ι(t, p) and r(t, p) to parameters, is reflected into perturbed trajectories that remain close to the
unperturbed ones, whereas the large sensitivity η of the unmeasured variables s(t, p) and a(t, p)
yields perturbed trajectories that significantly deviate from the unperturbed ones.
We now illustrate the different levels of identifiability that appears in the SIAR model for
diverse settings of the parameters. Its analysis, in fact, fully depicts the more complete perspective on the problem of practical identifiability offered by simultaneously inspecting the
sensitivity measures, σ and η. As the two sensitivity measures are not necessarily correlated,
there can be cases for which to a high identifiability of the measured variables to the parameters,
i.e. large values of σ, corresponds either a low or a high identifiability of the hidden variables
to the parameters. Analogously, for other system configurations, in correspondence of small
values of σ, namely to non-identifiable parameters, one may find large values of η, meaning
that the hidden variables are non-identifiable as well, or, on the contrary small values of η, indicating that the hidden variables are poorly sensitive to parameter perturbations. Altogether,
four distinct scenarios of identifiability can occur and all of them effectively appear in the SIAR
model: (a) low identifiability of the model parameters p and high identifiability of the hidden
11

Figure 3: Four scenarios of identifiability for the SIAR model of Fig. 1. All panels show the
system dynamics (solid line) and the evolution of the system when the vector of parameters
undergoes a variation δp such that kδpk = 0.3kpk along the first eigenvector of M (dashed
lines). Panels (a) and (c) display configurations for which the observed variables (ι, r) are not
sensitive to the variation, i.e. the model parameters are not identifiable, while panels (b) and
(d) show the opposite case. Furthermore, panels (a) and (b) present scenarios for which the
unobserved variables (s, a) are insensitive to the variation, meaning that their are predictable,
vice-versa panels (c) and (d) show the the case in which the variables s and a are sensitive.
variables h, (b) high identifiability of both p and h, (c) low identifiability of both p and h and
(d) high identifiability of p and low identifiability of h. To illustrate them, we have considered
four distinct configurations of the model (with parameters as given in Table 3, illustrated in
Methods) and, for each case study, compared the unperturbed trajectories to the perturbed ones,
with the vector of parameters undergoing a variation kδpk = ±0.3kpk, along v1 . Fig. 3 shows
the results obtained for each parameter configuration. In each panel, the solid lines represent
the unperturbed trajectories, while the dashed lines correspond to the perturbed dynamics. In

12

case (a) and (b), we see that, under the variation δp, the perturbed trajectories of the hidden
variables remain close to the unperturbed dynamics. Hence, the hidden variables are highly
identifiable. Conversely, in case (c) and (d), the perturbed trajectories substantially differ from
the unperturbed dynamics, meaning that the hidden variables are poorly identifiable, as they are
sensitive to a variation of the model parameters. As concerns the measured variables, in cases
(a) and (c) the perturbed trajectories slightly differ from the unperturbed dynamics. Therefore,
as the measured variables are insensitive to the perturbation δp, the model parameters have a
low degree of identifiability. On the other hand, in case (b) and (d), the perturbation of the
parameters significantly affects the trajectories of the measured variables, meaning that the set
of parameters reproducing the observed data is more identifiable.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
σ 0.0096 0.15 0.013 0.091
η 0.012 0.16 0.36
1.4
µ
34
5.2
29
15
Table 1: Values of σ, η and µ for the four configurations of the SIAR model shown in Fig. 3.
Finally, Table 1 illustrates the values of the sensitivity measures σ, η and µ for each case. In
particular, case (c) represents the worst scenario, as the value of σ is relatively small, meaning
that the model parameters p are poorly identifiable, and the value of η is large, indicating a
high sensitivity of the hidden variables to the parameters. Conversely, the best scenario is
represented by case (b), for which both the model parameters and the hidden variables are
highly identifiable, as the value of σ is large compared to the other cases while the value of η
remains relatively small.

Lack of identifiability in COVID-19 modeling prevents reliable forecasting
As a second application we show the relevance of the problem of practical identifiability in the
context of COVID-19 pandemic modeling. We consider a realistic model (Fig. 4) of the disease
13

Figure 4: Graphical representation of a nine-compartment model for the propagation of COVID19 (see also Eq. (22) in Materials and Methods).
propagation, that is a variant of the SIDARTHE model (16) and is characterized by nine compartments accounting respectively for susceptible (S), exposed (E), undetected asymptomatic
(IA ), undetected symptomatic (IS ), home isolated (H), treated in hospital (T ), undetected recovered (Ru ), detected recovered (Rd ) and deceased (D) individuals. Following (16), in order to
account for the different non-pharmaceutical interventions and testing strategies issued during
the COVID-19 outbreak in Italy (38,39), the model parameters have been considered piece-wise
constant, and estimated, using nonlinear optimization, by fitting of the official data provided by
the Civil Protection Department (40). The available data, namely the daily number of home
isolated, hospitalized, detected recovered and deceased individuals, are shown as coloured circles in Fig. 5. Accordingly, we have considered four measured and five hidden variables in the
model: m ≡ [H, T, Rd , D] and h ≡ [S, E, IA , IS , Ru ]. The two panels (a) and (b) of Fig. 5
display the prediction of the model for two sets of the parameters, which have been obtained by
14

10 5

2

(a)

1.5

E
IA

H
T

IS

Rd

D

1
0.5
0
2

10 5
(b)

1.5
1
0.5
0
03/04

03/24

04/13

05/03
date

05/23

06/12

07/02

Figure 5: Modelling the COVID-19 outbreak in Italy. The evolution of both hidden and measured variables of the model in Fig. 4 (continuous lines) is reported together with the official
data from the Civil Protection Department (circles). (a) and (b) refer to two different sets of
parameters p of the model, which fit equally well the available data.
allowing different ranges of parameter values for the fitting (see Materials and Methods). Although the model fits equally well the empirical data on the observed variables in the two cases,
fundamental differences in the trend of the hidden variables appear. In particular, in case (a) the
model predicts a number of asymptomatic individuals, IA , which is practically zero throughout
the entire outbreak, indicating that all the infectious individuals are symptomatic. Instead, a
significant population of asymptomatic individuals (25343 in its peak at day 26) is observed in
case (b) and, correspondingly, the size of the symptomatic population is consistently smaller
than in case (a).
The two scenarios also lead to remarkable discrepancies in the values of the parameters
obtained through fitting. Let us consider, for instance, the rates αEIA and αEIS , providing
15

information on the percentage of infected individuals not developing symptoms. In scenario
(a) αEIA = 1/18.5 days−1 and αEIS = 1/2.5 days−1 , such that 12% of the newly infected
individuals are asymptomatic, while in scenario (b) αEIA = 1/7 days−1 and αEIS = 1/6
days−1 , which signifies that only 45% of the individuals do not develop symptoms after the
latency period.
These findings have relevant implications. In fact, the large uncertainty on the size of the
asymptomatic population makes questionable the use of the model as a tool to decide the policies to adopt, as it is equally consistent with two scenarios corresponding to two extremely
different dynamics of the epidemic.

Discussion
The practical identifiability of a dynamical model is a critical, but often neglected, issue in determining the reliability of its predictions. In this paper we have introduced a novel framework
to quantify: 1) the sensitivity of the dynamical variables of a given model to its parameters,
even in the presence of variables that are difficult to access empirically; 2) how changes in the
measured variables impact the evolution of the unmeasured ones. The set of easily computable
measures we have introduced enable to assess, for instance, if and when the model predictions
on the unmeasured variables are reliable or not, even when the parameters of the model can be
fitted with high accuracy from the available data. As we have shown with a series of case studies, practical identifiability can critically affect the predictions of even very refined epidemic
models recently introduced for the description of COVID-19, where dynamical variables, such
as the population of asymptomatic individuals, are impossible or difficult to measure. This, by
no means, should question the importance of such models, in that they enable a scenario analysis, otherwise impossible to carry out, and a deeper understanding of the spreading mechanisms
of a novel disease, but should hallmark the relevance of a critical analysis of the results that
16

takes into account sensitivity measures. It also highlights the importance of cross-disciplinary
efforts that can provide a priori information on some of the parameters, ultimately improving
the reliability of a model (8, 22).

Materials and Methods
The sensitivity matrices and their properties
The sensitivity matrices considered in this paper are given by
Mij =

Z∞
0

∂mT ∂m
dt;
∂pi ∂pj

Hij =

Z∞
0

∂hT ∂h
dt,
∂pi ∂pj

(6)

where the vector functions m = m(t; p) and h = h(t; p) are obtained integrating system (1).
The derivative of measurable and hidden variables with respect to the parameters p,
mi ≡ ∂m/∂pi ,

hi ≡ ∂h/∂pi

can be obtained by integrating the system
∂f
∂f
∂f
dmi
=
· mi +
· hi +
,
dt
∂m
∂h
∂pi
dhi
dt

∂g
∂g
∂g
=
· mi +
· hi +
,
∂m
∂h
∂pi

(7)

where i = 1, . . . np .
The numerical evaluation of the sensitivity matrices is carried out, first integrating system
(7) (for this step we use a fourth-order Runge-Kutta solver with adaptive step size control),
resampling the trajectories with a sampling period of 1 day, and, then, performing a discrete
summation over the sampled trajectories. Moreover, integration is carried out over a finite time
interval [0, τ ], with large enough τ . In the context of our work, as we have considered SIR-like
epidemic models, we set the value of τ such that the system has reached a stationary state,

17

i.e. the epidemic outbreak has ended, as every infected individual has eventually recovered (or
dead, depending on the model).
We now present an important property of the sensitivity matrices. We will only take into
account the set of measured variables m, as similar considerations can be made for the hidden
variables. Let us assume to be able to measure only a single variable, so that the vector m collapses into a scalar function, that we call m1 (t). In this case, the element Mij of the sensitivity
matrix would be simply given by
(M)ij =

Z∞
0

∂m1 ∂m1
dt.
∂pi ∂pj

(8)

Let us call this sensitivity matrix M1 .
Consider now a larger set of measured variables m = (m1 , m2 , . . . , mnm ). The quantity
∂mT /∂pi ∂m/∂pj in Eq. (6) is given by
∂m1 ∂m1 ∂m2 ∂m2
∂mnm ∂mnm
∂mT ∂m
=
+
+···+
.
∂pi ∂pj
∂pi ∂pj
∂pi ∂pj
∂pi ∂pj

(9)

Therefore, integrating over time in the interval [0, ∞) and given the linearity property of the
integrals, we find that the sensitivity matrix M of the set of the measured variables is given by
the sum of the sensitivity matrices of the single measured variables. Formally we have that
M = M1 + M2 + · · · + Mnm .

(10)

This property of the sensitivity matrices is useful to demonstrate how measuring a further variable affects the sensitivity measures σ and µ as discussed in the following subsection and in the
Results.
Finally, because matrices M and H are positive semidefinite, their eigenvalues are nonnegative. For any positive semidefinite matrix A of order m, we shall denote its eigenvalues as
0 ≤ λ1 (A) ≤ λ2 (A) ≤ · · · ≤ λm (A).
18

Sensitivity measures and their properties
Here, we discuss in more detail the sensitivity measures introduced in the Results. First, we
want to propose a measure to quantify the practical identifiability of the model parameters
given the measured variables. To do this, we need to evaluate the sensitivity of the trajectories
of the measured variables to a variation of the model parameters. In fact, if this sensitivity is
small, then different sets of parameters will produce very similar trajectories of the measured
variables, meaning that the parameters themselves are poorly identifiable. In particular, as a
measure of the parameters identifiability, we can consider the worst scenario, namely the case
in which the perturbation of the parameters minimizes the change in the measured variables.
This happens when the variation of the model parameters δp is aligned along the eigenvector
v1 of M corresponding to the minimum eigenvalue λ1 (M). Given the definition of M we have
p
that kδmk = λ1 (M) kδpk, hence we can consider the quantity
σ=

p
λ1 (M)

(11)

as an estimate of the sensitivity of the measured variables to the parameters. Note that, here
and in the rest of the paper, kvk denotes the Euclidean norm of a finite dimensional vector v,
kvk2 = v · v, while for a function u(t), kuk denotes the L2 norm of u in [0, ∞], i.e. kuk2 =
R∞
u · u dt.
0
Let us now focus on the hidden variables h. In general, as the hidden variables are not

directly associated to empirical data, the largest uncertainty on the hidden variables is obtained
in correspondence of a variation of the parameters along the eigenvector of H associated to the
largest eigenvalue, namely λnp (H). Hence, to quantify the sensitivity of the hidden variables to
the parameters, one may consider
ηM AX =

q

19

λnp (H).

(12)

However, it is crucial to note that the hidden variables ultimately depend on the parameters of
the model, which are estimated by fitting data that are available for the measured variables only.
As a consequence, it is reasonable to consider a quantity that evaluates how the uncertainty on
the model parameters (determined by the uncertainty of the measured variables and by their
sensitivity to the parameters) affects the identifiability of the hidden variables. Therefore, as a
measure of the sensitivity of the hidden variables to the parameters we consider
δpT1 Hδp1
,
η =
δpT1 δp1
2

(13)

where δp1 is a perturbation of the parameters along the eigenvector v1 of M corresponding to
the minimum eigenvalue λ1 (M). Note that, when v1 and the eigenvector of H corresponding to
the largest eigenvalue λnp (H) are aligned, by definition we have η = ηM AX .
Finally, we want to define a quantity to estimate how much the hidden variables are perturbed given a variation of the measured ones. In particular, as a measure of the sensitivity of
the hidden variables to the measured variables, we consider the maximum perturbation of the
hidden variables given the minimum variation of the measured ones, which is
δpT Hδp
.
kδpk=1 δpT Mδp

µ2 = max

(14)

Note that µ2 can be computed considering the following generalized eigenvalue problem
Huk = λk Muk ,

(15)

where H and M are the sensitivity matrices for the hidden and the observed variables respectively, and λk = λk (M, H) denotes the k-th generalized eigenvalue of matrices M and H. We
will denote by λnp the largest generalized eigenvalue, and u the corresponding generalized
eigenvector. Note that, since both matrices are symmetric, if u is a right eigenvector then uT is
a left eigenvector. Multiplying each member of the equation by uT and dividing by uT Mu, we
20

obtain
λn p =

vT Hv
uT Hu
=
max
,
uT Mu kvk=1 vT Mv

(16)

where one can recognize the definition of µ2 provided in Eq. (14). In other words, µ2 represents
the largest eigenvalue of the matrix M−1 H.
It is worth noting two aspects about the sensitivity measure µ. First, given definitions (11)
2
T
2
and (12), for any δp with kδpk = 1, we have that δpT Hδp ≤ ηM
AX and δp Mδp ≥ σ . As a

consequence, we have that
µ2 ≤

2
ηM
AX
.
σ2

(17)

Second, when the vector δp that determines µ is aligned with the eigenvector v1 of M, it is
possible to express µ in terms of the sensitivity measures σ and η. Indeed, when δp = kδpkv1 =
v1 , recalling definitions (11) and (13), one obtains v1T Mv1 = σ 2 , while v1T Hv1 = η 2 , from
which it follows
µ=

η
.
σ

(18)

Also, we note that if v1 and the eigenvector of H corresponding to its largest eigenvalue are
aligned, one obtains that µ = ηM AX /σ, which is the maximum value for the sensitivity measure
µ.
We now demonstrate that the sensitivity of the hidden variables to the measured ones, µ2 ,
decreases as we measure one further variable. Let us assume now we are able to measure one
further variable, thus increasing the size of the set of measured variables to n′m = nm + 1 and,
correspondingly, reducing that of the unmeasured variables to n′h = nh − 1. Given the property
in Eq. (10), the new sensitivity matrices can be written as M′ = M+M1 and H′ = H−M1 , where
by M1 we denote the sensitivity matrix for the newly measured variable. The new generalized
eigenvalue problem is
H′ u′ = λ′ M′ u′ ⇔ (H − M1 )u′ = λ′ (M + M1 )u′ ,
21

(19)

where, for simplicity, we have denoted by λ′ the largest generalized eigenvalue of matrices M′
and H′
Left multiplying by u′T and dividing by u′T Mu′ , we obtain
λn p

u′T Hu′
u′T H′ u′ + u′T M1 u′
u′T H′ u′
uT Hu
≥
=
≥
= λ′ ,
= T
′T
′
′T
′
′T
′
′T
′
′
u Mu
u Mu
u Mu − u M1 u
u Mu

(20)

where the first inequality comes from the definition of λnp , while the second comes from the fact
that H, M, H′ , M′ and M1 are positive semidefinite. In short, we find that λnp ≥ λ′ , meaning
that, by measuring one variable, the sensitivity of the hidden variables to the measured ones
decreases.

SIAR model and setup for numerical analysis
The SIAR model of Fig. 1 is described by the following equations


ṡ = −s(βI ι + βA a)

ι̇ = (1 − γ)a(β ι + β a) + α a − α ι
I
A
AI
IR

ȧ = γa(βI ι + βA a) − (αAI + αAR )a



ṙ = αIR ι + αAR a,

(21)

where s(t), ι(t), a(t), and r(t) represent population densities, i.e., s(t) = S(t)/N, ι(t) =
I(t)/N, a(t) = A(t)/N, and r(t) = R(t)/N, where S(t), I(t), A(t), and R(t) represent the
number of susceptible, infectious, asymptomatic and recovered individuals and N is the size
of the population, so that s(t) + ι(t) + a(t) + r(t) = 1. Here, βI and βA are the transmission
rates for the symptomatic and the asymptomatic individuals respectively, γ is the probability
for newly infected individuals to show no symptoms, αAI is the rate at which asymptomatic
individuals become symptomatic, and αIR and αAR are the recovery rates for the two infectious
populations.
Asymptomatic individuals are difficult to trace, as the individuals themselves could be unaware about their state. As a consequence, we assume that the density of asymptomatic in22

dividuals is not measurable, while the densities of symptomatic and recovered individuals are
measured variables. According to the notation introduced in Eq. (1), we therefore have that
m ≡ [ι, r] and h ≡ [s, a]. Note that, as a first approximation, here we assume to be able to trace
the asymptomatic individuals once they recover.
The results presented in Fig. 2 have been obtained considering the following setup. As the
number of symptomatic infectious and recovered individuals are considered measurable, we
have assumed that the initial conditions ι(0), r(0) and the rate of recovery αI,R are known parameters. Second, we have supposed to be able to measure, for instance through backward contact tracing, the rate at which asymptomatic individuals develop symptoms, i.e., αAI . Hence, the
vector of parameters to determine by calibrating the model is given by p = [a(0), βI , βA , γ, αAR ].
Table 2 displays the value of the model parameters used to obtain the results shown in Fig. 2.
a0 r0
ι0
0.05 0.1 0

βI
0.6

βA
0.3

αIR
0.1

αAR
0.2

αAI
0.03

Table 2: Values of the model parameters used for the case study in Fig. 2.
For the analysis of the four scenarios considered in Fig. 3, the values of the model parameters
have been set as given in Table 3. Furthermore, to better contrast the results arising in the different case studies, in (a) and (c) we have considered p = [ι(0), a(0), r(0), βI , βA , γ, αIR , αAR , αAI ],
while in (b) and (d) we have set p = [a(0), βI , βA , γ, αAR ].

(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)

ι0
0.1
0.05
0.1
0.1

a0
r0
0.2 0.05
0.1
0
0.2 0.05
0.2 0.05

βI
0.3
0.6
0.6
0.3

βA
0.4
0.3
0.8
0.4

γ
0.26
0.51
0.77
0.53

αIR
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1

αAR
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2

αAI
0.03
0.03
0.1
0.03

Table 3: Values of the model parameters used for the case study in Fig. 3

23

Nine compartment model for COVID-19
The nine compartment model of Fig. 4 can be considered as a variant of the SIDARTHE
model (16). It is characterized by the presence of an incubation state, in which the individuals have been exposed to the virus (E) but are not yet infectious, and by infectious individuals,
that, in addition to being symptomatic or asymptomatic, can be either detected or undetected.
The model, therefore, includes four classes of infectious individuals: undetected asymptomatic
(IA ), undetected symptomatic and pauci-symptomatic (IS ), home isolated (H, corresponding
to detected asymptomatic and pauci-symptomatic), and treated in hospital (T , corresponding to
detected symptomatic). Finally, removed individuals can be undetected (Ru ), detected (Rd ) or
deceased (D).
The model dynamics is described by the following equations

Ṡ = −S(βIA IA + βIS IS + βH H + βT T )/N





Ė =
S(βIA IA + βIS IS + βH H + βT T )/N




−(αEIA + αEIS )E



˙

IA = αEIA E − (αIA IS + αIA Ru )IA − χIA




 I˙S = αEIS E + αIA IS IA
−(αIS H + αIS T + αIS Ru + αIS D )IS


Ḣ = αIS H IS + χIA − (αHT + αHRd )H





Ṫ = αIS T IS + αHT H − (αT,Rd + αT D )T




Ṙu = αIA Ru IA + αIS Ru IS




Ṙd = αHRd H + αT Rd T



Ḋ = αIS D IS + αT D T,

(22)

where the state variables represent the number of individuals in each compartment, N = 60·106
and S +E +IA +IS +H +T +Ru +Rd +D = N. The official data on the spreading of COVID19 in Italy made available by the Civil Protection Department (Dipartimento della Protezione
Civile, (40)) provide information only on four of the nine compartments of the model, namely
the home isolated (H), hospitalized (T ), detected recovered (Rd ) and deceased individuals (D).
These compartments constitute the set of the measured variables, while the other variables have
to be considered as hidden, that is m ≡ [H, T, Rd , D] and h ≡ [S, E, IA , IS , Ru ].
24

All the parameters appearing in (22) are considered unknown, thus they need to be determined through fitting the model to the available data. It should also be noted that, as many nonpharmaceutical interventions have been issued/lifted and the testing strategy has been changed
several times over the course of the epidemics (38, 39), not all parameters can be considered
constant in the whole period used for the fitting. Hence, similarly to (16), we have divided
the whole period of investigation (which in our case ranges from February 24 to July 6, 2020)
into different windows, within each of which the parameters are assumed to be constant. In
each time window, one allows only some parameters to vary, according to what is reasonable to
assume will be influenced by the government intervention during that time window.
We distinguish two kinds of events that may require an adaptation of the model parameters.
On the one hand, there are the non-pharmaceutical containment policies, aimed at reducing
the disease transmission. When such interventions are issued, the value of the parameters β
may vary. On the other hand, the testing strategy, which affects the probability of detecting
infected individuals, was also not uniform in the investigated period. When the testing policy
changes, the value of the parameters αIS H , αHT and αHRd may vary. Here, we notice two
important points. First, the value of αIS T is assumed to be constant in the whole period, as we
suppose that there are no changes in how the symptomatic individuals requiring hospitalization
are detected. Second, as a change in the sole parameter αIS H would affect too much the average
time an individual remains infected, then also αHT and αHRd have to be included in the set
of parameters that may change. Based on these considerations, the intervals in which each
parameter remains constant or may change are identified. This defines the specific piece-wise
waveform assumed for each of the parameters appearing in the model and, consequently, the
effective number of values that need to be estimated for each parameter.
Hereafter, we summarize the events defining the different windows in which the whole
period of investigation is partitioned:
25

1. On March 2, a policy limiting screening only to symptomatic individuals is introduced.
2. On March 12, a partial lockdown is issued.
3. On March 18, a stricter lockdown, which further limits non-essential activities, is imposed.
4. On March 28, a wider testing campaign is launched. Starting from this date, as the number
of tests has constantly increased, while the number of new infections was decreasing, the
parameters are allowed to change every 14 or 28 days, namely on April 11, April 25 and
May 23.
5. On May 4, a partial lockdown lift is proclaimed.
6. On May 18, further restrictions are relaxed.
7. On June 3, inter-regional mobility is allowed. This is the last time the model parameters
are changed.
Note that, for the time period until April 5, we have followed the same time partition used
in (16).
The model parameters have been estimated using a nonlinear optimization procedure (implemented via the function fmincon in MATLAB) with the following objective function to
minimize
v
u
τ
u1 X

t
(H(k) − H̄(k))2 + (T (k) − T̄ (k))2 + (Rd (k) − R̄d (k))2 + (D(k) − D̄(k))2
e=
4τ k=1

(23)

where H̄(k), T̄ (k), R̄d (k), and D̄(k) with k = 1, . . . , τ (τ = 134 days) represent the time series
of daily data for isolated, hospitalized, detected recovered and deceased individuals provided
26

by the Civil Protection Department (40), and H(k), T (k), R̄d (k), and D̄(k) are the values of the
corresponding variables obtained from the integration of Eqs. (22). The integration of Eqs. (22)
has been carried out by using a suitable ODE solver with maximum integration step size equal
to 10−2 days and then resampling the data with a sampling period of 1 day.
Fig. 3 displays two distinct fits of model (22). Here, we provide further details on how they
have been obtained. In case b), upper and lower bounds on the parameters αEIA and αEIS have
been incorporated in the parameter estimation procedure, thus constraining the percentage of
asymptomatic individuals pA = αEIA /(αEIA + αEIS ), while in case (a) no constraint has been
considered. In more detail, in case (b), we fixed 30% ≤ pA ≤ 50% (29) and also imposed
αEIS /2 ≤ αEIA ≤ αEIS . In both cases the model fits well the empirical data on the observed
variables [the fitting error (23) is e = 898 individuals in case (a) and e = 938 individuals in
case (b)], but fundamental differences in the trend of the hidden variables appear. In particular,
in scenario (a), which does not include constraints on the percentage of asymptomatic individuals, the compartment IA is approximately zero throughout the entire epidemics, indicating that
all the undetected infectious individuals are symptomatic. Vice-versa, in scenario (b) a number of undetected asymptomatic individuals appears, and, correspondingly, the population of
undetected symptomatic individuals is consistently smaller than in case (a).

References
1. R. M. Anderson, H. Heesterbeek, D. Klinkenberg, T. D. Hollingsworth, How will countrybased mitigation measures influence the course of the covid-19 epidemic? The Lancet 395,
931–934 (2020).
2. World Health Organization (WHO), Coronavirus disease (covid-19): weekly epidemiologi-

cal update, https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novel-coronavirus-2019/

27

(2020). Accessed: 2020-10-15.
3. E. Dong, H. Du, L. Gardner, An interactive web-based dashboard to track covid-19 in real
time. The Lancet infectious diseases 20, 533–534 (2020).
4. C. Huang, Y. Wang, X. Li, L. Ren, J. Zhao, Y. Hu, L. Zhang, G. Fan, J. Xu, X. Gu, et al.,
Clinical features of patients infected with 2019 novel coronavirus in wuhan, china. The
lancet 395, 497–506 (2020).
5. N. Chen, M. Zhou, X. Dong, J. Qu, F. Gong, Y. Han, Y. Qiu, J. Wang, Y. Liu, Y. Wei,
et al., Epidemiological and clinical characteristics of 99 cases of 2019 novel coronavirus
pneumonia in wuhan, china: a descriptive study. The Lancet 395, 507–513 (2020).
6. W. J. Wiersinga, A. Rhodes, A. C. Cheng, S. J. Peacock, H. C. Prescott, Pathophysiology,
transmission, diagnosis, and treatment of coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19): a review.
Jama 324, 782–793 (2020).
7. L.-s. Wang, Y.-r. Wang, D.-w. Ye, Q.-q. Liu, A review of the 2019 novel coronavirus (covid19) based on current evidence. International journal of antimicrobial agents p. 105948
(2020).
8. E. Estrada, Covid-19 and sars-cov-2. modeling the present, looking at the future. Physics
Reports (2020).
9. M. Chinazzi, J. T. Davis, M. Ajelli, C. Gioannini, M. Litvinova, S. Merler, A. P. y Piontti,
K. Mu, L. Rossi, K. Sun, et al., The effect of travel restrictions on the spread of the 2019
novel coronavirus (covid-19) outbreak. Science 368, 395–400 (2020).

28

10. K. Leung, J. T. Wu, D. Liu, G. M. Leung, First-wave covid-19 transmissibility and severity in china outside hubei after control measures, and second-wave scenario planning: a
modelling impact assessment. The Lancet (2020).
11. P. Castorina, A. Iorio, D. Lanteri, Data analysis on coronavirus spreading by macroscopic
growth laws. International Journal of Modern Physics C p. 2050103 (2020).
12. D. Lanteri, D. Carcò, P. Castorina, M. Ceccarelli, B. Cacopardo, Containment effort reduction and regrowth patterns of the covid-19 spreading. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.14701
(2020).
13. D. Fanelli, F. Piazza, Analysis and forecast of covid-19 spreading in china, italy and france.
Chaos, Solitons & Fractals 134, 109761 (2020).
14. A. Arenas, W. Cota, J. Gomez-Gardenes, S. Gómez, C. Granell, J. T. Matamalas,
D. Soriano-Panos, B. Steinegger, A mathematical model for the spatiotemporal epidemic
spreading of covid19. MedRxiv (2020).
15. A. J. Kucharski, T. W. Russell, C. Diamond, Y. Liu, J. Edmunds, S. Funk, R. M. Eggo,
F. Sun, M. Jit, J. D. Munday, et al., Early dynamics of transmission and control of covid19: a mathematical modelling study. The lancet infectious diseases (2020).
16. G. Giordano, F. Blanchini, R. Bruno, P. Colaneri, A. Di Filippo, A. Di Matteo, M. Colaneri,
Modelling the covid-19 epidemic and implementation of population-wide interventions in
italy. Nature Medicine pp. 1–6 (2020).
17. A. Aleta, D. Martı́n-Corral, A. P. y Piontti, M. Ajelli, M. Litvinova, M. Chinazzi, N. E.
Dean, M. E. Halloran, I. M. Longini Jr, S. Merler, et al., Modelling the impact of testing,
contact tracing and household quarantine on second waves of covid-19. Nature Human
Behaviour 4, 964–971 (2020).
29

18. F. Della Rossa, D. Salzano, A. Di Meglio, F. De Lellis, M. Coraggio, C. Calabrese, A. Guarino, R. Cardona-Rivera, P. De Lellis, D. Liuzza, et al., A network model of italy shows that
intermittent regional strategies can alleviate the covid-19 epidemic. Nature Communications 11, 1–9 (2020).
19. T. Heinemann, A. Raue, Model calibration and uncertainty analysis in signaling networks.
Current opinion in biotechnology 39, 143–149 (2016).
20. A. F. Villaverde, A. Barreiro, A. Papachristodoulou, Structural identifiability of dynamic
systems biology models. PLoS computational biology 12, e1005153 (2016).
21. T. Quaiser, M. Mönnigmann, Systematic identifiability testing for unambiguous mechanistic modeling–application to jak-stat, map kinase, and nf-κ b signaling pathway models.
BMC systems biology 3, 50 (2009).
22. W. C. Roda, M. B. Varughese, D. Han, M. Y. Li, Why is it difficult to accurately predict the
covid-19 epidemic? Infectious Disease Modelling (2020).
23. G. Massonis, J. R. Banga, A. F. Villaverde, Structural identifiability and observability of
compartmental models of the covid-19 pandemic. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.14295 (2020).
24. N. Tuncer, T. T. Le, Structural and practical identifiability analysis of outbreak models.
Mathematical biosciences 299, 1–18 (2018).
25. N. Tuncer, M. Marctheva, B. LaBarre, S. Payoute, Structural and practical identifiability
analysis of zika epidemiological models. Bulletin of mathematical biology 80, 2209–2241
(2018).
26. R. A. Horn, C. R. Johnson, Matrix analysis (Cambridge university press, 2012).

30

27. K. Mizumoto, K. Kagaya, A. Zarebski, G. Chowell, Estimating the asymptomatic proportion of coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) cases on board the diamond princess cruise
ship, yokohama, japan, 2020. Eurosurveillance 25, 2000180 (2020).
28. Q. Bi, Y. Wu, S. Mei, C. Ye, X. Zou, Z. Zhang, X. Liu, L. Wei, S. A. Truelove, T. Zhang,
et al., Epidemiology and transmission of covid-19 in shenzhen china: Analysis of 391 cases
and 1,286 of their close contacts. MedRxiv (2020).
29. E. Lavezzo, E. Franchin, C. Ciavarella, G. Cuomo-Dannenburg, L. Barzon, C. Del Vecchio,
L. Rossi, R. Manganelli, A. Loregian, N. Navarin, et al., Suppression of covid-19 outbreak
in the municipality of vo, italy. medRxiv (2020).
30. C. Liu, X. Wu, R. Niu, X. Wu, R. Fan, A new sair model on complex networks for analysing
the 2019 novel coronavirus (covid-19). Nonlinear Dynamics pp. 1–11 (2020).
31. R. H. Chisholm, P. T. Campbell, Y. Wu, S. Y. Tong, J. McVernon, N. Geard, Implications of
asymptomatic carriers for infectious disease transmission and control. Royal Society open
science 5, 172341 (2018).
32. L. Pribylova, V. Hajnova, Seiar model with asymptomatic cohort and consequences to
efficiency of quarantine government measures in covid-19 epidemic.

arXiv preprint

arXiv:2004.02601 (2020).
33. J. B. Aguilar, J. S. Faust, L. M. Westafer, J. B. Gutierrez, Investigating the impact of asymptomatic carriers on covid-19 transmission. medRxiv (2020).
34. M. Robinson, N. I. Stilianakis, A model for the emergence of drug resistance in the presence
of asymptomatic infections. Mathematical biosciences 243, 163–177 (2013).

31

35. D. Balcan, H. Hu, B. Goncalves, P. Bajardi, C. Poletto, J. J. Ramasco, D. Paolotti, N. Perra,
M. Tizzoni, W. Van den Broeck, et al., Seasonal transmission potential and activity peaks
of the new influenza a (h1n1): a monte carlo likelihood analysis based on human mobility.
BMC medicine 7, 45 (2009).
36. D. Balcan, B. Gonçalves, H. Hu, J. J. Ramasco, V. Colizza, A. Vespignani, Modeling
the spatial spread of infectious diseases: The global epidemic and mobility computational
model. Journal of computational science 1, 132–145 (2010).
37. X. He, E. H. Lau, P. Wu, X. Deng, J. Wang, X. Hao, Y. C. Lau, J. Y. Wong, Y. Guan,
X. Tan, et al., Temporal dynamics in viral shedding and transmissibility of covid-19. Nature
medicine 26, 672–675 (2020).
38. Presidenza
Council

del

Consiglio

of

dei

Ministers),

Ministri

Governmental

(Presidency

of

containment

the
policies,

http://www.governo.it/it/coronavirus-misure-del-governo.
Accessed: 2020-07-06.
39. Presidenza
of

del

Ministers),

Consiglio
Legislation

dei

Ministri

issued

in

(Presidency
response

to

of

the

covid-19

Council
epidemic,

http://www.governo.it/it/coronavirus-normativa. Accessed: 2020-0706.
40. Dipartimento della Protezione Civile (Civil protection department), Data on the national

trend, https://github.com/pcm-dpc/COVID-19/tree/master/dati-andamento-nazio
Accessed: 2020-07-06.

32

Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank Prof. Valeria Simoncini for pointing out the relation between
the sensitivity µ and the generalized eigenvalue.
V.L. acknowledges support from the Leverhulme Trust Research Fellowship 278 “CREATE:
The network components of creativity and success”.
V.L and G.R. acknowledge support from University of Catania project “Piano della Ricerca
2020/2022, Linea d’intervento 2, MOSCOVID”.

Author contributions
L.G., M.F., V.L. and G.R. conceived the research and developed the theory. L.G. carried out the
numerical analysis. All authors wrote the manuscript.

Competing interests
The authors declare they have no competing interests.

Data and material availability
All data needed to evaluate the results are present in the paper itself. Additional data related to
this paper may be requested to the authors.

33

