The COVID-19 pandemic: socioeconomic and health
disparities
Dr Behzad Javaheri
Abstract—Disadvantaged groups around the world have suffered and endured higher mortality during the current COVID19 pandemic. This contrast disparity suggests that socioeconomic and health-related factors may drive inequality in disease
outcome. To identify these factors correlated with COVID-19 outcome, country aggregate data provided by the Lancet COVID19 Commission subjected to correlation analysis. Socioeconomic and health-related variables were used to predict mortality in
the top 5 most affected countries using ridge regression and extreme gradient boosting (XGBoost) models. Our data reveal that
predictors related to demographics and social disadvantage correlate with COVID-19 mortality per million and that XGBoost
performed better than ridge regression. Taken together, our findings suggest that the health consequence of the current pandemic
is not just confined to indiscriminate impact of a viral infection but that these preventable effects are amplified based on preexisting health and socioeconomic inequalities.
Keywords—COVID-19, mortality, socioeconomic disparity, disadvantaged groups.

I. INTRODUCTION
The world is facing an unresolved and urgent global health
challenge with indications that pharmaceutical interventions
alone will not provide a permanent solution to COVID-19 and
future pandemics [1]. This crisis is bringing to light and has
magnified existing health and socioeconomic inequalities with
higher mortality amongst people living in poverty, with preexisting conditions, unemployed and ethnic minorities.
Previous studies have reported that this higher mortality is
associated with wealth, social class and ethnicity and that
disadvantaged groups are at greater risk of COVID-19
mortality [2-5]. For example, whilst 14% of England and
Wales are from Asian and minority ethnic, they nevertheless
account for ~35% of critically-affected COVID-19 patients
[4].
This disparity in pandemic outcome is not exclusive to the
current crisis. Indeed, previous studies reported higher
mortality in countries with extreme poverty [6], amongst poor,
unemployed and working-class in industrialised countries [79] during the 1918 influenza pandemic. More recently, during
H1N1 2009 pandemic, higher mortality was reported in
disadvantaged groups around the world [10-13].
This historical background suggests that the outcome of
COVID-19 has been exacerbated by social and economic
determinants of population health. It also implies that, to
successfully suppress high mortality, non-pharmaceutical
interventions to address these societal inequalities in the
present and future health crisis should be considered.
During the current pandemic, Governments around the
world have taken non-pharmaceutical steps, implemented
social restrictions and provided economic support of various
degrees. These include school and workplace closures,
restrictions on international travel and test/tracing policies.
For Government-led policies to significantly reduce mortality
in particular amongst disadvantaged groups, appropriate
social, economic and determinant of population health need to
be identified and targeted.
It is therefore important to identify socioeconomic and
health-related predictors to fine-tune social and economic
measures for effective management of the pandemic.
II. ANALYTICAL QUESTION AND DATA
Fundamental to appropriate management of current health
crisis is the identification of factors that are associated with
high COVID-19 mortality. This will allow policymakers to

provide the needed support to vulnerable communities that
bear a disproportionate burden.
One major limitation to ascertain the sources of the
disparity is difficulty in obtaining patient-level data where
patients individual health and socioeconomic background
matched to disease severity and outcome. This arises
primarily with concerns surrounding patients data sharing
[14]. An alternative approach to partially remedy this
limitation is a country aggregate of COVID-19 mortality
together with their respective socioeconomic, demographic
and health information.
Is it possible to identify these factors, ultimately to address
non-viral drivers of mortality? Building on growing evidence
and by focusing on the idea that socioeconomic and health
background are forerunners for higher COVID-19 mortality,
this study will: i) explore the correlation between COVID-19
mortality, societal and health indicators and Governments
responses to the crisis and ii) examine whether COVID-19
outcome could be predicted by these indicators alone.
This study aims to address these questions using the
Lancet COVID-19 Commission dataset [15]. It currently
contains 3.8 million datapoints, 218 countries, 304 days with
135 indicators. These include parameters related to mortality,
risk factors including age, gender, and pre-existing conditions
(e.g. diabetes), lifestyle (e.g. life expectancy, smoking),
healthcare and hygiene provisions (number of hospital beds,
handwashing facilities etc.), socioeconomic status (poverty,
social mobility, financial support etc.) and government
response to the crisis (e.g. closure of public transport, schools
and workplaces). These data are pooled from various trusted
sources: a) Oxford COVID-19 Government Response Tracker
(OxCGRT) [16]; b) Imperial College London YouGov
COVID-19 Behaviour Tracker Data Hub [17]; c) Johns
Hopkins University [18]; d) Our World in Data [19] and; e)
Google COVID-19 Community Mobility Reports [20].
III. ANALYSIS
To address the aims the following steps are taken:
A. Data preparation
Initially, the dimension of imported data [21], and overall
structure explored indicating that dataset has 64,675 rows and
138 columns. Describe function in Pandas used to test the
overall description of the data, including count, mean,
standard deviation, min, max, 25%, 50% and 75%. The count
function indicates missing values which was further
confirmed by “isnull” and “.isna.” test. To impute missing

https://github.com/bjavaheri/Data-Science/tree/master/COVID_Lancet_Commission

2

Fig. 1. Visualisation of data before (top) and after (bottom)
imputation for missing values (in yellow).

values, columns with significant missing values were
dropped. Furthermore, the countries with less than 1,000,000
population were excluded, the analysis focused on top 5 most
affected countries (USA, Brazil, India, Mexico and the UK)
and confined to data collected between 01/April and
30/October/2020 resulting in a dataset with no missing values
(Figure 1).
B. Data derivation
In this step the following procedures performed: a) feature
engineering, b) understanding data by visualisation and c)
distribution analysis and data transformation.
Initially, a new feature, “daily recovery/million” computed
and visualised with daily mortality suggesting bimodal
recovery with the first phase between July-September and
second peaking at the end of October (Figure 2).
Analysis of histogram plots reveals that the target variable
(first histogram) does not follow a normal distribution (Figure
3). Further dissection using a probability plot to compare the
distribution of the target variable to theoretical normal
distribution reveals a curvature. To address this, a log
transformation was performed; histogram of the transformed
variable suggests a bimodal phase for data related to daily
COVID-19 mortality potentially due to earlier and current
phases of higher mortality (Figure 4).

Fig. 3. Distribution of various variables to examine distribution
of target (first) and the remainder predictors.

For recovery, a higher variation is observed in Brazil, two
clusters for the UK and consistent observation for India and
Mexico. Whilst less variation is observed for recovery in the
USA than Brazil their average are similar (~115 per million).
Furthermore, Extreme poverty is the highest in India and
lowest in the UK, with an opposite trend for life expectancy
and number of 65 years of age respectively. Number of
hospital beds is the lowest in India and highest in the USA and
the UK
C. Construction of models
In this step following procedures performed: a)
correlation analysis, b) testing linearity and multicollinearity
and b) construction of ridge regression and extreme gradient
boost (XGBoost). The first step will provide some answers
on our first question of whether predictors are correlated to
mortality. Data show positive and negative correlations of 17
and 13 predictors (“hospital beds/thousand”: 0.417;
“population density”: -0.581) with the target variable. Two

Additional exploration of select variables (per country)
including daily mortality/million, daily recovery/million,
measures of Government responses (health containment &
stringency policy), socioeconomic including extreme poverty,
life expectancy, age and number of hospital beds, reveal
consistent daily mortality/million for Brazil, India and Mexico
and a wider spread for the UK and USA (Figure 5).

Fig. 2. COVID-19 daily recovery (top) and mortality (bottom)
per million between 1st of April and 30th of October 2020 in
USA, Brazil, India, Mexico and UK.

Fig. 4. Transformation of target variable: daily COVID-19
mortality/million. Distribution of mortality together with
probability plot before (top) and after (bottom) transformation

3

Fig. 5. Country-based visualisation of indices related to COVID mortality, recovery, health, socioeconomics and government restrictions.

predictors (“cancellation of public events” and “public
information campaigns”) showed no correlation (Table 1).
Ordinary least square (OLS) testing for linearity showed a
violation of linearity suggesting that whilst estimates from
OLS are unbiased, however, if employed they will result in
high variance (Figure 6). This suggests that data might suffer
from multicollinearity. To test for this assumption, the
variable inflation factor (VIF) test performed, indicating
significant collinearity as evident by high VIF demonstrated
in Table 2. Together, these suggest that some predictors are
highly dependent on other predictors.
These findings provide evidence to support inclusion of
two models: ridge regression as a simple model to deal with
collinearity and also able to reduce error by adding a degree
of bias (lambda) and extreme gradient boosting (XGBoost) as
a model which in addition addresses the relationship between
individual predictors and target variable more efficiently.
To construct both models, dataset divided into training
and test (80 and 20% respectively). For ridge regression,
parameter tuning was performed to identify an appropriate
value for penalty lambda following 10-fold cross-validation
(CV) using RidgeCV. The purpose of the CV is to identify
Variable

the best-suited portion of dataset to train the model. Once this
is known, the model with the best performance is validated
on the entire training dataset and its generalisation tested on
the unseen testing dataset.
The average score for CV is shown in Figure 7. The result
from cross-validation shows that 0.001 results in the lowest
mean square (MSE; metric for error) and highest R2 (metric
for performance). This lambda value was used on the entire
training datasets and the performance of this model was
evaluated on the testing datasets. The R2 values for training
and testing datasets were 0.676 and 0.700 suggesting that
performance on training and testing was comparable. The
plot of residuals and Q-Q plot suggest comparable
performance (Figure 7).
To construct XGBoost model, a grid search
(GridSearchCV) was performed to identify a number of
predictors to select at every split in a given tree, the number
of trees, maximum depth of a tree and a learning rate. This
resulted in a model with tuned parameters that was
subsequently validated on the entire training dataset
producing R2 score of 0.845. The R2 score for the testing
dataset was comparable (0.82; Figure 8).

Score

Fig. 6. Ordinary least square testing of linearity.

Table 1. Pairwise Pearson correlation of predictors to target.

Table. 2. Variable inflation factors (VIF) of selected variables

4

Fig. 7. CV score (top) and plot of residuals for ridge regression
(bottom).

D. Validation of results
Two steps were taken for validation of results for both
ridge regression and XGBoost; a) validation curve and b) plot
of prediction error.
Results from validation curve which uses a single
hyperparameter on the training and test data suggest that
whilst performances of both models are comparable between
testing and training, that using lambda as the hyperparameter
does not provide us with intuition about the performance of
ridge regression (Figure 9). This is a limitation of this model
as has a limited capacity for hyperparameter tuning. In
contrast, using maximum tree depth for XGBoost suggests
that this model performs similarly on the training and testing
dataset with various level of tree depth (Figure 10).

Fig. 9. Validation curve and prediction error for ridge
regression.

Fig. 8. CV score (top) and plot of residuals for XGBoost
(bottom).

Analysis of prediction error which demonstrates actual
targets against the predicted values indicate that ridge
regression with R2 of 0.7 has higher variance compared with
XGBoost with R2 of 0.825 and low variance.
IV. FINDINGS, REFLECTION AND FUTURE WORK
This study, within its limited scope, strived to address two
aims: i) relationship between COVID-19 mortality, societal
and health indicators and Governments responses and ii)
whether these indicators allowed mortality prediction. Our
findings: i) suggest that predictors related to demographics
and social disadvantage correlate with daily COVID-19
mortality in the top 5 most affected countries and ii) both ridge
regression and XGBoost models revealed that these accounted
for 0.7 and 0.83 of the variances for COVID-19 mortality.

Fig. 10. Validation curve and prediction error for XGBoost.

5

Fig. 11. Comparison of ridge regression (top) and XGBoost (bottom) mortality prediction (red) to the original (blue) train and test datasets.

Performance visualisation of both models (Figure. 11)
demonstrate the prediction of COVID-19 outcome with high
accuracy. Therefore, health impact of the current pandemic is
not just confined to indiscriminate impact of viral infection but
that these effects are amplified based on pre-existing health
and socioeconomic inequalities and that the outcome of the
disease is not just a consequence of infection but a cumulative
effect. They also suggest that Government responses of the 5
most-affected countries (USA, Brazil, India, Mexico and the
UK) influence the outcome and severity of COVID-19.
Visualisation of mortality and predictors revealed
variation and clustering. Whilst time aspect of this dataset was
not utilised, this observation, however, might suggest that
variations relate to different periods of the pandemic. It is,
therefore, reasonable to divide the dataset into periods for
better interrogation. This is indeed suggested by Finch et al.,
(2020) where dividing of data related to different periods of
pandemic suggested for dissecting relationship of poverty and
mortality in the USA [22]. Additionally, pooling data from
countries with similar mortality, government responses as
well as the socioeconomic status will allow higher statistical
power.
Analysis of predictor importance using better performing
model (XGBoost) reveal that indices related to health and
socioeconomic status including the number of hospital beds,
smoking, cardiovascular death rate, diabetes, age, extreme
poverty, GDP as well as those related to Government policies
around COVID-19 management including workplace and
school closures, test and contact tracing significantly

contribute to accurate prediction of disease outcome (Figure.
12).
The relationship between societal and economic indicators
and disease outcome in different countries does not seem to
follow the same pattern. For example, whilst India has the
highest number of people in extreme poverty per million and
the lowest number of hospital beds, it has reported lower
mortality/million than the UK with the lowest extreme poverty
and higher hospital beds. This could potentially be explained
by the proportion of the aged 65 years and over per million as
the UK has highest such proportion. Indeed, our correlation
studies provided evidence to support this notion.
Our findings also suggest that the relationship between
health and socioeconomic factors and COVID-19 mortality is
complex and that country aggregate data where information
related to patients with diverse background combined is not
ideal. This is a significant limitation to such analysis [14].
There are several other limitations. The limited scope of this
study allowed us to only focus on the top 5 most affected
countries; analysis of counties with diverse socioeconomic
background might provide a clearer picture. This, however,
poses a different challenge as countries with extreme poverty
and low GDP lack the capacity to ascertain excess death due
to the pandemic. Furthermore, such analysis spanning
different countries wrongly assumes that reported statistics
adhere to similar standards.

6

Fig. 12. Predictor importance computed by XGBoost demonstrating predictors that are most important to XGBoost model.

Taken together, this study explored the relationship
between a range of variables with COVID-19 mortality and in
agreement with historical findings found that variables related
to pre-existing health and living conditions correlated with
and predicted mortality. Therefore, effective strategies for
suppression of the current and future health crisis should
consider addressing these societal inequalities.

Code
All files related to this work available:
https://github.com/bjavaheri/DataScience/tree/master/COVID_Lancet_Commission

REFERENCES

[11]

[1]
[2]
[3]

[4]
[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

A. Iwasaki, "What reinfections mean for COVID-19," The Lancet
Infectious Diseases, 2020.
M. S. Bryan et al., "COVID-19 mortality and neighborhood
characteristics in Chicago," Annals of epidemiology, 2020.
A. Gkiouleka, T. Huijts, J. Beckfield, and C. Bambra,
"Understanding the micro and macro politics of health:
Inequalities, intersectionality & institutions-A research agenda,"
Social Science & Medicine, vol. 200, pp. 92-98, 2018.
I. Audit, "ICNARC report on COVID-19 in critical care," April,
vol. 10, p. 2020, 2020.
J. T. Chen and N. Krieger, "Revealing the unequal burden of
COVID-19 by income, race/ethnicity, and household crowding:
US county versus zip code analyses," Journal of Public Health
Management and Practice, vol. 27, no. 1, pp. S43-S56, 2020.
C. J. Murray, A. D. Lopez, B. Chin, D. Feehan, and K. H. Hill,
"Estimation of potential global pandemic influenza mortality on
the basis of vital registry data from the 1918–20 pandemic: a
quantitative analysis," The Lancet, vol. 368, no. 9554, pp. 22112218, 2006.
S.-E. Mamelund, "A socially neutral disease? Individual social
class, household wealth and mortality from Spanish influenza in
two socially contrasting parishes in Kristiania 1918–19," Social
science & medicine, vol. 62, no. 4, pp. 923-940, 2006.
T. Bengtsson, M. Dribe, and B. Eriksson, "Social class and excess
mortality in Sweden during the 1918 influenza pandemic,"
American Journal of Epidemiology, vol. 187, no. 12, pp. 25682576, 2018.
K. H. Grantz, M. S. Rane, H. Salje, G. E. Glass, S. E. Schachterle,
and D. A. Cummings, "Disparities in influenza mortality and
transmission related to sociodemographic factors within Chicago
in the pandemic of 1918," Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences, vol. 113, no. 48, pp. 13839-13844, 2016.
M. Biggerstaff et al., "Impact of medical and behavioural factors
on influenza-like illness, healthcare-seeking, and antiviral
treatment during the 2009 H1N1 pandemic: USA, 2009–2010,"
Epidemiology & Infection, vol. 142, no. 1, pp. 114-125, 2014.

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]
[20]
[21]

[22]

E. C. Lowcock, L. C. Rosella, J. Foisy, A. McGeer, and N.
Crowcroft, "The social determinants of health and pandemic
H1N1 2009 influenza severity," American journal of public
health, vol. 102, no. 8, pp. e51-e58, 2012.
P. D. Rutter, O. T. Mytton, M. Mak, and L. J. Donaldson, "Socioeconomic disparities in mortality due to pandemic influenza in
England," International journal of public health, vol. 57, no. 4,
pp. 745-750, 2012.
V. Charu et al., "Mortality burden of the A/H1N1 pandemic in
Mexico: a comparison of deaths and years of life lost to seasonal
influenza," Clinical infectious diseases, vol. 53, no. 10, pp. 985993, 2011.
C. V. Cosgriff, D. K. Ebner, and L. A. Celi, "Data sharing in the
era of COVID-19," The Lancet Digital Health, vol. 2, no. 5, p.
e224, 2020.
J. D. Sachs, R. Horton, J. Bagenal, Y. B. Amor, O. K. Caman,
and G. Lafortune, "The Lancet COVID-19 Commission," The
Lancet, vol. 396, no. 10249, pp. 454-455, 2020.
T. Hale, S. Webster, A. Petherick, T. Phillips, and B. Kira,
"Oxford covid-19 government response tracker," Blavatnik
School of Government, vol. 25, 2020.
S. P. Jones, "Imperial College London Big Data Analytical Unit
and YouGov Plc. 2020," Imperial College London YouGov Covid
Data Hub, v1. 0, YouGov Plc, 2020.
E. Dong, H. Du, and L. Gardner, "An interactive web-based
dashboard to track COVID-19 in real time," The Lancet infectious
diseases, vol. 20, no. 5, pp. 533-534, 2020.
M. Roser, H. Ritchie, E. Ortiz-Ospina, and J. Hasell,
"Coronavirus pandemic (COVID-19)," Our World in Data, 2020.
G. LLC. Google COVID-19 Community Mobility Reports.
[Online]. Available: https://www.google.com/covid19/mobility/
T. Lancet. Lancet COVID-19 Commission - Github database
[Online] Available: https://github.com/sdsna/lancet-covid-19database
W. H. Finch and M. E. Hernández Finch, "Poverty and Covid-19:
rates of incidence and deaths in the United States during the first
10 weeks of the pandemic," Frontiers in Sociology, vol. 5, p. 47,
2020.

