Digital Object Identifier

Spread Mechanism and Influence
Measurement of Online Rumors in China
During the COVID-19 Pandemic
YIOU LIN, HANG LEI AND YU DENG
School of Information and Software Engineering, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu 610054, China

arXiv:2012.02446v2 [cs.SI] 11 Jan 2021

Corresponding author:YIOU LIN. (e-mail: lyoshiwo@163.com).

ABSTRACT In early 2020, the Corona Virus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic swept the world.
In China, COVID-19 has caused severe consequences. Moreover, online rumors during the COVID-19
pandemic increased people’s panic about public health and social stability. At present, understanding
and curbing the spread of online rumors is an urgent task. Therefore, we analyzed the rumor spreading
mechanism and propose a method to quantify a rumor’s influence by the speed of new insiders. The
search frequency of the rumor is used as an observation variable of new insiders. The peak coefficient
and the attenuation coefficient are calculated for the search frequency, which conforms to the exponential
distribution. We designed several rumor features and used the above two coefficients as predictable labels.
A 5-fold cross-validation experiment using the mean square error (MSE) as the loss function showed that
the decision tree was suitable for predicting the peak coefficient, and the linear regression model was ideal
for predicting the attenuation coefficient. Our feature analysis showed that precursor features were the most
important for the outbreak coefficient, while location information and rumor entity information were the
most important for the attenuation coefficient. Meanwhile, features that were conducive to the outbreak
were usually harmful to the continued spread of rumors. At the same time, anxiety was a crucial rumor
causing factor. Finally, we discuss how to use deep learning technology to reduce the forecast loss by using
the Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers (BERT) model.
INDEX TERMS COVID-19, rumor spread mechanism, new media, peak coefficient, attenuation coefficient, machine learning.

I. INTRODUCTION

N December 2019, some hospitals in Wuhan, China discovered multiple cases of unexplained pneumonia with
a history of exposure to the South China Seafood Market
[1]. The cases have now been confirmed as the acute respiratory infectious disease, named Corona Virus Disease 2019
(COVID-19). At the time of this writing (December 3, 2020),
the global number of COVID-19 infections exceeded 64.7
million, and the deaths exceeded 1.5 million. The COVID19 crisis has caused economic, social, and mental crises in a
brief period, and it has spread internationally and affected
all aspects of human life [2]. When lockdowns and social
distancing measures to prevent the spread of COVID-19
started, Wei et al. pointed out that the prevalence of mental
and psychological problems was as follows: sleep problems
were 49.8%, anxiety symptoms were 44.5%. Among them,
stress-induced excitatory symptoms accounted for 21.6%,
and depression symptoms were 18. 9% [3]. Meanwhile, the

I

VOLUME 4, 2016

present COVID-19 pandemic appears to be leading to higher
suicidality. Griffiths et al. presented six cases in chronological order of couple suicides and attempted suicides relating
to COVID-19 [4]. Research on rumors has a long tradition.
For decades, one of the most popular ideas in rumor research
is the idea that rumors are always accompanied by crises
[5]. According to a cross-sectional survey 30.9% of all the
respondents reported believing in some unverified COVID19 crisis-related rumors from internet media [6]. Now we are
in an Internet era of information explosion. Recent theoretical
developments have revealed that the role of the Internet and
the media during the present pandemic crisis should not
be underestimated [7]. Due to the lack of moderation and
guarantee, as a platform for freedom of speech, online social
media and networks are highly susceptible to the spread
of rumors [8]. For example, after the Fukushima Nuclear
Disaster in 2011, there was a rumor that the nuclear leak
would cause a short supply of salt. This rumor led to panic
1

Y Lin et al.: Spread Mechanism and Influence Measurement of Online Rumors in China During the COVID-19 Pandemic

buying and hoarding salt. Similarly, misinformation about
a COVID-19 medication regimen or unreliable protection
measures has a severe impact on public health and can even
affect social stability [9]. For example, on January 31, 2020,
it was reported that the Oral Liquid “Shuanghuanglian” (a
Chinese patented medicine) had an inhibitory effect on the
COVID-19. After the news was released, “Shuanghuanglian”
products were quickly snapped up and hoarded, causing market chaos. Thus, quantitatively describing rumor spreading
and measuring the influence of rumors during the COVID-19
pandemic has a theoretical significance. In the past several
decades, the common strategies that have been used to study
the rumor mechanism are simulation experiments and statistical learning. With the rise of deep learning, natural language
processing (NLP) has been widely used in interdisciplinary
fields [10]. This area of rumor mechanism research constitutes a relatively new area that has emerged from NLP and
deep learning technology.
TABLE 1: Chinese search engine market share in 2020
Search Engine
Share
Period

Baidu
69.55%

Sogou

360

Google

Bing

16.84%
4.19%
3.76%
From July 2019 to July 2020

2.8%

This study is based on a quantitative analysis of data
extracted from Sogou (China’s second-largest search engine
company as shown in Table. 1) search index. We believe that
Internet surveillance is a convenient and cost-effective way
to assess public responses and that it can provide evidence
for government decision-making. The main contributions of
this paper can be summarized as follows: 1. We propose
an epidemic-like model to quantitatively describe the law of
rumors spreading during the COVID pandemic. The model
includes four-node states: susceptible state, infected state,
refuted state, and removal state. Through calculation by
simulation, we found that, ideally, the density of the infected
state conforms to a power-law distribution.
2. We collected a COVID-19 related rumor data crawled
from search engine results based on which we propose a
method to determine the peak coefficient and the attenuation
coefficient of a rumor outbreak. As far as we know, no
previous research has investigated this.
3. Using NLP techniques and machine learning methods, we analyze the relationship between rumor features
and rumor indexes, including the peak coefficient and the
attenuation coefficient. Analysis of the experimental results
reveal several exciting conclusions. We also ran deep learning
techniques and showed how semantic features help improve
peak coefficient prediction.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: In
the next section, we first introduce the literature on rumor
propagation and the NLP techniques used in this article. In
the third section, we build the epidemic-like rumor model
and describe the simulation experiments that were conducted.
Then, we develop our hypotheses and the ideas for the
2

verification of these hypotheses, and the peak coefficient and
attenuation coefficient are calculated in the fourth section.
After that, we discussed how three models predicated these
two coefficients, their results, and analysis features. Finally,
our conclusions are given and future research possibilities are
suggested.
II. RELATED WORKS

This section reviews several research papers and mentions a
few indicative works about rumor theory and propagation.
Rumor refers to a cooperative transaction in which community members offer, evaluate, and interpret information
to reach a common understanding of uncertain situations,
alleviate social tension, and solve collective crisis problems
[11–13]. From its birth, a rumor involves communication
dynamics surrounding shared issues in a community, the
generation and transmission are inseparable in practice [8].
Rumor propagation is often modeled as a process of social
contagion [14]; therefore, epidemiological models are highly
relevant to the research literature on rumor propagation
[15]. Kermack and McKendrick studied the mathematical
theory of epidemics and proposed the Susceptible-InfectedRemoved (SIR) model, which is the most widely used model
in research of rumor spreading [16]. Currently, many studies
have proposed more rumor spreading models through the
addition and modification of node state types and state transformation mechanisms [17, 18]. We propose a rumor spread
mechanism motivated by the above work. In addition to the
above simulation research, empirical research of rumors has
attracted people’s attention. Better understanding the spread
of rumors on social networks (such as Twitter and Weibo) is
especially valued [5, 19]. However, using rumor forwarding
in social networks as the rumor spread metric has two main
disadvantages: 1. The users of social networks are limited and
consist of mainly young people. 2. The dissemination data
becomes unreliable when rumor information is gradually
deleted. In response to this situation, the search index of web
search engines has become a common area of focus. Search
index data has been applied in many ways, such as forecasting tourist arrivals [20, 21], hotel registrations [22], economic
indicators [23], and monitoring influenza epidemics [24].
The search index is also helpful for epidemic prevention
and control. An extensive search trends-based analysis of
public attention proved that Internet monitoring could be
particularly incredibly and economical in the prevention and
control of epidemics and rumors [25]. Meanwhile, social
media is also helping to predict the number of COVID-2019
cases [26], map of health literacy and social panic [27], and
predict the peak of the COVID-19 pandemic through Internet
search [28]. Although the search index research has been
widely used, its application in combination with the field of
rumor analysis has not yet been proposed. Therefore, this
article attempts to unearth the inner connection between user
searches and online rumors.
From a modeling perspective, we need to quantify user
searches and online rumors separately. The user’s search
VOLUME 4, 2016

Y Lin et al.: Spread Mechanism and Influence Measurement of Online Rumors in China During the COVID-19 Pandemic

behavior leaves a search record and forms a search index.
Thus, the real difficulty lies in how to express online rumors.
Online rumors can be regarded as a kind of short text, and
the short text representation method is very mature [29, 30].
In this study, we employed content-based features as well as
semantic features. The technologies we used included part of
speech (POS) [31], named entity recognition (NER) [32], and
Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers
(BERT) [33].
The internal connection between two variables is a mathematical mapping relationship, which can be described by
a machine learning model. By combining machine learning
and the representation of rumors, Raveena et al. investigated
in retrospect a dataset in which tweets spreading rumor detection was completed machine learning algorithms, including
the k-nearest neighbor and Naive Bayes classifier [34]. The
first to propose the application of rumor theory to social
media and community intelligence was Onook Oh et al., who
studied citizen-driven information processing [8]. The above
research is limited to the identification of the authenticity
of rumors. Li et al. analyzed the association between user
features and rumor forwarding behavior in five main rumor
categories: economics, society, disaster, politics, and military
[19]. However, their work failed to consider the influence
of rumor features on forwarding behavior. Therefore, due to
these shortcomings, our method is proposed to quantify the
rumor spread influence based on the search frequency and
rumor representation.
III. SPREAD MECHANISM

After rumors appear in real social networks, the government or relevant authoritative organizations dispel the rumors
through mainstream media or the Internet. However, existing
research on rumor dissemination mostly involves the modeling of single rumor without refuting information [35, 36] or
only analyzed the key factors affecting mass communication
behavior were analyzed from the information dissemination
level [37]. To more reasonably describe the interactive propagation process and to understand the interactive propagation mechanism of different rumors, this study used meanfield theory, which is commonly used in complex network
propagation dynamics, to establish equations to characterize
the dynamics propagation model of the interactive process.
The impact of rumor rejection nodes is discussed and the key
factors affecting the spread of rumors based on the simulation
results are analyzed below.
Drawing lessons from the spreading characteristics of
viruses in a network, the attitudes of users on rumors and
other information in social networks are combined to classify
the status of users in the network.
In the process of rumor spreading, there are four node
states: susceptible state, infected state, refuted state, and
removal state. Users who are infected by refuted node are
the disseminators of positive information, including those
who publish positive information; users who believe in authoritative information will disseminate it. Removal nodes
VOLUME 4, 2016

say that such users will neither be infected by rumors nor
by positive information. All the users in the network are
regarded as nodes, and the relationship between friends is
regarded as edges. The transition relationship between node
states as shown in Fig. 1.

FIGURE 1: Flow chart of rumor spreading with four states
In Fig. 1, susceptible means those who are ignorant, Infected means those who will be a disseminator, removed
means those who lost interest in the rumor, and refuted means
those who see through the rumor and disseminate positive
information. The status change is based on the following four
rules.
1) If a susceptible node contacts a rumor-infected node,
then it will change to a rumor-infected state with a probability
of β, change to removed state with a probability of α, and
change to a refuted node with a probability of 1 − β − α.
2) If a susceptible node contacts a refuted node, then it will
change to a removed state with a probability of α or change
to another refuted node with a probability of 1 − α.
3) If an infected node contacts a refuted node, then it will
change to removed state with a probability of σ, change to a
refuted node with a probability of θ, or remain unchanged.
4) In each iteration, an infected node or a refuted node has
the probability of ε of being forgotten and changes to be a
removed node.
In a homogeneous network, S(t), I(t), Rl (t), and R2 (t)
denote the density of a susceptible node, infected node,
removed node (who know about the rumor but do not care
about it), and refuted node (who do not accept the rumor
and try to stop it) through the rumors at time t, respectively.
They reach the normalization condition S(t)+I(t)+R1 (t)+
R2 (t) = 1. The above dissemination rules can be combined
to establish the average spread of rumors, and the mean-field
equations can be described as follows:
dS(t)
= − αhki(I(t) + R2 (t))S(t) − βhkiI(t)S(t)
dt
− hkiS(t)((1 − α − β)I(t) + (1 − α)R2 (t))
= − hki(I(t) + R2 (t))S(t),
(1)
dI(t)
= (βhkiS(t) − (δ + θ)hkiR2 (t) − )I(t),
dt

(2)
3

Y Lin et al.: Spread Mechanism and Influence Measurement of Online Rumors in China During the COVID-19 Pandemic

dR1 (t)
=αhki(I(t) + R2 (t))S(t) + δhkiI(t)R2 (t)
dt
+ (I(t) + R2 (t)),

(3)

and
dR2 (t)
=hkiS(t)((1 − α − β)I(t) + (1 − α)R2 (t))
(4)
dt
+ θhkiI(t)R2 (t) − R2 (t),
where hki is the average degree of the network, which was
usually set to 1 in the simulation experiment. There are few
spreaders at the beginning of the rumor spreading; thus, it is
usually assumed that there is only a very small number of
infected nodes in the initial state network, and the rest are
marked as susceptible nodes. Afterward, the number of the
infected nodes first increases to the peak and then decreases
until it goes down to zero, at which point the rumor dies
out, and the system reaches a stable state. The various node
densities S(t), I(t), R1 (t) and R2 (t) under these four states
evolve with time t (see Fig. 2). The parameters used in the
numerical simulation are N = 10000, α = 0.6, β = 0.3, δ =
0.1,  = 0.2, θ = 0.3, I(0) = 0.01.

Fig 3. The same conclusion and case studies can be found in
rumor spreading among micro-blog followers based on user
browsing behavior[39]. Ideally, assuming that susceptible
persons will query the rumors with the same probability after
being exposed to them, then the query index of the rumors
should have a similar distribution. Like a roller coaster track,
the rate of spread of rumors will first accelerate and increase,
and then it will decelerate and decrease. The rate of new
contacts of rumors rises to the apex first, then falls, and the
rate of decline gradually slows down. Furthermore, the rate
has an apparent long-tail distribution.

FIGURE 3: Derivative function of each state with time

IV. RUMOUR MODELING
A. MODEL SIMULATION

FIGURE 2: State density change with time
Figure 2 shows that the spread of rumors caused about 80%
of the population to be infected by rumors in the end. Because
of the forgetting rate , people lose interest in rumors or their
factors cease to spread and eventually become removed. At
this time, record the density of new insiders who knew but
did not spread the rumors at the end is recorded as R, and
then it can be known that R = final{R(t)} = lim R(t) =
R +∞ t→+∞
R(∞) = R2 (+∞) = 1 − S(+∞) ≈ − 0 S 0 (t)dt.
We use the search frequency of a rumor as an observation
variable of new insiders. Search frequency was first used
to track public events, such as influenza-like illnesses, by
Google in 2009 [38]. Experiments proved that the frequency
of specific queries was positively correlated with relative
events. The size of S 0 (t) represents the rate of increase of
people who are new to the rumor, and those who are new to
the rumors will use the Internet to query the rumors with a
fixed probability and leave a query record. It can be found
that S 0 (t) conforms to a power-law distribution, as shown in
4

Compared with the rate of spread of rumors based on the
spread mechanism, we found that the actual result was
slightly different. As an example, the search index of the
rumor "Louis Koo donated 10 million yuan to Wuhan" provided by Sogou indicates is shown in Fig. 4. Louis Koo
received unusual attention when the rumor occurred (January
26, 2020), and it reached its highest within 24 hours. Compared with Fig. 3, We suppose that the reasons for the above
phenomenon are as follows: In an era when traffic is king, in
order to attract attention, news media and self-media always
forward rumors as soon as possible. The right to speak a
public opinion is in the hands of news media and self-media.
Rumors are pushed directly to interested users with push
technology and hot searches. The rumor also caused Louis
Koo-related searches to increase. After nearly two months,
the search value of Louis Koo’s search index returned to the
historical average. Since rumors usually peak on the first day,
they fit the exponential decline distribution more than the
power-law distribution.
yt = eat+b + c

(5)

Mark the search frequency motivated by rumor as ỹt = yt −c
T
and Y = [ln (y0 − c) , ln (y1 − c) , . . . , ln (yn − c)] where
t is the time, n represents the total number of days, a and b
are rumor-related variables, c is the bias which is unrelated
VOLUME 4, 2016

Y Lin et al.: Spread Mechanism and Influence Measurement of Online Rumors in China During the COVID-19 Pandemic

FIGURE 4: Louis Koo’s search frequency provided by Sogou

rumor. Since ỹt is a geometric series, the sum of ỹt could be
calculated as follows:
n


X
ỹt =ỹ0 · 1 − ea(n+1) / (1 − ea )
(10)
0


=eb · 1 − ea(n+1) / (1 − ea ) .

FIGURE 5: Convergence for parameter c

For the rumor "Louis Koo donated 10 million yuan to
Wuhan" the solution a, b, and c̃ were finally equal to -0.605,
10.69 and 22653 respectively. After experiments, the range of
a was determined to be [-0.26,-1.45], and then the following
inequation could be obtained:
1.31ỹ0 ≤

to rumor (initialized with the minimum search frequency
multiply by 0.9 in seven days), and y is the search frequency.
1
(6)
JLS (θ) = kXθ − Yk2 ·
2

T
1 1 ... 1
s.t. X =
and θ = (a, b), thus let
0 1 ... n
the gradient of JLS (θ) be 0, we can get


∂JLS ∂JLS
,
= XT Xθ − XT Y = 0 (7)
∇θ JLS =
∂θ1 ∂θ2
−1 T
(8)
θ = (a, b) = XT X
X Y
!
n
n
X
X
c=
yt −
ỹt /n
(9)
0

0

Equations (6)-(9) are calculated iteratively several times
until parameter c convergence. Using the least square
method, Fig. 5 shows the variation of parameter c with the
number of iterations under different initial conditions. Our
observation found that usually the intensity of a rumor will
not exceed seven days and can be calculated by rumorrelated variables a and b. For each rumor, parameter a is the
attenuation coefficient, and b is the peak coefficient of each
VOLUME 4, 2016

+∞
X

ỹt = ỹ0 / (1 − ea ) ≤ 4.37ỹ0

(11)

0

From what has been discussed above, usually the intensity of
a rumor will not exceed five times the search frequency of the
first outbreak day, and it can be expressed by the sum of the
search frequency.
B. MODEL HYPOTHESES

In the following sections, our goal is to study the elements
that can be used to estimate the rumor-related variables a
and b. For this goal, we introduce five empirically testable
hypotheses.
1. The fundamental entity that owns the least search frequency can represent the rumor search index.
2. Public anxiety helped spread the rumor.
3. The outbreak intensity is associated with historical
awareness of named entities of each rumor.
4. The daily search frequency sequence before the rumor
can be used to predict the burst strength of the rumor.
5. Under the background of the pandemic, the feedback of
network media is associated with rumor spread.
In this work, Hypothesis 1 is the premise of our research.
As shown in Fig. 6, other common entities usually had far
more searches than the fundamental entity, which means they
5

Y Lin et al.: Spread Mechanism and Influence Measurement of Online Rumors in China During the COVID-19 Pandemic

FIGURE 6: Search frequency trends of key named entities in the Louis Koo rumor

are not representative. Public sentiment was calculated by the
daily average sentiment of Weibo text, as shown in Fig. 8.
The historical awareness of named entities was measured by
natural logarithms of the average daily search frequency in
the last two months of 2019. The feedback of the network
media was presented by the results returned by the search
engine, as shown in Fig. 9.
V. EXPERIMENT AND RESULT ANALYSIS
A. DATASET AND FEATURE EXTRACTION

FIGURE 7: Common rumor keyword cloud
We use crawler frame selection to collect a public rumor
corpus including 1029 rumors from Dingxiangyuan (a medical knowledge-sharing website) and Tencent (an Internetbased platform company). For each rumor, we extracted two
keywords and drew the word cloud graph that is shown in Fig.
7. Rumors abounded with some elements, such as viruses,
drugs, celebrities, protections, and locations. Since the search
frequency of commonly named entities (such as “Wuhan”
and “donate”) were easily influenced by other rumors or
facts, the fundamental entity (“Louis Koo”) that had the least
search frequency had obvious guiding significance, as shown
in Fig. 4 and Fig. 6. We empirically accept Hypothesis 1 and
manually filtered 120 rumor based on it, of which variable
6

a and b could be accurately estimated and parameterized. To
find the key features that could accurately predict variable a
and b of each type of situational information, we extracted
the Boolean features of six NER tags. The historical awareness of the top two most commonly named entities and the
fundamental entity before the outbreak of the pandemic were
selected. Meanwhile, a rumor portrait was obtained through
the search engine. An example is shown in Fig.9 of the search
results about the rumor "Louis Koo donated 10 million yuan
to Wuhan". Three elements were given attention, including
the resulting amount (224,000), start date (January 26, 2020),
and rumor flag (fake news). The resulting amount was used
as statistical feature feedback by network media.
Allport and Postman [40] proposed the idea that a rumor is
motivated by intellectual pressure along with the emotional.
Moreover, Anthony [41] introduced anxiety as a proxy variable for rumor-mongering conditions. Thus, to Hypothesis 2,
We used a public COVID-19 related microblog corpus1 . As
shown in Fig. 8, the index of public sentiment reached its
lowest point before Wuhan was closed due to the pandemic.
After that, the index rose quickly and fluctuated violently.
Using the start data extracted from the search results of
rumor, as shown in Fig. 8, the current public emotion density
value could be located. Meanwhile, to verify Hypothesis 3,
the search frequency sequence of the fundamental named
entity in a week before the rumor breakout is extracted.
In summary, a rumor like "Louis Koo donated 10 million
yuan to Wuhan" could be extracted into [(top2: "donated",
ln(800)), (top1: "Wuhan", ln(2,200,000)), (key: "Louis Koo",
ln(11,000)), (PER, 1), (ORG, 0), (LAC, 1), (NZ, 0), (N,
0), (V, 1), ("resulting amount", ln(224,000)), ("public emotion", 0.0032), ("search frequency sequence before the rumor broke", (ln(13850), ln(10584), ln(10278), ln(12281),
ln(10105), ln(8738), ln(10548)))]. At last, all the features
were transformed into the range [0, 1] using Min-Max Normalization.

1 https://www.datafountain.cn/competitions/423
VOLUME 4, 2016

Y Lin et al.: Spread Mechanism and Influence Measurement of Online Rumors in China During the COVID-19 Pandemic

FIGURE 8: An emotional time distribution map of Internet
users since January 1, 2020

cance of features by weights directly, while a tree model can
handle nonlinear situations. The mean-square error (MSE) is
used as a loss function and Formula (6)-(8) calculates linear
weights. The decision tree learning includes three steps:
feature selection, decision tree generation, and decision tree
pruning. To build the tree, we used the CART algorithm to
train a regression tree. Compared to the linear model using
5-folds cross-validation, experiments have shown that the
decision tree model reduced the MSE of variable b from 3.77
to 1.79 but increased the MSE of variable a from 0.14 to 0.21.
We extracted the essential features for each model, and they
are listed in Table.2.
In the next section, we discuss the significant differences in
the use of features by regression models, including the linear
regression model and decision tree model.
C. FEATURE ANALYSIS

FIGURE 9: Results returned by search engines that used
rumors as the queries

B. REGRESSION MODELS

Machine learning methods, such as the linear regression
model and the decision tree model, have been applied in the
field of rumor analysis [8, 42]. The linear regression model
is one of the most basic types of statistical techniques and
is widely used in predictive analysis. It shows a relationship
between two variables with a linear algorithm and equation.
The decision tree model is a decision support tool that uses a
tree-like model of decisions and their possible consequences.
The main advantage of the decision tree classifier is its ability
to use different feature subsets while still being readable.
After using min-max normalization to covert features to the
same scale, a linear regression model measures the signifiVOLUME 4, 2016

Through the experiment, we found that only three kinds of
named entities were useful in the prediction of the attenuation
coefficient (parameter a), including PER, ORG and LOC, but
only LOC made sense for the peak coefficient (parameter
b). This suggests that rumors involving institutions are more
quickly quelled because the authorities will deny it in time,
while rumors involving specific celebrities and locations are
more likely to be believed by people. Two other conclusions
can be drawn. One is that Top-1, SFR-1, and PE were not
conducive to the persistence of rumors, while ANE and
RA were opposites. Second, all five of these features were
essential to predicting parameter b and SFR-1 was the most
important.
Since most rumors die down within seven days, one possible inference is that the feature that makes rumors more
intense is not conducive to their sustainable renewal. A correlation analysis of features and parameters is shown below
using the Pearson correlation coefficient. Table. 3 shows that
this inference was not entirely correct because ANE and RA
were positively correlated with all three parameters a, b, c.
Regarding Hypothesis 2, PE and parameter a were negatively
correlated, that is to say, when the public mood is negative,
the rumor search frequency dropped more slowly, and the
rumor is to spread more continuously. At the same time,
the outbreak of rumors was also related to PE. Specifically,
for the tree model, the importance of PE for parameter b is
1.2 ∗ 10−1 , and the linear correlation of b was only 0.02,
indicating that the outbreak degree of the rumor and PE
was not a simple linear relationship. Hypothesis 3 was also
correct, but only ANE and TOP-1 played a significant role
in entity search records. Hypothesis 4 can be refined to "the
outbreak of rumors could be predicted by precursors". The
experiments showed that only the precursor that happened the
day before the rumor made sense due to the suddenness of
the rumor’s explosion. Compared with other features, SFR1 (the intensity of precursors) had the strongest positive
correlation with the intensity of the rumor outbreak. In terms
of Hypothesis 5, we only used RA as the feedback of the
search engine in the statistical characteristics, and the results
7

Y Lin et al.: Spread Mechanism and Influence Measurement of Online Rumors in China During the COVID-19 Pandemic

TABLE 2: Most important features for linear regression model and decision tree model

PER
ORG
LOC
Top-1
SFR-1
PE
ANE
RA

Description

Weight for a

Importance for b

The Boolean variable that indicates whether or not the person’s name is present
The Boolean variable that indicates whether or not the organization is present
The Boolean variable that indicates whether or not the location is present
Historical search frequency of the most commonly named entity
Search frequency of the fundamental named entity at the day before the rumor break out
Public emotion when rumor occurs
Average search frequency of the fundamental named entity
Resulting amount of the search engine

1.8 ∗ 10−1
−1.7 ∗ 10−1
2.2 ∗ 10−1
−1.7 ∗ 10−1
−1.2 ∗ 10−1
−9 ∗ 10−2
2.1 ∗ 10−1
1.6 ∗ 10−1

0
0
1.3 ∗ 10−2
1.0 ∗ 10−2
6.2 ∗ 10−1
1.2 ∗ 10−1
1.8 ∗ 10−1
2.6 ∗ 10−1

TABLE 3: Pearson correlation coefficient between six
features and three parameters

LOC
Top-1
SFR-1
PE
ANE
RA

coefficient for a

coefficient for b

coefficient for c

0.27
-0.15
-0.04
-0.24
0.15
0.09

-0.16
0.10
0.58
0.02
0.41
0.42

0.22
-0.27
0.50
0.07
0.57
0.18

showed that rumors with a more massive RA tended to have
a stronger breakout and spread for a longer amount of time.
D. DEEP AND WIDE MODEL

FIGURE 10: The spectrum of Deep and Wide model
In the field of NLP, BERT has apparent advantages in
small sample learning and transfer learning. We used both the
rumor data and the result text on the first page of the search
engine as the training corpus.
We propose a hybrid model that applies the common deep
and wide framework of the recommendation system to solve
the task. As the deep part is directly implemented using the
Chinese BERT, we only introduce statistical features of the
wide part in detail. The statistical features include the eight
features shown in Table. 2.
As shown in Fig. 9, the search engine returned not only the
RA but also the text content of the first page. Using BERT
encoding, the semantic vectors with 256 dimensions could
be obtained. However, the vector dimension exceeded the
number of samples, causing an overfitting problem. Thus,
we did not modify the original weight of the BERT model
as a solution to avoid overfitting; instead, a transfer learning
method was used. The text contents of the front pages of
8

all the rumors were collected and compressed into three
dimensions using the hidden layers of three neurons to predict the RA. We used 50% of the data as the training set
and 50% of the data as the validation set. As most of the
information on the first page is redundant, it only consists
of repeated news or debunking of the rumor. Thus, the key
differentials are the rumor itself, the release time, and the
publishers. Experiments show that this operation helps the
model converge preferably with fewer than two points MAE
of RA, and the results are shown in Fig. 11. We speculate that
the timely authoritative refutation of rumor sources plays a
perfect role in hindering the spread of a rumor. At the same
time, this implies that the outbreak of rumor is strong enough
to attract the attention of those involved in refuting the rumor.
By using deep and wide model, the MSE of parameter a
was reduced from 0.14 to 0.10. Meanwhile, the output of
the three semantic hidden layer neurons extracted by the
deep and wide model was added to the tree model, and the
experiment showed that the MSE of parameter b increased
from 1.79 to 1.83. This means that information on the front
page barely predicts the outbreak intensity. Table. 4 shows
that the first two semantic features made sense in promoting
the prediction result of parameter a. We assume that semantic
features do not work for parameter b because it duplicates the
function of the RA.
TABLE 4: Correlation coefficient and importance between
semantic represents and parameters

Neure-1
Neure-2
Neure-3
RA

coefficient for a

coefficient for b

importance of c

-0.16
-0.28
-0.01
0.09

0.15
0.05
0.38
0.42

9 ∗ 10−2
0
1.2 ∗ 10−1
2.6 ∗ 10−1

VI. CONCLUSION AND AND FUTURE WORK

We constructed a corpus of rumors in China during the
pandemic and proposed a method to determine the peak
coefficient and attenuation coefficient of rumor outbreak
based on the change of the fundamental entity search index.
Based on this method, we calculated the corresponding indexes of rumors and analyze the relationship between the
characteristics and the indexes. In the future, we will continue
to study the differences and connections between rumors
and the propagation behaviors on ordinary hot events on the
VOLUME 4, 2016

Y Lin et al.: Spread Mechanism and Influence Measurement of Online Rumors in China During the COVID-19 Pandemic

(a) Loss of model using original corpus

(b) Loss of model using clean corpus

FIGURE 11: The loss changes with the number of epoch

Internet. Moreover, we will study the use of unified models
to describe the parameters. More data should be used and a
unified model method should be trained to identify the peak
coefficient and attenuation coefficient of rumor outbreaks.
The current method still requires filtering the training set
manually and is highly dependent on feature engineering. In
the future, we plan to apply automatic labeling methods and
the language model to avoid this limitation.
REFERENCES

[1] C. Huang, Y. Wang, X. Li, L. Ren, J. Zhao, Y. Hu,
L. Zhang, G. Fan, J. Xu, X. Gu et al., “Clinical features
of patients infected with 2019 novel coronavirus in
wuhan, china,” The lancet, vol. 395, no. 10223, pp.
497–506, 2020.
[2] M. Nicola, Z. Alsafi, C. Sohrabi, A. Kerwan, A. AlJabir, C. Iosifidis, M. Agha, and R. Agha, “The socioeconomic implications of the coronavirus pandemic
(covid-19): A review,” International journal of surgery
(London, England), vol. 78, p. 185, 2020.
[3] L. Wei, Z. Cai-di, L. Jin-jing et al., “Psychological
status among different populations during covid-19 epidemic: a systematic review and meta-analysis,” J Tongji
Univ Med Sci, vol. 41, no. 02, pp. 147–154, 2020.
[4] M. D. Griffiths and M. A. Mamun, “Covid-19 suicidal
behavior among couples and suicide pacts: Case study
evidence from press reports,” Psychiatry Research,
2020.
[5] L. Zhao, J. Yin, and Y. Song, “An exploration of rumor
combating behavior on social media in the context of
social crises,” Computers in Human Behavior, vol. 58,
no. May, pp. 25–36, 2016.
[6] H. Cai, Y. Zhu, L. Lei, C. Pan, L. Zhu, J. Li
et al., “Novel coronavirus pneumonia epidemic-related
knowledge, behaviors and psychology status among
college students and their family members and friends:
an internet-based cross-sectional survey,” Chin J Public
VOLUME 4, 2016

Health, pp. 1–4, 2020.
[7] E. Pieri, “Media framing and the threat of global pandemics: The ebola crisis in uk media and policy response,” Sociological research online, vol. 24, no. 1, pp.
73–92, 2019.
[8] O. Oh, M. Agrawal, and H. R. Rao, “Community intelligence and social media services: A rumor theoretic
analysis of tweets during social crises,” MIS quarterly,
pp. 407–426, 2013.
[9] R. Shabahang, M. S. Aruguete, and L. E. McCutcheon,
“Online health information utilization and online news
exposure as predictor of covid-19 anxiety,” North American Journal of Psychology, vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 469–482,
2020.
[10] W. Liu, Z. Wang, X. Liu, N. Zeng, Y. Liu, and F. E.
Alsaadi, “A survey of deep neural network architectures
and their applications,” Neurocomputing, vol. 234, pp.
11–26, 2017.
[11] P. Bordia, “Rumor interaction patterns on computermediated communication networks.” 1997.
[12] P. Bordia, N. DiFonzo, and A. Chang, “Rumor as group
problem solving: Development patterns in informal
computer-mediated groups,” Small Group Research,
vol. 30, no. 1, pp. 8–28, 1999.
[13] P. Bordia and N. DiFonzo, “Problem solving in social
interactions on the internet: Rumor as social cognition,”
Social Psychology Quarterly, vol. 67, no. 1, pp. 33–49,
2004.
[14] K. Kawachi, M. Seki, H. Yoshida, Y. Otake,
K. Warashina, and H. Ueda, “A rumor transmission
model with various contact interactions,” Journal of
theoretical biology, vol. 253, no. 1, pp. 55–60, 2008.
[15] D. J. Daley and J. Gani, Epidemic modelling: an introduction. Cambridge University Press, 2001, vol. 15.
[16] W. O. Kermack and A. G. McKendrick, “A contribution
to the mathematical theory of epidemics,” Proceedings
of the royal society of london. Series A, Containing
9

Y Lin et al.: Spread Mechanism and Influence Measurement of Online Rumors in China During the COVID-19 Pandemic

[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]

[21]

[22]

[23]

[24]

[25]

[26]

[27]

[28]

[29]

[30]
10

papers of a mathematical and physical character, vol.
115, no. 772, pp. 700–721, 1927.
F. Yin, J. Lv, X. Zhang, X. Xia, and J. Wu, “Covid19 information propagation dynamics in the chinese
sina-microblog,” Mathematical biosciences and engineering: MBE, vol. 17, no. 3, p. 2676, 2020.
H. Hui, C. Zhou, X. Lü, and J. Li, “Spread mechanism
and control strategy of social network rumors under the
influence of covid-19,” Nonlinear Dynamics, pp. 1–17,
2020.
Z. Li, Q. Zhang, Y. Wang, and S. Wang, “Social media
rumor refuter feature analysis and crowd identification
based on xgboost and nlp,” Applied Sciences, vol. 10,
no. 14, p. 4711, 2020.
S. Sun, Y. Wei, K.-L. Tsui, and S. Wang, “Forecasting tourist arrivals with machine learning and internet
search index,” Tourism Management, vol. 70, pp. 1–10,
2019.
K. Volchek, A. Liu, H. Song, and D. Buhalis, “Forecasting tourist arrivals at attractions: Search engine empowered methodologies,” Tourism Economics, vol. 25,
no. 3, pp. 425–447, 2019.
R. Rivera, “A dynamic linear model to forecast hotel
registrations in puerto rico using google trends data,”
Tourism Management, vol. 57, pp. 12–20, 2016.
N. McLaren and R. Shanbhogue, “Using internet search
data as economic indicators,” Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, no. 2011, p. Q2, 2011.
Q. Yuan, E. O. Nsoesie, B. Lv, G. Peng, R. Chunara,
and J. S. Brownstein, “Monitoring influenza epidemics
in china with search query from baidu,” PloS one, vol. 8,
no. 5, p. e64323, 2013.
T. Xie, T. Tan, and J. Li, “An extensive search trendsbased analysis of public attention on social media in the
early outbreak of covid-19 in china,” Risk management
and healthcare policy, vol. 13, p. 1353, 2020.
L. Qin, Q. Sun, Y. Wang, K.-F. Wu, M. Chen, B.-C.
Shia, and S.-Y. Wu, “Prediction of number of cases of
2019 novel coronavirus (covid-19) using social media
search index,” International journal of environmental
research and public health, vol. 17, no. 7, p. 2365, 2020.
C. Xu, X. Zhang, and Y. Wang, “Mapping of health
literacy and social panic via web search data during the
covid-19 public health emergency: infodemiological
study,” Journal of Medical Internet Research, vol. 22,
no. 7, p. e18831, 2020.
M. Effenberger, A. Kronbichler, J. I. Shin, G. Mayer,
H. Tilg, and P. Perco, “Association of the covid-19 pandemic with internet search volumes: a google trendstm
analysis,” International Journal of Infectious Diseases,
2020.
J. Tang, X. Wang, H. Gao, X. Hu, and H. Liu, “Enriching short text representation in microblog for clustering,” Frontiers of Computer Science, vol. 6, no. 1, pp.
88–101, 2012.
V. Qazvinian, E. Rosengren, D. Radev, and Q. Mei,

[31]

[32]

[33]

[34]

[35]

[36]

[37]

[38]
[39]

[40]

[41]
[42]

“Rumor has it: Identifying misinformation in microblogs,” in Proceedings of the 2011 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
2011, pp. 1589–1599.
A. Ratnaparkhi, “A maximum entropy model for partof-speech tagging,” in Conference on empirical methods in natural language processing, 1996.
G. Lample, M. Ballesteros, S. Subramanian,
K. Kawakami, and C. Dyer, “Neural architectures
for named entity recognition,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1603.01360, 2016.
J. Devlin, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova,
“Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1810.04805, 2018.
R. Dayani, N. Chhabra, T. Kadian, and R. Kaushal,
“Rumor detection in twitter: An analysis in retrospect,”
in 2015 IEEE International Conference on Advanced
Networks and Telecommuncations Systems (ANTS).
IEEE, 2015, pp. 1–3.
M. Nekovee, Y. Moreno, G. Bianconi, and M. Marsili, “Theory of rumour spreading in complex social
networks,” Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its
Applications, vol. 374, no. 1, pp. 457–470, 2007.
L.-L. Xia, G.-P. Jiang, B. Song, and Y.-R. Song, “Rumor spreading model considering hesitating mechanism
in complex social networks,” Physica A: Statistical
Mechanics and its Applications, vol. 437, pp. 295–303,
2015.
Z.-j. Zhao, Y.-m. Liu, and K.-x. Wang, “An analysis of
rumor propagation based on propagation force,” Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications, vol.
443, pp. 263–271, 2016.
J. GINSBERG, “Detecting influenza epidemics using
search engine query data.” Nature, vol. 457, 2009.
J. Huang and Q. Su, “A rumor spreading model based
on user browsing behavior analysis in microblog,” in
2013 10th International Conference on Service Systems
and Service Management, 2013, pp. 170–173.
V. Jack, “The humanitarian duty to communicate: an
analysis of rumour,” in Migrants, Refugees, and the
Media. Routledge, 2018, pp. 173–194.
S. Anthony, “Anxiety and rumor.” Journal of Social
Psychology, vol. 89, no. 1, pp. 91–98, 1973.
Z. Li, Q. Zhang, Y. Wang, and S. Wang, “Social media
rumor refuter feature analysis and crowd identification
based on xgboost and nlp,” Applied ences, vol. 10,
no. 14, p. 4711, 2020.

VOLUME 4, 2016

Y Lin et al.: Spread Mechanism and Influence Measurement of Online Rumors in China During the COVID-19 Pandemic

YIOU LIN received the bachelor’s degree from the
School of Information and Software Engineering,
University of Electronic Science and Technology
of China, China in 2013, where he is currently
pursuing the Ph.D. degree. His research interests
include deep learning and natural language processing.

HANG LEI received the Ph.D. degree in computer
science from the University of Electronic Science
and Technology of China, China, in 1997. After
graduation, he conducted research in the fields of
real-time embedded operating systems, operating
system security, and program verification as a Professor with the Department of Computer Science,
University of Electronic Science and Technology
of China, where he is currently a Professor (a Doctoral Supervisor) with the School of Information
and Software Engineering. His research interests include big data analytics,
machine learning, and program verification.

YU DENG has been pursuing a Ph.D. degree in
the School of Information and Software Engineering, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China since 2014. His research interests
include deep learning and sentiment analysis.

VOLUME 4, 2016

11

