Medical Robots for Infectious Diseases:
Lessons and Challenges from the COVID-19 Pandemic
Antonio Di Lallo, Robin R. Murphy, Fellow, IEEE, Axel Krieger, Member, IEEE, Junxi Zhu,
Russell H. Taylor, Fellow, IEEE, Hao Su*, Member, IEEE


Abstract— Medical robots can play an important role in
mitigating the spread of infectious diseases and delivering quality
care to patients during the COVID-19 pandemic. Methods and
procedures involving medical robots in the continuum of care,
ranging from disease prevention, screening, diagnosis,
treatment, and homecare have been extensively deployed and
also present incredible opportunities for future development.
This paper provides an overview of the current state-of-the-art,
highlighting the enabling technologies and unmet needs for
prospective technological advances within the next 5-10 years.
We also identify key research and knowledge barriers that need
to be addressed in developing effective and flexible solutions to
ensure preparedness for rapid and scalable deployment to
combat infectious diseases.

I. INTRODUCTION
Since the first reports of a novel coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2)
in December 2019, over 44.7 million patients have been
infected worldwide, and more than 1.17 million patients
worldwide have died from COVID-19, the disease caused by
this virus (numbers as of October 29th 2020) [1]. Among them,
19% of infected persons were hospitalized, while 6% were
admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU) [2]. Healthcare
professionals acted as the frontline against the virus, resulting
in a large exposure risk to infection and imperiling any
mitigation efforts. The robotic community also took charge of
an important role in providing aid to manage the pandemic [3,
4], and great efforts were made to adapt preexisting devices to
the new challenges, which translated into a number of helpful
solutions [5]. The shortage of time to design and develop adhoc robots pushed experts to reflect on the methods to get a
ready response to future infectious disease crises, analyzing
the challenges and opportunities for advancements in the
technologies.
This paper covers the deployment of robots in the healthcare
workflow across the continuum of care that goes from
prevention, screening, and diagnosis to treatment and
homecare, as depicted in Fig. 1. For each category of medical
robots, the discussion starts from describing the current state of
practice (i.e., robots deployed during the COVID-19
pandemic) and state of the art (i.e., research prototypes, not
deployed during the COVID-19 pandemic), providing a review
of the most advanced research progress. Then, we aim at
providing a look ahead to a mid-term perspective, analyzing
A.D. Lallo, J. Zhu, H. Su are with Lab of Biomechatronics and Intelligent
Robotics, Department of Mechanical Engineering, The City University of
New York, City College, NY, 10031, USA.
R. Murphy is with Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
Texas A&M University, College Station, TX, 77840, USA.

the major challenges and the enabling technologies that may be
leveraged to make progress.
Reported systems are chosen according to the following
inclusion criteria: 1) they are provided with some automated
features that allow for at least a basic degree of autonomy,
including shared autonomy or teleoperation; 2) they are either
research prototypes or commercial products, have been already
experimentally tested at least on a mockup (Technology
Readiness Level greater than 3 according to the classification
by the European Commission [6]); 3) they had or may have
direct deployment in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
With innovations in design, perception, actuation, and
control, we envision that in the near future, robots may play a
valuable role to assist the hospital personnel, relieve them from
low-skilled or high-risk tasks, and to improve the quality of
care of people who are ill or isolated because of infectious
diseases.
II. CLINICAL BACKGROUND AND UNMET NEEDS
COVID-19 is a respiratory viral disease with transmission
via respiratory aerosols and micro-droplets. This places
clinicians and healthcare professionals at risk of contracting
the virus when caring for patients infected with COVID-19.
The primary morbidity and mortality of COVID-19 are related
to pulmonary involvement, and pneumonia is the primary
cause of death in 44% of cases [2]. 15-20% of patients who
develop COVID-19 will require ventilation in an intensive
care unit (ICU) at some point during their illness [7]. Some of
the most demanded resources during COVID-19 are
healthcare workers, personal protective equipment (PPE), and
ventilators. The infection risk for staff and the strain on PPE
resources is exacerbated by the fact that healthcare workers
must put on and take off PPE every time they enter an ICU or
engage with a patient, even if only to perform a simple task
such as changing a setting on a ventilator or changing the
dosing of medication. Despite common traits, healthcare
needs and responses were not identical everywhere. In many
hard-hit countries, including the US, the COVID-19 pandemic
has also ground to halt elective surgeries and routine health
check-ups imperiling the public health and negatively
impacting economic recovery [8].

A. Krieger is with Department of Mechanical Engineering, The John
Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, 21218, USA.
R. Taylor is with Department of Computer Science, The Johns Hopkins
University, Baltimore, MD, 21218, USA.
*Corresponding author. Email: hao.su@ccny.cuny.edu

Fig. 1. In terms of continuum of care, five categories of representative medical robots were deployed during the COVID-19 pandemic to assist with healthcare
needs associated to an infectious disease. For each category, the table outlines the three challenges (crossed cells) that according to the authors have the highest
potential to enable key advances in that specific area. Further details are provided in the relative sections.

The COVID-19 pandemic is having a major impact on the
global healthcare system, with telemedicine being one of the
key drivers of the change. While the COVID-19 pandemic has
driven the strong expansion of contact-less telemedicine use
for urgent care and nonurgent care visits [9], further
technological advances are necessary to expand the use of
telemedicine to areas that require physical interactions such as
for swab testing, imaging, nursing, or interventional treatment.
Medical robots have the unique capability for bridging the gap
between remote health care providers and patients by
interacting with imaging and therapeutic equipment and with
the patients, ushering in the next generation of telecare. But
for robots to robustly and safely perform physical tasks such
as swabbing a patient, changing a ventilator setting in an ICU,
or performing an ultrasound scan, advancements in the areas
of sensing, actuation, control, autonomy, and artificial
intelligence (AI) are required.
III. ROLE OF MEDICAL ROBOTICS IN INFECTIOUS
ENVIRONMENTS
Robotics can play a key role in combating infectious
diseases in four areas, including clinical care, logistics,
reconnaissance, and continuity of work and maintenance of
socioeconomic functions [3]. Here, we focus on the first area,
within which we identify five categories of medical robots
(Fig. 1) in the continuum of care, including prevention,
screening, diagnosis (e.g., biological sampling and laboratory
automation), treatment, and homecare (e.g., nursing).
A. Robots for Prevention
Disinfection is one of the key measures against infectious
diseases. A common method adopted for the disinfection of
public spaces, such as hospitals, is ultraviolet (UV)
disinfection. It consists of exposing the surfaces to be
disinfected to a specific ultraviolet light bandwidth, so-called

UVC (200-280 nm), corresponding to the peak of the
germicidal effectiveness [10]. In general, UV robots are
comprised of a mobile base equipped with an array of lamps
mounted on the top, spanning 360° coverage. The positioning
of the device can be manual or autonomous. For instance,
LightStrike Germ-Zapping Robot (Xenex, USA) is operated
by trained hospital environmental services staff [11], while the
UVD Robot (UVD Robots, Denmark, Fig. 1) relies on
simultaneous localization and mapping to scan and navigate
the environment on its own. As UVC light may be harmful to
humans, the operation of these robots is typically suspended
when opportune occupancy sensors detect the presence of a
person in the space undergoing disinfection.
The possibilities offered by all these UV robots are strictly
confined to the line of sight. To overcome this limitation, the
University of Southern California developed a semiautonomous mobile manipulator for ultraviolet disinfection by
readapting its Agile Dexterous Autonomous Mobile
Manipulation System (Fig. 2-a). It was endowed with UVlight wands, augmented vision guidance, and a teleoperation
framework that relies on autonomous path planning
algorithms to comply with high-level directives by a human
operator. By exploiting human-in-the-loop control, it can
handle targeted disinfection tasks through challenging
scenarios that involve the approach to objects of interest and
their manipulation.
Another class of robots uses chemicals to disinfect surfaces.
Nanyang Technological University developed the eXtreme
Disinfection roBOT (XDBOT, Fig. 2-b) that explores the
environment and identifies objects to be disinfected using
Light Detection and Ranging (LIDAR) and cameras. The
wheeled mobile base supports a 6-axis robotic arm that
handles an electrostatic sprayer and is remotely controlled by
a human operator.

(a)
(b)
Fig. 2. Robots for disinfection. (a) ADAMMS (University of Southern
California, USA) is a mobile robot with manipulation capabilities for UV
disinfection. (b) XDBOT (Nanyang Technological University, Singapore)
uses an electrostatic sprayer to carry out chemical disinfection.

As a common shortcoming, typically disinfection robots
operate over a predefined temporal horizon while not
providing any direct measurement of the decontamination
evolution (e.g., mapping of the disinfection dose), which
prevents the application of any feedback control on the
accuracy of the process. Yet, factors like distance and
orientation of surfaces play a crucial role in the effectiveness
of the UV decontamination. Chemical decontamination with
robots needs to consider or control multiple parameters,
including concentration and quantity of disinfectant, contact
time and temperature, residual activity and effects on material
properties and surface roughness, and pH scale and
interactions with other compounds. Future research is needed
to understand how to control disinfection with robotic systems
better, possibly exploiting feedback to enhance the reliability
of the process. Other opportunities are related to the
development of AI to turn the current semi-autonomous
devices into fully autonomous robots with enhanced
efficiency.
B. Robots for Screening
Early identification of infected persons is a critical function
in the management of infectious diseases. In hospitals, triage is
the first step to receive people who need medical attention and
arrange the sorting of treatment before they arrive in the
emergency department. Telemedicine enables forward triage
via smartphone [12], allowing physicians and patients to
communicate without direct contact.

(a)
(b)
Fig. 3. Robots for screening. (a) A robot used for temperature monitoring at a
hospital in Shenyang, China. (b) SHUYU robot developed by the Tsinghua
University, China, allows for drive-through rapid temperature screening [13].

Incorporating thermal sensors and vision algorithms onto
autonomous or remotely operated robots can increase the
efficiency and coverage of screening. Robots for temperature
screening were employed at the intake of many hospitals in
China (Fig. 3-a). Moreover, some preexisting devices were
adapted for the same purpose. Besides wheeled telerobots for
indoor navigation like Diligent Robotics and Ava (iRobot Inc.,
USA), legged robots (Boston Dynamics, USA, Fig. 1) were
adapted for telepresence and vital sign monitoring both indoor
and outdoor thanks to its versatile mobility. Other robots were
also deployed for drive-through rapid temperature screening,
such as SHUYU robot (Tsinghua University, China, Fig. 3-b)
[13], which locates human faces through computer vision and
takes the temperature using a non-contact infrared
thermometer.
The main challenges for improved outcomes regard the
accuracy and robustness of the sensors. For instance, thermal
cameras may fail in detecting the correct temperature when
particular conditions are encountered, such as when sweat or a
mask covers the face of the subject. Increasing the environment
and context awareness of the robot would be beneficial to
tackle these difficulties so that similar errors could be
compensated with the aid of additional sensors and
computational processing.
C. Robots for Diagnosis
Bio Sampling and Image-Guided Diagnosis
Depending on the disease, a host of samples may need to be
collected, such as blood or stool samples in the case of nonairborne diseases like Ebola and cholera, or saliva, oral, or
nasal swab samples in the case of airborne diseases like
COVID-19. Conventional testing methods typically require
interaction between a potentially infected patient and medical
workers. Thus they represent occasions for the potential
spreading of the virus. Additional issues may also stem from
the handling of collected samples prior to, during, or after
testing. Hence, robotic solutions to collecting, handling,
testing, and disposing of these samples may allow for a
valuable reduction in transmission of and exposure to the
disease.
Telerobots with manipulation capabilities are able to achieve
physical human-robot interaction, which is not feasible with
conventional telemedicine solutions. As an example, the
Chinese Academy of Sciences developed steerable telerobots
for throat swab sampling of coronavirus tests (Fig. 4-a) [14].
During the traditional throat swab sampling, healthcare staff is
in close contact with patients, which poses a high risk of crossinfection. In addition, healthcare workers' operating skills
affect the accuracy and quality of swab results. To overcome
those limitations, healthcare workers can teleoperate the robot
with haptic feedback and visual feedback from the highdefinition 3D anatomical view of binocular endoscopes. A
further step was taken by a joint team from Lifeline Robotics
and the University of Southern Denmark, who developed the
first fully automatic throat swab robot (Fig. 1). Another work
presented a portable robot (Fig. 4-b) for needle placement to
draw blood or deliver fluids through an image-guided
autonomous operation [15]. Multimodal image sequences

(both ultrasound and near-infrared optical imaging) were
decoded by predictions from a series of deep convolutional
neural networks (CNN) to guide real-time actuation of the
robotic cannulation process.

(a)

(b)

(c)
(d)
Fig. 4. Robots for sampling and diagnosis: (a) Steerable telerobot for throat
swab from the Chinese Academy of Sciences[14]. (b) Portable robot
exploiting deep learning for blood testing at Rutgers University, USA [15].
(c) A robotic platform for lung ultrasound at Tsinghua University, China. (d)
Robotic system for remote trauma assessment at the University of Maryland,
USA [16].

Another important method for diagnosis, especially during
COVID-19, is the ultrasonic examination, well suited for
monitoring the lung's condition, unlike the Computed
Tomography (CT) scan that causes radiation and is not realtime. Tsinghua University evaluated a force-controlled
ultrasound robot (Fig. 4-c) that fuses cross-modal sensory
information from ultrasound and force measurements for
remote diagnosis to minimize contact between healthcare staff
and patients. University of Maryland developed a semiautonomous system for hemorrhage detection using robotic
ultrasound [16] and explored using the system for COVID-19
lung imaging (Fig. 4-d). A similar study was conducted to
evaluate the feasibility of a remote robot-assisted ultrasound
system in examining patients with COVID-19 [17]. Despite
these valuable contributions, substantial technological gaps
remain in dexterity, haptics, multimodal sensor integration,
and autonomy, which complicate the operability of the
devices. In the case of the ultrasonic examination, it turned out
that training physicians to operate the robot was challenging,
especially for the problem of hand-eye coordination. On the
other hand, ultrasonic devices and, in general, existing
medical devices are not designed for remote use by robots, so
they usually need to be modified to be operated remotely.
Lab Automation
There is a new trend to use robots in laboratories for tasks,
including sample processing, goods delivery, and conducting
experiments. The primary purpose is to automate manual
processes to protect personnel from infectious agents,
alleviate the human workload, and achieve high throughput.
The widespread COVID-19 disease has sparked a need for

mass testing capacity. Lab automation is the application most
frequently requested during Ebola and COVID-19. To address
this need, the Innovative Genomics Institute (IGI) at
University of California, Berkeley, established a SARS-CoV2 testing lab in three weeks [18]. Due to the technical
challenges of establishing a fully automated workflow, the IGI
designed a workflow that supports two workstreams in
parallel, a semi-manual approach and an automated approach
in RNA extraction and liquid handling (Fig. 5), so that the
testing efforts could reach the community as early as possible.
Rapid Automated BIodosimetry Tool (RABIT, Fig. 6-b)
[19] developed at Columbia University is a highly automated,
ultra-high throughput, biodosimetry workstation for
radioactive materials handling. It can output dose estimate
with no further human intervention than manual placement of
the test tubes. The initial version of the RABIT system had a
capacity of ~6,000 samples per day, and the goal is to reach
30,000 samples per day after parallelizing various steps. Its
high throughput is partly due to pre-determined processing
sequences and homogenous features of the test tubes.
However, this is hardly the case in broader scenarios. For
example, the mass screening of COVID-19 among a vast
population led to a significant increase in the number of
performed polymerase chain reaction (PCR) tests and
antibody tests, which require a massive amount of
heterogeneous test tubes. Despite the automation in extraction
and detection, a remaining problem is the autonomous
preparation of the examination plates. Osaka University [20]
developed a robotic system that uses 3D vision and AI
planning for autonomously arranging test tubes. Without
specific instructions, the robot is able to efficiently manage the
examination samples. Since the system does not require expert
knowledge by human operators, it has the potential to
significantly increase the throughput as well as protect and
free people for more important work.
Instead of automating laboratory analysis procedures,
robots can also automate the function of conducting
experiments. Burger et al. used a KUKA mobile robot to
automatically search for better photocatalysts for hydrogen
production from water in a laboratory setting (Fig. 6-c) [21].
Thanks to its modularized approach, the robot could be used
in conventional laboratories for research experiments other
than photocatalysis.
Robots for laboratory automation have the potential to
alleviate workload by automating manual processes and
protect the personnel from being exposed to infectious agents.
However, it takes significant time and resources to develop
specialized robots that enable high throughput and accuracy.
Thus, modular design is an opportunity to make robots
adaptive to the needs of different kinds of infectious agents.
Besides, all the robots need to undergo extensive benchmark
and reliability tests and meet government regulations before
they can be used. Per the CDC guidelines [22], the SARSCoV-2 virus can only be cultured in laboratories with
biosafety level (BSL) of 3 or higher , which significantly
limits the number of facilities allowed to study the virus and

Fig. 5. The workflow of manual and automated protocols proposed by the Innovative Genomics Institute (IGI) at the University of California, Berkeley [18]
(blue background). Their implementation of the workflow is built upon Thermo Fisher’s authorized Emergency Use Authorization (EUA) protocol [23] (yellow
background). Phase 1 of the IGI’s workflow requires the manual implementation of the Thermo Fisher kit, while Phase 2 is automated. Bolded words indicate
elements changed from the implementation above. Icons credit: Flaticon.com.

thus hinders the development of new treatments or vaccines.
All these obstacles affect how soon robotic solutions can be
available to the public.
D. Robots for Treatment
One in every six patients with COVID-19 experienced
severe conditions involving bilateral pneumonia and acute
respiratory distress syndrome [24]. Therefore, endotracheal
intubation was one of the most required treatments to allow for
mechanical ventilation. Intubation is a complicated procedure
with high complication rates, which strongly relies on the
manual dexterity of experienced physicians [25]. It is
performed by placing a tracheal tube into the trachea of the
patient while lifting the jaw with a laryngoscope. This
procedure implies direct contact with contagious airways, and
in the situation of infectious disease like that of COVID-19, it
exposes the operator to a high risk of infection. Robots, such as
protective devices, can provide valuable help to ensure the
safety of doctors and patients during operation, especially in
emergency situations. As shown in Fig. 7, intubation teams
involved in airway management procedures are composed of
several members with defined roles. Thus a robot can
potentially assist or replace some personnel, relieving the

annexed workflow and reducing the probability of disease
transmission.
Researchers at John Hopkins University designed a
Cartesian robot with an integrated camera that enables remote
control of a ventilator [26]. Airway management in infectious
conditions is a challenge that may greatly benefit from robotic
assistance to make the intubation safer and more efficient.
Nonetheless, unintended issues and undesired consequences
may arise from their deployment, like reducing the ergonomics
and maneuverability of operators or the introduction of
additional contamination sources. Therefore, it is critically
important that the use of any additional tool is adequately
considered and handled [27] [28]. Researchers explored
general-purpose surgical robotic platforms, such as the Da
Vinci surgical system [29], and purposely designed devices to
address specific issues. Ad-hoc solutions span across the entire
spectrum of robotics, from fully manual teleoperation to
assisted sensing and actuation, up to the eventual deployment
of fully autonomous systems [30]. One interesting result is the
development of intubation systems remotely controlled via a
joystick by the user. This strategy was embodied both in a fixed
platform (Fig. 8-a) [29] and a portable device, Remote RobotAssisted Intubation System [31] for hospital and pre-hospital

(a)
(b)
(c)
Fig. 6. Robots for laboratory automation. (a) Automated liquid-handling robot (Hamilton STARlet) at University of California Berkeley will be used to analyze
swabs from patients to diagnose COVID-19 [18]. (b) A rapid automated biodosimetry tool (RABIT) from Columbia University [19]. (c) A mobile robotic
chemist for conducting experiments [21].

treatment, respectively. Yet, the main challenges of robotassisted intubation are related to the lack of tactile feedback.
Researchers from Columbia University developed InTouch, an
advanced laryngoscope with a tactile sensing blade [32]. Even
though it demonstrated to decrease the complication rate and
the time required for correct intubation, it does not include any
automation feature and still relies on visual recognition of the
airway and manual steering by its user. A step further in this
direction is taken with REALITI, a Robotic Endoscope
Automated via Laryngeal Imaging for Tracheal Intubation
(Fig. 8-b), developed at ETH Zurich [33]. It handles the task of
guiding the tracheal tube into its correct position by performing
the automated detection of anatomical landmarks within the
throat and the automated steering of endoscopes toward the
recognized features. While this system has been successfully
tested on manikins, a long way is still required before it can be
effectively deployed on human subjects.

Fig. 7. According to the Safe Airway Society principles of airway
management and tracheal intubation, intubation teams are composed of
multiple operators with specific roles. Hence, the adoption of robotic
solutions may substantially relieve the workflow by replacing/assisting some
personnel. [34].

A key challenge is the necessity of a robust method for
accurately identifying the anatomical features in a large and
multifaceted population, whereby variations in airways’
anatomy, local pathologies, and other particular conditions
may hinder regular tracheal intubation. To this extent,
significant improvements might derive from the constantly
progressing tools of computer vision and artificial intelligence.
Other opportunities come from the enhancement of sensing and
actuation technologies. Besides visual feedback, force sensing
is crucial to enhance the reliability of robotic intubation. Its
success rate could significantly benefit from distributed, and
accurate force/pressure sensors made possible by
advancements in stretchable electronics. From the actuation
perspective, a promising approach could derive from the
conquers of soft robotics. A vine-inspired robot, for instance,
may represent a feasible way to create a conduit to the lungs
via a failsafe and easy-to-use device, with the ability to grow
into multiple branches to deal with different morphologies
[35].
E. Robots for Homecare
The COVID-19 pandemic caused an overwhelming load of
the health facilities requiring intensive employment of the
hospital workforce. Doctors and nurses strive to work extra
shifts to save lives [36]. Additionally, direct contact with

infectious patients puts them in the critical condition of being
regularly exposed to the risk of contracting the disease.
Therefore, robots capable of performing typical assistance
tasks would enormously benefit the daily medical care of
patients during similar circumstances.

(a)
(b)
Fig. 8. Robots for intervention and treatment: (a) Kepler Intubation System
(McGill University, Canada) [29]. (b) Robotic Endoscope Automated via
Laryngeal Imaging for Tracheal Intubation (REALITI, ETH Zurich,
Switzerland) [33].

Not only in hospitals, nursing assistance is also a
fundamental service in nursing homes and domestic spaces. It
covers all the workflow of care, from the acceptance of the
patient to the hospital until the recovery and aid service at
home. To date, there are no robots that can effectively carry out
the versatile activities of nurses. The great challenge remains
the ability to deal with a plethora of tasks and a myriad of
different subjects, requiring both physiological empathy and
physical interaction. The monitoring of patients, delivery of
meals and medication, assistance with patient ambulation, and
manipulation of medical equipment are only a few examples
highlighting the incredible amount of required versatility.
Most nursing robots are only able to perform very basic
functions, e.g., telepresence and meal delivery. An example is
the Sanbot Elf robot (Qihan Technology, China), which
became famous as Tommy while treating COVID-19 patients
in an Italian hospital (Fig. 9-a). Another class of nurse robots
embraces robots for social assistance [37]. Indeed,
psychological support is also critical during pandemic
emergencies, when mental health is exacerbated by severe
restrictions, such as quarantine and social distancing. More
generally, five primary functions have been identified for
general-purpose nursing robots: communication, mobility,
measurement of clinical data, general manipulation, and tool
use [38]. Among these, physical interaction constitutes the key
challenge, and in particular, manipulation is the bottleneck
towards effective deployment of nursing robots due to the
necessity of a broad range of dexterity and strength, involving
dealing with both gross, powerful actions (e.g., patient
assistance during lifting and walking) and delicate, precise
manipulation (e.g., intravenous fluid management). Advances
in soft robotics enable substantial progress in this direction,
with the development of numerous adaptive and versatile
grippers. In addition to the end-effector solution, high torque
density actuators demonstrated high compliance and high
bandwidth in legged and wearable robots [39]. They can be
incorporated into a robot arm design to enhance safety and
performance during the interaction.

(a)

(b)

(c)
(d)
Fig. 9. Robots for nursing assistance: (a) Sanbot Elf robot (Qihan Technology,
China) worked as a nurse nicknamed Tommy in an Italian hospital. (b) Moxi
(Diligent Robotics Inc., USA). (c) Tele-robotic Intelligent Nursing Assistant
(TRINA, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign & Duke University,
USA) [40]. (d) Robotic Nursing Assistant (RoNA, Hstar Technologies, USA)
[41].

Another challenge is related to the use of tools since medical
devices are not designed for being used by robots. An adopted
solution is the use of special replaceable connectors for various
grippers to reconfigure the end effector [42]. To tackle these
challenges, the baseline approach relies on the employment of
traditional anthropomorphic robotic arms installed on
omnidirectional mobile platforms. Additional features include
different levels of autonomy, autonomous 3D mapping and
navigation, telepresence with two-way audio for telerobotichuman communication, patient surveillance, and assistance for
patient mobility (e.g., during lifting and walking).
Some of the most advanced embodiments of these
technologies include both commercial products, like Moxi
(Diligent Robotics, USA, Fig. 9-b), and research prototypes,
such as the Tele-robotic Intelligent Nursing Assistant
(University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, USA, Fig. 9-c)
[40], Robotic Nursing Assistant (Hstar Technologies, USA,
Fig. 9-d) [41], and a telerobotic system based on YuMi (ABB,
Switzerland) [42]. The latter was developed for remote care
operation in the isolation ward and was tested in the Hospital
of Zhejiang, China. The robot is composed of two subsystems,
one for telepresence and one for teleoperation, and can assist
or even replace the medical staff with taking care of patients
in tasks that include daily checkups, delivery of medicine,
food, or other essentials, operation of medical instruments,
disinfection of frequently touched surfaces, and auscultation
while wearing PPE.
IV. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
Robotic systems are currently being used to perform moreand-more sophisticated tasks throughout our society. It is not

surprising that they are playing an important role in responding
to the challenges posed by the current COVID-19 pandemic. In
this survey, we have focused primarily on robotic applications
in healthcare, including those directly related to the care of
COVID-19 patients in hospitals and those allowing provision
of ordinary care at homes (e.g., nursing robots). Specifically,
prevention, screening, diagnosis & treatment in hospital
settings, and post-recovery home care are discussed. Other
application areas, such as public safety, supply chain logistics,
and transportation, are also important. Indeed, the adaptability
of robot systems and technology means that there has been
considerable cross-talk between areas. Many healthcare robots
discussed in this survey are essentially adaptations of robotic
systems developed for non-healthcare uses.
As this paper is being written, the pandemic continues, and
robotic systems may be expected to play an increasing role in
dealing with the challenges presented. However, it is not too
soon to consider some of the lessons drawn from the
experience.
The first lesson is the crucial role of communication between
the user communities that are most immediately affected by the
disease and the engineers and robotics researchers who are
developing systems to address emerging needs. Unless there is
a good understanding of the unmet needs and the constraints
imposed by the environment into which a robot is to be
introduced, it is not likely that it will be useful. Similarly, it is
important to understand the differing needs and expectations of
all the people (technicians, healthcare workers, patients, family
members) with whom the system is likely to interact.
A second lesson is the importance of capability and
adaptability in robotic systems. As mentioned above, many of
the systems discussed in the paper adapt robotic capabilities
developed for other uses to meet emergent needs. This
adaptability is almost an inherent aspect of robotic systems,
and the trend will continue, both due to research programs such
as the US National Robotics Initiative (NRI) and increasing
commercial deployment of robots. It is crucial for those
involved in developing these systems to remain sensitive to the
importance of future flexibility while also concentrating on the
demands of safety, simplicity, and robustness in meeting a
current requirement.
A third lesson concerns deployability in sufficient numbers
to make a major difference in a crisis. Although the systems we
discussed meet real needs, only a relatively small number have
actually been installed. As more robots are installed broadly in
our economy, there is at least the potential to exploit their
inherent adaptability to be put to work in healthcare
applications. However, advanced planning and preparation for
such a mobilization seem important.
A final lesson concerns the need for better preparation for
the infectious disease-specific constraints associated with
operating in a pandemic environment. These include such
matters as cleaning and disinfection protocols and materials
choices.
The adoption of technology needs to be expedient but safe
and responsible for facing disasters like a pandemic crisis.

Speedy and mindful regulations that properly weigh the
benefits and risks are necessary to guarantee the safety and the
effectiveness of robots and prevent biases and privacy issues.
Joint efforts by roboticists, government, industry, and citizen
stakeholders may indeed facilitate the development and
deployment of useful and validated robotic solutions for the
benefit of the community. If appropriate strategies are
implemented to ensure adaptable and reliable systems that can
be quickly replicated and distributed on demand, robots could
play a much more significant role in future crises.
REFERENCES
[1] "“Coronavirus Resource Center” The Johns Hopkins University & Johns
Hopkins Medicine. https://coronavirus.jhu.edu/ (accessed Aug. 08, 2020)."
[2] "Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “Interim Clinical Guidance
for Management of Patients with Confirmed Coronavirus Disease (COVIDCoronavirus
Disease
2019
(COVID-19),
19),"
https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/hcp/clinical-guidancemanagement-patients.html, accessed Aug. 08, 2020.
[3] G.-Z. Yang, B. J. Nelson, R. R. Murphy, H. Choset, H. Christensen, S. H.
Collins, P. Dario, K. Goldberg, K. Ikuta, and N. Jacobstein, "Combating
COVID-19—The role of robotics in managing public health and infectious
diseases," ed: Science Robotics, 2020.
[4] G. Hager, V. Kumar, R. Murphy, D. Rus, R. Taylor, "The Role of Robotics
in Infectious Disease Crises," arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.09909, 2020.
[5] "https://i-rim.it/en/pilot-projects/."
[6] M. Heder, "From NASA to EU: the evolution of the TRL scale in Public
Sector Innovation," The Innovation Journal, vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 1-23, 2017.
[7] G. Grasselli, A. Zangrillo, A. Zanella, M. Antonelli, L. Cabrini, A. Castelli,
D. Cereda, A. Coluccello, G. Foti, and R. Fumagalli, "Baseline characteristics
and outcomes of 1591 patients infected with SARS-CoV-2 admitted to ICUs
of the Lombardy Region, Italy," Jama, vol. 323, no. 16, pp. 1574-1581, 2020.
[8] A. Jain, P. Jain, and S. Aggarwal, "SARS-CoV-2 impact on elective
Orthopaedic surgery: implications for post-pandemic recovery," The Journal
of bone and joint surgery. American volume, 2020.
[9] D. M. Mann, J. Chen, R. Chunara, P. A. Testa, and O. Nov, "COVID-19
transforms health care through telemedicine: evidence from the field,"
Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association, 2020.
[10] W. Kowalski, Ultraviolet germicidal irradiation handbook: UVGI for
air and surface disinfection. Springer science & business media, 2010.
[11] B. Stibich and A. Duong, "Reduction of healthcare associated
infections through the use of pulsed xenon ultraviolet disinfection," 2016.
[12] J. E. Hollander and B. G. Carr, "Virtually perfect? Telemedicine for
COVID-19," New England Journal of Medicine, vol. 382, no. 18, pp. 16791681, 2020.
[13] Z. Gong, S. Jiang, Y. Ye, P. Li, F. Xie, H. Zhao, C. Lv, X. Wang, and
X. Liu, "SHUYU Robot: Automatic Rapid Temperature Screening System,"
Chinese Journal of Mechanical Engineering, vol. 33, no. 1, pp. 1-4, 2020.
[14] S.-Q. Li, W.-L. Guo, H. Liu, T. Wang, Y.-Y. Zhou, T. Yu, C.-Y. Wang,
Y.-M. Yang, N.-S. Zhong, and N.-F. Zhang, "Clinical Application of
Intelligent Oropharyngeal-swab Robot: Implication for COVID-19
Pandemic," European Respiratory Journal, 2020.
[15] A. I. Chen, M. L. Balter, T. J. Maguire, and M. L. Yarmush, "Deep
learning robotic guidance for autonomous vascular access," Nature Machine
Intelligence, vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 104-115, 2020.
[16] B. Mathur, A. Topiwala, S. Schaffer, M. Kam, H. Saeidi, T. Fleiter,
and A. Krieger, "A Semi-Autonomous Robotic System for Remote Trauma
Assessment," in 2019 IEEE 19th International Conference on Bioinformatics
and Bioengineering (BIBE), 2019: IEEE, pp. 649-656.
[17] R. Ye, X. Zhou, F. Shao, J. Hong, W. Tong, J. Wang, S. Chen, and A.
Cui, "Feasibility of a 5g-based robot-assisted remote ultrasound system for
cardiopulmonary assessment of patients with COVID-19," Chest, 2020.
[18] I. T. Consortium, "Blueprint for a pop-up SARS-CoV-2 testing lab,"
Nature biotechnology, vol. 38, no. 7, pp. 791-797, 2020.
[19] G. Garty, Y. Chen, A. Salerno, H. Turner, J. Zhang, O. Lyulko, A.
Bertucci, Y. Xu, H. Wang, and N. Simaan, "The RABIT: a rapid automated
biodosimetry tool for radiological triage," Health physics, vol. 98, no. 2, p.
209, 2010.

[20] W. Wan, T. Kotaka, and K. Harada, "Arranging Test Tubes in Racks
Using Combined Task and Motion Planning," arXiv preprint
arXiv:2005.03342, 2020.
[21] B. Burger, P. M. Maffettone, V. V. Gusev, C. M. Aitchison, Y. Bai, X.
Wang, X. Li, B. M. Alston, B. Li, and R. Clowes, "A mobile robotic chemist,"
Nature, vol. 583, no. 7815, pp. 237-241, 2020.
[22] "Interim Laboratory Biosafety Guidelines for Handling and Processing
Specimens Associated with Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19)."
[Online]. Available: https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/lab/labbiosafety-guidelines.html.
[23] "] Thermo Fisher Scientific. TaqPath COVID-19 Multiplex Diagnostic
Solution.
https://www.thermofisher.com/us/en/home/clinical/clinicalgenomics/pathogen-detection-solutions/sars-cov-2-covid-19.html (2020). ."
[24] "World Health Organization, Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19),
Situation
Report
–
135”.
https://www.who.int/docs/defaultsource/coronaviruse/situation-reports/20200603-covid-19-sitrep135.pdf?sfvrsn=39972feb_2."
[25] J. V. Divatia, P. U. Khan, and S. N. Myatra, "Tracheal intubation in the
ICU: Life saving or life threatening?," Indian journal of anaesthesia, vol. 55,
no. 5, p. 470, 2011.
[26] "https://hub.jhu.edu/2020/08/13/remote-control-ventilators-covid-19pandemic/."
[27] R. Canelli, C. W. Connor, M. Gonzalez, A. Nozari, and R. Ortega,
"Barrier enclosure during endotracheal intubation," New England Journal of
Medicine, vol. 382, no. 20, pp. 1957-1958, 2020.
[28] W. H. Rosenblatt, J. D. Sherman, P. Kovatsis, C. Matava, and J. Peyton,
"More on barrier enclosure during endotracheal intubation," N Engl J Med,
vol. 382, no. 21, p. e69, 2020.
[29] P. J. Tighe, S. Badiyan, I. Luria, S. Lampotang, and S. Parekattil,
"Robot-assisted airway support: a simulated case," Anesthesia and analgesia,
vol. 111, no. 4, p. 929, 2010.
[30] A. Zemmar, A. M. Lozano, and B. J. Nelson, "The rise of robots in
surgical environments during COVID-19," Nature Machine Intelligence, vol.
2, no. 10, pp. 566-572, 2020.
[31] X. Wang, Y. Tao, X. Tao, J. Chen, Y. Jin, Z. Shan, J. Tan, Q. Cao, and
T. Pan, "An original design of remote robot-assisted intubation system,"
Scientific reports, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 1-9, 2018.
[32] "https://engineering.columbia.edu/news/intouch-intubation-devicenih-prize."
[33] Q. Boehler, D. Gage, P. Hofmann, A. Gehring, C. Chautems, D. Spahn,
P. Biro, and B. J. Nelson, "REALITI: A Robotic Endoscope Automated via
Laryngeal Imaging for Tracheal Intubation," IEEE Transactions on Medical
Robotics and Bionics, vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 157-164, 2020.
[34] D. J. Brewster, N. C. Chrimes, T. B. Do, K. Fraser, C. J. Groombridge,
A. Higgs, M. J. Humar, T. J. Leeuwenburg, S. McGloughlin, and F. G.
Newman, "Consensus statement: Safe Airway Society principles of airway
management and tracheal intubation specific to the COVID-19 adult patient
group," Med J Aust, vol. 16, 2020.
[35] E. W. Hawkes, L. H. Blumenschein, J. D. Greer, and A. M. Okamura,
"A soft robot that navigates its environment through growth," Science
Robotics, vol. 2, no. 8, 2017.
[36] R. H. Almaghrabi, H. Alfaradi, W. A. Al Hebshi, and M. M. Albaadani,
"Healthcare workers experience in dealing with Coronavirus (COVID-19)
pandemic," Saudi medical journal, vol. 41, no. 6, pp. 657-661, 2020.
[37] B. Scassellati and M. Vazquez, "Potential of socially assistive robots
during infectious disease outbreaks," Science Robotics, vol. 5, no. 44, 2020.
[38] "https://spectrum.ieee.org/automaton/robotics/medicalrobots/medical-robots-future-outbreak-response."
[39] S. Yu, T.-H. Huang, X. Yang, C. Jiao, Y. Chen, J. Yi, and H. Su,
"Quasi-Direct Drive Actuation for a Lightweight Hip Exoskeleton with High
Backdrivability and High Bandwidth," IEEE/ASME Transactions on
Mechatronics, 2020.
[40] Z. Li, P. Moran, Q. Dong, R. J. Shaw, and K. Hauser, "Development
of a tele-nursing mobile manipulator for remote care-giving in quarantine
areas," in 2017 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation
(ICRA), 2017: IEEE, pp. 3581-3586.
[41] J. Ding, Y.-J. Lim, M. Solano, K. Shadle, C. Park, C. Lin, and J. Hu,
"Giving patients a lift-the robotic nursing assistant (RoNA)," in 2014 IEEE
International Conference on Technologies for Practical Robot Applications
(TePRA), 2014: IEEE, pp. 1-5.
[42] G. Yang, H. Lv, Z. Zhang, L. Yang, J. Deng, S. You, J. Du, and H.
Yang, "Keep Healthcare Workers Safe: Application of Teleoperated Robot in
Isolation Ward for COVID-19 Prevention and Control," Chinese Journal of
Mechanical Engineering, vol. 33, no. 1, pp. 1-4, 2020.

