arXiv:2012.13061v1 [cs.CY] 24 Dec 2020

Quantifying the Privacy-Utility Trade-offs in
COVID-19 Contact Tracing Apps
Patrick Ocheja1 , Yang Cao1 , Shiyao Ding1 , and Masatoshi
Yoshikawa1
1

Graduate School of Informatics , Kyoto University
December 25, 2020

1

Introduction

COVID-19 is a novel severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARSCoV-2) that was first reported in late December 2019 in the city of Wuhan,
China [1]. The virus can be transmitted from person to person which could
occur through physical contact with body fluid from an infected person or by
touching infected objects or surfaces and then touching one’s face, mouth or
nose. Since the first case of COVID-19, over four million persons have been
diagnosed with COVID-19 with more than three thousand fatalities reported
across the world [2].
To combat the virus, the World Health Organization (WHO) recommends
strategic guidelines such as limiting human-to-human transmissions, early identification, isolation and care for infected persons, and communicating critical
risk and event information to communities so as to avoid misinformation [3].
Consequently, various countries have adopted measures such as contact tracing,
travel restrictions, and partial or total shutdown of economic activities so as to
flatten the curve.
To effectively implement the recommendations for containing the spread of
COVID-19, it is necessary for government agencies, healthcare organizations and
citizens to be aware of vital information such as infectious clusters, likelihood
of infection, and personal status. This will require access to personal data such
as healthcare data, location information, and recent contacts. Therefore, it also
becomes important to protect the privacy rights of citizens as their personal
data are being collected.
This work presents a quick review of some of the various methods that have
been adopted in combating and controlling the spread of COVID-19 and how
privacy rights of citizens are being upheld or infringed. We begin by grouping
them according to: the technology used, architecture, trade-offs between privacy
and utility, phase of adoption (1, 2 or 3) and notable representative applications.
1

2

Related work

[4, 5, 6] reviewed COVID-19 contact tracing related solutions with the aim
of identifying utility/security requirements, their (dis)advantages and present
key findings to guide the development of more effective privacy-aware contact
tracing solutions. Also, [5, 6] presented a review of contact tracing tools based on
privacy-utility trade-offs and the type of technology adopted such as broadcast,
selected cast, unicast, participatory and safe paths.
The unique contribution of our work is to provide a broad classification of
tools used in combating the COVID-19 pandemic focusing on distinguishing
criteria such as the type of technology used, the architecture of the proposed
tool, the phase in which the tool is adopted or useful, and applications backed by
representative organizations. This work further assess the implications of totalprivacy, privacy trade-offs, and zero-privacy scenarios. Specifically, we present
a novel approach for evaluating privacy using both qualitative and quantitative
measures of privacy-utility assessment of contact tracing applications. In this
new method, we classify utility at three (3) distinct levels: no privacy, 100%
privacy and at k where k is set by the system providing the utility or privacy.
Finally, we make a case for potential solutions that will be useful as countries
begin to lift social distancing [7] measures.

3

Classification of Reviews

In this section, we review works under 3 broad categories: contact tracing technology, system architecture, and privacy vs utility trade-offs.

3.1

Contact tracing technology

In this subsection, we take a classification by position/contact collection technology, which is classified into three types: base station, GPS and bluetooth.
Base station: Telecommunication operators provide anonymous cell phone
base station data to the government, which is mainly used to predict and monitor
the overall trend of the epidemic. The data based on the location of the base
station can relatively accurately determine the user’s mobility, but due to the
accuracy insufficient, it can only be used to help judge close contacts.
There some telecommunication companies to provide such data for the government in Europe such as Telecom Italia in Italia, Swisscom in Swiss and
Deutsche Telekom in Germany.
GPS: GPS (Global Positioning System) is a satellite-based radio navigation
system owned by the United States government and operated by the United
States Space Force. This can obtain precise data of personal local position and
achieve the recognition of close contacts to a certain extent and many countries
have applied such type of applications.

2

In Israel, the Israeli Ministry of Health has publish an application called The
Shield [8]: the Ministry of Health, when encountered with a new Coronavirus
patient, will interview them about all the locations and places they visited before
coming there. Once the patient has told this information, it is added onto a
JSON file and this file is hourly downloaded onto the app. So, every hour
new locations of possible Coronavirus threats are added onto the app without
fail. While a user is using the app, the software of The Shield will analyze
the surroundings and compare it with the JSON file data. If the location of a
Coronavirus patient is pinged, then the app will send an alert to tell the user
that a match has been found and they are at risk of exposure to COVID-19. On
the same hand, if the location is safe, the app will alert you then as well to give
you an ’All Clear’ sign. They have do some safety measures to decrease thereat

Figure 1: The interface of ’The Shield’ application
to the privacy: 1) it guarantees that the information is only stored locally; 2)
they have released the source code of the app under an MIT license; 3) they have
asked the network security company to conduct a security review of the code;
4) the information of the user is only used if the user specifically volunteers it.
In Korea, the government utilize a system called Epidemic Intelligent Management System rather than applications. It only allows a few officials of the
epidemic prevention department to log in, and only records patient information
”those that may cause super spread”; And it need to ask for the agreements of
the related companies to protect patient privacy when obtaining official patient
information

3

Bluetooth: bluetooth technology is a wireless technology standard used for
exchanging data between fixed and mobile devices over short distances. The
applications based on bluetooth are opposite to other technologies where personal invasion is relatively small and it does not exist and actual location. Many
countries have applied such type of applications.
In Singapore, the Singaporean government released a TraceTogether [9] application that allows for digital contact tracing using the custom BlueTrace
protocol. The user’s Bluetooth proximity data is encrypted and stored only on
his/her phone. Then, the Ministry of Health (MOH) will seek user’s consent
to upload the data, if it’s needed for contact tracing. If a user had close contact with a COVID-19 case, TraceTogether allows the MOH call the user more
quickly, to provide guidance and care.
In Australia, they published an application called COVIDSafe [10] based
on bluetooth. When the user choose to download it, the user will receive a
confirmation SMS text message to complete installation. Then the system creates a unique encrypted reference code just for the user and it recognizes other
devices with the COVIDSafe app installed and Bluetooth enabled. When the
app recognizes another user, it notes the date, time, distance and duration of
the contact and the other user’s reference code. The COVIDSafe app does not
collect your location.
In America, the companies Apple and Google jointly announced that they
will release an application about Health Code [11] using Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE) technology to help governments and public health agencies slow the
spread of the epidemic.
In China, the government released an application called as StayHomeSafe
[12] based on a combination of many location technologies such as bluetooth,
Wifi and GPS. After a user download the app, he/she must keep the StayHomeSafe app running on your smartphone, and turn on the Bluetooth, Wi-Fi,
Location Services, Camera, Notifications and Mobile Data functions throughout
the quarantine period. Then, the app will utilize those informations to judge
whether the user is at home or where he/she has been gone.

3.2

Classification by System Architecture

COVID-19 applications can be classified based on the architecture of the underlying system in three categories: centralized, distributed and decentralized.
Centralized applications are applications whose data is solely managed and regulated by a central authority. As for distributed applications, the data and
processing activities could take place across multiple nodes but with a centralized control. In a simple sense, decentralized applications are not regulated or
managed by a central authority instead, each user on the application maybe responsible for managing their data and behaviour on the network. However, some
decentralized systems maybe centralized in nature depending on the underlying
algorithm and how users are admitted. In this work, we consider decentralized
systems as a subset of distributed systems.
In America, the app called CovidWatch [13] is developed in collaboration
4

Figure 2: A broad classifications based on technologies, architectures and privacy threats
with Stanford University, the app empowers people to protect themselves and
their communities without the need of surrendering their privacy. It uses Bluetooth signals to detect users when they are in proximity to each other and alerts
them anonymously if they were in contact with someone who has tested positive. A distinguishing feature of the app is that any third party, including the
government won’t be able to track who was exposed by whom. It has been
among the first apps to release an open-source protocol for privacy-preserving,
decentralized Bluetooth contact tracing.
In Germany, a smartwatch app called Corona DataSpende [11] is developed
that can monitor the spread of coronavirus by collecting crucial signs-pulse rate,
body temperature, sleep patterns from volunteers wearing a smartwatch or a
fitness tracker. It checks whether they have developed any Covid-19 symptoms
or not. The results are then portrayed on an online interactive map that makes
it possible for health authorities to take stock of the situation and find out the
hotspots.
In India, the Indian Ministry of Electronics and IT developed an app called
Aarogya Setu [14] which can notify users if they have crossed paths with someone
who has been diagnosed positive. Tracking is done via Bluetooth and a locationgenerated graph that charts proximity with anyone infected. Once the app is
installed, the users are required to switch on their Bluetooth and Location
sharing, and keep them on always for effective tracking. The app also has a
self-testing function. A user has to answer a few questions, and if the responses
indicate symptoms of coronavirus then the information is sent to the government
servers.
In UK, an app called Covid Symptom Tracker [15] has been designed by
doctors and researchers at the King’s College London and St. Thomas hospitals,
in partnership with a private healthcare company called Zoe Global. The app
studies the symptoms of the virus for advanced research and also helps track

5

Figure 3: 1) Covidwatch; 2) Corona DataSpende; 3)AarogyaSetu
how it spreads. The scientists analyze high-risk areas in the UK, speed of virus
spread, and the most vulnerable group, based on health conditions. The app
is GDPR [16] compliant and data is used only for healthcare research and not
commercial purposes.
In England, the NHS ( National Health Service) developed an application
to keep a tab on people’s movements and notify those who come in close contact with those who have been infected. Experts suggest that by analysing
the patterns of the virus spread and hotspots, the app would also help in relaxing lockdown. It would categorize details based on demography, household
structures and mobility patterns and based on this, maximum number of people
would be allowed to move freely.
In Indonesian, an app called PeduliLindungi [11]is developed by the Indonesian Communications and Information Ministry, along with the State-Owned
Enterprises (SOEs) Ministry, the app enables users to compile data related to
the spread of COVID-19 in their communities and help boost the government’s
efforts to track confirmed cases, as well as those suspected to be infected with
the virus. It cross references data stored on mobile device through Bluetooth.
When a user is in the vicinity of another user whose data has been uploaded to
PeduliLindungi, the app enables an anonymous exchange of identities, according
to its official website.
In Poland, the government has been one of the first Western countries to
roll out a smartphone app called Home Quarantine [17] that collects a lot of
personal information, including people’s location and digital photos, in its fight
to combat the pandemic. In this app, people upload their selfies when asked
by the officials, so that their exact location can be pinpointed. It has become
mandatory for anyone who has developed coronavirus symptoms.
In Japan, a health management application called Health Diary is developed

6

Figure 4: 1) Covid Symptom Tracker; 2) NHS; 3) PeduliLindungi
by Health Tech Research Institute. It allows each person to register and manage
the check items when a new coronavirus infection (COVID-19) is suspected.
Data is managed only on the smartphone where it will not be sent to the outside
including our company unless the person himself sends to the outside based on
his intention.
3.2.1

More on Decentralized Systems

In table 1 we show COVID-19 applications that are built on a decentralized
architecture. MIT Safe Paths [5] is a global movement for a free, open-source,
privacy-by design tools to help flatten the curve of COVID-19. Two main applications have been developed based on MIT Safe Paths these are: Safe Places and
COVID Safe Paths. Safe Places is a browser-based map tool that enables public
health officials interview verified cases, discover and trace likely contacts with
verified cases and provide public anonymized and aggregated data sets of possible virus spread hotspots location. Similar to MIT Safe Paths, another proposed
application is called MiPasa: a global-scale control and communication system
that enables detection of COVID-19 carriers and infection hotspots through a
fully private information sharing mechanism between multiple stakeholders [18].
Temporary Contact Numbers (TCN) [19] is a decentralized and privacyfirst contact tracing protocol to facilitate information exchange between various
contact tracing applications. TCN does not reveal any personal data and allow
users’ devices to send short-range broadcasts over Bluetooth to nearby devices.
This helps users to become informed when they come in contact with an infected
person. The TCN protocol also provides a channel for infected persons to report
their status. Another protocol similar to TCN is the Private Automated Contact
7

Table 1: Decentralized COVID-19 applications.
Application
Safe Places [5]

COVID
SafePaths [5]

MiPasa [18]

TNC [19]

PACT [20]

Alipay
Blockchain
[21]
PHBC [22]

Features
Interview verified cases, discover and trace
likely contacts with verified cases, provide
public anonymized and aggregated data sets
of possible virus spread hotspots
Logs diagnosed patients’ history at a 5minute interval, assist public health officials
with such information for contact tracing,
and inform users of possible exposure
Swift and precise early detection of carriers
and infection hotspots, privacy-based information sharing among stakeholders, and analytics tools for deriving insights.
Privacy-first contact tracing protocol, enables interoperability between contact tracing applications, bluetooth-base communication for reporting and detecting carriers
Broadcasts constantly-changing, anonymous
and randomly chosen chirp values, a tracing
layer for users to determine their risk to contracting the virus and interact with health
workers
Review, record and track demand, supplies
and logistics of epidemic prevention materials.
Track and identify virus-free zones, connect
healthcare across organizations, medical supplies alert system, and facilitate joint research.

8

Availability
Public

Public

Public

Public Protocol

Public Protocol

Private

N/A

Figure 5: 1) Home Quarantine; 2) Health Diary
Tracing (PACT) [20]. PACT is a protocol which specifies the broadcast of
constantly-changing, anonymous and randomly chosen chirp values on users’
devices to the network. When a user becomes infected, PACT activates risk
containment and contact tracing by making public (upon user’s approval) the
user’s chirp values in the past three weeks.
There are other decentralized applications that have emerged as a result of
the current COVID-19 situation in various sectors including: Alipay blockchain
for tracking medical supplies [21], Public Health Blockchain Consortium (PHBC)
on COVID-19 related research [22], and Hyperchain for tracking donations [23].

3.3

Privacy vs utility trade-offs

The need to contain the spread of COVID-19 through certain measures such
as contact tracing and social distancing comes with a necessary requirement
to acquire some personal information from citizens. Personal information such
as location and health information have been considered important to ensuring
that infectious clusters are detected on time so that quarantine measures can
be effectively implemented. However, it is also important to respect the privacy
rights of citizens as access to such information maybe counter productive during
and after the pandemic [24].
As for the level of threat to privacy based on the type of technology used,
we present the results of our evaluation on table 2.

9

Table 2: The level of threat to privacy

Threat
to
the privacy

The level of
the threat
3.3.1

Base station
It usually does
not constitute a
privacy
violation
concern, since they
are involving a
large number of
people rather than
specific
personal
local information.
Low

GPS
It is easy to violate
the privacy of the
user and be rejected
by the user.

High

Bluetooth
It usually does
not constitute a
privacy
violation
concern, since they
are involving a
large number of
people rather than
specific
personal
local information.
Low

Trade-offs

In table 3, we take a look at how various applications handle privacy especially
when handling personal information. We also compare how much utility can
be provided at varying privacy levels. The permissibility (Perm.) refers to
what degree of privacy violation can an application have where 0 means privacy
rights are fully protected and 1 means a user’s privacy rights can be completely
ignored. The utility metric assesses how much good or original intentions of the
application can be fulfilled at varying privacy levels.
Table 3: Utility derived at various privacy levels
Application Perm. Utility
@0
MIT
0.3
PDF + OF
SafePaths
[5]
MiPasa [18]
0.67
PDF + OF

Utility
@100
(0.7*PDF)
+ OF

Utility
@sys
(0.3 * PDF)
+ OF

Checker
Open

(0.33*PDF) (0.67
* N/A
+ OF
PDF)
+
OF
TNC [19]
0.3
PDF + OF
(0.7*PDF) (0.3 * PDF) Open
+ OF
+ OF
PACT [20]
0.3
PDF + OF
(0.7*PDF) (0.3 * PDF) Open
+ OF
+ OF
PDF = Privacy Dependent Features, OF = Other Features
For example, utility@0 would mean the utility provided to the user with no
privacy guarantee while utility@100 means utility provided with no potential
threats to privacy. The utility@sys is the base utility the system can provide
by itself whether or not the user consents to use of personal information. The
final parameter is the checker which is the entity that can verify privacy preser10

vation or violation. Checkers can be open (anyone), collective (multi-party) or
sovereign (single entity) checker. We calculate the permissibility and measure
utility by providing answers to the following questions:
1. Can the application take total control of the user’s privacy? Yes = 30, No
= 0 (Utility: How many features depend on its ability to do so?)
2. If No to (1), does the application collect any personally identifying information? Yes = 10, No = 0 (Utility: How many features depend on
this?)
3. If (2) = Yes, is this collection consent based? Yes = 0, No = 20
4. If consent to collect personal data is denied, can the application perform
all targeted goals? Yes = 0, No = 5 (Utility: How many can be performed
if not all?)
5. Is the application data decentralized? Yes = 0, No = 10
6. Is the application’s data storage done locally or cloud-based? Yes (cloud)
= 0(10), No(local) = 10 (0)
7. Does the data collection process and usage actively involve users or it is
done separately? Yes(separate) = 5(10), No(active) = 10(5)
8. Is the application’s code openly accessible? Yes = 0, No = 10
9. Can a user request for their data to be completely erased? Yes = 0, No =
10
10. Is this application verified or backed by an independent or non-governmental
organization? Yes = 0, No = 10

3.4

Adoption phase

In the first phase of the COVID-19 pandemic, the focus has been on identification, testing and care for infected persons. To facilitate identification of infectious groups, contact tracing applications such as [5, 19, 20, 25] are considered
important. In the second phase where social distancing measures are gradually
being lifted, it becomes important to answer some key questions: How can we
prevent a second outbreak (pandemic prevention - prevent)? What places or
activities pose a high risk of exposure to being infected (exposure)? Who is
infected/infectious, susceptible or immune to the virus (status)? What research
paths are promising or what elements are desirable for a successful discovery
(research)? When a vaccine is found, how should vaccination be carried out
(equity)?
In the table 4 we identify some COVID-19 applications and their ability to
provide answers to questions that will be useful in phase 2.

11

Table 4: Adoption in Phase-2: How COVID-19 apps may be useful
Application
MiPasa [18]
MIT SafePaths [5]
TNC [19]
PACT [20]

prevent exposure status
7
3
7
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3

research equity
3
7
7
7
7
7
7
7

References
[1] Zhe Xu, Lei Shi, Yijin Wang, Jiyuan Zhang, Lei Huang, Chao Zhang,
Shuhong Liu, Peng Zhao, Hongxia Liu, Li Zhu, et al. Pathological findings
of covid-19 associated with acute respiratory distress syndrome. The Lancet
respiratory medicine, 8(4):420–422, 2020.
[2] Ensheng Dong, Hongru Du, and Lauren Gardner. An interactive web-based
dashboard to track covid-19 in real time. The Lancet infectious diseases,
2020.
[3] W.H.O. World Health Organization. Novel coronavirus (2019-ncov): situation report, 12., 2020.
[4] Qiang Tang. Privacy-preserving contact tracing: current solutions and
open questions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.06818, 2020.
[5] Ramesh Raskar, Isabel Schunemann, Rachel Barbar, Kristen Vilcans, Jim
Gray, Praneeth Vepakomma, Suraj Kapa, Andrea Nuzzo, Rajiv Gupta,
Alex Berke, et al. Apps gone rogue: Maintaining personal privacy in an
epidemic. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.08567, 2020.
[6] Hyunghoon Cho, Daphne Ippolito, and Yun William Yu. Contact tracing
mobile apps for covid-19: Privacy considerations and related trade-offs.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.11511, 2020.
[7] Annelies Wilder-Smith and David O Freedman. Isolation, quarantine, social
distancing and community containment: pivotal role for old-style public
health measures in the novel coronavirus (2019-ncov) outbreak. Journal of
travel medicine, 27(2), 2020.
[8] Israel ministry of health, hamagen: Covid-19 exposure prevention app
(2020). https://github.com/MohGovIL/hamagen-react-native.
[9] Government
of
singapore,
https://www.tracetogether.gov.sg/.

tracetogether

(2020),.

[10] Government of australia, covidsafe app (2020). https://github.com/AUCOVIDSafe/mobile-android.

12

[11] Chaturvedi
A.
Top
10
popular
smartphone
apps
Available
fromGeospatial
World:
to
track
covid-19.
.https://www.geospatialworld.net/blogs/popular-apps-COVID-19/;2020,
4 18. accessed on:, 24 April, 2020.
[12] Jinfeng Li and Xinyi Guo. Global deployment mappings and challenges of
contact-tracing apps for covid-19. Available at SSRN 3609516, 2020.
[13] Covid watch: Slowing the spread of infectious diseases using crowdsourced
data (2020). https://github.com/covid19risk, 2020.
[14] Ashok Jhunjhunwala. Role of telecom network to manage covid-19 in india:
Aarogya setu. Transactions of the Indian National Academy of Engineering,
page 1.
[15] Susan Mayor. Covid-19: Researchers launch app to track spread of symptoms in the uk, 2020.
[16] Paul Voigt and Axel Von dem Bussche. The eu general data protection regulation (gdpr). A Practical Guide, 1st Ed., Cham: Springer International
Publishing, 2017.
[17] Jaroslaw Pinkas, Mateusz Jankowski, Lukasz Szumowski, Aleksandra Lusawa, Wojciech S Zgliczyński, Filip Raciborski, Waldemar Wierzba, and
Mariusz Gujski. Public health interventions to mitigate early spread of sarscov-2 in poland. Medical science monitor: international medical journal of
experimental and clinical research, 26:e924730–1, 2020.
[18] n.a. Mipasa, 2020.
[19] Ellie Daw, Scott Leibrand, Jenny Wanger, Andreas Gebhard, Nele Quast,
and Desmon Walker. Contact tracing interoperability recommendations,
2020.
[20] Ronald L. Rivest, Jon Callas, Ran Canetti, Kevin Esvelt, Daniel Kahn Gillmor, Yael Tauman Kalai, Anna Lysyanskaya, Adam Norige, Ramesh
Raskar, Adi Shamir, Emily Shen, Israel Soibelman, Michael Specter,
Vanessa Teague, Ari Trachtenberg, Mayank Varia, Marc Viera, Daniel
Weitzner, John Wilkinson, and Marc Zissman. The pact protocol specification, 2020.
[21] Xinhua. China focus: Blockchain technology improves coronavirus response, 2020.
[22] Dinh Nguyen, Ming Ding, Pubudu N Pathirana, and Aruna Seneviratne.
Blockchain and ai-based solutions to combat coronavirus (covid-19)-like
epidemics: A survey. 2020.
[23] Ting Peng. Blockchain charity platform to fight against the coronavirus
outbreak, 2020.
13

[24] Yang Cao, Shun Takagi, Yonghui Xiao, Li Xiong, and Masatoshi Yoshikawa.
Panda: Policy-aware location privacy for epidemic surveillance. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2005.00186, 2020.
[25] Justin Chan, Shyam Gollakota, Eric Horvitz, Joseph Jaeger, Sham Kakade,
Tadayoshi Kohno, John Langford, Jonathan Larson, Sudheesh Singanamalla, Jacob Sunshine, et al. Pact: Privacy sensitive protocols and mechanisms for mobile contact tracing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.03544, 2020.

14

