C HARACTERIZING T WITTER USERS BEHAVIOUR DURING THE
S PANISH C OVID -19 FIRST WAVE

Bernat Esquirol

arXiv:2012.06550v1 [cs.SI] 11 Dec 2020

Universitat de Barcelona
UBICS
Luce Prignano
Universitat de Barcelona
UBICS

Albert Díaz-Guilera
Universitat de Barcelona
UBICS

Emanuele Cozzo
Universitat de Barcelona
UBICS
Universitat Oberta de Catalunya
CNSC/IN3
ecozzo@uoc.edu

December 10th, 2020

A BSTRACT
People use Online Social Media to make sense of crisis events. A pandemic crisis like the Covid-19 outbreak
is a complex event, involving many aspects of the social lives on many temporal scales. Focusing on the
Spanish Twittersphere, we characterize users activity behaviour across the different phases of the Covid-19
first wave. By performing stepwise segmented regression analysis and Bayesian switchpoint analysis on a
sample of Spanish Twittersphere users timeline, we observe that generic Spanish Twitter users and journalists
experience an abrupt positive relative increment of their tweeting activity between March the 9th and the 14th,
in coincidence with control measures being announced by regional and State level authorities. On the contrary,
politicians follow a completely endogenous dynamic determined by institutional agenda.
Keywords Online Human Behavior · Twitter · Covid-19 · Segmented Regression · Bayesian switchpoint

1
1.1

Introduction
Making sense of the Covid-19 pandemic on Twitter

The COVID-19 outbreak (1 December 2019 – present) is the first global pandemic of the information age. A large-scale public
debate is taking place in a hybrid media ecosystem in which online social media (OSM) in general, and Twitter in particular, play
a central role [9, 3]). The online debate addresses all the aspects of the pandemic induced crisis that the public opinion considers
to be relevant: from the origin of the virus, to the controversy surrounding (future) vaccination campaigns; from the necessity (or
lack of it) for lockdowns and other social distancing measures, to the effectiveness of the different national health systems. These
are evidence that people use Twitter to make sense of the pandemic crisis, i.e. they try to understand, through interaction with
others, an ongoing event that is new, uncertain, and confusing [12]. Unlike other crisis events as for instance earthquakes or
terrorist attacks, a pandemic crisis is a complex phenomena spanning different time scales. In particular, we can distinguish a
priori three different phases for the first wave: an early phase in which the virus and information about it starts to spread, a phase
in which the epidemic hits a particular region and the debate about control and mitigation measures arises, and a third phase in
which these measures are finally implemented. Our hypothesis is that online users will react differently to different phases, in
line with some recent findings [3, 7].

C HARACTERIZING T WITTER USERS BEHAVIOUR DURING THE S PANISH C OVID -19 FIRST WAVE

1.2

Online Social Media volatility

It is a well known fact that OSM reacted abruptly to external and internal forces, eventually resulting in deep transformations
without warning [5]. This inherent volatility indicates that online behaviour changes in response to crises and the associated
interventions. In this sense, OSM can serve as an early warning system for any kind of emergency worldwide, from natural
disasters to terrorist acts [6, 8].
Unfortunately, this useful property comes with an important drawback. The efforts made in the last few years to measure and
characterize human and human-like activity in OSM mainly consist in the search for characteristic patterns in users activity data.
For instance, it has been shown that some aspects of human communication are described by universal statistics which may
help distinguish among different types of human and human-like users [11, 10]. Nonetheless, when an emergency occurs, all
the typical patterns of activity are probably altered and usual classification algorithms are no longer reliable. This is even more
important if we take into account the misinformation processes that accompany an ongoing crisis event, named ‘infodemics’ in
the case of a pandemic [9]. In order to properly identify harmful activity in the context of a crisis, either abrupt or prolonged, we
need to know how generic users behave in such circumstances.

1.3

The case of Covid-19 first wave in Spain

In this work, we characterize online collective behaviour throughout the different phases of the first wave of Covid19, and, in
particular, in response to the prevention and control measures adopted, using Spain Twittersphere as a case study.
To this end, we consider the whole tweeting activity, regardless of the topic of the content, instead of only tracking tweets directly
related to the Covid-19 outbreak. We are thus able to compare online behaviors before and during the crisis from an overall
perspective.

Figure 1: Timeline of Covid-19 pandemic related events in Spain: restriction measures, confirmed cases and deaths during the
first wave. A interactive version of the infographic is available at https://public.flourish.studio/visualisation/
4432020/

2
2.1

Methods
Data Collection

We collect Twitter users’ timelines, i.e., , the time stamped list of tweets (including retweets) emitted from an user, of three
different types of Spain-based users: journalists, politicians, and random users.
2

C HARACTERIZING T WITTER USERS BEHAVIOUR DURING THE S PANISH C OVID -19 FIRST WAVE

Journalists’ accounts We observed that, usually, the news media follow on Twitter the journalists working for them and
journalists usually have some variation of the word journalist in their bio. Leveraging on these two facts, in order to sample
Spanish journalists’ Twitter profiles, we search the Twitter accounts of the top news media in Spain (list in appendix A) and get
their friends (users being followed by the media account). Among them, we retain those who have in their bio some version of
the word journalist. In this way, we get 1722 journalists’ profiles.
Politicians’ accounts We picked the members of the Congreso XIV Legistlatura list that contains all the members in the Spanish
congress during the February to June 2020 period. There are only 350 congresspersons in Spain, and not all of them have a
Twitter account: altogether, we have retrieved 261 politicians profiles.
Random users Getting unbiased random samples of Twitter users for a given location is not an easy task given that geolocated
tweets are sparse. We developed a method with the aim to reduce as much as possible the bias toward highly active users.
Our method works as follows:
1. We get the 100 most recent tweets from users located in Spain through the Twitter Standard Search API
2. We filter those 100 tweets so that the creator of the tweet (u0 ) has more than a given threshold number of followers,
friends, and actions.
3. We get one follower and one friend of u0 at random.
Step 2 is to filter out bots or extremely inactive users. Step 3 is to avoid a bias towards high frequency users that we would have
by taking user u0 directly. In this way, we get two types of random users: random-friends are those that we get sampling the
friends of u0 , and random-followers those obtained by sampling the followers. The first group is biased toward users following
many other accounts, and the other is biased towards users having many followers. We have around 8.000 profiles in each
random set.
The Twitter Search API allows us to retrieve 3200 tweets for each timeline, starting from the most recent one. Hence, depending
on the user’s activity, we have been able to cover a more or less large time period. The first data retrieval was conducted on April
the 28th, then we periodically collect new tweets from the sample via the Twitter Search API.

2.2

Analysis of the activity

We characterize the activity of an individual user trough the abrupt jumps it may experience in particular days. To quantify a
jump, we will consider the mean activity before and after it with respect to the whole activity. To estimate those values, we
perform two types of analysis and compare the results.

2.2.1

Stepwise segmented regression analysis

cc
We perform a stepwise segmented regression (SSR) analysis [5] of the timeline of each user. In this way, for each timeline we
obtain a number of breakpoints marking moments of abrupt change in the tweeting frequency of the user. Given the list of
timestamps of the tweets of a user, we optimize a piecewise linear fit for each of the segments in which the timeline is divided by
the breakpoints. The optimal breakpoints are estimated by minimizing the residual sum of squares [4], while the number of
breakpoints is fixed by minimizing the Bayesian Information Criteria of the model.
In this way, we can associate to each user u the set of breakpoints τ1u , τ2u , ..., τnu , i.e. the days in which their activity changes
abruptly, if any. Finally, we characterize users’ breakpoints by the relative jump

Jiu =

Lui − Lui−1
∆Lui
=
mu
mu

(1)

u
where Lui is the tweeting frequency of user u in the interval [τiu , τi+1
) and mu is the mean frequency on the whole user u
retrieved timeline.

We can describe the overall activity by summing separately positive and negative jumps:
X
τu
J ± (τ ) =
Jiu θ(±Jiu )δτ i

(2)

u

3

C HARACTERIZING T WITTER USERS BEHAVIOUR DURING THE S PANISH C OVID -19 FIRST WAVE

2.2.2

Bayesian switchpoint analysis

In order to perform a Bayesian switchpoint (BS) analysis, our model assumes a Poisson-distributed tweeting rate with constant
but potentially different rates, before and after a switchpoint, i.e. a day in which the twitter activity changes.

(0)

λ1

: Exponential (rate =α)

(3)

: Exponential (rate =α)
τ : Uniform [0, 1)

(4)
(5)

(0)
λ2

For i = 1 . . . n:
(
(0)
λ1 if τ ≤ i/n
λi =
(0)
λ2 if τ > i/n

(6)

Our prior for is an exponential distribution with rate while our prior for is a uniform distribution over the whole time span of the
timeline.
An Hamiltonian Monte Carlo method [13] as implemented in TensorFlow [1] is used for sampling from the relevant posterior
distributions of λ1,2 and τ .
Thus, we can associate to each user a probability distribution for the switchpoint and a probability distribution of the tweeting
frequency respectively before and after the switch. To carry out an overall analysis of the behavior of the Spanish Twittersphere,
we need,as for the SSR analysis, to characterize the switchpoints. By approximating the distribution of the s with a delta centered
in their mode, we obtain the following expression for the relative jump:
J u (τi ) = P (τ u = τi )

λ˜u2 − λ˜u1
∆λu
=
u
m
mu

(7)

where λ̃1,2 are the mode of the respective posterior distribution. We can then characterize the overall activity by summing
separately positive and relative jumps of each user weighted by the jump probability:
J ± (τ ) =

X

J(τi )Θ(±J u (τi ))δττi

(8)

u

3

Results

From both the SSR and BS analysis, we obtain a clear indication that in the week between the 9th and the 14th of March the
majority of Spanish twitter users abruptly changed their tweeting behaviour, starting to tweet with higher frequency. These
days coincide with the firsts control measures being introduced in Spain at regional level on Monday 9th and the declaration of
the state of alarm by the Spanish prime minister on Friday 13th, which implied a state level lockdown. The BS analysis also
indicates a noticeable decrease in the tweeting activity in those days, but much less intense than the opposite behaviour. As
a final note, the SSR and BS analyses are discordant near the boundary of the considered time window. However, these two
models are biased in opposite ways in these regions and the analysis has hence to be regarded as inconclusive for what concerns
both the end of 2019 and May 2020.
Considering the different types of users, we can observe that only the politicians do not display any change in their activity in the
week of the lockdown declaration. Contrarily, both analyses indicate a positive jump in the activity near the 7th of January, the
day on which the two parties forming the current coalition government found an agreement, as well as a pronounced negative
jump near the 12th of February, day in which the composition of the government was announced by the prime minister. Finally,
journalists also show an interesting behaviour. Relative positive jumps concentrate in the aforementioned week, but they also
show a secondary peak on March the 2nd, the day before the first Covid-19 death was officially confirmed in Spain.

4

C HARACTERIZING T WITTER USERS BEHAVIOUR DURING THE S PANISH C OVID -19 FIRST WAVE

Figure 2: All

5

C HARACTERIZING T WITTER USERS BEHAVIOUR DURING THE S PANISH C OVID -19 FIRST WAVE

Figure 3: Types

6

C HARACTERIZING T WITTER USERS BEHAVIOUR DURING THE S PANISH C OVID -19 FIRST WAVE

4

Conclusions

In this work, we have shown how a statistical analysis of individual users’ activity on online social media can highlight the
relation between crisis events and abrupt changes in behaviours. In particular, our results indicate that the debate about the
government of the crisis triggers collective participation more than events itself. This is in line with findings in [7] in which
the authors show a robust large increase in the use of words related to control measures only since the first week of March,
generic Covid-related words, instead, start to be increasingly used since January. On the other hand, results point to the fact that
politicians’ activity has a dynamic that is more endogenous, while journalists anticipate trends.
The analysis of the individual activity of users in the Spanish Twittersphere shows that an abrupt change occurs for a large
part of them in coincidence with the days on which the control and mitigation measures were announced in Spain, at regional
and State level. In this sense, we can claim that it is not the epidemic outbreak that drives the change in the users’ activity.
Indeed, the main driver is rather the political reactions to the crisis. Interestingly enough, we do not observe any major activity
change at the beginning of the lockdown period, suggesting that there is no further effect on the online activity of the change in
the physical social behaviour. The only observable consequence of the enforcement of the “Stay at home” recommendations
is precisely the absence of a second change, which under more ordinary circumstances would have reestablished the overall
activity at the previous level. Differently from the case of a usual highly participated political debate, the discussion around the
introduction of the state of alarm and the related measures, determined a persistent increase of the online activity. On the other
hand, politicians do not follow this general pattern. On the contrary, their activity responds rather to the institutional agenda
itself. Finally, journalists anticipate the change in activity of generic users.
It is worth mentioning that the phase in which we observe the major changes in users activities roughly matches the transition
between two different phases of the associated social epidemics [14] as shown in [2]. In particular, extrapolating results from [2],
jumps in activities should be located between the suspended reality phase, in which people express anger about the looming
feeling that things were about to change, and the acceptance phase, started after the authorities imposed physical-distancing
measures, in which people adjust to a "new normality". This observation calls for a deeper understanding of the relation between
online activity and psychological states during a crisis.
In the present preliminary work, we limited our analysis to the activity without taking into account the sentiment associated with
it or its content, neither the interaction patterns that it generates. Those elements are crucial for a full description of the online
behavioural response and will be matter of future research.

7

C HARACTERIZING T WITTER USERS BEHAVIOUR DURING THE S PANISH C OVID -19 FIRST WAVE

Appendix A

Overall activity

In fig. 4, we represent the mean number of tweets per day for each week. We observe that the overall activity increase in the
week after that in which we observe the majority of individual changes.

Figure 4: Activity per week for all our users.

Appendix B

Distributions of the number of breakpoints in the
Stepwise Segmented Regression Analysis

In fig. 5, we show the fraction of the number of optimal breakpoints for each user type. We can see that the distribution is quite
similar among different user types. We can observe that the maximum of the distribution is always centered at 2 breakpoints, and
that few users reach the 5 breakpoints. This serves as an a posteriori validation of the maximum number of breakpoints we set in
our model.

Figure 5: Number of breakpoints for each user type.

Appendix C

Bayesian Switchpoint Analysis in presence of multiple
switches.

Real data may show more than one switch, while our model assumes there is just one. We show some examples of the results we
get when data are generated with multiple switches.
In both examples we can see how in case of multiple switches the model will obviously get only one of them. We can conclude
that we can use the p-value as a way of knowing if there are some existing breakpoints in the data that we missed. When the
p-value is low, it does not mean that the model has to be rejected, but rather that it is choosing one of the breakpoints present in
the data, while other breakpoints probably exist.
8

C HARACTERIZING T WITTER USERS BEHAVIOUR DURING THE S PANISH C OVID -19 FIRST WAVE

Figure 6: Syntetic data with λ changing from 1 to 5 at the 2019-01-12 and from 5 to 2 at the 2020-03-02. For the model we
obtain a p-value=0.46

Figure 7: Syntetic data with λ changing from 1 to 5 at the 2019-10-12 and from 5 to 2 at the 2020-03-02. For the model we
obtain a p-value=0.50

Appendix D

Bayesian Switchpoint Analysis with non-Poissonian
models.

For comparison, we also analysed other models for a given example.

D.1

Sigmoidal

We analyze here the sigmoidal model. Instead of a sudden switch, we now have a smooth transition between the two λs. While
in this way we can reduce the uncertainty in τ , in general the two models give very similar results.
9

C HARACTERIZING T WITTER USERS BEHAVIOUR DURING THE S PANISH C OVID -19 FIRST WAVE

Figure 8: Comparison between Poissonian and Sigmoidal model

D.2

Multistate model

As in the case of the breakpoints model in SSR, we can allow for multiple states or levels represented by more than two λs. The
maximum number of levels being (LMAX ).

Figure 9: Multistate model for different states
This model has the advantage of fitting the data more accurately, but the computation time and the simplicity of the result are
worse than that of the linear breakpoints model. For example, we can see in fig. 9 that the 4-state model has a small spike at a
10

C HARACTERIZING T WITTER USERS BEHAVIOUR DURING THE S PANISH C OVID -19 FIRST WAVE

given day, this is useful to detect anomalies in the activity, but when we look for changes that persist through time, the linear
breakpoints model introduces less noise.

References
[1] Martín Abadi, Paul Barham, Jianmin Chen, Zhifeng Chen, Andy Davis, Jeffrey Dean, Matthieu Devin, Sanjay Ghemawat,
Geoffrey Irving, Michael Isard, et al. Tensorflow: A system for large-scale machine learning. In 12th {USENIX} Symposium
on Operating Systems Design and Implementation ({OSDI} 16), pages 265–283, 2016.
[2] Luca Aiello, Quercia Daniele, Zhou Ke, Constantinides Marios, Šćepanović Sanja, and Joglekar Sagar. How epidemic
psychology works on social media: Evolution of responses to the covid-19 pandemic. arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.13169,
2020.
[3] T. Alshaabi, J. R. Minot, M. V. Arnold, J. L. Adams, D. R. Dewhurst, A. J. Reagan, R. Muhamad, C. M. Danforth, and
P. S. Dodds. How the world’s collective attention is being paid to a pandemic: Covid-19 related n-gram time series for 24
languages on twitter, 2020.
[4] Jushan Bai and Pierre Perron. Computation and analysis of multiple structural change models. Journal of Applied
Econometrics, 18(1):1–22, 2003.
[5] Brian Britt. Stepwise segmented regression analysis: An iterative statistical algorithm to detect and quantify evolutionary
and revolutionary transformations in longitudinal data. In Transparency in Social Media, pages 125–144. Springer, 2015.
[6] Andrew Crooks, Arie Croitoru, Anthony Stefanidis, and Jacek Radzikowski. #earthquake: Twitter as a distributed sensor
system. Transactions in GIS, 17(1):124–147, 2013.
[7] David Rushing Dewhurst, Thayer Alshaabi, Michael Vincent Arnold, Joshua R. Minot, Christopher M. Danforth, and
Peter Sheridan Dodds. Divergent modes of online collective attention to the COVID-19 pandemic are associated with
future caseload variance. CoRR, abs/2004.03516, 2020.
[8] Diana Fischer-Preßler, Carsten Schwemmer, and Kai Fischbach. Collective sense-making in times of crisis: Connecting
terror management theory with twitter user reactions to the berlin terrorist attack. Computers in Human Behavior, 100:138
– 151, 2019.
[9] Riccardo Gallotti, Francesco Valle, Nicola Castaldo, Pierluigi Sacco, and Manlio De Domenico. Assessing the risks of
‘infodemics’ in response to covid-19 epidemics. Nature Human Behaviour, 2020.
[10] Ruth García-Gavilanes, Andreas Kaltenbrunner, Diego Sáez-Trumper, Ricardo Baeza-Yates, Pablo Aragón, and David
Laniado. Who Are My Audiences? A Study of the Evolution of Target Audiences in Microblogs, pages 561–572. Springer
International Publishing, Cham, 2014.
[11] Zafar Gilani, Reza Farahbakhsh, Gareth Tyson, and Jon Crowcroft. A large-scale behavioural analysis of bots and humans
on twitter. ACM Trans. Web, 13(1), February 2019.
[12] Thomas Heverin and Lisl Zach. Use of microblogging for collective sense-making during violent crises: A study of three
campus shootings. Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology, 63(1):34–47, 2012.
[13] R MCMC Neal. Mcmc using hamiltonian dynamics (handbook of markov chain monte carlo) ed s brooks et al. A Gelman,
G Jones and XL Meng, 2011.
[14] Philip Strong. Epidemic psychology: a model. Sociology of Health & Illness, 12(3):249–259, 1990.

11

