A review on plasmonic and metamaterial based biosensing
platforms for virus detection

arXiv:2012.00551v5 [q-bio.QM] 25 May 2021

Mohammad Muntasir Hassana,b , Farhan Sadik Siuma,c , Fariba Islama,d and Sajid
Muhaimin Choudhurya,∗
a Department

of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Bangladesh University of Engineering and Technology, Dhaka.
of Information and Communication Technology, Bangladesh University of Engineering and Technology, Dhaka.
c Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Daffodil International University, Dhaka.
d Department of Computer Science and Engineering, BRAC University, Dhaka.
b Institute

ARTICLE INFO

ABSTRACT

Keywords:
surface plasmon resonance
metamaterials
biosensor
virus detection
nanoparticle
optofluidic
quantum dot
Coronavirus
fluorescence
nanowire
meta-surface

Due to changes in our climate and constant loss of habitat for animals, new pathogens for humans are constantly erupting. SARS-CoV-2 virus, become so infectious and deadly that they put
new challenge to the whole technological advancement of healthcare. Within this very decade,
several other deadly virus outbreaks were witnessed by humans such as Zika virus, Ebola virus,
MERS-coronavirus etc and there might be even more infectious and deadlier diseases in the
horizon. Though conventional techniques have succeeded in detecting these viruses to some
extent, these techniques are time-consuming, costly, and require trained human-resources. Plasmonic metamaterial based biosensors might pave the way to low-cost rapid virus detection. So
this review discusses in details, the latest development in plasmonics and metamaterial based
biosensors for virus, viral particles and antigen detection and the future direction of research in
this field.

1. Introduction
In late 2019, an unprecedented case of pneumonia was diagnosed in China which later was proved to be caused
by a novel severe acute respiratory syndrome -coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2) or novel coronavirus[32, 51]. This novel
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) spread throughout the world in a very short time and was declared a pandemic by the
World Health Organization (WHO)[66]. It is to be noted that this is the third large-scale outbreak of Coronavirus
associated disease within less than a decade after Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS) in 2003[110] and
Middle East Respiratory Syndrome (MERS) in 2012[7]. Apart from novel Coronavirus, a number of other virus
related diseases also cause wreak havoc to the global economy and it is needless to say that a rapid, reliable and
accurate detection of viruses can contribute greatly to control the spread of the disease and prevent future pandemics
like COVID-19.
Currently, several common methods are used for detecting infectious viruses. Serological testing [10], immunofluorescence, nucleic acid amplification test (NAAT) are the most common genre of diagnosis [98]. Hemagglutination
inhibition assay (HI) and enzyme linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) are the major serological testing [87]. However, they have some major drawbacks which have hindered their ubiquitous usage for virus detection. For instance,
∗ Corresponding

author
hmuntasir@iict.buet.ac.bd (M.M. Hassan); sium1093@gmail.com (F.S. Sium); faribaislam3011@gmail.com (F. Islam);
sajid@eee.buet.ac.bd (S.M. Choudhury)
ORCID (s): 0000-0001-7235-0710 (M.M. Hassan); 0000-0002-9784-8256 (F.S. Sium); 0000-0001-6125-4993 (F. Islam)

M M Hassan et al. Sensing and Biosensing Research, 33, 100429, (2021) DOI: 10.1016/j.sbsr.2021.100429

Page 1 of 29

A review on plasmonic and metamaterial based biosensing platforms for virus detection

the preparation of antibody for ELISA is a costly technique and requires expert manpower[75]. On the other hand,
HI has low specificity under certain levels of agglutination and the sample may contain non-specific hemagglutinating factors [85]. Nucleic acid amplification based reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT PCR) test is
another technique to detect virus and to date, it is the most widely used technique to detect novel Coronavirus[17].
RT–PCR technique is a highly sensitive, specific and reliable diagnostic method. But this test typically takes longer
than other detection methods and requires expert manpower and hence is expensive. Nucleic acid sequence-based
amplification (NASBA), loop-mediated isothermal amplification (LAMP), RT–PCR and q-PCR are in the genre of
nucleic acid amplification test (NAAT). Most of these testing schemes are costly and require a lot of time and highly
trained manpower. Other methods to detect viruses such as CRISPR [71] and culture methods have apparently failed
to be a rapid and reliable method for satisfactory diagnosis of different viruses as they are not widely used yet. In such
circumstances, real-time and label-free biosensors have recently emerged as auspicious diagnostic tools for different
infectious diseases. These sensors overcome the need for fluorescence or radioactive tagging for virus detection, thus
enabling compact, robust, cost-effective point-of-care diagnostics. Different bio-sensing platforms based on optical,
electrical [52], and mechanical [78] has shown promising applications ranging from laboratory investigation to clinical diagnostics and drug development to combating emerging infectious diseases. Among these different genres of
biosensors, optical detection platforms have gained considerable interest in recent years. Optical biosensors allow remote diagnosis scheme of the bio-molecular binding signal from the sensing volume without any physical connection
between the excitation source and the detection media. Unlike mechanical and electrical sensors, these optical sensors are also compatible with physiological solutions and are not sensitive to the changes in the ionic strengths of the
solutions. Among different optical biosensors, plasmonic and metamaterial based plasmonic biosensors are highly potential in this regard due to their exotic properties like miniaturized sensor chip[104], real-time sensing [29], label-free
sensing mechanism [53].
The aim of this comprehensive review is to present the advances in plasmonic and metamaterial based plasmonic
biosensors for virus or viral particles detection and highlight the scopes of future work in this field. There have been
some recent review papers on plasmonic biosensors for virus detection [55, 82], different methods of Coronavirus
detection [76, 107, 37, 8] and recent progress in nanophotonic biosensors to combat the COVID-19 pandemic [86].
However, metamaterial based plasmonic biosensors haven’t been covered before and in this review, metamaterial based
virus detection methods are discussed in detail which is unprecedented and different plasmonic biosensors are classified in five broad fields based on the detection technique and structure of the biosensors. Due to the ongoing COVID-19
pandemic, emphasis is given to the family of Coronavirus detection techniques and the performance of a number of
biosensors for various virus detection are also compared and summarized. Moreover, we have discussed the future
trends in plasmonic and metamaterial based biosensing such as surface plasmon resonance imaging (SPRi), incor-

M M Hassan et al. Sensing and Biosensing Research, 33, 100429, (2021) DOI: 10.1016/j.sbsr.2021.100429

Page 2 of 29

A review on plasmonic and metamaterial based biosensing platforms for virus detection

Virus
Virus Capturing layer
Metal layer

Virus

Virus
Metal

Capturing
Molecule
Nano
aperture

(b) Opto-fluidic

(h)Meta-surface based

(a) Planar structure

Virus
Virus
Capturing
Molecule
Au/Ag NP

(c) Nano particle based

Plasmonic
biosensors for
virus detection

Metamaterial
based biosensors

3D metamaterial
structure

(g) 3D metamaterial based
Quantum
Dot

Virus
Capacitance
Metal

Nano wire
Virus

Virus
Au NP

(d) QD enhanced
fluorescent LSPR

(e) Nano wire based

(f) 2D metamaterial based

Figure 1: Schematic of different plasmonic and metamaterial based virus-sensing structures. (a) Planar structure: Surface
plasmon is generated in between dielectric and metal. (b) Opto fluidic structure: nano aperture holding antibody increasing
binding potential for flowing virus antigen. (c) nanoparticle: localized surface plasmon around NPs enhances the sensitivity.
(d) Quantum dots attachment with NPs: Binding QD with NP enables enhanced fluorescent LSPR sensing. (e) Nano
wire: Plasmons are generated around nano wires increasing the sensitivity. (f) 2D metamaterial: virus attachment in
metamaterial changes capacitance which changes the resonant frequency. (g) 3D metamaterial: 3D shaped metamaterial
can mend magnetic field of light more efficiently which has the potential to materialize ultra-sensitive biosensors. (h)
Metasurface: unusual patterns of metasurface performs as an efficient virus sensing platform.

porating quantum properties of materials in biosensing, novel materials based biosensors, artificial intelligence, and
machine learning application in biosensing. As a non-destructive virus sensing platform, the potential application
of plasmonic and metamaterial based biosensors for rapid, multiplexed, point-of-care detection of virus is also highlighted.

2. Evaluation of plasmonic biosensors
To evaluate the performance of biosensors several figures of merit are widely used. Among them, detection limits
or limit of detection (LOD), sensitivity, selectivity or specificity are the most popular. Selectivity or specificity (S)
is defined as the ability of a sensor to detect a particular virus from a sample containing admixtures of similar or
other materials. Sensitivity and detection limits are two significant metrics that can be used to compare biosensors of
different platforms. Sensitivity in the case of virus detection expresses how a sensor interacts in the presence of the

M M Hassan et al. Sensing and Biosensing Research, 33, 100429, (2021) DOI: 10.1016/j.sbsr.2021.100429

Page 3 of 29

A review on plasmonic and metamaterial based biosensing platforms for virus detection

virus. For virus detection generally sensitivity of plasmonic biosensor is defined as-

𝑆=

Δ𝜆
Δ𝐶

(1)

Here Δ𝜆 is the change in peak reflection/transmission wavelength and Δ𝐶 is the change in virus concentration.
Another important figure of merit limit of detection (LOD) or detection limit (DL) is defined as the minimum virus
concentration that can be detected by the sensor. In other words, LOD is the minimum number of viruses necessary to
cause a detectable change in the output signal of the sensor. For the determination of LOD a formula commonly used
is- [83, 90]

𝐿𝑂𝐷 =

3𝜎
𝑆

(2)

Here 𝜎 is the standard deviation of the control without virus which is basically the system noise floor and S is the
slope of the linear fit for wavelength shift versus virus concentration plot which is the sensitivity of the sensor. LOD
for virus detection can be specified in different units. But commonly used units are: (1) ng/mL (2) copies of virus/mL
(3) PFU/mL (4) pg/𝑚𝑚2 (5) EID/mL

3. From plasmonic to metamaterial based biosensor
3.1. Plasmonic excitation in biosensing
Metal-dielectric contact has been one of the primary methods of generating plasmonic excitation. Generally, it
is a guided mode that propagates along metal/dielectric interfaces. Plasmonic excitations are characterized into two
segments, namely surface plasmon polaritons (SPP) or surface plasmon resonance (SPR) and localized surface plasmon
resonance (LSPR). SP that propagates at the flat interface between a conductor and a dielectric is a two-dimensional
electromagnetic wave. It is the collective resonant oscillation of conduction electrons and incoming photons at the
interface between the metal and the dielectric as shown in Figure 1(a). On the other hand, LSPR is generated by a light
wave trapped within conductive nanoparticles (NPs) smaller than the wavelength of light as depicted in Figure 1(c).
The size of the NPs is typically in the region of Rayleigh scattering. When an external electric field is applied to metallic
NPs, the conduction electrons encounter combined harmonic oscillations causing a strongly localized electromagnetic
field with high intensity. Ever since the discovery of this unique characteristic, many exciting research on biosensing
has been conducted using this exotic property and it has been used in virus detection as well. Viruses like HIV,

M M Hassan et al. Sensing and Biosensing Research, 33, 100429, (2021) DOI: 10.1016/j.sbsr.2021.100429

Page 4 of 29

A review on plasmonic and metamaterial based biosensing platforms for virus detection

coronavirus, influenza, dengue, adeno virus, zika virus, hepatitis, norovirus etc. have been reported to be successfully
detected by employing a variety of plasmonic biosensors.
To induce SPR in the boundary between metal and dielectric, the momentum of the incident photon must be
matched with the momentum of the conduction band electrons. If the matching condition is met, light can be coupled
in the interface between the metal and dielectric plane. For flat planar surfaces, this phase matching is fulfilled by the
attenuated total reflection (ATR). This usually requires a media of higher refractive index (RI). The matching condition
can be interpreted from the dispersion relation given below [73]:

𝐾𝑠𝑝𝑝 =

2𝜋
𝜆𝑜

√

𝜀𝑚 𝜀𝑑
2𝜋
=
𝑛 𝑠𝑖𝑛Θ𝑖
𝜀𝑚 + 𝜀𝑑
𝜆𝑜 𝑝

(3)

where 𝑛𝑝 is the refractive index of the coupling prism, Θ𝑖 is the incident angle of light, 𝜀𝑚 is the dielectric constant
of metal, 𝜀𝑑 is the dielectric constant or dielectric permittivity, 𝐾𝑠𝑝𝑝 is the wave vector of surface plasmon polariton.
As the refractive index of the analyte media changes, 𝜀𝑑 also changes, eventually altering the wave vector k. When
𝜀𝑚 and 𝜀𝑑 are equal and opposite of each other, the wave vector is maximum which results in resonance. Here 𝜀𝑚
depends on the wavelength of incident light and 𝜀𝑑 depends on the refractive index of the dielectric environment.
Diverse configurations are used to generate SPR or LSPR for bio-sensing. In this review, these plasmonic biosensors
are broadly classified into five different groups based on their structure and sensing principle namely planar structure,
optofluidic structure, nanoparticle based structure, quantum dot based structure and nano rod-based structure as shown
in Figure 1(a)-(e).

3.2. Emergence of metamaterials in biosensing
In recent years, to increase the sensitivity of plasmonic biosensors metamaterial based plasmonic biosensors have
been employed. Advantages of using metamaterial based sensors are that a variety of geometric structures and different
sensing principles can be utilized which were not feasible with conventional plasmonic biosensors.
In 1968, Russian physicist Victor Veselago first came up with the theoretical concept of left-handed materials [99]
which shows unusual refraction of light. Then in 1999, Pendry et al. theoretically showed that micro-structures built
from nonmagnetic conducting sheets which are much smaller than the wavelength of radiation exhibit an effective
magnetic permeability and these structures can be tuned to show varying magnetic permeability [69] including imaginary component. Rodger Walser termed this type of substance as metamaterials in 1999. Smith with his colleagues
experimentally demonstrated the first left-handed metamaterial at microwave frequency in the year 2000 [84]. From
then on metamaterials have been explored extensively for possible applications in optics [68], photonics [24], energy
harvesting [106], communication [95], sensing [15, 11], biological imaging and spectroscopy [111]. Primarily, electromagnetic metamaterials are utilized in biosensing applications and metamaterials based biosensors can be classified in
M M Hassan et al. Sensing and Biosensing Research, 33, 100429, (2021) DOI: 10.1016/j.sbsr.2021.100429

Page 5 of 29

A review on plasmonic and metamaterial based biosensing platforms for virus detection

Figure 2: Different stages of a bio-molecular reaction which can be observed by a planar SPR sensor. (a) Immobilized
capturing molecules are attached to a sensor chip surface. (b) Association: pumped viral surface protein starts to bind
with capturing molecule. (c) Equilibrium: almost all binding molecules captured the virus; (d) Disassociation: after certain
time viral bodies starts to unbind with capturing probes. (f) With proper treatment the chip is ready for reuse.

different groups based on their structure- two dimensional, three dimensional and two dimensional meta-surface based
biosensors. Among them, two dimensional meta-surface biosensors have been successfully employed in virus sensing.
Though usage of metamaterial in biosensing is still in its early stage, already detection of viruses like HIV[5], Zika
virus [4], Avian Influenza Virus [42], CPMV [89], PRD1 [67] using metamaterial based sensors have been reported
and sensitivity has improved by approximately an order of magnitude [31]. Metamaterial based plasmonic biosensors
have the potential to be a game changer in the field of label-free point of care virus detection.

4. Sensing using plasmonic biosensors
Biosensor-based detection methods always utilize a specific bio-receptor surface to analyze either intact viruses or
viral proteins. A common and widely explored bio-receptor is antibodies that originate in animal bodies against specific
viral surface proteins or antigens. In addition to that, a number of artificial capturing molecules are developed in the
laboratory to capture certain viruses such as laboratory made DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) or RNA (ribonucleic acid)
aptamers [20] and hairpin type mRNA [50]. The SPR system authorizes the characterization of the binding kinetics of
these biomolecules in real-time. To analyze the reaction between biomolecules, generally, one interacting molecule is
immobilized on the surface of the sensor chip, and its binding counterpart (sample analyte) is injected constantly into

M M Hassan et al. Sensing and Biosensing Research, 33, 100429, (2021) DOI: 10.1016/j.sbsr.2021.100429

Page 6 of 29

A review on plasmonic and metamaterial based biosensing platforms for virus detection

the solution through the flow cell, resulting in the analyte flowing over the capturing surface. As a result of the analyte
reaction with the binding molecule, the analyte accumulates on the surface and increases the refractive index. The
change in refractive index is measured in real-time, generating a plot of the response unit (RU) versus time. This entire
process is depicted in Figure 2. The resulting responses obtained at different analyte concentrations are integrated to
derive the rate constants (association, 𝐾𝑎 ; dissociation,𝐾𝑑 ; and equilibrium, 𝐾𝑒 ). Thus, by using the SPR signal, the
amount, and condition of analyte in the sample are diagnosed. SPR signal is usually measured in two ways for planar
structures. Firstly, the change of incident angle with respect to the generation of SPR. Secondly, change of wavelength
about SPR occurrence. SPR sensors are also categorized in this regard as incident angle modulated SPR sensor [112]
and wavelength modulated SPR sensor [49] respectively. In the following subsections, different plasmonic biosensors
for virus detection are discussed in five broad categories.

4.1. Planar structure
SPR based planar structure biosensors are conventional plasmonic biosensors and recently they are in the spotlight
due to their ease of fabrication. They have been studied extensively for different virus detection. In 2020 Dengue Virus
Type (DENV) 2E-proteins with high sensitivity and accuracy were successfully detected [64]. An SPR sensor based on
self-assembled monolayer/reduced graphene oxide- polyamidoamine dendrimer (SAM/ NH2rGO/ PAMAM) thin film
was developed that detected the DENV-2 E-proteins with the detection threshold of 0.08 pM. This same research group
also developed another sensor chip back in 2018 to detect the dengue virus [63]. But in the later work, they introduced
a graphene-oxide (GO) layer in the sensor chip that significantly enhanced the overall performance of the sensor. In a
similar work, graphene-based material sensor chips were investigated for real-time and quantitative detection of DENV
protein. In this study, the sensor chip was developed by accumulating cadmium sulfide quantum dots-reduced GO upon
a thin gold plate. By changing the angle of incident light this graphene-based chip was able to detect DENV protein
of concentration as low as 0.1 pM. Like dengue another deadly disease that causes hemorrhagic fever is ebola and
certainly this virus has the potential to create another pandemic. Recently an SPR chip was developed to diagnose
the ebola virus with high specificity and sensitivity [80]. To develop the sensor a gold SPR chip was modified with
4-mercaptobenzoic acid (4-MBA). Three different monoclonal antibodies (mAb1, mAb2, and mAb3) of Ebola virus
were in the race and the interactions of antibodies were investigated to determine the suitable mAb based on the
affinity constant (𝐾𝑑 ). After the screening mAb3 showed the highest affinity which later was confirmed by ELISA.
This study also suggested the interaction was spontaneous, endothermic, and driven by entropy. Figure 3(a) shows
a commonly used experimental setup generally known as Kretschmann configuration. Figure 3(b)-(d) illustrates the
sensing schemes of different planar sensors.
In 2013 a new type of avian influenza H7N9 virus emerged in China, causing human infection with high mortality

M M Hassan et al. Sensing and Biosensing Research, 33, 100429, (2021) DOI: 10.1016/j.sbsr.2021.100429

Page 7 of 29

A review on plasmonic and metamaterial based biosensing platforms for virus detection

(a)

(c)

(b)

(d)

Figure 3: (a) Experimental set-up in Kretschmann configuration for sensing (reproduced with permission from [54]). (b)
Signal amplitude of surface plasmon resonance varies in accordance with number viral bodies (reproduced with permission
from [14]). (c) Antigen-antibody binding changes resonance condition (reproduced with permission from [64]). (d) Viral
pathogen determined by SPR signal intensity with high specificity (reproduced with permission from [81]).

taking 612 lives. A quantitative and real-time diagnosis was crucial for eradicating the outbreaks of that emerging disease. A straightforward strategy for rapidly and sensitively detecting the H7N9 virus was using an intensity-modulated
surface plasmon resonance (IM-SPR) biosensor integrated with a newly generated monoclonal antibody [14]. In another study, an SPR-based biosensor was developed for specific detection of nine common respiratory viruses including
influenza A and influenza B, H1N1, respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), parainfluenza virus 1-3 (PIV1, 2, 3), adenovirus,
and severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS) [81]. A significant challenge in this work was amplifying
viral bodies by PCR (Polymerase chain reaction). But an advantage was the same sensor chip could be used to diagnose
multiple times after washing with NaOH solution.
In a recent study, HIV virus was successfully detected by a commercially available simple planar SPR biosensor.
HIV-related DNA with hairpin type DNA aptamers was diagnosed [22]. The proposed SPR biosensor could detect
target DNA sensitively in a linear range from 1 pM to 150 nM with a detection limit of 48 fM. Lately, a typical
planar SPR biosensor for medical diagnostics of human hepatitis B virus (hHBV) has been developed [94]. A 7-fold
higher limit of detection and 2-fold increase in the coefficient of variance (CV) of the replicated results, were shown
as compared to typical enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) testing.

M M Hassan et al. Sensing and Biosensing Research, 33, 100429, (2021) DOI: 10.1016/j.sbsr.2021.100429

Page 8 of 29

A review on plasmonic and metamaterial based biosensing platforms for virus detection

(b)

(c)

(f)

(e)

(d)

(a)

(g)
(h)

Figure 4: (a) Portable small optofluidic biosensor. (b) Schematic diagram of portable biosensor using different wavelength
LED. (c) Photography of the wafer after deep-UV and dry etching steps. (d) Single plasmonic chip containing eight
plasmonic pixels. (e) SEM image of the nanohole array with a hole diameter of 200 nm and an array period of 600 nm
((a)-(e) reproduced with permission from [18]).(f) The illustration of LSPR sensor chip integrated with programmable
microfluidics (reproduced with permission from [26]). (g) Nano apertures holding antibodies. (h) Fluidic viral bodies being
captured by immobilized antibody ((g)-(h) reproduced with permission from[103]).

4.2. Optofluidic systems (plasmonic aperture systems)
Another commonly used compact portable plasmonic biosensing platform is optofluidic systems. It is the combination of optoelectronics, optics, and nanophotonic with fluidics. Such a scheme constitutes a new perspective for
manipulation of optical properties which incessantly scales the wavelength of light with applications ranging from fluidically adaptable optics to high sensitivity bio-detection. Many optofluidic plasmonic biosensors are based on nano
apertures to enhance the plasmonic sensing capabilities of fluidic viral analytes. These nano apertures hold capturing
molecules (e.g. antibody, aptamers) which increases binding potential between viral antigens and antibodies. One of
the major recent breakthroughs in this regard is the detection of the COVID-19 virus[25]. In this device, the optomicrofluidic property is combined with plasmonic property. A serological testing with high specificity was devised.
The refractive index (RI) sensitivity of the pure Au nanospikes in the opto-microfluidic device was precisely calculated
by measuring the wavelength shift in the LSPR peak position when solutions with different refractive indexes (RI) are
delivered to the microfluidic chip. The COVID 19 antibody presence was correlated with the LSPR wavelength peak

M M Hassan et al. Sensing and Biosensing Research, 33, 100429, (2021) DOI: 10.1016/j.sbsr.2021.100429

Page 9 of 29

A review on plasmonic and metamaterial based biosensing platforms for virus detection

(a )

(c )

(b )

(d )

(e )

Figure 5: (a) Nanoplasmonic biosensing platform for HIV detection (reproduced with permission from [34]). (b) Schematic
diagram of optical set-up to detect adenovirus particles using gold nano island based plasmonic sensor (reproduced with
permission from [105]). Absorbance spectra of the biosensor immobilized with anti-NS1 antibody (red dashed line)
exhibiting wavelength shift of peak absorbance after incubation with plasma separated on-chip from whole blood samples
containing (c) 0.25 𝜇g/mL and (d) 2 𝜇g/mL of dengue NS1 antigen (green solid line). (e) Plot of variation of wavelength
shift with concentration of NS1 spiked into whole blood showing linearity with R2 value of 0.84 ((c)-(e) reproduced with
permission from [90]).

shift of gold nanospikes caused by the local refractive index change due to the antigen–antibody binding.
In 2010 nano-plasmonic biosensor chips were introduced which operated by utilizing the fluidic property of the
sample. Here the fluidic property was holding binding molecules by nano apertures. Detection and recognition of
small enveloped RNA viruses (Vesicular stomatitis virus and pseudo typed Ebola) and large enveloped DNA viruses
(vaccinia virus) was demonstrated. This platform opened opportunities for the detection of a broad range of pathogens
in typical biology laboratory settings. 220nm radius aperture was formed in a metal-dielectric layer. These apertures
hold capture molecules for selective viral detection[103]. In a more advanced work, programmable control systems
for microfluidic flow of analytes were used to develop a more efficient and portable plasmonic biosensor. In this study,
the 9 kinds of samples with different reflective index and antigen/antibody systems were utilized for characterization.
By using these programmable optofluidic arrays, the biomarker of liver cancer was tested in situ and real-time.[26].
Figure 4(a)-(e) exhibits a portable opto-fluidic sensor, which uses spectral shift of light to detect virus presence.
Figure 4(f)-(h) illustrate how nano apertures hold immobilized antibody to capture pathogens.

M M Hassan et al. Sensing and Biosensing Research, 33, 100429, (2021) DOI: 10.1016/j.sbsr.2021.100429

Page 10 of 29

A review on plasmonic and metamaterial based biosensing platforms for virus detection

4.3. Nanoparticle enabled plasmonic structures
Nanoparticles (NP) are primarily used in the plasmonic sensors due to their easy fabrication process and costeffectiveness. Gold (Au) and silver (Ag) nanoparticles are used for this purpose. Au NPs’ SPR wavelength is found
around 520nm and Ag NPs show LSPR usually around 400nm[36]. However, by changing the shape and size of the
NPs, the SPR wavelength can be tuned[45]. NP based plasmonic biosensors play a crucial role in virus sensing as
they make label-free detection possible. As a result, no fluorescence or colorimetric biomarker is required. Different
immobilizing antibodies are used to capture the viral particles or proteins.
The first virus detection using nanoparticle based plasmonic sensor was reported by Fatih Inci et. al. in 2013[34].
They used Au nanoparticles with immobilized antibodies to detect and quantify different subtypes of HIV viruses from
unprocessed whole blood. Their limit of detection was 98 ± 39 copies/mL for HIV subtype D. They measured the shift
in resonant wavelength when the HIV virus was captured on the antibody immobilized biosensing surface as shown in
Figure 5(a). They reported a maximum wavelength shift of 9.3nm for HIV sub-type A with virus concentration of 6.5
x 105 copies/mL.
During the same time, Yu et. al. detected adenovirus particles by using Ag nanoisland-based localized surface
plasmon resonance[105]. It is to be noted that this was non-specific detection of adenovirus particles but based on
numerical results they proposed specific detection models. They used rigorous coupled wave analysis and transfer
matrix method using effective medium theory for numerical analysis. Change in reflectivity was measured to detect
adenovirus particles as depicted in Figure 5(b) and the limit of detection was 109 viruses/mL.
In 2013, Jahanshahi et.al. detected four diverse types of dengue virus using Immunoglobulin (Ig-M) based diagnostic test[35]. They used Au coating on glass substrate to excite surface plasmons. Antigens and amines in the form
of NPs were used to immobilize four different types of dengue virus. Change in reflection angle of SPR was measured
to detect the viruses. They achieved sensitivity of 83-89% in detecting the proven dengue cases and specificity was
100%. Their LOD was 10 antibody titers. In 2016, Valdez and his colleagues used LSPR shift to detect respiratory
syncytial virus (RSV) using gold, silver and copper nanoparticles [97]. They used anti-RSV polyclonal antibody to
bind the virus with metallic NPs and they found copper NPs perform better in detecting RSV with LOD of 2.4 PFU.
A year later, Lee et. al.[44] used Au NP and magnetic nanoparticle (MNP) decorated graphene (GRP) based
hybrid structure to detect norovirus-like particles (NoV-LP). Enhanced plasmonic and electrical properties exhibited
by this hybrid structure were used to detect NoV-LP. The surface of Au/MNP-GRPs was functionalized with norovirus
antibody to detect NoV-LPs and it performed well with high sensitivity and specificity. The change in resistivity was
measured to detect NoV-LP in a concentration range from 0.01 pg/mL to 1 ng/mL and LOD was found to be 1.16pg/mL.
At the same time, Kim and his group used gold nanoparticles in hetero-assembled sandwich format to detect hepatitis
B surface antigen (HBsAg) using anti-HBsAg antibody as the binding antibody [39]. These sensors were very specific

M M Hassan et al. Sensing and Biosensing Research, 33, 100429, (2021) DOI: 10.1016/j.sbsr.2021.100429

Page 11 of 29

A review on plasmonic and metamaterial based biosensing platforms for virus detection

to HBsAg and the LOD was 100 fg/mL.
In 2019, Heo et. al.[30] used gold nanoparticle based LSPR biosensor to detect noroviral protein and human
norovirus. They used for the first time norovirus recognizing affinity peptides to bind noroviral proteins which are
relatively inexpensive compared to the binding antibodies. From the change in absorption value, they detected the
presence of the virus. Their detection limit for noroviral capsid protein was 0.1 ng/mL and the limit of detection
for human norovirus was 9.9 copies/mL. Lee and his group utilized LSPR method using Au spike like NPs to detect
avian influenza virus using a multi-functional DNA 3 way-junction [46]. They employed hemagglutinin (HA) binding
aptamer and thiol group to bind the virus with NPs and achieved a LOD of 1 pM in two different environment of PBS
buffer and diluted chicken serum.
At the same time, Sen et. al. [90] used thermally annealed thin silver film deposited onto silicon substrate to detect
NS1 antigen of dengue virus in whole blood. Refractive index sensitivity of the biosensor was 10−3 . A polyethersulfone
membrane filter was used at the inlet of the sensor to separate blood cells from plasma and anti NS1 antibody was used
to ensure specific binding of the NS1 antigen. An increase in absorption was found for antigen binding as shown
in Figure 5(c)-(d) and for the highest 50 𝜇g/mL concentration 108nm redshift in peak absorption wavelength was
found. The sensitivity of this LSPR sensor was found to be 9nm/(𝜇g/mL) and limit of detection was .06 𝜇g/mL as
shown in Figure 5(e). Recently in 2020, Qiu et. al. used dual functional plasmonic biosensor combining LSPR with
plasmonic photothermal (PPT) effect to detect SARS Coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2)[72]. They used functionalized
two dimensional gold nano islands for sequence specific viral nucleic acid detection. Local PPT heat generated from
Au NIs is used to transduce the in-situ hybridization for highly sensitive SARS CoV-2 detection and they achieved a
detection limit of 0.22pM. During the same time, Rippa et.al. used two dimensional gold nano structures based on
octupolar geometry to detect low concentration of rotavirus in water [74]. They used rotavirus capsid (2B4) antibody
to capture rotavirus for specific binding and detected the virus through the change in LSPR extinction wavelength shift.
They achieved maximum wavelength shift of 46nm for a virus concentration of 105 PFU/mL and they achieved LOD
of 126 ± 3 PFU/mL.

4.4. Quantum dots in plasmonic structures
Quantum dots(QDs) are used as fluorescence signal amplifiers to enhance the luminescent signals generated from
the fluorescence probes attached to affinity reagents or viral targets. QDs generally have a core-shell structure and
are made of inorganic substances like CdSe as core and ZnS as the shell. QDs possess exquisite optical properties
and they exhibit stokes shift quantified up to hundreds of nanometers. Stokes shift is the difference between the
maximum absorption wavelength and the maximum emission wavelength. QDs have several advantages like tunable
broad absorption and narrow emission spectra and unlike traditional fluorescent dyes they can detect multiple signals

M M Hassan et al. Sensing and Biosensing Research, 33, 100429, (2021) DOI: 10.1016/j.sbsr.2021.100429

Page 12 of 29

A review on plasmonic and metamaterial based biosensing platforms for virus detection

(a )

(c )

(b )

(d )

Figure 6: (a) Schematic diagram of an optical system of a V-trench biosensor to detect norovirus like particles (reproduced
with permission from [9]). (b) Selectivity of the plasmon alloyed AuAgNP-Qdot646-MB biosensor probe toward ZIKV
RNA in the presence of the negative controls (influenza virus (IV) H3N2 and norovirus (NV)) (reproduced with permission
from [1]). (c) Infectious bronchitis virus (Coronavirus) concentration dependent PL intensity of QD fluorescence biosensor
(reproduced with permission from [6]). (d) Calibration curves of ZIKV detection using 4 kinds of thiol-functionalized
AuNPs. The LSPR signal amplifiers of L-cyst-AuNPs (red closed circles) and Ab-MPA-AuNPs (black closed circles)
showed higher correlation coefficients than those of Ab-GSH-AuNPs (black open circles) and Ab-TGA-AuNPs (yellow
open circles) (reproduced with permission from [92]).
.

simultaneously. Xuepu Li et. al.[47] used quantum dot fluorescence along with gold nanoparticles to detect Avian
Influenza Virus (AIV). They did not use plasmonic biosensor in this work but their work paved the way for using QDs
as fluorescent signal enhancer in plasmonic biosensors virus detection.
In 2016, Takemura et.al. reported LSPR induced immunofluorescence nano biosensor by using CdSeTeS QDs
with Au NPs to detect influenza virus [93]. Here quaternary CdSeTeS QDs were used to enhance the fluorescent
signal generated from the antibody antigen interaction on the thiolated Au NPs. Anti-neuraminidase antibody and
anti-hemagglutinin antibody were conjugated with thiolated Au NPs and quaternary QDs respectively. They achieved
a limit of detection of 0.03 pg/mL for H1N1 influenza virus in deionized water, 0.4 pg/mL for influenza H1N1 virus in
human serum and 10 PFU/mL for clinically isolated H3N2 virus. During the same time, surface plasmon resonance
assisted CdSe-ZnS based quantum dots were first used to detect norovirus like particles [9]. Excitation wavelength of

M M Hassan et al. Sensing and Biosensing Research, 33, 100429, (2021) DOI: 10.1016/j.sbsr.2021.100429

Page 13 of 29

A review on plasmonic and metamaterial based biosensing platforms for virus detection

390nm was used to excite SPR on an Al film of the sensor chip equipped with a V-shaped trench as shown in Figure
6(a). To immobilize proteins a self-assembled monolayer (SAM) of phosphonic acid derivative was used. Concurrently
gold and silver plasmonic nanoparticles with semiconductor quantum dots were used by Adegoke et. al [1] to detect
Zika virus RNA. They used four different plasmonic NPs functionalized with 3-mercaptopropionic acid (MPA). MPAAgNPs, MPA-AuNPs, core/shell (CS) Au/AgNPs, and alloyed AuAgNPs along with CdSeS alloyed Qdots were used
to form the respective LSPR-mediated fluorescence nano biosensor the PL intensity of which is shown in Figure 6(b).
They achieved minimum LOD for alloyed Au Ag NP which is 1.7 copies/mL and it was very selective toward Zika
virus RNA.
In 2018, Ahmed and his colleagues [6] proposed and demonstrated a novel method by using Zr NPs with Zr QDs
to detect Coronavirus. Zr QDs show blue fluorescence emission and by functionalizing them with anti-infectious bronchitis virus (IBV) antibodies, anti-IBV antibody-conjugated magneto-plasmonic nanoparticles (MPNPs) are formed.
As shown in Figure 6(c), from the change in photoluminescence intensity they detected Coronavirus and their LOD
was 79.15 EID/50𝜇L. In another work, an immunofluorescence biosensor for the detection of nonstructural protein 1
(NS1) of the ZIKV by using gold NPs and QDs was made [92]. The LSPR signal from the Au NPs was used to amplify
the fluorescence signal intensity of quantum dots (QDs) from the antigen-antibody detection process. CdSeTeS QDs
were used with four different thiol capped Au NPs and their PL intensity with different ZIKV concentration is shown
in Figure 6(d). The biosensor achieved a LOD of 8.2 copies/mL and could detect the virus within the concentration
range 10 − 107 RNA copies/mL. It could detect the ZIKV in human serum and showed good specificity for NS1 antigen against other negative control targets. At the same time, Omar et. al used CdS QDs with amine functionalized
graphene oxide thin film to detect the dengue virus E-protein [65]. They used monoclonal antibodies (IgM) to bind
the protein and achieved an outstanding LOD of 1 pM.
Very recently, Nasrin and her group [60] employed CdZnSeS/ZnSeS QD-peptide and gold nanoparticle composites
to enhance the LSPR signal to detect different concentrations of influenza virus from 10−14 to 10−9 g/mL. They varied
fluorescence intensity by changing the distance between the QD and NP by using different peptide chain lengths to find
the optimized condition to detect the virus and achieve a detection limit of 17.02 fg/mL. Previously, the same group
detected norovirus [61] using the same mechanism and their LOD was 95 copies/mL. However, this system could not
detect the small change in norovirus concentration due to the smaller crosslinker between two NPs.

4.5. Nanowire and nanorod based plasmonic biosensor
Nanowires and nanorods are usually used to enhance the properties of existing biosensors due to their ability to
confine electromagnetic fields in a superior way.
Das and his colleagues designed and simulated a plasmonic immunoassay, in 2020, which comprised of sandwich

M M Hassan et al. Sensing and Biosensing Research, 33, 100429, (2021) DOI: 10.1016/j.sbsr.2021.100429

Page 14 of 29

A review on plasmonic and metamaterial based biosensing platforms for virus detection

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 7: (a) Schematic representation of the synthesis of HBsAb antibody functionalized gold nanorods and the detection
mechanism for the biosensor immunoassay in capturing targets in different matrices (reproduced with permission from
[101]). (b) Representative scanning electron micrographs of the Ag nanorod arrays deposited with different lengths, (A)
h = 868 nm and (B) h = 2080 nm. The typical SERS substrate used for virus detection is represented in (A) i.e. 870
nm (reproduced with permission from [79]). (c) Representative SERS spectra of RSV, HIV, adenovirus and rhinovirus
(reproduced with permission from [79]). (d) Normalized transmission amplitudes through hybrid slot antenna (lNW=
1𝜇m) with (red) and without (black) PRD1 viruses (reproduced with permission from [31]).

plasmonic biosensor whose sensitivity was enhanced by using gold nanorods. They have varied the prismatic configuration and found that the BK-7 glass-based sensor has a sensitivity of 111.11 deg/RIU [21]. They also varied the
distance of the gold NRs and their aspect ratio and recorded their observations. This sensor was designed for SARSCOV-2 detection, the gold nanorods (NRs) and gold nanosheets are functionalized with SARS-COV-2 spike-protein

M M Hassan et al. Sensing and Biosensing Research, 33, 100429, (2021) DOI: 10.1016/j.sbsr.2021.100429

Page 15 of 29

A review on plasmonic and metamaterial based biosensing platforms for virus detection

antibodies, and shift is observed in the SPR angle. In 2010, a biosensor was devised by functionalizing gold nanorods
with monoclonal hepatitis B surface antibody (HBsAb) through physical adsorption. The characteristic plasmonic
absorption spectrum is then measured after placing these nanorods in the vial containing blood serum. The LOD of
the sensor is 0.01 IU/ml [101]; the schematic representation is shown in Figure 7 (a).
In 2006, a biosensor was fabricated by Shanmukh et al. where they obliquely deposited silver nanorods on the
surface, the scanning electron micrograph is shown in Figure 7 (b). Three different human viruses were detected by
the device namely adenovirus, rhinovirus, and HIV. After depositing the virus, Raman spectrum is measured and from
the change in the spectrum, viruses can be detected. This sensor mainly results in improved SERS detection; Ag
nanorod substrates exhibit extremely high (∼108 ) SERS enhancement factors. The SERS spectra of different viruses
are shown in Figure 7 (c). The vibrational spectra of the molecule adsorbed on the sensor surface are enhanced as
the incoming laser beam interacts with the electrons in the plasmonic oscillation in the nanorods [79]. In 2018, Hong
et al. developed hybrid slot antenna structures in the THz frequency range, where silver nanowires (AgNWs) were
employed to increase the sensitivity. The schematic representation of this structure is shown in Figure 7 (d). They
used this structure for virus detection. PRD1 bacteriophage virus was detected using this sensor. The THz spectrum
before and after placing the virus was used for the detection purpose [31].

5. Metamaterial based biosensors
5.1. Sensing principles of metamaterial based plasmonic biosensors
Metamaterials are engineered materials; they possess properties that are not found in naturally occurring elements
[40]. These exotic properties depend on the geometry of the material hence can be tuned as per requirement. Usually,
specific repeating patterns are created on the material and each pattern has size smaller than the wavelength they need
to affect.
Metamaterials enable the detection of biomolecules in THz-GHz frequency regimes which is difficult otherwise, as
microorganisms such as fungi, bacteria, and viruses have scattering cross-sections that are much smaller than THz/GHz
wavelengths. Sensing biomolecules in the THz-GHz electromagnetic spectra has several advantages as it provides
label-free, non-contact, and non-destructive sensing.
Metamaterial was first used in biosensing by Lee et al. In 2008 [43]. They used a gold split ring resonator (SRR)
array to detect biotin and streptavidin to show the biosensing capability of the metamaterial. SRR worked as a biosensor
as it can be considered as a simple LC circuit with a simple resonant frequency of

𝑓0 ≈

1
√
2𝜋 𝐿𝐶

M M Hassan et al. Sensing and Biosensing Research, 33, 100429, (2021) DOI: 10.1016/j.sbsr.2021.100429

(4)

Page 16 of 29

A review on plasmonic and metamaterial based biosensing platforms for virus detection

Figure 8: LC equivalent circuit for a metamaterial (reproduced with permission from [102]).

So, the resonant frequency of the system changes as the capacitance or inductance changes. As biotin and streptavidin
bind to the system the capacitance of the SRR changes which is reflected in the resonant frequency thus, it can be used
as a biosensor. In Figure 8 the equivalent LC representation of a specific metamaterial with rectangular geometry with
a split is shown. In this way, the metamaterials with nanogap can be modeled and their sensing mechanism can be
understood using equation 4.

5.2. Metamaterial based biosensors for virus detection
In 2017, S.J. Park and his group created a metamaterial surface using a gold rectangular structure on quartz, the
schematic of the structure is shown in Figure 9 (a). Metamaterial has certain capacitance and inductance equivalent
parameters. The presence of virus particles within the capacitor gap changes the resonance frequency which can be
explained by a simple LC circuit. Hence different viruses were detected by observing the THz transmission spectra.
They detected bacteriophage viruses PRD1 (60 nm) and MS2 (30 nm). Sensitivity was 80 GHz/ particle [67]; the
transmission spectra of the biosensor after deposition of virus at various surface density is shown in Figure 9 (b).
Ahmadivand and his colleagues designed a toroidal metamaterial-based biosensor that detected zika virus envelope
protein by measuring the spectral shifts of the toroidal resonance in 2018. They also added gold nanoparticles to see the
effect in the sensitivity and observed enhancement in the performance of the sensitivity [4]. In 2018, A THz biosensing
metamaterial absorber for virus detection based on Spoof Surface Plasmon Polariton (SSPP) Jerusalem cross apertures
metamaterial absorber was devised. They determined the shift in absorption and resonant frequency as the alpha-beta
parameters of the viruses were changed. Analyte thickness of H9N2 was also changed to see the variation in resonant
frequency and absorption. From this observation, they claimed that virus subtypes can be uniquely identified using
this sensor. H5N2, H1N1, H9N2 viruses were detected [16]. The schematic is shown in Figure 9 (c).
In 2017, Ahmadivand and his group used 2D microstructures composed of iron (Fe) and titanium (Ti) for the
magnetic and electric resonators (torus), respectively to design a set of asymmetric split resonators as meta-atoms to
support ultra-strong and narrow magnetic toroidal moments in the THz spectrum; the schematic demonstration of this
M M Hassan et al. Sensing and Biosensing Research, 33, 100429, (2021) DOI: 10.1016/j.sbsr.2021.100429

Page 17 of 29

A review on plasmonic and metamaterial based biosensing platforms for virus detection

(a)

(d)

(b)

(c)

(e)

(f)

Figure 9: (a) Schematic of THz nano-gap Au metamaterial sensing of viruses (reproduced with permission from [67]). (b)
Normalized THz transmission amplitudes of THz metamaterials after deposition of PRD1 at various surface densities for gap
width of 200 nm (reproduced with permission from [67]). (c) 3D schematic diagram of the THz biosensing metamaterial
absorber for AI virus detection (reproduced with permission from [16]). (d) Schematic demonstration of ZIKV envelope
protein binding with respective antibody on the toroidal THz plasmonic metasurface (reproduced with permission from
[2]). (e) Schematic of THz detection of virus samples in liquid state using a nano slot-antenna array based sensing
chip (reproduced with permission from [42]). (f) Transmittance spectra through multi-resonance nano-antenna with and
without virus sample onto the antenna (reproduced with permission from [42]).

structure is shown in Figure 9 (d). Limit of detection of 24.2 pg/mL and sensitivity of 6.47 GHz/log(pg/mL) their
system resulted in toroidal response lineshape extremely sharp, narrow, and deep. They analyzed the sensitivity of
the dip with Zika virus envelope protein attached to the system [2]. In 2017, Lee et. al. used a multi-resonance and
single resonance nanoantenna sensing chip which was fabricated using gold nanoantennas printed on a silicon wafer to
sense different types of Avian Influenza viruses. H9N2 was sensed using a multi resonance sensor. By using a single
resonance nanoantenna they demonstrated that viruses can be classified in terms of resonance frequency and decreased
transmission ratio [42]. The schematic of the biosensor is depicted in Figure 9 (e) and the transmission spectra with
and without virus particles are shown in Figure 9 (f).
In 2019 Vafapour and his colleagues developed a biosensor using metamaterial comprising of H-shaped graphene
resonator on a semiconductor film which they used to detect Avian Influenza [38]. Ahmed et al. developed a cost-

M M Hassan et al. Sensing and Biosensing Research, 33, 100429, (2021) DOI: 10.1016/j.sbsr.2021.100429

Page 18 of 29

A review on plasmonic and metamaterial based biosensing platforms for virus detection

effective metasurface-based biosensor in 2020. They used a Digital Versatile Disc which already has built-in periodic grating where they deposited multilayers of gold, silver, and titanium and showed that the device exhibits fanoresonance. When the HIV particles were captured they observed a shift in the fano resonance peak from which HIV
can be detected [5]
In 2016, Aristov et al. devised a 3D metamaterial-based biosensor composed of woodpile structure which has not
yet been used in virus detection but showed sensitivity greater than 2600nm/RIU and phase-sensitive response is more
than 3 × 104 degrees/RIU for analytes which is very high. In the same year, Sreekanth et al. designed a biosensor
with grating coupled hyperbolic metamaterial which is a bulk 3D sub-wavelength structure that enhances the angular
sensitivity of the plasmonic biosensor. They detected cowpea virus with it and obtained a maximum sensitivity of
7000deg per RIU [88].

M M Hassan et al. Sensing and Biosensing Research, 33, 100429, (2021) DOI: 10.1016/j.sbsr.2021.100429

Page 19 of 29

Table 1. Summary of plasmonic and metamaterial based biosensors for virus detection

OPTOFLUIDIC

PLANAR

STRENGTH & WEAKNESS
Strength
• simple structure
• easy to fabricate
• cost effective
Weakness
• plasmon electric field not localized
• lower specificity of the sensing
Strength
• antigen-antibody binding is easier
• high specificity
• very compact in size
Weakness
• non-reusable sensor chip

SENSOR CONFIGURATION
Au/DSU/NH2rGO-PAMAM [63]
Au/CdSQDs-rGO [62]
Au(plate) [14]
Cr(1.7nm)/Au (47nm) [81]

NANO-PARTICLE BASED
QUANTUM DOT FLUORESCENCE

LOD/SENSITIVITY
0.08 pM
2ng/mL

Monoclonal antibody (IgM)

144 copies/mL

PCR amplified viral bodies

0.5 nM for
adenovirus

Ebola Virus

Biacore X (Commercial name) [22]
Biacore CM5 (Commercial name) [94]
Au/SiNx(with nano holes)/Si [103]
Au/SiNx(with nano holes)/Si/SiNx [18]

HIV
Hepatitis B
VSV, vaccinia virus
protein A/G

Three Monoclonal antibodies (mAb1,
mAb2 and mAb3)
Hairpin DNA, capture probes
HBsAg
8G5 antibodies, A33L antibodies.
IgG

Au NPs on Si inside PDMS pipe [26]

Liver cancer
antigen

Liver cancer
antibody

Au NPs [33]

HIV

Ag nano-islands [105]

Adenovirus

Au coating on glass substrate [34]

Dengue virus
respiratory syncytial
virus

0.5 pg/ml
48 fM
980ng/L
0.5mg/mL
0.055M
25 to 42ng/ml

Immobilizing antibody with
NeutrAvidin
pDE1sp1A/GFP adenovirus shuttle
vector
Amine NPs

98 ± 39 copies/mL
for HIV D

Anti-RSV polyclonal antibody

2.4 PFU

Norovirus

Norovirus antibody

1.16pg/mL

Hepatitis B virus antigen

100 fg/mL

109 viruses/mL
10 antibody titer

Strength
• electric field of the plasmon is
localized
• cost effective

Au NP and magneto NP decorated
graphene [43]
Au NP monolayer [38]
Au NP [29]

Norovirus

Weakness
• antibody binding with nano particles
is very unpredictable

Au spike like NP [45]
Thermally annealed silver film [90]
Au Nanoislands [72]
Au nanostructures in octupolar geometry
[74]

Avian influenza virus
Dengue virus
SARS CoV-2

anti-HBsAg antibody
Norovirus recognizing aﬃnity
peptide
Hemagglutinin binding aptamer
NS1 antibody
Thiol cDNA receptor

Rotavirus

Rotavirus capsid (2B4) antibody

126 ± 3 PFU/mL

CdSeTeS QDs with Au NPs [93]

Influenza virus

Anti-neuraminidase and antihemagglutinin antibody

0.4 pg/mL for
H1N1 in human
serum

Norovirus

SAM phosphonic acid

.01 ng/mL

Zika virus

3-mercaptopropionic acid (MPA)

1.7 copies/mL

CdSe-ZnS based QD on Al film with V
shaped trench [9]
Gold and silver plasmonic NP with Cd- SeS
QDs [1]

NANOWIRE

BINDING MOLECULE/ ANTIBODY
DENV-2 E-proteins
DENV IgG

Au/4-MBA [80]

Au, Ag and Cu NPs [97]

METAMATERIAL

VIRUS DETECTED
DENV-2 E-proteins
DENV-2 E-proteins
Avian Influenza H7N9
Influenza A, B
H1N1, RSV, Adenovirus,
PIV1, 2, 3, SARS

Strength
• QDs enable very strong coupling
between analytes and surface
plasmon
• QDs enhance the fluorescence signal
• detection possible even at very low
concentrations
Weakness
• expensive.
• mass production is difficult

Strength
• uses intense localized electric field
for sensing
• enhances the selective property
• utilizes plasmonic mode trapping
property
Weakness
• antibody binding with nano rods is
very unpredictable
• limited range of working wavelength
Strength
• tunable working frequency
• high adaptivity for wide range of
biosensing
• high sensitivity
Weakness
• difficult to fabricate as precise nano
structure is required

9.9 copies/mL
1pM
0.06 μg/mL
0.22 pM

Zr NPs with Zr QDs [6]

Coronavirus

Gold NPs with Cd-SeTeS QDs [92]
CdSeTeS QD with Au NP [60]
CdS QDs with graphene oxide thin film
[64]
CdZnSeS/ZnSeS QD-peptide-Au NP
composite [59]
SSPP Jerusalem Cross Aperture [16]

Zika virus
Norovirus

Anti-infectious bronchitis virus (IBV)
antibodies
Anti-NS1 antibody
11-mercaptoundecanoic acid

Dengue virus E protein

Monoclonal antibodies (IgM)

AIV

Aspartic acid residue and anti HA
antibody
Not Stated

Rectangular Au metamaterial [67]

PRD1, MS2

Not Stated

Toroidal metasensor [2]

Zika Virus

Immobilized antibody

H1N1, H9N2, H5N2

Not Stated

0.35 THz/RIU

cowpea virus

Not Stated

Toroidal metasensor [4]

Zika Virus

Immobilized antibody

Au NR [101]

Hepatitis B virus

HBsAB

7000o per RIU
5.81
GHz/log(pg/mL)
30nm LSPR shift

Ag NR Arrays [109]

RSV, HIV

Not Stated

Not Stated

Ag NR [21]

SARS COV-2

COVID-19 spike-protein antibody

111.11 deg/RIU

PRD1

Not Sated

32.7GHz
μm2/particle

Au nano-antenna with 2D punctured
rectangular slots [41]
Hyperbolic metamaterial [88]

Rectangular Slot antenna with silver
nanowire [30]

Influenza virus

79.15 EID/50 μL
8.7 copies/mL
95 copies/mL
1pM
17.02 fg/mL
0.5 THz/RIU
80
GHz/particle/μm2
6.47 GHz/log
(pg/mL)

A review on plasmonic and metamaterial based biosensing platforms for virus detection

6. Plasmonic Biosensors for Coronavirus Detection
Currently, diagnosis of COVID-19 is primarily accomplished by three techniques- quantitative reverse-transcription
polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR) [17] and gene sequencing, a lateral flow immunoassay, which is a common
point-of-care (POC) diagnostic approach that detects antibodies against SARS-CoV-2 in patient samples [13, 10], and
chest computed tomography (CT) [108]. Quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR) is
widely used as the confirmatory test for COVID-19 detection and it is considered as the gold standard in this regard.
However, the RT-qPCR method is lengthy and involves difficult processing methods. It demands highly trained manpower and cost which hinder the large-scale testing for COVID- 19. Although the RT-qPCR test is highly sensitive,
may give false negative reports especially if the specimen is collected from the upper respiratory tract after a certain
period from the onset of symptoms [91]. Therefore, there is an ongoing demand for an alternative detection method
for novel coronavirus.
Plasmonic biosensing is a promising field for the detection of Coronavirus, as it can enable rapid testing and also
reduce the manpower needed for performing the diagnosis. There are already many ongoing and reported works on
plasmonic detection of novel Coronavirus. The schemes that were developed for detecting other coronaviruses can be
useful for SARS-CoV-2 detection as well. Commercially available surface plasmon resonance (SPR) and localized
surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) sensors are already being used for viral strain detection such as SARS, MERS,
and influenza [12]. In May 2020, Moitra et. al. reported work on COVID-19 detection using plasmonic nanoparticles
which produced results within 10 minutes [57]. Ahmadivand et. al. reported in June 2020 their work using toroidal
plasmonic metasensor for femto-molar detection of the COVID-19 spike protein. They claimed that their sensor had
a limit of detection of around 4.2 fmol and sample-to-result duration was around 80 minutes [3]. In the same year,
Das et al designed a gold nanorod-based plasmonic sensor to detect COVID-19 with a sensitivity of 111.11 deg/ RIU
[21]. In 2018, Ahmed et. al. devised a sensor using magneto-plasmonic nanoparticles for coronavirus detection. The
fluorescence properties of immuno-conjugated QD MP NPs nanohybrids through separation by an external magnetic
field enabled biosensing of Coronavirus with a limit of detection of 79.15 EID/50 mL [6]. In August 2020 Uddin et.
al. proposed a surface plasmon resonance sensor for COVID-19 detection which they claimed to have a sensitivity of
130.3 degrees/RIU [96]. Previously, in 2009, Huang et. al developed a localized surface plasmon coupled fluorescence
fiber-optic biosensor for the detection of SARS-CoV [33]. Funari et al. devised a detection system that combined
opto-microfluidic chip with LSPR to detect antibodies against SARS-COV-2 spike protein in December 2020 [25].
In addition to that, several works have been mentioned in this article in which viruses with a diameter smaller than
coronavirus (120 nm) are detected e.g. PRD1 (60 nm) MS2 (30 nm), Avian Influenza Virus (80 nm - 120 nm), Zika
Virus (50 nm), etc. using plasmonic and metamaterial-based biosensors with promising sensitivity, these schemes
might be useful for the detection of Coronavirus as well and further investigation can be done to prove their usefulness in
M M Hassan et al. Sensing and Biosensing Research, 33, 100429, (2021) DOI: 10.1016/j.sbsr.2021.100429

Page 21 of 29

A review on plasmonic and metamaterial based biosensing platforms for virus detection

coronavirus detection. It is noteworthy that there is still no reported work of Coronavirus detection using metamaterialbased biosensors.

7. Future perspective
Researchers are always on the quest of finding new methods of pathogen detection which is faster, accurate, sensitive, and also can be used as a point-of-care device because the population is increasing at a fast pace and epidemics
are materializing more frequently than ever. In recent times, carbon-based materials like graphene [19, 28], carbon
nanotube[100], and nanodiamond [56] are introduced in biosensing.
Like other fields, machine learning has garnered significant interest from researchers in the field of biosensing. Recently the behavior of plasmonic biosensor designs that integrate metamaterials based on machine learning algorithms
was explored [58]. The overall design process was defined by two steps. The first step involves the initialization of
classical calculation before machine learning. The performance of various detection scenarios was tested with sensing
of different DNA oligomers. The results were employed to generate both training and test sets. In the second step, a
machine learning algorithm was applied to predict the performance of metamaterial-based plasmonic biosensors. The
use of meta-plasmonic structure with the help of machine learning has enhanced the detection sensitivity by more than
13 times. Lately, another work has also shown the use of diverse machine learning algorithms that aims to improve the
quality of the real-time SPR responses called sensorgrams [27]. In a different work, deep learning methods enabled
by artificial neural networks were used as a powerful and efficient tool to construct correlation between plasmonic
geometric parameters and resonance spectra[48]. With this numerical method, the spectra of millions of different
nano-structured sensors can be predicted.
Topological insulators have emerged as new building blocks in photonics and they offer promising prospects for
plasmonic biosensing. It is one kind of new material and bulk insulator with a chiral Dirac cone on its surface. It is a
new state of quantum matter with internal insulation but the electric conduction for the interface. Recently these are
being used to enhance the sensitivity and detection limit of surface plasmon resonance based sensors [113, 109].
Quantum enhanced plasmonic sensing is a state of the art idea as quantum properties of light adds more degrees
of freedom in biosensing. Quantum properties can amplify the sensitivity of a sensor and thus has the potential to
significantly improve the plasmonic sensing scheme through the development of quantum-enhanced sensors. For
this purpose, recently researchers fabricated an array of sub-wavelength nano-structured holes in a thin silver film.
This sensor used an effect known as extraordinary optical transmission (EOT) [23]. This phenomena preserved the
quantum properties of the light and made the use of quantum states of light, a viable option to enhance the sensitivity
of plasmonic sensors.
Surface plasmon resonance imaging (SPRi) is another emerging field that has been applied in the detection and

M M Hassan et al. Sensing and Biosensing Research, 33, 100429, (2021) DOI: 10.1016/j.sbsr.2021.100429

Page 22 of 29

A review on plasmonic and metamaterial based biosensing platforms for virus detection

monitoring of biomolecular events [70]. There has been a study of the apple stem pitting virus (ASPV) by imaging
the aptamer binding with the coat protein using SPR [41]. Recently, another SPRi based technique, named ultra-nearfield index modulated PlAsmonic NanO-apeRture lAbel-free iMAging (PANORAMA) was developed[62]. It relies on
unscattered light to detect dielectric nanoparticles. PANORAMA can detect, count and size individual nanoparticles
beyond 25 nm, and dynamically monitor their distance to the plasmonic surface at a millisecond timescale.
Finally, the sensitivity of plasmonic and metamaterial-based biosensors has reached femtomolar detection limit
but here limiting factor is the specificity of the biosensors which requires attention. Although, by employing aptamer
and peptide-based binding molecules specificity has improved significantly, their application is still not suitable for all
biosensors. Moreover, the biosensors may detect viruses successfully in a laboratory environment, their performance
needs to be evaluated from clinical samples. Another issue for metamaterial-based biosensors can be mass production
for which the sensing platform needs to be scalable for reduced fabrication cost. Plasmonic biosensors can pave the
way for achieving multiplexing capability for detecting multiple viruses [77] using the same sensing platform.

8. Conclusion
The world is currently fighting the pandemic caused by SARS-CoV-2, there is no assurance when will this pandemic
end let alone the next one. Disease diagnosis in the early stage is one of the main weapons in this ongoing fight
against the pandemic. Though during the last few years there has been significant improvement in disease diagnosis
by optical biosensors, even COVID-19 has been successfully detected by LSPR based biosensors there is still room
for development. Plasmonic and metamaterial-based biosensors exist in many different forms and each form has one
or more supremacy over conventional techniques, some are already being used in laboratories for drug and vaccine
developments [59]. Some of the plasmonic biosensors like planar metal-dielectric interface-based biosensors have
simple fabrication techniques and give pretty good sensitivity and low LOD. Plasmonic biosensors like those based on
metamaterials and nanowres allow label-free, non-destructive sensing. Nanoparticle based plasmonic biosensors allow
a broad range of antibody binding and metamaterial based biosensors have increased the sensitivity manifolds. Most
importantly all the biosensors make rapid detection possible. However, plasmonic and metamaterial-based biosensors
need to be robust and reproducible to become mainstream virus-caused disease diagnosis methods. Also, biosensors
need to be developed as a lab-on-a-chip system to make them ubiquitous. Many of the researchers are already working
on a lab-on-a-chip configuration of plasmonic biosensors. If these shortcomings can be overcome in near future then
plasmonic and metamaterial-based biosensors will enable faster and more accurate detection of pathogens which will
greatly help to prevent outbreaks in the future.

M M Hassan et al. Sensing and Biosensing Research, 33, 100429, (2021) DOI: 10.1016/j.sbsr.2021.100429

Page 23 of 29

A review on plasmonic and metamaterial based biosensing platforms for virus detection

References
[1] Adegoke, O., Morita, M., Kato, T., Ito, M., Suzuki, T., Park, E.Y., 2017. Localized surface plasmon resonance-mediated fluorescence signals
in plasmonic nanoparticle-quantum dot hybrids for ultrasensitive zika virus rna detection via hairpin hybridization assays. Biosensors and
Bioelectronics 94, 513–522.
[2] Ahmadivand, A., Gerislioglu, B., Manickam, P., Kaushik, A., Bhansali, S., Nair, M., Pala, N., 2017. Rapid detection of infectious envelope
proteins by magnetoplasmonic toroidal metasensors. ACS sensors 2, 1359–1368.
[3] Ahmadivand, A., Gerislioglu, B., Ramezani, Z., Kaushik, A., Manickam, P., Ghoreishi, S.A., 2020. Femtomolar-level detection of sars-cov-2
spike proteins using toroidal plasmonic metasensors. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.08536 .
[4] Ahmadivand, A., Gerislioglu, B., Tomitaka, A., Manickam, P., Kaushik, A., Bhansali, S., Nair, M., Pala, N., 2018. Extreme sensitive
metasensor for targeted biomarkers identification using colloidal nanoparticles-integrated plasmonic unit cells. Biomedical Optics Express
9, 373–386.
[5] Ahmed, R., Ozen, M.O., Karaaslan, M.G., Prator, C.A., Thanh, C., Kumar, S., Torres, L., Iyer, N., Munter, S., Southern, S., et al., 2020.
Tunable fano-resonant metasurfaces on a disposable plastic-template for multimodal and multiplex biosensing. Advanced Materials 32,
1907160.
[6] Ahmed, S.R., Kang, S.W., Oh, S., Lee, J., Neethirajan, S., 2018. Chiral zirconium quantum dots: a new class of nanocrystals for optical
detection of coronavirus. Heliyon 4, e00766.
[7] Alhamlan, F., Majumder, M., Brownstein, J., Hawkins, J., Al-Abdely, H., Alzahrani, A., Obaid, D., Al-Ahdal, M., BinSaeed, A., 2017. Case
characteristics among middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus outbreak and non-outbreak cases in saudi arabia from 2012 to 2015.
Bmj Open 7, e011865.
[8] Antiochia, R., 2020. Developments in biosensors for cov detection and future trends. Biosensors and Bioelectronics 173, 112777.
[9] Ashiba, H., Sugiyama, Y., Wang, X., Shirato, H., Higo-Moriguchi, K., Taniguchi, K., Ohki, Y., Fujimaki, M., 2017. Detection of norovirus
virus-like particles using a surface plasmon resonance-assisted fluoroimmunosensor optimized for quantum dot fluorescent labels. Biosensors
and Bioelectronics 93, 260–266.
[10] Bastos, M.L., Tavaziva, G., Abidi, S.K., Campbell, J.R., Haraoui, L.P., Johnston, J.C., Lan, Z., Law, S., MacLean, E., Trajman, A., et al.,
2020. Diagnostic accuracy of serological tests for covid-19: systematic review and meta-analysis. Bmj 370.
[11] Beruete, M., Jáuregui-López, I., 2020. Terahertz sensing based on metasurfaces. Advanced Optical Materials 8, 1900721.
[12] Bhalla, N., Pan, Y., Yang, Z., Payam, A.F., 2020. Opportunities and challenges for biosensors and nanoscale analytical tools for pandemics:
Covid-19. ACS nano 14, 7783–7807.
[13] Böger, B., Fachi, M.M., Vilhena, R.O., de Fátima Cobre, A., Tonin, F.S., Pontarolo, R., 2020. Systematic review with meta-analysis of the
accuracy of diagnostic tests for covid-19. American journal of infection control .
[14] Chang, Y.F., Wang, W.H., Hong, Y.W., Yuan, R.Y., Chen, K.H., Huang, Y.W., Lu, P.L., Chen, Y.H., Chen, Y.M.A., Su, L.C., et al., 2018.
Simple strategy for rapid and sensitive detection of avian influenza a h7n9 virus based on intensity-modulated spr biosensor and new generated
antibody. Analytical chemistry 90, 1861–1869.
[15] Chen, T., Li, S., Sun, H., 2012. Metamaterials application in sensing. Sensors 12, 2742–2765.
[16] Cheng, D., He, X., Huang, X., Zhang, B., Liu, G., Shu, G., Fang, C., Wang, J., Luo, Y., 2018. Terahertz biosensing metamaterial absorber
for virus detection based on spoof surface plasmon polaritons. International Journal of RF and Microwave Computer-Aided Engineering 28,
e21448.
[17] Corman, V.M., Landt, O., Kaiser, M., Molenkamp, R., Meijer, A., Chu, D.K., Bleicker, T., Brünink, S., Schneider, J., Schmidt, M.L., et al.,

M M Hassan et al. Sensing and Biosensing Research, 33, 100429, (2021) DOI: 10.1016/j.sbsr.2021.100429

Page 24 of 29

A review on plasmonic and metamaterial based biosensing platforms for virus detection
2020. Detection of 2019 novel coronavirus (2019-ncov) by real-time rt-pcr. Eurosurveillance 25, 2000045.
[18] Coskun, A.F., Cetin, A.E., Galarreta, B.C., Alvarez, D.A., Altug, H., Ozcan, A., 2014. Lensfree optofluidic plasmonic sensor for real-time
and label-free monitoring of molecular binding events over a wide field-of-view. Scientific reports 4, 6789.
[19] Cucci, L.M., Naletova, I., Consiglio, G., Satriano, C., 2019. A hybrid nanoplatform of graphene oxide/nanogold for plasmonic sensing and
cellular applications at the nanobiointerface. Applied Sciences 9, 676.
[20] D’Agata, R., Spoto, G., 2012. Artificial dna and surface plasmon resonance. Artificial Dna: Pna & Xna 3, 45–52.
[21] Das, C.M., Guo, Y., Yang, G., Kang, L., Xu, G., Ho, H.P., Yong, K.T., 2020. Gold nanorod assisted enhanced plasmonic detection scheme
of covid-19 sars-cov-2 spike protein. Advanced theory and simulations 3, 2000185.
[22] Diao, W., Tang, M., Ding, S., Li, X., Cheng, W., Mo, F., Yan, X., Ma, H., Yan, Y., 2018. Highly sensitive surface plasmon resonance biosensor
for the detection of hiv-related dna based on dynamic and structural dna nanodevices. Biosensors and Bioelectronics 100, 228–234.
[23] Dowran, M., Kumar, A., Lawrie, B.J., Pooser, R.C., Marino, A.M., 2018. Quantum-enhanced plasmonic sensing. Optica 5, 628–633.
[24] Fang, Y., Ge, Y., Wang, C., Zhang, H., 2020. Mid-infrared photonics using 2d materials: Status and challenges. Laser & Photonics Reviews
14, 1900098.
[25] Funari, R., Chu, K.Y., Shen, A.Q., 2020. Detection of antibodies against sars-cov-2 spike protein by gold nanospikes in an opto-microfluidic
chip. Biosensors and Bioelectronics 169, 112578.
[26] Geng, Z., Kan, Q., Yuan, J., Chen, H., 2014. A route to low-cost nanoplasmonic biosensor integrated with optofluidic-portable platform.
Sensors and Actuators B: Chemical 195, 682–691.
[27] Gomes, J.C.M., Souza, L.C., Oliveira, L.C., 2021. Smartspr sensor: Machine learning approaches to create intelligent surface plasmon based
sensors. Biosensors and Bioelectronics 172, 112760.
[28] Gong, S., Xiao, B., Xiao, L., Tong, S., Xiao, S., Wang, X., 2019. Hybridization-induced dual-band tunable graphene metamaterials for
sensing. Optical Materials Express 9, 35–43.
[29] Guner, H., Ozgur, E., Kokturk, G., Celik, M., Esen, E., Topal, A.E., Ayas, S., Uludag, Y., Elbuken, C., Dana, A., 2017. A smartphone based
surface plasmon resonance imaging (spri) platform for on-site biodetection. Sensors and Actuators B: Chemical 239, 571–577.
[30] Heo, N.S., Oh, S.Y., Ryu, M.Y., Baek, S.H., Park, T.J., Choi, C., Huh, Y.S., Park, J.P., 2019. Affinity peptide-guided plasmonic biosensor
for detection of noroviral protein and human norovirus. Biotechnology and Bioprocess Engineering 24, 318–325.
[31] Hong, J., Jun, S., Cha, S., Park, J., Lee, S., Shin, G., Ahn, Y., 2018. Enhanced sensitivity in thz plasmonic sensors with silver nanowires.
Scientific reports 8, 1–8.
[32] Huang, C., Wang, Y., Li, X., Ren, L., Zhao, J., Hu, Y., Zhang, L., Fan, G., Xu, J., Gu, X., et al., 2020. Clinical features of patients infected
with 2019 novel coronavirus in wuhan, china. The lancet 395, 497–506.
[33] Huang, J.C., Chang, Y.F., Chen, K.H., Su, L.C., Lee, C.W., Chen, C.C., Chen, Y.M.A., Chou, C., 2009. Detection of severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) coronavirus nucleocapsid protein in human serum using a localized surface plasmon coupled fluorescence fiber-optic
biosensor. Biosensors and Bioelectronics 25, 320–325.
[34] Inci, F., Tokel, O., Wang, S., Gurkan, U.A., Tasoglu, S., Kuritzkes, D.R., Demirci, U., 2013. Nanoplasmonic quantitative detection of intact
viruses from unprocessed whole blood. ACS nano 7, 4733–4745.
[35] Jahanshahi, P., Zalnezhad, E., Sekaran, S.D., Adikan, F.R.M., 2014. Rapid immunoglobulin m-based dengue diagnostic test using surface
plasmon resonance biosensor. Scientific reports 4, 3851.
[36] Jans, H., Huo, Q., 2012. Gold nanoparticle-enabled biological and chemical detection and analysis. Chemical Society Reviews 41, 2849–
2866.

M M Hassan et al. Sensing and Biosensing Research, 33, 100429, (2021) DOI: 10.1016/j.sbsr.2021.100429

Page 25 of 29

A review on plasmonic and metamaterial based biosensing platforms for virus detection
[37] Ji, T., Liu, Z., Wang, G., Guo, X., Lai, C., Chen, H., Huang, S., Xia, S., Chen, B., Jia, H., et al., 2020. Detection of covid-19: A review of
the current literature and future perspectives. Biosensors and Bioelectronics 166, 112455.
[38] Keshavarz, A., Vafapour, Z., 2019. Sensing avian influenza viruses using terahertz metamaterial reflector. IEEE Sensors Journal 19, 5161–
5166. doi:10.1109/JSEN.2019.2903731.
[39] Kim, J., Oh, S.Y., Shukla, S., Hong, S.B., Heo, N.S., Bajpai, V.K., Chun, H.S., Jo, C.H., Choi, B.G., Huh, Y.S., et al., 2018. Heteroassembled
gold nanoparticles with sandwich-immunoassay lspr chip format for rapid and sensitive detection of hepatitis b virus surface antigen (hbsag).
Biosensors and Bioelectronics 107, 118–122.
[40] Kshetrimayum, R.S., 2004. A brief intro to metamaterials. IEEE Potentials 23, 44–46.
[41] Lautner, G., Balogh, Z., Bardóczy, V., Mészáros, T., Gyurcsányi, R.E., 2010. Aptamer-based biochips for label-free detection of plant virus
coat proteins by spr imaging. Analyst 135, 918–926.
[42] Lee, D.K., Kang, J.H., Kwon, J., Lee, J.S., Lee, S., Woo, D.H., Kim, J.H., Song, C.S., Park, Q.H., Seo, M., 2017a. Nano metamaterials for
ultrasensitive terahertz biosensing. Scientific reports 7, 1–6.
[43] Lee, H.J., Yook, J.G., 2008. Biosensing using split-ring resonators at microwave regime. Applied Physics Letters 92, 254103.
[44] Lee, J., Takemura, K., Kato, C.N., Suzuki, T., Park, E.Y., 2017b. Binary nanoparticle graphene hybrid structure-based highly sensitive
biosensing platform for norovirus-like particle detection. ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces 9, 27298–27304.
[45] Lee, J., Zhou, H., Lee, J., 2011. Small molecule induced self-assembly of au nanoparticles. Journal of Materials Chemistry 21, 16935–16942.
[46] Lee, T., Kim, G.H., Kim, S.M., Hong, K., Kim, Y., Park, C., Sohn, H., Min, J., 2019. Label-free localized surface plasmon resonance
biosensor composed of multi-functional dna 3 way junction on hollow au spike-like nanoparticles (hausn) for avian influenza virus detection.
Colloids and Surfaces B: Biointerfaces 182, 110341.
[47] Li, X., Lu, D., Sheng, Z., Chen, K., Guo, X., Jin, M., Han, H., 2012. A fast and sensitive immunoassay of avian influenza virus based on
label-free quantum dot probe and lateral flow test strip. Talanta 100, 1–6.
[48] Li, X., Shu, J., Gu, W., Gao, L., 2019. Deep neural network for plasmonic sensor modeling. Optical Materials Express 9, 3857–3862.
[49] Liu, X., Song, D., Zhang, Q., Tian, Y., Ding, L., Zhang, H., 2005. Wavelength-modulation surface plasmon resonance sensor. TrAC Trends
in Analytical Chemistry 24, 887–893.
[50] Liu, Y., Wilson, W.D., 2010. Quantitative analysis of small molecule–nucleic acid interactions with a biosensor surface and surface plasmon
resonance detection, in: Drug-DNA Interaction Protocols. Springer, pp. 1–23.
[51] Lu, R., Zhao, X., Li, J., Niu, P., Yang, B., Wu, H., Wang, W., Song, H., Huang, B., Zhu, N., et al., 2020. Genomic characterisation and
epidemiology of 2019 novel coronavirus: implications for virus origins and receptor binding. The Lancet 395, 565–574.
[52] Luo, X., Davis, J.J., 2013. Electrical biosensors and the label free detection of protein disease biomarkers. Chemical Society Reviews 42,
5944–5962.
[53] Maalouf, R., Fournier-Wirth, C., Coste, J., Chebib, H., Saïkali, Y., Vittori, O., Errachid, A., Cloarec, J.P., Martelet, C., Jaffrezic-Renault, N.,
2007. Label-free detection of bacteria by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy: comparison to surface plasmon resonance. Analytical
chemistry 79, 4879–4886.
[54] Manera, M., Colombelli, A., Rella, R., Caricato, A., Cozzoli, P.D., Martino, M., Vasanelli, L., 2012. Tio2 brookite nanostructured thin layer
on magneto-optical surface plasmon resonance transductor for gas sensing applications. Journal of Applied Physics 112, 053524.
[55] Mauriz, E., 2020. Recent progress in plasmonic biosensing schemes for virus detection. Sensors 20, 4745.
[56] Miller, B.S., Bezinge, L., Gliddon, H.D., Huang, D., Dold, G., Gray, E.R., Heaney, J., Dobson, P.J., Nastouli, E., Morton, J.J., et al., 2020.
Spin-enhanced nanodiamond biosensing for ultrasensitive diagnostics. Nature 587, 588–593.

M M Hassan et al. Sensing and Biosensing Research, 33, 100429, (2021) DOI: 10.1016/j.sbsr.2021.100429

Page 26 of 29

A review on plasmonic and metamaterial based biosensing platforms for virus detection
[57] Moitra, P., Alafeef, M., Dighe, K., Frieman, M., Pan, D., 2020. Selective naked-eye detection of sars-cov-2 mediated by n gene targeted
antisense oligonucleotide capped plasmonic nanoparticles. ACS nano .
[58] Moon, G., Choi, J.r., Lee, C., Oh, Y., Kim, K., Kim, D., 2020. Machine learning-based design of meta-plasmonic biosensors with negative
index metamaterials. Biosensors and Bioelectronics , 112335.
[59] Myszka, D.G., Rich, R.L., 2000. Implementing surface plasmon resonance biosensors in drug discovery. Pharmaceutical science & technology today 3, 310–317.
[60] Nasrin, F., Chowdhury, A.D., Takemura, K., Kozaki, I., Honda, H., Adegoke, O., Park, E.Y., 2020. Fluorometric virus detection platform
using quantum dots-gold nanocomposites optimizing the linker length variation. Analytica Chimica Acta .
[61] Nasrin, F., Chowdhury, A.D., Takemura, K., Lee, J., Adegoke, O., Deo, V.K., Abe, F., Suzuki, T., Park, E.Y., 2018. Single-step detection of
norovirus tuning localized surface plasmon resonance-induced optical signal between gold nanoparticles and quantum dots. Biosensors and
Bioelectronics 122, 16–24.
[62] Ohannesian, N., Misbah, I., Lin, S.H., Shih, W.C., 2020. Plasmonic nano-aperture label-free imaging (panorama). Nature communications
11, 1–10.
[63] Omar, N.A.S., Fen, Y.W., Abdullah, J., Chik, C.E.N.C.E., Mahdi, M.A., 2018. Development of an optical sensor based on surface plasmon
resonance phenomenon for diagnosis of dengue virus e-protein. Sensing and bio-sensing research 20, 16–21.
[64] Omar, N.A.S., Fen, Y.W., Abdullah, J., Kamil, Y.M., Daniyal, W.M.E.M.M., Sadrolhosseini, A.R., Mahdi, M.A., 2020. Sensitive detection
of dengue virus type 2 e-proteins signals using self-assembled monolayers/reduced graphene oxide-pamam dendrimer thin film-spr optical
sensor. Scientific Reports 10, 1–15.
[65] Omar, N.A.S., Fen, Y.W., Abdullah, J., Zaid, M.H.M., Daniyal, W.M.E.M.M., Mahdi, M.A., 2019. Sensitive surface plasmon resonance
performance of cadmium sulfide quantum dots-amine functionalized graphene oxide based thin film towards dengue virus e-protein. Optics
& Laser Technology 114, 204–208.
[66] Organization, W.H., et al., 2020. Who director-general’s opening remarks at the media briefing on covid-19-11 march 2020.
[67] Park, S., Cha, S., Shin, G., Ahn, Y., 2017. Sensing viruses using terahertz nano-gap metamaterials. Biomedical optics express 8, 3551–3558.
[68] Pendry, J.B., 2000. Negative refraction makes a perfect lens. Physical review letters 85, 3966.
[69] Pendry, J.B., Holden, A.J., Robbins, D.J., Stewart, W., 1999. Magnetism from conductors and enhanced nonlinear phenomena. IEEE
transactions on microwave theory and techniques 47, 2075–2084.
[70] Puiu, M., Bala, C., 2016. Spr and spr imaging: Recent trends in developing nanodevices for detection and real-time monitoring of biomolecular events. Sensors 16, 870.
[71] Qin, P., Park, M., Alfson, K.J., Tamhankar, M., Carrion, R., Patterson, J.L., Griffiths, A., He, Q., Yildiz, A., Mathies, R., et al., 2019. Rapid
and fully microfluidic ebola virus detection with crispr-cas13a. ACS sensors 4, 1048–1054.
[72] Qiu, G., Gai, Z., Tao, Y., Schmitt, J., Kullak-Ublick, G.A., Wang, J., 2020. Dual-functional plasmonic photothermal biosensors for highly
accurate severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 detection. ACS nano 14, 5268–5277.
[73] Raether, H., 1988. Surface plasmons on smooth surfaces, in: Surface plasmons on smooth and rough surfaces and on gratings. Springer, pp.
4–39.
[74] Rippa, M., Castagna, R., Brandi, S., Fusco, G., Monini, M., Chen, D., Zhou, J., Zyss, J., Petti, L., 2020. Octupolar plasmonic nanosensor
based on ordered arrays of triangular au nanopillars for selective rotavirus detection. ACS Applied Nano Materials 3, 4837–4844.
[75] Sakamoto, S., Putalun, W., Vimolmangkang, S., Phoolcharoen, W., Shoyama, Y., Tanaka, H., Morimoto, S., 2018. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay for the quantitative/qualitative analysis of plant secondary metabolites. Journal of natural medicines 72, 32–42.

M M Hassan et al. Sensing and Biosensing Research, 33, 100429, (2021) DOI: 10.1016/j.sbsr.2021.100429

Page 27 of 29

A review on plasmonic and metamaterial based biosensing platforms for virus detection
[76] Samson, R., Navale, G.R., Dharne, M.S., 2020. Biosensors: frontiers in rapid detection of covid-19. 3 Biotech 10, 1–9.
[77] Sánchez-Purrà, M., Carrè-Camps, Marc an dePuig, H., Bosch, I., Gehrke, L., Hamad-Schifferli, K., 2017. Surface-enhanced raman
spectroscopy-based sandwich immunoassays for multiplexed detection of zika and dengue viral biomarkers. ACS infectious diseases 3,
767–776.
[78] Savran, C.A., Knudsen, S.M., Ellington, A.D., Manalis, S.R., 2004. Micromechanical detection of proteins using aptamer-based receptor
molecules. Analytical chemistry 76, 3194–3198.
[79] Shanmukh, S., Jones, L., Driskell, J., Zhao, Y., Dluhy, R., Tripp, R.A., 2006. Rapid and sensitive detection of respiratory virus molecular
signatures using a silver nanorod array sers substrate. Nano letters 6, 2630–2636.
[80] Sharma, P.K., Kumar, J.S., Singh, V.V., Biswas, U., Sarkar, S.S., Alam, S.I., Dash, P.K., Boopathi, M., Ganesan, K., Jain, R., 2020. Surface
plasmon resonance sensing of ebola virus: a biological threat. Analytical and Bioanalytical Chemistry , 1–12.
[81] Shi, L., Sun, Q., He, J., Xu, H., Liu, C., Zhao, C., Xu, Y., Wu, C., Xiang, J., Gu, D., et al., 2015. Development of spr biosensor for
simultaneous detection of multiplex respiratory viruses. Bio-medical materials and engineering 26, S2207–S2216.
[82] Shrivastav, A.M., Cvelbar, U., Abdulhalim, I., 2021. A comprehensive review on plasmonic-based biosensors used in viral diagnostics.
Communications biology 4, 1–12.
[83] Shrivastava, A., Gupta, V.B., et al., 2011. Methods for the determination of limit of detection and limit of quantitation of the analytical
methods. Chronicles of young scientists 2, 21.
[84] Smith, D.R., Padilla, W.J., Vier, D., Nemat-Nasser, S.C., Schultz, S., 2000. Composite medium with simultaneously negative permeability
and permittivity. Physical review letters 84, 4184.
[85] Soares, R.M., Durigon, E.L., Bersano, J.G., Richtzenhain, L.J., 1999. Detection of porcine parvovirus dna by the polymerase chain reaction
assay using primers to the highly conserved nonstructural protein gene, ns-1. Journal of virological methods 78, 191–198.
[86] Soler, M., Estevez, M.C., Cardenosa-Rubio, M., Astua, A., Lechuga, L.M., 2020. How nanophotonic label-free biosensors can contribute to
rapid and massive diagnostics of respiratory virus infections: Covid-19 case. ACS sensors 5, 2663–2678.
[87] Souf, S., 2016. Recent advances in diagnostic testing for viral infections. Bioscience Horizons: The International Journal of Student Research
9.
[88] Sreekanth, K.V., Alapan, Y., ElKabbash, M., Wen, A.M., Ilker, E., Hinczewski, M., Gurkan, U.A., Steinmetz, N.F., Strangi, G., 2016.
Enhancing the angular sensitivity of plasmonic sensors using hyperbolic metamaterials. Advanced optical materials 4, 1767–1772.
[89] Sreekanth, K.V., ElKabbash, M., Alapan, Y., Ilker, E.I., Hinczewski, M., Gurkan, U.A., Strangi, G., 2017. Hyperbolic metamaterials-based
plasmonic biosensor for fluid biopsy with single molecule sensitivity. EPJ Applied Metamaterials 4, 1.
[90] Suthanthiraraj, P.P.A., Sen, A.K., 2019. Localized surface plasmon resonance (lspr) biosensor based on thermally annealed silver nanostructures with on-chip blood-plasma separation for the detection of dengue non-structural protein ns1 antigen. Biosensors and Bioelectronics
132, 38–46.
[91] Tahamtan, A., Ardebili, A., 2020. Real-time rt-pcr in covid-19 detection: issues affecting the results.
[92] Takemura, K., Adegoke, O., Suzuki, T., Park, E.Y., 2019. A localized surface plasmon resonance-amplified immunofluorescence biosensor
for ultrasensitive and rapid detection of nonstructural protein 1 of zika virus. Plos one 14, e0211517.
[93] Takemura, K., Adegoke, O., Takahashi, N., Kato, T., Li, T.C., Kitamoto, N., Tanaka, T., Suzuki, T., Park, E.Y., 2017. Versatility of
a localized surface plasmon resonance-based gold nanoparticle-alloyed quantum dot nanobiosensor for immunofluorescence detection of
viruses. Biosensors and Bioelectronics 89, 998–1005.
[94] Tam, Y.J., Zeenathul, N.A., Rezaei, M.A., Mustafa, N.H., Azmi, M.L.M., Bahaman, A.R., Lo, S.C., Tan, J.S., Hani, H., Rasedee, A., 2017.

M M Hassan et al. Sensing and Biosensing Research, 33, 100429, (2021) DOI: 10.1016/j.sbsr.2021.100429

Page 28 of 29

A review on plasmonic and metamaterial based biosensing platforms for virus detection
Wide dynamic range of surface-plasmon-resonance-based assay for hepatitis b surface antigen antibody optimal detection in comparison
with elisa. Biotechnology and applied biochemistry 64, 735–744.
[95] Turpin, J.P., Bossard, J.A., Morgan, K.L., Werner, D.H., Werner, P.L., 2014. Reconfigurable and tunable metamaterials: a review of the
theory and applications. International Journal of Antennas and Propagation 2014.
[96] Uddin, S.M.A., Chowdhury, S.S., Kabir, E., 2020. Numerical analysis of a highly sensitive surface plasmon resonance sensor for sars-cov-2
detection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2008.10354 .
[97] Valdez, J., Bawage, S., Gomez, I., Singh, S.R., 2016. Facile and rapid detection of respiratory syncytial virus using metallic nanoparticles.
Journal of nanobiotechnology 14, 1–12.
[98] Vemula, S.V., Zhao, J., Liu, J., Wang, X., Biswas, S., Hewlett, I., 2016. Current approaches for diagnosis of influenza virus infections in
humans. Viruses 8, 96.
[99] Veselago, V.G., 1968. The electrodynamics of substances with simultaneously negative values of 𝜖 and 𝜇. Physics-Uspekhi 10, 509–514.
[100] Wang, R., Xu, W., Chen, D., Zhou, R., Wang, Q., Gao, W., Kono, J., Xie, L., Ying, Y., 2020. Ultrahigh-sensitivity molecular sensing with
carbon nanotube terahertz metamaterials. ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces 12, 40629–40634.
[101] Wang, X., Li, Y., Wang, H., Fu, Q., Peng, J., Wang, Y., Du, J., Zhou, Y., Zhan, L., 2010. Gold nanorod-based localized surface plasmon
resonance biosensor for sensitive detection of hepatitis b virus in buffer, blood serum and plasma. Biosensors and Bioelectronics 26, 404–410.
[102] Withayachumnankul, W., Fumeaux, C., Abbott, D., 2010. Compact electric-lc resonators for metamaterials. Opt. Express 18, 25912–25921.
URL: http://www.opticsexpress.org/abstract.cfm?URI=oe-18-25-25912, doi:10.1364/OE.18.025912.
[103] Yanik, A.A., Huang, M., Kamohara, O., Artar, A., Geisbert, T.W., Connor, J.H., Altug, H., 2010. An optofluidic nanoplasmonic biosensor
for direct detection of live viruses from biological media. Nano letters 10, 4962–4969.
[104] Yesilkoy, F., Terborg, R.A., Pello, J., Belushkin, A.A., Jahani, Y., Pruneri, V., Altug, H., 2018. Phase-sensitive plasmonic biosensor using a
portable and large field-of-view interferometric microarray imager. Light: Science & Applications 7, 17152–17152.
[105] Yu, H., Kim, K., Ma, K., Lee, W., Choi, J.W., Yun, C.O., Kim, D., 2013. Enhanced detection of virus particles by nanoisland-based localized
surface plasmon resonance. Biosensors and Bioelectronics 41, 249–255.
[106] Yu, P., Besteiro, L.V., Huang, Y., Wu, J., Fu, L., Tan, H.H., Jagadish, C., Wiederrecht, G.P., Govorov, A.O., Wang, Z., 2019. Broadband
metamaterial absorbers. Advanced Optical Materials 7, 1800995.
[107] Yüce, M., Filiztekin, E., Özkaya, K.G., 2020. Covid-19 diagnosis—a review of current methods. Biosensors and Bioelectronics , 112752.
[108] Zhang, K., Liu, X., Shen, J., Li, Z., Sang, Y., Wu, X., Zha, Y., Liang, W., Wang, C., Wang, K., et al., 2020. Clinically applicable ai system
for accurate diagnosis, quantitative measurements, and prognosis of covid-19 pneumonia using computed tomography. Cell .
[109] Zhao, Y., Gan, S., Zhang, G., Dai, X., 2019. High sensitivity refractive index sensor based on surface plasmon resonance with topological
insulator. Results in Physics 14, 102477.
[110] Zhong, N., Zheng, B., Li, Y., Poon, L., Xie, Z., Chan, K., Li, P., Tan, S., Chang, Q., Xie, J., et al., 2003. Epidemiology and cause of severe
acute respiratory syndrome (sars) in guangdong, people’s republic of china, in february, 2003. The Lancet 362, 1353–1358.
[111] Zhou, R., Wang, C., Xu, W., Xie, L., 2019. Biological applications of terahertz technology based on nanomaterials and nanostructures.
Nanoscale 11, 3445–3457.
[112] Zhou, X., Chen, K., Li, L., Peng, W., Yu, Q., 2017. Angle modulated surface plasmon resonance spectrometer for refractive index sensing
with enhanced detection resolution. Optics Communications 382, 610–614.
[113] Zhu, J., Ke, Y., Dai, J., You, Q., Wu, L., Li, J., Guo, J., Xiang, Y., Dai, X., 2019. Topological insulator overlayer to enhance the sensitivity
and detection limit of surface plasmon resonance sensor. Nanophotonics 1.

M M Hassan et al. Sensing and Biosensing Research, 33, 100429, (2021) DOI: 10.1016/j.sbsr.2021.100429

Page 29 of 29

