Bae et al.

RESEARCH DRAFT

arXiv:2012.12263v2 [econ.GN] 12 Feb 2021

Challenges in Equitable COVID-19 Vaccine
Distribution: A Roadmap for Digital Technology
Solutions
Joseph Bae3,10 , Darshan Gandhi3 , Jil Kothari3 , Sheshank Shankar3 , Jonah Bae3 , Parth Patwa3 , Rohan
Sukumaran3 , Sethuraman T. V.3 , Vanessa Yu9 , Krutika Misra3 , Srinidhi Murali3 , Aishwarya Saxena3,8 ,
Kasia Jakimowicz1,3,5 , Vivek Sharma1,2,4 , Rohan Iyer3 , Ashley Mehra3 , Alex Radunsky3,6 , Priyanshi
Katiyar3 , Sunaina Anand3 , Shailesh Advani3,7 , Jagjit Dhaliwal1 and Ramesh Raskar1,2,3*
1 Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 02139 Cambridge, USA.
2 MIT Media Lab, 02139 Cambridge, USA.
3 PathCheck Foundation, 02139 Cambridge, USA.
4 Harvard Medical School, 02115 Boston, USA.
5 Ash Center for Democratic Governance and Innovation, Harvard Kennedy School, 02138 Cambridge, USA.
6 Institute for Technology and Global Health, 02139 Cambridge, USA
7 National Human Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of Health, 20892 Bethesda, USA
8 University of California, Berkeley School of Law, 94720 Berkeley, USA.
9 University of California, San Diego School of Medicine, 92092 San Diego, USA
10 Renaissance School of Medicine, Stony Brook University, 11794 Stony Brook, USA

*

Correspondence:
https://web.media.mit.edu/∼raskar/
2
MIT Media Lab, 02139
Cambridge, USA
Full list of author information is
available at the end of the article

Abstract
As several COVID-19 vaccine candidates approach approval for human use,
governments around the world are preparing comprehensive standards for vaccine
distribution and monitoring to address and hopefully avoid difficulties that may
result from rush-to-market. In this early draft article, we identify challenges for
vaccine distribution in four core areas - logistics, health outcomes, user-centric
impact, and communication. Each of these challenges is analyzed against their
impacts on five critical consequences including disease-spread, individual behavior,
society, the economy, and data privacy. Disparities in equitable distribution,
vaccine efficacy, duration of immunity, multi-dose adherence, and privacy-focused
record keeping are among the most critical difficulties that must be addressed.
While many of these challenges have been previously identified and planned for,
some have not been thoroughly addressed to target the needs of diverse
population groups for which significant health disparities have been identified.
The logistics of global equitable, widespread vaccine distribution among diverse
populations and countries of various economic, racial/ethnic, and cultural
backgrounds requires careful planning and consideration for global vaccine
distribution to be successessful. We also describe unique challenges regarding
vaccine efficacy in specialized populations including children, seniors, and
immunocompromised individuals [1, 28]. Furthermore, we report the potential for
potential drug-vaccine interactions as well as the possibility that certain vaccine
platforms may increase susceptibility to autoimmune effects [81, 14, 75]. Given
these complex issues, the importance of privacy-focused, user-centric systems for
vaccine education and incentivization along with clear communication from
governments, organizations, and academic institutions is imperative. These
challenges are by no means insurmountable, but require thorough consideration
and planning to avoid harmful consequences that span a range of individual,
societal, economic, and security domains.
Keywords: COVID-19; Vaccines; Healthcare information management; Privacy

Bae et al.

Page 2 of 21

1 Introduction
The severity of the COVID-19 pandemic on the health and economies of nations
has ushered in an unparalleled period of rapid vaccine research, development, and
production. As of November 17, 2020, the WHO reports 48 vaccines undergoing clinical trials and 164 candidates in preclinical evaluation [76]. If several of these vaccine
candidates are approved for widespread use, we anticipate multi-level challenges
in their distribution, access, clinical outcomes, patient compliance, privacy-related
concerns, and communication. In this work, we divide this landscape of challenges
into four distinct categories: 1) logistics, 2) health outcomes, 3) user-centric issues,
and 4) communication. We further examine the consequences of these challenges,
focusing on the impact for disease spread, individual behavior, society, the economy,
and data privacy. The world’s manufacturers and supply chains are underprepared
for the task of widespread vaccine distribution. Currently, a seamless framework
and pipeline for vaccine allocation, distribution, and administration have not been
fully developed in all countries globally, and early proposals in some nations do not
account for all potential challenges and obstacles to equitable vaccine coverage that
may occur [49, 78, 18].
Furthermore, there are many challenges in assessing the effectiveness of a vaccine
and its long-term effects on health outcomes. The relative novelty of several leading
vaccine candidate platforms causes concerns regarding their long-term efficacy and
potential side effects. The incredible speed of vaccine development must be supplemented by long-term followup of vaccinated individuals to further understand these
characteristics.
There also exist several challenges surrounding consumer privacy and individual
behavior regarding COVID-19 vaccination. Concerns surrounding vaccine hesitancy,
accurate information sharing, the importance of receiving a booster vaccination, and
individual data privacy all must be addressed.
Finally, several challenges arise in proper communication of vaccine information
between governments, companies, and the general public. In the current era of misinformation and the politicization of science, clear and transparent communication
will be vital to the success of widespread vaccination.
In this early draft, we explore the various challenges associated with COVID-19
vaccine development and administration. We also provide insight into the conse-

Figure 1 Summary of challenges in vaccine distribution.

Bae et al.

Page 3 of 21

Figure 2 A generalized pipeline for vaccine distribution. Challenges can arise at multiple points
within this process.

quences of failing to overcome these obstacles, and highlight the need for digital
tools to address these challenges.

2 Background
2.1 The Landscape of Vaccine Development
The current progress in COVID-19 vaccine development can be attributed to both
advances in vaccine technologies as well as to historically unparalleled international
funding and cooperation. In the United States, the Trump administration implemented Operation Warpspeed, a program designed to massively fund vaccine development, speed the regulatory process, and begin vaccine manufacturing even before
emergency FDA authorization for safety and effectiveness [40]. International organizations GAVI, the Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations and the World
Health Organization have partnered to launch the COVAX initiative, whose mission is to ”accelerate the development and manufacture of COVID-19 vaccines, and
to guarantee fair and equitable access for every country in the world” [35]. These
efforts have contributed to the apparent success of Pfizer and Moderna’s recent
Phase III clinical trials with reported efficacies of greater than 94% for each vaccine
candidate [47, 57]. However, challenges still remain in the production, distribution,
and monitoring of these and other COVID-19 vaccines.
2.2 Challenges Identified by President-elect Biden’s Administration
President-elect Joseph Biden has already established a COVID-19 taskforce that
has outlined a general approach for the new administration’s efforts in combating
the pandemic [10, 9]. The Biden team references important issues in restoring public trust in science through transparent and educational dialogue, making vaccine
availability equitable among different demographics and economic classes, and ensuring transparency in the determination of efficacy and safety of vaccines. However,

Bae et al.

Page 4 of 21

other challenges remain. It is our hope that the present work provides further detail into the many challenges facing widespread vaccine distribution as well as the
consequences if those challenges remain unmet. These insights might supplement
the future presidential administrations approach to vaccine distribution.
2.3 Challenges in Vaccination for Previous Infectious Diseases
Vaccine development for previous infectious disease epidemics and pandemics have
encountered numerous challenges including the advent of viral antigenic shifts and
drifts, difficulties coordination and communication, and concerns about administration to individuals with pre-existing health conditions.
Viral antigenic shifts and drifts occur when a virus strain changes over time,
causing a current vaccine to be rendered less effective. Antigenic shifts generally are
defined as dramatic, radical genetic changes whereas antigenic drifts occur gradually
over time [20]. For example, the H1N1 virus underwent an antigenic shift in 2009
enabling it to have much quicker spread when compared to the H1N1 virus observed
in 1918 [20]. These changes to a virus can make it much harder to vaccinate, as new
vaccines often must be developed for every change. Additionally, if a virus shifts
during vaccine production (a scenario which could apply to SARS-CoV-2), the entire
development of a vaccine will be thrown off and much research rendered obsolete.
Another obstacle for vaccine development is coordination and communication:
both on a national and international scale. When dealing with widespread pandemics, it is essential that response forces coordinate together to resolve the pandemic. The importance of coordination was seen in the H1N1 pandemic of 2009, in
which communication proved to be both a strong point in the global response and a
weak point. Many response forces such as the DOC were successfully activated and
international collaboration did occur. However, many of the challenges imposed by
the H1N1 pandemic also stemmed from miscommunications. For example, the WHO
(who was largely responsible for global coordination) was criticized for not taking
into consideration research from multiple groups. Due to this, vaccine testing was
somewhat crippled, especially in phases 4 and 5 where the WHO convened with only
a subset of their committee [33]. There was also ineffective public communication,
with a lack of media reports during phase 6 of the testing [33].
While communication can be easily facilitated in countries with large scale mass
media, it is not so easily done in less developed countries with fewer communication
resources. In some cases, these countries might rely on direct human communication of medical news and guidelines. The H1N1 pandemic also highlighted the
importance of observing infection and vaccination in multiple populations. For instance, it was observed that the H1N1 virus’ effect on pregnant women was quite
severe, and safe vaccination of pregnant women was therefore made a priority [71].
Many of these challenges are also applicable to the future of COVID-19 vaccination
development and deployment.

3 Logistics
The complexity of planning the production, allocation, distribution, administration,
and monitoring of hundreds of millions of COVID-19 vaccinations pose a broad
range of challenges [69]. Of utmost importance is addressing these through an equity

Bae et al.

Page 5 of 21

lens, with an understanding of the intersectionality between uniform, large-scale
logistical challenges and the diversity present in governments and populations. We
have identified five key logistical challenges that must be addressed in deploying
COVID-19 vaccinations.
3.1 Challenges
3.1.1 Production
Despite significant government and private sector funding, the demand for COVID19 vaccines internationally outstrips current supply chains. In America, the CDC
has indicated that a COVID-19 vaccine may not be widely available to the general
public until the middle of 2021[46]. Decisions about allocation of the limited number
of vaccines that will initially be available in addition to the need for increased
manufacturing capability are two critical challenges that must be addressed.
3.1.2 Prioritization
Most proposed frameworks for COVID-19 vaccine distribution suggest that healthcare workers should be the first to receive a potential vaccination, but plans diverge from that point. Organizations including the National Academy of Health, the
WHO, and others all have developed their own distribution guidelines [78, 49, 16].
A CDC framework for vaccine distribution exists, but is limited due to ambiguity in
how efficacious novel vaccines might be in various populations and how long vaccine
immunity might last [18, 16].
Once vaccine distribution guidelines have been adopted by a given jurisdiction
such as a state or country, additional challenges may arise in confirming the eligibility of individuals for vaccination. For instance, if an occupational group or
individuals with pre-existing health conditions are designated for early vaccination,
it can be difficult to confirm an individual’s eligibility without overstepping privacy
concerns or causing undue logistical burdens. Current medical record systems in the
US are non-uniform, making the confirmation of an individual’s pre-existing condition status difficult. Furthermore, there are data and privacy concerns that must
be considered when distributing vaccines on the basis of health statuses or conditions. This is especially relevant in settings where a patient’s information must be
stored in order to facilitate follow-up COVID-19 booster vaccination or monitoring
long-term side effects.
3.1.3 Distribution
There are anticipated difficulties in the pipeline to properly store and distribute
some COVID-19 vaccine. The “cold chain” references the necessity for several
COVID-19 vaccines that are currently undergoing clinical trials (including those
developed by Pfizer and BioNTech) to be stored at sub-zero temperatures during
both transport and storage [64]. Often, dry ice is needed in each of these processes,
and there is some concern that the US will experience dry ice shortages during the
distribution of these vaccines [67]. Pharmaceutical-grade glass vials capable of withstanding sub-zero temperatures might also experience shortages in this setting [67].
In some countries, storage facilities may lack vaccine-qualified refrigerators, potentially greatly affecting the efficacy and storage life of vaccines [39]. Furthermore, a

Bae et al.

Page 6 of 21

proper data monitoring framework is not in place to track and evaluate the transport and storage conditions of vaccines distributed widely across multiple countries.
Furthermore, it may be difficult to ensure that a shipment of vaccines has been
properly stored throughout transit. This is especially important in the setting of
international shipping of vaccines in which storage conditions can be more difficult
and costly to maintain.
In the US, it is more than likely that vaccine transport will rely heavily on shipping
companies including UPS and FedEx due to their previous experience in transporting vaccines for illnesses such as the seasonal flu [67]. However, populations that
might be most prioritized for vaccination (health-care workers, perople over the age
of 65, those with serious comorbidities, etc.) are not evenly distributed across the
United States [73].This can pose a challenge in determining where best to allocate
vaccine doses and how to properly enact that distribution. An enormous challenge
will be the proper coordination of local, state, and federal agencies with manufacturers and shipping companies to ensure proper distribution of vaccines across the
country. Inadequate digital or technological pipelines leave open the opportunity for
errors in the proper tracking and transport of vaccine shipments, potentially creating scarcities and surpluses if vaccines are not properly routed to their intended
destinations. This is particularly concerning in countries where inconsistencies in
internet, satellite, and data storage infrastructure might prevent centralized monitoring of vaccine distribution.
There also exists issues in determining where and who should be responsible for
vaccination of the general public. In developed nations such as the United States,
existing healthcare and pharmaceutical infrastructure will likely be relied upon for
distribution of vaccines. However, issues still remain as to the responsibility for
vaccination administration to specific populations such as indigenous populations,
federal employees, etc. [64]. In developing nations, sufficient numbers of centralized
vaccination locations for large swathes of the population may not exist. In these
cases, an appropriate vaccination framework must be developed. Mass-transit of
individuals from remote locations to centralized urban centers for vaccination can
have dire consequences for disease spread, but a failure to provide access to vaccines
might also marginalize these populations. In these countries, another difficulty may
arise in monitoring the mobility of individuals who are constantly migrating. This
challenge is compounded in monitoring vaccine distributions in countries where large
segments of the population cannot be identified by a standardized identification or
address [48, 4].
3.1.4 Equity
Equitable distribution of a potential COVID-19 vaccine is an enormous challenge.
This has been highlighted previously during the distribution of the H1N1 vaccine [66]. Economic and racial disparities can be exacerbated by inappropriate or
unequal eligibility criteria for vaccine distribution, and it is imperative that government institutions ensure that appropriate guidelines are in place to prevent these
inequities. Equitable distribution of COVID-19 vaccines can also be a challenge on
the international scale, as wealthier and more influential nations may have increased
access to limited vaccine doses. Prohibitive costs might bring these national differences in vaccine access into sharp focus. Previous data demonstrates discordances in

Bae et al.

Page 7 of 21

vaccination rates along socioeconomic status both dependent on individual wealth
within countries and national wealth on the global stage. Wealthier individuals and
nations tend to have higher rates of vaccination whereas the less wealthy tend to
have lower rates [45, 17].
3.1.5 Record Keeping/Follow-up
Following vaccine administration, obtaining and maintaining secure and thorough
immunization records for patients will pose several challenges. These records are
crucial in understanding which segments of the population have been vaccinated to
guide distribution as well as public health policy. Furthermore, these records might
be used to monitor long term efficacy including duration of immunity, compliance to
the two dose regime currently required by most vaccine candidate frontrunners, and
long term side effects. Secure, universal, accessible, and interoperable health information storage systems are in short supply, and the development of such a system
for COVID-19 vaccination recordkeeping will be an enormous challenge. However,
development and implementation of such a framework for COVID-19 monitoring
can have enormous societal and individual benefits.
3.2 Consequences
While the primary consequences of unaddressed logistical challenges are plainly
observed in ineffective distribution of vaccines, there are nuanced complications
surrounding equitable distribution in diverse populations. These consequences must
be evaluated, and plans must be put into place to alleviate their effects should they
become realized.
3.2.1 Disease Spread
A lack of an effective digital framework to monitor vaccine allocation, distribution,
and storage may result in inefficient vaccination of populations, leading to preventable disease transmission. Vaccines that are lost, transported to incorrect geographic locations, or rendered ineffective by improper storage conditions are wasted
tools to combat the spread of COVID-19. Furthermore, inadequate monitoring systems can dramatically hinder investigative procedures into vaccine distribution or
storage errors, allowing supply chain problems to persist longer than necessary.
3.2.2 Individual Behavior
Inadequate logistical preparation for COVID-19 vaccine distribution can have negative impacts on individuals. First, people residing in areas where supply chain errors
cause reduced vaccine availability will simply be less likely to receive a COVID-19
vaccine. These individuals might then be less likely to obtain a vaccine when supply
shortages are corrected in their area due to a desensitization from the necessity to
receive a vaccine. Alternatively, an individual who is unable to obtain a COVID-19
vaccine due to a lack of availability might choose to travel elsewhere for vaccination. This might increase mobility patterns leading to disease spread. Finally,
incompetent logistical planning for vaccine distribution might engender mistrust in
the government in individuals, potentially decreasing the likelihood of vaccination
or compliance with other health recommendations.

Bae et al.

Page 8 of 21

3.2.3 Societal Impact
Consequences noted for individual behavior above might be observed more broadly
in societal behaviors, and more widespread mistrust in government competence
might be stimulated. Furthermore, logistical inadequacies leading to disparities in
vaccine distribution might further widen socioeconomic divides between races and
classes.
3.2.4 Economic Impact
The economic burden of logistical errors in vaccine production, distribution, and
storage can be most obviously understood in the economic cost associated with
correcting misdirected vaccines. The loss of viable vaccines as a result in errors
in transportation or poor storage conditions has a negative economic impact with
fewer vaccines available to prevent disease spread, exacerbating the already dramatic
economic effects of COVID-19.
3.2.5 Security/Bad Actors
Insufficient monitoring of the entire supply chain of vaccine production, distribution, and storage also lends itself to attack by bad actors. If a country does not
carefully monitor the total pipeline of vaccine distribution, there may be opportunities for theft and counterfeit vaccine delivery. Furthermore, privacy concerns can
arise in numerous areas along the pipeline of vaccine distribution and administration. Private information including health records will undoubtedly be collected for
some individuals receiving a COVID-19 vaccine, and solutions must be in place to
safeguard against improper usage or access of this personal data. It is imperative
that privacy be safeguarded to the highest possible extent in developing systems to
track vaccinated patients and to provide reminders for second-dose administration.
3.3 Need for Technology Solutions
It is imperative that systems are put in place to coordinate and monitor the distribution and administration of COVID-19 vaccines. Vaccine distribution must be coordinated across a variety of private and public sectors including governments, manufacturers, and transport agencies. Constant tracking and monitoring of where vaccine shipments are currently located both in space and in the distribution pipeline
must be achieved through a comprehensive, uniform digital framework. Furthermore, systems must be put in place to identify errors in vaccine storage. Additionally, steps must be taken to ensure equitable distribution of vaccines. Ideally
this will be achieved using a transparent methodology that enables the public to
directly observe that there are no unintended biases in vaccine distribution. Simple
technology such as the barcoding of individual vaccines can help address problems
that may arise along the vaccine supply chain and may be useful in monitoring lonterm safety and effectiveness. Finally, a privacy-focused approach to vaccination
and patient follow-up must be implemented to evaluate the efficacy of the various
vaccines and to gather information about vaccination rates and follow-up seconddose adherence. This record-keeping system will also be crucial in understanding
the long-term effectiveness and side effects of vaccines in diverse population groups.
It is also important to note that poorer nations suffer more acutely from many
of the challenges outlined in vaccine distribution and administration, underscoring
the importance for the deployable digital solutions described above.

Bae et al.

Page 9 of 21

4 Health Outcomes
Due to the unprecedented rapid development of COVID-19 vaccines, there exists a
dearth of relevant clinical data on the long-term efficacy and side effect profile of
many of the most promising vaccine candidates. However, the limited amount of
data provided on current vaccines in development as well as previous knowledge of
similar vaccine platforms can lend insights into some of the challenges that might
be faced in the deployment of these vaccines.
4.1 Challenges
The COVID-19 pandemic has inspired the use of novel vaccine platforms. These
technologies have enabled the observed rapid development of promising vaccine
candidates, but the fact they have not been widely used previously requires a degree of caution and study as they are broadly implemented. Key concerns are the
potential reactogenicity of mRNA vaccines, as well as potential issues in multiple
dose regimens and HIV susceptibility for adenoviral vector vaccines [31, 75, 14].
4.1.1 mRNA Vaccines
mRNA vaccines are a very new technology that seems to be ideal for rapid vaccine
development in the setting of pandemics. To date, there have been no mRNA vaccines approved by the FDA for widespread public use in preventing any viral illness,
but previous clinical trials have examined their efficacy with promising results [60].
Pfizer and BioNTech as well as Moderna also recently have reported positive preliminary results of Phase 3 trials for COVID-19 vaccines using mRNA platforms,
demonstrating greater than 90% efficacy and no serious adverse events [57, 47].
However, these results represent findings from only a small fraction of the total
patients enrolled in the study, and the long-term efficacy of the vaccines remains to
be studied [57, 47]. Potential challenges previously observed in the setting of other
mRNA vaccines include serious reactogenic effects to vaccination as well as potential concerns over relatively weaker immunogenic responses using this platform [54].
mRNA vaccines for COVID-19 that are developed will need to be observed closely
to determine whether reactogenic effects are more prevalent in certain populations,
and whether the length of conferred immunity is substantial enough to be useful
for public health applications.
4.1.2 Adenoviral Vector Vaccines
Another relatively new technology for COVID-19 vaccine development involves the
usage of adenoviral vectors containing genetic coding sequences for COVID-19
antigens. While a more extensively studied platform compared to mRNA vaccines,
there are very few vaccines on the global stage that have been approved for use in
any illness using adenoviral vectors. In the setting of COVID-19, Johnson & Johnson
as well as Astrazeneca are currently developing vaccines using various adenoviral
vector platforms; both candidates have recently resumed trials following adverse
events that were deemed to be most probably unrelated to vaccination [42, 3].
The primary challenge to adenoviral vector vaccines lies in potential prior host
immunity to the viral vector, potentially reducing the efficacy of the original or
booster vaccinations [65]. Furthermore, prior host immunity to adenoviral vectors

Bae et al.

Page 10 of 21

is nonuniform; for example, some studies have suggested a larger serological immunization prevalence in sub-Saharan Africa for several adenovirus subtypes when
compared to Europe and the United States [23]. If trials do not adequately account
for this fact, an adenovirus vaccine might be dramatically less effective in these
populations.
Additionally, two previous adenoviral vector vaccines being developed for HIV
were found in clinical trials to increase susceptibility to HIV infection in certain
vaccinated patients [31]. There is some concern that the use of adenoviral vectors
for COVID-19 vaccines might induce this same susceptibility in some demographic
groups [14].
Finally, there is some indication that viral vector vaccines may be contraindicated
in patients receiving certain drug regimens such as those used in the treatment of
multiple sclerosis [81]. The effects of these medications on vaccinations has not been
thoroughly studied but should be considered, especially in the setting of a relatively
nascent technology such as adenoviral vectors.
4.1.3 Duration of Immunity
The duration for which new COVID-19 vaccines might confer immunity is currently
unknown. While clinical trials have thus far demonstrated the short-term safety and
efficacy of vaccine candidates, there is still a lack of understanding of how long any
vaccine might produce immunity to COVID-19. Currently, estimates are best made
based upon the immune response to other, similar coronaviruses as well as studies on
the lasting serological response to natural COVID-19 infection [30, 29]. Each of these
studies suggest that immunity to COVID-19 may not last more than 12 months,
and may be even shorter in vaccinated individuals [30, 29, 74]. If the duration of
immunity is not well-understood prior to widespread vaccine distribution, it will be
imperative for proper tools to be in place for monitoring new COVID-19 infection
in vaccinated individuals. In scenarios where vaccines for COVID-19 only confer
short-lived immunity, protocols to vaccinate the population at regular intervals will
need to be developed and supported by appropriate digital reminder and tracking
tools.
4.1.4 Efficacy of Immunity
Though current trials have reported high efficacies of greater than 90% for the Pfizer
and Moderna COVID-19 vaccine candidates, the potential for lower effectiveness
must be addressed [57, 47]. It is possible that immunity may wane over time, and
previous clinical trials have produced results that were not consistent with future
performance of a drug/vaccine. Furthermore, variation in the efficacy of individual
vaccine doses or lots might be observed due to varying production, storage, and
transport conditions. In the setting of diverging vaccination effectiveness, tools must
be in place to monitor individuals across a broad spectrum of demographic and
geographic windows in order to identify causes of varied immunity. Should a vaccine
be shown to be uniformly less effective than indicated by clinical trials, procedures
must be in place for optimal vaccination strategies and coordination with other
preventative policies must be established to prevent renewed COVID-19 outbreaks.
A vaccine with lower efficacy can still be useful (as observed in the case of influenza
vaccines), but must be coupled with appropriate procedures and policies accounting
for this reduced efficacy to protect individuals and the public.

Bae et al.

Page 11 of 21

4.1.5 Vaccination of Special Populations
Current COVID-19 vaccine trials have attempted to accurately assess efficacy across
sex, age, and race [56]. Thus far, results from several Phase 3 studies appear to be
promising [57, 47]. However, there is still concern over the immediate and long-term
efficacy of vaccine immunogenesis in specific populations such as seniors, children,
and immunocompromised individuals [1, 38]. Elderly individuals often undergo a
process termed “immunosenescence” which can hinder immune response to vaccination [28]. While these concerns have prompted companies such as Pfizer to enroll a
large number of seniors in their COVID-19 vaccine trial, it is still unknown whether
the long-term vaccine efficacy may differ between patients in different age groups
[57]. In line with FDA guidelines, clinical trials for COVID-19 vaccine candidates
in pediatric populations will follow adult trials, and currently no data has been
gathered on the use of these vaccines in children under the age of 12 [32, 56]. Individuals may become immunocompromised due to a variety of health conditions,
organ transplant operations, or by taking medications for diseases such as cancer.
Vaccines for other diseases have had varied efficacies and morbidities in these populations; COVID-19 vaccines remain to be completely studied in this setting. For
individuals with some medical conditions, some vaccines may pose a medical risk
[49]. These individuals must not be subjected to penalties for not receiving a vaccine
under the ADA [80].
4.2 Consequences
Aside from obvious effects of lower efficacy vaccines or potential side effects, close
attention must be paid to the variance of these health outcomes in diverse population groups. Unequal health outcomes can have significant impact across society
and must be prepared for and mitigated.
4.2.1 Disease Spread
The consequences of ineffective or short-lasting vaccines are self-evident. Further,
these issues are made more complicated by the potential for varied effects among
different populations groups. It will be crucial to understand whether disparate
long-term effects or the length of immunity conferred by COVID-19 vaccines are
disparate in different population groups including those special populations outlined
above. A failure to identify and understand these disparities could lead to prolonged
disease spread in specific communities or populations.
4.2.2 Individual Behavior
Recent polls have suggested that vaccine efficacy and reactogenicity are among the
most critical determinants in individual willingness to obtain a COVID-19 vaccine
[61]. Transparency in reporting real-world efficacies and side effects in various populations is imperative to ensure that individuals are willing to receive vaccines as
they become more available. Additionally, the duration of immunity conferred by
COVID-19 vaccines must be communicated to individuals to help inform their decision making behavior. While the CDC and several public health officials have
suggested that mask-wearing and social distancing will still be needed to optimally
combat disease spread even after vaccine distribution, it is likely that vaccinated

Bae et al.

Page 12 of 21

individuals will be more lax in adherence to these guidelines [27, 19]. It is therefore
important that the public be kept well-informed of both the efficacy and length of
immunity that they should expect to obtain following COVID-19 vaccination.
4.2.3 Societal Impact
If there are differences in vaccine efficacy among diverse populations, there is potential for imbalanced prevalences of disease spread and transmission in various regions
of the country and world. This might lead to prejudice and social tension among
different demographic groups. Varied vaccination efficacy and lengths of immunity
might also influence communal adherence to social distancing and mask-wearing
guidelines. Finally, misinformation and a lack of transparency regarding the relative efficacy, side effects, and length of immunity for COVID-19 vaccines might
engender unnecessary fear, rumors, and concern in populations.
4.2.4 Economic Impact
The timeline of immunity and vaccine efficacy must be well-understood to develop
cost-efficient public vaccination regimens. Systems must be in place to identify which
vaccines are most efficacious in diverse populations. Furthermore, liability compensation programs have been instituted by governments to sponsor vaccine development, rendering governments responsible for reparations in the setting of negative
health outcomes caused by vaccination. Ultimately, the most powerful effect of vaccine efficacy on the economy lies in the potential of widespread vaccination to return
the economy to some semblance of normality.
4.3 Need for Technology Solutions
The rapid pace of COVID-19 vaccine development has been a boon in the fight
against disease spread while engendering caution and concern in those worried
about the safety and efficacy of rapidly developed products. A uniform system
for both top-down and participatory monitoring of health outcomes for vaccinated
individuals can help address these concerns. Such a system must prioritize individual privacy while also gathering enough information to analyze the effects of a
COVID-19 vaccine across multiple demographic groups.

5 User-Centric Issues
In addition to high-level issues regarding the logistics of high-volume vaccine distribution and effectiveness of new vaccine candidates, it is crucial to consider various
issues that are directly pertinent to individual behavior. Citizens must choose to
become vaccinated, and incentivizing that behavior will require proper solutions to
several challenges.
5.1 Challenges
5.1.1 Trust in the System
According to a recent study, 71.5% of individuals surveyed from 19 different countries would be likely to take a COVID-19 vaccine, with 61.4% relying on their
employer’s recommendation [44]. These numbers vary significantly across countries
with up to 90% of those in China and as little as 55% of those in Russia indicating

Bae et al.

Page 13 of 21

that they would be likely to receive a COVID-19 vaccine [44]. Governments will
need to contend with the challenge of raising these numbers in order to widely
distribute vaccines. To do so effectively, there must be an understanding of which
demographics, economic classes, education levels, and geographic locations contain
individuals least likely to seek vaccination. Gaining user trust relies on a combination of transparency and clear, effective planning from governments. The challenge
of creating these clear lines of communication and pandemic response guidelines
in a rapidly evolving disease landscape is a challenge that many governments are
finding difficulty in overcoming.
5.1.2 Follow-up Tracking and Multi-Dose Reminders
Among the current top COVID-19 vaccine candidates, most require two-dose vaccination schedules [77]. While these multi-dose regimens are certain to require additional costs and logistical challenges, they have been shown to increase immunogenicity in vaccinated individuals [72, 36]. The importance of developing systems to
record individuals who have received one or two doses of the vaccine and to remind
individuals to receive a second booster of the same vaccine type will be of utmost
importance. Paper-based reminders introduce a risk of loss of data due to difficulty
in managing and recording a physical paper trail. Furthermore, paper-based reminders pose a greater risk for data spoofing and there are confidentiality concerns
related to loss of reminders/records. Systems must also address the monitoring and
reminding of individuals that are dependent on others for health care and vaccine
obtainment including children and disabled individuals.
5.1.3 Data Privacy
The CDC offers various high-level software tools to assist state and local governments including the Vaccine Tracking System (VTrckS) and PANVAX [21, 22].
Other digital products have also been developed by Palantir Technologies Inc.,
Salesforce, the Maryland Department of Health, Accenture, and SAP in order to
address various challenges in vaccine distribution and administration [43, 62, 2, 52].
These tools could be utilized for identifying and allocating vaccines to high-priority
populations, but the lack of privacy guidelines in place to protect sensitive patient
data is concerning. For instance, several of these companies have neither disclosed
what collected private health information might be used for nor whether any privacy
safeguards have been set in place to protect an individual’s name, race, location,
travel history, and past health records [43] . This personal data might be used
maliciously in the setting of data spoofing and data breaches.
5.1.4 Vaccine Incentivization and Motivation
While an individual’s own health and well-being is an obvious incentive for both
initial and booster-shot vaccination, the government will need to make advances in
motivating large portions of the population to become vaccinated. A recent study
reported that as many as 49% of Americans are inclined towards not receiving a
COVID-19 vaccine, with primary deterrents being concerns over side effects and
low efficacies [61]. Governments will need to work to motivate these individuals
towards vaccination while grappling with ethical concerns regarding individuals’

Bae et al.

Page 14 of 21

right to refuse vaccination. Incentivization of vaccination could occur through the
implementation of both positive and negative reinforcements for those choosing to
be vaccinated and those choosing to forgo vaccination, but again the delicate ethical
balance between public health and individual freedoms will need to be addressed
[13].
5.2 Consequences
In a world that continues to place increased importance on individual liberties,
vaccine frameworks that do not attempt to build user engagement and trust will
have dramatic consequences.
5.2.1 Disease Spread
A failure to properly motivate individuals to vaccination and adherence to booster
doses can obviously have direct consequences on disease spread. Lower vaccine adoption rates will lead to decreased levels of population immunity and therefore higher
disease prevalence.
5.2.2 Societal Impact
Left unaddressed, the above user-centric issues can result in population level trends
in mistrust and low rates of vaccination. Vaccination frameworks must be designed
with user behavior in mind lest societal norms outweigh scientific and government
guidelines. Explicitly, if focused systems are not set in place to guide users through
the process of vaccination and follow-up, society will dictate its own acceptable
standards for these processes which may not align with official recommendations.
5.2.3 Economic Impact
A balance between resource investment and return must be made in designing an
incentive structure for vaccination and adherence to multi-dose vaccination. Additionally, data privacy breaches can result in large scale fraud and economic loss
when instigated by malfeasant parties or result in losses via lawsuits when the result
of improper precautionary measures.
5.2.4 Security/Bad Actors
Technologies seeking to address issues in vaccine distribution pipelines must take
thorough measures to protect user data and privacy, such as individuals’ consent
for collecting sensitive information before disclosing their identity. To obfuscate the
sensitive personal information, one could guarantee privacy using cryptographic
techniques such as hashing, private set intersection, secret sharing and fully homomorphic encryption [58, 68, 59, 8, 7]. The government, public health department,
policymakers, or companies should introduce robust data security measures to minimize security risks. Thus, avoiding numerous possibilities for malicious access and
use of private health information.
5.3 Need for Technology Solutions
Technological solutions and backing are crucial in assisting and protecting against
the most important issue of data theft and breach, indirectly helping to create a

Bae et al.

Page 15 of 21

sense of trust among users. These tools must be personalized, real-time, and come
from trusted sources such as public governments. These tools should also enable
participation in large observational studies, and enable passive user engagement
without unnecessary user input in order to set reminders, schedules, etc. Finally,
these tools must be transparent, enabling a user to understand the use of their data.
In each of these aspects, digital solutions can be more effective and secure than the
use of traditional paper methods for user engagement and follow-up.

6 Communication
Communication is perhaps as important a tool as vaccination itself in combating
the COVID-19 pandemic. Fears surrounding a “COVID theater” of political communication in which certain public leaders might appear to take stances on issues
without substantive action, have resulted in the proliferation of misinformation and
uncertainty. The public must be made thoroughly and transparently aware of both
the importance of vaccination, as well as the fact that vaccines are only a part of
the continued public health framework of social distancing and mask-wearing that
must be put in place to overcome COVID-19.
6.1 Challenges
6.1.1 Political Communication
Proper governance is integral to successful reduction in disease prevalence. Political
leaders who downplay the pandemic or disregard the opinions of health care experts
and scientists in an attempt to manufacture good news to the public can stifle a
nation’s trajectory towards recovery [11, 12]. In the United States, the presidential
administration has been criticized for mixed stances on mask-wearing and the use
of hydroxychloroquine for COVID-19 treatment [37]. These messages have oftentimes conflicted with the stances of the national scientists including Dr. Anthony
Fauci, potentially undermining public trust in public health policies [26]. A lack of
consistent messaging across a country’s top executive and scientific officials creates
ideal conditions for the spread of false information and mistrust.
It is imperative to note that even if all vaccines developed for COVID-19 are
highly efficacious, it is possible that these vaccines may not prevent infection with
COVID-19 at high rates [24]. As evidenced by the recent Pfizer and Moderna vaccines, efficacy has been assessed based upon primary endpoints of clinically apparent disease, while asymptomatic infection and spread has gone mostly unmonitored
[24]. It is critical that this is accurately and thoroughly communicated to individuals in order to ensure that proper public health protocols remain in place following
widespread vaccination.
6.1.2 Coordination in Vaccine Distribution
Thorough distribution of a vaccine in both developed and developing nations will
require varying levels of coordination between multiple levels of government, private
companies, and nonprofit organizations. Within developed countries, collaboration
between national health authorities and authorities at state, district, and county
levels will be required to assess vaccination needs and plan distribution of vaccines
accordingly. Developing countries will often require collaborations with NGOs or

Bae et al.

Page 16 of 21

organizations such as the WHO, GAVI, etc. to procure and distribute vaccines. [79]
In either case, communication between a wide array of governmental, corporate,
and nonprofit organizations will be crucial for successful vaccine dissemination.
6.1.3 Miscommunication and Trust
The majority of the American population is divided in the acceptance of vaccines.
Both long-standing anti-vaxxer sentiment and newer COVID-19-specific concerns
produce reluctance towards use of COVID-19 vaccine. One widespread concern involves the efficacy and safety of COVID-19 vaccines that appear to have been produced far faster than previous vaccines [51]. However, it has been demonstrated
that the increased speed of vaccine development is most primarily due to improvements in technology as well as the unprecedented levels of funding and government
cooperation leveraged for COVID-19 vaccine production [24]. Furthermore, there is
larger widespread support for full FDA approval rather than emergency use authorizations (EUAs). Previously, data for EUA decisions were not publicly available,
but the FDA has recently agreed to make this data public [25]. These misconceptions have not been well-communicated to the public and form the basis for many
rumors and misconceptions regarding vaccine safety.
Systemic biases and discrimination present in medicine have also impacted communication surrounding COVID-19 vaccine distribution. [50] For instance, plans to
distribute COVID-19 vaccines to marginalized populations first have sparked fears
that such a policy would be viewed as experimentation of the vaccine on minority
populations [63].
6.1.4 Misinformation Shared on Social Media
We are facing an ‘infodemic’ with the surge in rumors and misinformation spread
on social media platforms [55]. Rumors regarding cures for COVID-19 have led
to death and hospitalizations [53, 55], and have also prompted individuals to be
lax in mask-wearing and social distancing. A popular conspiracy theory [5] claims
that COVID-19 vaccines may be utilized by Bill Gates to implant individuals with
microchips. Obviously, these rumors and theories fuel anti-vaccine sentiment in the
population. Social media is the primary breeding ground of such misinformation [15].
6.2 Consequences
Unaddressed, challenges in communication threaten the very foundation of widespread
vaccination. Miscommunication whether intentional or unintentional has the power
to sway individual and societal understandings of vaccine efficacy and safety. Below
we outline key effects of miscommunication.
6.2.1 Disease Spread
The effect of miscommunication on individual and societal behavior is the primary
way in which it will tend to affect disease spread. Miscommunication can reduce
vaccination rates, adherence to public health policies, etc., thereby resulting in
higher disease prevalence and spread.

Bae et al.

Page 17 of 21

6.2.2 Individual Behavior
Improper or inadequate communication by the government can have dramatic implications for an individual’s likelihood to adhere to precautionary measures in
the pandemic. Misinformation that downplays or underestimates the severity of
COVID-19 can de-incentivize people from seeking vaccines. The same effect is produced if vaccine trials and efficacy are not properly and thoroughly explained to
the public. Skepticism, doubt, and mistrust can act even more dramatically, causing
individuals to actively reject vaccines, further compounding beliefs that the COVID19 pandemic is “fake news”. Proper communication and education surrounding the
need for two-dose vaccination regimes is also critical in properly providing vaccine
coverage to the population.
6.2.3 Societal Impact
In America, already inflamed public tensions can become further exacerbated in
populations that believe that their own source of information regarding COVID-19
is absolute fact. In the setting of contradicting or unclear messaging from multiple
government and scientific sources, groups might be easily turned against one another as they rely on their own personal source of information. This will engender a
positive feedback cycle of mistrust and further antagonism between groups at odds
with one another. An illustrative example lies in the use of masks; even some physicians in the US have described their belief in the inefficacy of masks, furnishing
groups in society with backing for anti-masker views [6].
6.2.4 Economic Impact
Miscommunication can cause multiple sources of economic loss. Small businesses can
be affected by miscommunicated policy guidelines and difficulty enforcing policies
that are not believed by the public to be necessary, as in the case of wearing masks
in some areas. Miscommunication can also result in improper allocation of resources
or goods; for instance the advertisement of false COVID-19 therapies can result in
wasted resources in obtaining ineffective treatments.
6.2.5 Security/Bad Actors
Miscommunication and the spread of false information is one of the primary ways
in which bad actors can influence behavior in the setting of the pandemic. If governments are not explicit about vaccination procedures, it is possible for bad actors
to provide disingenuous information in order to perform fraud or other malicious
actions. For instance, if long term monitoring is introduced for vaccinated individuals, false apps or websites as were observed in the setting of contact tracing might
appear in attempts to steal user information [41]. These same security breaches can
occur at every intersection of user interaction with government protocol if guidelines
are not explicitly and transparently communicated to individuals.
6.3 Need for Technology Solutions
Technological advances have the potential to greatly augment effective communication efforts during COVID-19 vaccine distribution. Large social network companies
are in positions to take bigger steps to eliminate the spread of misleading information (that could potentially discourage vaccine adoption) through their platforms.

Bae et al.

Page 18 of 21

Figure 3 Summary of challenges and consequences of vaccine distribution

Social media platforms also are uniquely situated to disseminate accurate educational information concerning vaccine development and distribution. Furthermore,
advances in machine learning-based fake news detection [55, 70] can help automate
the process of removing misinformation. Finally, it is critical that governments have
intense security built around their technological solutions to prevent unwanted influence from bad actors.

7 Discussion and Conclusion
The initial step in overcoming the many challenges associated with vaccination in
the COVID-19 pandemic is the proper identification of each potential issue. In this
early draft, we have presented challenges spanning the logistics, health outcomes,
user-centric issues, and communication surrounding COVID-19 vaccine development and distribution. We explicitly connect these challenges to consequences in
disease spread, individual behavior, societal impact, economic impact, and data security. Our work is intended to succinctly compile these findings for governments,
organizations, and individuals as they navigate the unprecedented landscape of
mass vaccine distribution. This is not intended to be an exhaustive enumeration
of every challenge likely to be faced in this setting, but we hope to address those
challenges with the most potential to negatively impact society should they remain
unaddressed.
Many challenges remain unaddressed by current vaccination strategies and guidelines, and, in some cases, no easy solutions exist. Nevertheless it is crucial that
governments, organizations, academics, and individuals begin to develop the frameworks and approaches necessary to prevail over these challenges.
Future work will seek to better identify the solutions and frameworks already
developed to meet these challenges, in addition to proposing privacy-minded digital
solutions to many of the obstacles demonstrated in this work.
Advances in technology and global cooperation have brought about the development of incredibly efficacious vaccine candidates. The same forces must be harnessed

Bae et al.

Page 19 of 21

in a transparent, privacy-minded manner in order to ensure the equitable and effective distribution of COVID-19 vaccines.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Acknowledgements
We are grateful to Riyanka Roy Choudhury, CodeX Fellow, Stanford University, Adam Berrey, CEO of PathCheck
Foundation, Dr. Brooke Struck, Research Director at The Decision Lab, Canada, Vinay Gidwaney, Entrepreneur and
Advisor, PathCheck Foundation, and Paola Heudebert, co-founder of Blockchain for Human Rights for their
assistance in discussions, support and guidance in writing of this paper.
Author details
1
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 02139 Cambridge, USA. 2 MIT Media Lab, 02139 Cambridge, USA.
3
PathCheck Foundation, 02139 Cambridge, USA. 4 Harvard Medical School, 02115 Boston, USA. 5 Ash Center for
Democratic Governance and Innovation, Harvard Kennedy School, 02138 Cambridge, USA. 6 Institute for
Technology and Global Health, 02139 Cambridge, USA. 7 National Human Genome Research Institute, National
Institutes of Health, 20892 Bethesda, USA. 8 University of California, Berkeley School of Law, 94720 Berkeley, USA.
9
University of California, San Diego School of Medicine, 92092 San Diego, USA. 10 Renaissance School of Medicine,
Stony Brook University, 11794 Stony Brook, USA.
References
1. AAMC. We can’t defeat covid-19 without vaccinating children. there aren’t even any kids’ clinical trials yet,
2020.
2. Accenture. Accenture vaccine management solution, 2020.
3. Astrazeneca. Covid-19 vaccine azd1222 clinical trials resumed in the uk, 2020.
4. The World Bank. Country engagement, 2020.
5. BBC. Coronavirus: Bill gates ‘microchip’ conspiracy theory and other vaccine claims fact-checked, 2020.
6. BBC. Stella immanuel - the doctor behind unproven coronavirus cure claim, 2020.
7. James Bell, David Butler, Chris Hicks, and Jon Crowcroft. Tracesecure: Towards privacy preserving contact
tracing, 2020.
8. Alex Berke, Michiel Bakker, Praneeth Vepakomma, Kent Larson, and Alex ’Sandy’ Pentland. Assessing disease
exposure risk with location data: A proposal for cryptographic preservation of privacy, 2020.
9. Joe Biden. Joe and kamala’s plan to beat covid-19, 2020.
10. Joe Biden. The biden plan to combat coronavirus (covid-19) and prepare for future global health threats, 2020.
11. The BJM. Political interference in public health science during covid-19, 2020.
12. The BJM. Political interference in public health science during covid-19, 2020.
13. Bookings. Want herd immunity? pay people to take the vaccine, 2020.
14. Susan P Buchbinder, M Juliana McElrath, Carl Dieffenbach, and Lawrence Corey. Use of adenovirus type-5
vectored vaccines: a cautionary tale. The Lancet, 2020.
15. Talha Burki. Vaccine misinformation and social media. The Lancet Digital Health, 1(6):e258–e259, 2019.
16. CDC. ACIP december 2020 presentation slides | immunization practices | CDC.
17. CDC. U.s. public health response to the measles outbreak, 2019.
18. CDC. Covid-19 vaccination program interim playbook for jurisdiction operations, 2020.
19. CDC. Frequently asked questions about covid-19 vaccination, 2020.
20. CDC. How the flu virus can change: “drift” and “shift”, 2020.
21. CDC. Panvax tool for pandemic vaccination planning, 2020.
22. CDC. Vaccine tracking system (vtrcks), 2020.
23. C&EN. Adenoviral vectors are the new covid-19 vaccine front-runners. can they overcome their checkered
past?, 2020.
24. The Hastings Center. Public trust in science with dr. anthony fauci, 2020.
25. CIDRAP. Who will accept a covid-19 vaccine?, 2020.
26. CNBC. Dr. fauci says all the ‘valid’ scientific data shows hydroxychloroquine isn’t effective in treating
coronavirus, 2020.
27. CNN. State of the union, 2020.
28. Stephen N Crooke, Inna G Ovsyannikova, Gregory A Poland, and Richard B Kennedy. Immunosenescence and
human vaccine immune responses. Immunity & Ageing, 16(1):25, 2019.
29. Jennifer M Dan, Jose Mateus, Yu Kato, Kathryn M Hastie, Caterina Faliti, Sydney I Ramirez, April Frazier,
D Yu Esther, Alba Grifoni, Stephen A Rawlings, et al. Immunological memory to sars-cov-2 assessed for greater
than six months after infection. bioRxiv, 2020.
30. Arthur WD Edridge, Joanna Kaczorowska, Alexis CR Hoste, Margreet Bakker, Michelle Klein, Katherine Loens,
Maarten F Jebbink, Amy Matser, Cormac M Kinsella, Paloma Rueda, et al. Seasonal coronavirus protective
immunity is short-lasting. Nature medicine, pages 1–3, 2020.
31. Anthony S Fauci, Mary A Marovich, Carl W Dieffenbach, Eric Hunter, and Susan P Buchbinder. Immune
activation with hiv vaccines. Science, 344(6179):49–51, 2014.
32. FDA. Development and licensure of vaccines to prevent covid-19 guidance for industry, 2020.
33. Harvey V Fineberg. Pandemic preparedness and response—lessons from the h1n1 influenza of 2009. New
England Journal of Medicine, 370(14):1335–1342, 2014.
34. Darshan Gandhi, Sanskruti Landage, Joseph Bae, Sheshank Shankar, Rohan Sukumaran, Parth Patwa,
Sethuraman TV, Priyanshi Katiyar, Shailesh Advani, Sunaina Anand, et al. Clinical landscape of covid-19
testing: Difficult choices. arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.04202, 2020.

Bae et al.

Page 20 of 21

35. GAVI. Covax explained, 2020.
36. Simon P Graham, Rebecca K McLean, Alexandra J Spencer, Sandra Belij-Rammerstorfer, Daniel Wright,
Marta Ulaszewska, Jane C Edwards, Jack WP Hayes, Veronica Martini, Nazia Thakur, et al. Evaluation of the
immunogenicity of prime-boost vaccination with the replication-deficient viral vectored covid-19 vaccine
candidate chadox1 ncov-19. NPJ vaccines, 5(1):1–6, 2020.
37. ET Healthworld. Hydroxychloroquine promoted by trump as covid ’game changer’ linked to increased deaths,
2020.
38. Benjamin KI Helfand, Margaret Webb, Sarah L Gartaganis, Lily Fuller, Churl-Su Kwon, and Sharon K Inouye.
The exclusion of older persons from vaccine and treatment trials for coronavirus disease 2019—missing the
target. JAMA Internal Medicine, 2020.
39. National Herald. Covid-19: The logistic challenges of vaccine distribution in india, 2020.
40. HHS. Explaining operation warp speed, 2020.
41. Chartered Trading Standards Institute. New covid-19 app exploited by fraudsters to scam public, 2020.
42. Johnson & Johnson. Johnson & johnson prepares to resume phase 3 ensemble trial of its janssen covid-19
vaccine candidate in the u.s., 2020.
43. The Wall Street Journal. Palantir to help u.s. track covid-19 vaccines, 2020.
44. Jeffrey V Lazarus, Scott C Ratzan, Adam Palayew, Lawrence O Gostin, Heidi J Larson, Kenneth Rabin,
Spencer Kimball, and Ayman El-Mohandes. A global survey of potential acceptance of a covid-19 vaccine.
Nature medicine, pages 1–4, 2020.
45. Neal A Masia, Jonathan Smerling, Tendayi Kapfidze, Richard Manning, and Mark Showalter. Vaccination and
gdp growth rates: Exploring the links in a conditional convergence framework. World Development, 103:88–99,
2018.
46. AUDREY MCNAMARA. Cdc director says covid vaccine won’t be widely available until mid-2021, 2020.
47. Moderna. Modernaś covid-19 vaccine candidate meets its primary efficacy, 2020.
48. Raveesha R Mugali, Farooq Mansoor, Sardar Parwiz, Fazil Ahmad, Najibullah Safi, Ariel Higgins-Steele, and
Sherin Varkey. Improving immunization in afghanistan: results from a cross-sectional community-based survey
to assess routine immunization coverage. BMC Public Health, 17(1):290, 2017.
49. National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. Framework for Equitable Allocation of COVID-19
Vaccine. The National Academies Press, Washington, DC, 2020.
50. STAT News. Health experts want to prioritize people of color for a covid-19 vaccine. but how should it be
done?, 2020.
51. STAT News. Stat-harris poll: The share of americans interested in getting covid-19 vaccine as soon as possible
is dropping, 2020.
52. Maryland Dept. of Health. Covid-19 vaccination plan, 2020.
53. Times of Israel. Hundreds die of poisoning in iran as fake news suggests methanol cure for virus, 2020.
54. Norbert Pardi, Michael J Hogan, Frederick W Porter, and Drew Weissman. mrna vaccines—a new era in
vaccinology. Nature reviews Drug discovery, 17(4):261, 2018.
55. Parth Patwa, Shivam Sharma, Srinivas PYKL, Vineeth Guptha, Gitanjali Kumari, Md Shad Akhtar, Asif Ekbal,
Amitava Das, and Tanmoy Chakraborty. Fighting an infodemic: Covid-19 fake news dataset, 2020.
56. Pfizer. Our progress in developing a potential covid-19 vaccine, 2020.
57. pfizer. pfizer and biontech conclude phase 3 study covid-19 vaccine, 2020.
58. Aarathi Prasad and David Kotz. Enact: Encounter-based architecture for contact tracing. In Proceedings of the
4th International on Workshop on Physical Analytics, WPA ’17, page 37–42, New York, NY, USA, 2017.
Association for Computing Machinery.
59. Ramesh Raskar, Isabel Schunemann, Rachel Barbar, Kristen Vilcans, Jim Gray, Praneeth Vepakomma, Suraj
Kapa, Andrea Nuzzo, Rajiv Gupta, Alex Berke, Dazza Greenwood, Christian Keegan, Shriank Kanaparti,
Robson Beaudry, David Stansbury, Beatriz Botero Arcila, Rishank Kanaparti, Vitor Pamplona, Francesco M
Benedetti, Alina Clough, Riddhiman Das, Kaushal Jain, Khahlil Louisy, Greg Nadeau, Vitor Pamplona, Steve
Penrod, Yasaman Rajaee, Abhishek Singh, Greg Storm, and John Werner. Apps gone rogue: Maintaining
personal privacy in an epidemic, 2020.
60. Susanne Rauch, Edith Jasny, Kim E Schmidt, and Benjamin Petsch. New vaccine technologies to combat
outbreak situations. Frontiers in immunology, 9:1963, 2018.
61. Pew Research. U.s. public now divided over whether to get covid-19 vaccine, 2020.
62. SAP. Vaccine collaboration hub from sap improves supply chain efficiency for government and life sciences
organizations, 2020.
63. Harald Schmidt, Lawrence O Gostin, and Michelle A Williams. Is it lawful and ethical to prioritize racial
minorities for covid-19 vaccines? JAMA, 2020.
64. New York State. National governors association submits list of questions to trump administration on effective
implementation of covid-19 vaccine, 2020.
65. Erin E Thacker, Laura Timares, and Qiana L Matthews. Strategies to overcome host immunity to adenovirus
vectors in vaccine development. Expert review of vaccines, 8(6):761–777, 2009.
66. Los Angeles Times. H1n1 vaccine was unevenly distributed across l.a. county, figures show, 2010.
67. New York Times. How to ship a vaccine at ∼80°c, and other obstacles in the covid fight, 2020.
68. Ni Trieu, Kareem Shehata, Prateek Saxena, Reza Shokri, and Dawn Song. Epione: Lightweight contact tracing
with strong privacy, 2020.
69. U.S. Government Accountability Office. Covid-19: Federal efforts accelerate vaccine and therapeutic
development, but more transparency needed on emergency use authorizations, 2020.
70. Rutvik Vijjali, Prathyush Potluri, Siddharth Kumar, and Teki Sundeep. Two stage transformer model for
covid-19 fake news detection and fact checking. In Proceedings of the Workshop on NLP for Internet Freedom,
2020.
71. Nicola Vousden and Marian Knight. Lessons learned from the a (h1n1) influenza pandemic. Best Practice &
Research Clinical Obstetrics & Gynaecology, 2020.

Bae et al.

Page 21 of 21

72. Edward E Walsh, Robert W Frenck Jr, Ann R Falsey, Nicholas Kitchin, Judith Absalon, Alejandra Gurtman,
Stephen Lockhart, Kathleen Neuzil, Mark J Mulligan, Ruth Bailey, et al. Safety and immunogenicity of two
rna-based covid-19 vaccine candidates. New England Journal of Medicine, 2020.
73. Washingtonpost. The biggest problem isn’t when a vaccine is ready. it’s how to distribute it, 2020.
74. Aaron M Wendelboe, Annelies Van Rie, Stefania Salmaso, and Janet A Englund. Duration of immunity against
pertussis after natural infection or vaccination. The Pediatric infectious disease journal, 24(5):S58–S61, 2005.
75. Stuart White. Could COVID-19 mRNA vaccines cause autoimmune diseases? BMJ, 2020.
76. WHO. Draft landscape of covid 19 candidate vaccines, 2020.
77. WHO. Draft landscape of covid-19 candidate vaccines, 2020.
78. WHO. Fair allocation mechanism for covid-19 vaccines through the covax facility, 2020.
79. WHO. More than 150 countries engaged in covid-19 vaccine global access facility, 2020.
80. Y. Tony Yang, Elizabeth Pendo, and Dorit Rubinstein Reiss. The americans with disabilities act and healthcare
employer-mandated vaccinations. Vaccine, 38(16):3184 – 3186, 2020.
81. Crystal Zheng, Indrani Kar, Claire Kaori Chen, Crystal Sau, Sophia Woodson, Alessandro Serra, and Hesham
Abboud. Multiple sclerosis disease-modifying therapy and the covid-19 pandemic: implications on the risk of
infection and future vaccination. CNS drugs, 34(9):879–896, 2020.

