Revisiting ICH E9 (R1) during the COVID-19 pandemic
Yongming Qu*, Ilya Lipkovich
Eli Lilly and Company, Indianapolis, IN 46285, USA
*Correspondence: Yongming Qu, Department of Biometrics, Eli Lilly and Company, Lilly
Corporate Center, Indianapolis, IN 46285, USA. Email: qu_yongming@lilly.com

Word Count: 7269

1

Abstract
The current COVID-19 pandemic poses numerous challenges for ongoing clinical trials and
provides a stress-testing environment for the existing principles and practice of estimands in
clinical trials. The pandemic may increase the rate of intercurrent events (ICEs) and missing
values, spurring a great deal of discussion on amending protocols and statistical analysis plans to
address these issues. In this article we revisit recent research on estimands and handling of
missing values, especially the ICH E9 (R1) on Estimands and Sensitivity Analysis in Clinical
Trials. Based on an in-depth discussion of the strategies for handling ICEs using a causal
inference framework, we suggest some improvements in applying the estimand and estimation
framework in ICH E9 (R1). Specifically, we discuss a mix of strategies allowing us to handle
ICEs differentially based on reasons for ICEs. We also suggest ICEs should be handled primarily
by hypothetical strategies and provide examples of different hypothetical strategies for different
types of ICEs as well as a road map for estimation and sensitivity analyses. We conclude that the
proposed framework helps streamline translating clinical objectives into targets of statistical
inference and automatically resolves many issues with defining estimands and choosing
estimation procedures arising from events such as the pandemic.
Keywords: Causal inference, intercurrent events, missing data, potential outcomes, treatment
policy.

2

1. Introduction
On March 11, 2020 the World Health Organization (WHO) declared the coronavirus disease
2019 (COVID-19) pandemic, caused by SAS-Cov-2 virus infection. The pandemic has had a
great impact on ongoing clinical trials from multiple aspects, including study treatment
interruptions, treatment or study discontinuations, and missing clinical visits due to COVID-19
control measures (patient or site personnel’s quarantine and travel restrictions, site closure,
disruption on drug supply chain, or transportation) and COVID-19 illness. This has spurred
many discussions in the scientific community including guidance from regulatory agencies,
scientific communities, publications, webinars, podcasts, and posts on social media (ACRO,
2020; McDermott and Newman, 2020; EMA, 2020a, 2020b; FDA 2020a; Meyer et al, 2020;
Collins and Levenson, 2020).
Despite the fact that the ICH E9 (R1) addendum released in November 2019 laid a solid
foundation for estimands, the pandemic has uncovered much confusion and uncertainty within
the clinical trials community surrounding defining and re-defining estimands and revising the
estimation methods for the handling of missing values. This observation reflects the experience
of the present authors and many of their colleagues across industry, and can be indirectly seen
through the release of several regulatory guidance documents (EMA 2020b, FDA 2020),
numerous webinars and podcasts (e.g., by Drug Information Association, Biopharmaceutical
Section of American Statistical Association, and Cytel), and the very fact that a special issue of
Statistics in Biopharmaceutical Research has been called for. In light of this, it becomes apparent
to the present authors that estimands and the estimation methods may not have been properly
chosen in current clinical protocols and statistical analysis plans. Additionally, these issues point
to a lack of clarity within existing guidelines. The stress created by the pandemic reveals existing

3

gaps in our understanding of estimands and the estimation methods. As always, rather than
adjusting and “patching” existing concepts to accommodate new situations, it is better to identify
the fundamental issues and provide a more plausible framework for estimands and estimation in
clinical trials that would accommodate the COVID-19 pandemic as well as any such future
events.
The pandemic causes an increasing amount of ICEs (e.g. treatment interruptions and
discontinuations, AEs related to COVID-19 illness, etc.) and missing values (e.g. missing
clinical visits). Current discussions within the scientific community focus on the immediate need
to revise statistical analysis plans for handling ICEs and missing values due to the COVID-19
pandemic (e.g., Meyer et al., 2020). It is important to realize the pandemic should not make us
change the original target of inference that applies to “normal” situations. Instead of rushing to
make changes, we need to ask ourselves: “as our study objectives have not changed, why cannot
the original statistical analysis plan cover the pandemic period in terms of the primary
estimand?”
One gap in existing guidance on estimands (ICH E9 [R1], 2019) is that it does not explicitly use
causal language and potential outcomes (POs), specifically in discussing estimands and strategies
for dealing with ICEs that may confound and complicate interpretation of the treatment outcome
and treatment effect. The framework of POs was introduced by Neyman (1923) and was later
accepted by most researchers in causal inference (see Rubin, 1978; Robins, 1986; Pearl, 2001) to
formulate the target of inference in observational and randomized clinical trials. Hernán and
Robins (2020) provide a comprehensive review of causal inference. Causal interpretation of
estimands proposed by ICH E9 (R1) is discussed in Permutt (2018, 2020), despite not explicitly
using potential outcome (counterfactual) framework. Hernán and Scharfstein (2018) provide a
4

critique of the draft version of the guidance, arguing an explicit definition of the treatment
regimens (policies, plans, or strategies) and treatment adherence should play a central role in
defining causal estimands. This point is taken further in Scharfstein (2019), arguing most
treatment regimens of interest should include dynamic components. Lipkovich et al. (2020)
provides causal interpretation of different estimand strategies using the language of POs.
In this article, we will discuss estimands and estimation from a holistic perspective and provide a
novel framework for estimands and estimation that will not only cover the current COVID-19
pandemic and future unexpected events but will also improve statistical analysis even under
normal circumstances. In particular, we will use the language of POs in causal inference to
define estimands using various strategies to handle ICEs in clinical trials.
This article is organized as follows. In Section 2, we provide in-depth discussion of all strategies
for handling ICEs under the causal inference framework. In Section 3, we discuss options for
handling ICEs and missing values according to the causes of ICEs. Finally, in Section 4 we
summarize the key points and propose some enhancements of the current estimand framework in
ICH E9 (R1).
2. Using POs to Describe the Strategies to Handle ICEs in Defining Estimands
ICH E9 (R1) provides a framework for defining estimands and handling missing values in
estimation. The treatment of interest and the handling of ICEs are the two most important
components in defining an estimand. The treatment of interest should include not only the
randomized treatment, but also the treatment regimen (e.g., incorporating other concomitant
medications). ICH E9 (R1) defines ICEs as “events occurring after treatment initiation that affect
either the interpretation or the existence of the measurements associated with the clinical

5

question of interest.” ICH E9 (R1) also proposes five strategies for handling ICEs: treatment
policy, hypothetical, composite variable, while-on-treatment (WOT), and principal stratum (PS).
Subsequent comprehensive discussions on defining and choosing estimands and handling
missing values according to ICH E9 (R1) are provided by Ratitch et al. (2020a, 2020b) and
Mallinckrodt et al. (2020).
Although ICH E9 (R1) states the treatment regimen is an important attribute in defining
estimands, the lack of connection between the definition of ICEs and the treatment regimen is
somewhat confusing. Per the definition of ICE in ICH E9 (R1), the use of rescue medication
occurring after treatment initiation and affecting the outcome, is an ICE. Treating the use of
rescue medication as an ICE makes sense if the treatment regimen is the randomized treatment
without use of any rescue medication (i.e. use of rescue is a deviation of treatment regimen of
interest); however, it does not seem reasonable to treat the use of rescue medication as an ICE if
the treatment regimen of interest is the randomized treatment with additional rescue medications
(rescue medication is part of the treatment regimen). Therefore, to avoid “circular” reasoning, as
the best practice, one may define treatment regimen(s) first and classify as ICE only events that
are deviations from these regimens. In the rest of this article we primarily focus on events that
are not part of the treatment regimens of interest.
The potential ICEs related to the COVID-19 pandemic include:
•

Prolonged treatment interruptions either due to control measures. The definition of
“prolonged” should depend on the disease state, study objectives, and mechanism of
action of the study medications and should be the same for treatment interruptions due to
COVID-19 or other reasons.

•
6

Prolonged treatment interruptions due to COVID-19 illness (an AE)

•

Study treatment discontinuations due to COVID-19 control measures

•

Study treatment discontinuations either due to COVID-19 illness (an AE)

•

Death as a result of COVID-19 illness.

•

Use of protocol prohibited medications to treat COVID-19 illness.

ICH E9 (R1) clearly points out methods for handling ICEs may be different depending on the
nature of the ICE. Up to now, however, it is common that only one strategy to handle all ICEs is
employed by a sponsor for constructing an estimand. For example, in the PIONEER 2 study
(Rodbard et al., 2019), two estimands are used: the treatment policy estimand (using the
treatment policy strategy for all ICEs) and the trial product estimand (using the hypothetical
strategy for all ICEs). While convenient, it is overly simplistic and is not consistent with the
spirit of ICH E9 (R1). One of the major reasons the COVID-19 pandemic has led to so much
discussion within study teams regarding amending estimands is arguably the use of a single
strategy in handling all ICEs in a study without differentiating the causes of ICEs.
As an example of how different strategies for handling ICEs may be justifiable depending on
their causes, ICH E9 (R1) (2019, page 12) states, “the question of what the values for the
variable of interest would have been if rescue medication had not been available may be an
important one. In contrast, the question of what the values for the variable of interest would have
been under the hypothetical condition that subjects who discontinued treatment because of
adverse drug reaction had in fact continued with treatment, might not be justifiable as being of
clinical or regulatory interest.” The COVID-19 related ICEs may belong to the former situation
in which we are interested in the PO if the pandemic did not occur.

7

One of the key aspects of the ICH E9 (R1) is (in agreement with earlier National Research
Council, 2010) it distinguishes between missing data and ICEs (e.g. change of treatment) that
often cause missing data. In doing so, it encourages sponsors to document the nature of ICEs and
the reason of missing values, as much as possible. As stated in ICH E9 (R1) (page 14), “[a]
prospective plan to collect informative reasons for why data intended for collection are missing
may help to distinguish the occurrence of intercurrent events from missing data.”
In the spirit of more nuanced handling of different ICEs for constructing estimands, Akacha et al.
(2017) classifies the reasons for treatment discontinuation into 3 categories: treatment
discontinuation due to AE, treatment discontinuation due to LoE, and treatment discontinuation
due to administrative reasons, which is a step toward a more informative classification of
treatment discontinuations in constructing estimands. Qu et al. (2020c) expand this idea and
classify ICEs into these 3 categories:
•

ICEs due to AE (prolonged treatment interruptions, treatment discontinuation and/or use
of rescue medications due to AE). A treatment switch can be considered as two ICEs:
treatment discontinuation and use of additional rescue medication.

•

ICEs due to LoE (treatment discontinuation and/or use of rescue medications that are not
part of the treatment regimen).

•

ICEs due to administrative reasons (prolonged treatment interruptions or treatment
discontinuation due to administrative reasons including relocation, job changes, family
reasons, natural disasters, etc.).

Note multiple ICEs can occur to the same patient at the same time or sequentially. Darken et al.
(2020) also differentiate the ICEs potentially related to the randomized treatment (e.g., ICEs due
to AE or LoE) and ICEs that are independent of the randomization treatment and suggest
8

different strategies in handling these two different types of ICEs. While Qu et al. and Darken et
al. provide examples of handling ICEs according to their reasons, the authors do not provide a
comprehensive framework on the issue.
In the rest of this article, we will revisit the five strategies for handling ICEs, using examples
based on the three categories of ICE.
2.1. Hypothetical strategy
ICH E9 (R1) uses the term “hypothetical strategies” to refer to special cases when we are
interested in the PO under the “hypothetical” treatment regimen which a patient may or may not
follow. Stating a hypothetical strategy always requires posing an assumption (a “hypothetical”
scenario) that in combination with other assumptions (e.g. on the missing data mechanism) make
the resulting estimand identifiable. Based on the causal framework, there could be many
hypothetical strategies for PO (Lipkovich et al., 2020). We only discuss a few special cases here.
The PO is a random variable for the outcome of a (hypothetical) treatment regimen, if applied to
a given subject 𝑖, even when contrary to the fact. Hence, it is often also referred to as a
“counterfactual” outcome (see Pearl, 2001; Robins, 1998). Let 𝑌𝑖 denote the outcome of interest
and 𝑌𝑖 (𝑎, 𝑏) denote the PO with assigned treatment regimen 𝑎, but actually taking treatment
regimen 𝑏 during the study. Assume we only have two treatment regimens of interest in a study
and let 𝐴𝑖 denote the treatment regimen to be studied, such that 𝐴𝑖 = 0 for the control treatment
and 𝐴𝑖 = 1 for the experimental treatment. Then, the causal treatment difference for a subset of
patients (S), if they would have adhered to their assigned treatments, is the average treatment
effect (ATE) in the response between the two potential treatments averaged across all patients in
S:

9

𝑁𝑠

𝑁𝑠−1 ∑ 𝐸[𝑌𝑖 (1,1) − 𝑌𝑖 (0,0) |𝑆],
𝑖=1

where 𝑁𝑠 is the sample size for 𝑆. If the outcomes are independently and identically distributed,
this ATE becomes the treatment difference in the population means 𝜇1 − 𝜇0 , where 𝜇0 and 𝜇1 are
the population means under the control and experimental treatment, respectively. We use ATE as
a general term (not specific to the above estimand) to describe the average treatment difference
under two different treatment regimens over the same patients, which is critical for
understanding the causal inference, as will be shown later. For the rest of this article, we may
omit the summation to simplify the notation in describing other ATEs.
In causal literature, this type of causal effect is often called a controlled direct effect (Pearl,
2009) of treatment where “controlled” means we force the ICE not to occur and the initial
treatment to continue. We call this hypothetical strategy the controlled direct hypothetical
(CDH) strategy. With this strategy, the estimand is the treatment difference if patients would
have adhered to the designed treatment regimen.
This type of hypothetical strategy is useful in scenarios when such POs are generalizable to a
real-world population because ICEs may reflect special conditions that would not necessarily be
reproduced in the future or in a real-world setting. There are a few scenarios where the CDH
strategy may be used. This strategy is most applicable when patients discontinue treatment for
reasons unrelated to the experimental treatment, e.g., due to administrative reasons including the
COVID-19 control measures. This strategy may also be applicable for the ICEs related to using
rescue medications due to ethical reasons and using concomitant medications to treat COVID-19
illness, which could potentially impact the outcome. In these cases, one may be interested in the
PO if the patient would not have used the (rescue) concomitant medications, as the (rescue)
10

concomitant medications in the clinical trials may not reflect the real world or “normal
circumstances.” The CDH strategy may also be applied to prolonged treatment interruption or
treatment discontinuation due to COVID-19 illness. As the COVID-19 illness does not occur
under normal circumstances, one may be interested to understand the PO and the treatment effect
in the absence of the COVID-19 pandemic.
The second type of hypothetical strategy is interested in the PO assuming patients who
experience ICEs (e.g., ICEs due to an AE) would have no benefit: as if the patients were left
untreated starting from randomization. In this case, the estimand can be written as an ATE of
𝐸[{𝑌𝑖 (1, −1)Δ𝑖 (1) + 𝑌𝑖 (1,1)(1 − Δ𝑖 (1))} − {𝑌𝑖 (0, −1)Δ𝑖 (0) + 𝑌𝑖 (0,0)(1 − Δ𝑖 (0))}].
where “−1” in the second parameter 𝑌𝑖 (⋅,⋅) indicates no treatment received and Δ𝑖 (𝑎) is the ICE
indicator (0 for no ICE and 1 for ICE occurring).
While the definition of such an estimand is simple, the estimation of the PO without any
treatment may be challenging, especially in active-comparator studies. We will discuss more
about the estimation under this hypothetical strategy in Section 3.1. We call this hypothetical
strategy the no treatment hypothetical (NTH) strategy.
The third type of hypothetical strategies is to define the PO as the outcome if the patient takes the
medication until the ICE and then stops taking the medication. Using the PO language, the
estimand is defined as the below ATE:
𝐸[{𝑌𝑖 (1, 𝑔𝑖 (𝑇𝑖 (1)))Δ𝑖 (1) + 𝑌𝑖 (1,1)(1 − Δ𝑖 (1))} − {𝑌𝑖 (0, 𝑔𝑖 (𝑇𝑖 (0)))Δ𝑖 (0) + 𝑌𝑖 (0,0)(1 − Δ𝑖 (0))}],

where 𝑇𝑖 (𝑎) is the time to the ICE under treatment 𝑎 and 𝑔𝑖 (𝑇𝑖 (a)) is the treatment regimen:
taking treatment 𝑎 until the occurrence of the ICE and then having no access to treatment until a

11

specified assessment time. This strategy assumes patients may still benefit from or be harmed by
the treatment even though they discontinue the treatment earlier. This strategy may be suitable
for handling ICEs due to AE at a “normal time” (not for AE related to the COVID-19 pandemic),
especially for treatment with potential long-term or disease-modification effect. We call this
strategy as partial treatment hypothetical (PTH) strategy.
The NTH and PTH strategies may be appropriate for handling discontinuations of the study
treatment due to tolerability or other AEs occurring under normal circumstances, where such
patients are assumed to have no or partial benefits from the treatment.
2.2. Treatment policy strategy
ICH E9 (R1) describes the treatment policy strategy as “the occurrence of the intercurrent event
is considered irrelevant in defining the treatment effect of interest: the value for the variable of
interest is used regardless of whether or not the intercurrent event occurs.” Following the
notation in Section 2, let 𝐴∗𝑖 = {𝐴𝑖 , 𝑔𝑖 (𝑍𝑖 (𝐴𝑖 ))} be the treatment regimen (policy) patient 𝑖 takes
(which generally is not precisely defined in the protocol), where 𝑍𝑖 (possibly multidimensional)
is postbaseline intermediate outcomes that affect treatment changes captured by patient-specific
function 𝑔𝑖 (∙). Using the causal framework, the estimand using this treatment policy strategy is
defined by an ATE of
𝐸 {𝑌𝑖 (1, 𝑔𝑖 (𝑍𝑖 (1))) − 𝑌𝑖 (0, 𝑔𝑖 (𝑍𝑖 (0)))}.
Treatment policy strategy essentially compares outcomes (across randomized groups) associated
with whatever actual treatment regimen (or “policy”) is used for every patient no matter whether
a patient followed protocol or was even receiving treatment at the time of the outcome
measurements.
12

The treatment policy strategy is different from the dynamic treatment regimens (DTR) (Murphy
et al., 2001; Moodie et al., 2007) in which the time-varying treatment regimens are clearly
defined based on evolving patients’ outcomes (e.g. adding additional concomitant or rescue
medication if the intermediate efficacy outcome is poor). Let 𝑔(∙) (without the subscript i) be a
function that maps 𝑍𝑖 to the choice of subsequent treatments. The estimand for DTR is defined as
the below ATE:
𝐸 {𝑌𝑖 (1, 𝑔(𝑍𝑖 (1))) − 𝑌𝑖 (0, 𝑔(𝑍𝑖 (0)))}.
In DTR, the rules for treatment changes [𝑔(∙) without the subscript 𝑖] are clearly defined (e.g.
add medication 𝑋 if the 𝑍𝑖 is greater than 𝛿), while treatment policy strategy allows patients to
have their own individualized rules [𝑔𝑖 (∙) with the subscript 𝑖].
With the treatment policy strategy for handling ICEs, the treatment regimen of interest is the
randomized treatment with all possible deviations (such as use of rescue medication or stopping
the study medication). One argument for using the treatment policy strategy is that the treatment
policy regarding the use of a drug may be anticipated in real clinical practice. Except for
pragmatic studies (Tunis et al., 2003), the difference in the settings (e.g. frequency of visit,
diligence of follow-up, allowed concomitant medications, etc.) between clinical studies and the
real-world situation is generally large. One cannot directly assume the results from the
randomized clinicals are expected in real-world clinical practice. A clear description of
treatment regimens (including the treatment of interest and specific requirements of compliance)
will allow clinicians to better unde We use ATE rstand the difference between treatment
regimens implemented in clinical trials and treatment regimens observed in the real-world
practice. This will also make it easier to relate estimates of treatment effect from clinical trials to

13

specific clinical settings. Treatment policy strategy, which takes the observed outcomes ignoring
ICEs that are not clinically defined as part of the treatment regimen, will make such
interpretation difficult.
Obtain generalizable inference for a treatment effect, one must assume sensible requirements for
the use of rescue medication and duration of drug interruptions during the study. In a long-term
study, if a patient takes a treatment for one week and stops the treatment, it is hard to argue that
the long-term outcomes for this patient is reflective of the treatment regimen expected in a realworld setting. One may argue many successful studies did use all data collected regardless of
treatment compliance (e.g. cardiovascular outcome studies), but this may only be the case when
only a small proportion of patients were severe non-adherers, which has a limited impact on the
overall results. In a disaster or pandemic, the proportion of severely noncompliant patients could
become very large, and the problem cannot be relegated to having a negligible impact.
Therefore, the argument for the treatment policy strategy to reflect the appropriate treatment
regimen becomes increasingly vulnerable in the COVID-19 pandemic. This is exactly the reason
why studies using treatment policy strategies blindly without considering the cause of ICEs
potentially require amending the definition of their primary estimand (Meyer et al., 2020) to
handle the COVID-19 related ICEs. ICEs related to the COVID-19 pandemic, especially due to
COVID-19 control measures, are generally considered not part of the treatment regimen of
interest, so the treatment policy strategy should not be applied in this situation.
In summary, in most cases, a vaguely defined treatment regimen (policy) may lead to challenges
in understanding the “true” treatment effect and unsuccessful extrapolation of the clinical trial
study results to the real-world setting. Therefore, treatment policy strategies should generally be
avoided except for two situations: (1) ICEs are explicitly included in treatments of interest under
14

a rigorous treatment regimen (e.g. a DTR) – of course one can argue these events are part of
treatment regimens and should not be considered ICEs, and (2) selected ICEs in a pragmatic
study in which the study setting is similar to the real-world setting.
2.3. Composite strategy
The composite strategy may have been used most widely in areas where the endpoint of interest
is binary (failure or success), so an ICE can be easily “defined away” as a “failure” or
non-responder. Since in the composite strategy certain ICEs are incorporated into the outcome, it
is more appropriate to explicitly include these events as components of the composite endpoint
instead of classifying these events as ICEs.
Let us illustrate this using an example from clinical trials in rheumatoid arthritis. The primary
endpoint is ACR20 at week 12 (e.g. see Burmester et al., 2018), where ACR20 is an indicator of
20% improvement in the scale of American College of Rheumatology (ACR). A composite
endpoint that treats this ICE of death or use of rescue medication as treatment failure is generally
used, as described in ICH E9 (R1) and Burmester et al. (2018). However, such a composite does
not reflect the primary endpoint of ACR20 (which has nothing to do with survival or use of
rescue medication). If it is reasonable to consider a patient’s death or use of rescue medication a
clear indication of treatment failure, one can revise the objective and the endpoint to read as “the
proportion of patients with treatment success indicated by achieving the ACR20 goal at 12 weeks
without use of rescue medication and without treatment discontinuation due to AE/death before
12 weeks,” which would be, in our opinion, a clinically meaningful endpoint. Therefore, it is
more appropriate to define a primary endpoint by explicitly incorporating all the relevant postrandomization events as its components, than to define a primary endpoint using a single
outcome and then account for other post-randomization events by defining special ICE
15

strategies. With the precise definition of the primary endpoint, the “composite strategy” is not
needed.
However, one should not over-engineer the primary endpoint by including unnecessary or not
clinically meaningful ICEs. Without careful consideration, the composite endpoint can be
misleading, as the overall effects may not have the same magnitude or may not even go in the
same direction as individual components. The composite strategy can be easily confused with
non-responder imputation (NRI) where missing responders are imputed as non-responders.
While it may be appropriate to impute death as NRI (although it is arguable whether it is the
most appropriate imputation method), the imputation needs to be discussed at the time of
defining estimation procedures, not at the time of defining estimands. Again, precise description
of the primary endpoint and removing the composite strategy for handling ICEs could avoid such
confusion.
2.4. While-on-treatment strategy
The while-on-treatment (WOT) strategy intends to define estimands with treatment effect that
can be observed before ICEs. Although this estimand can be described using POs (Lipkovich et
al., 2020), its interpretation may be complicated by dependency on two POs, the primary
outcome of interest 𝑌, and an individual’s length of exposure before the first ICE. So far, we
have not found any convincing example for which the WOT strategy is plausible or needed.
2.5. PS strategy
A PS is a subset of the population defined by a PO for a post-randomization variable. As an
example, suppose we are interested in estimating the treatment effect for patients with the
postbaseline biomarker 𝑆 > 𝑐 when treated with 𝐴 = 1. Then, the PS is defined using the PO

16

language {𝑖: 𝑆𝑖 (1,1) > 𝑐} and the estimand for this PS if all patients in this stratum would adhere
to the treatment regimen (using the CDH strategy) is
𝐸{𝑌𝑖 (1,1) − 𝑌𝑖 (0,0)|𝑆𝑖 (1,1) > 𝑐}.
Note the PS population can theoretically be combined with any strategy for handling ICEs. For
example, we can define an estimand for this PS using a treatment policy strategy based on the
notation in Section 2.2:
𝐸 {𝑌𝑖 (1, 𝑔𝑖 (𝑍𝑖 (1))) − 𝑌𝑖 (0, 𝑔𝑖 (𝑍𝑖 (0)))| 𝑆𝑖 (1) > 𝑐}.
Therefore, PS is a more suitable strategy to define a (hypothetical) sub-population, rather than a
strategy to handle ICEs (also, see Scharfstein, 2019). The reason someone may think of using the
PS as a special strategy for handling ICEs is because a PS is often defined by an (intercurrent)
event, e.g. CACE (complier average causal effect) for those who can be compliant to both
treatments (Imbens and Rubin, 1997; Frangakis and Rubin, 2002), SACE (survivor average
causal effect) for patients who can survive under both treatments (Zhang and Rubin, 2003), and
the adherer average causal effect for patients who can adhere to one or both treatments without
ICEs (Qu et al., 2020a).
A key challenge for the PS strategy is it depends on a (PS) variable that may not be observed for
all the patients in one or both treatment groups. For example, the indicator for being compliant to
both treatments in CACE cannot be observed in any patient. Incorrect assumptions (mostly
untestable), especially in the presence of important unmeasured confounding factors, may result
in a very biased estimator. Other strategies for handling ICEs generally only deal with a (small)
proportion of patients with ICEs, so inappropriate approaches for handling ICEs or missing

17

values may have limited impact on the estimand (averaged treatment effect over all patients) and
the associated estimator.
3. Handling missing values according to the strategies for handing ICEs
As discussed here and in many other sources, ICEs should be distinguished from missing data
(which often result from ICEs). Therefore, handling missing data belongs to the estimation
procedure that should be considered after the strategies for dealing with ICEs are defined.
Outcomes considered missing for one strategy may be non-missing for another. Outcomes
measured after ICEs may not be the POs of interest under a hypothetical strategy, thus they
cannot be used. In this section, we treat the observed outcomes that are not the desired POs as
missing values. Therefore, in the rest of this article, values referred to as “missing” can be the
result of using a hypothetical strategy to handling ICEs (forcing us to discard outcomes collected
after ICEs) or true missing values due to the fact that the outcome measurements are not
collected. In the context of a longitudinal clinical trial, missingness can be classified into four
categories (Rubin, 1987; Little, 1995):
•

Missing not at random (MNAR). Conditional on the observed values, the probability of
missingness is dependent of unobserved (missing) outcomes.

•

Missing at random (MAR). Conditional on the observed values, the probability of
missingness is independent of any unobserved outcomes.

•

Covariate dependent MAR (Cov-MAR). Conditional on the baseline covariates, the
probability of missingness is independent of any observed or unobserved outcomes.

•

Missing completely at random (MCAR). The probability of missingness is independent
of any observed and unobserved outcomes.

18

Based on the above definitions, MCAR and Cov-MAR are special cases of MAR. The National
Research Council (2010) and Little (2012) clearly point out the importance of collecting reasons
for missingness and using such information to better ascertain the assumptions of missingness.
Surprisingly, it is still a common practice to use one assumption across the board for all missing
values in developing estimation strategies. Information on reasons for missingness and ICEs may
enable us to make the most appropriate assumptions for missing values and to use the most
appropriate statistical methods. Figure 1 provides an illustration of handling ICEs in defining
estimands and handing missing values in estimation.
A couple of cautionary remarks should be made for interpreting the diagram. First, Figure 1 only
includes ICEs that are not part of treatment regimens. For those ICEs that are part of treatment
regimens, we can either not consider them ICEs or use the treatment policy strategy for handling
these ICEs with the same result as ignoring them altogether. Secondly, Figure 1 only serves to
illustrate (with selected statistical procedures) some general principles the reader may apply to
their specific needs. There are many imputation and analysis strategies for handling missing
values (see Mallinckrodt and Lipkovich, 2016 and references therein). In real clinical trials, a
variety of appropriate imputation methods may be selected and often sensitivity analyses need to
be performed (see Cro et al., 2020b). However, we believe the proposed framework should
generally be followed. Specifically: (1) the classification of ICEs and imputation methods should
be based on the cause of ICEs, and (2) the PO language should be used to define the estimand,
which means some kind of hypothetical strategies should mostly be used in addressing ICEs.
3.1. ICEs due to AEs
We suggest ICEs due to AEs be classified into two subcategories: (1) due to AEs representing
the normal circumstances and (2) due to AEs not representing normal circumstances (pandemic
19

and other region or nation-wide crises). For example, the AE of COVID-19 illness that does not
occur before the onset of pandemic or after it ends should be considered in the second
subcategory.
AEs in the first sub-category reflect the expected environment for patients. It is not plausible to
assume patients may still gain the full benefit of the drug if patients are not able to complete the
treatment due to an AE. Therefore, we may use the NTH strategy (assuming patients have no
benefit from the treatment), the PTH strategy (assuming patients have partial benefit), or the
NHH strategy (assuming patients have “null” treatment effect) to handle such ICEs.
When using the NTH strategy to handle such ICEs, missing data due to ICEs can be imputed
using baseline values if assuming no change from baseline. Examples of such methods include
multiple imputation (Rubin, 1987) by baseline values and likelihood-based return-to-baseline
method (Zhang et al., 2020). Note the imputation by baseline values, which assumes the PO has
the same mean as the baseline while accounting for variability, is not equivalent to the baseline
value carried forward method, assuming the PO takes the exact same baseline value (without
imputation variability). Alternatively, missing values due to AE related ICEs can be imputed
using retrieved dropout multiple imputation (CHMP, 2010), i.e. using the outcome for patients
who do not use any treatment other than the standard care after the AEs but stay in the study
(assuming the treatment effect before AEs is washed out). Note if patients take additional
non-standard care medications after ICEs, the outcomes for these patients should not be used to
inform the imputation model. For placebo-controlled studies, another plausible approach is to use
jump-to-reference imputation (Carpenter et al., 2013) if we assume patients assigned to placebo
have the same outcome as patients who take no treatment in an open-label fashion.

20

When the PTH strategy is used for handling treatment discontinuations due to AE, if there are no
additional ICEs of using rescue medications that are not part of the treatment regimen, the
outcomes measured after the ICEs are the POs of interest and therefore can be used for
estimation. The case when additional rescue medications are used after the ICEs of AE will be
discussed in Section 3.4. For those patients with truly missing outcome after ICEs, the data
observed for other patients in the same treatment group and with similar ICEs may be used to
impute the missing values (e.g. using “retrieved dropout” imputation). Note even though
retrieved dropout imputation can be used for both NTH and PHT, the assumptions behind it are
different: for the NTH strategy, retrieved dropout imputation assumes the treatment effect is
washed off starting from the occurrence ICEs to the time of outcome measurement; for the PTH
strategy, there is no such assumption. For placebo-controlled studies, another plausible approach
is to use copy-reference imputation (Carpenter et al., 2013) which assumes the efficacy retained
up to the ICE but also assumes no additional treatment benefit after the ICE. This approach may
not be appropriate if the treatment effect can be washed out quickly after treatment
discontinuation. If none of the above hypothetical strategies is plausible, a sensitivity parameter
may be introduced for imputation. For example, for a non-inferiority study with rapid disease
progression, the missing value resulting from ICEs handled by the NTH strategy may be imputed
using data from the comparator arm followed by adding a positive non-inferiority margin
(assuming smaller outcomes indicate clinical benefit).
For the second category of ICEs due to an AE not representing “normal circumstances” (e.g.,
COVID-19 illness), we may still be interested in the outcome that would have been observed had
the patients taken the assigned medication without the AE. Therefore, the PO as if patients would
have completed the study under assigned treatment regimens is of interest. The CDH strategy

21

should be used to handle these ICEs, and methods based on the MAR assumption are
recommended for handling the resulting missing values. For an AE that is related to the efficacy
outcome, the MAR assumption may be still reasonable if the probability of such an AE can be
modeled using intermediate outcomes observed prior to the AE. If there is a strong reason to
believe the MAR assumption is not valid, an alternative method may be used. For example, when
there is a biological plausibility the occurrence of such an AE may be correlated with the
efficacy outcome of interest AND the efficacy outcome prior to the AE is not collected. For such
scenarios, the imputation for the PO under a special pattern (e.g. assuming the missing efficacy
outcome prior to the AE is poor) may be performed. Since this type of methods requires
selection of a special pattern (based on subjective judgment), it is generically recommended as a
sensitivity analysis. In addition, when all patients with similar patterns have missing values (e.g.
missingness due to death), a sensitivity parameter may be introduced for imputation (Mehrotra et
al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2020; Cro et al., 2020b).
3.2. ICE due to LoE
As mentioned in Section 3, ICEs due to LoE include treatment discontinuation due to LoE and
use of rescue medications that are not part of the treatment regimen. A medication belonging to
standard care is generally considered part of the treatment regimen, while a rescue medication,
for ethical reasons, is generally not considered part of the treatment regimen.
The CDH strategy is often used to handle these ICEs due to LoE. This is because the scientific
questions addressed by the study is what outcomes patients would get if taking treatment as
directed provided there is no counterindication. If the efficacy measurements prior to ICEs are
collected, the assumption of MAR is plausible and statistical methods based on the MAR
assumption should be used. We can use a variety of methods for estimating treatment effects
22

under MAR. These include methods based on likelihood such as direct likelihood (e.g. linear
mixed models for repeated measures) and multiple imputation. Non-likelihood based methods
are often preferred when likelihood is not readily available (such as for repeated measures binary
data) and include weighted generalized estimating equations (WGEE) and doubly robust
methods combining modeling ICE (treatment discontinuation) and outcome process (Robins and
Rotnitzky, 1995; Robins et al., 1995; Bang and Robins, 2005). Methods based on multiple
imputation are popular in that they can be easily coupled with sensitivity analyses under various
departures from MAR, e,g. using delta-adjusted sensitivity analyses (Cro et al., 2020b). See
Mallinckrodt and Lipkovich (2016) and references therein. In cases when important efficacy
measurements predictive of the ICEs are not collected, multiple imputation under a special
pattern may be used. For example, we may assume these patients have similar intermediate
efficacy outcomes as other patients within their treatment arm with similar ICEs. Methods based
on MAR essentially assume patients with an ICE have observed “counterparts” who did not
experience an ICE having similar outcome history as the patient with the ICE prior to the ICE.
For situations when no such data is available by design (for example, strict rescue conditions
preclude observing outcomes for any patients meeting non-response condition), sensitivity
analyses such as multiple imputation under special pattern can be used.
3.3. ICEs due to administrative reasons
ICEs due to administrative reasons are ICEs generally considered unrelated to efficacy or safety.
Treatment discontinuations or unacceptable duration of drug interruptions due to COVID-19
control measures during the pandemic belong in this category. POs under the designed treatment
regimen should be considered, and the resulting missing value can be reasonably considered as
MAR. For ICEs due to administrative reasons but lacking clear documentation on the exact

23

reasons of ICEs, such as loss to follow-up, the resulting missing values may not be considered
MAR and can be imputed under a special pattern in the primary analysis or in a sensitivity
analysis. For example, we may assume the efficacy outcomes prior to loss to follow-up are
similar to those who have ICEs due to LoE.
3.4. Patients with multiple ICEs
A patient may experience multiple ICEs. In principle, the corresponding aforementioned
strategies for handling ICEs and resulting missing values should be applied in combination. For
example, a patient may use rescue medication after treatment discontinuation due to AE. If the
PTH is used to handle the treatment discontinuation due to AE and the CDH is used to handle the
use of rescue medication, the outcome for this patient should be considered missing and may be
imputed using a patient who discontinues treatment due to AE at approximately the same time
period, does not use rescue medication and has a non-missing outcome measurement.

3.5. Missing values not due to ICEs
Missingness not due to ICEs is generally considered to be purely due to randomness and a
MAR-based statistical method should be used to handle such missing values. Examples include
invalid procedures in handling blood samples and performing the laboratory analytics, missing
visits due to COVID-19 control measures, etc.
4. Summary and discussion
The novel COVID-19 pandemic may serve as a testing ground for the existing research and
guidelines on estimands, strategies for dealing with ICE’s and resulting missing values, including
the newly released ICH E9 (R1). It spurs discussion in the clinical trial community regarding
revising protocols and statistical analysis plans to address the ICEs and missing values related to
24

the pandemic (Meyer et al., 2020). Fortunately, the amendments to the current protocols and
SAPs to address these issues can be done relatively quickly (although amending protocols is
generally a long process) based on the framework provided by ICH E9 (R1); however, the very
fact that so many studies impacted by the pandemic require amending, the protocol and SAPs is
a sign the framework can be further improved.
In this article, we discuss each strategy proposed in the ICH E9 (R1) for handling ICEs in detail
using the language of POs under the causal framework. Our main conclusion is most clinically
meaningful causal estimands should be defined based on POs and are necessarily “hypothetical.”
We provide a few examples of different hypothetical strategies for addressing different clinical
questions; our intention was not to provide a complete list of possible scenarios for hypothetical
strategies, rather aiming to define a general direction.
There are few situations when the WOT strategy can provide meaningful causal estimands
corresponding to important objectives in clinical trials. Instead of using a composite strategy, we
recommend defining the composite endpoint by explicitly specifying components (i.e., the events
of interest). The treatment policy strategy, which takes whatever outcome regardless of ICEs,
could lead to undesirable consequences under some special situations (e.g., pandemic or natural
disaster).
The PS strategy, in our opinion, is a framework for defining the target population for causal
inference which, as stated in ICH E9 (R1), is one of the key elements of estimands, rather than a
strategy for handling ICEs, although often a principal stratum may be defined based on a certain
type of ICE. Therefore, the principal stratum can be combined with any one of the above four
strategies for handling an ICE, which supports the idea that the principal stratum, as such, is not
a strategy for handling ICEs.
25

We emphasize the value of hybrid strategies (handling ICEs differently according to the cause of
the ICE) formed by classifying ICEs into 3 categories (due to AE, due to LoE, and due to
administrative reasons) based on the cause of ICEs, and discuss their further classification into
potential subcategories (Figure 1). We provide recommendations and various options on
handling different ICEs and the resulting missing values.
We recommend the CDH strategy should generally be used for handling COVID-19 related ICEs
as the purpose of studies (for non-COVID treatment) is to understand the treatment effect under
normal circumstances (without this pandemic). The resulting missing values due to the CDH
strategy of handling COVID-19 related ICEs or missing visits due to COVID-19 control
measures may be dealt with under the MAR assumption. With the CDH strategy, for patients
with the ICEs of treatment discontinuation due to AE or death, the hypothetical outcome may be
imputed or inferred using an imputation under a special pattern if it is reasonable to assume an
interaction between the COVID-19 disease and the intermediate (efficacy) outcomes prior to the
ICE.
To reduce the ambiguity of the current definitions of ICEs, we suggest the following
considerations in the application of the ICH E9 (R1) guidance. First, treatment regimens of
interest need to be defined precisely before considering which events are ICEs. Secondly, to be
considered an ICE, this event should be a deviation from the treatment regimens of interest.
Then, we can handle the true ICEs that are not part of the treatments of interest mostly using
hypothetical strategies. More discussion on various hypothetical strategies are needed, and the
selection of hypothetical strategies should depend on the cause of ICEs and study objectives.
Finally, in the estimation stage, the most plausible (not the most conservative) assumption
should be used (Cro et al., 2020a).
26

ICH E9 (R1) lists three types of populations: all randomized study patients, a subset of patients
based on baseline covariates, and a principal stratum by occurrence of a specific ICE. While we
generally agree on the three categories, the principal stratum may also be defined by any
post-baseline outcome variable.
The success of implementing the conceptual and analytic framework proposed or discussed in
this article critically depends on accurate and diligent collection of underlying reasons for ICEs
and missingness. This should not be an extra burden for data collection, as good data collection
is important, especially for the data elements (ICEs or missing values) that impact the key
analyses. A number of COVID-19 related guidance documents (EMA, 2020b; FDA, 2020) also
emphasize the importance of collecting such information.
This article does not cover the situation when a single ICE may be caused by multiple reasons
(Qu et al., 2020b). For example, one patient who feels the efficacy is not improved as expected
while experiencing a mild AE may choose to discontinue the study medication. Although we do
not cover such situations in this article, the framework provided can be used to select the
appropriate hypothetical strategy and imputation methods to handle the ICE and the resulting
missing values under such “trade-off” scenarios.
In conclusion, as the pandemic may have prompted greater attention on estimands and missing
data, the framework in this article advances the field beyond the current crisis. It may help
streamline the process of choosing estimands and handling missing values in protocols and
statistical analysis plans.

27

Acknowledgements
We are grateful to Stephen Ruberg and Bohdana Ratitch for numerous discussions on estimands
which motivated us to write this article. We would like to thank Yu Du, Linda Shurzinske, and
Dana Schamberger for a careful review of this article. We would also like to thank the two
anonymous references and the Associate Editor for their valuable comments leading to a
significant improvement of this manuscript.

28

References
ACRO (2020), “Considerations to Support Clinical Trial Monitoring Oversight During COVID19,” Association of Clinical Research Organizations [online], Available at
https://www.acrohealth.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/03/ACRO-Statement-on-MonitoringOversight-FINAL-3.13.20.pdf.
Akacha, M., Bretz, F., and Ruberg, S. (2017), “Estimands in Clinical Trials Broadening the
Perspective,” Statistics in Medicine, 36, 5–19.
Bang, H., and Robins, J. M. (2005). “Doubly Robust Estimation in Missing Data and Causal
Inference Models”. Biometrics, 61(4), 962-973.
Bornkamp, B., and Bermann, G. (2020), “Estimating the Treatment Effect in a Subgroup
Defined by an Early Post-Baseline Biomarker Measurement in Randomized Clinical Trials
With Time-to-event Endpoint,” Statistics in Biopharmaceutical Research, 12, 19-28.
Carpenter, J. R., Roger, J. H., and Kenward, M. G. (2013). “Analysis of longitudinal Trials with
Protocol Deviation: A Framework for Relevant, Accessible Assumptions, and Inference via
Multiple Imputation,” Journal of Biopharmaceutical Statistics, 23(6), 1352-1371.
CHMP (2010). “Guideline on Missing Data in Confirmatory Clinical Trials,” European
Medicines Agency Committee for Medicinal Products for Human Use (CHMP),
EMA/CPMP/EWP/1776/99 Rev. 1. [online], Available at
https://www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/scientific-guideline/guideline-missing-dataconfirmatory-clinical-trials_en.pdf.

29

Cro, S., Morris, T. P., Kahan, B. C., Cornelius, V. R., & Carpenter, J. R. (2020a). A four-step
strategy for handling missing outcome data in randomised trials affected by a pandemic.
BMC Medical Research Methodology 20:208. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12874-020-01089-6
Cro, S., Morris, T. P., Kenward, M. G., & Carpenter, J. R. (2020b). “Sensitivity Analysis for
Clinical Trials with Missing Continuous Outcome Data Using Controlled Multiple
Imputation: A Practical Guide,” Statistics in Medicine. https://doi.org/10.1002/sim.8569
Darken, P., Nyberg, J., Ballal, S., & Wright, D. (2020). “The attributable estimand: A new
approach to account for intercurrent events”. Pharmaceutical Statistics.
EMA (2020a), “Guidance on the Management of Clinical Trials during the COVID-19
(Coronavirus) pandemic,” European Commission [online], Available at
https://ec.europa.eu/health/sites/health/files/files/eudralex/vol10/guidanceclinicaltrials_covid19_en.pdf.
EMA (2020b), “Points to Consider on Implications of Coronavirus Disease 4 (COVID-19) on
Methodological Aspects of Ongoing Clinical Trials,” European Commission [online],
Available at https://ec.europa.eu/health/sites/health/files/files/eudralex/vol10/guidanceclinicaltrials_covid19_en.pdf.
FDA (2020), “Guidance on Conduct of Clinical Trials of Medical Products during COVID-19
Pandemic,” U.S. Food and Drug Administration [online], Available at
https://www.fda.gov/media/136238/download.
Frangakis, C. E., and Rubin, D. B. (2002), “Principal Stratification in Causal Inference,”
Biometrics, 58, 21–29.

30

Hernán M. A., and Robins J. M. (2020). Causal Inference: What If. Boca Raton: Chapman &
Hall/CRC.
Hernán, M. A. and Scharfstein, D. (2018), “Cautions as Regulators Move to End Exclusive
Reliance on Intention to Treat,” Annals of Internal Medicine, 168, 515–516.
ICH E9 (1998), “ICH Harmonised Tripartite Guideline E9: Statistical Principles for Clinical
Trials,” International Conference on Harmonisation [online], Available at
https://database.ich.org/sites/default/files/E9_Guideline.pdf.
ICH E9 (R1) (2019). “ICH Harmonised Guideline Addendum on Estimands and Sensitivity
Analysis in Clinical Trials to the Guideline on Statisical Principles for Clinical Trials
E9(R1) ,” International Conference on Harmonisation [online], Available at
https://database.ich.org/sites/default/files/E9-R1_Step4_Guideline_2019_1203.pdf.
Imbens, G. W., and Rubin, D. B. (1997), “Bayesian Inference for Causal Effects in Randomized
Experiments With Noncompliance,” Annals of Statistics, 25, 305–327.
Lipkovich, I., and Dmitrienko, A. (2014), “Biomarker Identification in Clinical Trials,” in
Clinical and Statistical Considerations in Personalized Medicine, eds. Carini, C., Menon, S.,
and Chang, M., New York, NY: Chapman and Hall/CRC Press.
Lipkovich, I., Ratitch, B., and Mallinckrodt, C. H. (2020), “Causal Inference and Estimands in
Clinical Trials,” Statistics in Biopharmaceutical Research 12:1, 54-67, DOI:
10.1080/19466315.2019.1697739.
Little, R. J. A. (1995), “Modeling the Drop-Out Mechanism in Repeated Measures Studies,”
Journal of the American Statistical Association, 90, 1112–1121.

31

Little, R. J., D'Agostino R., Cohen M.L., Dickersin K., Emerson S. S., Farrar J. T., Frangakis
C., Hogan J. W., Molenberghs G., Murphy S. A., Neaton J. D., Rotnitzky A., Scharfstein
D., Shih W. J., Siegel J. P., and Stern H. (2012), “The prevention and Treatment of Missing
Data in Clinical Trials,” New England Journal of Medicine, 367, 1355-1360.
Little, R. J., and Rubin, D. B. (2000), “Causal Effects in Clinical and Epidemiological Studies
via Potential Outcomes,” Annual Review of Public Health, 21, 121–145.
Mallinckrodt, C. H., Bell, J., Liu, G., Ratitch, B., O’Kelly, M., Lipkovich, I., Singh, P., Xu, L.
and Molenberghs, G. (2020), “Aligning Estimators with Estimands in Clinical Trials:
Putting the ICH E9 (R1) Guidelines into Practice,” Therapeutic Innovation & Regulatory
Science, 54, 353-364.
Mallinckrodt, C., and Lipkovich, I. (2016), “Analyzing Longitudinal Clinical Trial Data: A
Practical Guide,” Boca Raton, FL: Chapman & Hall/CRC Press.
Meyer, R. D., Ratitch, B., … (2020), “Statistical Issues and Recommendations for Clinical Trials
Conducted During the COVID-19 Pandemic,” Submitted to the COVID-19 special issue of
Statistics in Biopharmaceutical Research. arXiv:2005.10248, available at
https://arxiv.org/abs/2005.10248.
McDermott, M. M., and Newman, A. B. (2020), “Preserving Clinical Trial Integrity During the
Coronavirus Pandemic,” JAMA [online], DOI:10.1001/jama.2020.4689.
Mehrotra, D. V., Liu, F., and Permutt, T. (2017), “Missing Data in Clinical Trials: Control‐
Based Mean Imputation and Sensitivity Analysis,” Pharmaceutical Statistics, 16(5), 378392.

32

Moodie, E. E. M., Richardson, T. S., and Stephens, D. A. (2007), “Demystifying Optimal
Dynamic Treatment Regimes,” Biometrics, 63, 447–455.
Murphy, S. A., van der Laan, M. J., Robins, J. M., and CPPRG (2001), “Marginal Mean Models
for Dynamic Regimes,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 96, 1410-1423.
National Research Council (2010), “The Prevention and Treatment of Missing Data in Clinical
Trials,” Washington, DC: National Academies Press.
Pearl, J. (2001), “Causal Inference in the Health Sciences: A Conceptual Introduction,” Health
Services and Outcomes Research Methodology, 2, 189–220.
Pearl, J. (2009), “Causal Inference in Statistics: An Overview,” Statistics Surveys, 3, 96–146.
Permutt, T. (2018), “Effects in Adherent Subjects,” Statistics in Biopharmaceutical Research,
10, 233-235.
Permutt, T. (2020), “Treatment Effects, Comparisons, and Randomization,” Statistics in
Biopharmaceutical Research, 12:137-141.
Qu, Y., Fu, H., Luo, J., and Ruberg, S. J. (2020a), “A General Framework for Treatment Effect
Estimators Considering Patient Adherence,” Statistics in Biopharmaceutical Research, 12,
1-18.
Qu, Y., Luo, J., and Ruberg, S. J. (2020b), “Implementation of Tripartite Estimands Using
Adherence Causal Estimators Under the Causal Inference Framework,” Pharmaceutical
Statistics. https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/pst.2054.

33

Qu, Y., Shurzinske, L. and Sethuraman, S. (2020c), “A Hybrid Estimand in Clinical Trials with
Intercurrent Events,” Pharmaceutical Statistics. Accepted for publication. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2006.03105.
Ratitch, B., Bell, J., Mallinckrodt, C., Bartlett, J.W., Goel, N., Molenberghs, G., O’Kelly, M.,
Singh, P., and Lipkovich, I. (2020b), “Choosing Estimands in Clinical Trials: Putting the
ICH E9(R1) Into Practice,” Therapeutic Innovation & Regulatory Science, 54, 324-341.
Ratitch, B., Goel, N., Mallinckrodt, C., Bell, J., Bartlett, J. W., Molenberghs, G., Singh, P.,
Lipkovich, I., and O’Kelly, M. (2020a), “Defining Efficacy Estimands in Clinical Trials:
Examples Illustrating ICH E9 (R1) Guidelines,” Therapeutic Innovation & Regulatory
Science, 54, 370-384.
Robins, J.M. (1986), “A New Approach to Causal Inference in Mortality Studies With a
Sustained Exposure Period—Application to Control of the Healthy Worker Survivor
Effect,” Mathematical Modelling, 7,1393–1512.
Robins, J. M. (1998), “Correction for Non-Compliance in Equivalence Trials,” Statistics in
Medicine, 17, 269–302.
Robins, J. M., and Rotnitzky, A. (1995), “Semiparametric Efficiency in Multivariate Regression
Models with Missing Data,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 90, 122–129.
Robins, J. M., Rotnitzky, A., and Zhao, L. P. (1995), “Analysis of Semiparametric Regression
Models for Repeated Outcomes in the Presence of Missing Data,” Journal of the American
Statistical Association, 90, 106–121.

34

Rodbard, H. W., Rosenstock, J., Canani, L. H., Deerochanawong, C., Gumprecht, J., Lindberg,
S. Ø., Lingvay I., Søndergaard A.L., Treppendahl M.B., Montanya E. (2019), “Oral
Semaglutide Versus Empagliflozin in Patients with Type 2 Diabetes Uncontrolled on
Metformin: The PIONEER 2 Trial,” Diabetes Care, 42, 2272-2281.
Rubin, D. B. (1978), “Bayesian Inference for Causal Effects: The Role of Randomization,”
Annals of Statistics, 6, 34–58.
Rubin, D. B. (1987), “Multiple Imputation for Nonresponse in Surveys”, New York: Wiley.
Rubin, D. B. (2005), “Causal Inference Using Potential Outcomes,” Journal of American
Statistical Association, 100, 322–331.
Scharfstein, D. O. (2019), “A Constructive Critique of the Draft ICH E9 Addendum”, Clinical
Trials, 16, 375–380.
Shepherd, B. E., Gilbert, P. B, and Dupont, C. T. (2011), “Sensitivity Analyses Comparing
Time-To-Event Outcomes Only Existing in a Subset Selected Postrandomization and
Relaxing Monotonicity,” Biometrics, 67, 1100–1110.
Tunis, S. R., Stryer, D. B., Clancy, C. M. (2003), "Practical Clinical Trials: Increasing the Value
of Clinical Research for Decision Making in Clinical and Health Policy," JAMA, 290, 1624–
1632.
Zhang, J. L., and Rubin, D. B. (2003), “Estimation of Causal Effects via Principal Stratification
when Some Outcomes are Truncated by ‘Death’,” Journal of Educational and Behavioral
Statistics, 28, 353–368.

35

Zhang, Y., Golm, G., and Liu, G. (2020), “A Likelihood-Based Approach for the Analysis of
Longitudinal Clinical Trials with Return-to-Baseline Imputation,” Statistics in Biosciences,
12, 23-36.

36

Figure 1. Handling missing values based on the nature of ICEs. ICEs that are part of treatment
regimens are not included in this diagram. Missingness (or missing values) includes missing data
as a result of handling ICEs by a hypothetical strategy and missing measurements of the
outcome. The solid boxes are used for the primary strategy and dashed boxes are used for
alternative strategies or sensitivity analyses. Abbreviations: AE, adverse events; CDH, controlled
direct hypothetical; ICEs, intercurrent events; IPW, inverse probability weighting; LoE, lack of
efficacy; MAR, missing at random; MI, multiple imputation, MNAR, missing not at random;
NTH, no treatment hypothetical; PTH, partial treatment hypothetical.

37

