EPJ manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)

The anomalous magnetic moment of the muon: status of Lattice
QCD calculations
Antoine Gérardin1

a

Aix Marseille Univ, Université de Toulon, CNRS, CPT, Marseille, France.

arXiv:2012.03931v1 [hep-lat] 7 Dec 2020

Received: date / Revised version: date
Abstract. In recent years, the anomalous magnetic moment of the muon has triggered a lot of activity
in the lattice QCD community because a persistent tension of about 3.5 σ is observed between the phenomenological estimate and the Brookhaven measurement. The current best phenomenological estimate
has an uncertainty comparable to the experimental one and the error is completely dominated by hadronic
effects: the leading order hadronic vacuum polarization (HVP) contribution and the hadronic light-by-light
(HLbL) scattering contribution. Both are accessible via lattice simulations and a reduction of the error
by a factor 4 is required in view of the forthcoming experiments at Fermilab and J-PARC whose results,
expected in the next few years, should reduce the experimental precision down to the level of 0.14 ppm.
In this article, I review the status of lattice calculations of those quantities, starting with the HVP. This
contribution has now reached sub-percent precision and requires a careful understanding of all sources of
systematic errors. The HLbL contribution, that is much smaller, still contributes significantly to the error.
This contribution is more challenging to compute, but rapid progress has been made on the lattice in the
last few years.
PACS.

1 Introduction
The anomalous magnetic moment of the muon is the deviation of the gyromagnetic ratio gµ of the muon from
2, the value predicted by the Dirac equation. This deviation is explained by quantum corrections and has been
measured with an impressive precision of 0.5 ppm by the
Brookhaven experiment [1].
Interestingly, a persistent discrepancy of 3.5 standard
deviations has been observed in the last few years making
this quantity a key observable to search for new physics
beyond the Standard Model of particle physics. The main
contribution to this observable comes from quantum electrodynamics (QED) and can be accurately computed using a perturbative expansion in the fine-structure constant
α [2,3]. The small electroweak corrections are also under
control [4, 5]. Finally, although quarks and gluons do not
couple directly to the muon, they do interact via loop diagrams. If hadronic contributions are relatively small, they
completely dominate the error budget and are the limiting
factor in view of reducing the theory error. The current
status of the Standard Model contributions is summarized
in Table 1.
Significant efforts have been made on the experimental side and two new experiments (E989 at Fermilab and
E34 at J-PARC) plan to reduce the error of the measurement by a factor four in the next few years [6, 7]. This
a

email: antoine.gerardin@cpt.univ-mrs.fr

has sparked a lot of activity in the community to reduce
the theory error at the same level of precision and the
Muon g − 2 Theory Initiative 1 was created to facilitate
interactions among the theoretical and experimental g − 2
communities. Recently, this activity has been summarized
in a white-paper [8].
More specifically, the theory error is dominated by effects of the strong interaction that can be separated into
two distinct contributions depicted in Fig. 1: the Hadronic
Vacuum Polarization (HVP) that enters at order α2 in the
electromagnetic coupling and the Hadronic Light-by-Light
scattering (HLbL) contribution, at order α3 . For the HVP
contribution, the most precise determination based on the
dispersive approach has reached a precision of 0.58% [9, 10,
11]. This is a data driven method that relies on the analytical properties of the theory: the hadronic contribution is
obtained as a convolution integral between a QED weight
function K, that is known analytically, and the R−ratio,
obtained from the combination of e+ e− → hadrons cross
section data that can be measured experimentally
 αm 2 Z ∞
K(s)R(s)
µ
ds
ahvp
=
,
(1)
µ
3π
s2
0
R(s) =
1

σ(e+ e− → hadrons
.
4πα2 /(3s)

https://muon-gm2-theory.illinois.edu/

(2)

2

Antoine Gérardin: The anomalous magnetic moment of the muon: status of Lattice QCD calculations

the methodology before presenting the latest results for
the direct lattice calculation. Finally, I present results for
the pseudoscalar-pole contributions, that are expected to
provide the dominant contribution, and the forward lightby-light scattering amplitudes that can provide valuable
information on form factors that are used in phenomenological models to estimate the HLbL contribution.
Fig. 1. Diagrams corresponding to the LO-HVP (left) and
HLbL (right) contribution to the muon (g − 2)µ . The red blobs
represents the non-perturbative contribution. Muon and photon are represented by plain and wiggly lines respectively.

aµ × 1011

Contribution
5

QED (order O(α )) 116 584 718.93 ± 0.10
153.6 ± 1.0

Electroweak

This method is mostly limited by the availably of precise experimental data. The dominant contribution comes
from the region [0.6 − 0.9] GeV which contains the rho
resonance. Unfortunately, in this energy region, the π + π −
channel suffers from tensions between different data sets [9,
10]. Thus, a second, independent determination would be
valuable and lattice QCD is the ideal tool to provide a
first-principle result. In this case, a precision below 0.25%
would be needed to reach the future experimental precision. Most lattice QCD simulations are less precise, with
uncertainties around 2%, but significant progress has been
made in recent years and a very recent determination by
the BMW collaboration has sub-percent precision [12].
Several lattice groups are working on this contribution
and independent checks of this latest result are expected
in the coming months.
The HLBL contribution appears at order α3 and is
suppressed compared to the HVP contribution such that
an overall precision of 10%, or better, is needed. But its
determination is also much more challenging, contributing
significantly to the theory error. Until recently, this contribution was estimated using model estimates [13, 14] and
the Glasgow consensus [15] largely relies on model calculations where systematic errors are difficult to quantify.
Recently, two model-independent approaches have been
proposed. First, the dispersive approach: as compared to
the HVP, this data-driven method is much more complex
and involves a four-point correlation function [16, 17, 18,
19]. Moreover, experimental data are often incomplete or
missing. However, the lack of experimental data can be
partly compensated by lattice QCD, especially for the
dominant contributions. Second, it has been shown that
lattice QCD can also directly access this hadronic contribution [20] and two collaborations have presented results
so far. This year, a first lattice estimate, with controlled
errors, has been published by the RBC/UKQCD collaboration [21].
This review is organized as follows: in Section 2, I
present the current status of the lattice determination of
the hadronic vacuum polarisation contribution. Different
contribution are discussed with emphasis on the challenges
for reaching sub-percent precision. The section ends with
a compilation of lattice results. In Section 3, I discuss related quantities that can be used to perform cross-checks
between lattice collaborations or with the phenomenological estimate. In Section 4, I summarize the status on the
hadronic light-by-light contribution. I first briefly explain

Ref.
[2, 3]
[4, 5]

QCD
HVP (LO)

6 931 ± 40

[22, 23, 24, 25, 9, 10]

HVP (NLO)

−98.3 ± 0.7

[10]

12.4 ± 0.1

[26]

HVP (NNLO)
HLbL

94 ± 19

Total (theory)

116 591 810 ± 43

[8]

Experiment

116 592 089 ± 63

[1]

[27, 8]

Table 1. List of the Standard Model contributions to the
anomalous magnetic moment of the muon.

2 Hadronic vacuum polarization
The leading-order hadronic vacuum polarization is the
dominant hadronic contribution to the muon anomalous
magnetic moment. The corresponding diagram is shown
on the left panel of Fig. 1. The first lattice calculation
started with [28] where it was realized that this quantity
is accessible via lattice simulations. In recent years, several
collaborations, with different lattice discretizations, have
published results and, this year, the first publication with
sub-percent precision has been presented [12]. A further
increase in precision is still needed in view of the forthcoming experimental results and, in the next sections, I
summarize the current status of lattice results.

2.1 Lattice determination
The LO-HVP contribution can be obtained through a convolution integral of the subtracted polarization function Π̂
with a QED weight function over spacelike momenta
 α 2 Z ∞
ahvp
=
dQ2 K(Q2 )Π̂(Q2 ) ,
(3)
µ
π
0


Π̂(Q2 ) = 4π Π(Q2 ) − Π(0) .

(4)

Here α is the electromagnetic coupling and K is a known
analytic QED weight function [28] that depends on the
lepton mass. The polarization function is a scalar function that parametrizes the hadronic vacuum polarization

Antoine Gérardin: The anomalous magnetic moment of the muon: status of Lattice QCD calculations

Fig. 2. The quark-connected (left) and quark-disconnected
(right) Wick contractions for the LO-HVP in the isospin limit.

tensor, defined in the continuum through the two-point
correlation function of electromagnetic currents
Z
Πµν (Q2 ) = d4 x hJµ (x)Jν (0)i eiQ·x
(5)
= (Qµ Qν − δµν Q2 )Π(Q2 )

with
G(t) =

3 Z
1X

3

k=1

be discussed in Section 2.5 along with isospin breaking corrections. In this approximation, the two-point correlation
function can be written as a sum of connected contributions for the light, strange, charm and bottom quarks and
a quark disconnected contribution
1
4
1
5
G(t) = Gl (t) + Gs (t) + Gc (t) + Gb (t) + Gdisc (t) .
9
9
9
9
(12)
The corresponding diagrams are depicted in Fig. 2 and the
shape of the integrand is shown on Fig. 3 for light, strange
and charm quarks. It is also interesting to consider the
isospin decomposition

(6)

where Jµ = 23 uγµ u − 13 dγµ d − 31 sγµ s + 32 cγµ c − 13 bγµ b is
the hadronic part of the electromagnetic curent and Q
denotes the space-like momentum. The top quark is not
shown here: its contribution is known can be estimated
using perturbation theory. The b-quark contribution has
been determined by the HPQCD collaboration [29] who
quote abµ = 0.271(37) × 10−10 .
In recent lattice calculations, the vacuum polarisation
function is obtained from the vector 2-point correlation
function at vanishing three-momentum

 
Z
4
Qt
Π(Q2 ) = 4π 2 dt G(t) t2 − 2 sin2
(7)
Q
2

G(t) = GI=0 (t) + GI=1 (t)

(13)

with
1
1
Gl (t) + Gs (t)
18
9
4
1
+ Gc (t) + Gb (t) + Gdisc (t) (14)
9
9
where the iso-vector part contains 9/10 of the light quark
contribution while other 1/10 belongs to the iso-scalar
part.
GI=1 (t) =

1
Gl (t) ,
2

GI=0 (t) =

f
Gconn (t)K(t)/m
µ

0.016

Light
Strange (×6)
Charm (×6)

0.012

d3 x hJk (x, t)Jk (0)i .

3

(8)

The time momentum representation (TMR) [30] is then
obtained by inverting the integration over imaginary time
and momentum in Eqs. (3) and (7)
 α 2 Z ∞
ahvp
=
dx0 K̃(t)G(t) .
(9)
µ
π
0
Equivalently, one can start with the definition of the timemoments [31, 32]
Z ∞
G2k+2
Πk = (−1)j+1
, G2k = 2
dt t2k G(t) , (10)
(2k + 2)!
0

0.008

0.004

0

0

0.5

1

1.5

t [fm]

2

2.5

3

3.5

Fig. 3. Integrand for the light, strange and charm quark
contributions as a function of the Euclidean time. Extracted
from [34].

A lattice calculation with a sub-percent precision requires to go beyond the iso-symmetric limit of QCD by inwhich are the Taylor coefficients of the vacuum polariza- cluding QED and strong isospin-breaking corrections due
tion function at vanishing four-momentum transfer squared to the mass difference of the up and down quarks. If it
Q2 = 0 [32],
is often convenient to separate the calculation into an isosymmetric part plus isospin breaking corrections, this sep∞
X
Π(Q2 ) = Π0 +
Πn Q2k .
(11) aration is scheme dependent and a direct comparison between lattice collaborations becomes less trivial for interk=1
mediate quantities. This will be discussed in Section 2.5.
From the first few time moments, Padé approximants can
In Fig. 4, I show the relative size of each contribution
be constructed to estimate ahvp
[33].
to the LO-HVP and, in the following sub-sections, I will
µ
We first consider the iso-symmetric theory, where the present the status and the challenges associated with each
up and down quark masses are degenerate and the elec- of them. I first discuss the four contributions in Eq. (12) in
tromagnetic effects are neglected. The definition of iso- the isospin limit. Then, I present the status of the isospin
symmetric QCD depends on the choice made to set the breaking corrections before concluding with a comparison
scale and the quark masses in lattice simulations. It will between lattice results for the total contribution.

4

Antoine Gérardin: The anomalous magnetic moment of the muon: status of Lattice QCD calculations

numerical cost. The latter is also used in [42, 43] and by
the Fermilab/HPQCD/MILC (FHM) collaboration where
a reduction of the cost by a factor of 2 has been observed
compared to standard stochastic sources [44].
680

random source
low modes+solver truncation

660

[alight
µ ]0

640
620
600
580
560

Fig. 4. Different contributions to the leading order HVP in
the muon (g − 2) as defined in Eq. (12).

540
520
2

2.2 The light quark contribution
The connected light-quark contribution is the dominant
contribution to the leading-order HVP and accounts for
almost 90% of the total. It is obtained by inserting Gl
from Eq. (12) into the master formula (9). By definition,
we consider the isospin-symmetric limit and the isospinbreaking corrections will be discussed later in Section 2.5.
Among the main challenges to reach the desired precision
are the statistical precision, the control of finite-size effects
and a precise scale-setting. Most collaborations are now
working with at least one ensemble at (or very close to) the
physical pion mass, eliminating the error from the chiral
extrapolation.
2.2.1 Statistical precision
The tail of the integrand for the light quark contribution suffers from a noise-to-signal problem. For the vector
two-point correlation function, one expects the noise over
signal ratio to increases exponentially as exp((mV −mπ )t)
where mV is the mass of the reseonance and the signal is
eventually lost at large Euclidean times. At the physical
pion mass, the integrand probes distances above 3 fm (see
Fig. 6). Methods to overcome the noise problem can be
separated into two categories:
– algorithmic improvements,
– description of the tail based on theoretical grounds.
Several algorithmic improvements are used to reduce
the cost of the simulation and to increase the statistical precision. The low-mode averaging technique [35, 36]
is used by the BMW [12] and the RBC/UKQCD [37] collaboration and in Ref. [38]. It consists in calculating exactly the low-modes of the Dirac operator and it provides
an estimate of the low-part of the all-to-all propagator.
A comparison with stochastic sources is shown in Fig. 5.
The part orthogonal to these modes is generally evaluated
using standard methods such as stochastic sources. This
can be combined with the all-mode-averaging (or truncated solver) technique [39, 40, 41] to reduce further the

2.5

3
tc[fm]

3.5

4

Fig. 5. Comparison of the low-mode averaging technique combined with all-mode-averaging with the traditional method
with stochastic sources. The two sets of curves correspond to
the lower and upper bound of the integrand as described in
Eq. (16). The lattice data are obtained at the physical pion
mass. The plot is taken from [12].

In addition to algorithmic improvements, a specific
treatment of the tail of the integrand is usually needed and
the long-distance behavior is treated in a different manner
by splitting the integration range at some Euclidean time
t∗ . This separation relies on the observation that, at large
Euclidean times, the contribution to the signal comes from
a relatively small number of states.
A first strategy is to perform a (multi)-exponential
fit to extend the correlator above some Euclidean time
t∗ . Below the cut, the lattice data are used to evaluate
Eq. (9) and, above the cut, the approximate correlator,
reconstructed from the fit, is used. This strategy is the one
followed by the ETM collaboration with the value t∗ in the
range [1.6 − 1.8 fm] and where a single state is included
above the cut. The Fermilab/HPQCD/MILC collaboration also uses this method with the value t∗ ≈ 2 fm [44].
In this case, more than one state is included and additional
smeared interpolating operators are used to stabilize the
fit. This method is expected to work well as long as the resonance state in the vector channel is above the threshold,
a valid assumption for large unphysical quark masses or at
sufficiently coarse lattice spacing in the staggered formalism. Otherwise, the two-pion like state might be difficult
to resolve on the lattice. Since the later is lighter, it might
lead to an underestimate of the light quark contribution.
In [44], the FHM collaboration has provided evidence that
the bias introduced by this method is below their statistical uncertainty.
Another strategy, followed by Mainz [34, 46] and more
recently by the RBC/UKQCD collaboration [45], is to
perform a dedicated spectroscopy analysis in the vector
channel using a large basis of interpolating operators that

Antoine Gérardin: The anomalous magnetic moment of the muon: status of Lattice QCD calculations
5
f
9 Gl (t)K(t)/mµ

0.016

promise between the statistical precision that increases
with t∗ and the systematic error introduced by the specific
treatment of the tail for t > t∗ . In practice, one can derive
rigorous lower and an upper bounds for the integrand and
t∗ is chosen such that both agree within statistical error.
In its original formulation, the bounds are

Light
N=4
N=3
N=2
N=1

0.012

0.008

0 ≤ G(t) ≤ G(tc )e−E0 (t−tc ) ,

0.004

0

0

0.5

1

1.5

t [fm]

2

2.5

3

5

t ≥ tc .

(16)

The lower bound is a consequence of the positivity of the
correlator. For the upper bound, one notices that the correlator decreases faster than the lowest lying state. Here
E0 is the ground state of the spectrum in finite volume and
in the isovector channel. More stringent lower bounds have
been proposed in the literature [37, 34] and these methods
has been employed in [37,34,38, 12, 42]

3.5

2.2.2 Finite-size effects

Fig. 6. Reconstruction of the vector correlator using the
method described in the main text. Right : Mainz [34] with a
pion mass of 200 MeV and a ≈ 0.064 fm. Left : RBC/UKQCD
at the physical pion mass [45] and a ≈ 0.114 fm. The different curves are obtained by adding more and more states in
the spectral decomposition. One can see that more sates are
required as le pion mass is lowered.

couple to single- and multi-particle state and using the
Lüscher formalism [47]. In this way, one can extract the
masses and overlaps of the low-lying eigenstates and the
correlator for t > t∗ can be reconstructed in a systematic way by introducing more and more eigenstates in the
lattice spectral decomposition
G(x0 ) =

N
−1
X
n=0

Zn −En x0
+ O(e−EN x0 ) ,
e
2En

(15)

where Zn is an overlap factor. The important point is that
only a few states are required to saturate the integrand.
The overlaps and energies can be determined with relatively high precision and the error on the reconstructed integrand grows linearly with time, solving the noise/signal
problem. A reconstruction of the integrand is shown in
Fig. 6 for both collaborations. Recently, the FHM collaboration has presented preliminary result using the staggered formalism [48]. In this case, an additional difficulty
comes from the contribution of the 15 copies of the meson
with different tastes.
Finally, the bounding method introduced in [49, 50, 37],
or its further improvements, provide a systematic way to
cut the integration range in time. The idea is to find a com-

Lattice simulations are inevitably performed in a finite
volume and need to be corrected for this. In the case of
the HVP, one expects the isovector channel to be mostly
affected and one usually assumes finite-size effects (FSE)
to be negligible in the isoscalar channel, dominated by
three-pions states at long distances. If FSE are exponentially suppressed with the physical size of the lattice, they
are not negligible for typical lattice sizes that are currently
used to compute ahvp
µ . At the physical pion mass and with
a physical volume of about 6 fm (mπ L ≈ 4), this correction turns out to be at the level of 3% of the total contribution. Thus, for a few permil precision, this correction
needs not only to be included, but also to be known with
a relative precision better than 10%. This is currently one
of the most important systematic corrections that need to
be applied to lattice data and a careful treatment is thus
mandatory for the target precision. Several theory-based
approaches have been proposed, with major improvements
in the recent years, and the results have been confirmed
by direct, large-volume, lattice simulations.
Chiral Perturbation Theory. The natural framework to
study finite-size corrections to aµ is Chiral Perturbation
Theory (ChiPT). In early calculations, FSE were estimated using NLO ChiPT [50, 37]. The FHM collaboration [44] uses an extended version of ChPT that also includes the ρ meson and photons [51, 52]. More recently, the
NNLO correction in ChiPT have been determined in [53,
38] and, in a recent paper [54], the authors have shown
that ChiPT can, in principle, be used to compute FSEs at
any order in the effective field theory. The NNLO correction is found to be quite large and of the order of 0.4–0.45
times the NLO correction at physical pion mass and for
spatial volumes in the range L = 5.4 − 5.8 fm. In [38], the
systematic error is obtained by assuming a similar relative correction for the next order. It corresponds to a 15%
uncertainty. It is interesting to note that it translates into
a 0.5% error on the total contribution, underlining the
importance of this correction for a few permil precision.

6

Antoine Gérardin: The anomalous magnetic moment of the muon: status of Lattice QCD calculations

Time-like pion form factor and the Lüscher formalism.
A second approach is based on the Lüscher formalism and
the knowledge of the time-like pion form factor. In this
method, the isovector part of the correlation function is
evaluated in both finite and infinite volumes using a spectral decomposition. The time-like pion form factor enters
in the determination of the finite-volume matrix elements.
The theoretical framework has been derived in [47, 55, 30]
and has been used for the first time in [32]. This method
is used by the Mainz collaboration [34], where the pion
form factor is obtained from a dedicated lattice calculation [46]. The procedure has been explicitly tested on
ensembles with a pion mass of 280 MeV as can be seen
on Fig. 7. In [56], the ETM collaboration uses a similar strategy to estimate FSE: they assume a GounarisSakurai parametrization of the pion form factor and the
associated parameters Mρ and Γρ are obtained from a
fit to the lattice data. This strategy is embedded in the
so-called analytical representation of the correlator that
also includes a description of the correlator at short distances. In their recent publication [12], the BMW collaboration has also studied this method assuming a GounarisSakurai parametrization of the pion form factor with parameters estimated from phenomenology. They obtained
results perfectly compatible with their direct lattice calculation using large volumes.
5
f
9 Gl (t)K(t)/mµ

L = 2.8 fm
L = 2.8 fm + FSE
L = 4.1 fm

0.014
0.012

ployed on lattice data for the first time by the BMW collaboration [12]. The results are found to be numerically
compatible with NNLO ChPT and the previous method
based on the time-like pion form factor. Interestingly, this
method also provides the leading correction for the finite
time-extent of the lattice.
Direct lattice calculation. An other approach is to perform dedicated lattice calculations using small and large
physical volumes at the same bare lattice parameters. The
main challenge of such calculations is to get a signal at
large Euclidean times where FSEs are most important.
Due to the large volumes required by this method, it is
numerically expensive even if a relatively coarse lattice
spacings can be used. The PACS collaboration have presented results using two volumes of L = 5.4 fm and L =
10.8 fm [43]. On the larger volume, ChiPT can be used
to estimate the small persistant FSE. Their result differs
by about 1 standard deviation with the NLO ChiPT estimate, confirming the prediction obtained from other approaches, while with relatively big uncertainties of about
30%. A similar work has been presented by RBC/UKQCD
[60] where they found a correction of 21.6(6.3) × 10−10 at
the physical pion mass between two volumes L = 6.22 fm
and L = 4.66 fm. This correction is almost twice as big at
the correction obtained using NLO ChiPT. This method
is also the one used by the BMW collaboration where a
lattice with L ≈ 10.7 fm was used [12]. They found a correction of 18.7(2.5) × 10−10 at the physical pion mass as
compared to L = 6.3 fm. This observation is in line with
previous studies but with higher precision.

0.01

35

Light
30

0.008

β=1.82 - [L/a=64,T/a=64]β=1.82
[L/a=128,T/a=128]135MeV
139MeV

25

0.006

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

1.2

t [fm]

1.4

1.6

1.8

2

∆FV 1010

20

0.004
0.2

β=1.82 - [L/a=64,T/a=128]β=1.82
[L/a=128,T/a=128]135MeV
139MeV
ChPT(mπ=139 MeV), T/a=64
ChPT(mπ=139 MeV), T/a=128

15
10

Fig. 7. Test of the finite-size correction procedure using the
time-like pion form factor and the Luescher formalism. The
pion mass is 280 MeV and two volumes with L = 2.8 fm and
L = 4.1 fm are used (it corresponds to mπ L ≈ 4 and 6 respectively). Figure extracted from [34].

Hansen-Patella method. More recently, a new method
has been proposed where finite-size effects are expressed in
terms of the forward Compton amplitude of the pion [57]
in an expansion in exp[−|~n|mπ L]. The first publication
was restricted to the dominant exp[−Mπ L] contribution
and the sub-dominant contributions were neglected. However, the latter are numerically relevant and this limitation
has been overcome in a more√recent publication√[58, 59]
where sub-leading terms exp[− 2Mπ L] and exp[− 3Mπ L]
have been included. Numerically, one observes a nice convergence of this expansion. This methods has been em-

5
0
0

0.5

1

1.5

2

2.5

rcut fm

Fig. 8. Difference of the light quark contribution ahvp
µ (rcut ) on
three lattices with 644 , 1284 and 643 × 128 (the spatial extents
in physical units are L = 5.4 fm and L = 10.8 fm and the pion
mass is mπ ≈ 135 MeV. The plot is taken from [43].

Most lattice collaborations correct lattice data for FSE
on each ensemble prior to the continuum (and chiral) extrapolation. When using staggered quarks, finite-size effects are entangled with the taste-breaking corrections and
therefore with the continuum extrapolation. This moti-

Antoine Gérardin: The anomalous magnetic moment of the muon: status of Lattice QCD calculations

vates the BMW collaboration to first compute ahvp
in the
µ
continuum limit, at a reference volume with L ≈ 6.3 fm
and, in a second step, to correct this continuum extrapolation for FSEs.
To conclude, three theory-based approaches are known
to estimate FSEs. Remarkably, they provide very similar
estimates suggesting that this correction is under control
at the level of 10%. This has been further confirmed by the
recent large-volume calculation performed by the BMW
collaboration. FSEs are also important for the quark disconnected contribution, as discussed in Section 2.4, and for
the isospin-breaking correction discussed in Section 2.5.

7

be O(a2 ). Recently, the relevance of log-corrections for
high precision calculations as been emphasized in [63]. In
simulations performed with staggered quarks, the leading
source of discretization effects are due to taste-breaking
effects. Taste splitting is generally corrected for using staggered chiral perturbation theory (SχPT) [44, 12, 38]. The
continuum extrapolation turns out to be the main source
of systematic error in the recent publication by the BMW
collaboration [12]. Obviously, at least three lattice spacings should be used to check the expected scaling.
2.2.5 Results and conclusion

2.2.3 Chiral extrapolation/interpolation
The chiral extrapolation is still a significant source of error
for lattice collaborations that are not working directly at
the physical pion mass. In Ref. [34], the Mainz group observes a significant enhancement of the signal for the light
quark contribution between the ensemble at the physical pion mass and another ensemble with a 220 MeV pion
mass. The ETM collaboration does not yet include ensemble directly at the physical pion mass [56]. However, such
an ensemble is now available and has been used in a recent
paper on the ratios of the hadronic contributions to the
lepton g − 2 [61]. For collaborations working close to the
physical pion mass [50, 37, 43, 44, 38], a smooth interpolation is required and does not introduce a significant error.
Fortunately, it concerns most collaborations and this issue
has become less relevant in recent analysis.

A summary of the results for the light-quark contribution
is depicted in Fig. 9. We observe some tension between
different collaborations. Since the systematic error is not
negligible and is correlated between different collaborations (especially for the FSE correction), further work is
needed here. Possible cross-checks among lattice groups
but also with phenomenology will be further discussed in
Section 3.
ahvp,l
× 1010
µ
BMW ’20
Lehner et al. ’20
Aubin et al. ’20
FHM ’19
Mainz ’19
PACS ’19
ETMC ’19
RBC/UKQCD ’18

2.2.4 Lattice spacing and continuum extrapolation
Although the anomalous magnetic moment is a dimensione in Eq. (9) depends on
less quantity, the weight function K
the muon mass that eventually needs to be converted into
lattice units. To study the impact of the scale setting uncertainty, the authors of [32] have estimated the relative
error on ahvp
from error propagation
µ
∆ahvp
= a
µ

dahvp
dahvp
∆a
∆a
µ
µ
·
= mµ
·
,
da
a
dmµ
a

600 620 640 660 680 700
Fig. 9. Comparison of lattice results for the connected light
quark contribution to the leading-order HVP. The results are
extracted from [12, 42, 38, 44, 34, 43, 64, 65, 37].

(17)

hvp
and obtained ∆ahvp
≈ 1.8%. Therefore, a two-permil
µ /aµ
hvp
precision for aµ translates into a permil determination
of the scale setting. This is probably one of the biggest
challenge for lattice QCD and requires the inclusion of
isospin-breaking effects. It should be noted that this relation has been derived in the time-momentum representation given by Eq. (9) and might differ if one uses a different
estimators. A review of scale setting can be found in [62].
A continuum extrapolation is also required and this
step depends significantly on the action and the choice
of operators that are used in lattice simulations. All results presented in Fig. 9 are obtained using lattice formulations where O(a) lattice artifacts have been removed and
the leading discretization errors are therefore expected to

2.3 The strange and charm quark contributions
The strange quark contribution is much simpler to evaluate on the lattice. As can be seen in Fig. 3, the integrand decreases faster than the light quark contribution
and there is no noise problem at large Euclidean times.
No sophisticated treatment of the tail is needed and a
high statistical precision is easily achieved by integrating
the lattice data only. Finite-size effects are much smaller
than for the light-quark contribution and can be safely
neglected [33, 66]. The results for different lattice collaborations are depicted in Fig. 10 and we observe a nice
agreement between all of them. A significant source of uncertainty still lies in the determination of the scale setting,
as discussed in Section 2.2.4. It mostly explains the spread

8

Antoine Gérardin: The anomalous magnetic moment of the muon: status of Lattice QCD calculations

of the errors and can be improved independently. An other
source of systematic uncertainty originates from the tuning the of the strange quark mass at the physical point.
The strange-quark contribution amount to about 8% of
the total LO-HVP and a relative precision of 2.5% is required for a two permil precision. This is already achieved
by many of the collaborations and this is not the main
challenge for the future.
ahvp,s
µ

× 10

2.4 The quark-disconnected contribution
Thanks to the structure of the electromagnetic current,
the quark-disconnected contribution to the LO-HVP contribution can be factorized as [67]
3

Gdisc (t) = −

11X
93

k=1



Llk (t) − Lsk (t) Llk (0) − Lsk (0)

(18)
where the loop on a given timeslice and with a quark of
flavor f is defined by

10

BMW ’20
Lehner et al. ’20
Mainz ’19
PACS ’19
ETMC ’19
RBC/UKQCD ’18
HPQCD ’14

1 X
Tr [Sf (x, x)γk ] .
Lfk (t) = √
V ~x

(19)

with Sf the quark propagator. Here, we assume mu =
md and isospin-breaking corrections will be discussed later
in Section 2.5. We also neglect the valence charm quark
contribution that has been shown to be much smaller than
the current statistical precision [50]. From Eq. (18), it is
50 51 52 53 54 55 56 57
clear that this contribution vanishes in the SU(3)f limit
Fig. 10. Comparison of lattice results for the connected where mu = md = ms .
The calculation of the loop functions requires the esstrange quark contribution to the leading-order HVP. The retimation
of all-to-all propagators Sf on each time-slice.
sults are extracted from [12, 34, 43, 65, 37, 31].
The latter are notoriously difficult to estimate in lattice
QCD and require the use of sophisticated noise-reduction
techniques. Since this contribution can be expressed as a
The integrand of the charm quark contribution is peaked difference between light and strange loops, we expect the
at even smaller Euclidean times. As for the strange quark signal to be dominated by low energy physics. In particucontribution, a high statistical precision is easily achieved. lar, it is important that noise reduction techniques mainIn that case, the main difficulty lies in the continuum ex- tain the light- minus strange structure to benefit from the
trapolation and the control of discretization effects. As cancellation of noise between the light and strange-quark
can be seen in Fig. 3, it becomes difficult to sample the contributions. This is the case of the low-mode averaging
integrand correctly and small lattice spacings are required. technique used by the RBC/UKQCD and BMW collaboThe results for various collaborations are shown in Fig. 11 rations where the low-modes are computed for eigenvalues
and, as for the strange quark contribution, we observe a up to (or close to) the strange quark mass. In practice,
very good agreement between groups. This contribution the low-mode averaging described in Section 2.2.1 is ofis about 2% of the total contribution. For most collabo- ten combined with the all-mode-averaging (or truncated
rations, the current uncertainty is already below the re- solver) technique [39, 40, 41] to estimate the stochastic part
quired precision for a two permil determination and does of the estimator. In Ref. [68], the Mainz group uses hiernot represent a challenge for the future target precision.
archical probing [69], which replaces the sequence of noise
vectors by one noise vector multiplied with a sequence
hvp,c
10
of Hadamard vectors. The same noise vectors are used
aµ × 10
for both the light and strange quark inversions. In any
case, the signal is eventually lost at large Euclidean times
BMW ’20
t ≈ 2 − 2.5 fm and, as for the light quark contribution,
Mainz ’19
the bounding method can be used to cut the integration
PACS ’19
range.
ETMC ’19
Finite-size effects are also relevant for this contribuRBC/UKQCD ’18
tion. If one assumes FSEs to be negligible in the iso-scalar
HPQCD ’14
channel, the quark-disconnected contribution, taken separately, receives the same FSE correction as the light quark
10 11 12 13 14 15 16
contribution but with a factor −1/10. At the physical pion
mass and with a volume of 5.5 fm, they are of about 15%
Fig. 11. Comparison of lattice results for the connected for the RBC/UKQCD collaboration. The systematic error
strange quark contribution to the leading-order HVP. The re- associated to this correction is, however, negligible and
sults are extracted from [12, 34, 43, 65, 37, 31].
under control.
The quark-disconnected contribution has been computed by fewer collaborations, including RBC/UKQCD [70,

Antoine Gérardin: The anomalous magnetic moment of the muon: status of Lattice QCD calculations
5

LT=20
Partial contribution of lattice data for t ≤ T

aDISCµ 1010

0
-5
-10
-15
-20
-25

0

5

10

15

20

T

Fig. 12. Integrated value of ahvp,disc
obtaining using Eq. (9)
µ
and integrating the lattice data up to t ≤ T . Extracted
from [70].

9

spacing with a = 0.11 fm was used. The results of the
Mainz group was obtained on a reduced set of ensembles
that includes 3 lattice spacings but no ensemble directly
at the physical pion mass such that a chiral extrapolation was required and turned out to be the main source
of uncertainty (since the isoscalar contribution is not singular in the chiral limit, the disconnected piece has to
compensate the singularity present in the light quark contribution [68]). The Mainz group has recently presented
a preliminary update [73] that includes more ensembles,
including one at the physical pion mass and the new noise
reduction technique proposed in [74]. Their preliminary re= −14.8 ± 2.8 × 10−10 reduces the tension.
sults ahvp,disc
µ
The BMW collaboration works directly as the physical
pion mass but did not include their finest lattice spacing.
The precision of the BMW collaboration has reached
10% and recent new calculations confirm the overall size of
this contribution. Further cross-checks on this important
contribution would be highly desirable and a first step
might be to compare the results obtained from the window
method described in Section 3.1.
ahvp,disc
× 1010
µ

(preliminary)

Fig. 13. Preliminary summary of the disconnected results for
the FHM collaboration. Slides presented during the workshop
The hadronic vacuum polarization from lattice QCD at high
precision by the Muon g-2 Theory Initiative [72].

37], BMW [50, 12] and the Mainz group [32, 34]. An early
calculation has been presented by the the HPQCD collaboration in [71], but on a single ensemble with a heavy pion
of 391 MeV. The published results read
BMW : ahvp,disc
= −13.2(1.3)stat (1.3)syst × 10−10
µ

Mainz : ahvp,disc
= −23.2(2.2)stat (4.5)syst × 10−10
µ
RBC : ahvp,disc
= −11.2(3.3)stat (2.3)syst × 10−10
µ

and are summarized in Fig. 14. This contribution is negative and, in magnitude, amounts to about 2% of the total
contribution. A precision below 10% is therefore needed
to reach the two permil precision.
Recently, the FHM collaboration [72] has presented
preliminary results shown in Fig. 13. They are obtained
using three lattice spacings at the physical pion mass and
the extrapolation is in good agreement with previous results.
We observe a slight tension of about 2σ between the
published Mainz results and the other collaborations. The
significance of this tension should however be tempered
by noticing that most results are dominated by systematic error and, for the RBC collaboration, a single lattice

FHM ’20
Mainz ’20
BMW ’20
Mainz ’19
RBC/UKQCD ’18

−30 −25 −20 −15 −10 −5
Fig. 14. Comparison of lattice results for the quarkdisconnected contribution, to the leading-order HVP, in the
isospin limit. The results are extracted from [12, 34, 37].

2.5 Isospin-breaking corrections
Most lattice simulations are performed in the iso-symmetric
limit where mu = md . However, the current level of precision of the HVP contribution requires the inclusion of
isospin breaking effects. There are two sources of isospinbreaking corrections in nature: first the mass of the up
and down quarks are measured to be different, second the
electromagnetic corrections due to the different electric
charges of the quarks. These effects are expected to be of
order O(α) ≈ 1% and O((md − mu )/ΛQCD ) ≈ 1%, respectively. Recent calculations have confirmed that this
contribution is below 1% (see Table 2).
Those calculations are numerically challenging. Numerous diagrams need to be evaluated and a good statistical precision, at large Euclidean times, is difficult to
achieve. Similar methods as the one discussed for the light
quark contribution can be used. Naively, finite-size effects
can also be large: corrections are expected to fall off as
powers of 1/L, where L is the spatial extent of the lattice,
and not exponentially. The scale-setting, which is one of

10

Antoine Gérardin: The anomalous magnetic moment of the muon: status of Lattice QCD calculations

the limiting factor in term of precision, as discussed in
Section 2.2.4, needs to include IB corrections as well. Furthermore, if the vector current needs to be renormalized,
isospin corrections need to be included there as well.
After a brief overview of the methods used to include
iso-spin breaking effects, I present recent results. Until recently, only a sub-part of the diagrams, expected to be
dominant, have been estimated. In particular, the ETM
and the RBC/UKQCD collaboration have worked within
the electro-quenched approximation. Recently, the BMW
collaboration has published a first estimate of all diagrams
including electromagnetic sea-quark effect [12].

Fig. 15. Top: Dominant QED and strong isospin-breaking diagrams for the quark-connected (top panel) and the quarkdisconnected (bottom panel) contributions.

2.5.1 Methods
To include QED on the lattice, we are interested in evaluating the path integral in presence of both QCD and QED
Z
1
hOi =
(20)
D[U ] D[A] D[ψ, ψ] O e−S[U,A,ψ,ψ] ,
Z
with the total action
S[U, A, ψ, ψ] = Sg [U ] + Sγ [A] +

X

ψ f D[U, A; e, qf , mf ]ψf

f

(21)
where Sg and Sγ are the gluon and photon actions and
D is the Dirac operator associated to the quark of flavor
f . The latter includes coupling to photons and it depends
on the quark mass mf , the quark electric charge ef and
the gluonic coupling g. The first step is to regularize the
photon action on the lattice and the associated difficulties
are discussed in detail in [75, 76]. All results for the HVP
are obtained using the QEDL prescription [77] where the
spatial zero modes of the photon field in finite volume are
explicitly removed.
Two methods are used to include QED effects in ahvp
µ
using lattice simulations.
The first methods treats QED non-perturbatively. It
consists in generating gauge configurations for the full
QED+QCD theory [78]. Most simulations are performed
in the electro-quenched approximation where the the seaquarks are considered as electrically neutral. This approximation allows to generate the U(1) photon fields independently of the SU(3) gauge fields and then reduces the
computational cost. For the strong-isospin-breaking effects, different values for the quark masses can be used
in the action. Here, the results are obtained to all orders
in α (or within the electro-quenched approximation). For
the HVP, this method has been studied by the RBC collaboration [79] and the QCDSF collaboration [80].
The second approach to compute isospin breaking effects is based on the perturbative expansion of the path
integral in powers of the fine structure constant, α, and
the mass difference of the quark compared to the mass in
the iso-symmetric theory ∆mf = mf − m) [81, 82]. Since
it is a perturbative expansion around the iso-symmetric
theory, the same SU(3) gauge ensembles can be used. The
relevant diagrams for the HVP are shown in Figs. (15) and

Fig. 16. Diagrams beyond the electro-quenched approximation for the quark-connected (top panel) and the quarkdisconnected (bottom panel) contributions (diagrams are 1/Nc
suppressed).

(16). Additional diagrams, that are specific to the regularization used on the lattice, are not shown. Corrections
to the connected and disconnected parts have been separated. The second set of plots include diagrams beyond
the electro-quenched approximation. This methods is used
by the ETM [66, 65], RBC/UKQCD [37] and BMW [12]
collaborations
A comparison between the two methods has been presented by the RBC/UKQCD collaboration in [79].

2.5.2 Separation prescription
The separation between strong isospin breaking and QED
effects is prescription dependent. Furthermore, the definition of the physical point in the iso-symmetric theory
is also scheme dependent. Only the full contribution, in
QCD + QED simulations can be unambiguously defined.
In that sense, some care needs to be taken when comparing the results from different lattice calculations, as in Table 2. However, the ambiguity between different schemes
is expected to be small (O(αmf ) with mf the quark mass)
compared to the current statistical precision. Further details on the prescriptions used by each group can be found
in [8] and references therein.

2.5.3 Results
The first set of diagrams, depicted in the top panel of
Fig. 15, represents the correction to the quark-connected

Antoine Gérardin: The anomalous magnetic moment of the muon: status of Lattice QCD calculations
Figure
(15) - top -

QED

(15) - top -

SIB

(15) - botom -

QED

(15) - botom -

SIB

(16)
Charm
Total

BMW [12]

ETMC [66, 65]

FHM [83]

RBC/UKQCD [37]

−1.27(40)(33)

1.2(1.0)

×

5.9(5.7)

6.59(63)(53)

6.0(2.3)

9.4(4.5)

10.6(4.3)(6.6)

6.59(63)(53)

×

×

−6.9(2.1)(1.4)

−4.63(54)(69)

×

×

×

0.37(20)(19)

×

×

×

×

−0.0344(21)

×

×

×

0.46(91)(98)

7.1(2.9)

9.4(4.5)

9.5(10.2)

< 1%

11

QCDSF [84, 80]

Table 2. Summary of the results for different lattice collaborations. We quote separately the connected (Fig. 15 - top) and
disconnected connected (Fig. 15 - bottom) contributions in the eletro-quenched approximation from the other sub-leading
diagrams of Fig. 16. As explained in the text, those numbers are scheme dependent and a direct comparison between lattice
collaborations is not trivial.

contribution in the electro-quenched approximation, where
QED corrections for the sea-quarks are not taken into account. The right most diagram is the strong isospin correction while the other two diagrams are QED corrections.
Those diagrams have been computed by the ETM [65], the
RBC/UKQCD [37] and the BMW [12] collaborations.
The second set of diagrams in Fig. 15 (bottom panel)
has been computed by both the RBC/UKQCD [37] and
the BMW [12] collaborations. They correspond to corrections to the quark-disconnected contribution, in the same
electro-quenched approximation. The RBC/UKQCD collaboration has evaluated only the first diagram of Fig. 16,
that is expected to be dominant.
Finally, beyond the electro-quenched approximation,
one has to compute the diagrams in Figs. (16). Only the
BMW collaboration [12] has presented results so far. Those
diagrams are expected to be at least either SU(3)f or 1/Nc
suppressed and are more challenging to compute on the
lattice. Fortunately, from Table 2, they appear to be negligible even for a precision of a few permil on ahvp
µ .
A direct check of finite-size effect corrections has been
done in [65] where different volumes with the same bare
lattice parameters are used. For strong IB corrections, an

Fig. 17. QED and strong-isospin corrections to ahvp
for five
µ
ensembles with the same bare lattice parameters but different
volumes. The red line corresponds to a fit of the form A +
Be−Mπ L and the blue line to a fit of the form C + D/Ln with
n = 3 (dashed line) or n = 6 (dotted line). Figure extracted
from [64]

exponential suppression with the lattice size is observed.
However, the precision of the data is not yet sufficient to
test the coefficient of the power-law for the QED corrections. See Fig. 17.
The isospin-breaking effects for the charm quark have
been estimated by the ETM collaboration and found to
be negligible [66, 65], see Table 2.
Further results are expected in the near future. The
Mainz group have presented preliminary results on the inculsion of isospin-breaking effects using the the ROME123
method [85, 86]. A first step toward IB correction to ahvp
µ
has been presented in [87]. This year, the QCDSF collaboration also presented preliminary results during the
APLAT 2020 conference [80]. They use full lattice QCD+
QED simulations at a single lattice spacing. They observed
a positive increase of about 0.2% of ahvp
due to QED efµ
fects. When comparing this value with previous determinations, it should be noted that an unphysical value of the
fine structure constant α ≈ 0.1 has been used.

2.6 Summary of the HVP contribution

A comparison of the most recent lattice results is shown in
Fig. 18, along with the more precise results based the datadriven evaluations of the HVP. It is reassuring that results
obtained with different lattice discretizations, and therefore affected by different systematic errors are in relative
good agreement with each other. However, some tensions,
especially for the dominant light quark contribution, are
still present and need to be understood. Some methods
will be discussed in the next section.
Finally, the first sub-percent calculation has been published this year by the BMW collaboration [12]. This result is in tension with the R-ratio estimates and further
investigations, among lattice collaborations and with phenomenology are required. Importantly, an even stronger
tension is observed for the window method discussed in
Section 3.1.

12

Antoine Gérardin: The anomalous magnetic moment of the muon: status of Lattice QCD calculations
10
ahvp
µ × 10

BMW ’20
Lehner et al. ’20
FHM ’19
Mainz ’19
PACS ’19
ETMC ’19
RBC/UKQCD ’18
R-ratio
680 700 720 740 760
Fig. 18. Comparison of lattice results for full contribution
to the leading-order HVP. The lattice results are extracted
from [12, 42, 44, 34, 43, 64, 65, 37]. The R-ratio data are extracted
from [9, 10, 88]. The vertical bands correspond to the value
quoted in Table 1.

3 Benchmark quantities for the HVP
contribution
To match the precision of future experimental measurements, the target precision for the LO HVP contribution
is 0.2% and it represents an enormous challenge for lattice simulations. In previous sections, we have presented
an overview of the dominant sources of error common to
all lattice simulations. Since current estimates for this observable are usually dominated by systematic errors, it is
of major importance to perform further cross-checks between collaborations to provide evidence that lattice simulations are under control. In the next subsections, we discuss several strategies that can be used, either as a check
among lattice calculations (by designing observables less
sensible to some specific source of error), or directly with
phenomenology.
3.1 The ”window method”
The window method has been presented for the first time
in Ref. [37] as a tool to improve the accuracy of the HVP
by supplanting the dispersive results based on R-ratio
measurements [9, 10, 11] by lattice inputs in a time-region
where the lattice data turn out to be more precise. The
idea is that the lattice calculation is much easier if one discards very short Euclidean times (< 0.3 fm), which are affected by large discretization effects, and the long distance
contribution (> 1 fm), which is noisy and requires significant finite-size corrections. An additional feature of this
method is that the chiral extrapolation is much smoother
due to the suppression of the tail of the integrand.
In this method, the integrand for ahvp
in the TMR repµ
resentation is convoluted with a smooth window function
W (t; t0 , t1 ) in Euclidean time
 α 2 X
e W (t; t0 , t1 ) .
awin
=
G(t) K(t)
(22)
µ
π
t

A convenient definition is given by
W (t; t0 , t1 ) = Θ(t, t0 , ∆) − Θ(t, t1 , ∆) ,

(23)

where Θ is a smooth step function defined by Θ(t, t0 , ∆) =
[1 + tanh[(t − t0 )/∆]] /2. In Ref. [37], the authors have chosen the parameters t0 = 0.4 fm, t1 = 1 fm and ∆ =
0.15 fm. This choice was done by minimizing the total error on ahvp
when using lattice data to compute awin
and
µ
µ
the R-ratio data in the two complementary time regions.
However, such a combination (between lattice data and
R-ratio data) might appear premature. Indeed, the recent
result from the BMW collaboration [12] presents a significant discrepancy with the one obtained in the dispersive
approach. In this section, rather than using the window
method to provide a more accurate result, we underline
the power of this method to compare different lattice calculations and to spot the region where the disagreement
might appear.
In Section 2, we listed the different challenges inherent to a sub-percent calculation of the leading order HVP.
Interestingly, they do not affect the same time ranges. If
discretization effects are mostly important at short distances, FSEs and the specific treatment of the tail of the
integrand become more relevant at large Euclidean times.
Thus, the window method is a useful tool to compare different lattice calculations. The choice made in [37] has
several advantages. First, by removing the short distance
contribution, discretization effects are suppressed and the
continuum extrapolation might be smoother. Second, the
suppression of the tail not only reduces significantly the
noise at large Euclidean times but also flattens the chiral behavior. Finally, finite-size effects are much smaller
on this quantity. However, some difficulties remain: the
uncertainty associated to the scale setting, discussed in
Section 2.2.4, is still present. The situation is even a bit
worse since the definition of the window itself depends on
the scale setting determination.
Ideally, results for this intermediate window, as well as
the complementary short ad long-distance window should
be published together with the total ahvp
µ . So far, only
four collaborations have published results in this direction
but some preliminary results have been presented recently.
The results for the light quark contribution in the isospin
limit and with (∆, t0 , t1 ) = (0.15, 0.4, 1.0) are depicted in
Fig. 19. In this comparison, the R-ratio estimate is extracted from [12] by subtracting all lattice contributions,
except the light-quark-connected one, to the phenomenological estimate based on the R-ratio. We observe some
tension between different estimates. More importantly, a
signifiant tension appears between the R-ratio estimate
and the published lattice values, with the exception of the
RBC/UKQCD estimate. As stated above, FSE are small
in this time region. The main difficulty thus lies in the
scale-setting determination and the continuum extrapolation. It is of major importance to have better control on
this observables and more lattice determinations would be
valuable.
For the strange-quark contribution, the results published in [42, 12, 37] are in good agreement. It suggests that

Antoine Gérardin: The anomalous magnetic moment of the muon: status of Lattice QCD calculations


win,l
ahvp
µ

× 10

and the relative precision of 5 × 10−5 would be required
by future colliders [92]. It corresponds to a reduction of
the error by a factor 2-3.
The effective running coupling at a scale q 2 is conventionally written as

ETM ’20 (prelim)
FHM ’20 (prelim)
Mainz M2 ’20 (prelim)
Mainz M1 ’20 (prelim)
Lehner et al. ’20
BMW ’20
Aubin et al. ’19
RBC/UKQCD ’18
R-ratio

α(q 2 ) =

200 204 208
Fig. 19. Comparison of lattice results for the window observable in the case of the connected contribution in the
isospin symmetric limit. The. window is defined by (∆, t0 , t1 ) =
(0.15, 0.4, 1.0). The results are extracted from [42, 12, 38, 37].

the scale-setting determination is not the cause of the discrepancy observed in the light-quark contribution. Concerning the charm quark contribution, a small tension is
observed between BMW [12] and the RBC/UKQCD [37]
collaboration who found aµwin,c = 2.7(0.1) × 10−10 and
aµwin,c = 3.0(0.1) × 10−10 , respectively. In addition to the
light-quark contribution, results for the quark disconnected
contribution might be valuable to understand the tension
in the quark-disconnected contribution discussed in Section 2.4.
To conclude, this observable is in principle much easier to access than the full HVP contribution and a good
statistical precision is easily obtained. Many sources of
systematic errors are suppressed and the main difficulty
originates from the scale-setting and the continuum extrapolation. A comparison between different lattice collaborations provides a strong consistency check, especially for
the light and quark disconnected contributions. In particular, it is important to understand the current discrepancy
between some lattice results and the R-ratio estimate.
3.2 Running of alpha
The fine structure constant is a fundamental parameter
of the Standard Model of particle physics that characterizes the strength of the electromagnetic interaction. In the
Thomson limit (Q2 = 0), it is known with an impressive
precision of 0.08 ppb [90, 91]. However, at the Z-pole mass,
the value of the coupling increases by approximately 7%
where half of the correction is due to hadronic effects. As
a consequence, almost 5 order of magnitude are lost in
precision:
α = 1/137.035999206(11) ,
α(MZ2 )

13

10

= 1/127.955(10) .

(24)
(25)

In this running, the major source of uncertainty comes
from low-energy hadronic contributions. This important
parameter enters precision tests of the Standard Model

α
,
1 − ∆α(q 2 )

(26)

where α = α(0) is fine-structure constant and ∆α(−Q2 ) =
(5)
∆αlep (−Q2 ) + ∆αhad (−Q2 ) + ∆αtop (−Q2 ) contains the
contribution from leptons and the top quark, that can be
estimated using perturbation theory, and the non perturbative hadronic vacuum polarization from the five light
(5)
quarks, ∆αhad (Q2 ). As for ahvp
µ , it can be estimated in a
+ −
data-driven approach from e e → hadron cross sections
using dispersion relations [9, 10]. As compared to Eq. (1),
only the weight function is different and, for the running coupling, the contribution from high energy is much
(5)
more pronounced such that 70% of ∆αhad (Q2 ) comes from
pQCD and contributes to a large part of the final error.
The lattice calculation of the hadronic contribution to
the running starts with
b 2) ,
∆αhad (Q2 ) = 4παΠ(Q
(5)

(27)

where the right-hand side is evaluated using Eq. (7) in the
time-momentum representation. The exact same correlaare required. Here, the main chaltion functions as for ahvp
µ
lenge lies in the control of discretization effects that become large as Q2 increases. Ideally, very fine lattice spacings are needed. Then, the question is which Q2 is high
enough such that a matching with perturbation theory is
under control, within the lattice estimate uncertainty. One
possibility is to use Euclidean split technique [93] where
(5)

(5)

∆αhad (MZ2 ) = ∆αhad (−Q20 )+
h
i
(5)
(5)
∆αhad (−MZ2 ) − ∆αhad (−Q20 )
h
i
(5)
(5)
+ ∆αhad (MZ2 ) − ∆αhad (−MZ2 ) . (28)

For Q20 high enough, the last two term can be computed
using perturbation theory and the first term is the lattice
input.
The running coupling has been studied on the lattice
for the first time in [94, 95], using twisted mass fermions.
Later, the ETM collaboration [96] published results for the
running, in the range Q2 ∈ [0 − 10] GeV2 , that includes a
chiral and continuum extrapolation to the physical point.
The Mainz group has also presented preliminary results
in [97, 98] with two dynamical Wilson quarks. During last
years Lattice conference, an analysis based on the CLS ensembles with 2 + 1 dynamical quarks including one ensemble at the physical pion mass has been presented [89]. In
[50] the BMW collaboration published results for Π̂(Q2 )
using staggered quarks at the physical pion mass. A comparison between the most recent BMW and the preliminary Mainz results is shown in the left panel of Fig. 20.

14

Antoine Gérardin: The anomalous magnetic moment of the muon: status of Lattice QCD calculations
−0.008

0.008
this work, preliminary
Borsanyi et al. 2018, connected only

0.007

−0.007
−0.006
∆had sin2 θW (−Q2 )

∆αhad (−Q2 )

0.006
0.005
0.004
0.003

−0.005
−0.004
−0.003

0.002

−0.002

0.001

−0.001

0.000

0

1

2
3
Q2 [GeV2 ]

4

5

0.000

0

1

2
3
Q2 [GeV2 ]

4

5

Fig. 20. Preliminary results for the running of the electromagnetic coupling α (right panel) and the Weinberg angle (right panel)
as a function of the space-like momentum transfert Q2 . The blue line corresponds to the preliminary Mainz result presented in
Ref. [89]. The red dots are obtained from the results published in Ref. [50]. Figure extracted from [89].

Another observable of phenomenological interest is the
electroweak mixing (Weinberg) angle ΘW that parametrizes
the mixing between the electromagnetic and the weak interactions. It defined through
sin ΘW =

g2

g 02
,
+ g 02

(29)

where g and g 0 are the SU (2)L and U (1)Y couplings. Contrary to α, the Weinberg angle is measured with a subpermil precision at the Z-pole mass and the running at
low energy is affected by hadronic uncertainties. In this
case, the hadronic part of the running is defined by [99]
∆had sin2 ΘW (−Q2 ) = −

e2
Π̂ γZ (Q2 )
2
sin ΘW
2

(30)

where Π̂ γZ is the hadronic vacuum polarization mixing
between the electromagnetic current defined below Eq. (6)
and the vector part of the neutral weak current


1
1
1
1
2
Z
jµ = jµ − sin ΘW
uγµ u − dγµ d − sγµ s + cγµ c .
4
4
4
4
(31)
Compared to the phenomenological estimate, it is much
easier to perform the required flavor decomposition in lattice QCD simulations.
The electroweak mixing angle has ben studied on the
lattice in [96, 98, 100, 101, 89] and the results of the running
for the Mainz group is shown in the right panel of Fig. 20.
3.3 Electron g − 2
The anomalous magnetic moment of the electron has been
measured by the Harvard group with an accuracy of 0.24
ppb [102] and present a slight tension with the SM [10]
aSM
− aexp
= −89(23)th (28)exp × 10−14
e
e

(32)

corresponding to about −2.5 σ. Very recently, a new measurement of the fine structure constant was published [90]
with a relative accuracy of 81 parts per trillion. This new
value differs by by more than 5 standard deviations with
the previous best result [103] and leads to
aSM
− aexp
= +48(30) × 10−14 ,
e
e

(33)

corresponding to a tension of +1.6 σ. Interestingly, this
new result leads to a deviation with the same sign as compared to the muon anomaly. In the case of the electron, the
experimental determination based on atomic interferometry, is completely different from the one used for the muon
anomaly. The phenomenology determination is, however,
based on the same data set and can be computed from
the e+ e− → hadrons cross sections via dispersive methods. On the lattice, only the QED weight function differs
through the lepton mass and ae can be easily obtained
as a side results of the (g − 2)µ , using the same set of
correlation functions. The integrand, in the time momentum representation, and for lepton= e, µ, τ is depicted in
Fig. 21. Results for individual leptons have been presented
in Refs [104, 105, 50].
Recently, the ETM collaboration proposed to study
the following ratio [61]
Re/µ =



mµ
me

2

ahvp
e
ahvp
µ

,

(34)

constructed from the anomalous magnetic moment of the
electron and the muon. Because the integrand of the two
lightest leptons are similar, this ratio can be used to reduce the statistical and systematic errors. In particular, it
has been pointed out that the error coming from the scale
setting (see the discussion in Section 2.2.4) is strongly reduced as compared to ahvp
µ . Finite-size effects also largely
compensate as well as renormalization factors. Finally, the
chiral extrapolation is also much milder. In [61], the au-

Antoine Gérardin: The anomalous magnetic moment of the muon: status of Lattice QCD calculations

15

0

10

ud

Nl Kl (t) V (t)

-1

(fm )

tn/n! Cii(t) [GeV3-n]

0.020

-1

10

e
e

µ
τ

τ

µ

n=4
n=6

0.015
0.010
0.005

-2

10

0.0

0.5

1.0

1.5

2.0

t

2.5

3.0

3.5

4.0

(fm)

Fig. 21. Integrand for the lepton (` = e, µτ ) anomaly in the
time-momentum representation in Eq. (9) by the ETM collaboration. The integrand is normalized to unity for convenience.
Extracted from [61].

thors observed a reduction of the error by a factor close
to 4 for individual ensembles.
In Ref. [61], the ETM collaboration has published a
lattice determination of the ratio (34), including the dominant isospin-breaking corrections. Their result at the physical point reads

0.000
0

2

4

6

8

10

t[fm]
Fig. 22. Integrand for the first two time-moment as a function
of the Euclidean time. The electromagnetic current correlator
is obtained using a phenomenological description of the e+ e−
data and dispersion relations, as explained in [107]. The figure
is extracted from Ref. [107].

as n increases. It is interesting to note that the kernel function K̃, used in lattice calculations of the HVP in Eq. (9),
2
behaves as K̃ ∼ π9 m2µ t4 at short distances t  m−1
µ and
2 2
−1
as K̃ ∼ 2π t at long distances t  mµ [34]. Thus, the
Re/µ = 1.1456(63)stat (54)stat .
(35) second moment probes much longer distances and is even
more subject to the noise problem discussed in Section 2.2.
This result is in good agreement with the estimate obIt is also more affected by FSEs or by the finite time+ −
tained from the dispersive analyses based on e e →
extent of the lattice. On the other hand, the integrand of
hadron cross sections [10] and presents a tension of about
the first moment is closer to the one for the HVP. It in2.7 standard deviation with the experimental result [106,
deed behaves as the HVP at short distances and is also
102,1]. However, on the phenomenological side, this tenpeaked at t ≈ 1 fm. Finally, one notices that, contrary to
sion is mostly due to QED uncertainties and not to hadronic
aµ , the time moments are dimensionful quantities.
ones.
Because of those difficulties, the time moments are,
From a purely lattice point of view, this observable
to some extent, even more challenging to evaluate that
might be interesting to compare the results obtained by
the HVP itself and makes them less useful for a direct
different lattice collaborations.
comparison between lattice results.
Results for the first moment, restricted to the light
quark contribution in the isospin limit, have been pub3.4 Time moments
lished by several collaborations [38, 44, 56, 107, 105] and, as
The time moment of order n has been defined in Eq. (10) can be seen in Fig. 23, turn out to be in good agreement.
and can be used to determine the hadronic vacuum po- Results for the second moment have also been presented
larization contribution using Padé approximants. This is by various collaborations [44, 56, 107]. In this case, there is
actually the strategy followed by the Fermilab-HQPCD- however a slight tension between the FHM and BMW colMILC collaboration, where the authors use two series of laborations. It might underline the difficulty to get a good
approximants [n, n] and [n, n − 1] [33]. It has been proven description of the correlator at large Euclidean times, in
that the true result lies between them, such that only a the treatment of FSEs or in the scale setting determination that affect this dimensionful observable.
few terms of the series are required at a given precision.
The time moments can be computed using the exact
same set of lattice data and results that have been presented by various collaborations. As such, they played an 4 The hadronic light-by-light contribution
important role in the past years when comparing results
The hadronic light-by-light contribution enters at order
from different lattice collaborations.
As for the time momentum representation, one can α3 in the perturbative expansion and is expected to be
use the flavor or isospin decompositions of the vector cor- much smaller than the LO-HVP contribution. The relerelator. The statistical and systematic errors of the time vant diagram is depicted in the right panel of Fig. 1 and
moments can be treated in a very similar fashion as for the the current best-estimate, extracted from [8], is given in
HVP. The integrand for the first two moment (n = 1, 2) is Table 1. If this contribution is about 70 times smaller than
depicted in Fig. 22 and they probe larger Euclidean times the LO-HVP, its evaluation is also more challenging. For-

16

Antoine Gérardin: The anomalous magnetic moment of the muon: status of Lattice QCD calculations

Πl1 [GeV−2]

z
z

0

x

Aubin et al. ’20
FHM ’19
ETMC ’19
RBC/UKQCD ’18
BMW ’16
HPQCD ’16

y

x

z

0

y

z
z

0.14

0.15

0.16

0.17

0.18

x

x

y

0

y

0
x

0

y

Πl2 [GeV−4]
FHM ’19
ETMC ’19
RBC/UKQCD ’18
BMW ’16
HPQCD ’16

Fig. 24. The five classes of diagrams for the HLbL calculation.
The first two diagrams are dominant one. The other three diagrams vanish in the SU(3)f limit.

The second method to tackle this challenge is to consider contributions from individual intermediate states.
This is done in a systematic and rigorous way in the dis−0.40 −0.35 −0.30 −0.25
persive approach [16, 17, 18, 19]. This data-driven method
has been successfully applied to the vector 2-point correFig. 23. Comparison of lattice results for the quark- lation function to estimate the LO-HVP contribution but
disconnected contribution to the leading-order HVP. The re- the situation is much more difficult for the HLbL due to
sults are extracted from [38, 44, 65, 37, 107, 105].
the complicated analytic structure of the 4pt correlation
function. Fast progress has been achieved in recent years
and an overview of this approach can be found in [8]. Fortunately, an overall precision of 10% would already suffice tunately, it is expected that, among all possible intermedito match the future experimental precision on aµ .
ate states, the largest contributions are given by a handful
Interestingly, this contribution is two times larger than of states: the light pseudoscalar mesons π 0 , η and η 0 . All
the current precision on aµ and it should be about 3 times the non-perturbative information is encoded in the (spacelarger to explain the discrepancy in the muon (g − 2) by like) transition form factors that describe the interaction
itself. The recent lattice results by the RBC/UKQCD and of the meson with two virtual photons. However, the exMainz collaborations, as well as the dispersive result, sug- perimental data, needed for this approach, are often missgest that this is very unlikely.
ing. Lattice QCD can provide valuable information, espeIn the past, this contribution was estimated using model cially for the dominant pseudoscalar pole contributions.
estimates [13, 14] where systematic errors are difficult to This will be discussed in Sections 4.2 and 4.3.
=
estimate and the Glasgow consensus [15] reads ahlbl
µ
(102 ± 39) × 10−11 . One of the main messages is that
pseudoscalar exchanges are by far the dominant contri- 4.1 Direct lattice calculation
bution. There are currently two independent approaches
that aim to provide a model-independent determination The first lattice calculation of the HLbL diagram was performed by the RBC/UKQCD collaboration in [108], where
of this contribution.
The first method consists in calculating the full HLbL the authors focused on the connected contribution only.
diagram using ab-initio lattice calculations with all errors The form factor F2 was computed at different values of
2
under control. Recently, two collaborations have published Q using a non-perturbative treatment of QED and a pion
mass
of 329 MeV. The large statistical error and the exresults in this direction: the RBC/UKQCD collaboration
trapolation
to Q2 = 0 prevented them from a comparison
and the Mainz group. Although they use slightly different
strategies, they both rely on the numerical evaluation of with phenomenology. Later, in [109], several major improvements in methodology were presented, first to reduce
a four-point correlation function in position space
the statistical error and the numerical cost and, second,
Z
to avoid the need for an extrapolation to Q2 = 0 by in4
4
4
−i(q1 x1 +q2 x2 +q3 x3 )
troducing the moment method. For the first time, a very
Πµνλσ (q1 , q2 , q3 ) = d x1 d x2 d x3 e
clear signal was obtained for the connected contribution
hJµ (x1 )Jν (x2 )Jλ (x3 )Jσ (0)i (36) with a pion mass of 171 MeV, close to the physical one.
All recent calculations consist in evaluating a fourwhere Jµ is the hadronic part of the electromagnetic cur- point correlation function in QCD and in position space.
rent defined below Eq. (6). This method will be discussed The latter is summed with a QED weight function that
represents the muon and quark lines in Fig. 1, such that
in Section 4.1.

Antoine Gérardin: The anomalous magnetic moment of the muon: status of Lattice QCD calculations

QCD,
b ρ;µνλσ (x, y) = −
iΠ

Z

e µνσλ (x, y, z),
d4 z zρ Π

(38)

e µνσλ (x, y, z) ≡ h jµ (x) jν (y) jσ (z) jλ (0)iQCD . (39)
Π

The QED weight function L̄ has been computed semianalytically in the continuum and infinite volume, in position space. It is expressed in terms of a few scalar weight
functions that can be easily evaluated numerically, on the
fly, during the contractions of the quark propagators. First
results and checks of the kernel have been presented in previous conferences and workshops [112, 113, 114]. A theoretical advantage of treating QED in infinite volume is that
no power-law finite-volume effect appears. Such terms are
expected to arise in the QEDL formulation (see the next
section), due to the massless photon propagators. Instead,
finite-volume errors are exponentially suppressed with the
lattice size.
Eq. (37) requires three sums over the whole lattice volume and an exact summation would be prohibitively expensive. In the numerical setup presented by the Mainz
group, only two sums over x and z are performed explicitly on the lattice. This is possible using propagators with
sources at the origin and y since the contractions involve
only O(V ) operations, because the weight factor factorizes as a function of (x, y) (the QED kernel) times zρ
(see Eq. (38)). After contracting all the Lorentz indices,
the result depends only the norm of the vector y (up to
discretization effect at finite lattice spacing) and the integrand is sampled reliably by choosing a few values of |y|.
The shape of the integrand as a function of |y| and for the
connected contribution is shown in Fig. 25.
The two main challenges associated with this calculation are the control of statistical errors (especially for the
disconnected contribution) and the correction for finitesize effects that are large even for lattices with mπ L > 4.
Various techniques have been proposed to deal with those
challenges.
120
H200
N202
π 0 + η (L = 2.1 fm)
π 0 + η (L = 3.1 fm)
π 0 + η (L = ∞)

100
80

f (|y|) × 1011 [fm−1 ]

the Pauli form factor is directly obtained at vanishing momentum, F2 (0) = aµ . No extrapolation q → 0 is required.
So far, only two collaborations have presented results and
the difference in their setups mostly lies in the determination of the QED weight function: either in finite volume for
the RBC/UKQCD collaboration or in the continuum and
infinite volume for the Mainz Group. The RBC/UKQCD
collaboration also presented preliminary results for the
second case [110].
The four-point correlation function in Eq. (36) involves
five different classes of Wick contractions that are depicted
in Fig. 24. The quark disconnected contributions are conveniently called (2+2), (3+1), (2+1+1) and (1+1+1+1),
depending on the number of vertices in each quark loop.
The fully connected and 2+2 disconnected diagrams, that
does not vanish in the SU(3)f limit (upper diagrams of
Fig. 24) are expected to be dominant. In [111], based on π 0
exchange, the authors anticipated that the disconnected
contribution might be large to cancel a part of the connected contribution. This has been confirmed numerically
by both the RBC/UKQCD and the Mainz collaborations.
The other, sub-dominant diagrams vanish exactly in the
SU(3)f symmetry limit and are suppressed by a factor
1/Ncn where n is the number of single closed loops. Although their contribution is expected to be smaller than
the target precision, an upper bound on their size would
be valuable to assess systematic errors.
To reach the target precision of 10%, the main challenges consist in reducing the statistical error as well as
controling the main sources of systematic errors, namely
the finite-volume effects and the extrapolation to the physical point. The light-quark contribution is by far the dominant one, the strange quark contribution being further
suppressed by its electric charge. The charm quark can be
safely neglected. Reaching a high statistical precision is
made difficult by the large cancellation between the connected and disconnected contributions. The numerical implementation used so far leads to contributions that are
statistically uncorrelated and little is gained when taking
the difference such that the relative precision gets worse.
Finally, finite-size effects are found to be large even on
big lattices. In this case, the situation differs significantly
when one uses QEDL or QED∞ . Finally, the evaluation of
the QED weight function is by itself difficult, as no fullyanalytical expression is known and the cost associated to
its evaluation is not necessarily negligible.

17

60
40
20

4.1.1 The Mainz approach
The Mainz group starts with the master formula
ahlbl
µ

mµ e
=
3

6

Z

4

d y

Z

0

−20
−40
0

b ρ;µνλσ (x, y),
d x L̄[ρ,σ];µνλ (x, y) iΠ
4

(37)
with mµ the muon mass, L̄ a QED weight function that
b is
describes the muon and photon lines in Fig. 1, and iΠ
a spatial moment of the Euclidean four-point function in

1

2

3

|y| [fm]

4

5

Fig. 25. Integrand for the quark-connected contribution for
two ensembles at the SU(3)f symmetric point with mπ =
mK ≈ 420 MeV (H200 with mπ L = 4.4 and N202 with
mπ L = 6.4) for the Mainz group [115].

Antoine Gérardin: The anomalous magnetic moment of the muon: status of Lattice QCD calculations

Concerning statistical errors, as first noted in [110], the
weight function in Eq. (37) is not unique. This is a consequence of the conservation of the vector current in the
continuum limit (in particular any function that depends
only on the variable x or y can be added to the kernel).
Such subtractions are equivalent, in the continuum and
infinite-volume limits, but provide different lattice estimators that can be affected by different statistical and
systematic errors. The following subtraction

140

raw lattice data (N202)
FSE correction
corrected lattice data

120
100

aconn
× 1011
µ

18

80
60
40
20

(Λ)

L̄[ρ,σ];µνλ (x, y) = L̄[ρ,σ];µνλ (x, y)
−

2 2
∂µ(x) (xα e−Λmµ x /2 )L̄[ρ,σ];ανλ (0, y)
2

− ∂ν(y) (yα e−Λmµ y

2

/2

(40)

)L̄[ρ,σ];µαλ (x, 0),

where Λ is an arbitrary dimensionless parameter reduces
the long-distance contribution and the discretization effects that arise with the standard kernel. Using the unsubtracted kernel, the signal is lost at very short distance,
below 1 fm.
As a second strategy to address the noise problem at
long distance, the Mainz group has considered two different estimators for the connected-quark contribution. A
direct implementation of the master formula in Eq. (37) is
rather expensive and requires the use of many sequential
propagators. Fortunately, the integral can be re-arranged
in such a way that only two inversions are required for
each value of |y|. Keeping all propagators in memory, it
allows for a significant reduction of the noise [115].
Finally, assuming a Vector Meson Dominance (VMD)
model, with parameters obtained from a dedicated lattice calculation of the pion transition form factor (see
Section 4.2), the pion-pole contribution has been evaluated both in finite and infinite volume [116, 117]. First,
the light pseudoscalar is expected to give the dominant
contribution at long distance and the noisy lattice data
can eventually be replaced by the pion-pole contribution
only. In Fig. 26 the lattice data are used below the cut
and, above the cut, the pion-pole calculation is used. As
expected, one observes a plateau if the cut is such that
|y|cut > 2.5 fm. Second, this method allows to correct for
the dominant source of finite-size effect that arises from
the pion and a comparison in different volumes is shown
on Fig. 26.
4.1.2 RBC/UKQCD : QED in finite volume
In the moment method [109, 118, 21], the RBC/UKQCD
collaboration starts with the following expression
ahlbl
µ
~ u(~0, s) =
u(~0, s0 ) Σ
2mµ


1 X
~ C r , − r , z, xop u(~0, s), (41)
~xop × iu(~0, s0 ) F
2 r,z,x
2 2
op

1
where Σi = 4i
ijk [γj , γk ]. The notations are explained in
Fig. 27 and r = x − y. The amplitude FνC (x, y, z, xop ) is

0
0

1

2

3

|y|cut [fm]

4

5

Fig. 26. Value of the connected contribution using the longdistance correction prescription described in the text: below
|y|cut the lattice data are used. Above the cut, the prediction
from the pion-pole contribution is used. Extracted from [115].

Fig. 27. Notations used by the RBC/UKQCD collaboration
for the quark-connected contribution. The origin is set at w =
x+y
and r = x − y. Figure extracted from [118].
2

obtained from the average of the function Fν (x, y, z, xop )
over the three cyclic permutations of the positions x, y
and z with
Fν (x, y, z, xop ) = (−ie)6 ×

C
Gρ,σ,κ (x, y, z; xsnk , xsrc ) Hρ,σ,κ,ν
(x, y, z, xop ) . (42)

C
where i4 Hρ,σ,κ,ν
(x, y, z, xop ) represents the hadronic part
of the diagram that is expressed in terms of four quark
propagators and i3 Gρ,σ,κ (x, y, z; xsnk , xsrc ) is the QED weight
function expressed in terms of muon and photon propagators. The later includes a sum over the variables x0 ,
y 0 and z 0 . The QED part is evaluated on the same finite
lattice and the spatial zero modes of the photons are explicitly removed. This procedure is known as QEDL [77].
As compared to the Mainz approach, one expects powerlaw, finite-volume effects and an extrapolation L → ∞
is eventually required. In this setup, the cost associated
with the evaluation of the QED weight function is also
not negligible.
Similarly to the Mainz approach, due to the huge computational cost, all spacetime summations cannot be performed exactly over the whole lattice. The summation over

Antoine Gérardin: The anomalous magnetic moment of the muon: status of Lattice QCD calculations

−3

γκ Sq (z, y)γσ Sq (y, xop ) γν Sq (xop , x)

−5
−6

−9
−10
0

0.5

1

1.5

2

2.5

3

3.5

4

4.5

r (fm)
18

48I
64I
24D
32D
48D
32Dfine

16

QCD

14

. (43)

To reduce the noise, the Ward identity on the current
insertion xop is enforced exactly, on each gauge configuration. This is done by inserting the external photon at
all possible locations on the quark loop on each gauge
configuration. This provides a significant increase in the
statistical precision.
The moment method can be applied to the disconnected contribution as well, in this case
D1
D
Hρ,σ,κ,ν
(x, y, z, xop ) =
Πν,κ (xop , z)×
2

E
avg
Πρ,σ (x, y) − Πρ,σ
(x, y)

−4

−8

q=u,d,s

E

QCD

discon
discon
discon
discon
discon

−7

X  eq 4 D 
× tr γρ Sq (x, z)
e

·

48I
64I
24D
32D
32Dfine

−2

12
aµ × 1010

C
Hρ,σ,κ,ν
(x, y, z, xop ) = −

0
−1

aµ × 1010

r = x − y is done stochastically with a distribution chosen such that points that contribute most to the signal
are more frequent. It has been observed that the dominant contribution comes from distances less than 1 fm.
The two propagators, with sources at x and y, can then
be contracted for all sink values and the sums over xop
and z are performed exactly over the whole lattice.
For the connected contribution,

19

con
con
con
con
con
con

10
8
6
4
2
0
0

0.5

1

1.5

2

2.5

r (fm)

Fig. 28. Cumulative contributions to the muon anomaly for
the connected (upper) and leading disconnected (lower) diagrams. Here r is the distance between the two sampled currents in the hadronic loop (the other two currents are summed
exactly).

(44)

A subtraction of the QED weight function has been used
to reduce the noise.
Preliminary results have been presented during workX  eq 2
shops and conferences [119, 120] and are shown in Fig. 29.
Tr [γρ Sq (x, y)γσ Sq (y, x)] .
Πρ,σ (x, y) = −
e
A similar strategy to the Mainz group is used: at short
q
(45) distance, the lattice data are used and at long distance,
the prediction from the pion-pole contribution is used.
To evaluate this contribution, if M propagators can be Using a lattice with a = 0.2 fm and L = 4.8 fm, a
kept in memory, with different source positions, then M (M − plateau at Rmax ≈ 2.5 fm is observed leading to ahlbl
=
µ
1)/2 combination of points (x, y) can be used to evaluate 11.40(1.27)stat × 10−10 . The error is statistical only and
the integrand. For large values of M , it leads to a signifi- 60% of the results comes from actual lattice data. A more
cant reduction of the noise.
systematic study of FSE and an extrapolation to the physTo study the finite-size effects of the form 1/Ln with ical point is still required.
n ≥ 2, the RBC/UKQCD collaboration has performed
simulations with different volumes: such infinite-volume
extrapolations are shown in Fig. 31.
4.1.4 Cross check
where

4.1.3 The RBC/UKQCD approach in infinite volume
In Ref. [110], the RBC/UKQCD collaboration has presented first results using QED in infinite volume. This
approach is more similar to the one followed by the Mainz
group. Here, one still starts from Eq. (41), but the weight
function G is now evaluated in the continuum and infinitevolume limits. The 12-dimensional integration is reduced
to a 4-dimensional integration by analytic calculations.
The resulting expression is then integrated numerically.
To reduce the associated numerical cost, the weight function is pre-computed on a grid of points and an approximation is obtained by interpolating the computed values.

Both the RBC/UKQCD and the Mainz collaborations have
tested their method and lattice setup in pure QED to
reproduce the well-known lepton-loop contribution. This
contribution enters at order α3 in the QED contribution
and is known exactly [121]. The results for both collaboration are shown in Fig. 30. In this extrapolation, finite-size
effects are taken into account by both collaborations.
4.1.5 Results for ahlbl
µ
This year, the RBC/UKQCD has published the first abinitio calculation of the the hadronic light-by-light scattering contribution to the anomalous magnetic moment

20

Antoine Gérardin: The anomalous magnetic moment of the muon: status of Lattice QCD calculations
50

analytic
a=0
mµ a = 0.1000
mµ a = 0.1333
mµ a = 0.1500
mµ a = 0.2000

aµ × 1010

40
30
20
10
0
0

0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08

0.1

0.12 0.14

1/(mµ L)2

Lepton-loop contribution to aLbL
(ml = 2mµ )
µ
0.16
0.14

= 0.1503
aLbL,ll
µ

Fig. 29. Preliminary results for the RBC/UKQCD collaboration in the QED∞ setup. The results, obtained for a pion
mass of mπ = 142MeV, include both the connected and the
dominant disconnected contribution. At short distances, the
lattice data are used. At long distance, the pion-pole contribution is used (assuming an LMD model). One expects a plateau
a sufficiently large value of Rmax

of the muon, at the physical pion mass, with a continuum
extrapolation and an estimate of finite-size effects corrections [21]. The study is based on Domain-Wall fermions at
the physical point using two sets of ensembles generated
with different gauge actions. Simulations include the fully
connected contribution for the light quark as well as the
leading 2 + 2 quark disconnected contribution with both
the light and the strange quarks. The latter contributes
only at the level of 5% of the disconnected contribution.
The result is obtained using the QEDL formulation
described above. A part of the results, on a single ensemble, have been published earlier in [118]. This update includes several lattice spacings, as well as different volumes.
Two ensembles using the same action are used to perform
the continuum extrapolation and three (two) other ensembles are used to constrain the infinite-volume extrapolation of the quark connected (disconnected) contribution.
The value at the physical point reads
−10
atot
,
µ = 7.87(3.06)stat (1.77)syst × 10

(46)

where the total error is dominated by statistics. It corresponds to a precision of about 45%. The systematic error
is dominated by finite-size effects and by the continuum
extrapolation, see Fig. 31. A large cancellation between
the connected and leading disconnected contributions is
observed, as expected. In fact the two contributions taken
individually are known with much better relative precision
aconn
= 23.76(3.96)stat (4.88)syst × 10−10 ,
µ

adisc
µ

−10

= −16.45(2.13)stat (3.99)syst × 10

.

(47)
(48)

The result (46) is compatible with the most precise determination based on the dispersive approach [122, 123,
124,125, 126, 127, 88, 128, 129, 130] (see Table 1), although

× 108
aLbL
µ

0.12

aLbL,cc
= 0.1498
µ

0.1
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02

L(2) (x, y) = L(x, y) − L(x, 0) − L(0, y)

0
0

0.02

0.04

0.06

0.08

0.1

0.12

amµ

Fig. 30. QED light-by-light scattering contribution to the
muon anomaly. The top panel if the result from the RBC collaboration using the method described in Section 4.1.2. Different colors correspond to different lattice spacings and the cross
is the extrapolated value. The bottom panel shows the Mainz
results using the method described in Section 4.1.1. The two
colors correspond to two different discretizations of the vector
current, the dashed lines does not include the FSE correction.

with larger error-bars. It demonstrates the feasibility of
a lattice QCD calculation with controlled statistical and
systematic errors. Further studies, in particular to better
control the extrapolation to the physical point, are needed
to reach 10% level accuracy.
This year, the Mainz group published their first result [115] for the hadronic light-by-light contribution to
the anomalous magnetic moment of the muon, in the continuum limit, but at the SU (3)-flavor symmetric point
with mπ = mK ≈ 400 MeV. The results are obtained
with Nf = 2 + 1 Wilson fermions and several ensembles
have been used to study the main sources of systematic
errors : FSEs and discretization effects. The restriction to
the SU (3)f point is motivated by the moderate computational cost as compared to the physical pion mass ensembles and the reduced number of disconnected diagrams
that need to be evaluated. In this limit, only the 2+2 disconnected contribution survives since other diagrams with
at least one single loop vanish due to the charge factors.
The result in the continuum limit reads
−11
atot
.
µ = 65.4(4.9)stat (6.6)syst × 10

(49)

and corresponds to a precision better than 15%. The extrapolation to the continuum limit is shown in Fig. 32

Antoine Gérardin: The anomalous magnetic moment of the muon: status of Lattice QCD calculations

6

60

hlbl

4

80

aµ

aµ × 1010

8

100

11

48I
64I
24D
32D
32Dfine
24D-32D
48I-64I
inf & cont

10

x 10

12

2

21

40

Connected
Disconnected
Full Contribution

20
0
-20

0
0

0.05

0.1

0.15

0.2

-40

1/(mµ L)2

-60

30

48I
64I
24D
32D
48D
32Dfine
24D-32D-48D
48I-64I
inf & cont

aµ × 1010

25
20
15
10

0

0.050

2

0.064

2

2

0.076

2

0.086

2

2

a [fm ]

Fig. 32. Combined continuum-extrapolation analysis for the
connected (black) and disconnected (red) data. The purple
cross represents the addition of the continuum-extrapolated
results for the connected and disconnected contributions. Figure extracted from [115].

5
0
0

0.05

0.1

aµ × 1010

1/(mµ L)

0.15

0.2

2

0
−2
−4
−6
−8
−10
−12
−14
−16
−18
−20

48I
64I
24D
32D
32Dfine
24D-32D
48I-64I
inf & cont

4.1.6 Sub-dominant disconnected contributions
0

0.05

0.1
1/(mµ L)

0.15

0.2

2

Fig. 31. Infinite volume extrapolation for the RBC/UKQCD
collaboration using the QEDL formalism. Connected (top),
(2+2) disconnected (middle), and total (bottom). The continuum limit (purple line) is obtained from the two ensembles
48I and 64I sharing the same action. The other ensemble are
used to performed the infinite volume extrapolation only. Figure extracted from [21].

and, as for the RBC/UKQCD collaboration, the statistical correlations between the connected and disconnected
contributions are found to be very small.
Subtracting from Eq. (49) their lattice result for the
pion-pole contribution discussed in Section 4.2, and assuming that the remaining part has a mild chiral dependance, the Mainz group obtains a prediction at the physical pion mass
hlbl,SU (3)f

aµ

contributions, the authors associate an additional error
of 20% to this result. Additional ensembles are required
to perform a more careful chiral extrapolation and first
results have been presented during workshops and conferences [117, 131]. This value is higher than (46) but compatible within error bars. It is also in good agreement with
the most recent dispersive results [122, 123, 124, 125, 126,
127, 88, 128, 129, 130].

hlbl,π 0 ,SU (3)f

− aµ

+ ahlbl,π
µ

0

,phys

The RBC/UKQCD collaboration also published results
for the first sub-leading diagram [21] (third diagram in
Fig. 24). The latter is evaluated on a single ensemble using
the QED in infinite-volume setup. In practice, the whole
diagram is not computed and only the expected dominant
Wick contraction is included. Above 1 fm the contribution
is consistent with zero and this result is used to set a
bound of the neglected diagrams : |ahlbl;3+1
| < 0.5×10−10 .
µ
The Mainz group has presented preliminary results for
all sub-dominant disconnected contributions [132]. The
study is performed on ensembles with pion masses down
to 220 MeV. The signal is lost at short distances but it
provides important upper bounds on the amplitude of the
contributions : they appear to be negligible at the level of
precision required by future experiments and they confirm
the observation made by the RBC/UKQCD collaboration
on the 3 + 1 topology. A more systematic study, that includes a proper continuum and chiral extrapolation, as
well as an estimate of the FSE correction, would be welcome to confirm this observation.

=

(104.1 ± 9.1) × 10−11 . (50)

Using a slightly more sophisticated method to correct for
the quark-mass effects, that originate from non pion-pole

4.2 The pseudoscalar-pole contributions
In the dispersive approach to the HLbL contribution to te
muon g − 2, the dominant contribution is given by the

22

Antoine Gérardin: The anomalous magnetic moment of the muon: status of Lattice QCD calculations

π 0, η, η 0

Fig. 34. Pseudoscalar-pole contribution to hadronic light-bylight scattering in the muon g − 2. The blobs on the represent
the T → γ ∗ γ ∗ transition form factors with P = π 0 , η, η 0

Fig. 33. Integrated value for the sub-dominant contributions to ahlbl
as a function of the integration range. For the
µ
(3+1) topology [21] and the (2+1+1) and (1+1+1+1) topologies [132].

light pseudoscalar-pole contributions, namely the pion,
the η and the η 0 . According to recent estimates [8, 122],
the pion-pole contributes roughly two times more than
the η- and η 0 -pole together. Furthermore, the two singlet mesons have a comparable contribution in magnitude and are therefore not negligible. In [8], the best estimate for the HLbL contribution to the muon (g − 2) is
ahlbl
= 92(19) × 10−11 while the pseudoscalar-pole contriµ
bution itself is ahlbl,ps
= 93.8(4.0)×10−11 and large cancelµ
lations are observed for the remaining, smaller, contributions. Thus, in parallel to the direct lattice calculation of
the HLbL contribution, a first-principle determination of

the light pseudoscalar-pole contribution is an important
challenge for lattice QCD. In addition, this calculation
provides valuable information for the direct lattice calculation presented in the previous section. It can be used
to reduce significantly the statistical error but also to estimate the dominant source of systematic error. See Section 4.1.1.
The lattice calculation of the pion-pole contribution is
based on the definition of the pseudoscalar-pole contribution of Ref [133] and the result is obtained as a convolution integral between some QED weight functions and
a product of two transition form factors (TFF) as shown
in Fig. 34. The formula involves only space-like momenta
and the dominant part of the signal come from virtualities below 2 GeV2 . Those two points make lattice QCD
an excellent candidate for a first-principle determination.
The pion-pole contribution to the HLbL diagram has
been computed in [134, 68] with a precision of 6% and previous lattice studies have focused on the normalization of
the TFF [135]. With the aim of a 10% precision on the
full HLbL amplitude, a precision of 20% on the η and η 0
might already suffice. In this case, the lattice calculation
is more challenging due to the mixing between the two
states. There is currently no first-principle determination
of the TFF but first preliminary results have been presented by the ETM collaboration [136]. Since experimental
data are very sparse and not available in the kinematical
range of interest, in particular for the doubly-virtual form
factor, a first, even imprecise, lattice calculation would be
extremely valuable.
In the next subsections, I start with a brief description of the methodology used to compute the pseudoscalar
transition form factors. Then I present the state of the art
of such calculations before concluding on possible future
directions.

4.2.1 Methodology
In Minkowski space-time, the pion transition form factor
is given by the following matrix element
Z
Mµν (p, q1 ) = i d4 x eiq1 ·x hΩ|T {Jµ (x)Jν (0)}|π 0 (p)i
= µναβ q1α q2β Fπ0 γ ∗ γ ∗ (q12 , q22 ) ,

(51)

Antoine Gérardin: The anomalous magnetic moment of the muon: status of Lattice QCD calculations

23

and for pion masses in the range [830-310] MeV, using
gauge configurations from the Hadron Spectrum Collaboration. The later are based on anisotropic clover lattices
with 2 + 1 dynamical quarks. In the single-virtual case,
the study supports the validity of the vector-meson dominance model. In the doubly-virtual case, the data suggest
~
x,~
z
(52) that the vector-meson dominance model does not work
where τ = ti − tf is the time separation between the two very well.
In Refs [134, 68], a first systematic study of the TFF,
vector currents and tπ = min(tf − t0 , ti − t0 ) is the miniwith
a proper continuum and chiral extrapolation, as well
mal time separation between the pion interpolating operator and the two vector currents. To project onto the pion as an estimate of the pion-pole contribution to the HLbL
diagram, was published. The TFF was computed for sevstate, one can define the amplitude
eral values of Q21 and Q22 to cover the full Euclidean region,
2
Eπ (tf −t0 ) (3)
e
Aµν (τ ) ≡ lim e
Cµν (τ, tπ ) ,
(53) below 4 GeV in the (Q21 , Q22 ) plane, relevant for the g − 2.
tπ →+∞
The authors used non-perturbatively O(a)-improved Wilfrom which the matrix element of interest can be extracted son fermions with Nf = 2 + 1 dynamical quarks. Four
lattice spacings in the range [0.5 − 0.9] fm and two lattice
[137,138]
discretizations of the vector curent, that differ by O(a2 )
Z ∞
lattice artifacts, were used to perform the continuum ex2Eπ
E
eµν (τ ) .
dτ eω1 τ A
(54) trapolation. Several pion masses, down to 200 MeV allow
Mµν
=
Zπ −∞
an extrapolation to the physical pion mass. Finite-size efIn this equation, Eπ is the pion energy and Zπ = h0|P (0)|πi fects have been found to be negligible compared to the
is the overlap of the pseudoscalar operator with the pion statistical precision and both the connected and the disstate. The free parameter ω1 allows to scan different pho- connected contributions have been included; the later contributes at the level of 1%, and is a sub-leading source of
ton virtualities through the relation
error in this calculation.
2
2
2
The extrapolation to the physical point was performed
q1 = ω1 − ~q1
using
a modified z-expansion, which satisfies the kinemat(55)
q22 = (Eπ − ω1 )2 − (~
p − ~q1 )2
ical and short-distances contraints,
where p = q1 + q2 and µναβ is the fully antisymmetric
tensor with 01234 = +1. In Ref [134, 68] the authors have
computed the following three-point correlation fonction
X
(3)
Cµν
(τ, tπ ) = a6
Jµ (~z, ti )Jν (~0, tf )P † (~x, t0 ) ei~p ~x e−i~q1 ~z

with

2π
~n , ~n ∈ Z3 ,
(56)
L
and L the spatial extent of the lattice. Using several values
of the pion momenta p~ and photon virtuality ~n, it is possible to scan a dense region in the (Q21 , Q22 ) plane, especially
for large volumes. It should be noted that Eq. (54) is valid
only below the threshold s0 = 4m2π (assuming the rho meson is heavier). For the muon g − 2, this limitation is of
little relevance since we are interested in space-like virtualities. In practice, when using Eq. (54), one is confronted
to similar problems as for the HVP: first, the integration
range is limited by the finite time extent of the lattice and
second, the noise over signal increases rapidly at large τ
and a careful treatment of the tail is required.
~q1 =

4.2.2 Results for the pion-pole contribution
A first feasibility study was presented in [139]. The results are based on CP-PACS gauge configurations using
2 + 1 dynamical flavors of clover fermions at a single lattice spacing a−1 ≈ 2.25 GeV and with a heavy pion mass
Mπ = 725 MeV. The authors were able to describe their
lattice data for the doubly-virtual transition form factor
assuming a simple vector-meson dominance (VMD) model
with a pole mass approximately equal to the corresponding rho mass.
In a later study [140], the pion transition form factor was computed at a single lattice spacing a ≈ 0.12 fm

P (Q21 , Q22 ) Fπ0 γ ∗ γ ∗ (−Q21 , −Q22 ) =

N
X
cnm z1n − (−1)N +n+1
n,m=0

with


n
z1N +1
N +1


m
z2m − (−1)N +m+1
z2N +1 . (57)
N +1

p

zk = p

tc + Q2k −
tc + Q2k +

√
√

tc − t0
tc − t0

,

k = 1, 2 ,

(58)

and tc = 4m2π . Here, the free parameter t0 was chosen to
reduce the maximum value of |zk | in the range [0, Q2max ].
The imaginary part of the TFF behaves as (q 2 − tc )3/2
near threshold (P-wave) and this contraint has been implemented in Eq. (57) by imposing [141]


dFπ0 γ ∗ γ ∗
= 0 , k = 1, 2 .
(59)
dzk
zk =−1
The function P (Q21 , Q22 ) is an arbitrary analytical function. The choice
P (Q21 , Q22 ) = 1 +

Q21 + Q22
,
MV2

(60)

where MV = 775 MeV is the vector meson mass ensures that the TFF has the correct short-distance behavior, as predicted by the Brodsky-Lepage scaling, in the

24

Antoine Gérardin: The anomalous magnetic moment of the muon: status of Lattice QCD calculations

Q2 Fπγ ∗ γ ∗ (−Q2, 0)
0.2

0.1

0.05

[GeV]

[GeV]

0.06

N =3
BL
pQCD
CLEO
CELLO
Dispersive

0.15

Q2 Fπγ ∗ γ ∗ (−Q2, −Q2)

0.07

0.04
0.03
N =3
Dispersive
OPE
pQCD
Danilkin et al.

0.02

0.05

0.01
0

0

0.5

1

Q2 [GeV2 ]

1.5

2

0

0

0.5

1

1.5

2

Q2 [GeV2 ]

2.5

3

3.5

4

Fig. 35. Result for the calculation of the pion transition form published in collaboration with my col- leagues from Mainz.
Left: single virtual transition form factor where a comparison with experimental data is possible. Right: prediction for the
double-virtual transition form factor. A confirmation from the dispersive framework is also shown.

single-virtual case and by the OPE in the double-virtual
case [142, 143, 144, 145, 146]. At finite value of N , the TFF
decreases asymptotically as 1/Q2 in all directions in the
(Q21 , Q22 ) plane. The advantage of this approach is that it
is systematically improvable as more precise data become
available.
In practice, the value N = 3 was used and was sufficient to describe the TFF in the whole kinematic range.
The final result was obtained through a global fit over
13 ensembles and the parameters cnm were expanded to
linear order in a2 and m2π , to account for discretization
effects. The results for two specific kinematics are shown
in Fig. 35. The lattice results are in good agreement with
the experimental data in the single virtual case. In the
doubly-virtual case, no experimental data exist, and the
results are in good agreement with other determination
based on dispersion relations [147, 148, 124] and Canterbury approximants [122].
Using the parametrization of the TFF in the continuum limit and at the physical pion mass, one can estimate
the pion-pole contribution to the HLbL. The formalism
was derived in [149] and the result reads
0

aHLbL;π
= (59.7 ± 3.4 ± 0.9 ± 0.5) × 10−11 ,
µ

(61)

where the first error is statistical, the second is the systematic error associated with the parametrization. This corresponds to a relative precision of 6%. In fact, this purely
lattice result can be further improved if the normalization
of the TFF is constrained by the expriment result [150]
0

aHLbL;π
= (62.3 ± 2.0 ± 0.9 ± 0.5) × 10−11 ,
µ

(62)

Both results are in very good agreement with other de0
terminations based on a dispersive analysis aµHLbL;π =
−11
63.0+2.7
[147, 124, 148] and Canterbury approxi−2.1 × 10
HLbL;π 0
mants aµ
= 63.6(2.7)×10−11 [151, 152], with a comparable precision.

4.2.3 The chiral anomaly
An important cross-check of the lattice calculations is the
normalization of the TFF. In the chiral limit, the normalization of the transition form factor is given by [153, 154]
Fπ0 γ ∗ γ ∗ (0, 0) = 4π12 F where F the pion decay constant in
the chiral limit. Away from the chiral limit, corrections
have been computed up to NNLO in ChiPT [155, 156,
157]. This normalization was measured by the PrimExII experiment with a precision of 0.8% and it translates to
Γ (π 0 → γγ) = 7.790(56)stat (109)syst eV [158].
In [135], the authors have studied the two-photon decay on the lattice by computing the transition form factors at low virtualities using a single lattice spacing. Large
FSE corrections were required and their final result reads
Γπ0 →γγ = 7.83(31)(49) eV, compatible with the measured
value. In [140], the authors found Γπ0 →γγ = 8.7(1.4) eV,
where the error is statistical only. Again, this study is performed at a single lattice spacing and heavy pion masses
were used to perform the chiral extrapolation. Finally,
in [68], the authors performed a full continuum and chiral extrapolation to the physical point and they quote
Fπ0 γ ∗ γ ∗ (0, 0) = 0.264(8)(4) GeV−1 , with a precision of
about 3%. It translates to Γπ0 →γγ = 7.17(50) eV.
Improving this result is also important for future lattice calculations. In [68], a significant part of the error
in the estimate of the pion-pole contribution comes from
very low virtualities.
4.2.4 Future directions
Concerning the pion-pole contribution, the current precision is already satisfactory. A more precise determination of the decay width and a comparison with experiment
would be valuable but would probably require, in addition
to high statistics, the study of isospin breaking effects due
to the light quark mass difference.
In addition to the pion-pole, the η and η 0 mesons are
expected to contribute significantly. The only determination of the corresponding contribution to the HLbL di-

Antoine Gérardin: The anomalous magnetic moment of the muon: status of Lattice QCD calculations

agram is based on Canterbury approximants [122] and
a lattice QCD calculation would be extremely valuable.
Here one has first to face the problem of the mixing between those two states and the extraction of the TFFs
is much more challenging. However, a precision of 20%
would already suffice in view of the forthcoming experimental precision. This year, very first results in this direction have been presented by the ETM collaboration during
the APLAT 2020 lattice conference [136].

25

needed to saturate the sum rules, the lattice calculations
can provide constraints on meson transition form factors
and thus improve the estimate of ahlbl
µ , especially when
experimental measurements are missing. It is complementary to the direct calculation of pseudoscalar transition
form factors described in the previous section.
In refs. [159, 160], the authors restricted their study to
the forward light-by-light scattering amplitudes with real
or spacelike photons
γ ∗ (λ1 , q1 )γ ∗ (λ2 , q2 ) → γ ∗ (λ3 , q1 )γ ∗ (λ4 , q1 )

(63)

where λ = ±, 0 is the transverse or longitudinal helicity
of the virtual photon. The relevant process is depicted on
the left panel of Fig. 37. Using parity and time-reversal
invariance, the 81 amplitudes associated with this process Mλ1 ,λ2 ,λ3 ,λ4 reduce to only 8 independent amplitudes
which depend on the 3 kinematical invariants q12 , q22 and
ν = q1 · q2 .
For fixed photon virtualities Q21 and Q22 , the optical
theorem can be used to write sum rules that relate each
of the eight amplitudes to γ ∗ γ ∗ → M fusion cross sections where M stands for any C-parity-even states. In the
specific case of two transverse photons, one obtains
p
Z
4ν 2 ∞ 0 ν 0 − q12 q22 σT T (ν 0 )
2 2
MT T (q1 , q2 , ν) =
dν
(64)
π ν0
ν 0 (ν 0 2 − ν 2 − i)

Fig. 36. Preliminary results for the η and η 0 transition form
factor using a pion mass of 260 MeV. The integrand correspond to Eq. (53) for a photon virtuality ~
q 2 = 1. Plot extracted
from [136].

4.3 Light-by-light forward scattering amplitudes
The hadronic contribution to the scattering of space-like
virtual photons, γ ∗ γ ∗ → γ ∗ γ ∗ , can be studied on the lattice for virtualities below the hadronic threshold. From
a lattice point of view, this study requires the analysis of
the same four-point correlation function as the one used in
the direct approach to ahlbl
Eq. (36), but in momentum
µ
space. In particular, the knowledge of the QED weight
function is not needed here. The motivation for such a
study is that the forward scattering amplitudes can be related, using dispersive relations, to the γ ∗ γ ∗ → M fusion
cross sections where M stands for any C-parity even final
state. Thus, the applicability of the hadronic models to
ahlbl
[133], where the QCD amplitude has been approxiµ
mated by the exchange of a few mesonic resonances, can be
tested. Furthermore, assuming that only a few states are

where MT T (q12 , q22 , ν) = MT T (q12 , q22 , ν) − MT T (q12 , q22 , 0)
means that a subtraction is done and σT T (ν 0 ) is the total
cross section γ ∗ γ ∗ → M with total helicities 0 and 2. Similar sum-rules can be written for the other 7 amplitudes
(see [161] for explicit formulae).
The left hand side of Eq. (64) is computed on the lattice starting from Eq. (36) and using adequate projector
of the four-pont correlation function, see Ref [159] for details. For two transverse photons, MT T , one has
MT T (q12 , q22 , ν) = e4 Pµνλσ (q1 , q2 ) Πµνσλ (q1 , q2 , q1 ) , (65)
where Pµνλσ is a projector. As in the direct lattice calculation of ahlbl
µ , there are 5 classes of diagrams: the fully
connected and the (2+2) quark-disconnected diagrams are
expected to be dominant, whereas the (3 + 1), (2 + 1) and
(1 + 1 + 1 + 1) disconnected contractions are expected to
be subdominant [162, 163]. Assuming SU(2) flavor symmetry, if one neglects those sub-leading diagrams and if one
assumes that resonance exchanges indeed dominate the
amplitudes, then one can show that only isovector mesons
contribute to the connected diagrams, with a weight factor 34/9 > 1. In the (2+2) disconnected contribution, the
isovector mesons contribute with the negative weight factor −25/9 that compensate part of the connected contribution, while the iso-scalar mesons contribute with weight
factor 1. Those weight factors have been used in the comparison with the lattice data obtained with Nf = 2 degenerate quarks. Similar counting rules can be derived assuming SU(3) flavor symmetry [160].
In a second step, the right hand side of Eq. (64) is
obtained using a phenomenological description of the twophoton fusion processes for mesons with quantum number

26

Antoine Gérardin: The anomalous magnetic moment of the muon: status of Lattice QCD calculations
γ ∗(λ1, q1)

γ ∗(λ3, q1)

γ ∗(λ1, q1)

X(p)
γ ∗(λ2, q2)

γ ∗(λ4, q2)

γ ∗(λ2, q2)

Fig. 37. The eight light-by-light forward scattering amplitudes (left) that can be computed on the lattice. Using dispersion
relation, they are related to two-photon fusion processes (right) that are described in terms of transition form factors.

J P C = 0−+ , 0++ , 1++ , 2++ . As an example, the pseudoscalar meson contribution to σT T (ν 0 ) is
√ 
2
2 X FPγ ∗ γ ∗ (Q21 , Q22 )
σT T = 8π δ(s −
,
m2P
FPγ ∗ γ ∗ (0, 0)
(66)
where X is a kinematical factor. In addition to the pseudoscalar meson mass mP , the cross section simply depends
on the transition form factor of the P → γ ∗ γ ∗ process (the
two-photon decay width is directly related to the normalization of the transition form factor). Similar expressions
are obtained for the other channels. Thus, the only unknowns are the masses of the particles and their transition
form factors. Hadronic resonances with different quantum
numbers appear with different weight in each sum rule. If
one assumes that only a few states contribute significantly,
then we obtain an over-constrained system that allow us
to constrain the form factors.
The Mainz collaboration has computed the eight lightby-light forward scattering amplitudes [159, 160] for different virtualities and an example is depicted in Fig. 38.
They used Nf = 2 Wilson fermion with two lattice spacings to study discretization effects and four pion masses to
perform an extrapolation to the physical pion mass. Only
the fully-connected and the dominant quark-disconnected
contributions have been computed. To estimate the right
hand side of the sum rules, only one resonance was included in each channel. Using the pion TFF from a dedΓγγ
m2P )
mP

2

Q21 = 0.352 GeV2

100

ν [GeV2 ]
0.117
0.234
0.351
0.467
0.583
0.698
0.812
0.927
1.039
1.150

80

MT T

60
40
20
0
0

0.5

1

1.5

2

2.5

Q22 [GeV2 ]

3

3.5

4

Fig. 38. Amplitude MT T with two transverse photons. The
results correspond to a lattice ensemble with a pion mass of
270 MeV. The curves with error-bands represent the result of
a fit using a phenomenological model where the monopole and
dipole masses of the TFFs are considered as free fit parameters.
Extracted from [160].

icated lattice simulation [68], the exploratory study [160]
found that it is possible to describe the whole set of data,
for virtualities in the range [0-4] GeV2 , with a single resonance in each channel and assuming simple monopole or
dipole parameterizations of the virtuality-dependance of
the form factors. The results of the global fit to the eight
amplitude, in the case of MT T , is given by the colored
bands in Fig. 38. A comparison of the TFFs with phenomenology has been performed. This analysis was mostly
limited by the large statistical error in the disconnected
diagrams and if a chiral limit has been taken, the continuum limit and the possibly large finite-size effects remain
to be studied.
A more systematic study, which includes both connected and quark-disconnected contributions as well as a
study of FSEs might provide valuable information on resonance transition form factors. In a second step, the latter
can be used in phenomenological models or as input in
the dispersive framework to improve the determination of
ahlbl
µ .

5 Conclusion
This year, the first sub-percent estimate of the leadingorder hadronic vacuum contribution to the anomalous magnetic moment of the muon has been published by the
BMW collaboration and the RBC/UKQCD collaboration
has published the first estimate for ahlbl
at the physical
µ
point with controlled systematic errors. On the experimental side, the first results of the Fermilab experiment [6] are
expected to be published early next year, before the final
results expected within the next few years.
Concerning the LO-HVP contribution, many collaborations have presented results in the last years. Most systematics are now properly addressed and it becomes a mature field of research. A confirmation of the recent BMW
result by other groups is highly desired. Meanwhile, other
cross-checks between lattice collaboration are possible and
do not require additional computer ressources : the window method, presented in Section 3.1, might help to understand the spread in the lattice results for the dominant
light quark contribution.
Concerning the hadronic light-by-light contribution,
the lattice community is likely to play a major role in the
comparison with experiment. The current precision of the
RBC/UKQCD collaboration is of 45% [21] and a precision of 20% might suffice. The Mainz group has presented
preliminary results at the SU(3)f point where an error of
15% has been reached [115] and some preliminary results

Antoine Gérardin: The anomalous magnetic moment of the muon: status of Lattice QCD calculations

at lower pion masses have been presented. The lattice community can also provide important inputs to the dispersive
framework, especially for the light pseudoscalar-pole contributions. The pion-pole contribution is already known
with a precision of 6% [134,68] and preliminary results
for all three light pseudoscalars have been presented by
the ETM collaboration this year [136].
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank the organizers of the 38th International Symposium on Lattice Field Theory for the
invitation to write this review. I would like to thank Laurent Lellouch for interesting discussions and feedback on
this manuscript.
This publication received funding from the Excellence
Initiative of Aix-Marseille University - A*MIDEX, a French
“Investissements d’Avenir” programme, AMX-18-ACE-005.

References
1. G. Bennett et al. (Muon g-2), Phys. Rev. D 73, 072003
(2006), hep-ex/0602035
2. T. Aoyama, M. Hayakawa, T. Kinoshita, M. Nio, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 109, 111808 (2012), 1205.5370
3. T. Aoyama, T. Kinoshita, M. Nio, Atoms 7, 28 (2019)
4. A. Czarnecki, W.J. Marciano, A. Vainshtein, Phys. Rev.
D 67, 073006 (2003), [Erratum: Phys.Rev.D 73, 119901
(2006)], hep-ph/0212229
5. C. Gnendiger, D. Stöckinger, H. Stöckinger-Kim, Phys.
Rev. D 88, 053005 (2013), 1306.5546
6. G. Venanzoni (Fermilab E989), Nucl. Part. Phys. Proc.
273-275, 584 (2016), 1411.2555
7. M. Otani (E34), JPS Conf. Proc. 8, 025010 (2015)
8. T. Aoyama et al. (2020), 2006.04822
9. M. Davier, A. Hoecker, B. Malaescu, Z. Zhang, Eur. Phys.
J. C 80, 241 (2020), [Erratum: Eur.Phys.J.C 80, 410
(2020)], 1908.00921
10. A. Keshavarzi, D. Nomura, T. Teubner, Phys. Rev. D
101, 014029 (2020), 1911.00367
11. F. Jegerlehner, EPJ Web Conf. 166, 00022 (2018),
1705.00263
12. S. Borsanyi et al. (2020), 2002.12347
13. J. Bijnens, E. Pallante, J. Prades, Phys. Rev. Lett. 75,
1447 (1995), [Erratum: Phys.Rev.Lett. 75, 3781 (1995)],
hep-ph/9505251
14. J. Bijnens, E. Pallante, J. Prades, Nucl. Phys. B 474, 379
(1996), hep-ph/9511388
15. J. Prades, E. de Rafael, A. Vainshtein, Adv. Ser. Direct.
High Energy Phys. 20, 303 (2009), 0901.0306
16. G. Colangelo, M. Hoferichter, M. Procura, P. Stoffer,
JHEP 09, 091 (2014), 1402.7081
17. G. Colangelo, M. Hoferichter, B. Kubis, M. Procura,
P. Stoffer, Phys. Lett. B 738, 6 (2014), 1408.2517
18. V. Pauk, M. Vanderhaeghen (2014), 1403.7503
19. G. Colangelo, M. Hoferichter, M. Procura, P. Stoffer,
JHEP 09, 074 (2015), 1506.01386
20. M. Hayakawa, T. Blum, T. Izubuchi, N. Yamada, PoS
LAT2005, 353 (2006), hep-lat/0509016

27

21. T. Blum, N. Christ, M. Hayakawa, T. Izubuchi, L. Jin,
C. Jung, C. Lehner, Phys. Rev. Lett. 124, 132002 (2020),
1911.08123
22. M. Davier, A. Hoecker, B. Malaescu, Z. Zhang, Eur. Phys.
J. C 77, 827 (2017), 1706.09436
23. A. Keshavarzi, D. Nomura, T. Teubner, Phys. Rev. D 97,
114025 (2018), 1802.02995
24. G. Colangelo, M. Hoferichter, P. Stoffer, JHEP 02, 006
(2019), 1810.00007
25. M. Hoferichter, B.L. Hoid, B. Kubis, JHEP 08, 137
(2019), 1907.01556
26. A. Kurz, T. Liu, P. Marquard, M. Steinhauser, Phys.
Lett. B 734, 144 (2014), 1403.6400
27. G. Colangelo, M. Hoferichter, A. Nyffeler, M. Passera,
P. Stoffer, Phys. Lett. B 735, 90 (2014), 1403.7512
28. T. Blum, Phys. Rev. Lett. 91, 052001 (2003),
hep-lat/0212018
29. B. Colquhoun, R. Dowdall, C. Davies, K. Hornbostel,
G. Lepage, Phys. Rev. D 91, 074514 (2015), 1408.5768
30. D. Bernecker, H.B. Meyer, Eur. Phys. J. A 47, 148 (2011),
1107.4388
31. B. Chakraborty, C. Davies, G. Donald, R. Dowdall,
P. Gonçalves de Oliveira, J. Koponen, G.P. Lepage,
T. Teubner, PoS LATTICE2014, 129 (2015), 1410.8466
32. M. Della Morte, A. Francis, V. Gülpers, G. Herdoı́za,
G. von Hippel, H. Horch, B. Jäger, H. Meyer, A. Nyffeler,
H. Wittig, JHEP 10, 020 (2017), 1705.01775
33. B. Chakraborty, C. Davies, G. Donald, R. Dowdall, J. Koponen, G. Lepage, T. Teubner (HPQCD), Phys. Rev. D
89, 114501 (2014), 1403.1778
34. A. Gérardin, M. Cè, G. von Hippel, B. Hörz, H.B. Meyer,
D. Mohler, K. Ottnad, J. Wilhelm, H. Wittig, Phys. Rev.
D 100, 014510 (2019), 1904.03120
35. T.A. DeGrand, S. Schaefer, Nucl. Phys. B Proc. Suppl.
140, 296 (2005), hep-lat/0409056
36. L. Giusti, P. Hernandez, M. Laine, P. Weisz, H. Wittig,
JHEP 04, 013 (2004), hep-lat/0402002
37. T. Blum, P. Boyle, V. Gülpers, T. Izubuchi, L. Jin,
C. Jung, A. Jüttner, C. Lehner, A. Portelli, J. Tsang
(RBC, UKQCD), Phys. Rev. Lett. 121, 022003 (2018),
1801.07224
38. C. Aubin, T. Blum, C. Tu, M. Golterman, C. Jung,
S. Peris, Phys. Rev. D 101, 014503 (2020), 1905.09307
39. G.S. Bali, S. Collins, A. Schafer, Comput. Phys. Commun. 181, 1570 (2010), 0910.3970
40. T. Blum, T. Izubuchi, E. Shintani, Phys. Rev. D 88,
094503 (2013), 1208.4349
41. E. Shintani, R. Arthur, T. Blum, T. Izubuchi, C. Jung,
C. Lehner, Phys. Rev. D 91, 114511 (2015), 1402.0244
42. C. Lehner, A.S. Meyer, Phys. Rev. D 101, 074515 (2020),
2003.04177
43. E. Shintani, Y. Kuramashi (PACS), Phys. Rev. D 100,
034517 (2019), 1902.00885
44. C. Davies et al. (Fermilab Lattice, LATTICE-HPQCD,
MILC), Phys. Rev. D 101, 034512 (2020), 1902.04223
45. E.H. Chao, A. Gérardin, J.R. Green, R.J. Hudspith, H.B. Meyer, Contribution to the Third Plenary
Workshop of the Muon g-2 Theory Initiative (2019),
https://indico.fnal.gov/event/21626/contributions
/63777/
46. C. Andersen, J. Bulava, B. Hörz, C. Morningstar, Nucl.
Phys. B 939, 145 (2019), 1808.05007
47. M. Luscher, Nucl. Phys. B 364, 237 (1991)

28

Antoine Gérardin: The anomalous magnetic moment of the muon: status of Lattice QCD calculations

48. S.
Lahert,
Contribution
to
the
Workshop
:The
hadronic
vacuum
polarization
from
lattice
QCD
at
high
precision.
(2020),
https://indico.cern.ch/event/956699/contributions/
4108692/
49. C. Lehner, RBRC Workshop on Lattice Gauge Theories
(2016)
50. S. Borsanyi et al. (Budapest-Marseille-Wuppertal), Phys.
Rev. Lett. 121, 022002 (2018), 1711.04980
51. J. Gasser, H. Leutwyler, Annals Phys. 158, 142 (1984)
52. G. Ecker, J. Gasser, A. Pich, E. de Rafael, Nucl. Phys. B
321, 311 (1989)
53. J. Bijnens, J. Relefors, JHEP 12, 114 (2017), 1710.04479
54. C. Aubin, T. Blum, M. Golterman, S. Peris (2020),
2008.03809
55. L. Lellouch, M. Luscher, Commun. Math. Phys. 219, 31
(2001), hep-lat/0003023
56. D. Giusti, F. Sanfilippo, S. Simula, Phys. Rev. D 98,
114504 (2018), 1808.00887
57. M.T. Hansen, A. Patella, Phys. Rev. Lett. 123, 172001
(2019), 1904.10010
58. M.T. Hansen, A. Patella, JHEP 10, 029 (2020),
2004.03935
59. A. Patella, Contribution to Asia-Pacific Symposium
for
Lattice
Field
Theory
(2020),
https://conference-indico.kek.jp/event/113/contri
butions/2153/
60. C. Lehner, 36th International Symposium on Lattice Field Theory (Lattice 2018) East Lansing (2018),
https://indico.fnal.gov/event/15949/session/8/co
ntribution/29
61. D. Giusti, S. Simula, Phys. Rev. D 102, 054503 (2020),
2003.12086
62. R. Sommer, PoS LATTICE2013, 015 (2014), 1401.3270
63. N. Husung, P. Marquard, R. Sommer, Eur. Phys. J. C
80, 200 (2020), 1912.08498
64. D. Giusti, S. Simula, PoS LATTICE2019, 104 (2019),
1910.03874
65. D. Giusti, V. Lubicz, G. Martinelli, F. Sanfilippo, S. Simula, Phys. Rev. D 99, 114502 (2019), 1901.10462
66. D. Giusti, V. Lubicz, G. Martinelli, F. Sanfilippo, S. Simula, JHEP 10, 157 (2017), 1707.03019
67. V. Gülpers, A. Francis, B. Jäger, H. Meyer, G. von
Hippel, H. Wittig, PoS LATTICE2014, 128 (2014),
1411.7592
68. A. Gérardin, H.B. Meyer, A. Nyffeler, Phys. Rev. D 100,
034520 (2019), 1903.09471
69. A. Stathopoulos, J. Laeuchli, K. Orginos (2013),
1302.4018
70. T. Blum, P. Boyle, T. Izubuchi, L. Jin, A. Jüttner,
C. Lehner, K. Maltman, M. Marinkovic, A. Portelli,
M. Spraggs, Phys. Rev. Lett. 116, 232002 (2016),
1512.09054
71. B. Chakraborty, C. Davies, J. Koponen, G. Lepage,
M. Peardon, S. Ryan, Phys. Rev. D 93, 074509 (2016),
1512.03270
72. C.
McNeile,
Contribution
to
the
Workshop
:The
hadronic
vacuum
polarization
from lattice QCD at high precision. (2020),
https://indico.cern.ch/event/956699/contributions/
4083783/
73. A.
Gérardin,
Contribution
to
the
Workshop
:The
hadronic
vacuum
polarization

74.
75.
76.
77.
78.
79.

80.

81.
82.

83.

84.
85.
86.
87.
88.
89.

90.
91.
92.

93.
94.
95.
96.
97.
98.

99.
100.

from lattice QCD at high precision. (2020),
https://indico.cern.ch/event/956699/contributions/
4083779/
L. Giusti, T. Harris, A. Nada, S. Schaefer, Eur. Phys. J.
C 79, 586 (2019), 1903.10447
S. Borsanyi et al., Science 347, 1452 (2015), 1406.4088
A. Patella, PoS LATTICE2016, 020 (2017), 1702.03857
M. Hayakawa, S. Uno, Prog. Theor. Phys. 120, 413
(2008), 0804.2044
A. Duncan, E. Eichten, H. Thacker, Phys. Rev. Lett. 76,
3894 (1996), hep-lat/9602005
P. Boyle, V. Gülpers, J. Harrison, A. Jüttner,
A. Portelli, C. Sachrajda, PoS LATTICE2016, 172
(2016), 1612.05962
A. Westin, Contribution to Asia-Pacific Symposium
for
Lattice
Field
Theory
(2020),
https://conference-indico.kek.jp/event/113/contri
butions/2185/
G. de Divitiis et al., JHEP 04, 124 (2012), 1110.6294
G. de Divitiis, R. Frezzotti, V. Lubicz, G. Martinelli, R. Petronzio, G. Rossi, F. Sanfilippo, S. Simula,
N. Tantalo (RM123), Phys. Rev. D 87, 114505 (2013),
1303.4896
B. Chakraborty et al. (Fermilab Lattice, LATTICEHPQCD, MILC), Phys. Rev. Lett. 120, 152001 (2018),
1710.11212
A. Westin et al. (CSSM/QCDSF/UKQCD), PoS LATTICE2018, 136 (2019), 1902.01518
A. Risch, H. Wittig, EPJ Web Conf. 175, 14019 (2018),
1710.06801
A. Risch, H. Wittig, PoS LATTICE2018, 059 (2018),
1811.00895
A. Risch, H. Wittig, PoS LATTICE2019, 296 (2019),
1911.04230
F. Jegerlehner, The Anomalous Magnetic Moment of the
Muon, Vol. 274 (Springer, Cham, 2017)
M. Cè, T.S. José, A. Gérardin, H.B. Meyer, K. Miura,
K. Ottnad, A. Risch, J. Wilhelm, H. Wittig, PoS LATTICE2019, 010 (2019), 1910.09525
L. Morel, Z. Yao, P. Cladé, S. Guellati-Khélifa, Nature
588, 61 (2020)
M. Tanabashi et al. (Particle Data Group), Phys. Rev. D
98, 030001 (2018)
M. Baak, J. Cúth, J. Haller, A. Hoecker, R. Kogler,
K. Mönig, M. Schott, J. Stelzer (Gfitter Group), Eur.
Phys. J. C 74, 3046 (2014), 1407.3792
F. Jegerlehner, Nucl. Phys. B Proc. Suppl. 181-182, 135
(2008), 0807.4206
D.B. Renner, X. Feng, K. Jansen, M. Petschlies, PoS
LATTICE2011, 022 (2012), 1206.3113
X. Feng, G. Hotzel, K. Jansen, M. Petschlies, D.B. Renner, PoS LATTICE2012, 174 (2012), 1211.0828
F. Burger, K. Jansen, M. Petschlies, G. Pientka, JHEP
11, 215 (2015), 1505.03283
A. Francis, G. Herdoı́za, H. Horch, B. Jäger, H.B. Meyer,
H. Wittig, PoS LATTICE2014, 163 (2014), 1412.6934
A. Francis, V. Gülpers, G. Herdoı́za, H. Horch, B. Jäger,
H.B. Meyer, H. Wittig, PoS LATTICE2015, 110 (2015),
1511.04751
F. Jegerlehner, Z. Phys. C 32, 195 (1986)
V. Gülpers, H. Meyer, G. von Hippel, H. Wittig, PoS
LATTICE2015, 263 (2016)

Antoine Gérardin: The anomalous magnetic moment of the muon: status of Lattice QCD calculations
101. M. Cè, A. Gérardin, K. Ottnad, H.B. Meyer, PoS LATTICE2018, 137 (2018), 1811.08669
102. D. Hanneke, S. Hoogerheide, G. Gabrielse, Phys. Rev. A
83, 052122 (2011), 1009.4831
103. R.H. Parker, C. Yu, W. Zhong, B. Estey, H. Müller, Science 360, 191 (2018), 1812.04130
104. F. Burger, K. Jansen, M. Petschlies, G. Pientka, Eur.
Phys. J. C 76, 464 (2016), 1501.05110
105. B. Chakraborty, C. Davies, P. de Oliviera, J. Koponen,
G. Lepage, R. Van de Water, Phys. Rev. D 96, 034516
(2017), 1601.03071
106. D. Hanneke, S. Fogwell, G. Gabrielse, Phys. Rev. Lett.
100, 120801 (2008), 0801.1134
107. S. Borsanyi, Z. Fodor, T. Kawanai, S. Krieg, L. Lellouch,
R. Malak, K. Miura, K. Szabo, C. Torrero, B. Toth, Phys.
Rev. D 96, 074507 (2017), 1612.02364
108. T. Blum, S. Chowdhury, M. Hayakawa, T. Izubuchi, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 114, 012001 (2015), 1407.2923
109. T. Blum, N. Christ, M. Hayakawa, T. Izubuchi, L. Jin,
C. Lehner, Phys. Rev. D 93, 014503 (2016), 1510.07100
110. T. Blum, N. Christ, M. Hayakawa, T. Izubuchi, L. Jin,
C. Jung, C. Lehner, Phys. Rev. D 96, 034515 (2017),
1705.01067
111. J. Bijnens, EPJ Web Conf. 118, 01002 (2016),
1510.05796
112. N. Asmussen, J. Green, H.B. Meyer, A. Nyffeler, PoS
LATTICE2016, 164 (2016), 1609.08454
113. N. Asmussen, A. Gérardin, H.B. Meyer, A. Nyffeler, EPJ
Web Conf. 175, 06023 (2018), 1711.02466
114. N. Asmussen, A. Gerardin, J. Green, O. Gryniuk, G. von
Hippel, H.B. Meyer, A. Nyffeler, V. Pascalutsa, H. Wittig,
EPJ Web Conf. 179, 01017 (2018), 1801.04238
115. E.H. Chao, A. Gérardin, J.R. Green, R.J. Hudspith, H.B.
Meyer, Eur. Phys. J. C 80, 869 (2020), 2006.16224
116. H. Meyer, Contribution to the Second Plenary Workshop of the Muon g-2 Theory Initiative (2018),
https://indico.him.uni-mainz.de/event/11/session/
11/contribution/91/
117. N. Asmussen, E.H. Chao, A. Gérardin, J.R. Green, R.J.
Hudspith, H.B. Meyer, A. Nyffeler, PoS LATTICE2019,
195 (2019), 1911.05573
118. T. Blum, N. Christ, M. Hayakawa, T. Izubuchi, L. Jin,
C. Jung, C. Lehner, Phys. Rev. Lett. 118, 022005 (2017),
1610.04603
119. L. Jin, PoS LATTICE2018, 012 (2018)
120. L. Jin, Contribution to the Third Plenary Workshop of the Muon g-2 Theory Initiative (2019),
https://indico.fnal.gov/event/21626/contributions
/63821/
121. S. Laporta, E. Remiddi, Phys. Lett. B 301, 440 (1993)
122. P. Masjuan, P. Sanchez-Puertas, Phys. Rev. D 95, 054026
(2017), 1701.05829
123. G. Colangelo, M. Hoferichter, M. Procura, P. Stoffer,
JHEP 04, 161 (2017), 1702.07347
124. M. Hoferichter, B.L. Hoid, B. Kubis, S. Leupold, S.P.
Schneider, JHEP 10, 141 (2018), 1808.04823
125. J. Bijnens, N. Hermansson-Truedsson, A. Rodrı́guezSánchez, Phys. Lett. B 798, 134994 (2019), 1908.03331
126. G. Colangelo, F. Hagelstein, M. Hoferichter, L. Laub,
P. Stoffer, JHEP 03, 101 (2020), 1910.13432
127. I. Danilkin, M. Vanderhaeghen, Phys. Rev. D 95, 014019
(2017), 1611.04646

29

128. M. Knecht, S. Narison, A. Rabemananjara, D. Rabetiarivony, Phys. Lett. B 787, 111 (2018), 1808.03848
129. G. Eichmann, C.S. Fischer, R. Williams, Phys. Rev. D
101, 054015 (2020), 1910.06795
130. P. Roig, P. Sanchez-Puertas, Phys. Rev. D 101, 074019
(2020), 1910.02881
131. N. Asmussen, Contribution to the Second Plenary
Workshop of the Muon g-2 Theory Initiative (2018),
https://indico.him.uni-mainz.de/event/11/session
/0/contribution/3/
132. E.H. Chao, A. Gérardin, J.R. Green, R.J. Hudspith,
H.B. Meyer, Contribution to the Asia-Pacific Symposium for Lattice Field Theory 2020 conference (2020),
https://conference-indico.kek.jp/event/113/contri
butions/2082/
133. F. Jegerlehner, A. Nyffeler, Phys. Rept. 477, 1 (2009),
0902.3360
134. A. Gérardin, H.B. Meyer, A. Nyffeler, Phys. Rev. D 94,
074507 (2016), 1607.08174
135. X. Feng, S. Aoki, H. Fukaya, S. Hashimoto, T. Kaneko,
J.i. Noaki, E. Shintani, Phys. Rev. Lett. 109, 182001
(2012), 1206.1375
136. S.
Burri,
Contribution
to
Asia-Pacific
Symposium
for
Lattice
Field
Theory
(2020),
https://conference-indico.kek.jp/event/113/contri
butions/2077/
137. X.d. Ji, C.w. Jung, Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 208 (2001),
hep-lat/0101014
138. X.d. Ji, C.w. Jung, Phys. Rev. D 64, 034506 (2001),
hep-lat/0103007
139. S.D. Cohen, H.W. Lin, J. Dudek, R.G. Edwards, PoS
LATTICE2008, 159 (2008), 0810.5550
140. H.W. Lin, S.D. Cohen, PoS ConfinementX, 113 (2012),
1302.0874
141. C. Bourrely, I. Caprini, L. Lellouch, Phys. Rev. D 79,
013008 (2009), [Erratum: Phys.Rev.D 82, 099902 (2010)],
0807.2722
142. G. Lepage, S.J. Brodsky, Phys. Lett. B 87, 359 (1979)
143. G. Lepage, S.J. Brodsky, Phys. Rev. D 22, 2157 (1980)
144. S.J. Brodsky, G. Lepage, Phys. Rev. D 24, 1808 (1981)
145. V. Nesterenko, A. Radyushkin, Sov. J. Nucl. Phys. 38,
284 (1983)
146. V. Novikov, M.A. Shifman, A. Vainshtein, M. Voloshin,
V.I. Zakharov, Nucl. Phys. B 237, 525 (1984)
147. M. Hoferichter, B. Kubis, S. Leupold, F. Niecknig, S.P.
Schneider, Eur. Phys. J. C 74, 3180 (2014), 1410.4691
148. M. Hoferichter, B.L. Hoid, B. Kubis, S. Leupold,
S.P. Schneider, Phys. Rev. Lett. 121, 112002 (2018),
1805.01471
149. M. Knecht, A. Nyffeler, Phys. Rev. D 65, 073034 (2002),
hep-ph/0111058
150. I. Larin et al. (PrimEx), Phys. Rev. Lett. 106, 162303
(2011), 1009.1681
151. P. Masjuan, Phys. Rev. D 86, 094021 (2012), 1206.2549
152. P. Sanchez-Puertas, P. Masjuan, Mod. Phys. Lett. A 31,
1630034 (2016), 1606.02704
153. S.L. Adler, Phys. Rev. 177, 2426 (1969)
154. J. Bell, R. Jackiw, Nuovo Cim. A 60, 47 (1969)
155. J. Donoghue, B.R. Holstein, Y. Lin, Phys. Rev. Lett.
55, 2766 (1985), [Erratum: Phys.Rev.Lett. 61, 1527–1527
(1988)]
156. J. Bijnens, A. Bramon, F. Cornet, Phys. Rev. Lett. 61,
1453 (1988)

30

Antoine Gérardin: The anomalous magnetic moment of the muon: status of Lattice QCD calculations

157. K. Kampf, B. Moussallam, Phys. Rev. D 79, 076005
(2009), 0901.4688
158. I. Larin, Y. Zhang, A. Gasparian, L. Gan, R. Miskimen, M. Khandaker, D. Dale, S. Danagoulian, E. Pasyuk,
H. Gao et al., Science 368, 506 (2020)
159. J. Green, O. Gryniuk, G. von Hippel, H.B. Meyer, V. Pascalutsa, Phys. Rev. Lett. 115, 222003 (2015), 1507.01577
160. A. Gérardin, J. Green, O. Gryniuk, G. von Hippel, H.B.
Meyer, V. Pascalutsa, H. Wittig, Phys. Rev. D 98, 074501
(2018), 1712.00421
161. V. Pascalutsa, V. Pauk, M. Vanderhaeghen, Phys. Rev.
D 85, 116001 (2012), 1204.0740
162. J. Bijnens, J. Relefors, JHEP 09, 113 (2016), 1608.01454
163. J. Bijnens, EPJ Web Conf. 179, 01001 (2018),
1712.09787

