2020 IEEE/ACM International Conference on Advances in Social Networks Analysis and Mining (ASONAM)

arXiv:2012.03039v1 [cs.SI] 5 Dec 2020

Understanding Public Sentiments, Opinions and
Topics about COVID-19 using Twitter
Jolin Shaynn-Ly Kwan

Kwan Hui Lim

Information Systems Technology and Design Pillar
Singapore University of Technology and Design
Email: jolin kwan@mymail.sutd.edu.sg

Information Systems Technology and Design Pillar
Singapore University of Technology and Design
Email: kwanhui lim@sutd.edu.sg

Abstract—The COVID-19 pandemic has caused widespread
devastation throughout the world. In addition to the health
and economical impacts, there is an enormous emotional toll
associated with the constant stress of daily life with the numerous restrictions in place to combat the pandemic. To better
understand the impact of COVID-19, we proposed a framework
that utilizes public tweets to derive the sentiments, emotions and
discussion topics of the general public in various regions and
across multiple timeframes. Using this framework, we study and
discuss various research questions relating to COVID-19, namely:
(i) how sentiments/emotions change during the pandemic? (ii)
how sentiments/emotions change in relation to global events? and
(iii) what are the common topics discussed during the pandemic?

I. I NTRODUCTION
The COVID-19 outbreak is a global pandemic that has
infected millions and claimed the lives of hundred thousands.
Social media, e.g., Twitter, has proved to be valuable in times
of such global pandemics, as it reveals the real-time sentiment
and discussions of Twitter users [1]. Additionally, with the
implementation of quarantine measures and the prohibition of
social gatherings across the world, the usage of social media
has soared to extraordinary levels.
Towards this effort, we aim to answer three research questions through analysis of global tweets about COVID-19 in
the duration after the virus was named as a pandemic. The
research questions (RQ) are:
• RQ1: What are the sentiments and emotions experienced
during the COVID-19 pandemic?
• RQ2: How do these sentiments and emotions change in
relation to global events?
• RQ3: What are the common topics discussed during the
COVID-19 pandemic?
Related Work. Social media data have been a popular
source of information for studying pandemics and diseases [2].
For example, Signorini et al. studied the use of Twitter to
track rapidly-evolving public interest with respect to the 2009
H1N1 pandemic in the United States [3]. The study found that
interest in hand hygiene and face masks seemed to be timed
with public health messages from the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention (CDC). Chew studied public sentiment
with regards to the 2009 H1N1 pandemic from manual content
IEEE/ACM ASONAM 2020, December 7-10, 2020
978-1-7281-1056-1/20/$31.00 © 2020 IEEE

analysis of tweets [4]. Keywords corresponding to certain
sentiments were collated and the tweets were categorised into
the different sentiments by string detection of the different
keywords.
Other researchers worked on different aspects of studying
the COVID-19 pandemic. Dubey [5] studied the sentiments of
COVID-19 related tweets between 11-31 March 2020, while
Rajput et al. [6] used word frequency analysis to identify
trends in the words used. Similarly, Lwin et al. [7] studied the
prevalence of the four emotions of fear, anger, sadness, and joy
in relation to the COVID-19 pandemic. Abd-Alrazaq et al. [8]
focused on understanding topics related to COVID-19 from
2 February to 15 March 2020 and [9] used mobility patterns
within and out of Wuhan, China to understand COVID-19
cases.
Contribution. While there has been significant research
with regards to pandemics, the use of Twitter as a research
tool for this is still relatively new and focus on one aspect of
the research. In contrast, our work adopts a holistic framework
that combines sentiment analysis, emotion detection, topic
modelling, spatial/temporal analysis to understand the range
of issues surrounding COVID-19. For example, we combine
sentiment analysis with topic modelling to provide a deeper
understanding about how individuals feel about specific topics,
which can aid public health officials in developing strategies
and policies.
II. R ESEARCH F RAMEWORK
In this section, we discuss the framework used to utilize
public tweets for understanding sentiments, emotions and
discussion topics related to COVID-19.
A. Data Collection
Our dataset comprises 910,000 public tweets from users
across the world, curated from a combination of three larger
COVID-19 related datasets. We extracted 70,000 tweets per
week that were more likely to contain geolocation information
(more details later), for the period of 12 March to 10 June
2020. Out of the 910,000 tweets, there are a total of 896,031
geolocated tweets in English. We extracted this subset of
tweets from three larger datasets, namely: (i) Shane Smith’s
datasets on Kaggle [10], where daily datasets of tweets containing hashtags surrounding the topic of COVID-19 from 12

Fig. 1. Time Series Plot for Sentiment Score of Daily Tweets

March to 30 April 2020; (ii) The Github repository of [11]
contained tweet IDs of collected tweets from 1 May to 22
May 2020; and (iii) our own data collection from 23 May
2020 onwards.
B. Data Preprocessing
Previous studies have estimated that only 0.85% of tweets
are GPS geotagged [12], [13]. Likewise for the original larger
datasets, the proportion of tweets that are geotagged is extremely small. To address this issue, we utilized other attributes
of the tweets to infer the location of these tweets, such as:
(i) the self-declared location in the user profiles; and (ii) the
“entities” section of the tweets which contain metadata and
additional contextual information about them. This resulted in
the significantly higher number of 896,031 geolocated tweets
that will be used for spatial analysis. Thereafter, we perform
the standard text preprocessing steps such as conversion to
lowercase, tokenizing, lemmatizing and stemming.
C. Sentiment/Emotion Analysis
The process of sentiment/emotion analysis involves taking
the pool of words that have been identified from the preprocessing steps and comparing them to lexicons to determine
their sentiments or polarity [14]. There are two main lexicons
used in this study: the NRC Word-Emotion Association Lexicon (also known as EmoLex) and the AFINN lexicon. The
NRC lexicon is a list of more than 14,000 English unigrams
and their associations with eight fundamental emotions (anger,
fear, anticipation, trust, surprise, sadness, joy, and disgust) and
two sentiments (negative and positive) [15]. The assignment
and labelling of a word to its sentiment were manually done
by crowdsourcing through Amazon’s Mechanical Turk service.
The eight fundamental emotions in the lexicon correspond to
the eight primary emotions introduced by Plutchik [16].
The AFINN lexicon, on the other hand, assigns English
words on a scale of -5 to 5 (excluding 0), with negative
scores representing negative sentiment and positive scores
representing positive sentiment [17]. The sentiment score for
each tweet is calculated as a sum of the sentiment scores for
words in the tweet. A net positive overall sentiment score
indicates a positive statement, a net negative overall sentiment
score indicates a negative statement and a net overall sentiment
score of zero indicates a neutral statement.
Therefore, two aspects of sentiment analysis were carried
out for this research. The NRC lexicon was used for the
detection of the different emotions that Twitter users have
towards the pandemic, while the AFINN lexicon was used

Fig. 2. Sentiment Score of Daily Tweets for Week of 28 May to 3 June

for detecting the extent of negativity/positivity of the tweets
regarding the pandemic.
D. Topic Modelling
Latent dirichlet allocation (LDA), a topic modelling algorithm, was carried out to identify key topics talked about
in tweets surrounding the COVID-19 pandemic. LDA is a
generative probabilistic model of a corpus [18]. The algorithm
works by representing documents as random mixtures over
latent topics, where each topic is characterized by a collection
of words (“bag-of-words”) [19].
The tweets were grouped into weeks (7 days) with a total of
13 weeks and the tweet pool of each individual week is treated
as an individual document. To identify the optimal number of
topics for LDA on the 13 different documents, the measure
of perplexity was used. Perplexity is a statistical measure of
how well a probability model predicts a given sample. In the
context of LDA, the theoretical word distribution represented
by the given number of topics is compared to the actual topic
mixtures or distribution of words in the documents [20].
III. F INDINGS AND D ISCUSSION
A. RQ1: Is it all doom and gloom?
We observe that the emotion “trust” surprisingly makes
up a consistently higher proportion of tweets as compared
to other emotions. Additionally, the emotion “disgust” makes
up for a consistently lower proportion of tweets as compared
to others. These results are surprising because a pandemic is
usually associated with devastation and it would be natural
to assume a greater prevalence of negative emotions. These
negative emotions have been reported to stem from areas
such as the fear and anxiety people feel in the face of a
novel virus, the feelings of isolation and loneliness from
social distancing [21], as well as the stress and worry from
economic uncertainties [22]. However, a study by Barford et
al. found that negative emotions rarely overwhelm positive
ones in everyday circumstances [23], and the findings from
our research displays the same phenomenon even in the midst
of the COVID-19 pandemic. A study surveyed 854 Australian
residents about their emotions specifically during the COVID19 pandemic in March 2020 and the results showed that
only 3% of the participants felt purely negative emotions, but
almost all the participants actually reported feeling positive
emotions at some point in time. These positive emotions were
attributed to factors such as the novelty and flexibility of
different working arrangements and also feelings of approval

Fig. 3. Time Series of Weekly Emotions in Singapore

towards social distancing for the sake of everyone’s collective
health [24].
B. RQ2: Global Events and Sentiments
The first global event that will be covered is the declaration
of COVID-19 as a pandemic by WHO Director-General on 11
March 2020. This came after the number of cases COVID-19
outside China increased by 13 folds and the number of affected
countries tripled in just two weeks [25]. This study started the
analysis of tweets on 12 March, the day after the declaration
and it can be seen from the visualization of daily sentiment
score (see Figure 1) that people’s sentiments were significantly
more negative on 12 March as compared to other days within
the week as well as in the next few weeks. This is likely due
to the fact that anxiety and fear levels were heightened after
people realised the gravity of the COVID-19 situation and how
many aspects of their lives will be impacted – be it in daily
routines or in finances.
The second global event is the protests sparked by the death
of George Floyd on 25 May 2020 where a police officer killed
him by kneeling on his neck during an arrest. The Black Lives
Matter movement kick-started many protests not just in the
USA, but all over the world as well. The weekend of May 30
and May 31 saw protests all over the world in countries like
Britain, Germany, France and Spain, where people stood “in
a global act of solidarity” [26]. To add on to the anger and
devastation that people had towards this issue, the President of
the USA, Donald Trump tweeted controversial and insensitive
comments in response to the protests. His tweets on 29 May
and 30 May threatened violence against the protesters outside
the White House with one tweet saying that they could have
been attacked with “vicious dogs and ominous weapons” by
the US Secret Service [27]. The culmination of the protests
and the comments by Trump fuelled people’s rage towards this
situation and this can be seen in the significantly more negative
sentiment scores for 30 May and 31 May (see Figure 2).
Figure 3 shows the time series of the proportions of emotions exhibited by Twitter users in Singapore with regards
to COVID-19. The week after the circuit breaker1 started
for Singapore on 7 April (April 9 to April 15), it can be
seen that percentages of the emotions “fear” (11.9%) and
“sadness” (9.3%) dropped to one of the lowest percentages for
1 Measures

to reduce movement, activity and interactions in the country.

Fig. 4. Time Series of Weekly Emotions in the United Kingdom

their respective emotions throughout the whole duration of the
dataset; while the percentages of the emotions “trust” (25.1%)
and “joy” (15.7%) rose to one of the highest percentages for
their respective emotions. From these results, it can be seen
that contrary to popular belief that being in a “lockdown”
dampens moods with the prohibition of social gatherings as
well as harsh consequences associated with breaching the
associated rules, Singaporeans generally still do feel a sense
of relief and satisfaction at the implementation of the circuit
breaker. According to a recent analysis of Singaporeans’
sentiment online, positive sentiments could be attributed to
the Singapore government’s initiatives such as the Solidarity
Budget that offers help to Singaporeans’ livelihoods while
coping with the economic effects of the pandemic, and also the
sense of relief at stricter control measures in light of growing
cases of infection [28].
Figure 4 shows the time series of the proportions of
emotions exhibited by Twitter users in the United Kingdom
with regards to COVID-19. Looking at the percentages of the
emotions across the weeks, it can be seen that the percentages
for the emotions “fear” (16.2%) and “sadness” (11.9%) saw
significant increases while emotions like “joy” saw a significant decrease (11.4%) starting from the week of April 30
to May 6. During the first coronavirus press conference since
being infected with COVID-19 on 30 April, the Prime Minister
of the United Kingdom (UK) , Boris Johnson, announced that
the UK was “past the peak” of the virus outbreak and that a
“road map” would be laid out to phase out the lockdown in the
UK [29]. The “road map” was eventually revealed on 10 May
where Johnson announced a phased end to existing lockdown
restrictions. However, many criticisms were made against the
way Johnson handled the reopening – that there was a lack
of clear plans and guidance for safety [30] at a critical time
in managing the pandemic [31]. In addition, the change of
message for the UK’s coronavirus safety campaign from “stay
home” to “stay alert” has also been criticized as “confused”
and “nonsensical” by the public and rejected by nations such
as Scotland and Wales [32]. The feelings of uncertainty and
anxiety felt by people in the UK during this period is reflected
in how the overall levels of negative emotions increased
significantly from the week of April 30 onwards, while the
overall levels of positive emotions decreased.

C. RQ3: Discussion Topics
The analysis from longitudinal topic modelling for 3 months
of tweets related to COVID-19 has proven to be effective in identifying key trends of public dialogue and could
potentially be used to guide targeted and timely interventions. For example, the overall trend of topics started off
containing words with negative connotations such as “violence”, “assault”, “marginalize”, with the topics suggesting
the woes and frustrations associated with the COVID-19
lockdown/quarantine. However, as time went by, the topics
started shifting towards the more positive end of the spectrum,
with topics that involved tweets about keeping productive
during the lockdown and tweets about approaching a “new
normal” with telecommuting and e-commerce. This signals a
potential “glimmer of hope” amidst the bleak outlook because
it shows that society is accelerating the use of technology,
progressing forward in becoming “smart” cities, and adapting
to the new future.
IV. C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we present a framework that allows the general
public or public health officials, to understand the public
sentiment towards the pandemic, the key topics discussed.
For example, with an idea of what the key topics are at a
specific time in point, as well as across time, the general
public can be educated about events that might not have
been reported that widely in their specific countries. Using
this framework, we studied three research questions relating
to COVID-19, namely: (i) how sentiments/emotions change
during the pandemic? (ii) how sentiments/emotions change in
relation to global events? and (iii) what are the common topics
discussed during the pandemic?. We believe that this research’s
methodology can be easily tweaked and applied to different
contexts as well to examine other research topics such as that
of a natural disaster or political events.
Acknowledgements. This research is funded in part by the
Singapore University of Technology and Design under grant
SRG-ISTD-2018-140. The authors would like to thank Olivia
Nicol for her useful suggestions.
R EFERENCES
[1] J. Xue, J. Chen, R. Hu, C. Chen, C. Zheng, and T. Zhu, “Twitter
discussions and concerns about covid-19 pandemic: Twitter data analysis
using a machine learning approach,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.12830,
2020.
[2] J. Liu, T. Singhal, L. T. Blessing, K. L. Wood, and K. H. Lim,
“EPIC30M: An Epidemics Corpus of Over 30 Million Relevant Tweets,”
in Proceedings of the 2020 IEEE International Conference on Big Data
(BigData’20), Dec 2020.
[3] A. Signorini, A. M. Segre, and P. M. Polgreen, “The use of twitter to
track levels of disease activity and public concern in the us during the
influenza a h1n1 pandemic,” PloS one, vol. 6, no. 5, p. e19467, 2011.
[4] C. Chew and G. Eysenbach, “Pandemics in the age of twitter: content
analysis of tweets during the 2009 h1n1 outbreak,” PloS one, vol. 5,
no. 11, p. e14118, 2010.
[5] A. D. Dubey, “Twitter sentiment analysis during covid19 outbreak,”
Available at SSRN 3572023, 2020.
[6] N. K. Rajput, B. A. Grover, and V. K. Rathi, “Word frequency and
sentiment analysis of twitter messages during coronavirus pandemic,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.03925, 2020.

[7] M. O. Lwin, J. Lu, A. Sheldenkar, P. J. Schulz, W. Shin, R. Gupta,
and Y. Yang, “Global sentiments surrounding the covid-19 pandemic on
twitter: analysis of twitter trends,” JMIR public health and surveillance,
vol. 6, no. 2, p. e19447, 2020.
[8] A. Abd-Alrazaq, D. Alhuwail, M. Househ, M. Hamdi, and Z. Shah,
“Top concerns of tweeters during the covid-19 pandemic: infoveillance
study,” Journal of medical Internet research, vol. 22, no. 4, p. e19016,
2020.
[9] D. Bisanzio, M. U. Kraemer, I. I. Bogoch, T. Brewer, J. S. Brownstein,
and R. Reithinger, “Use of twitter social media activity as a proxy
for human mobility to predict the spatiotemporal spread of covid-19
at global scale,” Geospatial health, vol. 15, no. 1, 2020.
[10] S. Smith, “Coronavirus (covid19) tweets - early april, version 4,” https:
//www.kaggle.com/smid80/coronavirus-covid19-tweets-early-april/
version/4, 2020.
[11] Rrishik,
“Covid-19-tweets,”
https://github.com/Rrishik/
COVID-19-tweets, 2020.
[12] L. Sloan and J. Morgan, “Who tweets with their location? understanding
the relationship between demographic characteristics and the use of
geoservices and geotagging on twitter,” PloS one, vol. 10, no. 11, p.
e0142209, 2015.
[13] L. Chi, K. H. Lim, N. Alam, and C. J. Butler, “Geolocation Prediction
in Twitter Using Location Indicative Words and Textual Features,”
in Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Noisy User-generated Text
(WNUT’16), Dec 2016, pp. 227–234.
[14] K. H. Lim, K. E. Lee, D. Kendal, L. Rashidi, E. Naghizade, Y. Feng,
and J. Wang, “Understanding Sentiments and Activities in Green Spaces
using a Social Data-driven Approach,” in Smart Cities: Issues and
Challenges. Elsevier, Jun 2019, pp. 77–107.
[15] S. M. Mohammad and P. D. Turney, “Crowdsourcing a word–emotion
association lexicon,” Computational Intelligence, vol. 29, no. 3, pp. 436–
465, 2013.
[16] R. Plutchik, “A general psychoevolutionary theory of emotion,” in
Theories of emotion. Elsevier, 1980, pp. 3–33.
[17] University of Cincinnati, “Text mining: Sentiment analysis,” https://uc-r.
github.io/sentiment analysis, 2018.
[18] D. M. Blei, A. Y. Ng, and M. I. Jordan, “Latent dirichlet allocation,”
Journal of machine Learning research, vol. 3, no. Jan, pp. 993–1022,
2003.
[19] C. Montenegro, C. Ligutom III, J. V. Orio, and D. A. M. Ramacho,
“Using latent dirichlet allocation for topic modeling and document
clustering of dumaguete city twitter dataset,” in Proceedings of the 2018
International Conference on Computing and Data Engineering, 2018,
pp. 1–5.
[20] University of Cincinnati, “Topic modeling. computing for the social
sciences,” 2020.
[21] Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “Coping with stress: Pandemics can be stressful,” 2020.
[22] L. Bareket-Bojmel, G. Shahar, and M. Margalit, “Covid-19-related
economic anxiety is as high as health anxiety: Findings from the usa,
the uk, and israel,” International Journal of Cognitive Therapy, p. 1,
2020.
[23] K. A. Barford, P. Koval, P. Kuppens, and L. D. Smillie, “When good
feelings turn mixed: Affective dynamics and big five trait predictors of
mixed emotions in daily life,” European Journal of Personality, 2020.
[24] J. Anglim, K. Barford, P. O’Connor, and L. Smillie, “Not all doom and
gloom: even in a pandemic, mixed emotions are more common than
negative ones,” The Conversation, 2020.
[25] World Health Organization, “Who director-general’s opening remarks at
the media briefing on covid-19 (11 march 2020),” 2020.
[26] N. Colarassi, “Photos show how the world is demanding justice for
george floyd at global black lives matter protests,” The Insider, 2020.
[27] O. Milman, M. Pengelly, R. Luscombe, and D. Smith, “George floyd:
as protests rage across us, trump comments inflame tensions,” The
Guardian, 2020.
[28] N. Syed, “Circuit breaker: How are singaporeans affected?” Human
Resource Director, 2020.
[29] N. Triggle, “Coronavirus: Boris johnson says uk is past the peak of
outbreak,” BBC, 2020.
[30] A. Bienkov and T. Colson, “Boris johnson has revealed his ‘road map’
for ending the uk coronavirus lockdown,” Business Insider, 2020.
[31] A. Forsyth, “Coronavirus: Government urges ‘caution’ on lockdown
easing,” BBC, 2020.
[32] L. Handley, “Uk pm boris johnson’s new ‘stay alert’ coronavirus warning
criticized as ‘confused’ and ‘nonsensical’,” CNBC, 2020.

