Comment on: A systematic review and
meta-analysis of published research data on
COVID-19 infection-fatality rates
Chen Shen1, Derrick Van Gennep1, Alexander F. Siegenfeld1,2, and Yaneer Bar-Yam1
1 New

arXiv:2012.12400v1 [q-bio.PE] 22 Dec 2020

2 Department

England Complex Systems Institute, Cambridge, MA, USA
of Physics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA
November 26, 2020

The infection fatality rate (IFR) of COVID-19 is one of the measures of disease impact that can be of importance for
policy making. Here we show that many of the studies on which these estimates are based are scientifically flawed for
reasons which include: nonsensical equations, unjustified assumptions, small sample sizes, non-representative sampling
(systematic biases), incorrect definitions of symptomatic and asymptomatic cases (identified and unidentified cases),
typically assuming that cases which are asymptomatic at the time of testing are the same as completely asymptomatic
(never symptomatic) cases. Moreover, a widely cited meta-analysis misrepresents some of the IFR values in the original
studies, and makes inappropriate duplicate use of studies, or the information from studies, so that the results that are
averaged are not independent from each other. The lack of validity of these research papers is of particular importance
in view of their influence on policies that affect lives and well-being in confronting a worldwide pandemic.
R EVIEW

OF

M ETA -A NALYSIS

The infection fatality rate (IFR) of COVID-19 is one of
the measures of disease impact that can be of importance for
policy making. Over an extended period of time the CDC
estimation of 0.65% IFR [1] was based on an unpublished
meta-analysis [2]. We have previously written a criticism of
one of the 24 reports used by the meta-analysis [2] based
on the Diamond Princess cruise [3], [4]. Starting from an
incorrectly estimated 1.3% IFR for the Diamond Princess—
the actual IFR for the Diamond Princess being 2.0%—the
report attempted to model the IFR in China and reported a
value 0.6%; however, the multiple errors in their calculations,
including dividing by the same factor twice, render their results
meaningless.
Here we discuss flaws in five additional studies cited
in the meta-analysis. We note that these studies were not
selected because of the presence of flaws, but instead they
were sequentially chosen in each of the three categories in
the meta-analysis and therefore can be taken as indicative
of the quality to be expected. They include the following
members of the three labeled categories in the meta-analysis:
model estimates (first, on repatriation flights from Japan [5],
second, on exported cases from China [6], third, on a study
in France [7]), observational studies (first, on cases in Beijing
[8], second, on the Diamond Princess [3] previously reviewed
[4]), and serological surveys (first, on a study of Santa Clara
County [9]). We discuss two types of problems: flaws in the
studies per se, and flaws in the way in which they are used
by the meta-analysis.
Characteristic problems in the cited studies include:
•
•
•

Small sample sizes
Non-representative sampling (systematic biases)
Incorrect definitions of symptomatic and asymptomatic
cases (identified and non-identified cases), typically assuming that cases which are non-symptomatic at the
time of testing are the same as completely asymptomatic
(never symptomatic) cases.

Mathematical errors
Errors of presentation that distort the meaning of findings
• No attempt to account for unattributed deaths from
COVID-19 (e.g. if the infected individual died before
being tested for COVID-19)
Characteristic problems in the meta-analysis include:
• Misrepresentation of the IFR values in the original studies
• Inappropriate duplicate use of studies, or the information
from studies, so that results averaged are not independent
from each other, which gives uneven weight to the results
of the original work.
•
•

I.
The Rate of Underascertainment of Novel Coronavirus
(2019-nCoV) Infection: Estimation Using Japanese Passengers
Data on Evacuation Flights [5].
At the end of January, Japan conducted three repatriation
flights of Japanese nationals and their families on Jan 29-31
from Wuhan, China. Upon disembarkation from the planes,
tests were performed of the passengers and the test results
were used to estimate IFR in Wuhan. The study infers an IFR
of 0.3% − 0.6%, based on a 3 − 6% case fatality rate (CFR)
for Wuhan and an estimated ≈ 9.2% ratio of confirmed cases
to infections. This estimate is obtained by taking the number
of individuals who tested positive upon disembarkation, 8, as
a fraction of the total number of passengers, 565, to be equal
to the fraction of infected people detectable at the same time
in the city of Wuhan. Given this estimate of the infection rate,
the IFR is determined.
Flaws: (a) Small sample size. (b) Non-representative sample. (c) Nonsensical mathematical analysis. (d) No external
validity to the ascertainment rate (percentage of infections
that are tested and confirmed). (e) Ignoring confidence interval
uncertainty.
Flaw (a): This study uses repatriation flights of Japanese
nationals to estimate the prevalence in Wuhan. With n = 565

2

passengers total, 8 of them received positive test results. Thus,
a sample size of only 8 positive cases is used to infer the
ascertainment rate, prevalence rate, and IFR in a population of
11 million. Given the highly heterogeneous nature of pandemic
outbreaks in populations, a small sample size undermines
conclusions. Moreover, the repatriation consisted of families
rather than independent individuals, and the high correlation
between cases among family members reduces the statistical
independence of the sample.
Flaw (b): The use of repatriated flights of Japanese nationals
to estimate the prevalence in Wuhan require two unjustified assumptions: (a) the 565 passengers are a representative
sample of the Wuhan population, and (b) the infections in
Wuhan had no geographical, socio-economic, cultural, or other
heterogeneity. The flight consisted of Japanese nationals and
their families, indicating a distinct and potentially partially
segregated population, with behavioral cultural differences relevant to disease transmission, compared to Chinese nationals
generally. The general population and those who both fly
on international flights and have Japanese citizenship should
not be assumed to have the same prevalence due to distinct
socioeconomic classes and social networks. We also note
that geographical heterogeneity is a feature of this outbreak,
and Japanese nationals in Wuhan cannot be assumed to be
uniformly distributed geographically. The assumption by the
paper of a homogeneous urban population is highly implausible.
Flaw (c): The authors write an equation in which they set
the cumulative number of infections in Wuhan (the confirmed
cases divided by the ascertainment rate c(t)/q) divided by the
total population of Wuhan n times the detection window T
equal to the fraction of evacuees who tested positive (8/565)—
i.e.
c(t)T
8
=
.
(1)
565
qn
We immediately see a problem, however, which is that the lefthand side of the equation is dimensionless, while the righthand side of the equation has units of time. This renders
the equation meaningless. If, in fact, the sample were at all
8
representative, an appropriate equation would be 565
= c(t)
qn p
where p is the fraction of all infections in Wuhan that would
be detectable at the time that the evacuees were tested. We
will not carry through such an analysis here, however, since
the entire concept of trying to estimate incidence in Wuhan
from 8 positive cases among evacuees is fatally flawed.
Flaw (d): The ascertainment rate that the authors derive
is not valid, both due to a lack of a representative and
independent sample and due to a mathematical error in their
equation that renders their results meaningless. Even if it were
correctly derived, however, it has no validity for application
to other contexts, as it applies only to a particular snapshot
in time when tests in China were just starting to ramp up.
Any application of this rate to convert CFR to IFR under
other conditions is therefore inappropriate and misleading (see
Section II).
Flaw (e): The ascertainment rate, derived from 8 cases out
of 565, comes with a 95% CI range of 3.5 − 15.7 positive
results. The authors are evidently aware of this error range
as they noted q with (5.0 − 20%) 95% CI, an error range
that can half or double the point estimate of 10%. Yet when
calculating IFR subsequently, where IFR = CFR ×q, they

use 10% for q without addressing the error range to obtain
their final estimation of China IFR of 0.3-0.6% (China CFR
estimated as 3-6% at the time). Correctly including the error
in both the China CFR estimate and the ascertainment rate
would lead to a significantly larger error range for China’s
IFR. Of course, given all of the errors present in deriving
the ascertainment rate, even a correctly calculated error range
would be meaningless.
In total, the multiple errors, including nonsensical mathematical equations, statistical uncertainty, non-transferability,
and incorrect reporting of results, makes this paper unusable
for estimating an IFR.
II.
Real-Time Estimation of the Risk of Death from Novel
Coronavirus (COVID-19) Infection: Inference Using Exported
Cases [6].
This study modeled the epidemic growth rate in China. Its
results are an estimate of CFR (more precisely the case fatality
rate based upon cases and fatalities at one point in time during
the outbreak, called cCFR) of 5−8%. The study did not report
an IFR. The meta-analysis claimed an IFR of 0.5 − 0.8%
by multiplying the cCFR of the study by the ascertainment
rate from the previously described Japanese passenger study
in Section I.
Flaws: (a) Inappropriate duplicate use of studies. (b) Use
of the ascertainment rate from the previous study is subject to
all the flaws of that study (see Section I).
Flaw (a): There is no independent assessment of q [6].
We emphasize that this is a scientifically incorrect method
of performing a meta-analysis. Since the ascertainment rate is
a key determining factor for IFR, this is not an independent
evaluation of the IFR as would be required for correct inclusion in a meta-analysis. Even if the ascertainment rate were
valid, including multiple studies using the same ascertainment
rate without independent validation of the value, as the metaanalysis did with both [5] and [6], inflates the weight given to
the data and assumptions from which the ascertainment rate
in question was calculated.
Flaw (b): We note again that the ascertainment rate that is
being used has multiple invalidating flaws detailed previously.
In total, this study has no independent assessment of the
ascertainment rate which is fundamental for IFR estimation.
The inclusion of both studies in the meta-analysis is methodologically flawed, and the fundamentally flawed ascertainment
rate makes this study unusable for estimating an IFR.
III.
Estimating the burden of SARS-CoV-2 in France [7].
By assuming that the French and Diamond Princess cruise
ship populations differ only in their age/sex composition and
by assuming a particular distribution of infected individuals
across age/sex groups, the authors estimate the IFR for each
age/sex group in France. They report an overall IFR of 0.5%
(95% credible interval: 0.3 to 0.9%).
Flaws: (a) Misstatement of the study’s conclusions as being
the population death rate when they only included hospital
deaths. (b) Unjustified assumptions regarding contact rates

3

and inaccurate analysis of the relationship between contact
rates and probability of being infected. (c) Non-representative
sample (Diamond Princess data) used to set the overall IFR.
(d) No analysis of the sensitivity of the results to the assumed
Bayesian prior distributions. (e) Meta-analysis flaw: inappropriate duplicate use of studies in using the Diamond Princess
data.
Flaw (a): In the abstract the authors state that “0.5% of
those infected die” but later in their manuscript they note
that all COVID-19 deaths occurring outside of hospitals—and
in particular all retirement/nursing home populations—are
excluded from their analyses. While it is valid to conduct
an analysis that applies only to part of a population, it is
misleading to report results derived from such analyses as if
they apply to the population as a whole as the authors do in
the abstract, particularly given that they exclude 37% of the
total COVID-19 deaths. (By May 7, the final date for data
used in this study, there were 16, 386 deaths in hospitals in
France and 9, 604 deaths that occurred outside of hospitals,
including in retirement homes. [7].)
Flaw (b): While they have data on the number of deaths
and hospitalizations in each age/sex group in France, they do
not know how many people in each group were infected. By
estimating the relative rates of infections among the age/sex
groups, they are able to estimate the ratio of the IFRs between
the groups. They assume that infections for each age/sex group
are proportional to contact rate based on the supposed linearity
of their Fig. S17. However, Fig. S17 actually has substantial
curvature to it, bringing this assumption into question. Furthermore, the data they use to ascertain the contact rates of
each of the age/sex groups is from a study conducted in 2012
rather than during the pandemic period. The authors then make
a series of assumptions that are not validated by empirical
data as to the effect of the lockdown on these contact rates
in each age group. Different assumptions about the relative
probability of infection in each age group will yield different
results. For instance, when they perform a sensitivity analysis
in which everyone from all age/sex groups is equally likely to
be infected, their overall IFR is 0.7% rather than 0.5%.
Flaw (c): In order to estimate absolute IFRs for each
age/sex group (rather than only the ratios between them),
they also included in their Bayesian analysis the Diamond
Princess cruise ship data, in which the number of infected
people by age and sex is known. Thus, the absolute IFRs
by age/sex group that they calculate are essentially derived
from those on the Diamond Princess, using the French data to
understand the relative effect of age/sex on IFR. The reason
why their estimated overall IFR (0.5%) is far lower than the
IFR of 2% on the Diamond Princess cruise ship is that their
estimated age distribution of infected individuals in France is
far younger than the age distribution of infected individuals
on the Diamond Princess.
Their analysis is accurate only to the extent that the IFR
for each age/sex group on the Diamond Princess equals
the IFR for that age/sex group in France. This assumption
is not justified; individuals on the Diamond Princess could
substantially differ from individuals of the same age and sex
in France. In particular, cruise ship passengers are, for their
age, likely to be healthier than the general population. They
also were likely to receive more rapid medical attention due

to the active screening of the virus among the cruise ship
passengers. Given that relatively small changes in age can
substantially impact IFR (e.g. an age difference of ten years
impacts the estimated IFRs by a factor of 3 or 4 according to
this study), it seems likely that IFRs are also substantially
impacted by relatively small differences in health or other
variables. Recognizing that there may be a health difference
between the populations, they perform a sensitivity analysis.
However, their sensitivity analysis in which the Diamond
Princess population has a 25% lower IFR for each age/sex
group is inadequate; it would not be surprising if the Diamond
Princess IFRs for each particular age/sex group differed from
their French counterparts by a greater factor. (The Diamond
Princess data is also noisy, with only 15 deaths total, although
presumably this noise is accounted for in the wide credible
intervals that the authors report.)
Flaw (d): Finally, their paper is based on Bayesian analysis,
meaning that the authors had to select a prior distribution
for each of their parameters. However, they provide no justification for their choice of priors, nor is any sensitivity
analysis for the priors reported. The robustness/usefulness of
their estimates is thus left unjustified, and it is unclear how
their results would differ had they chosen a different set of
priors.
We now consider how an IFR estimate could be adjusted to include the non-hospitalized retirement home deaths.
There were 16, 384 total hospitalized deaths and 9, 604 nonhospitalized deaths. We have that
IFRtotal =

Total Deaths
=
Total Infections

1.59 IFRHospitalized
16384 + 9604
=
NHI
16384/IFRHospitalized + NHI
1 + 16384/IFR

Hospitalized

where NHI is the number of non-hospitalized infections.
Assuming the number of non-hospitalized infections is small
compared to the total number of infections in France, an IFR
that includes deaths in retirement homes can be calculated
from an IFR that does not by multiplying by 1.59. (This factor
is so large in part because individuals in nursing homes were
more likely to be infected.) Thus, an estimate of 0.5% becomes
0.8%, and an estimate of 0.7% becomes 1.1%. The study’s
95% credible interval for the IFR of 0.3 to 0.9% becomes 0.6
to 1.6% when non-hospitalized deaths are included. However,
this credible interval does not include the additional sources
of error discussed above, including the systematic bias that
a healthier Diamond Princess population would lead to IFR
estimates that are too low, which render it impossible to obtain
an accurate estimate of IFR from this study.
Flaw (e): Meta-analysis flaw: By including both the Diamond Princess study[3] and this study that estimated IFR
based on the Diamond Princess data, the meta-analysis effectively includes IFR estimation of the Diamond Princess data
twice, a similar meta-analysis error as found in Section II.
IV.
Characteristics of COVID-19 infection in Beijing [8].
This is an observational study of patients from Beijing,
with 262 confirmed cases that were transferred to designated

4

hospitals and 3 deaths. It is used as 1.15% IFR in the metaanalysis.
Flaws: (a) non-representative population sample, (b) Metaanalysis flaw: misstatement of the study results by the metaanalysis.
Flaw (a): The study cannot be considered to contain a
representative sample of the population. It over-represents
travelers (from Wuhan) consisting of 26% of the sample. Without widespread transmission in the population, those infected
cannot be considered to be representative of the population
as a whole. In particular, intra-city travelers are young and
tend to have reduced chances of prior health conditions. Due
to homophily, those that they infect in the first generation of
infections would also not be representative.
Flaw (b): The abstract of the Beijing study reads “the fatality
of COVID-19 infection in Beijing was 0.9%" [8]. The 0.9%
was obtained by taking 3 deaths divided by 342 total confirmed
cases reported in Beijing by Feb 10, 2020 [8], including 80
cases that were not transferred to designated hospitals. Thus
the “0.9% fatality rate” is the CFR, not IFR. Thus, the metaanalysis [2] misstated the CFR as IFR. Moreover the metaanalysis divides the 3 deaths by the 262 confirmed cases
that were transferred to designated hospitals to get a CFR of
1.15%, which they include as the IFR.
V.
COVID-19 Antibody Seroprevalence in Santa Clara County,
California [9].
This study was one of the first seroprevalance studies in
the US, which estimated a 2.8% prevalence rate, meaning
infections were more than 50 times higher than the confirmed
cases in Santa Clara county at the time of the study. The
estimated IFR was 0.17%. This is one of the lowest IFR
estimations the meta-analysis cited.
Flaws: (a) Non representative sample. (b) Widely criticized
sensitivity and specificity of the tests.
Flaw (a): The population sample was obtained by on-line
sign-up without measures to determine whether or not it was
a representative sample. This is a highly suspect sampling
method that should not be used in a meta-analysis.
Flaw (b): Sensitivity and specificity: The serological test
was not approved by the FDA and was widely criticized [10],
[11].
Criticisms of this study have been present since the day
it was published in pre-print form. The sampling method,
the statistical tests, the sensitivity/specificity of the tests, are
all reported to be seriously flawed [10], [11]. The population
prevalence estimate, the ratio of IFR to CFR used to determine

the IFR, which is the basis of this study is wildly inconsistent
with other studies. Considering these criticisms, the inclusion
of it in a meta-analysis is inappropriate. As one of the lowest
IFRs in the meta-analysis, it had an outsized influence over
the reported result.
We note that one of the authors of this Santa Clara study
has also posted a meta-analysis (which includes this Santa
Clara study) [12]. The author has been faulted for not reporting
conflict of interest due to funding from a financially interested
party and for advocating for policies consistent with that
party’s view [13]. The severity of misconduct and its damaging
effects are described in the report.
S UMMARY
Our review of the meta-analysis points out multiple flaws in
the papers cited and in their use by the meta-analysis. In addition to these specific flaws, none of the studies discussed above
attempted to estimate the number of deaths from COVID-19
that were not attributed to COVID-19, leading to systematic
underestimates of the IFR, as noted in the meta-analysis.
Excess mortality data [14] suggests a significant number of
unattributed deaths from COVID-19, although some of the
excess mortality may be from indirect effects of the pandemic.
(Such deaths should still be considered when evaluating the
overall impact of the pandemic.)
It is also important to note that the IFR is not a biological
invariant but rather significantly varies with the distribution
of age, health and other qualities of those infected as well
as what type of medical care they receive. Thus, the IFR
calculated for a particular population of infected individuals
is not immediately generalizable to other populations. Metaanalyses that consider IFR as a well-defined quantity and that
average values from various populations to produce a single
estimate without accounting for such differences are therefore
problematic. (The lead author has recently posted an additional
meta-analysis that investigates age-stratified IFRs [15]; such an
analysis is an improvement but still does not take into account
other factors such as differences in the underlying health of
each age group and differences in access to treatment.)
In summary, we have pointed out flaws in 5 papers included
in the meta-analysis [2], as well as the methods of their use
in the meta-analysis itself. We previously published criticism
of one of the other reports which the meta-analysis was based
on [3], [4]. Inclusive, of 6 studies that we analyzed, not one
provided a sound statistical and methodological basis for an
IFR determination. With all of its flaws, we are surprised to
see that this meta-analysis has been used in preprint form as
the CDC’s estimate for the IFR of SARS-CoV-2 [1] and that
it is provided any credibility by the scientific community.

R EFERENCES
[1] CDC. COVID-19 Pandemic Planning Scenarios. https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/hcp/planning-scenarios.html (accessed November 18, 2020).
[2] Meyerowitz-Katz G, Merone L. A systematic review and meta-analysis of published research data on COVID-19 infection-fatality rates. medRxiv 2020;
DOI: 2020.05.03.20089854.
[3] Russell T, Hellewell J, Jarvis C, et al. Estimating the infection and case fatality ratio for COVID-19 using age-adjusted data from the outbreak on the
Diamond Princess cruise ship. medRxiv 2020; DOI: 10.1101/2020.03.05.20031773.
[4] Shen C, Van Gennep D, Bar-Yam Y. The IFR of the Diamond Princess has been misreported, best current value is 2.0%. New England Complex Systems
Institute https://necsi.edu/the-ifr-of-the-diamond-princess-has-been-misreported-best-current-value-is-2 (accessed November 18, 2020).
[5] Nishiura H, Kobayashi T, Yang Y, et al. The Rate of Underascertainment of Novel Coronavirus (2019-nCoV) Infection: Estimation Using Japanese
Passengers Data on Evacuation Flights. Journal of Clinical Medicine 2020; 9(2), 419. DOI: 10.3390/jcm9020419.
[6] Jung S, Akhmetzhanov AR, Hayashi K, et al. Real-Time Estimation of the Risk of Death from Novel Coronavirus (COVID-19) Infection: Inference
Using Exported Cases. Journal of Clinical Medicine 2020; 9(2), 523. DOI: 10.3390/jcm9020523.

5

[7] Salje H, Tran Kiem C, Lefrancq N, et al. Estimating the burden of SARS-CoV-2 in France. Science 2020; 369(6500), eabc3517.
DOI: 10.1126/science.abc3517
[8] Tian S, Hu N, Lou J, et al. Characteristics of COVID-19 infection in Beijing. Journal of Infection 2020; 80(4), 401–406. DOI: 10.1016/j.jinf.2020.02.018.
[9] Bendavid E, Mulaney B, Sood N, et al. COVID-19 Antibody Seroprevalence in Santa Clara County, California. medRxiv 2020;
DOI:10.1101/2020.04.14.20062463.
[10] Kreiger L. Stanford coronavirus research: Did politically-motivated scientists hype their speedy study? The Mercury News, May 24, 2020.
https://www.mercurynews.com/2020/05/24/coronavirus-research-stanford-scientists-accused-of-hyping-covid-19-antibody-study/ (accessed November
18, 2020).
[11] McCormick E. Why experts are questioning two hyped antibody studies in coronavirus hotspots. The Guardian, April 23, 2020.
https://www.theguardian.com/world/2020/apr/23/coronavirus-antibody-studies-california-stanford (accessed November 18, 2020).
[12] Ioannidis JPA. Infection fatality rate of COVID-19 inferred from seroprevalence data. Bulletin of the World Health Organization 37, 2020.
https://www.who.int/bulletin/online_first/BLT.20.265892.pdf (accessed November 18, 2020).
[13] Lee SM. JetBlue’s Founder Helped Fund A Stanford Study That Said The Coronavirus Wasn’t That Deadly. Buzzfeed May 15, 2020.
https://www.buzzfeednews.com/article/stephaniemlee/stanford-coronavirus-neeleman-ioannidis-whistleblower (accessed November 18, 2020).
[14] Rossen LM, Branum AM, Ahmad FB, Sutton P, Anderson RN. (2020). Excess Deaths Associated with COVID-19, by Age
and Race and Ethnicity — United States, January 26–October 3, 2020. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2020; 69: 1522–7.
https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/69/wr/mm6942e2.htm (accessed November 18, 2020).
[15] Levin AT, Hanage WP, Owusu-Boaitey N, Cochran KB, Walsh SP, Meyerowitz-Katz G. Assessing the Age Specificity of Infection Fatality Rates for
COVID-19: Systematic Review, Meta-Analysis, and Public Policy Implications. medRxiv 2020; DOI: 10.1101/2020.07.23.20160895

