Simple control for complex pandemics: the impact of testing and
contact tracing on heterogeneous networks
Sarah C. Fay,∗ Dalton J. Jones, Munther A. Dahleh, and A.E. Hosoi
Institute for Data Systems & Society

arXiv:2012.08755v2 [q-bio.PE] 2 Feb 2021

Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
(Dated: February 3, 2021)

1

Abstract
Amidst the current COVID-19 pandemic, quantifying the effects of strategies that mitigate the
spread of infectious diseases is critical. This article presents a compartmental model that addresses
the role of random viral testing, follow-up contact tracing, and subsequent isolation of infectious
individuals to stabilize the spread of a disease. We propose a branching model and an individual
(or agent) based model, both of which capture the stochastic, heterogeneous nature of interactions
within a community. The branching model is used to derive new analytical results for the trade-offs
between the different mitigation strategies, with the surprising result that a community’s resilience
to disease outbreaks is independent of its underlying network structure.

I.

INTRODUCTION

Communities around the world are fighting the COVID-19 pandemic. In the United
States alone, more than 26 million cases and 400,000 deaths have been recorded in less than
a year [1]. While awaiting the deployment of a vaccine, different mitigation strategies have
proven to be necessary to reduce cases, fatalities, and outbreaks of the disease. To this end,
the first measure many communities took was encouraging or mandating social distancing
[2–4] and many of these policies were largely successful in slowing the rate of viral spread.
However, social distancing also prevents healthy people from interacting with each other,
leaving many feeling isolated [5–7] and hindering global economic activity [8, 9]. One way
to combat these issues and safely resume more normal levels of interaction is to detect and
isolate infectious individuals via viral testing. While the effect of social isolation and quarantining on the spread of disease has been studied [10, 11], this article examines particular
and practical methods—random viral testing and follow-up contact tracing—for bringing
only infectious individuals into isolation while allowing healthy individuals to interact more
freely. The analysis provides expressions for the trade-offs between social distancing and
these detection methods. While this work was inspired by the COVID-19 pandemic, the
results apply to any disease with similar characteristics.

∗

Corresponding author: scfay@mit.edu

2

Recovery, Φrec

Susceptible
Infection, Φin

Recovered

Isolated

Infectious, I
Detection, Φdet

Recovery

FIG. 1. Compartmental model for COVID-19 and similar diseases. Individuals join the infectious
class (red) by contracting the disease (at a rate Φin ) and leave by recovering (Φrec ) or by being
detected and subsequently isolated (Φdet ).
II.

MODELING FOUNDATIONS

We begin by applying the disease modeling principles established by Kermack and McKendrick [12]. This model relies on partitioning the population into different categories (Susceptible, Infectious, Recovered or SIR) based on disease status and applying a conservation
law on the total population size. The rate of change of the number of people in a particular
partition is determined only by the net flow of individuals into or out of that group. Stable
dynamics (i.e. a shrinking infectious population) can be equivalently defined as a positive
net flow of people out of the infectious group.
Many extensions of the SIR model include additional classifications of individuals [13–
16]. In our cases, we partition the population into four groups: susceptible, infectious,
isolated, and recovered. An exposed/latent group, which separates presymptomatic from
symptomatic individuals, is not considered in this study1 due to the high number of COVID19 cases that never become symptomatic [17, 18]. The choice of partitions and the flows
between them are depicted in Fig. 1. The rate of the flow into the infectious class is denoted
as Φin . The flow out is driven by two mechanisms. The first is recovery, denoted as Φrec .
The second is detection. If infectious individuals are detected, they can be isolated from
the rest of the population and thus cannot infect others. This flow rate due to detection is
denoted as Φdet .
1

By ignoring the development of symptoms, we will overestimate the number of total infections, leading
to more conservative stability bounds.

3

We can now write a conservation equation for the infectious group:
It+1 − It = Φin − Φrec − Φdet

(1)

where It is the number of infected individuals at time t. This conservation equation highlights
three levers that we can operate to reduce the spread of the disease and achieve controlled,
stable dynamics. The first is reducing the rate of infection (i.e. reducing Φin ), which can be
achieved by reducing the likelihood of transmission of the disease (e.g. by increasing social
distancing or wearing masks). The second is increasing the rate of recovery. This lever is not
easy to operate and is dictated by biological constraints and available medical treatments.
The final lever, increasing detection, is the focus of this work.
To analyze the conservation principle expressed in Eq. 1, we must further define each of
the flows into and out of this group. The rate of infection depends on how many interactions
an infectious person has with others at each time step. In order to capture the heterogeneous
nature of interactions within a community [19–21], each individual will have a random
number of contacts coming from a distribution X with mean and variance given by µx and
σx2 respectively. If this interaction occurs between an infectious individual and a susceptible
contact, the disease will be transmitted with probability ρ, referred to as the transmissibility
of the disease [22]. In defining recovery, we assume that every infectious individual is equally
likely to recover at a given time step. This likelihood is denoted 1/d, where d is the average
number of days spent infectious in the absence of detection methods. Using this memoryless
approximation, we do not need to know (or keep track of) when each particular individual
became sick.
These parameter definitions are related through the basic reproduction number of the
disease
R0 = ρµx d.

(2)

This parameter, standard to epidemiology, represents the number of “secondary cases one
infectious individual will produce in a population consisting only of susceptible individuals”
[22]. Given its frequent use in infectious diseases studies, the empirical value of this parameter is more widely available and therefore often a more useful metric than transmissibility
[23, 24].
The two final parameters of interest are related to detection. We consider a policy
where every member of the population has a probability ν of being chosen for random viral
4

testing each day. Infectious individuals that are tested are assumed to be detected with
100% accuracy (though it is straightforward to incorporate the sensitivity of the test) and
immediately sent to isolation. The contacts of those detected are then traced and isolated.
The likelihood of successful tracing (i.e. the contact was correctly identified, tested, and if
infected, isolated) is denoted as c.
We consider two models for disease dynamics with these parameters: a branching model
[25–27] and an individual-based model (IBM) [19, 21, 28, 29]. These two models differ only in
the representation of interactions between members of the population. The branching model
does not track specific individuals in the population, only the total number of infectious
people; in contrast, the individual-based model tracks the status of each person at every
point in time. While the individual-based model contains more information, the branching
model is easier to analyze, allowing us to derive a quantitative estimate of how much random
testing and contact tracing is required to stabilize the spread of a disease.

A.

Branching model

In the branching model, the number of contacts each infectious person has is assumed
to follow an (unknown) distribution X with mean µx and variance σx2 ; for each infectious
individual i, we simulate their interactions by sampling from this distribution. In this study,
we assume that all of these contacts are with susceptible individuals. This assumption leads
us to overestimate the number of infections that occur on each step, resulting in an upper
bound on the stability criterion derived below.
Susceptible individuals contract the disease with probability ρ. The number of new
infections at time t is then written as
Φin =

Xi
It X
X

Yij

i=1 j=1

where Yij is a Bernoulli random variable with parameter ρ and Xi is sampled from the
distribution of the number of contacts.
Once an individual tests positive, their contacts are traced and tested. In order for one
of these contacts (j) to be successfully detected, two events must happen. First, the contact
must be infected at the time they are traced. At the previous time step, each contact had a
likelihood ρ of having been infected by person i. Using this as the likelihood that contact j is
5

infected at the current time step will underestimate the number of infected contacts because
person i may have been infecting their contacts for more than one day, which in turn leads
to more conservative stability bounds.2 The second event that must occur is successful
tracing which happens with likelihood c. Each contact therefore has a probability cρ of
being detected as infectious through contact tracing. Together, the number of infectious
individuals removed from the population by detection via both random testing and contact
tracing is
Φdet =

It
X

Vi

1+

Xi
X

i=1

!
Wij

j=1

where Vi (random testing) and Wij (tracing) are Bernoulli random variables with parameters
ν and cρ respectively.
Unlike infection and detection, recovery does not depend on the number of contacts a
person has. An infectious person has a likelihood of 1/d of recovering on a given day.
However, to ensure we are not overestimating the flow out of the infectious population, we
will only count those who recover if they are not chosen for testing on that day. The recovery
flow rate is then given by
Φrec =

It
X

Zi (1 − Vi )

i=1

where Zi is a Bernoulli random variable with parameter 1/d.
Using the the constitutive relationships defined above and the conservation law of Eq. 1,
the evolution of the number of infectious individuals (I) is given by
!
" X
It
i
X
X
Yij − Zi (1 − Vi )
It+1 = It +
i=1

− Vi

j=1

1+

Xi
X

!#
Wij

(3)

.

j=1

Infectious disease dynamics are stable if the number of infectious individuals decreases
on average, i.e. E [It+1 ] < E [It ]. From Eq. 3 for the full stochastic process, the expectation
of It+1 can be written as:
E [It+1 ] = λE [It ]

(4)

λ = 1 + ρµx (1 − cν) − ν − 1/d + ν/d.

(5)

where

2

In reality, it takes up to three days after initial exposure for the COVID-19 causing virus to become
detectable through testing [23].

6

Stability therefore requires that λ < 1, which contains no dependence on the variance in the
distribution of the number of contacts σx2 , i.e. stability depends only on the mean number
of contacts in the population and not on any other features of the underlying network of
connections.
To put this in a familiar form, we can redefine λ in terms of an effective reproduction
number Reff :
λ = 1 + r (Reff − 1)
where the effective reproduction number is given by


1 − cν
Reff = R0
1 + ν (d − 1)

(6)

(7)

and the parameter r is the likelihood of an infectious person being removed through either
recovery or random testing given by
r = ν + 1/d − ν/d.
In this formulation, we see that a sufficient stability criterion for the mean dynamics is
Reff < 1. Notice, if we consider the case where no testing or contact tracing occurs, the
expression simplifies to R0 < 1, which, by definition, represents stable dynamics for a disease
in a fully susceptible, naive population [22].
While the variance of the number of contacts σx2 does not appear in the analysis of the
expectation of It+1 , it does appear in the variance, var (It+1 ). Computing this variance gives
var (It+1 ) = γE [It ] + λ2 var (It )
where λ is the same parameter defined in Eq. 5 and γ is given by




γ = σx2 ρ2 (1 + c2 ν) + r (1 − r) + µ2x ρ2 c2 ν (1 − ν)
+ µx [ρ (1 − ρ) + ρcν (3 − ρc − r)] .
The disease dynamics can therefore be summarized by the two difference equations:

 


E [It+1 ]
λ 0
E [It ]

=

.
(8)
var (It+1 )
γ λ2
var (It )
An eigenvalue analysis of Eq. 8 shows that the system is stable if λ is less than 1. Hence
stability in the mean is a sufficient condition for stability of the whole system.
7

B.

Individual-based model (IBM)

To test the analytic framework derived above, we implemented an individual-based model
which tracks the infection status of each member of the population. Rather than developing
a network of contacts on-the-fly through branching, the network is established at the outset.
Every member of the population is a node and every edge represents a contact between two
individuals. Such a network is difficult to estimate for a real population (though techniques
are improving [30]), but a random graph where connections are distributed as X can be
created. Fig. 2 shows sample realizations of these random graphs for 8 different distributions,
varying in mean, variance, and distribution type.
Once the underlying network of connections is established, each individual is assigned
to one of the partitions of the model. At each time step, the status of each individual is
updated. If a person is infectious, they infect their susceptible neighbors with probability ρ
at each time. If an individual is infectious at time t, they recover at t + 1 with probability
1/d. They may also become isolated if they are detected through random testing with
probability ν. If they are detected, each of their infectious neighbors has a probability c of
also joining the isolated population. Isolated individuals will eventually recover and do so
with probability 1/d at each time step.

III.
A.

RESULTS
Universal behavior

To demonstrate the efficacy of the analytic expressions in Eq. 5-7 and to illustrate the
trade-offs between social distancing, testing, and contact tracing, simulations of the underlying stochastic models were run. In both the branching and individual-based models,
the distribution of edges in the graph is arbitrary. For illustrative purposes, two specific
distributions, a binomial distribution and a uniform distribution, were tested.
Fig. 3 shows the results of running 3, 600 simulations for a small outbreak (10 infected
individuals) for a fixed disease transmissibility ρ, mean infectious period d, and fraction
of successfully traced contacts c. Each point represents the mean number of infectious
individuals on day 5 over 100 trials. Fig. 3(a) shows that more random testing leads to
fewer infectious people after 5 days and a more controlled outbreak. However, case numbers
8

Uniform Distribution
High μx
Low μx

Low μx

High μx

Binomial Distribution

Low σx2

High σx2

Low σx2

High σx2

FIG. 2. Sample random graphs where the number of connections made to each node is distributed
as X. Here, X takes either a uniform or a binomial form and has mean µx and variance σx2 .

also depend on the average number of daily interactions µx ; as expected, underlying graphs
with higher connectivity require more testing.
Because of the linear time-invariant nature of Eq. 4, the number of infectious individuals
on any future day will depend only on the size of the initial outbreak and on the parameter
λ (defined in Eq. 5). This growth/decay rate depends only on the mean number of daily
interactions a person has (µx ) and not on the variance or form of the associated distribution.
Fig. 3(b) corroborates this prediction, showing a collapse of the simulation data to the
analytical result for all of the different models and distributions of the underlying graph.

B.

Comparing mitigation strategies

Having verified the collapse of the data, we turn our attention to the practical implications
of this study. The stability analysis performed on the branching model allows us to reduce
the spread of a disease to a single parameter, the effective reproduction number Reff of
Eq. 7. The first term on the right-hand side in Eq. 7 is the reproduction number which in
our notation captures the amount of social distancing that occurs in the community. Social
distancing often consists of both reducing the number of contacts per day (decreasing µx )
9

I 0 e 5λ

Branching model
IBM

40
2

σ x2 = 0

1.9

Binomial distribution:
1.8
1.3
1.2
1.1
1
1

1.1

1.2

1.3

1.4

1.5

1.6

2

1.7

(b)

μ x = 10
μ x = 20
μ x = 30

1.8

λ (growth /decay parameter)

(a)

1.7
1.4

Uniform distribution:

1.9

ν (daily testing fraction)

μ x = 30

1.6

Uncontrolled

1.5

Controlled
I0 = 10

μ x = 10
μ x = 20

FIG. 3. Number of infectious individuals at t = 5 for I0 = 10 (dashed line) as a function of (a)
the daily testing fraction and (b) the parameter λ, for various models of community interactions.
The collapse in λ shown in (b) indicates that stability is independent of the variance and type of
distribution of interactions. The shaded region represents stable dynamics, i.e. where the number
of infectious individuals decreased from I0 . Each point represents the mean of 100 trials with the
same parameters.

as well as changing the nature of these interactions, e.g. through wearing masks (decreasing
ρ); in this analysis, changes in µx and ρ are reflected in R0 through Eq. 2.
The stability criterion (Reff < 1) provides simple guidance on how much random testing
and contact tracing are required to mitigate the spread of the disease. Rearranging this
expression, the minimum amount of testing required to ensure stability to outbreaks is
νmin =

R0 − 1
.
cR0 + d − 1

(9)

This relationship can be used to estimate the minimum required daily testing fraction for
various diseases. The results for some specific diseases (including COVID-19) are shown
in Table I. The table contains both the required testing fraction for the case of no contact
tracing (c = 0) and the case where 50% of contacts are successfully traced (c = 0.5).
The specific parameters selected are mean values taken from the literature for spread under
normal conditions, i.e. no social distancing. Note that some of these diseases can be (and are)
managed in ways other than testing (e.g. through vaccination or symptom identification),
and the provided testing fractions represent what would be required in the absence of these
other mitigation strategies.
10

TABLE I. Levels of random testing required in the absence of a vaccine to control the spread
of different common diseases for two contact tracing scenarios. The rate of testing indicates the
probability of an individual being tested on each day; 1 corresponds to daily testing for everyone.
The required level of testing decreases as contact tracing increases, as shown in the fourth column
where 50% of contacts are traced after a successful test. Estimates for COVID-19 are based on
aggregate global data [23].
Reproduction

Fraction of popu-

lation tested daily

lation tested daily

number

Days

(R0 )

(d)

for c = 0

for c = 0.5

19

4.5 [23]

14 [23]

0.27

0.23

Influenza

1.4 [31]

7 [31]

0.07

0.06

Measles

12.0 [32]

14 [32]

0.85

0.58

Mumps

4.28 [33]

12[33]

0.30

0.25

Polio

5.0 [34]

7 [34]

0.67

0.47

SARS

1.08 [35]

14 [35]

0.006

0.004

Smallpox

5.0 [36]

21 [36]

0.20

0.18

Disease

infected

Fraction of popu-

COVID-

Regardless of the specific disease and its characteristics, the expression for the minimum
required testing fraction (Eq. 9) shows the trade-offs between social distancing, testing, and
contact tracing. Consider the case where no contact tracing is done: c = 0. The minimum
required testing fraction simplifies to
νmin,c=0 =

R0 − 1
.
d−1

This relationship shows that decreasing social distancing requires more testing to control
the spread of the disease. Put another way, if more testing is available, less social distancing
is required. In actuality, the amount of daily testing is often limited by a community’s resources, e.g. available tests, processing facilities, labor, etc. In the case where these resources
are limited, communities can still safely increase the frequency of normal interactions (R0 )
if they can increase contact tracing capability (c).
The trade-offs expressed analytically in Eq. 9 are visualized in Fig. 4 for a disease with
11

0.5
=
c

c =
0.8

0
c =

FIG. 4. Trade-offs between social distancing (reflected in R0 ), testing and contact tracing. The
stability boundary between scenarios of controlled and uncontrolled disease behavior are shown.
Horizontal lines represent mean reproduction numbers for COVID-19 in early Wuhan studies [37]
(solid), global aggregate values [23] (dashed), and on the Diamond Princess cruise ship [38] where
little social distancing was possible (dotted). In Wuhan, testing 10-20% of the population daily
suffices to control the epidemic whereas no amount of testing (in the absence of contact tracing)
could control the outbreak on the Diamond Princess.

a mean infectious period of 14 days, as is the case for COVID-19 [23]. As the amount of
testing increases, the allowable R0 increases as well, and these gains can be further amplified
by increasing contact tracing. Also shown in Fig. 4 are the mean measured reproduction
numbers in three different scenarios: Wuhan communities [37], a global average [23], and
aboard the Diamond Princess cruise ship [38]. While the case data used to arrive at these
values largely occurred before robust, large-scale testing options were established, examining
these scenarios allows us to project how much testing and contact tracing would be required
to support similar communities in the future.
12

IV.

DISCUSSION

While this work was originally inspired by the necessity to use testing and other non
pharmaceutical interventions to control the spread of COVID-19, the results depend on
the details of the neither the disease nor of the population. Given some estimate of the
parameters of a disease’s proliferation, the stability analysis performed in this paper gives
general guidelines on the amount of testing and contact tracing needed to stop outbreaks.
However, the most practical guidance arises in cases where there is a large susceptible
population, a large proportion of asymptomatic cases, and no vaccine. For example, without
any other policy interventions, in order to stop a disease like measles from spreading in a
fully susceptible population, 85% of the population would need to be tested daily (see Table
I). For this reason (among others), vaccinating for measles in order to reduce the number of
susceptible individuals is essential.

Finally, it is important to emphasize that the stability criteria does not depend on the
variance of the underlying network of the community, only its average degree; highly connected individuals only impact the dynamics through their contribution to the mean. This
simplifies the analysis of the spread of an epidemic as it proves to be independent of network structure, allowing one to evaluate mitigation strategies for all communities, not just
those whose interaction behaviors are roughly homogeneous. Hence in examining the impact
of non-pharmaceutical interventions on stability, higher complexity network models (those
with additional information about the underlying community structure) are unnecessary.
However, analyses that go beyond stability, e.g. predicting the size of an outbreak, require
models that contain more detailed network information [39, 40]. Lastly, one of the most
potentially useful implications of this work is that with knowledge of only a few disease
parameters, the derived stability criteria relates detection methods to social distancing and
therefore captures many of the trade-offs policymakers must consider. This effectively quantifies the “value of social connections” in terms of the additional amount of testing needed
as social distancing is relaxed.
13

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

S.C.F. was partially supported by the adidas Future team. D.J.J was supported by C3.ai
Digital Transformation Institute Agreement dated 5/22/2020.
All four authors were involved in the formulation of the problem, the analysis, and the
writing and editing of the manuscript. S.C.F. and D.J.J. were responsible for the numerical
simulation.

[1] CDC, Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19): Cases and Deaths in the U.S. (2020 (accessed
December 15, 2020)).
[2] D. J. McGrail, J. Dai, K. M. McAndrews, and R. Kalluri, Enacting national social distancing
policies corresponds with dramatic reduction in covid19 infection rates., PLoS ONE 15, 1
(2020).
[3] T. P. B. Thu, P. N. H. Ngoc, N. M. Hai, and L. A. Tuan, Effect of the social distancing measures
on the spread of covid-19 in 10 highly infected countries., Science of the Total Environment
742 (2020).
[4] A. Teslya, T. M. Pham, N. G. Godijk, M. E. Kretzschmar, M. C. J. Bootsma, and G. Rozhnova, Impact of self-imposed prevention measures and short-term government-imposed social
distancing on mitigating and delaying a covid-19 epidemic: A modelling study., PLoS Medicine
17, 1 (2020).
[5] R. Elran-Barak and M. Mozeikov, One month into the reinforcement of social distancing due
to the covid-19 outbreak: Subjective health, health behaviors, and loneliness among people
with chronic medical conditions., International journal of environmental research and public
health 17 (2020).
[6] J. G. Luiggi-Hernández and A. I. Rivera-Amador, Reconceptualizing social distancing:
Teletherapy and social inequality during the covid-19 and loneliness pandemics., Journal of
Humanistic Psychology 60, 626 (2020).
[7] K. Lewis, Covid-19: Preliminary data on the impact of social distancing on loneliness and
mental health., Journal of psychiatric practice 26, 400 (2020).
[8] F. Milani, Covid-19 outbreak, social response, and early economic effects: a global var analysis

14

of cross-country interdependencies., Journal of population economics , 1 (2020).
[9] H. Simola and L. Solanko, Domestic and global economic effects of covid-19 containment
measures: How does domestic and global economic effects of covid-19 containment measures:
How does russia compare internationally?., BOFIT Policy Brief , 3 (2020).
[10] L. Feng, Q. Zhao, and C. Zhou, Epidemic spreading in heterogeneous networks with recurrent
mobility patterns, Phys. Rev. E 102, 022306 (2020).
[11] O. Valba, V. Avetisov, A. Gorsky, and S. Nechaev, Self-isolation or borders closing: What
prevents the spread of the epidemic better?, Phys. Rev. E 102, 010401 (2020).
[12] W. Kermak and A. McKendrick, Contributions to the mathematical-theory of epidemics .1.
(reprinted from proceedings of the royal society, vol 115a, pg 700-721, 1927)., Bulletin of
Mathematical Biology 53, 33 (1991).
[13] Z. Feng and H. R. Thieme, Recurrent outbreaks of childhood diseases revisited: the impact
of isolation., Mathematical biosciences 128, 93 (1995).
[14] J. Zhang and Z. Ma, Global dynamics of an seir epidemic model with saturating contact rate.,
Mathematical Biosciences 185, 15 (2003).
[15] D. W. Berger, K. F. Herkenhoff, and S. Mongey, An seir infectious disease model with testing
and conditional quarantine., NBER Working Papers , 1 (2020).
[16] D. Franco, H. Logemann, and J. Perán, Global stability of an age-structured population
model., Systems & Control Letters 65, 30 (2014).
[17] A. Kronbichler, D. Kresse, S. Yoon, K. H. Lee, M. Effenberger, and J. I. Shin, Asymptomatic
patients as a source of covid-19 infections: A systematic review and meta-analysis., International Journal of Infectious Diseases 98, 180 (2020).
[18] D. He, S. Zhao, Q. Lin, Z. Zhuang, P. Cao, M. H. Wang, and L. Yang, The relative transmissibility of asymptomatic covid-19 infections among close contacts., International Journal
of Infectious Diseases 94, 145 (2020).
[19] H. Kang, M. Sun, Y. Yu, X. Fu, and B. Bao, Spreading dynamics of an seir model with delay
on scale-free networks., IEEE Transactions on Network Science and Engineering, Network
Science and Engineering, IEEE Transactions on, IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng 7, 489 (2020).
[20] E. Khain, Two-level modeling of quarantine, Phys. Rev. E 102, 022313 (2020).
[21] R. Pastor-Satorras and A. Vespignani, Epidemic dynamics and endemic states in complex
networks., Physical Review E (Statistical, Nonlinear, and Soft Matter Physics) 63, 066117/1

15

(2001).
[22] M. Martcheva, Introduction to mathematical epidemiology., Texts in applied mathematics: v.
61 (New York : Springer, [2015], 2015).
[23] G. G. Katul, A. Mrad, S. Bonetti, G. Manoli, and A. J. Parolari, Global convergence of covid19 basic reproduction number and estimation from early-time sir dynamics., PLoS ONE 15,
1 (2020).
[24] Y. Tao, Maximum entropy method for estimating the reproduction number: An investigation
for covid-19 in china and the united states, Phys. Rev. E 102, 032136 (2020).
[25] L. J. S. Allen, S. R. Jang, and L.-I. Roeger, Predicting population extinction or disease
outbreaks with stochastic models., Letters in Biomathematics 4, 1 (2017).
[26] M. Peak Corey, M. Childs Lauren, H. Grad Yonatan, and O. Buckee Caroline, Comparing nonpharmaceutical interventions for containing emerging epidemics., Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 114, 4023 (2017).
[27] M. E. Kretzschmar, G. Rozhnova, M. C. J. Bootsma, M. van Boven, J. H. H. M. van de
Wijgert, and M. J. M. Bonten, Impact of delays on effectiveness of contact tracing strategies
for covid-19: a modelling study., The Lancet Public Health 5, e452 (2020).
[28] L. Wang and G.-Z. Dai, Global stability of virus spreading in complex heterogeneous networks.,
SIAM Journal on Applied Mathematics 68, 1495 (2008).
[29] Z. Kiss Istvan, M. Green Darren, and R. Kao Rowland, Disease contact tracing in random
and clustered networks., Proceedings: Biological Sciences 272, 1407 (2005).
[30] K. Nagarajan, M. Muniyandi, B. Palani, and S. Sellappan, Social network analysis methods
for exploring sars-cov-2 contact tracing data., BMC medical research methodology 20, 233
(2020).
[31] L. F. White, J. Wallinga, L. Finelli, C. Reed, S. Riley, M. Lipsitch, and M. Pagano, Estimation
of the reproductive number and the serial interval in early phase of the 2009 influenza a/h1n1
pandemic in the usa, Influenza and other respiratory viruses 3, 267 (2009).
[32] O. M. Tessa, Mathematical model for control of measles by vaccination, in Proceedings of Mali
Symposium on Applied Sciences, Vol. 2006 (2006) pp. 31–36.
[33] W. J. Edmunds, N. J. Gay, M. Kretzschmar, R. Pebody, and H. Wachmann, The prevaccination epidemiology of measles, mumps and rubella in europe: implications for modelling
studies, Epidemiology & Infection 125, 635 (2000).

16

[34] N. C. Grassly, C. Fraser, J. Wenger, J. M. Deshpande, R. W. Sutter, D. L. Heymann, and R. B.
Aylward, New strategies for the elimination of polio from india, Science 314, 1150 (2006).
[35] G. Chowell, C. Castillo-Chavez, P. W. Fenimore, C. M. Kribs-Zaleta, L. Arriola, and J. M.
Hyman, Model parameters and outbreak control for sars, Emerging infectious diseases 10,
1258 (2004).
[36] E. M. Nishiura H, Brockmann SO, Extracting key information from historical data to quantify
the transmission dynamics of smallpox, Theoretical Biology 5:20 (2008).
[37] Q. Li, X. Guan, P. Wu, X. Wang, L. Zhou, Y. Tong, R. Ren, K. S. M. Leung, E. H. Y. Lau,
J. Y. Wong, X. Xing, N. Xiang, Y. Wu, C. Li, Q. Chen, D. Li, T. Liu, J. Zhao, M. Liu, W. Tu,
C. Chen, L. Jin, R. Yang, Q. Wang, S. Zhou, R. Wang, H. Liu, Y. Luo, Y. Liu, G. Shao, H. Li,
Z. Tao, Y. Yang, Z. Deng, B. Liu, Z. Ma, Y. Zhang, G. Shi, T. T. Y. Lam, J. T. Wu, G. F. Gao,
B. J. Cowling, B. Yang, G. M. Leung, and Z. Feng, Early transmission dynamics in wuhan,
china, of novel coronavirus-infected pneumonia., The New England journal of medicine 382,
1199 (2020).
[38] K. Mizumoto and G. Chowell, Transmission potential of the novel coronavirus (covid-19)
onboard the diamond princess cruises ship, 2020., Infectious Disease Modelling 5, 264 (2020).
[39] H. Sakaguchi and Y. Nakao, Slow decay of infection in the inhomogeneous susceptible-infectedrecovered model, Phys. Rev. E 103, 012301 (2021).
[40] F. Radicchi and G. Bianconi, Epidemic plateau in critical susceptible-infected-removed dynamics with nontrivial initial conditions, Phys. Rev. E 102, 052309 (2020).

17

