Digital Contact Tracing: Technologies, Shortcomings, and the
Path Forward
Amee Trivedi

University of Massachusetts, Amherst
amee@cs.umass.edu

Deepak Vasisht

Microsoft & University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
deepakv@illinois.edu

arXiv:2012.06466v1 [cs.CY] 11 Dec 2020

ABSTRACT
Since the start of the COVID-19 pandemic, technology enthusiasts have pushed for digital contact tracing as a critical tool for
breaking the COVID-19 transmission chains. Motivated by this
push, many countries and companies have created apps that enable digital contact tracing with the goal to identify the chain of
transmission from an infected individual to others and enable early
quarantine. Digital contact tracing applications like AarogyaSetu
in India, TraceTogether in Singapore, SwissCovid in Switzerland,
and others have been downloaded hundreds of millions of times.
Yet, this technology hasn’t seen the impact that we envisioned at
the start of the pandemic. Some countries have rolled back their
apps, while others have seen low adoption [12, 17].
Therefore, it is prudent to ask what the technology landscape
of contact-tracing looks like and what are the missing pieces. We
attempt to undertake this task in this paper. We present a highlevel review of technologies underlying digital contact tracing, a
set of metrics that are important while evaluating different contact
tracing technologies, and evaluate where the different technologies
stand today on this set of metrics. Our hope is two fold: (a) Future
designers of contact tracing applications can use this review paper
to understand the technology landscape, and (b) Researchers can
identify and solve the missing pieces of this puzzle, so that we are
ready to face the rest of the COVID-19 pandemic and any future
pandemics. A majority of this discussion is focused on the ability
to identify contact between individuals. The questions of ethics,
privacy, and security of such contact tracing are briefly mentioned
but not discussed in detail.

CCS CONCEPTS
• Networks → Mobile networks; Mobile networks; • Humancentered computing → Ubiquitous and mobile devices.

KEYWORDS
Digital Contact Tracing, Technology, System and Challenges

1

INTRODUCTION

COVID-19 has affected 33,349,007 lives worldwide causing more
than 1,003,010 deaths globally [23], impacting the mental health
of citizens, crashing economies, and creating global financial distress, thus giving rise to the start of a global recession. The disease
burden of infectious diseases such as COVID-19, SARS, pandemic
influenza, etc. is very high and contact tracing is a critical step in
the containment and reduction of infectious disease spread. Contact
tracing is a method of identifying and testing all people who have
come in contact with an infected person and iterating through the
process for each of the contacts. Contact tracing helps in greatly
reducing the spread of disease by identification, and isolation of

WiFi Access Points

WiFi Access Points

Figure 1: Digital contact tracing technologies can help trace
contacts between infected individuals and others.
possible spreaders while also provisioning services for counseling
or diagnosis of the illness.
The spread of communicable diseases such as measles, coronavirus (COVID-19), SARS as well as sexually transmitted diseases
can be restricted significantly using contact tracing. Currently, once
an individual test positive for a communicable disease, the public
health workers question the identified patient about the recent
history of their social interaction to create a contact list comprising
of people who came in contact with the infected patient. As a next
step, the public health agency further examines and tests each identified person in the contact list. If anyone among the contacts tests
positive, that person is labeled infected, isolated, and the process is
repeated. This process of tracing is a very labor-intensive process.
Additionally, it is very hard for individuals to remember all their
social contacts in a particular timeframe resulting in incomplete
and inaccurate information. Moreover, most pathogens stay active
at a location even after the patient might have left a location. So
if a patient has spread the pathogens of an infectious disease (by
coughing, touching surfaces with infected hands, etc) at a location,
the individuals who visit the same location after the patient’s departure while the pathogens are still active might be at risk of getting
infected. Such cases are extremely hard to identify since they fall
beyond the social interactions of the patient.
The spread of infectious disease is fundamentally linked to the
potential of transmission of the pathogens over face-to-face interactions or in-person contact with infected physical objects (such
as doorknobs, table surfaces, etc). These interactions or connections that provide a mode for disease propagation define a network
that provides an insight in understanding the potential structure
of transmission that can be used for contact tracing. Additionally,
there are many different factors such as pathogen active period,
host immunity, duration of contact, the volume of pathogens, etc.
that impact the possible routes of transmission.

,,

Amee Trivedi and Deepak Vasisht

While there has been significant interest in technology-aided
tracing based using Bluetooth [1, 3, 6, 8], QR code [24], GPS [4], and
WiFi traces [7, 20] as shown in fig 1, each technology has its benefits
and limitations. In this work, we try and provide an overview of all
the technologies, their limitations, questions to ponder on while
selecting and designing a digital contact tracing system, and a brief
discussion on the path forward.

2

DIGITAL CONTACT TRACING

Digital contact tracing is the method of identification and determination of contact between 2 or more users using a technology-enabled
tracking system. In the context of COVID-19, contact is defined as
being within 6 feet of an individual for a period of over ten minutes.
Manual contact tracing is time-consuming and requires a lot of
manual labor, which when coupled with a poor human recollection of social encounters in the recent past creates a possibility of
incomplete and inefficient contact tracing. These limitations can
be overcome with digital contact tracing systems. The main advantages of a digital contact tracing solution are (i) it creates a log of
locations visited (absolute or relative locations) and time of visit (ii)
passive logging requires no human intervention (iii) scalability to a
large audience, and (iv) provision for easy and quick notification
interface.
The primary ubiquitous tool for digital contact tracing is the
mobile phone. In today’s world, users carry their phones everywhere and mobility trajectories of mobile phones act as a proxy for
user/owner mobility. Hence, using mobile phones for implementing contact tracing systems seems quite reasonable. Based on the
various features present in a smartphone, the digital contact tracing
systems can be designed based on GPS, Bluetooth, WiFi, etc. with
each technology offering its share of benefits and limitations. In this
section, we start by providing an overview of metrics to measure a
digital contact tracing system followed by a description, pros, and
cons of the available technology-based contact tracing solutions
while keeping the metrics in mind. We would like to emphasize
that any digital contact tracing solution is complementary to the
manual contact tracing solutions and is not designed to replace
manual contact tracing.

2.1

Metrics

In this section, we identify the key metrics for measuring the effectiveness of a contact tracing system:
Accuracy: First, a digital contact tracing solution should have high
spatial and temporal accuracy to correctly identify proximity and
co-location. The accuracy of users in proximity as identified by the
tool v/s observed ground truth is heavily tied to the location granularity of the tracking system. A contact tracing system that uses Call
Data Records (CDR) datasets with a coarse location granularity in
the range of Kms will have very low accuracy (high false positives)
as compared to a Bluetooth based tool with a fine location granularity in the range of few meters. Typically, we objectively measure
accuracy by computing the false positives and false negatives of
the system. In this context, false positives identify the number of
people falsely identified as being in contact, i.e. people who were
never in contact with a COVID-positive patient but were identified
as a contact. While false negatives identify the people who were

actually in contact with a COVID-positive patient but were not
identified as one. Both false positives as well as false negatives are
important. On one hand, if the number of false positives is high,
the contact tracing system will identify a lot more people in need
of tests causing false alarm, reducing trust in the application, and
overwhelming the healthcare resources. On the other hand, a high
false negative value indicates that the system is missing out on
identifying several colocated users thereby increasing the risk to
the general population. Technology users view accuracy as very
important factor for their willingness to adopt such solutions. According to a recent survey by Microsoft Research [13], around 85%
of the surveyed population was willing to install contact tracing
apps that were perfectly accurate.
Privacy: Any contact tracing solution needs to interact with user
health and location data, which makes privacy a very important
metric. In fact, in the Microsoft research study quoted above [13],
privacy concerns were almost as high on people’s minds as accuracy. Systems that collect absolute location information could
leak details about user mobility revealing entire trajectory with
details about absolute location visit history, frequency of visit, and
details of frequent associations over time. Alternatively, systems
that collect relative information could leak frequent association
information as well as mobility patterns. Additionally, with a lot
of social content available, and people self-reporting check-ins on
social media, merging multiple datasets could result in a lot more
privacy leakage. Understanding the system areas where privacy
can be compromised and mitigating the risks of compromise is an
important measure.
Data Security and Ease of Attacks: Designing a contact tracing
application requires the designers to make decisions about the
amount of data collected per user and about what data is being
stored. Is it a single central data storage or is it a distributed data
store? How easy and susceptible is the data store to attacks?
Ubiquity: For a contact tracing system to be effective, a large
percentage of the population must adopt it. Accordingly to [5],
about 80% of the user population needs to use the contact tracing
app for it to be effective. Such large scale user adoption needs:
(a) Compatibility: The technology used for proximity detection
must be compatible with smartphones using outdated software. For eg., 25% of global Android users would be unable
to use apps designed below Android 8.0 that was launched in
2017. Therefore, any apps that use capabilities available only
in modern mobile operating systems won’t be compatible
with large user devices resulting in a selective representation
of the population.
(b) Scalable design: The app must be able to identify contact not
only in homes where few smartphones talk to each other
and identify their distance, but also in crowded retail stores,
subways, and supermarkets, that have hundreds of people
walking around. The design of the apps must be able to handle such large traffic and measure accurate proximity within
this large group of people. The other aspect of the scalable
design is the ability to not crash when tens of millions of
people end up using the app – this is the scale that most
internet applications dream of. For example, AarogyaSetu,

Digital Contact Tracing: Technologies, Shortcomings, and the Path Forward

the official Indian government application for digital contact
tracing crossed 100 million downloads. Apps operating at
such a scale need to follow skillful engineering practices.
This challenge is amplified because because not only do the users
need to download, install the app, and consent the collection of data
but also, in some cases (e.g. Bluetooth-based apps) to keep the app
running and enabled all the time. Such apps may drain energy very
quickly resulting in users disabling the apps. This on a bigger scale
results in an inefficient and incorrect contact tracing system. From
the user adoption perspective, systems that use an existing data
source collected passively for alternate reasons such as WiFi logs
based system that uses network logs collected for network analysis,
do not suffer from this problem. Once a user gives consent to data
collection the network-centric system does not need any apps to
run on individual mobile devices.

2.2

Data Sources and Technology

In this section, we describe various technologies used for contact
tracing, their advantages, and their limitations.
Bluetooth - Bluetooth is a protocol for short-distance wireless
communication (up to 100 meters) using radio waves. For two
devices to communicate using Bluetooth, they should be equipped
with a Bluetooth chip and have Bluetooth communication enabled.
The ubiquity of smartphones along with Bluetooth availability on
a large range of smartphones (and even some feature phones) has
made it a very promising candidate for digital contact tracing.
Applications (Apps) designed to use only Bluetooth technology
identify the presence of other Bluetooth devices within their proximity range ( 100 meters) as contacts. So, in a densely populated
location such as a large retail store or a residential housing complex with closely knit small apartment spaces, everyone within the
radius of 100 meters of a Bluetooth device might be marked as a
contact in close proximity. Though the person might be in a different shop or apartment with no physical contact. To alleviate this
concern, Bluetooth apps are coupled with the use of signal strength
to label devices in proximity. In this case, the devices should be able
to connect over Bluetooth and the signal strength should be above
a threshold i.e. the device is not just in the hearing range but also
close enough to deliver a strong signal, to be identified as a contact.
Bluetooth coupled with signal strength is the most common approach out there today and it forms the bedrock of the Apple-Google
Exposure Notification system [2]. However, as the founders of Bluetooth have themselves pointed out [10], this approach is bound to
have false-positives and false-negatives as well. The premise of this
approach is that the signal strength is a function of distance, therefore signal strength can be used as a proxy measure for distance.
Unfortunately, the signal strength depends on other factors too such as phone context that is reflected by the phone being carried in
hand, bag, clipper, or if there is an obstacle between the two devices.
This leads to large errors in distance estimation where two devices
3 feet away can appear to be 30 feet away and vice-versa. Such inaccuracies in Bluetooth positioning are common knowledge among
researchers in the wireless positioning community. However, in
the absence of more advanced techniques that are as ubiquitous
as Bluetooth, this method has emerged as the method of choice.
Governments across various countries have rolled out Bluetooth

,,

based apps - AarogyaSetu in India [1], TraceTogether in Singapore
[8], SwissCovid in Switzerland [6], and Australia [3] mainly due to
the ubiquity of the smartphones on which these apps are deployed.
GPS - The Global Positioning System (GPS) provides geographic
location and time information to devices equipped with a GPS receiver through a set of GPS radio navigation satellites. GPS provides
a means to track every smartphone and identify two phones as being in contact when they stay too close for too long. This premise
is promising because most smartphones are GPS-enabled and GPS
works across the globe. So, a GPS-based solution would be ubiquitous and scalable. Solutions such as CovTracer [4] used in Cyprus
collect GPS data to compute the proximity of devices.
However, this approach fails on two counts. Firstly, it raises serious privacy questions ("Am I Being Tracked?") because the location
(not just a contact) is being logged, and secondly, it fails on the
accuracy front as well. GPS suffers from poor accuracy, especially
indoors and outdoor urban tunnels. It is non-trivial to enable robust
GPS indoors and even when it works, it achieves positioning errors
of around 10 meters (nearly 30 feet) [14]. These errors are too high
for contact-tracing approaches. A contact tracing approach needs
to identify if two people are closer than 6 feet (2 meters) of each
other. An error of 30 feet will throw these estimates way off and
will lead to a high false-positive or false-negative rate, depending
on how the system is designed.
Furthermore, GPS traces are easy to de-anonymize and can reveal
a lot about individuals such as their daily routines, activities, and
frequent co-locators. Contact tracing advocates believe that these
concerns are overshadowed by the health benefits of the contact
tracing apps. Moreover, they claim that users share their location
data with corporations every day when they check their apps for
maps, ride-hailing, or food delivery. However, a user has the choice
to not use GPS based apps for maps, ride-hailing, and other services
due to privacy violations. But, making a GPS based contact tracing
app mandatory, as is being done with contact tracing apps in some
jurisdictions, will make users have no control or option to opt-out
resulting in the possibility of privacy violations and attacks from
corporations as well as government organizations.
Overall, the accuracy of GPS is low for contact tracing with
errors of 20-30 feet, especially indoors where humans spend a
lot of their time, so using it for contact-tracing won’t help much
anyway. Also, sharing location details with a central entity can lead
to leakage and data misuse. However, with explicit user consent
to upload selective data, it can provide other benefits like help
governments visualize the locations of high-risk individuals, and
allocate healthcare resources, thereby preempting the outbreak.
WiFi - While GPS works outdoors as explained above, it has limitations indoors and in urban tunnels. People spend about 80% of their
time indoors [15], so we need a solution for indoor contact tracing.
In homes and enterprises, WiFi networks provide an alternative
approach. In enterprise WiFi networks comprising of several access
points (AP), user devices constantly get connected, disconnected,
and move between APs. All these events of connections, disconnections, authorizations, and hops across APs are logged internally by
each AP in a system log aka “syslog” file. By analyzing the events
logged in the syslog file for each device we can identify the mobility

,,

trajectory of each device. Today’s users carry their phones along
everywhere and thus, the mobility trajectory of a smartphone can
be considered as a proxy for the user mobility trajectory. Thus, in
an enterprise network, we can derive the mobility trajectories of
all users connected to the network using the WiFi logs.
The derived mobility trajectories provide details about locations
visited along with the time of visit as logged by the connection,
disconnection time by the APs in the syslog files. Without advanced
localization techniques like channel state based approaches, the
spatial granularity is restricted to the AP range (tens of meters).
While performing localization and fingerprinting leads to a finer
spatial granularity for proximity analysis, it requires more effort to
deploy. Once the spatio-temporal mobility trajectories of all users
are derived a proximity graph also called a contact graph can be
generated. If a user reports illness then the contact graph is used
to identify the co-located users with the infected person over the
past 𝑛 days, where 𝑛 varies based on the disease incubation period.
We can use the generated contact graph to identify the set of most
frequently visited locations for frequent sanitization and the set of
users who visited a location after the infected person departed but
during the window when the pathogens dispersed might be alive.
In [20] authors propose a network-centric system that uses WiFi
syslogs where as systems such as TraceFi [7] use WiFi signals and
strength to determine proximity. The main advantages of such WiFibased contact tracing are (i) provisioning for indoor contact tracing
(ii) no need for installation of new sensors or new instrumentation,
works with existing WiFi network and logs collected by most enterprise for network security and traffic analysis (iii) is completely
passive (iv) provides details of the time of visit and duration of
the visit (v) no app installation on mobile phones needed for WiFi
syslog based systems.
The main problems with WiFi-based contact tracing are (i) spatial
location granularity depends on the AP range (ii) proximity v/s
contact: a person might be connected to the same AP but be in
different rooms. WiFi-based contact tracing might state that the 2
persons are in contact when in reality they might have never come
in contact (iii) different devices have different aggressiveness to
hop APs.
Acoustic-ranging - Sound is as ubiquitous as Bluetooth. After
all, the primary purpose of phones is to emit, record, and transfer
sound (or it used to be). Thus, sound-based range estimation is
another competing approach. Sound-based contact tracing is based
on the idea that every device emits a random but unique sound
signature that can be used to infer distance. The acoustic frequency
and amplitude are chosen to be outside of the human hearing range.
Unlike Bluetooth, GPS, and WiFi, sound is a mechanical wave that
travels much slower than radio waves (in the order of 106 times
slower). This gives acoustic-ranging an arrow in its quiver, which
is time-of-flight estimation. Specifically, two devices can accurately
measure the time it takes for a sound to go from one device to
another. Since sound travels as a wave, we can multiply the time it
takes for sound to travel between devices by the speed of sound to
get the distance between the devices. For example, if it took a sound
signal 4 milliseconds to go from 𝑃ℎ𝑜𝑛𝑒 1 to 𝑃ℎ𝑜𝑛𝑒 2 , it indicates that
the phones are at a distance of about 4.5 feet. Also, an error of a
millisecond or two in measuring the time of travel wouldn’t make

Amee Trivedi and Deepak Vasisht

the errors large. More importantly, the time estimates are more
robust to reflections and obstacles than signal strength estimates.
Though acoustic-based systems have the pros of high accuracy
and ubiquity [18], there are 3 main pitfalls in sound-based ranging :
• Scale: The number of devices that can simultaneously perform sound-based contact tracing is small. It works fine
when communication is between 2 devices, but as the number of devices communicating with each other increases, it
becomes very noisy. Ambient noise in commercial places
such as a retail store adds further noise making the system
unreliable.
• Privacy: Implementing an acoustic based system using smartphones is the best solution for ubiquity. This in turn means
the microphones on smartphones need to be turned “on” all
the time or sample at a high frequency raising a high level of
privacy-risk that most people are unwilling to accommodate.
• Animal Discomfort: Though the acoustic range signals are
inaudible to the human ear as they fall in the frequency
range outside the human hearing range, animals can hear
them. We need rigorous tests to ensure that acoustic range
systems do not cause discomfort to animals that can pick
them up.
Non-mainstream Methods - GPS, Bluetooth, and WiFi are relatively mainstream methods but there are several other interesting
ideas and research on technology to support digital contact tracing.
Below we list a few of them:
• Time-of-flight using Bluetooth: Using the concept of time-offlight measurements in Bluetooth as done in sound waves
is a very interesting premise. Using Bluetooth for time-offlight measurements will alleviate the concerns about soundbased ranging and inaccuracies of Bluetooth contact-tracing.
Since radio waves travel a lot faster (106 times faster) than
sound waves the time measurements will need to be highly
accurate. In [21] and [9] authors present work on achieving nanosecond-level accuracy in time measurements and
achieve a foot-level accuracy in distance measurements by
using advanced phase information. However, phase information isn’t available on all smartphones today, so this approach, while way more accurate, won’t be ubiquitous for
the next few years.
• Hybrid multi-modal approaches: Many app designers today
are exploring the use of different modalities like sound and
Bluetooth in conjunction with each other so that one technology can help remove the pitfalls of the other. Such approaches are seeing a lot of traction and are being used in
many of the apps out there. These approaches, however, are
still in the preliminary stages of research and haven’t been
tested extensively.
Table 1 compares these technologies across the parameters of
accuracy, privacy, ubiquity, and scalability.

2.3

Choice of digital contact tracing solutions

All digital contact tracing systems can be broadly classified into systems that collect absolute location data (eg. GPS, WiFi logs, etc) and
relative location data (Bluetooth). Based on this classification, the

Digital Contact Tracing: Technologies, Shortcomings, and the Path Forward

Technology
Bluetooth
GPS
Acoustic
WiFi Logs
Advanced

,,

Proximity Accuracy
Privacy
Ubiquity
Low accuracy(errors 10-20 feet).
Privacy preserving solution
Yes
Low accuracy (errors 30 feet)
Privacy concerns for absolute location
Yes
High accuracy
Privacy concerns for microphone access
Yes
Low Accuracy (errors 10-15 meters) Privacy preserving solution
Yes
High accuracy (0-5 feet)
Privacy concerns exist
No
Table 1: Comparison of various digital contact tracing technologies

system functionality itself is different. Systems that collect absolute
location data can also find out same place different time contacts in
addition to same place same time contacts. Such systems are very
useful in contact tracing of infectious diseases that spread indirectly.
When a patient visits a location and spreads the pathogens at a
location, the pathogens remain active at the location for a certain
time duration. Even though the patient leaves the location, a visitor
may get infected if he/she visits the same location and comes in
contact with surfaces with active pathogens resulting in indirect
transmission of the disease.
On the other hand, systems that rely on relative location of two
devices, i.e. they can tell if person A is close to person B but not
where they are, offer exciting features from a privacy standpoint.
The inherent guarantees are stronger, even though you can still
reveal information about who interacts with whom. Though a lot
of features of the contact tracing system are defined by the above
classification, the choice of contact tracing system also depends on
several other factors discussed below :
• Location Granularity - Location granularity defines the
range or reach within which two or more people are labeled
in the proximity of each other. The coarser the location granularity more people are reported to be in proximity and the
lower is the system accuracy in identifying true co-locators.
For eg, a Call Data Record based contact tracing system
reports all users within the range of the call tower to be
colocated. The range of the call tower can range from 15
Kms to 50 Kms whereas a Bluetooth based system has a
location granularity of 10 meters and hence reports a lower
number of people who are truly within the proximity range
and has lower false positives of labeling co-locators than
a coarse location-based system. GPS based systems have
finer location granularity, Bluetooth based systems have a
location granularity of 10 meters, WiFi-based systems (without advanced signal processing techniques) have a location
granularity based on the WiFi range of the access point.
• Temporal Granularity - Temporal granularity provides
the user time of visit at a location. This helps identify if two
people are co-located at the same time for direct transmission or visited the same location within the time frame the
pathogens were active. In the case of WiFi-based systems,
the temporal granularity is also based on the aggressiveness
of the device in hopping across APs.
• Indoor v/s Outdoor - Some technologies such as GPS only
work outdoors while WiFi, location beacons, Bluetooth, Acoustic Range systems can all work indoors.
• Percentage Population Adaption- Not everyone owns a
smartphone with the latest technological advancements that

Scalability
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
No

could result in a low percentage of user population adapting the digital contact tracing solution. Some estimates [5]
suggest an adaptation of 60% - 80% of the population to use
digital contact tracing to add value. This is problematic in
vulnerable populations like prison inmates, poverty-stricken
neighborhoods, etc. where the smartphone density is low. If
digital contact-tracing alone is used for allocating healthcare
resources and become the center of our strategies, we will
end up completely missing out on large groups of people.
• Scalability - Understanding the user population size for
performing contact tracing is an important parameter in
selecting the technology. The system should be scalable to
support a large enough population while providing high
availability to prove efficient.
• Data Storage - The collected data can be stored in 2 ways
either all the collected data gets pooled into a central data
store or is distributed across multiple data stores to create a
distributed system. Understanding the limitations of the environment and the features of the system would help decide
the data storage architecture aspect of the digital contact
tracing system.
• Data Collection Reliability - The underlying user location dataset needed for the effective working of the contact
tracing system needs to be collected reliably, highly available, and representative of a sufficiently large population
for effective contact tracing. If the collection mode requires
the consent of users then a substantial population of the
users should use the app, give consent to data collection
and a reliable mode of uploading the data to a system for
analysis should exist. In contrast, if a system is designed to
use passive data from sources already collecting the data for
other purposes such as network analysis for performance or
security such as WiFi logs, then only the consent from the
user for health data needs to be taken.

3

SECURITY AND PRIVACY

Any digital contact tracing tool requires the collection of user location/proximity data (Spatio-temporal component), and user health
data forming the base dataset for digital contact tracing. The channels of data collection depend on the technology used such as GPS
logs comprising of latitude, longitude details for GPS based solutions, WiFi syslog for WiFi based solutions, Bluetooth beacons, and
user ids for BlueTooth based proximity identification, etc. The storing mechanisms are based on technology as well as system design
and fall under 2 main categories: (i) centralized datastore resulting
in a single contact tracing graph, and (ii) distributed datastore. Any
method of data collection and storage has 2 main user concerns

,,

linked to it - Privacy and Security. In this section, we briefly discuss
the main aspects of privacy and security.
Security: As stated above, all contact tracing systems deal with
extremely sensitive data due to the collection and storage of user
personal data. This makes the system susceptible to security exploits and attacks. A secure system should satisfy the three main
areas namely confidentiality, integrity, and availability. These three
aspects of security should protect the user data from identification,
alteration, access by non-privileged users, disclosure, data safety,
and authentication. Authenticity is an important criterion and guarantees that the user location data (absolute or relative location data)
is not forged. Strict rules should be defined for data security and
user information confidentiality. Apart from confidential, password
protected data storage and access mechanisms to the system code
should be well subjected to thorough security audits to ensure
protection against attacks.
Privacy: Designing an effective privacy preserving contact tracing
system is an essential requirement in making the users feel safe and
secure enough to voluntarily opt-in and use a solution. First, note
that contact tracing itself (digital or not) reveals some private information about users – their health status and their interactions with
other individuals. In some contexts, access to this information can
be harmful, for example, when interactions between government
critics are revealed in authoritarian regimes or when individuals get
targeted for their visits to LGBTQ meetings. For a digital contact
tracing solution, the goal is to (a) not reveal or store more information than is absolutely required, and (b) to prevent such misuse of
the data.
Recent research interest in privacy preserving contact tracing
solutions has been explored leading to some interesting solutions.
Researchers are exploring various protocols, and mechanisms for
designing a privacy preserving digital contact tracing solutions
[11, 16, 19, 22]. For example, the generation of random unique
identifiers for devices while using Bluetooth for finding proximity.
In such solutions [8], the phone is assigned random identifiers and
so are other smartphones in proximity. The phone keeps a track of
its unique identifiers as well as unique identifiers of the other phone
in proximity as broadcast by them. When a particular smartphone
user is marked as an infected person then the phone identifier
labels of the infected person are announced publicly and each user
checks the infected user phone identifiers against the self log of
proximity phone identifiers to check if a proximity contact was
ever established. This approach keeps the user data private.
The challenge in this approach is the same as that of Bluetooth
based apps resulting in high false positives, which could result in
the system becoming unusable while creating panic. To avoid this
problem the signal strength associated with each message can be
used to compute the proximity distance between the devices. The
weaker the signal strength the farther away is the device and vice
versa. However, quantifying the signal strength value to classify
devices as close and far is tricky and depends on the model, make
of phone, phone context (in the pocket, hand, bag, phone case, etc).
To concur, in the case of contact tracing systems, since access to
user health data and location data both are needed for the correct
functioning of the system it becomes extremely crucial that the

Amee Trivedi and Deepak Vasisht

system specifications, design, and development be considered as
inter-disciplinary user-focus research taking into account the social,
psychological, security and Human-Computer Interaction (HCI)
aspects of users while designing solutions satisfying the needs of
the healthcare workers.

4

PATH FORWARD AND CONCLUSIONS

In this paper, we presented various technologies that can be used for
contact tracing and discussed various factors that play important
role in making the design decisions of a contact tracing system.
While digital contact tracing has a lot of benefits especially with
respect to scalability, quick reach, and precision there are pressing
issues concerning privacy and security that should not make the
system feel and act like a surveillance system. User data leakage
and use by agencies such as government that could result in the
exploitation of citizens should never happen. We need to solve these
challenges with technological as well as legal solutions through
better privacy laws. Additionally, we need to design frameworks
that are compatible with contact tracing systems that use different
channels of data collection. We strongly believe that designing
an efficient privacy preserving contact tracing system should be
an inter-disciplinary user-focus research taking into account the
social, psychological, security, and Human-Computer Interaction
aspects of users while designing solutions satisfying the needs of
the healthcare workers.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Amee would like to thank John Krasinski and Sendhil Ramamurthy
for helping her stay sane during the pandemic. Deepak thanks
Ranveer Chandra for seeding some of the ideas in this editorial.

REFERENCES
[1] 2020. AarogyaSetu App Covid-19 Contact Tracing. https://www.mygov.in/aarogyasetu-app/
[2] 2020. Apple Google Partner Covid-19 Contact Tracing. https://www.apple.com/
newsroom/2020/04/apple-and-google-partner-on-covid-19-contact-tracingtechnology/
[3] 2020. COVIDSAFE APP. https://www.health.gov.au/resources/apps-and-tools/
covidsafe-app
[4] 2020. CovTracer App Covid-19 Contact Tracing. https://covid-19.rise.org.cy/en/
[5] 2020. Singapore built a coronaviris app but it hasnt worked so far. Wall Steet
Journal, https://www.wsj.com/articles/singapore-built-a-coronavirus-app-butit-hasnt-worked-so-far-11587547805. (April 22 2020).
[6] 2020. SwissCovid App Covid-19 Contact Tracing. https://ethz.ch/services/en/newsand-events/solidarity/pilot-swiss-covid-app.html
[7] 2020. TraceFi WiFi based Covid-19 Contact Tracing. https://covidtech.harvard.edu/
[8] 2020. TraceTogether App Covid-19 Contact Tracing. https://www.tracetogether.
gov.sg/
[9] Roshan Ayyalasomayajula, Deepak Vasisht, and Dinesh Bharadia. 2018. BLoc:
CSI-Based Accurate Localization for BLE Tags (ACM CoNEXT).
[10] Sam Biddle. The Inventors of Bluetooth Say There Could Be Problems Using
Their Tech for Coronavirus Contact Tracing. (????). https://theintercept.com/
2020/05/05/coronavirus-bluetooth-contact-tracing/
[11] Justin Chan, Dean Foster, Shyam Gollakota, Eric Horvitz, Joseph Jaeger, Sham
Kakade, Tadayoshi Kohno, John Langford, Jonathan Larson, Puneet Sharma,
Sudheesh Singanamalla, Jacob Sunshine, and Stefano Tessaro. 2020. PACT: Privacy Sensitive Protocols and Mechanisms for Mobile Contact Tracing. (2020).
arXiv:cs.CR/2004.03544
[12] Charlotte Jee. 2020. Is a successful contact tracing app possible? These countries
think so. (2020). https://www.technologyreview.com/2020/08/10/1006174/covidcontract-tracing-app-germany-ireland-success/
[13] Gabriel Kaptchuk, Daniel G. Goldstein, Eszter Hargittai, Jake Hofman, and
Elissa M. Redmiles. 2020. How good is good enough for COVID19 apps? The
influence of benefits, accuracy, and privacy on willingness to adopt. (2020).
arXiv:cs.CY/2005.04343

Digital Contact Tracing: Technologies, Shortcomings, and the Path Forward

[14] Mikkel Baun Kjærgaard, Henrik Blunck, Torben Godsk, Thomas Toftkjær,
Dan Lund Christensen, and Kaj Grønbæk. 2010. Indoor Positioning Using GPS
Revisited. In Pervasive Computing, Patrik Floréen, Antonio Krüger, and Mirjana
Spasojevic (Eds.). Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
[15] Neil E Klepeis, William C Nelson, Wayne R Ott, John P Robinson, Andy M
Tsang, Paul Switzer, Joseph V Behar, Stephen C Hern, and William H Engelmann.
2001. The National Human Activity Pattern Survey (NHAPS): a resource for
assessing exposure to environmental pollutants. Journal of Exposure Science &
Environmental Epidemiology 11, 3 (2001), 231–252.
[16] Joseph K Liu, Man Ho Au, Tsz Hon Yuen, Cong Zuo, Jiawei Wang, Amin Sakzad,
Xiapu Luo, and Li Li. 2020. Privacy-Preserving COVID-19 Contact Tracing App:
A Zero-Knowledge Proof Approach. IACR Cryptol. ePrint Arch. 2020 (2020), 528.
[17] Patrick Howell O’Neill, Tate Ryan Mosley, and Bobbie Johnson. 2020. A flood
of coronavirus apps are tracking us. Now it’s time to keep track of them.
(2020). https://www.technologyreview.com/2020/05/07/1000961/launching-mittrcovid-tracing-tracker/
[18] Chunyi Peng, Guobin Shen, Yongguang Zhang, Yanlin Li, and Kun Tan. 2007.
BeepBeep: A High Accuracy Acoustic Ranging System Using COTS Mobile

,,

Devices (ACM SenSys).
[19] Ni Trieu, Kareem Shehata, P. Saxena, R. Shokri, and D. Song. 2020. Epione:
Lightweight Contact Tracing with Strong Privacy. IEEE Data Eng. Bull. 43 (2020),
95–107.
[20] Amee Trivedi, Camellia Zakaria, Rajesh Balan, and Prashant Shenoy. 2020. WiFiTrace: Network-based Contact Tracing for Infectious Diseases Using Passive
WiFi Sensing. (2020). arXiv:cs.NI/2005.12045
[21] Deepak Vasisht, Swarun Kumar, and Dina Katabi. 2016. Decimeter-Level Localization with a Single WiFi Access Point (USENIX NSDI).
[22] Paulo Esteves Veríssimo, Jérémie Decouchant, Marcus Völp, Alireza Esfahani,
and Rafal Graczyk. 2020. PriLok: Citizen-protecting distributed epidemic tracing.
ArXiv abs/2005.04519 (2020).
[23] WorldOmeter. 2020. Covid19 User infected worldwide. https://www.worldometers.
info/coronavirus/
[24] Tyler M Yasaka, Brandon M Lehrich, and Ronald Sahyouni. 2020. Peer-to-Peer
contact tracing: development of a privacy-preserving smartphone app. JMIR
mHealth and uHealth 8, 4 (2020), e18936.

