Australasian Conference on Information Systems
2020, Wellington

Hofeditz et al.
Virtually Extended Coworking Spaces

Virtually Extended Coworking Spaces? – The
Reinforcement of Social Proximity, Motivation and
Knowledge Sharing Through ICT
Completed research paper
Lennart Hofeditz

Department of Computer Science and Applied Cognitive Science
University of Duisburg-Essen
Duisburg, Germany
Email: lennart.hofeditz@uni-due.de

Milad Mirbabaie

Faculty of Business Studies and Economics
University of Bremen
Bremen, Germany
Email: milad.mirbabaie@uni-bremen.de

Stefan Stieglitz

Department of Computer Science and Applied Cognitive Science
University of Duisburg-Essen
Duisburg, Germany
Email: stefan.stieglitz@uni-due.de

Abstract
Coworking is characterized by different people sharing a workspace to benefit from the inspiring
working atmosphere. Even before Covid-19, many positive effects and dynamics were not fully
exploited by their users. One reason is a lack of trust among the users that leads to social isolation,
although a coworking space should increase knowledge and idea exchange. As most people in
coworking spaces use information and communication technologies (ICT) for their collaboration with
their clients or employers, we examined if and how ICT can be used to support the positive effects and
dynamics of coworking spaces. For this, we conducted eight interviews with freelancers and
entrepreneurs who have already worked in coworking spaces in order to identify requirements for a
complementary virtual coworking platform. We found that social proximity, motivation and
knowledge sharing could be increased by such a platform. Based on the process virtualization theory,
we derived six design principles.
Keywords coworking spaces, process virtualization theory, ICT, virtual collaboration, digital
workplace

1

Australasian Conference on Information Systems
2020, Wellington

Hofeditz et al.
Virtually Extended Coworking Spaces

1 Introduction
Information and communication technologies (ICTs) and the digitization of organizations allow people
to work from remote locations while traveling (Kong et al. 2019). Even though this has some
advantages, it can also result in social isolation (von Zumbusch and Lalicic 2020). As many freelancers
and people who are self-employed mostly work alone, many of them use coworking spaces to
counteract social isolation and to increase their productivity (Bueno, Rodríguez-Baltanás, and M
Dolores Gallego 2018). Coworking spaces are defined as “dynamic, inspiring and low-cost workplaces
where people (from different business backgrounds) can interact, share knowledge and co-create”
(Weijs-Perrée et al. 2019, p. 534). Alongside the possibility to share knowledge with others, individuals
can build or expand their social networks in such work environments (Weijs-Perrée et al. 2019).
Further advantages are positive effects on creativity, productivity and social learning (Bilandzic and
Foth 2013; Blagoev et al. 2019; Brown 2017). However, the worldwide Covid-19 pandemic
demonstrates that it is not always possible for face-to-face communication (Morrow 2020) in
coworking spaces to take place. Even before Covid-19, many people were not aware of all advantages
and positive effects of coworking spaces (Pollak and Anderst-kotsis 2017). Furthermore, there often is
a lack of mutual trust to exchange ideas (Egea 2017), as it is often not clear whether other people in
coworking spaces are interested in social and professional exchange or not.
For communicating with clients, freelancers and self-employed people mostly use ICTs such as Google
Drive, MS Teams or Slack (Van Ostrand et al. 2016). Moreover, there is a wide range of studies that
examined the collaboration and communication of distributed project teams (Andres et al. 2009;
Hassell and Cotton 2017; Massey et al. 2014). However, platforms that support the exchange of users
of coworking spaces rarely exist so far. Platforms such as sococo already try to establish as a coworking
online platform (Sococo - Online Workplace for Distributed Teams. 2019). However, existing
platforms are not empirically grounded or examined and rather provide the networking of freelancers
beyond national borders than supporting people within coworking spaces. The question arises how
ICTs can be used to decrease isolation of self-employed people and freelancers and to what extent we
can learn from the existing information systems (IS) literature. Hence, we derived the following
research question:
RQ1: How can ICT be used to improve coworking spaces?
Furthermore, there is a wide range of positive effects of coworking spaces, but not all of them are
exploited by users (Egea 2017). Although ICT has been shown to improve collaboration and
communication, it is hard to determine precisely which positive aspects of coworking spaces can be
enhanced by a virtual platform. That is why we derived the following second research question:
RQ2: Which positive aspects of coworking spaces can be improved by a complementary virtual
platform?
To answer these research questions, we not only considered literature on ICT, but also interviewed
eight users of coworking spaces and identified requirements for a supportive virtual platform that
could reinforce positive effects such as an increased level of productivity, creativity, networking,
collaboration, knowledge sharing and motivation. To structure our interviews we designed our
interview guide according to the process virtualization theory (PVT) of Overby (2011). Therefore, the
aim of this paper is to contribute to the research stream of digital work and virtual collaboration in IS.
We examined coworking spaces from an information systems (IS) perspective and identified six design
principles for a complementary virtual platform based on the requirements of our interviewees and
corresponding IS literature.

2 Background
2.1 Coworking Spaces
In 2017, the number of coworking spaces rose to 15,500 places worldwide (Vidaillet and Bousalham
2018). This strong growth is accompanied by an even higher future forecast for the number of
coworking spaces (Andrade et al. 2013). Users of a coworking space can rent a workplace for a rather
small amount of money and benefit from the inspiring working atmosphere which is generated by
diverse people sharing a workspace (Weijs-Perrée et al. 2019). Overall, such working environments
enable the collective use of infrastructure and resources such as desks, meeting rooms and WI-FI

2

Australasian Conference on Information Systems
2020, Wellington

Hofeditz et al.
Virtually Extended Coworking Spaces

connections (Bouncken and Reuschl 2018). Additionally, employees can share knowledge, brainstorm
together and provide emotional support (Spinuzzi et al. 2019). Coworking space activities are meant to
contribute to the life quality of employees, not only in terms of work, but also in relation to private life.
They were developed to avoid the feeling of loneliness when working from home and to enable people
to separate their private and working lives (Weijs-Perrée et al. 2019). However, the expectation of
reduced loneliness is not always fulfilled. Most of the users of coworking spaces are self-employed
workers, small firms such as startups or micro-businesses and students (Weijs-Perrée et al. 2019).
Bouncken and Reuschl (2018) stressed that increased social interactions are one of the main reasons
for working in coworking spaces but in fact working alone together has many more advantages. New
skills can be acquired in a coworking environment, because coworking spaces are characterized by
members who all have different knowledge and experiences, which leads to a huge variety and
opportunities to learn new things (Bueno, Rodríguez-Baltanás, and M. Dolores Gallego 2018).
According to Bouncken and Reuschl (2018), the co-presence of people with different or similar
attitudes and characteristics can result in increased satisfaction and as a result economic benefit. Thus,
the presence of other people provides positive working experiences and outcomes as positive emotions
and experiences have a positive impact on job satisfaction. Furthermore, coworking environments and
social interactions can have a positive influence on productivity (Bueno, Rodríguez-Baltanás, and M.
Dolores Gallego 2018). Creativity can be increased by sharing knowledge and inspiration through
interaction with other coworkers (Bouncken and Reuschl 2018). In addition, it could be shown that
coworking can even increase employees' overall performance and self-efficacy (Bouncken and Reuschl
2018). All in all, coworking can improve the performance of independent workers (Bouncken and
Reuschl 2018; Garrett et al. 2017; Weijs-Perrée et al. 2019).
However, there are also some negative aspects. Although the ability to communicate with other users
is an advantage, the predominant and often too much noise in coworking spaces can be criticized
(Bouncken 2018). Literature on coworking spaces indicated that they would have many positive effects
on their users, but it is unclear whether they are perceived and valid in practice. Furthermore,
interactions such as brainstorming or knowledge exchange require a certain amount of extraversion
and self-confidence. Due to a high level of anonymity, it is also questionable how well networking in
coworking spaces really works. The contact restrictions imposed by Covid-19 could also contribute to
the lack of a lively exchange of ideas in coworking spaces.
For collaboration, it could already be shown that the correct use of ICT can help to mitigate and
overcome similar issues (Egea 2017). The question arises how ICT can be used to virtualize the positive
aspects of coworking to provide a complementary digital workplace and how IS research on virtual
collaboration can contribute to design a digital platform that supports knowledge sharing in coworking
spaces.

2.2 Collaboration vs. Coworking at Coworking Spaces
Coworking spaces are sparsely examined in IS research to this time (Josef 2018; Kong et al. 2019;
Schlagwein 2018). They are usually only discussed in passing within the context of digital nomads,
remote work or flexible work concepts (Schlagwein and Jarrahi 2020). To shape how ICT can be used
to improve coworking spaces, it is important to understand the activities of people working at such
spaces. As the general activity practiced at coworking spaces, coworking can be described as “emergent
collaborative activity”, which emphasizes that coworking and collaboration are interrelated (Spinuzzi
et al. 2019). Collaboration therefore is a more specific activity at coworking spaces that could be
positively influenced by a complementary platform. There are some key elements which highlight the
differences between coworking and collaboration. Referring to Mattessich and Monsey (1993)
collaboration is characterized by a persuasive relationship. Coworking is more dynamic, because
people could change the coworking spaces every time. This prevents permanent working groups which
are not necessary in coworking spaces. Spinuzzi (2019) described coworking as "Working alone
together" (p. 399). In contrast, collaboration requires cohesion and arrangement (Reeves et al. 2018).
A common feature of coworking and collaboration is that in both people from different disciplines and
interests come together (Reeves et al. 2010; Weijs-Perrée et al. 2019). One the one hand, collaboration
is therefore defined as a process where a group of people work together cooperatively to complete a
problem-solving task (Alavi et al. 1995). Coworking, on the other hand, may involve collaboration, but
usually involves the aspect of ‘working alone together’, with each individual pursuing his or her own
goals (Spinuzzi 2012). Whereas collaboration can be supported by ICT such as enterprise social
networking platforms (Laumer et al. 2017) or enterprise collaboration systems (Nitschke et al. 2019),
coworking has not yet been considered as a process that can be supported by ICT.

3

Australasian Conference on Information Systems
2020, Wellington

Hofeditz et al.
Virtually Extended Coworking Spaces

2.3 Process Virtualization Theory
For a theory-guided virtualization of physical work processes a process virtualization theory
(PVT) can be used (Overby 2008). The PVT describes how processes can be transformed
virtually. For coworking spaces, the theory provides a guided approach to consider processes
and dynamics in order to test their virtualizability. By doing so, the theory tries to explain to
what extent factors of a process or a sub-task can be performed virtual and automated
(Overby 2011). To measure this virtualizability there are two approaches used in research. On
the one hand it can be measured how often a process is transferred into a virtual
environment to derive a specific level of need. On the other hand, the quality of a process in a
physical and a virtual environment can be compared. If the quality is much higher in the
virtual version of the process the virtualizability is very high. The theory not only considers
the states “physical process” and “virtual process” but also the characteristics of the process
and the characteristics of the virtualization mechanism (Overby 2011). In this study we tested
whether the theory is applicable to identify requirements for a complementary platform for
users of coworking spaces. The PVT consists of four main constructs that describe the
characteristics of processes: a) the sensory requirements which refer to the importance of the
main sensory impressions for a process, b) the relationship requirements which include the
role of all types of social interactions for a process, c) the synchronism requirements which
refer to place and time of a process and to whether the respective communication needs to
have a direct response or not and d) the identification and control requirements which
include both the identification of all participants in the process and the control over their
behavior. The PVT is visualized in Figure 1.

Figure 1. Process Virtualization Theory (Overby 2011)
These constructs of process virtualizability can be affected by IT-related mechanisms especially when
the considered case include technology. Grounded on the PVT, we derived our research design.
However, we were aware of some limitations of the PVT, as it was designed to show the virtualizability
of one physical process and not a set of processes such as the dynamics at coworking spaces. In our
research, we were therefore open to additional aspects that might not be covered by the PVT.

3 Research Design
Since empirical research on ICT use in coworking spaces is very limited, detailed experiences and field
reports are needed, in order to make specific statements to this topic. In order to identify which
positive effects of coworking spaces can be supported by a virtual platform and how, we decided to
conduct semi-structured interviews with different groups of people working at coworking spaces. We
recruited employees, freelancers, entrepreneurs and students who continuously used coworking
spaces, who were familiar with remote full- or part-time work, and who also were experienced in using
ICT at the workplace. We chose these four user groups because we found those in the literature to be
the main user groups of coworking spaces (Bouncken 2018; Bouncken and Reuschl 2018; Spinuzzi
2012). We recruited both full-time and part-time interviewees working in coworking spaces in order to

4

Australasian Conference on Information Systems
2020, Wellington

Hofeditz et al.
Virtually Extended Coworking Spaces

be able to depict a composition of people in coworking spaces which is as close to actual situations as
possible and to be able to identify design principles which are useful for a broad range of people. In
addition, we discovered in our search that these groups often overlap. For example, students can work
as freelancers or with start-ups at the same time, and companies often employ freelancers for a short
or a longer time period. After eight extensive interviews with recruited participants we had the
impression that we covered the main types of coworking space users. Another reason besides the
perceived saturation was that we analyzed additional findings from previous literature as a second
source of data to establish the design principles for a complementary virtual coworking platform.
For the interviews, we used a guideline which consisted of open questions about what they think about
the virtualization of specific processes at coworking spaces and how a complementary platform needs
to be designed to be useful for them. To structure the guideline, we asked for sensory requirements,
relationship requirements, identification and control requirements and synchronism requirements
according to the PVT (Overby 2011). In addition, we guided our interviews by following the constructs
of the collaboration virtualization theory which was used to virtualize collaboration processes (Fan et
al. 2013). As an example, referring to urgency and complexity of the category task, the interviewees
had to picture what communication tools they would like to use in a particularly urgent or complex
task (sample question: ‘If a task is particularly urgent, what communication tools would you prefer
to use?’). We also enquired the influence of the presence of others on their own working performance
(sample question: ‘How should other coworking space users be represented on a virtual platform?’).
The questions were primarily related to previous experiences of relationships in physical coworking
spaces. However, we asked to what extent the recipients want to communicate with others via an
online platform (sample question: ‘How do you imagine the general network among online
coworkers?’). In addition to our open questions and sub-questions, we presented three mock-ups in
the interviews. They were provided as an anchor to imagine a complementary coworking platform and
to give possible thought-provoking impulses regarding the preferred design and functions. We showed
the mockups after the interviewees had already been asked about a possible coworking platform
features, in order to prevent them from biasing the answers. We created two mock-ups ourselves
including features of different collaboration tools and a possible representation of an office from
different perspectives (Slack, Bitrix24, Roomsketcher). The second one was a modified screenshot of
an existing online coworking platform, that tries to offer an alternative to physical coworking spaces
(Sococo - Online Workplace for Distributed Teams. 2019). Figure 2 shows the self-created mock-up of
a coworking platform. The second mock-up differs only in perspective.

Figure 2: Mock-up of a platform that could support people in coworking spaces which was
shown in the interviews.
We identified the participants through internet research and existing contacts (peers, colleagues and
project partners) and conducted the interviews between May and June in 2019. The duration of the
interviews varied between 40 and 70 minutes with an average duration of 49 minutes. As there are
different groups of people working in coworking spaces such as employees, students, entrepreneurs
and freelancers (Weijs-Perrée et al. 2019), we interviewed people representing one or several of these
groups (Table 1.).

Table 1. Description of the interviewed coworking space users

5

Australasian Conference on Information Systems
2020, Wellington
Synonym

Student

Freelancer

S1
S2
S3
F1
F2
Em
En1
En2

X
X
X

X

Hofeditz et al.
Virtually Extended Coworking Spaces

Entrepreneur

Employee

ICT
experience

Age

Gender

X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X

26
22
28
31
27
32
30
31

female
female
female
male
female
male
male
male

X
X
X
X
X
X
X

We transcribed the interviews literally and analyzed them using MAXQDA, as it is a software especially
designed for computer-assisted qualitative and mixed methods to analyze text and multimedia data
(Saillard 2011). For analyzing the data, we applied a qualitative content analysis according to Mayring
(2014) and followed a deductive approach for category formation. Therefore, we created the categories
according to the constructs of the PVT and some aspects of the collaboration virtualization theory. In
the first step, we paraphrased corresponding text passages. For the coding, three experienced coders
discussed every paraphrase against the background of the PVT categories and excluded paraphrases
which did not match. If a phrase was considered relevant but did not match with the initial categories,
an additional category was derived. After the coding, we applied a generalization step according to
Mayring (2014) and interpreted our results. We then developed design principles based on current
literature findings and the findings from the expert interviews which were conducted and followed the
guidelines of Kruse et al. (2016).

4 Results & Discussion
4.1 Derivation of Requirements and Design Principles
Sensory requirements: Our interviewees highlighted that one of the greatest advantages of
physical coworking spaces is the emotional support and the perceived motivation which could also be
increased by presenting logged-in users on the platform (F1-2, Em, En2). As an example, S1 stated:” I
believe that it is a kind of help to motivate oneself to work. Somehow to sit down in a nice
environment, in a nice working atmosphere. To meet other people maybe, so mostly positive people,
who also, mostly I noticed, who either learn or do creative things”. Weiss and Cropanzano (Weiss and
Cropanzano 1996) described that cognitive and emotional processes have an influence on job
satisfaction which can result in an increase of productivity. Emotional support during work is very
important and should always be sought. A virtual coworking platform would provide one opportunity
to disseminate this effect beyond the borders of physical coworking spaces to people who would like to
work from home, from a café, from a library, or from other open spaces. To represent the emotional
support in a virtual environment, auditive and visual applause was mentioned in our interviews (S3).
This could also be mixed with other technologies providing emotional support such as automated
virtual assistants (Letho et al. 2011). In this way, coworkers are motivated even without the physical
presence of others. If, for example, a project has been successfully completed or if things are not going
well, other coworkers can virtually express their happiness or empathy:
DP1: Provide a complementary virtual coworking platform with the possibility to get emotional
encouragement in order to ensure that users can also get virtual auditory and visual feedback when
they are in social or physical absence of others.
Relationship requirements: In collaboration, trust within a group is seen as crucial to team
success, especially in terms of knowledge sharing and virtual collaboration (Fan et al. 2013). This
raises the question of the extent to which relationships are necessary in coworking and virtual
coworking. Fan et al. (Fan et al. 2013) concluded that strong relationships and thus collaboration are
easier to virtualize. The relationship between users of coworking spaces was described as familiar and
friendly, nevertheless professional and collegial in our interviews (F1, En2). In some cases, personal
contacts and friendships were formed (F1-2, Em, En2). F1 stated: “So I met a few coworkers with
similar age privately. Simply because there were a few overlapping interests, a few friendships were
formed. But then that remained rather private”. The interviewees emphasized that the contact is
usually not as intense as it is supposed to (S1, S3, F1, Em). They pointed out the disadvantage that
everyone in the coworking space works on their individual tasks and that there is little exchange.
Interviewee F2 stressed that coworking does not create synergies in terms of collaboration. This
contradicts the definition of coworking, which assumes that people interact and co-create (WeijsPerrée et al. 2019). However, all interviewees said that having productive people around increases

6

Australasian Conference on Information Systems
2020, Wellington

Hofeditz et al.
Virtually Extended Coworking Spaces

their own motivation. Thus, it seems valuable to see who is active and at work. The interviewees
suggested to implement icons and self-designed avatars or simple profile pictures for a better
overview. In addition, a status consisting of a few words could indicate whether the person is currently
available or busy (F1-2, Em, En2). A symbol was wanted, which shows the availability status of each
person (S1-2, En1). This is consistent with statements made by Dourish and Bellotti (Dourish and
Bellotti 1992) which stressed that awareness, such as knowing what others are doing, is important.
This finally results in our following design principle:
DP2: Ensure that user motivation in the social or physical absence of others is supported by a
complementary virtual coworking platform by transparently displaying logged-in users through
profile pictures and an availability indicator.
According to the interviews, users of coworking spaces are placed by their competences and areas of
responsibility. Meeting people with similar attitudes has a positive influence on satisfaction and thus
on work performance (Bouncken and Reuschl 2018). The interviewees were already familiar with the
function of channels from collaboration tools (such as slack), which facilitates their use and
integration. In addition to the functionalities already available in collaboration tools, three new ones
were named that would complement coworking platforms. A browsing mode would take you into a
virtual coworking world where things and people can be discovered (S3). Invisibility mode would
mean not only making your status ‘busy’ but disappearing completely from the platform for a certain
period (S1): “Maybe also such a function that you can make yourself invisible, that nobody can
contact you or see that you are there. I think that would be quite good”. Furthermore, the electronic
brainstorming or virtual idea exchange area describes an area in which one presents ideas on the
platform and gets feedback from other coworkers (En2). In general, individualization should be
offered to a certain extent, since this heightens the degree of involvement, which in turn could have a
positive effect on the intention to use a coworking platform (En2). Private and professional exchange
are to be separated (F1, En2). It was also explicitly stated that small talk – so-called kitchen
conversations – should arise just as in the physical coworking space (S2-03, En1). Interviewee F1
believed that there is a greater chance and less restraint in contacting others online than in coworking
spaces. This results in our following design principle:
DP3: Provide a complementary virtual coworking platform with the ability to exchange information
in different channels in order to ensure that users who have the same interests can find each other
easily in order to increase the knowledge exchange.
Synchronism Requirements: Many interviewees stated that in the case of urgent tasks they would
interact via synchronous communication that is most likely face-to-face communication (F1, Em, En1,
En2). Asynchronous communication, such as email, would be disadvantageous in this situation (S3,
Em). Faster systems, such as messengers are more important here (S1, S3, Em, En2). These especially
include phone calls and video conferences to be able to express something more directly, avoid
misunderstandings and to act more efficiently (S1-3, F1-2, En2). In addition, it is always important to
document the discussed content in the form of a written note, such as through email (Em).
Furthermore, a desktop sharing tool was desired in order to be able to clarify contents in combination
with a conversation (S1-2, F1). This is supported by researchers who argued that there are less delays
when everyone works at the same place (Baltes et al. 2002; Fan et al. 2013). In practice there are both
synchronous and asynchronous communication features (Sococo - Online Workplace for Distributed
Teams. 2019). According to the process virtualization theory the required synchronicity contributes to
lower virtualizability (Overby 2008). In order to avoid this problem, we have identified a suggested
solution in the interviews. A ticket system could help to highlight particularly urgent tasks and ensure
faster communication. In addition, mobile phone notifications facilitate the speed of answers. If
respondents work on a complex task, they would also prefer synchronous communication. A phone
call or a video conference (En2) can be used to solve problems and create a better understanding. To
provide an example, En2 stated: “I believe that coordination can be achieved faster with video
telephony or instant messaging, for example. Or with a short telephone conference”. It makes sense
to share the screen in order to be able to describe complex issues more easily (S1). It was additionally
noted that asynchronous communication tools, such as messengers, a forum, organization tools and
emails should be used in such situations (S2-3, En1). According to Kirkman and Mathieu (2005)
complex tasks primarily require technologies that provide rich information and synchronous
communication channels. However, our results showed that it is not sufficient to communicate only
synchronously. This could be due to the fact that especially when working alone together (as it is the
case in coworking spaces) it is important to make communication available for a longer period of time.
This is also reflected in the interviewees' statements, as they would use both synchronous and

7

Australasian Conference on Information Systems
2020, Wellington

Hofeditz et al.
Virtually Extended Coworking Spaces

asynchronous communication channels. These results leaded us to develop the following design
principle:
DP4: Provide a complementary virtual coworking platform with different types of computermediated communication in order to ensure that users can perform synchronous or asynchronous
communication to complete urgent and complex tasks.
Identification and Control Requirements: According to Lee (Lee 2009) internet-based
communication can lead to the unauthorized transfer of data. The fear that unauthorized persons
could get access to personal and sensitive data, was also expressed in our interviews. But in general,
our interviewees had no concerns regarding the privacy of personal data on a complementary virtual
coworking platform, as they perceive basic trust in such platforms. However, that does not mean that
personal data privacy is no important factor. When it comes to job-related data, more problems and
concerns are raised by the interviewees. Even in physical coworking, it can occur that co-users get to
know work-related information that should be kept protected. This problem is anticipated when
working on digital workplaces. For example, there could be damage to their businesses if a competitor
sees sensitive data or when data is passed on to third parties or is lost if the server leaks data (S2-3,
Em, En1-2). As an example, S3 said: “Basically, I would say that there are concerns about whether
the data is read out for the purposes of third parties”. Therefore, it should be ensured that sensitive
and private files are protected on a coworking platform. Kamat et al. (2003) also claimed that access
rights are needed to protect the data online. Even in coworking spaces strangers can look into workrelated documents (Bouncken and Reuschl 2018). Thus, access rights are necessary to protect the
professional data. This aspect is already highlighted in literature, since it is a well-established way of
protecting data (Fan et al. 2013; Kamat et al. 2003). From these data protection issues, we formulated
the following design principle in order to determine who can view and edit which information and data
on a coworking platform:
DP5: Ensure that a complementary virtual coworking platform is aligned with the security of
confidential data in order to ensure that users can control the way their job-related files are handled
in terms of access rights and permissions.
Organizational requirements: The extent to which the technology enables the virtualization of
collaboration processes depends on the wealth of information and the type and number of
communication channels (Fan et al. 2013). According to the PVT, a higher information technology
capacity will make collaboration more virtualizable (Overby 2011). Our interviews revealed that
standard tools such as text, voice or video chat should be included. However, organizational and
planning tools such as project management tools play an important role (S2-3, En1). Interviewees S2
and F1 also believed that a common digital pinboard would be useful: “Tiles with different buckets,
which can be layered up and down according to priority, where comments are attached, where the
task is described, where files may be attached and where it says who is going to do it and until when.
Basically, a shared pinboard” (S2). Thereby, information and ideas can be shared and opinions can be
exchanged. Research showed that a digital display with information about present people leads to
more social interaction and knowledge sharing (Parrino 2015). Other researchers already argued that
online coworking could be managed by a coordinator, which can be a user or an artificial intelligence
(Andrade et al. 2013). The use of the tool also depends on whether the platform is used only at a
physical coworking space or also at other places where people still want to feel part of the coworker
community. In our interviews we discovered that only a few of the interviewees participate at events in
coworking spaces so far (S2, F1-02). This could be due to poor organization. Participation may
increase through appropriate organizational tools such as embedded calendar functionalities or virtual
assistant support (Diederich et al. 2019). Therefore, our sixth design principle is the following:
DP6: Provide a complementary virtual coworking platform with organizational tools to ensure that
all members of the coworking platform can clarify organizational issues even if they are not at the
physical coworking space.

4.2 Implications
In general, it can be stated that some positive effects and mechanisms of physical coworking could be
supported by a complementary virtual coworking platform. Especially motivation, knowledge sharing
and social proximity could be increased according to our interviewees. The PVT was well suited as a
framework to identify design principles for a complementary virtual platform. The constructs of the
theory allowed us to cover almost all relevant aspects in order to test the processes and dynamics in
coworking spaces for virtualization. However, the PVT was designed to test the virtualizability of
physical processes. A complementary virtual coworking platform could deliver further advantages that

8

Australasian Conference on Information Systems
2020, Wellington

Hofeditz et al.
Virtually Extended Coworking Spaces

are not found in physical coworking. For these aspects not covered by the PVT, we added the
requirement category of organizational requirements which resulted in DP6. Although the technical
requirements of PVT (monitoring capabilities, reach and representation) also include organizational
aspects, our interviews showed that the creation of organizational requirements is highly relevant. This
aspect could also be highly relevant for other complex processes or process chains that needs to be
virtualized. We have therefore added organizational requirements to the PVT model (Figure 3).

Figure 3. Modified PVT showing the virtualizability of dynamics at coworking spaces
The organizational requirements represent all organizational aspects of a process, mechanism or a set
of processes such as organizing tasks or meetings that are amenable or resistant to being conducted
virtually. These requirements are also influenced by technical aspects such as monitoring capabilities
and representation and richness.
Moreover, almost no process today is completely physical or completely virtual. Most processes consist
of hybrids of physical interaction and virtual operations. PVT assumes completely physical processes
for virtualization, but even the processes in coworking spaces contain some virtual elements that can
be linked to. Further research should examine the virtualizability of these mixed processes in order to
identify more requirements that makes a process even more effective when it is performed virtually.

4.3 Limitations & Further Research
The present paper also contains limitations that can be considered with regard to future research. It
would be valuable to interview more people with experience in virtual collaboration, in order to
identify more concrete requirements. Moreover, this study is limited to Germany, but it would also be
interesting to discover intercultural and country-specific differences. There is also a need to investigate
how to ensure that current problems such as technostress can be avoided by using a coworking
platform (Ayyagari et al. 2017). Furthermore, this study we focused on an ICT solution. Future
research should examine other aspects that could improve the work at coworking spaces such as
emotional factors.
Finally, it should be further investigated whether there are differences in the functionalities of a virtual
coworking platform when it is used at home or only in addition to a physical coworking space, and
which opportunities both options can offer. Furthermore, the developed design principles should be
tested to examine the practicability and the need for the actual use of the system. Future research
should first focus on verifying the conceptual model of coworking virtual reinforcement theory which
we provided in this study.

5 Conclusion
In this study, we found that positive effects and dynamics of coworking spaces can be supported by
complementary virtual coworking platforms. Especially motivation, knowledge sharing and social
proximity of a coworking space could be increased by such a platform. We showed how ICT, which is
already used to communicate with clients, can also be used to increase motivation, social exchange and

9

Australasian Conference on Information Systems
2020, Wellington

Hofeditz et al.
Virtually Extended Coworking Spaces

creativity. In addition, we showed that the PVT provides a first guided approach to identify
requirements for a complementary virtual coworking platform. Furthermore, we identified
organizational requirements as an important factor that needs to be considered when virtualizing the
dynamics and set of processes at coworking spaces. We derived six design principles from our
interview findings and corresponding literature which should be taken into account when designing
such a platform. The platform should serve as a supplement to a physical coworking space and thus
enable participants, who are not always able to physically interact with others, to be a part of the
community and to benefit from the advantages such as knowledge and motivation exchange. The
exploration of such a platform from an IS perspective is important as it is primarily focusing on
processes and effects of coworking spaces and not on the physical coworking space itself.

6 References
Alavi, M., Wheeler, B. C., and Valacich, J. D. 1995. “Using IT to Reeingineer Business Education: An
Exploratory Investigation of Collaborative Telelearning,” Mis Quarterly.
Andrade, J., Ares, J., Suárez, S., and Giret, A. 2013. “Implementation Challenges for Supporting
Coworking Virtual Enterprises,” Proceedings - 2013 IEEE 10th International Conference on eBusiness Engineering, ICEBE 2013, pp. 9–16. (https://doi.org/10.1109/ICEBE.2013.2).
Andres, H. P., Shipps, B. P., and Carolina, N. 2009. Team Learning in Technology-Mediated
Distributed Teams, (21:2), pp. 213–222.
Ayyagari, Grover, and Purvis. 2017. “Technostress: Technological Antecedents and Implications,” MIS
Quarterly (35:4), p. 831. (https://doi.org/10.2307/41409963).
Baltes, B. B., Dickson, M. W., Sherman, M. P., Bauer, C. C., and LaGanke, J. S. 2002. “ComputerMediated Communication and Group Decision Making: A Meta-Analysis,” Organizational
Behavior
and
Human
Decision
Processes
(87:1),
pp.
156–179.
(https://doi.org/10.1006/obhd.2001.2961).
Bilandzic, M., and Foth, M. 2013. “Libraries as Coworking Spaces: Understanding User Motivations
and Perceived Barriers to Social Learning,” Library Hi Tech (31:2), pp. 254–273.
(https://doi.org/10.1108/07378831311329040).
Blagoev, B., Costas, J., and Kärreman, D. 2019. “‘We Are All Herd Animals’: Community and
Organizationality
in
Coworking
Spaces,”
Organization,
pp.
1–23.
(https://doi.org/10.1177/1350508418821008).
Bouncken, R. B. 2018. “University Coworking-Spaces: Mechanisms, Examples, and Suggestions for
Entrepreneurial Universities,” International Journal of Technology Management.
(https://doi.org/10.1504/ijtm.2018.10012930).
Bouncken, R. B., and Reuschl, A. J. 2018. “Coworking-Spaces : How a Phenomenon of the Sharing and
for Entrepreneurship,” Review of Managerial Science (12:1), Springer Berlin Heidelberg, pp.
317–334. (https://doi.org/10.1007/s11846-016-0215-y).
Brown, J. 2017. “Curating the ‘Third Place’? Coworking and the Mediation of Creativity,” Geoforum
(82:April), Elsevier, pp. 112–126. (https://doi.org/10.1016/j.geoforum.2017.04.006).
Bueno, S., Rodríguez-Baltanás, G., and Gallego, M Dolores. 2018. “Coworking Spaces: A New Way of
Achieving Productivity,” Journal of Facilities Management (16:4), pp. 452–466.
(https://doi.org/10.1108/JFM-01-2018-0006).
Diederich, S., Brendel, A. B., and Kolbe, L. M. 2019. “On Conversational Agents in Information
Systems Research: Analyzing the Past to Guide Future Work,” Proceedings of the International
Conference on Wirtschaftsinformatik.
Dourish, P., and Bellotti, V. 1992. “Awareness and Coordination in Shared Workspaces,” CSCW ’92
Proceedings of the 1992 ACM Conference on Computer-Supported Cooperative Work, pp. 107–
114.
Egea, K. 2017. “Relationship Building in Virtual Teams: An Academic Case Study,” Proceedings of the
2006 InSITE Conference. (https://doi.org/10.28945/3046).
Fan, S., Choon, L. S., and J. Leon, Z. 2013. “Towards Collaboration Virtualization Theory,” PACIS 2012
Proceedings, pp. 1–10. (https://doi.org/10.1002/pbc.ABSTRACT).

10

Australasian Conference on Information Systems
2020, Wellington

Hofeditz et al.
Virtually Extended Coworking Spaces

Garrett, L. E., Spreitzer, G. M., and Bacevice, P. A. 2017. “Co-Constructing a Sense of Community at
Work: The Emergence of Community in Coworking Spaces,” Organization Studies (38:6), pp.
821–842. (https://doi.org/10.1177/0170840616685354).
Hassell, M. D., and Cotton, J. L. 2017. “Some Things Are Better Left Unseen: {Toward} More Effective
Communication and Team Performance in Video-Mediated Interactions,” Computers in Human
Behavior (73), pp. 200–208. (https://doi.org/10/gbk9cw).
Josef, B. 2018. Coworking from the Company’s Perspective - Serendipity-Biotope or Getaway-Spot?,
pp. 265–278. (https://doi.org/10.18690/978-961-286-043-1.19).
Kamat, N., Vishwanathan, S., Prabhakar, B. S., Goradia, T., and Saran, A. 2003. Dynamic Rules-Based
Secure Data Access System for Business Computer Platforms, (1:19).
Kirkman, B. L., and Mathieu, J. E. 2005. “The Dimensions and Antecedents of Team Virtuality,”
Journal of Management (31:5), pp. 700–718. (https://doi.org/10.1177/0149206305279113).
Kong, D., Schlagwein, D., and Cecez-Kecmanovic. 2019. “Issues in Digital Nomad – Corporate Work :
An Institutional Theory Perspective,” in Proceedings of the 27th European Conference on
Information, Stockholm, pp. 1–16.
Kruse, L. C., Seidel, S., and Purao, S. 2016. “Making Use of Design Principles,” in Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, Springer International Publishing, pp. 37–51. (https://doi.org/10.1007/9783-319-39294-3).
Laumer, S., Shami, N. S., Muller, M., and Geyer, W. 2017. “The Challenge of Enterprise Social
Networking (Non-)Use at Work: A Case Study of How to Positively Influence Employees’
Enterprise Social Networking Acceptance,” Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Computer
Supported
Cooperative
Work,
CSCW,
pp.
978–994.
(https://doi.org/10.1145/2998181.2998309).
Lee, S. J. 2009. “Online Communication and Adolescent Social Ties : Who Benefits More from Internet
Use ? ∗,” Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication Online (14), pp. 509–531.
(https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1083-6101.2009.01451.x).
Letho, T., Oinas-Kukkonen, H., and Drozd, F. 2011. “FACTORS AFFECTING PERCEIVED
PERSUASIVENESS OF A BEHAVIOR CHANGE SUPPORT SYSTEM,” Ejisdc (45:6), pp. 1–14.
(https://doi.org/10.1007/s40596-014-0205-9).
Massey, A. P., Montoya-weiss, M. M., Hung, Y., Massey, A. P., and Montoya-weiss, M. M. 2014.
Because Time Matters : Temporal Coordination in Global Virtual Project Teams Because Time
Matters :
Temporal
Coordination
in
Global
Virtual,
(1222).
(https://doi.org/10.1080/07421222.2003.11045742).
Mattessich, P. W., and Monsey, B. R. 1993. Collaboration: What Makes It Work - A Review of
Research Literature on Factors Influencing Successful Collaboration, Minnesota: Amherst H.
Wilder Foundation.
Mayring, P. 2014. Qualitative Content Analysis.
Morrow, J. A. 2020. “Alone Together : Finding Solidarity in a Time of Social Distance,” Space and
Culture (23:3), pp. 315–319. (https://doi.org/10.1177/1206331220938643).
Nitschke, C. S., Williams, S. P., and Schubert, P. 2019. “A Multiorganisational Study of the Drivers and
Barriers of Enterprise Collaboration Systems-Enabled Change,” International Conference on
Wirtschaftsinformatik (WI), pp. 1612–1626.
Van Ostrand, A., Islands, C., Wolfe, S., Islands, C., Arredondo, A., Islands, C., Skinner, A. M., Islands,
C., Visaiz, R., Islands, C., Jones, M., Islands, C., Jenkins, J. J., and Islands, C. 2016. Creating
Virtual Communities That Work : Best Practices for Users and Developers of E-Collaboration
Software, (12:4). (https://doi.org/10.4018/IJeC.2016100104).
Overby, E. 2008. “Information Technology Process Virtualization Theory and the Impact of
Information
Technology,”
Organization
Science
(19:2).
(https://doi.org/10.1287/orsc.1070.0316).
Overby, E. 2011. “Process Virtualization Theory and the Impact of Information Technology.,” Academy
of
Management
Proceedings
(2005:1),
pp.
G1–G6.
(https://doi.org/10.5465/ambpp.2005.18781442).

11

Australasian Conference on Information Systems
2020, Wellington

Hofeditz et al.
Virtually Extended Coworking Spaces

Parrino, L. 2015. “Coworking: Assessing the Role of Proximity Knowledge Exchange,” Knowledge
Management Research and Practice (13), pp. 261–271.
Pollak, M., and Anderst-kotsis, G. 2017. “E-Mail Monitoring and Management with MS Social Bots,”
IiWAS ’17, pp. 4–6. (https://doi.org/10.1145/3151759.3151799).
Reeves, S., Lewin, S., Espin, S., and Zwarenstein, M. 2010. Interprofessional Teamwork for Health
and Social Care, Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
Reeves, S., Xyrichis, A., and Zwarenstein, M. 2018. “Teamwork, Collaboration, Coordination, and
Networking: Why We Need to Distinguish between Different Types of Interprofessional
Practice,” Journal of Interprofessional Care (32:1), Taylor & Francis, pp. 1–3.
(https://doi.org/10.1080/13561820.2017.1400150).
Saillard, E. K. 2011. “FORUM : QUALITATIVE SOCIAL RESEARCH Systematic Versus Interpretive
Analysis with Two CAQDAS Packages : NVivo and MAXQDA,” Forum: Qualitative Social
Research (QSR) (12:1).
Schlagwein, D. 2018. “‘Escaping the Rat Race’: Justifications in Digital Nomadism,” Research-inProgress Papers.
Schlagwein, D., and Jarrahi, M. H. 2020. “The Mobilities of Digital Work : The Case of Digital
Nomadism,” in Twenty-Eighth European Conference on Information Systems (ECIS2020).
Sococo - Online Workplace for Distributed Teams. 2019.
Spinuzzi, C. 2012. “Working Alone Together: Coworking as Emergent Collaborative Activity,” Journal
of
Business
and
Technical
Communication
(26:4),
pp.
399–441.
(https://doi.org/10.1177/1050651912444070).
Spinuzzi, C., Bodrožić, Z., Scaratti, G., and Ivaldi, S. 2019. “‘Coworking Is About Community’: But
What Is ‘Community’ in Coworking?,” Journal of Business and Technical Communication (33:2),
pp. 112–140. (https://doi.org/10.1177/1050651918816357).
Vidaillet, B., and Bousalham, Y. 2018. “Coworking Spaces as Places Where Economic Diversity Can Be
Articulated:
Towards
a
Theory
of
Syntopia,”
Organization
(Ea
2354).
(https://doi.org/10.1177/1350508418794003).
Weijs-Perrée, M., van de Koevering, J., Appel-Meulenbroek, R., and Arentze, T. 2019. “Analysing User
Preferences for Co-Working Space Characteristics,” Building Research and Information (47:5),
Taylor & Francis, pp. 534–548. (https://doi.org/10.1080/09613218.2018.1463750).
Weiss, H. M., and Cropanzano, R. 1996. “Affective Events Theory: A Theoretical Discussion of the
Structure, Causes and Consequences of Affective Experiences at Work,” in Research in
Organizational Behavior: An Annual Series of Analytical Essays and Critical Reviews (Vol. 18),
B. M. Staw and L. L. Cummings (eds.), US: Elsevier Science/JAI Press, pp. 1–74.
von Zumbusch, J. S. H., and Lalicic, L. 2020. “The Role of Co-Living Spaces in Digital Nomads’ WellBeing,” Information Technology & Tourism (0123456789), Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
(https://doi.org/10.1007/s40558-020-00182-2).
Copyright © 2020 Lennart Hofeditz, Milad Mirbabaie & Stefan Stieglitz. This is an open-access
article licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-Non Commercial 3.0 New Zealand, which
permits non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original
author and ACIS are credited.

12

