Graph-based open-ended survey on concerns related to COVID-19
Tatsuro Kawamoto
Artificial Intelligence Research Center,
National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology, Tokyo, Japan

Takaaki Aoki
Faculty of Education, Kagawa University, Takamatsu, Japan

Michiko Ueda

arXiv:2012.04510v1 [cs.SI] 8 Dec 2020

Faculty of Political Science and Economics, Waseda University, Tokyo, Japan
(Dated: December 9, 2020)
The COVID-19 pandemic is an unprecedented public health crisis with broad social and economic
consequences. We conducted four surveys between April and August 2020 using the graph-based
open-ended survey (GOS) framework, and investigated the most pressing concerns and issues for the
general public in Japan. The GOS framework is a hybrid of the two traditional survey frameworks
that allows respondents to post their opinions in a free-format style, which can subsequently serve
as one of the choice items for other respondents, just as in a multiple-choice survey. As a result, this
framework generates an opinion graph that relates opinions and respondents. We can also construct
annotated opinion graphs to achieve a higher resolution. By clustering the annotated opinion graphs,
we revealed the characteristic evolution of the response patterns as well as the interconnectedness
and multi-faceted nature of opinions.

INTRODUCTION

The COVID-19 pandemic is an unprecedented event
with a myriad of consequences. Without a doubt, it is
one of the most serious public health crises in recent history. However, it is more than a public health challenge.
Various measures that were introduced to prevent the
spread of the virus have caused major disruptions in economic activities and social life. Reduced business activities and associated job losses, school closures, movement
restrictions, and social distancing have affected multiple
aspects of our lives, presenting new challenges that every
single member of society has to face in addition to the
disease itself. Thus, the COVID-19 pandemic has given
rise to multi-faceted issues and concerns for many individuals, ranging from the consequences of the infection
itself to the economic and social ramifications of the pandemic. Throughout this paper, we refer to these concerns
and issues as opinions.
Using the graph-based open-ended survey (GOS)
framework [1], this paper seeks to understand such multifaceted opinions expressed by the general population in
Japan between April and August 2020. The GOS framework is a hybrid of the two traditional survey frameworks:
multiple choice and free format. In a multiple-choice survey, respondents are presented with a list of items from
which they could choose one or more that were most applicable to them. While this is a widely used framework
owing to its ease of implementation, the potential answers must be anticipated and compiled as a list by those
conducting the survey. Thus, the multiple-choice survey
may not be the most appropriate framework to use if the
purpose is to gauge complex and multi-faceted opinions,
such as people’s concerns during an unprecedented event
like the COVID-19 pandemic. Their concerns and opin-

ions may not be clear a priori because of the complex
and rapidly developing nature of the event. The second
framework is the free-format survey in which the respondents post their opinions as texts. However, analysing
such texts can be arbitrary to a certain extent and challenging in a large-scale survey, including this study.
In the GOS framework, respondents can post their
opinions in a free-format style, which can subsequently
serve as one of the choice items for other respondents, just
as in the multiple-choice survey. Because survey respondents can select others’ opinions that they agree with,
the GOS framework constitutes a graph (or network) of
responses at the end. This graph makes statistical evaluation of the free-format responses feasible, while preserving the diversity of respondents’ opinions that increases
spontaneously as respondents express their own opinions.
A major contribution of this paper is to reveal the
most pressing issues and concerns of the general public
through the opinions expressed by the respondents. In
addition, by conducting the same survey using the GOS
framework several times, we were able to capture the
evolution of those opinions.
Our analysis shows that the variety of major opinions
rapidly changed during the study period, and that several opinions were strongly related. Traditional survey
methods are less suitable to capture such characteristic
behaviours. These results indicate that studying opinions
under a rapidly changing situation, such as the COVID19 pandemic, is indeed an ideal application of the GOS
framework.
Our study period corresponded to the middle of the
first wave of cases in Japan (April 2020), the period in
which the number of cases temporarily diminished (May
2020), and the beginning and the middle of the second
wave (July and August 2020, respectively), which was

Daily new confirmed cases

2

First survey

1500

Second survey

Third survey Fourth survey

1000
500
0
31

17

03

20

06

22

08

25

11

27

13

30

16

g
Au

g
Au

g
Au

l
Ju

l
Ju

n
Ju

n
Ju

ay

M

ay

M

r

r

Ap

Ap

ar

M

ar

M

FIG. 1. Survey periods and the daily new confirmed cases of COVID-19 in Japan.

larger than the first one in terms of the number of cases,
but resulted in fewer deaths (see Fig. 1 for the evolution
of the confirmed cases). The first case of COVID-19 in
Japan was reported on January 16. The Japanese government declared a state of emergency in major metropolitan areas on April 7, and expanded the coverage to the
entire country on April 16. The Japanese government
implemented neither a lockdown nor strict movement restrictions. Non-essential businesses were urged to either
temporarily close or operate for reduced hours, but noncompliance was not penalised. The state of emergency
was lifted on May 25. As of August 31, the total number
of positive cases was 67,077, and the number of COVID19-related deaths was 1,278, which amounted to 10.15
deaths per one million people [2].

METHODS

We conducted four rounds of an online survey of the
Japanese adult population aged 20–59 between April and
August 2020. The respondents were asked about their
most pressing concerns. Specifically, the question asked
(in Japanese) was, “What is the concern and the difficulty that you face in your daily life and economic activities? Please provide concrete and succinct answers.”
This study was approved by the Ethics Review Committee on Human Research of Waseda University (approval
number: 2020-050). Further details on data collection
can be found in Supplementary Information.

refer to this graph as an opinion graph (see Supplementary Information for a comment on the definition of the
opinion graph).
The generation process of the opinion graph is illustrated in Fig. 2. At the beginning of the survey, we prepared a set of opinion vertices (which can be an empty
set) as the initial opinions (choices). The description
of the initial opinions is provided in Supplementary Information. When a respondent responds to a question,
several opinions are sampled uniformly and randomly,
and presented to the respondent; the minimum number
of samples is eight, while respondents can opt to refer
to up to 24 opinions. Whenever a respondent supports
a presented opinion(s), the GOS generates a respondent
vertex connected to the selected opinion vertices. When
a respondent expresses new opinions, the GOS generates
corresponding opinion vertices connected to the newly
added respondent vertex. The numbers of opinion vertices and respondent vertices increase simultaneously as
the GOS is carried out. The above procedure constitutes
an opinion graph.
We expect a set of similar opinion vertices to be connected via respondent vertices. Similarly, we expect the
respondent vertices to be classified into groups, in which
the vertices have a similar response pattern. The classification of opinions and respondents is realised through
clustering of an opinion graph, which we refer to as the
opinion groups and respondent groups, respectively.

Clustering of the opinion graphs
Graph-based open-ended survey

The results of the GOS were used to generate a bipartite graph consisting of two sets of vertices representing
the opinions and respondents, respectively. Each edge
connects a pair of opinions and respondent vertices, and
indicates that a respondent supports the opinion. We

A number of clustering algorithms have been proposed
for graphs and bipartite graphs in the literature [3–7].
Here, we used the Markov chain Monte Carlo method,
which was implemented in a software called graph-tool [8]
that performs a Bayesian inference of groups under the
assumption of a stochastic block model [9]. The algorithm identifies a statistically significant group structure

3

Respondent
vertices
Opinion
vertices

{
{

Initial
opinion graph

Support 1 opinion
Propose 1 opinion

Support 1 opinion
Propose 0 opinion

Support 0 opinion
Propose 2 opinions

FIG. 2. Example of the generation process of an opinion graph.

and estimates the number of groups in a non-parametric
manner. All the clustering results in this study are inferences of unnested (i.e. non-hierarchical) stochastic block
models. We confirmed that, while the nested variant does
not raise the resolution considerably, it often subdivides a
large opinion group into smaller sets, which is apparently
an overfit.

cause we used a non-parametric inference method, the
algorithm eventually identifies the parsimonious number
of opinion groups. Alternatively, one could use an approach discussed in [10] to incorporate annotations in
the inference.

RESULTS
Annotated opinion graphs
Response patterns

In addition to the clustering of raw opinion graphs, we
also considered annotated opinion graphs to achieve a
higher resolution by adding more information externally
through annotation.
Based on the collected opinions, we asked three annotators to classify the opinions into 10 groups: (1) infection risk, (2) social pressure & future prospect, (3) financial issues, (4) (restriction of ) travel, (5) government
policies, (6) mask (shortage), (7) mask (discomfort), (8)
other issues, (9) no concerns, and (10) invalid responses.
The opinions that may not exclusively belong to one of
these groups are left unannotated. The last item refers to
opinions that are not directly related to the question that
was asked. More detailed descriptions of these groups are
provided in Supplementary Information.
The annotators classified opinions independently, and
we distinguished annotations according to different annotators. The maximum number of annotation labels was
30 for each survey. We denoted the total number of annotation labels as K, which can be less than 30 if some
labels are not used.
As shown in Fig. 3, based on annotators’ decisions,
we constructed a K-dimensional vector that represents
a prior probability distribution of the group assignment
for each opinion vertex. The kth element is η ( 0)
if the vertex has the kth annotation label; otherwise, 
(0 <   η), where  and η are determined to normalise
the vector to unity. Therefore, the annotated vertices
have biased prior distributions, whereas all unannotated
vertices have a uniform prior distribution.
These prior distributions were incorporated into the
Bayesian inference using the bfield parameter in graphtool. The set of opinion vertices with similar prior distributions tends to be classified into the same group. Be-

The number of respondents who participated in the
four rounds of the survey were 2103, 1516, 1729, and
1659, respectively. In each round, 191 (9.1%), 127
(8.4%), 119 (6.9%), and 117 (7.1%) respondents expressed their own opinions, while the remaining respondents selected opinion(s) that were applicable to them
from a list presented to them.
Figure 4 shows the clustering results of the raw opinion graphs. For the first and fourth surveys, no group
structure was identified. In contrast, for the second and
third surveys, opinion graphs were partitioned into two
groups. In both cases, the vertices in the smaller respondent group are highly connected to the opinion vertices
that can be coded as no concerns, while the respondents
in the other group supported the opinions on various issues, such as infection risk and financial concerns.
The clustering in Fig. 4 is the most agnostic result
based purely on the collected responses. However, their
resolution is insufficient, as the raw opinion graph is only
classified into a few groups or not classified at all. Figure 5 shows the response patterns of respondents that
were obtained through the clustering of annotated opinion graphs. The (i, j) element is the group-wise propensity (normalised in each column) towards opinion group
i for respondent group j. More precisely, this is the fraction of the number of edges between groups i and j. Although the number of identified opinion groups in each
survey was nine (first survey), six (second survey), and
seven (third and fourth surveys), we added empty opinion groups in Fig. 5 to obtain the same number of rows in
all surveys. In contrast to the results reported in Fig. 4,
where we observed only one group of respondents for the
first and fourth surveys, we can now observe two groups,

Respondent
vertices
Opinion
vertices

{
{

Prior distributions
by annotations

Infection risk

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

]

Social pressure &
future prospect

4

]

Raw opinion graph

Annotated opinion graph

First annotator
Second annotator
Third annotator

FIG. 3. Schematic of an annotated opinion graph. A raw opinion graph is shown at the top, and the prior distribution for each
vertex is shown as a bar plot at the bottom.

First survey

Third survey

Second survey

Fourth survey

FIG. 4. Clustering results of the opinion graphs. These graphs only show randomly sampled connected subgraphs instead
of the entire dataset, for illustration purposes. The opinion vertices are aligned at the bottom, while the respondent vertices
are aligned at the top. Both types of vertices are sorted based on the inferred group assignments. The colour of each vertex
represents the group assignment. The pink vertices are the set of opinions that can be coded as no concerns.

analogous to the results of the second and third surveys.
To further reveal the details about response patterns,
we show the palette diagrams [11, 12] in Fig. 6. The
palette diagram is essentially a stream plot, which is a
stack plot with varying origin axes. The vertical axis
represents the normalised propensity for each opinion
group that a respondent supports. The set of normalised
propensities (i.e. vertical thickness is unity) for all respondents are optimally aligned horizontally so that the
global distribution of the response pattern can be better
understood. The palette diagrams in Fig. 6 show the microscopic response patterns of respondents; the tables in
Fig. 5 show how these patterns can be summarised at a
macroscopic level.
The results presented in these two figures suggest that
there was a sizable block of respondents who did not ex-

press any specific concerns throughout the study period.
These respondents were identified as a distinct group,
relatively isolated from others, through graph clustering.
The evolution of the number of respondents in this group
is negatively correlated with the number of daily cases,
which peaked during our fourth survey, as expected. As
indicated in Fig. 6, these respondents were less likely to
support other opinion groups.
For the other opinion groups, it should be noted that
many of these groups, including government policies
and travel, emerged spontaneously from the opinions expressed by respondents themselves, as they were not included in the initial opinions displayed at the beginning
of the survey. On the other hand, the opinions belonging
to infection risk, social pressure & future prospect, and
financial issues were included in the initial opinions. It

5
First survey

Second survey

Third survey

Fourth survey

Infection risk
Social pressure &
future prospect
Financial issues
Travel
Government policies
Mask (shortage)
Mask (discomfort)
Other issues
No concerns
Invalid responses

FIG. 5. Response patterns of the four surveys. The rows indicate opinion groups and the columns indicate respondent groups.
In each table, the two respondent groups are indicated as groups A and B.

should also be noted, however, that the initial opinions
become less likely to be displayed to the respondents as
more respondents post their own opinions. Therefore, the
initial opinions are unlikely to have a significant influence
on the result.
In all four surveys, the opinions of respondent group
A (shown in Fig. 5) tended to focus on the following
opinion groups: infection risk, social pressure & future
prospect, financial issues, and travel. The size of these
opinion groups varied considerably across surveys. For
example, travel, which covers issues associated with difficulties with traveling and stay-at-home “requests,” was
not a major issue in April, as there were no formal movement restrictions in Japan. It became more prevalent
in the second and third surveys (May and July) when
the number of cases diminished temporarily. By August,
however, it no longer constituted a major opinion as the
infection risk again became the dominant concern with
the rising number of cases.
In the first survey (April 2020), our respondents also
tended to complain about the government’s handling of
the pandemic (government policies) as well as express
concerns regarding the status of hospitals that were overwhelmed by the rapidly rising number of patients; this
was captured in the other issues group. However, as in-

dicated in Fig. 5, the fraction of such concerns quickly
decreased in subsequent surveys as the focus of respondents shifted to other issues, such as financial concerns.
It is noteworthy that social pressure & future prospect
always constituted one of the major opinion groups
throughout our study period. This group mainly refers
to the negative social consequences of contracting the
disease, rather than the physical consequences. Many respondents expressed fears that they might be ostracised
by others if they contract the disease; thus, this opinion group largely represents the social pressure that respondents felt even before testing positive for COVID19. Similarly, financial issues was another group that
appeared as a sizable block in all of the surveys, indicating that the economic consequences of the pandemic
were among the major concerns of respondents.
Fig. 6 reveals that many respondents expressed multiple concerns and opinions, instead of selecting a single
issue as their most pressing concern. While financial issues, social pressure & future prospect, and no concerns
tended to appear on their own, other types of issues were
more likely to appear in combination with other opinion
groups, suggesting that many of our respondents faced
multiple issues and concerns during the pandemic.
Finally, our results show that infection risk became the

6
First survey

Second survey

Third survey

Fourth survey

FIG. 6. Palette diagrams of the four surveys.

dominant concern by the time we conducted the fourth
survey, which coincided with the peak period of the second wave of cases (August). As shown in Fig. 6, although
the infection risk group was one of many other opinions
for most respondents until the third survey, it became

a prominent group in the fourth survey. The number
of respondents who specified infection risks as their only
concern was highest in the fourth survey, which suggests
that infection risk became the dominant issue for a large
number of respondents.

7
DISCUSSION

In this paper, we surveyed the general adult population of Japan four times using the GOS framework to investigate the issues and concerns of people in the midst
of the COVID-19 pandemic. We classified the opinions
of respondents by aggregating the response patterns and
annotations through graph clustering. As a result, we
revealed the characteristic evolution of the response patterns, particularly on infection risk.
The survey results indicated that the most pressing
concerns of the general public changed through the various phases of the pandemic. Many of our respondents
also had multiple issues and concerns. Such a fine evolution of people’s opinions as well as the multi-faceted
nature of these opinions may not be adequately captured
by the traditional multiple-choice survey method, which
required us to predict the opinions to be included in a
list of potential choices. Presenting survey respondents
with a pre-determined set of responses can be particularly
challenging when the situation changes on a daily basis,
as in the case of the current pandemic. Therefore, this
is an ideal situation for an open-ended survey, in which
the group labels are determined a posteriori. As a hybrid
of the two traditional survey methods, the GOS framework takes advantage of both methods and successfully
reveals the multi-faceted and rapidly changing features
of people’s opinions.
Finally, let us discuss the role of annotation in the
clustering of opinion graphs. If every respondent supports only one issue or concern, then the resulting opinion
graph would have a relatively simple group structure, in

[1] T. Kawamoto and T. Aoki, Democratic classification of
free-format survey responses with a network-based framework, Nature Machine Intelligence 1, 322 (2019).
[2] Ministry of Health Labour and Welfare, On the number of COVID-19 cases., https://www.mhlw.go.jp/stf/
covid-19/kokunainohasseijoukyou.html#h2_1 (2020).
[3] I. S. Dhillon, Co-clustering documents and words using
bipartite spectral graph partitioning, in Proceedings of
the Seventh ACM SIGKDD International Conference on
Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, KDD ’01 (Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA,
2001) p. 269–274.
[4] D. D. Lee and H. S. Seung, Learning the parts of objects
by non-negative matrix factorization, Nature 401, 788
(1999).
[5] Y. Kluger, R. Basri, J. T. Chang, and M. Gerstein, Spectral biclustering of microarray data: coclustering genes
and conditions, Genome research 13, 703 (2003).
[6] D. B. Larremore, A. Clauset, and A. Z. Jacobs, Efficiently inferring community structure in bipartite networks, Phys. Rev. E 90, 012805 (2014).
[7] M. Gerlach, T. P. Peixoto, and E. G. Altmann, A network approach to topic models, Science Advances 4,
10.1126/sciadv.aaq1360 (2018).

which each respondent group would be densely connected
to the corresponding opinion group. However, as observed in Figs. 5 and 6, the opinion graphs in the present
survey have more complex group structures because a significant number of respondents support multiple opinions
with different meanings. The annotations were needed
to achieve a higher resolution because a graph with a
complex group structure is difficult to distinguish from a
uniformly random graph, that is, pure noise.
Although the annotations made the group structures
clear, it should also be noted that clustering annotated
opinion graphs is far from trivial. First, because the
annotators’ classifications were performed independently,
just as the responses of the surveys, the decisions of the
annotators are subjective and do not coincide precisely
(see Supplementary Figure S1 for the consistency among
the annotators). In addition, not all opinion vertices were
annotated, and there were no annotations for respondent
vertices. Considering the fact that the responses to openended questions are often classified (i.e. annotated) in a
completely manual manner, our statistical inference approach that brings together all the information from respondents and annotators is a considerable improvement.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This study was financially supported by JSPS Grantsin-Aid for Scientific Research Grant Nos. 18K18604
(T.A. and T.K.) and 20H01584 (M.U.), and Research and
Regional Cooperation for Crisis Management Shikoku
(T.A.). The funders had no role in study design, data
collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript.

[8] T. P. Peixoto, The graph-tool python library, figshare
10.6084/m9.figshare.1164194 (2014).
[9] T. P. Peixoto, Bayesian stochastic blockmodeling, ”Advances in Network Clustering and Blockmodeling”,
edited by P. Doreian, V. Batagelj, A. Ferligoj, (Wiley,
New York, 2019) (2017).
[10] D. Hric, T. P. Peixoto, and S. Fortunato, Network structure, metadata, and the prediction of missing nodes and
annotations, Phys. Rev. X 6, 031038 (2016).
[11] C. Noguchi and T. Kawamoto, Evaluating network partitions through visualization (2019), arXiv:1906.00699.
[12] C. Noguchi and T. Kawamoto, Palette diagram: A
python package for visualization of collective categorical
data (2020), arXiv:2011.01934.
[13] H. Schuman and J. Scott, Problems in the Use of Survey
Questions to Measure Public Opinion, Science 236, 957
(1987).

1

Supplementary Information:
Graph-based open-ended survey on
concerns related to COVID-19
DATA COLLECTION

The first survey was conducted from April 13–19, 2020.
The subsequent three surveys were conducted on the following dates: May 21–26, July 3–7, and August 5–9,
2020. In each round, a set of screening questions was sent
to approximately 10,000 individuals (aged 20–59) who
are members of commercial web panels. We then selected
a sample of approximately 6,000 respondents each time,
based on their demographic characteristics, to represent
the Japanese general population in terms of their residency, sex, and age groups. An invitation to our survey
was sent to these selected individuals through a survey
company.
The survey participants were informed of the purpose
of the study prior to their participation, and had the
option to quit at any time. The respondents provided
explicit consent that the information they provided could
be used for the purpose of this study. The data were
completely anonymous.

ON THE DEFINITION OF THE OPINION
GRAPH

The data collection procedure in this study is essentially the same as the survey conducted in [S1]. However,
we considered bipartite opinion graphs, and treated both
opinion and respondent vertices as vertices of the same
type (i.e. monopartite graph) in [S1]. Note that we only
considered the single-edge type in this study for simplicity, whereas we considered multiple-edge types (positive
and negative) in [S1] for graph clustering.

• I do not know what is going to happen to me if I
become infected.
• I am hesitant to visit my doctor even when I feel
sick with the common cold, etc., because I do not
want to catch the virus.
• I cannot get a PCR test even when I want to get
tested.
• I cannot get a paid leave even if I tested positive
with COVID-19, and I would have no choice but to
take a leave without pay or quit my job.
• I am not sure if I can afford to pay medical bills if
I become infected.
• I am spending too much on childcare costs.
• I do not have much money left and I am not sure
if I can survive without public assistance.
These opinions were selected because they could be
considered typical opinions. We also included several
opinions from each of the potential major categories: infection risk, social pressure/future prospect, and financial
issues.
We provided these initial opinions to help respondents
understand the scope of the question. As pointed out
in [S13], providing the scope of a question is important
for an open-ended question, and it is often mentioned
in the question. If no information about the scope was
provided, then the diversity of opinions could be narrower
than what could have been obtained.
A drawback of the initial opinions is that they may
influence respondents’ opinions. However, the contents
of the resulting opinion groups sufficiently deviated from
the initial opinions; thus, it is unlikely that these initial
opinions influenced the results of the present study.
OPINION GROUPS

INITIAL OPINIONS

Below is a list of the initial opinions that were randomly presented to respondents. The original texts were
written in Japanese.
• Domestic violence
• I had to close my business because of a declining
number of customers.
• I cannot concentrate on my work because of school
closure.
• I am afraid of the pressure that I might experience
from others if I become infected with COVID-19.
• My business is suffering.

Brief descriptions of each opinion group are provided
below.
infection risk: Concerns related to the infection risk of
COVID-19
social pressure & future prospect: Fears that they
may be criticised should they be tested positive
for COVID-19; concerns about uncertain future
prospects
financial issues: Concerns about income and/or employment status
travel: Dissatisfaction with difficulties in traveling or going out
government policies: Issues related to one-time cash
handouts, dissatisfaction with politicians

2
mask (shortage): Shortage of masks at pharmacies
mask (discomfort): Discomfort associated with wearing a mask
other issues: This group contains various valid opinions
that are not classified into other opinion groups
identified in each survey. For example, we identified the following contents in this opinion group:

4. Family-related issues (e.g. parenting)
no concerns: No particular concerns about the present
situation.
invalid responses: Responses that are not directly related to the question asked in the present survey

1. Worries about the capacity of hospitals
2. Frustration with the behaviour of others, or
school

CONSISTENCY AMONG THE ANNOTATORS

3. Shortage of items in stores (other than masks);
physical and mental health

The consistency among the three annotators is shown
in the tables in Fig. S1.

3

First survey

Second survey

Third survey

Fourth survey

FIG. S1. Agreement between each pair of annotators with respect to the opinion group labels.

1

