3D Printing Autoclavable PPE on Low-Cost Consumer 3D Printers

Authors: Hannelore Hemmingera and *Xiaoyu (Rayne) Zhengab

Affiliations:
a

Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, & Department of Mechanical and
Aerospace Engineering, University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA
b
Department of Mechanical Engineering, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA 24061, USA

*Corresponding author:
Email address: rayne@seas.ucla.edu (X. Zheng)

Abstract:
During the COVID-19 pandemic, medical facilities began using 3D printed PPE sourced
from their own print labs, makerspaces, universities, and individuals with 3D printers to fill the
gaps in supply as traditional manufacturing was not widely enough distributed nor quick enough
to scale to widespread spikes in demand. However, to date this PPE has been limited to lowtemperature, easy to print thermoplastics which are not compatible with autoclave sterilization
and must be sterilized by hand washing methods. Herein, we present a method for 3D printing a
temperature resistant nylon copolymer on a common low-cost 3D printer. We show that the
resulting parts can be autoclaved without deformation, and conduct uniaxial tensile testing
showing that autoclaving the material does not result in substantial degradation of material
properties. As a result, we demonstrate the capability to manufacture autoclavable PPE on lowcost consumer 3D printers with only minor modification.

Keywords:

3D printed PPE, personal protective equipment, autoclavable, sterilization, low cost

1. Introduction
The onset of a global pandemic has revealed a need for widely distributed manufacturing
of medical Personal Protective Equipment (PPE). With demand for PPE spiking and traditional
manufacturing unable to scale production quickly and flexibly enough to match it, medical
facilities around the world began using 3D printed PPE sourced from their own 3D printers, local
makerspaces and universities, or even individuals who own one or more 3D printers [1]. While
there has been some analysis done on design efficacy of individual PPE designs, little to no
research has taken place on expanding the printing materials used by these PPE sources, which
presently is typically Polylactic Acid (PLA), Polyethylene Terephthalate Glycol (PETG),
Acrylonitrile Butadiene Styrene (ABS), Acrylonitrile Styrene Acrylate (ASA), or nylon [2] [3].
While easy to print, PLA has a Vicat softening temperature of around 62 °C [4]. This means
it cannot be sterilized by steam autoclave, which takes place at 121 °C, and must be sterilized with
other methods such as surface disinfectants to avoid severe warping and drooping of the part.
While larger facilities such as hospitals are likely to have other compatible automated sterilization
methods such as low-temperature hydrogen peroxide gas plasma [5], smaller or older facilities
without such modern equipment available currently need to manually disinfect 3D printed PPE,
which can take medical personnel several minutes per item [6]. Steam autoclave is a disinfecting
process which uses pressurized steam at 121 °C to sterilize objects by way of heat. It is an effective
and automated sterilization process and allows for objects to be sterilized in large quantities. 3D
printing PPE in an autoclavable material would save valuable time for medical professionals on
the front lines of the pandemic, as well as building confidence that the parts are fully disinfected,
since sterilizing 3D printed parts with surface disinfectants can be inconsistent due to the large
number of small gaps and crevices which result from the 3D printing process. To allow steam

autoclave to be used as a disinfecting method for 3D printed PPE, it is necessary to expand the
materials used to print them to include those which can survive autoclave temperatures without
major deformation. Since consumer 3D printers are not capable of high extrusion temperatures
and do not have high temperature heated chambers [7] [8] [9] [10], they are incapable of producing
parts made from high-temperature engineering thermoplastics that extrude at well over 300 °C,
such as Polyether Ether Ketone (PEEK) or Polyetherimide (PEI), which would typically be chosen
when autoclavability is required. To save the time of medical professionals, it is therefore
desirable to demonstrate the use of an autoclavable thermoplastic with widely available consumer
3D printers with as little modification as possible to provide widespread, autoclavable PPE
manufacturing capabilities.
In this paper, we demonstrate the 3D printing of a nylon copolymer (CoPA) manufactured
by Polymaker and test its resistance to autoclave conditions by printing and autoclaving test
components which consist of large bridges and overhangs to test for unacceptable deformations
[11]. Tensile testing specimens with dimensions according to ASTM D638 Type V are also 3D
printed and tested on a tensile testing machine (Instron) to check if and how mechanical properties
of the material are degraded by autoclave. The print quality of the CoPA material is raised to
acceptable levels by designing a very simple heated chamber, capable of heating to up to 50 °C
without causing damage to the printer, consisting of a cardboard and clear plastic sheet enclosure
built around the printer with a commonly available 500 watt personal space heater and temperature
controller available from Amazon.
2.

Theory and Hypothesis
Common engineering thermoplastics with high temperature resistance also have a high

glass transition temperature, with PEEK and PEI having glass transition temperatures of 143 °C

and 217 °C respectively [13]. As a thermoplastic cools, once it reaches its glass transition
temperature it can no longer release internal stresses, which in 3D printing causes warping of the
printed part due to thermal contraction of the polymer [14]. Large differences between a 3D
printing polymer’s glass transition temperature and the build chamber temperature can therefore
cause a large amount of warping, and thermoplastics with a high glass transition temperature,
including PEEK and PEI, typically require a high temperature heated build chamber to print
successfully. Other factors in part warping include a polymer’s thermal expansion coefficient and
crystalline behavior, although these behaviors can be more complicated and are frequently not
reported by 3D printing filament manufacturers. Some thermoplastics – including PEEK, but not
PEI, maintain physical strength at temperatures above their glass transition temperature [13]. One
measure of what temperature a polymer softens at is its Vicat softening temperature, making the
Vicat softening temperature a simple method of predicting whether a polymer will survive
autoclave cycles without deforming [13]. Therefore, to find a 3D printing thermoplastic which will
survive autoclave but be printable on a Prusa MK3S or similar machine, the authors hypothesize
that a polymer should have a Vicat softening temperature well above the 121 °C of steam
autoclave, a low glass transition temperature, and a recommended printing temperature safely
under the 300 °C limit of the Prusa MK3S hotend. A plot of Vicat softening temperature vs. glass
transition temperature of many 3D printing materials is shown below in Figure 1 [4, 13, 15-20].

CoPA

Figure 1: Vicat softening vs. glass transition temperatures of many 3D printing filament types and
blends. Notice that most polymers follow the line Tv = Tg, but that notable outliers include CoPA
and PEEK. *For PEEK, the continuous service temperature is shown in place of Vicat softening
temperature due to incomplete data.

CoPA, a nylon-based copolymer made by Polymaker, has a Vicat softening temperature of
180 °C, a glass transition temperature of 67 °C, and a recommended printing temperature of 250270 °C, making it a good candidate for testing [21]. The authors hypothesize that it should be
possible to print CoPA on a Prusa MK3S or any similar printer, since the manufacturer’s
recommended build environment temperature is only 40-60 °C [21], and a chamber temperature

of up to 45-50 °C should be tolerable for the motors, electronics, and 3D printed components of
most consumer machines.

3. Materials and Methods
Consumer 3D Printer selection
The Prusa MK3S 3D printer was selected to represent a commonly available consumer 3D
printer. Available at $800 USD and with a production volume of over 60,000 printers in 2019 [12],
it is popular in makerspaces and universities as well as with individual owners, making it widely
available for distributed manufacturing of PPE. It has also already been used in other studies on
3D printing PPE [2]. With a maximum extrusion temperature of 300 °C, it cannot extrude high
temperature engineering thermoplastics such as PEEK and PEI, but is capable of extruding CoPA
which prints at 250 - 270 °C.
Heated enclosure setup
The heated enclosure was constructed from cardboard, tape, a space heater and temperature
controller, and clear sheet plastic to provide a viewing window, along with two twist ties to help
secure the enclosure door. A 5-sided oversized box was constructed around the printer, with the
5th (front) side of the box hollowed out to an approximately 3-inch frame and copied a second time.
The center of the 2nd copy was filled with the clear plastic sheeting to create a see-through door,
which was hinged to the front top edge of the enclosure. Finally, a hole was pierced in the top for
the temperature probe and a cutout was made in the back of the right panel to install the space
heater. The completed enclosure with all components installed is shown in Figure 2.

(a)

(b)

Figure 2: Cardboard heated build chamber. (a): Closed chamber. Note the use of twist ties to
secure the chamber door and clear plastic sheet used to provide visualization of the print. (b):
Inside of the chamber. Note the position of the space heater and temperature probe.

While a much higher quality enclosure could be constructed using standard aluminum
extrusions and plastic panels for example, the authors’ intent is to demonstrate that such
engineering time and materials are unnecessary to create a satisfactory heated chamber which
functions well enough to raise the print quality of the CoPA material to an acceptable level. The
described enclosure can be constructed in only an hour or two with minimal tools, and only
requires materials and tools which are commonly available and are likely already owned by most
individuals and makerspaces.
3D Printing of CoPA
To initially test for drooping and structural integrity in autoclaved components, test pieces
including a tower with 4 increasingly large overhangs and a bridge were printed and subjected to
a 121 °C steam autoclave sterilization cycle. Test pieces were then inspected for any substantial

deformation and compared to test pieces printed in PLA and Acrylonitrile Styrene Acrylate (ASA).
To check for unacceptable degradation in mechanical properties, 20 ASTM D638 type V tensile
testing specimens, with a cross-section of 3.2x3.2mm, were manufactured using perimeter-only
100% infill, and half were autoclaved. In each group, 5 specimens were dried prior to testing while
5 were tested while acclimated to atmospheric moisture content. Prior to printing, all filament of
each material was dried thoroughly to avoid quality issues caused by atmospheric moisture
absorption. During testing, it was noticed that prolonged heat soaks at drying temperatures (several
days or more over many overnight drying cycles) were causing the filament to gradually degrade
and become brittle and fragile. For this paper, authors used vacuum sealing filament containers
with desiccant packs to store and dry the filament to avoid heating it repeatedly, but recommend
that others make an airtight filament dry-box with Bowden fittings to allow for printing from the
dry-box directly. The manufacturer states that CoPA can be abrasive to brass nozzles when used
extensively [11], although no nozzle abrasion was noted by the authors during the printing of
approximately 1.5 kg of CoPA through an uncoated brass nozzle.

4. Results and Discussion
Part fidelity and deformation tests
In initial testing, no heated chamber was used, and the print quality with CoPA was
consistently poor. Overhangs showed a tendency to curl upward when cooling to room temperature
and the print quality also degraded as the filament absorbed atmospheric moisture, since CoPA is
a hygroscopic material. The authors suspect that the crystalline behavior of CoPA, which has a
crystallization temperature of 128 °C, is likely responsible for the upward warping of the
overhangs, due to the observation during printing that this particular category of warping occurred

while the deposited plastic was still well above its glass transition temperature. After constructing
the heated chamber and drying the filament thoroughly before printing, print quality improved
substantially, and with further tuning of print settings it was possible to achieve good print quality
even for medium to high complexity objects such as the popular Benchy boat model [22]. The
final major print settings used for CoPA (Polymaker), set in Prusa Slicer, are shown below in Table
1 alongside the print settings used for the deformation test objects for PLA (Polymaker) and ASA
(Polymaker).
Table 1: Print Settings
Print
Materia
l
PLA
ASA
CoPA

Extrusion
Temperature,
°C
210
260
260

Bed
Temperature,
°C
60
105
70

Enclosure
Temperature,
°C
20
20
48

Layer
Height,
mm
0.2
0.2
0.2

Extrusion
Width, mm
0.4
0.4
0.4

For large objects, especially objects with sharp corners, a large brim size was used for
CoPA prints to improve build platform adhesion, or custom adhesion pads were added to the part
design at sharp corners contacting the build platform.
The results of the deformation testing are shown in Figure 3. After autoclave, parts printed
from both PLA and ASA exhibited clear thermal failure with severe warping and drooping, while
parts printed from CoPA held their shape.

Figure 3: Post-autoclaving deformation testing results. Blue: PLA, Beige: CoPA, White: ASA.
Top: Testing of cantilevers of various lengths. Bottom: Testing of bridges. PLA and ASA both fail
to withstand autoclave temperatures for all cantilevers as well as the bridge, while CoPA has no
detectable deformation on the bridge experiment and only minimal deformation on even the
largest cantilevers tested.

Design and Printing for Uniaxial Tensile Test
Initially, tensile testing was difficult due to specimen failure at a weak point inherent in the
3D printed part where the extrudates spread outward as the specimen widens. The point where a
central filling extrudate joined the spreading extrudates had lower strength than the rest of the
specimen, and consistently failed first before any necking occurred in the specimen as shown
below in Figure 3. Unsuccessful solution attempts included varying the infill pattern, re-melting
the weak point area with a soldering iron, and packing salt around the prints and reflowing them
in an oven. The weak point was eventually eliminated by processing the 3D model as 5 different
pieces, separated by 1 micron, consisting of a central spar running the length of the specimen and

4 reinforcing wings which form the remaining width of the specimen grip. When using perimeter
only infill by setting the number of perimeters to be large as well as setting the part combination
distance to be small compared to the piece separation, this results in a printed specimen with all 5
pieces fused with a consistent central spar with no inherent weak points running the full length of
the specimen. Every extrudate in the testing area of the specimen runs parallel to the direction of
tension, yielding accurate results of the material strength. A comparison of the toolpaths and
resulting tested specimens is shown below in Figure 4 before and after manipulating the toolpath.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(c)

Figure 4: Toolpaths and tested specimens before and after manipulating the printer toolpath via
part splitting and slight separation. (a) and (c): Before toolpath manipulation. (b) and (d): After
toolpath manipulation via part splitting and separation.

Uniaxial Tensile Properties of 3D printed CoPA
The results of the tensile testing for mechanical degradation are shown in Table 2, reporting
the mean engineering values of Ultimate Tensile Strength (UTS) and mechanical strain at UTS.
Stress-strain curves showing the first 50% strain are also shown for qualitative comparison in
Figure 5.
Table 2: Tensile testing results
Mean
UTS, MPa
Non-Autoclaved, Wet
69.4
Autoclaved, Wet
65.8
Non-Autoclaved, Dry
73.4
Autoclaved, Dry
64.4

UTS Standard
Deviation, MPa
1.9
0.7
0.9
2.1

Mean Strain
at UTS, %
16.6
17.1
17.8
17.3

Strain at UTS
Standard Deviation, %
0.31
0.75
0.32
0.26

Figure 5: Representative tensile testing engineering stress-strain curves. Left: Samples after being
dried in a sealed container with desiccant at reduced pressure. Right: Samples allowed to reach
equilibrium with atmospheric moisture (‘wet state’). Since specimens are 3D printed, there was
variation between individual stress-strain curves, so the curves presented are the closest to a
representative sample among the samples tested.

The table shows that the material withstands autoclave while maintaining strength and with
little change to the engineering strain at Ultimate Tensile Strength (UTS). There are several
qualitative features of interest in the stress-strain curves shown above. Most notably, the
autoclaved specimens on average have a slightly lower UTS, particularly for the dry specimens,
but a substantially larger stress during the necking region of the curve. This increased necking
stress is likely the result of annealing taking place during autoclave resulting in lower residual
internal stresses and an increased resistance to slip in its semi-crystalline structure. The typical
difference between dry and wet samples is also much lower for the autoclaved specimens, which
suggests that the method of drying (2+ weeks in low pressure with desiccant packs) may be
insufficient for removing the large amount of moisture collected during the autoclave process.
Therefore, the authors recommend that future work use a vacuum oven to further reduce the
pressure and lightly heat specimens to more thoroughly dry them if it is desired to study the dry
state of the material. However, since the properties of the wet material lend itself well to face shield
frames and other PPE as they are somewhat more flexible and therefore more comfortable, the
authors do not recommend any drying of face shield frames after autoclaving and suggest that the
frames go directly back into use after autoclave. It is also possible that the annealing caused by the
autoclave temperatures somehow reduces the material’s sensitivity to moisture content. More
study of the basic material properties with respect to annealed and non-annealed states is suggested
for future work. More study is also recommended on the number of times the material can be
autoclaved without substantial degradation.
A face shield frame was printed with CoPA and subjected to a sterilization autoclave cycle.
Only a small amount of deformation was noticed, and the part remained fully operational after the

autoclave cycle, demonstrating that the material is suitable for manufacturing 3D printed
autoclavable PPE. A face shield frame printed with CoPA is shown below in Figure 6.

Figure 6: A researcher wearing a face shield 3D printed from CoPA. After autoclaving face
shields printed from CoPA there is only a small amount of deformation, and the part remains
fully usable. Warping of large parts like this could be further minimized by annealing the parts
to release internal stresses before autoclaving, or by putting weighted objects on top of the frame
to control the warp that results from the release of internal stresses from printing (such as by
stacking wire trays in between frames in order to stack many frames into an autoclave).

5. Conclusion
We presented a new material for 3D printing autoclavable personal protective equipment.
We show that, unlike other commonly used materials such as PLA and ABS, CoPA, with its high
Vicat softening temperature, can withstand autoclave temperatures without visible deformation
and retains its mechanical properties post testing. Unlike other high temperature polymers such as
PEEK and PEI, which require industrial level 3D printers not typically accessible to mass

consumers, CoPA with its relatively lower glass transition temperature can be printed with
acceptable quality with only simple modifications to a commonly available consumer level 3D
printer via a heated build chamber. Additionally, our uniaxial tensile experiments reveal that not
only are ultimate tensile strength and elastic limit not substantially degraded when autoclaved,
some properties, including some post-necking hardening are also moderately improved, likely
attributable to the annealing effect during the autoclave process. We demonstrated 3D printing of
face shields that remain functional after being subjected to autoclaving. This work points to a
viable path to use widely available consumer 3D printers for autoclavable PPE manufacturing.

Acknowledgements
X. Zheng and H. Hemminger would like to thank Dr. Shaily Mahendra and Yu (Rain)
Miao for their autoclaving assistance and Huachen Cui and Zhenpeng Xu for their technical
support in testing initial print settings. The authors would like to thank 3M Young Faculty Gift
Award and Startup support from UCLA.

Conflicts of Interest
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

6. Appendices
A. Enclosure Construction
The heated enclosure was constructed by simply cutting out panels of cardboard to
construct an oversized box around the printer, measuring 26 x 32 x 26 inches to allow plenty of
clearance room for the filament roll and convenience of operation. All cardboard for the walls
and ceiling of the box was simply roughly cut with a pair of scissors, and the box construction
was accomplished with the use of regular gaffer’s tape, although any similar tape or suitable
adhesive may be substituted. To create a door frame on the front, a cut out was made in the front
of the box with an Exacto knife, leaving approximately 3-4 inches on all sides. For the door
itself, another matching window was cut out of another piece of cardboard using an Exacto knife
and a 10-gauge clear vinyl sheet was taped in its place. Once again, any suitable clear plastic
may be substituted if the materials used are stable at the intended chamber temperature. If no
clear sheet material is available, the authors suggest creating a small viewport instead of cutting
out a large window and covering it on both sides with clear tape. The assembled door was then
hinged to the top of the enclosure with more tape and the other sides left free to allow opening
and closing the door. To secure the door for printing, 2 sets of 2 holes were pierced through the
door and doorframe in the bottom left and bottom right corners, allowing the door to be secured
by passing a twist-tie through the holes and twisting it closed. The cardboard door was found to
have a slight tendency to warp due to the temperature gradient between the inside and outside of
the chamber as well as tightening of the plastic sheet. To reduce air loss and improve chamber
temperature stability, more tape can be used as needed to secure the door. Alternatively, any
convenient rigid rods may be used to form and attach a rigid support structure around the outside
of the door to prevent the warp, such as simple wooden dowels. To accommodate the space

heater, the heater’s profile was traced to the cardboard and cut out from the lower back corner of
one side panel, allowing the heater to be placed with the output face only slightly into the
enclosure with the rest of the heater outside of it. If a better seal is required to reach desired
chamber temperatures, cardboard flaps can be taped to the outside of the side panel to get a
tighter fit after heater placement. Finally, the temperature probe was added by piercing a hole in
the top of the enclosure through which the probe was lowered until the tip was at the same height
as the top of the printer frame. The completed enclosure with all components installed is shown
in Figure 2.

7. References
[1] M. Tarfaouri, M. Nachtane, I. Goda, Y. Qureshi and H. Benyahia, "3D Printing to Support
the Shortage in Personal Protective Equipment Caused by COVID-19 Pandemic,"
Materials, 2020.
[2] D. Amin, N. Nguyen, S. M. Roser and S. Abramowicz, "3D Printing of Face Shields During
COVID-19 Pandemic: A Technical Note," Journal of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, 2020.
[3] J. Tai, "UCSF 3D Printed Face Shield Project," 18 August 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://www.library.ucsf.edu/news/ucsf-3d-printed-face-shield-project/.
[4] Polymaker, "Technical Data Sheet PolyMax PLA," [Online]. Available:
https://us.polymaker.com/Downloads/TDS/PolyMax%20PLA_TDS_V5.pdf.
[5] O. Oth, C. Dauchot, M. Orellana and R. Glineur, "How to Sterilize 3D Printed Objects for
Surgical Use? An Evaluation of the Volumetric Deformation of 3D-Printed Genioplasty
Guide in PLA and PETG after Sterilization by Low-Temperature Hydrogen Peroxide Gas
Plasma," The Open Dentistry Journal, November 2019.
[6] S. Mechler, "Covid-19 Pandemic: Face Mask Disinfection & Sterilization for Viruses,"
Consolidated Sterilizer Systems, 10 April 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://consteril.com/covid-19-pandemic-disinfection-and-sterilization-of-face-masks-forviruses/.
[7] Prusa Research, "Original Prusa i3 MK3S kit," Prusa Research, [Online]. Available:
https://shop.prusa3d.com/en/3d-printers/180-original-prusa-i3-mk3s-kit.html.
[8] 3D Universe, "Ultimaker S5," 3D Universe, [Online]. Available:
https://shop3duniverse.com/products/ultimaker-s5.
[9] Monoprice, "MP10 300x300mm 3D Printer," Monoprice, [Online]. Available:
https://www.monoprice.com/product?p_id=34437.
[10] Creality, "Ender 3 3D Printer," Creality, [Online]. Available:
https://www.creality.com/goods-detail/ender-3-3d-printer.
[11] Polymaker, "PolyMide™ CoPA," Polymaker, [Online]. Available:
https://us.polymaker.com/product/polymide-copa/.
[12] J. Prusa, "2019 Recap, plans for 2020 and Original Prusa MINI update," Prusa Research, 13
January 2020. [Online]. Available: https://blog.prusaprinters.org/2019-recap-plans-for2020-and-original-prusa-mini-update_31279/.
[13] D. Parker, J. Bussink, H. T. v. d. Grampel, G. W. Wheatley, E.-U. Dorf, E. Ostlinning, K.
Reinking, F. Schubert, O. Jünger and R. Wagener, "Polymers, High-Temperature,"
Ullmann's Encyclopedia of Industrial Chemistry, 2012.

[14] Q. Zhang, D. Yan, K. Zhang and G. Hu, "Pattern Transformation of Heat-Shrinkable
Polymer by Three-Dimensional (3D) Printing Technique," Scientific Reports, 11 March
2015.
[15] Polymaker, "PolyMax™ PETG," Polymaker, [Online]. Available:
https://polymaker.com/product/polymax-petg/.
[16] Polymaker, "PolyLite™ ABS," Polymaker, [Online]. Available:
https://polymaker.com/product/polylite-abs/.
[17] Polymaker, "PolyLite™ ASA," Polymaker, [Online]. Available:
https://polymaker.com/product/polylite-asa/.
[18] Polymaker, "PolyMax™ PC (formerly PC-Max™)," Polymaker, [Online]. Available:
https://polymaker.com/product/polymax-pc/.
[19] Polymaker, " Polymaker™ PC-ABS," Polymaker, [Online]. Available:
https://us.polymaker.com/product/polymaker-pc-abs/.
[20] Polymaker, " Polymaker™ PC-PBT," Polymaker, [Online]. Available:
https://polymaker.com/product/polymaker-pc-pbt/.
[21] Polymaker, "Technical Data Sheet PolyMide CoPA," [Online]. Available:
https://us.polymaker.com/Downloads/TDS/PolyMide_CoPA_TDS_V5.pdf.
[22] Creative Tools, "About #3DBenchy," Creative Tools, [Online]. Available:
http://www.3dbenchy.com/about/.

