Statistical mechanics study of the introduction of a vaccine against
COVID-19 disease.
Hilla De-Leon1, 2, a) and Francesco Pederiva1, 3, b)
1) INFN-TIFPA

Trento Institute of Fundamental Physics and Applications, Via Sommarive, 14, 38123 Povo TN,
Italy
2) European Centre for Theoretical Studies in Nuclear Physics and Related Areas (ECT*), Strada delle Tabarelle 286,
I-38123 Villazzano (TN), Italy
3) Dipartimento di Fisica, University of Trento, via Sommarive 14, I–38123, Povo, Trento,
Italy

arXiv:2012.07306v1 [q-bio.PE] 14 Dec 2020

(Dated: 15 December 2020)

By the end of 2020, a year since the first cases of infection by the Covid-19 virus have been reported, there is a
light at the end of the tunnel. Several pharmaceutical companies made significant progress in developing effective
vaccines against the Covid-19 virus that has claimed the lives of more than a million people over the world. On the
other hand, there is growing evidence of re-infection by the virus, which can cause further outbreaks. In this paper,
we apply statistical physics tools to examine the vaccination rate required to control the pandemic for three different
vaccine efficiency scenarios. Also, we study the effect of temporal restrictions/reliefs on the pandemic’s outbreak,
assuming that re-infection is possible. When examining the efficiency of the vaccination rate of the general population
in preventing an additional outbreak of the disease, we find that a high vaccination rate (where at least 0.3% of the
population is vaccinated daily, which is equivalent to ≈ 1 million vaccine doses in the United States daily) is required to
gain control over the spread of the virus without further restrictions. Due to feasible limitations on the vaccination rate,
the vaccination process should be accompanied by the prevailing restrictions until most of the population is vaccinated.
I.

INTRODUCTION

The COVID-19 disease has been spreading worldwide in
the last year, whereby at the end of 2020, tens of millions
have been infected from the virus and over a million people
have died.
Today, many companies and research institutes are in an
advanced research stage to issue an efficient vaccine that will
help to suppress the pandemic, eventually allowing for a faster
return to the pre-corona life. As of this writing, at least two
companies have reported proven efficacy of the vaccine1,2 . As
a result, in many countries worldwide, the question now arises
about how the vaccine will affect the spread of the epidemic
and what an effective rate of population vaccination will ensure control of the epidemic. Moreover, during the time that
has passed since the first outbreaks of the epidemic, some evidence of re-infection with the virus has accumulated (see for
example Refs.3–8 , and many more).
The time extent of the coverage provided by a vaccine
and the probability of re-infection after being subject to
symptoms-free contagion or to the manifest disease have to
be treated as separate issues from the medical perspective.
However, it is clear that, whatever mechanism that changes
a person’s status from potentially covered from the disease
to vulnerable, such time extent is a crucial parameter to establish whether an equilibrium condition with a controlled or
zero level of infected people can be reached, avoiding another
sequence of global outbreaks.
Closely related to this mechanism, there are also two other
parameters: the first is the actual effectiveness of the vaccine

a) E-mail:
b) E-mail:

hdeleon@ectstar.eu
francesco.pederiva@unitn.it

(claimed at present to be of order 90%), and the second is the
actual availability, which can be translated into the number of
people who can be vaccinated in a given amount of time.
In this paper, we address the study of the influence of such
parameters on the evolution of the pandemics using basic principles of statistical mechanics similar to the method presented
in Ref.9 , where the population is modeled as a set of interacting classical particles. Each ’particle’ can be in four states
relative to the health status: susceptible of infection, infected,
recovered/died (with 1% rate of death), and vaccinated. For
the recovered people, we assume that re-infection can occur
in periods ranging from 150 days from initial infection to one
year later. Also, we assume that the vaccine efficiency varies
from half a year (180 days) to two years, which is equivalent to
infinity in the model’s terms. All simulations were tested for
different population densities, allowing us to apply the model
to very different situations, ranging from a city suburb population to a single university classroom.
The algorithm is based on standard Monte-Carlo (MC) procedures of sampling the transition among the following states,
which are sampled from a statistical distribution, in the spirit
of transport MC algorithms.
Similarly to what reported in Ref.9 , we are using a "oneway" Ising-model Monte-Carlo such that a healthy person (i)
can become sick with a daily probability, Pi = ∑ j Pi j , where
Pi j is a function of the distance between each infected person ( j) in the area and the healthy person (i). Based on the
epidemiology data, we assume that a sick person stops being
sick (i.e., recovered or died) within an average time of ∼ 14
up to 40 days for the most severe cases, adding this time a
finite probability of re-infection and a "vaccination" mechanism which switches a certain fraction of particles from the
vulnerable stat to the immune state.
In this approach, the parameter Rt , the effective reproduc-

2
tion rate of the virus,10 is a direct outcome of the simulation
and not pre-assumed. This is achieved by the relation between
Rt and the doubling time Td , which is a direct result of the
infection probability chosen, which is, in turn, a function of
observable epidemiological data and the average density on a
given area. In this paper, we will present the results of several
simulations meant to reproduce the spread of the Coronavirus
in the presence of re-infection with and without an effective
vaccine. Moreover, the model’s high flexibility enables us to
control the population density as a function of time and to simulate how temporary changes in Rt affects the virus’s spread.
In Section II, we will describe some details of the model. Section III is devoted to the presentation and discussion of the
results, and Sec. IV to the Conclusions.

B.

Population dynamics

Similar to Ref.9 , our model is based on the principles of
Brownian motion, such that for each day, the population position (R) and displacement (∆R) are given by:
R → R + ∆R ,
p
where ∆R = ∆x2 + ∆y2 is distributed normally:
P[∆R] =



1
∆x2 + ∆y2
,
exp
−
2π 2 σR2
2σR2

where ∆x (∆y) is displacement in the x-(y-) direction and σR2 ,
the variance, is a function of the diffusion constant, D:

II. THE PARAMETERS AND PRELIMINARY
ASSUMPTIONS

Given the scarce information available, we had to make
some assumptions based on current data, which may be more
stringent than it might be required by the real nature of the
virus. In this work, similar to Ref.9 , we based on Ref.11 for
the Coronavirus epidemiology data and on Refs.12,13 for the
physical properties of the virus14
All simulations are performed, assuming an initial surface area unit of 1 km2 , wherein some simulations we increased/decreased the area as a function of time. The control
over the surface area allows to change the simulation population density, which is equivalent to a temporary change of
the parameter Rt . The use of periodic boundary conditions reduces broad confinement effects (e.g., the lockdown of an entire province or city) and focuses at the local dynamics of the
infections within that given area15 Similar to Ref.9 the population density is a function of the number of households in a
certain area since it is crucial to distinguish between the infection among the family and non-household contacts16 .
A.

σR2 = 2Dt ,

D = µkB T ,

C.

The infection probability

We assume that this process can be described by a Gaussian
function of the distance for each contact with another infected
person, weighted with a factor that parametrizes the sick person’s conditions and social interaction.17

4. Simulations are started with a single infected person (the zero patient). Also, every day there is a
chance of 20% that a healthy person (who is not recovered/vaccinated) becomes sick without interaction with
a known sick person.

!

nsick

Pi = int

3. Each sick person is considered contagious between the
3rd and the 7th day.

(3)

where µ is defined as the mobility, kB is Boltzmann’s constant
and T is the absolute temperature. By fixing T = 1, the diffusion coefficient would be directly related to mobility. In our
model, during all the time period, the population is allowed to
move with σR = 500 meter.

This work has identified a list of parameters and corresponding values that describe the population and the infection’s kinetics.

2. The fraction of "silent carriers," which have no symptoms (AKA asymptomatic) but can infect other people
is denoted by asilent , and the probability of transmitting
the infection has been set to 0.5.

(2)

where t=1 day. For a Brownian motion the diffusion coefficient, D, would be related to the temperature, T , using the
Einstein relation:

Parameterization of the model

1. The number of effective households, denoted by N.

(1)

∑ Pi j + ξ

=

j=1

(4)
(

nsick

= int

∑ exp

j=1

"

2

(ri − r j )
2σr2

#

)
× f (asilent , nout ) + ξ

where:
• ri (xi , yi ) is the location of the ith healthy person and
r j (x j , y j ) is the location of the jth sick person, so
|ri − r j | is the distance between them.
• nsick is the total number of sick people in the area.
• σr is the standard deviation (here σr = 2.4 meters) since
recent studies show that even a slight breeze can drive
droplets arising from a human cough over more than 6
meters 13 .

3
• f (asilent , nout ) is a function that considers the social activity of the sick person and whether he has symptoms,
which affects the spread of the virus outside the house.
In our model, we estimate that infection by asymptomatic people is approximately 50% lower than patients with symptoms.
• ξ is a number a random number uniformly distributed
between 0 and 1, needed for converting to infection
probability to a number between 0 and 1.
• We are assuming that each sick person will infect
some of his household members. Since the latest estimates are that household infections are ∼ 15% from the
known cases (without lockdown,18 ), we estimated that
the number of household infections is are of uniformly
distributed between 0 and 3.
• During all the runs, we assume that people must wear
face-masks so that the daily infection probability (for
the non-household members, eq. 4), is reduced to19–24
(

#
)
(ri − r j )2
∑ 0.7 × exp 2σr2 × f (asilent , nout ) + ξ (5)
j=1

nsick

int

"

• For all the simulations, people are forced to maintain a
distance of 3 meters from each other (social distancing).
III.

RESULTS

time of outbreak stands at about doubling time, Td ≈ 10 days.
This doubling time corresponds to Rt ≈ 1.5, i.e., that each infection directly generates 1 − 2 more infections within countermeasures like social distancing and wearing masks.
In our model, similar to Ref.9 , both Rt and Td are directly
obtained from the simulation and not pre-assumed. We show
in Fig. 1 the doubling time, Td for the first 14 days, as a
function of the effective density, N, under the assumption of
wearing masks and social distancing. We find that a value
of Td ≈ 10 days, corresponding to Rt = 1.525 , in the current
model, would correspond to N = −.45 · 104 households per
square kilometer, which is significantly lower than the density
used in Ref.9 and represents the social distance actions taken
in many countries.
Today, with various companies in the vaccine race, one
of the questions arising these days is what vaccine rate will
ensure maximum protection. In this work, we have examined different infection scenarios under the assumption of
possible re-infection for a population density of households
per squared kilometer, with and without an effective vaccine.
When there is also a vaccine in the following scenario, we
have considered the possibility that the vaccine’s effectiveness
is limited in time. Note that here we present the number of active cases as a function of time (how many people are sick
at any given moment) since this is the measure of the health
system’s capacity threshold in different countries.
As in our previous work, the different probability densities are calculated using standard techniques, in the spirit of
a kinetic Monte-Carlo simulation, for predicting the number
of active Coronavirus cases in a specific area. Each case has
been run 100 times26

A.

FIG. 1: The doubling time, Td , of the percentage of active
cases of the total population in the first 14 days as a function
of the population density, N (dots). The solid line marks the
value of Td = 10 days, corresponding to Rt ≈ 1.5.
With the continued spread of the COVID-19 virus worldwide, it appears that many countries are experiencing an increase in the rate of multiplication of patients per day at the

Numerical results for the case of re-infection

In this subsection, we examine how the possibility of reinfection can affect the number of active cases as a function
of time. Figure 2 shows our numerical results for the different
simulations for the case of Rt = 1.5 in the first 14 days, without any further restrictions nor reliefs, which can affect Rt .
In Fig. 2, we show our calculations for different re-infection
cases, ranging from 150 days from the time of initial infection
to 300 days from the time of initial infection. From Fig. 2,
it is shown that even for low population density, re-infection
can cause a second wave of infection, at an intensity that is
not negligible compared to the first wave.
As previously pointed out, the numerical results, presented
in Fig. 2, do not make any assumption on the doubling time,
Td , but only on some observed features of the disease and
the population density. Hence, we examined how a temporal
change of the population density, which affects Rt , the effective reproduction number of the virus, will be expressed in the
number of cases under the assumption of re-infection. In our
modal, the temporal reduction in population density is equivalent to the restrictions that are now contained worldwide due
to the increase in the virus’s morbidity, while a temporal increase in population density is equivalent to a release in the
restrictions. Therefore, in Fig. 3, we present how a temporal

4

FIG. 2: Numerical results for the percentage of active cases
from the total population for the different re-infection cases:
Solid line: 150 days; Short dashed-dotted line: 180 days;
Long dashed-dotted line: 210 days; Short dashed line: 240
days; Long dashed line: 270 days; Dotted line: 300 days.
Errorbars originate from the simulation’s rmsd, computed
from the 100 different samples generated to compute each
curve.

change of the population density from the 200th day (represented by a temporally change in the surface area) affects the
number of active cases under the assumption of possible second infection after 150 days. Any relief will provoke a new
wave of infections, even without the possibility of re-infection
as long as a certain percentage of unknown infection is taken
into account.
Figure 3 shows that a temporal change in less than 40% in
the surface area, i.e., a change in effective population density,
can cause a difference in order of magnitude in the number
of infected. This result is consistent with the results from9 ,
which examined the effect of mobility on the coefficient of infection. Also, it is seen that increasing the surface area (which
is equivalent to reducing the population density or reducing
the average number of contacts per person) by 40% can reduce the number of people infected as a function of time even
without a vaccine. Hence, in Fig. 4 we show how a temporal
increase of Rt (Which in simulations is represented by temporary change in population density), can affect another outbreak of the virus for three different population densities, also
for the case that further infection can occur only after a year.
Figure. 4 shows how increasing Rt after 200 days will affect
the degree of infection for different population densities. It
can be seen that for the case of a low initial Rt (population
density of 0.3 · 104 household per 1 sq km), increasing the
population density by 1.4 times results in the second wave of
infection, which is almost an order of magnitude higher than
the first wave, even for a possible re-infection after a year. For
a medium initial Rt (population density of and 0.45 and 0.55
·104 household per 1 sq km), there is a difference between a
re-infection after 150 days and after one year. In the case of
prolonged immunity from further infection, we find that even

FIG. 3: Numerical results for the percentage of active cases
from the total population for the different surface areas (from
day 200) under the assumption of the possibility of
re-infection after 150 days for a population density of
N = 0.45 · 104 households. Solid line: 0.64 sq km; Short
dashed-dotted: 0.8 sq km; Long dashed-dotted: 1 sq km,
Short dashed: 1.2 sq km; Long dashed: 1.44 sq km. The
uncertainty is similar to that of Fig. 2 and is omitted for
improving the readability of the figure.

FIG. 4: Numerical results for the percentage of active cases
from the total population for a surface area of 0.64 sq m
(from day 200) under the assumption of the possibility of
re-infection after for 150 and 360 days for different
population densities. Solid (Dotted) line: population density
of 0.35 · 104 for possible re-infection after 150 (360) days;
Long (Short) dashed-dotted line: population density of
0.45 · 104 for possible re-infection after 150 (360) days; Long
(Short) dashed line: population density of 0.55 · 104 for
possible re-infection after 150 (360) days. The uncertainty is
similar to that of Fig. 2 and is omitted for improving the
readability of the figure.

for a 1.4 times increase in population density, no second wave
of infection is observed due to the relatively high infection

5

FIG. 5: Numerical results for the percentage of active cases from the total population for different population vaccination rates,
where the vaccine is effective from the 100th day. Left panel (a): vaccine is effective for 180 days; Right panel (b): the vaccine
is effective for 360 days; Lower panel the vaccine is effective for 720 days, (i.e., infinity, within the limitations of the
simulation). For all panels - Solid line: no vaccination; Short dashed-dotted: vaccination rate of 1%; Long dashed-dotted:
vaccination rate of 0.33%; Short dashed line: vaccination rate of 0.2%; Long dashed line: vaccination rate of 0.15%; Dotted
line:vaccination rate of 0.1%. The uncertainty is similar to that of Fig. 2 and is omitted for improving the readability of the
figure.
tion.
in the first wave. For a short immunity case, an increase in
population density will cause a second wave similar to the
In the next subsection, we test different vaccination situations for the case of re-infection.
first one.
Note that for all cases, a situation in which almost 10% of
the population is ill at the same time is above the capacity
B. Numerical results for the case of effective vaccine
threshold of the health system in most of the world, such that
countries will take drastic actions to reduce the rate of infec-

In this subsection, we test various simulations for the case
of an effective vaccine.
In this work, we examine how the efficiency of the vaccine

can reduce the number of active cases for three different cases
(for all case, we assumed the re-infection without vaccination
could occur after 150 days); the first, when we assume that

6

FIG. 6: Insert of Fig. 5 from the 200th . Left panel (a): vaccine is effective for 180 days; Right panel (b): the vaccine is effective
for 720 days, (i.e., infinity, within the limitations of the simulation). For both panels - Solid line: no vaccination; Short
dashed-dotted: vaccination rate of 1%; Long dashed-dotted: vaccination rate of 0.33%; Short dashed line: vaccination rate of
0.2%; Long dashed line: vaccination rate of 0.15%; Dotted line:vaccination rate of 0.1%. The uncertainty is similar to that of
Fig. 2 and is omitted for improving the readability of the figure.
ferent percentages are marked for convenience. From Fig. 6
the vaccine is valid only for half a year (180 days), i.e., after
it easy to see that when a ∼ 1% of the population can be vac180 days there is a chance that a person who has been vaccinated daily, the effectiveness of the vaccine does not affect
cinated will become infected, the second, where the vaccine
morbidity since the rate of immunization is higher than the
is efficient for a whole year and the third, where the vaccine
rate of decline in immune protection even for the efficacy of
is efficient for two years, i.e., infinity for our model. For all
only 180 days. On the other hand, when the rate of protection
models, a certain percentage of the population is vaccinated
decreases faster than the rate of vaccination of the population,
starting from the 100th day at daily rates ranging from 1% of
there is a difference between the efficiencies of 180 days and
the population to 0.1% percent each day (i.e., from the 100th
720 days (i.e., infinity). For example, for a 720-day immudays, the vaccinated populations is protected from infection).
nization efficacy, a vaccination rate of 0.2% of the population
Figure. 5 shows the number of active cases as a function of
per day would result in similar immunization rates of 0.33%
the efficacy of the vaccine and the vaccination rate (i.e., the
of the population per day, for a vaccination efficacy of only
percentage of people who can be vaccinated every day). Fig180 days, where for both cases, the maximal percentage of
ure. 5 indicates that the impact of the vaccination rate on the
infected people is ∼ 0.5%. Therefore, as long as the effectivedaily number of patients is much higher than its efficiency.
ness of the vaccine is unknown and the entire population canFrom Fig. 6, we see that a vaccination rate of 0.1% of the
not be massively vaccinated, it will be necessary to maintain
population per day (which is equivalent to∼300,000 vaccine
the social restrictions to prevent outbreaks of the pandemic
doses daily in the United States for at least a year) will not
(i.e., a vaccination rate of 0.14% means that about one million
significantly reduce morbidity even for an infinite efficiency.
people in Europe will be vaccinated daily).
Figure. 6 is an insert of Fig. 5 from the 200th day, where dif-

Also, by comparing to Fig. 3, we find that reducing the effective population density by 20% (which can be achieved by
enforcing various social constraints) leads to a vaccine-like
effect of a daily vaccination rate of 0.2% of the entire population. Hence, social distancing and wearing masks will have
to be maintained even after vaccinating part of the population
to reduce the Rt as much as possible and to prevent another
outbreak of the pandemic. Hence, it of interest to examine the
effect of temporary changes in Rt , in the case of an effective
vaccine (720 days) with a vaccination rate of approximately
0.2% of the population each day. We assume that naturally,
vaccination of the population will lead to a loosening of the
strictness of the restrictions, which, as a result, will affect Rt .
Figure. 7 indicates that for a vaccination rate of 0.2 %, an

uncontrolled release of the restrictions will lead to an increase
in Rt and, and as a result, to a further outbreak of the pandemic. For example, increasing the population density by
about 20% will result in a maximum active percentage of patients of 2 % . On the other hand, vaccinating the population,
which will be accompanied by restrictions that parallel the reduction of the population density by 20 %, will result in a
maximum active percentage of patients of 0.2 %. Hence, during the immunization period, the public must observe the restrictions and wear masks, and that masks have to be worn until a significant percentage of the population was vaccinated.

7
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank R. Milo and his group at Weizmann Institute of
Science for sharing their epidemiological data and for fruitful
discussions. We thank G. Haimovich at Weizmann Institute
of Science for fruitful discussions.
The data that support the findings of this study are available
from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.
1 “Pfizer

FIG. 7: Numerical results for the percentage of active cases
from the total population for different surface areas (from
day 200) under the assumption of the possibility of
re-infection after 150 days for a population density of
N = 0.45 · 104 households, with a vaccination rate of 0.2%
per day. Solid line: 0.64 sq km; Short dashed-dotted line: 0.8
sq km; Long dashed-dotted line: 1 sq km; Short dashed line:
1.2 sq km; Long dashed- line: 1.44 sq km. The uncertainty is
similar to that of Fig. 2 and is omitted for improving the
readability of the figure.

IV.

CONCLUSIONS

In this paper, we presented a kinetic Monte-Carlo algorithm
for modeling different scenarios of spreading the COVID-19
under the assumption of possible re-infection and an efficient
vaccine. The model’s main advantage is its extreme flexibility,
such that we can test many infection scenarios with a minimal
computational cost.
In this work, we studied how the possibility of re-infection
affects the epidemic outbreak for different scenarios. Also,
we examined how a temporary change in Rt , the effective
reproduction rate of the virus, has an influence on the reemergence of the pandemic when we assume the possibility
of re-infection and infection from unknown sources, and how
an effective vaccine would affect an infection recurrence in
this situation. We found that even with a relatively low effective reproduction rate of the virus, i.e., Rt ≈ 1.5, (which is a
result of social distancing and local restrictions), a significant
percentage of the population should be vaccinated to prevent
the outbreak of a virus.
Hence, in principle, our model might be used as a tool for
decision-making concerning the rate of vaccination and for
deciding which populations should be vaccinated first for a
limited amount of vaccines, depending on the healthcare system capacity threshold in each country.
Nevertheless, our results show that as long as a significant
percentage of the population is not vaccinated, social distance
regulations will have to be enforced, and people will continue
to wear masks to reduce Rt as much as possible to prevent an
outbreak of the pandemic.

and biontech announce vaccine candidate against covid19 achieved success in first interim analysis from phase 3 study,”
https://www.pfizer.com/news/press-release/press-release-detail/pfizer-andbiontech-announce-vaccine-candidate-against.
2 “Moderna’s covid-19 vaccine candidate meets its primary efficacy endpoint in the first interim analysis of the phase 3 cove
study,”
https://investors.modernatx.com/news-releases/news-releasedetails/modernas-covid-19-vaccine-candidate-meets-its-primary-efficacy.
3 M. Gousseff, P. Penot, L. Gallay, D. Batisse, N. Benech, K. Bouiller,
R. Collarino, A. Conrad, D. Slama, C. Joseph, A. Lemaignen, F.-X.
Lescure, B. Levy, M. Mahevas, B. Pozzetto, N. Vignier, B. Wyplosz,
D. Salmon, F. Goehringer, and E. Botelho-Nevers, “Clinical recurrences
of covid-19 symptoms after recovery: Viral relapse, reinfection or inflammatory rebound?” Journal of Infection 81, 816 – 846 (2020).
4 N. M. Duggan, S. M. Ludy, B. C. Shannon, A. T. Reisner, and S. R. Wilcox,
“A case report of possible novel coronavirus 2019 reinfection,” The American journal of emergency medicine (2020).
5 J. Alizargar, “Risk of reactivation or reinfection of novel coronavirus
(covid-19),” Journal of the Formosan Medical Association (2020).
6 A. W. Edridge, J. Kaczorowska, A. C. Hoste, M. Bakker, M. Klein,
K. Loens, M. F. Jebbink, A. Matser, C. M. Kinsella, P. Rueda, et al., “Seasonal coronavirus protective immunity is short-lasting,” Nature medicine ,
1–3 (2020).
7 F. Landi, A. Carfì, F. Benvenuto, V. Brandi, F. Ciciarello, M. R. L. Monaco,
A. M. Martone, C. Napolitano, F. Pagano, A. Paglionico, et al., “Predictive
factors for a new positive nasopharyngeal swab among patients recovered
from covid-19,” American Journal of Preventive Medicine (2020).
8 “More people are getting covid-19 twice, suggesting immunity wanes
quickly in some,” https://www.sciencemag.org/news/2020/11/morepeople-are-getting-covid-19-twice-suggesting-immunity-wanes-quicklysome.
9 H. De-Leon and F. Pederiva, “Particle modeling of the spreading of
coronavirus disease (covid-19),” Physics of Fluids 32, 087113 (2020),
https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0020565.
10 Note that the onset of the epidemic was characterized by the parameter
R0 , the basic reproducing number. Now, in many countries, social distance
measures are taken that affect the spread of the epidemic. Hence, the calculations in this work were done under the assumption that an effort is made
to reduce Rt by various constraints.
11 Y. M. Bar-On, A. Flamholz, R. Phillips, and R. Milo, “Sars-cov-2 (covid19) by the numbers,” eLife 9, e57309 (2020).
12 R. Bhardwaj and A. Agrawal, “Likelihood of survival of coronavirus in
a respiratory droplet deposited on a solid surface,” Physics of Fluids 32,
061704 (2020), https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0012009.
13 T. Dbouk and D. Drikakis, “On coughing and airborne droplet
transmission to humans,” Physics of Fluids 32, 053310 (2020),
https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0011960.
14 We are aware that this model cannot take into account every single spreading event, but since such events affect the initial Td , (which is a function
of the population density), and since the infection process is random, we
expect that the existence of such events will be reflected in the numerical
results. Also, in contrast to real-life, here, there is no time gap between the
infection and being tested positive for Coronavirus. Therefore, an immediate decrease in the rate of infection resulting from lockdown is expected in
the model in contrast to the real data.27 .
15 The application of periodic boundary conditions means that we have an
infinite number of identical systems; each system is a replica of the others.
I.e., if a person leaves the simulation surface on one side, an equal person
will enter the surface from the other side.

8
16 W.

Li, B. Zhang, J. Lu, S. Liu, Z. Chang, P. Cao, X. Liu, P. Zhang,
Y. Ling, K. Tao, and J. Chen, “The characteristics of household
transmission of COVID-19,” Clinical Infectious Diseases
(2020),
10.1093/cid/ciaa450, ciaa450, https://academic.oup.com/cid/advancearticle-pdf/doi/10.1093/cid/ciaa450/33097408/ciaa450.pdf.
17 Since the infection probability is a function of the absolute value of the
distance between two people and the standard deviation, several distributions such as a Gaussian distribution and a Lorentzian distribution could
serve for modeling the infection probability under the assumption that the
simulation’s dynamics dependents on σr and not on the distribution’s tail.
The choice of Gaussian distribution was since this is the typical distribution
for thermal systems approaches for equilibrium, e.g., Maxwell Boltzmann
distribution.
18 Q.-L. Jing, M.-J. Liu, J. Yuan, Z.-B. Zhang, A.-R. Zhang, N. E. Dean,
L. Luo, M.-M. Ma, I. Longini, E. Kenah, et al., “Household secondary
attack rate of covid-19 and associated determinants,” medRxiv (2020).
19 T. Dbouk and D. Drikakis, “On respiratory droplets and face masks,”
Physics of Fluids 32, 063303 (2020), https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0015044.
20 “Hku hamster research shows masks effective in preventing covid-19 transmission - fight covid,” https://medicalxpress.com/news/2020-05-hamstermasks-coronavirus-scientists.html/ (2020).
21 J. F. Robinson, I. R. de Anda, F. Moore, J. P. Reid, R. P. Sear, and
C. P. Royall, “Efficacy of face coverings in reducing transmission of
covid-19: calculations based on models of droplet capture,” arXiv preprint

arXiv:2008.04995 (2020).
E. Eikenberry, M. Mancuso, E. Iboi, T. Phan, K. Eikenberry, Y. Kuang,
E. Kostelich, and A. B. Gumel, “To mask or not to mask: Modeling the
potential for face mask use by the general public to curtail the covid-19
pandemic,” Infectious Disease Modelling (2020).
23 S. Balachandar, S. Zaleski, A. Soldati, G. Ahmadi, and L. Bourouiba,
“Host-to-host airborne transmission as a multiphase flow problem for
science-based social distance guidelines,” International Journal of Multiphase Flow 132, 103439 (2020).
24 K. A. Prather, C. C. Wang, and R. T. Schooley, “Reducing transmission of
sars-cov-2,” Science (2020).
25 The relation between T and R as shown in Fig. 1 means that attempting
t
d
to describe a wide area’s current situation by means of some average value
of Rt might be highly unappropriated. On the other hand, the spread of
the disease over smaller, more homogeneous areas in which the population
shares a certain degree of mobility and social behavior would be quite well
described by this parameter.
26 Note that each run starts with the same initial condition, only one sick person. Since the Monte Carlo algorithm is based on random numbers, we
expect that every run will yield slightly different results. Repeating the simulation for 100 separated runs evaluates the algorithm’s robustness. Results
have been averaged and analyzed to determine the statistical error.
27 https://www.endcoronavirus.org/countries.
22 S.

