Identifying pandemic-related stress factors from social-media posts effects on students and young-adults

Sachin Thukral∗, Suyash Sangwan†, Arnab Chatterjee‡, Lipika Dey§(TCS Research, India)

arXiv:2012.00333v1 [cs.SI] 1 Dec 2020

Abstract
The COVID-19 pandemic has thrown natural
life out of gear across the globe. Strict measures are deployed to curb the spread of the
virus that is causing it, and the most effective of them have been social isolation. This
has led to wide-spread gloom and depression
across society but more so among the young
and the elderly. There are currently more than
200 million college students in 186 countries
worldwide, affected due to the pandemic. The
mode of education has changed suddenly, with
the rapid adaptation of e-learning, whereby
teaching is undertaken remotely and on digital platforms. This study presents insights
gathered from social media posts that were
posted by students and young adults during
the COVID times. Using statistical and NLP
techniques, we analyzed the behavioral issues
reported by users themselves in their posts
in depression-related communities on Reddit.
We present methodologies to systematically
analyze content using linguistic techniques to
find out the stress-inducing factors. Online
education, losing jobs, isolation from friends,
and abusive families emerge as key stress factors.

1

Introduction

The outbreak of novel Coronavirus disease 2019
(COVID-19) has affected the day to day life of
people across the world and is slowing down
the global economy (World Health Organization,
2020). Along with serious health problems leading to an alarming number of fatalities over a very
short time, the world is also seeing a staggering rise
in COVID-19 linked depression, anxiety, violence,
and suicidal tendencies across different sections of
∗

sachi.2@tcs.com
†
suyash.sangwan@tcs.com
‡
arnab.chatterjee4@tcs.com
§
lipika.dey@tcs.com

the society. Our study of a few communities in the
Reddit platform which discuss depression related
issues was initiated to analyze social media content
related to pandemic-induced stress markers. We
chose this platform since a large number of people
who suffer from depression and/or related symptoms express themselves freely here. However, during analysis, we encountered an alarmingly large
number of posts that discussed student-related issues. Hence we narrowed down our study to focus
primarily on this community. Our study revealed
that this community contained high school students,
college-goers as well as young adults on the verge
of graduating from college, most of whom suffer
from mental health issues. We intend to apply Natural Language Processing (NLP) and text mining
techniques to analyze such content and generate
insights about the different types of concerns expressed by student members of these communities.
Several surveys have also reported a phenomenal rise in the number of depression-related cases
among college students between the end of March
through May 2020. A research project based at
the University of Michigan, Boston University,
and the University of California, Los Angeles
have reported over a 5% rise in depression cases
when compared with the data of last fall. Suicide risks are also reported to have gone up by
over 2% as per a survey taken in April by Active Minds—which has chapters in more than 500
colleges in the USA (Petersen, Andrea, 2020).
Another recent, survey-based study on university
students in Bangladesh (Islam et al., 2020) revealed that students experienced pronounced depression and anxiety, with around 15% reportedly
had moderately severe depression, while 18.1%
were severely suffering from anxiety.
Our work differs substantially from the above
since we analyze social media content and not surveys or feed-backs. Social media data is informal

and often much more expressive, giving us cues
about possible causes along with the effects. An
important aspect of social media is that it is interactive in nature – users can reply, discuss, debate, and
possibly agree or disagree on opinions, which bring
out rich perspective to their points of view, which
is not possible in a survey that usually collects oneshot answers to queries. With social isolation and
distancing from physical friends, social media also
saw a huge rise in footfalls during the pandemic.
In this paper, we have presented a detailed analysis of depression-related posts from specific Reddit
communities posted during the COVID-19 period.
Starting with the community at large, we systematically identified content related to students or fresh
graduates who have reported depression or mental
health problems suffer and derived some novel insights about COVID-induced stress factors. The
key contributions of the paper are as follows :
1. Identified distinct statistically valid linguistic
markers that differentiate depression-related
content from other general content. This is
done with the help of established linguistic
analysis tools like LIWC.
2. Propose a text classification method to identify student-authored or student-related content from within a large repository
3. Proposed topical analysis of COVID-19 time
posts using LDA and methods to perform subsequent linguistic analysis of representative
posts for each topic.
4. Provided detailed insights on pandemic induced stress in students – A set of detailed
insights are presented through a topical analysis of content. While some of these issues
were found to be quite generic and persistent,
it was observed that the pandemic added more
stress factors to people, specifically students
and young adults, who were already suffering
from mental health issues.
5. The methods proposed above can be generalized to identify the right social media content
for analytical purposes and generate insights
systematically.
About the Data source: We have chosen Reddit, which is an American content aggregation platform, with more than 330 million users, called
Redditors, as our content platform. Contents on

this site are divided into categories or communities
known as subreddits. More than 138, 000 of these
active communities share, debate and discuss various issues of public interest. Due to its large user
base and high levels of user engagement, Reddit is
considered as a good source for gathering public
insights on any issue of current interest. Reddit is
known to be a widely used online forum and social
media site among the college students (Duggan and
Smith, 2013). Our analysis is based on content that
was posted between December 2019 and June 2020.
More details about the dataset are given in Section
3.
Section 2 presents an overview of related work
on analyzing social media content for detecting the
mental health of people. Section 4 presents details
about the analytical methods used for our analysis.
Section 5 presents the key insights that are found
to affect students and young adults during COVID
19.

2

Related Work

Since the outbreak of this pandemic, researchers
have been extensively studying its impact on the
mental health of people. One of the studies, where
researchers have examined the sentiment dynamics
of people (Zhou et al., 2020), showed that various
government policies and the events did affect people’s overall sentiment from positive to negative.
Researchers also studied that whether engaging
with online community support initiatives (OCSIs)
generated a positive or negative mood in those who
engaged with them and whether or not different
reasons for this engagement play different roles (Elphick et al., 2020). They showed that people were
in a better mood after engaging with an OCSI than
before. Another study conducted on Twitter discussions, identified popular unigrams, bigrams, salient
topics and themes, and sentiments in collocated
tweets (Xue et al., 2020). Another study about the
impact of COVID-19 on students with disabilities
or health concerns (Zhang et al., 2020) showed that
people with disabilities and health concerns are
more worried about classes going online than their
peers without disabilities. They argued that these
people need more confidence in the accessibility of
the online learning tools that are becoming more
prevalent in these times. A study using Google
trends to see the impact of lockdown on the mental
health of people (Brodeur et al., 2020) has shown
that during lockdown there is a significant increase

in google searches on boredom, loneliness, worry,
and sadness. Another study focuses on the things
that are we depressed about during COVID-19 (Li
et al., 2020). They trained deep models that classify
tweets into emotions like anger, anticipation, disgust, fear, joy, sadness, surprise, and trust, and have
also built an EmoCT dataset for classifying these
tweets. They also applied methods to understand
why the public may feel sad or fearful during these
times. There is one study that highlights differences in topics concerning emotional responses and
worries based on gender (van der Vegt and Kleinberg, 2020). They used Real World Worry Dataset
(RWWD) which is a text data collected from 2500
people in which each participant was asked to report their emotions and worries (Kleinberg et al.,
2020). They reported that women worried mainly
about loved ones and expressed negative emotions
such as anxiety and fear whereas men were more
concerned with the societal impacts of the virus.
A study conducted using Reddit platform (Murray et al., 2020) used r/COVID19Positive subreddit in which patients who are COVID-positive talk
about their experiences and struggles with the virus.
While providing a perspective of the patient experience during there course of treatment, they also
suggest that there is a need for other supports such
as mental health support during these times. Our
work is focused on studying the effects of the pandemic on students who suffer from mental health
issues.

3

Creating a focused dataset for the
study

Since the Reddit platform is well organized around
communities or subreddits with a shared interest,
our first objective was to identify proper communities that contained data appropriate for mental
health analysis. Based on the community descriptions, we found 47 subreddits whose members discuss mental health-related issues. However, many
of them are not active. Further, some of these
groups focused on specific neurotic disorders like
autism or Bi-polar disease, etc. These were also
not considered for our study. Finally, we have
considered only those posts from the depression
and mental health subreddits were combined to
create a focused data set. We used the Pushshift
API (pushshift.io, 2020), provided by the platform,
to crawl the data for the period from July 2019 to
April 2020. Detailed statistics about the datasets

Figure 1: Geographical spread of posts

are presented in the Table 1.
The posts themselves do not have any geotagging. However, to assess the geographical
spread, we looked for location names referred to
in the content itself. There are 7% of posts that
have mentions of location in our data. After doing appropriate resolution of the location names,
identified using the Spacy Named Entity Recognition tool, we observed that the data predominantly
refers to the Americas and Europe, with 49% and
29% representation respectively(Figure 1). 17%
refer to Asian countries and the rest are from other
parts of the world.

4

Finding Language markers for
Depression-related text content

TTo determine the distinct markers, if any, for
depression, we did the following. We obtained
data from two popular subreddits r/AskReddit and
r/worldnews, where large numbers of users engage
in discussing News and other contemporary topics,
for the same time period to create a control set.
We did a numerical and linguistic comparison of
this data with the depression-related posts in the
focused set. To compare the statistics, we divided
the time-period into two phases - the pre-COVID
phase ranging from July to November 2019 while
the other phase lasted from December 2019 to April
2020. Table 1 shows that these two sets appear to
be very similar in nature when numbers are compared. However, the linguistic analysis revealed
something very different.
For the linguistic comparison of the two sets of
posts, we analyzed the relative usage of different
categories words in the two data sets for the entire
periods. We have combined the posts from the control set C1 and control set C2 and compared with the
combined posts from focused set F1 and focused
set F2 . This is done with the help of a linguis-

Table 1: Dataset description

Total posts
Total User
Comments

Total posts
Total User
Comments

July-November 2019
control set C1 focused set F1
2,412,600
135,078
679,099
79,691
41,607,923
465,286
December 2019-April 2020
control set C2 focused set F2
2,661,403
139,888
722,520
81,063
42,522,951
454,145

tic tool called Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count
(LIWC). It uses a dictionary created by psychological experts for categorization of words (Tausczik
and Pennebaker, 2010) into 64 categories that fall
under different groups like psychological processes,
personal concerns, social processes, linguistic properties, etc. LIWC categories were created for and
by the psychologists to assess various attributes
like attentional focus, emotionality, social relationships, thinking styles, and individual differences of
authors, based on text content created by them.
Using the LIWC tool, we transform each post
into a 64-dimensional vector that represents its
LIWC category concentrations. Using these category concentrations as features, we performed the
two-sample Kolmogorov-Smirnov (KS) test to find
out the distinguishing features, if any, from the
two sets. The two-sample K–S test is one of the
most useful and general nonparametric methods
for comparing two samples since it is sensitive to
differences in both location and shape of the empirical cumulative distribution functions of the two
samples. The null hypothesis for the KS test is
that both groups were sampled from populations
with identical distributions. The KS distance metric
D is the maximum distance between the Cumulative Distributive Functions of the corresponding
features from both the sets.
For each of 64 LIWC category we have computed cumulative distribution in each set. Denoting the cumulative distribution of focused set for
k (x) and cumulative
k-th LIWC category as F1,n
distribution for the control set for k-th LIWC catk (x) where n and m are the caregory with F2,m
dinalities for the two sets respectively. Then the
KS distance metric D is computed as Dn,m =
k (x) − F k (x)|. For the null hypothesis
supx |F1,n
2,m

q

to be rejected Dn,m > c(α) n+m
n.m . We rejected
the null hypothesis at level α = 0.001.
Our analysis revealed that the two sets significantly differed in word usage for 32 of the 64
categories. The most significant differences are
summarized as follows.
1. Negative emotion category words like hurt,
ugly, nasty, etc. occur far more often in the focused set containing depression related posts
than in the control set.
2. The focused set also has higher usage of Affect
category words like cried, trauma, victim, etc.
3. Use of words like pain, sick, heal, etc. that
belong to the health category are also significantly more frequent in this set.
4. The control set shows a much higher use of
words like mate, society etc. which fall under
the social category.
5. It is observed that, the focused set shows a
significantly higher use of first person singular words like I, me and myself over the control set. On the contrary, the control set has a
much higher use of the second person singular
words like you, your and you’ll. Literature on
psychological studies of text for personality
assessment (Majumder et al., 2017), (Pennebaker et al., 2001) have pointed out that use
of pronouns can be a significant indicator of
personalities.
The above findings indicate that there are
clear linguistic markers to differentiate depressionrelated posts from the general talk. The posts in
the focused set are mostly about stress, healthrelated concerns, negative thoughts shared by people, which are known indicators of depression. This
reinforces the fact that the chosen subreddits indeed
have the right content to gather depression-related
information. In the next section, we present how
pandemic specific issues were identified by comparing the content from the two different phases.

5

Finding pandemic-induced stress
factors

Our next intent was to find distinct markers of
stress, if any, during the COVID period. We separated the focused set data into two subsets - preCOVID set (F1 ) which contained content from July

COVID-time content, was the presence of the terms
online education, online school, online classes, assignments, etc. Thus, we decided to dig deeper into
this aspect. However, rather than only looking at
online-education related content, we extended our
analysis towards analyzing content that could be
discussing issues about students, in general. This
is discussed in detail in the next sub-section.
5.1

Figure 2: The keywords extracted from the depression
set in two time periods – pre-COVID (Top) and COVID
(Bottom).

to November, 2019 and COVID-time (F2 ) content
that spanned over December 2019 to April 2020.
In order to do the comparison, first the Rapid
Automatic Keyword Extraction (RAKE) algorithm (Rose et al., 2010) was used to extract the
significant terms from each post and thereafter use
these terms to represent the content. RAKE is a
well known key term extraction method that uses
statistical analysis of words and phrases in the collection to determine the key-terms. After removing
the stop words like a, an, the, etc. from the content,
it detects phrase delimiters in each post. Using a
co-occurrence matrix of words built from the entire repository, it then assigns a score to each pair
based on its relative co-occurrence frequency in the
collection. The algorithm then creates a matrix of
word co-occurrences and assigns a score to each
word as a function of its individual occurrence and
co-occurrence with other words. This is continued
for all words and phrases. Higher the score of a
term, higher is its representation in the corpus.
Figure 2 shows the tag clouds generated by the
key-terms of each sub-set. The lower tag-cloud
clearly shows that terms like social distancing, self
isolation, corona virus, etc. had significant presence in the COVID-time content. Since these terms
occurred in conjunction with the earlier mentioned
LIWC categories like health, affect, etc. these can
be considered as the stress inducers for this period.
A significant aspect that we noticed in the

Detection and Analysis of content related
to Student Community

For this study we are considering the content from
the focused set F2 . Since there is no meta-data
available to identify posts that are by, for or about
students, we employed a classifier to identify relevant content for the study. We started by manually
annotating a few posts that were picked up using
a set of student-specific key-terms like online education, assignments, grades, class, lecture, etc. A
total of 1, 100 posts from the COVID period were
annotated as positive samples discussing student related issues. An equal number of negative samples
were picked up from the remaining data set, ensuring that they did not contain any student-specific
issue.
After trying out a range of classifiers with different features, the Extreme Gradient Boosting classifier (Friedman, 2001) using word level TF-IDF as
features was found to achieve the highest ten-fold
cross-validation accuracy of 96.19% on the annotated data set. This, when applied on the remaining
posts of COVID times, identified 19, 552 posts are
related to students. This number constitutes around
14% of the posts which is significantly high. It was
not possible to manually verify each of these posts,
however a random check revealed that the selected
content were indeed positive samples. Since our
intent was not to generate exact statistics, but rather
identify indicative issues from social media, this
should be acceptable.
These 19, 552 posts were then subjected to topic
extraction using unsupervised Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA). LDA is a fairly standard generative
model that works as follows – it assumes that a document was generated by picking a set of topics and
then for each topic picking up a set of words. Starting with an input k, which specifies the number of
topics, the output of LDA contains the distribution
of these k topics in each document. It also provides the distribution of words in each topic. For
the present content, the best result with minimum

Figure 3: Word clouds for the topics extracted by the LDA – Topic 1: People and social issues, Topic 2: Negative emotions, Topic 3: Family, Topic 4: Daily activities, Topic 5: Educational concerns, Topic 6: Employment
concerns, Topic 7: Friendship, Topic 8: Feelings, Topic 9: Health concerns, Topic 10: Past issues.

perturbation was obtained for k equal to 10.

Figure 4: Boxplot of topic distribution in posts.

Figure 3 presents overview of the ten topics. It
can be seen that the significant terms of the topics
are unique. We used these to manually associate
indicative names to the topics. The boxplots presented in Figure 4 clearly show that all the topics
are positively skewed, i.e. there are a few outliers
with very high score for each topic. Topics 2 and
8, which indicate negative emotions and feelings
have a steady underlying presence in almost all
the documents. All other topics have quite a few
outliers with very high scores. Of course, as per
LDA norms, each post is a mix of various topics.
In the next subsection, we present more detailed
discussions around our findings.
5.2

Key Insights on pandemic - induced
additional stress for the young adults who
suffer from depression

We now present detailed insights on some of the
key topics individually.

5.2.1 Online Education related stress
In this section, we provide the insights gathered
from the posts related to the topic of online education. These posts on an average contained 200
to 300 words, which is enough to explain issues in
detail. The group consists of students belonging
to high school and college both, from all over the
world, with more users from the earlier group. Table 2 presents the key aspects identified as stress
inducers resulting from online classes, along with
portions from sample posts.
Along with “heavier workload than regular
times” - noticeable is the presence of “fear of missing assignments”. This was found to be a predominant fear and cause of mental anguish in this group,
which also appears to work in a self-feeding loop.
More the fear, more the apathy to work and thus
more accumulated distress.
Factors like “missing friends” and “missing
counsellors” are very crucial issues. Not being able
to meet friends and counsellors physically leads
to increased mental stress. The posts show that
friends and counsellors play an important and positive role in their well-being during normal school
or college times. There are also a few counsellors
within this group offering positive advice to students. Conversations within communities and their
influences, can be subject of a separate study.
The other aspect that emerged was the mention
of “parents” playing an abusive role. It appears that
several students who suffer from depression felt
even more tortured by the isolation since they had
to deal with non-cooperative and abusive parents at

home. The posts reveal that a number of students
find it difficult to face parents who are not very
supportive of their “depression patient” status.
Discussions - The fact that online classes do
tend to stretch beyond usual hours is a major stressinducing factor and is undesirable. Discipline similar to regular physical classes should be maintained.
Various studies have reported the supportive roles
of teachers and classmates in physical schools towards people suffering from emotional distress.
Our study reinforces this. While online education
is being considered on a wider scale worldwide, often as a substitute for regular classroom teaching in
the near future, then there is an immediate need to
build new mechanisms for introducing checks and
balances to ensure inclusivity. It is important to embed it in a holistic environment that can take track
of the mental health of the students and ensure their
well-being. While information can be disseminated
through technology, it is difficult to substitute the
role played by the physical presence of other humans in a student’s life, particularly for those who
lack much family support. However, this aspect
has to be integrated into a learning environment.
5.2.2

Sentiment analysis for people mentions

made in section 5.2.1. The reasons are also pretty
similar. Friends are missed and mentioned as important part of support systems. On the other hand
parents are most often mentioned as abusive. Many
have reported history of abuse from childhood and
also family history of mental troubles. Table 3
shows portions of sample text picked up from posts
scoring high on topic 3 and topic 7. Though the
parental issue cannot be attributed to the pandemic
as such, social isolation, quarantine and lockdown
forced the students to spend more time at home and
with parents - this can be considered as a severe
issue of the times.
5.2.3

Insights related to Employment
concerns
We now discuss a few insights gathered from a
different category of students who had recently
graduated or completed high school. This group of
people is majorly found to talk about “losing job”.
Job losses have been reported widely in the media. These posts especially reveal the trauma of the
group which consists of young adults who suffer
from depression and find a job with a lot of difficulties. Quite obviously, losing a new job along with
financial burden appears to be immensely stressful
for them. A second stress factor that is found in
the COVID-19 induced isolation at a new job location, which makes it difficult for them to maintain
healthy mental conditions. Table 2 shows portions
of sample text picked up from posts scoring high
on topic 6.
5.2.4

Figure 5: Sentiment distribution in posts related to
friend and family.

Continuing with the discussion in the earlier section, we provide more details about two different
contexts in which people mention friends and parents are found in these posts in general. We did
a sentiment analysis of all posts containing high
scores for topics 7 and 3 indicative of friends and
parents respectively. Figure 5 presents the relative
occurrence of positive and negative sentiments for
these two relations. While the term friend occurs
more with a positive connotation, terms like mom,
dad, parents occurred more with negative connotations. These are consistent with the observations

Depression, Pandemic and the Student
community
Dealing with depression and other mental disorders
is in general very hard for the young. The data set
we analyzed corroborated that the pandemic added
more stress to their otherwise everyday struggle.
For many of them, self-isolation led to relapse or
surge. Table 4 shows portions from a few samples
that reported this issue, captured by topic 9.

6

Conclusion

Depression and other mental health issues are persistent with many people, and the social media
harbors content where users express their state of
mind, discuss problems, and seek counseling. The
COVID-19 period presents possibly new factors
that stimulate depression (and anxiety) and is the
main focus of our study. Specifically, we identified
concerns posted by the student community within

Table 2: Table showing typical examples of text corresponding to different categories in Topic 5 (Educational
concerns) and Topic 6 (Employment concerns).

Stress
factors
identified
Heavier
workload than regular
classes
Fear of missing assignments

Sample Text (Topic 5)

“this online school is killing me It’s just double the homework, teachers speak
to us about the homework for the same time I would usually go to school and
then Leave us with double the homework we would usually have.”
“Somehow online school just makes the misery worse and I’m not doing me
online assignments as I just don’t have the energy if that makes sense. Then
since I didn’t do the assignments I wnd up getting lower grades and that also
just makes thing worse.”
Missing friends in “I miss my friends so much, they were pretty much the only reason I kept going
School
to school, and now I don’t have that.”
Locked down with 1.“Also everyone gets so disappointed when I fail to turn in some homework in
non-cooperative
time, and my parents threaten me that I won’t be able to pass the class if I’m
parents
not 100% successful.”
2. “My mom doesn’t let me do anything else than work. She constantly reminds
of everything I have to do and I don’t feel like I have a purpose anymore.”
3. “My parents are constantly pressuring me to do well enough to get scholarships. I understand that Scholarships are important but they make me feel like
I’m a failure if I’m not a perfect student.”
Sample Text (Topic 6)
Lost job
1. “this pandemic is going to kill me i’m a recent college graduate thats been
having a hard time finding work in my field. ... my restaurant is still open for
take out, but they laid me off. i don’t qualify for unemployment because i was
only at this job for a month and didn’t work my last year of college.”
2. “fired and feel a failure the company i ve been working for in the past years is
closing (used to work part time because i am a caregiver of my elderly parents)”
Isolation woes
“how ironic being isolated, when a lot of us were already in that place. ...in late
february i get a job offer from my old 13hr to 45k a year in a new city. ... but
then also i have no friends here.”

certain groups in Reddit. The comments clearly reveal that students who have already declared themselves as suffering from mental illnesses like depression are suffering additional stress, both neurotic and psychotic in nature. The topic modeling revealed specific concerns - related to people,
negative emotions, family issues, daily activities,
education, employment, friends and relationships,
feelings, health issues, and even issues of their past
life. While we have shared our views on how online education platforms need to accommodate the
special needs of the student community as a whole,
hopefully, the insights shared here will also be useful for socio-economic planning.
Our future plans are to study the conversations
and interaction patterns within these communities.
This can help further in understanding the role of

positive influences and key users who play those
roles within a community. Since social media is
an integral part of social lives today, these kinds
of insights can help in engaging it more fruitfully
towards ensuring community well-being.

References
Abel Brodeur, Andrew E Clark, Sarah Fleche, and Nattavudh Powdthavee. 2020. Assessing the impact
of the coronavirus lockdown on unhappiness, loneliness, and boredom using Google Trends. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2004.12129.
Maeve Duggan and Aaron Smith. 2013. 6% of online
adults are reddit users. Pew Internet & American
Life Project, 3:1–10.
Camilla Elphick, Avelie Stuart, Richard Philpot, Zoe
Walkington, Lara Frumkin, Min Zhang, Mark

Table 3: Table showing typical examples of text corresponding to different categories in Topic 3 (Family) and
Topic 7 (Friendship).

Abusive parents

Missing friends in
General

Sample Text (Topic 3)
1. ”i hate my abusive dad i wish i was just born without a father like a immaculate conception... this quarantine is forcing me to be stuck in the the house with
my whole family mostly my abusive father.”
2. ”i just found out my upbringing was abusive and now i want to die. my
parents are abusive physically, mentally, and financially. i’m a 23 year old male.
i broke mentally over the last of respect for boundaries. ever since then, i have
left home and i have been in quarantine with my gf and have time to think over
my life.”
3. ”nightmares about my abusive father so my father has been abusive since i
was a little kid. he beat me and verbally abused me everyday.”
4. ”my mom abused me for years and one day i was self harming at school and
she squeezed my arm so hard it bruised and i went a mental hospital”
Sample Text (Topic 7)
1. ”so quarantine is kinda getting to me. i can’t really go out, i’m glad i’m not
working anymore. i just miss my friends. some thinks it’s ok and they’ve let me
know they still care but to what extent.”
2. ”ever since quarantine i realised i really dont have friends. nobody texts me
and here i was thinking that my friends would help me get through it all.”
3. ”just a dumb question i have depression, and the whole quarantine thing has
made it really come out, but i’ve been spending a lot of time talking to friends
on discord.”

Levine, Blaine Price, Graham Pike, Bashar Nuseibeh, et al. 2020. Altruism and anxiety: Engagement with online community support initiatives (OCSIs) during Covid-19 lockdown in the UK and Ireland. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.07153.

Curtis Murray, Lewis Mitchell, Jonathan Tuke, and
Mark Mackay. 2020. Symptom extraction from the
narratives of personal experiences with COVID-19
on Reddit. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.10454.

Jerome H Friedman. 2001. Greedy function approximation: a gradient boosting machine. Annals of
statistics, pages 1189–1232.

James W Pennebaker, Martha E Francis, and Roger J
Booth. 2001. Linguistic inquiry and word count:
Liwc 2001. Mahway: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 71(2001):2001.

Md Akhtarul Islam, Sutapa Dey Barna, Hasin Raihan, Md Nafiul Alam Khan, and Md Tanvir Hossain. 2020. Depression and anxiety among university students during the COVID-19 pandemic in
Bangladesh: A web-based cross-sectional survey.
PloS one, 15(8):e0238162.

Petersen, Andrea. 2020.
Coronavirus Turmoil
Raises Depression Risks in Young Adults.
https://www.wsj.com/articles/coronavirusturmoil-raises-depression-risks-in-young-adults11597066200. [accessed 28 August 2020].

Bennett Kleinberg, Isabelle van der Vegt, and Maximilian Mozes. 2020. Measuring emotions in the
Covid-19 real world worry dataset. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2004.04225.
Irene Li, Yixin Li, Tianxiao Li, Sergio AlvarezNapagao, and Dario Garcia. 2020. What are we depressed about when we talk about covid19: Mental
health analysis on tweets using natural language processing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.10899.
Navonil Majumder, Soujanya Poria, Alexander Gelbukh, and Erik Cambria. 2017. Deep learning-based
document modeling for personality detection from
text. IEEE Intelligent Systems, 32(2):74–79.

pushshift.io. 2020.
Calling API for dumping
dataset. https://pushshift.io/api-parameters. Accessed: 2020-05-01.
Stuart Rose, Dave Engel, Nick Cramer, and Wendy
Cowley. 2010. Automatic keyword extraction from
individual documents. Text mining: applications
and theory, 1:1–20.
Yla R Tausczik and James W Pennebaker. 2010. The
psychological meaning of words: LIWC and computerized text analysis methods. Journal of language and social psychology, 29(1):24–54.
Isabelle van der Vegt and Bennett Kleinberg. 2020.
Women worry about family, men about the econ-

Table 4: Samples from posts mentioning “Relapse due to isolation”

1.

2.

3.

4.

Sample Text(Topic 9)
“and this past year has been, in contrast, heaven. i am more much functional, and i very much
enjoy sanity. however, in light of the covid-19 crisis, i’m thinking that all this self-isolation
is getting to me. these past 1-2 weeks, i’ve been noticing my ability to keep my thinking
clear and organized has suffered... and i’m writing this while trying to ignore the thoughts in
my head that i cannot control telling me there are people out to get me.”
“so today im coming up to my 17th birthday in 9 days which im going to spend in isolation
due to quarantine, im alone i have no one but my family to celebrate it but my family struggles
to understand my interests as i would consider my self nerdy. no one to be compasionate for
no one to hapy for left no one to relate to left no one to share this story with.”
“self isolation has brought my depression back after 2 years of not having an episode. need
help finding the motivation to do anything. this past week i’ve really noticed my mental
health getting worse by the day.”
“i’m feeling very depressed because life has lost all quality amid corona and i’m not even
sure i want to be alive anymore. i’m only 20 years old so i don’t even have a lot of fond
memories to look back on and i feel like i am wasting my youth in isolation.”

omy: Gender differences in emotional responses to
COVID-19. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.08202.
World Health Organization. 2020. WHO DirectorGeneral’s opening remarks at the media
briefing on COVID-19 - 11 March 2020.
https://www.who.int/dg/speeches/detail/whodirector-general-s-opening-remarks-at-the-mediabriefing-on-covid-19—11-march-2020. [accessed 5
May 2020].
Jia Xue, Junxiang Chen, Ran Hu, Chen Chen, ChengDa
Zheng, and Tingshao Zhu. 2020. Twitter discussions
and concerns about COVID-19 pandemic: Twitter
data analysis using a machine learning approach.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.12830.
Han Zhang, Paula Nurius, Yasaman Sefidgar, Margaret
Morris, Sreenithi Balasubramanian, Jennifer Brown,
Anind K Dey, Kevin Kuehn, Eve Riskin, Xuhai Xu,
et al. 2020. How Does COVID-19 impact Students
with Disabilities/Health Concerns? arXiv preprint
arXiv:2005.05438.
Jianlong Zhou, Shuiqiao Yang, Chun Xiao, and Fang
Chen. 2020. Examination of community sentiment
dynamics due to Covid-19 pandemic: a case study
from Australia. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.12185.

