ULTRASOUND DIAGNOSIS OF COVID-19: ROBUSTNESS AND EXPLAINABILITY

arXiv:2012.01145v1 [eess.IV] 30 Nov 2020

Jay Roberts, Theodoros Tsiligkaridis
Homeland Sensors and Analytics Group, AI Technology Group
MIT Lincoln Laboratory
Lexington, MA 02421
{jay.roberts, ttsili}@ll.mit.edu
ABSTRACT
Diagnosis of COVID-19 at point of care is vital to the containment of the global pandemic. Point of care ultrasound
(POCUS) provides rapid imagery of lungs to detect COVID19 in patients in a repeatable and cost effective way. Previous work has used public datasets of POCUS videos to train
an AI model for diagnosis that obtains high sensitivity. Due
to the high stakes application we propose the use of robust
and explainable techniques. We demonstrate experimentally
that robust models have more stable predictions and offer improved interpretability. A framework of contrastive explanations based on adversarial perturbations is used to explain
model predictions that aligns with human visual perception.
Index Terms— Machine Learning, Ultrasound, Visualization
1. INTRODUCTION
The Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic is the
pre-eminent global health crisis of our time. Reverse Transcribed Real-Time PCR (RT-PCR) - a molecular test - is
one of the most common and effective detection techniques,
though there are concerns about processing time and sensitivity of these tests [Chen et al., 2020, Kanne et al., 2020].
Incorporating medical imaging can be a powerful tool in
the diagnostic process. In this paper we consider point of
Care Ultrasound (POCUS) which has been shown to be a
cost effective and sensitive diagnostic tool [Buonsenso et al.,
2020]. Born et al. Born et al. [2020a] provide an open source
database of POCUS imagery and use deep convolutional neural networks (CNN) for automated diagnosis of COVID-19
and bacterial pneumonia 1 . While it has been shown that
high diagnostic accuracy is achievable using deep CNNs for
frame- and video-based detectors [Born et al., 2020b], the
issue of model robustness in this context has not received
attention.
It has been well established that large capacity deep learning models can be fooled by small, carefully chosen, input
1 The
dataset
and
models
available
https://github.com/jannisborn/covid19 pocus ultrasound.

at

perturbations known as adversarial attacks [Goodfellow et al.,
2015]. In the context of computer vision such attacks can be
imperceptible to the human eye but still manage to fool the
model. Though we do not imagine that medical diagnosis
systems will be subjected to such attacks from malicious actors, their existence implies that the model may be learning
features which are not medically relevant. This degrades trust
from medical practitioners and brings into question the validity of any proposed explanation of the model’s predictions.
Figure 1 (a) and (b) shows examples of such perturbations.
The adoption of AI-enabled techniques for augmenting
diagnostic decision processes used by clinicians depends on
the important issue of trust. Both robustness to imperceptible changes and explainability for justifying model predictions are critical factors in establishing trust. Our preliminary
work presented here paves the way for providing insight into
how robust deep CNNs make diagnostic decisions using ultrasound imaging modality by visualizing feature changes that
lead to different decision boundaries, in addition to providing
robustness.

(a) Standard CNN

(b) Robust CNN

Fig. 1: Examples of L2 Adversarial perturbations against a
standard (a) and robust (b) ResNet18 network attempting to
fool the models correct prediction (P) of COVID. The input
image is shown on the left and the perturbed image on the
right.

2. METHODS
The prevalent way of training neural networks is through the
empirical risk minimization (ERM) principle defined as
min E(x,y)∼D [ L(x, y; θ) ] .
θ

(1)

This yields high accuracy on test sets but leaves the network
vulnerable to adversarial attacks. An effective defense against
such attacks is adversarial training (AT) Madry et al. [2018]
which instead aims to minimize the adversarial risk


min E(x,y)∼D max L(x + δ, y; θ) .
(2)
θ

δ∈Bp ()

The training procedure constructs adversarial attacks, δ, at
given inputs, x, that aim to maximize the loss, L. The attacks are constrained to be within some , in the Lp sense, of
the original image, ensuring that the perturbed image resembles the original. Common choices of constraint are L2 and
L∞ . Though L2 perturbations can be more noticeable than
L∞ perturbations, they are generally smoother and so for the
purposes of visual explanations we restrict our robustness discussion to the L2 case.
A common method to approximate the maximization
is projected gradient descent (PGD) which performs iterative updates of the approximation based on the gradient of
the loss. Because of the high number of forward-backward
propagations AT can become computationally expensive for
large and/or high resolution datasets. There are several regularization methods aimed at obtaining robustness with less
computation [Lyu et al., 2015, Moosavi-Dezfooli et al., 2019,
Tsiligkaridis and Roberts, 2020]. However, since the POCUS
dataset is small we use AT to train our robust models.
2.1. Explanations
As noted in [Ilyas et al., 2019], adversarial attacks are not
strictly a detriment and can be used to discern concepts that
a model has learned. For robust models in particular these
features have shown to be better aligned with human perception than their non-robust counterparts. To this end, we
consider a framework similar to [Tsiligkaridis and Roberts,
2020]. The approach finds pertinent negatives/positives by
optimizing over the perturbation variable δ. Pertinent negatives capture what is missing in the prediction and pertinent
positives refer to critical features that are present in the input
examples.
We consider two contrastive explanations defined by the
optimizations
δmax := argmax l(x + δ, y)

(3)

δ∈B2 ()

and
δmin := argmin l(x + δ, y),

(4)

δ∈B2 ()

where the losses are locally optimized within an L2 ball of
radius  to ensure that the perturbation δ is small.
In the case of correct predictions, δmax are features that
can be added in the original image which flip the model’s decision to a nearby class and therefore are pertinent negative

features of the image. Whereas δmin are features which contribute to the correct prediction, making them the pertinent
positive features. In the case of incorrect predictions the roles
are flipped. The δmax are features which can be added or emphasized to make the model more confident in its incorrect
prediction; the δmin are the features that are missing for the
model to make a correct prediction.
This framework can be used to investigate features a
model has learned and to identify trends in failure cases.
3. RESULTS
We used lung point-of-care ultrasound (POCUS) imagery
gathered by [Born et al., 2020a] to train our network. This is
the first publicly available dataset of lung POCUS recordings
of COVID-19, bacterial pneumonia, and healthy patients.
The dataset consists of 3119 frames from 195 ultrasound
videos. A 5-fold cross validation over the videos was performed. We evaluated two deep CNNs on the POCUS dataset
VGG16 [Simonyan and Zisserman, 2015] and ResNet18 [He
et al., 2015]. Models were trained for 51 epochs using an
SGD optimizer that had an initial learning rate of 0.01 which
decayed by a factor of 10 every 15 epochs. In this paper,
we report results for the best models over the 51 epochs. For
standard models (trained with ERM) the best model is defined
as the model with highest clean accuracy. For robust models
(trained with AT) it is the model with the highest adversarial
accuracy.
Performance. Table 1 shows the performance for each
outcome task. All models performed well in pneumonia detection and in all tasks VGG16 outperforms its ResNet18
counterpart. For the remaining outcomes the robust models
have less sensitivity than their standard counterparts.
Figure 2 shows the overall performance of robust models versus standard models across the 5-fold cross validation
for increasingly strong adversarial attacks. We see the standard models perform well in the clean setting (epsilon =
0), achieving mean accuracy above 80% and outperforming their robust counterparts. However, the performance of
standard models degrades dramatically as the attack strength
increases compared to the robust models, which maintain
better performance. This suggests that the standard models
have learned brittle features sensitive to idiosyncrasies and/or
noise in the training dataset. The robust models lacked such
sensitivity, suggesting they learned more medically relevant
features. Further, as the attack strength increases the robust models eventually lose performance - which is expected
since a model that is robust to very large perturbations may
be insensitive to small but medically relevant features in the
input.
Explanations.
Figures 3 and 4 show δmin and δmax perturbations for robust and standard models. In general, the perturbations of
robust models are more focused and targeted than the per-

(a) Robust-Correct-Min

(b) Standard-Correct-Min

(c) Robust-Error-Min

(d) Standard-Error-Min

Fig. 2: Accuracy of models against increasing strength of L2
attacks. The mean is plotted with the shaded area being one
standard deviation across splits. Standard models (dashed)
experience dramatic degradation of performance compared to
robust models (solid).
Model
ResNet18-rob

ResNet18

VGG16-rob

VGG16

Outcome
covid
pneumonia
regular
covid
pneumonia
regular
covid
pneumonia
regular
covid
pneumonia
regular

Acc.
78.076
93.994
81.146
82.616
93.856
86.422
81.498
93.568
83.122
85.992
95.144
86.508

AUROC
81.326
95.066
81.372
85.746
95.992
87.992
87.054
96.952
85.114
89.646
97.618
88.928

Table 1: Mean clean accuracy (Acc.) and AUROC over 5
splits for each outcome for VGG16 and ResNet18 trained
with standard ERM or with AT (rob).

turbations for standard models which were diffuse, making
their learned features less interpretable. A notable exception
is row-2 of Figure 3 where both models seem to focus on
the pocket-like features present in many bacterial pneumonia
POCUS imagery.
Figure 3 shows the effects of a δmin attack on robust and
standard networks for correct predictions and errors. For the
pertinent positives of the correct predictions (Figure 3 (a) and
(b)) both models emphasize the pockets seen in the pneumonia image but for the other two images the standard model
seems to only be focusing on the brighter parts of the image.
In comparison, the robust model has picked up on distinct
features of the original image.
The pertinent negatives (Figure 3 (c) and (d)) of the robust model appear to de-emphasize certain features of the input. This is particularly interesting since these were images of

Fig. 3: Examples of a δmin perturbation for robust and standard models. The columns are the input image, adversarial
perturbed image, and the perturbation respectively. The target (T) label is given on the left of each row and the model’s
prediction (P) is given above each image.

healthy lungs which the models mistook for pathology. These
perturbations allow us to not only identify difficult cases for
the models to classify, but to effectively localize the features
that fooled the model. Such an insight can be used to identify
gaps in training data or flag common failure cases.
Figure 4 shows the effects of a δmax attacks. For the correct predictions (Figure 4 (a) and (c)) these are the pertinent
negative features that would cause the network to misclassify.
The perturbations for robust models suggest they have learned
more relevant features than the standard model. For example,
in rows 1 and 3 we see that the pocket-like features are missing from the COVID-19 images that would cause the model
to classify them as pneumonia. Whereas in row 2, the perturbation has removed some pockets and fused others together.
In contrast, the perturbations for the standard model are less
interpretable. Figure 4 (b) and (d) show the pertinent positive
features that led the model to misclassify. It is clear that the
robust model focuses on the upper region for its predictions
while the standard model used more diffuse features.
4. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this work we advocate for using robust AI in the safetycritical domain of automated diagnosis. We show that while

6. COMPLIANCE WITH ETHICAL STANDARDS
This research study was conducted retrospectively using human subject data aggregated, processed, and made available
in open access by Born et. al. Born et al. [2020a] . Up
to date references of data sources and access can be found
at : https://github.com/jannisborn/covid19 pocus ultrasound.
Ethical approval was not required as confirmed by the license
attached with the open access data.
(a) Robust-Correct-Max

(b) Standard-Correct-Max

References
Jannis Born, Gabriel Brändle, Manuel Cossio, Marion Disdier, Julie Goulet, Jérémie Roulin, and Nina Wiedemann.
Pocovid-net: Automatic detection of covid-19 from a new
lung ultrasound imaging dataset (pocus), 2020a.
Jannis Born, Nina Wiedemann, Gabriel Brändle, Charlotte
Buhre, Bastian Rieck, and Karsten Borgwardt. Accelerating covid-19 differential diagnosis with explainable ultrasound image analysis, 2020b.

(c) Robust-Error-Max

(d) Standard-Error-Max

Fig. 4: Examples of a δmax perturbation for robust and standard models. The columns are the input image, adversarial
perturbed image, and the perturbation respectively. The target (T) label is given on the left of each row and the model’s
prediction (P) is given above each image.

standard models may outperform robust ones in terms of raw
metrics, it comes at the cost of reliability and explainability.
Further, we provide a means of using adversarial attacks to
discern the features learned by robust models. Future work
will include collaborating with hospitals to leverage more ultrasound data - improving accuracy, quality of robust features,
and allowing us to focus on discriminating between multiple
manifestations of COVID-19 (e.g. B-lines, pleural abnormalities, consolidations). Additionally, we plan to guide our explanation framework based on expert radiologist feedback.

5. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This material is based upon work supported by the Under
Secretary of Defense for Research and Engineering under Air
Force Contract No. FA8702-15-D-0001. Any opinions, findings, conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the Under Secretary of Defense for Research and
Engineering.

Danilo Buonsenso, Davide Pata, and Antonio Chiaretti.
Covid-19 outbreak: less stethoscope, more ultrasound. The
Lancet Respiratory Medicine, 8(5):e27, 2020.
Dabiao Chen, Wenxiong Xu, Ziying Lei, Zhanlian Huang,
Jing Liu, Zhiliang Gao, and Liang Peng. Recurrence of
positive sars-cov-2 rna in covid-19: A case report. International Journal of Infectious Diseases, 2020.
Ian J. Goodfellow, Jonathon Shlens, and Christian Szegedy.
Explaining and harnessing adversarial examples. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2015.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun.
Deep residual learning for image recognition, 2015.
Andrew Ilyas, Shibani Santurkar, Dimitris Tsipras, Logan Engstrom, Brandon Tran, and Aleksander Madry. Adversarial
examples are not bugs, they are features, 2019.
Jeffrey P. Kanne, Brent P. Little, Jonathan H. Chung, Brett M.
Elicker, and Loren H. Ketai. Essentials for radiologists
on covid-19: An update—radiology scientific expert panel.
Radiology, 296(2):E113–E114, 2020. doi: 10.1148/radiol.
2020200527. URL https://doi.org/10.1148/
radiol.2020200527. PMID: 32105562.
Chunchuan Lyu, Kaizhu Huang, and Ha-Ning Liang. A unified gradient regularization family for adversarial examples. In IEEE International Conference on Data Mining
(ICDM), 2015.
Aleksander Madry, Aleksandar Makelov, Ludwig Schmidt,
Dimitris Tsipras, and Adrian Vladu. Towards deep learning models resistant to adversarial attacks. In International
Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.

Seyed-Mohsen Moosavi-Dezfooli, Jonathan Uesato, Alhussein Fawzi, and Pascal Frossard. Robustness via curvature regularization, and vice versa. In IEEE Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2019.
Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman. Very deep convolutional networks for large-scale image recognition, 2015.
Theodoros Tsiligkaridis and Jay Roberts. Second order optimization for adversarial robustness and interpretability,
2020.

