111

arXiv:2012.01553v2 [cs.CY] 4 Dec 2020

COVID-19 Contact Tracing and Privacy: A Longitudinal Study of
Public Opinion
LUCY SIMKO, Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering, University of Washington
JACK LUCAS CHANG, Information School, University of Washington
MAGGIE JIANG, Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering, University of Washington
RYAN CALO, School of Law, University of Washington
FRANZISKA ROESNER, Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering, University of Washington
TADAYOSHI KOHNO, Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering, University of Washington
There is growing use of technology-enabled contact tracing, the process of identifying potentially infected COVID-19 patients
by notifying all recent contacts of an infected person. Governments, technology companies, and research groups alike have
been working towards releasing smartphone apps, using IoT devices, and distributing wearable technology to automatically
track “close contacts” and identify prior contacts in the event an individual tests positive. However, there has been significant
public discussion about the tensions between effective technology-based contact tracing and the privacy of individuals. To
inform this discussion, we present the results of seven months of online surveys focused on contact tracing and privacy, each
with 100 participants. Our first surveys were on April 1 and 3, before the first peak of the virus in the US, and we continued to
conduct the surveys weekly for 10 weeks (through June), and then fortnightly through November, adding topical questions to
reflect current discussions about contact tracing and COVID-19. Our results present the diversity of public opinion and can
inform policy makers, technologists, researchers, and public health experts on whether and how to leverage technology to
reduce the spread of COVID-19, while considering potential privacy concerns. We are continuing to conduct longitudinal
measurements and will update this report over time; citations to this version of the report should reference Report Version
2.0, December 4, 2020.
Additional Key Words and Phrases: privacy, security, usable security, contact tracing, longitudinal, COVID-19

1

INTRODUCTION

Technology companies, university research groups, and governments have been diligently working to deploy
COVID-19 contact tracing apps, for which adoption has been slow [10, 19]. Prior work has determined that
contact tracing apps are most effective when used by the majority of a population [23, 27, 66]; however, some
have raised security and privacy concerns (e.g., [16, 88]) as well as broader concerns about efficacy (e.g., [87]).
Our research seeks to provide to the scientific, technology, and policy communities an informed understanding
of the public’s values, concerns, and opinions about the use of automated contact tracing technologies. We argue
neither for nor against automated contact tracing in this work, but instead we offer a summary of public opinion
on potential contact tracing scenarios since many regions have already implemented automated contact tracing
programs or are moving towards them. We ask the following research questions:
• App functionality. What do potential users want a contact tracing app to do or not do? What data sources
do people feel most and least comfortable with being used for contact tracing? Our survey asks about potential
app features and multiple data sources, including: location data (e.g., from cell tower data, credit card history,
or wearable electronics), proximity data, data from an existing app, and data from a new app by a known entity
or company (Sections 5.2 and 5.4).
Authors’ addresses: Lucy Simko, Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering, University of Washington; Jack Lucas Chang,
Information School, University of Washington; Maggie Jiang, Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering, University of
Washington; Ryan Calo, School of Law, University of Washington; Franziska Roesner, Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering,
University of Washington; Tadayoshi Kohno, Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering, University of Washington.

• Developer and stakeholder identity. What kinds of institutions do potential users trust to conduct or
implement automated contact tracing? We ask about trust in a number of potential developers, including
government agencies and well known tech companies (Section 5.3). We also solicit individuals’ opinions
regarding contact tracing data being shared with or used by different entities for the purposes of contact tracing.
We consider data sharing with and usage by multiple entities, including: their government, cellular provider,
cellphone manufacturer, and various well-known technology companies (Sections 5.3 and 5.4).
• Changes over time. How, if at all, has public opinion about the preceding topics changed over time? We
discuss longitudinal changes in Sections 5.2, 5.3, and 5.4. We also ask whether there are any correlations with
demographic factors or world events, e.g., the global or regional infection rate (Section 5.5).
We capture public opinion using an international paid survey platform (Prolific). Our first survey (April 1,
2020) was repeated weekly through June and fortnightly thereafter, with the latest data collected on November
6, 2020. Our first survey collected data from 200 participants, and the rest collected data from 100 participants
each. Our first surveys were before the initial viral peak infection rate in North America, before contact tracing
apps were available in many of the regions that now have them, and early in the public discourse about contact
tracing; our later surveys track how public opinion evolves over time.
This paper addresses a broad audience—researchers, app developers, public health officials, policy makers,
etc. Our results can inform (1) ongoing technical efforts to design contact tracing apps in a privacy-preserving
manner, (2) how the makers of such a contact tracing app or program communicate the privacy properties of
their contact tracing program to their potential users, and (3) legal, ethical and policy discussions about the
appropriate use and design of such technologies. At a high level, we find:
• Privacy preferences are stable over time at a population level. We find that public opinion about privacy
and contact tracing is roughly stable over time, suggesting that our—and others’—results can successfully
inform future efforts. We find there is a shrinking population that has yet to use contact tracing apps, and that
privacy concerns limit potential users’ willingness to download the apps. Therefore, the population that does
not yet use a contact tracing app may appear to become more privacy conscious as the less privacy conscious
leave it and download an app (Section 5.2).
• An abundance of privacy concerns about data sharing, usage, and developer identity leads to a personal decision about the tradeoffs between privacy and health, and leaves no perfect solution. We
observe that potential contact tracing app users care deeply about the identity of the developer, and have strong
opinions about with whom data should or should not be shared. However, we note that participants disagree
about trusted entities. Many participants raised concerns about sharing with their government and data being
used for advertising or government surveillance, now or in the future (Section 5.3).
• Informed consent and transparency about data sharing and usage may mitigate some privacy concerns. Participants expressed a strong desire for meaningful consent and control over their data. If developers
and policy makers (1) better inform the public about the current and future use of their data, and (2) give
individuals control over how their data are used, they may be more willing to enroll in automated contact
tracing. For example, we find support for judicial oversight of government data usage in some circumstances,
potentially making users more confident that their data would not be misused (Section 5.3).
• Mental models of technical and legal concepts are often incomplete or inaccurate, but play a significant role in potential users’ willingness to begin contact tracing. Participants repeatedly reasoned
about the accuracy of certain technical methods of contact tracing (e.g., GPS vs Bluetooth), the competence of
the app developer to implement contact tracing at a technical level, and the capability of their government to
protect (or exploit) their data. Through this reasoning, we identified multiple inaccurate or incomplete mental
models, e.g., some participants thought a proximity tracking app would be less secure than a location tracking
app due to constant communication with others’ phones via Bluetooth. Other participants overestimated the
2

Fig. 1. COVID-19 new infections per 100k as reported to the World Health Organization (WHO) [68] for the six countries
from which we had at least 100 participants (together, these countries comprise 74.4% of our participant pool).

prevalence of judicial corruption, causing them to discount the protection potentially provided by judicial
oversight of government data usage. These mental models invite stakeholders to improve user education so
that users can make well-informed decisions.

2

THE EVOLUTION OF CONTACT TRACING DURING THE COVID-19 PANDEMIC

Because both the pace of development of contact tracing apps and the pandemic itsef are evolving rapidly, we
expect content in this section to be quickly outdated. However, it is important to capture the state of the world
on April 1, when we first deployed our survey, and see how both the infection rates and contact tracing efforts
have progressed through the time of this writing in mid-November, in order to contextualize our results.

2.1

COVID-19 infection rates and quarantine restrictions

Infection rates. On April 1, the course of the COVID-19 pandemic had not yet reached its first peaks outside
of Asia. Figure 1 shows the number of infections per 100k people in the six countries from which we had at
least 100 participants total: Canada, Mexico, Poland, Portugal, the UK, and the US. After an initial spring peak in
many countries in our dataset, the rate of infection declined. The US saw a second peak of infection in August,
though rates of infection in many others countries remained low [25]. As of this writing, in mid-November, many
countries are experiencing skyrocketing infection rates, as seen in Figure 1.
Regional lockdowns. On April 1, as we began our survey, many European countries, (e.g., the UK, Germany,
Italy, and Spain), were under varying forms of lockdown, with some combination of schools, restaurants, bars,
and non-essential shops closed, public gatherings banned, and citizens urged or mandated to stay inside except
for essential outings [14, 47, 55, 81]. Many in the US were under similar restrictions, though some states issued
no stay-at-home orders at all during those early months [31, 50, 62, 83].
Due to the lower infection rates over the summer, restrictions largely eased in Europe but have been reimplemented in many countries as of mid-November in the form of nightly curfews, closures of non-essential
3

businesses, travel restrictions, and mask-wearing and social distancing mandates [7, 51, 59]. As of mid November,
restrictions in many US states are not as strict, with limitations but not bans on indoor activities (such as dining
and shopping) and masks mandated in some but not all states [91].

2.2

Contact tracing technical efforts and app adoption

Here, we briefly overview existing contact tracing app efforts and their adoption as well as the conversation
around how to contact trace in a privacy-preserving way. The purpose of this section is to contextualize our
findings and recommendations, not to give a comprehensive look at technology-enabled contact tracing efforts.
Why automated contact tracing? Traditionally, contact tracing is done by a team of public health experts
and focuses on tracking down those who might have been infected by someone who tested positive for a disease,
in combination with widespread testing. A state, region, or other entity might implement automated contact
tracing (e.g., to augment or complement human-based efforts, for which there has been a shortage [70, 84]) for
multiple reasons, although though not all experts agree that automated contact tracing is needed or will be
effective. For example, automated contact tracing might be used to keep infection rates low while allowing people
to leave their homes, or used to enforce quarantine for people identified as COVID-19-positive.
Existing automated contact tracing programs. As of April 1, some governments had already deployed
automated contact tracing programs using a variety of devices and data sources [98]. For example, contact
tracing apps existed in Bahrain, China, Colombia, the Czech Republic, Ghana, India, Israel, the Republic of
North Macedonia, Norway, Singapore, and some US States [5, 13, 17, 32, 36, 43, 45, 61, 63–65, 92, 94]. Some apps
were mandatory (e.g., in China), but most were optional (e.g., Singapore) and struggled with low adoption [10].
Hong Kong deployed electronic wristbands to those infected with COVID-19 to ensure they did not leave their
homes [79]. In South Korea, the government sent text messages with details about new COVID-19 cases and
made available a central database with anonymized information; however, some entries were specific enough to
be traced back to a single person and initiated damaging rumors [15, 52]. Additionally, Taiwan and Israel both
began using cell tower data [36, 41].
On April 10, Google and Apple announced “a joint effort to enable the use of Bluetooth technology to help
governments and health agencies reduce the spread of the virus, with user privacy and security central to the
design” [33]. In May, they released the first version of their Exposure Notification API [8, 11, 24]. The API uses
proximity tracking through Bluetooth, is opt-in, and can be used only by public health authorities; Apple and
Google report that the data will not be monetized [8, 11]. In September, Apple and Google launched “Exposure
Notification Express,” allowing users to participate in contact tracing without downloading an app [24].
Since the release of Apple and Google’s Exposure Notification API, many public health authorities have released
apps using the API. According to the MIT Technology Review COVID Tracing Tracker [67], as of mid-November,
46 non-US countries are using automated contact tracing applications, 13 with Apple and Google’s API and 4 with
DP-3T [93]. Additionally, at least 12 US States are using the Apple and Google API as of mid-November [76, 99].
Apps have been released steadily over time around the world, yet adoption remains low in most regions: of
the apps for which the adoption rate is in the MIT Technology Review’s database, as of mid-November, Iceland,
Ireland, and Singapore have the highest voluntary adoption rates, at just below 40% of the population of each
country [67]. Though automated contact tracing is more effective with more users, it can be effective at low rates
of adoption as well [66].
Design decisions affecting security and privacy. Design properties at multiple levels affect user security
and privacy, some of which are transparent to users (e.g., being potentially identified as infectious in some
designs) and some of which are more opaque (e.g., broadcast vs narrowcast; centralization vs decentralization).
For a more complete and in-depth discussion of these properties, see [73, 95].
4

Some designs explicitly focus on privacy-respecting contact tracing. Each group makes design decisions based
on its own threat models and on-the-ground situations to produce different technical protocols, including Apple
and Google, the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), the University of Washington (UW), Inria, PEPP-PT,
and DP-3T, and PanCast [6, 9, 33, 44, 77, 93]. One high-level distinction that has become extremely popular since
our initial surveys in early April is proximity tracking, where a user’s phone tracks other nearby phones, rather
than a more traditional implementation of location-based contact tracing.
Additionally, other, non-smartphone methods are being used to trace contacts, such as credit card purchase
history, facial recognition on surveillance camera footage, and wearable devices [42, 85, 86].

3

RELATED WORK

Other groups have also investigated public opinion on location tracking during COVID-19, described below.
Themes: privacy concerns abound, but a majority indicate a willingness to download contact tracing
apps. Many groups have assessed a population’s willingness to download a contact tracing app, finding rates
between 27 and 84% at different points in time, with different privacy and data sharing and usage situations and
different populations, including Australia [21, 22, 30], China [56], a number of countries in Western Europe [1,
3, 35, 38, 46, 56, 69, 97, 100], and the US [1, 3, 4, 38, 39, 56, 60, 72, 90, 101]. These works identified concerns
thematically similar to ours, such as privacy concerns about sharing with the government, and correlations
between willingness to download and COVID-19 concern levels or demographic information, e.g., age.
Cross cultural studies. Some groups have studied participants from multiple countries, including [1, 3]. For
example, Altmann et al. found that people in the US and Germany were less likely than people in France, Italy,
and the UK to install a contact tracing app due to security and privacy concerns [3]. Kostka and Habich-Sobiegalla
compared public acceptance of contact tracing apps in China, Germany, and the US; in line with Altmann et al.,
they find that participants in Germany and the US were much less accepting of an app than those in China [56].
Longitudinal studies. Garrett et al. are studying public opinion over time in several countries (including
Australia, Germany, and the UK) by periodically surveying participants from those countries in “waves” [22]. In
Australia, Garrett et al. have found widespread acceptance for contact tracing apps but lower download rates
than were predicted by attitudes about contact tracing apps [30].
Situating our work. In the context of existing work, our work adds a regular and periodic survey of public
opinion, capturing trends and stability over time. Additionally, the free response answers present in our data
provide rich insight into the values and concerns underlying individuals’ willingness to download, allowing them
to express themselves in their own words in addition to via prescribed quantitative options.

4

METHODOLOGY

To collect rich data and measure public opinion, we designed an approximately 20-minute online survey with
both multiple choice and free response questions. Our survey was implemented in Qualtrics. We deployed the
survey through Prolific, an online survey platform based in the United Kingdom.
Our institution’s IRB determined that our study was exempt from further human subjects review, and we
adhered to best practices for ethical human subjects survey research, e.g., we paid at or slightly above minimum
wage, all questions were optional except the initial screening questions about age and smartphone usage, and we
did not collect unnecessary personal information.

4.1

Survey Protocol

Because we expected most participants to live in countries where contact tracing apps were not in ubiquitous
use, at least for our initial survey, we designed the survey to elicit attitudes about contact tracing in specific
hypothetical situations. The survey did include branches for those who had already downloaded an app for
5

tracking or mitigating COVID-19, or who had the opportunity to but chose not to, but in this paper, we focus
on those who did not have a contact tracing app at the time of inquiry. To avoid biasing participants towards
presenting themselves as more privacy-conscious than they are, the survey did not mention “privacy” until its
final two questions (demographics) and asked instead about participants’ “comfort” with various situations, or
their “likelihood” of downloading an app in a certain situation. Each section (except for demographics) concluded
with one or more free-response questions, inviting participants to explain their opinions.
When designing this survey in late March—and adding to it in response to the evolving world—we paid close
attention to the ways that technology and terminology might change, opting to describe terms that may fall
in or out of style (like “contact tracing” or “exposure notification”) and prioritized longitudinal consistency by
not editing questions after they had appeared once (other than to correct the rare typo). We expand on this
experience of future-proofing a longitudinal survey during a rapidly evolving event in Section 6.
The survey had the following main sections (excluding questions for participants who were already using a
contact tracing app). See Appendix A for the full protocol.
Demographics. We asked participants three types of demographic questions that focused variables we
hypothesized might correlate with their attitude towards COVID-19 and contact tracing programs: (1) standard
demographic questions, like age, gender, geographic location; (2) general political views, news sources, and
privacy and technology interest and knowledge; (3) COVID-19-specific questions, like their general level of
concern about the pandemic, whether they live with someone who is in a high-risk group, whether they had had
COVID-19 or had ever been tested, and their beliefs about social distancing and mask wearing. We asked many
of the demographic questions at the end of the survey to help mitigate stereotype threat.
Cell tower location data. We asked participants how comfortable they were with their cell phone manufacturer or cellular carrier using their location data for the purposes of studying or mitigating the spread of
COVID-19. We presented participants with three variations of a situation: their location data being shared with
their government; their location data being shared with their government if they tested positive; and their location
data being shared publicly if they tested positive.
Existing apps using GPS location data. We asked participants to imagine that “the makers of an existing
app on your phone started using your GPS location data to study or mitigate the spread of COVID-19.” We chose
3 popular apps from each of 5 categories that we expected would use location data (navigation, social media,
messaging, transportation, fitness), for a total of 15 apps. Participants rated their comfort level with each of the 15
apps using their location data for mitigating the spread of COVID-19 on a 5-point Likert scale, with an additional
option for “I don’t use this app.” We then asked two free-response questions about the app that they regularly use
that they would most trust and the app that they would least trust to study or mitigate COVID-19.
New app: perfect privacy. We asked participants to imagine a new app that would track their location for
the purposes of mitigating the spread of COVID-19 but that would protect their data perfectly. On 5-point Likert
scales, we asked how likely they would be to install the app and how it would change their current behavior.
New app: app makers know location at all times but do not share it. Changing the previous scenario
slightly, we asked participants to imagine a new app that would know their location at all times for the purposes
of mitigating the spread of COVID-19, but this time the app makers would know their location at all times but
would not share this information. We again asked participants how likely they would be to download and use
such an app. This time, we asked participants to rate their comfort with each company that made the same
popular 15 apps we showed them previously. We expanded this list to include other companies in week 3 of
the survey. We also asked about their comfort level with five generic entities making such an app: a university
research group, an activist group, an industry startup, your government, and the United Nations.
New app: app makers know location at all times and share data with your government if you are
diagnosed with COVID-19. Again changing the previous scenarios, we asked participants about a situation in
which the new app’s makers share their location history with the government if they test positive for COVID-19.
6

We asked, again, how likely they would be to download such an app as well as their download likelihood in two
variant situations: if the data were shared regardless of whether they tested positive, and if the government’s use
of the data were supervised by a judge.
Non-smartphone location data sources. In response to an evolving conversation about alternate data
sources, we asked participants next about their comfort level with having location history derived from surveillance camera footage and credit card purchase history (added in week 3). Beginning in week 16, we also asked
participants about their comfort with public area sensors or electronic bracelets.
New app: proximity tracking. Due to the growing discussions about and technical work on proximity
tracking protocols and apps after April 1, in week 3 we added a group of questions about proximity tracking. We
asked about proximity tracking by phone manufacturers, phone operating systems, a new app, and apps from
several well known companies or generic entities.
Government use of location or proximity data. In this section, we stepped back from scenarios about
specific data sources to ask participants questions about a scenario in which their government acquires their
location or proximity data for studying and mitigating COVID-19. We asked about their confidence in their
government’s deletion of the data post-pandemic, use of data only for COVID-19 tracking, and their general level
of concern about their “personal safety or the safety of those in their community.”
Desired features in a new COVID-19 mitigation app. We then asked participants about a wide variety of
features that a potential new COVID-19 mitigation app might have when notifying people of potential infections
or enforcing isolation; features were drawn from existing contract tracing apps or programs. For example, one
feature we asked about would “notify you if you came close to someone who later tested positive for COVID-19,”
while another would “automatically notify the authorities if people were not isolating as mandated.”
Location sharing with their government pre-pandemic. Finally, we asked participants to rate their level
of comfort with their location data being shared with their government in October 2019, i.e., before COVID19. Since participants may not accurately recall their own previous beliefs or may have been primed towards
privacy-sensitivity by the rest of the survey. Therefore, any results from this data must be treated with caution.

4.2

Recruitment

We recruited participants through Prolific, an online survey platform, with no demographic restrictions, since
Prolific already requires that all participants be 18 or older. The first questions of our survey screened participants
as required by our IRB. We asked: (1) are you at least 18 years old? and (2) do you use a smartphone regularly? If
participants answered ‘Yes’ to both, they proceeded to the rest of the survey.
We ran the survey on Prolific on April 1, 3, 8, 10, and every Friday thereafter until June 5, then every other
Friday, around the same time (3pm PST). We excluded anyone who had taken any previous version of the survey.

4.3

Analysis

In this report, we present analyses of our qualitative and quantitative data. We conducted exploratory and
descriptive statistical analysis of our quantitative data rather than testing specific hypotheses, described below.
Longitudinal analysis. To explore longitudinal trends, we present data with time on the x axis and the
percent of participants on the y axis. We draw slopes that are statistically significant with p <= .05, a standard
threshold for significance, but we observe that a statistically significant slope does not necessarily mean that the
slope has practical significance. We calculate the statistical mean (𝜇) for each question.
Demographic analysis. For the questions that displayed longitudinal stability (the majority of the questions),
we examined demographic trends by collapsing all weeks of data into one pool. We analyzed each question by:
country or region, age bracket, gender, and phone manufacturer, including only demographic groups for which
there were at least 100 participants.
7

Qualitative analysis. To understand participants’ values and concerns more deeply, we conducted qualitative
analysis of the optional free response questions accompanying many of the survey sections. To analyze these
questions, two researchers iteratively created independent qualitative codebooks for each question, first open
coding and then creating axial and hierarchical codes for each question. We opted to use separate codebooks
for every question except questions that were variants in order to allow the themes from one question to arise
independently from the themes in another. When reporting qualitative data, we report the number of participants
for each theme, idea, or concept, and attribute quotes to participants using an identifier with both the week and a
participant number, e.g., W3P40 for participant 40 from week 3.

4.4

Limitations

We are presenting these results without peer review because we believe our results have the potential to inform
the current rapidly-evolving policy and technical work on contact tracing apps. However, because the paper has
yet to undergo peer review, and despite our good faith attempts never to mislead or misrepresent our findings,
we hope the reader will be especially cautious in interpreting our results.
Online surveys have inherent limitations. Participants may experience survey fatigue and click through long
matrix questions, giving inaccurate answers in order to finish the survey more quickly. From our qualitative
analysis, responses to free response questions seem to be on topic and high quality, indicating a low rate of survey
fatigue. Survey fatigue, or lack thereof, may also be affected by the fact that participants were paid and therefore
incentivized to finish. Additionally, though we intentionally recruited from an international audience, our survey
was in English, meaning that those who do not read English are not represented, and some with weaker English
skills may have chosen not to complete the free response questions; this could lead to potential biases towards
English speakers in the qualitative responses.
Another limitation of a survey such as ours, in which participants are asked about different situations without
being able to directly compare them, is that opinions about earlier questions may change given later questions
(order bias) [74]. Thus, because question order matters, our quantitative results in Figures such as Figure 3 and 9a
must be interpreted with caution, though we believe there is still value in presenting the questions comparatively.
Prior work on Mechanical Turk participants in the United States, a different survey platform than ours, found,
with varied results, that online survey participants may not be representative of the general population [78].
Other studies have examined whether online survey participants’ security and privacy knowledge and behavior
accurately represent the general public, with varying results [49, 75].
Finally, although we have an international sample, we do not recruit large numbers of participants from any
individual country each week, so our data cannot be used to examine country-level trends over time.

5

RESULTS

We now report results from our analysis of both quantitative and qualitative data from weeks 1 (April 1, 2020)
through 32 (November 6, 2020) of our survey. For weeks 1-10 (through June 5), we surveyed participants once a
week; for subsequent weeks, we surveyed every two weeks (hence, there is no data for weeks 11, 13, 15, etc.). We
excluded participants who had participated in any prior version of the survey.
Our survey had two branches, one addressing those who had a contact tracing app and one addressing those
who did not. In this paper, we focus on the latter cohort since they may share concerns and values we must
understand in order to make it possible for them to (1) have safe access to automated contact tracing, and (2) be
able to make an informed decision about participating.
In Section 5.1, we describe our population demographically, finding that while our participants hail from
dozens of countries, minority viewpoints may be absent. In Section 5.2, we consider estimates of a population’s
willingness to download a contact tracing app. We also consider how privacy concerns affect willingness to
8

download. We find that while adoption of contact tracing applications is increasing, a significant minority of the
population does not intend to use them, and that privacy concerns are indeed a central concern, even amongst
those who might download an app. We also consider functionality users might want from contact tracing apps,
finding support for bare-bones tracing features but not for more privacy invasive ones, such as quarantine
enforcement.
In Section 5.3, we examine values and concerns potential app users might share about tech companies,
governments, or other entities that develop contact tracing apps. We observe that users have substantial concerns
about their data being shared or used without their consent and for purposes that might harm them or others.
We also find no one-size-fits-all app developer profile: comfort with an app developer (e.g., Google or the
US government) is a complex decision that differs for every user; therefore, policy makers, tech companies,
researchers, governments, and public health experts must work together towards protecting users and helping
users understand the protections in place so that they can make informed decision. Finally, in Section 5.4, we
more broadly explore user values and concerns through a discussion of alternative data sources for contact
tracing, including cell tower location data, credit card history, public sensors (including surveillance cameras), and
wearable electronics. Expanding upon themes from previous sections, we observe that anonymity and technical
accuracy are of great concern to users, whose mental models may be incomplete or inaccurate.
Some notes on terminology: We use the term ‘contact tracing’ to include ‘location tracking’ and ‘proximity
tracking.’ When reporting qualitative results, we use the format W1P100 to mean participant 100 from week 1.
Further, our notation Q[𝑁 ], where 𝑁 is a number, refers to unique identifiers in the Qualtrics survey platform
that we used. Question numbers do not appear strictly in order; we analyze questions in groups but encourage
readers to refer to the full survey protocol in Appendix A if necessary. Finally, in longitudinal plots, we draw
lines when statistically significant (p≤.05) and show the average (𝜇) in the legend for all questions.

5.1

Participant Demographics: European, male, white, and young

Over the course of 20 surveys and 32 weeks, we reached 2337 participants, mostly from Europe. Countries
with at least 10% of participants in our dataset are the United Kingdom and Northern Ireland (22.4%), Portugal
(15.9%), and Poland (14.6%). 9.9% of our participants were from United States. European countries (including the
UK, Portugal, Poland, and 21 others) comprised 73% of total survey participants.
As is common in online surveys [78], participants were overwhelmingly young. Over 70% were under the
age of 30; 54.9% between ages 18 and 24 (we screened out anyone younger than 18); 18.9% between 25 and 29;
and 11.2% between 30 and 34, with a long tail to a highest age bracket of 70-74.
40.7% of participants who disclosed their gender were female; 58.1% were male. Approximately 1% of participants disclosed that they were transgender, genderfluid, genderqueer, non-binary, or agender. We manually
bucketed participants’ gender identities as reported in a free response text field; we believe we have stayed
true to participants’ gender identities when bucketing, though these identities may change over time and our
respondents may have included more trans or gender non-conforming participants than disclosed as such. To
avoid stereotype threat, we asked most demographic questions at the end of the survey, asking only high-level
questions about demographics (e.g., location) and COVID-19 at the start.
In week 12 (June 19), we began collecting data on race and ethnicity. Because race and ethnicity are complex
and have different meanings throughout the world, we provided participants with a number of races or ethnicities
commonly asked about in surveys [12, 29] and also offered a free response question if they wished to self describe
in addition to or instead of options we provided, as recommended by the EU [26]. Of these responses, 79.6%
identified as white, 13.5% as Hispanic or Latinx, 6.9% as Asian, 3.2% as Black or African-American, and less
than 1% as American Indian, Alaskan Native, Pacific Islander, or Native Hawaiian. Percentages add up to more
9

Fig. 2. This plot describes our participants’ attitudes toward COVID-19 and preventative measures. Respondents have a
generally high degree of belief in preventative measures, like mask wearing a social distancing. The line at the bottom shows
a statistically significant increase in the percent of participants who had been tested for COVID-19.

than 100 because some participants selected multiple identities. Those who chose to self describe indicated both
intersectional identities and European ethnicities, such as Slavic, Irish, and Scandinavian.
Though we have survey participants from a variety of countries, they are overwhelmingly young, white, and
European. Thus, our survey is dominated by racial and ethnic majorities in the countries that we surveyed from,
and privacy concerns of those who we were unable to reach—older adults, racial and ethnic minorities—are
not well represented in our dataset.
5.1.1 Participants are concerned about COVID-19 and believe in social distancing and mask wearing. Figure 2
summarizes COVID-19-related demographic information about participants, revealing no statistically significant
longitudinal trend other than a slight increase in those who were tested for COVID-19 (Q133, p<.01). However,
our data reveal that our participants are generally concerned about COVID-19 (𝜇 = 70%) and believe in social
distancing (𝜇 = 94%) and mask wearing (𝜇 = 89%) as preventative measures for COVID-19. A sizeable minority
are in a high risk category or living with someone who is (𝜇 = 32%).
A report on public attitudes in the US towards mask wearing and other COVID-19 prevention measures found
that mask wearing increased substantially between June and August in many regions of the US [57]. We do not see
such an increase in support for mask wearing in our data but do find support for such measures similar to higher
numbers from [57]; the lack of trend in our data may be explained by our smaller and Euro-centric population. A
May 2020 CDC report found that those surveyed in Los Angeles and New York City overwhelmingly supported
mask wearing and social distancing measures [18], with numbers similar to our results. However, as revealed
in [57], many US regions showed limited support for mask wearing and other measures: these views are not
represented in our data, so our findings must be interpreted carefully to consider those who we did not reach.

5.2

Expectations about app functionality, data sharing, and technical implementation suggest
privacy and accuracy concerns will influence users’ willingness to download contact tracing apps

We now ask what proportion of our population might be willing to download a contact tracing application, and
what concerns or values they might have about what the app does. Estimating the number of people willing to
download under some circumstances is critical to finding the best-case success of voluntarily downloaded contact
tracing applications. Understanding potential users’ concerns and values will help app makers and public health
10

(a) This graph addresses the question: what kind of app are
those who do not already have a contact tracing app willing to
download? One might expect this sector of the population—a
shrinking portion—to become proportionally more privacyconscious over time since those who are less privacy-conscious
may download an app voluntarily.

(b) This graph addresses the question: What percent of the
population as a whole might have a contact tracing app in the
future? (i.e., each colored point is the sum of those who already
have a contact tracing app and those who might be willing to
download one)

Fig. 3. The percent of respondents who indicated that they would be somewhat or extremely likely to download an app that
tracked their location or proximity to others “for the sake of tracking or mitigating COVID-19. The left plot (a) shows only
the participants who do not have a contact tracing application. The right plot (b) shows all participants: each colored point is the
sum of those who already have a contact tracing app and those who said would be somewhat or extremely likely to download one.

experts in ongoing efforts to tailor policy, technology, and public awareness campaigns towards reaching global
critical mass usage of automated contact tracing. We find that:
• The upper bound of people willing to download a contact tracing app remains roughly constant over time, but
potential users may be becoming more willing to accept an app that does not have perfect privacy
(i.e., an app that shares data under some circumstances) (Sections 5.2.1 and 5.2.3).
• When comparing contact tracing apps that use location tracking (GPS) and proximity tracking (Bluetooth),
participants considered both expected technical accuracy and privacy concerns (Section 5.2.4).
• Participants value a contact tracing app that notifies them (or others) if they have been exposed to
COVID-19, but not an app that would enforce isolation or quarantine (e.g., [53]), citing concerns about
algorithmic inaccuracy and equity. In qualitative results, participants organically suggested informational
features, such as regional guidelines or medical advice, perhaps revealing a lack of reliable information about
COVID-19 or an unmet desire for a unified or official source (Sections 5.2.5).
5.2.1 Not everyone intends to download a contact tracing app; privacy concerns reduce likelihood to download,
but some concerns may be decreasing over time. Figure 3a shows that even if a contract tracing app were to
“protect your data perfectly,” a significant minority of those who have not yet downloaded an app do not intend
to voluntarily do so. Approximately 63% said they would be somewhat or extremely likely to download a contact
11

tracing app with perfect privacy, while many fewer would download an app that shared their location with their
government (𝜇 = 27%). Participants showed no significant preference between an app for which the app makers
have access to location (Q55), an app for which the developers share data for those who test positive with the
government (Q63), or proximity tracing (Q124), all around 50% of those who have not yet downloaded an app.
Over time, we observe a convergence of those who would download an app with perfect privacy (denoted by
the blue ‘x’s in Figure 3) and those who would download an app in any of the other circumstances we presented,
other than all data being shared with their government (i.e., the other data points except for the red triangles).
This convergence may indicate that as contact tracing apps are released, those who have not yet downloaded
them are increasingly accepting of ceding some privacy, though they remain concerned about sharing data with
their government. This introduces an opportunity for app developers and governments to increase participation
in automated contact tracing, while it also imposes a responsibility on policy makers, app developers, and
governments to do so responsibly and with respect for users’ data.
5.2.2 Concerns about sharing data with the government limits willingness to download; users may be more likely
to cede some privacy if they test positive for COVID-19. Participants were more comfortable with an app that
would share location data only from users that tested positive (𝜇 = 52%) than one that would share location data
from all users (𝜇 = 27%). This difference in comfort reveals that participants have strong concerns about sharing
location data with their government and that those concerns may limit their willingness to download a contact
tracing app. This difference in opinion also raises questions about participants’ mental models of the mechanics
of contact tracing—who do they believe is conducting contact tracing?—as well as their views of government
data usage (explored further in Section 5.3).
More broadly, these results suggest that those who test positive for COVID-19 may be more likely to cede
some privacy. W1P194 wrote: “If I were to be tested positive for the virus, I would definitely sacrifice some of my
privacy to the government if it means protecting others. However I’m conflicted on the thought of sharing this data
with the government if I am healthy.” W6P58 said: “I don’t want the government to track my location. However, if i
tested positive for Covid-19 I understand why it would be necessary so I would reluctantly accept it in that case.”
5.2.3 Not everyone will voluntarily download a contact tracing app. In Figure 3b, we add to Figure 3a—the
participants who have already downloaded a contact tracing app—in order to ask a subtly different question:
what percentage of smartphone users might have a contact tracing app in the future? We observe, first, that
the percent of our participants who have downloaded a contact tracing application is steadily, and significantly,
increasing over time (p < .01), from less than 5% in week 1 to almost 25% in week 321 ). By adding the data from
Figure 3a on top of the participants who already have a contact tracing app, we find that approximately 68% of
our participants have either already downloaded a contact tracing application or would be willing to download
one under certain circumstances (including “an app that protects your data perfectly”).
Estimates vary on how much of a population needs to participate in contact tracing in order for it to halt the
pandemic, but recent work suggests a rate of around 60% [23, 27] to 70% [40], though [27] shows that automated
contact tracing at any rate will slow the pandemic.
Our data show that even in the best possible situation, with “an app that protects your data perfectly” (Q50),
many participants have reservations about using an app to study or mitigate COVID-19. Results from other
surveys about the same topic have shown a willingness to download ranging from 27 to 84%, depending on the
population and exact situations presented. The wide range of willingnesses in related work suggests that further
work is necessary to examine the differences between the populations studied and the exact situations presented.
1 Some

participants may have misunderstood the question asking whether they had a contact tracing application and answered ‘Yes’ when
they did not have an app. In a cursory estimate, we find that about 10-15% of participants wrote mainstream apps like “Google Maps” instead
of a contact tracing app; however, here, we count all ‘yes’ answers because it is possible that the participants who answered incorrectly
believe that they have a contact tracing app, given that the incorrect apps are still likely to ask for location or Bluetooth permissions.
12

5.2.4 Location tracking presents privacy and security concerns that proximity does not, reducing appeal to users;
participants also reasoned about equity and technical accuracy. Participants did not exhibit a strong preference
for proximity tracking over two other forms of location tracking in our quantitative data (Figure 3), potentially
due to bias inherent with question ordering since location tracking situations were presented first. However,
qualitative data reveals underlying concerns about location tracking compared to proximity tracking, as well as
concerns about privacy and efficacy of proximity tracking itself. We also find that inaccurate mental models of
technology and contact tracing drive individuals’ concerns, values, and willingness to download.
Participants have technical security concerns with proximity tracking. Proximity tracing evoked security concerns, with participants specifically concerned about anonymity and the security risks of their phone
communicating directly with others’: “I don’t want the phones to be sharing information between them because it
could be easy for a hacker to violate multiple phones privacy” (W6P74). W16P59 imagined a scenario in which
tracing close contacts instead of location might put political dissidents at risk: “Again, there are MANY people for
whom this would simply not be safe if our current government had that information. Identify, say, one person at a
protest. Get the info of EVERY phone that came within 6 feet of them on that day, or in that timeframe, and suddenly
a LOT of people are at risk that had not been identified, and most often had done nothing wrong.” Though these
scenarios raise questions about the accuracy of participants’ mental models of proximity tracing, they reveal that
participants’ concerns about the technical safety of a contact tracing method will drive their willingness to enroll
in automated contact tracing initiatives. Additionally, recent work has shown that many contact tracing apps
have suboptimal privacy and security properties [82, 89, 96], so even though participant’ mental models were
inaccurate, their fears were not unfounded.
Qualitative data shows fewer privacy concerns about proximity tracking than about location tracking. Despite their concerns about privacy, 98 participants wrote a response that indicated they preferred proximity
tracking, while only 13 preferred location. 18 indicated that it depended on who ran the service. Those who
preferred proximity tracking considered it less invasive than location tracking. W9P100 brought up concerns
about contact tracing data being shared with both companies and their government, and reasoned that proximity
data was more private: “Proximity will probably be easier to swallow than location. There’s something fundamentally
unsettling about companies / my government having a record of everywhere I’ve gone, for how long I stayed there,
etc. Knowing who I’ve passed on the street or purchased a burrito from, but not precisely where I passed them or
exactly when I bought the burrito would be much less uncomfortable.”
Participants reasoned about accuracy and effectiveness of both location tracking and proximity
tracking. This reasoning revealed inaccurate mental models, e.g., “I think that proximity tracking is more
effective...as it would... be able to alert others and possibly stop them further spreading it, whereas location tracking
would only really give an insight into where the virus is spreading” (W6P23). Taking the opposite stance, W9P46
wrote: “This method [proximity] appears to be better in a user data protection sense. But it does not provide the same
benefits to the government that location data would. Location data enables lockdown and focus on specific areas with
recent outbreaks.” Other participants were concerned about proximity tracing not capturing surface transmission:
“There is also some evidence about catching from surfaces that others have touched, so location tracking may also
be relevant” (W14P67). Regardless of the accuracy of participants’ mental models—both about the mechanics of
automated contact tracing and about virus transmission—their concerns about efficacy reveal that they value a
technology that they believe can accurately conduct automated contact tracing, and that their views of what
technology is most likely to produce accurate contact tracing results will play into their decision to download.
5.2.5 Participants desire bare-bones contact tracing and informational features, not an app that might enforce
quarantine or reveal personal information. The features or functionality of an app may also influence how many
people are willing to download it. Participants responded positively to four of the ten potential app features2 ,
2 All

features were drawn from existing or proposed designs as of April 1, 2020.
13

Fig. 4. Features desired by participants in a COVID-19 tracking app (Q72).

shown in Figure 4: they desire contact tracing notifications (a, b) (𝜇 = 88%, 84%) and general reports on trends (h,
j) (𝜇 = 74%, 67%). All other potential features received less than 50% support.
In qualitative responses (Q74), 106 participants indicated support for informational features, with 44 desiring
general information such as news and safety guidelines, and 62 expressing interest in location-specific resources
such as information about nearby hospitals. W6P97 suggested that “it would be useful to have a hotline or chat
where you could be evaluated and diagnosed,” and W1P54 thought it would be useful for a contact tracing app to
“provide national announcements and guidelines so that people get them in a clear, uniform fashion.” 31 participants
also expanded upon (j), expressing support for an app that shows COVID-19 hotspots, and 39 supported the
options to notify (or be notified) if in contact with a positive case (a, b). Participants’ desire for an informative
app raises the question of whether access to reliable information about COVID-19 is an issue.
Concerns about security, privacy, equity, and access also arose. 41 participants mentioned anonymity, specifically bringing up stalking, harassment, and other forms of app abuse. Participants also reiterated their desire
for health information to be shared with scientists, health professionals, and family, but not with the public.
Though 16 participants wanted enforcement of rules to keep themselves or others safe, others were strongly
opposed to this idea, citing concerns about fairness: “I would prefer it to only inform and not gather any data or
contact any law enforcers because everyone has their own circumstances and there might be people who cannot be on
quarantine because of being not wealthy enough” (W6P53). W14P75 noted that developers must be mindful of
resource consumption and backwards compatibility lest they risk excluding people since “not all of us have the
privilege of having the latest models.”

5.3

App developer identity matters: (Mis)trust in government and some companies

We next more deeply investigate the privacy concerns revealed in Section 5.2 by exploring participants’ trust in
both government agencies and well-known tech companies. We find that:
• Participants trust companies they perceive to be competent and resource-rich (Section 5.3.1). In both
qualitative and quantitative responses, participants indicated trust for Google over other companies.
• When weighing pros and cons of generic entities (e.g., government, university researchers) that might create a
contact tracing app, participants go through a complex decision process, with no entity preferred by all and
both positives and negatives about each of the entities we presented (Section 5.3.2).
14

Fig. 5. Participant comfort with a known company creating a new app using their location to study or mitigate COVID-19
(Q56). Due to longitudinal stability of the data, we combine all data here in order to show nuances in opinion. Columns sum
to one and represent only participants who responded to the question and did not choose the option “I do not know enough
about this company to make a decision.”

• Participants conveyed substantial mistrust in their government (as a generic entity) conducting contact
tracing, but displayed more trust in government health agencies and, in some circumstances, judicial oversight
of government (Section 5.3.3).
5.3.1 Participants prefer large, known, already-trusted tech companies over other tech companies. Our survey
asked both about a known company adding contract tracing to an existing app vs creating a new app to trace
contacts. Though these situations require subtly different threat modeling, the results were similar; here, we
present numbers from the question about a new app since that more closely reflects today’s reality.
Participants indicated trust in large tech companies that have a good reputation concerning security and privacy
and that they perceive to be capable of conducting contact tracing. More participants indicated comfort with
Google or Google products than with any other company (𝜇 = 62% comfortable), as shown in Figure 5. Participants
also indicated some comfort with Microsoft and Apple (𝜇 = 41 % and 46% comfortable, respectively), as shown in
Figure 5. Less than 30% of participants indicated comfort with all other companies. Participants displayed the
least comfort with ByteDance (TikTok) (𝜇 = 79% uncomfortable) and Facebook (𝜇 = 71% uncomfortable).
Qualitative analysis results reveals themes around user values and concerns regarding what apps they would
trust most (Q23) and least (Q24) to use their location data for COVID-19 tracking. In line with the quantitative
results reported above, 1205 users picked Google Maps or another Google app as their most trusted app and 431
picked Facebook as their least trusted app in the context of using location data for COVID-19 tracking. Reasons
for picking their most trusted app, or for not picking their least trusted app, include the following:
Pre-existing technical capabilities, user base, and resources. Participants value a company that already
has a large user base, sufficient monetary resources to add contact tracing to its capabilities, and the technical
resources to implement accurate contact tracing (from participants’ perspectives). W2P60 wrote: “I would trust
Google maps because it shows the most accurate current location real-time. I believe Google maps has the resources
15

and manpower to allocate where I’ve been and when, I trust a more accurate and informational app. I imagine an
app such as Instagram would be inaccurate because anyone can pick a location when they post a picture.”
Some participants preferred an app in which location tracking is already central to its purposes (e.g., Google
Maps, fitness apps, Uber, Snapchat, Pokemon Go), which they believed was a sign of technical capability to
conduct contact tracing via location tracking. W8P77 explained, “I would trust Google Maps or Apple Maps the
most. Mainly because the app is made to track your location. Other apps for things like social media don’t necessarily
consider location as a huge factor of the app so I would feel more comfortable using an app that already tracks your
location to determining spread of COVID-19.” Others trusted a mapping app additionally because it was not social
media and therefore maintained a degree of anonymity: “Google Maps because it does get the location access, but
not more of my personal data like instagram or facebook etc, where all my contacts and photos are” (W2P151).
Already use and trust the app. Participants value an app that they already know and trust either because
they feel like they understand the app’s data sharing and privacy procedures or because they have already ceded
privacy to that app: “Waze, it uses my data anyway so why not” (W1P125), and W3P3: “I am ... locked in Apple’s
ecosystem, so they likely have all the data about me anyways.” W4P17 clarified that it was less about trust and
more about risk management: “not necesarily (sic) trust, but resignation- I know Google and Waze already know my
whereabouts and am resigned to them having my data.”
Positive history and reputation with respect to security and privacy. Participants preferred a company
known for protecting user data and making secure and private apps. W14P85 wrote: “I would probably trust google
maps the most since most of the other apps are known to be susceptible to data breaches/leaks in the past.” W16P93
commented: “I trust banking applications the most, because storing money is a serious matter,” while W14P43 wrote
that they trusted WhatsApp the most “as I know it’s encrypted and is very hard for mallicious (sic) hackers to break
into to find my data.” On the other hand, W1P75 wrote that they would not trust Facebook because “Facebook is
notorious for selling user data to third parties, and I would be very uncomfortable to know that they are tracking
my location with the purpose of researching COVID-19.” 14 participants wrote that they would not trust an app
developed in China, e.g., TikTok: “TikTok because I heard it sends user data to China” (W2P140).
Participants also considered privacy policies: W5P91 preferred Apple because “Apple have a reliable privacy
policy and therefore I would trust this the most as I don’t believe any of my data would become public without my
permission.”
Company-agnostic concerns about privacy and personal harm. Participants also mentioned concerns
that extend to any contact tracing program and reflect broader themes throughout this survey: (a) stalking or
personal harm due to poorly anonymized data, (b) data leakage or privacy breaches, (c) data being sold by the
company, and (d) a “slippery slope,” in which this sort of tracking eventually becomes the norm.
5.3.2 Mixed trust levels for non-corporate generic entities. Stepping back, we asked for participants’ comfort with
other types of entities developing a contact tracing app. Participants indicated general mistrust for a potential
new COVID-19-tracking app created by an industry startup (𝜇 = 21% comfortable) or an activist group (𝜇 =
24% comfortable), as shown in Figure 6, but were largely split on generic trust for a government- or United
Nations-developed app. Responses indicate that most would place trust in a university-developed app (72%
comfortable), but we note that at the beginning of the survey, participants were shown our university’s logo
and told that this survey was an academic endeavour, which may have caused response or selection bias [20]. In
contrast, Hargattai and Redmiles found that universities would be one of the least trusted entities, at less than
10%, while a survey by the Washington Post and the University of Maryland found they were relatively trusted,
at 57%. This discrepancy highlights the need for multiple surveys and qualitative data to better understand the
nuances of public opinion.
Qualitative data revealed nuanced decisions around trust of a company or entity, echoing themes of general
reputation and ability to both technically conduct contact tracing and protect data, while adding in participants’
16

Fig. 6. Participants’ trust in generic entities (Q126). The higher reported trust in universities could be due to response or
selection bias, as participants were shown the logo of our university before beginning the survey.

beliefs about the intentions of a given entity. As such, 86 wrote that they would trust an app developed by
scientists, universities, or researchers over any other entity.
Participants argued both for and against the entities in Figure 6, revealing complex and individual decisions.
Generally, participants indicated that trust depended on an entity’s (a) intent to share or sell data, (b) anonymity
or privacy guarantees, (c) reputation with respect to privacy and security, and (d) commitment to transparency
and consent. Some expressed a desire for a regulatory body or for open source apps.
Some would support a tech startup because there is “less notoriety attached to the brand” (W9P55) and because
they do not already have other data about the users; others would trust a big company because of its resources,
credibility, and stability. Some participants considered activists unstable, unreliable, not credible, and incapable
of actually securing data properly, while others valued activists groups’ purer intentions, i.e., they believed that
activists groups, unlike tech companies, would not sell the data on principle.
Participants who wrote about the UN mentioned its power and resources, but its international status was a
plus for some (due to mistrust of their own government and not believing the UN would sell their data) and a
minus for others (who disagreed with past UN work or believed the UN would be unable to produce a solution
that worked for every country). W6P74 wrote in favor of the UN: “If an International Organization such as the
United Nations built the app and manages it, I will be more comfortable using the app because is a superior force
than a government whom can use my data for electoral purposes or a company whom can use my data for profit.”
Participants also raised several positives that they would expect from a government-developed app compared
to other entities: governments cannot profit off the data, can keep companies in check through policy, and have
a degree of legitimacy. W8P50 wrote in support of technical and regulatory transparency: “I would feel most
comfortable if the app was open sourced for the public to be able to scrutinize, by a government agency to remove
any profit motivation to misuse the data, and would feel most comfortable if the data was stored in aggregate rather
than individual tracking (no data as to where I personally am at a certain time, but rather on a population level what
% are at home, near other app users, etc).”
5.3.3 Trust in government health agencies; mistrust for “the government” as a whole, with strong concerns about
proper data use and sharing. We find that participants are more comfortable sharing location or proximity data
with governmental health agencies (as opposed to other sectors of government), and that more participants are
comfortable with their location or proximity data being shared with their government only if they test positive
17

Fig. 7. Participants’ comfort with specific government agencies receiving their location or proximity data for the purposes of
contact tracing (Q69).

for COVID-19, echoing trends from Section 5.2 and reemphasizing the need to protect the privacy of those who
test positive.
We find no strong regional trends concerning trust in government, as noted in Section 5.5, but other surveys
have addressed this question more thoroughly and found some trends differing per country, e.g., [3, 30, 56]
Participants indicated significantly higher comfort with their data being shared with health agencies for contact
tracing than with other government agencies (in line with previous work [75]), as shown in Figure 7. More
participants were comfortable with both federal and local health departments (𝜇 = 57% federal; 𝜇 = 63% local).
Many fewer participants were comfortable with other agencies, i.e., local law enforcement (𝜇 = 20%), immigration
authorities (𝜇 = 14%), and a tax agency (𝜇 = 7.3%).
Concerns about data overuse and data sharing. Participants indicated substantial concerns about their
government’s use of data and about non-consensual data sharing with or within their government. 65 participants
believed that the benefits of sharing location or proximity data with their government, especially with local or
national health departments, would outweigh any negatives. Of those, 39 imagined restrictions on governmental
data use and retention, such as that their government should delete the data after the pandemic. 36 wrote that
sharing should be voluntary, and 27 said the US government should not share the data with Immigration and
Customs Enforcement (ICE). However, quantitative data indicates a lack of trust that their government would use
its citizens’ location data conservatively: 72% responded that it was unlikely that their government would delete
the data (Q66), and 69% said it was unlikely that their government would use it only for COVID-19 tracking (Q67).
Participants also indicated concern that such data sharing or collection would be harmful to their safety or the
safety of those in their community (Q68), with 65% responding that they were extremely or somewhat concerned.
W6P58 wrote: “There is no chance they’re going to only use it for Covid, especially in the states, and it could be very
dangerous for many people, especially marginalized groups.”
Mixed trust for judicial oversight of data sharing and use. We observe a clear preference for judicial
supervision if data is shared from users regardless of health status, and no preference if data is shared only
from COVID-19 positive users, as shown in Figure 8. We also observe that participants’ perceptions of judicial
oversight is grounded in their mental model of their judicial system and government; thus, overestimations of
the level of corruption or self interest in the judiciary could skew trust and affect decision making.
18

Fig. 8. Participants’ self-reported likelihood to download an app that shares their location data with their government under
various conditions. This plot shows only those who have not already downloaded a contact tracing app.

Despite this preference for judicial supervision, and the increase in willingness to share if positive, 220
participants were overwhelmingly negative about judicial supervision in qualitative data, citing general concerns
about not trusting their government, concerns about data sharing or usage for another purpose (142), as well as
concerns about judicial impartiality (17) and tech literacy of judges (7). W30P50 (UK) wrote: “No, judges can often
be influenced by and working in a corrupt way with the government,” and W28P76 (Poland) brought up bias and
harm that could be introduced or exacerbated: “I’m a member of a minority that our government doesn’t like at this
moment. I am extremely wary.” Other participants felt negatively because they did not believe the judges would
make the right decisions: “The judges here in Canada suck, and can’t be trusted to deal out justice properly. We have
a revolving door justice system for criminals - what makes you think they’d do any better when things aren’t as clear
cut as criminal cases?” (W22P88).
Participants commented on judges’ digital literacy, citing that “government officials, globally, seem to have
a high rate of technology illiteracy” (W14P83, Ireland). Instead, one participant suggested that there be “data
watchdogs and possibly even a human rights person” (W18P98, Slovenia).
Some participants who were concerned about judicial impartiality actually desired oversight, but thought it
would not be possible in their country due to corrupt or politically motivated judges: “Would be more influenced
if observed by an independent party not affiliated with the government or partners”(W24P89, UK). W22P55 (US)
wrote: “Judicial oversight is a good starting point. But with the current administration, I feel like trust in the judicial
system has been slowly getting eroded.” Alluding to different levels of trust, understanding, and different political
systems, W26P89 (Chile) wrote that“Judges in my country are not really that much better than politicians....”
Despite many concerns about corruption, politicization, and bias, some participants did present positive values,
including already trusting the judicial system and/or their government (115) or judicial oversight being better
than nothing (24). W28P11 (UK) felt that judicial oversight would prevent corruption, instead of enabling it;
they wrote that judicial oversight “should prevent abuse of power.” W26P71 (Portugal) wrote: “I think judicial
oversight of apps should be more common.” Additionally, themes of consent arose (27) along with the idea that
such oversight is already occurring (21). Echoing themes from Section 5.2, 32 participants reiterated that their
government should have access to their location data only if they actually tested positive for COVID-19.
This combination of qualitative and quantitative data tells a complex story about participants’ trust in their
governments, including trust in the legal system, as well as their understanding of how both judicial oversight
19

and contact tracing operate. It also reflects the seemingly directly competing values of privacy and altruism that
push people towards not sharing data and pull them towards sharing it for the common good. Again, participants’
mental models of the mechanism in question here, the judicial system, may be inaccurate or incomplete, but still
drive their willingness to participate in automated contact tracing. Additionally, political and judicial systems
differ across the globe, and judicial oversight may be appropriate in some countries and not others.

5.4

Mixed attitudes towards alternate data sources

We now review participants’ opinions about data sources other than smartphone apps: cell tower location data,
credit card history data, public sensors (including surveillance cameras), and electronic wearables. We find that:
• There is more support for contact tracing using cell tower location data than for the other non-app
data sources we asked about. Additionally, about the same percentage of participants supported the most
popular cell tower data question (in which location data of COVID-19-positive users would be shared with the
government) as participants who said they were comfortable with proximity tracing, app data from positive
COVID-19 users being shared with their government, or app data being used by the app developer but not
shared further (all around 50%). However, these comparisons must be interpreted with caution due to (1)
potential biases arising from question ordering, and (2) the fact that the app questions ask about “likelihood”
whereas the questions reported on here ask about “comfort.”
• We also find that many of the concerns and values about smartphone contact tracing are magnified with
non-smartphone automated contact tracing. Specifically, we observe that consent for data collection, use,
and sharing is extremely important to participants, and particularly relevant to these non-smartphone
data sources, which can largely occur without the user’s informed consent. We call on the stakeholders in
power to critically examine the need for consent beyond a terms of service agreement.
5.4.1 Support for cell tower data over other data sources. Regarding comfort with cell tower data being used for
contact tracing, participants were most comfortable with their government being given the data if they tested
positive, and many fewer were comfortable with the data being released publicly, as shown in Figure 9a. This
preference resembles the increased comfort with data sharing if positive (Figures 8 and 3, Sections 5.2 and 5.3).
We observe statistically significant but slight downward slopes for three of the questions, and we note that the
order of participants’ comfort is largely consistent across weeks: the most participants were comfortable with
their cell phone manufacturer or carrier sharing data with their government if they are positive (𝜇 = 51%), and the
fewest were comfortable with their location history being shared publicly if they tested positive (𝜇 = 21%). This
sentiment of being uncomfortable with public disclosure more generally underscores the importance of contact
tracing data being properly protected when and if collected to avoid data exposure were a breach to occur.
As shown in Figure 9, participants were much less comfortable with their credit card history being used
for contact tracing: 𝜇 = 23% comfortable with contact tracing done by the credit card company, and 𝜇 = 19%
comfortable with that data going to their government. Participants were generally uncomfortable with their
government using footage from surveillance cameras or other public area sensors for contact tracing (𝜇 = 19%
comfortable with surveillance cameras and 𝜇 = 33% comfortable with public area sensors) as well as with electronic
bracelets (𝜇 = 28%).
5.4.2 Qualitative data reveals privacy concerns and the need for informed consent. Through the qualitative data,
we find similar thematic concerns as from Section 5.3 about privacy, data sharing, surveillance, equity, accuracy.
Participants also reiterate the need for meaningful consent and transparency. We emphasize, again, that there
is no perfect data source, and that users will likely have privacy concerns about any potential source. As such,
the technology and policy communities must assume responsibility for protecting and informing users about
personal data acquisition and use.
20

(a) Attitudes towards cell tower location data being used for
COVID-19 tracking: participants who said they were somewhat
or extremely comfortable with their cell phone manufacturer or
carrier using their location data for the purposes of COVID-19
tracking.

(b) Attitudes towards other data sources: participants who said
they were somewhat or extremely comfortable with electronic
wearables, public sensors, surveillance cameras, or credit card
data being used for contact tracing.

Fig. 9. Participants’ attitudes about cell tower data and other data sources.

Concerns about privacy, anonymity, and data sharing regarding alternate data sources. Privacy and
anonymity were of paramount concern, especially with regard to public sensors and cell tower data, with many
mentioning a “surveillance state.” 88 participants wrote that the use of cell tower data for contact tracing could be
a “slippery slope” towards more permanent privacy invasion or other misuse of data. 31 specifically referenced
George Orwell’s 1984 in reference to contact tracing data from surveillance cameras. W3P122 wrote: “I’m very
against expanding the surveillance state, even for a good reason, because it’s never going to get rolled back.” 67
participants were also uncomfortable with the idea of wearable electronics, with 22 specifically associating it
with feeling like a “criminal,” “prisoner,” or “animal.”
132 participants had concerns about the privacy of cell tower data, focused on the data being publicized
or shared with their government (see Figure 9a); 68 of those specifically mentioned anonymity as a value. In
responses about using credit card data, 53 specifically considered the sensitive nature of financial data. Some
participants considered credit card data less private because it “gives only a handful of specific locations, and not a
complete timeline of every location like a phone would” (W16P59), while others mentioned a mistrust of financial
institutions (“Credit card companies are not customer friendly and are always behind monetary benefits therefore
I would not like them to have my data and trust them” W3P20). These responses also suggest that participants’
mental models of the privacy of their credit card history is that location tracking would involve revealing their
purchase history.
Concerns about equity, discrimination, and personal harm regarding alternate data sources. Participants raised concerns about the potential for discrimination, harm, and equity, echoing concerns from privacy
experts [87] and emphasizing the need for technologists and policy makers to take extraordinary and thorough
21

measures to protect potentially vulnerable populations. 17 participants feared harassment, prosecution, or discrimination with the use of cell tower data: “if the location of people that has (sic) tested positive for COVID-19
is publicly shared, they might get targeted and hurt (or worse). This last idea comes from the fact that this was a
situation given in my country, where it was publicly shared that a group of immigrants was tested positive, and this
lead to them being persecuted” (W16P98, Chile). Another participant mentioned the concern “that people would
would draw conclusions from (for example) two people being at the same hotel at the same time” (W20P89). This
situation is reminiscent of South Korea’s initial handling of location tracking: location data and biographical
details were posted publicly and were not sufficiently anonymized; groups discovered the identities of those who
had tested positive and rumors started about extramarital affairs and plastic surgery trips [54]. South Korea has
since started anonymizing the publicly released data more thoroughly [86].
Speaking to a theme of equity, some participants wrote that contact tracing using credit card data would be
ineffective because “credit cards are only for the elite” (W3P33, South Africa). W3P63 extrapolated further, raising
concerns about the potential societal implications of health information being linked to financial status: “I fear
this will lead to access to credit and my credit score being linked to my health or my compliance with social distancing.
I am social distancing, but I worry about the future implications for this.”
Participants also described the potential for harm caused through racial bias, specifically in reference to public
sensors and surveillance cameras, recalling numerous issues with existing facial recognition systems. Others
were concerned about the potential for future misuse: “Police have already been caught illegally using face ID
software, I certainly wouldn’t trust them [using surveillance camera data for contact tracing]” (W7P30).
Concerns about accuracy regarding alternate data sources. Echoing themes from Sections 5.2 and 5.3,
participants reasoned about the accuracy of alternate data sources, concerned that cell tower data, credit card
data, public sensors, and electronic wearables could not provide sufficient data for accurate contact tracing. 94
participants raised concerns about the lack of accuracy of credit card data: W9P60 noted that credit card data
would an inappropriate source of contact tracing data because it is “not good enough to track movement. Park/beach
and many more places where I would not use card but be around people.” Participants also reflected on the potential
for facial identification from surveillance cameras to fail (e.g., if wearing masks or sunglasses) or to be impractical
due to cost or lack of population density. Reflecting on practicality, W16P71 wrote: “A tracking bracelet may get
lost or people may forget to wear it when they leave the house. It wouldn’t provide the most accurate data.”
Participants value consent and transparency regarding alternate data sources. Throughout all questions, participants raised concerns about consent and transparency, which are particularly important with data
that could be collected without their knowledge or with minimal consent (e.g., through a terms of service agreement), for example, via public sensors or data that already exists, like credit card data or cell phone tower data.
W1P190 wrote that an end-date for cell tower data collection and use would make them feel more comfortable:
“If I were informed in advance of the initiative and there was a sunset date for the initiative, I’d be somewhat likely to
allow it for the purpose of scientific research. Absent my explicit consent and for only a short period of time, however,
I’d be extremely uncomfortable with it.” Even W12P86, who was largely comfortable with the use of credit card
data for contact tracing, gave the caveat that “explicit consent” was necessary: “I feel more comfortable with my
location being acquired (with my knowledge and consent) via this method as it makes me more relieved that I am not
actively being tracked (or my location is not being tracked and traced to beach movement). The usage of my credit
card history allows me windows of privacy which I would not want anyone interfering with.” Thus, policy makers
and technologists must both work to protect and inform users.
Some support for non-smartphone data sources for contact tracing. Though a majority of participants
raised concerns, some supported the alternative data sources we asked about. Of those who supported (or did not
oppose) the idea of cell tower data being used for contact tracing, 123 mentioned altruism and the greater good
of contact tracing, suggesting that many users, under the right circumstances, may decide that the greater good
of their communities outweighs some personal privacy concerns. 24 said they would accept such data sharing
22

(a) Likelihood of downloading a contact tracing app versus
location (for the countries from which we had at least 100
participants total). (See Section 5.2.)

(b) Comfort with generic entities creating a contact tracing app
(for the countries for which we had at least 100 participants).
(See Section 5.3.2.)

Fig. 10. These figures show two sets of questions broken down by regional responses.

if it were for research, while 20 would accept only if they tested positive for COVID-19; these opinions raise
questions about these participants’ mental models of contact tracing or whether they would consider such data
sharing as a way to reduce their need to quarantine if positive.

5.5

Demographic trends

Given the lack of strong longitudinal trends in many of the questions, we examined demographic trends by
combining data from all weeks. We find no trends for age, gender, or time spent outside home. We also observe
no correlation with infection rate (see Figure 1). The following section presents trends that are largely present
throughout all questions; we show the questions related to willingness to use a COVID-19 contact tracing app.
Few regional trends appear in our dataset, but related work investigates them more thoroughly.
When examining regional trends, we include only regions (e.g., the EU) or countries from which we had more
than 100 participants: EU, UK, USA, Mexico, and Canada. We do not find regional trends between the EU, UK, USA
and Canada. However, we find that participants from Mexico are less willing to share data with their government,
but perhaps more willing to give up privacy if their government is not involved, as shown in Figure 10 (as
compared to participants from the EU, UK, US, and Canada). Others have studied regional differences in attitudes
towards contact tracing applications [1, 3, 56], and there is a growing body work about cultural or regional
differences in privacy attitudes and definitions more generally (e.g., [37, 80]).
Concern (or lack of concern) about COVID-19 correlated to willingness to download a contact tracing app or give up privacy. Perhaps unsurprisingly, as shown in Figure 11a, we find that extreme concern
about COVID-19 is correlated with greater willingness to download a contact tracing app or surrender some
personal privacy for the sake of contact tracing. However, we also find that extreme unconcern is correlated with
23

(a)

(b)

Fig. 11. Willingness to download as compared to (a) concern about COVID-19 and (b) phone manufacturer.

the same willingness to download a contact tracing app or give up some privacy. One possible explanation is that
those who are unconcerned are more accepting of risk in general and thus may be more willing to take actions
that others view as potential violations of privacy.
Phone manufacturer correlated to willingness to download a contact tracing app or give up privacy.
As seen in Figure 11b, we find that participants’ choice of phone manufacturer correlates with their willingness to
cede some privacy, with Apple users being the most willing, followed by users of Huawei, Samsung, and Xiaomi
phones. This willingness has multiple possible explanations, including trust in the phone manufacturer itself, and
may run along other demographic lines that we are not aware of.

6

DISCUSSION

Drawing from our findings, we surface lessons for both researchers and stakeholders (including app makers,
public health experts, policy makers, and others).
User education is needed to correct inaccurate mental models and therefore enable adoption. Users
are concerned with the accuracy of the technology involved in contact tracing as well as companies’ abilities
to actually conduct contact tracing, but may be ill-equipped to accurately reason about these factors due to an
understandable lack of technical training. Adding to recommendations by groups with similar findings [100, 101],
we recommend that technology companies and governments conduct user education campaigns to teach users—at
an appropriate technical level—to reason about the extent to which the contact tracing app available to them is
appropriate for their personal situation.
Users value transparency and consent, and may be less concerned about privacy if they feel in
control. Our data revealed substantial fears about data overuse and oversharing, echoing privacy concerns
found by numerous others (see Section 3). Participants feared non-consensual data sharing with both their own
government and foreign governments as well as data being used for purposes other than contact tracing (e.g.,
advertising, national security, etc). We recommend that policy makers continue to both create restrictive policies
to make users comfortable and educate users about those policies.
24

An individual’s willingness to download a contact tracing app depends on security and privacy and
other factors. Beyond the privacy and security concerns and opinions that our work surfaces, there are many
other broader issues that must be addressed with the release of a contact tracing application, some of which
arose in our qualitative data: participants brought up concerns of accuracy, equity, and access to smartphones, as
well as concerns about the harms of data overusage or sharing disproportionately affecting certain parts of the
population. Building on those themes, we encourage stakeholders to consider accessibility and usability by all,
including those who do not speak the majority language, those who cannot read or write, those who have one
or more disabilities (e.g. vision impairment). Additionally, not all people have smartphones, and some high risk
groups, such as seniors, may be less likely to regularly use a smartphone. A smartphone app excludes those sets
of users. If a certain demographic group is left without access, or without usable access, they will benefit less
from contact tracing, potentially resulting in different rates of infection. Thus, we urge stakeholders to explore
acceptance for automated contact tracing in a broader context than strictly security and privacy and refer readers
to [2, 34, 58, 71, 73, 87] for a fuller discussion of equity and efficacy concerns.
There are substantial challenges with future-proofing longitudinal work during a rapidly evolving
global event due to changing terminology and technology. Terminology and technology have evolved
rapidly during the COVID-19 pandemic, and we thus implore other researchers doing longitudinal work to
carefully consider the phrasing of their surveys. In designing our survey in late March, we knew we were trying to
design questions that would remain relevant for months, throughout a rapidly changing world event. We designed
our survey with a goal of being resilient to such world changes. We include our full survey in the appendix, and
explicitly note when new questions were added, as the world and the global discussion around contact tracing
evolved. Our key recommendations, to any future designers of surveys focused on rapidly evolving issues, are to:
(1) design the initial survey with an eye toward future-resiliency, (2) strive to make sure that any additions or
modifications to the survey do not invalidate longitudinal analyses, and (3) clearly document any such changes,
so that the scientific community can fully evaluate the work and the results.
Researchers should continue to study acceptance for automated contact tracing within specific populations. Our survey focused on a longitudinal view of young, white, European and North American views
towards automated contact tracing, but we were unable to study any one particular population in depth. Other
work has studied populations at a single-country level, e.g., the Netherlands, Germany, Australia, but to our
knowledge, few have focused yet on specific and potentially vulnerable subpopulations or minorities, who might
have heightened or different privacy preferences, and who also might have greater vulnerability to the virus
(one exception is Filer et al., who studied adoption and attitudes amongst health care workers in England’s
national health care system, the NHS [28]). We specifically call for further research on minority populations
that may be harder hit by the virus (e.g., communities of color in the US [48]), communities that may have a
more strained relationship with government or authorities (e.g. Black communities in the US, undocumented
immigrants, political dissidents), or communities that may remember a past epidemic (e.g., gay men who lived
through the AIDS epidemic). Despite certain communities being particularly vulnerable, we are not aware of
existing studies about contact tracing and privacy for such populations, and we believe it is crucial for future
work to study and address the specific contexts of these groups.

7

CONCLUSION

Here we have presented results from a longitudinal survey about public opinion surrounding location privacy
and contact tracing during the COVID-19 pandemic, finding that public opinion is largely stable over time, and
that they have significant and diverse privacy concerns about contact tracing.

25

The report adds to other concurrent work about public opinion on potential contact tracing technologies and
privacy concerns, and we strongly encourage contact tracing developers, policy makers, and others to consider
the user values and concerns presented here, as user cooperation is crucial.

8

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We are very thankful to Karl Weintraub for general discussions, sanity, and his Pandas knowledge. We are also
thankful to Gennie Gebhart for early discussions about this work. We thank Christine Chen, Ivan Evtimov, Joseph
Jaeger, Shrirang Mare, Alison Simko, Robert Simko, and Eric Zeng for their valuable feedback on pilot versions of
our survey. Additionally, we are thankful to Gennie Gebhart, Joseph Jaeger, and Elissa Redmiles for their valuable
feedback on a draft of this paper. We also thank Alison Simko and Sandy Kaplan for their brilliant editing, and
Lang Liu, Kristof Glauninger, and Zhitao Yu from the University of Washington’s Statistics Consulting program.
We are also very thankful to Prolific for supporting our research by waiving their fees for one month as part of
their COVID-19 fee waiver program.
This research was supported in part by a University of Washington Population Health Initiative’s COVID-19
Rapid Response Grant and by the University of Washington Tech Policy Lab, which receives support from: the
William and Flora Hewlett Foundation, the John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation, Microsoft, the Pierre
and Pamela Omidyar Fund at the Silicon Valley Community Foundation. This work was also supported by the US
National Science Foundation (Awards 1565252 and 1513584).

REFERENCES
[1] Johannes Abeler, Sam Altmann, Luke Milsom, Séverine Toussaert, and Hannah Zillessen. 2020. Support in the UK for app-based contact
tracing of COVID-19.
[2] Ali Alkhatib. 2020. We Need to Talk About Digital Contact Tracing. https://ali-alkhatib.com/blog/digital-contact-tracing. [Accessed
6-May-2020].
[3] Samuel Altmann, Luke Milsom, Hannah Zillessen, Raffaele Blasone, Frederic Gerdon, Ruben Bach, Frauke Kreuter, Daniele Nosenzo,
Severine Toussaert, and Johannes Abeler. 2020. Acceptability of app-based contact tracing for COVID-19: Cross-country survey
evidence. Available at SSRN 3590505 (2020).
[4] Monica Anderson and Brooke Auxier. 2020. Most Americans don’t think cellphone tracking will help limit COVID-19, are divided on
whether it’s acceptable. Pew Research Center (16 April 2020).
[5] Bahrain [n.d.]. https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=bh.bahrain.corona.tracker&hl=en_US.
[6] Gilles Barthe, Roberta De Viti, Peter Druschel, Deepak Garg, Manuel Gomez-Rodriguez, Pierfrancesco Ingo, Matthew Lentz, Aastha
Mehta, and Bernhard Schölkopf. 2020. PanCast: Listening to Bluetooth Beacons for Epidemic Risk Mitigation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2011.08069 (2020).
[7] BBC. [n.d.]. Coronavirus: Austria locks down as new wave grips Europe. https://www.bbc.com/news/world-europe-54945400.
[Accessed 14-November-2020].
[8] Dave Burke. [n.d.]. An update on Exposure Notifications. https://blog.google/inside-google/company-announcements/updateexposure-notifications/. [Accessed 14-November-2020].
[9] Justin Chan, Dean Foster, Shyam Gollakota, Eric Horvitz, Joseph Jaeger, Sham Kakade, Tadayoshi Kohno, John Langford, Jonathan
Larson, Sudheesh Singanamalla, Jacob Sunshine, and Stefano Tessaro. 2020. PACT: Privacy-Sensitive Protocols And Mechanisms for
Mobile Contact Tracing. arXiv:arXiv:2004.03544
[10] Clara Chong. 2020. About 1 million people have downloaded TraceTogether app, but more need to do so for it to be effective: Lawrence
Wong. https://www.straitstimes.com/singapore/about-one-million-people-have-downloaded-the-tracetogether-app-but-more-needto-do-so-for. The Straits Times (1 April 2020). [Accessed 24-April-2020].
[11] Juli Clover. 2020. Apple’s Exposure Notification System: Everything You Need to Know. [Accessed 14-November-2020].
[12] D’vera Cohn. 2015. Census considers new approach to asking about race – by not using the term at all.
[13] Colombia [n.d.]. https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=co.gov.ins.guardianes&hl=en_US.
[14] European Commission. [n.d.]. COVID-19 media surveillance - 31 March 2020. https://ec.europa.eu/jrc/en/science-update/covid-19media-surveillance-20200331. [Accessed 22-April-2020].
[15] Coronamap. [n.d.]. https://coronamap.site/.
[16] Andrew Crocker, Kurt Opsahl, and Bennett Cyphers. 2020. The Challenge of Proximity Apps For COVID-19 Contact Tracing.
https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2020/04/challenge-proximity-apps-covid-19-contact-tracing.
26

[17] Czech [n.d.]. https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=cz.covid19cz.erouska&hl=en_US.
[18] Mark É Czeisler, Michael A Tynan, Mark E Howard, Sally Honeycutt, Erika B Fulmer, Daniel P Kidder, Rebecca Robbins, Laura K
Barger, Elise R Facer-Childs, Grant Baldwin, et al. 2020. Public attitudes, behaviors, and beliefs related to COVID-19, stay-at-home
orders, nonessential business closures, and public health guidance—United States, New York City, and Los Angeles, May 5–12, 2020.
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 69, 24 (2020), 751.
[19] Alejandro de la Garza. [n.d.]. Contact Tracing Apps Were Big Tech’s Best Idea for Fighting COVID-19. Why Haven’t They Helped?
https://time.com/5905772/covid-19-contact-tracing-apps/. [Accessed 13-November-2020].
[20] Nicola Dell, Vidya Vaidyanathan, Indrani Medhi, Edward Cutrell, and William Thies. 2012. " Yours is better!" participant response bias
in HCI. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1321–1330.
[21] Simon Dennis, Paul Garrett, Joshua White, Daniel Little, Amy Perfors, Yoshihisa Kashima, and Stephan Lewandowsky. 2020. A
Representative Sample of Australian Participant’s Attitudes Towards Government Tracking During the COVID-19 Pandemic. https:
//paulgarrettphd.github.io/Site/Wave2Final.html. [Accessed 21-October-2020].
[22] Simon Dennis, Stephan Lewandowsky, Philipp Lorenz-Spreen, Klaus Oberauer, Yasmina Okan, Rob Goldstone, Yang Cheng-Ta, Yoshihisa
Kashima, Amy Perfors, Josh White, Paul Garrett, Nic Geard, Daniel Little, Lewis Mitchell, Martin Tomko, Anastasia Kozyreva, Stefan
Herzog, Ralph Hertwig, Thorsten Pachur, Muhsin Yesilada, and Marcus Butavicius. [n.d.]. Social Licensing of Privacy-Encroaching
Policies to Address the COVID-19 Pandemic. https://stephanlewandowsky.github.io/UKsocialLicence/index.html. [Accessed 19October-2020].
[23] Zak Doffman. 2020. Forget Apple And Google—Here’s The Real Challenge For COVID-19 Contact-Tracing. https://www.forbes.com/
sites/zakdoffman/2020/04/12/forget-apple-and-google-heres-the-real-challenge-for-covid-19-contact-tracing/#4f9426092709. [Accessed 21-April-2020].
[24] Darrell Etherington. 2020. Apple launches COVID-19 “Exposure Notification Express” with iOS 13.7 — Android to follow later
this month. https://techcrunch.com/2020/09/01/apple-launches-system-level-covid-19-exposure-notification-express-with-ios-13-7google-to-follow-later-this-month/.
[25] Evaluate research [n.d.]. https://www.evaluate.com/covid-19-daily-update.
[26] Lilla Farkas. [n.d.]. Data collection in the field of ethnicity: Analysis and comparative review of equality data collection practices in the
European Union.
[27] Luca Ferretti, Chris Wymant, Michelle Kendall, Lele Zhao, Anel Nurtay, Lucie Abeler-Dörner, Michael Parker, David Bonsall, and
Christophe Fraser. 2020. Quantifying SARS-CoV-2 transmission suggests epidemic control with digital contact tracing. Science (2020).
[28] Joshua Filer and Daniel Gheorghiu. 2020. Test, track, and trace: How is the NHSX Covid app performing in a hospital setting? medRxiv
(2020).
[29] US Food, Drug Administration, et al. 2016. Collection of Race and Ethnicity Data in Clinical Trials: Guidance for Industry and Food
and Drug Administration Staff. Rockville, MD: US Food and Drug Administration (2016).
[30] Paul Garrett, Joshua Paul White, Stephan Lewandowsky, Yoshihisa Kashima, Andrew Perfors, Daniel R Little, Nic Geard, Lewis Mitchell,
Martin Tomko, and Simon Dennis. 2020. The acceptability and uptake of smartphone tracking for COVID-19 in Australia. (2020).
[31] Jacob Gershman. 2020.
A Guide to State Coronavirus Lockdowns.
https://web.archive.org/web/20200401234127/https:
//www.wsj.com/articles/a-state-by-state-guide-to-coronavirus-lockdowns-11584749351/?utm_source=GadgetFlow&utm_medium=
GadgetFlow&utm_campaign=GadgetFlow. The Wall Street Journal (31 March 2020).
[32] Ghana [n.d.]. http://ghcovid19.com/.
[33] Google. 2020. Apple and Google partner on COVID-19 contact tracing technology. https://web.archive.org/web/20200410202023/https:
//www.blog.google/inside-google/company-announcements/apple-and-google-partner-covid-19-contact-tracing-technology/. [Accessed 10-April-2020].
[34] Matthew Guariglia and Adam Schwartz. 2020. Protecting Civil Liberties During a Public Health Crisis. https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/
2020/03/protecting-civil-liberties-during-public-health-crisis.
[35] M Guillon and P Kergall. 2020. Attitudes and opinions on quarantine and support for a contact-tracing application in France during
the COVID-19 outbreak. Public health 188 (2020), 21–31.
[36] David M. Halbfinger, Isabel Kershner, and Ronen Bergman. 2020. To Track Coronavirus, Israel Moves to Tap Secret Trove of Cellphone
Data. https://www.nytimes.com/2020/03/16/world/middleeast/israel-coronavirus-cellphone-tracking.html. The New York Times (16
March 2020). [Accessed 29-March-2020].
[37] Marian Harbach, Alexander De Luca, Nathan Malkin, and Serge Egelman. 2016. Keep on lockin’in the free world: A multi-national
comparison of smartphone locking. In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 4823–4827.
[38] Eszter Hargittai and Elissa Redmiles. [n.d.]. Covid-19 Study on Digital Media and the Coronavirus Pandemic. http://webuse.org/covid/.
[39] Eszter Hargittai and Elissa Redmiles. 2020. Will Americans Be Willing to Install COVID-19 Tracking Apps? https://blogs.
scientificamerican.com/observations/will-americans-be-willing-to-install-covid-19-tracking-apps/. Scientific American (28 April
2020).

27

[40] Joel Hellewell, Sam Abbott, Amy Gimma, Nikos I Bosse, Christopher I Jarvis, Timothy W Russell, James D Munday, Adam J Kucharski,
W John Edmunds, Fiona Sun, et al. 2020. Feasibility of controlling COVID-19 outbreaks by isolation of cases and contacts. The Lancet
Global Health (2020).
[41] Mary Hui. 2020. How Taiwan is tracking 55,000 people under home quarantine in real time. https://qz.com/1825997/taiwan-phonetracking-system-monitors-55000-under-coronavirus-quarantine/. Quartz (31 March 2020). [Accessed 26-April-2020].
[42] Mary Ilyushina. 2020. How Russia is using authoritarian tech to curb coronavirus. https://www.cnn.com/2020/03/29/europe/russiacoronavirus-authoritarian-tech-intl/index.html. CNN (29 March 2020).
[43] India [n.d.]. https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=nic.goi.aarogyasetu&hl=en_US.
[44] Inria. [n.d.]. https://github.com/ROBERT-proximity-tracing/documents.
[45] Israel [n.d.]. https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.hamagen&hl=en_US.
[46] Stephanie Maria Jansen-Kosterink, Marian Hurmuz, Marjolein den Ouden, and Lex van Velsen. 2020. Predictors to use mobile apps for
monitoring COVID-19 symptoms and contact tracing: A survey among Dutch citizens. medRxiv (2020).
[47] Jessica Jones. [n.d.]. Spain toughens restrictions as coronavirus death toll surges. Reuters ([n. d.]).
[48] Rafi Kabarriti, N Patrik Brodin, Maxim I Maron, Chandan Guha, Shalom Kalnicki, Madhur K Garg, and Andrew D Racine. 2020.
Association of race and ethnicity with comorbidities and survival among patients with COVID-19 at an urban medical center in New
York. JAMA network open 3, 9 (2020), e2019795–e2019795.
[49] Ruogu Kang, Stephanie Brown, Laura Dabbish, and Sara Kiesler. 2014. Privacy attitudes of Mechanical Turk workers and the US public.
In Symposium on Usable Privacy and Security (SOUPS), Vol. 4. 1.
[50] Jennifer Kates, Josh Michaud, and Jennifer Tolbert. 2020. Stay-At-Home Orders to Fight COVID-19 in the United States: The Risks of a
Scattershot Approach. https://www.kff.org/coronavirus-policy-watch/stay-at-home-orders-to-fight-covid19/. KFF (5 April 2020).
[51] Jamey Keaten and Frank Jordans. 2020. More masks, less play: Europe tightens rules as virus surges.
[52] Min Joo Kim and Simon Denyer. 2020. A ‘travel log’ of the times in South Korea: Mapping the movements of coronavirus carriers. https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/asia_pacific/coronavirus-south-korea-tracking-apps/2020/03/13/2bed568e-5fac-11eaac50-18701e14e06d_story.html. The Washington Post (13 March 2020). [Accessed 26-April-2020].
[53] Max S. Kim. 2020. South Korea is watching quarantined citizens with a smartphone app. https://www.technologyreview.com/2020/03/
06/905459/coronavirus-south-korea-smartphone-app-quarantine/. [Accessed 19-November-2020].
[54] Nemo Kim. 2020. ’More scary than coronavirus’: South Korea’s health alerts expose private lives. https://www.theguardian.com/world/
2020/mar/06/more-scary-than-coronavirus-south-koreas-health-alerts-expose-private-lives. The Guardian (5 March 2020).
[55] Sarah Knapton. 2020. How long will the UK coronavirus lockdown last? https://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2020/04/24/how-long-willuk-lockdown-last-summer/. Telegraph (27 April 2020). [Accessed 27-April-2020].
[56] Genia Kostka and Sabrina Habich-Sobiegalla. 2020. In Times of Crisis: Public Perceptions Towards COVID-19 Contact Tracing Apps in
China, Germany and the US. Germany and the US (September 16, 2020) (2020).
[57] Stephanie Kramer. 2020. More Americans say they are regularly wearing masks in stores and other businesses. "https://www.
pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2020/08/27/more-americans-say-they-are-regularly-wearing-masks-in-stores-and-other-businesses/".
[58] Susan Landau, Christy E. Lopez, and Laura Moy. 2020. The Importance of Equity in Contact Tracing. https://www.lawfareblog.com/
importance-equity-contact-tracing.
[59] Alex Ledsom. 2020. New EU Travel Restrictions, Country By Country, As Europe Locks Down. https://www.forbes.com/sites/alexledsom/
2020/11/12/new-eu-travel-bans-country-by-country-covid-19-restrictions-as-europe-locks-down/?sh=34b75c466f80. [Accessed 14November-2020].
[60] Tianshi Li, Cori Faklaris, Jennifer King, Yuvraj Agarwal, Laura Dabbish, Jason I Hong, et al. 2020. Decentralized is not risk-free:
Understanding public perceptions of privacy-utility trade-offs in COVID-19 contact-tracing apps. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.11957
(2020).
[61] Macedonia [n.d.]. https://stopcorona.app/.
[62] Sarah Mervosh, Jasmine C. Lee, Lazaro Gamio, and Nadja Popovich. [n.d.]. See Which States Are Reopening and Which Are Still Shut
Down. https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2020/us/states-reopen-map-coronavirus.html. The New York Times ([n. d.]). [Accessed
6-May-2020].
[63] Paul Mozur, Raymond Zhong, and Aaron Krolik. 2020. In Coronavirus Fight, China Gives Citizens a Color Code, With Red Flags.
https://www.nytimes.com/2020/03/01/business/china-coronavirus-surveillance.html. The New York Times (1 March 2020).
[64] North Dakota [n.d.]. https://ndresponse.gov/covid-19-resources/care19.
[65] Norway [n.d.]. https://helsenorge.no/coronavirus/smittestop.
[66] Patrick Howell O’Neill. 2020. No, coronavirus apps don’t need 60% adoption to be effective. https://www.technologyreview.com/2020/
06/05/1002775/covid-apps-effective-at-less-than-60-percent-download/. [Accessed on Nov 14, 2020].
[67] Patrick Howell O’Neill, Tate Ryan-Mosley, and Bobbie Johnson. [n.d.]. MIT Technology Review Covid Tracing Tracker. https:
//docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1ATalASO8KtZMx__zJREoOvFh0nmB-sAqJ1-CjVRSCOw/. [Accessed 14-November-2020].
[68] World Health Organization. [n.d.]. https://covid19.who.int/table. [Accessed 14-November-2020].
28

[69] Michael Edmund O’Callaghan, Jim Buckley, Brian Fitzgerald, Kevin Johnson, John Laffey, Bairbre McNicholas, Bashar Nuseibeh, Derek
O’Keeffe, Ian O’Keeffe, Abdul Razzaq, et al. 2020. A national survey of attitudes to COVID-19 digital contact tracing in the Republic of
Ireland. Irish Journal of Medical Science (1971-) (2020), 1–25.
[70] Lois Parshley. 2020. The magnitude of America’s contact tracing crisis is hard to overstate. https://www.nationalgeographic.com/
science/2020/09/contact-tracing-crisis-magnitude-hot-mess-america-fixes-coronavirus-cvd/. [Accessed 19-November-2020].
[71] Ramesh Raskar, Isabel Schunemann, Rachel Barbar, Kristen Vilcans, Jim Gray, Praneeth Vepakomma, Suraj Kapa, Andrea Nuzzo, Rajiv
Gupta, Alex Berke, Dazza Greenwood, Christian Keegan, Shriank Kanaparti, Robson Beaudry, David Stansbury, Beatriz Botero Arcila,
Rishank Kanaparti, Vitor Pamplona, Francesco M Benedetti, Alina Clough, Riddhiman Das, Kaushal Jain, Khahlil Louisy, Greg Nadeau,
Vitor Pamplona, Steve Penrod, Yasaman Rajaee, Abhishek Singh, Greg Storm, and John Werner. 2020. Apps Gone Rogue: Maintaining
Personal Privacy in an Epidemic. arXiv:arXiv:2003.08567
[72] Elissa M. Redmiles. [n.d.]. What does it mean for a COVID app to “work”? http://www.cs.umd.edu/~eredmiles/how-good-goodenough.pdf.
[73] Elissa M. Redmiles. 2020. User Concerns & Tradeoffs in Technology-Facilitated COVID-19 Response. 2, 1 (2020). https://doi.org/10.
1145/3428093
[74] Elissa M Redmiles, Yasemin Acar, Sascha Fahl, and Michelle L Mazurek. 2017. A summary of survey methodology best practices for
security and privacy researchers. Technical Report.
[75] Elissa M Redmiles, Sean Kross, and Michelle L Mazurek. 2019. How well do my results generalize? comparing security and privacy
survey results from mturk, web, and telephone samples. In 2019 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP). IEEE, 1326–1343.
[76] Nicolás Rivero. [n.d.]. US states are finally rolling out Covid-19 exposure notification apps.
[77] Ronald L. Rivest, Hal Abelson, Jon Callas, Ran Canetti, Kevin Esvelt, Daniel Kahn Gillmor, Louise Ivers, Yael Tauman Kalai, Anna
Lysyanskaya, Adam Norige, Bobby Pelletier, Ramesh Raskar, Adi Shamir, Emily Shen, Israel Soibelman, Michael Specter, Vanessa
Teague, Ari Trachtenberg, Mayank Varia, Marc Viera, Daniel Weitzner, John Wilkinson, and Marc Zissman. [n.d.]. pact.mit.edu.
[78] Joel Ross, Lilly Irani, M Silberman, Andrew Zaldivar, and Bill Tomlinson. 2010. Who are the crowdworkers?: shifting demographics in
mechanical turk. In CHI’10 extended abstracts on Human factors in computing systems. ACM, 2863–2872.
[79] Uptin Saiidi. 2020. Hong Kong is putting electronic wristbands on arriving passengers to enforce coronavirus quarantine. https:
//www.cnbc.com/2020/03/18/hong-kong-uses-electronic-wristbands-to-enforce-coronavirus-quarantine.html. CNBC (18 March 2020).
[Accessed 24-April-2020].
[80] Yukiko Sawaya, Mahmood Sharif, Nicolas Christin, Ayumu Kubota, Akihiro Nakarai, and Akira Yamada. 2017. Self-confidence trumps
knowledge: A cross-cultural study of security behavior. In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems. 2202–2214.
In Germany, High Hopes For New COVID-19 Contact Tracing App That Protects Privacy.
[81] Rob Schmitz. 2020.
https://www.npr.org/sections/coronavirus-live-updates/2020/04/02/825860406/in-germany-high-hopes-for-new-covid-19-contacttracing-app-that-protects-privacy. [Accessed 23-April-2020].
[82] Tanusree Sharma and Masooda Bashir. 2020. Use of apps in the COVID-19 response and the loss of privacy protection. Nature Medicine
(2020), 1–2.
[83] Michael D. Shear. 2020. Trump Extends Social Distancing Guidelines Through End of April. https://www.nytimes.com/2020/03/29/us/
politics/trump-coronavirus-guidelines.htmll. [Accessed 23-April-2020].
[84] Selena Simmons-Duffin. 2020. COVID-19 Contact Tracing Workforce Barely ’Inching Up’ As Cases Surge. https://www.npr.org/
sections/health-shots/2020/10/14/923468159/covid-19-contact-tracing-workforce-barely-inching-up-as-cases-surge. [Accessed on
Nov 19 2020].
[85] Natasha Singer. 2020. The Hot New Covid Tech Is Wearable and Constantly Tracks You. https://www.nytimes.com/2020/11/15/
technology/virus-wearable-tracker-privacy.html?referringSource=articleShare. [Accessed 19-November-2020].
[86] Natasha Singer and Choe Sang-Hun. 2020. As Coronavirus Surveillance Escalates, Personal Privacy Plummets. https://www.nytimes.
com/2020/03/23/technology/coronavirus-surveillance-tracking-privacy.html. [Accessed 24-March-2020].
[87] Ashkan Soltani, Ryan Calo, and Carl Bergstrom. 2020. Contact-tracing apps are not a solution to the COVID-19 crisis. https:
//www.brookings.edu/techstream/inaccurate-and-insecure-why-contact-tracing-apps-could-be-a-disaster/. (27 April 2020).
[88] Jay Stanley and Jennifer Stisa Granick. 2020. The Limits of Location Tracking in an Epidemic. https://www.aclu.org/aclu-white-paperlimits-location-tracking-epidemic.
[89] Ruoxi Sun, Wei Wang, Minhui Xue, Gareth Tyson, Seyit Camtepe, and Damith Ranasinghe. 2020. Vetting Security and Privacy of
Global COVID-19 Contact Tracing Applications. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.10933 (2020).
[90] Craig Timberg, Drew Harwell, and Safarpour Alauna. 2020. Most Americans are not willing or able to use an app tracking coronavirus
infections. That’s a problem for Big Tech’s plan to slow the pandemic. https://www.washingtonpost.com/technology/2020/04/29/mostamericans-are-not-willing-or-able-use-an-app-tracking-coronavirus-infections-thats-problem-big-techs-plan-slow-pandemic/. The
Washington Post (29 April 2020).

29

[91] The New York Times. [n.d.]. See Which States Are Reopening and Which Are Still Shut Down. https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/
2020/us/states-reopen-map-coronavirus.html. The New York Times ([n. d.]). [Accessed 14-November-2020].
[92] TraceTogether [n.d.]. https://www.tracetogether.gov.sg.
[93] Carmela Troncoso, Mathias Payer, Jean-Pierre Hubaux, Marcel Salathé, James Larus, Edouard Bugnion, Wouter Lueks, Theresa Stadler,
Apostolos Pyrgelis, Daniele Antonioli, Ludovic Barman, Sylvain Chatel, Kenneth Paterson, Srdjan Čapkun, David Basin, Jan Beutel,
Dennis Jackson, Bart Preneel, Nigel Smart, Dave Singelee, Aysajan Abidin, Seda Guerses, Michael Veale, Cas Cremers, Reuben Binns,
and Ciro Cattuto. 2020. Decentralized Privacy-Preserving Proximity Tracing. https://github.com/DP-3T/documents/blob/master/
DP3T%20White%20Paper.pdf.
[94] 2020. State of Utah Releases “Healthy Together” Beta App. https://coronavirus.utah.gov/state-of-utah-releases-healthy-together-betaapp/. (22 April 2020).
[95] Serge Vaudenay. 2020. Centralized or Decentralized? The Contact Tracing Dilemma. https://eprint.iacr.org/2020/531.pdf. (6 May 2020).
[96] Haohuang Wen, Qingchuan Zhao, Zhiqiang Lin, Dong Xuan, and Ness Shroff. 2020. A study of the privacy of covid-19 contact tracing
apps. In International Conference on Security and Privacy in Communication Networks.
[97] Caroline Wiertz, Aneesh Banerjee, Oguz A Acar, and Adi Ghosh. 2020. Predicted Adoption Rates of Contact Tracing App ConfigurationsInsights from a choice-based conjoint study with a representative sample of the UK population. Available at SSRN 3589199 (2020).
[98] Wikipedia. [n.d.]. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/COVID-19_apps.
[99] Wikipedia. [n.d.]. Exposure Notification. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Exposure_Notification. [Accessed on 14-November-2020].
[100] Simon N Williams, Christopher J Armitage, Tova Tampe, and Kimberly Dienes. 2020. Public attitudes towards COVID-19 contact
tracing apps: A UK-based focus group study. medRxiv (2020).
[101] Baobao Zhang, Sarah Kreps, and Nina McMurry. 2020. Americans’ perceptions of privacy and surveillance in the COVID-19 Pandemic.
(2020).

A

SURVEY PROTOCOL

The survey protocol is below. We give section headings and descriptors for the reader’s reference here; participants
did not see headers. Unless otherwise specified, all questions were answered on a five-point Likert scale.
The logo of our institution (with the institution name prominent) appear as a header to each survey page. Our
lab and department name did not.

A.1

Consent and Screening

This is a survey about location tracking and Coronavirus (COVID-19) by researchers at the University of
Washington, in Seattle, Washington, USA. The University of Washington’s Human Subjects Division reviewed
our study, and determined that it was exempt from federal human subjects regulation. We do not expect that
this survey will put you at any risk for harm, and you don’t have to answer any question that makes you
uncomfortable. In order to participate, you must be at least 18 years old, regularly use a smartphone, and able to
complete the survey in English. We expect this survey will take about 15-20 minutes to complete.
If you have any questions about this survey, you may email us at <study-specific-email>.
Thanks for taking our survey! To start, please answer the two questions below...
Are you at least 18 years old? [yes, no]
Do you use a smartphone regularly? [yes, no]

A.2

Demographics I

This survey involves questions about COVID-19, the disease caused by SARS-CoV-2 (commonly known as
coronavirus).
Q6: How concerned are you about COVID-19?
Q7: Do you believe that social distancing is an important tool for slowing the spread of COVID-19? [yes, no,
not sure]
Q8: Averaged over the past week, approximately how many hours much time per day did you spend out of
your home, within 6 feet (2 meters) of other people? (e.g., getting groceries, working at an essential job like in a
30

hospital, in a grocery store, etc). [‘I did not leave my home’, 0-1 hours per day, 2-3 hours per day, ... , 7-8 hours
per day, 8+ hours per day]
Q144: Do you believe that wearing a mask is an important tool for slowing COVID-19? [yes, no, not sure]
Q145: Over the past week, how often did you wear a mask when you were out of your home? [All of the time,
most of the time, some of the time, rarely, never]
Q9: In which country do you currently reside? [drop-down country list]
Q10: For respondents in the USA: in which state do you currently reside? [drop-down US state list]

A.3

Cell phone manufacturer and provider location data

Cell phone manufacturers and cellular providers have access to your physical-world location.
Q12: How comfortable are you with your cell phone manufacturer or your cellular carrier using your location
data for the purposes of studying or mitigating the spread of COVID-19?
Q13: How comfortable are you with your cell phone manufacturer or your cellular carrier sharing your location
data for the past two weeks with your government for the purposes of studying or mitigating the spread of
COVID-19? (Regardless of whether you test positive for COVID-19.)
Q14: If you tested positive for COVID-19, how comfortable would you be with your cell phone manufacturer
or your cellular carrier sharing your location data for the past two weeks with your government for the purposes
of studying or mitigating the spread of COVID-19?
Q15: If you tested positive for COVID-19, how comfortable would you be with your cell phone manufacturer
or your cellular carrier sharing your location data for the past two weeks publicly?
Q16: Optionally, do you have any other thoughts about your cell phone manufacturer or your cellular carrier
sharing your location data for the purposes of studying or mitigating the spread of COVID-19? [free response]

A.4

Existing app location data

Some phone applications have access to your physical-world location, either when the application is in use or all
the time. Suppose the makers of an existing app on your phone started using your GPS location data to
study or mitigate the spread of COVID-19. For example, this could include disclosing past locations of known
positive COVID-19 cases to the public or to the government, or alerting people who have crossed paths with the
positive case.
Q18: Below we’ve listed 15 commonly-used apps. For the apps that you use regularly: how comfortable are
you with the following apps using your location data for the purposes of studying or mitigating the spread of
COVID-19? [“I don’t use this app” + 5-point Likert scale for each of the following apps]
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Google Maps
Apple Maps
Waze
Facebook
Instagram
TikTok
WhatsApp
Facebook Messenger
Zoom
Uber
Lyft
Airbnb
Calorie Counter (MyFitnessPal)
31

• FitBit
• AllTrails
Suppose that one of the apps that you regularly use – not necessarily one of the ones above – started using your
location data to study or mitigate the spread of COVID-19.
Q20: How comfortable are you with this app using your location data for the purposes of studying or mitigating
the spread of COVID-19?
Q22: If you tested positive for COVID-19, how comfortable would you be with this app sharing your
location data for the past two weeks publicly?
Q23: Consider all the apps you regularly use on your phone (not just the apps listed earlier). Which app would
you most trust to use your location data for the purposes of studying and mitigating COVID-19? Why? [free
response]
Q24: Which app that you currently use would you least trust to use your location data for the purposes of
studying and mitigating COVID-19? Why? [free response]

A.5

Current use of COVID-19 app

Q25: Have you used any apps that help track the spread of COVID-19? (for example, Singapore’s “TraceTogether”)
[yes, no]
If yes, participants branch to ‘already have app.’
If no, participants continue.

A.6

New app, perfect privacy

Imagine there is a new app that would track your location at all times for the purposes of mitigating the spread of
COVID-19.
Suppose that this app protects your data perfectly.
Q50: How likely would you be to install and use this app?
Q51: Would this app change your current behavior?
Q52: Optionally, please use this space tell us any initial thoughts you have about such an app. [free response]

A.7

New app, app makers know location

Imagine there is a new app that would track your location at all times for the purposes of studying or mitigating the
spread of COVID-19.
Suppose now that the makers of the application would know your location at all times, but would not share your
location with any other entity.
Q55: How likely would you be to install and use this app?
Q56: Now, suppose that the app is made by one of the following companies, all of which already have created
popular apps. Please rate how comfortable you would be if each company were responsible for this new app. [“I
don’t know enough about this company to make a decision” + 5-pt Likert scale for each of the following]
•
•
•
•
•
•

Google (Google Maps, Waze, etc)
Apple (Apple Maps)
Facebook (Facebook, Facebook Messenger, Instagram, WhatsApp)
Microsoft (Skype, OneDrive, etc)3
ByteDance (TikTok)
Zoom Video Communication

3 Added

April 17 (week 3).
32

• Uber
• Lyft
• AirBnb
• MyFitnessPal
• AllTrails
• FitBit
Q57: Suppose that the app is made by one of the following general entities. Please rate how comfortable you
would be if one of the following were responsible for this new app, which would use the location data they collect
from your smartphone to track the spread of COVID-19. [5-pt Likert scale for each of the following]
• A university research group
• An activist group
• An industry startup
• Your government
• The United nations
Q58: Optionally, please use the space below to elaborate on your thoughts about one or more companies using
your location data for the purposes of tracking COVID-19. [free response]

A.8

New app, app makers share data with government

Again, imagine there is a new app that would track your location at all times for the purposes of studying or mitigating
the spread of COVID-19.
Suppose now that the makers of the application would know your location at all times, and would also share that
data with your government if you were diagnosed with COVID-19.
Q61: How likely would you be to install and use this app?
Q62: If the government’s use of the data were supervised by a judge, how likely would you be to install and
use this app?4
Now suppose that the makers of the application would share your location data with your government only if
you tested positive for COVID-19.
Q63: How likely would you be to install and use this app?
Q112: If the government’s use of the data were supervised by a judge, how likely would you be to install
and use this app?
Q64: Optionally, do you have any other thoughts about a company that is doing COVID-19 tracking sharing
your location with your government? [free response]
Q115: Optionally, do you have any other thoughts about judicial oversight of the government’s usage of
location data? [free response]

A.9

Other location data sources: Credit card history and surveillance camera footage

There5

are other ways to track someone’s location. One is the use of video cameras in public places. Another is the use
of credit card purchasing histories.
Q115: How comfortable would you be with your credit card company deriving your location history for the
past two weeks for the purposes of studying and mitigating the spread of COVID-19?
Q116: How comfortable would you be with your credit card company deriving your location history for the
past two weeks and sharing it with your government for the purposes of studying and mitigating the spread
of COVID-19?
4 This

question, and the rest of this section, was added on April 17 (week 3) as a previous version was ambiguous.
April 17 (week 3)

5 Added

33

Q118: Optionally, do you have any other thoughts about your location history being derived from your credit
card purchase history? [free response]
Q117: How comfortable would you be with your government deriving your location history for the past two
weeks from surveillance camera footage for the purposes of studying and mitigating the spread of COVID-19?
Q119: Optionally, do you have any other thoughts about your location history being derived from surveillance
camera footage? [free response]

A.10

Other data location sources II: wearable electronics and public area sensors

Suppose6 there were an electronic bracelet that would track your location for the purposes of studying or
mitigating the spread of COVID-19.
Q146: How likely would you be to use this bracelet?
Q147: Optionally, do you have any other thoughts about wearable electronics being used for the purposes of
studying or mitigating the spread of COVID-19? [free response]
Suppose your region added sensors (such as cameras, phone tagging stations, etc) in public areas (such as
subway stations, bus stops, storefronts, public parks, etc).
Q148: How comfortable would you be with the use of public-area sensors to study or mitigate the spread of
COVID-19?
Q149: Optionally, do you have any other thoughts about such sensors being used for the purposes of studying
or mitigating COVID-19? [free response]

A.11

Proximity tracing

One alternative7 to location tracking for the purposes of studying or mitigating COVID-19 is proximity tracing,
in which your phone would automatically exchange information with every phone within 6 feet (2 meters) of your
phone, keeping track of your close physical encounters, but not tracking your actual location. This data
could then be used to reconstruct your close encounters if you contracted COVID-19, or could alert you if someone you
had been in close physical proximity to tested positive for COVID-19.
Q121: Imagine that your cell phone manufacturer or phone operating system would conduct proximity
tracing for the purposes of studying or mitigating COVID-19 (and, vice versa, other phones will record that they
have been in the proximity of your phone). How comfortable would you be with this?
Q122: Suppose that your cell phone manufacturer or phone operating system would share this proximity
data with your government if you tested positive for COVID-19. How comfortable would you be with this?
Q123: Optionally, do you have any other thoughts about your cell phone manufacturer or phone operating
system tracking other phones nearby? [free response]
Imagine instead there is a new app that would conduct proximity tracing for the purposes of studying or mitigating
COVID-19: that is, it would not track your location, but would instead keep track of other phones that you are nearby
(and, vice versa, other phones with this app will record that they have been in the proximity of your phone).
Q124: How likely would you be to download this app?
Q125: Now, suppose that the proximity tracing app is made by one of the following companies. Please rate
how comfortable you would be if each company were responsible for this new app. [“I don’t know enough about
this company to make a decision” + 5-pt Likert scale for each of the following]
• Google (Google Maps, Waze, etc)
• Apple (Apple Maps)
• Facebook (Facebook, Facebook Messenger, Instagram, WhatsApp)
6 Added
7 Added

July 17 (week 16)
April 17 (week 3)
34

• Microsoft (Skype, etc)
• ByteDance (TikTok)
• Zoom Video Communication
• Uber
• Lyft
• AirBnb
• MyFitnessPal
• AllTrails
• FitBit
Q126: Now, suppose that the proximity tracing app is made by one of the following general entities. Please
rate how comfortable you would be if each entity were responsible for this new app.
• A university research group
• An activist group
• An industry startup
• Your government
• The United nations
Q127: Optionally, do you have any other thoughts about an app that tracks other phones nearby?
Q128: Optionally, do you have any other thoughts about proximity tracking versus location tracking for the
purposes of studying or mitigating COVID-19?

A.12

Government use of data

If the government acquired your location data or proximity data8 (i.e. from an app on your phone, from your
cell phone carrier, etc) for the purposes for studying and mitigating COVID-19....
Q66: How likely do you think it is that your government would delete the data after the pandemic ends?
Q67: How likely do you think it is that your government would only use the data for the purposes of tracking
COVID-19?
Q68: How concerned would you be about your government’s use of your location data harming your personal
safety or the safety of those in your community?
Q69: Suppose your location was shared with only a specific sector of the government. For each of the following
sectors of government, please rate how comfortable you would be with them having access to your location data.
• Federal Disease Tracking Agency (US: CDC)
• Your state or City Health Department
• Tax Agency (US: IRS)
• Local law enforcement (state, country, city, etc)
• Immigration authorities (US: CBP or ICE)
Q70: Optionally, please use the space below to elaborate on your thoughts about the government having access
to your location data for the purposes of COVID-19 tracking. [free response]

A.13

App features

In some countries, such as South Korea, China, and Singapore, there do exist apps to monitor the spread of COVID-19
through location tracking. These apps can have multiple purposes, including:
- Alerting the user if they have come into contact with someone who later tests positive with COVID-19;
- Helping the community or law enforcement enforce isolation and quarantine edicts;
8 ’or

proximity data’ added April 17
35

- Tracing viral strains through the community.
Q72: If a new app were deployed in your country to mitigate the spread of COVID-19, which of the following
features would you want it to have? (5-point Likert-scale for each of the following:)
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Notify you if you came close to someone who later tested positive for COVID-19
Notify anyone you came close to in the past two weeks if you tested positive for COVID-19
Make your location history for the past two weeks publicly available if you tested positive for COVID-19
Make public a database of the location histories of anyone who tested positive for COVID-19
Notify you if your neighbors were not isolating themselves as recommended or mandated
Let you notify the authorities if you saw people you suspected or knew to be breaking the isolation
recommended or mandated
Automatically notify the authorities if people were not isolating as mandated
Used by scientists to study tends, not individuals
Geofence to enforce mandatory or voluntary quarantine
General assessment of social distancing in an area to display areas of high congregation

Q73: Optionally, do you have any other thoughts about what you would want such an app to do? [free response]
Q74: Optionally, do you have any other thoughts about what you would want such an app to NOT do? [free
response]
Q75: Is such an app available in your country? [Yes / No / I’m not sure] If yes, participants branch to ‘App available’

A.14

Section 5.0: Prior privacy preferences

We’re now going to ask you about your thoughts about location sharing with your government BEFORE COVID-19.
Q80: In Oct 2019 (before the first known cases of COVID-19), how comfortable would you have been with
your location data being shared with the government in general?
Q81: In Oct 2019 (before the first known cases of COVID-19), how comfortable were you with your location
data being shared with the following sectors of government? [5-Point Likert scale for each of the following:]
•
•
•
•
•

Federal Disease Tracking Agency (US: CDC)
Your state or City Health Department
Tax Agency (US: IRS)
Local law enforcement (state, country, city, etc)
Immigration authorities (US: CBP or ICE)

Q82: Optionally, please use the space below to elaborate on your thoughts about one or more companies
sharing your location data with some part of the government (before COVID-19). [free response]

A.15

Demographics II

Almost done!
Q39: What is your age? (you may answer approximately if you do not know, or wish not to say exactly) [free
response]
Q40: What is your gender identity? [free response]
Q141: Please select any races or ethnicities that you feel accurately reflect who you are. Please select as many
as apply to you. We also realize that because race and ethnicity cannot be put into categories, you may prefer
to self-describe your race and ethnicity in the following question. You may also select from the options below
and submit a free-response. The following races and ethnicities are presented in alphabetical order. [American
36

Indian or Alaskan Native, Asian, Black or African American, Hispanic, Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander,
White]9
Q142: If you prefer to self-describe your race and ethnicity instead of or in addition to using the checkboxes
above, please do so here. [free response]10
Q41: What political party do your views typically align with? [free response]
Q42: What are your top three news sources? (i.e. Twitter, Facebook, Fox News, CNN, NPR, New York Times,
etc) [free response]
Q132: Have you ever had COVID-19? [Yes, definitely; Yes, I think so; I am unsure; No, I don’t think so; No,
definitely not]11
Q133: Have you ever been medically tested for COVID-19? [Yes, I have had a test; No, I have not been tested]12
Q43: Regarding COVID-19, are you in high risk group or live with someone with high risk? [yes / no]
Q44: Are you generally interested in or concerned about privacy and technology? [yes / no]
Q45: Do you know how to change location permissions for apps on your phone? [yes / no]
Q129: What is your phone manufacturer? (e.g. Apple, Samsung, Huawei, Nokia, OnePlus, XiaoMi, OPPO, etc)
[free response]13

A.16

Branch: app is available

Q76: Have you downloaded the app in your country to mitigate or study the spread of COVID-19? [yes, no]
Q77: If you have not downloaded the app: why not? what changes, or assurances by the manufacturer or
government (if any) would you want to see to the app before downloading? [free response]
Q78: What are your thoughts about the privacy properties of this app? [free response]

A.17

Branch: Already have app

You indicated that there is an app (or apps) available in your country to track, study, or mitigate COVID-19. This
section will ask about that app.
Q27: What is the name of the app, or apps?
Q28: Why did you install and use it?
Q29: Do you know anyone who did not download the app? [yes, no]
Q30: If so, why did they not install it?
Q31: What concerns, if any, do you have about the app?
Q32: If you had or have concerns, what outweighed the concerns and lead you to the decision to download the
app?
Q33: What concerns, if any, do you have about your government having access to your location data?
Q34: What concerns, if any, do you have about the app makers having access to your location data?
Q35: Do you expect the app makers to stop storing your location data after the pandemic is over?
Q36: Do you plan to delete the app after the pandemic?
Q37: Anything else you’d like to say about the app and/or your concerns?

9 Added

week 12
week 12
11 Added week 5
12 Added week 5
13 Added week 5
10 Added

37

