TUDublin team at Constraint@AAAI2021 COVID19 Fake News Detection

arXiv:2101.05701v1 [cs.CL] 14 Jan 2021

Elena Shushkevich1 and John Cardiff1
Technological University Dublin, Ireland
elena.n.shushkevich@gmail.com
john.cardiff@tudublin.ie

Abstract. The paper is devoted to the participation of the TUDublin
team in Constraint@AAAI2021 - COVID19 Fake News Detection Challenge. Today, the problem of fake news detection is more acute than ever
in connection with the pandemic. The number of fake news is increasing
rapidly and it is necessary to create AI tools that allow us to identify
and prevent the spread of false information about COVID-19 urgently.
The main goal of the work was to create a model that would carry out a
binary classification of messages from social media as real or fake news in
the context of COVID-19. Our team constructed the ensemble consisting
of Bidirectional Long Short Term Memory, Support Vector Machine, Logistic Regression, Naive Bayes and a combination of Logistic Regression
and Naive Bayes. The model allowed us to achieve 0.94 F1-score, which
is within 5% of the best result.
Keywords: COVID-19, Fake News, Machine Learning, Neural Networks,
Logistic Regression, Naive Bayes, SVM, LSTM

1

Introduction

Nowadays, the increasing number of fake messages on social networks has become
a huge problem. Social networks are the tools of communication that most of
us use daily not only to communicate with friends and family, but also to get
news about current events in the economy, politics, and the world around us in
general.
Fake news is information hoaxes designed to deliberately mislead the reader
in order to gain financial or political advantage[1]. When faced with such news,
it is not always easy to recognize whether the message is real or not, so it is
necessary to create tools, including through the use of machine learning, that
will help the unprepared reader to define if information they receive from social
media is reliable or not. Such mechanisms should also help identify and prevent
the spread of fake news by social media themselves.
In 2020, one of the main information agendas, without doubt, is the coronavirus, which has led to numerous losses, deaths, and economic difficulties. Often
the main source of information on this topic for many people is social media,
where news is updated promptly, as well as where it is possible to discuss what is

2

E. Shushkevich et al.

happening in the world in social networks. Unfortunately, some people are trying
to hype on such a global disaster as a pandemic, to get financial and political
bonuses from what is happening. In this regard, there is fake news about the
coronavirus, which spreads at a high speed. Such news can be not only false, but
also dangerous for people’s lives and health.
It is obvious that the detection and suppression of the spread of such fake
news is an urgent goal, and in this article we are describing a possible method
for detecting fake news about coronavirus, which we presented in the framework
of the challenge Constraint@AAAI2021 - COVID19 Fake News Detection in
English Language [2].
The article consists of the following 6 sections. Section 1 is the introduction
to the problem. In Section 2 we conduct some relevant research in the field
of identifying and investigating fake social media messages in the health sector
and, in particular, fake news about the pandemic and COVID-19. In Section 3 we
describe the challenge Constraint@AAAI2021 - COVID19 Fake News Detection
and the dataset on which we trained and tested our models. In Section 4 we
describe the steps we took during the preprocessing phase and the models we
created to detect fake news about the Coronavirus. In Section 5 we present the
results we achieved during the training phase and the results we achieved on the
challenge and analyze them. The final Section 6 summarizes the conclusions that
we have reached during the research and describes further possible improvements
of the model.

2

Related Work

There are many works devoted to the study of fake news in the field of health
care, such as [3] where the authors’ research questions were about ways that
social media messages focused on fake health information or misinformation and
health evidence with real or potential social impacts, and how interactions based
on health evidence with social impacts help overcome fake health information.
The authors used a methodology of social impact in social media, which combined quantitative and qualitative content analysis of the collected messages.
Numerous harmful advice about the prevention and treatment of diseases,
taken seriously, could cause the deterioration of the patient’s condition and the
emergence of new diseases. In this regard, identifying fake news about the Coronavirus, as well as trying to prevent the further spread of such news, are important
steps towards improving the current situation. At the time of writing, although
less than a year has passed since the emergence of COVID-19 as a global threat,
already several studies have been published aimed at detecting and classifying
fake messages in social media, related to COVID-19.
In one such work [4] the authors researched the impact of rumors and misinformation in social media in a context of COVID-19 pandemic. They found
that the huge number of hoaxes and misinformation leads to an increase in the
spread of the virus and a decrease of mental health individuals.

TUDublin team at Constraint@AAAI2021 - COVID19 Fake News Detection

3

Researchers have used different Natural Language Processing and Machine
Learning tools and models to solve these problems. In [5], the authors collected
4,800 expert-annotated social media posts related to COVID-19 and 86 common
misconceptions about the disease to evaluate the performance misinformation
detection related to Coronavirus pandemic.
For the modelling, the authors used TF-IDF1 and GloVe2 to obtain vectorized
representations, and also to obtain contextual word embeddings the RoBERTabase [6] implementation was used with two models of textual similarity. Also,
they tuned RoBERTa-base using the dataset of tweets connected with COVID19.
In the research [7] researchers used K-Nearest Neighbour Classifier to predict
fake news connected with COVID-19. The authors of [8] used natural language
processing to analyse the messages connected with COVID-19 and to indicate
the main topics which people discuss in social media in the framework of the
pandemic, where top negative themes included concerns about social distancing
and isolation policies, misinformation, while top positive themes connected with
the pandemic were public awareness, spiritual support, encouragement, charity
and entertainment.
In addition to such studies, open challenges appear that invite participants
to create effective models for identifying fake messages about the pandemic. The
challenge we took part in is called Constraint@AAAI2021 - COVID19 Fake News
Detection in English and Hindi, and we used the English dataset only.

3

Dataset

The goal of the Constraint@AAAI2021 - COVID19 Fake News Detection challenge was to create a model that would allow us to determine whether the message about COVID-19 is fake or real news.
the organizers of the challenge created an annotated dataset of 10,700 social
media posts and articles of real and fake news on COVID-19 in English. To
collect real tweets, they used relevant sources such as World Health Organization
(WHO), Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), Covid India Seva,
and others. To collect fake news, authors used Facebook posts, Twitter tweets,
Instagram posts and other types of social media and checked them by factverification websites such as PolitFact3 and Boomlive4 to ensure the messages
were fake. The collected dataset was split into train (60%), validation (20%),
test (20%).
As a result, authors collected 6,420 training messages (3,360 of them were
real and 3,060 - fake ones), 2,140 validation messages (1,120 - real, 1,020 - fake),
and 2,140 testing messages (with 1,120 real and 1,010 fake messages).
1

2
3
4

https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.feature_
extraction.text.\TfidfVectorizer.html
https://nlp.stanford.edu/projects/glove/
https://www.politifact.com/
https://www.boomlive.in/

4

E. Shushkevich et al.

4

Model

This section describes the two stages of our model creation: the preprocessing
and the modelling steps.
4.1

Preprocessing

Preprocessing is an important step in creating a model that allows researchers
to identify fake news in social media, because it helps to prepare the data for
subsequent processing. In our case, at the preprocessing stage we:
- used TF-IDF (term frequency - inverse document frequency) for the classical
machine learning models;
- used PorterStemmer5 which removes morphological affixes from words, leaving only the word stem, for the neural networks models;
- translated all the letters of the dataset to lowercase.
After performing preprocessing, we started the modeling stage.
4.2

Modelling

At the modelling stage, we used both classical machine learning models and
models based on neural networks. Also, we implemented ensembles that allow
us to combine the results of several different models with the aim to achieve the
best results.
In the process of modeling based on classical machine learning, we implemented the following models:
- Logistic regression (LR)[9,10] one of the most popular approaches with
the basic idea of a linear classifier is that a feature space can be divided by a
hyperplane into two half-spaces, in each of which one of the two values of the
target class is predicted.
- SVM [11,12,13] which creates a hyperplane or set of hyperplanes in multidimensional or infinite-dimensional space that can be used to solve classification,
regression, and other related problems.
- Naive Bayes (NB)[14] which is quite simple and fast to use and is used as
a reference point when comparing different methods. Also, Naive Bayes method
needs a priori information about probabilities of each class, while other methods
don’t need it.
- NB+LR - the interpolation between LR and NB with the coefficient of
interpolation as a form of the regularization: in practice it means that in this type
of modeling we trust NB unless the LR is very confident, which is the analogy of
the approach from [15] and where such type of algorithms overperformed another
approaches.
Having built these models, we combined them into an ensemble that resulted
in the final class of the message (fake or real news): each model in the ensemble
showed the probability of class, we the summed up such probability and divided
5

https://www.nltk.org/howto/stem.html

TUDublin team at Constraint@AAAI2021 - COVID19 Fake News Detection

5

the sums to the number of models, then we compared the obtained values and
chose the largest (and, accordingly, the class). The approach based on the ensembles constructing has proven itself well in classification problems [16,17,18,19].
If the final arithmetic mean probability of belonging to the class of fake news
was higher than the final arithmetic mean probability of belonging to the class
of real news, then we marked the message as fake news.
Additionally, we have created models for detecting fake news based on neural
networks, namely: - LSTM (Long Short-Term Memory) [20,21] with an embedding layer, which is a specific kind of recurrent neural network, and is capable
of learning long-term dependencies. - Bidirectional LSTM with an embedding
layer, which consists of two LSTMs that are run in parallel, and which achieved
good results in [22].
Finally, we have combined into a single ensemble the models of classical
machine learning and bidirectional LSTM, the structure of which is shown in
Figure 1.

LR

Fake

Dataset

SVM

Preprocessing

NB

Ensemble

LR+NB
Real

biLSTM

Fig. 1. The construction of final ensemble of models.

The final class of the messages was determined by the majority voted method.

5

Results

The results we achieved on the training dataset are presented in Table 1.

6

E. Shushkevich et al.
Table 1. Results with Classical Machine Learning Models on training dataset.

Model
Logistic Regression (LR)
Support Vectors Machine (SVM)
Naive Bayes
NB+LR
Ensemble

F1-score
0.92
0.91
0.93
0.93
0.93

As we can see from the table, all models show similar fairly high results,
because of which we decided to include an ensemble in the final submission,
since it combines all models and we decided to check our own ensemble on the
testing dataset.
The results of neural network models we obtained on the training dataset
are presented in Table 2.

Table 2. Results with Neural Networks Models on training dataset.

Model

F1-score

Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM)
Bidirectional Long Short-Term Memory (biLSTM)

0.94
0.95

Both models showed decent results, so we included them in the final submission.
Table 3 shows the results we achieved with the all different models we submitted.

Table 3. Results on testing dataset.

Model

F1-score

SVM + LR+Naive Bayes + (LR+NB) + biLSTM
SVM + Naive Bayes + (LR+NB)
LSTM
biLSTM

0.94
0.94
0.92
0.91

TUDublin team at Constraint@AAAI2021 - COVID19 Fake News Detection

7

The results we obtained indicate that in our case both ensembles of models
work better than the single models. Note that the best result was achieved with
an ensemble that combines both classical machine learning models and a neural
network, which indicates the prospects for the future work in this direction. Also,
it should be noted that at the training step results of biLSTM overperformed
LSTM, while on the testing dataset LSTM model showed better result. In future
we are planning to investigate that case and explain this difference. All the results
obtained are quite close, within 4% of each other.
Considering the results we achieved in the context of the challenge, it should
be noted that the best F1 score is 0.99. This result differs from our best result
by less than 5%, which indicates the competitiveness of the model we have built.

6

Conclusion

To sum up, it should be noted that the problem of fake news detection and in
particular fake news about COVID-19, is an important and urgent issue. The
challenge Constraint@AAAI2021-COVID19 Fake News Detection, which aimed
at detecting fake news about COVID-19 in social networks, could help to create
models that can quickly identify and stop the spreading of this kind of fake news.
The TUDublin team created several models based on both classical machine
learning models and models based on neural networks, as well as ensembles that
combine several of these models. The best results were achieved using ensembles, and these results are competitive compared to the results of the challenge
winners. Also, it should be noted that our study was more experimental, this
way we had aim to check our models on the testing dataset.
In the future, we are planning to further develop our work, paying more
attention to the creation and training of neural networks at a more advanced
level, since, as we have noted above, neural networks allow us to identify and
classify fake messages with high effectiveness. We are also planning to pay more
attention to linguistic features that would improve the quality of classification,
and include additional datasets so that neural networks are trained on more
data.

References
1. Hunt, E.: What is fake news? How to spot it and what you can do
to stop it. The Guardian. https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/dec/18/
what-is-fake-news-pizzagate. (2016 Dec 17)
2. Patwa, P., Sharma, S., PYKL, S., Guptha, V., Kumari, G., Akhtar, M.S., Ekbal, A., Das, A., Chakraborty, T.: Fighting an Infodemic: COVID-19 Fake News
Dataset.arXiv:2011.03327. (2020)
3. Pulido, C.M., Ruiz-Eugenio, L., Redondo-Sama, G., Villarejo-Carballido, B.: A New
Application of Social Impact in Social Media for Overcoming Fake News in Health.
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health. (2020)

8

E. Shushkevich et al.

4. Tasnim, S., Hossain, MM., Mazumder, H.: Impact of Rumors and Misinformation on COVID-19 in Social Media. J Prev Med Public Health.53(3):171-174.(2020)
https://doi.org/( 10.3961/jpmph.20.094)
5. Hossain, T., Logan, R., Ugarte, A., Matsubara, Y., Young, S., Singh, S.: Detecting
COVID-19 Misinformation on Social Media.(2020)
6. Liu, Y., Ott, M., Goyal, N., Du, J., Joshi, M., Chen D., Levy, O., Lewis, M., Zettlemoyer, L., Stoyanov, V.: RoBERTa: A Robustly Optimized BERT Pretraining Approach. CoRR abs/1907.11692 (2019)
7. Bandyopadhyay, S., DUTTA, S.: Analysis of Fake News In Social Medias for Four Months during Lockdown in COVID-19. (2020)
https://doi.org/(10.20944/preprints202006.0243.v1)
8. Oyebode, O., Ndulue, C., Mulchandani, D., Suruliraj, B., Adib, A., Orji, F.A.,
Milios, E., Matwin, S., Orji, R.: COVID-19 Pandemic: Identifying Key Issues using
Social Media and Natural Language Processing. ArXiv, abs/2008.10022.(2020)
9. Genkin, A., Lewis, D., Madigan, D.: Large-scale bayesian logistic regression for
text categorization. In: Proceedings of the NAACL Student Research Workshop. p.
49(3):291304. Technometrics. (2007)
10. Wright, R.: Logistic regression. L.C. Grimm P.R. Yarnold (Eds.) Reading and understanding multivariate statistics. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association, 217-244.(1995)
11. Joachims, T.: Learning to classify text using support vector machines: Methods,
theory and algorithms. Kluwer Academic Publishers.(2002)
12. Scholkopf, B., Burges, C., Smola, A.: Advances in kernel methods : Support vector
learning. Cambridge: MIT Press.(1999)
13. Vapnik, V.:The Nature of Statistical Learning Theory. Springer, New York.(1995)
14. Zhang, H., Li D.: Naive bayes text classifier. granular computing. In: GRC 2007
IEEE International Conference. pp. 708–708. IEEE. (2007)
15. Wang, S., Manning, C.: Baselines and bigrams: simple, good sentiment and topic
classification. In: Proceedings of the 50th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Short Papers. pp. 90–94. ACL. (2012)
16. Vinodhini, G., Chandrasekaran, Dr.: Opinion Mining using principal component
analysis based ensemble methods. CSIT. 2. 10.1007/S40012-014-0055-3.(2014)
17. Xia, R., Zong, C., Li, S.: Ensemble of feature sets and classification algorithms for
opinion classification. Information Sciences 181:1138–115212. (2011)
18. Li W., Wang W., Chen Y.: Heterogeneous ensemble learning for Chinese sentiment
classification. Computing Sciences 9(15):4551–4558.(2012)
19. Shushkevich, E., Cardiff, J., Rosso, P.: TUVD team at SemEval-2019 Task 6: Offense Target Identification. SemEval@NAACL-HLT. (2019)
20. Hochreiter, S., Schmidhuber, J.: Long short-term memory. Neural Computation. 9
(8): 1735–1780. PMID 9377276.(1997) https://doi.org/(10.1162/neco.1997.9.8.1735)
21. Gers, F. A., Schmidhuber, E.: LSTM recurrent networks learn simple context-free
and context-sensitive languages. IEEE Transactions on Neural. (2001)
22. Zhou, P., Qi, Z., Zheng, S., Xu, J., Bao, H., Xu, B.:Text classification improved
by integrating bidirectional lstm with two-dimensional max pooling. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1611.06639.(2016)

