arXiv:2101.04774v1 [stat.AP] 12 Jan 2021

Decision Support for COVID-19 Policy Including
Poverty Drivers
Peter Strong ∗
P.R.Strong@warwick.ac.uk

Aditi Shenvi ∗
A.Shenvi@warwick.ac.uk

Xuewen Yu †
Xuewen.Yu@warwick.ac.uk
K.Nadia Papamichail ‡§
nadia.papamichail@manchester.ac.uk

Henry P Wynn ¶§
H.Wynn@lse.ac.uk

Jim Q Smith †§
J.Q.Smith@warwick.ac.uk
January 14, 2021

Abstract
In this paper we present a multi-attribute decision support framework
for choosing between countermeasure strategies designed to mitigate the
effects of COVID-19 in the UK. Such an analysis can evaluate both the
short term and long term efficacy of various candidate countermeasures.
The expected utility scores of a countermeasure strategy captures the expected impact of the policies on health outcomes and other measures of
population well-being. The broad methodologies we use here have been
established for some time. However, this application has many unusual
elements to it: the pervasive uncertainty of the science; the necessary
dynamic shifts between states within each candidate suite of countermeasures; the fast moving stochastic development of the underlying threat all
present new challenges to this domain. We incorporate these within our
framework. Further, we demonstrate our framework through an example
where we evaluate several strategies by considering short- and long-term
attributes that impact on the health of our population

Keywords: Decision Support Systems; Decision Analysis; Markov Processes;
Multi-criteria; Government.
∗ Centre

for Complexity Science, University of Warwick, Coventry CV4 7AL, UK
of Statistics, University of Warwick, Coventry CV4 7AL, UK
‡ Alliance Manchester Business School, The University of Manchester, Booth Street West,
Manchester, M15 6PB, UK
§ The Alan Turing Institute, British Library, 96 Euston Road, London NW1 2DB, UK
¶ London School of Economics and Political Science, Houghton Street, London WC2A 2AE,
UK
† Department

1

1

Introduction

In this paper we present a multi-attribute decision support framework to illustrate how decision makers and other users can systematically decide between
candidate COVID-19 countermeasure policies. COVID-19, caused by the SARSCoV-2 virus, first emerged in Wuhan, China in late 2019, and since March 2020
countries all over the world have been grappling to deal with the effects of the
virus on their populations. Several countries across Europe including the UK,
with the notable exception of Sweden, imposed lockdowns on regional or national
levels in an effort to control the spread of the virus, prevent overburdening their
healthcare systems and to buy more time to enable researchers to learn more
about this disease. However, these lockdowns were economically damaging, particularly for hard-hit sectors such as aviation and hospitality. The UK was in
recession in the first two quarters of 2020 with early signs of recovery in the
third quarter when lockdown restrictions were relaxed (PwC UK, 2020). As of
18th October, 9.6 million jobs were furloughed under the UK government’s job
retention scheme (HM Revenue & Customs, UK, 2020).
Since the relaxation of national lockdown measures, there have been several
localised outbreaks of COVID-19 across the UK resulting in local lockdowns.
The government, keen to avoid another national lockdown in order to protect
the economy, has been under scrutiny with regards to the efficacy and frequent
changes of the measures introduced under these local lockdowns (BBC Rachel
Schraer & Ben Butcher, 2020). In this “second wave”, the government again
faces a challenging balancing act with managing the public health impacts of
COVID-19 on one hand, and its economic and social impacts on the other.
Since the pandemic began, unprecedented numbers of researchers have devoted their efforts to studying various aspects of the disease itself and its health,
social and economic impacts in the short and long term. While it is necessary
that decisions are guided by these research findings, it is not straightforward for
anyone - be it a scientist or a politician - to directly compare the health, social
and economic impacts. This issue primarily arises as health and social impacts
are generally measured in terms of number of deaths, reduction in expected life
years, quality-adjusted life years (QALYs) or wellbeing years (WELLBYs) as
caused directly by the virus itself or indirectly by the countermeasures implemented to tackle it. The economic impacts are typically measured in terms of
difference in realised GDP and empirical or projected GDP, or sometimes as
number of jobs in various sectors, consumer spending growth or business investment growth (PwC UK, 2020). Additionally, these impacts often move in
opposite directions in response to any given countermeasure. Hence, a common
metric is essential for their comparison (Layard et al., 2020). Within a Bayesian
decision analysis, this typically takes the form of utilities. However, having a
common metric is not enough. The specification of the elicited decision maker’s
utility function will involve uncertain estimates of future events (e.g. predicted number of COVID-19 deaths under a complete lockdown). This becomes
especially important if the decision maker’s marginal utilities are risk-averse and
non-linear: see below. Finally, even under a common metric, individuals within
2

a decision centre may be inclined to prioritise the importance of the various
impacts in different ways. Consequently, there may be no agreement within a
centre as to how efficacious each policy may be. Thus, the function to convert
the actual impact measurement (e.g. number of deaths or first order difference
in the GDP) into a common metric (e.g. utilities) may not be equivalent for
everyone.
Established Bayesian methodologies have been developed over a number of
decades to support the decision centre, capable of respecting both the preferences of the centre and the uncertainties around predictions that inform such
decisions. However, in light of the aforementioned challenges, it is essential that
any decisions made by policymakers are done after due consideration and analysis within a systematic decision support framework with proper treatment of the
associated uncertainties (French, 1995). Such a framework is a defensible and
a powerful continuous assessment tool and allows policymakers to feed into the
model their priorities when it comes to decision making. However, even eight
months into this pandemic, it appears governments are not yet supported by
such tools. COVID-19 decision support tools in the literature (discussed in Section 2) fail to provide a systematic and statistically sound framework that any
decision maker can utilise to compare their options under their self-determined
constraints. This paper outlines how a Bayesian decision analysis can help balance the different priorities and uncertainties when evaluating the efficacy of
different options.
Bayesian decision analyses have been successfully adapted and implemented
for various applications including nuclear disaster support (Geldermann et al.,
2009), food security management (Barons et al., 2020), industrial risk management (Rikalovic et al., 2014) and environmental planning (Mattiussi et al.,
2014). For more Bayesian and frequentist applications of decision support systems, see Eom and Kim (2006). The COVID-19 threat is fast moving, driven
not only by the stochastic spread of the virus but also the dynamic control exerted by government on the activities of its agents and the general population to
the unfolding crisis. Any support tool for managing this crisis needs to acknowledge that, while governments may need to switch between lockdown regimes to
increase or decrease the severity of social restrictions in response to the virus
prevalence, the general population may tire of the uncertainty in their lives
attributable to constantly changing restrictions. In this paper, we draw from
previous work (Leonelli & Smith, 2015) to develop and present a new framework
of a multi-attribute decision support system (DSS) under a Bayesian approach
to address COVID-19 decision making challenges.
We note here that a Bayesian approach has been used for other COVID19 studies (Dehning et al., 2020; Mbuvha & Marwala, 2020; Neil et al., 2020;
Verma et al., 2020) although not for the purpose of providing a decision support
framework. Finally, note that in many situations, historical data alone may
be inadequate for estimating aggregate utilities from the various attributes.
Continuously generated data for our recent and evolving COVID-19 situation
along with empirical data from past epidemics and pandemics are useful to a
certain extent but are not sufficient. In this case, it is useful to elicit the required
3

estimates and their associated uncertainties through discussions among a panel
of domain experts. The iterative nature of such discussions and the development
of the corresponding DSS are detailed in Barons et al., 2018. The structure
and estimates of such a DSS would need to be repeatedly reviewed as more
information comes to light (e.g. development of a vaccine or new information
on immunity from the disease). Typically the iterative improvements to the
DSS are performed until the decision support model is deemed to be requisite
(Phillips, 1984). Given the urgency of the issue at hand, it is prudent to begin
the process of establishing such a requite DSS by first developing its framework
to address the new challenges of the COVID-19 decision making problem. As
more information and data come in, the DSS can be appropriately modified
within the framework and the data can be fed into it. Thus our contribution
here is the framework for a multi-attribute Bayesian DSS for COVID-19.

2

Related research

There have been several studies focused upon specific aspects of the COVID19 decision making problem such as impacts on mortality and poverty (Decerf
et al., 2020), a cost-benefit analyses of a lockdown (Layard et al., 2020; Miles
et al., 2020), and the impact of specific countermeasure strategies (Karnon,
2020; Lander, 2020; Peto et al., 2020). However, none of these studies adopted
a Bayesian approach which we believe is essential in this case as it not only
supports uncertainty handling but also gives the government a more transparent
and auditable tool. Additionally, these studies look at specific cases but do not
describe their general framework. This makes it hard to adapt the existing work
as new information comes in. We note here that clinical decision support tools
for COVID-19 (e.g. Y. Liu, Wang, et al., 2020; McRae et al., 2020; Reeves
et al., 2020; Wu et al., 2020) are beyond the scope of discussion for this paper.

3

A COVID-19 Decision Support Framework

In this section, we describe the framework for a DSS for deciding between
COVID-19 countermeasures. When examining the efficacy of competing strategies within a Bayesian decision analysis, it is convenient to break the elicitation
down into four phases:
(1) An elicitation of the class of strategies we might consider and the
attributes of the utility function. We consider the types of strategy, defined
by the switching between regimes when thresholds are reached in the system.
These aim to control the behaviour of the population, often tiered by the level
of stringency these represent.
The attributes of the utility function represent the various types of benefit
that each strategy might bring. This always concerns the survival of the population. Thus, we always include an attribute which measures: the years of

4

life saved across the population from avoiding infection by the virus; the years
saved through timely medical examinations, for example through the detection
of cancer and the encouragement to report to A&E when exhibiting symptoms
of a stroke or heart attack. A third clear threat to survival will be the response
to increased poverty as categorised by the distribution of life expectancy given
movements in the social class across the population induced by, for example,
less effective education, unemployment or reduced employment activities. Note
that all these attributes can be measured in units of years of life saved. On
top of these, we may need to consider further attributes that define the quality
of life of the population or its well being, such as measures of depression and
anxiety or economic hardship.
(2) We elicit a quantification of the decision centre’s marginal utilities
of these attributes and the criterion weights. The specification of the
marginal utilities on the attributes enables us to offset the expected benefits of
a particular policy against the uncertainty of attaining these benefits. Typically,
a utility is associated with the measurement of each of the attributes. These
attributes may be measurable directly or through proxies and can be elicited
using a variety of well-tested methods (Papamichail & French, 2003). In contexts
like these, decision makers are often risk averse and therefore have a bias towards
choices with more certain benefits, in which case the form of the utility functions
would be designed to reflect this (Smith, 2010). For simplicity, in the example
below we simply set these marginal utilities to be linear.
To evaluate the effects of choosing a particular strategy, we need to first decide which attributes are considered the most influential in the decision making
process. These attribute-specific utilities are then combined through a suitable
utility function which ranges from 0 to 1 (Smith, 2010). The attributes are chosen such that they are mutually utility independent and so the utility function
is a linear combination of these attributes.
The utility weights would typically need to be elicited from the decision
makers responsible for the choice and implementation of a particular candidate
policy. There are many successful methods of eliciting these values (Smith, 2010;
Winterfeldt & Edwards, 1993). In settings like the one described above, it is
often possible for approximate values of these weights on the different attributes
to be inferred through analysis of previous choices and stated public policies of
the responsible decisions centre.
(3) We build a probabilistic model of each attribute, performing a
Bayesian analysis which combines available data with probabilistic
expert judgements. This produces predictive models of the consequences on
the attributes of applying certain strategies. In this context, this requires some
sophistication since the spread of the virus at any time is complex and uncertain
as it is a function of the regime that a strategy is in at that time and therefore
needs intelligent science-driven forward simulations and computation Bayesian
techniques.

5

(4) A final score on each attribute can be calculated as an expectation of the utility function for each of the attributes. These scores are
weighted by the elicited criterion weight to provide expected utility scores for
each of the considered options. Note that there is always an explanatory rationale to whether or not a strategy scores well or not based on each of the different
individual attribute scores and the predictions of the uncertain consequences of
each strategy.
Explicitly, under the assumption of preferential independence of attributes
(Insua and French, 2010; Keeney, Raiffa, et al., 1993): when there are the subjective expected utility score U (s) of each strategy s and there are m attributes
a1 , a2 , . . . , am with respective marginal utilities U1 , U2 , . .P
. , Um and associated
m
criterion weights k1 , k2 , . . . , km , kj ≥ 0, j = 1, 2, . . . , m, j=1 kj = 1, is given
by
U (s) =

m
X

kj U j (s)

(1)

j=1

where the marginal expected utility scores are given by
Z
U j (s) = Uj (aj )dP (aj |s)
P (aj |s) is the centre’s subjective probability distribution - informed by expert
judgement, epidemiological modelling and data - of attribute aj given that strategy s is adopted, j = 1, 2, . . . , m. Note here that in this context it is natural to
define the attributes to extend to a point in time when the virus is no longer
a threat, so in this sense they are always uncertain throughout the decision
making process.

4

Example of Framework

In this section, we present an illustrative example of our framework. Our example looks at strategies that implement a combination of three regimes, each
corresponding to a regime implemented so far by the UK government. The three
regimes are:
• r0 - Complete lockdown: Work from home in effect, ban on nonessential interactions, complete closure of schools and non-essential businesses.
• r1 - Partial lockdown: Return to work, school, non-essential businesses
with 1m+ distancing.
• r2 - No lockdown: No restrictions.
The first two regimes are analogous to the UK policies in effect on 26th
March and 4th July respectively. The design of a specific strategy informs when
6

and how the transitions between these regimes might occur. We first outline
the details of the strategies we consider here, the attribute considered and the
estimation of their corresponding utilities under the different strategies. We
then demonstrate, with our DSS, how these strategies can be compared.

4.1

Countermeasure Strategies

While most of the population remains susceptible (due to lack of a vaccine,
treatments or long term immunity), strategies considered will naturally have
to acknowledge switching between these three regimes as and when required.
Further, we assume that at most one switch between regimes can take place
in a given week. Thus changes between regimes are not instantaneous and a
change will be effected once a week when necessary.
For simplicity, we simulate the effects of each strategy up to 40 weeks. Additionally, we assume that it is extremely unlikely that in 40 weeks from now
we can return to life without restrictions and so once we switch from a no lockdown regime (r0 ), we won’t switch back to it within this time period. Thus, the
possible switches between regimes that can be implemented within any countermeasure strategy are shown by the state-space diagram in Figure 1.

r0

r1

r2

Figure 1: State-space diagram of transitions between the three regimes
The transitions between regimes here are set such that they are dependent
on cumulative deaths and proportion of the population infected at the point
when the switch is made. Further assume that for the latter, there is a delay of
one week in reporting and so the decision maker will always have the estimates
from a week ago on any given day. Below we outline the different conditions
that a strategy might have for switching between regimes.
Initial Lockdown (r0 → r1 /r0 → r2 ): Given that we are in regime r0 , a
transition to r1 or r2 occurs when the cumulative deaths are larger than some
chosen critical value L. We consider three choices of L:
• Earlier lockdown: L1 = 100;
• Lockdown in line with the UK’s policy: L2 = 300;
• Later lockdown: L3 = 500.

7

Note that since we only transition out of r0 at most once, we don’t set out different conditions for transitioning to r1 and r2 . Instead, each strategy specifies
whether its transition out of r0 is to r1 or r2 .
Tightening of Lockdown (r1 → r2 ): When we’re in regime r1 , a 5% rise in
cases over a week will cause a transition from into r2 .
Easing of Lockdown (r2 → r1 ): Given that we are in regime r2 , a transition
into r1 occurs when the proportion of infected individuals falls below a certain
critical proportion E of the peak proportion of infected individuals since r2 has
been in effect. We consider the following choices of E:
• No easing: E0 = 0;
• Easing in line with the UK’s policy: E1 = 0.12;
• Quicker easing: E2 = 0.3;
• Very quick easing: E3 = 0.5.
Based on these transition rules, we design our strategies. To align with the
countermeasure strategies enacted by countries within Europe, we assume that
the initial transition out of r0 is to r2 for all but three of the strategies we
consider. A strategy denoted as Li Ej has initial transition from r0 to r2 under
critical value Li and allows for easing from r2 to r1 under critical proportion Ej
where i ∈ {1, 2, 3} and j ∈ {0, 1, 2, 3}. Further, analogous to Sweden’s strategy,
we define three strategies denotes by Li E∗ where the initial transition is from
r0 to r1 under critical value Li , i ∈ {1, 2, 3}. Under these three strategies, once
regime r1 is effected, it remains in place till the end of the simulations with no
transition into r2 permitted.

4.2

Attributes and Utilities

We will consider the attributes that affect the life expectancy of individuals
within our population. Figure 2 shows the attribute tree for our example. Since
we are only considering health-related attributes, all our attributes can be measured in terms of aggregate expected life-years lost by the population. We thus
assume that the marginal utility score Ūi (s) for attribute ai , ∀i = 1, 2, 3 under
strategy s is a decreasing linear function of the life-years lost. Hence, maximising the aggregate utility score Ū (s) for strategy s is equivalent to minimising
µ(s), the raw attribute score given by
µ(s) =

3
X

ki µi (s),

(2)

i=1

where µi (s) is the expected life-years lost under attribute ai . Clearly, µi (s) will
not lie in the range of 0 to 1 but the scores of different strategies can be easily
8

compared through the inverse relationship given as the lower the raw attribute
score, the more preferable the strategy. We next describe how we measure these
attributes.
This attribute tree can be easily adapted to add other attributes of interest for the decision maker such as cost of strategy implementation, economic
impacts and social impacts such as quality of life. It is necessary to ensure
that the attributes chosen satisfy the required preferential independence requirements (Keeney, Raiffa, et al., 1993; Leonelli & Smith, 2015).

Attributes

Long term
a¯2

Short to medium term
a¯1
Delayed
cancer diagnoses
a2

Covid-19 Deaths
a1

Poverty
a3

Figure 2: Example of an attribute tree for COVID-19.
COVID-19 deaths (a1 )
To estimate the deaths from COVID-19 and the proportion of infected individuals in the population, we use a simple discrete-time SIRD compartmental
epidemiological model. The states in this model are “Susceptible” (S), “Infectious” (I), “Recovered” (R) and “Dead” (D). The dynamics of this model are
described in Figure 3. Clearly, D is an absorbing state and we assume that
those that have recovered from COVID-19 are immune to it. We stratify our
population in this model by region and age.

Figure 3: SIRD disease dynamics
Figure 4 shows how the disease dynamics change over time under two cases:
9

the first where the initial transition is to r2 with subsequent switches back and
forth between r2 and r1 ; the second where there is no lockdown. In the first
case, we see that our model captures a steep drop in the number of cases with
several smaller peaks caused by switching between r1 and r2 . In the second case,
we see a point in mid-March when the rate of infection decreases. However, this
effect is short-lived with 2,500,000 infected individuals at the peak compared to
400,000 in the first case with the peak coming much earlier in March instead of
September.

(a) With lockdown

(b) No lockdown

Figure 4: Predicted number of infected individuals under two different strategies
Delayed cancer diagnoses (a2 )
Deaths due to delayed diagnosis of cancer are used here as a proxy of deaths
that would not have normally occurred as a composite of missed treatments
and patients who have not presented in hospital. Sud et al. (2020) evaluate how
delays to cancer diagnoses due to the COVID-19 outbreak impact survival and
life-years lost. This study gives a nearly linear relationship for delay in cancer
diagnoses to extra deaths per age group. With this, we can estimate the total
number of extra deaths per extra week of lockdown where referral pathways are
closed. We will assume that the number of deaths in a partial lockdown is half
of those in a total lockdown.
Poverty (a2 )
Decerf et al. (2020) evaluate the impact of the COVID-19 outbreak in terms
of number of life-years lost and the additional number of poverty-years suffered.
The life-years lost by an individual are calculated as the country-specific residual life expectancy at the age of the individual. These are calculated for deaths
directly caused by COVID-19. The poverty-years are calculated as the effect
of the COVID-19 induced change in GDP on the variations in the country’s
population living below the poverty threshold. The changes in GDP here are
forecast by the country’s central bank and the World Bank’s Global Economics
10

Prospect. Decerf et al. (2020) conservatively assumes that these individuals will
remain poor only for a single year.
Further details on the disease dynamics model and its parameters, as well
as more information on the last two attributes are given in the supplementary
materials. The weights for these attributes reflect how the decision maker prioritises them. We compare the effects of different setting of the attribute weights
k = (k1 , k2 , k3 ) on the aggregate weighted life-years lost where weight ki is for
attribute ai , i = 1, 2, 3. Consider the following weights:
• (1, 0, 0);
• (0.5, 0.5, 0);
• (1/3, 1/3, 1/3);
• (0.45, 0.45, 0.1).

11

4.3

Results

Figure 5: Aggregate weighted life-years lost under different attribute weightings
for each strategy. Top left: COVID-19 deaths only. Top right: COVID-19 and
delayed cancer diagnoses deaths equally weighted. Bottom left: COVID-19,
delayed cancer diagnoses and poverty deaths equally weighted. Bottom right:
COVID-19, delayed cancer diagnoses and poverty deaths custom weighting.
From Figure 5, we can see that under k = (1, 0, 0) where only life-years lost
due to COVID-19 are of interest, strategies that do not involve a lockdown
perform magnitudes worse. Looking at strategies that do involve lockdown
earlier lockdown and slower easing of lockdown lead to fewer life-years lost. The
second scenario under k = (0.5, 0.5, 0) in which life-years lost due to delayed
cancer diagnoses are also considered, we can begin to see the negative impacts
of the lockdown with reduced disparity between strategies that include lockdown
and those that do not. However, the lockdown strategies remain more desirable.
This example also shows little difference between the lockdown strategies that
only differed in their lockdown time with more significant differences depending

12

on when the lockdown conditions were eased.
Under k = (1/3, 1/3, 1/3) which includes life-years lost due to poverty with
equal weighting for all attributes, we can see that the non-lockdown strategies
perform the best. Finally under k = (0.45, 0.45, 0.1), we treat short and medium
term years lost as more important than long term years lost. While lockdown
strategies still perform better, the disparity among all strategies is much less.

Figure 6: Pareto plots showing the trade-off between life-years lost (LYL) due
to poverty (deprivation) on one hand and COVID-19 and delayed cancer diagnoses on the other. The dashed lines represent examples of different attribute
weightings.
We further explore these trade-offs in Figure 6 which shows a Pareto front
plotting life-years lost due to poverty against those lost from COVID-19 and
cancer combined, assuming equal weighting. We can see how the trade-off in
weights leads to different strategies being the most effective with the weights
giving the gradient of the line. This plot can help to reduce the number of
strategies considered; as in this example strategies with no easing of lockdown
are strictly dominated by strategies with quick easing of lockdown. Thus, there
is no weighting of attributes in which we would rather have no easing. We
can also find the value c in k ∗ = (c, c, 1 − 2c) for which the decision maker
would swap preferences between strategies that involve lockdown and those
that don’t. In this example that point is at c = 0.414, where short and medium
13

term attributes are weighted as 2.42 times more important than long term attributes. At c ≥ 0.414, the optimal weighting would be strategies that involve
lockdown. For comparing trade-offs between more attributes at the same time,
an n-dimensional Pareto front with each axis on its own label should be used.
Further analyses of the trade-offs between the attributes using Pareto fronts is
given in the supplementary materials.

5

Discussion

In this paper, we presented a statistically sound and robust framework under
which countermeasure strategies for COVID-19 can be evaluated. This framework enables the decision centre to input the attributes they consider to be vital,
with attribute weights reflecting their priorities, to such an evaluation and to
choose an appropriate metric by which these attributes can be measured.
Our illustrative example can be refined in several ways. Firstly, more attributes such as excess death and economic impacts could be considered. Further, our example does not consider the impact on the attributes to the UK
caused as a spillover effect of the way other countries manage COVID-19. For
example, the UK’s economy is likely to be affected by COVID-19 spreading in
other countries, increasing levels of poverty regardless of the UK’s state of lockdown. Our model implicitly assumes that such further causes of deprivation are
additive whereas the relationship between impacts to domestic employment and
international economic variables on the differential scores associated with different options is likely to be more subtle. However, we note that by embarking
on this decision analysis we are drawn into trying to quantify such issues. Furthermore, the analysis gives a framework for introducing such studies as these
become available.
Another critical issue that should impinge on a more measured analysis
is the capacity of the NHS both with respect to numbers of available beds
and the numbers of doctors and nurses available to treat non-COVID patients.
Obviously, as COVID hospital cases rise, this can cause all non-urgent hospital
procedures to cease. Understanding and integrating these capacity issues - which
are regional in nature - would form a critical element of the model we might
employ in a serious model.
We also assumed that all the marginal utilities were linear. In contexts like
the one above, the decision centre tends to be risk adverse. The mathematics
then means that the scores we assign to different options which lead to more
uncertain outcomes are penalised. However, once the marginal utilities have
been elicited the framework is able to score the different options in the light
of this and the type of analysis above can be adapted. Further, compliance
of the population to flip-flopping between regimes could be accounted for by
accounting for it within the probabilistic predictions of the attributes.
The epidemiological model describing the disease dynamics could be refined
in several ways; see Aguilar et al. (2020) and Keeling et al. (2020). In particular,
we could choose a stochastic disease model such as Abrams et al. (2020). As-

14

sumptions on immunity after recovery might also need to be revised as relevant
studies become available; for e.g. T. Liu et al. (2020) and Long et al. (2020).
We are currently working on incorporating these additional features into our
example within our presented framework. This work will be reported in a later
paper.

15

S1: Disease dynamic model
In our example, the UK will be split up into 14 regions and the 7 age groups
used by the ONS, each with population Ni which we will assume to be constant.
Table 1 shows the regions and age groups. We further split up these populations
into age groups giving us Ni,a . This model has the constraint:
Si,a (t) + Ii,a (t) + Ri,a (t) + Di,a (t) = Ni,a

(3)

For locations i = 1, 2, . . . , 14 and age classifications a = 1, 2, . . . , 7. For any time
t, the sum of individuals in each state in location i in age group a is equal to
the number of individuals in the sub population i in age group a. The disease
dynamics are shown in Equations (5-6).
∆Si,a (t) = −βa,s
∆Ii,a (t) = βa

Ii (t)
Si,a (t)
Ni

Ii (t)
Si,a (t) − (γa + λa )Ii,a (t)
Ni

(4)
(5)

∆Ri,a (t) = γa Ii,a (t)

(6)

∆Di,a (t) = λa Ii,a (t)

(7)

Each time step in this model represents a day, with βa , γa and λa being the
retrospective probabilities of infection, recovery and death within a day. We
will assume each of these rates are independent of location and time but are
age dependent. βa is dependent on what strategy is currently being enforced
to fight the infection. Ii is the total number of infectious people in location i.
This is used in Equations 4 and 5 as we are assuming uniform mixing between
age groups.

S2: Parameters
S2.1: λa and γa
To estimate γa and λa , we will use estimates of the probability of dying in
each age group Da from Ferguson et al., 2020. We will assume that 28 days is
sufficient time after a positive test for an individual’s death not to be thought of
as due to coronavirus. We will therefore model that after 28 days, the probability
of still being infected is 0.05. Using this, we can estimate γa and λa by solving
the following:
27
X
(γa + λa )(1 − γa − λa )i = 0.95
(8)
i=0
∞
X
(λa )(1 − γa − λa )i = Da
i=0

16

(9)

Regions
North East
North West
Yorkshire and the Humber
East Midlands
West Midlands
East
London
South East
South West
Wales
Scotland
Northern Ireland

Age groups
Under 1
1-14
15-44
45-64
65-74
75-84
85 and over

Table 1: Table showing regions and age groups used in our analysis
Equations 8 and 9 give the probability of either recovering or dying in 28 days
since infection and the probability of dying after becoming infected respectively,
(1 − γa − λa )i is the probability that an infected individual of age a is still
infectious in time step i.
Equation 8 can be solved numerically giving λa + γa = 0.101466 and combining this with Equation 9 can be used to give each λa and γa values.
S2.2: βa
We can calculate an estimate for βa by splitting it into p (the probability of
becoming infected after contact with an infected individual) multiplied by ca
(the average number of contacts an individual in age group a has while strategy
s is being enforced). Under normal conditions, the average number of contacts
for individuals of each age can be found from Mossong et al., 2008. We assume
under partial lockdown that the number of contacts will be half of this and
within lockdown individuals of any age group will have 3 contacts. We can
work out an estimate of p for our example by considering the value of R0 , the
average number of people an infectious person will infect in a fully susceptible
population. There have been many estimates of R0 for COVID-19. (Y. Liu,
Gayle, et al., 2020) gives a review of these giving us a medium value of 2.79.
We can calculate p as follows:
P
P∞
i
a∈A na
i=0 ca p(1 − γa − λa )
P
(10)
R0 =
a∈A na
P∞
Here i=0 ca p(1−γa −λa )i is the average number of infections that an infectious
individual in age group a will cause. The population weighted average of this
gives R0 . This can be rewritten to give p and solved using the previously

17

described values.
p= P

a∈A

R0
Pinf

i=0

P

a∈A

na

na ca (1 − γa − λa )i

(11)

This gives p=0.023.
S2.3:Initial conditions
The model was initialised on the 2nd March: the first date when all regions in
the UK had at least one coronavirus case.

S3: Other Attributes
S3.1: Delayed cancer diagnoses
Sud et al., 2020 use 10-year age- and stage-stratified cancer survival estimates
in England for 20 different common tumour types present in adults using information from Public Health England. Using these estimates and annual numbers
of early-stage cancers diagnosed via the ‘2-week-wait’ pathway, they calculate
probable lives and life years lost in England dependant on the length of a lockdown and how many symptomatic patients’ assessments are delayed by lockdown.
The research primarily focuses on early stage I-III cancers; they assume
delays to stage IV cancer treatment will not affect 10 year survival. They also
on focus on diagnosis delays instead of treatment delays; it is assumed that there
is no delay to treatment, which the authors accept is unlikely in reality. The
authors calculate the attributable lives lost by length of delay due to the pausing
of the ‘2-week-wait’ pathway for 1-6 months for 20 different tumour types. They
also age-stratify each cancer type to denote the proportion of tumours prevalent
in each age group. By combining this information, we can identify how many
lives are lost for each cancer in each age group dependant on how long the
‘2-week-wait’ pathway is not operating at 100% capacity for.

S3.2: Deaths due to poverty
There are several assumptions involved in estimating LY and PY. The Decerf et
al., 2020 state that their methodology gives a conservative estimate by providing
a upper bound for LY and a lower bound for PY. The deaths caused indirectly by
COVID-19 have not been considered in their paper. It is unrealistic to assume
that the condition of individuals who are faced with poverty will improve within
a single year and will not have further lasting effects. Thus, the premature
mortality effects of poverty are not actually considered (Baland et al., 2019).
Additionally, it is assumed that the GDP reduction caused by the economic
contraction is distribution neutral, i.e. the inequality in the society remains
constant. However, this is known not to be the case (Van Lancker & Parolin,
2020). While there are several shortcomings to these estimates, we use them in

18

Age group
children
working-age
pension-age
total

2017/2018 estimates
4.6
8.3
1.3
14.2

PY in 2020
1.41
2.54
0.42
4.37

Equivalent LY
0.16
0.29
0.048
0.498

Table 2: PY and its equivalent LY in 2020 in the UK. All estimates are in
millions.
our paper for illustrative purposes and for the lack of better estimates regarding
deprivation caused by COVID-19 and the lockdown at this point of the pandemic
(Miles et al., 2020).
Decerf et al. (2020) estimates PY for the UK at 4,370,000 and LY as 495,319
as of early June 2020. Since there are about 8.8 times as many PY as LY,
they assume that a welfare policy treating these two effects as equal would
judge 8.8 PY to be equivalent to 1 LY. In Table 2 we use the estimates of
the population living under the poverty threshold in the UK, stratified by age
(‘children’, ‘working-age’ and ‘pension-age’) as given in Commission (2019).
Here, we assume that children comprise of those under 16 years of age,
working-age as those between 16 and 65 years of age, and pension-age as those
over 65 years. Decerf et al. (2020) evaluated the effect of the COVID-19 pandemic on LY and PY as of early June 2020. For the UK, this period corresponds
to the time that the UK was more or less under complete lockdown. In our paper, we shall assume - for illustrative purposes - that the impacts on PY were
caused as a direct effect of the lockdown and whose alleviation would be proportional to the removal of lockdown restrictions.

S3.3: Age-stratification
When the age-stratification from our data sources are not the same as the agestratification in this study, where possible, the age-stratification were combined.
Where the age-stratification in the paper did not match the stratification in our
study, the group was split proportionally (for example, the 60-69 age group
in the paper was split 50/50 into the appropriate age ranges for this research
of 45-64 and 65-74). This assumes that the proportion of cases is uniformly
distributed across the age group.

S4: Age comparison of strategies
We explore how the strategy impacts different age groups in Figure 7. Looking
at the critical weightings ko∗ = (co , co , (1 − 2co )) and ku∗ = (cu , cu , (1 − 2cu ))
for switching between strategies that involve lockdown and those that don’t for
groups of over and under 65 years old respectively. We get cu = 0.472 and
co = 0.331, which means when selecting strategies that focus on people over the
age of 65 you would have to value short and medium term attributes as 0.982
19

(a) Under 65 year olds

(b) Over 65 year olds

Figure 7: Pareto plots showing the trade-offs of life-years lost due to COVID19 and delayed cancer diagnoses to life-years lost due to poverty (deprivation)
comparing the effects of different trade-offs on the two age classifications of
over and under 65 year olds. The dashed lines represent examples of different
attribute weightings.

20

times as important to prefer strategies that don’t involve lockdown. When
optimising to benefit people under the age of 65, you would have to value short
and medium term attributes as 8.585 times as important to consider strategies
that involve lockdowns.

S5: Life years lost under each attribute
Figure 8 shows the life years lost under each attribute for each of the different
strategies we have considered in this paper.

21

22
Figure 8: Diagram showing the LYL under each attribute due to each strategy.

References
Abrams, S., Wambua, J., Santermans, E., Willem, L., Kuylen, E., Coletti, P.,
Libin, P., Faes, C., Petrof, O., Herzog, S. A., et al. (2020). Modeling
the early phase of the Belgian COVID-19 epidemic using a stochastic compartmental model and studying its implied future trajectories.
medRxiv.
Aguilar, J. B., Faust, J. S., Westafer, L. M., & Gutierrez, J. B. (2020). Investigating the impact of asymptomatic carriers on COVID-19 transmission.
medRxiv.
Baland, J.-M., Decerf, B., & Cassan, G. (2019). “too young to die”. deprivation
measures combining poverty and premature mortality.
Barons, M. J., Fonseca, T. C., Davis, A., & Smith, J. Q. (2020). A decision
support system for addressing food security in the UK. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2004.06764.
Barons, M. J., Wright, S. K., & Smith, J. Q. (2018). Eliciting probabilistic judgements for integrating decision support systems. Elicitation (pp. 445–
478). Springer.
BBC Rachel Schraer & Ben Butcher. (2020). Local lockdown UK: Do city-wide
curbs work? It’s not clear. https : / / www . bbc . co . uk / news / health 54239538
Commission, S. M. (2019). Social metrics commission 2019 results tables. https:
//socialmetricscommission.org.uk/social- metrics- commission- resultstables-2/
Decerf, B., Ferreira, F. H., Mahler, D. G., & Sterck, O. (2020). Lives and livelihoods: Estimates of the global mortality and poverty effects of the
COVID-19 pandemic.
Dehning, J., Zierenberg, J., Spitzner, F. P., Wibral, M., Neto, J. P., Wilczek,
M., & Priesemann, V. (2020). Inferring change points in the spread of
COVID-19 reveals the effectiveness of interventions. Science.
Eom, S., & Kim, E. (2006). A survey of decision support system applications
(1995–2001). Journal of the Operational Research Society, 57 (11), 1264–
1278.
Ferguson, N., Laydon, D., Nedjati Gilani, G., Imai, N., Ainslie, K., Baguelin, M.,
Bhatia, S., Boonyasiri, A., Cucunuba Perez, Z., Cuomo-Dannenburg,
G., et al. (2020). Report 9: Impact of non-pharmaceutical interventions
(NPIs) to reduce COVID-19 mortality and healthcare demand.
French, S. (1995). Uncertainty and imprecision: Modelling and analysis. Journal
of the Operational Research Society, 46 (1), 70–79.
Geldermann, J., Bertsch, V., Treitz, M., French, S., Papamichail, K. N., &
Hämäläinen, R. P. (2009). Multi-criteria decision support and evaluation of strategies for nuclear remediation management. Omega, 37 (1),
238–251.
HM Revenue & Customs, UK. (2020). HMRC coronavirus (COVID-19) statistics. https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/hmrc-coronaviruscovid-19-statistics
23

Insua, D. R., & French, S. (2010). E-democracy: A group decision and negotiation perspective. Springer Science Business Media B.V.
Karnon, J. (2020). A simple decision analysis of a mandatory lockdown response
to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Keeling, M. J., Hill, E., Gorsich, E., Penman, B., Guyver-Fletcher, G., Holmes,
A., Leng, T., McKimm, H., Tamborrino, M., Dyson, L., et al. (2020).
Predictions of COVID-19 dynamics in the UK: Short-term forecasting
and analysis of potential exit strategies. medRxiv.
Keeney, R. L., Raiffa, H. et al. (1993). Decisions with multiple objectives: Preferences and value trade-offs. Cambridge university press.
Lander, A. D. (2020). The UK COVID-19 lockdown weakened in April and May
2020: Implications for the size of the epidemic and for outcomes had
lockdown been earlier. medRxiv.
Layard, R., Clark, A., De Neve, J.-E., Krekel, C., Fancourt, D., Hey, N., &
O’Donnell, G. (2020). When to release the lockdown? A wellbeing framework for analysing costs and benefits.
Leonelli, M., & Smith, J. Q. (2015). Bayesian decision support for complex
systems with many distributed experts. Annals of Operations Research,
235 (1), 517–542.
Liu, T., Wu, S., Tao, H., Zeng, G., Zhou, F., Guo, F., & Wang, X. (2020). Prevalence of IgG antibodies to SARS-CoV-2 in Wuhan- implications for
the ability to produce long-lasting protective antibodies against SARSCoV-2. medRxiv.
Liu, Y., Gayle, A. A., Wilder-Smith, A., & Rocklöv, J. (2020). The reproductive
number of COVID-19 is higher compared to SARS coronavirus. Journal
of travel medicine.
Liu, Y., Wang, Z., Ren, J., Tian, Y., Zhou, M., Zhou, T., Ye, K., Zhao, Y.,
Qiu, Y., & Li, J. (2020). A COVID-19 Risk Assessment Decision Support System for General Practitioners: Design and Development Study.
Journal of medical Internet research, 22 (6), e19786.
Long, Q.-X., Tang, X.-J., Shi, Q.-L., Li, Q., Deng, H.-J., Yuan, J., Hu, J.-L.,
Xu, W., Zhang, Y., Lv, F.-J., et al. (2020). Clinical and immunological
assessment of asymptomatic SARS-CoV-2 infections. Nature Medicine,
1–5.
Mattiussi, A., Rosano, M., & Simeoni, P. (2014). A decision support system for
sustainable energy supply combining multi-objective and multi-attribute
analysis: An Australian case study. Decision Support Systems, 57, 150–
159.
Mbuvha, R., & Marwala, T. (2020). Bayesian Inference of COVID-19 Spreading
Rates in South Africa. PLOS ONE, 15 (8), 1–16. https://doi.org/10.
1371/journal.pone.0237126
McRae, M. P., Simmons, G. W., Christodoulides, N. J., Lu, Z., Kang, S. K.,
Fenyo, D., Alcorn, T., Dapkins, I. P., Sharif, I., Vurmaz, D., et al.
(2020). Clinical decision support tool and rapid point-of-care platform
for determining disease severity in patients with COVID-19. Lab on a
Chip.
24

Miles, D. K., Stedman, M., & Heald, A. H. (2020). “Stay at Home, Protect
the National Health Service, Save Lives”: A cost benefit analysis of
the lockdown in the United Kingdom. International Journal of Clinical
Practice, e13674.
Mossong, J., Hens, N., Jit, M., Beutels, P., Auranen, K., Mikolajczyk, R., Massari, M., Salmaso, S., Tomba, G. S., Wallinga, J., et al. (2008). Social
contacts and mixing patterns relevant to the spread of infectious diseases. PLoS Med, 5 (3), e74.
Neil, M., Fenton, N., Osman, M., & McLachlan, S. (2020). Bayesian Network
Analysis of COVID-19 data reveals higher Infection Prevalence Rates
and lower Fatality Rates than widely reported. medRxiv.
Papamichail, K. N., & French, S. (2003). Explaining and justifying the advice
of a decision support system: A natural language generation approach.
Expert Systems with Applications, 24 (1), 35–48.
Peto, J., Alwan, N. A., Godfrey, K. M., Burgess, R. A., Hunter, D. J., Riboli,
E., Romer, P., Buchan, I., Colbourn, T., Costelloe, C., et al. (2020).
Universal weekly testing as the UK COVID-19 lockdown exit strategy.
The Lancet, 395 (10234), 1420–1421.
Phillips, L. D. (1984). A theory of requisite decision models. Acta psychologica,
56 (1-3), 29–48.
PwC UK. (2020). UK Economic update. https://www.pwc.co.uk/premium/
covid-19/uk-economic-update-covid-19.pdf
Reeves, J. J., Hollandsworth, H. M., Torriani, F. J., Taplitz, R., Abeles, S., TaiSeale, M., Millen, M., Clay, B. J., & Longhurst, C. A. (2020). Rapid
response to COVID-19: Health informatics support for outbreak management in an academic health system. Journal of the American Medical
Informatics Association, 27 (6), 853–859.
Rikalovic, A., Cosic, I., & Lazarevic, D. (2014). GIS based multi-criteria analysis
for industrial site selection. Procedia engineering, 69 (12), 1054–1063.
Smith, J. Q. (2010). Bayesian decision analysis: Principles and practice. Cambridge University Press.
Sud, A., Torr, B., Jones, M. E., Broggio, J., Scott, S., Loveday, C., Garrett,
A., Gronthoud, F., Nicol, D. L., Jhanji, S., et al. (2020). Effect of delays in the 2-week-wait cancer referral pathway during the COVID-19
pandemic on cancer survival in the uk: A modelling study. The Lancet
Oncology, 21 (8), 1035–1044.
Van Lancker, W., & Parolin, Z. (2020). COVID-19, school closures, and child
poverty: A social crisis in the making. The Lancet Public Health, 5 (5),
e243–e244.
Verma, B. K., Verma, M., Verma, V. K., Abdullah, R. B., Nath, D. C., Khan,
H. T., Verma, A., Vishwakarma, R. K., & Verma, V. (2020). Global
lockdown: An effective safeguard in responding to the threat of COVID19. Journal of Evaluation in Clinical Practice.
Winterfeldt, D. v., & Edwards, W. (1993). Decision analysis and behavioral
research. Cambridge University Press.

25

Wu, G., Yang, P., Xie, Y., Woodruff, H. C., Rao, X., Guiot, J., Frix, A.-N.,
Louis, R., Moutschen, M., Li, J., et al. (2020). Development of a clinical decision support system for severity risk prediction and triage of
COVID-19 patients at hospital admission: An international multicentre
study. European Respiratory Journal, 56 (2).

26

