Where you live matters: a spatial analysis of COVID-19 mortality
Dr Behzad Javaheri
Department of Computer Science, City University of London, London, UK. behzad.javaheri@city.ac.uk
Abstract— The COVID-19 pandemic has caused ~ 2 million fatalities. Significant progress has been made in advancing our
understanding of the disease process, one of the unanswered questions, however, is the anomaly in the case/mortality ratio with
Mexico as a clear example. Herein, this anomaly is explored by spatial analysis and whether mortality varies locally according
to local factors. To address this, hexagonal cartogram maps (hexbin) used to spatially map COVID-19 mortality and visualise
association with patient-level data on demographics and pre-existing health conditions. This was further interrogated at local
Mexico City level by choropleth mapping. Our data show that the use of hexagonal cartograms is a better approach for spatial
mapping of COVID-19 data in Mexico as it addresses bias in area size and population. We report sex/age-related spatial
relationship with mortality amongst the Mexican states and a trend between health conditions and mortality at the state level.
Within Mexico City, there is a clear south, north divide with higher mortality in the northern municipalities. Deceased patients
in these northern municipalities have the highest pre-existing health conditions. Taken together, this study provides an improved
presentation of COVID-19 mapping in Mexico and demonstrates spatial divergence of the mortality in Mexico.

1

P R OBL EM S T AT EME NT

It is more than 1 year since a new coronavirus strain, SARSCoV-2, the underlying cause for the current pandemic has been
identified [1]. Despite the global effort, COVID-19 has spread
to 201 countries leading to ~90 million cases with ~2 million
fatalities [2].
To better understand the disease aiming to suppress
mortality, various aspects of the pandemic has been the subject
of numerous studies covering disciplines including social
sciences, medicine, mathematics and artificial intelligence.
A significant advance in our understanding of COVID-19
pandemic has been made, however, many unanswered
questions remain. In particular, the underlying cause for the
anomaly in the case-fatality ratio is unclear. The clear example
is Mexico, which is the 13th country with the highest confirmed
cases, however, with the 4th highest mortality. Is this anomaly
due to interrelationship between disease and factors related to
the environment/geographical location? The notion that
COVID-19 mortality varies locally forms the basis of this study.
This study aims to explore the spatial distribution of
COVID-19 mortality and relationship to country and local level
data on demographics and pre-existing health conditions. To
address the central question, two databases are used: a) a
publicly available country aggregate dataset of global COVID19 cases to explore the position of Mexico amongst the other
countries [3] and a dataset provided by the Mexican Ministry of
Health. The latter is a unique patient-level dataset detailing
health background, demographics and associated comorbidities
for each COVID-19 patient together with disease outcome [4].
2

S TAT E

OF T HE

A RT

One of the earliest studies (February 2020) to investigate the
spatial analysis of the current pandemic used data from ~ 1100
COVID-19 patients together with their demographic data
including gender and age to identify the spread of the virus
through Chinese provinces, whether they experienced contact
with wild-life or visited Wuhan, the currently reported origin
of the pandemic. The authors mapped the distribution of

patients across Mainland China [5]. Furthermore, Chen et
al., (2020), examined the spatial distribution of COVID-19
patients and correlation with the migration of the Wuhan
resident during the early phase of the crisis and concluded that
Wuhan residents were the main source of infection spread to
other Chinese provinces [6]. In addition, using spatiotemporal
analysis, Huang et al., (2020) reported that a high number of
COVID-19 cases in Wenzhou province (neighbouring
pandemic origin) in earlier phase was due to a significant
number of residents travelling from Wuhan to Wenzhou [7].
Other studies have examined the relationship between
COVID-19, geography and/or health and socioeconomic
factors. For example, Padula and Davidson (2020) investigated
the country-based relationship between COVID-19 mortality
and number of healthcare workers and reported an inverse
relationship [8]. Moreover, Mollalo et al., (2020), studied the
relationship between a range of socioeconomic, behavioural,
environmental and demographic factors of COVID-19 patients
to their geographical locations [9]. The authors reported that
income, number of healthcare workers in the area and ethnicity
correlate with a high mortality rate in the US states. Other
studies mapped COVID-19 data to geographical locations in
Brazil [10], India [11], USA [12], Spain [13], Iran [14], Israel
[15], Mexico [16] and Pakistan [17].
These studies have significantly enhanced our
understanding of the epidemiological spread of the disease and
provided spatial information, typically by a map with the
weight of the reported measure (mortality, survival, etc.)
represented by colour intensity or symbols of different sizes
[12].
This approach, nonetheless, leads to a visual bias by overemphasizing geographically large but sparsely populated area,
conversely underrepresenting densely populated cities. This is
particularly a significant issue as the majority of COVID-19
mortality has occurred within densely populated large cities.
An alternative approach is by assigning the same weight to
each area for equal representation. One method to achieve this

2

is by hexbin cartogram, a new method that is gaining popularity
particularly for election reporting [18]. This allows revealing
patterns in conventional choropleth maps that are otherwise
hidden due to geographical weight of such maps. Using hexbin
plots Beecham et al., 2018 reported metropolitan weight of
electorate that voted Remain in the 2016 UK referendum on
membership of the European Union.
Herein, the spatial distribution and relationship of COVID19 mortality in Mexico, as one of the most affected countries,
will be examined. In addition, the spatial relationship of
mortality to a range of pre-existing health conditions and
demographics (age, sex) will be investigated at country and
local levels.
3

P R OPER TIE S

OF T HE

D ATA

Two datasets are used in this study: a) country aggregate
data provided by the Lancet COVID-19 Commission [3] to
visualise the position of Mexico amongst the affected countries
and; b) Mexico COVID-19 patient-level data released by the
Mexican Ministry of Health [4] for spatial mapping.
The country aggregate data contain details of COVID-19 in
201 countries from the start of the pandemic. It currently
contains 4.8 million datapoints covering 201 countries, 374 days
with 154 indicators related to cases confirmed, mortality,
demographics pre-existing health and socioeconomic status as
well as measures related to stringency levels of government
response around the world. Measures were taken to clean this
dataset reported recently [19]; briefly, the missing values were
removed and a subset of data related to the top 15 affected
countries used to plot confirmed cases, recovered and mortality.
In addition, time-series data for recovery and mortality in
Mexico from April/2020 to Nov/2020 were extracted to plot and
identify any potential pattern.
Mexico COVID-19 data [4] detailing individual-level
information of patients and their pre-existing health background
(e.g. obesity, diabetes, pulmonary heart disease, chronic kidney
disease, etc.), behavioural (smoking), demographics (age,
gender) and outcome of the disease and whether the patient
survived or deceased. The dataset contains information related
to 3,628,951 patients with 40 columns. Using the dictionary
provided the name of the columns renamed from Spanish to
English and the variables unrelated to the remit of this study
(e.g., record ID) were removed. Missing and partial data related
to patients were also removed. The distribution of variables used
for analysis is plotted and visualised in Figure1. Data show that
the majority of COVID-19 patients survived, further analysis
revealed that 175,494 out of total 3,628,951 patients deceased.
Survival data removed and analysis focused on mortality.
Information in this dataset is in a binary format (1: True, 2:
False), therefore, to obtain the count of patients for each
Mexican state and municipalities within, a series of grouping
operations were performed. This resulted in a table containing
data related to mortality only with the total count of males,
females, whether patients intubated, exhibited pneumonia,
diabetes, had the chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD), asthmatic, immunosuppression, hypertension,
cardiovascular disease, obesity, chronic kidney disease and age
ranges of 0-20, 20-40, 40-60, 60-80 and 80-110. These
operations were performed in Python.

Fig. 1. Distribution of Mexico COVID-19 data. Variables
plotted include age, obesity, diabetes, chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COD), asthma, immunosuppression,
hypertension, cardiovascular and kidney disease, presence of
other comorbidities, pneumonia and mortality.
The resulting dataset imported into R and merged with a
sample dataset with “mxmaps” library to obtain a population of
each state and municipality as well as to generate the dataset
required by the library for plotting thematic choropleth and
hexbin maps [20].
4
4.1

A N AL YSIS
Approach

The steps which are taken in this study detailed in Figure 2.
Initially, the status of COVID-19 mortality in Mexico amongst
other countries explored. To achieve this, bar plots of confirmed
cases, recovered, and mortality plotted using Seaborn library for
Python. Subsequently, the number of recovered and mortality
per million/population plotted to visually examine patterns.
The central tenet in this study is to examine spatial variation
in COVID-19 mortality in Mexico states and local
municipalities. If found, these associations will be further
examined at a local level.

Fig. 2. Workflow for the analysis of COVID-19 data performed in
this study.

To ascertain geographical link to disease it is important to
present data without inherent bias. This is particularly an issue
when a country of interest is composed of a large sparsely
populated and small densely populated area. A clear example

in Mexico is the comparison between the large state of
Chihuahua (247,455 square km) on the north of Mexico with a
population of 3,376,062 and mortality of 6,431. In contrast,
Mexico City, a geographically small (1,485 square km) is a
densely populated city (8,918,653) and the 32nd Mexican state
that has suffered 22,880 mortality. Whilst, the geographical
size of Chihuahua is ~167 times bigger than Mexico City, its
population is 260% smaller than Mexico City with a reported
355% less mortality.

per million of the population has been consistently below 10
with one exception of 23/million in October 2020 (Fig.3B).

The approach in this study to overcome this bias is to use a
method of equal representation of each geographical area. This
is indeed used in spatial analysis of elections where analysts
are faced with a similar dilemma. Hexbin mapping produces a
map similar to a scatter plot, with the graphing space divided
into equally-sized hexagonal cartograms. A variable such as the
number of voters can subsequently be represented on this
hexagons by colour intensity [18]. This is an improvement;
however, it is a newly reported methodology and as such
readers might not be able to immediately recognise
corresponding geographical area to their respective hexagons.
The hexbin mapping in this study is achieved by using
“mxmaps” R library [20] which is based on “choroplethr”
package. It is also able to use “leaflet” package to create
interactive maps. The mxmaps library contains sample dataset
which includes population per state and municipality. The
Mexico data is merged in R with the sample dataset to integrate
population data. For comparison, the choropleth maps together
with the hex maps of the entire country are produced using
RColorBrewer reversed RdYlBu colouring palette. This is
followed by spatial state mapping of data and subsequently
spatial choropleth mapping of data in Mexico City.
The correlation of pre-existing health conditions and
demographics to mortality is further investigated by correlation
matrix. Finally, dimensionality reduction is employed to select
predictors that can optimally model the disease outcome. This
is achieved by lassoglm in MATLAB function on train and test
datasets. Spatial analysis will inform whether dividing the
dataset into male and females is more appropriate for this step.
4.2

Process

4.2.1 Analysis of country aggregate data
Initially, the position of Mexico amongst the top 15 affected
countries is explored. Our data show that Mexico is the 13th
country for the number of COVID-19 confirmed cases with
1,437,185 and the US being the 1st with 20,132,054 cases.
Mexico occupies 10th place on the recovery chart with
1,083,768 and India having the highest recovery at 9,883,461.
Mexico has the 4th highest mortality with 126,507 and the US
is at the top with 347,894 mortality (Fig. 3A). The position of
Mexico on the mortality chart is not on par with its position on
the number of cases and recovery.
Is this anomaly on the ratio of COVD-19 cases and mortality
due to the unusual pattern in mortality during the pandemic?
Analysis of recovery and mortality over an 8 month period
indicate that whilst a peak in recovery between July and August
of 2020 is observed, that the number of mortality normalised

Fig. 3. COVID-19 data in top 15 affected countries and Mexico. A)
Confirmed cases, recovery and mortality in top 15 affected countries
and B) daily COVID-19 recovery and mortality per million in Mexico.

Is this consistently high case/mortality ratio better explained
by spatial analysis of locally-influenced factors?
4.2.2 Traditional choropleth for COVID-19 mapping?
Is traditional choropleth the best method to visually convey
COVID-19 spatial mapping in Mexico? This study sought to
test this question by comparing choropleth and hexbin maps.
Our data show that whilst traditional choropleth maps retain
geographical proportionality, they, nevertheless, are unable to
visually reveal the extent of the crisis.
Figure 4A shows that the size of 32 Mexican States has
significant variations. For example, the northern states are less
populated and occupy a significantly larger area than central
states which are small densely populated. Spatial mapping of
absolute mortality and mortality normalised/population of each
state reveal a similar trend. Two central states named Mexico
(this is also the name of a state, in addition to the country named
Mexico and Mexico City as Capital) and Mexico City together
account for ~32% of total country-wide mortality, however not
visible according to their weight. This comparison is
highlighted in Figure 4A-B.
Taken together, our data show that hexbin maps are a more
appropriate method to spatially analyse COVID-19 data
country-wide and thus this will be used in further analysis of
country-wide data.
4.2.3 Spatial mapping of sex and age-related differences in
COVID-19 mortality in entire Mexico
Is there a difference between males and females COVID-19
mortality in Mexico and is this difference revealed spatially?
Our data show that males account for 63% of total mortality
whilst females for 37%. This can not be explained by the slight
difference in the proportion of males and females (48.6% and
51.4% of the total population for males and females
respectively). Hexbin mapping of mortality separated by sex,

4

show that male mortality is higher in 7 States and lower in 6
than females (Fig. 5A).

were intubated. Southern states (e.g. Oaxaca and Campeche)
exhibited (except for diabetes) the least number of deceased
patients with pre-existing conditions (Fig. 6).

Fig. 5. Hexbin mapping of COVID-19 mortality in Mexico
separated by sex (A) and age (B).
Fig. 4. Spatial mapping of Mexico population, COVID-19
mortality and mortality/population using traditional choropleth
(A, C and E) and hexbin maps (B, D and F). The dashed box in
A show two comparable States accounting for ~32% of
COVID-19 mortality using choropleth and hexbin mapping.
Further analysis of mortality by age range mapped both as a
proportion of total mortality and normalised against the
population, revealed spatial divergence with age range. As a
proportion to total mortality, more patients at age range 0-20
deceased in the southern and northern states with the central
states including Mexico City suffering the least proportion of
0-20 mortality. With regard to the age range 20-40 and 40-60
more patients deceased in central states including Mexico City.
A trend was also observed for 60-80 and 80-110 years of
age with more patients deceased in the northern states. Plotting
of the same data, normalised against the total population show
a slightly different trend. The northern states and the central
state of Mexico and Mexico City (except for 0-20) suffered
high mortality consistently across all age ranges. The southern
states account for higher mortality for 0-20 but the lowest for
the other age ranges (Fig. 5B).

4.2.5 Spatial mapping of age-related differences in COVID19 mortality in Mexico City
Are these nationally-divergent observations also evident at
the local level? To address this question, a subset of data related
to Mexico City extracted and plotted using traditional
choropleth mapping. Our data show that whilst, the eastern
municipality of Iztapalapa is the most populated and has the
highest absolute number of mortality, once this is normalised
to the local population it no longer retains the highest mortality.
The second most populated municipality in Mexico City
(Fig.7A top: Gustavo Madero) has suffered the second-highest
absolute number and remains the second-highest after
normalisation. The northern municipality of Azcapotzalco is
sparsely populated but has the highest normalised mortality. In
contrast, the most southern municipality (Fig.7A bottom:
Milpa Alta) is sparsely populated and has experienced the
lowest number of COVID-19 mortality.

4.2.4 Spatial mapping of pre-existing conditions in deceased
COVID-19 patients in entire Mexico
To what extent these spatial variations are explained by preexisting health conditions. To answer this question, patientrelated data (diabetes, obesity, cardiovascular disease,
hypertension, asthma, chronic kidney disease) and two
COVID-19 related clinical features (pneumonia and
intubation) were plotted using hexbin maps. Our data show a
spatial trend for deceased patients with pre-existing conditions.
For example, except diabetes, Mexico City has consistently the
highest deceased patients with obesity, cardiovascular disease,
hypertension, asthma and kidney disease. Similarly, more
deceased patients in Mexico City suffered from pneumonia and

Fig. 6. Mexico COVID-19 spatial mapping of pre-existing
conditions amongst deceased patients. These conditions are:
diabetes, obesity, cardiovascular disease, hypertension, asthma
and chronic kidney disease. In addition, two COVID-19 related
clinical outcomes (pneumonia and intubation) are also plotted.

Fig. 8. Mexico City COVID-19 spatial mapping of pre-existing
conditions amongst deceased patients. These conditions are:
diabetes, obesity, cardiovascular disease, hypertension, asthma
and chronic kidney disease. In addition, two COVID-19 related
clinical outcomes (pneumonia and intubation) are also plotted.

Fig. 7. Mexico City mapping of population, absolute COVID19 mortality and mortality normalised by population (A) and
age range of deceased COVID-19 patients mapped onto
municipalities within the City.
Further break down of mortality by age range normalised
both against the total mortality and local population reveal that
the northern municipalities of Azcapotzalco and Gustavo
Madero have suffered the highest proportion of mortality. In
contrast, the southern municipality of Milpa Alta has
experienced the lowest mortality for 0-20, 20-40, 60-80 and 80110. Normalised against the total mortality this municipality
suffered high mortality amongst 40-60 years of age, this,
however, was not apparent when normalised against the
population (Fig. 7).
4.2.6 Spatial mapping of pre-existing conditions in deceased
COVID-19 patients in Mexico City
Is the country-wide trend for the association of pre-existing
conditions to mortality apparent at local Mexico City level?
Our analysis shows a clear spatial pattern of pre-existing
conditions amongst deceased patients in Mexico City. Four
northern municipalities of Azcapotzalco, Gustavo Madero,
Venustiano Carranza and Iztacalco have the highest diabetes,
obesity, cardiovascular disease, hypertension, asthma and
kidney disease. The deceased in these municipalities were most
likely to suffer from pneumonia and to be intubated (Fig. 8).
Similar to its position on the breakdown of age-related
mortality in Mexico City, the municipality of Milpa Alta again
showed the lowest values for pre-existing conditions (Fig. 8).
4.2.7 Is COVID-19 mortality in Mexico dependent on preexisting conditions?
Spatial analysis revealed an association of mortality both at
the country and local level. These visual findings have
informed and led to further statistical analysis.

Correlation analysis of pre-existing health conditions and
demographics including age and gender revealed that in both
male and females, pneumonia, hypertension and diabetes were
negatively related to survival. Age was positively correlated
with mortality (Fig. 9). To ascertain whether these variables
could contribute to the prediction of mortality, lasso
regularisation was performed. This analysis showed that for
males, age; obesity; diabetes; immunosuppression;
hypertension; kidney disease; other comorbidities and
pneumonia are significant contributors to disease outcome. In
addition, for females, age; obesity; diabetes; chronic
obstructive
pulmonary
disease,
immunosuppression,
hypertension, kidney disease and other comorbidities are
important predictors for disease outcome.
4.3

Results

The main findings of this study are that:
a) Mexico suffers from COVID-19 case/mortality ratio
imbalance. Whilst it occupies the 13th place on the list of
countries with the highest confirmed cases, its place on the
mortality list is 4th. The rate of mortality per million has been
consistent for the past several months.
b) The use of hexagonal cartograms is a better approach for
spatial mapping of COVID-19 data in Mexico as it addresses
bias in area size and population.
c) Sex and age-related spatial relationship with mortality is
observed amongst the Mexican states.
d) There is a spatial trend between pre-existing health
conditions and mortality at the state level.
e) Within Mexico City, there is a clear south, north divide with
higher mortality in the northern municipalities.
f) Deceased patients in these northern municipalities have the
highest pre-existing health conditions.
g) Correlation analysis revealed that all factors were correlated
with the disease outcome each at different levels with age,
diabetes, hypertension and pneumonia having the strongest
correlation.

6

h) Lasso regularization and feature selection showed that
aspects of pre-existing health conditions are strong predictors
of disease outcome.

expansion, appropriate infrastructure including healthcare
provisions not built accordingly [22, 23]. This large
concentration of residents with significant pre-existing health
complications has led for Mexico City and neighbouring
Mexico state to account for about 1/3 of total COVID-19
mortality. Our data, in agreement with a previous report, show
that Mexico City has the highest pre-existing health conditions
including diabetes, hypertension and obesity. This high
prevalence is apparent amongst young and old similarly [24].
This study has several limitations. These include exclusion
of patients that survived, a discrepancy between reported
fatality by the Mexican Ministry of Health (154,441) and John
Hopkins University (133,204). It is likely that data provided by
the former to be accurate, however, these need to be explored.
In addition, the basis for these spatial relationships needs to be
further explored as to why within Mexico City the mortality are
concentrated in particular regions. Inclusion of locally-derived
factors related to socioeconomic and health background may, to
an extent, address this shortcoming. Furthermore, correlation
analysis, feature selections and prediction of outcomes should
consider these local variations and build in measures to account
for this variability.

Fig. 9. COVID-19 data in top 15 affected countries and
Mexico. A) Confirmed cases, recovery and mortality in top 15
affected countries and B) daily COVID-19 recovery and
mortality per million in Mexico.
5

C RI TIC AL

Adequate inferences from spatial analysis of COVID-19
data may allow better understanding for the management of
highly infectious disease amongst densely populated regions.
This approach is not new as many previous studies during the
current and previous pandemics were performed [25-29]. There
is, however, scope for improvement in visualisation.
Taken together, this study provides an improved presentation
of COVID-19 mapping in Mexico and demonstrates spatial
divergence of the mortality in Mexico.

RE FL EC TION

In this study, a predominantly descriptive, spatially centred
examination of COVID-19 mortality and related factors at both
country and local levels is presented.
The central aim was to achieve this spatial mapping without
visual bias, inherent in presenting data related to densely
packed small regions vs. sparsely populated large area. Within
this central aim, several sub-aims were explored: i) to
investigate the spatial relationship between COVID-19
mortality, demographics and patient background at country
level; ii) to examine these relationships at the local
municipality level, and iii) to test for correlation and to identify
important features for disease outcome.
In agreement with the newly described approach employed
to report election data [18], findings from this study indicate
that hexagonal cartograms are better suited to report COVID19 data in Mexico. This study reports spatial patterns of
mortality in the Mexican states with the most southern states
least affected by the pandemic except for young patients
between 0-20. The central/northern states are affected to a
greater degree with similar pattern for pre-existing conditions.
Further exploration of these observations for Mexico City,
revealed clear patterns for the spatial distribution of mortality
Mexico City is a megacity that with the surrounding area
accounts for about 20 million inhabitants [21]. Due to its rapid

R E FE RE NC ES

[1]
[2]
[3]

[4]
[5]

[6]
[7]

C. Huang et al., "Clinical features of patients infected
with 2019 novel coronavirus in Wuhan, China," The
lancet, vol. 395, no. 10223, pp. 497-506, 2020.
J. Hopkins, "Johns Hopkins Coronavirus Resource
Center," COVID-19 Case Tracker, 2020.
J. D. Sachs, R. Horton, J. Bagenal, Y. B. Amor, O. K.
Caman, and G. Lafortune, "The Lancet COVID-19
Commission," The Lancet, vol. 396, no. 10249, pp.
454-455, 2020.
M. M. o. Health. Mexico COVID-19 dataset. [Online].
Available:
https://github.com/alberto-mateosmo/covid19mx
W.-j. Guan et al., "Clinical characteristics of
coronavirus disease 2019 in China," New England
journal of medicine, vol. 382, no. 18, pp. 1708-1720,
2020.
Z.-L. Chen et al., "Distribution of the COVID-19
epidemic and correlation with population emigration
from Wuhan, China," Chinese medical journal, 2020.
H. Huang et al., "Epidemic Features and Control of
2019 Novel Coronavirus Pneumonia in Wenzhou,
China," China (3/3/2020), 2020.

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]
[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]
[20]
[21]
[22]

[23]

W. V. Padula and P. Davidson, "Countries with High
Registered Nurse (RN) Concentrations Observe
Reduced Mortality Rates of Coronavirus Disease
2019 (COVID-19)," Available at SSRN 3566190,
2020.
A. Mollalo, B. Vahedi, and K. M. Rivera, "GIS-based
spatial modeling of COVID-19 incidence rate in the
continental United States," Science of The Total
Environment, p. 138884, 2020.
R. Dagnino, E. J. Weber, and L. M. Panitz,
"Monitoramento do Coronavírus (Covid-19) nos
municípios do Rio Grande do Sul, Brasil," SocArXiv.
March, vol. 28, 2020.
A. Saha, K. Gupta, and M. Patil, "Monitoring and
Epidemiological Trends of Coronavirus Disease
(COVID-19) Around The World," 2020.
E. Dong, H. Du, and L. Gardner, "An interactive webbased dashboard to track COVID-19 in real time," The
Lancet infectious diseases, vol. 20, no. 5, pp. 533-534,
2020.
L. Orea and I. C. Álvarez, "How effective has the
Spanish lockdown been to battle COVID-19? A
spatial analysis of the coronavirus propagation across
provinces," Documento de Trabajo, p. 03, 2020.
Z. Arab-Mazar, R. Sah, A. A. Rabaan, K. Dhama, and
A. J. Rodriguez-Morales, "Mapping the incidence of
the COVID-19 hotspot in Iran–Implications for
Travellers," Travel Medicine and Infectious Disease,
2020.
H. Rossman et al., "A framework for identifying
regional outbreak and spread of COVID-19 from oneminute population-wide surveys," Nature Medicine,
vol. 26, no. 5, pp. 634-638, 2020.
M.
S.
Juárez,
"COVID-19
en
México:
comportamiento espacio temporal y condicionantes
socioespaciales, febrero y marzo de 2020," Posición,
vol. 3, pp. 2683-8915, 2020.
S. Sarwar, R. Waheed, S. Sarwar, and A. Khan,
"COVID-19 challenges to Pakistan: Is GIS analysis
useful to draw solutions?," Science of The Total
Environment, p. 139089, 2020.
R. Beecham, A. Slingsby, and C. Brunsdon, "Locallyvarying explanations behind the United Kingdom's
vote to leave the European Union," Journal of Spatial
Information Science, vol. 2018, no. 16, pp. 117-136,
2018.
B. Javaheri, "The COVID pandemic: socioeconomic
and
health
disparities,"
arXiv
preprint
arXiv:2012.11399, 2020.
D. Valle-Jones. "mxmaps - create maps of Mexico."
https://github.com/diegovalle/mxmaps/ (accessed.
C. Paquette, "OECD Territorial Reviews: Valle de
México, Mexico," ed: Editions de l'OCDE, 2015.
B. Tellman et al., "Adaptive pathways and coupled
infrastructure: seven centuries of adaptation to water
risk and the production of vulnerability in Mexico
City," Ecology and Society, vol. 23, no. 1, 2018.
A. Baeza, A. Estrada-Barón, F. Serrano-Candela, L.
A. Bojórquez, H. Eakin, and A. E. Escalante,
"Biophysical,
infrastructural
and
social

[24]

[25]

[26]
[27]

[28]

[29]

heterogeneities explain spatial distribution of
waterborne gastrointestinal disease burden in Mexico
City," Environmental Research Letters, vol. 13, no. 6,
p. 064016, 2018.
L. Parra-Rodríguez et al., "The burden of disease in
Mexican older adults: premature mortality
challenging a limited-resource health system,"
Journal of aging and health, vol. 32, no. 7-8, pp. 543553, 2020.
B. Meng, J. Wang, J. Liu, J. Wu, and E. Zhong,
"Understanding the spatial diffusion process of severe
acute respiratory syndrome in Beijing," Public
Health, vol. 119, no. 12, pp. 1080-1087, 2005.
L. Q. Fang et al., "Geographical spread of SARS in
mainland China," Tropical Medicine & International
Health, vol. 14, pp. 14-20, 2009.
K. Al-Ahmadi, S. Alahmadi, and A. Al-Zahrani,
"Spatiotemporal clustering of Middle East respiratory
syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) incidence in
Saudi Arabia, 2012–2019," International journal of
environmental research and public health, vol. 16, no.
14, p. 2520, 2019.
Q. Lin, A. P. Chiu, S. Zhao, and D. He, "Modeling the
spread of Middle East respiratory syndrome
coronavirus in Saudi Arabia," Statistical methods in
medical research, vol. 27, no. 7, pp. 1968-1978, 2018.
O. A. Adegboye, E. Gayawan, and F. Hanna, "Spatial
modelling of contribution of individual level risk
factors for mortality from Middle East respiratory
syndrome coronavirus in the Arabian Peninsula,"
PloS one, vol. 12, no. 7, p. e0181215, 2017.

