Characterizing Discourse about COVID-19 Vaccines: A Reddit Version of the
Pandemic Story
Wei Wu, Hanjia Lyu, Jiebo Luo

arXiv:2101.06321v1 [cs.SI] 15 Jan 2021

University of Rochester
wwu22@u.rochester.edu, hlyu5@ur.rochester.edu, jluo@cs.rochester.edu

Abstract
It has been one year since the outbreak of the COVID-19
pandemic. The good news is that vaccines developed by several manufacturers are being actively distributed worldwide.
However, as more and more vaccines become available to the
public, various concerns related to vaccines become the primary barriers that may hinder the public from getting vaccinated. Considering the complexities of these concerns and
their potential hazards, this study aims to offer a clear understanding about different population groups’ underlying concerns when they talk about COVID-19 vaccines - particular
those active on Reddit. The goal is achieved by applying LDA
and LIWC to characterizing the pertaining discourse with insights generated through a combination of quantitative and
qualitative comparisons. Findings include: 1) during the pandemic, the proportion of Reddit comments predominated by
conspiracy theories outweighed that of any other topics; 2)
each subreddit has its own user bases, so information posted
in one subreddit may not reach those from other subreddits; 3)
since users’ concerns vary across time and subreddits, communication strategies must be adjusted according to specific
needs. The results of this study manifest challenges as well as
opportunities in the process of designing effective communication and immunization programs.

Introduction
Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARSCoV-2), known as COVID-19, has hit 222 countries and
caused over 2 million deaths in the worldwide as of January
14, 2021* . Since the World Health Organization (WHO) declared COVID-19 a pandemic† , it has caused catastrophic
damages to various aspects of the human society, from economy (Fernandes 2020) to psychology (Atalan 2020). To
minimize the deadly impacts of the pandemic, scientists
from different countries have been actively involved in the
investigations of effective treatments and vaccines. Staring
in January 2021, the vaccines developed by the corporations led by Pfizer and Moderna are being distributed across
the U.S., while the Johnson & Johnson vaccine is also on
* https://www.worldometers.info/coronavirus/

the way‡ . Despite the arduous efforts of scientists that have
demonstrated the efficacy of possible COVID-19 vaccines
and their protection mechanisms to human bodies (Lipsitch
and Dean 2020), the public attitudes towards COVID-19
vaccines are nothing if not disparate.
As early as of June 2020, a survey covering 13,426 participants in 19 countries already showed that the potential acceptance of a COVID-19 vaccine varies largely from country to country: in China, the acceptance rate of a potentially
safe and effective COVID-19 vaccine is 90%, which is the
highest among all countries, while that rate in Russia is only
55% (Lazarus et al. 2020). The study suggested that the variation in the vaccine acceptance rates may be a result of the
difference in levels of trust in central governments. Another
study (Reiter, Pennell, and Katz 2020), which mainly focused on adults in the United States, conducted an online
survey with 2,006 qualified participants and investigated factors that influence their acceptability of a COVID-19 vaccine. One of the main implications of this study is that participants whose political beliefs are moderate or liberal have
a relatively higher vaccine acceptance rate in this case. There
are also many other emerging studies that conducted similar surveys to analyze the acceptability of a COVID-19 vaccine among different social, ethnic groups (e.g., Goldman
et al. (2020)), providing policy makers with a clearer picture of the public’s attitudes towards COVID-19 vaccines.
These studies are important because they shed light on the
hidden obstacles and challenges in the vaccine distribution
process, and offer critical information for implementing appropriate communication strategies in times of crisis. Nevertheless, because of the limitations of the survey approach —
including but not limited to a small sample size, a definite
number of available choices, etc. — it is difficult to know
what the specific concerns of the general public are when
they think of COVID-19 vaccinations. In addition, out of
the fear of being considered as “anti-vaxxers”, people with
concerns may choose to restrain themselves from expressing
their genuine opinions in the aforementioned surveys (Brenner and DeLamater 2016) or not to participate in them at
all.
To supplement and verify the findings in the preceding

†

https://www.who.int/director-general/speeches/detail/whodirector-general-s-opening-remarks-at-the-media-briefing-oncovid-19—11-march-2020

‡
https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/vaccines/8things.html

studies, we employ a data-mining approach to investigating the discourse related to COVID-19 vaccines using largescale social media data. Since the advents of social media platforms, they have been widely used as reliable data
sources for a variety of research purposes. From presidential election analyses (Jin et al. 2017) to electronic cigarette
perception examinations (Lu et al. 2020), social media data
demonstrates advantages such as the involvement of an extensive population and the revelation of hidden patterns that
are easily overlooked otherwise. The use of social media
data in topics like the public opinions towards COVID-19
vaccines has also been reported. For instance, in a recent
study based on millions of Twitter data, Lyu et al. (2020)
found that safety, effectiveness, and political issues are chief
concerns of the U.S. public when talking about COVID-19
vaccines. However, it is unclear whether the findings revealed by this study are valid with other online communities, which differ from Twitter in user bases and platform
features. To better characterize the online discourse related
to COVID-19 vaccines, we think it is important and necessary to extend the “ground truth” of public opinions to a
broader range of online communities, such as Reddit.
Ranked as the 7th most visited website in the United
States by November 2020§ , Reddit is one of the more newsoriented social media platforms according to a research published by the Pew Research Center¶ . Unlike Twitter which
requests users to fill in profile information, Reddit only asks
users to enter usernames in the sign-up process, which results in an anonymous environment. Because of this anonymous feature, users of Reddit, who are referred to as Redditors, perceive a freedom of expression and tend to share their
true opinions on topics that they would not openly address
on other social media platforms (Kilgo et al. 2018). Therefore, in this work, we collect data from Reddit to examine
the thematic characteristics of the discussions of COVID-19
vaccines on it. In doing so, we hope to answer two research
questions:
• RQ 1: What specific topics characterize the discussions of COVID-19 vaccines on Reddit? How do the
topics vary across time and subreddits?
• RQ 2: Given three most active subreddits, what can
we learn from their overlapping users? How do they
contribute to the thematic, linguistic similarities and
differences among these subreddits?
Our approach consists of the Latent Dirichlet Allocation
(LDA) topic modeling (Blei, Ng, and Jordan 2003), the Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count (LIWC) text analysis (Pennebaker, Francis, and Booth 2001), and visual comparisons.
Taking into account the nature of social media data, whose
development is free from the intervention of researchers, we
apply the longitudinal study design to detect the changes in
side-wide discussion topics on Reddit over a 9-month time
period, and use the cross-section study design to analyze thematic, linguistic similarity, difference, and membership in
§

https://www.alexa.com/siteinfo/reddit.com
https://www.journalism.org/2016/02/25/seven-in-ten-redditusers-get-news-on-the-site/
¶

three different subreddits. Both the longitudinal and crosssection studies are observational studies, which are widelyused approaches in social science fields. Through a combination of computational and qualitative methods, we aim to
generate a more comprehensive understanding of the public’s concerns about COVID-19 vaccines, thus paving the
way for effective communication strategies geared towards
the needs of different communities.

Related Work
Factors that influence vaccines acceptance and coverage are
complex. In the review of articles published between January 2007 and November 2012 (Larson et al. 2014), researchers examined 1,164 articles that studied vaccine hesitancy across different regions in the world, concluding that
even given a definite number of determinants (i.e., level
of income, education, etc.), their impacts on people’s perceptions of vaccines vary across time, place and vaccine
types. The study particularly pointed out that as the access
to healthcare becomes less a barrier in many countries, personal attitudes and beliefs put an increasing impact on vaccine behaviors, especially in regions wherein vaccine services are available to the most of the population. This finding
coheres with what was suggested by another study, which
forecast the trends in vaccination coverage using a timeseries analysis over 30 years (de Figueiredo et al. 2016).
Hence, from either a cross-section or a longitudinal perspective, probing into the role of personal opinions in vaccination behaviors at different settings becomes a necessity in
the pursuit of a deeper understanding about factors that influence vaccines acceptance.
Entering the 21st century, people gradually adapt to the
idea that there is no better place than the Internet to find and
share information they need at fingertips, including health
information. According to a study conducted by the KRC
Research|| , 81% Americans seek for healthcare information
online in 2018, with some indicating that they rely more
on the Internet than physicians in search of health advice.
In the context of vaccine information acquisition and sharing, the overdependence on online information is alarming.
When examining online anti-vaccine websites, Kata (2012)
found that a combination of tactics like shifting hypotheses
and censorship makes anti-vaccine claims highly convincing, thus effectively spreading fear and suspicion towards
vaccines among Internet users. As social media platforms
become prevalent, more and more researchers utilize usergenerated contents to understand the public opinions on vaccines as well as their associations with vaccine coverage. For
example, with the use of Twitter data, Dunn et al. (2017)
found a high correlation between the social media information exposure and the state-level HPV vaccine coverage in
the U.S., which can explain the differences in coverage that
are unexplainable by socioeconomic factors like education
and insurance. Further, in a recent study also focusing on the
HPV vaccine, Lama et al. (2019) revealed that political debates are the most frequent topics in all discussions related to
||
https://www.webershandwick.com/wpcontent/uploads/2018/11/Healthcare-Info-Search-Report.pdf

HPV vaccines on Reddit, in comparison with conversations
on general mainstream media which usually link HPV vaccines to sexual activities. In terms of validity, a study which
applied natural language processing methods to Twitter data
proved that in the case of understanding vaccine refusal, “the
strengths of social media data may greatly outweigh their
weakness” (Dredze et al. 2016), which aligns with the consensus of top methodologists that the most reliable research
comprises mixed methods and data sources (Adams et al.
1999).
Since the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic, several
studies have already conducted surveys to reflect the public
health concerns regarding COVID-19 vaccines (e.g., Pogue
et al. (2020)). Nevertheless, none of the aforementioned
studies analyzed Reddit discourse about COVID-19 vaccines and the evolution of underlying concerns implied by
the change of topics on this issue. Therefore, we believe our
interdisciplinary approach with the use of Reddit data would
be a potent complement to this study area. To the best of our
knowledge, there is no existing published study conducted
with similar conditions. We hope our findings would fill in
the gaps currently existing in the understanding of different
communities’ concerns about COVID-19 vaccines, thus offering some useful insights for the design of communication
and immunization strategies.

Data Collection and Methods
Reddit consists of individual communities or subgroups
that differ in topics (i.e., r/Coronavirus, r/worldnews, etc.),
which are called subreddits. Reddit users can create original
posts, which are referred to as submissions, on a particular subreddit, and comment under submissions. If any user
replies to a comment and carries on the conversation under
that comment, all the comments together form a comment
forest, where it is common that the topics of a comment forest deviates from the original topic discussed in the submission or the top comment. Compared to submissions, which
are mostly news, questions, and lengthy stories, comments
under submissions are better sources in the light of discourse
characterizing, so we decide to focus on top comments under the submissions about COVID-19 vaccines.
To collect the comments, we employ a Reddit API Wrapper called PRAW** , which is a Python package extensively used in Reddit-related studies (e.g., (Buntain and Golbeck 2014)). We crawl the comments through the keywordsearching function in the package, so the comments collected must contain at least two keywords: one from
the list [‘vaccine’, ‘vaccines’, ‘vaccinated’, ‘vaccination’,
‘vacinne’, ‘vacine’] plus one from the list [‘covid’, ‘covid19’, ‘coronavirus’, ‘pandemic’, ‘immunization’]. Unlike
some studies that collected data from one or two particular
subreddits (e.g, Gozzi et al. (2020)), we crawl comments that
meet the conditions in a sitewide basis. For each comment,
we download its subreddit, comment id, comment created
time, comment author, and comment body. All of the data
are visible and accessible to the public. Taking into account
the fact that the COVID-19 pandemic did not expand to a
** https://praw.readthedocs.io/en/latest/

world-wide scale until March — the U.S. reported its first
coronavirus death on February 29, 2020†† , and the WHO
declared the pandemic on March 11, 2020 — we discarded
comments which predated March 1, 2020. Duplicate comments posted in the same or different subreddits and bots are
also pruned. As a result, we had 172,091 comments from
6,466 subreddits that were generated by 107,522 unique
users, spanning from March 1, 2020 to December 15, 2020.
Table 1 lists the top eight subreddits ranked by the number
of comments, along with their general attributes. The total
numbers of comments and authors of these 8 subreddits constitute over 1/3 of the entire comments and authors in all the
subreddits.

LDA
We use LDA to extract topics with semantic meanings from
the collected comments. Before feeding the comments into
the model, we remove punctuations from the comments and
did lemmatization. We also process the data by using the directory of “english” stopwords from the Natural Language
Toolkit (NLTK)‡‡ with an extended list of words [‘vaccine’,
‘vaccines’, ‘vaccinated’, ‘covid’, ‘coronavirus’, ‘virus’, ‘us’,
‘get’, ‘take’, ‘also’], which aims to best differentiate possible topics. Thereafter, we form a corpus of comments and
then apply the LDA model with 10 topics using Gensim§§ .
The choice of the number of topics is based on coherence
scores as well as the semantic significance of generated topics. The coherence score of the chosen model is 0.511.

LIWC
We apply LIWC 2015 to capture the psychological information from the collected comments. Lyu et al. (2020) have
suggested that sentiment is positively related to the acceptance level of COVID-19 vaccines, therefore, posemo
(i.e., positive emotion) and negemo (i.e., negative emotion) categories are selected to measure the sentiment expressed through the comments. To get more nuanced insights into emotions, anx (i.e., anxiety) and anger are included. health, risk, death are also included to obtain a broader understanding of the comments. Similar to the
methods of Chen et al. (2020), we concatenate all the comments of the authors of the same group and apply LIWC
2015. Since the scales of the LIWC categories are not the
same, we normalize the LIWC scores in the plots to better
illustrate the the qualitative differences.

RQ 1 Results
Table 2 itemizes the 10 topics that predominate the comments. Note that every comment may belong to more than
one topic, while in this case we categorize each comment
to only its dominant topic in order to calculate the proportion of comments for each topic. The first row indicates that
among all the comments, 12.44% of them belong to the topic
††

https://www.cdc.gov/media/releases/2020/s0229-COVID-19first-death.html
‡‡
https://www.nltk.org/book/ch02.html
§§
https://radimrehurek.com/gensim/

Subreddits
r/Coronavirus
r/worldnews
r/conspiracy
r/politics
r/wallstreetbets
r/AskReddit
r/news
r/COVID19
Grand Total

Num. of Comments
17,263
7,985
7,122
7,006
6,424
5,700
3,779
2,378
57,657

Num. of Comment Authors
9,849
5,782
4,159
5,520
3,982
4,954
3,123
1,169
35,798

Average Comments per Author
1.75
1.38
1.71
1.27
1.61
1.15
1.21
2.03
1.61

Table 1: Top eight subreddits with the most number of comments.
Topics
% of Comments
Keywords
skeptical/aggressive remarks
12.44%
people, mask, wear, make, fuck, anti, thing, literally, shit, stop
clinical trials/research/testing
11.22%
test, trial, study, phase, result, dose, effective, testing, early, datum
life/family/kids
11.18%
work, live, home, feel, day, life, school, family, child, back
people/vaccine efficacy/risks
10.35%
people, immunity, death, risk, die, rate, population, case, high, number
governments/big companies
10.16%
government, make, company, world, country, pandemic, work, money, pay, develop
symptoms/immune systems
9.38%
effect, immune, antibody, response, human, system, develop, body, side, cell
time/long-term effects
9.15%
year, long, time, month, thing, good, make, term, happen, bad
stock market/sports
8.96%
back, market, start, big, year, stock, business, buy, play, hold
politics/news sources
8.80%
trump, https, comment, question, article, post, news, source, claim, pandemic
lockdown/spread/cases
8.36%
case, lockdown, health, country, spread, hospital, social, state, open, place

Table 2: 10 topics generated by LDA and their associated keywords.
“skeptical/aggressive remarks”, and the top 10 keywords associated with this topic are listed in a descending order of
contribution. Not only does the first topic occupy the highest
percent of comments, but the percentage difference between
it and the second topic “clinical trials/research/testing” is
larger (1.22%) than the difference between any other two
consecutive topics. Below are representative examples of the
“skeptical/aggressive remarks” comments:
‘‘[...] See you out in the real world
very very soon vaccine is coming,
wooooohoooo! Can’t wait to burn my
mask in dumpster fire! Vaccine vaccine
vaccine!! Goodbye covid!!!!! Even
<name> and <name> are like who gives
a fukkkkk!"
‘‘Here is another gem from him: When you
realize that the ENTIRETY of the vaccine
industry is a massive fraud and scam,
it’s easier to realize how they could
fool the same doctors into believing the
COVID scam [...]"

As shown above, one common feature of this type of
comments is that they convey conspicuous suspicions or
condemnations of certain entities, which could be antivaxxers, vaccine manufacturers, governments, etc. From a
longitudinal perspective, Figure 1 manifests that comments
of “skeptical/aggressive remarks” predominated the overall

discourse related to COVID-19 vaccines from June to December except for November (6 out of 10 months). Even
though comments of “governments/big companies” supplanted the dominant position of comments belonging to
“skeptical/aggressive remarks” in November, the number of
the latter still outstripped the number of comments of any
other topics till the end of the collection period. In contrast,
comments about “lockdown/spread/cases” originally had the
largest proportion among all comments in April and May,
but the comments’ proportion decreased sharply from May
to June, and remained as the least discussed topic till the end.
From a cross-section perspective, Figure 2 illustrates
the proportions of comments of different topics in the
top eight subreddits. Particularly, comments of “skeptical/aggressive remarks” occupy the largest proportion in
r/conspiracy; comments of “stock market/sports” have the
largest proportion in r/wallstreetbets; comments of “clinical trials/research/testing” and “symptoms/immune systems” predominate r/COVID19. It is noteworthy that the
dominant topic detected by our LDA model in each subreddit is in accordance with the subreddit’s description. For
example, in the “About Community” field of r/COVID19,
it reads “In December 2019, SARS-CoV-2, the virus causing the disease COVID-19, emerged in the city of Wuhan,
China. This subreddit seeks to facilitate scientific discussion
of this global public health threat”¶¶ . This finding keeps con¶¶

https://www.reddit.com/r/COVID19/

Figure 1: Trends of the numbers of comments of different topics from March 1, 2020 to December 15, 2020.
stant in the rest of the subreddits, which proves the robustness of our topic characterizing model. Moreover, the proportion of comments of the same topic varies widely from
subreddit to subreddit, which may be caused by two situations: Reddit users tend to discuss particular topics in particular subreddits, or the fundamental user bases of different subreddits differ and have disparate concerns. In the first
case, it is difficult for us to prove whether the comments
made by users can represent their major concerns, since the
variation may also be caused by the policy of a subreddit;
while in the second case, we can prove that the comments
made in a specific subreddit can characterize primary concerns of its users, as long as its user base hardly overlaps
with that of other subreddits.

RQ 2 Results
To understand whether the variations in proportions of comments derive from the differences in subreddits’ user bases,
we pick three subreddits out of the top eight subreddits:
r/Coronavirus, r/worldnews, and r/conspiracy. They are the
subreddits that have the most comments among the collected
data. In Table 3, we divide them into three pairs and compare
each pair’s overlapping user bases, their most discussed topics in each subreddit as well as their linguistic profiles.

r/Coronavirus vs. r/worldnews
This pair shares the most overlapping users (435) among
all three pairs. Respectively, the proportions of overlapping users in the user bases of these two subreddits are
4.42% (435 out of 9,849) and 7.52% (435 out of 5,782).
In average, each of the 435 users posted four comments
in r/Coronavirus and two comments in r/worldnews, which
implies that these overlapping users are more active in
r/Coronavirus than r/worldnews during the selected time period. In both subreddits, the topic discussed most by these

users is “clinical trials/research/testing”, whereas the proportion of comments related to this topic is relatively larger
in r/Coronavirus than in r/worldnews, which echoes the
findings in the linguistic profiles where the overlapping users
pay less attention to the health-related issues in r/worldnews.
Conversely, the proportions of comments related to “governments/big companies” and “lockdown/spread/cases” are
both higher in r/worldnews. Interestingly, as shown in Figure 3, the overlapping users express more negative emotions,
anxiety, anger, and show more concerns about death-related
issues in r/worldnews than r/Coronavirus.

r/Coronavirus vs. r/conspiracy
This pair shares 104 overlapping users, each of whom posted
an average of 2 comments in both subreddits during the selected period of time. Respectively, the overlapping users occupy 1.06% (104 out of 9,849) and 2.50% (104 out of 4,159)
of the overall user bases of r/Coronavirus and r/conspiracy.
The top five topics that characterize the comments of the
overlapping users in these two subreddits are nearly the
same, with slight variations in the proportions of comments
of each topic. In particular, the overlapping users talked
more about “time/long-term effects” in r/Coronavirus, while
they made more comments about “skeptical/aggressive remarks” in r/conspiracy. The overlapping users show more
anxiety, pay more attention to risks, and talk more about
health-related issues in r/Coronavirus, which corresponds
to the higher proportion of the comments about “time/longterm effects”. In addition, more anger is observed among
the overlapping users in r/conspiracy who talked more about
“skeptical/aggressive remarks”.

r/conspiracy vs. r/worldnews
This pair has the least overlapping users (91) among the
three pairs. The proportions of overlapping users in the user

r/Coronavirus
r/worldnews
435
435
1682
717
3.87**
1.65**
clinical trials/research/testing (26.46%)** clinical trials/research/testing (20.22%)**
symptoms/immune systems (15.10%)
governments/big companies (17.57%)†
Top Five Occurring Topics (% of
†
governments/big companies (14.80%)
symptoms/immune systems (16.04%)
the overall comments)
people/vaccine efficacy/risks (12.25%)
people/vaccine efficacy/risks (12.41%)
time/long-term effects (9.39%)
lockdown/spread/cases (8.09%)†
r/Coronavirus
r/conspiracy
Num. of Overlapping Comment Authors
104
104
Num. of Total Comment Authors
183
220
Mean of Num. of Comments
1.76
2.12
people/vaccine efficacy/risks (17.49%)
people/vaccine efficacy/risks (15.45%)
governments/big companies (14.75%)
governments/big companies (15.45%)
Top Five Occurring Topics (% of
symptoms/immune systems (13.66%)
symptoms/immune systems (14.55%)
the overall comments)
clinical trials/research/testing (13.11%)
skeptical/aggressive remarks (14.09%)†
time/long-term effects (11.48%)†
politics/news sources (10.91%)
r/conspiracy
r/worldnews
Num. of Overlapping Comment Authors
91
91
Num. of Total Comment Authors
192
129
Mean of Num. of Comments
2.11**
1.42**
skeptical/aggressive remarks (16.67%)
clinical trials/research/testing (14.73%)
people/vaccine efficacy/risks (15.10%)
people/vaccine efficacy/risks (14.73%)
Top Five Occurring Topics (% of
symptoms/immune systems (14.58%)
symptoms/immune systems (13.95%)
the overall comments)
clinical trials/research/testing (13.02%)
skeptical/aggressive remarks (13.95%)
governments/big companies (12.50%)
governments/big companies (13.17%)
Note. † p-value < 0.1; *p-value < 0.05; **p-value < 0.01
Num. of Overlapping Comment Authors
Num. of Total Comment Authors
Mean of Num. of Comments

Table 3: Characteristics of comment authors who participated in multiple subreddits and most commonly discussed topics by
these overlapping authors.

Figure 2: Distributions of comments of different topics across top eight subreddits.

Positive emotion
3.0
2.5
Negative emotion
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5

Health

Death

r/Coronavirus
r/worldnews

Anxiety

Risk

Anger

Figure 3: Linguistic profiles for the comments of the overlapping users of r/Coronavirus and r/worldnews. (Note: The
scores have been normalized.)

Positive emotion
3.0
2.5
Negative emotion
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5

Health

Death

r/conspiracy
r/Coronavirus

Anxiety

Risk

Anger

Figure 4: Linguistic profiles for the comments of the overlapping users of r/Coronavirus and r/conspiracy. (Note: The
scores have been normalized.)

bases of these two subreddits are 2.19% (91 out of 4,159)
and 1.57% (91 out of 5,782). These users made an average
of two comments in r/conspiracy and and an average of one
comment in r/worldnews. Since the difference between the
means is statistically significant, it is reasonable to declare
that these overlapping users are more active in r/conspiracy
than r/worldnews. In terms of the top five occurring topics, although comments related to “skeptical/aggressive remarks” seem to be more frequent in r/conspiracy, the z-test
shows no statistically significant difference between the two
subreddits’ proportions of comments related to any of the
listed topics. As for the linguistic profiles, the overlapping
users express more positive emotions, focus more on risks,
and show more anger in r/worldnews.
Positive emotion
3.0
2.5
Negative emotion
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5

Health

Death

r/conspiracy
r/worldnews

Anxiety

Risk

Anger

Figure 5: Linguistic profiles for the comments of the overlapping users of r/conspiracy and r/worldnews. (Note: The
scores have been normalized.)

Moreover, these topics vary across time and subreddits, suggesting differences in subreddits’ user bases. We further
pick three subreddits out of the top eight: r/Coronavirus,
r/worldnews, r/conspiracy, and find that the variations in
topic proportions across subreddits are mainly related to the
thematic and linguistic differences among the overlapping
users.
Implications. As the first work to characterize discourse
related to COVID-19 vaccines on Reddit, our study has three
significant implications. First and foremost, aside from Twitter (Jamison et al. 2020), Reddit has served as a “hotbed” for
conspiracy theories and disinformation since the outbreak
of the pandemic. The facts that r/conspiracy has gained
the third most comments and that the sitewide conversations have been dominated by those belonging to “skeptical/aggressive remarks” for six months are simply shocking.
Nevertheless, this finding is in accordance with the claim
that the 21st century is “the golden age of anti-vaccine conspiracies”, made by Stein (2017). Second, despite the small
number of overlapping users between subreddits, each of the
most active subreddits has its own user bases. Hence, reliable news posted in r/Coronavirus would not draw attention
from users in r/conspiracy, while the latter may be the group
of people who need reliable information sources the most.
Lastly, even on a single social media platform like Reddit,
the concerns related to COVID-19 vaccines vary from subcommunity to subcommunity. These various concerns imply
different communication preferences (Gilkey et al. 2017).
Therefore, in real practice, we must consider the characteristics of different groups and implement communication
strategies targeting at specific groups’ needs. Speak the same
language is the weapon for us to overcome the overabundance of mis- and disinformation in times of crisis.

Discussion

Limitations. Admittedly, our study is not free of limitations. Although our model achieves a high coherence score
in characterizing the collected comments, the generated topics can only represent the concerns of users who posted
top comments that meet our selection standards (keyword
searching, etc.). There may be some opinions or concerns
underlying comments that were not taken into account in
our current analysis, so in order to obtain a more precise
picture of thematic characteristics of the discourse related to
COVID-19 vaccines on Reddit, we should amplify the scale
of data in future works. In addition, since it is impossible to
know Reddit users’ demographics, our findings simply imply the discourse characteristics of the general Reddit users
instead of the users from a certain region or socioeconomic
level. From the perspective of designing communication or
immunization programs, more information is needed to target the needs of specific groups. Moreover, we did not incorporate the interactions between Reddit users (i.e., upvotes
and downvotes) in this work, although these are elements
that may help us better understand the dynamics of pertaining conversations— this can be done in future work.

By examining what specific topics characterize the discussions of COVID-19 vaccine on Reddit, we find that the
proportion of the comments about “skeptical/aggressive remarks” outweighed that of other topic during the pandemic.

In this study, we characterize the Reddit discourse related
to COVID-19 vaccines through a combination of computa-

In generally, r/conspiracy shares a relatively small number of overlapping users with either r/Coronavirus or
r/worldnews. Despite some nuances in the proportions of
different types of comments, the main topics discussed by
overlapping users in disparate subreddits are nearly identical, which refutes the hypothesis that the same users discuss different topics based on the features/policies of specific subreddits and thus contribute to the variations in different comments’ proportions to a large extent. In other
words, the impact of the overlapping users is modest. Therefore, it is valid to infer that the variations in topic proportions across subreddits are mainly attributed to different user
bases, which is confirmed by the small percentage of overlapping users in the overall user base of each subreddit. A
further qualitative analysis of the linguistic profiles of the
comments of overlapping users is conducted. The differences in the linguistic profiles, combined with topics have
revealed more insights into the user bases.

Conclusion

tional and qualitative methods. Specifically, we employ an
LDA model to categorize top Reddit comments from March
1, 2020 to December 15, 2020 under 10 topics, analyze how
the number of each type of comments changed over time,
and examine these comments’ proportions across eight different subreddits— we detect discrepancies from both longitudinal and cross-section perspectives. Thereafter, we conduct a more careful investigation into the thematic and linguistic variations between subreddits by comparing three
most active subreddits. With the use of statistical tests, we
confirm that although there are overlapping users between
these subreddits, the scale of them is quite smaller than that
of each subreddit’s own user base, thus proving the hypothesis that thematic variations among subreddits’ conversations
mainly result from differences in user bases. This finding
also suggests the need of taking care of different subgroups’
communication preferences within a large social media platform. Furthermore, we employ LIWC and find that there are
also differences among the overlapping users across emotions, personal concerns and attention. As information on
social media platforms puts greater influence on people’s
vaccination behaviors (Kata 2012), we believe the findings
of our study can provide policy makers with useful insights
in the process of designing effective communication and immunization programs.

References
Adams, A.; Soumerai, S.; Lomas, J.; and Ross-Degnan, D.
1999. Evidence of self-report bias in assessing adherence to
guidelines. International Journal for Quality in Health Care
11(3): 187–192. ISSN 1353-4505.
Atalan, A. 2020. Is the lockdown important to prevent the
COVID-19 pandemic? Effects on psychology, environment
and economy-perspective. Annals of medicine and surgery
56: 38–42.
Blei, D. M.; Ng, A. Y.; and Jordan, M. I. 2003. Latent dirichlet allocation. Journal of machine Learning research 3(Jan):
993–1022.
Brenner, P. S.; and DeLamater, J. 2016. Lies, damned lies,
and survey self-reports? Identity as a cause of measurement
bias. Social psychology quarterly 79(4): 333–354.
Buntain, C.; and Golbeck, J. 2014. Identifying social roles
in reddit using network structure. In Proceedings of the 23rd
international conference on world wide web, 615–620.
Chen, L.; Lyu, H.; Yang, T.; Wang, Y.; and Luo, J. 2020.
In the eyes of the beholder: Sentiment and topic analyses
on social media use of neutral and controversial terms for
covid-19. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.10225 .

Need Social Media Now. American Journal of Preventive
Medicine 50(4): 550 – 552. ISSN 0749-3797.
Dunn, A. G.; Surian, D.; Leask, J.; Dey, A.; Mandl, K. D.;
and Coiera, E. 2017. Mapping information exposure on social media to explain differences in HPV vaccine coverage
in the United States. Vaccine 35(23): 3033 – 3040. ISSN
0264-410X.
Fernandes, N. 2020. Economic effects of coronavirus outbreak (COVID-19) on the world economy. Available at
SSRN 3557504 .
Gilkey, M. B.; Calo, W. A.; Marciniak, M. W.; and Brewer,
N. T. 2017. Parents who refuse or delay HPV vaccine: differences in vaccination behavior, beliefs, and clinical communication preferences. Human vaccines & immunotherapeutics 13(3): 680–686.
Goldman, R. D.; Yan, T. D.; Seiler, M.; Parra Cotanda, C.;
Brown, J. C.; Klein, E. J.; Hoeffe, J.; Gelernter, R.; Hall,
J. E.; Davis, A. L.; Griffiths, M. A.; Mater, A.; Manzano, S.;
Gualco, G.; Shimizu, N.; Hurt, T. L.; Ahmed, S.; Hansen,
M.; Sheridan, D.; Ali, S.; Thompson, G. C.; Gaucher, N.;
and Staubli, G. 2020. Caregiver willingness to vaccinate
their children against COVID-19: Cross sectional survey.
Vaccine 38(48): 7668 – 7673. ISSN 0264-410X.
Gozzi, N.; Tizzani, M.; Starnini, M.; Ciulla, F.; Paolotti, D.;
Panisson, A.; and Perra, N. 2020. Collective Response to
Media Coverage of the COVID-19 Pandemic on Reddit and
Wikipedia: Mixed-Methods Analysis. Journal of medical
Internet research 22(10): e21597.
Jamison, A. M.; Broniatowski, D. A.; Dredze, M.; Sangraula, A.; Smith, M. C.; and Quinn, S. C. 2020. Not just
conspiracy theories: Vaccine opponents and pro-ponents add
to the COVID-19 ‘infodemic’on Twitter. Harvard Kennedy
School Misinformation Review 1(3).
Jin, Z.; Cao, J.; Guo, H.; Zhang, Y.; Wang, Y.; and Luo, J.
2017. Detection and analysis of 2016 us presidential election related rumors on Twitter. In International conference
on social computing, behavioral-cultural modeling and prediction and behavior representation in modeling and simulation, 14–24. Springer.
Kata, A. 2012. Anti-vaccine activists, Web 2.0, and the postmodern paradigm – An overview of tactics and tropes used
online by the anti-vaccination movement. Vaccine 30(25):
3778 – 3789. ISSN 0264-410X. Special Issue: The Role of
Internet Use in Vaccination Decisions.
Kilgo, D. K.; Ng, Y. M. M.; Riedl, M. J.; and Lacasa-Mas, I.
2018. Reddit’s Veil of Anonymity: Predictors of engagement
and participation in media environments with hostile reputations. Social Media + Society 4(4): 2056305118810216.

de Figueiredo, A.; Johnston, I. G.; Smith, D. M. D.; Agarwal, S.; Larson, H. J.; and Jones, N. S. 2016. Forecasted
trends in vaccination coverage and correlations with socioeconomic factors: a global time-series analysis over 30 years.
The Lancet Global Health 4(10): e726 – e735. ISSN 2214109X.

Lama, Y.; Hu, D.; Jamison, A.; Quinn, S. C.; and Broniatowski, D. A. 2019. Characterizing Trends in Human Papillomavirus Vaccine Discourse on Reddit (2007-2015): An
Observational Study. JMIR Public Health Surveill 5(1):
e12480.

Dredze, M.; Broniatowski, D. A.; Smith, M. C.; and Hilyard, K. M. 2016. Understanding Vaccine Refusal: Why We

Larson, H. J.; Jarrett, C.; Eckersberger, E.; Smith, D. M.; and
Paterson, P. 2014. Understanding vaccine hesitancy around

vaccines and vaccination from a global perspective: A systematic review of published literature, 2007–2012. Vaccine
32(19): 2150 – 2159. ISSN 0264-410X.
Lazarus, J. V.; Ratzan, S. C.; Palayew, A.; Gostin, L. O.;
Larson, H. J.; Rabin, K.; Kimball, S.; and El-Mohandes, A.
2020. A global survey of potential acceptance of a COVID19 vaccine. Nature medicine 1–4.
Lipsitch, M.; and Dean, N. E. 2020. Understanding COVID19 vaccine efficacy. Science 370(6518): 763–765. ISSN
0036-8075.
Lu, X.; Chen, L.; Yuan, J.; Luo, J.; Luo, J.; Xie, Z.; and Li, D.
2020. User perceptions of different electronic cigarette flavors on social media: Observational study. Journal of medical Internet research 22(6): e17280.
Lyu, H.; Wang, J.; Wu, W.; Duong, V.; Zhang, X.; Dye, T. D.;
and Luo, J. 2020. Social Media Study of Public Opinions on
Potential COVID-19 Vaccines: Informing Dissent, Disparities, and Dissemination.
Pennebaker, J. W.; Francis, M. E.; and Booth, R. J. 2001.
Linguistic inquiry and word count: LIWC 2001. Mahway:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates 71(2001): 2001.
Pogue, K.; Jensen, J. L.; Stancil, C. K.; Ferguson, D. G.;
Hughes, S. J.; Mello, E. J.; Burgess, R.; Berges, B. K.;
Quaye, A.; and Poole, B. D. 2020. Influences on attitudes
regarding potential COVID-19 vaccination in the United
States. Vaccines 8(4): 582.
Reiter, P. L.; Pennell, M. L.; and Katz, M. L. 2020. Acceptability of a COVID-19 vaccine among adults in the United
States: How many people would get vaccinated? Vaccine
38(42): 6500 – 6507. ISSN 0264-410X.
Stein, R. A. 2017. The golden age of anti-vaccine conspiracies. Germs 7(4): 168.

