Exploring the Regulatory Function of the N-terminal Domain of SARS-CoV-2
Spike Protein Through Molecular Dynamics Simulation
Authors: Yao Li1,2,3†, Tong Wang3†*, Juanrong Zhang1,2,3†, Bin Shao3, Haipeng Gong1,2*,
Yusong Wang3, Siyuan Liu3,4,5 and Tie-Yan Liu3
Affiliations:
1

MOE Key Laboratory of Bioinformatics, School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing
100084, China
2
Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Structural Biology, Tsinghua University, Beijing
100084, China
3

Microsoft Research Asia, Beijing, China

4

School of Data and Computer Science, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China

5

Guangdong Key Laboratory of Big Data Analysis and Processing, Guangzhou, China

†

These authors contributed equally.

*

To whom correspondence should be addressed: watong@microsoft.com (T.W.) and
hgong@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn (H.G.)
Abstract
SARS-CoV-2 is what has caused the COVID-19 pandemic. Early viral infection is mediated by
the SARS-CoV-2 homo-trimeric Spike (S) protein with its receptor binding domains (RBDs) in
the receptor-accessible state. We performed molecular dynamics simulation on the S protein with
a focus on the function of its N-terminal domains (NTDs). Our study reveals that the NTD acts
as a “wedge” and plays a crucial regulatory role in the conformational changes of the S protein.
The complete RBD structural transition is allowed only when the neighboring NTD that typically
prohibits the RBD’s movements as a wedge detaches and swings away. Based on this NTD
“wedge” model, we propose that the NTD-RBD interface should be a potential drug target.

1

Introduction
The Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19), which has become a worldwide pandemic, is
caused by the Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) (1-3). Similar
to other β coronaviruses such as SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV, SARS-CoV-2 is an enveloped,
positive-stranded RNA virus (4, 5). Furthermore, SARS-CoV-2 has high homology with SARSCoV, sharing the same human cell receptor, angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) (6, 7).
After the completion of the genome sequencing of SARS-CoV-2 (1), a great amount of
research attention has been put on elucidating the infection process and searching for potential
therapies against COVID-19. The experimentally determined structures of the Spike (S) protein
(8, 9), Main protease (10), RNA dependent polymerase (11), as well as the complex formed by
the S protein and ACE2 (12, 13) provide atomic details of SARS-CoV-2. Meanwhile,
computational efforts have been exerted to improve the understanding of the infection
mechanism via evolutional analysis (14, 15). According to previous studies, the first step of the
infection is the attachment of the S protein to ACE2 (16). The homo-trimeric S protein is located
on the surface of the viral membrane, with each monomer consisting of two regions, S1 and S2,
which are respectively responsible for receptor binding and membrane fusion. S1 is composed of
a receptor binding domain (RBD) and an N-terminal domain (NTD) (17). Reported infection
models for other coronaviruses suggest that the association of ACE2 and S trimers triggers a
series of molecular events, including the shedding of S1, refolding of S2, and subsequent fusion
of viral and host cell membranes (18-21). Multiple conformations of the SARS-CoV-2 S protein
have been identified, with varying orientations of the RBDs and distinct ACE2 binding affinities
(8, 9). The closed state with all three RBDs in the downward orientation is ACE2-inaccessible
and thus inactive, while the partially open state with one RBD flipped up is capable of receptor
binding (9). Recently, the semi-open state with two RBDs turned upwards as well as the open
state with all three RBDs turned upwards have been detected by cryo-electron microscopy
(Cryo-EM) (22), although the corresponding high-resolution structures have not been released
yet.
With more atomic details of the S protein unveiled, the functional role of the RBD is generally
understood by the research community. However, the contribution of the NTD, another
component of S1, in the infection process is still elusive, despite some subtle clues. In MERSCoV, a neutralizing monoclonal antibody 7D10 targeted at an NTD epitope precludes the RBD
from binding to its cell receptor DPP4 by steric hindrance (23). Interestingly, in SARS-CoV-2, a
monoclonal antibody 4A8 that directly interacts with the NTD without blocking the RBD-ACE2
binding still exhibits neutralizing effects (24). Recently, an obvious movement of the NTD was
detected accompanying the RBD’s conformational changes in the D614G variant of the S protein
(22). These studies suggest that the NTD is at least not completely independent of the functional
conformational change of the RBD in the S protein and thus may be involved in the regulation of
viral infection.
Molecular dynamics (MD) simulation is a computational tool for understanding the dynamics
and function of macromolecules. Particularly, it can supplement the static spatial information
provided by experimental methods such as X-ray crystallography and Cryo-EM. In our work, we
performed MD simulations on four systems that corresponded to the closed, partially open, semiopen, and open states of the S protein. To explore the functional role of the NTD, each system
was simulated 1 𝜇𝑠 using accelerated MD (aMD) (25) with 5 repeats to thoroughly sample the
relative motion between the NTD and the RBD. Our results suggest that the upward RBD is
2

intrinsically inclined to tilt towards to the more stable downward orientation, and that the NTD
either favorably interacts with the RBD as a wedge to block this motion or occasionally detaches
from the RBD to allow its free transition between the upward and downward orientations. Based
on this “wedge” effect of the NTD, we virtually screened potential drugs that strengthen the
NTD-RBD interface, which would hypothetically prohibit the structural transition of RBD that is
required for viral infection.
Results
Conformational changes of the S proteins with different initial structures
To study the conformational changes of the S proteins of SARS-CoV-2, we built four simulation
systems of the S trimer with different initial conformations, i.e., a closed system with three
“downward” RBDs, a partially open system with one “upward” RBD, a semi-open system with
two “upward” RBDs, and an open system with three “upward” RBDs. The S proteins in the
closed system and the partially open system were sourced from PDB structures 6VXX (9) and
6VYB (9), respectively, where non-native mutations in 6VYB were mutated back to the wildtype counterparts, and the missing fragments were reconstructed by SWISS-MODEL (26-30).
Meanwhile, the initial conformations in the semi-open and open systems were built by homology
modeling using SWISS-MODEL by taking the S proteins of SARS-CoV with 2 upward RBDs
(PDB ID: 6NB6) (21) and 3 upward RBDs (PDB ID: 6NB7) (21) as templates, respectively.
With an explicit water solvent model, each simulation system consists of nearly one million
atoms. Considering the intimidating sizes of simulation systems and the simulation steps
required for large-scale conformational changes, we initiated 5 independent one-microsecond
aMD simulations (25) following 10-ns equilibration with a timestep of 4 fs (31) to enhance the
conformational sampling in each system.
As shown in Fig. 1, remarkable conformational changes are observed in the S1 region,
including both NTD and RBD, while the S2 region retains structural rigidity. Hence, we used the
S2 region as a basis to define the central axis of the S protein (red dashed lines shown in Fig.1)
and used the upper part of it as a reference for evaluating the conformational changes of the S1
region (see Methods for more details). The simulation results show that NTDs may play an
important role in regulating the movement of the adjacent RBDs. In the closed system, besides
the trend of one NTD moving away from the central axis observed in a trajectory, all RBDs were
locked in the “downward” conformation, and the other NTDs were stable in all 5 repeats (Fig.
1A), in agreement with the experimental evidence that the closed S protein is stable and forms a
condensed structure with RBDs packed tightly against the adjacent NTDs (8, 19-21, 32). In
contrast, dramatic relative movements between NTDs and RBDs were observed in the other
three simulation systems. In the partially open system, the upward RBD of chain B tended to tilt
downwards while the adjacent NTD of chain C moved toward the central axis to prevent this
downward movement; this observation was confirmed by all five repeated simulations (Fig. 1B).
This blockage of RBD by NTD was also observed in the semi-open and open systems (Fig.
1C&D). Interestingly, an unusual event was detected in these two systems: when the NTD
occasionally moved away from the central axis, the adjacent RBD was allowed to tilt downwards
completely (Fig. 1E&F).
We proposed novel angle and distance metrics to quantify the movements of the NTD and
RBD in the simulation trajectories. Previous research used three single residues, i.e. D405-V6223

V991, to define the angle for evaluating the orientation of the RBD (33). To ensure robustness of
the results, we replaced these single residues with the centroids of structurally rigid regions and
defined three metrics: 1) RBD angle (θr) that describes the upward and downward tilting poses of
the RBD and any conformations in between; 2) RBD distance (dr) that describes the distance
between the RBD and the central axis; 3) NTD distance (dn) that describes the distance between
the NTD and the central axis (Fig. 2A, see Methods for more details). As shown in Fig. 2B-D,
the quantitative measurements of the relative motions between NTDs and neighboring RBDs
agree with the representative conformational changes shown in Fig. 1. All motions can be
classified into two modes. In the first mode, the NTD wedges in to block RBD movement, as
detected in all three simulation systems possessing upward RBDs. As shown in the first three
columns of Fig. 2B-D, both angle and distance of the upward RBD decrease, but this tendency is
later blocked by the quick movement of the NTD towards the central axis (i.e., a marked
reduction of the NTD distance). In the second mode, NTD swings away, and RBD accomplishes
its complete downward tilt, as observed in both the semi-open and open systems. As shown in
the last two columns of Fig. 2D, the distance of the NTD increases in the early stage of
simulation, suggesting that it moves away from the central axis, releasing the steric hindrance for
RBD movement. Accordingly, the highlighted upward RBDs in both semi-open system (the
penultimate column) and open system (the last column) eventually approach much smaller
distance and angle values compared with the blocked RBDs (the first three columns), which
indicates that these highlighted RBDs tilt downward completely. To further validate these two
modes, we calculated the distributions of RBD distance and angles from all five repeats for each
simulation system. Consistently, the metrics of the upward and downward RBDs are separated
by a marked gap in the RBD blocked mode (see the first three columns of Fig. 2E&F), while
huge overlaps occur in the RBD downward tilting mode (see the last two columns of Fig. 2E&F).
Moreover, one-way ANOVA analysis confirms that significant difference is present between
experimental groups and control groups in the RBD blocked mode but is absent in the RBD
downward tilting mode (Table S1). These results imply that the NTD may act as a wedge to
regulate the functional movement of the RBD.
The complete downward tilt of the RBD was not caught in the partially open system, possibly
because the NTD kept wedging in during the simulations. To validate this hypothesis, we
artificially forced the NTD of chain C to the swinging-out posture (using targeted MD (tMD) on
a target position inferred from a reference structure with large NTD distance in the semi-open
system) and then investigated the movement of the upward RBD in this system through 5
redundant 400-ns aMD simulations (Fig. S1A). Compared with previous simulations that started
from the crystal structure, the distributions of RBD angles and distances exhibited remarkable
left-shifts in the NTD-forced-out trajectories (Fig. S1B), indicating that the upward RBD tilts
downward to a significantly larger extent when its partner NTD is absent. We also conducted a
time-structure based Independent Components Analysis (tICA) (34, 35) to identify slow motions
with high time autocorrelation on the first 200 ns of these NTD-forced-out simulations. As
expected, the first tIC presents the highest correlation with the difference vector between the
representative structures of the upward and downward RBDs (Fig. S1C). Hence, the downward
tilting movement of the RBD is the main slow motion when the NTD is forced away.
Intermediate conformations and transition analysis by Markov State Models

4

Markov state models (MSM) (36) are a powerful tool used to extract structural information from
multiple simulations and has been exploited to track dynamic progress and elucidate slow
motions in MD simulations (37-39). In our work, considering the relative structural rigidity of
the S2 region, we extracted Cartesian coordinates of Cα atoms of S1 to build MSM and
identified intermediate conformational states in the two modes described previously. For the
NTD wedging-in mode, all five repeated trajectories of the partially open system were used in
the principal component analysis (PCA) to reduce the dimensionality of original coordinates. As
shown in Fig. S2A, the top 4 principal components (PCs) were picked to represent the S1 regions
of three chains since they explained 69.38% of the total variance. A lag-time of 1.0 ns was set for
the time-discretization of the process (39, 40) and a number of 100 microstates was chosen based
on the implied timescale analysis (37, 41). These microstates were built using mini-batch KMeans clustering (40, 42, 43) and were subsequently aggregated into a number of macrostates
(or metastable states), for which pairwise transition probabilities were calculated (34). The
detailed workflow of MSM construction is illustrated in Methods.
As shown in Fig. 3A&B, all five trajectories in the partially open system were finally lumped
into six macrostates and the structure closest to the centroid of each macrostate cluster in the
space of the top 4 PCs was chosen as the representative structure. State 0 is the initial state with
one RBD turned upwards, whereas states 4 and 5 are the final states with this RBD blocked by
the adjacent NTD. States 1, 2 and 3 are intermediate states between the initial and final states.
With the NTD quickly moving toward the central axis in the early stage of simulation, the initial
state 0 can directly transform into the final state 4 with a high probability. Meanwhile, in the
intermediate state 2, the NTD initially moves a little away from the central axis to allow the
upward RBD to tilt slightly downward, leading to significantly smaller RBD angles than those of
the initial state (Fig. 3B). The NTD then moves back toward the central axis, preventing the
upward RBD from falling, and consequently, the RBD angle increases afterwards, reaching a
stable final state (state 5) with RBD held in the upward pose (Fig. 3B). State 3 is another
intermediate state, which either transforms into the final state 5 with the NTD moving towards
the central axis or interconverts with intermediate state 2.
We also built an MSM for the mode characterized by the NTD moving out and the RBD
tilting downward from two trajectories of the semi-open system. Following the same protocol,
we chose the top 5 PCs, set the microstate number as 100 and set the lag-time as 1.0 ns (Fig.
S2B). As shown in Fig. 3C, this mode is represented by a four-state transition network, including
two transition paths between the RBD’s initial upward state (state 0) and the RBD’s final
downward state (state 3), mediated by two intermediate states (states 1 and 2). In this mode, the
NTD first moves away from the central axis, eliciting the upward RBD to fall (state 1) and/or
moves inward to stabilize the already downward RBD (state 2). As shown in Fig. 3D, the final
state (state 3) exhibits the smallest values in all three metrics, implying that the upward RBD has
tilted down completely to form a highly packed structure in this state. Notably, the transition
probabilities here are obtained from aMD simulations with boosting potentials (44) and thus may
not correlate well with the “real” probabilities estimated from an equilibrium distribution (37).
Analysis on the interface between NTD and RBD during structural transition
As demonstrated above, each state in MSM is crucial to the transition from the initial to the final
state, and the whole network clearly illustrates how the overall conformational change happens
5

step by step. In order to figure out the molecular mechanism of these conformational changes,
we performed Molecular Mechanics Generalized Born Surface Area (MM/GBSA) (45-47) on
each microstate with one protomer as the ligand and the remaining two as the receptor and
decomposed the total binding free energy to individual residue pairs. By this means, the residue
pairs that make significant contribution to the physical interactions between the NTDs and their
adjacent RBD partners can be identified.
The identified residue pairs are mainly located at the NTD-RBD interface but can be clustered
spatially into several clumps (Table S2&S3). The interaction patterns of these clumps vary
substantially during the structural transition. Specifically, for the mode characterized by NTD
wedging in and RBD being blocked in the partially open system (Fig. 4A and Table S2), the red
clump, including H519 and P230, forms in the intermediate states 2 and 3 and remains in the two
final states 4 and 5. Meanwhile, the yellow clump, including P521 and Y170, forms and breaks
intermittently and disappears in the final state 5. We suspect that the interactions between these
residue pairs are more relevant in mediating the relative motions between the NTD and the RBD.
On the contrary, the more conservative clumps that exist among most macrostates, e.g., the green
clump including R357 and N165, as well as the purple clump including N360 and T167, are
likely to play more basic roles such as structural stabilization. For the mode characterized by
NTD moving out and RBD tilting downward in the semi-open system (Fig. 4B and Table S3),
the identified residue pairs scarcely overlap among macrostates, possibly due to the more drastic
relative motions between the NTD and the RBD. However, it is noteworthy that the initial state
lacks strongly interacting residue pairs if -1.5 kcal/mol is taken as the energy threshold.
Interactions gradually form when the RBD tilts downward, reaching the final stable state with
the NTD-RBD interface composed of three clumps.
We further performed evolutional analysis on key residue pairs identified in the partially open
system: the residues of the RBD of chain B from 355 to 360 and from 519 to 521, and the
residues of the NTD of chain C from 159 to 170 and from 230 to 233. We first compared such
residue pairs with the corresponding residues in SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV. As shown in Fig.
4C, most of these key residues are conserved in SARS-CoV while only parts of them are
conserved among three kinds of sequences (conservativeness reflected by the darkness of blue
colors), which is consistent with the overall sequence similarity among the three coronaviruses.
When evaluated on the samples of COVID-19 patients derived from Global Initiative on Sharing
All Influenza Data (GISAID) (51, 52), all these residues were highly conserved regardless of
region or race (Fig. 4D). These results indicate that the NTD-regulated structural transition may
be generalizable for all current SARS-CoV-2 samples, which implies that potential therapy based
on this mechanism may be applicable to all COVID-19 cases.
The NTD wedge effect for conformational changes of the S protein
Given all the consistent observations and comprehensive analysis demonstrated above, we
propose the “wedge” model to illustrate the crucial regulatory role of the NTD in the functional
conformational change of the S protein. As shown in Fig. 5, the NTD acts as a wedge in two
aspects: wedging in for RBD blockage and moving out to allow RBD tilting. In general, the
receptor-accessible upward RBD is inclined to tilt downward to form the more compact
structure. Occasionally, the NTD may swing away and detach from the RBD, sterically allowing
the free movement of the RBD. Although not observed in our simulations due to the high
6

stability of the closed S protein, the opposite motion of the RBD tilting upward may occur during
the activation of the S protein. The free reorientation of the RBD, however, will be blocked when
the neighboring NTD moves towards the central axis and forms favorable interactions with the
RBD. According to this model, the NTD may be a potential drug target for COVID-19 therapy.
Particularly, drugs targeting the NTD-RBD interface is supposed to augment the NTD “wedge”
effect and lock the S protein into an individual conformational state (complete “up” or complete
“down” states), which would inhibit the functional structural transition required for viral
infection.
Preliminary NTD-targeted drug virtual screening
Given the “wedge” model of the NTD, the partially open state was employed to recruit drug
compounds that enhance interactions on the NTD-RBD interface. The NTD of chain C from the
last frame in the equilibrium simulation of the partially open system was chosen as the receptor.
We used AutoDock Vina (55, 56) to perform virtual screening against the sub dataset of “intrials” in ZINC15(57-59), including all approved drugs and investigational compounds in clinical
trials. 9,800 chemical compounds were evaluated, and top compounds with high binding
affinities are shown in Table S4. The compound ZINC000261494659, a Paclitaxel analogue, has
the highest binding affinity of -13.8kcal/mol and binds at the interface between NTD of chain C
and the “up” RBD of chain B. The drug compound strengthens the NTD-RBD binding by
forming new interactions at the interface, including hydrogen bonds (e.g., with N360 of the RBD
of chain B and V171 of the NTD of chain C), hydrophobic interactions (e.g., with P330 of the
RBD and V159 of the NTD) and van der Waals (Fig. 6A). ZINC000256109538 can also bind at
the NTD-RBD interface with high affinity but in a different pose (Fig. 6B), forming interactions
with T108, Q115, and T167 of the NTD as well as I233, R357, and N394 of the RBD. In
addition, we also performed virtual screening against the database of TCMSP (60), which
consists of 14,249 chemical compounds extracted from Chinese herbs, and used a threshold of 9.5 kcal/mol to select compounds with high binding affinities to the NTD-RBD interface.
Interestingly, the identified compounds are ingredients of the prescriptions recommended by the
National Health Commission of China for the treatment of COVID-19 (Table S5-13). For
example, in the prescription of “Qing Fei Pai Du Tang”, a total of 18 compounds from 8 herbs
were detected with high binding affinities (Fig. 6D). These results imply that active constituents
of the recommended prescriptions may deliver their medical effects by targeting the NTD of the
S protein.
Discussion
In our work, we found that the NTD acts as a wedge to regulate the movement of the adjacent
upward RBD: holding it to stand up (the “wedging in” mode) or allowing it to tilt down (the
“moving out” mode). Both modes were observed in the simulation systems with upward RBDs,
and several metastable states were identified by MSM. This NTD “wedge” model should be
further validated by biochemistry and molecular biology experiments. Notably, previous research
has proven that the closed and the partially open structures coexist in vivo (61), which implies
active transitions between the two structure states. However, despite the energy boost applied,
we failed to observe significant conformational changes of RBDs in the simulations of the closed
system. More advanced enhanced sampling techniques or even biased simulations may be
7

conducted in the future to see the RBD’s upward flipping movement. Alternatively, based on the
RBD’s downward tilting trajectories observed in this work, a reaction path connecting the two
conformational states could be identified and optimized by path optimization approaches like the
string method, which allows thorough sampling and rigorous free energy estimation along the
reaction coordinates.
The semi-open and open states are more flexible with more than one upward RBD, and thus
their simulations exhibit high diversities. As shown in Fig. S3 and Fig. S4, besides the two kinds
of relative movements between the NTD and the RBD, we also observed that the upward RBDs
formed interactions with each other. In the semi-open system, two upward RBDs tilted down,
and the three downward RBDs in the final structure formed stable mutual interactions (Fig. S3).
Similar behavior was also observed in the open system (Fig. S4), where all three upward RBDs
tilted downwards completely to form a compact packing. Occasionally, two RBDs tilted
downwards while the remaining upward RBD only formed close interactions with one of the
other two RBDs (Fig. S4B). Nevertheless, the complicated interactions with multiple upward
RBDs and their potential influence on viral infection still await further investigation.
Our main observations were obtained from aMD simulations, which disrupted the Boltzmann
distribution by applying energy boosts. Hence, unperturbed distributions of conformational states
need to be recovered from the microstate transition analysis in MSM, which are essential for the
evaluation of kinetic properties, such as transition probabilities, and thermodynamic properties,
such as the potential of mean force. In addition, although we have screened out dozens of
promising compounds with high binding affinities to the NTD-RBD interface from the ZINC15
and TCMSP databases, more stringent calculations and experimental validations should be
conducted to evaluate the identified drug candidates in the future.

Materials and Methods
Simulation system design and configuration
The initial structures of the closed system and the partially open system were chosen from the PDB
structures of 6VXX (9) and 6VYB (9), respectively. These structures are trimer glycoproteins with
1281 residues with N-glycosylation in each chain. In our research work, non-native proline
mutations were mutated back to the wild type lysine and valine, respectively. Since several
fragments were not resolved in these Cryo-EM structures, SWISS-MODEL (26-30) was employed
to replenish the missing atoms. We used the GLYCAM-Web online server (http://glycam.org) to
add glycans (biantennary LacNAc N-glycans) on 13 aspartic acids and changed the residue name
of “ASN” to “NLN” for residues modified by glycans in the PDB files. In the semi-open and the
open simulation systems, the initial structures of the S proteins were generated by SWISS-MODEL
with SARS-CoV (21) structures of 2 upward RBDs (PDB ID: 6NB6) and 3 upward RBDs (PDB
ID: 6NB7) taken as templates. Glycans were also added at the same positions.
Each simulation system was solvated by a cubic TIP3P water box. Considering that the protein
mainly stretched in the x and y directions, the boundaries of the water box in each simulation
system were extended more in the x and y dimensions than in the z dimension (Table S14) to
ensure that the protein stayed in the periodic cell during the simulation process. 3 Na+ ions were
added to neutralize the simulation systems. The force fields “leaprc.GLYCAM_06j-1” (62),
“leaprc.protein.ff14SB” (63), and “leaprc.water.tip3p” (64) in Amber20 were employed to
parameterize glycans, the protein and water molecules (as well as ions), respectively. Topology
8

files suffixed with “.prmtop” and coordinate files suffixed with “.inpcrd” were generated by
running the program “tleap” in Amber20. The program “cpptraj” was executed to fix the orders of
all atoms.
In order to accelerate simulation speed, we used a timestep of 4 fs via hydrogen mass
repartitioning, which repartitioned the mass of hydrogen atoms and their attached heavy atoms
(31). SHAKE was used to remove the stretching degrees of freedom of hydrogen-involved bonds.
Simulation process
We first performed 5,000 steps of energy minimization to relax steric clashes, including 2,500
steps of steepest descent minimization and 2,500 steps of conjugate gradient minimization. The
temperature of each simulation system was set to 300 K, and the pre-equilibration was run in the
NVT ensemble for 300 ps. A radius cutoff of 10 Å was used for non-bonded interactions. Harmonic
positional constraints of 10 kcal/mol/Å2 were applied during the pre-equilibration to gradually
release improper forces in the system. Before the equilibrium simulation, the solvent was first
optimized, followed by optimization of the protein side chains, and then restraints were gradually
removed to allow the system to approach a low-energy state. Then we performed 10 ns equilibrium
simulation at 300 K for each system. The minimization, pre-equilibration and equilibrium
simulation were performed with the binary file “pmemd.cuda” in Amber20.
By adding bias potential to the original potential, aMD (25) can promote the protein to overcome
local energy barriers, which would enhance the efficiency of conformational sampling. We applied
energy boosting to both the whole potential and the torsion term (iamd=3). The aMD parameters
adopted in our simulations included the average energy thresholds and inverse strength boost
factors for the total potential and the dihedral potential. When estimating these parameters, we
scaled the total number of atoms by 0.16 (65) in the partially open, semi-open, and open systems
but by 0.20 in the closed system, since the last system was more stable. 1000-ns aMD was run for
each simulation system with 5 repeats.
We performed tMD to detect the mode characterized by NTD moving out and RBD tilting
downward in the partially open system. We calculated the distance between the NTD and the
central axis of the S protein in the trajectory of the semi-open system and chose the frame with the
largest distance as the target structure. The initial structure was chosen as the last frame of 100 ns
equilibrium simulation on the partially open system. tMD (66) applies an additional term to the
energy function based on the mass-weighted root mean square deviation (RMSD) of a set of atoms
in the current structure compared to the reference structure:
𝐸 = 0.5 × 𝑇𝐺𝑇𝑀𝐷𝐹𝑅𝐶 × 𝑁𝐴𝑇𝑇𝐺𝑇𝑅𝑀𝑆 × (𝐶𝑈𝑅𝑅𝑀𝑆𝐷 − 𝑇𝐺𝑇𝑅𝑀𝑆𝐷)2,

(Eq. 1)

where TGTMDFRC stands for the force constant, NATTGTRMS stands for the number of Cα
atoms of NTD, CURRMSD stands for the RMSD of the current structure compared with the target
structure and TGTRMSD stands for expected RMSD value, which is equal to 0 in our work.
Evaluation of the relative motions between NTD and RBD
To conduct a quantitative analysis of relative motions between the NTD and the RBD, we first
defined four stable regions by calculating the residue-wise positional fluctuations (also referred to
as root-mean-square fluctuations or RMSF),
𝑅𝑀𝑆𝐹𝑖 = √〈(𝑥𝑖 − 〈𝑥𝑖 〉)2 〉,
9

(Eq.2)

where xi stands for the Cartesian coordinates of the Cα atom of a residue in each frame of the
whole trajectory and <xi> stands for the mean value along the simulation trajectory. By selecting
residues with small RMSFs, the four stable regions were defined as follows: 1) the RBD core
region including resides 334-527, with residues 454-491 excluded; 2) the rotation axis of RBD
including residues 541-586; 3) the upper part of the central axis including residues 976-996; and
4) the NTD core region including resides 27-303. We calculated the centroids of each region and
defined three evaluation metrics: 1) RBD angle (θr) is the scalar angle between centroids of the
RBD core region, the rotation axis and the central axis; 2) RBD distance (dr) describes the distance
between the RBD core region and the central axis; 3) NTD distance (dn) describes the distance
between the NTD core region and the central axis.
We used tICA (34, 35) to evaluate motions of the upward RBD in the partially open system
when the NTD was forced out by tMD. Instead of using structural similarity as a proxy for kinetic
similarity, tICA sought to encode kinetic similarity in the states explicitly by choosing the states
along the slowest degrees of freedom. Given a multidimensional dataset, tICA is able to find the
linear combinations (tIC) of the input coordinates that maximize the autocorrelation function of
the corresponding projection, while restraining this linear combination to be uncorrelated to the
previous ones. In practice, we performed tICA on the first 200 ns of the aMD trajectory with a lag
time of 2 ns.
Markov State Model
By using MSMBuilder v3.8.0 (39, 40), we built the MSM for the partially open system with the
following procedures:
1) To remove the degrees of freedom of rotation and translation, we aligned all frames of all
trajectories to the first frame of trajectory 1.
2) As our study focused on relative motions of the NTD and its partner RBD of the S1 region,
the Cartesian coordinates of Cα atoms of S1 regions were extracted from five trajectories
as input data for MSM.
3) We performed PCA to reduce the dimensions of the input data and projected the input data
on the top 4 PCs.
4) The choice of lag-time is important since it allows the discrete microstates to be Markovian
and ensures kinetic accessibility (39, 40). According to the implied timescale analysis(41),
if the implied timescale no longer increases at any lag-time longer than , then  is chosen
as a proper lag-time to resolve the process (37). We chose the lag time based on MSMs
built with a series of microstate numbers including 50, 100, 250, 500, 1000 and 2000. At
the beginning, the implied timescale rose gradually, with the 0.2-ns stepwise increment of
lag-time increasing. When the lag time reached 1.0 ns, the implied timescales tended to be
relatively constant, and no significant increase was detected with any longer lag times in
all MSMs with different numbers of microstates. Therefore, we chose 1.0 ns as the lag
time.
5) We used the generalized matrix Rayleigh quotient (GMRQ) as a metric to choose a proper
number of microstates. GMRQ is a criterion that evaluates how well the MSM eigenvectors
generated on the training dataset explains kinetics variance in the test dataset (42). We built
MSM with a lag time of 1.0 ns and with varying numbers of microstates (50, 100, 250,
500, 1000 and 2000), and finally chose 100 microstates because of the highest value of
GMRQ in 5-fold cross validation. With all hyperparameters fixed, all subsequent MSMs
10

were constructed with a lag time of 1.0 ns and microstate number of 100, using mini-batch
K-Means (40).
6) 100 microstates were lumped into 6 macrostates by perron-cluster cluster analysis (PCCA)
(67).
7) For the partially open system, MSM was built with 6 macrostates and transition
probabilities were calculated between each pair of macrostates.
8) We selected the structures closest to the center of each macrostate as the representative
structures.
We also built MSM for the mode characterized by the NTD moving out and the RBD tilting
downwards in the semi-open system with the same procedures. 100 microstates were clustered in
a 5-dimensional PC space and a lag time of 1.0 ns was chosen for this model. 4 macrostates were
selected in the final model.
Free energy decomposition
We used MM/GBSA for free energy decomposition and detected key residue pairs on the NTDRBD interface. For each macrostate, we first picked up 100 structures that had the smallest RMSD
with the representative structure and discarded structures with RMSD larger than 4 Å. MM/GBSA
(68) was performed in Amber20 on each microstate for the selected structures. The program
“Parmed” was used to split the topology file of the original system into two parts, i.e., a chain with
the selected NTD acting as the ligand and the remaining two chains acting as the receptor. We
decomposed the total free energy on pairs of residues and identified residue pairs in the NTD of
the ligand and in the corresponding RBD of the receptor according to decomposed binding free
energies. After ranking the pairwise decomposed binding free energy, we found that most of the
residue pairs with high bind affinities were located on the NTD-RBD interface.
Virtual screening by docking
Virtual screening was performed by AutoDock Vina (55, 56) with the following procedures:
1) We generated the receptor file for docking. The structure of the last frame of the
equilibrium simulation in the partially open system was selected as the receptor. Charges
were added for each residue.
2) The virtual screening was performed against two compound databases. We culled 9,800
chemical compounds from the category of “in-trails” of ZINC15(57-59) and 14,249
compounds from the database of TCMSP (60). The compounds culled from ZINC15 were
approved drugs and investigational compounds in clinical trials with the “sdf” format. The
compounds culled from TCMSP were chemical compounds extracted from 502 kinds of
Chinese herbs with the “mol2” format. Chemical compounds were converted into the PDB
format by OpenBabel (69) and were further optimized using the Generalized Amber Force
Field (gaff). Charges were added and rotatable bonds were assigned for each compound.
3) We then designed the grid box and set the configuration file. We chose the NTD-RBD
interface of the partially open system as the target for docking. We calculated the Cartesian
coordinates of the centroid of the NTD and placed this NTD into a rectangular box with
each dimension extended by 5Å.
4) We ran AutoDock Vina (55, 56) to screen compounds in two databases with the same
configuration. The top 20 compounds with the highest binding affinities in ZINC15 were
selected, and the detailed interactions were visualized using Discovery Studio Visualizer.
For compounds in TCMSP, we selected all compounds with binding free energy lower than
11

-9.5 kal/mol. We then analyzed the selected compounds that coexisted in 10 prescriptions
recommended by National Health Commission of China for the treatment of COVID-19.

References:
1.
F. Wu et al., A new coronavirus associated with human respiratory disease in China.
Nature 579, 265-269 (2020).
2.
N. Zhu et al., A Novel Coronavirus from Patients with Pneumonia in China, 2019. N
Engl J Med 382, 727-733 (2020).
3.
C. C. Lai, T. P. Shih, W. C. Ko, H. J. Tang, P. R. Hsueh, Severe acute respiratory
syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) and coronavirus disease-2019 (COVID-19): The
epidemic and the challenges. Int J Antimicrob Agents 55, 105924 (2020).
4.
T. G. Ksiazek et al., A novel coronavirus associated with severe acute respiratory
syndrome. N Engl J Med 348, 1953-1966 (2003).
5.
A. M. Zaki, S. van Boheemen, T. M. Bestebroer, A. D. Osterhaus, R. A. Fouchier,
Isolation of a novel coronavirus from a man with pneumonia in Saudi Arabia. N Engl J Med 367,
1814-1820 (2012).
6.
W. H. Li et al., Angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 is a functional receptor for the SARS
coronavirus. Nature 426, 450-454 (2003).
7.
M. Hoffmann et al., The novel coronavirus 2019 (2019-nCoV) uses the SARScoronavirus receptor ACE2 and the cellular protease TMPRSS2 for entry into target cells.
(2020).
8.
D. Wrapp et al., Cryo-EM structure of the 2019-nCoV spike in the prefusion
conformation. Science 367, 1260-1263 (2020).
9.
A. C. Walls et al., Structure, Function, and Antigenicity of the SARS-CoV-2 Spike
Glycoprotein. Cell 181, 281-292 e286 (2020).
10.
Z. Jin et al., Structure of M(pro) from SARS-CoV-2 and discovery of its inhibitors.
Nature 582, 289-293 (2020).
11.
Y. Gao et al., Structure of the RNA-dependent RNA polymerase from COVID-19 virus.
Science 368, 779-+ (2020).
12.
J. Shang et al., Structural basis of receptor recognition by SARS-CoV-2. Nature 581,
221-224 (2020).
13.
J. Lan et al., Structure of the SARS-CoV-2 spike receptor-binding domain bound to the
ACE2 receptor. Nature 581, 215-220 (2020).
14.
X. Xu et al., Evolution of the novel coronavirus from the ongoing Wuhan outbreak and
modeling of its spike protein for risk of human transmission. Sci China Life Sci 63, 457-460
(2020).
15.
J. He, H. Tao, Y. Yan, S. Y. Huang, Y. Xiao, Molecular Mechanism of Evolution and
Human Infection with SARS-CoV-2. Viruses 12, (2020).
16.
A. C. Walls et al., Tectonic conformational changes of a coronavirus spike glycoprotein
promote membrane fusion. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 114, 11157-11162 (2017).
17.
S. Belouzard, J. K. Millet, B. N. Licitra, G. R. Whittaker, Mechanisms of coronavirus cell
entry mediated by the viral spike protein. Viruses 4, 1011-1033 (2012).
18.
W. Song, M. Gui, X. Wang, Y. Xiang, Cryo-EM structure of the SARS coronavirus spike
glycoprotein in complex with its host cell receptor ACE2. PLoS Pathog 14, e1007236 (2018).
12

19.
J. Pallesen et al., Immunogenicity and structures of a rationally designed prefusion
MERS-CoV spike antigen. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 114, E7348-E7357 (2017).
20.
A. C. Walls et al., Unexpected Receptor Functional Mimicry Elucidates Activation of
Coronavirus Fusion. Cell 176, 1026-1039 e1015 (2019).
21.
Y. Yuan et al., Cryo-EM structures of MERS-CoV and SARS-CoV spike glycoproteins
reveal the dynamic receptor binding domains. Nat Commun 8, 15092 (2017).
22.
L. Yurkovetskiy et al., Structural and Functional Analysis of the D614G SARS-CoV-2
Spike Protein Variant. Cell, (2020).
23.
H. Zhou et al., Structural definition of a neutralization epitope on the N-terminal domain
of MERS-CoV spike glycoprotein. Nat Commun 10, 3068 (2019).
24.
X. Chi et al., A neutralizing human antibody binds to the N-terminal domain of the Spike
protein of SARS-CoV-2. Science 369, 650-655 (2020).
25.
D. Hamelberg, J. Mongan, J. A. McCammon, Accelerated molecular dynamics: a
promising and efficient simulation method for biomolecules. J Chem Phys 120, 11919-11929
(2004).
26.
A. Waterhouse et al., SWISS-MODEL: homology modelling of protein structures and
complexes. Nucleic Acids Res 46, W296-W303 (2018).
27.
S. Bienert et al., The SWISS-MODEL Repository-new features and functionality.
Nucleic Acids Res 45, D313-D319 (2017).
28.
N. Guex, M. C. Peitsch, T. Schwede, Automated comparative protein structure modeling
with SWISS-MODEL and Swiss-PdbViewer: a historical perspective. Electrophoresis 30 Suppl
1, S162-173 (2009).
29.
G. Studer et al., QMEANDisCo-distance constraints applied on model quality estimation.
Bioinformatics 36, 2647 (2020).
30.
M. Bertoni, F. Kiefer, M. Biasini, L. Bordoli, T. Schwede, Modeling protein quaternary
structure of homo- and hetero-oligomers beyond binary interactions by homology. Sci Rep 7,
10480 (2017).
31.
C. W. Hopkins, S. Le Grand, R. C. Walker, A. E. Roitberg, Long-Time-Step Molecular
Dynamics through Hydrogen Mass Repartitioning. J Chem Theory Comput 11, 1864-1874
(2015).
32.
M. Gui et al., Cryo-electron microscopy structures of the SARS-CoV spike glycoprotein
reveal a prerequisite conformational state for receptor binding. Cell Res 27, 119-129 (2017).
33.
C. Peng et al., Exploring the binding mechanism and accessible angle of SARS-CoV-2
spike and ACE2 by molecular dynamics simulation and free energy calculation. Preprint.
https://doi. org/10.26434/chemrxiv 11877492, v1 (2020).
34.
C. R. Schwantes, V. S. Pande, Improvements in Markov State Model Construction
Reveal Many Non-Native Interactions in the Folding of NTL9. J Chem Theory Comput 9, 20002009 (2013).
35.
G. Perez-Hernandez, F. Paul, T. Giorgino, G. De Fabritiis, F. Noe, Identification of slow
molecular order parameters for Markov model construction. J Chem Phys 139, 015102 (2013).
36.
V. S. Pande, K. Beauchamp, G. R. Bowman, Everything you wanted to know about
Markov State Models but were afraid to ask. Methods 52, 99-105 (2010).
37.
B. E. Husic, V. S. Pande, Markov State Models: From an Art to a Science. J Am Chem
Soc 140, 2386-2396 (2018).

13

38.
S. J. Klippenstein, V. S. Pande, D. G. Truhlar, Chemical kinetics and mechanisms of
complex systems: a perspective on recent theoretical advances. J Am Chem Soc 136, 528-546
(2014).
39.
G. R. Bowman, X. H. Huang, V. S. Pande, Using generalized ensemble simulations and
Markov state models to identify conformational states. Methods 49, 197-201 (2009).
40.
M. P. Harrigan et al., MSMBuilder: Statistical Models for Biomolecular Dynamics.
Biophys J 112, 10-15 (2017).
41.
J. H. Prinz et al., Markov models of molecular kinetics: generation and validation. J
Chem Phys 134, 174105 (2011).
42.
R. T. McGibbon, V. S. Pande, Variational cross-validation of slow dynamical modes in
molecular kinetics. J Chem Phys 142, 124105 (2015).
43.
F. Noe, C. Clementi, Kinetic distance and kinetic maps from molecular dynamics
simulation. J Chem Theory Comput 11, 5002-5011 (2015).
44.
S. Bacallado, J. D. Chodera, V. Pande, Bayesian comparison of Markov models of
molecular dynamics with detailed balance constraint. J Chem Phys 131, 045106 (2009).
45.
L. T. Chong, J. W. Pitera, W. C. Swope, V. S. Pande, Comparison of computational
approaches for predicting the effects of missense mutations on p53 function. J Mol Graph Model
27, 978-982 (2009).
46.
P. A. Kollman et al., Calculating structures and free energies of complex molecules:
combining molecular mechanics and continuum models. Acc Chem Res 33, 889-897 (2000).
47.
E. Wang et al., End-Point Binding Free Energy Calculation with MM/PBSA and
MM/GBSA: Strategies and Applications in Drug Design. Chem Rev 119, 9478-9508 (2019).
48.
E. Qin et al., A complete sequence and comparative analysis of a SARS-associated virus
(Isolate BJ01). Chin Sci Bull 48, 941-948 (2003).
49.
S. van Boheemen et al., Genomic characterization of a newly discovered coronavirus
associated with acute respiratory distress syndrome in humans. mBio 3, (2012).
50.
D. Systèmes, Biovia, discovery studio modeling environment. Dassault Systèmes Biovia:
San Diego, CA, USA, (2016).
51.
S. Elbe, G. Buckland-Merrett, Data, disease and diplomacy: GISAID's innovative
contribution to global health. Glob Chall 1, 33-46 (2017).
52.
Y. Shu, J. McCauley, GISAID: Global initiative on sharing all influenza data - from
vision to reality. Euro Surveill 22, (2017).
53.
G. E. Crooks, G. Hon, J. M. Chandonia, S. E. Brenner, WebLogo: a sequence logo
generator. Genome Res 14, 1188-1190 (2004).
54.
T. D. Schneider, R. M. Stephens, Sequence logos: a new way to display consensus
sequences. Nucleic Acids Res 18, 6097-6100 (1990).
55.
O. Trott, A. J. Olson, AutoDock Vina: improving the speed and accuracy of docking with
a new scoring function, efficient optimization, and multithreading. J Comput Chem 31, 455-461
(2010).
56.
S. Forli et al., Computational protein-ligand docking and virtual drug screening with the
AutoDock suite. Nat Protoc 11, 905-919 (2016).
57.
J. J. Irwin, T. Sterling, M. M. Mysinger, E. S. Bolstad, R. G. Coleman, ZINC: a free tool
to discover chemistry for biology. J Chem Inf Model 52, 1757-1768 (2012).
58.
T. Sterling, J. J. Irwin, ZINC 15--Ligand Discovery for Everyone. J Chem Inf Model 55,
2324-2337 (2015).

14

59.
J. J. Irwin, B. K. Shoichet, ZINC--a free database of commercially available compounds
for virtual screening. J Chem Inf Model 45, 177-182 (2005).
60.
J. Ru et al., TCMSP: a database of systems pharmacology for drug discovery from herbal
medicines. J Cheminform 6, 13 (2014).
61.
H. Yao et al., Molecular Architecture of the SARS-CoV-2 Virus. Cell 183, 730-738 e713
(2020).
62.
K. N. Kirschner et al., GLYCAM06: a generalizable biomolecular force field.
Carbohydrates. J Comput Chem 29, 622-655 (2008).
63.
J. A. Maier et al., ff14SB: Improving the Accuracy of Protein Side Chain and Backbone
Parameters from ff99SB. J Chem Theory Comput 11, 3696-3713 (2015).
64.
W. L. Jorgensen, J. Chandrasekhar, J. D. Madura, R. W. Impey, M. L. Klein, Comparison
of simple potential functions for simulating liquid water. The Journal of chemical physics 79,
926-935 (1983).
65.
L. C. Pierce, R. Salomon-Ferrer, F. d. O. C. Augusto, J. A. McCammon, R. C. Walker,
Routine Access to Millisecond Time Scale Events with Accelerated Molecular Dynamics. J
Chem Theory Comput 8, 2997-3002 (2012).
66.
W. Gan, S. Yang, B. Roux, Atomistic view of the conformational activation of Src kinase
using the string method with swarms-of-trajectories. Biophys J 97, L8-L10 (2009).
67.
G. R. Bowman, L. Meng, X. Huang, Quantitative comparison of alternative methods for
coarse-graining biological networks. J Chem Phys 139, 121905 (2013).
68.
S. Genheden, U. Ryde, The MM/PBSA and MM/GBSA methods to estimate ligandbinding affinities. Expert Opin Drug Discov 10, 449-461 (2015).
69.
N. M. O'Boyle et al., Open Babel: An open chemical toolbox. J Cheminform 3, 33
(2011).
Acknowledgement:
We thank Zhuoxuan Liu at the Department of Electrical Engineering of Tsinghua University for
his support for drawing the schematic diagram for the NTD “wedge” effect. This work was
partially founded by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (no. 31670723, no.
81861138009, and no. 91746119) to H.G. and by the Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for
Structural Biology to H.G.
Author contributions:
T.W., H.G. and B.S. contributed to the overall methodology and experimental design. J.Z, T.W
and S.L. contributed to simulation system design and initial analysis. Y.L., J.Z. and T.W.
contributed to intermediate conformations and transition analysis. Y.L., T.W. and Y.W.
contributed to interface analysis. T.W. and Y.W. contributed to preliminary drug virtual
screening. Y.L., T.W. and J.Z. contributed to writing the original draft. H.G., B.S., T.W. and T.L.
contributed to writing. All authors reviewed the final manuscript.

15

Fig. 1. Top view (left) and side view (right) of the initial and final structures of the four
simulation systems. The leftmost column is a structural illustration of the pair of RBD and NTD
16

that is explored in all simulations. Here, the partially open S protein is chosen for demonstration,
with the RBD of chain B and the NTD of chain C highlighted in cyan and orange respectively,
while the other parts are colored gray in the transparent mode. The central axis is represented by
a red dashed line in the side view and a red circle in the top view. (A-F) Comparison of the initial
and final structures in all simulation systems. In the second column, the RBD of interest is
colored cyan and its partner NTD is colored orange. The initial structures are shown in the
transparent mode to assist visual identification of conformational changes. The NTD and RBD
are enlarged and shown in the following two columns with the side view. The initial structures
are colored gray in the transparent mode. In the final structure, the RBDs are colored cyan and
the NTDs are colored orange. The intermediate states are shown in the transparent mode with the
RBDs colored cyan and the NTDs colored orange. In the closed system (A), all RBDs are locked
in the downward orientation. In the partially open system (B), semi-open system (C) and open
system (D), the tendency of the upward RBD to tilt downwards is prohibited by the neighboring
NTD moving toward the central axis. (E-F) In the semi-open system (E) and the open system (F),
the upward RBD reorients to the downward orientation when the NTD swings away from the
central axis and then moves back.

17

Fig. 2. Illustration of the relative motions between NTD and RBD in the four simulation systems.
(A) The sketch of three quantitative metrics: the angle (θr) and distance (dr) to quantify RBD
movement and the distance (dn) to evaluate NTD movement. (B-D) Evolution of the three
metrics in the whole simulation. For each simulation system, an upward RBD and its adjacent
NTD are picked from one repeat for evaluation. Chains with the selected NTD and RBD are
colored orange and cyan, respectively, whereas the remaining chains are shown in the
transparent mode. The dashed lines are shown as reference to capture the differences between
simulation systems. (E-F) Probability distributions of the angle (θr) and the distance (dr) as
collected from the simulations to illustrate the movement of the upward RBDs of interest (blue
solid lines). The distributions of the RBDs held at the downward orientations (orange solid lines)
are taken as control. The blue dashed lines and the orange dashed lines indicate the
corresponding values of the initial structures of the upward and downward RBDs, respectively.
For each simulation system, one chain from each of the 5 repeats is collected for evaluation. To
evaluate the final state of the upward RBDs during simulation, the distributions of the upward
RBDs are estimated based on the last 200 ns trajectory of each repeat, while the control
distributions of the downward RBDs (chain A in both partially open and semi-open systems) are
calculated from the whole trajectories. The first three columns in (B-F) show the blockage of the
RBD by its adjacent NTD in the partially open, semi-open and open systems (corresponding to
Fig. 1B-D), respectively, while the last two columns show the complete downwards tilt of the
RBD in the semi-open and open systems (corresponding to Fig. 1E&F). Considering that the
open system lacks downward RBDs, in (E) and (F), the downward RBDs of the semi-open
system (corresponding to Fig. 1B) are taken as the control.
18

Fig. 3. MSMs on the mode characterized by the NTD wedging in and the RBD being blocked in
the partially open system and the mode characterized by the NTD moving out and the RBD
tilting down in the semi-open system.
19

(A) MSM in the partially open system illustrates the mode characterized by NTD wedging in and
RBD being blocked. Six macrostates were extracted from 5 trajectories, among which state 0 is
the initial state with an upward RBD, states 1, 2 and 3 are intermediate states, while states 4 and
5 are two final states. All structures are superposed onto the initial structures (shown in the
transparent mode) to facilitate visual detection of structural changes. The thickness of arrows is
proportional to the transition probability. Bidirectional arrows indicate mutual transition. (B) A
quantitative evaluation on all macrostates in (A). Final states have smaller NTD distance (dn) but
comparable RBD angle (θr) and distance (dr) when compared with the initial state. (C) MSM in
the semi-open system illustrates the mode characterized by NTD moving out and RBD tilting
downward. Four macrostates were extracted, among which state 0 is the initial state with an
upward RBD, states 1 and 2 are intermediate states, while state 3 is the final state. All structures
are superposed onto the initial structures (shown in the transparent mode) to facilitate visual
detection of structural changes. (D) A quantitative evaluation on all macrostates in (C). Both
RBD angle (θr) and distance (dr) in the final state are remarkably smaller than those in the initial
state.

20

Fig. 4. Key residue pairs identified at the interacting interface between the NTD and
corresponding RBD during the transition process.
(A) Key residue pairs of each macrostate in MSM for the mode characterized by NTD wedging
in and RBD being blocked. Spatially neighboring residue pairs form a clump and different
clumps are marked with different colors (see Table S2 for more details). (B) Key residue pairs of
each macrostate in MSM for the mode characterized by NTD moving out and RBD tilting
downward (see Table S3 for more details). (C) Evolutional analysis of key residue pairs in (A)
among SARS-CoV-2 (PDB ID:6VYB) (9), SARS-CoV (GenBank: AY278488.2) (48) and
MERS-CoV (GenBank: NC_019843.3) (49). Results were visualized by Discovery Studio
Visualizer (50). (D) Evolutional analysis of key residue pairs in (A) among all samples of
COVID-19 patients from GISAID (51, 52). Data were collected on September 28th, 2020.
Results were visualized by WebLogo (53, 54). Hydrophilic, neutral and hydrophobic residues are
colored in blue, green and black, respectively.
21

Fig. 5. The schematic diagram for the NTD “wedge” effect in controlling conformational
changes of the S protein.
The leftmost structure is the simplified initial conformation, where only one NTD (orange) and
its neighboring RBD (cyan) are showed in this sketch. When the NTD wedges in and favorably
interacts with the RBD, the free tilting of the RBD is blocked and the S protein is locked into
individual conformation states. Occasionally, when the NTD swings out and detaches from the
RBD, the RBD’s reorientation is restored, thus enabling the inter-state transition of the S protein.
Hypothetically, the opposite motion of the RBD tilting upward may occur during the activation
of the S protein, which is illustrated by dotted arrows.

22

Fig. 6. Case study of virtual screening by docking.
(A-B) top compounds, ZINC000261494659 (A) and ZINC000256109538 (B) from ZINC15
database are identified with high binding affinities to the NTD-RBD interface in the partially
open system. In the left column, the NTD of chain C is colored orange and the upward RBD of
23

chain B is colored cyan. The drug compounds are represented with the ball-and-stick model. In
the right column, detailed interactions between the compounds and the NTD-RBD interface are
visualized using Discovery Studio Visualizer. Residues in chain C are highlighted with a black
circle. (C) Compounds from the TCMSP database with high binding affinities are detected in the
traditional Chinese prescription “Qing Fei Pai Du Tang”.

24

