Sharing Heartbeats: Motivations of Citizen Scientists in Times of
Crises
Daniel Diethei

diethei@uni-bremen.de
University of Bremen
Bremen, Germany

Jasmin Niess

niessj@uni-bremen.de
University of Bremen
Bremen, Germany

arXiv:2101.04913v2 [cs.CY] 25 Jan 2021

Evropi Stefanidi

Carolin Stellmacher

cstellma@uni-bremen.de
University of Bremen
Bremen, Germany

Johannes Schöning

evropi@uni-bremen.de
University of Bremen
Bremen, Germany

schoening@uni-bremen.de
University of Bremen
Bremen, Germany

ABSTRACT

1

With the rise of COVID-19 cases globally, many countries released
digital tools to mitigate the effects of the pandemic. In Germany the
Robert Koch Institute (RKI) published the Corona-Data-DonationApp, a virtual citizen science (VCS) project, to establish an early
warning system for the prediction of potential COVID-19 hotspots
using data from wearable devices. While work on motivation for
VCS projects in HCI often presents egoistic motives as prevailing,
there is little research on such motives in crises situations. In this paper, we explore the socio-psychological processes and motivations
to share personal data during a pandemic. Our findings indicate
that collective motives dominated among app reviews (n=464) and
in in-depth interviews (n=10). We contribute implications for future VCS tools in times of crises that highlight the importance of
communication, transparency and responsibility.

The ongoing COVID-19 global pandemic [35, 86] has resulted in
more than 29.3 million cases and 930,000 deaths as of September 15,
2020, in more than 188 countries [41]. The virus is spread primarily
via nose and mouth secretions [87], and the two most common
symptoms are fever and dry cough. However, symptoms can be
non-specific, and some infected people can be asymptomatic [9]. In
conjunction with the virus’ ranging incubation period [88], these
facts facilitate the (involuntary) transmission of the virus [10].
Thus, governments, research facilities and industry have developed a variety of digital tools, which can fulfil central functions in
the mitigation and control of the COVID-19 pandemic, by addressing different important aspects in the fight against it [85]. From a
research point of view, technologies can be employed to control
the pandemic, within five main application areas [83]: i) early detection and diagnosis of the infection, ii) monitoring the treatment,
iii) contact tracing of the individuals, iv) projection of cases and
mortality, and v) development of drugs and vaccines. Therefore,
various mobile applications have emerged as digital tools aiming
to accomplish the aforementioned goals [15].
In particular, digital tools that are currently being utilised are
covering the following areas: (i) providing instant epidemic information (Johns Hopkins University Dashboard [16, 41]; Worldometer’s coronavirus update statistics [95]; WHO’s Coronavirus Disease
(COVID-19) Dashboard [89]), (ii) providing health information and
prevention advice (CovApp [11]; India’s GoK Direct [56], Poland’s
ProteGO Safe [22]), (iii) facilitating contact tracing (Germany’s
Corona-Warn-App [62]; Australia’s COVIDSafe [93]; Singapore’s
TraceTogether [94]), (iv) supporting symptom checking and feedback (Italy’s Covid Community Alert, Sri Lanka’s Self Shield [91]),
(v) monitoring quarantine compliance (Poland’s Home Quarantine
App [30]; Karnataka’s Quarantine Watch [81]), (vi) or citizen science projects to support research (COVID Symptom Study research
mobile app [92], Germany’s Corona-Data-Donation-App [63]).
The Corona-Datenspende-App (CDA, Corona-Data-Donation-App)
[63] is such a citizen science tool, published by the Robert Koch Institute (RKI; the German public health institute) in early April 2020
(see section 4.1 for a detailed description of the app and its functionalities). It provides citizens with the opportunity to share their
health data from fitness trackers and smartwatches, with the aim
to better record and understand the spread of COVID-19, detecting
local fever outbreaks potentially associated with COVID-19 [65].

CCS CONCEPTS
• Human-centered computing → Empirical studies in HCI;
HCI design and evaluation methods; Human computer interaction (HCI); Empirical studies in collaborative and social computing.

KEYWORDS
citizen science, wearables, motivation, social computing, covid-19,
pandemic
ACM Reference Format:
Daniel Diethei, Jasmin Niess, Carolin Stellmacher, Evropi Stefanidi, and Johannes Schöning. 2021. Sharing Heartbeats: Motivations of Citizen Scientists
in Times of Crises. In CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’21), May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan. ACM, New York, NY, USA,
16 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3411764.3445665

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan
© 2021 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-8096-6/21/05. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3411764.3445665

INTRODUCTION & MOTIVATION

CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan

This app is a virtual citizen science (VCS) project, meaning it comprises a crowdsourced approach conducted almost entirely through
virtual portals [90]. We chose the CDA as our subject of research for
multiple reasons. The CDA addresses a problem of global relevance,
gathered a large user base (more than 500,000 users) within a few
weeks of the release, was endorsed by the government and health
authorities and was one of the earliest technological efforts in collecting physiological data for the detection of COVID-19 symptoms.
Understanding the motivations behind the participation in a VCS
project that takes place under such exceptional circumstances is
of great significance, especially given the current high stakes. The
success of such research relies on the data collected, thus a higher
number of people with continuing engagement are imperative for
contributing and growing the data set. In the case of the CDA in
particular, it is essential for volunteers to participate in the longterm.
In this paper, we study the motivations and investigate the sociopsychological processes which led people to engage in a VCS project
and share personal data during the COVID-19 pandemic. In particular, we explore the "lived experience" of a VCS project and how
it affected participation. The need to study the lived experience of
such projects is also pointed out in Brown et al. [5]. To that end,
we researched the motivations of VCS users of the CDA.
We collected 10,202 reviews about the CDA from Apple’s App
Store and Google’s Play Store (later described in detail in section 4.3)
and coded 464 reviews to understand the motivations of the users,
deriving a model about their lived experience and engagement lifecycle. Based on our findings, in a second step, we validated the
model with in-depth interviews of ten app users, in which they
discussed their experience using the CDA. Our findings indicate
that, contrary to other VCS projects, collective motives dominated
over egoistic ones. Moreover, we observed an unprecedented persistence from the app’s users to continue using the CDA, despite
various deterring factors (app instability and issues, negative media
coverage etc). These motives and reasons are explored in-depth and
presented in this paper, and we contribute design implications for
future VCS tools in times of crises that embed user needs and aim
for long-term engagement.

2

BACKGROUND & RELATED WORK

In this section, we contextualise our research within past efforts.
First, we review prior work about citizen science in HCI and Computer Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW). Then, we describe
research on the motivational processes of social participation.

2.1

Citizen Science in HCI

Citizen science, also known as community science, is scientific research conducted, in whole or in part, by nonprofessionals [28].
The definition of ‘citizen science’ and the terminology surrounding the concept is in constant flux [19]. As outlined by Eitzel et
al. [19], citizen science encompasses a spectrum from active to passive participation. We adopt a definition in line with this broad
vision. Citizen science can be described as public participation in
scientific research and can lead to advancements in scientific research, as well as in an increase of the public’s understanding of
science [17, 31]. Citizen science can enable people to help solve

Diethei et al.

problems that are relevant for or of interest to them [45], and most
of its projects are contributory ones [68]. By participating as collaborators/volunteers in a scientific research project [37], citizen
scientists are more engaged and have a more active role compared
to scientific research studies involving members of the public as
subjects. Moreover, by incorporating members of the public, citizen science projects enable data collection on a larger scale and
over a wider geographical area [42, 43, 68]. Citizen science can be
employed in a variety of disciplines, such as biology [76], environmental studies [45], and mathematics [13], with applications
ranging from observation documentation [52] and data collection
and analysis [98], to content creation [53] and curation [51].
In 2016, Preece [55] presented a research agenda on how HCI
and citizen science can mutually enrich each other. Concurrently,
within the last couple of years, HCI and CSCW scholars explored a
variety of different aspects of virtual citizen science projects. Understanding how to facilitate and maintain engagement in virtual
citizen science projects is one of the main questions HCI research focuses on. Eveleigh et al. [23] emphasised the need to study different
groups of citizen science collaborators, namely highly committed
volunteers, occasional contributors and contributors who drop out.
They found that the type of motivation (i.e. extrinsic, intrinsic) was
related to contribution behaviour. They determined that there is
a need to design VCS interfaces that address a variety of different motivational needs of citizen scientists. Snyder [71] explored
visualisations created by and for nonprofessionals in the context
of the citizen science project COASST (i.e. Washington’s Coastal
Observation and Seabird Survey Team). Based on their results, they
derived insights on how vernacular visualisations can enrich communication and coordination in citizen science projects. Moreover,
scholar have explored the integration of gamification into VCS
projects to increase user activity and support motivation. For instance, Eveleigh et al. [24] found that competitive gamification
elements led to various reactions from engagement to disengagement within the citizen science project. Based on their results, they
derived design implications for citizen scientists with different engagement levels. Simperl et al. [70] conducted a literature review
combined with an interview study to identify the value of gamification elements for VCS projects. Their findings indicate that
gamification elements appeared to have little impact on the recruitment of new citizen scientists. However, such elements seemed to
be a means to maintain interest of already engaged citizen scientists. These examples indicate the need to build an understanding
about the motivational processes of citizen science projects across
various contexts (i.e. projects), encompassing citizen scientists with
different levels of experience. Our work aims to take another angle
from previous work as it looks specifically at the lived experience
of a VCS project on the COVID-19 pandemic. Based on our results,
we strive to derive implications to design VCS systems that embed
user needs in times of personal and societal crises.
Another strain of research studied the social mechanisms of VCS
projects. Jackson et al. [38] described the dynamic process of volunteer engagement. Based on the example of the CS project Gravity
Spy their study showed that citizen scientists initially engaged with
resources by project organisers. However, their engagement shifted
to community- and agent-centred resources in later stages of the
project. In contrast to most studies in VCS that focus on long-term

Sharing Heartbeats: Motivations of Citizen Scientists in Times of Crises

engagement, Reeves and Simperl [60] explored short-term citizen
science projects. They noted that responding to discussion messages by volunteers was particularly important at the beginning
of VCS projects to maintain involvement. On a similar note, Jay et
al. [39] found that contribution rates to VCS projects can be significantly increased by allowing citizen scientists to contribute without
registering for a designated citizen science project. Addressing the
data privacy concerns in citizen science, Bowser et al. [3] report that
values and norms of citizen science explicitly promote data sharing
to achieve a greater good. The examples outlined above all focus on
topics that do not pose an immediate threat to the individual citizen
scientist or the society as a whole (e.g. Old Weather project [23],
COASST [71]). Our work aims to take another angle from previous
work as it looks specifically at a virtual citizen science project that
addresses an immediate crises. We strive to understand the lived
experience of CDA as a VCS project to derive insights about the
intricacies of designing VCS tools in times of crises.

2.2

Motivations for Participation in Citizen
Science

Multiple studies have investigated which motives are responsible for participation in citizen science. Many report intrinsic motives, such as personal interest, as the most important factor for
contribution [40, 49, 67]. However, some studies suggest that collective motives, such as contributing to science, motivate citizen
scientists [14, 58]. Some studies found both intrinsic and collective
motives make people participate in citizen science [47, 50]. Most
studies on citizen science in HCI are based on motivational models
from psychology, e.g. from Batson & Ahmad [1], who identified
four types of motivations for social participation towards common
goals: egoism, altruism, collectivism and principlism. Egoism occurs
when the ultimate goal is to increase one’s own welfare. Altruism
has the goal of increasing the welfare of another individual or group
of individuals. Collectivism has the goal of increasing the welfare
of a specific group that one belongs to. Principlism has the goal of
upholding one or more principles dear to one’s heart (e.g. justice or
equality). Batson & Ahmad’s theory was not directed towards citizen science, but explains the mechanisms of motivation in building
and sustaining a community [68].
Another model has been proposed by Klanderman, who explains
voluntary participation in social movements [46]. This framework
includes four classes of volunteers’ motivations for participation:
collective motives (the importance attributed to the project’s objectives); norm-oriented motives (expectations regarding the reactions of important others, such as friends, family or colleagues);
reward motives (benefits such as gaining reputation, or making
new friends); and identification (identification with the group, and
following its norms). Klanderman’s framework has been extended
with an intrinsic motivation dimension, operationalised as the enjoyment associated with participation in the project. This extended
framework has been applied in studies of open-source software
development [33] and Wikipedia editing [69]. Furthermore, reward
motives have been divided into two specific motives: community
reputation benefits and social interaction benefits [7, 50, 66]. Rotman et al. [68] describe a dynamic model of motivations that change

CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan

during the contribution cycle of a citizen science project. Two important points in time are the initial encounter between a volunteer
and scientific projects and the point at which a project ends. At the
initial encounter, volunteers are driven by egoism. At the second
end of a task or a project, other motivational factors, altruism and
collectivism, become more important.
Citizen Science projects are conducted in different domains, and
the motivations that drive participants vary.

2.3

Crisis Informatics

A large array of past research efforts in HCI and beyond explored
how people utilise technologies in crisis. Crisis informatics is an
interdisciplinary research area investigating ‘the interconnectedness of people, organisations, information and technology during
crises’ [29]. In recent years, crisis informatics increasingly focused
on the sociotechnical intricacies connected to crises [73]. Previous
work in crisis informatics inter alia explored topics such as public
health crisis [27], natural disasters [12, 84] and climate change [72].
In the context of the Zika virus epidemic, Gui et al. [27] qualitatively studied the perception of risk and risk communication on
Reddit. Their study provided relevant starting points for successful
risk communication via social media. For instance, their results
highlighted the relevance of personal experiences and the resulting
perception of risks and risk measures. Besides, Gui et al. found
that people also thought about the challenges facing society as a
whole in times of crisis. Thus, they emphasised the need to foster
dialogue between the authorities and citizens in times of crisis.
The importance of another social media platform in times of crisis,
namely Twitter, was explored by Vieweg et al. [84]. They analysed
more than 20000 tweets connected to two natural hazards (the Red
River Floods and the Oklahoma grass fires). Their work provided
starting points on how social media could support affected areas in
current crises. More precisely, Vieweg et al. discussed how information extracted from Twitter could increase situational awareness
of the public and emergency responders. Similarly, Chauhan and
Hughes [12] analysed online information on the Carlton Complex
Wildfire. Their results emphasised the central role local media outlets played to distribute crisis information. They also discussed the
increasing difficulty for those affected by a crisis to identify helpful
information in the wealth of information available.
On another note, Huang et al. [36] explored how the emotional
proximity to an anthropogenic hazard, namely the Boston Marathon
Bombings in 2013, affected information sharing behaviour. Their
results showed that physical and emotional proximity to the crisis
impacted how people sought and shared information online. Furthermore, the authors highlighted the critical role social media can
play to those emotionally and physically affected by the crisis.
The aforementioned examples indicate a shift in crisis informatics from authority-centric ‘push’ culture towards citizens who
are considered to be able to do life-saving work [80]. It has been
suggested that future research should conduct user-centred studies for mobile crisis applications, specifically addressing the motivations of citizens. While there are usually multiple motivations
involved [1, 50], the dominating factors differ between projects.

CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan

Diethei et al.

Figure 1: Three screenshots of the CDA on a smartphone in German, the only available language for the app. The following
descriptions are from top to bottom in each screenshot. Left: One of five screens of the app’s initial setup asking users for their
gender, birth year, height and weight. Middle: Homescreen of the CDA thanking users and showing a short explanation of the
app’s purpose, three graphics explaining three important measures to mitigate the transmission of the virus (1.5m physical
distance, washing hands, wearing a mask), a hint that the personal pseudonym and the wearable’s registration setting can be
found in the menu and the current number of donated days, here "0". Right: Menu of the CDA displaying the user’s pseudonym
and offering access to the wearables registration settings, the apps’ data privacy and imprint, current information on the
results (leads to the blog on the CDA website), current information about the app and an option to delete the user account.
The remaining screens of the CDA, which can be accessed through the menu, do not offer (other) interactive elements or
information regarding the user’s data donation.
Our work is also inspired by previous work in HCI that focuses
on long-term user experience (UX). A crisis itself or the consequences of a crisis are often long-lasting. In line with that, ideally,
the CDA should be used over a more extended period of time. As
our study focuses on the lived experience of the CDA, there is a
need to discuss previous studies on long-term UX. Karapanos et
al. [44] introduced a conceptual model that focused on the temporality of user experience. Their model encompasses three forces,
familiarity, functional dependency and emotional attachment. The
three forces impact how people transition across three different
phases of their experiences with an interactive product. The phases
are orientation, incorporation and identification. Since we focus on
the lived experience of the CDA, the third phase identification and
the associated force emotional attachment is of particular relevance
in our inquiry. The identification phase focuses on how an interactive product is integrated into ones’ everyday life and concurrent
emotional experiences. Consequently, we consider emotions as a
key variable in our study. In the field of personal informatics, Epstein et al. [21], introduced the lived informatics model of personal

informatics. Also, Epstein et al. [20] emphasised the importance
of emotions during and after the personal informatics experience,
such as feeling guilty for stopping to track. Even though using the
CDA in a pandemic is not the same as a lived informatics experience
described by Epstein et al. [21], there are some similarities, such as
collecting and sharing personal data. Thus, in our study, we also
focus on the entire lived experience of the CDA. To summarise,
while citizen science projects in crises have been described in the
crisis informatics literature, to the best of our knowledge, no prior
work in HCI addressed emotions and motivations surrounding citizen science projects in times of crises. Hence, our work explores
the lived experience of the CDA with a focus on emotions and
motivations.

3

RESEARCH QUESTIONS

Our overarching goal is to learn more about the lived experience of
the Corona-Data-Donation App. We endeavour to understand the
motivations of people contributing to citizen science projects that
focus on incidents posing an immediate threat to the individual

Sharing Heartbeats: Motivations of Citizen Scientists in Times of Crises

citizen scientist or the society as a whole. We explore this topic by
focusing on the CDA, a virtual citizen science project that aims to
mitigate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. To that end, we
strive to answer the following research questions:
• RQ1: What are the motivations to participate in a VCS project
in times of crises?
• RQ2: What are the socio-psychological processes associated
with the participation in a VCS project in times of crises?

4

METHOD

This study explores the lived experience of the CDA. To that end,
we applied a two-step procedure. We retrieved and qualitatively
analysed users’ online reviews of the CDA from the App Store and
the Play Store to derive a holistic understanding about the experience with the CDA. As a second step, we conducted semi-structured
interviews with ten individuals to explore themes identified in the
reviews in greater detail. The reviews helped us to identify the range
of different motivations present among a large group of users, however, we anticipated the reviews to be of a rather strong opinion.
The additional analysis of the interviews allowed us to ask differentiated questions on specific motivations that contributed to a more
nuanced picture of the users’ reasoning for participation. Additionally, as one of our research goals targets the socio-psychological
processes of citizen scientists, the complementary analysis gave
us two perspectives on social interaction among users. First, reviewers can interact with other reviewers and the developers in
the app stores. Second, we asked our interview partners about the
exchanges they had with family and friends about the CDA. Our
understanding of the lived experience of the CDA is based on a
qualitative analysis of these two data collections.

4.1

Corona-Datenspende-App

The CDA [63] (Corona-Datenspende-App) app was released on
April 7th 2020 by the RKI which has worked together with the
German government to coordinate Germany’s response against
COVID-19. The general aim of the CDA app is to monitor the
spread of COVID-19 and analyse whether measures to contain the
novel coronavirus pandemic are working [6]. The app gathers vital
signs from volunteers wearing smartwatches or fitness trackers
- including heart rate, daily steps and sleep habits - to analyse
whether they are symptomatic of the flu-like illness. They can
indicate fever, e.g. when the resting heart rate goes up and the
daily steps go down. However, these physiological attributes do
not necessarily mean that the user has developed a fever; at the
same time, multiple causes for a fever exist, so the data has to
be supplemented by other sources, for example COVID-19 case
numbers. So far, there is limited evidence that passive physiological
data alone support the detection of COVID-19 [57]. Preliminary
results of the CDA are reported in a blog and in an interactive fever
curve on the CDA website with the aim to help the health authorities
and the general public to assess the prevalence of infections down
to state level, in combination with other data inputs [61].
As of September 15 2020, 526,727 people downloaded the app and
registered a wearable device [64]. During the CDA’s initial setup
process, users are asked to provide their information on postal
code, gender, birth year, height and weight (see Figure 1 (left))

CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan

and to register their wearable. After completing these initial steps,
the physiological data measured by the wearable is automatically
transmitted to the RKI from the user account at the wearable’s
provider [8]. Thus, the data donation begins (see Figure 1 (middle))
and no user interaction with the app is required after this. The app’s
menu, however, offers access to further information on the user’s
personal pseudonym, data privacy, imprint, current information
related to the research results (leads to the blog on the CDA website)
and current information about the app (see Figure 1 (right)). Users
can also change or disconnect their wearable or delete their account.
The CDA was published by the RKI which is a federal institute under the authority of the Federal Ministry of Health of Germany. The
call to use the app was backed up by the German government [25]
and multiple news channels reported on the day of release about the
CDA on national television [79, 97], their online platforms [78, 96]
and continued to report, e.g. about the reached user number of half
a million after one month [77]. Two weeks after the app’s release
the Chaos Computer Club (CCC) analysed the CDA and publicly
criticised parts of its data privacy practice [8]. For example, the
fitness data was only pseudonymised after being uploaded to the
RKI servers. As a response, the RKI started to immediately address
these issues in the implementation to close the related safety gaps.
Media coverage had a visible impact on download rates as well as
reviews provided (see Figure 2). This paper focuses on the CDA,
which was released before and should not be confused with the
Corona-Warn-App [62], a contact-tracing application launched by
the RKI, utilising Bluetooth and location tracking.

4.2

Data Collection & Analysis - CDA App
Reviews

Our original data set consisted of 10,202 reviews from the App
Store and Play Store. The reviews were submitted in the period
between April 7 (April 9 for the App Store), when the apps were
published, and April 26, which was the last day with more than 100
reviews on both platforms. For the Play Store, we scraped reviews
with the python package google_play_scraper. For the App Store
we accessed the RSS feed which only contained the most recent
500 reviews. The reviews information included a unique review
ID, submission date, title (App Store only), review text, vote sum,
vote count, score, version, author, reply content and reply date. All
reviews were imported into the MAXQDA data analysis software.
We applied open coding combined with thematic analysis similar
to Blandford et al. [2]. Previous work in the field of HCI has utilised
app reviews in multiple ways, including to characterise attitudes of
users and functionality of apps [26, 75]. Extracting user experience
information from online reviews has been, inter alia, done for software and video games [32]. Similarly, in this work, we retrieve the
experience of users of the CDA based on app reviews. According to
Vaast [82], it is important for researchers to access the context of
the texts they are analysing. Some online texts, e.g. tweets, are very
short (140 characters or less), thus making sense of them in and of
itself is difficult. Therefore, tweets are to be understood within an
ensemble [4], e.g. within surrounding tweets.
Accordingly, we analysed the data in the context of the pandemic,
meaning that we were aware that the motivations of the users

CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan

Diethei et al.

COVID­19 cases in Germany and downloads of the CDA
Covid­19 cases in Germany (cumulative)
250k
200k
150k
100k
50k

Release of
Corona­Datenspende­App

Downloads Corona­Datenspende­App (daily)

Reopening of playgrounds, museums, zoos and churches
Reopening of schools,
strict curfew lifted

Restrictions on public life
("lockdown")
Tagesschau reports on
Corona apps

Chancellor Merkel
addresses the nation

RKI press briefing

WHO declares
pandemic

0
Mar 1
2020

Mar 15

Mar 29

Apr 12

Apr 26

May 10

May 24

Figure 2: COVID-19 cases in Germany and downloads of the CDA. The CDA was released early in the pandemic, when cases
were rising rapidly. Two small spikes can be seen after the RKI gave a press briefing and when the German public broadcasting
news show Tagesschau reported about German Corona Apps and showed an image of the CDA on national television. On that
day, Tagesschau has actually only reported about Corona-Warn-App but showed an image of the CDA with the name clearly
visible. Sources: mdr.de [48] and rki.de [64].
differed from previous encounters with similar apps that collected
physiological data for no direct personal benefit.
In total, we coded 464 reviews from our dataset of 10,202 reviews.
Three coders coded the data independently. We selected and coded
the 464 reviews in four iterations, resulting in four samples, and
updated our coding tree after each iteration until theoretical saturation was reached [2]. Sample #1 consisted of 84 reviews, which were
randomly sampled from our dataset. This was followed by iterative
discussions to establish the initial coding tree. For samples #2 (108
reviews), #3 (136 reviews) and #4 (136 reviews) we followed the
same procedure: For each app store (App Store and Play Store), we
selected seven versions of the CDA, all ratings (5) and sampled two
reviews for each rating. This gives us a maximum of 140 reviews for
each sample. Since not all versions had at least two reviews for each
rating, e.g. version 1.0.7 in the App Store had only 22 reviews, none
of which were 2 or 4-star ratings, the actual amount of reviews
differs (e.g. just 108 in sample 2). Some versions had less than two
reviews for a rating, e.g. version 1.0.7 in the App Store had only
22 reviews, none of which were 2 or 4-star ratings. Therefore, the
actual sample sizes vary and are below 140.

4.3

Data Collection & Analysis - Interviews
CDA Users

To complement our review data, we recruited 10 users of the CDA
app through the Prolific platform and various Facebook groups.
Participants’ age range was 20-39 (M = 26.4, SD = 6.22), with six
female and four male participants. The majority of the participants
(8/10) were students, including three PhD students, three psychology students and one medical student. Other occupations included
research assistant and engineer. The participants were compensated

with 8€, either through an Amazon voucher or directly through
Prolific. Table 1 presents details about the participants.
All interviews were conducted via Zoom or via telephone using audio-only recording. Participants were asked for consent for
recording before the interviews. The interviews lasted an average
of 15 minutes (min = 08:40, max = 22:05, sum = 02:15:38). Using
a semi-structured approach, we covered the topics of motivation,
experience (e.g. installation issues and frequency of use) and data
(e.g. data privacy, awareness of types of data shared). Most questions were open-ended, e.g. “please describe your experience from
downloading the app until today”. We provide the interview guideline as a supplementary material. All interview recordings were
transcribed verbatim and imported into the MAXQDA data analysis
software.

Participant Age
Gender Profession
P1
27
female
PhD student
P2
22
female
student (medicine)
P3
22
female
student (psychology)
P4
29
male
PhD student
P5
23
female
student
39
male
PhD student
P6
P7
24
female
student (psychology)
P8
23
female
student
P9
20
male
student
P10
35
male
engineer
Table 1: Demographics of interview participants.

Sharing Heartbeats: Motivations of Citizen Scientists in Times of Crises

CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan

Persistence
Positive
Emotions
Motivation

Re-assessment of
Motivation

Use App

Drop-out
Negative
Emotions

Re-assessment of App

Figure 3: The experience of using the CDA, a virtual citizen science project, during the COVID-19 pandemic. People’s entry
point is the initial motivation leading to the decision of using the app, i.e., participating in the VCS project. After the download
and installation, users are confronted with the setup phase and exposed to positive and negative factors of the app. Consequently, positive and negative emotions arise causing a re-assessment of the motivation and re-assessment of the app. Based on
users’ decisions, what follows is either a drop-out, i.e. removal of the app or cancellation of the data donation, or continued
usage of the app. Particularly in the case of experienced negative emotions and the decision to continue donating data, users
demonstrated persistence in remaining a citizen scientist.

5

RESULTS

In this section, we report on our findings from the analysis of
the reviews and the interviews. First, we present the descriptive
analysis of the reviews. Second, we explain the experience of the
CDA citizen scientists and the three themes we identified in the
reviews and interviews, i.e. motivations, emotions and persistence.
We provide the coding tree in the supplementary materials.
The experience of citizen scientists using the CDA during the
COVID-19 pandemic is shown in Figure 3. Individual aspects of this
cycle of engagement demonstrated with the CDA such as the motivation and persistence are highlighted in the following subsections.
Direct quotes were translated from German.

5.1

Reviews

Our analysis included 464 reviews in total in equal proportions
from the App Store and Play Store. The average number of words
per review was 41.8 (SD = 29.7) in the App Store (title and review
combined) and 22.0 (SD = 17.4) in the Play Store (review only).
Most of the reviews were submitted within the first days after
publication. For example, the number of daily published reviews
in the Play Store peaked around 3,000 on the first day – almost a
third of all collected reviews (Figure 4). Afterwards, the submission
rate dropped rapidly.
The mean ratings, illustrating users’ quantified feedback between
1 and 5, were generally slightly higher in the App Store compared
to the Play Store (Figures 5). Reviews were mostly rather negative
or rather positive (Figure 6). Ratings went up after the release of the
version 1.0.4 on April 12 which fixed an error regarding a broken
counter for the number of donated days. A slight downward trend
followed afterwards.

5.2

Initial Motivation

Initial motivations for participation were collective and mainly
revolved around the opportunity to serve the community in an

unprecedented situation and the role of the RKI as a trusted organisation. These collective motivations were expressed through
a variety of perspectives, such as an explicit desire to support the
project due to the pandemic and its societal relevance. Many users
expressed that they were "happy to support" the research of the
RKI to better understand COVID-19 in such an unprecedented difficult situation. One common view amongst users was that the
app enabled individuals to contribute to the fight of stopping the
spread of the COVID-19 pandemic. The motivation of some users
to serve their community overcame their concerns about sharing
privacy-sensitive data. While the following quote also includes the
potential personal benefits of donating data, i.e. an egoistic motive,
it highlights the main motivation is still to serve the community.
I had never thought I would share such intimate details,
but everything that now helps statisticians to understand [the shared data], protects my family members at
risk and friends. Eventually, also me! (App Store, 1.0.4,
5 stars)
Another factor was the hope for the intended success of the app
which could lead to lifting social distancing measures in the long
run. This was valued higher by one user than the data privacy,
which was considered to be a "luxury product" in this unfamiliar
situation. Other reasons for the willingness to share personal data
were the pseudonymisation of the data, the trust in the RKI and
general concerns about the community’s health. As mentioned
frequently in the interviews, even users who did not usually share
their physiological data with other services participated in the
donation (P2, P7, P8, P9), emphasising the trust in the RKI, both in
terms of data privacy and hopes for mitigating the pandemic:
In contrast to giving the data to Google, they go to the
government. And I think they handle the data significantly better compared to when the data are sold. And
this I considered a small opportunity to help. (P9)

CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan

Diethei et al.

Number of daily reviews

3000

AppStore
PlayStore

2000

1000

0
Apr 7
2020

Apr 10

Apr 13

Apr 16

Apr 19

Apr 22

Apr 25

Figure 4: Number of daily reviews submitted for the CDA between April 7 and April 26 (Google Play Store), and April 9 and
April 26 (Apple App Store). More than 80% of the reviews were submitted in the first seven days after publication of the CDA.

Mean daily ratings
5
1.0.4

AppStore
1.0.5

PlayStore

4
1.0.7

1.0.4
3

1.0.6

1.0.3

1.0.8

2
1.0.1 1.0.2
1

Apr 7
2020

1.0.6
1.0.3
Apr 10

1.0.7 1.0.8
Apr 13

Apr 16

Apr 19

Apr 22

Apr 25

Figure 5: Mean daily ratings of reviews submitted for the CDA between April 7 and April 26 (Play Store), and April 9 and April
26 (App Store). Annotated are the version numbers. Version 1.0.4 fixed a common error with the day counter as can be seen by
the increase in the scores. The App Store ratings were generally slightly higher compared to the Play Store.
The commitment to serve for the “greater good“ was also accompanied by requests to share more data than the app asked for,
e.g. the fitness data collected by their devices before the app was
downloaded. In addition, it was requested to manually insert information about temperature, pregnancy status, allergies, general
health status or symptoms. P8 expresses readiness to share sensitive
data:
Yes, whatever they had asked for. Everything. In my
head there are symptoms, like how I feel, if I have a
high temperature. Maybe also normal things, such as

how often do you go outside, so you can maybe detect
preventively and protect [yourself] from Corona, not
only [detecting] symptoms.” (P8)
One user even reported purchasing a wearable for the sole purpose
of donating data to the CDA.
Often, users projected their motivation to support the project
to other users. This became apparent, when they peer-pressured
others in their reviews to help the RKI and accept certain errors or
to also donate their data.

Play
Store

App
Store

Sharing Heartbeats: Motivations of Citizen Scientists in Times of Crises

1 star
414
37.2%

CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan

2 star
137
12.3%
1 star
4636
51%

3 star
182
16.4%
2 star
1358
14.9%

4 star
112
10.1%
3 star
1260
13.9%

5 star
268
24.1%
4 star
600
6.6%

5 star
1235
13.6%

Figure 6: Distribution of ratings for both stores. Half of the Play Store ratings were 1-star, whereas only a third of the App
Store reviews were 1-star.
Let’s be reasonable and donate data! (App Store, version
1.0.6, 5 stars)
Help the RKI and participate! Accept bugs in the shortterm. (Play Store, version 1.0.6, 5 stars)
Responses from the interviews provided a deeper insight into certain motivational factors. Consistent with findings from the reviews,
interview participants indicated that collective motives dominated
the decision to contribute. Participants were aware that they had
no direct benefit from using the app, but could potentially support
the community. While the pandemic was considered serious by all
interviewees, concerns mainly focused on other community or family members who were at risk. Two interview participants, P1 and
P9, downloaded the CDA while searching the Corona-Warn-App
since it appeared in the search results and was also launched by RKI.
This indicates that their initial motivation might have been egoistic
or collective, since the Corona-Warn-App warns of contact with
infected people, which benefits both the individual and society. In
this case it is difficult to distinguish between egoistic and collective
motives.
Overall, a typical behaviour observed in the reviews consisted
of a general appreciation of the app’s purpose and, consequently, a
strong initial motivation to contribute.
The idea is great, but unfortunately no way to contribute
with my Samsung Gear Sport. (Play Store, version 1.0.1,
3 stars)
However, this was often followed by frustration due to errors or
the incompatibility of many devices excluding users from donating
their data.

5.3

Emotional Responses to Problems

Having charted the motivations of citizen scientists at the start
of their contribution, we now present the emotional responses
when being exposed to errors in the app. The experience of sharing
data through the CDA was accompanied by positive and negative
emotions. A common perception was the wish to help and the
consequent disappointment when facing errors that prevented the
contribution, mainly caused by a lack of feedback in the app and
a limited range of supported devices. A recurrent theme in the
reviews was a positive attitude towards supporting the fight against
COVID-19. A few users expressed their gratitude for the "hard work
to manage this crisis". Users were also thankful for updates that

resolved issues with the app. We will explain the positive emotions
in more detail in the next section.
It became obvious in the reviews that the app was released with
some errors that prevented or complicated the intended use for a
large proportion of the reviewers. This circumstance caused different negative emotions such as frustration, anger or sadness.
In particular, many reviews addressed the displayed counter of
donated days that was stuck at zero days. Users were, therefore,
uncertain and sceptical if their data donation was successful, i.e. if
they were actually helping or if an error in the app’s development
hindered their wish to contribute. This unawareness and lack of
feedback about the state of the data donation caused frustration,
and even when the day counter became active, some users were
not entirely convinced about the correct functioning of the system:
After the update, I can now finally see the days. Thanks
a lot. However, information about which data are sent
and what their purpose is is still missing. (App Store,
version 1.0.4, 3 stars)
Another dominant point of criticism leading to frustration was
the limited range of supported fitness trackers and smartwatches.
Many users were unable to contribute due to their own unsupported
device and communicated their frustration about this issue understanding, especially after a month of waiting for an update. In some
cases, frustrated users reported that this only became clear to them
at the end of the registration process. Users were also frustrated
that the CDA was only usable in combination with a fitness tracker
or smartwatch, excluding many people who were not able to afford
these devices.
While technical difficulties were the predominant reason for
negative emotional responses towards the app, we also observed
concerns about transparency. In particular, most users were left
unaware about the exact kind of data being collected and how it
would be used, as the RKI reported the generic types of data the
app requested, e.g. daily steps and heart rate, on the CDA website
but not in the app. Additionally, there was no option to see what
data an individual had shared with the RKI.
Overall, users often had hoped to contribute, but were excluded
due to reasons out of their control. A common expression in the
reviews was "I would like to help, but" which was followed by
the explained barriers. This led to sadness, frustration and anger,
expressed in disappointment and threats to stop the data donation.
In response to the experienced errors, some users also expressed
anger about a lack of professionalism in the app development and,

CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan

based on that, doubted that their data was handled securely enough.
Other negative comments related to the app drawing significant
battery or appeared in the context of misconceptions about the
CDA. For example, one user was frustrated that the CDA would
not alert users in case an infection was suspected based on the data
they shared.
But, what annoys me enormously are the explanations
on the RKI website1 : "The Corona data donation app is
not a Corona test. The users themselves are not informed
about a possible infection." No one in their right mind
will assume that a corona test is possible with the data
from a "fitness tracker". It would be nice if the app would
inform users about "anomalies" (heart rate too high in
conjunction with short deep sleep phases). Theoretically,
I can deduce that myself, but this way the app would
provide a benefit for the user. (App Store, version 1.0.4,
2 stars).

5.4

Persistence

Our analysis showed that, after using the app, users re-assessed
their motivations and attitudes towards the app (see Figure 3). Initially, the shortcomings of the app led to frustration and drop-outs
for many users. However, when contributors reassessed their motivations, they reminded themselves of their initial motivation of
supporting the collective, and applied strategies to overcome the
barriers. This persistence became especially apparent when contributors updated their reviews - often indicated through "update"
or "addition" or "update + revision date" at the end of the review based on positive enforcement of their motivation, e.g. after an app
update.
When re-assessing the app, common positive perceptions addressed the improvements app updates added, while negative perceptions were expressed through the errors experienced during the
use. When re-assessing their motivations after initial use, participants positively highlighted the contribution of the CDA in the fight
against the pandemic, while other users expressed doubts about
the effectiveness of the data donation in regards to the pandemic
mitigation at the same time.
We observed a strong sense of persistence, which was particularly noticeable in the context of negative emotions when facing
errors. In many cases, users did not remove the CDA from their
smartphone but rather explained their particular errors and requested the RKI to fix them. Users also often waited for multiple
updates and resumed donating their data.
Another common approach of dealing with errors was through
peer support. Users discovered workarounds and shared their solutions in the reviews or informed their fellow data donors in case
a particular update fixed an issue, taking the role of community
representatives. To do so, some returned to their reviews and, e.g. reported that it took a few days for them until the day counter started
to work. In other cases, users suggested to check the CDA website,
posted quotes from it or shared replies from the app support.
I think the purpose of the app is great and I trust the data
privacy. A clear ’Go’ from me. From the RKI website2 :
1 The

information this user refers to is found on the CDA website, which is provided
by the RKI, but not on the RKI website.

Diethei et al.

"Currently, in the app the counter for days donated is
not always up to date. Due to the high load of the servers,
the data retrieval is delayed.". (App Store, version 1.0.2,
5 stars)
Workarounds were also reported by users that initially were
not able to contribute due to an unsupported device. For example,
Huawei smartwatches were not directly supported in the first versions of the app. However, users explained that when connecting
their smartwatch from an unsupported manufacturer to the Google
Fit App they were able to donate. Since the Google Fit App can
solely run on a smartphone without a connected wearable, it also
allowed users not owning a fitness tracker or smartwatch wearable
to connect to the CDA and still donate their data. Reviewers also
recommended to always ensure a charged device since the app
would draw significant battery. A strategy to overcome the lack
of feedback given by the app was to check the day counter as an
indicator to whether the donation worked:
Especially in the beginning, I frequently checked the
app to make sure, does it count the days, hoping that
would mean the data for the day were transmitted (P6).
Users’ behaviours also demonstrated a lot of patience, especially
regarding errors with the day counter. Although users were uncertain if their data was even donated, they continued using the
CDA, hoping the issue would be resolved in future updates. Some
users reported that the set up phase and registration took quite
some time and even multiple restarts did not lead to a drop-out.
Furthermore, issues with the app were also seen in the context of
the COVID-19 pandemic. The exceptional circumstances were considered and an understanding was expressed for issues during the
early phase after publication. Fellow data donors were even asked
to show more compassion due to the unprecedented times. This
was expressed through statements like "Take it easy and drink some
tea". Nonetheless, some users threatened to uninstall the CDA and
stop sharing their data if their reported errors were not resolved in
the near future. This was particularly often expressed when users
were uncertain about their donated data being received. However,
a "second chance" was often granted in combination with a set
countdown of a couple of days:
Unfortunately, it turns out only at the very end [of the
registration process] that it can not be connected with
Samsung Health. But maybe this changes in the next
few days. So, it will not be uninstalled yet. (Play store,
version 1.0.1, 2 stars)
The strong commitment to the project was also illustrated by
users’ patience in regards to the incompatibility and anticipation for
their device to be supported soon. On that matter, users wished for
a larger range of supported devices, since they hoped for a considerable increase in the number of data donations and, consequently,
better chances for the project’s success.
The persistence of CDA users, observed particularly in these
updated reviews and the related investment of time to get the app
running properly in order to donate data, is particularly remarkable
given the expectation of immediate availability in the context of
digital technology, where long loading times of websites can already
lead to dropouts.

Sharing Heartbeats: Motivations of Citizen Scientists in Times of Crises

6

DISCUSSION

In this research, we explored the lived experience of the CDA, a
virtual citizen science projects to mitigate the negative effects of a
global pandemic. Our results contribute insights about motivational
processes of citizen scientists in times of crises. We observed that
users of the CDA showed collective motivation to donate their data
to support the community. The crisis experience led to participants
staying persistent using the CDA, even so they were dealing with
technical problems and waiting for updates. While we observed
frustration of the citizen scientist when faced with problems, common conceptions were positive sentiments towards the idea of data
donation.

6.1

Motivations in Times of Crises

In relation to our RQ1, which refers to the motivations for participation in citizen science in times of crises, we found that collective
motives were the dominant factor to contribute. This is consistent with Raddick et al. and Curtis [14, 58]. Contrary to Rotman
et al. [68], who propose that motivations are initially egoistic and
change at pivotal points in the interaction with VCS, we did not
observe that users’ main motives were egoistic throughout the contribution cycle. However, we hypothesise that this can partly be
explained by the limited interaction possibilities provided by the
CDA. In other words, due to limited interactions with the VCS app
and other citizen scientists, it was less likely for the motivations
to change during the cycle of engagement with the project. Our
results extend the findings from Batson et al [1] and Rotman et al.
[68]. Based on the work from Batson et al. [1] there is usually a mix
of motives present when citizens engage in communities and these
motives, according to [68], change during the participation.
However, our results showcased that this does not necessarily
seem to be the case for VCS projects in times of crises. We hypothesise that the initial motivation of citizen scientist in such
extraordinary circumstances might be strong enough to remain
stable even if confronted with negative experiences such as a lack
of interaction with the scientists and frustrating issues with the
VCS app.
In regards to RQ2, the socio-psychological processes in VCS
projects in times of crises, we found that peer support was common when dealing with problems of the app. Through providing
workarounds and relaying information from the CDA website, some
users indicated their commitment to the project. Besides the communication among volunteers, in contrast to other citizen science
projects, there was very little to no communication between scientists and users. This is critical for VCS [60] and for the field of
crisis informatics, for which our model of citizens’ motivations
towards such apps has important implications. In line with Tan
et al. [80], who postulate a more citizen-centric communication
in crises, we argue that serving the collective motives of participants will increase the understanding of the purpose of the project
and the nature of their contributions. Some of the problems and
questions raised in the reviews were answered by other users or
covered in the FAQs on the CDA website. We assume that more
effective communication could have reduced some of the frustration expressed in the reviews. Our results highlight the potential of
supporting motivated participants to support their peers in using

CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan

technologies such as the CDA. A practical implication could be
to empower CDA users to support each other, which is motivated
by our observation that peers adapted communication channels to
communicate with each other that were not actually designed for
such interactions. More precisely, citizens communicated about the
intricacies of dealing with the CDA via online reviews in the Apple
App Store and Google Play Store.
Factors deemed important for engagement in VCS, such as incorporating different motivational needs [23], visualisations [71], gamification [24], and responding to discussion messages [60] seemed to
be secondary for engagement in the CDA. Still, more than 500,000
people downloaded the app and connected their wearable device
to donate data. One explanation for the high participation could
be that the CDA app was promoted by the German government
through public broadcasting television and various press reports.

6.2

Design Implications

Based on our findings, we highlight possible ways forward for
designing VCS projects in crises contexts, as well as starting points
that can help guiding the design of future systems in the area of
crisis informatics.
6.2.1 Communicating Societal Relevance. First, we address the importance of communicating societal relevance. The pandemic has
already had drastic consequences on many societies worldwide
[41]. Official authorities, such as the RKI, the German government
and news outlets highlighted the role of the app in fighting the pandemic. We hypothesise that communicating the societal relevance
of the CDA had an important effect on the rapid adoption rate of the
app. From these observations we suggest that VCS projects in crises
situations should be endorsed by official authorities and highlight
their societal impact and communicate it clearly to the public. This
resonates with findings from previous work. For instance, Gui et
al [27] showed that people have a tendency of thinking beyond
their individual needs in times of crisis. This effect, combined with
the efforts of the authorities to communicate the societal relevance
of the CDA may have supported the persistence of users.
6.2.2 Cultivating Trust and Transparency. Besides technical difficulties, concerns about data transparency were the main reason for
users to stop using the CDA and contributing data. The high-level
goal of the CDA, to reduce the spread of COVID-19 with health
data from wearable devices, was clear to most users. However, the
specifics of how their health data helped the RKI, e.g. to detect local
fever outbreaks, remained unknown for many. In line with Huang
et al. [36] we found that citizens were morel likely to share data the
closer they were to a crisis physically and emotionally. However,
the lack of understanding how their data was useful raised concerns
about the value of their participation. Consequently, we argue that
in VCS projects that involve passive sharing of sensitive data, users
need fine-grained information about the value of their contribution.
Thus, it is not enough to provide information on a high-level but
on an individual level instead, e.g. through daily status reports.
The authority of the RKI as a federal German agency and the
support from official authorities such as the German government
led to a strong identification of the users with the goals of the CDA.
Our results showed that ensuring data transparency and partnering

CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan

with trusted institutions is essential to foster trust and long-term
engagement of citizen scientists. Furthermore, contributors shared
sensitive data with the RKI which they would not share with other
platforms. While increased participation is essential for the success
of VCS, developers acting on behalf of trusted institutions should
be aware of their responsibility for the users who trust the institutions represented by the developers. Bowser et al. [3] refer to this
problematic priming on openness in the context of citizen science
with suggesting that volunteers may not raise privacy concerns on
their own.
6.2.3 Fostering Community Support. As people are often overwhelmed by the range of information available, especially during
crises [12], it is not enough to simply provide information. However,
often, in crises, time and human resources to distribute important
information are scarce. We found that many users were unaware
of information that was available in the FAQ on the CDA website,
for example that a non-functional day counter did not mean they
were not donating data. Other topics frequently addressed in the
reviews, e.g. reasons for excluding devices or data privacy policies,
led to concerns about the integrity of the project. Identifying and
clarifying such misconceptions could have prevented drop-outs.
One way forward could be the launch of a designated platform
to foster peer support such as a CDA forum directly integrated
in the app. Another option could be the presentation of Twitter
hashtags together with a VCS project to support community-based
communication via social media [74, 84]. Previous work has shown
that digital volunteers in crisis situations use Twitter to gather and
disperse information and that such information is relevant, accurate
and useful [84]. Online platforms such as Twitter and other internet forums support disaster-related citizen participation, enabling
individual capacities and collective action [74]. Consistent with
these observations, we propose that such platforms could engage
volunteers who act as community representatives for the scientists to
mitigate some of the communication issues we observed in the current project, for example. As a positive side effect, these volunteers
take ownership of the project, possibly synthesising user feedback
for the developers.
6.2.4 Personal Crisis Informatics. Previous studies in crisis informatics primarily focused on analysing how different social media platforms, e.g. Reddit or Twitter, were used in times of crises,
e.g. [27]. However, there is unexplored potential at the intersection
of VCS and crisis informatics. For instance, the design and analysis
of the CDA can inspire novel crisis informatics systems beyond
social media. In other words, systems similar to the CDA could be
an interesting extension of previous crisis informatics approaches.
The CDA is unlike more traditional VCS projects. It collects
crisis-relevant, sensitive, personal data using personal informatics
technologies which are normally used for private purposes, e.g.
fitness trackers. Interestingly, we observed that citizens were willing to share not only their sensitive data (e.g. resting heart rate)
requested by the CDA, but also broader metrics not requested by
the system, e.g. body temperature.
Our analysis showed that the participants exhibited a high level
of willingness to share sensitive data for a social purpose. Fostering
such willingness appears to be a key design goal for technologies
which use data at the time of crisis. Citizens communicated that

Diethei et al.

they would have liked to actively log additional data such as their
daily temperature to support the RKI and they did not understand
why it was not possible to do so. Furthermore, citizens voiced their
frustration with the CDA supporting only specific wearables and,
which rendered them unable to donate their data. Future systems in
the area of crisis informatics could take advantage of this readiness
to help and provide a broader set of systems and platforms for
people with different levels of openness towards technology and
technology self-efficacy. This suggests that, in future public health
crises, using existing health apps for data donations together with
apps designed specifically for the crisis (similar to the CDA) can
render the best results. In addition, a simple website could be designed on which people who do not own a smartphone or wearable
could donate their data through manual input.

6.3

Generalisability

Users considered the CDA as an opportunity to serve for the greater
good and this perception was further reinforced by media coverage
and the RKI’s role as a government organisation. We argue that our
findings can be generalised to projects that are deployed within
comparable circumstances, e.g. official authorities fighting large
scale public health crises. For example, authorities could launch
similar services to monitor outbreaks of dengue fever, measles or
influenza. For the control of dengue fever, it is essential to reduce
mosquito populations, as there are no effective vaccines [18]. The
recommended management strategy is to eliminate unnecessary
container habitats that collect water. Another public health hazard
are measles, a highly contagious, serious disease caused by a virus
[54]. Even though there is an effective vaccine, in 2018, there were
more than 140 000 measles deaths globally, especially in developing
countries. For both diseases, surveillance of fever curves in conjunction with manual reporting of infections might contribute to the
localisation of outbreaks and help authorities in narrowing down
their efforts to regions with high prevalence. Given the technical difficulties that accompanied the launch of the CDA, one approach for
health authorities in future epidemics could be to officially endorse
existing providers, such as the Fitbit platform. Users could opt-in
to make their data available for the purpose of detecting symptoms based on their fitness tracker data, which has been shown to
work to predict influenza-like illnesses [59]. With this method, an
established technical infrastructure could be adopted by a trusted
organisation to ensure reliable measurements in large populations.
In the context of a pandemic, we assume that that the high
perceived relevance of the projects addresses users’ collective motivations and makes them accept a range of adversities, which we
will outline in the following. First, in contrast to many crisis informatics projects, where participants share observations, relay
information or map hazards, the CDA requires users to contribute
sensitive personal data, such as heart rate and activity data. Second,
not only were there no direct rewards or a gratification system
in place as a compensation for using the CDA, nor did the CDA
provide clear information on how exactly the data were useful in
mitigating the effects of the pandemic. Lastly, participants shared
data continuously with no defined end date, which is different to
episodic crises, where citizen scientists often provide only a few

Sharing Heartbeats: Motivations of Citizen Scientists in Times of Crises

data points, e.g. extent of damage at a certain location over a limited
amount of time.
Therefore, the CDA shows that the societal relevance of the
crisis might overrule common inhibitors for participation in VCS
and crisis informatics projects. Our findings suggest that users in
different types of crises with lower perceived relevance might have
stopped engaging with the project at earlier stages already. Users
potentially accept adversities should they have the feeling they
can contribute to the greater good. In this case, developers could
address users’ collective motivations and express their appreciation
for serving the community. For example, the app could acknowledge the donation and send participants thank you’ notifications
or let them share a message about their contributions on social
media. However, we want to highlight that more research is needed
to determine what drives citizen scientists’ participation during
different public health crises.

6.4

Limitations

While we aimed to make a contribution towards understanding
the lived experience of a virtual citizen science project during the
COVID-19 pandemic, we can identify some limitations in our work.
To this day, there is, to the best of our knowledge, no evidence that
the approach of using physiological data from fitness trackers to
predict COVID-19 hot-spots is effective. Moreover, most efforts to
utilise mobile devices for the mitigation of the pandemic focus on
contact tracing apps. These apps do not require to share personal
data with the providers. Therefore, the relevance of our work for
the current pandemic might be limited and is more significant for
future VCS projects in crisis contexts that rely on personal data.
Our results are largely based on the analysis of reviews from the
Apple App Store and Google Play Store. We are aware that most
app store reviews are rather extreme [34], being very positive or
very negative. Additionally, future work needs to determine if our
interview sample reflects the population of CDA users in terms of
its demographics. However, our case-study presents an in-depth
account of attitudes and behaviours in a nuanced manner, as it
distinguishes between positive and negative emotional responses
to the CDA, e.g. drop-outs or continued contribution. For a more
generaliseable understanding of the identified motivations, for instance in similar public health crises, future work could juxtapose
the results of a more large-scale study with our findings.
The CDA was developed in a short time frame due to the dynamic of the pandemic and the urgent need for measures to detect
infections and isolate potential carriers of the virus as fast as possible. Due to the time constraints, the app was released with several
severe limitations, mainly the non-functional day counter, a limited range of supported devices and a lack of information on how
the donated data was used by the RKI. These shortcomings could
potentially have been prevented through a user-centred design
process and systematic user testing. For future crisis VCS or crisis informatics projects that face the same constraints, we suggest
that even when there is not enough time for user involvement in
the initial releases, developers provide and maintain social media
channels to synthesise feedback for future iterations and give users
an opportunity to voice their opinion. This is consistent with the
recommendation to utilise social media for communication among

CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan

participants and between participants and developers. The negative
reviews that were associated with these shortcomings, contributed
to our observation of persistence, i.e. the continued participation
even after experiencing problems. Had the CDA been released without these problems, persistence may not have been among our key
findings. However, some of our other findings, such as the willingness to serve for the greater good, similarly support the prevalence
of collective motives.

7

CONCLUSION

In this paper we studied the motivations of citizen scientists to
contribute to a VCS project in a time of crises (COVID-19 pandemic).
For doing so, we collected and analysed reviews of the Corona DataDonation App, a mobile application released by the RKI in Germany.
This application allows users to donate their physiological data
using wearables, in order to mitigate the effects of the pandemic
by possibly detecting local fever outbreaks that could be associated
with COVID-19. We then conducted additional in-depth interviews
with individuals that had experience with using this application,
and analysed both the reviews and interviews. We thus could draw
a picture of the users’ lived experience of participating in this VCS
project, illustrating the cycle of engagement of the citizen scientists
and people’s motivations to contribute such personal data under
these circumstances. Our contribution in this paper is fourfold: First,
we reveal that collective motives prevailed over egoistic motives
driving the citizens to contribute to the CDA. Second, the emotional
response of the users included both positive and negative emotions,
and we demonstrated which aspects of using the CDA resulted
in particular emotions. We also show the repercussions this had
on the overall use of the app and continuation of contributing to
the VCS project. Third, we uncovered that citizen scientists of this
particular project demonstrated a very strong sense of persistence,
i.e. a large proportion continued to use the app in spite of various
issues "for the greater good". Finally, we present implications for
the design and presentation of future VCS projects, highlighting
the importance of communication, transparency and responsibility.
We thus drew insights for what motivates people to participate in
VCS projects in times of crises and how designers of such systems
can hopefully benefit from our findings in the future.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank the reviewers of this paper for their time and the valuable
feedback they provided on previous versions of this manuscript.
This research was supported in parts by a Lichtenbergprofessorship
of the Volkswagenfoundation, the BMWi funded network KI-SIGS
(grant 01MK20012), the BMBF project InviDas (grant 16SV8539) and
the Leibniz ScienceCampus Bremen Digital Public Health, which is
jointly funded by the Leibniz Association (W4/2018), the Federal
State of Bremen and the Leibniz Institute for Prevention Research
and Epidemiology – BIPS.

REFERENCES
[1] Daniel Batson, Nadia Ahmad, and Jo-Ann Tsang. 2002. Four motives for community involvement. Journal of social issues 58, 3 (2002), 429–445.
[2] Ann Blandford, Dominic Furniss, and Stephann Makri. 2016. Qualitative
HCI Research: Going Behind the Scenes. Synthesis Lectures on HumanCentered Informatics 9, 1 (April 2016), 1–115.
https://doi.org/10.2200/
S00706ED1V01Y201602HCI034 Publisher: Morgan & Claypool Publishers.

CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan

[3] Anne Bowser, Katie Shilton, Jenny Preece, and Elizabeth Warrick. 2017. Accounting for privacy in citizen science: Ethical research in a context of openness. In
Proceedings of the 2017 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work
and Social Computing. 2124–2136.
[4] Danah Boyd, Scott Golder, and Gilad Lotan. 2010. Tweet, tweet, retweet: Conversational aspects of retweeting on twitter. In 2010 43rd Hawaii international
conference on system sciences. IEEE, 1–10.
[5] Barry Brown and Oskar Juhlin. 2015. Enjoying machines. Mit Press.
[6] Douglas Busvine. 2020. Germany launches smartwatch app to monitor coronavirus
spread. Retrieved September 14, 2020 from https://www.reuters.com/article/ushealth-coronavirus-germany-tech/germany-launches-smartwatch-app-tomonitor-coronavirus-spread-idUSKBN21P1SS
[7] Brian Butler, Lee Sproull, Sara Kiesler, and Robert Kraut. 2002. Community effort
in online groups: Who does the work and why. Leadership at a distance: Research
in technologically supported work 1 (2002), 171–194.
[8] ccc.de. 2020. CCC analysiert Corona-Datenspende des RKI. Retrieved December
17, 2020 from https://www.ccc.de/de/updates/2020/abofalle-datenspende
[9] CEBM. 2020. COVID-19: What proportion are asymptomatic? Retrieved September
14, 2020 from https://www.cebm.net/covid-19/covid-19-what-proportion-areasymptomatic/
[10] Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, USA. 2020. Coronavirus Disease 2019
(COVID-19) - Transmission. Retrieved September 14, 2020 from https://www.cdc.
gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/prevent-getting-sick/how-covid-spreads.html
[11] Charite, Germany. 2020. CovApp: Recommendations and information regarding
coronavirus. Retrieved September 14, 2020 from https://covapp.charite.de/
[12] Apoorva Chauhan and Amanda L. Hughes. 2017. Providing Online Crisis Information: An Analysis of Official Sources during the 2014 Carlton Complex Wildfire.
In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
(Denver, Colorado, USA) (CHI ’17). Association for Computing Machinery, New
York, NY, USA, 3151–3162. https://doi.org/10.1145/3025453.3025627
[13] Justin Cranshaw and Aniket Kittur. 2011. The polymath project: lessons from
a successful online collaboration in mathematics. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI
conference on human factors in computing systems. 1865–1874.
[14] Vickie Curtis. 2015. Online citizen science projects: an exploration of motivation,
contribution and participation. Ph.D. Dissertation. The Open University.
[15] Samira Davalbhakta, Shailesh Advani, Shobhit Kumar, Vishwesh Agarwal, Samruddhi Bhoyar, Elizabeth Fedirko, Durga Misra, Ashish Goel, Latika Gupta, and
Vikas Agarwal. 2020. A systematic review of the smartphone applications available for coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID19) and their assessment using the
mobile app rating scale (MARS). medRxiv (2020).
[16] Ensheng Dong, Hongru Du, and Lauren Gardner. 2020. An interactive web-based
dashboard to track COVID-19 in real time. The Lancet infectious diseases 20, 5
(2020), 533–534.
[17] Cathal Doyle, Rodreck David, Yevgeniya Li, Markus Luczak-Roesch, Dayle Anderson, and Cameron M. Pierson. 2019. Using the web for science in the classroom:
Online citizen science participation in teaching and learning. In Proceedings of
the 10th ACM Conference on Web Science. 71–80.
[18] Nature Education. 2014. Controlling Dengue Outbreaks. Retrieved December
28, 2020 from https://www.nature.com/scitable/topicpage/controlling-dengueoutbreaks-22403714/
[19] Melissa V Eitzel, Jessica L Cappadonna, Chris Santos-Lang, Ruth Ellen Duerr,
Arika Virapongse, Sarah Elizabeth West, Christopher Kyba, Anne Bowser,
Caren Beth Cooper, Andrea Sforzi, et al. 2017. Citizen science terminology
matters: exploring key terms. Citizen science: Theory and practice 2, 1 (2017).
[20] Daniel A. Epstein, Monica Caraway, Chuck Johnston, An Ping, James Fogarty, and
Sean A. Munson. 2016. Beyond Abandonment to Next Steps: Understanding and
Designing for Life after Personal Informatics Tool Use. In Proceedings of the 2016
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (San Jose, California,
USA) (CHI ’16). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA,
1109–1113. https://doi.org/10.1145/2858036.2858045
[21] Daniel A. Epstein, An Ping, James Fogarty, and Sean A. Munson. 2015. A Lived
Informatics Model of Personal Informatics. In Proceedings of the 2015 ACM International Joint Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing (Osaka, Japan) (UbiComp ’15). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 731–742.
https://doi.org/10.1145/2750858.2804250
[22] European Cluster Collaboration Platform. 2020. ProteGO Safe application. Retrieved September 14, 2020 from https://www.clustercollaboration.eu/forum/bestpractices-sharing/protego-safe-application
[23] Alexandra Eveleigh, Charlene Jennett, Ann Blandford, Philip Brohan, and Anna L.
Cox. 2014. Designing for Dabblers and Deterring Drop-Outs in Citizen Science.
In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
(Toronto, Ontario, Canada) (CHI ’14). Association for Computing Machinery,
New York, NY, USA, 2985–2994. https://doi.org/10.1145/2556288.2557262
[24] Alexandra Eveleigh, Charlene Jennett, Stuart Lynn, and Anna L. Cox. 2013. “I
Want to Be a Captain! I Want to Be a Captain!”: Gamification in the Old Weather
Citizen Science Project. In Proceedings of the First International Conference on
Gameful Design, Research, and Applications (Toronto, Ontario, Canada) (Gamification ’13). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 79–82.

Diethei et al.

https://doi.org/10.1145/2583008.2583019
[25] Federal Press Office Germany. 2020. Datenspende gegen Corona. Retrieved September 14, 2020 from https://www.bundesregierung.de/breg-de/themen/coronavirus/
datenspende-app-1739928
[26] Arup Kumar Ghosh, Karla Badillo-Urquiola, Shion Guha, Joseph J. LaViola Jr,
and Pamela J. Wisniewski. 2018. Safety vs. Surveillance: What Children Have
to Say about Mobile Apps for Parental Control. In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Montreal QC, Canada)
(CHI ’18). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–14.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3173574.3173698
[27] Xinning Gui, Yubo Kou, Kathleen Pine, Elisa Ladaw, Harold Kim, Eli SuzukiGill, and Yunan Chen. 2018. Multidimensional Risk Communication: Public
Discourse on Risks during an Emerging Epidemic. In Proceedings of the 2018
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Montreal QC, Canada)
(CHI ’18). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–14.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3173574.3173788
[28] Trisha Gura. 2013. Citizen science: amateur experts. Nature 496, 7444 (2013),
259–261. ISBN: 0028-0836 Publisher: Nature Research.
[29] Chris Hagar. 2006. Using research to aid the design of a crisis information management course. In ALISE Annual Conference SIG Multicultural, Ethnic & Humanistic
Concerns (MEH). Information Seeking and Service Delivery for Communities in
Disaster/Crisis, San Antonio.
[30] Isobel Asher Hamilton. 2020. Poland made an app that forces coronavirus patients
to take regular selfies to prove they’re indoors or face a police visit. Retrieved September 14, 2020 from https://www.businessinsider.com/poland-app-coronaviruspatients-mandaotory-selfie-2020-3?r=DE&IR=T
[31] Eric Hand. 2010. People power: networks of human minds are taking citizen
science to a new level. Nature 466, 7307 (2010), 685–688. ISBN: 0028-0836
Publisher: Nature Publishing Group.
[32] Steffen Hedegaard and Jakob Grue Simonsen. 2013. Extracting usability and user
experience information from online user reviews. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 2089–2098.
[33] Guido Hertel, Sven Niedner, and Stefanie Herrmann. 2003. Motivation of software
developers in Open Source projects: an Internet-based survey of contributors to
the Linux kernel. Research policy 32, 7 (2003), 1159–1177.
[34] Nan Hu, Paul A Pavlou, and Jennifer Zhang. 2006. Can online reviews reveal
a product’s true quality? Empirical findings and analytical modeling of online
word-of-mouth communication. In Proceedings of the 7th ACM conference on
Electronic commerce. 324–330.
[35] Chaolin Huang, Yeming Wang, Xingwang Li, Lili Ren, Jianping Zhao, Yi Hu, Li
Zhang, Guohui Fan, Jiuyang Xu, and Xiaoying Gu. 2020. Clinical features of
patients infected with 2019 novel coronavirus in Wuhan, China. The lancet 395,
10223 (2020), 497–506. ISBN: 0140-6736 Publisher: Elsevier.
[36] Y. Linlin Huang, Kate Starbird, Mania Orand, Stephanie A. Stanek, and Heather T.
Pedersen. 2015. Connected Through Crisis: Emotional Proximity and the Spread
of Misinformation Online. In Proceedings of the 18th ACM Conference on Computer
Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing (Vancouver, BC, Canada) (CSCW
’15). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 969–980. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/2675133.2675202
[37] Alan Irwin. 1995. Citizen science: A study of people, expertise and sustainable
development. Psychology Press.
[38] Corey Brian Jackson, Carsten Østerlund, Kevin Crowston, Mahboobeh Harandi,
and Laura Trouille. 2020. Shifting Forms of Engagement: Volunteer Learning in
Online Citizen Science. Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact. 4, CSCW1, Article 036
(May 2020), 19 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3392841
[39] Caroline Jay, Robert Dunne, David Gelsthorpe, and Markel Vigo. 2016. To Sign
Up, or Not to Sign Up? Maximizing Citizen Science Contribution Rates through
Optional Registration. In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors
in Computing Systems (San Jose, California, USA) (CHI ’16). Association for
Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1827–1832. https://doi.org/10.1145/
2858036.2858319
[40] Charlene Jennett, Laure Kloetzer, Daniel Schneider, Ioanna Iacovides, Anna Cox,
Margaret Gold, Brian Fuchs, Alexandra Eveleigh, Kathleen Methieu, Zoya Ajani,
et al. 2016. Motivations, learning and creativity in online citizen science. Journal
of Science Communication 15, 3 (2016).
[41] Johns Hopkins University. 2020. COVID-19 Dashboard by the Center for Systems
Science and Engineering (CSSE) at Johns Hopkins University (JHU). (2020).
[42] Isaac Johnson, Connor McMahon, Johannes Schöning, and Brent Hecht. 2017. The
Effect of Population and" Structural" Biases on Social Media-based Algorithms:
A Case Study in Geolocation Inference Across the Urban-Rural Spectrum. In
Proceedings of the 2017 CHI conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems.
1167–1178.
[43] Isaac L Johnson, Yilun Lin, Toby Jia-Jun Li, Andrew Hall, Aaron Halfaker, Johannes Schöning, and Brent Hecht. 2016. Not at home on the range: Peer production and the urban/rural divide. In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems. 13–25.
[44] Evangelos Karapanos, John Zimmerman, Jodi Forlizzi, and Jean-Bernard Martens.
2009. User Experience over Time: An Initial Framework. In Proceedings of the

Sharing Heartbeats: Motivations of Citizen Scientists in Times of Crises

[45]

[46]
[47]
[48]
[49]
[50]
[51]
[52]
[53]
[54]
[55]
[56]
[57]

[58]

[59]

[60]

[61]
[62]
[63]
[64]
[65]
[66]

[67]

[68]

[69]
[70]

SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Boston, MA, USA)
(CHI ’09). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 729–738.
https://doi.org/10.1145/1518701.1518814
Sunyoung Kim, Christine Robson, Thomas Zimmerman, Jeffrey Pierce, and
Eben M Haber. 2011. Creek watch: pairing usefulness and usability for successful citizen science. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors
in Computing Systems. 2125–2134.
Bert Klandermans. 1997. The social psychology of protest. Blackwell, Oxford, UK.
Anne M Land-Zandstra, Jeroen LA Devilee, Frans Snik, Franka Buurmeijer, and
Jos M van den Broek. 2016. Citizen science on a smartphone: Participants’
motivations and learning. Public Understanding of Science 25, 1 (2016), 45–60.
MDR. 2020. Die Chronik der Corona-Krise.
Retrieved September 14,
2020 from https://www.mdr.de/nachrichten/politik/corona-chronik-chronologiecoronavirus-100.html
Oded Nov. 2007. What motivates wikipedians? Commun. ACM 50, 11 (2007),
60–64.
Oded Nov, Ofer Arazy, and David Anderson. 2011. Dusting for science: motivation
and participation of digital citizen science volunteers. In Proceedings of the 2011
iConference. 68–74.
Encyclopedia of Life. 2020. Encyclopedia of Life. Retrieved September 14, 2020
from https://eol.org/
The Cornell Lab of Ornithology. 2020. eBird - Discover a new world of birding...
Retrieved September 14, 2020 from https://ebird.org/home
U.S. Department of the Interior. 2020. Gulf Coast Inventory & Monitoring Network
(U.S. National Park Service). Retrieved September 14, 2020 from https://www.nps.
gov/im/guln/index.htm
World Health Organization. 2019. Measles. Retrieved December 28, 2020 from
https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/measles
Jennifer Preece. 2016. Citizen science: New research challenges for human–
computer interaction. International Journal of Human-Computer Interaction 32, 8
(2016), 585–612.
Qkopy. 2020. GoK Direct - Kerala - Apps on Google Play. Retrieved September 14,
2020 from https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.qkopy.prdkerala&
hl=en
Giorgio Quer, Jennifer M. Radin, Matteo Gadaleta, Katie Baca-Motes, Lauren
Ariniello, Edward Ramos, Vik Kheterpal, Eric J. Topol, and Steven R. Steinhubl.
2021. Wearable sensor data and self-reported symptoms for COVID-19 detection.
Nature Medicine 27, 1 (2021), 73–77. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-020-1123-x
Jordan Raddick, Georgia Bracey, Pamela Gay, Chris Lintott, Carolin Cardamone,
Phil Murray, Kevin Schawinski, Alexander Szalay, and Jan Vandenberg. 2013.
Galaxy Zoo: Motivations of Citizen Scientists. Astronomy Education Review 12
(12 2013), 0106–. https://doi.org/10.3847/AER2011021
Jennifer M Radin, Nathan E Wineinger, Eric J Topol, and Steven R Steinhubl. 2020.
Harnessing wearable device data to improve state-level real-time surveillance of
influenza-like illness in the USA: a population-based study. The Lancet Digital
Health 2, 2 (2020), e85–e93.
Neal T. Reeves and Elena Simperl. 2019. Efficient, but Effective? Volunteer
Engagement in Short-Term Virtual Citizen Science Projects. Proc. ACM Hum.Comput. Interact. 3, CSCW, Article 177 (Nov. 2019), 35 pages. https://doi.org/10.
1145/3359279
RKI. 2020. Aktuelle Fieberkurve für Deutschland. Retrieved September 14, 2020
from https://corona-datenspende.de/science/monitor/
RKI. 2020. Corona-Warn-App. Retrieved September 14, 2020 from https://www.rki.
de/DE/Content/InfAZ/N/Neuartiges_Coronavirus/WarnApp/Warn_App.html
RKI. 2020. Datenspende: Robert Koch-Institut - Corona-Datenspende. Retrieved
September 14, 2020 from https://corona-datenspende.de/
RKI. 2020. Ein Dankeschön an die Spender:innen! Retrieved September 14, 2020
from https://corona-datenspende.de/science/reports/thank-you
RKI. 2020. Robert Koch Institute - Corona-Datenspende-App. Retrieved September
14, 2020 from https://www.rki.de/DE/Content/InfAZ/N/Neuartiges_Coronavirus/
Corona-Datenspende-allgemein.html
Jeffrey A Roberts, Il-Horn Hann, and Sandra A Slaughter. 2006. Understanding the
motivations, participation, and performance of open source software developers:
A longitudinal study of the Apache projects. Management science 52, 7 (2006),
984–999.
Dana Rotman, Jen Hammock, Jenny Preece, Derek Hansen, Carol Boston, Anne
Bowser, and Yurong He. 2014. Motivations affecting initial and long-term participation in citizen science projects in three countries. IConference 2014 Proceedings
(2014).
Dana Rotman, Jenny Preece, Jen Hammock, Kezee Procita, Derek Hansen, Cynthia
Parr, Darcy Lewis, and David Jacobs. 2012. Dynamic changes in motivation in
collaborative citizen-science projects. In Proceedings of the ACM 2012 conference
on computer supported cooperative work. 217–226.
Joachim Schroer and Guido Hertel. 2009. Voluntary engagement in an open
web-based encyclopedia: Wikipedians and why they do it. Media Psychology 12,
1 (2009), 96–120.
Elena Simperl, Neal Reeves, Chris Phethean, Todd Lynes, and Ramine Tinati.
2018. Is Virtual Citizen Science A Game? Trans. Soc. Comput. 1, 2, Article 6 (June

CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan

2018), 39 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3209960
[71] Jaime Snyder. 2017. Vernacular Visualization Practices in a Citizen Science Project.
In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative
Work and Social Computing (Portland, Oregon, USA) (CSCW ’17). Association for
Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2097–2111. https://doi.org/10.1145/
2998181.2998239
[72] Robert Soden, Perrine Hamel, David Lallemant, and James Pierce. 2020. The Disaster and Climate Change Artathon: Staging Art/Science Collaborations in Crisis
Informatics. In Proceedings of the 2020 ACM Designing Interactive Systems Conference (Eindhoven, Netherlands) (DIS ’20). Association for Computing Machinery,
New York, NY, USA, 1273–1286. https://doi.org/10.1145/3357236.3395461
[73] Robert Soden and Leysia Palen. 2018. Informating Crisis: Expanding Critical
Perspectives in Crisis Informatics. Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact. 2, CSCW,
Article 162 (Nov. 2018), 22 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3274431
[74] Kate Starbird and Leysia Palen. 2011. "Voluntweeters": Self-Organizing by Digital
Volunteers in Times of Crisis. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems (Vancouver, BC, Canada) (CHI ’11). Association for
Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1071–1080. https://doi.org/10.1145/
1978942.1979102
[75] Katarzyna Stawarz, Anna L. Cox, and Ann Blandford. 2014. Don’t Forget Your
Pill! Designing Effective Medication Reminder Apps That Support Users’ Daily
Routines. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems (Toronto, Ontario, Canada) (CHI ’14). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2269–2278. https://doi.org/10.1145/2556288.2557079
[76] Brian L Sullivan, Christopher L Wood, Marshall J Iliff, Rick E Bonney, Daniel
Fink, and Steve Kelling. 2009. eBird: A citizen-based bird observation network in
the biological sciences. Biological conservation 142, 10 (2009), 2282–2292.
[77] tagesschau.de. 2020. Hunderttausende nutzen "Datenspende"-App. Retrieved
September 14, 2020 from https://www.tagesschau.de/inland/datenspende-apprki-corona-101.html
[78] tagesschau.de. 2020. Mit Fitnessdaten das Virus verstehen. Retrieved December
17, 2020 from https://www.tagesschau.de/inland/app-rki-101.html
[79] tagesschau.de. 2020. Sendung: tagesschau 07.04.2020 20:00 Uhr. Retrieved December 17, 2020 from https://www.tagesschau.de/multimedia/sendung/ts-36515.html
[80] Marion Lara Tan, Raj Prasanna, Kristin Stock, Emma Hudson-Doyle, Graham
Leonard, and David Johnston. 2017. Mobile applications in crisis informatics
literature: A systematic review. International journal of disaster risk reduction 24
(2017), 297–311.
[81] Economic Times. 2020. Those in home quarantine in Karnataka directed
to send selfies every hour to govt.
Retrieved September 14, 2020 from
https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/politics-and-nation/those-inhome-quarantine-in-karnataka-directed-to-send-selfies-every-hour-togovt/articleshow/74907051.cms?from=mdr
[82] Emmanuelle Vaast and Cathy Urquhart. 2017. Building Grounded Theory with
Social Media Data. In Routledge Companion to Qualitative Research in Organization
Studies, Raza Mir and Sanjay Jain (Eds.). Routledge, Chapter 14.
[83] Raju Vaishya, Mohd Javaid, Ibrahim Haleem Khan, and Abid Haleem. 2020. Artificial Intelligence (AI) applications for COVID-19 pandemic. Diabetes & Metabolic
Syndrome: Clinical Research & Reviews 14, 4 (2020).
[84] Sarah Vieweg, Amanda L. Hughes, Kate Starbird, and Leysia Palen. 2010. Microblogging during Two Natural Hazards Events: What Twitter May Contribute to Situational Awareness. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems (Atlanta, Georgia, USA) (CHI ’10). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1079–1088. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/1753326.1753486
[85] Sera Whitelaw, Mamas A Mamas, Eric Topol, and Harriette GC Van Spall. 2020.
Applications of digital technology in COVID-19 pandemic planning and response.
The Lancet Digital Health (2020).
[86] WHO. 2020. Novel Coronavirus – China. Retrieved September 14, 2020 from
http://www.who.int/csr/don/12-january-2020-novel-coronavirus-china/en/
[87] WHO. 2020. Q&A: How is COVID-19 transmitted? Retrieved September 14,
2020 from https://www.who.int/news-room/q-a-detail/q-a-how-is-covid-19transmitted
[88] WHO. 2020. Q&A on coronaviruses (COVID-19). Retrieved September 14, 2020
from https://www.who.int/news-room/q-a-detail/q-a-coronaviruses
[89] WHO. 2020. WHO Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19) Dashboard. Retrieved September 14, 2020 from hhttps://covid19.who.int/
[90] Andrea Wiggins and Kevin Crowston. 2011. From conservation to crowdsourcing:
A typology of citizen science. In 2011 44th Hawaii international conference on
system sciences. IEEE, 1–10.
[91] Wikimedia Foundation. 2020. COVID-19 apps. Retrieved September 14, 2020
from https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/COVID-19_apps
[92] Wikimedia Foundation. 2020. COVID Symptom Study. Retrieved September 14,
2020 from https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/COVID_Symptom_Study
[93] Wikimedia Foundation. 2020. COVIDSafe. Retrieved September 14, 2020 from
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/COVIDSafe
[94] Wikimedia Foundation. 2020. TraceTogether. Retrieved September 14, 2020 from
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/TraceTogether

CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan

[95] worldometers.info. 2020. COVID-19 Coronavirus Pandemic. Retrieved September
14, 2020 from https://www.worldometers.info/coronavirus/
[96] zdf.de. 2020. RKI stellt App für Krankheitssymptome vor. Retrieved December 17,
2020 from https://www.zdf.de/nachrichten/panorama/coronavirus-rki-102.html

Diethei et al.

[97] zdf.de. 2020. RKI veröffentlicht "Corona-Datenspende" App. Retrieved December 17, 2020 from https://www.zdf.de/nachrichten/heute-19-uhr/videos/coronadatenspende-app-100.html
[98] Zooniverse. 2020. Zooniverse. Retrieved September 14, 2020 from https://www.
zooniverse.org/projects/zookeeper/galaxy-zoo/

