Networks of Necessity: Simulating Strategies for COVID-19 Mitigation
among Disabled People and Their Caregivers
Thomas E. Valles

∗

Hannah Shoenhard

Mason A. Porter

∗

†

Joseph Zinski

†

Michael R. Lindstrom

Sarah Trick

‡

∗§

arXiv:2101.00060v1 [cs.SI] 31 Dec 2020

January 5, 2021

Abstract
A major strategy to prevent the spread of COVID-19 is through the limiting of in-person contacts. However, for
the many disabled people who live in the community and require caregivers to assist them with activities of daily
living, limiting contacts is impractical or impossible. We seek to determine which interventions can prevent infections
among disabled people and their caregivers. To accomplish this, we simulate COVID-19 transmission with a compartmental model that includes susceptible, asymptomatic, symptomatically ill, hospitalized, and removed/recovered
individuals. The networks on which we simulate disease spread incorporate heterogeneity in the risks of different
types of interactions, time-dependent lockdown and reopening measures, and interaction distributions for four different groups (caregivers, disabled people, essential workers, and the general population). Among these groups, we
find the probability of becoming infected is highest for caregivers and second highest for disabled people. Consistent
with this finding, our analysis of network structure illustrates that caregivers have the largest modal eigenvector
centrality among the four groups. We find that two interventions — contact-limiting by all groups and mask-wearing
by disabled people and caregivers — particularly reduce cases among disabled people and caregivers. We also test
which group most effectively spreads COVID-19 by seeding infections in a subset of each group and then comparing
the total number of infections as the disease spreads. We find that caregivers are the most effective spreaders of
COVID-19, particularly to other caregivers and disabled people. We then test where limited vaccine doses could be
used most effectively and we find that vaccinating caregivers better protects disabled people than vaccinating the general population, essential workers, or the disabled population itself. Our results highlight the potential effectiveness
of mask-wearing, contact-limiting throughout society, and strategic vaccination for limiting the exposure of disabled
people and their caregivers to COVID-19.

keywords: COVID-19, disabilities, networks, contagions, parameter estimation, vaccination

Author Summary
Disabled people who need help with daily life tasks, such as dressing or bathing, are in frequent close contact with their
caregivers. This prevents both disabled people and their caregivers from physically distancing from one another and thus
puts both groups at increased risk for COVID-19. How can society help disabled people and caregivers avoid infection?
To answer this question, we simulated infections on networks that we modeled after a city of about one million people.
We found that one good strategy is for both disabled people and their caregivers to use masks when they are together.
We also found that it is ineffective if only disabled people limit their social contacts, while other people continue their
lives as normal. However, if the general population also limits their contacts, it helps disabled people substantially.
There are now safe and effective COVID-19 vaccines, but few doses are available and it is important to determine who
should be prioritized for vaccination. Our simulations suggest that vaccinating caregivers most effectively protects both
caregivers and disabled people. Our findings highlight both behavioral measures and vaccination strategies that society
can take to protect disabled people and caregivers from COVID-19.
∗ Department

of Mathematics, University of California, Los Angeles
of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Pennsylvania
‡ Assistant Editor at tvo.org (TVOntario)
§ corresponding author: mikel@math.ucla.edu
† Department

1

Fig 1. Rates of comorbidities that predispose individuals (of ages 45–64) to severe cases of COVID-19 among U.S.
adults without (blue) and with (red) disabilities.

1

Introduction

The coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic, which has arisen from the unfettered spread of the severe acute
respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) virus, is a major health threat worldwide. In the absence of a widely
available vaccine, public heath authorities have called for the general population to change their behavior to prevent,
reduce, and/or delay the spread of virus, particularly among vulnerable groups [1]. Behavioral interventions include
mask-wearing and the limiting of social contacts. The effectiveness of society-wide behavioral interventions in mitigating
viral spread among the general population is now well-documented [2–6]. However, whether these measures are viable
for vulnerable groups, such as people with disabilities, remains an open question [7].
People with disabilities who require assistance with activities of daily living (ADLs) may live in a long-term care
facility or elect to live independently (e.g. in a community setting) with some form of caregiving support [8,9]. Although
extensive epidemiological and modeling studies have identified risk factors and mitigation strategies for COVID-19
outbreaks in long-term care facilities [10–15], there have not been similar studies of disabled people who live in a
community setting and their caregivers. Caregivers are often indispensable for the health and independence of disabled
people because they assist with activities such as bathing, dressing, and toileting. However, in the context of a pandemic,
public-health concerns dictate that people should minimize in-person contacts. Disabled people and their caregivers thus
face an urgent question: how can they continue to interact while minimizing the risk of COVID-19 transmission?
This question is especially urgent because of the high prevalence of risk factors for severe cases of COVID-19 in
the disabled population. These risk factors, for which we give statistics for adults of ages 45–64 (see Fig. 1) [16, 17],
include obesity (about 46.7% of adults with a disability have a body mass index (BMI) indicating obesity, compared
with about 31.7% of adults without a disability), heart disease (15.0% with disability and 4.6% without disability),
Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD) (20.5% with disability and 3.7% without disability), and diabetes
(25.6% with disability and 10.6% without disability). Additionally, whatever factor initially caused a person’s disability
can also complicate medical management of their case if they contract COVID-19. Furthermore, quarantining while ill
may be impossible for disabled people, because they rely on caregivers to assist them with essential daily tasks. This can
make disabled people more prone to spreading the SARS-CoV-2 virus to caregivers if they contract it. Consequently,
preventing COVID-19 in the disabled community should be a high priority.
The disabled population experiences high rates of conditions that confer medical vulnerability to severe COVID-19,
and the caregiver population experiences high rates of sociological risk factors for exposure to and death from COVID19. These workers are disproportionately likely to be women, immigrants, and people of color. The median wage for
in-home caregivers is $12.12 per hour, and the median annual earnings are $17,200 (which is below the federal poverty
guideline for a two-person household) [18]. Although women have a lower risk of severe disease [19, 20], in the United
States, experiencing poverty or being Black or Hispanic independently increase risk [21–23]. Furthermore, COVID-19
has brought immense challenges to the caregiving workforce, including frequent lack of personal protective equipment
(PPE), pandemic-specific training, paid time off, and childcare [18]. Finally, much caregiving work is impossible without

2/35

close physical contact, elevating the risk of caregivers for occupational exposure. Consequently, caregivers often belong
to groups that are at higher risk for COVID-19 exposure and more severe illness.
According to a 2018 report [24], approximately 26% of adults in the United States, including about 41% of those who
are 65 or older, have some form of disability. In 2016, Lauer and Houtenville [25] reported that 7.3% of the American
population suffered from a cognitive or self-care disability. For our study, we use these numbers and assume that
approximately the same percentage of the Canadian population who live in the community receive aid from professional
caregivers, but we acknowledge the large uncertainty in this estimate. Meanwhile, at least 2.4 million Americans
(approximately 0.7% of the population) are employed as home-care workers, but this is likely an underestimate due to
the difficulty of accurate statistical collection [18]. Because of the intense time commitment and irregular hours that
are necessary for care, many disabled people hire multiple caregivers and many caregivers work for multiple disabled
people [26]. Therefore, there is significant potential for the spread of COVID-19 among and between these two vulnerable
populations, making it a high priority to identify effective methods to reduce COVID-19 spread among disabled people
and caregivers without compromising care.
Various strategies have been proposed and implemented to protect disabled people and their caregivers. In some
cases, local governments in the U.S. have provided PPE directly to disabled people for their caregivers’ use [26]. At the
national level, a proposed Senate bill seeks to provide caregivers and/or disabled people with PPE [27]. However, some
people have proposed that although vulnerable individuals should protect themselves by limiting their own contacts, but
the general population should not be required to take such strict measures. For example, a petition known as the “Great
Barrington Declaration,” which was signed by thousands of individuals (including academics who study epidemiology),
claimed that “Those who are not vulnerable should immediately be allowed to resume life as normal. [...] Restaurants
and other businesses should open. Arts, music, sport and other cultural activities should resume. People who are more
at risk may participate if they wish, while society as a whole enjoys the protection conferred upon the vulnerable by
those who have built up herd immunity” [28]. To the best of our knowledge, the efficacy of mask-wearing, limiting the
number of caregiver contacts, and limiting contacts among disabled people while maintaining normal contact levels in
the general population have not been scientifically evaluated, despite the need for clarity on these questions.
Finally, now that a COVID-19 vaccine has become available, it is important to determine how to distribute it justly
and efficiently. The Johns Hopkins Center for Public Health Security has outlined a “Tier 1” category with three priority
groups: (1) healthcare personnel, (2) workers who sustain essential societal functions, and (3) people who are at greatest
risk for death from COVID-19 and the caregivers of these people [29]. The Center for Disease Control (CDC) has
prioritized healthcare personnel and residents of long-term care facilities for the earliest“Tier 1a” of vaccination [30].
However, current guidelines do not provide a complete definition of vulnerable populations and their caregivers, nor do
they resolve how to prioritize groups after Tier 1a. This underscores the need to assess both behavioral and vaccine-based
intervention strategies for their effectiveness, particularly when it comes to protecting vulnerable groups [7].
To examine these questions, we simulate COVID-19 spread on model networks of a city with parameters that
we base on Ottawa, Canada. Our stochastic model of disease spread takes into account several disease states (i.e.
“compartments”), different occupation types in a population, heterogeneity of risk in different interactions, and timedependent lockdown measures. Our disease-spread model, which we explain in Section 2, allows us to quantitatively
study our various questions under our set of assumptions. Using both computations of network structure and simulations
of disease dynamics on our networks, we find that disabled people and caregivers are both substantially more vulnerable
to COVID-19 infection than the general population because of their high centralities in the networks. We test the
effectiveness of several non-pharmaceutical interventions — including limiting number of social contacts, wearing masks,
and limiting the number of caregivers that a given disabled person sees — at preventing COVID-19 spread among
disabled people and their caregivers. By selectively seeding infections or blocking infections (via a simulated vaccine) in
certain groups, we identify caregivers as major drivers of COVID-19 spread — especially to disabled people and other
caregivers — and suggest that this group should not be overlooked in early vaccination campaigns.
Our paper proceeds as follows. We present our stochastic model of COVID-19 spread in Section 2, our results and
series of case studies in Section 3, and our conclusions and further discussion in Section 4. We describe the details of
our model in the Supporing Information sections A and B.

2

Stochastic Model of the Spread of COVID-19

We begin by presenting our stochastic model of COVID-19 spread at a high level and then expound upon many details
of it in Section 2.2. Readers who are interested predominantly in the essence of our model can safely skip Section 2.2.

3/35

We give a comprehensive list of our assumptions in Section 2.3. Those who wish to use our code can find it at this
Bitbucket repository. We recently wrote a white paper on this matter [31], and this manuscript gives the full details of
our study.

2.1

A High-Level Introduction to our Model

Many researchers have used mathematical approaches to examine the spread of COVID-19. Efforts have taken a variety
of approaches, including compartmental modeling [32,33], self-exciting point processes [34,35] (which one can also relate
to some compartmental models [36]), and agent-based models [37]. Some models have considered age stratification [38],
how mobility data can forecast the spread of COVID-19 [39,40], and examined travel networks [41]. In the present paper,
we use an agent-based approach to study COVID-19 within a single city. Our approach involves time-dependent networks
[42,43]. One of the features of our model is that different segments of the population have different degree distributions,
with mixing between these different segments. To examine networks with these features, we use generalizations of
configuration models [44, 45].
Within our model population, we consider three types of interactions between individuals, five disease states, and four
distinct groups (i.e. subpopulations). Because we encode interactions using a network, all interactions between different
individuals involve exactly two people. We suppose that strong interactions describe interactions at home within family
units (or, more generally, “household units”); weak interactions describe social interactions and interactions that take
place at work, at a grocery store, and so on; and caregiving interactions describe interactions between caregivers and
the disabled people for whom they care. We model each of these interactions with a different baseline level of risk of
disease transmission. Weak interactions have the lowest baseline risk level, strong interactions have the next-lowest risk
level, and caregiving interactions have the highest risk level.
We use a compartmental model of disease dynamics [46], which we will study on contact networks [47, 48]. We
assume that our population (e.g. of a single city, like Ottawa) is closed and that each individual is in exactly one disease
state (i.e. “compartment”): susceptible (S) individuals, who can contract COVID-19; asymptomatic (A) individuals,
who have contracted COVID-19 and do not have symptoms, but can spread the disease; ill (I) individuals, who are
symptomatically ill and contagious; hospitalized (H) individuals, for whom the disease course resulted in hospitalization;
and removed (R) individuals, who have recovered from the disease or died from it. We do not consider loss of immunity or
births in our model, and we reiterate that we classify both “recovered” and removed individuals in the R compartment.
We split the population into the following groups:
• caregivers, who provide care to disabled people;
• disabled people, who receive care;
• essential workers, whose occupations prevent them from limiting contacts during lockdowns and similar policies,
but who are not already included in the caregiving population; and
• the general population, which is everyone else.
The individuals in the disabled population have two types of caregivers: weak caregivers, who are professional caregivers whose connections are likely to break if either party becomes symptomatic, and strong caregivers, whose caregiving
relationship is preserved in our model even if the parties are symptomatic (and as long as neither is hospitalized). We
consider these two types of caregivers to account for family members or close friends who always provide some care to
a disabled person.
Although our model includes a hospitalized component, we stress that we do not model doctors, nurses, custodial
services, or other hospital staff who are involved in caring for COVID-19 patients. The caregivers in our model population
refer strictly to individuals who provide supportive assistance to members of the disabled community in their homes.
We are also not modeling skilled care facilities, such as nursing homes.
When individuals are symptomatic, we assume that they distance themselves (through so-called “physical distancing”
or “social distancing”) from society with a fixed probability b ∈ (0, 1). The probability is less than 1 to account for
a variety of situations, such as people who feel financially pressured to work anyway [49], people who have symptoms
that are so mild that they are unaware of them, and people who ignore common decency. In our model, the distancing
of an individual who becomes ill means that they temporarily cut off their weak contacts or weak caregiver–client
relationships and only maintain contacts within their household unit and possibly strong caregiver–client relationships
until they recover. If they go to the hospital, these contacts also break.

4/35

Fig 2. An ego network for an example disabled person on (A) some day before the start of contact-limiting and (B)
some day after the start of contact-limiting. The two ego networks encode contacts for the same disabled person. On
the two separate days, the disabled individual was working with two separate weak caregivers, but their strong
caregiver is present on both days. We illustrate the different groups within society (colors), the interaction strengths
(line thickness), and social distances (numbers) from the ego. The edge weights are relative to the strong-contact
weight of 1.

We seek to understand how COVID-19 spreads in these different groups over time and how different mitigation
strategies, such as contact-limiting and mask-wearing, affect the outcomes. Consequently, we allow the distributions of
the number of contacts to change with time and adjust the disease transmission probability to reflect the presence of
masks.
We tune our baseline model to describe the city of Ottawa from its first reported case on 10 February 2020 [50]
through its closure of non-essential businesses on 24 March 2020 [51] (the closure order occurred on 23 March) and then
to understand how its “Phase 1” reopening on 6 July 2020 [52] affected disease spreading. In Fig. 2, we illustrate an
egocentric network (i.e. “ego network”) [53] that is centered at a single disabled person in the population before and
after closure.

2.2

Specific Details of our Model

We now provide a detailed description of our model. One of the key elements of the networks on which a disease
spreads is their ability to describe the number and distribution contacts of different types of individuals. We do this
by constructing networks from a generalization of configuration-model networks. (See [54] for a review of configuration
models.) We give precise details in Algorithms 3, 2, 4, and 5 in the Supporting Information. When constructing
networks, we make use of three families of discrete probability distributions.
• P(a, b, µ) describes an approximate power-law distribution. If N ∼ P(a, b, µ), then N takes integer values in
{a, a + 1, . . . , b}. For large n, we have that Pr(N = n) = O(1/np ), where we choose p so that E(N ) = µ. See the
Supporting Information for full details.
• E(p0 , p1 , p2 , . . . , pk ) describes an empirical distribution. If N ∼ E(p0 , p1 , p2 , . . . , pk ), then Pr(N = n) = pn for
0 ≤ n ≤ k and 0 otherwise.
• F(k) describes a fixed distribution. If N ∼ F(k), then Pr(N = n) = δn,k , where δ denotes the Kronecker delta
(which equals 1 if the subscripts are equal and 0 if they are not).

5/35

We assign different groups in a population a number of weak contacts from a modified, truncated power-law distribution (see Section B), which can change at a lockdown and a reopening. Power laws have heavy tails, so some individuals
have vastly more contacts than others [55]. We choose household-unit sizes from an empirical distribution based on
census data [56] and do not change them during a simulation. We assume that disabled people have a pool of weak
caregivers and that the size of such a pool is based on a fixed distribution. Each day, we choose one member of a disabled
person’s pool uniformly at random to potentially provide care to them. (It is only potential care because that caregiver
may have broken contact due to illness.) Each day, they also receive care from a single strong caregiver if possible. (This
requires that that contact has not been broken√due to hospitalization.) Mask-wearing reduces transmissibility from a
mask wearer to their contact by a fixed factor m ∈ (0, 1). When both parties wear a mask, the reduction factor for
both parties is m.
Our model has three key dates: the first recorded case, which we set to be day 1, as we use day 0 for initial
conditions to produce a seed case of the disease (these cases are in the asymptotic compartment); lockdown, which is
when contact-limiting begins and individuals may wear masks; and reopening, which is when a city begins to reopen. For
mask-wearing, we focus on four situations (from two scenarios, which each have two possibilities): (1) weak interactions
with essential workers either do or do include mask-wearing (to model interactions in grocery stores, banks, routine
doctor visits, and so on where both essential workers and the customers wear masks), and (2) both disabled people and
their caregivers either do or do not involve masks. To describe essential workers, we assume (except when there are
symptoms of illness) that weak contacts with essential workers are not broken. Therefore, during a lockdown, essential
workers continue to have a large number of weak contacts on average. We model the caregiver population similarly;
they retain their caregiver interactions. We assume that an individual’s weak contacts during lockdown are a subset
of their weak contacts from before a lockdown. Upon a reopening, however, we rewire weak contact structures and
people typically gain contacts that they did not have before the lockdown. This accounts for situations (such as business
closures or job loss) that cause individuals to visit different stores or workplaces after a reopening.
We discretize time into units of ∆T = 1 day. Our model evolves in an agent-based fashion as the individuals interact
with other. Individuals who are in the S compartment move into the A compartment at a daily hazard rate that is
based on their contagious contacts. We add individual hazard rates from different types of contact, with weights for
each type. Each day, a given susceptible individual i experiences a hazard rate of
X
Wij Cij Mij /2
,
(1)
wc m
σ=β
ww
j∈B(i)

where B(i) is the set of all active (i.e. non-broken) contacts of individual i who are infectious, Wij is 1 if i and j are
weak contacts and 0 otherwise, Cij is 1 if i and j have a caregiving relationship and 0 otherwise, and Mij (which can
be equal to 0, 1, or 2) counts how many of individuals i and j wear a mask during an interaction between them. Given
σ, we compute the probability that i transitions from the susceptible compartment to the asymptomatic compartment
from one day to the next:
Pr(i from S to A) = 1 − exp(−σ∆T ) .
(2)
We base all other transitions on sampling from an exponential distribution with a fixed rate. We model the outcomes
of transitions from A to I, A to R, I to H, I to R, and H to R as exponential processes with fixed rates of α, η, µ, ρ,
and ζ, respectively. When multiple transmissions between compartments are possible, such as from A to I and from A
to R, we treat event transitions as competing exponential processes. See Fig. 3.
In our simulations, we uniformly-at-random initialize a fixed number A0 individuals to be asymptomatic on day 0.
We also assume that only small fraction τ of asymptotic individuals are tested, but that all hospitalized individuals
receive positive test results for COVID-19. These assumptions on testing are necessary for matching to the Ottawa
data, which tabulates the number of positive tests (but not the cumulative number of total infections) over time.
We present the parameters that we use in our model in Table 1. We justify these values in our Supporting Information,
section A.

2.3

Summary of our Assumptions

We now briefly summarize the main assumptions of our model
Population:

The population is closed, so there no inflow or outflow from the city.

6/35

Symbol
fdis

Meaning
Value
Reference
Source
fraction of population who are
0.073
[25]
literature
disabled
fcare
fraction of population who are
0.021
[57]
literature
caregivers
fess
fraction of population who are es0.15
[57–59]
literature
sential workers
fgen
fraction of population who are
0.76
[25, 57–59]
general
ww
weak edge weight
0.25
[5, 60]
inferred
ws
strong edge weight
1
N/A
by definition
caregiving edge weight
1.7
[61]
inferred
wc
β
transmissibility
0.0175 person−1 day−1
[50]
fit
transmission rate from A to I
0.11 day−1
[62, 63]
inferred
α
η
transmission rate from A to R
0.026 day−1
[62, 63]
inferred
µ
transmission rate from I to H
0.0099 day−1
[64, 65]
inferred
ρ
transmission rate from I to R
0.040 day−1
[64, 65]
inferred
transmission rate from H to R
0.078 day−1
[66]
inferred
ζ
m
risk reduction factor from masks
0.34
[5]
literature
b
probability for ill to break weak
0.92
[67]
inferred
contacts
probability of tested if ill but not
0.07
[50]
fit
τ
hospitalized
C∗
maximum number of contacts in
100
[50]
fit
power law
Dstrong
distribution of strong contacts
E(0.283, 0.332, 0.155, 0.148, 0.0816)
[56]
literature
Dpool
distribution of pool sizes
F(10)
n/a
chosen
Dess,pre
essential worker weak-contact
P(0, C ∗ , 21.37)
[68]
inferred
distribution before distancing
Dess,post
essential worker weak-contact
P(0, C ∗ , 21.37)
[68]
inferred
distribution after distancing
Dgen/dis,pre general/disabled
weak-contact
P(0, C ∗ , 10.34)
[68]
inferred
distribution before distancing
weak-contact
P(0, C ∗ , 7.08)
[68]
inferred
Dgen/dis,post general/disabled
distribution after distancing
caregiver weak-contact distribuP(0, C ∗ , 5.14)
[68]
inferred
Dcare,pre
tion before distancing
Dcare,post
caregiver weak-contact distribuP(0, C ∗ , 4)
[68]
inferred
tion after distancing
A0
number asymptomatic on day 0
140
[50]
fit
POttawa
population of Ottawa
994837
[69]
literature
Table 1. The parameter values that we use in our study. In the “Source” column, literature means that we found a
value directly in the literature; inferred means that we inferred a value based on published data in the literature; by
definition means that the value is mathematically fixed in our model; chosen indicates that a value is unknown, but we
made a choice for our model; and fit indicates that we used Ottawa case data along with other (i.e. not fit) parameters
in this table to estimate a value.

7/35

Fig 3. Schematic illustration of our compartmental model of disease transmission. Susceptible individuals (S), by
being exposed to asymptomatic (A) or symptomatically ill (I) individuals, can become asymptomatic with a baseline
hazard rate of β. One can reduce the hazard rate per interaction through the intervention of mask-wearing. From being
asymptomatic, people can either become symptomatically ill or be removed (R), which encompasses both recovery and
death. If symptomatic, they can either be removed or become hospitalized (H). From the hospitalized state, patients
move into the removed group. The parameter β is a hazard rate per interaction and m may or may not be present,
depending on the use of masks. The other parameters model processes based on exponential random variables.

Time:

We discretize time in units of 1 day.

Composition: The population has the following types of people: 7.3% of it are disabled, 2.1% of it are caregivers,
15% of it are essential workers, and 76% of it general people. Roles do not change.
Disease compartments: Individuals can be susceptible, asymptomatic, symptomatically ill, hospitalized, or removed.
All infected individuals must pass through the asymptomatic compartment before becoming infected.
Transitions between compartments: We model infection from a hazard rate, and all other transitions between
compartments come from exponential processes.
Strong Contacts:

We assign the numbers of strong contacts of all individuals from the empirical distribution Dstrong .

Weak Contacts: According to an individual’s assigned role and the status of contact-limiting, we determine the
numbers of their weak contacts from a modified, truncated power law (see Section B) using Dgroup,status , where group is
one of “gen/dis”, “care” or “ess” and status is one of “pre” or “post”.
Caregiving Contacts: All disabled people have a pool of weak-contact caregivers of a size that is dictated by Dpool .
For each disabled person, we choose that pool uniformly at random from the set of caregivers. Additionally, each
disabled person has one strong caregiver that we choose uniformly at random from the set of caregivers and they see
that person each day, unless one of the parties is hospitalized.
Breaking contacts: Asymptomatic individuals will not break contacts (except in the form of contact-limiting). An
ill (but not hospitalized) person will break their weak contacts with probability b. If a person becomes hospitalized, they
break both their weak contacts and their strong contacts until they move into the R compartment. Whether deceased
or recovered, individuals in the R compartment do not transmit the disease. In our computations, those individuals go
back to their regular weak and strong contacts, but our simulations results would not change if we instead removed from
the population.
Interactions: Each day, an individual interacts with the same weak (not including caregiver–disabled interactions)
and strong contacts unless contact has been broken due to illness or when the contact distributions change. Each day,
a disabled person interacts with their strong caregiver, unless illness prevents it. Each day, a disabled person interacts

8/35

with a uniformly randomly selected member of their pool, unless illness prevents it. Even during contact-limiting stages,
weak contacts of essential workers are notbroken.

3

Results

We first compared the cumulative number of positive test results from our model with empirical case data from Ottawa
(see Fig. 4). We fit the parameters in our model to the first 97 days of the epidemic in Ottawa, and we assumed that
the city immediately entered a contact-limited phase on day 44. Our model deviates little from the data for the first
97 days, but it then tends to overestimate the case count. We speculate that this may stem from overestimating the
number of contacts of the Ottawans. Our contact estimates came from survey data [68] and were not focused on Ottawa
specifically. We fit the model using a discretized H 1 norm, which takes into account both the mean squared deviation
in values and the mean squared deviation of successive daily differences. The fact that the inflection point in Fig. 4
occurs much earlier in our model than in case data may be a result of a lack of freedom in parameter choice. We sought
to minimize the number of parameters that we fit.

Fig 4. Comparison of a mean of 100 simulations of our stochastic model (blue) of COVID-19 spread with cumulative
case counts from Ottawa (red). The gray window indicates the middle 95% of these 100 simulations.
To help us understand the results of simulating our stochastic model of disease spread, we examined the structural
characteristics of the networks on which we perform our simulations. Because different types of contacts have different
levels of disease transmission, we base our measures on the statistics of weighted graphs. Additionally, our network
contact structure changes with time. In our analysis, for one network from our network model, we selected two days
— one before contact-limiting and one after — for our analysis. We focused on the number of first-degree contacts
(i.e. direct contacts), second-degree contacts (i.e. contacts of direct contacts), strength (edge weight, which one can
think of as a “conductance” of disease across a contact), and eigenvector centrality (i.e. the leading eigenvector of the
normalized adjacency matrix, where larger values are associated with “high-traffic” individuals, who get the most visits
from a random walker on the network [55]). We were interested in eigenvector centrality because the largest eigenvector
centrality of a network plays a role in determining that network’s susceptibility to a widespread outbreak of a disease
under certain conditions [70]. We consider the distribution of the values for different subpopulations in our model
society. We found that caregivers have the most first-degree and second-degree contacts (see Fig. 5A,B) and the largest
mean strength (see Fig. 5C). Essential workers have the largest mean eigenvector centrality (due to the heavy-tailed
distribution of their contacts), whereas caregivers have the largest modal eigenvector centrality (see Fig. 5D). We also
tested the effects of contact-limiting and mask-wearing (i.e., PPE status) strategies on the strengths and eigenvector
centralities of various populations. Both interventions reduce the strength of a node, and we found that contact-limiting
in particular reduces the heavy tails in the distribution (see Fig. 6). In other words, it reduces the probability that

9/35

individuals have a large number of contacts.

Fig 5. Characterization of centrality measures of groups in the networks on which we run our stochastic model of
COVID-19 spread. The violin plots depict the empirical probability density. The initial situation, for which we show
day 43 of one simulation, has no contact-limiting. The distanced situation, for which we show day 45 of the same
simulation, has contact-limiting in all subpopulations. For each subpopulation, we calculate the (A) number of
first-degree contacts (i.e. direct contacts), (B) the number of second-degree contacts (i.e. contacts of contacts), (C)
strength of first-degree contacts, and (D) eigenvector-centrality distribution.
We then tested how much different contact-limiting and mask-enforcement strategies affect the different subpopulations in our model. We considered different mitigation strategies, which we assumed were deployed on day 44, and
compared how many cumulative infections there were on day 148. We consider the following three contact-limiting
strategies:
• No contact-limiting: All people maintain their contacts for the entirety of the 148 days.
• Only disabled people limit their contacts. Disabled people reduce their number of weak contacts on day 44. All
other populations maintain their contacts.
• Everyone except for essential workers limits contacts. All subpopulations other than essential workers reduce their
number of weak contacts on day 44.
We consider the following three mask-wearing strategies:
• No masks: Masks are not worn by anybody for the entirety of the 148 days.
• Caregivers and clients wear masks: Both caregivers and their clients wear masks during their interactions with
each other. Other people do not wear masks.
• Caregivers, clients, and essential workers wear masks: Both caregivers and their clients wear masks during their
interactions with each other. When essential workers interact with a member of any group, both parties wear
masks. Masks are not worn in interactions between other weak contacts, nor are they worn with strong contacts
(i.e. members of the same household).

10/35

Fig 6. Characterization of the effects of mask-wearing on centrality measures of subpopulations in the networks on
which we run our stochastic model of COVID-19 spread. The violin plots depict the empirical probability density. The
initial situation, for which we show day 43 of one simulation, has no contact-limiting. The distanced situation, for
which we show day 45 of the same simulation, has contact-limiting in all subpopulations. We modify edge strengths by
supposing that maks have the effectiveness described in Table 1. To indicate PPE status, we use the following
notation: ‘N’ denotes the situation of nobody wearing masks, ‘D+C’ denotes disabled clients and caregivers wearing
masks, and ‘D+C+E’ denotes disabled clients, caregivers, and essential workers all wearing masks. For each
subpopulation, we compute (A) the edge-weight distribution and the (B) eigenvector-centrality distribution.
11/35

Fig 7. Mean cumulative infections in the general population (blue), essential workers (purple), caregivers (gold), and
disabled people (red) for different contact-limiting and mask-wearing scenarios.
We recognize that some people may wear masks even with weak contacts who are not essential workers, and we considered
the more optimistic scenario in which all weak interactions involve mask-wearing. In this case, when everyone limits
contacts on day 44, our simulations yielded a mean of 11,899 cumulative infections by day 148. This is approximately
14% lower than the 13,317 cumulative infections by day 148 when only caregivers, clients, and weak interactions with
essential workers wear masks. In our study, we did not focus on this optimistic case, but we note that the number of
cases may decrease by a larger margin if all weak interactions involve mask-wearing by both parties.
We find that contact-limiting by the disabled population alone has a relatively small effect on their cumulative
infections; it reduces the percent infected from 48.2% to 41.4%. Caregivers have a similar trend, with a reduction in
the percent infected from 70.0% to 63.5%. Contact-limiting by all populations has a larger effect, with the percent of
infected among the disabled people reduced to 20.1% and that of caregivers reduced to 33.1%. By contrast, mask usage
among disabled people and caregivers protects both subpopulations even in the absence of any contact-limiting, with the
percent of disabled people infected decreasing from 48.4% to 31.2% and the percent of caregivers who become infected
decreasing from 70.0% to 39.4%. When essential workers, caregivers, and their clients all wear masks, this benefit is
enhanced; the percent of disabled people who become infected decreases to 15.2% and the percent of caregivers who
become infected reduces to 19.6%. We summarize our results of the mask-wearing intervention in Fig. 7.
Because COVID-19 guidelines recommend reducing the number of contacts between individuals, we tested whether
reducing the number of weak caregiver contacts per pool — while maintaining daily caregiving interactions — would
have a protective effect on disabled people or caregivers. This intervention affects the total number of contacts of
disabled people, but it does not reduce the total amount of time that they are exposed to these contacts. We tested
pool sizes of 4, 10, and 25, and we found that reducing caregiver pool size does not reduce infections among caregivers
or disabled people (see Fig. 8).
We were rather uncertain of the values of two parameters: the probability that people break weak contacts when ill
and the effectiveness of masks. Therefore, we repeated our simulations with otherwise baseline conditions for different
values of these parameters (see Table 1). As expected, reducing the probability of breaking weak contacts when ill (see

12/35

Fig 8. Effects of the number of caregivers (4, 10, or 25) that are assigned to a given disabled person on the mean
fraction of each group that becomes infected.
Fig. 9A) and reducing mask effectiveness (see Fig. 9B) both increase the number of infections. Importantly, varying
these parameters did not affect the overall pattern of infection that we observed, with caregivers remaining the most
susceptible subpopulation.
Having observed that caregivers are the most likely to be infected among all subpopulations across all tested parameter sets, we investigated whether caregivers would also be most able to drive the spread of COVID-19. To do
this, we seeded all initial infections entirely in a single subpopulation, rather than distributing the initially infected
individuals uniformly at random across the entire population. After 148 days, we calculated the mean fraction of each
subppulation that was infected. We found that the caregivers were the most effective spreaders of COVID-19, with
each group reaching the highest infection rate when caregivers were infected initially (see Fig. 10). Seeding all initial
infections among only disabled people led to the second-highest number of infections in the caregiver population.
Our finding that caregivers as a subpopulation are the most effective spreaders of COVID-19 seems to have implications for vaccine prioritization, with the possibility that vaccinating caregivers can also protect other subpopulations.
We sought to test this hypothesis, taking into account that vaccines for those who are not frontline healthcare workers
will be extremely limited in supply at first. Therefore, we simulated the distribution of a very limited amount of vaccine
— equivalent to either half (10,143) or all (20,285) of the mean remaining susceptible caregivers on day 148 (which
accounts for approximately 1%–2% of the total city population) — by moving a uniformly random subset of susceptible
caregivers, disabled people, essential workers, or the general population immediately to the removed state. When there
were fewer susceptible people in a subpopulation than people to move, we moved everyone in that subpopulation to the
removed state and removed no other individuals.
We also simulated a scenario with no vaccination. At the same time as vaccination, we modeled three reopening
scenarios: all subpopulations returning to their original weak-contact distributions, all subpopulations except disabled
people returning to their original weak-contact distributions, and all subpopulations continuing to limit their contacts.
During these reopenings, we assumed that people did not wear masks.
We then simulated our stochastic model of infections until day 300 and calculated the number of infections that
potentially can be avoided through the given vaccine strategy by comparing the results of these simulations to simulations
without any vaccines. This enabled us to evaluate the benefits that vaccinating each subpopulation confers indirectly

13/35

Fig 9. Effects of (A) the probability of breaking contact with weak contacts when sick and (B) mask effectiveness on
the mean fraction of each group that becomes infected.

14/35

Fig 10. Fraction of cumulative infections for each subpopulation for different subpopulations with all of the initially
infected individuals on day 0 of the pandemic.
to other groups.
Consistent with our previous findings, the most infections are avoided when caregivers are vaccinated. When all
groups limit contacts and half of the susceptible caregivers (10,143 individuals) are vaccinated, a total of 34,589 infections
are avoided in a city of approximately 1 million residents (see Fig. 11). It is second-most effective to vaccinate essential
workers (this avoids 23,275 infections) and third-most effective to vaccinate the disabled population (this avoids 16,638
infections). By contrast, when the same number of general-population individuals are vaccinated, only 6,977 infections
are avoided. It is possible for the number of avoided infections to be smaller than the number of people who are
vaccinated, because not all vaccinated individuals would have become infected. One plausible scenario in which this
can occur is if the disease prevalence is low in the subpopulation that is vaccinated, as is the case with the general
population in our simulation. The same pattern of relative effectiveness holds when we vaccinate twice the number of
people, although more infections are avoided in total.
Vaccinating caregivers is also the most effective strategy to protect disabled people. When everybody limits contacts
and 10,143 caregivers are vaccinated, 8,811 disabled people avoid becoming infected. This is an even more favorable
outcome than vaccinating the same number of disabled people, which allows 6,312 disabled people to avoid infection.
This effect may arise from the relative sizes of the caregiver and disabled populations in our model. 10,143 people is
exactly half of the susceptible caregivers, but they constitute only about 14% of the disabled population. Therefore,
when caregivers are vaccinated, for any given interaction that a disabled person has with a caregiver, that caregiver
has a roughly 50% chance of having been vaccinated. However, when disabled people are vaccinated, for any given
interaction that a caregiver has with a disabled person, the disabled person has only a 14% chance of having been
vaccinated. Therefore, when the number of vaccines is extremely limited, vaccinating caregivers may be a more efficient
way to protect disabled people than vaccinating disabled people directly.
Notably, vaccinating either caregivers or disabled people is much more effective at protecting the disabled population
than vaccinating essential workers, which only protects 1,369 disabled people from infection. Vaccinating caregivers also
spares slightly more members of the general population (14,303 in the general population avoid infection when 10,143
caregivers are vaccinated) than vaccinating essential workers does (13,431 in the general population avoid infection when
10,143 caregivers are vaccinated). Essential workers are the only population that benefits most when essential workers
are vaccinated; they avoid 8,051 infections, as opposed to avoiding 3,503 infections when caregivers are vaccinated (see

15/35

Fig 11. The number of infections that are avoided in each subpopulation when each subpopulation is vaccinated with
the indicated number of vaccines.

16/35

Fig. 11).
In our case study, we found that vaccinating disabled people did not protect caregivers as effectively as vaccinating
caregivers protected disabled people. When everybody limits contacts and 10,143 disabled people are vaccinated, we
found that 1,274 caregivers avoid becoming infected. When 10,143 caregivers are vaccinated instead, 7,971 caregivers
avoid infection; this is approximately a sixfold difference (see Fig. 11). Again, this may be due to the relative sizes of
the caregiver and disabled populations. Because a relatively small fraction of the disabled people with whom any given
caregiver interacts will be vaccinated and caregivers are frequently in pools for multiple disabled people, our model seems
to suggest that caregivers’ risks are not mitigated greatly when only a small fraction of disabled people are vaccinated.
Notably, we observed no major differences in the number of infections that are avoided due to vaccination in different
contact-limiting scenarios. Although contact-limiting is effective (see Fig. 7), it neither strengthens nor weakens the
indirect positive effects of vaccination. For expository clarity, we performed the simulations in our vaccination case
study under the assumption that nobody wore masks, and uneven mask adherence can affect results. In general, the less
that a subpopulation tends to wear masks, the more that they will contribute to spread relative to other subpopulations
(see Fig. 7) and the more efficient it will be to vaccinate them.

4

Discussion

We now summarize and discuss our key results.

4.1

Our Most Significant Findings

The caregiver–disabled community is highly vulnerable to COVID-19 infection.
We simulated the spread of COVID-19 on networks to evaluate how vulnerable four interconnected populations—
caregivers, disabled people, essential workers, and the general population— are to infections. Across multiple simulation
conditions, we found that caregivers have the highest risk of infection and that disabled people have the second-highest
risk of infection. This is likely due to multiple structural factors in a contact network. First, caregivers are in short
supply relative to disabled people, so each caregiver typically has contact with multiple disabled people. This is reflected
by caregivers having the largest number of direct neighbors and neighbors of neighbors in a network. Second, caregiver–
disabled connections are stronger than other connections, which — along with the large number of direct connections
of caregivers — contributes to caregivers having the edges with the largest mean weights in the networks. Third, some
of our simulations involved a contact-limiting phase, in which individuals reduce their number of weak connections.
Caregiver–disabled contacts do not break during this phase. These structural factors render caregivers and disabled
people particularly vulnerable to infection with COVID-19. We also found that caregivers are the most effective spreaders
of COVID-19 once they are infected, and we suggest this is due to the same factors that make them most vulnerable to
becoming infected. This agrees with the observations of Gozzi et al. [71] that, for two different spread-limiting strategies
in an activity-driven network model, the most active nodes that do not comply with the spread-limiting strategy are
major drivers of disease spread. Reassuringly, our findings are robust to changes in the parameters — the effectiveness
of masks and the probability of breaking contact when sick — in which we had the greatest uncertainty.
In our model, we did not adjust the probability of hospitalization according to a particular infected person’s identity
(such as being disabled or being a caregiver), and we did not model death. However, disabled people are more likely
than others to have medical conditions that predispose them to severe cases of COVID-19 and caregivers are more
likely to belong to marginalized groups that are at increased risk. Taking these factors into account may reveal an
even more disproportionate disease burden on caregivers and disabled people. Ortega-Anderez et al. [72] observed that
small decreases in the exposure of medically vulnerable groups significantly decrease overall mortality, underscoring how
critical it is to identify interventions that effectively protect caregivers and disabled people.
Effective interventions.
It is essential that the necessary medical services that at-home caregivers provide to disabled people continue to be
available, despite the COVID-19 pandemic. We tested the effectiveness of various interventions at preventing the spread
of COVID-19 among these groups. We found that mask-wearing during contact between caregivers and disabled people
is a very effective strategy for reducing infections in both groups. This finding agrees with recent agent-based [73, 74]
and bond-percolation [75] models of mask-wearing interventions. We recommend that home-healthcare agencies provide
their employees with masks and (whenever possible) mandate their use on the job.

17/35

By contrast, we found that contact-limiting by disabled people alone only slightly reduces their risk of contracting
COVID-19 if it is not accompanied by contact-limiting in the general population. When the general population limits
contacts, we found that cases among disabled people and caregivers fall by almost 50%. Our results, along with
the resurgence of COVID-19 in nursing homes despite efforts to protect the people in them [76], directly contradicts
the assertion by some groups that reopening can be accomplished safely if vulnerable groups continue to limit their
contacts [28]. Among the disabled population that requires caregivers, complete contact-limiting is medically untenable.
We found that disabled people are protected effectively only when the general population limits contacts.
Caregiver vaccination prevents the most cases in other groups, including disabled people
A major application of modeling of the spread of a disease on a network is evaluating strategies for targeted vaccination [47, 48, 77]. Prior work suggests that, under certain conditions, the largest eigenvector centrality of a network
helps determine a network’s threshold (e.g. in the form of a basic reproduction number) for a widespread outbreak
of a disease [70]. This suggests that vaccinating nodes with large eigenvector centralities may be an effective control
strategy. Now that multiple vaccines have received rigorous safety testing for approval across the globe [78–81], we
sought to determine the most effective vaccination strategy in the context of our model. As a first step, we calculated
eigenvector centralities of the network’s four subpopulations. We calculated that essential workers have the largest mean
eigenvector centralities and that caregivers have the largest modal eigenvector centralities. This is a direct consequence
of the contact distributions of these groups; essential workers are sometimes assigned to very large workplaces and
sometimes assigned to very small workplaces, but caregivers are almost always assigned to work with multiple disabled
people. However, investigation of network structure alone did not resolve which group is most efficient to vaccinate.
Therefore, we analyzed how the dynamics of disease spread were affected by selectively vaccinating a subset of each
of these subpopulations. We took into account not only infections that are prevented directly (specifically, when a
person who would have become infected had already received the vaccine) but also ones that are prevented indirectly
(specifically, secondary spread that was prevented because the person who would have been spreading the virus was
instead vaccinated against it). Our simulations suggest that vaccinating caregivers (1) provides the highest ”return on
investment” in terms of total infections prevented and (2) prevents the most infections in three of the four subpopulations
(the exception is the subpopulation of essential workers). In fact, in our simulations, vaccinating a specified number of
caregivers protected more disabled people from infection indirectly than vaccinating the same number of disabled people
protected directly.
It is important to be cautious when interpreting our finding that vaccinating caregivers prevents the most infections
among disabled people. In the real world, vaccination campaigns must balance many factors — including medical
risk, public health, and equity — when assigning priority [29]. Furthermore, the precise conclusions about vaccination
strategies from our model may or may not hold in real-world scenarios, depending on a variety of local factors, including
the amount of vaccine that is available, the relative sizes of the caregiver and disabled populations, and the distributions
of age and pre-existing conditions in these populations. Even if vaccinating caregivers is most efficient, it may still be
more ethical to prioritize vaccinating individual disabled people, particularly those who are elderly or have conditions
that dispose them to severe cases of COVID-19 [72]. However, when a small number of caregivers serve a large number
of disabled people who are not at particularly high medical risk, vaccinating caregivers has a threefold benefit: (1) it
protects caregivers, who often are in demographic groups that have an elevated risk for COVID-19 complications, for
their own sake; (2) it indirectly shields the disabled people for whom they care; and (3) it prevents the disruption of
essential caregiving services to disabled people when caregivers are infected and must quarantine. Our model strongly
suggests that caregivers to the disabled population are at increased occupational risk of both contracting and spreading
COVID-19 and that protecting caregivers also provides substantial, quantifiable benefits to the vulnerable population
that they serve. Therefore, we suggest that caregivers should be among the groups who are given the opportunity to
receive a vaccine at a high priority.
Even as vaccines become available, we emphasize the importance of continuing effective non-pharmaceutical interventions, such as mask-wearing and contact-limiting among all groups (including the general population). Vaccination
campaigns should make protecting disabled people a priority, and they should consider early vaccination of caregivers
as one potential strategy among continued society-wide non-pharmaceutical interventions to accomplish this goal.

4.2

Limitations of our Study

In interpreting our results, we made many assumptions to construct a tractable model to study. Accordingly, our results
occur in the context of a variety of hypotheses about the epidemiology of COVID-19 in the disabled community and

18/35

optimal strategies to mitigate the spread of the disease. Although we consider our hypotheses to be reasonable ones, we
obviously do not perfectly describe the complexity of COVID-19, how it spreads, and how human behavior affects its
spread.
In reflecting on our assumptions and our modeling (of both the network structure and the spread of disease), there
are a variety of natural steps to take to enhance our work. Although they are beyond the scope of the present work, we
elaborate on some of them. We encourage careful examination of the following ideas:
• Incorporating skilled nursing facilities and hospitals: We assumed that caregivers provide at-home care to disabled
people. There are, of course, many disabled people who live in skilled care facilities, which have a different
network of care-giving and care-receiving than the ones that we examined. One can perhaps argue that we model
these effects indirectly through the heavy-tailed distributions of weak contacts, but this does not incorporate the
intricacies of these healthcare settings.
• Lack of entry into and exit from a city: We did not consider the possibility that people enter a city, which can
introduce more infections. This type of effect was studied in [41].
• Uncertainty in the numbers of disabled people and caregivers in a population: There is a lot of uncertainty in the
proportions of disabled people and caregivers in a population. Unfortunately, there is a lack of reliable information
concerning how many disabled people receive assistance for their activities of daily living and how many people in
society serve as caregivers (possibly in an unpaid capacity). It is very important to obtain more data about this
and to incorporate it into modeling efforts.
• More precise distributions of contacts: It was very difficult for us to estimate the contact distribution of people
before and during a lockdown, and it was even difficult to estimate the level of contact-limiting. It would be useful
to study how different types of distributions of weak contacts affect results.
• Incorporating daily randomness of interactions: During each phase of our model COVID-19 pandemic, we fixed
the daily contacts of a population’s individual, except for the disabled people and caregivers, for whom we assigned
a random caregiver from a pool to each disabled person.
• Modeling contact changes during reopening: One limitation of our network model is that when we assigned
additional contacts to individuals after reopening, we did so in a random way (for simplicity), rather than in a
way that is based on their contacts before a lockdown. This choice results in mixing of contacts in a network, and
studying the consequences of this choice seems important.
• Modeling mask-compliance probabilistically: We assumed that masks are either worn or not worn by an entire
subpopulation for given types of interactions. In reality, only some fraction of a subpopulation will wear masks.
• Analyzing the eigenvector centrality of caregivers: We speculated that the larger modal eigenvector centralities
of caregivers leads to COVID-19 spreading more effectively from caregivers than from other subpopulations. It
seems useful to study the importance of caregivers to disease spread from a theoretical perspective. For example,
given the properties of the contact distributions of different members of a society it is desirable to investigate the
probability with which a large-scale epidemic occurs and how quickly it spreads in its early stages if only caregivers
are infected when it starts.

4.3

Conclusions

We constructed a stochastic compartmental model of the spread of COVID-19 on networks that model a city of approximately 1 million residents and used it to study the spread of the disease in the disabled and caregiver communities.
Our model suggests that (1) caregivers and disabled people may be the most vulnerable subpopulations to exposure in a
society (at least among the four subpopulations that we considered); (2) mask-wearing appears to be extremely effective
at preventing infections between caregivers and disabled people; (3) contact-limiting by an entire population appears to
be far better at protecting disabled people than only contact-limiting only by disabled people; and (4) caregivers may
be the most effective spreaders of COVID-19 and vaccinating caregivers can be extremely helpful for protecting disabled
people.

19/35

Acknowledgements
We gratefully acknowledge Deanna Needell and Sherilyn Tamagawa for making the introductions that allowed our team
to form and Stephen Campbell for directing us to helpful resources and helping refine our questions. MAP acknowledges
support from the National Science Foundation (grant number DMS-2027438) through the RAPID program.

Competing interests
HS provides care, and JZ and ST receive care. ST reports on the COVID-19 pandemic.

References
1. World Health Organization. Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19) Advice for the Public; 2020. Available from:
https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novel-coronavirus-2019/advice-for-public.
2. Flaxman S, Mishra S, Gandy A, Unwin HJT, Mellan TA, Coupland H, et al. Estimating the Effects of NonPharmaceutical Interventions on COVID-19 in Europe. Nature. 2020;584(7820):257–261. Available from: https:
//doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-2405-7.
3. Dehning J, Zierenberg J, Spitzner FP, Wibral M, Neto JP, Wilczek M, et al. Inferring Change Points in the
Spread of COVID-19 Reveals the Effectiveness of Interventions. Science. 2020:eabb9789. Available from: https:
//www.sciencemag.org/lookup/doi/10.1126/science.abb9789.
4. Alfano V, Ercolano S. The Efficacy of Lockdown Against COVID-19: A Cross-Country Panel Analysis. Applied
Health Economics and Health Policy. 2020;18(4):509–517. Available from: http://link.springer.com/10.
1007/s40258-020-00596-3.
5. Chu DK, Akl EA, Duda S, Solo K, Yaacoub S, Schünemann HJ, et al. Physical Distancing, Face Masks, and Eye
Protection to Prevent Person-to-Person Transmission of SARS-CoV-2 and COVID-19: A Systematic Review and
Meta-Analysis. The Lancet. 2020;395:1973–1987. Available from: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(20)
31142-9.
6. Van Dyke ME PE Rogers TM, et al. Trends in County-Level COVID-19 Incidence in Counties With and Without
a Mask Mandate — Kansas, June 1–August 23, 2020. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report. 2020;69(47):1777–
1781. Available from: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/69/wr/mm6947e2.htm.
7. Tackle Coronavirus in Vulnerable Communities. Nature. 2020;581(7808):239–240. Available from: http://www.
nature.com/articles/d41586-020-01440-3.
8. Young C, Hall AM, Gonçalves-Bradley DC, Quinn TJ, Hooft L, van Munster BC, et al.. Home or Foster Home
Care Versus Institutional Long-Term Care for Functionally Dependent Older People. John Wiley and Sons Ltd;
2017. Available from: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28368550/.
9. Gorges RJ, Sanghavi P, Konetzka RT. A National Examination of Long-Term Care Setting, Outcomes, and
Disparities Among Elderly Dual Eligibles. Health Affairs. 2019;38(7):1110–1118. Available from: https://
pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31260370/.
10. He M, Li Y, Fang F. Is There a Link Between Nursing Home Reported Quality and COVID-19 Cases? Evidence from California Skilled Nursing Facilities. Journal of the American Medical Directors Association. 2020
Jul;21(7):905–908. Available from: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32674817/.
11. Kim JJ, Coffey KC, Morgan DJ, Roghmann MC. Lessons learned – Outbreaks of COVID-19 in Nursing Homes.
Mosby Inc.; 2020. Available from: https://doi.org/10.1093/cid/ciz1045.
12. Abrams H, Loomer L, Gandhi A, Grabowski D. Characteristics of U.S. Nursing Homes with COVID-19 Cases. J
Am Geriatr Soc. 2020;68:1653–1656.

20/35

13. Li Y, Temkin-Greener H, Shan G, Cai X. COVID-19 Infections and Deaths among Connecticut Nursing Home
Residents: Facility Correlates. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society. 2020 Sep;68(9):1899–1906. Available
from: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32557542/.
14. Chen MK, Chevalier JA, Long EF. Nursing Home Staff Networks and COVID-19. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences. 2021 Jan;118(1):e2015455118. Available from: http://www.pnas.org/lookup/doi/10.
1073/pnas.2015455118.
15. Gorges RJ, Konetzka RT. Staffing Levels and COVID-19 Cases and Outbreaks in U.S. Nursing Homes. Journal of
the American Geriatrics Society. 2020 Nov;68(11):2462–2466. Available from: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/32770832/.
16. CDC. Evidence Used to Update the List of Underlying Medical Conditions that Increase a Person’s Risk
of Severe Illness From COVID-19; 2020. Available from: https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/
need-extra-precautions/evidence-table.html.
17. CDC. Disability and Health Data System; 2020. Availabe at https://dhds.cdc.gov/CR, accessed Oct 2020.
Available from: https://dhds.cdc.gov/CR.
18. PHI. Direct Care Workers in the United States; 2020. Available from: https://phinational.org/resource/
direct-care-workers-in-the-united-states-key-facts/.
19. Yanez ND, Weiss NS, Romand JA, Treggiari MM. COVID-19 Mortality Risk for Older Men and Women.
BMC Public Health. 2020 Dec;20(1):1742. Available from: https://bmcpublichealth.biomedcentral.com/
articles/10.1186/s12889-020-09826-8.
20. Peckham H, de Gruijter NM, Raine C, Radziszewska A, Ciurtin C, Wedderburn LR, et al. Male Sex Identified
by Global COVID-19 Meta-Analysis as a Risk Factor for Death and ITU Admission. Nature Communications.
2020 Dec;11(1).
21. Adhikari, Samrachana; Pantaleo, Nicholas P ; Feldman, Justin M ; Ogedegbe, Olugbenga; Thorpe, Lorna; Troxel
AB. Assessment of Community-Level Disparities in Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) Infections and Deaths
in Large US Metropolitan Areas. JAMA Netw Open. 2020;3(7). Available from: https://jamanetwork.com/
journals/jamanetworkopen/fullarticle/2768723?resultClick=1.
22. Egede LE, Walker RJ. Structural Racism, Social Risk Factors, and Covid-19 — A Dangerous Convergence for
Black Americans. N Engl J Med. 2020;383(e77). Available from: https://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/
NEJMp2023616.
23. Kim SJ, Bostwick W. Social Vulnerability and Racial Inequality in COVID-19 Deaths in Chicago. Health Education and Behavior. 2020. Available from: https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/1090198120929677.
24. Okoro, Catherine A ; Hollis, NaTasha D ; Cyrus, Alissa C ; Griffin-Blake S. Prevalence of Disabilities and
Health Care Access by Disability Status and Type Among Adults — United States, 2016; 2018. Available from:
https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/67/wr/mm6732a3.htm?s{_}cid=mm6732a3{_}w.
25. Lauer E, Houtenville A. 2017 Annual Disability Statistics Supplement. Institute on Disability, University of New Hampshire. 2018. Available from: https://disabilitycompendium.org/sites/default/files/
user-uploads/2017_AnnualReport_FINAL.pdf.
26. NJ COVID-19 Disability Action Committee. NJ COVID-19 Disability Action Committee: Initial Report; 2020.
Available from: https://www.adacil.org/latest-updates/covid-19-disability-report.
27. Sen Casey, Robert P J. S.3544 - Coronavirus Relief for Seniors and People with Disabilities Act of 2020; 2020.
28. Kulldorff M, Gupta S, Bhattacharya J. Great Barrington Declaration; 2020.
gbdeclaration.org/.

Available from: https://

21/35

29. Toner, Eric; Barnill, Anne; Krubiner, Carleigh; Bernstein, Justin; Privor-Dumm, Lois; Watson, Mathew;
Martin, Elena; Potter, Christina; Hosangadi, Divya; Connell, Nancy; Watson, Crystal; Schoch-Spana,
Monica; Goodwin Veenema, Tener; Meyer, Diane; Daughert A. Interim Framework for COVID-19 Vaccine Allocation and Distribution in the United States. The Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security;
2020. Available from: https://www.centerforhealthsecurity.org/our-work/pubs_archive/pubs-pdfs/
2020/200819-vaccine-allocation.pdf.
30. How CDC Is Making COVID-19 Vaccine Recommendations. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; 2020.
Accessed: 2020-12-26. cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/vaccines/recommendations-process.html.
31. Lindstrom MR, Porter MA, Shoenhard H, Trick S, Valles TE, Zinski JM. Networks of Necessity: Preventing
COVID-19 Among Disabled People and Their Caregivers; 2020. ftp://ftp.math.ucla.edu/pub/camreport/
cam20-33.pdf.
32. Zaplotnik, Žiga and Gavrić, Aleksandar and Medic, Luka. Simulation of the COVID-19 Epidemic on the Social
Network of Slovenia: Estimating the Intrinsic Forecast Uncertainty. PLoS ONE. 2020;15(8). Available from:
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0238090.
33. Sameni R. Mathematical Modeling of Epidemic Diseases; A Case Study of the COVID-19 Coronavirus. arXiv
preprint arXiv:200311371. 2020. Available from: https://arxiv.org/abs/2003.11371.
34. Browning R, Sulem D, Mengersen K, Rivoirard V, Rousseau J. Simple Discrete-Time Self-Exciting Models
Can Describe Complex Dynamic Processes: A Case Study of COVID-19. medRxiv. 2020. Available from:
https://www.medrxiv.org/content/early/2020/11/03/2020.10.28.20221077.
35. Escobar JV. A Hawkes Process Model for the Propagation of COVID-19: Simple Analytical Results. EPL
(Europhysics Letters). 2020;131(6):68005. Available from: https://doi.org/10.1209/0295-5075/131/68005.
36. Bertozzi AL, Franco E, Mohler G, Short MB, Sledge D. The challenges of modeling and forecasting the spread
of COVID-19. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 2020;117(29):16732–16738. Available from:
https://www.pnas.org/content/117/29/16732.
37. Hoertel N, Blachier M, Blanco C, et al. A Stochastic Agent-Based Model of the SARS-CoV-2 Epidemic in France.
Nature Medicine. 2020;26:1417–1421. Available from: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-020-1001-6.
38. Arenas A, Cota W, Gómez-Gardeñes J, Gómez S, Granell C, Matamalas JT, et al. A Mathematical Model for
the Spatiotemporal Epidemic Spreading of COVID19. medRxiv. 2020. Available from: https://www.medrxiv.
org/content/early/2020/03/23/2020.03.21.20040022.
39. Pullano G, Valdano E, Scarpa N, Rubrichi S, Colizza V. Evaluating the Effect of Demographic Factors, Socioeconomic Factors, and Risk Aversion on Mobility During the COVID-19 Epidemic in France Under Lockdown:
A Population-Based Study. The Lancet. 2020;2(12):e638–e649. Available from: https://doi.org/10.1016/
S2589-7500(20)30243-0.
40. Kraemer MUG, Yang CH, Gutierrez B, Wu CH, Klein B, Pigott DM, et al. The Effect of Human Mobility
and Control Measures on the COVID-19 Epidemic in China. Science. 2020;368(6490):493–497. Available from:
https://science.sciencemag.org/content/368/6490/493.
41. Lai S, Bogoch II, Ruktanonchai NW, Watts A, Lu X, Yang W, et al. Assessing Spread Risk of Wuhan Novel
Coronavirus Within and Beyond China, January-April 2020: A Travel Network-Based Modelling Study; 2020.
Available from: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7276059/.
42. Holme P, Saramäki J. Temporal Networks. Physics Reports. 2012;519(3):97–125. Available from: https:
//arxiv.org/abs/1108.1780.
43. Dakiche N, Tayeb FBS, Slimani Y, Benatchba K. Tracking Community Evolution in Social Networks: A Survey.
Information Processing & Management. 2019;56(3):1084–1102. Available from: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ipm.2018.03.005.

22/35

44. Melnik S, Porter MA, Mucha PJ, Gleeson JP. Dynamics on Modular Networks with Heterogeneous Correlations.
Chaos: An Interdisciplinary Journal of Nonlinear Science. 2014;24(2):023106. Available from: https://arxiv.
org/abs/1207.1809.
45. Miller JC, Volz EM. Incorporating Disease and Population Structure Into Models of SIR Disease in Contact
Networks. PloS One. 2013;8(8):e69162. Available from: https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0069162.
46. Brauer F, Castillo-Chavez C, Feng Z. Mathematical Models in Epidemiology. Heidelberg, Germany: SpringerVerlag; 2019.
47. Kiss IZ, Miller JC, Simon PL. Mathematics of Epidemics on Networks: From Exact to Approximate Models.
Cham, Switzerland: Springer International Publishing; 2017.
48. Pastor-Satorras R, Castellano C, Van Mieghem P, Vespignani A. Epidemic Processes in Complex Networks.
Reviews of Modern Physics. 2015;87(3):925. Available from: https://journals.aps.org/rmp/abstract/10.
1103/RevModPhys.87.925.
49. Government of Tasmania. COVID-19 North West Regional Hospital Outbreak Interim Report;
https://www.health.tas.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0006/401010/North_West_Regional_
Hospital_Outbreak_-_Interim_Report.pdf.

2020.

50. Ottawa Public Health. Daily COVID-19 Dashboard. Ottawa Public Health; 2020. Accessed: 2020-08-24. https:
//www.ottawapublichealth.ca/en/reports-research-and-statistics/daily-covid19-dashboard.aspx.
51. Neilsen K. A Timeline of the Novel Coronavirus in Ontario. Global News; 2020. Accessed: 2020-08-24. https:
//globalnews.ca/news/6859636/ontario-coronavirus-timeline/.
52. City of Ottawa. City of Ottawa’s Reopening Plan; 2020. https://documents.ottawa.ca/sites/documents/
files/reopeningbooklet_en.pdf.
53. Baek EC, Porter MA, Parkinson C. Social Network Analysis for Social Neuroscientists. Social Cogn Affect Neuro.
2020;Advanced Access. Available at https://doi.org/10.1093/scan/nsaa069.
54. Fosdick BK, Larremore DB, Nishimura J, Ugander J. Configuring Random Graph Models with Fixed Degree
Sequences. SIAM Review. 2018;60(2):315–355.
55. Newman MEJ. Networks. 2nd ed. Oxford University Press; 2018.
56. Statistics Canada. Census Profile, 2016 Census; 2019. Accessed: 2020-06-21. https://www12.statcan.gc.ca/
census-recensement/2016/dp-pd/prof/details/page.cfm?Lang=E.
57. U S Bureau of Labor Statistics. Employment Projections; 2019. Accessed: 2020-10-31. https://www.bls.gov/
emp/tables/emp-by-detailed-occupation.htm.

58. McNicholas C, Poydock M. Who are Essential Workers?; 2020. Accessed: 2020-10-31. https://www.epi.org/
blog/who-are-essential-workers-a-comprehensive-look-at-their-wages-demographics-and-unionization-rates
59. United States Census Bureau. National Population Totals and Components of Change: 2010-2019; 2020. Accessed:
2020-10-31.
https://www.census.gov/data/tables/time-series/demo/popest/2010s-national-total.
html.
60. Wang X, Pan Y, Zhang D, Chen L, Jia L, Li X, et al. Basic Epidemiological Parameter Values from Data of RealWorld in Mega-Cities: The Characteristics of COVID-19 in Beijing, China. BMC Infectious Diseases. 2020;20,
526. Available from: https://bmcinfectdis.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12879-020-05251-9.
61. Li W, Zhang B, Lu J, Liu S, Chang Z, Peng C, et al. Characteristics of Household Transmission of COVID-19.
Clinical Infectious Diseases. 2020 04;71(8):1943–1946. Available from: https://doi.org/10.1093/cid/ciaa450.

23/35

62. Buitrago-Garcia D, Egli-Gany D, Counotte MJ, Hossmann S, Imeri H, Ipekci AM, et al. Occurrence and Transmission Potential of Asymptomatic and Presymptomatic SARS-CoV-2 Infections: A Living Systematic Review
and Meta-Analysis. PLoS medicine. 2020;17(9):e1003346. Available from: https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.
pmed.1003346.
63. Lauer SA, Grantz KH, Bi Q, Jones FK, Zheng Q, Meredith HR, et al. The Incubation Period of Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) from Publicly Reported Confirmed Cases: Estimation and Application. Annals of internal
medicine. 2020;172(9):577–582. Available from: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7081172/.
64. Bajema KL, Oster AM, McGovern OL, Lindstrom S, Stenger MR, Anderson TC, et al. Persons Evaluated for 2019
Novel Coronavirus- United States, January 2020. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report. 2020;69(6):166–170.
Available from: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/69/wr/mm6906e1.htm.
65. World Health Organization, et al.. Report of the WHO–China Joint Mission on Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19). Geneva; 2020.
https://www.who.int/docs/default-source/coronaviruse/
who-china-joint-mission-on-covid-19-final-report.pdf.
66. Guan Wj, Ni Zy, Hu Y, Liang Wh, Ou Cq, He Jx, et al. Clinical Characteristics of Coronavirus Disease 2019
in China. New England Journal of Medicine. 2020;382(18):1708–1720. Available from: https://www.nejm.org/
doi/full/10.1056/NEJMoa2002032.
67. Altman
D,
Kaiser
Family
Foundation.
Most
Americans
are
Practicing
Social
Distancing;
2020.
Accessed:
2020-06-21.
https://www.axios.com/
coronavirus-social-distancing-lockdown-polling-7c27d86f-bb4b-4cbf-aedf-cfdd26799fd1.html.
68. Rothwell J. Americans’ Social Contacts During the COVID-19 Pandemic; 2020. Accessed: 2020-10-31. https:
//news.gallup.com/opinion/gallup/308444/americans-social-contacts-during-covid-pandemic.aspx.
69. UNdata. UN City population; 2017. Accessed: 2020-08-24. https://www.google.com/publicdata/explore?
ds=z5567oe244g0ot_.
70. Yang Wang, Chakrabarti D, Chenxi Wang, Faloutsos C. Epidemic Spreading in Real Networks: An Eigenvalue
Viewpoint. In: 22nd International Symposium on Reliable Distributed Systems, 2003. Proceedings.; 2003. p.
25–34. Available from: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/1238052.
71. Gozzi N, Scudeler M, Paolotti D, Baronchelli A, Perra N. Self-Initiated Behavioural Change and Disease Resurgence on Activity-Driven Networks; 2020. Available from: http://arxiv.org/abs/2011.03754.
72. Anderez DO, Kanjo E, Pogrebna G, Johnson S, Hunt JA. A Modified Epidemiological Model to Understand the
Uneven Impact of COVID-19 on Vulnerable Individuals and the Approaches Required to Help them Emerge from
Lockdown; 2020. Available from: http://arxiv.org/abs/2006.10495.
73. Bahl R, Eikmeier N, Fraser A, Junge M, Keesing F, Nakahata K, et al. Modeling COVID-19 Spread in Small
Colleges; 2020. Available from: http://arxiv.org/abs/2008.09597.
74. Li KKF, Jarvis SA, Minhas F. Elementary Effects Analysis of factors controlling COVID-19 infections in
computational simulation reveals the importance of Social Distancing and Mask Usage; 2020. Available from:
http://arxiv.org/abs/2011.11381.
75. Tian Y, Sridhar A, Yagan O, Poor HV. Analysis of the Impact of Mask-wearing in Viral Spread: Implications
for COVID-19; 2020. Available from: http://arxiv.org/abs/2011.04208.
76. Alonso-Zaldivar
R.
Nursing
Home
COVID-19
Cases
Rise
Four-Fold
in
Surge
States;
2020.
Available
from:
https://apnews.com/article/
virus-outbreak-only-on-ap-chicago-nursing-homes-596ef4bfe18313ae72368e2c86e85f27.
77. Wang Z, Bauch CT, Bhattacharyya S, d’Onofrio A, Manfredi P, Perc M, et al. Statistical Physics of Vaccination.
Physics Reports. 2016;664:1 – 113. Available from: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0370157316303349.

24/35

78. CDC National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases. Different COVID-19 Vaccines; 2020. Available
from: https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/vaccines/different-vaccines.html.
79. European
Medicines
Agency.
EMA
Recommends
First
COVID-19
Vaccine
for
Authorisation
in
the
EU;
2020.
Available
from:
https://www.ema.europa.eu/en/news/
ema-recommends-first-covid-19-vaccine-authorisation-eu.
80. Health Canada. Drug and Vaccine Authorizations for COVID-19: List of Authorized Drugs, Vaccines and Expanded Indications - Canada.ca; 2020. Available from: https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/services/
drugs-health-products/covid19-industry/drugs-vaccines-treatments/authorization/list-drugs.
html.
81. Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency. Oxford University/AstraZeneca COVID19
vaccine
approved;
2020.
Available
from:
https://www.gov.uk/government/news/
oxford-universityastrazeneca-covid-19-vaccine-approved.
82. Brainard JS, Jones N, Lake I, Hooper L, Hunter P. Facemasks and Similar Barriers to Prevent Respiratory
Illness Such as COVID-19: A Rapid Systematic Review. medRxiv. 2020:2020.04.01.20049528. Available from:
https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.04.01.20049528v1.full.pdf+html.
83. Mossong J, Hens N, Jit M, Beutels P, Auranen K, Mikolajczyk R, et al. Social Contacts and Mixing Patterns
Relevant to the Spread of Infectious Diseases. PLoS Med. 2008;5(3):e74. Available from: https://doi.org/10.
1371/journal.pmed.0050074.
84. Rothwell J. A Survey of Essential Workers Shows a Political Divide. The New York Times. 2020 Apr. https:
//www.nytimes.com/2020/04/27/upshot/red-blue-workplace-differences-coronavirus.html.

Supporting Information
A

Estimates of Parameter Values

We present the assumptions and derivations that we need to estimate the parameters that we use in our model (see
Section 2). These include parameters that we can obtain directly (possibly with some inference) from the literature and
ones that we fit from case data in Ottawa. Note that we use log to denote the natural logarithm.

A.1
A.1.1

Parameters that we Infer from the Literature
Exponential-Distribution Properties

Because we assume that transition times between disease states come from exponential distributions, we state a few
useful properties for exponential random variables.
For a random variable X that one samples from an exponential distribution with rate λ, the probability density
function is f (x) = λe−λx , the mean is 1/λ, and the median is log 2/λ.
Suppose that we have a random variable Y = min{Y1 , Y2 }, where Y1 and Y2 are random variables that are sampled
from exponential distributions of rates λ1 and λ2 , respectively. It then follows that Y is an exponential random variable
with rate λ1 + λ2 and the probability that Y1 < Y2 is λ1 /(λ1 + λ2 ).
A.1.2

Parameters

Recovery Rate from Hospitalization (ζ).
12.8 days [66], so ζ = 0.0781 day−1 .

The mean duration of hospitalization has been estimated to be 1/ζ =

Transition Rates from Asymptomatic to Ill (α) and Recovered (η). It has been estimated that 19.45% of cases
η
= 0.1945. Additionally, the median time before an individual shows symptoms
are entirely asymptomatic [62], so η+α
is approximately

log 2
α+η

= 5.1 days [63]. Taken together, these estimates yield α = 0.109 day−1 and η = 0.0264 day−1 .

25/35

Transition Rates from Ill to Hospitalized (µ) and Recovered (ρ).

Approximately

µ
µ+ρ

= 20% of symptomatic

cases of COVID-19 result in hospitalization [64], and the median duration to recovery from being ill is
days [65]. This yields µ = 0.00990 day−1 and ρ = 0.0396 day−1 .

log 2
µ+ρ

= 14

Mask-Risk Reduction Factor (m). Based on three different diseases (SARS CoV-2, SARS-CoV, and MERS-CoV),
an unadjusted relative risk for wearing a face mask versus not wearing one and contracting the disease has been reported
to be 0.34 (with a 95% confidence window of 0.26 to 0.45) [5]. These results include both healthcare settings and nonhealthcare settings. Because the three diseases are from the same family, it was argued in [5] that their relative risks
should be comparable. For the data that were reported in [5], it is not clear if only one or both parties in an interaction
wore a mask. We used the middle value of m = 0.34 to represent the risk reduction when both parties wear masks and
√
m = 0.5831 if only one party wears a mask. In other words, if only one party wears a mask in an interaction between
two people, we choose the geometric mean of the best-case transmission reduction if both parties wear a mask and the
worst-case transmission reduction if neither party wears a mask to quantify the transmission risk. By definition, given
values q1 , q2 , . . . , qn , their geometric mean is (q1 × q2 × · · · × qn )1/n . Although our choice is not justified quantitatively,
according to [82], there is a small reduction of becoming infected for people who wear a mask within a household, so it
seems plausible that one party wearing a mask confers some reduction in transmission.
Probability of Breaking Weak Contacts if Symptomatic (b). It was very difficult to estimate this parameter.
Ultimately, we used the fact that 92% of people in a survey reported practicing physical distancing [67] as a proxy for
the portion of the population who would break their weak contacts if they became symptomatic. Therefore, we used
b = 0.92.
Caregiving (wc ) and Weak (ww ) Edge Weights. We estimated these edge weights based on the relative secondary
attack rates (i.e. the percentage of contacts that a contagious person infects) in different scenarios. Recall that, by
definition, we set the strong edge weight for household contacts to be 1.0.
Because of the close proximity between individuals that is necessary in many caregiving settings, we used the relative
ratio of the secondary attack rates among spouses versus those of their other household contacts to estimate wc . This
ratio is 1.701 [61].
A study found that the secondary attack rate in China between social contacts with COVID-19 is only 2.23% and
that the secondary attack rate within a household is 15.55% [60]. We assume that masks are not generally worn within a
household. It is not clear whether the social contacts in the above estimate were between parties who both wear masks,
and it is likely that this estimate arises from a mixture of wearing masks and not wearing masks. To estimate the weak
edge √
weight without a mask, we need to estimate the effective weighting between weak contacts in [60]. We assume that
it is mww , which is the geometric mean
of the weight (ww ) if neither party wears a mask and the weight (mww ) if
√
2.23
w
= 15.55
and hence that ww = 0.2459.
both parties wear a mask. This yields mw
ws
Proportions of the Subpopulations that Constitute the Total Population. By combining the percentages of
disabled people who have difficulty with self-care and those with cognitive impairment, we estimate that the fraction of
the population who are disabled and receive assistance from professional caregivers is fdis = 0.073 [25]. Unfortunately,
there is a paucity of readily available data, so this is a rough estimate. From the United States Bureau of Labor Statistics,
a fraction fcare = 0.021 of the U.S. population is employed as a home health/professional care aid [57]. We use this
number as an estimate of the proportion of the population that provides care. This is likely an underestimate, because
many people provide care in unpaid settings. From an estimated 55,217,845 essential workers in the United States [58]
with a population in July 2019 of 328,239,523 [59], the fraction of essential workers in the population is approximately
0.1682. After subtracting the people who are caregivers, we obtain that a fraction fess = 0.1472 of the population are
essential workers. That leaves the fraction fgen = 0.7588 for the remaining population (i.e. the general population).
Mean Numbers of Contacts. We need distributions of the numbers of family contacts, weak contacts (through
work, shopping, seeing friends, and so on), and caregiving contacts. We begin by focusing on the mean values and later
consider the distributions themselves. From the Canadian census [56], households have a mean value of 2.4 members,
which implies that individuals have a mean of F̄ = 1.4 strong contacts.

26/35

From Gallup data in April 2020 [68], during pandemic lockdowns, the people who were surveyed had a mean of 5.1
contacts per day at work and a mean of 4 contacts per day outside of work and home. Additionally, 27% of working adults
completely isolated themselves except to members of their own household. In Europe in 2008, the overall population
had a mean of 13.4 daily contacts without a lockdown in place [83]. Finally, in April 2020, essential workers saw a mean
of 22 contacts per day (a much larger number than those who are not essential workers) during the lockdown [84]. By
combining these disparate pieces of data, we are able to make some relevant estimates.
Let Ogd denote the mean number of occupational contacts of the general and disabled populations each day without
∗
a lockdown, Oc denote the mean number of disabled people that a caregiver sees in a day, Ogd
denote the mean number
of occupational contacts of the general and disabled populations each day during a lockdown, w denote the mean
number of weak contacts (outside of work) of the overall population each day without a lockdown, w∗ denote the mean
number of weak contacts (outside of work) of the overall population each day with a lockdown, and Oe denote the mean
number of occupational contacts of essential workers each day (both with and without a lockdown). Our parenthetical
comment about Oe means that we are assuming that the number of work contacts is the same for essential workers
regardless of whether or not there is a lockdown. We also assume that w, the mean number of weak contacts of a person
outside of work before a lockdown, does not depend on their role (disabled person, caregiver, essential worker, or general
population). Likewise, we assume that w∗ , the mean number of weak contacts of a person outside of work during a
lockdown, does not depend on their role.
From the data that we cited two paragraphs ago, we have that w∗ = 4 and that each disabled person sees 2 caregivers
dis
per day. Additionally, Oc = 2f
fcare = 6.95 and
fess (Oe + w∗ + F̄ ) + fcare (Oc + w∗ + F̄ )
fess + fcare
∗
5.1 = (fcare + fdis )Ogd
+ fess Oe + fcare Oc
22 =

13.4 = fgen (Ogd + w + F̄ ) + fdis (Ogd + w + F̄ )
+ fess (Oe + w + F̄ ) + fcare (Oc + w + F̄ ) .
To close the system of equations and obtain our estimates, we require one further assumption. If 27% of workers
isolate at home, then the mean number of contacts at work is
∗
Ogd
= 0.27 × 0 + 0.73 × (0.73 Ogd ) = 0.5329 Ogd .
∗
We obtain w = 5.14, w∗ = 4, Oe = 16.23, Oc = 6.95, Ogd = 5.20, and Ogd
= 3.08. When we select power-law
distributions to model the possibility of some people having very large numbers of contacts, we want to satisfy the
following criteria:

• the general population has a mean of w + Ogd = 10.34 weak contacts per day when not physically distancing and
∗
a mean of w∗ + Ogd
= 7.08 weak contacts per day when physically distancing;
• the disabled population has the same mean value for weak contacts as the general population whether or not
people are physically distancing;
• the caregiver population has a mean of w = 5.14 weak contacts per day when not physically distancing and a
mean of 4 weak contacts per day when physically distancing; and
• the essential-worker population has a mean of Oe +w = 21.37 weak contacts per day when not physically distancing
and Oe + w∗ = 20.23 contacts per day when physically distancing.
Although the caregiver population may seem to have very few weak contacts, we note that most of their daily contacts
come from Oc , which we estimate separately from the ordinary weak contacts.
Although the number of weak contacts for essential workers does decrease slightly during a lockdown, we used Oe + w
whether or not a lockdown is in place as an approximation, because the difference in the numbers of weak contacts is
very small (21.37 versus 20.23). In practice, it was difficult for us to reduce the mean number of contacts slightly in this
situation, because picking the minimum of two random variables of similar distributions tends to result in a value that
is much smaller than the original one and doing so would result in the essential workers having far too few contacts.

27/35

Distribution of Strong Contacts: We used data from the 2016 Canada Census [56] to describe the distribution of
household sizes. According to these data, 105,750 households consist of 1 person, 124,280 households consist of 2 people,
58,010 households consist of 3 people, 55,215 households consist of 4 people, and 30,500 households consist of 5 or more
people (which we treated as exactly 5 people). From these data, we constructed an empirical distribution, which we
used for the entire population. It is Ds = E(0.283, 0.332, 0.155, 0.148, 0.0816).
Caregivers: To each disabled person, we assign one strong caregiver and one weak caregiver with whom they interact
each day (although they do not interact with the latter when either they or the caregiver is symptomatic). We chose
the weak caregivers from a pool of caregivers. We used 10 as the baseline pool size, but we did consider other sizes (4
and 25, as we discuss briefly in Section 3).

A.2

Fits from Data

There are several other parameters that we also need to estimate. Even with our many estimates from the literature that
we discussed above, we still need to estimate the following quantities: (1) the maximum number C ∗ of weak contacts
that an individual may see in a day in the power-law distribution for their contacts (where we do not include the work
contacts of caregivers in this count); (2) the baseline disease transmissibility β (i.e. the hazard rate that describes
how readily an infected person spreads the disease to a strong contact if neither wears a mask); (3) the number A0 of
people who are asymptomatic on day 0; and (4) the probability τ that an individual who is symptomatically ill but not
hospitalized is counted in the cumulative number of cases.
We model the number of weak contacts using a power-law distribution. That is, the daily number of weak contacts
of an individual is P(0, C ∗ ; Og ), where Og denotes the mean number of weak contacts for group g.
Based on the simulation procedure that we describe in Section B, we used case data from Ottawa [50] and used a
fitting procedure to estimate the parameters τ , C ∗ , and β. We used the first 97 days as fitting data and treated day 44
(i.e. the start of the lockdown) as instantaneous in that contact distributions and mask-wearing policies are instantly
adopted on that day.
We assumed that A0 people on day 0 are asymptomatic and that everyone else is susceptible. On day 1, with the
first recorded case, there is 1 recorded case in expectation. Therefore,
1=

α
α+η
| {z }

×

−(α+η)×1day
{z
}
|e

Pr(move from A in 1 day)

×

τ
|{z}

A0 .

(3)

test ill person

Pr(asymptomatic to ill)

Our choice to make the expected case count be equal to 1 on day 1 allows us to have three parameters, rather than four
for fitting. Having more parameters could result in overfitting.
We sought to minimize the discrete H 1 -norm (i.e. the sum of squares of residuals plus the sum of squares of residual
daily differences). Because our stochastic model is complicated, with variation across trials, we did a grid search for
parameters. We originally tried a large range of parameters, allowing C ∗ to be as large as the entire Ottawa population,
but we obtained our best fit error when we considered values of the parameter C ∗ in the range [88, 250], values of the
parameter β in the range [0.01, 0.03], and values of the parameter τ in the range [0.02, 0.07]. Among the values that we
considered, we obtained our best results for C ∗ = 100 people, β = 0.0175 day−1 , τ = 0.07, and A0 = 140 people. In
Table 2, we give a variety of parameter values and H 1 -error values.

B
B.1

Simulations of our Stochastic Model
Simulation Steps

We summarize are simulation procedure in Algorithm 1. It uses the other algorithms that we present in this subsection.

B.2
B.2.1

Implementation of Approximate Power-Law Distributions
Sampling

Given a lower bound a, an upper bound b, and a power p, we wish to approximate a power-law distribution for a discrete
random variable N over [a, b], where Pr(N = n) = O(n−p ) as b, n → ∞. Our procedure amounts to (1) shifting the

28/35

Algorithm 1 Simulations of the Spread of COVID-19 on a Contact Network
1:
2:
3:
4:
5:
6:
7:
8:
9:
10:
11:
12:
13:
14:
15:
16:
17:
18:
19:
20:
21:
22:
23:
24:
25:
26:
27:
28:
29:
30:
31:
32:
33:
34:
35:
36:
37:

Initialize Population of size POttawa with fractions fdis who are disabled, fcare who are caregivers, fess who are
essential workers, and fgen who are members of the general population.
for all people in Population do
Assign number of weak stubs according to Dgroup,pre , where group is the group to which they belong.
end for
for all people in Population do
Assign possible household units according to Dstrong according to Algorithm 2.
end for
Assign weak contacts according to Algorithm 3.
Assign strong contacts according to Algorithm 4.
Match disabled people and caregivers according to Algorithm 5.
Initialize some number to be asymptomatic or ill based on program inputs.
day = 0, has opened = f alse, has closesd = f alse
while day < end day do
for all disabled people in DisabledPopulation do
Pick a weak caregiver uniformly at random from the set of weak caregivers.
end for
for all people in Population do
Calculate hazard rate.
end for
for all people in Population do
Advance state by 1 day according to Algorithm 6.
end for
day ← day + 1
if time < close time then
Do nothing.
else if time < open time then
if not has closed then
Close down (i.e. start a lockdown) according to Algorithm 8.
has closed ← true
end if
else
if not has opened then
Open up according to Algorithm 9.
has opened ← true
end if
end if
end while

Algorithm 2 Household Units
1:
2:
3:
4:
5:
6:
7:

Let AllIDs be a container that stores the unique IDs for each person in the population.
while AllIDs not empty do
Choose a person i uniformly at random from AllIDs and determine their number of household contacts (house)
by sampling from Dstrong .
Select house number of IDs uniformly at random from AllIDs.
Make i along with the people with those IDs selected above into a possible household unit.
Remove i and the IDs selected from AllIDs.
end while

29/35

β [person−1 day−1 ]
τ
C∗
Error
0.0175
0.07 100 8.4 × 105
0.05 125 9.1 × 105
0.015
0.015
0.06 125 1.0 × 106
0.05 88 1.1 × 106
0.0175
0.0175
0.07 100 1.7 × 106
0.015
0.06 125 1.8 × 106
0.06 88 2.9 × 106
0.0175
0.015
0.07 125 3.3 × 106
0.07 138 3.5 × 106
0.015
0.0175
0.06 100 3.8 × 106
0.06 138 4.1 × 106
0.015
0.0175
0.06 100 5.1 × 106
0.015
0.07 125 5.5 × 106
0.015
0.05 113 5.9 × 106
0.015
0.06 113 6.2 × 106
0.07 88 7.2 × 106
0.0175
0.05 138 7.7 × 106
0.015
Table 2. The discretized H 1 error for various values of β, τ , and C ∗ . By Equation (3), with values of α and µ from
the literature and given τ , we need to determine A0 . For each set of parameters, we conducted 40 trials, and we
computed the error by taking the mean of all trials in which there were at least 400 documented cases by day 97. We
only report parameter values for which the errors are less than 107 . Once we found parameters where the error was
less than 108 , we considered β ∈ {0.01, 0.0125, 0.015, 0.0175}, τ ∈ {0.05, 0.06, 0.07}, C ∗ = {88, 100, 113, 125, 138}.

Algorithm 3 Assigning Weak Contacts
1:
2:
3:
4:
5:
6:
7:
8:

Let W eakStubs be a container that stores the IDs of each person in the population with a multiplicity based on
their number of stubs.
while |W eakStubs| ≥ 2 do
Choose i and j uniformly at random from W eakStubs.
if i 6= j and i and j are not already contacts (weak, strong, or caregiving) then
Make i and j weak contacts.
end if
Erase i and j from W eakStubs.
end while

Algorithm 4 Assigning Strong Contacts
for all unit in PossibleHouseholdUnits do
for all person in unit do
3:
Make person a strong contact of each other member of the unit, unless they are already contacts (weak, strong,
or caregiving).
4:
end for
5: end for

1:
2:

30/35

Algorithm 5 Matching Disabled People and Caregivers
1:
2:
3:
4:
5:
6:
7:
8:
9:
10:
11:
12:
13:
14:
15:

for all client in DisabledPopulation do
Determine care weak num from Dpool , the number of weak caregivers in their pool.
Pick care weak num number of caregivers uniformly at random from the set of caregivers.
for all caregiver in CaregiversChosen do
if client and caregiver are not already contacts (weak, strong, or caregiving) then
Make their relationship a weak caregiver–disabled relationship.
end if
end for
end for
for all client in DisabledPopulation do
Choose 1 caregiver uniformly at random from the set of caregivers.
if client and caregiver are not already contacts (weak, strong, or caregiving) then
Make their relationship a strong caregiver–disabled relationship.
end if
end for

range to avoid the case a = 0, (2) sampling from a continuous power-law probability density, (3) truncating the result
to an integer, and (4) shifting the range back if we shifted the original range away from a = 0. In our model, we used
a = 0 and b = C ∗ but we present the approach for a general finite sequence of nonnegative integers.
If a = 0, we first shift to a distribution on [A, B], where A = max{a, 1} and B = b + (A − a). We define the
normalization constant
Z B+1
C=
x−p dx
A
(
1
((B + 1)1−p − A1−p ) , p 6= 1
= 1−p B+1
(4)
log( A ) , p = 1 .
To choose N , we select u ∈ [0, 1) from a uniform distribution and select x∗ such that C −1
calculate n∗ = bx∗ c. As an equation, this amounts to
(
((1 − p)uC + A1−p )1/(1−p) , p 6= 1
∗
x =
A exp(uC) , p = 1 .

R x∗
A

Finally, we shift back to set N = n∗ − (A − a).
Note that
(
Z n+1+(A−a)
p=1
log( n+1+(A−a)
n+(A−a) ) ,
Pr(N = n) ∝
x−p dx =
1−p
(n + 1 + (A − a))
− (n + (A − a))1−p ,
n+(A−a)

1
), p = 1
log(1 + n+(A−a)

1−p
=
1
 (n + (A − a))1−p 1 + N +(A−a)
− 1 , p 6= 1
= O(1/np ) ,

x−p dx = u. We then

(5)

p 6= 1

n → ∞,

thereby ensuring that asymptotically we have a power law as n → ∞.
B.2.2

Estimating the Mean

When B − A is large, it can be computationally expensive to compute the precise mean. When B − A large, it is also
the case that rounding errors and overflow errors can cause an estimation of the true mean to be inaccurate. Therefore,
we estimate the mean analytically. Given a, b, and p, we seek to estimate Ep := E(N ). We estimate the mean over the
interval [A, B].

31/35

Algorithm 6 Advancing One Day
1:
2:
3:
4:
5:
6:
7:
8:
9:
10:
11:
12:
13:
14:
15:
16:
17:
18:
19:
20:
21:
22:
23:
24:
25:
26:
27:
28:
29:
30:
31:
32:
33:
34:
35:
36:
37:

if Susceptible then
Calculate the hazard rate according to Algorithm 7.
Over ∆T = 1 day, move into the Asymptomatic compartment with probability 1 − exp(−σ∆T ).
else if Asymptomatic then
Sample Till from Exp(α).
Sample Tremoved from Exp(η).
if Till < Tremoved then
if Till < 1 day then
Move to Ill.
Inactivate weak contacts with probability b.
end if
else
if Tremoved < 1 day then
Move to Removed.
end if
end if
else if Ill then
Sample Thospital from Exp(µ).
Sample Tremoved from Exp(ρ).
if Thospital < Tremoved then
if Thospital < 1 day then
Move to Hospital.
Inactivate all weak and strong contacts.
end if
else
if Tremoved < 1 day then
Move to Removed.
Re-establish weak connections, unless the other contact has inactivated the connection.
end if
end if
else if Hospitalized then
Sample Tremoved from Exp(ζ).
if Tremoved < 1 day then
Move to Removed.
Re-establish weak and strong connections, unless the other contact has inactivated the connection.
end if
end if

32/35

Algorithm 7 Hazard Rate
1:
2:
3:
4:
5:
6:
7:
8:
9:
10:
11:
12:
13:
14:
15:
16:
17:
18:
19:
20:
21:
22:
23:
24:
25:
26:
27:
28:
29:
30:
31:
32:
33:
34:
35:
36:
37:
38:
39:
40:
41:
42:
43:
44:
45:
46:
47:
48:
49:
50:
51:
52:
53:

hazard = 0
if person is Susceptible then
for all weak in WeakContacts do
if weak is connected and contact is contagious then
if both wear mask then
hazard ← hazard + mww
else if one wears mask√then
hazard ← hazard + mww
else
hazard ← hazard + ww
end if
end if
end for
for all strong in StrongContacts do
if strong is connected and contact is contagious then
hazard ← hazard + ws
end if
end for
if person is disabled then
for all care in WeakCaregiversForTheDay do
if care is connected and contact is contagious then
if both wear mask then
hazard ← hazard + mwc
else if one wears mask√then
hazard ← hazard + mwc
else
hazard ← hazard + wc
end if
end if
end for
if strong caregiver is connected and contagious then
if both wear mask then
hazard ← hazard + mwc
else if one wears mask√then
hazard ← hazard + mwc
else
hazard ← hazard + wc
end if
end if
else if person is caregiver then
for all client in DisabledContactsForDay do
if client is connected and contagious then
if both wear mask then
hazard ← hazard + mwc
else if one wears mask√then
hazard ← hazard + mwc
else
hazard ← hazard + wc
end if
end if
end for
end if
end if

33/35

Algorithm 8 Closing Down (i.e., starting a lockdown)
1:
2:
3:
4:
5:
6:
7:
8:
9:
10:
11:
12:
13:
14:
15:

Update mask-wearing statuses.
for all person in Population do
Choose new target value for weak contacts according to Dgroup,post , where group is the group of the person.
end for
for all person in Population do
clear = max{0, current weak contacts − new target value}.
i=0
while i < clear do
Pick a weak contact $ uniformly at random.
if $ is not an essential worker and person is not either then
Erase the edge between the nodes.
end if
i←i+1
end while
end for

Algorithm 9 Opening Up
Update mask-wearing statuses.
for all person in Population do
Choose new target value for weak contacts according to Dgroup,pre , where group is the group of the person.
end for
for all person in Population do
Assign to them max{0, new target value − current weak contacts} stubs.
7: end for
8: Given the stubs, apply the weak contacts algorithm (see Algorithm 3).
1:
2:
3:
4:
5:
6:

We have that
B
X

Ep = C −1

n=A

Z

n+1

x−p dx

n
n

(
Pb
C −1 n=A n log((n + 1)/n) , p = 1
=
Pb
((1 − p)C)−1 n=A n((n + 1)1−p − n1−p ) , p 6= 1
( −1 Pb
C
+ 1)/n) , p = 1
n=A n log((n


PB+1
=
−1
((1 − p)C)
(B + 1)2−p − A2−p − n=A+1 n1−p ,

p 6= 1 .

PB
PB+1
To obtain the third equality, we rewrote n=A n(n + 1)1−p as n=A+1 (n − 1)n1−p , whose n2−p terms cancel with
PB
2−p
except at n = A and n = B + 1.
n=A n
For our approximation, we consider multiple cases.
p = 1:

B
Note that {n log( n+1
n )}n=A is an increasing sequence of terms. Therefore,


S 1 := A log

A+1
A



Z

B

+


x log

A

x+1
x


dx ≤

B
X
n=A


n log

n+1
n



Z

B+1

≤


x log

A

x+1
x


dx =: S 1 .

R
1
2
Because x log( x+1
x )dx = 2 (x log((x + 1)/x) + x − log(x + 1)) + const, we compute the integrals exactly and obtain
the estimate E1 = C −1 (S 1 + S 1 )/2.

34/35

Fig 12. (A) The estimated and numerically exact mean values for various values of p. The curves are
indistinguishable. (B) The estimation error. In the figure a = 0 and b = 100.
p = 2:

We need to estimate

PB+1

B+2



Z
S 2 :=

A+1

1
dx = log
x

We then estimate E2 = C −1
p∈
/ {1, 2}, p > 1:

n=A+1

n−1 . Because the sequence 1/n is decreasing,

B+2
A+1

1
2 (S 2

B+1
X


≤

n−1 ≤

n=A+1

1
+ log
A+1



B+1
A+1


=

1
+
A+1

Z

B+1

A+1

1
dx =: S 2 .
x


+ S 2 ) , where A2−p = (B + 1)2−p = 1 cancel each other.

We need to estimate

PB+1

n=A+1

n1−p , where the terms are decreasing. Therefore,

B+1
X
(B + 2)2−p − (A + 1)2−p
≤
n1−p
2−p
A+1
n=A+1
Z B+1
2−p
2−p
(B + 1)
− (A + 1)
= (A + 1)1−p +
≤ (A + 1)1−p +
x1−p dx =: S p> .
2−p
A+1

We then estimate Ep> = ((1 − p)C)−1 (B + 1)2−p − A2−p − 21 (S p> + S p> ) .

Z

B+2

S p> :=

p∈
/ {1, 2}, p < 1:

x1−p dx =

We need to estimate

S p< := (A + 1)1−p +

Z

PB+1

n=A+1

n1−p , where the terms are increasing. Therefore,

B+1

x1−p dx = (A + 1)1−p +

A+1

≤

(B + 2)

2−p

− (A + 1)
2−p

B+1
X
(B + 1)2−p − (A + 1)2−p
≤
n1−p
2−p
n=A+1

2−p

Z

B+2

=

x1−p dx =: S p< .

A+1


We then estimate Ep< = ((1 − p)C)−1 (B + 1)2−p − A2−p − 12 (S p< + S p< ) .
This approximation is very accurate. When a = 0 and b = 200, we plot the approximations and the numerically
exact values in Fig. 12.

35/35

