A Research Ecosystem for Secure Computing
A Computing Community Consortium (CCC) Quadrennial Paper
Nadya Bliss (Arizona State University), Lawrence A. Gordon (University of Maryland), Daniel Lopresti
(Lehigh University), Fred Schneider (Cornell University), and Suresh Venkatasubramanian (University of
Utah)
Computing devices are vital to all areas of modern life and permeate every aspect of our society. The
ubiquity of computing and our reliance on it has been accelerated and amplified by the COVID-19
pandemic. From education to work environments to healthcare to defense to entertainment – it is hard
to imagine a segment of modern life that is not touched by computing.
The security of computers, systems, and applications has been an active area of research in computer
science for decades. However, with the confluence of both the scale of interconnected systems and
increased adoption of artificial intelligence, there are many research challenges the community must
face so that our society can continue to benefit and risks are minimized, not multiplied. Those
challenges range from security and trust of the information ecosystem (the subject of a separate white
paper) to adversarial artificial intelligence and machine learning.
Along with basic research challenges, more often than not, securing a system happens after the design
or even deployment, meaning the security community is routinely playing catch-up and attempting to
patch vulnerabilities that could be exploited any minute. While security measures such as encryption
and authentication have been widely adopted, questions of security tend to be secondary to application
capability. There needs to be a sea-change in the way we approach this critically important aspect of the
problem: new incentives and education are at the core of this change.
As more devices become connected and join the Internet of Things, the importance of prioritizing
security ​alongside capability only increases. Now is the time ​to refocus research community efforts on
developing interconnected technologies with security “baked in by design” and creating an ecosystem
that ensures adoption of promising research developments.​
To realize this vision, two additional elements of the ecosystem are necessary – proper
​
incentive
structures for adoption and an
​ educated citizenry that is well versed in vulnerabilities and risks.​ The
research, design, and development incentive structures need to shift so that the first question asked
when designing a new piece of connected technology is not just ‘does
​
it work?’,​ but also ‘is
​ it secure?’.​

As outlined, this is a tightly coupled ecosystem that requires both focus and investment in each of these
goals and in interactions between them. Below, we outline some potential initiatives and topics in each
of the four focus areas: research,
​
​ transition
​
and adoption,​ ​incentives,​ ​education.​
(Computing) Research
Sustained investment in computing security research is vital for all security of diverse application
domains as well as economic security. As new technologies, such as artificial intelligence and quantum
computing, are developed, it is important to consider how both to leverage those technologies for
increased security and potential emergence of novel vulnerabilities when those new technologies are
deployed.
A few timely research topics include but are not limited to:
●

●

●

●

●

●

Artificial intelligence (AI) and security:​
○ Vulnerabilities of AI systems particularly in cyber-physical systems such as autonomous
vehicles;
○ Leverage of AI techniques in context of cyber defense;
Quantum computing and security:​
○ Advances in quantum computing have the potential to jeopardize the security of current
encryption systems, so sustained research in new quantum cryptographic approaches
and more generally the impact of quantum computing on what we think of as “security”
today are important;
Internet of Things (IoT) (a.k.a., cyber-physical systems) and next generation communication
systems:
○ Vulnerabilities, security, and resilience of IoT devices, which are rapidly proliferating,
require new approaches to security in constraint communication and/or processing
environments, including novel communication technologies such as 5G (the subject of a
separate white paper);
Hardware security:​
○ Computer architectures designed for security at the hardware layer and resilient to
recently deployed hardware attacks (Meltdown and Spectre);
Critical infrastructure security:​
○ Critical infrastructure such as electrical grids and other control systems remain highly
vulnerable and have different operational requirements;
Risk assessment of centralized architectures:​
○ As more of the economy moves to centralized cloud architectures, research in the areas
of risks of these single points of failure and associated mitigation are critical.

A number of these topics are already being invested in by agencies such as the Defense Advanced
Research Projects Agency (DARPA) and the National Science Foundation (NSF), however as investments
in AI and quantum computing research continue to scale it is vital to appropriately co-invest in emerging
security challenges associated with these new capabilities in parallel to avoid playing catch up after the

fact. While for the last few decades computer security research has been advancing alongside capability
research, we recommend creating consistent and ongoing touchpoints and co-design opportunities
specifically in the new technology areas (AI and quantum).
As computing touches more and more application and mission sectors, it is important to prioritize
research investments in computer security in sector specific agencies, such as increasing investments in
Department of Energy (specifically, around supervisory control and data acquisition (SCADA) systems
and electrical grid security), Department of Transportation (around autonomous systems and smart
infrastructure), and National Institutes of Health (around security of telehealth and cybersecurity of
biological research systems).
Transition and Adoption
Transition and adoption of new technology is a well-documented challenge. In the context of security,
however, the lack of transition of cyber security research has made us vulnerable as a nation. With the
accelerated adoption of computing capability, it is timely to consider examples of effective structures for
adoption. FFRDCs (Federally Funded Research and Development Centers) and UARCs (University
Affiliated Research Centers) are examples of organizational constructs that create environments to
de-risk cutting edge technology in context of mission specific applications (most commonly, defense
applications).
Given the way computing has permeated our society, it would be beneficial to consider both
persistent/longer term investments (leveraging existing UARC’s and FFRDC’s and/or creation of new
ones) and shorter term (accelerator-like) constructs that would de-risk and aid transition of cyber
security research for various sectors of the economy. These constructs could be specific to a technology
layer (for example, hardware security) or to an application domain (for example, healthcare).
Incentive Structures
As suggested earlier, as new efficiency in communication systems evolves and more and more domains
move online, new research is necessary in securing computer architectures, securing communication
networks, and mitigating and repairing vulnerabilities. This is an important area to continue focusing on,
working towards foundational advances.
Developing completely secure systems is not likely to ever be attainable – new technologies, new
applications, and new system paradigms create new attack surfaces that can be exploited. This is
inevitable. And it is difficult to design regulation and create incentives without being able to assess risk
effectively. How would a policy maker incentivize a secure system design, if there is no clear definition of
what that means?
Therefore, more focused efforts on measuring the security of interconnected systems will be of
significant benefit. A key challenge in building a secure system is that it is easier to assess capability than
it is to assess security – we can easily check if the system does the task it was designed to do or that it
does so within the computational and time constraints specified, while it is much harder, if not

impossible, to conduct an exhaustive assessment of all of the vulnerabilities of a system. This becomes
even more complex when that system must be assessed in the context of other, interacting systems.
A means to address this challenge could be through the creation of a large-scale interdisciplinary
research program to quantitatively study incentive structures for secure computing; security baked-in by
design. It is vital that this initiative be structured as a public/private partnership, as it would be
fundamentally impossible to cause change without buy-in from the private sector. A strong engagement
from the national security community here would also be highly beneficial because, in the mission
focused domain of national security, system capabilities and system vulnerabilities are typically
considered in concert.
Additionally, there would be significant benefits in creating a large-scale initiative to assess system
security and develop not just metrics (is it secure?), but also approaches to evaluate potential security
risks (if it is not secure, what are the costs of that?) that could be achieved through combinations of
technologies.
Determining the right amount to invest in cybersecurity is an important concern for all organizations. A
fundamental issue associated with this concern is that profit-oriented firms focus on the private costs
associated with cybersecurity breaches, but routinely ignore the externalities associated with the
breaches (i.e., the social costs of breaches are routinely not considered in cybersecurity investment
decisions by profit-oriented firms). It would be extremely beneficial for the federal government to fund
research that is directed toward developing economic incentives that ​help to align a firm's cybersecurity
investment decisions with the socially optimal cybersecurity investment decisions (i.e., the decisions
that take into account externalities, as well as the organization's private costs).
These initiatives should build upon existing standards developed by NIST and other institutions.
Assessment of metrics and incentives should be coupled to policy recommendations in an ongoing
fashion, as both technologies and policies evolve.
Education, Training, and Workforce
As computing is being used by broad segments of the population, investment in education with a focus
on a security mindset is critical. This is important not only in computer science degree programs, but
elsewhere throughout higher education and more broadly across the entire population. There has been
significant progress on increasing technical literacy in K-12 and broadening access to certificate and
college-level computer science curriculum. However, much of the education in risks and assessment of
threats and development of secure systems is still lacking. Increasing security risk elements in the K-12
curriculum, adding a focus on designing for security for computer science degrees (building on NSA/DHS
cybersecurity academic excellence certifications), and adding security and vulnerability components to
interdisciplinary computational curriculums should be the priorities.

Summary of Recommendations
As both the scale and complexity of computing systems in all aspects of our lives continue to grow, it is
vital to consider holistically what is necessary not just to manage existing risks, but to plan and mitigate
future ones. This prioritization of security is needed for research, transition, incentive, and education
initiatives. Attention should be paid not just to each domain individually, but to the interactions
between them.
●
●
●
●

Sustained investment in computer science research across both basic science and mission
focused agencies;
Creation of mission/sector focused accelerators to support transition of relevant cybersecurity
research into application and industry;
A multi-disciplinary effort and public/private partnership around metrics and incentives for
security with a goal of continuously producing policy recommendations;
Investment in lifelong learning and training to support a “security mindset” across the entire
population.

This white paper is part of a series of papers compiled every four years by the CCC Council and
members of the computing research community to inform policymakers, community members and
the public on important research opportunities in areas of national priority. The topics chosen
represent areas of pressing national need spanning various subdisciplines of the computing
research field. The white papers attempt to portray a comprehensive picture of the computing
research field detailing potential research directions, challenges and recommendations.
This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant
No. 1734706. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this
material are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science
Foundation.
For citation use: Bliss N., Gordon L., Lopresti D., Schneider F., & Venkatasubramanian S.
(2020) A Research Ecosystem for Secure Computing.
https://cra.org/ccc/resources/ccc-led-whitepapers/#2020-quadrennial-papers

