ASTROMOVES: Astrophysics, Diversity, Mobility
Jarita C. Holbrook
Science, Technology & Innovation Studies,
University of Edinburgh
United Kingdom
Jc.holbrook@ed.ac.uk
Submission 21 January 2021 to “Education and Heritage in the era of Big
Data in Astronomy” editors: R.M. Ros, B. Garcia, S. Gullberg, J. Moldon &
P. Rojo

Abstract
The US astronomy/astrophysics community comes together to create a
decadal report that summarizes grant funding priorities, observatory &
instrumental priorities as well as community accomplishments and
community goals such as increasing the number of women and the
number of people from underrepresented groups. In the 2010 US National
Academies Decadal Survey of Astronomy (National Research Council,
2010), it was suggested that having to move so frequently which is a
career necessity may be unattractive to people wanting to start a family,
especially impacting women. Whether in Europe or elsewhere, as
postdocs, astrophysicists will relocate every two to three years, until they
secure a permanent position or leave research altogether. Astrophysicists
do perceive working abroad as important and positive for their careers
(Parenti, 2002); however, it was found that the men at equal rank had
not had to spend as much time abroad to further their careers
(Fohlmeister & Helling, 2012). By implication, women need to work
abroad longer or have more positions abroad to achieve the same rank as
men. Astrophysicists living in the United Kingdom prefer to work in their
country of origin, but many did not do so because of worse working
conditions or difficultly finding a job for their spouse (Fohlmeister &
Helling, 2014). In sum, mobility and moving is necessary for a career in
astrophysics, and even more necessary for women, but astrophysicists
prefer not to move as frequently as needed to maintain a research career.
To gather more data on these issues and to broaden the discourse beyond
male/female to include the gender diverse as well as to include other
forms of diversity, I designed the ASTROMOVES project which is funded
through a Marie Curie Individual Fellowship. Though slowed down by
COVID-19, several interviews have been conducted and some preliminary
results will be presented.
Keywords: Cultural Astronomy, History And Philosophy Of Astronomy,
Sociology Of Astronomy, Social Studies Of Science, Qualitative Research

Introduction
The ASTROMOVES project is to study the career decision making of
astrophysicists and those in connected fields, the changes of positions in
terms of relocations and changes in job title while remaining in the same
place, and if and how these are related to intersectional identities.
‘Intersectional identities’ attempts to capture the many axes of difference
embodied by individual astrophysicists and is in reference to
‘intersectionality’ defined as:
The interconnected nature of social categorizations such as
race, class, and gender, regarded as creating overlapping
and interdependent systems of discrimination or
disadvantage (Oxford English Dictionary, n.d.)
When considering intersectional identities there is space to consider
nationality, mother tongue and disabilities/abilities along with race, class
and gender as mentioned in the definition. Astrophysicists have long been
tackling how to become more diverse in terms of including women and
members of underrepresented groups (Cowley et al., 1974). Most of the
social science studies of astrophysicists have focused on women; to
summarize the findings of a few of these studies women and men both
need to relocate multiple times for postdocs but the outcome, securing a
permanent position, is different for women and men. Every ten years,
there is an USA based exercise where the larger astrophysics community
comes together to assess the current state of the discipline and to lay out
the priorities for the coming decade; the resulting report is referred to as
the Decadal Survey. In the 2010 Decadal Survey (National Research
Council, 2010), it was suggested that having to move so frequently which
is a career necessity may be unattractive to people wanting to start a
family, especially impacting the careers of women. This suggestion is
supported in part by the American Physical Society’s Ivie & White (2015)
study which showed that women in physics & astronomy associate having
children with negatively impacting their career and slowing their rate of
promotion. Also supported in part by Fohlmeister & Helling (2012) study
which found that “Those who became mothers feel very restricted in
mobility and point out that it is harder to combine job and family.” In that
same study, the second most cited reason for moving was to be near
family. These findings point to conflicts between the need to relocate
often for career advancement and the needs of women to have stability
and external support to maintain a family and career. Men astrophysicists
face the same family issues but they rate the importance of these issues
to their careers as much lower than the women astrophysicists. Another
issue is where astrophysicists relocate to; in the European context; solar
astrophysicists perceived working abroad, that is working outside of their
home country, as important and positive for their careers (Parenti, 2002).

However, Fohlmeister & Helling (2014) found that the men at equal rank
had not had to spend as much time abroad to further their careers. By
implication, women need to work abroad longer or have more positions
abroad to achieve the same rank as men who have worked abroad.
Astrophysicists living in the United Kingdom prefer to work in their
country of origin, but many did not do so because of worse working
conditions or difficultly finding a job for their spouse (J. Fohlmeister &
Helling, 2014). Summarizing these research results for studies of women
in astrophysics and their careers, moving is necessary for a career in
astrophysics, and working abroad is even more necessary for women, but
there is some evidence that astrophysicists prefer not to move as
frequently as needed to maintain a research career. There are a few
studies of intersectionality and astrophysicists such as Ko et al. (2013),
which found that women of color in some cases prioritized life work
balance in general, including family life, over remaining in their chosen
field and revealed the positive role that activism plays, as well as
importance, in women of color’s lives even when doing activism is not
academically rewarded and not considered as part of advancement. This
and other studies considering intersectional identities in astrophysics are
not focused specifically on career moves.
ASTROMOVES’ focus on mobility and career decision making and its use
of qualitative interviews with astrophysicists provides a deep dive towards
surfacing previously unidentified factors as well as greater comprehension
of known factors important for navigating astrophysics careers. One of
the goals of ASTROMOVES is to leverage the research findings to make
recommendations to the astrophysics community for retaining and
promoting their diverse members. Though in its beginning stage, the
project has preliminary results that reveal decision making factors
previously not recorded, identified a new gender related outcome and has
expanded previous studies by including greater gender diversity.

Population
ASTROMOVES is a study of astrophysicists and scientists in adjacent fields
such as space scientists, planetary scientists, etc. Each person had to be
at least two career moves past their doctorate. Given that the project
was funded with European monies, each person had to have lived, worked
or studied in Europe at some point in their career. Targeted populations
include people that are ethnically and nationally underrepresented in
astrophysics, gender diverse people, people with physical disabilities, and
people with invisible disabilities or different abilities such as dyslexia or an
autoimmune disorder. Ethically, everyone who chooses to participate in
ASTROMOVES volunteers and they have a say in how their data is used as
well as how it appears in print.
The ASTROMOVES initial population of seven scientists was divided into
four males and three females, but their self-reported gender identities

include two bisexuals, one homosexual and one asexual, thus over half
are embodying gender diversity. Gender diverse astrophysicists were
identified using the Astronomy & Astrophysics Outlist (see https://astrooutlist.github.io (Mao & Blaes, n.d.)]. Among the seven scientists are
people of African descent, Indian descent, Middle Eastern descent, and
European descent. Snowball sampling was used, where people were
asked to recommend other people for ASTROMOVES interviews, and so
on.

Data Collection and Analysis
The primary method of data collection is interviews of between 30
minutes to 1.5 hours depending upon how many career moves the person
being interviewed has made. These qualitative interviews cover the
details of each career move and their decision making, as well as
including places they did not apply to and offers they did not accept. Each
interview was video recorded or voice recorded and transcribed. As a
social political statement reminding astrophysicists of their debt to
indigenous communities for allowing telescopes to exist on their sacred
mountaintops, each person is given a Hawaiian pseudonym which is used
across ASTROMOVES publications.
Publicly available documents are used to contextualize the interviews. To
get the sequence of career moves, publicly available CVs are primarily
used. When a CV is not available, the career sequence can be
approximated by noting the affiliations given for their scientific articles
found on the Astrophysical Data System archive
(https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/), which is publicly available, also. The
Astrophysics Rumour Mill (Anonymous, 2020) is another public source of
information about job offers that is fairly complete back to 2000. These
documents are used as prompts for the interviews.
Sensitive information related to intersectional identities was recorded or
not depending upon the desires of the interviewee. Such information was
written down and sent after the interview; interviewees had the option to
write down any additional information that they wanted to keep private
but that they thought was important for the analysis. In addition to
personal information about their intersectional identities, the
astrophysicists were hesitant to name departments with negative
reputations or bad reputations, such as those that treated women
postgraduate students badly by not supporting them or graduating them;
this information was written as private information.
Qualitative analysis software was used to analyse the contents of the
interviews. To anonymize information on specific institutions, their
Shanghai designations for physics, which includes astrophysics, were
used (Shanghai Ranking’s Global Ranking of Academic Subjects 2020 Physics | Shanghai Ranking - 2020, n.d.). Repeated themes, topics of

discussion, and experiences were compared across the set of interviews.
Given the small sample size of seven interviews all results presented in
the following section are preliminary.

Results and Discussion
"You know, it was a different environment than I was used
to. It was perhaps a little more (regional stereotype on
being more formal). [USA Top 50 location] is very laid
back. There it's very, it's very congenial. There's a lot of
interaction between faculty and students and postdocs, and
it's feels like more of a community. [USA Top 10 location] is
a little more hierarchical. And it was, you know, there was
the top people and then there was, you know, others. And,
yeah, I didn't, I felt like I didn't, there were some
people...You know, individually, I liked many of the people
there, but the overall atmosphere I felt was more sort of
competitive and not so friendly. And, so I, I wasn't that sad
to leave. You know. And I had visited the [2nd USA Top 50
location] and I knew that …some of the people there. So, I
knew I would have…like a nice community there."
The above except from one of the interviews is a true transcription of
what was said without correcting for filler words nor repetitions. When the
interviewee was asked about attaching their name to this quote, the
answer was only if it were grammatically corrected, thus it is presented
anonymously. As for the content, many of the astrophysicists spoke about
the academic environments that they preferred or didn’t. Only one person
stated that they enjoyed and thrived in competitive environments, most
indicated that they preferred less competitive environments similar to the
quote above.
“The end of my most recent research fellowship, then three
months of unemployment and it was pretty harrowing: I'VE
NEVER BEEN UNEMPLOYED BEFORE!”
All three of the females interviewed have been unemployed at some point
since earning their doctorate. Two of the three were recently unemployed
connected to COVID-19. During their period of unemployment, two had to
live on their own personal savings since they were not eligible for public
unemployment funds; the third was eligible for and used some public
unemployment assistance funds. In contrast, none of the four males
interviewed had been unemployed since their doctorate. The fact that
100% of the females had experienced unemployment indicates greater
job insecurity; in fact, one person felt strongly that if they had been male,
then the situation which lead to unemployment would not have happened.

If female astrophysicists do have higher job insecurity, then their
supervisors should consider securing additional funds to continue to
employ them until they obtain a new position. Two of the male
astrophysicists mentioned having positions made with them in mind, but
neither was on the verge of unemployment at the time, rather the
positions were made to attract them to a new institution.
Kamea: “I've actually got to [the] interview stage for a
couple of jobs and, and they were just unceremoniously
called off…months later they called me back and said, ‘We'd
like to resume the interview process with you.’”

Maka’ala: “I’m not happy about how this has affected my,
you know, my life and my ability to be with people that I
care about…in terms of my productivity, it has had no effect
or even a positive effect, because all the things like travel
and hanging out with friends or, you know, just whatever
that I would do, I don't have any more. So, I have fewer
distractions.”
The females’ experiences of unemployment cannot be disentangled from
the COVID-19 pandemic. To disentangle this, future interviews would
have to be done with more astrophysicists that were on the job market
during 2020 as well as interviews with other astrophysicists that
experienced unemployment prior to 2020. Checking the Astrophysics job
page in the fourth quarter of 2020 (Anonymous, 2020), of the 11 jobs
that mention COVID-19, 2 temporarily suspended their searches, 7
cancelled the job and 1 offer was rescinded. The quote by Kamea shows
how Kamea was part of the group of astrophysicists that were effected by
the astronomical job market’s fluctuations due to COVID-19.
Maka’ala is in a permanent position, so COVID-19 did not challenge their
job security; rather, Maka’ala speaks of the isolation brought about by the
pandemic. Most of the astrophysicists that lived alone were unhappy
about their isolation to the point that one, Hema, self-described as an
extrovert, regularly did meet people socially even thought it was against
the local government regulations.
Hema: “It's not so much about the number of persons, a
day that I need to speak [to]. It's more about the time of
day…I spend the entire day running around, because I have
a job. I’ve work to do. I have training in the evening after
work, which requires a lot of my energy - physical energy.
But if I come home at 7 pm. And I don't have a plan of
seeing someone that's what makes me feel really lonely…I

can talk to people at work all day. But if I'm home alone in
the evening with nothing to do. That's the hard part for me.
That's the vulnerable moment for me, it's sort of being
home alone in the evening with no one to talk to…”
Hema and another astrophysicist, Haoa, were both given permission to
work in their place of employment during COVID-19. Hema requested
permission; whereas Haoa didn’t have a choice because of Haoa’s
leadership role in an observatory related construction project.
The combination of teaching online and doing research was having a
negative impact on Maka’ala:
“there's just a lot to keep up with and I can't, you know, if
it's…if it's…if I'm working on a paper I can always say, ‘No,
I'm just going to stop at this point and take a break,’ but I
can’t…I feel like I've lost my agency in terms of setting my
schedule. Even if I, even if I might still be working long
hours in the summer when I was doing research versus
now when I'm teaching so…that's been a little bit mentally
tiring.”
It should be noted that a few articles have been published on how COVID19 is exacerbating the differences between the careers of women and
men in astrophysics, such as Inno et al. (2020) and Venkatesan et al.
(2020). Both articles point out the drop in publication submissions from
women during the pandemic will have the long term impact of women
being less competitive, because currently astrophysics competitiveness is
attached to publication rates. They advocate that the pandemic impact be
considered in future hiring decisions.
Contemplating unemployment and the females interviewed, financial
considerations have to be considered among the factors important for
career decision making in astrophysics. Postdocs and other fellowships
come with a fixed salary, which means everything is equal across the
sexes. However, in most cases for permanent positions, salaries are
negotiable as are what are called ‘start-up packages’, the onus is on the
new faculty member to ask for what they need to be successful. In their
study of women scientists that had taken a career break, which included
astronomers, Mavriplis et al. (2010) found that women were the least
confident about negotiating for their salary and start-up package. This
initial negotiation, which women are not confident about, may be the start
of building resentment and discontent if and when they discover that
others have negotiated for and gotten more both before and after they
were hired. Finances were discussed during the interviews and most said
that they did not make career decisions based on salary or cost of living.
However, some did note when they had taken a pay cut. One of the

women did provide information about negotiating for salary and start-up,
which is still being analysed. None of the females had purchased homes;
whereas three of the four males had purchased homes in the place where
they thought they would remain, even though they later may have
moved. If this same information is considered in terms of marital status,
two of the males that purchased homes were married; however, these
two were the only married people among the astrophysicists interviewed.

Conclusions
ASTROMOVES, though still in its beginning phase, has produced
interesting results that have to be tempered by the small number of
interviews completed. Nonetheless, the most troubling findings are
related to sex where the female astrophysicists had all experienced
unemployment post PhD. Generally, the astrophysicists did not consider
salary, cost of living or start-up package in their career decision making.
COVID-19 has changed the lives of astrophysicists; many of those
interviewed that were living alone spoke of their unhappiness connected
to loneliness, and two were impacted due to the fluctuating job market
due to COVID-19.
As ASTROMOVES continues, the interview pool will be increased to 50
scientists; an effort is being made to include those with physical
disabilities and invisible disabilities. Already, there is enough gender
diversity to have three gender categories for future analysis: cis-men, ciswomen and other gender; which will be the first time such categories are
possible in discussions of the mobility and career decision-making of
astrophysicists.

Acknowledgements
This research has made use of NASA’s Astrophysics Data System
Bibliographic Services. This project is funded by the European Union’s
Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under the Marie
Skłodowska-Curie individual fellowship program H2020-MSCA-IF-2019
grant #892944.

References Cited

Anonymous. (2020). AstroBetter | Rumor Mill Faculty-Staff 2019-2020.
AstroBetter. http://www.astrobetter.com/wiki/Rumor+Mill+FacultyStaff+2019-2020
Cowley, A., Humphreys, R., Lynds, B., & Rubin, V. (1974). Report to the
council of the AAS from the working group on the status of women
in astronomy-1973. Bulletin of the American Astronomical Society,
6, 412–423.
http://articles.adsabs.harvard.edu//full/1974BAAS....6..412C/00004
23.000.html

Fohlmeister, J., & Helling, C. (2012). Career situation of female
astronomers in Germany. Astronomische Nachrichten, 333(3), 280–
286. https://doi.org/10.1002/asna.201211656
Fohlmeister, J., & Helling, C. (2014). Careers in astronomy in Germany
and the UK. Astronomy & Geophysics, 55(2), 2.31-2.37.
https://doi.org/10.1093/astrogeo/atu080
Inno, L., Rotundi, A., & Piccialli, A. (2020). COVID-19 lockdown effects on
gender inequality. Nature Astronomy, 4(12), 1114–1114.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41550-020-01258-z
Ivie, R., & White, S. (2015). Is There a Land of Equality for Physicists?
Results from the Global Survey of Physicists. La Physique Au
Canada, 71(2), 69–73.
Ko, L. T., Kachchaf, R. R., Ong, M., & Hodari, A. K. (2013). Narratives of
the double bind: Intersectionality in life stories of women of color in
physics, astrophysics and astronomy. AIP Conference Proceedings,
1513(1), 222–225. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4789692
Mao, Y.-Y., & Blaes, O. (n.d.). Astronomy and Astrophysics Outlist.
Retrieved 19 January 2021, from https://astro-outlist.github.io
Mavriplis, C., Heller, R., Beil, C., Dam, K., Yassinskaya, N., Shaw, M., &
Sorensen, C. (2010). Mind the Gap: Women in STEM Career Breaks.
Journal of Technology Management & Innovation, 5(1), 140–151.
https://doi.org/10.4067/S0718-27242010000100011
National Research Council,. (2010). New Worlds, New Horizons in
Astronomy and Astrophysics. National Academies Press.
https://doi.org/10.17226/12951
Oxford English Dictionary. (n.d.). ‘intersectionality, n.’.
https://www.oed.com/view/Entry/429843?redirectedFrom=intersect
ionality&
Parenti, S. (2002). The European solar physics community: Outcome from
a questionnaire. Solar Variability: From Core to Outer Frontiers,
506, 985–990.
http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2002ESASP.506..985P
Shanghai Ranking’s Global Ranking of Academic Subjects 2020—Physics |
Shanghai Ranking—2020. (n.d.). Retrieved 19 January 2021, from
http://www.shanghairanking.com/shanghairanking-subjectrankings/physics.html
Venkatesan, A., Bertschinger, E., Norman, D., Tuttle, S., & Krafton, K.
(2020, July 17). The Fallout from COVID-19 on Astronomy’s Most
Vulnerable Groups. Women In Astronomy.
https://womeninastronomy.blogspot.com/2020/07/the-fallout-fromcovid-19-on-astronomys.html

