1

Joint Transmission Scheme and Coded Content
Placement in Cluster-centric UAV-aided Cellular
Networks

arXiv:2101.11787v1 [cs.IT] 28 Jan 2021

Zohreh HajiAkhondi-Meybodi, Student Member, IEEE, Arash Mohammadi, Senior Member, IEEE, Jamshid
Abouei, Senior Member, IEEE, Ming Hou, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—Recently, as a consequence of the COVID-19 pandemic, dependence on telecommunication for remote learning/working and telemedicine has significantly increased. In
this context, preserving high Quality of Service (QoS) and
maintaining low latency communication are of paramount importance. Development of an Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAV)aided heterogeneous cellular network is a promising solution to
satisfy the aforementioned requirements. Although an integrated
UAV-aided and cluster-centric cellular network can enhance
connectivity and provide improved QoS, there are key challenges
ahead for its efficient implementation. On the one hand, it is
challenging to optimally increase content diversity in caching
nodes to mitigate the network’s traffic over the backhaul. On the
other hand is the challenge of attenuated UAVs’ signal in indoor
environments, which increases users’ access delay and UAVs’
energy consumption. To address the aforementioned challenges,
we incorporate UAVs, as mobile caching nodes, together with
Femto Access points (FAPs) to increase the network’s coverage
in both indoor and outdoor environments. Referred to as the
Cluster-centric and Coded UAV-aided Femtocaching (CCUF)
framework, a two-phase clustering framework is proposed for
optimal FAPs’ formation and UAVs’ deployment. The proposed
CCUF implementation leads to an increase in the cache diversity, a reduction in the users’ access delay, especially in
indoor environments, and significant reduction in UAVs’ energy
consumption. To mitigate the inter-cell interference in edge areas,
the Coordinated Multi-Point (CoMP) approach is integrated
within the CCUF framework. In contrary to existing works,
we analytically compute the optimal number of FAPs in each
cluster to increase the cache-hit probability of coded content
placement. Furthermore, the optimal number of coded contents
to be stored in each caching node is computed to increase the
cache-hit-ratio, Signal-to-Interference-plus-Noise Ratio (SINR),
and cache diversity and decrease the users’ access delay and
cache redundancy for different content popularity profiles.
Index Terms—Cluster-centric, Coded Femtocaching, Coordinated Multi-Point (CoMP), Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs),
Users’ Access Delay.
Z. HajiAkhondi-Meybodi is with Electrical and Computer
Engineering (ECE), Concordia University, Montreal, Canada. (E-mail:
z hajiak@encs.concordia.ca). A. Mohammadi (corresponding author) is with
Concordia Institute of Information Systems Engineering (CIISE), Concordia
University, Montreal, Canada. (P: +1 (514) 848-2424 ext. 2712 F: +1
(514) 848-3171, E-mail: arash.mohammadi@concordia.ca). J. Abouei was
with the Department of Electrical, Computer and Biomedical Engineering,
Ryerson University, Toronto, ON M5B 2K3, Canada. He is now with the
Department of Electrical Engineering, Yazd University, Yazd 89195-741,
Iran (E-mail: abouei@yazd.ac.ir). M. Hou is with Defence Research and
Development Canada (DRDC), Ottawa, Toronto, ON, M2K 3C9, Canada.
(E-mail: ming.hou@drdc-rddc.gc.ca).
This Project was partially supported by the Department of National Defence’s Innovation for Defence Excellence and Security (IDEaS) program,
Canada.

I. I NTRODUCTION
As a consequence of the COVID-19 pandemic, dependence
on telemedicine and remote learning/working has significantly
increased due to the exponential rise in the demand for inhome care, remote working, schooling and remote reporting [1]. Within this context, to preserve real-time quality
and integrity of large-sized multimedia data and provide high
Quality of Service (QoS), it is of paramount importance to
develop advanced heterogeneous networking solutions [2]. In
this regard, caching has emerged as a promising solution
to maintain low latency communication and mitigate the
network’s traffic over the backhaul. This, in turn, improves
the QoS by storing the most popular multimedia contents close
to the end-users [3], [4]. Recently, Unmanned Aerial Vehicle
(UAV)-based caching has gained significant attention from
both industry and academia [5]–[8], due to its high mobility,
low cost and easy deployment characteristics. Although the
enhanced connectivity that comes by using UAVs will improve
the QoS in outdoor areas, there are key challenges ahead
in indoor environments due to attenuation of the received
signal [9]. To address this issue and in line with advancements
of 5G networks, the paper focuses on coupling UAVs as
aerial caching nodes with Femto Access Points (FAPs) [10],
equipped with storage. The ultimate goal is to increase the
caching network’s QoS and its coverage in a heterogeneous
environment (i.e., integrated indoor and outdoor settings).
Literature Review: There are several challenges in development of UAV-aided caching networks, including placement optimization [11], [12]; trajectory design [13], [14];
resource allocation [15], [16], and; energy consumption management [17], [18]. Existing works [11]–[22] mainly focus on
the deployment of UAVs in outdoor environments. There are
several benefits that come with utilization of UAVs as aerial
caching nodes such as high probability of establishing Lineof-Sight (LoS) links between UAVs and ground users. Such
benefits, however, result in several critical challenges especially in indoor environments due to signal attenuation [23].
This level of obfuscation in an integrated indoor and outdoor
environment can be settled by design of UAV-aided cellular
networks [24].
One of the main challenges in UAV-aided cellular networks
is to optimally assign caching nodes (UAVs or FAPs) to ground
users to efficiently serve their requests [25], [26]. There are
several QoS and Quality of Experience (QoE) metrics that

2

can be considered as the decision criteria for Access Point
(AP) selection, including users’ latency; traffic load and energy
consumption of APs; users’ link quality; handover rate, and;
Signal-to-Interference-plus-Noise Ratio (SINR). For instance,
Athukoralage et al. [25] considered an AP selection framework, where ground users are supported by UAV or WiFi APs.
In this work, the users’ link quality is utilized to balance the
load between UAVs and WiFi APs. Zhu et al. [26] proposed
a game theory-based AP selection scheme, where probability
of packet collision is used to select the optimal AP among all
possible UAVs and Base Stations (BSs). Considering the fact
that users’ mobility is one of the inherent features of current
ultra-dense wireless networks, movement characteristics, such
as speed of ground users, must be considered as a decision
criteria for connection scheduling. To date, limited research
has been performed on UAV-aided cellular networks to address
the aforementioned problem of connection scheduling between
FAPs and UAVs in a heterogeneous environment considering
the speed of users’ movement. The paper addresses this gap.
In UAV-aided cellular networks, the main objective is to
bring multimedia data closer to ground users and simultaneously improve users’ QoS and network’s QoE. If the requested
content can be found in the storage of one of the available
caching nodes, this request would be served directly and
cache-hit occurs; otherwise, it is known as a cache-miss. Due
to the large size of multimedia contents, however, it is not
feasible to store all contents in the storage of caching nodes.
To overcome this problem, coded caching strategies, such as
Linear Random Fountain Code (LRFC) [27], and Maximum
Distance Separable (MDS) [28] coding schemes have received
remarkable attention lately. In such coded caching strategies,
only specific segments of the most popular multimedia contents are stored in the caching nodes. Storing coded popular
contents increases the overall content diversity. In coded femtocaching frameworks, however, most early works such as Reference [29] consider homogeneous networks, where the same
segments of the most popular multimedia contents are stored
in different caching nodes. To overcome this issue, the main
focus of recent researchers has been shifted to heterogeneous
networks with an emphasis on the mobility of ground users
and overlapped caching nodes [30]. Toward this goal, Chen et
al. [31] proposed a cluster-centric small cell network, where
popular contents are classified into two different categories,
i.e., the Most Popular Contents (MPCs), and the Large Popular
Contents (LPCs). While MPCs are completely stored in the
storage of all Small Base Stations (SBSs), distinct segments
of LPCs are cached in different SBSs.
Cluster-centric cellular networks provide several benefits,
such as increased content/cache diversity, which in turn leads
to remarkable growth in the number of requests managed
by the caching nodes. However, this comes with the cost
of experiencing inter-cell interference especially for cell-edge
users. To tackle this issue, Chen et al. [31] employed the
Coordinated Multi-Point (CoMP) approach to mitigate the
inter-cell interference and improve the throughput of ground
users located in the cell-edges. Reference [31] developed
two transmission schemes, namely Joint Transmission (JT)
and Parallel Transmission (PT), which are selected based on

the popularity of the requested content. Alternatively, Lin et
al. [32] proposed a cluster-centric cellular network applying
the CoMP technique based on the users’ location, where cellcore and cell-edge users are served through Single Transmission (ST) and JT, respectively. Despite all the researches on
the cluster-centric cellular networks, there is no framework to
determine how different segments can be cached to increase
the data availability in a UAV-aided cluster-centric cellular
network integrated by the CoMP technology. The paper also
addresses this gap.
Contribution: In this paper, we consider an integrated UAVaided and cluster-centric cellular network to serve ground
users positioned in both indoor and outdoor environments. Our
first objective is to increase the content diversity that can be
accessed via the caching nodes. The second goal is to assign
ground users the best caching nodes to improve the achievable
QoS in terms of the users’ access delay and decrease the
energy consumption of UAVs. To achieve the above-mentioned
objectives, the paper proposes a novel Cluster-centric and
Coded UAV-aided Femtocaching (CCUF) framework, in which
the caching node and the transmission scheme are jointly determined based on the movement features of ground users and
the CoMP technology. Moreover, to increase content diversity,
an analytical solution is derived to allocate distinct segments
of the multimedia contents in different neighboring FAPs. In
summary, the paper makes the following key contributions:
•

•

•

Indoor penetration loss and deep shadow fading caused by
building walls significantly attenuate the UAV’s signals
in indoor environments degradation the network’s QoS.
To tackle this issue, we consider two different indoor and
outdoor caching service scenarios for the proposed CCUF
framework. More precisely, the indoor area is covered by
FAPs, equipped with extra storage. The outdoor, however,
is supported by coupled UAVs and FAPs depending on
the movement speed of ground users.
Due to the limited storage of caching nodes, the most
popular multimedia contents are determined based on
the solution of a formulated optimization problem. Consequently, multimedia contents are fragmented into the
same size segments based on the Fountain codes.
With the focus on a dynamic UAV-based femtocaching
network, storing distinct contents in neighboring FAPs
increases the resource availability. In contrary to existing
coded caching approaches [31], [32] that lack utilization
of placement strategies to allocate segments of video
contents to different caching nodes, the proposed CCUF
scheme determines a solution to store different segments
of contents in neighboring FAPs. Toward this goal,
we consider a cluster-centric cellular network, where
multimedia contents are classified into three categories,
including popular, mediocre, and non-popular contents.
While the popular contents are stored completely, distinct
segments of mediocre ones are determined according to
the proposed framework to be stored in the storage of
neighboring FAPs. In this paper, we determine the best
number of coded and uncoded contents in each caching
node to increase the cache-hit-ratio, SINR, and cache

3

diversity while decreasing users’ access delay and cache
redundancy for different content popularity profiles.
• To simulate a real wireless network, we consider mobile ground users, where the Angle of Arrival (AoA)
localization technique is utilized to estimate the initial
location of ground users. Then, the mobility pattern is
presented by the Difference Correlated Random Walk
(DCRW) model. To access a large amount of contents
during movement of ground users, two scenarios are
proposed: (i) The whole network is partitioned into subnetworks called inter-clusters. All FAPs in the same intercluster save different parts of mediocre contents, while
the cached contents of different inter-clusters are the
same. In this case, it can be shown that ground users
can acquire more segments during their movements, and;
(ii) To increase the resource availability, the outdoor
environment is partitioned into intra-clusters via a Kmeans clustering algorithm, each covered by a UAV.
• To mitigate the inter-cell interference in inter-clusters and
provide more efficient service for edge users, the CoMP
technique is utilized, including ST and JT schemes. Note
that the transmission type depends on both the popularity
of contents and the position of the ground user in the cell.
The effectiveness of the proposed CCUF framework is evaluated through simulation studies in both indoor and outdoor
environments in terms of cache-hit-ratio, users’ access delay,
SINR, cache diversity, cache redundancy, and energy consumption of UAVs. According to the simulation results, we
investigate the best number of coded contents in each caching
node to increase the cache-hit-ratio, SINR, and cache diversity
and decrease users’ access delay and cache redundancy for
different content popularity profiles. Moreover, we investigate
the effects of the UAV-aided femtocaching network on the
users’ access delay and energy consumption of UAVs in both
indoor and outdoor environments.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: In
Section II, the network’s model is described and the main
assumptions required for the implementation of the proposed
framework are introduced. Section III presents the proposed
CCUF scheme. Simulation results are presented in Section IV.
Finally, Section V concludes the paper.
II. S YSTEM M ODEL AND P ROBLEM D ESCRIPTION
We consider a UAV-aided cellular network in a residential
area that supports both indoor and outdoor environments.
There exist Nf number of FAPs, denoted by fi , for (1 ≤
i ≤ Nf ), each with the cache size of Cf and transmission
range of Rf . There are also Nu number of UAVs, denoted
by uk , for (1 ≤ k ≤ Nu ), with equal transmission range of
Ru . The transmission range of each FAP is significantly less
than that of a UAV. As it can be seen from Fig. 1, Ns < Nf
number of FAPs in a neighborhood form a cluster, referred
to as the inter-cluster. Similarly, Nic number of FAPs in the
outdoor environment form an intra-cluster covered by a UAV.
There are Ng number of ground users, denoted by GUj , for
(1 ≤ j ≤ Ng ), that move through the network with different
velocities. υj (t) denotes the speed of the ground user GUj at

Fig. 1: A typical structure of the proposed UAV-aided cellular network.
time slot t. In this work, FAP fi , for (1 ≤ i ≤ Nf ), operates in
an open access mode, i.e., it can serve any ground user GUj ,
for (1 ≤ j ≤ Ng ), located in its transmission range. The FAPs
within each inter-cluster use the CoMP transmission approach
(supporting ST and JT schemes) to mitigate the inter-cell
interference in edge areas and manage ground users’ requests.
To completely download a requested content, a finite time T is
required. For ease of exposition, the time T is discretized into
Ns time slots with time interval δt , i.e., T = Ns δt . In what
follows, we present users’ mobility pattern, the content popularity profile, and transmission schemes utilized to develop
the proposed CCUF.
A. Users’ Mobility Pattern
In the proposed CCUF framework, estimated location of
GUs is required to determine the transmission scheme and
select an appropriate caching node to manage the request.
Capitalizing on the reliability and efficiency of the AoA
localization technique [33], [34], it is utilized to identify the
initial location of GUs as follows
xj (0) =
yj (0) =

dn,i tan θi,j
,
tan θi,j − tan θn,j

(1)

dn,i tan θn,j tan θi,j
,
tan θi,j − tan θn,j

(2)

where lj (0) = [xj (0), yj (0)]T is the location of ground user
GUj at time t = 0. In addition, dn,i indicates the distance
between the ith and the nth FAPs, assuming the positions of
FAPs are known. Moreover, the angle between the line from
the location of the ground user GUj to FAP fi and X-axis is
denoted by θi,j [34].
Given the initial location of ground users, we use the
Difference Correlated Random Walk (DCRW) [35] to model

4

Fig. 2: Zipf distribution.
their movement patterns. In this regard, the location of GUj
at time slot t, denoted by lj (t), is given by
lj (t) = lj (t − 1) + υj (t − 1)∆t,

(3)

where ∆t is the time interval between two consecutive esti(x)
(y)
mated locations, and υj (t) = [υj (t), υj (t)]T denotes the
user’s velocity, obtained as follows [35]


− log ς1
θ
dυj (t) = −
(υj (t) − µ)dt + J dbt ,
−θ
− log ς2
(4)
where ς1 and ς2 denote auto-correlation parameters in X-axis
and Y -axis, respectively. Terms θ and µ represent the mean
turning angle and the mean velocity vector, respectively. Term
J represents the velocity shifts covariance, which is a (2 ×
2) lower triangular matrix with positive diagonal components.
Finally, bt , which is a (2 × 1) vector, determines the standard
Brownian motion at time slot t.
B. Content Popularity Profile
When the ground user GUj requests content cl from a
library of C = {c1 , . . . , cNc }, in which Nc is the cardinality of
multimedia data in the network, this request should be handled
by one of the nearest FAPs or UAVs having some segments
of cl . Regarding the user’s behavior pattern in multimedia services, the popularity of video contents is determined based on
the Zipf distribution [36], where the probability of requesting
lth file, denoted by pl , is calculated as
pl =

l−γ
,
Nc
P
r−γ

(5)

r=1

where γ represents the skewness of the file popularity. In the
proposed CCUF framework, each content cl is fragmented into
Ns encoded segments, denoted by cls , for (1 ≤ s ≤ Ns ),
which is the same as the number of FAPs in each inter-cluster.
The ground user GUj can download one segment in δt , which
is equivalent to 1/Ns of a multimedia content. In other words,
in each contact, user GUj will leave the transmission area of
the current FAP. For notational convenience, we assume that

P [n] ≡ P (nδt ) denotes the probability of accessing a new
segment in time slot n, with n ∈ {0, . . . , Ns }.
Without loss of generality and to be practical, we investigate
the probability distribution of a real multimedia data set, i.e.,
the YouTube videos trending statistics, shown in Fig. 2. As it
can be seen from Fig. 2, the probability distribution follows
Zipf, i.e., a small part of the contents are requested with a
high probability. The majority of contents are not popular,
and some contents, are requested moderately. Consequently,
in our cluster-centric UAV-aided cellular network, we classify
multimedia contents into three categories, including popular,
mediocre, and non-popular [31]. To improve content diversity,
the storage capacity of FAPs, denoted by Cf , is divided into
two spaces, where α portion of the storage is allocated to
store complete popular contents, i.e., 1 ≤ l ≤ bαCf c, where
l = 1 indicates the most popular content. Additionally, (1−α)
portion of the cache is assigned to store different parts of the
mediocre contents, where bαCf c + 1 ≤ l ≤ Ns (Cf − bαCf c).
The optimal value of α is obtained experimentally. The proposed model for identifying different segments to be cached
in neighboring FAPs will be discussed later on in Section III.
C. Transmission Scheme
In this subsection, we will describe both the connection
scheduling (serving by FAPs or UAVs) and the transmission
scheme depending on the presence of the ground user in indoor
or outdoor environments.
1) Indoor Environment: The transmitted signal by UAVs,
propagating in residential areas, becomes weaker due to the
penetration loss and shadow fading effects. Therefore, it is
assumed that ground users positioned in indoor areas are only
supported by FAPs. In the CoMP-integrated and cluster-centric
cellular network and as it can be seen from Fig. 1, there are two
regions in each inter-cluster, named cell-edge and cell-core,
which are determined based on the SINR value to illustrate
the quality of a wireless link. In such a case that the ground
user GUj is positioned in the vicinity of the FAP fi , the SINR
from fi to GUj , denoted by Si,j , is obtained as follows
Si,j (t) =

Pi |H̃i,j (t)|2
,
If−i (t) + N0

(6)

where Pi denotes the transmitted signal power of FAP fi .
If−i (t) and N0 represent the interference from other FAPground users, except for the corresponding fi link, and the
noise power related to the additive white Gaussian random
variable, respectively. Moreover, the path loss and fading
channel effect between FAP fi and ground user GUj at time
hi,j (t)
. In this case, hi,j (t)
slot t is denoted by H̃i,j (t) = p
Li,j (t)
denotes a complex zero-mean Gaussian random variable with
unit standard deviation and Li,j (t) represents the path loss
between FAP fi and ground user GUj at time slot t, obtained
as follows

Li,j (t) = L0 + 10η log di,j (t) + χσ ,
(7)
where η is the path loss exponent. Term χσ indicates the shadowing effect, which is a zero-mean Gaussian-distributed random variable with standard deviation σ. Additionally, dk,j (t)

5

represents the Euclidean distance between FAP fi 
and ground

4πfc d0
user GUj at time slot t. Furthermore, L0 = 20 log
c
is the path loss related to the reference distance d0 where
fc and c = 3 × 108 denote the carrier frequency and the
light speed, respectively. Accordingly, the ground user GUj is
located at the cell-core of FAP fi , if Si,j (t) > Sth ; otherwise,
GUj is located at the cell-edge, where Sth is the SINR
threshold.
The transmission scheme in the proposed CoMP-integrated
and cluster-centric cellular network is determined based on two
metrics; (i) The popularity of the requested content, described
in Subsection II-B, and; (ii) The location of the ground user
in the cell, i.e., cell-core or cell-edge. The following two
different transmission schemes are utilized for development
of the proposed CCUF framework:
• Single Transmission (ST): In this case, the requested
file cl , for (1 ≤ l ≤ bαCf c), is popular content, and the
ground user GUj is located at the cell-core of FAP fi ,
i.e., Si,j (t) > Sth . It means that the content is completely
cached into the storage of FAP fi and the high-quality
link can be established between FAP fi and ground user
GUj . Consequently, this request is served only by the
corresponding FAP fi . Moreover, if the requested content,
belongs to the mediocre category, i.e., bαCf c + 1 ≤ l ≤
Ns (Cf −bαCf c), regardless of the location of the ground
user, this request served according to the ST scheme.
• Joint Transmission (JT): In this transmission scheme,
the requested file cl is popular content, i.e., 1 ≤ l ≤
bαCf c. Consequently, all FAPs have the same complete
file. The ground user GUj , however, is located at the
cell-edge of FAP fi , i.e., Si,j (t) ≤ Sth . Therefore, the
link quality between FAP fi and the ground user GUj is
not good enough. In order to improve the reliability of
content delivery, the corresponding content will be jointly
transmitted by several FAPs in its inter-cluster. As it can
be seen from Fig. 1, neighboring FAPs in an inter-cluster
collaboratively serve cell-edge ground users based on the
JT scheme, which is shown by the red color.
2) Outdoor Environment: The wide transmission range
of UAVs and the high probability of establishing LoS link
provide several advantages, including the ability to manage the
majority of ground users’ requests, which leads to improved
coverage in outdoor environments. Due to the limited battery
life of UAVs, however, requests that are handled by UAVs
should be controlled. For this reason, we consider a UAV-aided
femtocaching network in the outdoor environment. Note that
we also need to reduce the number of handovers, which can
be frequently triggered by FAPs, if the ground user moves and
leaves the current position rapidly. Toward this goal, ground
users are classified based on their velocity into the following
two groups:
• Low Speed Users (LSUs): If the speed of ground user
GUj , denoted by υj (t), is less than a predefined threshold
υth , this user can be managed by inter-clusters. Similar
to the indoor environments, the transmission scheme is
determined based on the content popularity profile and
the ground user’s location.

High Speed Users (HSUs): In this case, the speed of
ground user GUj is equal or more than υth . Therefore,
this request should be served by a UAV that covers the
corresponding intra-cluster.
This completes our discussion on users’ mobility pattern, the
content popularity profile, and transmission schemes. Next, we
develop the CCUF framework.
•

III. T HE CCUF F RAMEWORK
In conventional femtocaching schemes, it is commonly
assumed that all caching nodes store the same most popular
contents. This assumption is acceptable in static femtocaching
models, in which users are stationary or move with a low
velocity. With the focus on a dynamic femtocaching network,
in which users can move based on the random walk model,
storing distinct contents in neighboring FAPs leads to increasing the number of requests served by caching nodes. Despite
recent researches on cluster-centric cellular networks, there
is no framework to determine how different segments should
be stored to increase content diversity. Toward this goal, we
propose the CCUF framework, which is an efficient content
placement strategy for the network model introduced in Section II. The most remarkable idea behind the CCUF strategy
is to identify the most widely requested contents to maximize
the cache-hit-ratio and minimize the users’ access delay. Given
the common content, an inter-cluster is formed by Ns number
of adjacent FAPs, in which distinct segments of coded content
are stored in the FAP’s cache. Consequently, the number of
requests served by caching nodes drastically increases without
any growth of the storage of FAPs. Additionally, Nic number
of near FAPs as an intra-cluster is managed by one UAV to
provide low-latency communication for outdoor ground users.
The proposed CCUF framework is implemented based on the
steps presented in the following subsections.
A. Optimal Content Caching for FAPs and UAVs
Identifying the optimal multimedia contents to be stored
in the storage of caching nodes leads to a reduction in the
users’ latency. It is a commonly assumed [3], [29] that the
total users’ access delay is determined according to availability
of the required content in the nearby caching nodes. Based
on this assumption, in scenarios where the requested content
can be served by caching nodes, the cache-hit occurs and the
ground user will experience no delay; otherwise, the request
is served by the main server resulting in a cache-miss. In this
paper, we relax the above assumption and express the users’
access delay as a function of the content popularity profile and
the distance between the ground user and the target caching
node. In the regard, we propose two optimization models for
content placement in both FAPs and UAVs to minimize the
users’ latency. Toward this goal, first we describe the delay
that ground users experience when served by FAPs and UAVs.
1) UAVs’ Content Placement: In order to calculate the
users’ access delay through UAVs, first, we investigate the
effect of distance between ground user GUj and target UAV
uk . Serving requests via UAVs leads to establishing air-toground links from UAVs to ground users. Due to the obstacles

6

in outdoor environments, the transmitted signal from UAVs is
attenuated. To be practical, we consider both LoS and NonLoS (NLoS) path losses from UAV uk to ground user GUj at
time slot t as follows [5]
(LoS)

Lk,j

(t) = L0 + 10η (LoS) log(dk,j (t)) + χ(LoS)
,
σ

(N LoS)
Lk,j
(t)

(N LoS)

(8)

LoS)
χ(N
, (9)
σ

= L0 + 10η
log(dk,j (t)) +


4πfc d0
where L0 = 20 log
denotes the reference path
c
loss in distance d0 , and dk,j (t) is the Euclidean distance
between UAV uk and the ground user GUj at time slot t.
(LoS)
(N LoS)
In addition, η (LoS) , η (N LoS) , χσ
and χσ
indicate
the LoS and NLoS path loss exponents and the corresponding
shadowing effects, respectively. Consequently, the average
path loss, denoted by Lk,j (t), is obtained as
(LoS)

Lk,j (t) = pk,j

(LoS)

(t)Lk,j

(LoS)

(t) + (1 − pk,j

(N LoS)

(t))Lk,j

(t),
(10)
(LoS)
where pk,j (t) is the probability of establishing LoS link
between UAV uk and ground user GUj at time slot t, obtained
as [15]
(LoS)

pk,j

−1

(t) = (1 + ϑ exp (−ζ[φk,j (t) − ϑ]))

,

(11)

where ϑ and ζ are constant parameters, depending

 on the
hk
−1
rural and urban areas. Moreover, φk,j (t) = sin
dk,j (t)
is the elevation angle between UAV uk and the ground user
GUj , and hk is the UAV’s altitude. Without loss of generality,
altitude hk is assumed to be a fixed value over hovering
time. If the requested content cannot be found in the storage
of UAVs, additional ground-to-air connection is required to
provide UAVs with the requested content through the main
server. Similarly, the average path loss of the main server-toUAV uk link is calculated as
(LoS)

(LoS)

(LoS)

(h)

(m)

where Du (t) and Du (t) represent the cache-hit and the
cache-miss delays, respectively, calculated as follows
!
Pk 10Lk,j (t)/10
Lc
−1
(h)
= Lc log
1+
(,16)
Du (t) =
Rk,j
Ik (t, u−k ) + N0
!
Pk 10Lm,k (t)/10
−1
(m)
Du (t) = Lc log
1+
+
Ik (t, u−k ) + N0
{z
}
|
,LMU

Lc log

−1

|

where Lc and Rk,j represent the file size of cl and the
transmission data rate from UAV uk to GUj . Furthermore,
Pk and Ik (t, u−k ) denote the transmission power of UAV
uk and the interference caused by other UAV-user links for
the transmission link between uk and GUj , respectively. Note
that when the cache-miss happens, the content should be first
provided for the UAV by the main server. Therefore, LM U and
LU G in Eq. (17) represent the users’ access delay related to
the main server-UAV and UAV-ground user links, respectively.
Given users’ access delay through UAVs, the goal is to place
contents in the storage of UAVs to minimize the users’ access
delay in Eq. (15). Due to the large coverage area of UAVs, it
is not feasible to move through areas supported by different
UAVs frequently. Therefore, we assume that contents are
cached completely (either popular or mediocre ones). Toward
this goal, the cached contents are selected as the solution of the
following optimization problem to minimize the users’ access
delay:
min
xl

Ng
Nc  X
X
l=1

=

1 − p(h)
u (t),

(14)

where Cu denotes the cache size of UAV uk , which is assumed
to be the same for all UAVs. Consequently, the users’ access
delay through UAVs is expressed as
(h)
(m)
(m)
Du (t) = p(h)
u (t)Du (t) + pu (t)Du (t),

(15)



(j)
1 − pl (t) Du(j) (t) xl

(18)

j=1

s.t. C1. xl ∈ {0, 1},
Nc
X
xl ≤ Cu ,
C2.

(N LoS)

l∈Cu

p(m)
u (t)

(17)

,LUG

Lm,k (t) = pm,k (t)Lm,k (t) + (1 − pm,k (t))Lm,k

(t),
(12)
(LoS)
(N LoS)
(LoS)
where Lm,k (t) = d−$
(t) = ψLm,k (t), in
m,k (t) and Lm,k
which dm,k (t) denotes the distance between the main server
and UAV uk . Furthermore, $ and ψ denote the LoS and NLoS
path loss exponents, respectively [5].
As mentioned previously, another parameter that has a
great impact on the users’ access delay is the presence of
the requested content in the caching node, depending on
the content popularity profile. Therefore, the cache-hit and
the cache-miss probability through serving by UAV uk at
(h)
(m)
time slot t, denoted by pu (t) and pu (t), respectively, are
expressed as
X
pu(h) (t) =
pl (t) ≤ 1,
(13)

!
Pk 10Lk,j (t)/10
1+
,
Ik (t, u−k ) + N0
{z
}

l=1
(j)
pl (t)

where
denotes the probability of requesting content cl
by the ground user GUj at time slot t, which is obtained according to the request history of ground users [3]. Furthermore,
(j)
Du (t) is the delay that the ground user GUj may experience,
which is calculated based on Eq. (15). In the constraint C1,
xl is an indicator variable, which is equal to 1 when content
cl exists in the cache of UAV uk . Moreover, the constraint C2
represents that the total contents cached in the storage of uk
should not exceed the storage capacity of UAV uk .
2) FAPs’ Content Placement: Serving requests by FAPs
leads to a ground-to-ground connection type between FAPs
and ground users. Similarly, the users’ access delay through
FAP connections is calculated as
(h)

(h)

(m)

(m)

Df (t) = pk (t)Df (t) + pk (t)Df

(t),

(19)

(h)

where Df (t), as the cache-hit delay, is expressed as
(h)

Df (t) = Lc log−1 (1 + Si,j (t)) ,

(20)

7

to indicate which segment of the mediocre content cl , denoted
by cls for (1 ≤ l ≤ Na ) and (1 ≤ s ≤ Ns ), should be cached
in FAP fi for (1 ≤ i ≤ Ns ). In this regard, we form an
Na × Ns indicator matrix of FAP fi , denoted by Zfi . Note
that the lth row of Zfi indicates segments of file cl is stored
in the cache of FAP fi , where zls = 1 means that sth segment
of file cl is stored in the cache of FAP fi . Consequently, the
cached contents of other FAPs in an inter-cluster is determined
as follows
zfi ,l zfTj ,l = 0,
Fig. 3: (a) A typical hexagonal cellular network, where seven FAPs form
an inter-cluster, (b) Real coverage area of FAPs in a practical model.

with Si,j (t) denoting the SINR from fi to GUj defined in
Eq. (6). The optimal coded contents to be stored in the storage
of FAPs are determined according to the solution of the
following optimization problem:
F(y, z) = min

bαCf c  Ng

X

X

l=1

j=1

yl ,zl

+
s.t.

 (j) 
(j)
1 − pl (t) Df (t) yl (21)

Ns (Cf −bαCf c)  Ng

X

X

l=bαCf c+1

j=1

 (j) 
(j)
1 − pl (t) Df (t) zl ,

C1. yl , zl ∈ {0, 1},
bαCf c

C2.

X

yl ≤ αCf ,

l=1
Ns Cf −(1+Ns )bαCf c)

C3.

X

zl ≤ (1 − α)Ns Cf ,

l=1

where F(y, z) is the cost function associated with users’
access delay, experienced by serving the request through FAPs.
By assuming that Np = bαCf c and Na = Ns (Cf − bαCf c)
are the cardinality of popular and mediocre contents, respectively, y = [y1 , . . . , yNp ]T is an indicator vector for
popular contents, where yl would be 1 if lth content is stored
in the cache of FAPs, otherwise it equals to 0. Similarly,
z = [z1 , . . . , zNa ]T is an indicator variable for mediocre
contents. According to the optimization problem, despite popular contents that are stored completely, just one segment of
mediocre contents are cached. Similarly, yl and zl in constraint
C1 illustrate the availability of content cl in the cache of FAP
fi . Finally, constraints C2 and C3 indicate the portion of cache
allocated to popular and mediocre contents, respectively.
B. Content Placement in Multiple Inter-Clusters
After identifying popular and mediocre contents, we need
to determine how to store different segments of mediocre
contents within an inter-cluster. Lack of prior research studies
on the coded content placement in a cluster-centric cellular
network (e.g., [30], [31]) motivates us to propose the CCUF
framework. Without loss of generality, we first consider a simple hexagonal cellular network including Ns = 7 FAPs as one
inter-cluster (Fig. 3(a)). Given the vector z = [z1 , . . . , zNa ]T
that determines the mediocre contents, in this phase, we need

i = 1, . . . , Ns , j = 1, . . . , Ns , i 6= j, (22)

where zfi ,l denotes the lth row of Zfi . After allocating
mediocre contents to FAPs inside an inter-cluster, the same
content as FAP fi is stored in FAP fk in the neighboring
inter-cluster, where k is given by
Zfk = Zfi

if

k = w2 + wz + z 2 ,

(23)

where w and z represent the number of FAPs required to reach
another FAP storing similar contents, in two different directions. For example, in Fig. 3(a) Ns = 7, w = 2, and z = 1 for
starting in a FAP including c15 and reaching the similar FAP
in a neighboring inter-cluster. The main idea behind the coded
placement scheme in our proposed CCUF framework comes
from the frequency reusing technique in cellular networks [37].
In order to increase the resource availability and minimum
inter-cell interference, the same radio frequencies are used in
different cells, where the distance between two cells with the
same spectrum bandwidth is determined based on Eq. (23).
Remark 1: As shown in Fig. 3(b), the coverage area of FAPs
in a practical scenario is influenced by path loss and shadowing
models. Location p = (x, y) is placed within the transmission
area of FAP fi , if the strength of the received signal at point p,
denoted by RSSIp , is higher than the threshold value RSSIth ,
where RSSIp is calculated as
RSSIp (dB) = RSSI(d0 ) + 10η log10 (

d
) + Xσ ,
d0

(24)

where d and d0 denote the distance between FAP and point p
in the boundary of transmission area of FAP, and the reference
distance is set to 1 m, respectively. Moreover, η represents the
path loss exponent, which is 10 dB or 20 dB, and Xσ is a
zero-mean Gaussian with standard deviation σ that represents
the effect of multi-path fading in our UAV-based femtocaching
scheme [38].
C. Cache-Hit Probability in the Proposed CCUF Framework
To quantify the benefits of the proposed CCUF strategy,
we form the probability of finding a new segment by user
GUj at time slot t under the following two scenarios: (i)
Uncoded cluster-centric, and; (ii) Coded cluster-centric UAVaided femtocaching network, denoted by puc , and pcc , respectively. Concerning the nature of mobile networks, ground users
move and leave their current positions. In this paper, it is
assumed that low-speed ground users can obtain one segment
in each contact, i.e., T = Ns δt is required to completely
download content cl . First, we consider a simple mobility
pattern, where ground users are positioned in the transmission

8

area of a new FAP in each time slot t. Eventually, in T = Ns δt ,
the whole content cl will be downloaded. Then, we generalize
the mobility pattern to the DCRW model, where ground users
are moving randomly.
1) Simple Mobility Pattern: Regarding the uncoded clustercentric UAV aided femtocaching framework, content cl consisting of cls , for (1 ≤ s ≤ Ns ) segments, is stored completely
in all FAPs. Consequently, the probability of downloading
n = Ns segments of content cl in T = Ns δt depends on
the probability of requesting file cl , denoted by pl . Since the
storage capacity of each FAP is equal to Cf , the cache-hit
probability, denoted by puc , is obtained as follows
puc [n = Ns , t = T ] =

Cf
X

pl .

(25)

l=1

Note that, since contents are completely stored in uncoded
cluster-centric framework, ground users can access the whole
content in each contact. By considering the size of content
and the speed of ground users, however, it is not possible to
download more than one segment in each contact. Therefore,
storing the whole of contents in all FAPs is not beneficial. On
the other hand, the cache-hit probability in the coded clustercentric UAV-aided femtocaching network is obtained as
pcc [n = Ns , t = T ] =

Np
X

Ns (Cf −bαCf c)

X

pl +

l=1

pl .

To illustrate the growth rate of the cache-hit probability in the
coded one, we rewrite puc in Eq. (25) as follows
puc [n = Ns , t = T ] =

Cf

X

X

l=1

pl +

pl .

Ns (Cf − bαCf c)
.
Cf

NX
s −1

pns [n = 2, t = 2δt |f = fi ]p(f = fi )

pns [n = 2, t = 2δt ] =

i=1

=(Ns − 1) × 1 ×

1
= 1.
(Ns − 1)

(29)

(27)

l=Np +1

As it can be seen from Eqs. (26), and (27), the first term
related to the popular content is the same. The second term,
however, illustrates that the number of contents that can be
served through FAPs in the coded cluster-centric network is
κ times greater than the uncoded one, where κ is given by
κ=

l=1

of the cache-hit probability, which is constant, the successful
probability of downloading a new segment of a mediocre
content in each contact depends on the current and all previous
locations of the ground user. Therefore, we first determine
the successful probability of achieving a new segment of a
mediocre content, denoted by pns (n = n0 , t = n0 δt ), for
(1 ≤ n0 ≤ Ns ). Then, we calculate the cache-hit probability of
a coded cluster-centric network based on the DCRW mobility
pattern.
As it can be seen from Fig. 3(a), regardless of the location
of GUj , this user can download one segment successfully in
the first contact (i.e., n0 = 1). Therefore, we have pns (n =
1, t = δt ) = 1. Similarly, where n0 = 2, the ground user GUj
can download a new segment without considering its location.
Therefore, the probability of downloading two segments after
two contacts is pns [n = 2, t = 2δt ] = 1. More precisely, in the
second contact, the ground user can be positioned in the cell
of (Ns − 1) number of FAPs, where the probability of being
1
. Therefore, we
in the cell of FAP fi is p(f = fi ) =
(Ns − 1)
have

(26)

l=Np +1

Np

of the location of the ground user within an inter-cluster, the
ground user can download one segment of the required content
Np
P
with the probability of
pl at each contact. Despite this part

(28)

Accordingly, due to the allocation of different segments in the
coded cluster-centric network, more segments of the desired
contents are accessible. Therefore, more requests can be
served in comparison to the uncoded cluster-centric UAV-aided
femtocaching networks.
2) Generalizing to the DCRW Mobility Pattern: Fig. 3(a)
provides an overall overview of the proposed network, consisting of numerous inter-clusters, where ground users move
randomly in all directions. In other words, it is possible for
ground users to return back to the previous coverage area of
FAPs (which is not considered in the simple mobility pattern).
Moreover, in some cases, ground users may be positioned in
the transmission area of a FAP, which stores the same segment
of the required content that the ground user has already
downloaded. Consequently, the cache-hit probability of the
coded cluster-centric will not be the same as the previous
scenario. If the requested content is the popular one, regardless

Accordingly, the probability of finding a new segment in the
third contact is
NX
s −1
pns [n = 3, t = 3δt ] = pns [n = 3, t = 3δt |f = fi ]p(f = fi )
i=1

1
1
(Ns − 2)
= (Ns − 2)
×1+
×0=
, (30)
(Ns − 1)
(Ns − 1)
(Ns − 1)
where (Ns −2) FAPs have different segments, whereas if GUj
returns to the FAP at t = δt , the ground user can find a similar
segment. Considering the fact that Ns = 7 in our proposed
wireless network, pns [n = 3, t = 3δt ] would be 0.83. It means
that user GUj can find a new segment of the desired content
in the third contact with a probability of 0.83. Similarly, it
can be proved that the probability of finding a new segment
in n > 2 is obtained as

pns [n = n0 , t = n0 δt ] =

NX
s −1

pns [n = n0 , t = n0 δt |f = fi ]

i=1

×p(f = fi ) =

(Ns − 2)n0 −2
.
(Ns − 1)n0 −2

for n0 > 2

(31)

Taking into account the unequal likelihood of finding new
segments of mediocre contents in different contacts, we re-

9

Algorithm 1 Proposed CCUF Strategy
1:
2:
3:
4:
5:

Ng
Nc  X
X

min
xl

6:
7:
8:

l=1



(j)
1 − pl (t) Du(j) (t) xl

j=1

s.t. C1. and C2. in Eq. (18).
end for
for fi , i = 1, . . . , Nf , do
min

bαCf c  Ng

X

X

l=1

j=1

yl ,zl

Ns (Cf −bαCf c)  Ng

9:
10:
11:
12:
13:
14:
15:
16:
17:
18:
19:
20:
21:
22:
23:
24:
25:
26:
27:
28:
29:
30:
31:
32:

have a dense population of ground users in some areas. The
main goal is to deploy UAVs in such a way that ground
users can experience high QoS communications even in a
dense area. Note that the distance between UAVs and ground
users is a critical factor that can significantly impact the QoS
from different perspectives such as the energy consumption of
UAVs and the users’ access delay. Our goal is to partition Ng
ground users into K intra-clusters, where the sum of Euclidean
distances between the ground user GUj , for (1 ≤ j ≤ Ngk ),
and UAV uk is minimized. In this case, Ngk is the cardinality of
ground users positioned in the intra-cluster related to the UAV
uk . Therefore, the UAVs’ deployment is obtained according to
the following optimization problem

Initialization: Set α, λ, Ns , and Cf .
(j)
(t)
(t)
Input: pl (t), Lk , and Lj .
Output: xl , yl , and zl .
Content Placement Phase:
for uk , k = 1, . . . , Nu , do

X

X

l=bαCf c+1

j=1

Nk

 (j) 
(j)
1 − pl (t) Df (t) yl +

Nu X
g
X

min
lk (t)

||lj (t), lk (t)||,

(33)

k=1 j=1

where lk (t) denotes the location of the UAV uk at time slot
t, defined as the mean of the coordinates of all ground users
inside the corresponding intra-cluster as follows

 (j) 
(j)
1 − pl (t) Df (t) zl ,

s.t. C1. C3. in Eq. (21).
end for
i = 1, . . . , Ns , j = 1, . . . , Ns , i 6= j,
zfi ,l zfTj ,l = 0,
Zfk = Zfi if k = w2 + wz + z 2 ,
Transmission Phase:
for GUj , j = 1, . . . , Ng , do
if GUj is in indoor environment then
if GUj is an edge-user and requests
popular content then
The request should be handled according to the
JT scheme.
else
The request should be handled according to the
ST scheme.
end if
else
if υj (t) ≥ υth then
The request is served by UAV uk .
else
Similar to lines 16 to 23.
end if
end if
end for

Ngk

P
lk (t) =

lj (t)

j=1

Ngk

,

k = 1, . . . , Nu .

(34)

To solve the above optimization problem, we utilize the
K-Means clustering algorithm [39], which is known as an
efficient unsupervised learning framework. In the first step,
a set of points, denoted by P = {P1 , . . . , PNu }, is generated,
where Pk for (1 ≤ k ≤ Nu ) should be within the pre-specified
environment. Then, the set of ground users in the vicinity of
Pk is determined as follows
uj ∈ Ngk

if ||lj (t), Pk || < ||lj (t), Pr ||, ∀k 6= r.

(35)

Given the set of ground users belonging to each intra-cluster,
UAVs’ locations are determined according to Eq. (34). In the
second step, by moving ground users from one intra-cluster
to another, the Euclidean distances between ground users and
UAVs are calculated to update the location of UAVs according
to Eq. (33). The K-Means algorithm is terminated when there
is no change in the ground users belonging to an intracluster over several iterations. This completes our discussion
on development of the CCUF scheme. The pseudo-code of the
proposed CCUF framework is summarized in Algorithm 1.

calculate pcc as follows
pcc [n = Ns , t = T ] =

Np
X

IV. S IMULATION R ESULTS
pl

l=1
Ns (Cf −bαCf c) 
Ns
X
X
(Ns − 2)n−2 
+
pl .
(Ns − 1)n−2
n=1

(32)

l=Np +1

D. 2-D Deployment of UAVs in Intra-clusters
To increase the resource availability for ground users, the
outdoor environment is partitioned based on an unsupervised
learning algorithm, each partition is covered by a UAV. Considering a Gaussian mixture distribution for ground users, we

To demonstrate the advantage of the proposed CCUF framework, we consider a macro cellular network consisting of
one MBS with the radius R = 1000 m, Nf = 180 FAPs,
and Nu = 10 UAVs, where each inter-cluster compromises
of Ns = 7 FAPs. Fig. 4 illustrates a typical 20 × 20 m2
area, where ground users are randomly distributed and their
locations are determined according to the AoA localization
method. It can be shown that the Root Mean Square Error
(RMSE) between the estimated and the actual location of the
ground users is about 0.4 m, which is acceptable in comparison
to the transmission range of FAPs.

10

Fig. 4: Typical location estimation results based on the AoA localization
scheme.

Fig. 5: Deployment of UAVs in intra-clusters within an integrated network,

Fig. 5 depicts an integrated heterogeneous network, where
yellow and red areas determine indoor and outdoor environments, respectively. Fig. 5 also shows the deployment of UAVs
in the intra-clusters within the network, which is generated by
partitioning ground users according to the K-means clustering
algorithm. As a result of the Gaussian mixture distribution
for clients, we have a dense population in some areas, which
can be changed over time by the movement of ground users.
Therefore, the location of Nu = 10 UAVs and the formation
of intra-clusters in this paper is varying, depending on the
user density distribution. The general simulation parameters
are summarized in Table I. In order to find the optimum value
of α, three types of caching strategies are considered:
• Uncoded UAV-aided Femtocaching (UUF): Without coding and clustering, popular contents are stored completely
into FAPs and UAVs. In this case, the value of α, which
indicates the percentage of contents stored completely,
would be one (i.e., α = 1).
• Proposed Cluster-centric and Coded UAV-aided Femtocaching (CCUF): In this case, the uncoded popular and
the coded mediocre contents are stored in the caching
nodes, where 0 < α < 1. According to the simulation
results, the best value of α is obtained.
• The Conventional Cluster-centric and Coded UAV-aided
Femtocaching (Conventional CCUF): In this framework,
regardless of the content popularity profile, all contents
are stored partially in this framework. Consequently, the
value of α is equal to zero.
These three strategies are evaluated over the cache-hit-ratio,
cache diversity, cache redundancy, SINR, and users’ access
delay to determine the best value of α. Moreover, to illustrate
the effect of considering a UAV-aided femtocaching framework in an integrated network, we compare the users’ access
delay and energy consumption of UAVs, by serving users in
both indoor and outdoor areas.

where “yellow” and “red” colors indicate indoor and outdoor environments,
respectively.

Cache-Hit-Ratio: This metric illustrates the number of requests served by caching nodes versus the total number of
requests made across the network. The high value of cache-hitratio shows the superiority of the framework. Since we assume

TABLE I: List of Parameters.
Notation
Ng
Nf
Nu
Ns
Nc
Ru
Rf
PT (t), PR (t)

Value
500
180
10
7
40724
250 m
30 m
0.5 , 0.25 W

Notation
η (LoS) , η (N LoS)
hk
$, ψ
Lc
τp
Pk
(LoS)
(N LoS)
χσ
, χσ
N0

Value
1.2, 3
100 m
2, 20
37.5 MB
0−5 s
15 dBm
3.5, 3
−94 dBm

Fig. 6: The cache-hit-ratio versus the popularity parameter γ for different
values of α.

that ground users can download one segment in each contact,
we evaluate the cache-hit-ratio in terms of the number of
fragmented contents served by caching nodes. Fig. 6 compares
the cache-hit-ratio of the UUF (α = 1), the proposed CCUF
(0 < α < 1), and conventional CCUF (α = 0) frameworks
versus the value of γ. As previously mentioned, parameter γ
shows the skewness of the content popularity, where γ ∈ [0, 1].
Note that the large value of γ indicates that a small number
of contents has a high popularity, where a small value of

11

Fig. 7: The cache-hit-ratio versus the α percentage of contents that are

Fig. 8: The users’ access delay in the indoor environment versus different

stored completely.

value of γ.

γ illustrates an almost uniform popularity distribution for
the majority of contents. As it can be seen from Fig. 6,
depending on the popularity distribution of contents, γ, the
conventional CCUF framework results in a higher cache-hitratio. The most important reason is that given a constant cache
capacity, the coded content placement of the conventional
CCUF strategy leads to a remarkable surge in the content
diversity. In contrast, for a high value of γ, where a small
number of contents is widely requested, the UUF and the
proposed CCUF frameworks have better results compared
to the conventional CCUF. By considering the fact that the
common value of γ is about 0.5 ≤ γ ≤ 0.6 (e.g., see [4],
[29], [40]), we define CHRth as the threshold cache-hit-ratio,
which is the average of cache-hit-ratio of different values of
α for a specific γ. As it can be seen from Fig. 6, the proposed
CCUF framework with 0 < α ≤ 0.4 and the UUF scheme
outperform other schemes from the aspect of cache-hit-ratio.

Fig. 9: The users’ access delay in the indoor environment versus different

Fig. 7 shows the cache-hit-ratio versus different values of α
when the popularity parameter γ changes in the range of 0.5
too 1. Accordingly, for 0.5 ≤ γ ≤ 0.6, by increasing the value
of α, the cache-hit-ratio decreases drastically. In the following,
we also investigate the impact of α on the users’ access delay
to determine the best value of α.
Users’ Access Delay: Users’ access delay depends on three
parameters, i.e., the availability of the content in caching
nodes, the distance between the ground user and the corresponding caching node, and the channel quality, known as the
SINR. Figs. 8 and 9 compare the users’ access delay of the
aforementioned frameworks, which is obtained according to
Eq. (19). By utilizing the CoMP technology in the proposed
CCUF, serving edge-users according to the JT scheme has a
great impact on the SINR, where users’ access delay decrease
by increasing the SINR. As can be seen from Table II, the
SINR of edge-users improves by increasing the value of α.
Note that JT scheme can be performed if the same contents
are stored in the neighboring FAPs. Therefore, by increasing
the value of α, the users’ access delay will decrease. With
the same argument, we define Dth , which is the average of
users’ access delay of different values of α for a specific γ,

values of α.

TABLE II: The SINR experienced by edge-users for different values of α
and γ.
α=0
α = 0.1
α = 0.2
α = 0.4
α = 0.6
α = 0.8
α=1

γ = 0.5
16.37
17.55
18.01
18.62
19.06
19.42
19.72

γ = 0.6
16.37
18.12
18.65
19.30
19.75
20.09
20.38

γ = 0.7
16.37
18.89
19.46
20.11
20.53
20.85
21.11

γ = 0.8
16.37
19.84
20.40
21.00
21.37
21.64
21.86

γ = 0.9
16.37
20.88
21.38
21.90
22.20
22.42
22.58

γ=1
16.37
21.88
22.30
22.70
22.93
23.08
23.20

shown in Fig. 8. Therefore, the best value of α would be
α ≥ 0.2. Consequently, the cache-hit-ratio and users’ access
delay of the proposed CCUF framework would be efficient if
α ∈ [0.2, 0.4].
Cache Diversity: This metric illustrates the diversity of contents in an inter-cluster, which is defined as the number of
distinct segments of contents, expressed as follows
CD =

Na
bαCf c
=1−
.
Ns Cf
Cf

(36)

As stated previously, we have Na = Ns (Cf − bαCf c). As
it can be seen from Fig. 10, the value of CD would be one,

12

Fig. 10: The percentage of the cache diversity and the cache redundancy
versus different values of α.

Fig. 12: The users’ access delay experienced through UAVs in both indoor
and outdoor versus different values of β.

be cached exceeds the total number of contents. Therefore,
the maximum required cache capacity, denoted by βmax , for
different values of α is obtained as
Nc
1
βmax ≤
=
, (37)
Ns Nc − (Ns − 1)αNc
α(1 − Ns ) + Ns
where the remainder of the storage would be occupied by
redundant contents if β > βmax . As it can be seen from
Fig. 11, the maximum cache capacity βmax increases by the
value of α. Consequently, in smaller values of α, we need a
smaller cache capacity to have the maximum cache diversity.

Fig. 11: The maximum cache capacity, required to achieve the maximum
cache diversity, versus different values of α.

if α = 0, which means that all cached contents are different.
The cache diversity, however, linearly decreases by increasing
the value of α, and reaches the lowest value zero, when all
contents are cached completely (i.e., α = 1).
Cache Redundancy: This metric indicates the number of
similar contents that ground users meet during their random
movements. As it can be seen from Fig. 10, the cache redundancy increases by storing the entire contents. By considering
the coded content placement, even in the proposed CCUF
framework, ground users that move randomly through the
network, can meet a similar coded contents during their
movements (see Fig. 3).
Maximum Required Cache Capacity: Given a specific number
of contents through the network, denoted by Nc , the storage
capacity of caching nodes is determined by Cf = βNc . In this
case, parameter β indicates the percentage of contents that can
be stored in caching nodes. In the coded content placement,
since only one segment of the contents is cached, it is fairly
likely that the total number of possible segments that can

Users’ Access Delay through UAVs and UAVs’ Energy Consumption: Finally, we evaluate the users’ access delay and
the energy consumption of UAVs in Figs. 12 and 13, when
the corresponding ground user is located in both indoor
and outdoor environments. According to Eqs. (11), and (16),
and (17), the probability of establishing a LoS connection
between the ground user GUj and the UAV uk has a great
impact on the users’ access delay, served by UAVs. To tackle
this problem, we assume that ground users in indoor areas
are served by inter-clusters. With the same argument, Fig. 13
illustrates the energy consumption of UAVs, calculated as
follows [8]
(LoS)

Eu(LoS)
(t) = Lc PT (t)τp + Lc PR (t)τp + Pj
k

(t)(τf − τp ),
(38)
(N LoS)
(N LoS)
Euk
(t) = Lc PT (t)τp +Lc PR (t)τp +Pj
(t)(τf −τp ),
(39)
where PT (t) and PR (t) represent the power consumed for
transmission and reception powers of 1 Mb file, respectively.
Moreover, Pj (t), τf , and τp denote the received power at
ground user GUj , and the flyby and the pause times of UAV
uk , respectively.
V. C ONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we developed a Cluster-centric and Coded
UAV-aided Femtocaching (CCUF) framework for an integrated
and dynamic cellular network to maximize the number of
requests served by caching nodes. To increase the cache

13

Fig. 13: The energy consumption of UAVs in both indoor and outdoor
environments in different time slots.

diversity and to store distinct segments of contents in neighboring FAPs, we employed a two-phase clustering technique
for FAPs’ formation and UAVs’ deployment. In this case,
we analytically formulated the cache-hit probability of the
proposed CCUF framework. Moreover, in the cluster-centric
cellular network, multimedia contents were coded based on
their popularity profiles. In order to benefit the Coordinated
Multi-Point (CoMP) technology and to improve the inter-cell
interference, we determined the best value of the number of
contents that should be stored completely. According to the
simulation results and by considering the optimum value of
α, the proposed CCUF framework results in an increase in
the cache-hit-ratio, SINR, and cache diversity and decrease
users’ access delay and cache redundancy. Going forward,
several directions deserve further investigation. First, it is of
interest to introduce a Reinforcement Learning (RL)-based
method for outdoor environment, where ground users can be
autonomously served by UAVs or FAPs, based on the dynamic
population of their current locations and their speeds. Second,
the optimum number of ground users to be served by a UAV
in the proposed network needs to be analyzed.
R EFERENCES
[1] V. Chamola, V. Hassija, V. Gupta and M. Guizani, “A Comprehensive
Review of the COVID-19 Pandemic and the Role of IoT, Drones, AI,
Blockchain, and 5G in Managing its Impact,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp.
90225-90265, May 2020.
[2] H. Hui, Y. Ding, Q. Shi, F. Li, Y. Song, and J. Yan, “5G network-based
Internet of Things for Demand Response in Smart Grid: A survey on
Application Potential,” Applied Energy, vol. 257, pp. 113972-113987,
Jan. 2020.
[3] Z. Hajiakhondi-Meybodi, J. Abouei, and A. H. F. Raouf, “Cache
Replacement Schemes Based on Adaptive Time Window for Video on
Demand Services in Femtocell Networks,” IEEE Transactions on Mobile
Computing, vol. 18, no. 7, pp. 1476-1487, July 2019.
[4] Z. HajiAkhondi-Meybodi, J. Abouei, M. Jaseemuddin and A. Mohammadi, “Mobility-Aware Femtocaching Algorithm in D2D Networks
Based on Handover,” accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions
on Vehicular Technology, June 2020.
[5] B. Jiang, J. Yang, H. Xu, H. Song, and G. Zheng, “Multimedia
Data Throughput Maximization in Internet-of-Things System Based on
Optimization of Cache-Enabled UAV,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal,
vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 3525-3532, Apr. 2019.

[6] F. Cheng, G. Gui, N. Zhao, Y. Chen, J. Tang, and H. Sari, “UAVRelaying-Assisted Secure Transmission With Caching,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 67, no. 5, pp. 3140-3153, May 2019.
[7] N. Zhao, F. Cheng, F. R. Yu, J. Tang, Y. Chen, G. Gui, and H. Sari,
“Caching UAV Assisted Secure Transmission in Hyper-Dense Networks
Based on Interference Alignment,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 66, no. 5, pp. 2281-2294, May 2018.
[8] V. Sharma, I. You, D. N. K. Jayakody, D. G. Reina, and K. K. R. Choo,
“Neural-Blockchain-Based Ultrareliable Caching for Edge-Enabled UAV
Networks,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, vol. 15, no.
10, pp. 5723-5736, Oct. 2019.
[9] J. Lee, K. Kim, M. Kim, J. Park, Y. K. Yoon and Y. J. Chong,
“Measurement-Based Millimeter-Wave Angular and Delay Dispersion
Characteristics of Outdoor-to-Indoor Propagation for 5G MillimeterWave Systems,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 150492-150504, Oct. 2019.
[10] R. Avanzato and F. Beritelli, “A Smart UAV-Femtocell Data Sensing
System for Post-Earthquake Localization of People,” IEEE Access, vol.
8, pp. 30262-30270, Feb. 2020.
[11] Z. Wang, L. Duan and R. Zhang, “Adaptive Deployment for UAVAided Communication Networks,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless
Communications, vol. 18, no. 9, pp. 4531-4543, Sept. 2019.
[12] X. Liu, Y. Liu and Y. Chen, “Reinforcement Learning in Multiple-UAV
Networks: Deployment and Movement Design,” IEEE Transactions on
Vehicular Technology, vol. 68, no. 8, pp. 8036-8049, Aug. 2019.
[13] M. Samir, S. Sharafeddine, C. Assi, T. M. Nguyen, and A. Ghrayeb,
“Trajectory Planning and Resource Allocation of Multiple UAVs for
Data Delivery in Vehicular Networks,” IEEE Networking Letters, vol.
1, no. 3, pp. 107-110, Sept. 2019.
[14] S. Li, B. Duo, X. Yuan, Y. Liang and M. Di Renzo, “Reconfigurable Intelligent Surface Assisted UAV Communication: Joint Trajectory Design
and Passive Beamforming,” IEEE Wireless Communications Letters, vol.
9, no. 5, pp. 716-720, May 2020.
[15] M. Chen, W. Saad, and C. Yin, “Liquid State Machine Learning for
Resource and Cache Management in LTE-U Unmanned Aerial Vehicle
(UAV) Networks,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications, vol.
18, no. 3, pp. 1504-1517, Mar. 2019.
[16] Z. Yang, C. Pan, K. Wang and M. Shikh-Bahaei, “Energy Efficient Resource Allocation in UAV-Enabled Mobile Edge Computing Networks,”
IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications, vol. 18, no. 9, pp.
4576-4589, Sept. 2019.
[17] B. Ji, Y. Li, B. Zhou, C. Li, K. Song, and H. Wen, “Performance
Analysis of UAV Relay Assisted IoT Communication Network Enhanced
With Energy Harvesting,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 38738-38747, Mar.
2019.
[18] L. Zhang, Z. Zhao, Q. Wu, H. Zhao, H. Xu, and X. Wu, “Energy-Aware
Dynamic Resource Allocation in UAV Assisted Mobile Edge Computing
Over Social Internet of Vehicles,” IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 56700-56715,
Oct. 2018.
[19] B. Li, Z. Fei, and Y. Zhang, “UAV Communications for 5G and Beyond:
Recent Advances and Future Trends,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal,
vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 2241-2263, Apr. 2019.
[20] M. Chen, W. Saad, and C. Yin, “Echo-Liquid State Deep Learning for
360 Content Transmission and Caching in Wireless VR Networks With
Cellular-Connected UAVs,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol.
67, no. 9, pp. 6386-6400, Sept. 2019.
[21] H. Wu, X. Tao, N. Zhang, and X. Shen, “Cooperative UAV ClusterAssisted Terrestrial Cellular Networks for Ubiquitous Coverage,” IEEE
Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 36, no. 9, pp. 20452058, Sept. 2018.
[22] M. Chen, M. Mozaffari, W. Saad, C. Yin, M. Debbah, and C. S.
Hong, “Caching in the Sky: Proactive Deployment of Cache-Enabled
Unmanned Aerial Vehicles for Optimized Quality-of-Experience,” IEEE
Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 35, no. 5, pp. 10461061, May 2017.
[23] S. Suman, S. Kumar and S. De, “Path Loss Model for UAV-Assisted
RFET,” IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 22, no. 10, pp. 2048-2051,
Oct. 2018.
[24] Z. Hu, Z. Zheng, L. Song, T. Wang and X. Li, “UAV Offloading: Spectrum Trading Contract Design for UAV-Assisted Cellular Networks,”
IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications, vol. 17, no. 9, pp.
6093-6107, Sept. 2018.
[25] D. Athukoralage, I. Guvenc, W. Saad and M. Bennis, “Regret Based
Learning for UAV Assisted LTE-U/WiFi Public Safety Networks,” IEEE
Global Communications Conference (GLOBECOM), Washington, Feb.
2017 pp. 1-7.

14

[26] S. Zhu, L. Gui, N. Cheng, F. Sun and Q. Zhang, “Joint Design of Access
Point Selection and Path Planning for UAV-Assisted Cellular Networks,”
IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 220-233, Jan. 2020.
[27] E. Recayte, F. Lazaro, and G. Liva, “Caching at the Edge with
Fountain Codes,” in Proc. Advanced Satellite Multimedia Systems Conference and the Signal Processing for Space Communications Workshop
(ASMS/SPSC), Berlin, Oct. 2018, pp. 1-6.
[28] D. Ko, B. Hong, and W. Choi, “Probabilistic Caching Based on Maximum Distance Separable Code in a User-Centric Clustered Cache-Aided
Wireless Network,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications,
vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 1792-1804, Mar. 2019.
[29] K. Shanmugam, N. Golrezaei, A. G. Dimakis, A. F. Molisch and G.
Caire, “FemtoCaching: Wireless Content Delivery Through Distributed
Caching Helpers,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 59,
no. 12, pp. 8402-8413, Dec. 2013.
[30] D. Ren, X. Gui, K. Zhang, and J. Wu, J., “Hybrid Collaborative
Caching in Mobile Edge Networks: An Analytical Approach,” Computer
Networks, vol. 158, pp.1-16, July 2019.
[31] Z. Chen, J. Lee, T. Q. S. Quek and M. Kountouris, “Cooperative Caching
and Transmission Design in Cluster-Centric Small Cell Networks,” IEEE
Transactions on Wireless Communications, vol. 16, no. 5, pp. 3401-3415,
May 2017.
[32] P. Lin, Q. Song, J. Song, A. Jamalipour and F. R. Yu, “Cooperative
Caching and Transmission in CoMP-Integrated Cellular Networks Using
Reinforcement Learning,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology,
vol. 69, no. 5, pp. 5508-5520, May 2020.
[33] Z. HajiAkhondi-Meybodi, M. S. Beni, K. N. Plataniotis, and A. Mo-

[34]

[35]
[36]
[37]
[38]

[39]

[40]

hammadi “Bluetooth Low Energy-based Angle of Arrival Estimation
via Switch Antenna Array for Indoor Localization,” International
Conference on Information Fusion, July 2020.
Z. HajiAkhondi-Meybodi, M. S. Beni, A. Mohammadi, and K. N.
Plataniotis, “Bluetooth Low Energy-based Angle of Arrival Estimation
in Presence of Rayleigh Fading,” Accepted in IEEE International
Conference on Systems, Man, and Sybernetics, 2020.
C. M. Albertsen, “Generalizing the First-Difference Correlated Random
Walk for Marine Animal Movement Data,” Scientific Reports, vol. 9,
no. 1, pp. 4017–4031, Mar. 2019.
L. Qiu and G. Cao, “Popularity-Aware Caching Increases the Capacity of
Wireless Networks,” IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing, vol.19,
no. 1, pp. 173–87, Jan. 2019.
Y. Choi, C. S. Kim and S. Bahk, “Flexible Design of Frequency Reuse
Factor in OFDMA Cellular Networks,” IEEE International Conference
on Communications, Istanbul, 2006, pp. 1784-1788.
A. M. Al-Samman, T. A. Rahman, T. Al-Hadhrami, A. Daho, M. N.
Hindia, M. H. Azmi, K. Dimyati, and M. Alazab, “Comparative Study
of Indoor Propagation Model Below and Above 6 GHz for 5G Wireless
Networks,” Electronics, vol. 18, no. 1, Jan. 2019.
T. Kanungo, D. M. Mount, N. S. Netanyahu, C. D. Piatko, R. Silverman
and A. Y. Wu, “An efficient k-means clustering algorithm: analysis and
implementation,” IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
Intelligence, vol. 24, no. 7, pp. 881-892, July 2002.
T. Zhang, Y. Wang, Y. Liu, W. Xu and A. Nallanathan, “Cache-enabling
UAV Communications: Network Deployment and Resource Allocation,”
IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications, July 2020.

