Context, input and process as critical elements for
successful Emergency Remote Learning
Luciana Oliveira1[0000-0003-2419-4332], Anabela Mesquita2[0000-0001-8564-4582], Arminda Sequeira1[0000-0003-1457-6070], Adriana Oliveira1[0000-0003-0081-2335] and Paulino Silva1[0000-00031443-4961]

1
2

CEOS.PP ISCAP Polytechnic of Porto, Rua Jaime Lopes Amorim, Matosinhos, Portugal
Polytechnic of Porto & Algoritmi RC, Rua Jaime Lopes Amorim, Matosinhos, Portugal
lgo@iscap.ipp.pt

Abstract. In Spring 2020, the world moved from traditional classes to what was
coined as ERL (Emergency Remote Teaching / Learning / Instruction), posing
real challenges to all actors involved, requiring an immediate, unprecedented,
and unplanned devising of mitigation strategies. The impacts of this transition
cannot, however, be studied only at the educational level, as it consists of a
broader social shift with multidomain repercussions. In this paper, we use the
CIPP model (Context, Input, Process and Product evaluations) to further investigate interrelations among the context, input and process elements of ERL during the first wave of COVID-19, as the second wave presses towards reconfining. A correlation analysis of 46 variables, based students’ responses (N=360)
to a closed-ended questionnaire shows the crucial importance of motivation and
engagement in online classes, as learning enablers or constrainers. These also
shape the students’ perception of the role that online classes play in helping
them to stay more positive during ERL.
Keywords: ERL, CIPP Model, Confinement, COVID-19.

1

Introduction

In March 2020, the world moved from traditional classes to what was coined as ERL
(Emergency Remote Teaching / Learning / Instruction). The urgent and unplanned
transition to fully remote teaching posed real challenges to all actors involved in the
process, requiring immediate and unprecedented use of technologies, in particular in
education. The impacts of this transition cannot, however, be studied only at the educational level, as it consists of a broader social shift with multilevel repercussions. In
this paper, we use the CIPP model – Context, Input, Process and Product evaluations
[1] to reflect on the circumstances and impact of the Emergency Remote Learning.
The context assesses needs, problems, assets, and opportunities, as well as relevant
contextual conditions and dynamics (e.g., institutional, social, financial, and governmental aspects). The input evaluation focus on how it should be done and assesses
competing strategies and the work plans and budgets of the selected approach (e.g,
technology infrastructure, software, faculty support, faculty professional develop-

2

ment, learning resources such as access to libraries). The process evaluation considers
if the program is being done and consists of monitoring, documenting, assessing, and
reporting on the implementation of plans (e.g., how processes can be adapted to this
new reality, quality of teaching and learning). Finally, the product evaluation sees if
the program succeeded and it identifies and assesses costs and outcomes – intended
and unintended short term and long term (e.g., course completion rates, aggregated
grade analyses, feedback).
According to Hodges [2], the “Evaluation of ERT should be more focused on the
context, input, and process elements than product (learning)”. The author explains
that they “are not advocating for no evaluation of whether or not learning occurred, or
to what extent it occurred, but simply stressing that the urgency of ERT and all that
will take to make it happen in a short time frame will be the most critical elements to
evaluate during this crisis”. As such, in previous research, we focused on reporting on
the overall evaluation according to six proposed dimensions. In this paper, we focus
on the CIPP model’s context, input and process elements concerning in Northern
Portugal. As of October 2020, with the rise of the second wave of COVID-19, and the
pressure to reconfine, we further investigate which are the most impactful variables of
these CIPP Model elements, and how they interrelate, in order to obtain in-depth
knowledge to foster current strategies being devised by teachers and Higher Education Institutions.

2

Background: the CIPP model

In this paper we focus on the CIPP model’s context, input and process elements, leaving the process element out, according to what is recommended by Hodges [2].
2.1

Context

The first lockdown and the consequent adoption of ERL forced nearly 2 billion
students worldwide to move online. One of the contextual challenges felt is related to
this years’ university graduates [3] as these experienced major interruptions in teaching and assessment in the final stage of education. This may imply, for some, postponing graduation, and job market entry. This situation is aggravated by the global
recession caused by COVID-19, with increased unemployment rates and salary reduction, which tends to get worse as the second wave expands.
Family issues should also be considered, pertaining to two different scopes: the
structure and stability of family income and, the conditions of the physical space that
the family shares, which may be very limited, raising questions of privacy but also of
equipment (desktops, laptops, or iPads) and internet access sharing. If the family is
experiencing income shrinking, the continuation of studies may be threatened. The
instability of family income is also linked to students’ anxiety, which has been considered one of the most evident psychological problems [3, 4].
These psychological issues had their origin in the feeling of uncertainty about what
was going to happen, namely, on the studies [5], future employment [6], and previous

3

psychological health of students [7, 8]. It could also have been caused by the gradually increasing distance between people resulting from the quarantine that affected all
students and in particular, those staying far from home as they were not only worried
about their health, safety, and education but they also had concerns for the wellbeing
of their families. Furthermore, anxiety disorders are more likely to occur and worsen
in the absence of interpersonal communication [9, 10], which was the case. The significant shortage of masks and disinfectants during the first wave, the overwhelming
and sensational news headlines, and erroneous news reports also contributed to this
effect [11].
Studies also show that the anxiety regarding the epidemic was associated with the
place of residence of the students, source of parental income, whether living with
parents and whether a relative or an acquaintance was infected with COVID-19 [4].
Living with parents is a favourable factor against feeling anxious. Moreover, social
support not only reduces the psychological pressure during the epidemics but also
changes the attitude regarding social support and help-seeking methods. This result
suggests that effective and robust social support is necessary during public health
emergencies [12].
In some countries, for some individuals, the psychological impact of the pandemic
situation was suggested to have been more significant than the physical health danger
posed by the diseases themselves [13] affecting the mental health of college students.
In addition to the psychological factors described above, it is necessary to consider
that the economic crisis and the sanitary measures to combat the epidemic will produce a significant personal income shrinkage [14]. This might result on an increase of
the number of working students, as it is often college students who report the highest
levels of financial strain, defined by their perceptions of economic stress or lack of
financial support from their families, that feel most compelled to work during their
undergraduate studies [15, 16]. Additionally, as distance education does not require
the student to move to the city/region where the university is located, this means that
those who previously could not afford or did not want to relocate can now apply for
admission in a university in another region [14]. Finally, it is known that students’
financial situation has a high impact on a student’s dropout decision [17].
Another aspect to consider relates to lecturers as they are an important part of the
educational ecosystem, designed to support learners with formal, informal, and social
resources. Any efficient online education requires an investment in an ecosystem of
learners’ support, which takes time to identify and build. Of course, it is possible to
use a simple online content delivery which can be quick and inexpensive, although it
can be confusing and not robust. This means it is essential to build a whole ecosystem
integrating all sorts of instruction in which the planning of the design process is key
[2]. Issues of online design must be taken into consideration as well. In a period of
crisis and crisis response, there is an increased risk of diminishing the quality of the
courses delivered. If there was already a stigma concerning the online instruction,
with people thinking it has lower quality, this prejudice might be exacerbated with
this quick move online, without the proper preparation of all the key actors involved.
Usually, a full-course development project can take months when done correctly. The

4

need to "just get it online" is in direct contradiction to the time and effort generally
dedicated to developing quality education.
2.2

Input

The input concerns the resources available to implement the ERL during the COVID19 crisis. One of the categories of these is the technology as it is central for both
teachers and students although less accessible for students, as some of them do not
have computers, and others may have to share the computer they have, as parents and
siblings are also working remotely during the crisis. Furthermore, the lack of internet
access is exacerbating the digital divide [2].
2.3

Process

One of the challenges during the first lockdown in the Spring of 2020 was the loss
of face-to-face contact and direct interactions with both colleagues and teachers and,
some studies suggest that students experienced severe limitations in subjects that benefited from physical interaction with the materials, and tended to lose the ”pacing
mechanism” of scheduled lectures, thus having a higher chance of dropping out than
those in traditional settings [18, 19].
Another challenge is related to the interaction. Knowledge is socially created [20],
and this means that it hatches from interactions between students, students and the
content and students and the teacher to increases the learning outcomes. Social constructionism recognizes learning as both a social and a cognitive process, not merely a
transmission of information [2]. Chat rooms or real-time tutorials were used to maximize interactions.
One lesson learned with the first lockdown was the importance of empathy in ERL,
as the “ability to understand and share the feeling of another” [21]. According to the
results of the survey, which compared the perspectives of teachers and students, for
faculty, the remote teaching and learning experience was much more positive to students. During and after the lockdown, they say they learn better in traditional classes
and that ERL was less effective [22]. They claimed to have missed discussions, engagement, and interaction. Another important issue relies on providing feedback to
students. As stated, “Anything over a week after the students submit their work may
be too long” [21]. Equity and inclusion are also relevant for the success of online
instruction, as stated by Jebsen “The intent is to improve access to learning more
equally while treating everyone equitably” [23].
Moreover, students may also face other challenges, such as lack of a structured environment that prevents them from remaining motivated or focused [24]. Also, as
students are at home, they can suffer from negative emotions and poor mental health
(anxiety and depression is a result of missing friends and isolation). Physical problems of being online all the time (such as strained eyes and migraines) should also be
added to the list. For all these reasons, it is important that lecturers are able to create a
safe and comfortable educational online environment and develop empathy with all
their students.

5

3

Methodology

The adopted methodology consists of exploratory survey-based research, quantitative
in nature. The authors proposed an evaluation instrument [22], a close-ended questionnaire, comprised of 67 variables organized in six dimensions of issues that impact
ERL, as follows: (A) Educational and organizational issues – 33 items, (B) Technological and working conditions – 5 items, (C) Social issues – 11 items, (D) Familyrelated issues – 4 items, (E) Psychological issues – 6 items, (F) Financial issues – 8
items, framed in the context, input and process elements of the CIPP model. Each
item on the questionnaire was presented in a labelled 4-point Likert scale anchored at
1 = never, 2 = rarely, 3 = frequently, and 4 = always.
The main goal of this stage of analysis was to identify the most impactful variables, among the initial set of 67, by expressing their interdependencies and adding to
previous knowledge about students’ perceptions regarding ERL.
The survey was disseminated among students enrolled in HEI in Northern Portugal, through social media channels, namely in institutional public pages and open
groups. Survey data were downloaded and transferred into IBM SPSS Statistics 26.0,
and the correlation analysis was transposed into a network developed in Gephi 0.9.2.
The sample consists of 360 valid responses from students, from which we considered
only the 341 students that indicated they were involved in ERL. The great majority of
the participants are female (74.72%), aged 18 to 22 years (83.06%).

4

Results

A series of Spearman rank-order correlations were conducted to determine the relationships among the 67 categorical nominal variables used in previous research [22].
For this study, we considered appropriate to use ‘strong’ and ‘moderate’ correlation
coefficients, as we believe it provides depth and richness. No ‘very strong’ correlations (rs > .8) were found. ‘Strong’ and ‘moderate’ correlations were found among 46
variables (Table 1), which are considered as the most impactful ones among the previous set. For all cases, the correlations among the pairs of variables are significant as
p < .001.
An undirected network of correlations was built (Fig 1.) and is composed of 46
nodes (variables) and 96 edges (correlations). The nodes size is ranked by total degree, i.e., the bigger the node (variable), the higher number of correlations with other
variables (nodes). The edges thickness is ranked and labelled with the correlation
coefficient (rs). Nodes colours are partitioned according to the network modularity,
and as observed, nine clusters were created. The pragmatic consistency of the clusters
of variables was verified by the researchers and the clusters were then labelled according to their dominant logic. Table 1 depicts the labels of the variables for each
cluster, the Mode of the student’s answers, the CIPP element and the cluster label.
The cluster analysis reveals that the most relevant clusters belong to the contextual
element of the CIPP model (K6, K5, K0 and K1), and that process elements are not
totally linked to process; K3 ‘relationship with teachers/school’ is, and K2 ‘relation-

6

ship with peers’ is not. The input element is totally isolated (K7) and liked to context
the element regarding the (K0) ‘family context’.

Fig. 1. The network of Spearman correlations (moderate and strong)

The cluster analysis also reveals that the sets of variables with higher correlation
coefficient reside in the subdomains of the “Remote Learning Environment”, “Pedagogy”, “Interactions with teachers/school” and “Educational resources” (K6, K5, K3
and K4). These consists of the most impactful variables, according to students’ responses.
Table 1. Depiction of variables’ labels, clusters and mode
K Var
A24
A23
A30
A33
6
A18
A9
A19
A27

Mo
2
2
2
2
2
3
3
3

Variable label
In online classes, I learn as much as in face-to-face classes
I am motivated to participate in online classes
I am optimistic about my academic success this semester
After this phase, I will be more interested in taking classes/training online
Online classes help me to stay more positive during this phase
I've been feeling closer to my teachers
It's easy to work online with my classmates
Online classes are interactive, which allows me to participate

CIPP / K label

Context /
Remote
learning
environment

7
A28
A25
A32
A3
A5
A4
A14
A1
A2

4
4
3
3
3
3
3
3
3

B36

1

E54

3

B37

4

B38
E55
E56
C40
C43
C41
C42
C39
C44
B34
B35

2
4
4
3
3
3
3
3
4
4
1

7

F62

1

2

F61
F60
D51
C49
D50

1
3
3
1
4

D53

2

A10
A8

3
3

5

0

1

3

4

A6

3

A21
A12

3
2

I have the necessary skills to use digital learning environments
Online classes are more tiring than face-to-face classes
It has been possible to guarantee a minimum quality in my education
My teachers have the necessary skills to manage online classes/work
The contact that my teachers keep with me is adjusted to my learning needs.
The classwork proposed by the teachers is appropriate
The online assessment mechanisms (tests, papers, etc.) are appropriate
My teachers created strategies to resume classroom work.
My teachers sent clear information about how online classes will work.
At home, I need to share my workspace with other people, and this causes me limitations
My family environment facilitates my participation in online classes/work
At home, I have a proper workstation with the ideal conditions to participate in online
classes/work
My work/study environment is disturbed by other people who live with me
In my family environment, my personal space and study/work schedules are respected
I feel cherished in my family environment
I feel less motivated than usual
I feel more nervous than usual
I feel more anxious than usual
I feel sadder than usual
I feel more tired than usual
I've been having more sleep disorders
At home, I have all the necessary equipment for online classes/work
At home, I need to share the computer I work on, and this causes me limitations
I feel impeded from participating in online classes due to lack of adequate material/equipment
I needed to buy equipment/devices to participate in online classes/work
I am preoccupied with the worsening of my financial situation
My wellbeing depends on keeping in contact with my friends/colleagues in school
I have lost access to a safe space when the school closed
I miss my school friends/colleagues
The suspension of in-person classes has worsened my relationships with my
friends/colleagues
My teachers use software and digital educational resources suitable for online classes
My teachers care about my personal wellbeing
My teachers have created alternative ways to contact me (chat rooms/groups, social
networks, etc.)
The school board is committed to my welfare and academic success
My teachers started using more creative and diverse resources/materials

A11

2

I have gained access to more educational resources/materials

F67

1

E59

1

8

The interruption of in-person classes has put my stay in higher education at risk, for
financial reasons
The interruption of in-person school activities put my stay in higher education at risk,
for family reasons

Context /
Pedagogy

Context /
Family
context

Context /
Wellbeing

Input / Working conditions

Process /
Social
interactions
with peers
Process /
Social
interactions
with teachers/
school
Context /
Educational
resources
Context /
Risks

Within this group of clusters, the variables with a higher total degree are A24 “In
online classes, I learn as much as in face-to-face classes”, and A23 “I am motivated to
participate in online classes” which are positively and strongly correlated. The notion
of learning as much in online classes tends to increase together with the motivation to
participate in online classes. According to the previous results [22], the majority of
the students answered “rarely” to both (c.f. column Mo in Table 1), thus, either students lacked the motivation to participate in online classes because they felt they did
not learn as much or the other way around. Other possible motivational constrainers
are found in variables correlated with A23, namely the rare belief that (A18) “Online
classes help me to stay more positive during this phase”, the (A30) lack of optimism
regarding their academic success in the confinement semester, and the students’ belief
that after this phase they will rarely be (A33) “interested in taking classes/training

8

online”, which, in turn, is correlated with the almost consensual idea that (A25)
“Online classes are more tiring than face-to-face classes”.
The motivation to participate in online classes (A3) is also positively correlated
with what we believe to be motivation enabling variables during the confinement
period namely, the frequent notion that (A32) “It has been possible to guarantee a
minimum quality in my education”, from K5, the frequent notion of (A9) “feeling
closer to my teachers”, the frequent perception that (A27) “Online classes are interactive, which allows me to participate”, the almost consensual assumption that students
have (A28) “necessary skills to use digital learning environments”. A3 is also positively correlated with the frequent belief that (A3) “My teachers have the necessary
skills to manage online classes/work”, from K5, and the frequent notion of (A19)
being “easy to work online with my classmates”, which is also negatively correlated
with (A25) “Online classes are more tiring than face-to-face classes”. Our pragmatic
assumption is that the higher the easiness to work with peers online, the lower the
feeling of tiredness in online learning.
The “Wellbeing” cluster (K1) is relatively isolated in the network but very close to
the educational clusters, having a single entry point (C40) “I feel less motivated than
usual”, which is negatively correlated with six variables: A23, A33, A24, A30, A18,
and A32. This means that unusual overall personal demotivation tends to increase or
decrease when students feel or not motivated to participate in online classes (fostered
by the previously mentioned enablers and constrainers), are more or less likely to take
classes/training online after the confinement, are able or unable to learn as much in
online classes than in face-to-face classes, are optimistic or not about their academic
success, consider or not that online classes helped them to stay more positive during
confinement, and consider or not that it was possible to guarantee the minimum quality of their education.
The intra-cluster analysis of K1 reveals that overall personal demotivation (C40) is
positively correlated with (C42) sadness, (C39) tiredness, (C43) nervousness, and
(C41) anxiety. There is a strong correlation triangle among nervousness, anxiety and
sadness, while sadness and nervousness are also correlated with (C44) sleep disorders.
Although tiredness is not correlated with sleep disorders, it is almost strongly correlated to nervousness.
The Social interactions cluster (K2) also appears relevant to the students’ wellbeing with a strong correlation between (D51) “My wellbeing depends on keeping in
contact with my friends/colleagues in school” (Mo=3) and (D50) “I miss my school
friends/colleagues” (Mo=4). The remaining correlations suggest that if the relationship with friends/colleagues worsens, students are likely to feel that they lost access to
a safe space.
In the Pedagogy cluster (K5), the most impactful variables consist of the guarantee
of minimum quality in education (A32), the necessary skills that teachers have to
manage online classes (A3), and the adjusted contact they keep with students. These
variables appear positively correlated with the frequent notion of proposed classwork
and assessment being adequate. The perception of the teachers’ skills to manage
online classes is also associated with the creation of strategies to resume classes during confinement and the clearness of regulatory information shared with students.

9

Regarding their family context (K0) and working conditions (K7), which we had
previously grouped under the same dimension (Technological and working conditions), there is a clear separation between the organization of work/workload, privacy
and disturbances, which students tend to relate to their family context (K0). In turn,
the pure technological issues, such as owning, accessing, and sharing devices, are
more closely linked to the students’ financial situation and concerns (K7).

5

Discussion and conclusion

We make causation assumptions among correlations based on the students answers to
each of the correlated variables since one of our objectives was to extract contextual
knowledge about this specific sample in this specific period of analysis. For this, we
used the modes of the answers for each variable combined with the correlation coefficient and the node total degree, to focus on the high impact variables on the network
of correlations. The forwarded causation assumptions will most likely change for
other datasets, though a certain level of abstraction in correlations may still be observed with other data for the same variables.
Results reveal the centrality of CIPP contextual elements and the centrality of motivation to participate in virtual classes during ERL as an important learning constrainer or enabler. Besides conditioning learning itself, motivation also shapes the
students’ perception of the role that online classes play in helping them to stay more
positive during ERL. Students that were motivated and engaged showed a more positive attitude towards the ERL while those that were less motivated showed worst results. This is in line with the literature as authors [2] stress the importance of the context, in particular in unusual circumstances, which is the case. Additionally, it is also
stressed that it is vital to learn how to develop empathy online as this contributes to
involve all the actors in the learning process. Results also show that there is here some
ground for future research, in particular concerning how to involve and engage students in online classes and virtual rooms as these are fundamental factors in the learning process.

References
1. Stufflebeam, D.L., The CIPP Model for Evaluation, in International Handbook of
Educational Evaluation, T. Kellaghan and D.L. Stufflebeam, Editors. 2003, Springer
Netherlands: Dordrecht. p. 31-62.
2. Hodges, C., et al., The difference between emergency remote teaching and online learning.
EDUCAUSE Review. https://er. educause. edu/articles/2020/3/the-difference-betweenemergency-remote-teachingand-online-learning, 2020.
3. Sahu, P., Closure of Universities Due to Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19): Impact
on Education and Mental Health of Students and Academic Staff. 2020, Cureus.
4. Cao, W., et al., The psychological impact of the COVID-19 epidemic on college students in
China. Psychiatry research, 2020: p. 112934.
5. Cornine, A., Reducing Nursing Student Anxiety in the Clinical Setting: An Integrative
Review. Nursing education perspectives, 2020.

10
6. Wang, C., et al., A novel coronavirus outbreak of global health concern. The Lancet, 2020.
395(10223): p. 470-473.
7. Al-Rabiaah, A., et al., Middle East Respiratory Syndrome-Corona Virus (MERS-CoV)
associated stress among medical students at a university teaching hospital in Saudi
Arabia. Journal of Infection and Public Health, 2020.
8. Kafka, A. Shock, Fear, and Fatalism: As Coronavirus Prompts Colleges to Close, Students
Grapple
With
Uncertainty.
2020
2020-03-12;
Available
from:
https://www.chronicle.com/article/Shock-FearFatalism-As/248240/.
9. Kmietowicz, Z., Rules on isolation rooms for suspected covid-19 cases in GP surgeries to
be relaxed. 2020, British Medical Journal Publishing Group.
10. Xiao, C., A novel approach of consultation on 2019 novel coronavirus (COVID-19)related psychological and mental problems: structured letter therapy. Psychiatry
investigation, 2020. 17(2): p. 175.
11. Ayittey, F.K., et al., Economic impacts of Wuhan 2019‐nCoV on China and the world.
Journal of Medical Virology, 2020.
12. Yin-xia, B., et al., Correlation Between Psychological Changes of The Community Cro wd
and The Social Support in Grave Public Health Event [J]. Nei Moivgol Medical Journal,
2005. 4.
13. McBride, O., et al., Monitoring the psychological impact of the COVID-19 pandemic in
the general population: an overview of the context, design and conduct of the COVID-19
Psychological Research Consortium (C19PRC) Study. 2020.
14. Sinelnikov-Murylev, S.G., Prospects for the Higher Eeducation System's Development in
the Pandemic. Monitoring of Russia's Economic Outlook. Moscow. IEP, 2020(6): p. 1519.
15. Adams, D.R., S.A. Meyers, and R.S. Beidas, The relationship between financial strain,
perceived stress, psychological symptoms, and academic and social integration in
undergraduate students. Journal of American college health, 2016. 64(5): p. 362-370.
16. Peltz, J.S., et al., The role of financial strain in college students’ work hours, sleep, and
mental health. Journal of American College Health, 2020: p. 1-8.
17. Gupta, S.K., et al., Lean Six Sigma for reducing student dropouts in higher education – an
exploratory study. Total Quality Management & Business Excellence, 2020. 31(1-2): p.
178-193.
18. Fedynich, L.V., Teaching beyond the classroom walls: The pros and cons of cyber
learning. Journal of Instructional Pedagogies, 2013. 13.
19. Morrison, G.R., et al., Designing effective instruction. 2019: John Wiley & Sons.
20. Berger, P. and T. Luckmann, The social construction of reality. 1966.
21. Kelly, K. Looking for Empathy in Wiley’s COVID-19 Remote Learning Survey Results
(Spring
2020).
PhilOnEdTech
2020
2020/10/07/;
Available
from:
https://philonedtech.com/looking-for-empathy-in-wileys-covid-19-remote-learning-surveyresults-spring-2020/.
22. Oliveira, L., et al. Emergency Remote Learning during COVID-19: socio-educational
impacts on Portuguese students. in Proceedings of 23rd International Conference on
Interactive Collaborative Learning. 2020. Springer.
23. Jebsen, J. Challenges in Equity and Inclusion for Online Learning: An Interview with Dr.
Brett Christie – O'Donnell Learn. 2020 03/09/2020; Available from:
https://www.odlearn.com/challenges-in-equity-and-inclusion-for-online-learning-aninterview-with-dr-brett-christie/.
24. MacLeod, A., Preparing For Remote Learning: The Second Wave Looming Over Us, in
Curiosity Shots. 2020.

