The sooner the better: lives saved by the lockdown during the
COVID-19 outbreak. The case of Italy
Roy Cerquetia,b , Raffaella Coppierc , Alessandro Girardid∗, Marco Venturae†
a

Department of Social and Economic Sciences – Sapienza University of Rome, Italy

arXiv:2101.11901v1 [econ.EM] 28 Jan 2021

b

School of Business – London South Bank University, UK
Email: roy.cerqueti@uniroma1.it

c

Department of Law and Economics – University of Macerata
Email: raffaella.coppier@unimc.it
d

Parliamentary Budget Office, PBO, Rome, Italy
Email: alessandro.girardi@upbilancio.it

e

Department of Economics and Law – Sapienza University of Rome, Italy
Email: marco.ventura@uniroma1.it

January 29, 2021

Abstract
This paper estimates the effects of non-pharmaceutical interventions – mainly, the
lockdown – on the COVID-19 mortality rate for the case of Italy, the first Western country to impose a national shelter-in-place order. We use a new estimator, the Augmented
Synthetic Control Method (ASCM), that overcomes some limits of the standard Synthetic Control Method (SCM). The results are twofold. From a methodological point
of view, the ASCM outperforms the SCM in that the latter cannot select a valid donor
set, assigning all the weights to only one country (Spain) while placing zero weights to
all the remaining. From an empirical point of view, we find strong evidence of the effectiveness of non-pharmaceutical interventions in avoiding losses of human lives in Italy:
∗

Any opinion, finding, and conclusion or recommendation expressed in this material are those of the

author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the PBO.
†
Corresponding author: Marco Ventura, Department of Economics and Law, Sapienza University
of Rome, Via del Castro Laurenziano 9- 00161, Rome, Italy.
marco.ventura@uniroma1.it

1

Fax: +39 (0)6 233 232 419.

Email:

conservative estimates indicate that for each human life actually lost, in the absence of
lockdown there would have been on average other 1.15, the policy saved in total 20,400
human lives.

Keywords: COVID-19; non-pharmaceutical interventions; Augmented Synthetic Control Method; Italy.
JEL Classification: C19; C23; I18

1

Introduction

Exponentially growing threats require strong and early policy response. In the first wave
of the COVID-19 outbreak, the timing of confinement measures played a fundamental role
in flattening the contagion curve (Flaxman et al., 2020; Amuedo-Dorantes et al., 2020).
However, policy makers reasonably hesitate to take resolute measures when threats appear
to be limited. This caution is reasonable, because if countermeasures work, it will seem in
retrospect as if the policy response was an overreaction, possibly causing a loss of consensus
(Pisano et al., 2020; The Economics, 2020). Once the curve is flattened, the public will
likely blame the incumbent government for the tremendous economic losses caused by social
distancing orders without fully grasping their essential role in halting the spread of the viral
disease.
This paper adds to this debate, estimating the effects of lockdown – or, in general,
of the so-called non-pharmaceutical interventions – on the propagation of COVID-19 with
particular emphasis on the most relevant aspect: saving human lives. Its real-world relevance, implications and its high level of socio-economic meaningfulness need no further
explanation. The task is particularly challenging from a methodological perspective due to
typical selection bias problems, and this explains the growing interest of econometricians
in this research question. At first instance, a natural candidate to face this challenge is
the SCM – first introduced by Abadie and Gardeazabal (2003) and the subsequent studies
by Abadie et al. (2010, 2015).1 At its very essence, the SCM involves the comparison of
outcome variables between the treated unit, i.e., the unit affected by the intervention and
similar but different unaffected units, reproducing an accurate counterfactual of the unit of
1
Since its introduction, the SCM has been widely used in social sciences and applied to a broad spectrum
of topics, spanning from terrorism and crime to natural resources and disasters, political and economic
reforms, immigration, education, pregnancy and parental leave, taxation, as well as social connections and
local development. Athey and Imbens (2017) have defined it as the most crucial innovation in the policy
evaluation literature over the last fifteen years. For a recent survey see Abadie (2020).

2

interest in the absence of intervention, commonly referred to as the synthetic unit. This
method can be conceived as a data-driven procedure to retrieve non-treated units sharing
similar characteristics concerning the treated in the pre-intervention period. In the COVID19 context, the treatment consists of non-pharmaceutical interventions implemented at a
given point in time in a specific country or, in general, in a region, so that the SCM lends
itself as one of the most immediate tools to face the problem empirically. For this reason,
it has been (more or less successfully) repeatedly applied in the very recent literature on
COVID-19. Bayat et al. (2020) and Friedson et al. (2020) have applied the SCM on US
data, where the latter takes a specific focus on California, taking advantage of the timely
enactment of the shelter-in-place order. Friedson et al. (2020) extend the analysis of the
impact to the unavoidable economic drawbacks, such as the number of jobs lost. As far as
the measurement of the avoided virus spread is concerned, it is possible to mention Huber
and Langen (2020), who apply the SCM design to Switzerland, and Tian et al. (2020a,
2020b) to China. Some authors have estimated the effect of particular prescriptions included in the more general lockdown policy. Notably, Mitze et al. (2020) study the effect
of wearing face masks in Germany and Neidhöfer and Neidhöfer (2020) study the effect of
school closures for Argentina, Italy and South Korea. Lee and Yang (2020) offer a purely
economic perspective focusing on the impact of contrasting COVID-19 measures on the
labour market in South Korea. As a peculiar case, Sweden is a country that has attracted
a lot of attention in this growing literature because it is one of the very few countries that
has not enacted a statewide shelter-in-place order (to date). Due to its unusual situation,
Sweden offers the researcher the opportunity to look at the case as if the treatment consisted
in non-intervening vis-a-vis a group of countries in which interventions took place (see Born
et al., 2020 and Cho, 2020).
Despite its popularity, however, some real-world circumstances can make this instrument
unapplicable, under penalty of biased estimates. This occurrence may be due to many
reasons, such as the employment of different heterogeneous measurement methodologies
whereby the same phenomenon is measured in different countries. The case under scrutiny
falls exactly within these circumstances. To overcome this problem, we have followed a general approach proposed by Ben-Michael et al. (2020), augmenting the SCM with the Ridge
regression model, therefore obtaining a Ridge ASCM, which can be written as a weighted
average of the control unit outcomes. To the best of our knowledge, the Ridge ASCM

3

has not yet been applied to assess the impact of non-pharmaceutical interventions for the
COVID-19 pandemic. It is possible to find just a couple of papers in the environmental
field (notably, forest fires in Colombia, Amador-Jimenez et al., 2020, and air pollution in
China, Cole et al., 2020).
Our contribution to the literature on the socio-economic effects related to the COVID-19
pandemic is manifold. First, it sheds light on a controversial policy intervention that has
been and still is largely debated. The intervention’s effectiveness is evaluated in terms of
the most immediate and desired effect, namely avoided deaths. Secondly, from a strictly
methodological point of view, it uses one of the most recent advances of the popular SCM,
i.e., the Ridge ASCM, which allows one to overcome the non-negligible limit of non-perfect
pre-treatment fit, which, in turn, would generate a biased estimate from the canonical estimator.2 Thirdly, the study focuses on Italy, which is widely acknowledged as a paradigmatic
case, owing to its pioneering role – immediately after China – in facing the current pandemic disease. The first Italian COVID-19 cases were registered quite early (January 2020
or even before) and contagion has accelerated since its inception. In March 2020, Italy was
the country with the highest number of cases – apart from China – rapidly becoming the
European epicentre of outbreak, with 207,428 confirmed cases and 28.236 deaths as of the
beginning of May 2020 (Ministry of Health). These figures represented approximately 14%
of all confirmed cases and 20% of deaths in Europe, 6% of confirmed cases and just over
11% of deaths worldwide. Moreover, and even more interestingly from our standpoint, Italy
was the first Western country in which the government imposed restrictions on mobility,
economic activities and social interactions – the already mentioned strict lockdown. The
lockdown order was officially imposed in Italy from March 9 up to the May 18, 2020, 70 days.
The intervention was highly criticized at that time, possibly because it was the first among
Western countries, and it was not yet completely clear the importance of acting timely,
especially on the part of some media and politicians. Nonetheless, many other European
countries followed the Italian model within a few weeks, including the UK that initially
claimed to be against such a type of intervention. A long list of scientific contributions
witnesses the relevance of the Italian case for understanding the COVID-19 spread and,
2

Other recent advances pertain to multiple treated units (Robbins et al., 2017; Abadie and L’Hour,
2019), extensions of permutation methods (Dube and Zipperer, 2015), denoising the outcome variable and
imputation of missing values (Amjad et al. 2018, 2019 and Athey et al. 2018), inference (Chernozhukov et
al. 2019a, 2019b; Cattaneo et al. 2019), the role of covariances (Botosaru and Ferman, 2019; Ferman et al.,
2020) and bias correction (Powel, 2018; Arkhangelesky et al., 2019; Chernozhukov et al., 2019b).

4

consequently, the effectiveness of non-pharmaceutical interventions (see, e.g., Bonacini et
al., 2020; Cameletti, 2020; Eckardt et al., 2020; Lolli et al., 2020; Palladino et al., 2020,
Peracchi and Terlizzese, 2020). In particular, the works by Modi et al. (2020) and Cerqua
et al. (2020) deserve special mentioning because both use the standard SCM to assess the
plausibility of official figures, concluding that the true count of deaths due to COVID-19 is
supposed to be significantly higher than the official count. Given the very high relevance
of the issue at stake, we contribute to the debate over the effects of lockdown measures by
using the Ridge ASCM and enjoying all its methodological advances. To the best of our
knowledge, this is the first paper dealing with applying the Ridge ASCM to Italy’s paradigmatic case and evaluating the effects of a lockdown in terms of public health. Operatively,
the task mentioned above is particularly challenging for at least a couple of other reasons.
First, all the other European countries (the most similar to the one under scrutiny) were
sooner or later treated. Secondly, the virus spread followed different paths among countries
at different points in time. Both features make constructing a credible counterfactual series
particularly difficult, and this pitfall is exacerbated by the limits the standard SCM suffers
from.
Our results show that the SCM cannot generate a valid counterfactual, collapsing all the
weights on one single unit, i.e., Spain, so that the lockdown effect would be calculated as
a naive difference between the two countries. Allowing for negative weights, we provide
evidence about the effectiveness of non-pharmaceutical interventions in saving human lives
and avoiding a collapse of the Italian health care system. The take-home message from
this study is twofold. From a methodological point of view, it suggests that the researcher
must compare the weights before choosing whether to apply the SCM or the ASCM. A
substantial distance of the two may be an indirect indicator of bias in the SCM estimates.
From a socio-economic perspective, it documents that non-pharmaceutical intervention has
led to at least 1.15 people saved for each life lost, for a total of 20,400 lives within the first
35 days of lockdown.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces the Ridge ASCM
as an extension of the canonical SCM and describes the estimation exercise dataset. Section
3 presents the empirical set up paying particular attention to how the benchmark specification is chosen and presents the estimates under testing in Section 4. Finally, Section 5
proposes some back-of-the-envelope computations based on the estimates and draws some

5

conclusions.

2

Methodology and Data

This section is devoted to the illustration of the Ridge ASCM procedure. To be selfcontained and provide a better understanding of this econometric method, we begin with a
brief description of the canonical SCM. In its very essence, the SCM aims to simulate the
outcome path of a country if it did not undergo a particular policy intervention. Operatively, the synthetic control is built as a weighted average of the units in the control group
(donor pool), where the weights are chosen so that the synthetic control’s outcome closely
matches the treated unit’s trajectory in the pre-treatment period, while also satisfying some
constraints such as being non-negative or adding up to one.

2.1

Econometric framework

More formally, let Yit (0) and Yit (1) represent the potential outcomes for unit i, with i =
1, . . . , N , at time t, with t = 1, . . . , T , under control and treatment, respectively. Let Wi be
an indicator that unit i is treated at time T0 < T , where units with Wi = 0 never receive
the treatment. In the SCM, one supposes that only one unit receives treatment and for
ease of reference this is listed as the first one, W1 = 1, the remaining N0 = N − 1 units
are possible controls, usually referred to as donor units. Without loss of generality, for the
time being, the post-treatment observation is limited to just one: T = T0 + 1. The observed
outcomes are then

 Yit (0)
Yit =
 Y (1)
it

if Wi = 0 or t ≤ T0

(1)

if Wi = 1 and t > T0

We also assume that control potential outcomes are generated as a fixed component mit
plus a mean-zero additive noise εit drawn from some distribution,
Yit (0) = mit + εit

(2)

The treated potential outcome is then Yit (1) = Yit (0) + τit where τit represent the treatment
effects – which are the objects of our estimation – and are fixed parameters. Therefore, the
treatment effects can be rewritten as τ = τ1T = YiT (1) − YiT (0). The error terms in the
post-treatment period are collected in the vector εT = (ε1T , . . . , εN T ) and are assumed to be

6

mean-zero and uncorrelated with treatment assignment. That is, the treatment assignment
Wi is ignorable given mit ,
EεT [Wi εiT ] = EεT [(1 − Wi ) εiT ] = EεT [εiT ]

(3)

where EεT denotes the expectation taken with respect to the error term εT . It follows that
the noise terms for the treated and control units do not systematically deviate from each
other. Let Xit represent pre-treatment outcomes that are used as and along with other
covariates, X0 represents the N0 × T0 matrix of control units pre-treatment outcome and
covariates. Y0T is the N0 vector of control unit outcomes in period T . With only one treated
unit, Y1T is a scalar, and X1 is a T0 -row vector of treated unit pre-treatment outcomes
and/or covariates. The potential outcome for the treated unit, Y1T (0), is computed by the
0 γ, being γ = (γ , . . . , γ ) the
SCM as a weighted average of the control outcomes, Y0T
1
N

vector of weights. The elements of γ are chosen to balance pre-treatment outcomes and
other covariates.3 To our aim, the SCM can be formalized as a solution with respect to γ
of the following constrained optimization problem
minγ
s.t.

k(X1 − X00 γ)k22 + ζ
P
Wi =0 γi = 1
γi ≥ 0

P

Wi =0 f (γi )

(4)

i : Wi = 0

where the constrains limit γ to the unit simplex and where
k(X1 − X00 γ)k22 ≡ (X1 − X00 γ)0 (X1 − X00 γ) is the 2-norm on RT0 . The simplex constraint in (4) ensures that the weights will be sparse and non-negative, while the hyperparameter ζ > 0 penalizes the dispersion of the weights, following a suggestion by Abadie et
al. (2015). The optimization problem in (4) can be regarded as an approximate balancing weights estimator. These weights achieve perfect pre-treatment fit, and the resulting
estimator has many attractive properties including a bias bound derived by Abadie et al.
(2010), when the treated unit’s vector of lagged outcomes and covariates, X1 , is inside the
convex hull of the control units’ lagged outcomes and covariates, X0 . Due to possible high
dimension, however, achieving perfect pre-treatment fit is not always feasible with weights
constrained to be on the simplex and in these cases Abadie et al. (2015) recommend against
using SCM. Thus, the conditional nature of the analysis is critical to deploying SCM, exclud3

Notice that since pre-treatment outcomes are included in the X0 matrix, “pre-treatment fit” and “covariance balancing” are equivalent expressions.

7

ing many practical settings. This drawback is overcome by the Ridge ASCM of Ben-Michael
et al. (2020), which is now discussed.
The Ridge ASCM proposes modifying the problem in (4) as follows:


X
X
0
Ŷ1T
(0) =
γ̂iscm YiT + m̂1T −
γ̂iscm m̂iT 
Wi =0

(5)

Wi =0

X

= m̂1T +

γ̂iscm (YiT − m̂iT )

(6)

Wi =0

where

γ̂iscm

is the estimated i-th SCM weight. In this context, the canonical SCM is a special

case in which m̂iT is constant. Albeit fully equivalent, equations (5) and (6) highlight two
distinct features of the Ridge ASCM. From (5) it appears clear that Ridge ASCM corrects
P
the SCM estimate, Wi =0 γ̂iscm YiT , by the imbalance in a particular function of the pretreatment, m̂(.). Intuitively, since m̂(.) estimates the post-treatment outcome, we can view
this as an estimate of the bias due to imbalance, analogous to bias correction for inexact
matching (Rubin, 1973; Abadie and Imbens, 2011). Therefore, the SCM and Ridge ASCM
estimates will be similar if the estimated bias is small. Differently, equation (6) is similar
in spirit to standard doubly robust estimation (Robins et al., 1994), which begins with the
outcome model but then re-weights to balance residuals. Given these premises, the choice of
the estimator m̂(.) is important both to understand the properties of the procedure and for
practical performance. Notably, there are some attractive features of estimating m̂(.) via
Ridge regression which is linear in both pre-treatment outcomes and in comparison units.
This case is referred to as the Ridge ASCM. In this case, the estimator of the post-treatment
outcome is m̂(Xi ) = η̂0ridge + X0i η̂ ridge , where η̂0ridge and η̂ ridge are the coefficients of a Ridge
regression of control post-treatment outcomes Y0T on centered pre-treatment outcomes X0
with penalty hyperparameter λridge :
n
o
2
1 X
η̂0ridge , η̂ ridge = argminη0 ,η
Yi − η0 + Xi0 η
+ λridge kηk22
2

(7)

Wi =0

The Ridge ASCM estimator is then:

aug
Ŷ1T
(0) =

X

γ̂iscm YiT + X1 −

Wi =0


X

γ̂iscm Xi  · η̂ ridge

(8)

Wi =0

when augmenting with Ridge regression the implied weights are themselves the solution
to a penalized synthetic control problem, as in the standard SCM problem. Nevertheless,
8

while the original SCM constrains weights to be on the simplex, this does not occur with
the Ridge ASCM. Indeed, when the treated unit lies outside the convex hull of the control
units, the Ridge ASCM improves the pre-treatment fit relative to the SCM by allowing for
negative weights and extrapolating away from the convex hull. The Ridge ASCM directly
penalizes the distance from the sparse, non-negative SCM weights, controlling the amount
of extrapolation by the choice of λridge , and only resorts to negative weights if the treated
unit is outside of the convex hull. When the treated unit is in the convex hull of the control
units – so the SCM weights exactly balance the lagged outcomes – the Ridge ASCM and
SCM weights are identical. When the SCM weights do not achieve an exact balance, the
Ridge ASCM solution will use negative weights to extrapolate from the convex hull of the
control units. The amount of extrapolation is determined both by the amount of imbalance
and by the hyperparameter λridge . When SCM yields good pre-treatment fit or when λridge
is large, the adjustment term will be small and γ aug will remain close to the SCM weights,
Ridge ASCM and SCM weights will be equivalent and the estimation error will only be due
to variance of the weights and post treatment noise. It follows that λridge plays a crucial
role and its value must be derived optimally. Operatively, one possibility is to follow the
P
(−t)
aug
Yik be
in-time placebo check proposed by Abadie et al. (2015). Let Ŷ1k = Wi =0 γ̂i(−t)
the estimate of Y1k obtained excluding time period t from the sample. The idea consists in
(−t)

comparing the difference Y1t − Ŷ1t

for some t ≤ T0 as a placebo check. We can extend this

idea to compute the leave-one-out cross validation Mean Squared Error (MSE) over time
periods:
CV (λridge ) =

X

T0
t=1




(−t) 2

Y1t − Ŷ1t

(9)

and the cross validation procedure chooses either the lambda that minimizes (9) or the
maximal value of λridge with MSE within one standard deviation of the minimal MSE, as
suggested by Hastie et al. (2009), among others. Such a choice trades off overfitting, i.e. a
too small λridge , and biased estimates, i.e. a too large λridge , indeed if λridge → ∞ ASCM
is equivalent to SCM.

9

2.2

Data sources and variables construction

As mentioned above, the ASCM4 procedure’s goal is to evaluate the impact of a lockdown
on the most immediate and desired effect, namely the number of avoided deaths.5 Specifically, the outcome variable Y is the mortality rate, which is defined as the cumulative
death counts per million population (dth) taken from the Epidemic Intelligence team of
the ECDC (European Center for Disease Prevention and Control). Since daily reported
figures for deaths tend to be challenging to compare and qualify across countries due to
possible confounding idiosyncratic socioeconomic differences related to health care systems
and population ageing, we also consider several covariates, X, that are expected to be linked
to the outcome variable. Accordingly, among the predictors, we include variables capturing
the COVID-19 dynamics, such as cumulative cases per million population (num), which are
intuitive predictors of mortality rates. The second group of predictors includes variables
capturing the “resilience” of each country’s health system. This subset includes the number
of hospital beds per hundred thousand population (hsp) under the assumption that the
more developed the health system, the less fatal the COVID-19 infection will be. As for
the outcome variable, the source for num and hsp is the Epidemic Intelligence team of the
ECDC. Following Sá (2020) and Rocklöv and Sjödin (2020), among others, we also include
socioeconomic characteristics that are likely to be (positively) related to mortality rates;
accordingly, the median age (age), as well as the average household size (hld ), are added to
the set of covariates. All demographic variables are taken from the United Nations report
(United Nations, 2019). We also control for “mobility trends” across different categories of
places and behavior changes derived from Google Mobility Reports, which collect percentage changes in visits and length of stay at different places relative to a baseline given by the
median values of the same day of the week from January 3, 2020, to February 6, 2020.6 Following Chernozhukov et al. (2021), we focus on four out of six mobility sub-indices (namely,
“Grocery and Pharmacy”, “Transit Stations”, “Retail and Recreation” and “Workplaces”).
4

For ease of reference, henceforth the simpler expression “ASCM” will be used referring to “Ridge ASCM”
Cho (2020) pointed out that identifying the most appropriate outcome variable to assess real epidemiological effects is controversial. On the one hand, endogenous cross-country differences in testing rates
regarding eligibility and accessibility limit the usefulness of the cases of infection. On the other hand, daily
death counts might be affected by measurement problems because some jurisdictions include both confirmed
and probable cases of deaths, as opposed to others only reporting confirmed cases.
6
This type of data is collected from smartphones with an initial level of “normal conditions” which is set
to 0. When this data is reduced from the base value, it suggests that some forms of mobility constraints
have been imposed in a specific area so that the average mobility decreases.
5

10

“Parks” and “Residential” are dropped because the former does not have clear implications on the spread of COVID-19, while the latter shows an overly-high correlation with
“Workplaces” and “Retail and Recreation”. We distil the information content conveyed
by the Mobility indicators into a synthetic index (mob) by following a “nonmodel based”
aggregation scheme, as discussed in Marcellino (2006).7 The subsequent logical step is identifying the donor states to form the synthetic control unit. When constructing a reliable
counterfactual, it is well understood that the relationship between the predictors and the
outcome variable in the donor pool must be as similar as possible to the relationship in the
treated unit. Accordingly, the selection of the donor pool’s candidate elements should be
carried out by identifying countries sharing some key similarities to the treated one. In the
present context, geographical proximity is a crucial factor to be considered as the spread
of the pandemic has been not homogeneous across space and over time, moving from Asia
in late 2019 to Europe at the beginning of 2020 and, subsequently, to the Americas. Given
our focus on the Italian case, an obvious choice to select the donor pool’s elements is to
focus on European countries. Accordingly, we have included all members belonging to the
European Union (except Luxembourg) plus Switzerland, Norway, and the United Kingdom
(28 countries in total).
Since the daily evolution of the mortality rate at the individual country level reflects different diffusion patterns at a given point in time, we have normalized the time unit such that
“day 1” refers to the day on which cumulative infection cases per million exceeds one in the
treated country as in Cho (2020). In our case, “day 1” corresponds to February 23, 2020,
with the lockdown policy enacted on March 9. Therefore, in our setup, the pre-treatment
period consists of 15 daily observations. Because the treated state contrasts to the control
unit after treatment, the relevant policy under scrutiny (the impact of non-pharmaceutical
interventions in our context) should not be enacted in any donor pool state during the
study. Accordingly, our sample’s ending date is given by the date when lockdown measures
have taken place in the synthetic counterfactual. To identify such an average date, we have
used an ad hoc index elaborated by the Oxford COVID-19 Government Response Tracker,
namely the Stringency Index, SI, which collects standardized information on several differ7

Specifically, the four sub-indices are standardised to have zero mean and unit standard deviation. This
step helps avoid the resulting (simple) average index, which is calculated in the subsequent step, to be
dominated by variables with a particularly pronounced degree of volatility or an incomparably high absolute
mean.

11

ent common government responses daily for a large number of countries. More specifically,
we have followed Cho (2020) and defined the ending sample as the date on which the SI
peaked in each donor country. Therefore, our sample’s last observation occurs on “day 149’,
corresponding to April 12, 2020, so our post-treatment period consists of 34 data points.

3

Empirical setup

3.1

Specification searching

Resorting to the ASCM makes it possible to choose in a transparent way the weights to
build the counterfactual for the treated unit (Abadie et al., 2010 p. 494). Nonetheless, such
an advantage is weakened by a lack of consensus on how (and what) covariates should be
chosen. Due to this approach’s relative infancy, there are not enough papers to formally
test for specification searching (Brodeur et al., 2016). On the one hand, using all lagged
outcome variables avoids the problem of omitting potentially irrelevant covariates because it
eliminates all other predictors effects (Kaul et al., 2018) so that the synthetic counterfactual
is created regardless of the other predictor’s values. This specification is the one that minimizes the Root Mean Squared Prediction Error (RMSPE) in the pre-treatment period, and
that is not subject to arbitrary decisions. On the other hand, it makes all the other covariates irrelevant, threatening the estimators’ unbiasedness in the post-treatment predictions
(Ferman et al., 2020). Given this lack of guidance, focusing on the specification that uses all
the pre-treatment outcome lags as matching variables, is generally recommended (Ferman
et al., 2020) unless there is a strong prior belief that it is crucial to balance on a specific
set of covariates (as in the present context). Moreover, optimizing the dependent variable’s
pre-treatment fit and ignoring the covariates can be quite misleading: the more the covariates are truly influential for future values of the outcome, the larger a potential bias of the
estimated treatment effect may become.8 Therefore, economic theory and the researcher’s
intuition play a relevant part in the context of the ASCM as well. Building on the relevant
literature on the topic discussed in the Introduction, we have considered the following sets
of covariates: variables related to the resilience of the health care system (captured by hsp),
to the demographic structure of the population (represented by age and hld ), as well as
to the pandemic dynamics (epitomized by num and mob). Operatively, we first consider
8

This result is essentially attributable to the fact that covariates are fitted rather poorly when all outcome
lags are used, introducing a bias that can be substantial even for reasonably long-treatment time spans.

12

the specifications that differ only in the combinations of pre-treatment outcome values used
as predictors. Specifically, we consider the following ones: (a0) all pre-treatment outcome
values; (a1) odd pre-treatment outcome values only; (a2) even pre-treatment outcome values only; (a3) mean of all pre-treatment outcomes; (a4) the first half of the pre-treatment
outcome values; (a5) the first three-fourths of the pre-treatment outcome values. We also
consider a set of specifications from (b1) to (b5) where lagged dependent values as defined
in (a1)-(a5) are augmented by structural time-invariant covariates (namely hsp, age and
hld ). Finally, in the third group of specifications from (c1) to (c5), we extend the set of
predictors by including lagged time-varying predictors averaged over time in a way which
is consistent with the pre-treatment outcome values in (b1) to (b5), respectively.
As a preliminary step, we compute the Average Treatment Effect on the Treated (ATT) that
is the average deviation of the counterfactual series from the actual one over the treatment
period (from March 9 2020, to April 11 2020) for each specification (a0)-(c5) to identify the
specifications with a negative and statistically significant gap in a way which is consistent
with our priors. Since there is more than one possible specification that satisfies the conditions above, we follow the recommendation by Ferman et al. (2020) of presenting results
for many different specifications, and in particular, we include the specification (a0) as a
benchmark. The upper part of Table 1 presents an overview of all the ASCM specifications
that we consider in the analysis, while the last row reports the associated p-value for the
computed ATT for the corresponding specification.9
INSERT HERE TABLE 1
The results show that all of the ATTs are negative and statistically significant at the 5
percent level (or better), calling for a criterion to combine the test statistics for the individual specifications to distil them into a summary test statistic (Imbens and Rubin, 2015).
Expressly, we assume that the test function is simply a weighted average of the test statistics
for individual specifications. The same equally-weighted scheme is applied to combine each
specification into a synthetic statistic (Christensen and Miguel, 2018; Cohen-Cole et al.,
2009). In this vein, Figure 1 shows the treatment effects, defined as the differences between
the mortality rate in Italy and the synthetic control over the evaluation period, averaged
9

In all the specifications, we select the hyperparameter λridge as the largest λ within one standard error
of the λ that minimizes the cross-validation placebo fit CV(λ) as discussed in Section 2.1 above. The results
obtained under the alternative rule of picking the minimal λ are almost identical to those reported in the
main text.

13

across all specifications (continuous black line), as well as the benchmark specification (a0)
(dashed line). As expected, the mean value of the treatment effects suggests a strongly negative impact a few days after the intervention date. Moreover, there is preliminary evidence
of statistical significance for these deviations from the actual path in the long-run according
to the confidence region computed as ±2.5 times the (median) absolute deviation from the
median as suggested by Leys et al. (2013).
INSERT HERE FIGURE 1
While this finding gives indirect support to the effectiveness of non-pharmaceutical interventions in reducing the mortality rate, there is still a need for a criterion to select a
given specification from a set of possible alternatives. It is well known that when covariates are expected to be useless in explaining the outcome, the recommended specification
should use all pre-treatment outcome lags, i.e., specification (a0) (Kaul et al., 2018). However, if the control unit should also match several socio-economically relevant covariates,
attention should be paid to the specifications allowing external predictors. Since b’s are a
particular case of their corresponding c’s variant, we can safely restrict the focus on the
latter group. A logical criterion to discriminate among the five remaining specifications
with time-invariant and time-varying external predictors is given by each specification’s lag
structure. Since the pandemic dynamics are likely to affect the mortality rate with a temporal lag, specification (c3) is not the most desirable choice. Likewise, a lag structure based
on either even or odd pre-treatment dates applied previously in SCM literature (see, for
instance, Eren and Ozbeklik, 2016), is hard to rationalize in our context, suggesting that
(c1) and (c2) are second-best options to alternative lag structures. This argumentation
leads us to focus on the two remaining models: (c4) and (c5). In what follows, we pick
(c4) as our preferred specification, while specification (c5) is used to check the robustness
of our empirical findings. Accordingly, in our baseline model, the set of predictors includes
time-invariant covariates, as well as the first half of the pre-treatment outcome values and
time-varying covariates, averaged over the first half of the sample values, in a way similar
to the empirical framework of reference in Cavallo et al. (2013). As Figure 2 shows, the
gaps for our baseline specification closely resemble not only the one for specification (c5)
but also the two summary statistics reported in Figure 1: all in all, the temporal evolution
of the treatment suggests a sort of delayed effect which becomes progressively negative as

14

the days pass by.
INSERT HERE FIGURE 2

3.2

Baseline specification: a primer

Though suggestive, the visual evidence presented above is insufficient to ensure proper implementation of the ASCM. Its practical use calls for the fulfillment of three conditions. As
for the first requirement, only the treated unit is affected by the policy change assessed over
the post-treatment period (I); secondly, the counterfactual outcome can be approximated
by a fixed combination of donor states (II); finally, the policy change has no effect before it
is implemented (III). While the procedures to align country-specific variables to a common
starting date as well as the definition of a general rule to identify the (average) treatment
date for the donor set (i.e., the last observation of our sample) discussed in Section 2.2
above help to answer point (I), in what follows we focus on the remaining two conditions.
As for point (II), Figure 3 reports the estimated weights according to both the ASCM
and the canonical SCM for each country belonging to the donor pool. It emerges that
the structure of the donor pool identified by the SCM consists of just one element (Spain)
with weight zero attached to the remaining 27 countries. In contrast, in the case of the
ASCM, a richer structure of the weights emerges. With regard to mortality rate this is in
line with Cho (2020) who observes that death counts might be affected by measurement
problems because some jurisdictions include both confirmed and probable cases of deaths,
as opposed to others only reporting confirmed cases. In the specific case of Italy, Cerqua et
al. (2020) claim that the official count of deaths due to COVID-19 is likely to under-report
the phenomenon. In our context, the mechanics behind ASCM allows us to extrapolateout of the convex hull and to assign non-zero weights to a higher number of countries. In
more detail, there is confirmation of a relevant role for Spain (0.917), along with France
(0.730) and Poland (0.583), with (relatively smaller) positive weights attached for several
other countries as well (namely Belgium, Bulgaria, Denmark, Greece, the United Kingdom,
the Netherlands, and Slovenia). In contrast, Germany, Switzerland, and Ireland do not
contribute to the synthetic unit’s construction, while the remaining 15 countries are associated with negative weights (ranging from -0.312 for Norway to -0.076 for Estonia). Overall,
from an applied viewpoint, the ASCM can identify three European countries where the
pandemic severity peaked compared to other donor pool candidate units. Simultaneously,
15

resorting to the ASCM seems like a legit choice from a methodological standpoint due to
the documented difficulty to build up a donor pool within the canonical SCM. In such an
occurrence, SCM and ASCM estimates tend to diverge. Specifically, ASCM estimates are
likely to rely heavily on extrapolation from the convex hull of the control units in order
to improve pre-treatment fit (Ben-Michael et al., 2020) by allowing for negative weights (if
the treated unit is outside the convex hull) in place of the sparse and always non-negative
weighting structure of the standard SCM. Moreover, resorting to a CV procedure makes
it possible to obtain the optimal amount of extrapolation through the choice of λridge of
condition (9).
INSERT HERE FIGURE 3
Turning to point (III), the synthetic outcome is expected to closely match the treated
outcome’s temporal profile during the pre-treatment period. Thus, as a preliminary step,
Table 2 reports the average values over the pre-treatment period of the predictors for Italy
(“actual”) and the counterfactual control (“synth”), where the latter is constructed with
the ASCM weights assigned to the elements of the donor pool as detailed in Figure 3.
Overall, the synthetic control unit provides a much better-matched profile of Italy along
the predictors compared to the simple average of all countries in the donor pool (donor),
suggesting that the ASCM-based selection of weights is more appropriate as a control unit,
rather than choosing subjectively the weights by means, for instance, the simple average
across all the donor units.
INSERT HERE TABLE 2
Such a requirement is necessary to ensure that the comparison of the outcome paths
during the post-treatment period provides insight into the effect of the treatments: when
the dynamics of the synthetic control and the treated entity tend to diverge, then the
treatment presumably caused the difference; in contrast, if both paths display similarities
in the treatment period, the treatment does not appear to have affected the outcome.
Figure 4 compares the temporal profile of mortality rate for both actual and synthetic Italy
by disentangling pre- and post-treatment periods: the upper panel assesses the quality of
fit in the pre-treatment period and refers to the first 15 daily observations since the case
per million exceeds one (corresponding to the temporal window from February 23, 2020,
16

to March 8, 2020); the lower panel displays the difference of the two series over the entire
sample span which also includes the post-treatment period ranging from March 9, 2020
(when the policy intervention took place) to April 11, 2020.
INSERT HERE FIGURE 4
While the cumulative mortality rate in the synthetic control unit closely overlaps the
actual series prior to the pre-treatment period, there is a visible divergence a few days after
the policy intervention date (vertical line in the lower panel) when the synthetic unit starts
following a much steeper path than the actual counterpart series. The resulting gap, defined
as the difference between the actual series and its synthetic control, turns out to be negative
and statistically significant with an ATT of -132.9 and a p-value of 0.000. In more detail, we
find that the cumulative mortality rate in synthetic Italy exceeds 670 per million population
roughly five weeks after the lockdown intervention, while the corresponding figure for actual
Italy is as low as 310. This evidence suggests that with a (negative) gap of around 340 cases
per million, Italy’s mortality rate case would have been higher by over 115 percent had there
not been the policy intervention. Moreover, the gap from the actual series turns out to be
statistically significant at the 95 percent level according to the confidence interval computed
by the jackknife+ approach of Barber et al. (2019).

4

Sensitivity analysis

Confidence intervals as those reported in Figure 4 above have only recently been introduced
(see also Cattaneo et al., 2019) in the SCM literature so that the statistical significance of
the post-treatment gap is typically assessed by resorting to permutation techniques (the socalled placebo test; Abadie et al., 2010). Nonetheless, permutation-based tests can convey
useful information in the present context to support our empirical findings. In what follows,
we discuss three types of sensitivity tests: placebo in-space, placebo in-time, and leave-oneout tests.
Under the “placebo in-space” test, the ASCM is sequentially applied to each country in the
donor pool as though it is a treated state, using the remaining members of the pool as before.
The resulting placebo unit is thus compared with its synthetic counterpart. Comparing the
difference between the treated unit and its synthetic control to the differences among placebo
countries and their controls makes it possible to evaluate better the effectiveness of policy
17

intervention on the treated unit.
As the Root Mean Square Prediction Error (RMSPE) measures the gap between the variable
of interest for the treated country and its synthetic counterpart, it is possible to calculate a
set of RMSPE values for the pre-and post-treatment periods for each unit considered in the
analysis. Consequently, the RMSPE of the treated country after the treatment is expected
to be large relative to its value before treatment. On the other hand, placebo units should
not see a substantial increase in their RMSPE following the treatment. For this reason,
Table 3 reports the RMSPE pre/post-treatment ratio of each donor country divided by the
same quantity computed for the treated country, Italy. Whenever the entry in the table is
less than 1, it indicates a relatively higher difficulty when forecasting future outcome values
for Italy. The share of RMSPEs above one is then used to obtain a p-value for Italy, which
measures the probability of observing a ratio as high as the one obtained for Italy if one
were to pick a country at random from the potential controls.
INSERT HERE TABLE 3
Overall, the RMSPE ratios turn out to be well below the unit threshold, suggesting
that the actual path of the treated states tends to diverge away from the synthetic control
after the intervention in a much more substantial way than all countries belonging to the
donor pool. The resulting p-value is (2/29=) 0.069 as it ranks second out of 29 countries,
which falls within the conventional range of statistical significance used in the relevant
literature. A remarkable exception is Belgium’s case, with an RMSPE slightly above the
unit; nonetheless, the associated ATT has an opposite sign to the expected one in a way
similar to what emerges for the other eight countries. There is no evidence of a statistically
significant ATT for three entities of the donor pool, while for the remaining cases, the
estimated ATT ranges from -0.7 (for Croatia) to -34.5 (for Greece and Hungary).
As a further sensitivity test, we run the “in-time placebo” test, in which the donor pool
remains fixed and the treated unit is always Italy, but the treatment date is re-assigned
to occur during the pre-treatment period, as devised by Abadie et al. (2015). Moreover,
this placebo model’s sample period must end when the actual treatment occurred (day
15, in our context) to avoid capturing its effects. Operatively, the in-time placebo test
is conducted under the assumption that the treatment occurred on day 8, roughly in the
middle of our pre-treatment period. Apart from the lockdown date, we apply the baseline

18

setup’s exact setting to use the same predictor variables, including lagged outcome values
for the first half of the pre-treatment period. As Figure 5 shows, our synthetic Italy for a
placebo treatment on day 8 closely follows the path of actual Italy, not only during the first
half of the baseline pre-treatment period but also in the second part of the sample with an
estimated gap barely different from zero (continuous black line) also according to the 95
percent confidence region. Similar results are obtained when the fictitious treatment date
is assigned to days 10 and 12 (corresponding to two-thirds and three-fourths of the baseline
pre-treatment period, respectively). According to the dotted and dashed lines in Figure
5, significant reductions in the mortality rate for these two fake lockdown dates cannot
be found over the actual pre-treatment period. Overall, the in-time placebo test assures
that the placebo estimate resembles the actual pre-treatment path closely enough to give us
confidence that our main findings are not through chance, ruling out the possibility that the
above-discussed difference between the synthetic and actual Italy arises for reasons other
than the treatment.
INSERT HERE FIGURE 5
INSERT HERE FIGURE 6
The third sensitivity check we consider is the leave-one-out test (Abadie et al., 2015),
where the model is iterated over to leave out one selected donor country each time to assess
whether one of the donor units is driving the results. Figure 6 shows all leave-one-out
synthetic gaps (thin grey lines) and the mean value across all of them (dashed line). It
emerges that the average gap across all permutations closely matches the baseline gap that
includes all donor states in terms of ATTs (-128.2 and -132.9, respectively), giving further
support to the robustness of our findings.

5

Concluding remarks and further research

This paper is the first contribution that uses the ASCM to evaluate the effectiveness of
non-pharmaceutical interventions against COVID-19. Evidence has been provided for Italy,
the first Western country which has implemented shelter-in-place orders after China. The
paper shows how the ASCM helps remove bias from a naive application of the canonical
SCM. Indeed, the latter estimator shrinks the donor pool to only one country, i.e., Spain,

19

generating de facto an estimate of the effect as a bare difference in mean between Italy and
Spain. Constraining SCM weights on the unit simplex may be too restrictive, especially
when it is hard to reproduce accurate synthetic pre-treatment dynamics. Our empirical case
falls precisely in this circumstance, and the ASCM overcomes the problem by assigning negative weights to some donor units. As already pointed out by Ben-Michael et al. (2020),
since the ASCM removes the non-negativity constraint and allows for extrapolation outside
of the convex hull, the pre-treatment fit from ASCM turns out to be at least as good as
the pre-treatment fit from the SCM alone. Our evidence suggests that applied economists
should compare weights obtained from the SCM and the ASCM and opt for the former only
if the two are not entirely different. The socio-economic relevance of the issue analyzed in
this contribution makes the importance of such a comparison even more evident because
the estimates may significantly diverge, and different conclusions may be based on biased
estimates.
The results report extensive evidence on the effectiveness of non-pharmaceutical interventions in avoiding human deaths and preventing health care systems from collapsing in the
present COVID-19 era. According to our benchmark estimate, for each life lost, the policy
has saved 1.15 lives. In other words, while the cumulative mortality rate has recorded 310
lives lost per million population, without lockdown policy, it would have been 670, that
is 340 lives saved per million population. With 60 million as the 2020 Italian population
in total, the policy has produced (60*340=) 20,400 lives saved. It is important to stress
that this figure can be considered conservative because the sample span we can use for
the econometric exercise is shorter than the total temporal horizon over which the policy
has been implemented, due to the lack of non-treated units from a specific point in time
onwards. Similar desirable results, albeit not comparable in magnitude, have been found
by Friedson et al. (2020) for California, while for the case of Sweden, Cho (2020) estimates
25 percent of lives lost attributable to the non-treatment decision. Due to limited external
validity and different methodologies applied, the figure by Cho (2020) is scantly comparable with ours; nevertheless, a more substantial effect in Italy is quite reasonable because of
structural differences between the two countries in terms of (lower) endowment of hospital
beds, (older) median age of the population and (larger) household average size (for Italy).
As a possible extension, one could think of extending and projecting the findings up to
the last day of the policy (i.e., other 36 extra days up to May 18, 2020) and re-calculate

20

the total effect of the policy. One can also consider relating the findings of this paper to
economic damages caused by the lockdown measure, while from a strictly methodological
point of view, a further possible extension consists in constructing a formal test to test the
equality in the mean of the weights generated by the SCM and the ASCM. These issues are
beyond the scope of the present work and are left for further research.

References
[1] Abadie A., 2020. Using synthetic controls: Feasibility, data requirements, and methodological aspects. Journal of Economic Literature, forthcoming.
[2] Abadie, A., Diamond, A., Hainmueller, J., 2010. Synthetic control methods for comparative case studies: Estimating the effect of Californias tobacco control program. Journal
of the American Statistical Association 105(490), 493–505.
[3] Abadie, A., Diamond, A., Hainmueller, J. 2015. Comparative politics and the synthetic
control method. American Journal of Political Science 59(2), 495–510.
[4] Abadie, A., Gardeazabal, J., 2003. The economic costs of conflict: A case study of the
Basque Country. American Economic Review 93(1), 113–132.
[5] Abadie, A., Imbens, G. W., 2011. Bias-corrected matching estimators for average treatment effects. Journal of Business & Economic Statistics 29(1), 1–11.
[6] Abadie, A., L’Hour, J., 2019. A penalized synthetic control estimator for disaggregated
data. Working paper. Available at https://sites.google.com/site/jeremylhour/research.
[7] Amador-Jimenez, M., Millner, N., Palmer, C., Pennington, R. T., & Sileci, L., 2020.
The unintended impact of Colombia’s covid-19 lockdown on forest fires. Environmental
and Resource Economics 76(4), 1081-1105.
[8] Amjad, M.J., Shah, D., Shen, D., 2018. Robust synthetic control. Journal of Machine
Learning Research 19(22), 1–51.
[9] Amjad, M.J., Misra, V., Shah, D., Shen, D., 2019. mRSC: Multidimensional robust
synthetic control. In: Proc. ACM Meas. Anal. Comput. Syst., Volume 3.

21

[10] Arkhangelesky, D., Athey, S., Hirshberg, D.A., Imbens, G. W., Wager, S., 2019. Synthetic Difference In Differences. Working Paper 25532. National Bureau of Economic
Research.
[11] Amuedo-Dorantes, C., Borra, C., Rivera-Garrido, N., Sevilla, A., 2020. Timing is Everything when Fighting a Pandemic: COVID-19 Mortality in Spain. IZA DP No. 13316
[12] Arkhangelesky, D., Athey, S., Hirshberg, D.A., Imbens, G. W., Wager, S., 2019. Synthetic Difference In Differences. Working Paper 25532. National Bureau of Economic
Research.
[13] Athey, S., Imbens, G. W., 2017. The state of applied econometrics: Causality and
policy evaluation. The Journal of Economic Perspectives 31, 23–32.
[14] Athey, S., G. W. Imbens, and S. Wager (2018). Approximate residual balancing: debiased inference of average treatment effects in high dimensions. Journal of the Royal
Statistical Society: Series B (Statistical Methodology) 80(4), 597–623
[15] Barber, R. F., Candes, E.J., Ramdas, A., Tibshirani, R.J., 2019. Predictive inference
with the jackknife. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.02928.
[16] Bayat, N., Morrin, C., Wang, Y., Misra, V. 2020. Synthetic Control, synthetic Interventions, and COVID-19 spread: Exploring the impact of lockdown measures and herd
immunity. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.09987.
[17] Ben-Michael, E., Feller, A., Rothstein, J., 2020. The augmented synthetic control
method. arXiv:1811.04170
[18] Bonacini, L., Gallo, G., Patriarca, F., 2020. Identifying policy challenges of COVID19 in hardly reliable data and judging the success of lockdown measures. Journal of
Population Economics 34(1), 275-301.
[19] Born, B., Dietrich, A., Müller, G., 2020. The lockdown effect: A counterfactual for
Sweden. CEPR Discussion Papers, No. 14744.
[20] Botosaru, I., Ferman, B., 2019. On the role of covariates in the synthetic control
method. The Econometrics Journal 22(2), 117–130.

22

[21] Brodeur, A., Le, M., Sangnier, M., Zylberberg, Y., 2016. Star wars: The empirics strike
back. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 8, 1–32.
[22] Cameletti, M., 2020. The effect of Corona virus lockdown on air pollution: Evidence
from the city of Brescia in Lombardia region (Italy). Atmospheric Environment 239,
117794.
[23] Cattaneo, M., Feng, Y., Titiunik, R., 2019. Prediction intervals for synthetic control
methods. arXiv e-prints, arXiv:1912.07120
[24] Cavallo, E., Galiani, S., Noy, I., Pantano, J., 2013. Catastrophic natural disasters and
economic growth. Review of Economics and Statistics 95(5), 1549–1561.
[25] Cerqua, A., Di Stefano, R., Letta, M., Miccoli, S., 2020. Local mortality estimates
during the COVID-19 pandemic in Italy. DiSSE Working papers. No. 14/20.
[26] Chernozhukov, V., Wüthrich, K., Zhu, Y., 2019a. An exact and robust conformal inference method for counterfactual and synthetic controls. arXiv e-prints,
arXiv:1712.09089v6.
[27] Chernozhukov, V., Wüthrich, K., Zhu, Y., 2019b. Practical and robust t-test based
inference for synthetic control and related methods. arXiv e-prints, arXiv:1812.10820v2.
[28] Chernozhukov, V., Kasahara, H., Schrimpf, P., 2021. Causal impact of masks, policies,
behavior on early covid-19 pandemic in the U.S.. Journal of Econometrics 220, 23–62.
[29] Cho, S. W., 2020. Quantifying the impact of nonpharmaceutical interventions during
the COVID-19 outbreak: The case of Sweden. The Econometrics Journal 23(3), 323–344.
[30] Christensen, G., Miguel, E., 2018. Transparency, reproducibility, and the credibility of
economics research. Journal of Economic Literature 56, 920–980.
[31] Cohen-Cole, E., Durlauf, S., Fagan, J., Nagin, D., 2009. Model uncertainty and the
deterrent effect of capital punishment. American Law and Economics Review 11, 335–369.
[32] Cole, M. A., Elliott, R. J., Liu, B., 2020. The impact of the Wuhan Covid-19 lockdown on air pollution and health: a machine learning and augmented synthetic control
approach. Environmental and Resource Economics 76(4), 553–580.

23

[33] Dube, A., Zipperer, B., 2015. Pooling multiple case studies using synthetic controls:
An application to minimum wage policies. IZA Discussion Papers 8944, Institute for the
Study of Labor (IZA).
[34] Eckardt, M., Kappner, K., Wolf, N., 2020. Covid-19 across European regions: The role
of border controls. CEPR Discussion Paper No. DP15178.
[35] Eren, O., Ozbeklik, S., 2016. What do right–to–work laws do? Evidence from a synthetic control method analysis. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 35(1), 173–
194.
[36] Ferman, B., Pinto, C., Possebom, V., 2020. Cherry picking with synthetic controls.
Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 39(2), 510–532.
[37] Flaxman, S., Mishra, S., Gandy A., Unwin, H. J. T., Mellan, T.A., Coupland, H.,
Whittaker C., Zhu1, H., Berah, T., Eaton, J.W., Monod, M, 2020. Estimating the effects
of non-pharmaceutical interventions on COVID-19 in Europe. Nature, Vol 584, August.
[38] Friedson, A. I., McNichols, D., Sabia, J. J., Dave, D., 2020. Did California’s shelterin-place order work? Early coronavirus-related public health effects. National Bureau of
Economic Research, No. w26992.
[39] Hastie, T., J. Friedman, and R. Tibshirani, 2009. The elements of statistical learning.
Springer series in statistics New York.
[40] Huber, M., Langen, H., 2020. The impact of response measures on COVID-19-related
hospitalization and death rates in Germany and Switzerland. Swiss Journal of Economics
and Statistics 156, 10.
[41] Imbens, G. W., Rubin, D. B., 2015. Causal inference for statistics, social and biomedical
sciences: An introduction. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
[42] Kaul, A., Klöbner, S., Preifer, G., Schieler, M., 2018. Synthetic control methods: Never
use all pre-intervention outcomes together with covariates. MPRA wp 83790.
[43] Lee, J., Yang, H. S., 2020. Pandemic and employment: Evidence from COVID-19 in
South Korea. WP at www.kapf.or.kr.

24

[44] Leys, C., Ley, C., Klein, O., Bernard, P., Licata, L., 2013. Detecting outliers: do
not use standard deviation around the mean, use absolute deviation around the median.
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 49, 764–766.
[45] Lolli, S., Chen, Y. C., Wang, S. H., Vivone, G., 2020. Impact of meteorological conditions and air pollution on COVID-19 pandemic transmission in Italy. Scientific reports
10(1), 1-15.
[46] Marcellino, M., 2006. Leading Indicators. In: Elliott, G., Granger C.W.J. and Timmermann A. eds., Handbook of Economic Forecasting, Ch. 16, North-Holland: Amsterdam,
pp. 879–960.
[47] Mitze, T., Kosfeld, R., Rode, J., Wälde, K., 2020. Face masks considerably reduce
COVID-19 cases in Germany: A synthetic control method approach. IZA Discussion
Paper No. 13319.
[48] Modi, C., Boehm, V., Ferraro, S., Stein, G., Seljak, U., 2020. Total COVID-19 mortality
in Italy: excess mortality and age dependence through time-series analysis. medRxiv,
https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.15.20067074.
[49] Neidhöfer, G., Neidhöfer, C., 2020. The effectiveness of school closures and other prelockdown COVID-19 mitigation strategies in Argentina, Italy, and South Korea. ZEWCentre for European Economic Research Discussion Paper, 20–34.
[50] Palladino, R., Bollon, J., Ragazzoni, L., Barone-Adesi, F., 2020. Excess deaths and
hospital admissions for Covid-19 due to a late implementation of the lockdown in Italy.
International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health 17(16), 5644.
[51] Peracchi, F., Terlizzese, D., 2020 Estimating the prevalence of the COVID-19 infection,
with an application to Italy. EIEF Working Paper 20/13
[52] Pisano, G.P., Sadun, R., Zanini, M., 2020. Lessons from Italy’s Response to Coronavirus. Harvard Business Review. https://hbr.org/amp/2020/03/lessons-from-italysresponse-to-coronavirus
[53] Powell, D., 2018. Imperfect synthetic controls: Did the Massachusetts health care
reform save lives?. Rand Labor & Population WR-1246.

25

[54] Robbins, M.W., Saunders, J., Kilmer, B., 2017. A framework for synthetic control
methods with high-dimensional, micro-level data: Evaluating a neighborhood-specific
crime intervention. Journal of the American Statistical Association 112, 109–126.
[55] Robins, J.M., Rotnitzky, A., Zhao, L.P., 1994. Estimation of regression coefficients
when some regressors are not always observed. Journal of the American Statistical Association 89(427), 846–866.
[56] Rockloöv, J., Sjödin, H., 2020. High population density catalyse the spread of COVID19. Journal of Travel Medicine 27.
[57] Rubin, D. B., 1973. The use of matched sampling and regression adjustment to remove
bias in observational studies. Biometrics, 185–203.
[58] Sá, F., 2020. Socioeconomic determinants of Covid-19 infections and mortality: Evidence from England and Wales. Covid Economics 22, 47–58.
[59] The Economist 2020. How to build social consensus around lockdown. 11th April
https://www.economist.com/britain/2020/04/11/how-to-build-social-consensus-aroundlockdown
[60] Tian, T., Luo, W., Tan, J., Jiang, Y., Chen, M., Pan, W., Yang, S., Zhao, J., Wang,
X., Zhang, H., 2020a. The timing and effectiveness of implementing mild interventions of
COVID-19 in large industrial cities. Available at SSRN 3619819.
[61] Tian, T., Luo, W., Jiang, Y., Chen, M., Wen, C., Pan, W., Wang, X. 2020b. The Effects
of stringent interventions for Coronavirus pandemic. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.00523.
[62] United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division
(2019). Patterns and trends in household size and composition: evidence from a United
Nations dataset.

26

Figure 1: Gap plot for the benchmark case
Note: The horizontal axis indicates the days after treatment. The dashed line is the difference between mortality rate in Italy and the synthetic control from the specification with
all pre-treatment outcome values (a0). The solid black line is the gap plot obtained by
averaging the synthetic control over all the alternative specifications. The shaded area is
the confidence region computed as ±2.5 times the (median) absolute deviation from the
median as suggested by Leys et al. (2013)

27

28

*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

-46.9
[0.000]

dth(1)
dth(2)
dth(3)
dth(4)
dth(5)
dth(6)
dth(7)
dth(8)
dth(9)
dth(10)
dth(11)
dth(12)
dth(13)
dth(14)
dth(15)
dth(*)
hsp
age
hld
num(.)
mob(.)

ATT
p-value

(a0)

-138.7
[0.000]

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

(a1)

-103.8
[0.000]

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

(a2)

-56.1
[0.000]

*

(a3)

-81.0
[0.000]

*
*
*
*
*
*
*

(a4)

-46.8
[0.000]

*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

(a5)

-132.1
[0.000]

*
*
*

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

(b1)

-104.9
[0.000]

*
*
*

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

-65.1
[0.000]

*
*
*
*

Specification
(b2)
(b3)

-136.3
[0.000]

*
*
*

*
*
*
*
*
*
*

(b4)

-102.5
[0.000]

*
*
*

*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

(b5)

-140.2
[0.000]

*
*
*
*
*

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

(c1)

-137.1
[0.000]

*
*
*
*
*

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

(c2)

-133.9
[0.000]

*
*
*
*
*
*

(c3)

-132.9
[0.000]

*
*
*
*
*

*
*
*
*
*
*
*

(c4)

-122.2
[0.000]

*
*
*
*
*

*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

(c5)

NOTE: dth(i): i-th lag of cumulative death counts per million population; hsp: number of hospital beds per hundred thousand population; age median
age; hld : average household size; num(.): cumulative cases per million population; mob(.): mobility indicator; (.) indicates the average value over
the lags chosen for the dependent variable: (*) stands for the average value over the entire pre-sample period; ATT= Average Treatment effect on
the Treated.

Table 1: Full set of specifications

Figure 2: Gap plots for alternative specifications
Note: The horizontal axis indicates the days after treatment. The solid black line is the
difference between the mortality rate in Italy and the synthetic control (gap) from the
specification (c4) with the first half of the pre-treatment outcome values averaged over
time and structural time-invariant covariates (hsp, age, hld ), as defined in Section 3.1. The
dotted and dashed lines represent the gap plot obtained by taking the average and the
median of all the alternative specifications, respectively. The hyphenated line is the gap
from the specification (c5) with the first three-fourths of the pre-treatment outcome values
averaged over time and structural time-invariant covariates (hsp, age, hld ), as defined in
Section 3.1.

29

Figure 3: Comparison between SCM and ASCM weights
Note: the picture reports the weights from the SCM (white) and from the ASCM (black)

Table 2: Balancing table.
NOTE: dth(i): i-th lag of cumulative death counts per million population; hsp: number of hospital beds per hundred thousand population; age median age; hld : average household size; num(.):
cumulative cases per million population; mob(.): mobility indicator.

dth(1)
dth(2)
dth(3)
dth(4)
dth(5)
dth(6)
dth(7)
hsp
age
hld
num(.)
mob(.)

Actual
0.033
0.033
0.099
0.182
0.199
0.282
0.348
3.180
45.500
2.400
6.341
4.143

30

Synth
0.026
0.079
0.109
0.124
0.182
0.253
0.356
3.641
44.034
2.383
5.066
4.943

Donor
0.001
0.008
0.01
0.011
0.019
0.023
0.039
4.777
42.007
2.449
6.002
2.492

(a) Pre-treatment period

(b) Pre- and post-treatment periods

Figure 4: Actual and synthetic Italy
Note: In both panels, the horizontal axis indicates days after the death per million exceeds
one. The profile of Italy is shown by the solid line while its synthetic counterfactual, the
dashed line. The vertical line in Panel (b) represents the lockdown date. The shaded area
is the confidence interval computed by means of the jackknife+ approach of Barber et al.
(2019).

31

Figure 5: In-time placebo
Note: The horizontal axis indicates the days after the death per million exceeds one. The
black solid, dotted and dashed lines are the gap plot when the fictitious treatment date is
assigned to half, two-thirds and three-fourths of the actual pre-treatment period, respectively. The shaded area is the 95 percent confidence interval computed by means of the
jackknife+ approach of Barber et al. (2019).

32

Figure 6: Leave-one-out
Note: The horizontal axis indicates days after the death per million exceeds one. The black
dashed line is the gap plot of the baseline specification obtained with the entire set of donor
countries. The grey lines are the leave-one-out gap plots obtained by removing one country
at a time from the donor pool of the baseline specification.

33

Table 3: In-space placebo.
Note: The column “RMSPE ratio” reports the post/pre-treatment RMSPE of each country of the
donor pool relative to the same ratio for Italy. Whenever the entry is less than one, the relative
difficulty in forecasting future outcome values after intervention for Italy is higher than the one for
the country considered. ATT= Average Treatment effect on the Treated.

aut
bel
bgr
che
cyp
cze
den
deu
esp
est
fin
fra
gbr
grc
hrv
hun
irl
ltu
lva
mlt
nld
nor
pol
prt
rou
svk
svn
swe

RMSPE ratio
0.050
1.050
0.006
0.102
0.043
0.016
0.070
0.057
0.414
0.014
0.178
0.067
0.094
0.194
0.005
0.244
0.302
0.324
0.054
0.013
0.076
0.331
0.890
0.041
0.159
0.071
0.013
0.179

34

ATT
7.1
133.8
-0.1
14.1
1.1
-1.8
8.2
6.5
61.3
-1.5
-20.6
3.3
4.7
-25.0
-0.7
-34.5
-42.2
-43.0
-7.2
-1.9
11.6
-45.8
115.9
-2.2
-23.0
10.9
-0.8
20.2

P-value
[0.000]
[0.000]
[0.384]
[0.000]
[0.280]
[0.000]
[0.000]
[0.000]
[0.000]
[0.000]
[0.000]
[0.107]
[0.100]
[0.000]
[0.000]
[0.000]
[0.000]
[0.000]
[0.000]
[0.000]
[0.000]
[0.000]
[0.000]
[0.079]
[0.000]
[0.000]
[0.032]
[0.000]

