“How Was Your Weekend?” Software Development
Teams Working From Home During COVID-19
Courtney Miller∗ , Paige Rodeghero‡ , Margaret-Anne Storey§ , Denae Ford¶ and Thomas Zimmermannk

arXiv:2101.05877v2 [cs.SE] 11 Feb 2021

∗

New College of Florida, FL, USA. Email: courtney.miller17@ncf.edu
‡ Clemson University, SC, USA. Email: prodegh@clemson.edu
§ University of Victoria, BC, Canada. Email: mstorey@uvic.ca
¶ Microsoft Research, WA, USA. Email: denae@microsoft.com
k Microsoft Research, WA, USA. Email: tzimmer@microsoft.com

Abstract—The mass shift to working at home during the
COVID-19 pandemic radically changed the way many software
development teams collaborate and communicate. To investigate
how team culture and team productivity may also have been
affected, we conducted two surveys at a large software company.
The first, an exploratory survey during the early months of
the pandemic with 2,265 developer responses, revealed that
many developers faced challenges reaching milestones and that
their team productivity had changed. We also found through
qualitative analysis that important team culture factors such as
communication and social connection had been affected. For
example, the simple phrase “How was your weekend?” had
become a subtle way to show peer support.
In our second survey, we conducted a quantitative analysis of
the team cultural factors that emerged from our first survey to
understand the prevalence of the reported changes. From 608
developer responses, we found that 74% of these respondents
missed social interactions with colleagues and 51% reported a
decrease in their communication ease with colleagues. We used
data from the second survey to build a regression model to
identify important team culture factors for modeling team productivity. We found that the ability to brainstorm with colleagues,
difficulty communicating with colleagues, and satisfaction with
interactions from social activities are important factors that are
associated with how developers report their software development
team’s productivity. Our findings inform how managers and
leaders in large software companies can support sustained team
productivity during times of crisis and beyond.

I. I NTRODUCTION
As COVID-19 spread globally, many companies, including
Google, Microsoft, Twitter, Amazon, and Facebook, instructed
their software developers to go home and work remotely [1].
Entire software development teams that used to work predominantly in-person suddenly had to pivot their work and quickly
establish effective remote collaboration and communication.
Prior research has studied how working from home (WFH)
affects productivity [2], [3]. While regular WFH is not the
same as WFH during a pandemic, the COVID-19 pandemic
has created a natural experiment for researchers to study
WFH on a much larger scale than previously possible. For
instance, it has helped reduce selection bias in studies of
WFH since almost everyone has to work from home, and it
has helped researchers identify and understand the concrete
challenges faced by developers while working remotely. There

WFH-Survey
RQ1: Ability to meet milestones
RQ2: Team culture
RQ3: Peer support

Team-Survey
RQ4: Communication and collaboration
RQ5: Social interactions

Team Productivity Model
RQ6: Modeling team productivity

Fig. 1. Methodology Flow Chart

are recent papers that already began investigating the impacts
of this unique work setting. Bao et al. performed a case
study using automated trace data, along with other metrics,
to determine how productivity has been affected. They found
that productivity was affected in various ways depending on
the productivity metrics used [4]. Ralph et al. performed
an international large-scale questionnaire survey of developer
well-being and productivity and found that productivity and
well-being are closely related, and both are currently suffering [5]. As insightful as these works are at providing empirical
evidence of factors affecting individual developer productivity,
they lack a deeper understanding of a major responsibility of
industrial software developers—collaborating with a team.
In our work, we identify factors that affect software development team productivity such as team culture factors,
including communication, camaraderie, and team cohesion [6],
[7]. We hypothesize these factors are at particular risk of
being disrupted by this unexpected shift to WFH. Thus, we
investigated the effects of WFH on teams and answered the
following research questions (RQs):
RQ1 How has the ability for teams to meet milestones
changed during WFH?
RQ2 How has team culture changed during WFH?

RQ3 How have teams supported their members during WFH?
RQ4 How has team communication and collaboration
changed during WFH?
RQ5 How have social interactions within teams changed
during WFH?
RQ6 Which factors are associated with a change in team
productivity during WFH?
To answer our research questions, we conducted two surveys. The first survey was an exploratory survey to understand
how team productivity, ability to meet milestones, culture,
and support structures have changed. We refer to this survey
throughout the paper as the “WFH-Survey.” We analyze data
collected from the exploratory survey that was aimed to better
understand team culture factors and changes in communication
and interaction practices. We also achieve early insights about
team productivity, specifically how some believe it has been
reduced and the reasons why teams may not meet milestones.
We found a common narrative among developers about
how ad-hoc in-person communication has been replaced with
online communication that, despite the often times more
meaningful intent, has more friction. For example, as one of
our respondents put it, formerly shallow questions from team
members like “How was your weekend?” are now a deep
inquiry of well-being and genuine concern. Many developers
also discussed how their teams had trouble finding satisfying
replacements for the low-effort in-person social activities
like lunch or coffee breaks that were used to help maintain
camaraderie and social connection on their team.
Consequently, we designed an additional quantitative survey, which we refer to throughout the paper as the “TeamSurvey” to focus on team-specific factors and their prevalence.
From our Team-Survey, we found that 66% of respondents
reported a decrease in social connection with their team
members, and 78% and 65% cited a decrease in impromptu
and scheduled social activities, respectively. Across the board,
we saw a dramatic decrease in feelings of social connection
and team cohesion. We also found that 57% of respondents felt
a decrease in their ability to brainstorm with their colleagues.
Likewise, the quality and ease of communication were commonly cited challenges. To understand the refined impact of
these factors, we built a model of team productivity where we
found that factors including the ability to brainstorm with team
members, the frequency of scheduled social activities, and experiencing difficulties communicating with colleagues all have
a significant relationship with change in team productivity.
As remote work will continue beyond the pandemic, it is
important for us to know how to evolve our approaches to
support remote work. Our work can help improve the experience of remote teams by identifying crucial factors that they
should focus on strengthening, like the ability to effectively
communicate and brainstorm, and factors they should work
on maintaining like social connection and team cohesion.
II. M ETHODOLOGY
To answer our research questions, we distributed two surveys to full-time software engineers at a large software com-

pany in the United States. The company started working from
home in March 2020 around the same time when Amazon,
Facebook, Google, and Microsoft started remote work due to
the COVID-19 pandemic.
Figure 1 shows a methodology flowchart. The first survey
(WFH-Survey, Section II-A) collected qualitative data and was
used to answer RQ1, RQ2, and RQ3. The second survey
(Team-Survey, Section II-B) builds on the first survey and
collected quantitative data to answer RQ4, RQ5, and RQ6.
Both surveys were anonymous, and no personally identifiable information was collected. We emphasized the anonymity
of the survey to help organically create a more-candid space
for respondents [8]. Respondents were invited to reach out to
us via separate email if they had any questions or concerns.
Both surveys included a filter question, in the beginning,
asking respondents whether they were currently working from
home to ensure they qualified to participate. The complete
surveys can be found in the replication package [9].
In both surveys, we asked participants about the change in
perceived team productivity:
• Compared to working in office, how has your team
productivity changed? (WFH-Q1, Team-Q1) 1
The responses to this question were on a five-point scale from
significantly decreased to significantly increased.
A. WFH-Survey
In April 2020, we ran a large-scale three-week survey with
the goal of understanding how developers are being affected
by WFH at the large software company.
Survey Instrument. We asked participants a wide array
of questions (42 in total) about their experiences working
from home. Most questions were focused on the respondents’
individual experiences. For this paper, we analyzed the subset
of questions that were specifically related to teams. We used
three open-ended questions for the qualitative analysis of how
teams are affected as they work from home:
• How has your team culture changed? (WFH-Q2)
• How has your team supported you during this crisis?
(WFH-Q3)
• Compared to working in office, do you think the ability
of the team to reach milestones has changed? (No/Yes).
If yes, please explain. (WFH-Q4) 2
To identify common ways teams are being affected by WFH,
we triangulated the responses from these three questions. This
helps create a more holistic perspective on the effects of WFH
by considering team culture, team support, and challenges in
meeting milestones.
Participants. The WFH-Survey was deployed using the
Qualtrics survey tool and participants were invited via personalized emails. We sent email invitations over a period of
three weeks to a random sample of 9,000 software engineers
1 We renumbered the questions for this paper. The prefix indicates whether
the question belongs to the WFH-Survey or the Team-Survey.
2 The question WFH-Q4 was asked only in Weeks 2 and 3.

(3,000 per week). This survey received 2,265 responses (response rate of 25%, which is comparable to other surveys
in software engineering [10]). After completion of the WFHSurvey, participants could enter a sweepstakes to win USD
$100 Amazon.com gift certificates.
Analysis. We used qualitative content analysis coding [11]
(sometimes also known as card sorting), which provides a
framework to ascertain the meaning and summarize overarching themes of responses within the context of the research
question. In the analysis, we grouped similar responses to the
open-ended questions into codes. The first iteration of coding
was performed by one author, and any responses the first
author was unsure of were decided by discussion with another
author. All the codes were then reviewed by the other authors.
For the questions about team culture (WFH-Q2) and team
provided support (WFH-Q3), we coded a random sample
of 600 responses. We selected this sample based on (1)
previous experience with similar surveys and (2) a sample
size determination for a confidence interval of 95% and a
margin of error of 5%, which required 385 or more responses.
For both questions we reached saturation, defined as coding
100 responses without new codes (for WFH-Q2 saturation was
after 358 responses, for WFH-Q3 after 511 responses).
For the question about whether the team’s ability to meet
milestones has changed (WFH-Q4, shown only in Weeks 2 and
3), we used all 416 explanations provided when participants
responded “Yes.” Of the 1,477 responses, 446 responded “Yes”
(30%) but not all provided an explanation.
In Section III, we discuss the most common responses
(codes) in more detail and include examples from the WFHSurvey. The codes are discussed in order from most to least
frequently cited in the responses. The codes were selected until
there was a natural dip in frequency. The full list of codes can
be seen in our replication package [9].
B. Team-Survey
From the analysis of the WFH-Survey, we learned that
communication and collaboration with team members were
among the most commonly cited challenges impacting the
ability to reach milestones. We also found that social connectedness and communication were the most commonly cited
team culture factors affected by WFH. Because the first survey
was primarily open-ended, we were not able to quantify
how widespread these experiences were and how they are
associated with team productivity. We, therefore, designed a
second survey (“Team-Survey”). To identify specific common
developer experiences that relate to social connectedness and
quality of communication to include in the Team-Survey, we
referred to the responses to the WFH-Survey that cited social
connectedness and communication factors.
Survey Instrument. The Team-Survey contained 19 questions in total, including questions about demographics, team
productivity, team culture, communication and collaboration,
social connectedness, as well as three open-ended questions
at the end to provide respondents with an opportunity to

share additional thoughts and feedback. The majority of the
questions were Likert response questions to allow for more
quantitative analysis.
We asked two key questions exploring team culture factors:
• How has communication with your team changed since
working from home? (Team-Q2)
• How has social interaction with your team members
changed since working from home? (Team-Q3)
The items and response formats for Team-Q2 and Team-Q3
can be found in Tables I and II. The items for Team-Q2
and Team-Q3 were derived from a combination of the WFHSurvey and previous literature [12].
We also asked about how respondents stayed socially connected to colleagues (Team-Q4), about work-related challenges while working from home, and how impactful these
challenges are (Team-Q5).
To quantify and model which factors are associated with a
change in team productivity, we included team culture factors
as items in the Team-Survey because team culture factors
have been established as important factors of productivity [13].
Related work has shown that there are additional team-related
factors that can predict productivity including confidence and
supportiveness of a team [12]. Therefore, we added a question
to the survey with agreement about: (1) my manager is highly
capable; (2) my team members are highly capable; (3) my team
members are supportive of new ideas; and (4) I feel positively
about other people on my team.
Participants. The Team-Survey was implemented with the
Microsoft Forms Pro survey tool and participants were invited
via personalized emails. Invitations were sent to a random
sample of 3,500 software engineers in July 2020. We received
178 out of office responses giving us a pool of 3,322 potential
participants, of whom 608 responded yielding about an 18%
response rate, which is comparable to other software engineering surveys [10]. There was no overlap between the invitees
of the WFH-Survey and the Team-Survey. The gender identification breakdown of respondents is as follows, 455 identified
as men, 90 as women, 2 as non-binary/gender diverse, and
17 preferred not to answer. While our survey collected the
gender identity of respondents, we did not ask about the gender
composition of teams as our scope was on team productivity.
Thus, we did not analyze gender composition.
Survey respondents did not receive compensation, but for
each response USD $2 were donated to the Black Lives Matter
Global Network [14] for a total of up to USD $400.
Analysis. To understand the overall trends of the responses
and to quantify the themes that emerged in the Team-Survey
we used visualizations and descriptive analyses.
To model the change in perceived team productivity with the
factors in the survey (RQ6), we ran a regression analysis with
three steps described as follows. We first built a model using
all factors, then we used AIC backwards stepwise regression
for variable selection, followed by standard model diagnostics.
Step 1: Build Regression Model. We initially built a multiple
linear regression model using all the factors included in the

Team-Survey [15]. Multiple linear regression analysis is a form
of regression modeling used to model a quantitative response
variable using multiple explanatory variables that can be both
quantitative and categorical [16]. The response variable was
the perceived change in team productivity (Team-Q1), which
was formatted as a 5-point Likert response item. Since we used
a 5-point scale, it is appropriate to treat it as an ordinal version
of a continuous variable and to code it as a numerical variable
for the model [17], [18]. However, the explanatory variables
remained categorical because some of them are Likert response
items with only three levels rather than five, so they could
not be coded numerically. All explanatory variables were kept
categorical to help preserve the consistency of interpretation.
Step 2: Perform Variable Selection. Once we had the full
model built with all the factors from the Team-Survey, we
reduced the model using variable selection. The goal of
variable selection is to reduce the model down to only the
most important variables, for this we use Akaike Information
Criterion (AIC) [19]. AIC considers two key components in
its formula. First, it considers the quality of fit for the model
given by the model’s sum of squared error (SSE). Second, it
considers the complexity of the model, based on the number
of parameters. Removing a variable from the model will lower
the complexity of the model, but it will also possibly increase
the error of the SSE, this balance is what the criterion is based
on. We used backward stepwise selection, which starts with
the full model and removes variables one at a time according
to the AIC [20] with the goal of minimizing the AIC.
Step 3: Model diagnostics. We first examined the Variance
Inflation Factor (VIF) for each factor, which signals whether
multicolinearity is an issue [21]. We removed any variables
with a VIF score greater than 5, which is a standard benchmark
within the statistics community [15]. We also performed
the standard diagnostic plots to assure the linear regression
assumptions of linearity, constant variance, and normality
were upheld [15]. We then used ANOVA testing to identify
which variables in the model had a statistically significant
relationship with perceived change in team productivity [22].
III. R ESULTS
A. How has the ability for teams to meet milestones changed
during WFH? (RQ1)
We discuss the responses to the question “Compared
to working in office, do you think the ability of the
team to reach milestones has changed?” (WFH-Q4). 30%
of respondents said “Yes” the ability to reach milestones
is affected. When people responded that their ability was
affected, they were asked to elaborate. Although this question
was phrased neutrally, the vast majority of respondents who
elaborated cited challenges that hindered their ability to reach
milestones. Beyond general reduced productivity and current
events, participants commonly cited collaboration challenges,
and challenges surrounding effective communication. These
communication-related factors were frequently raised.

Reduced Productivity – General. (72×) General reduced
productivity was characterized by an overall decrease in general efficiency/productivity among team members, it could also
manifest as the velocity of work decreasing.
7 We have lost somewhere between 20%-40% effectiveness
in use of time. In order to keep up, people are working
longer hours. We are starting to see burnout. (S1384)
7 We definitely are not as efficient. (S1629)
Reduced Productivity – Current Events/Kids. (71×) This
code encompasses reduced productivity/efficiency due to WFH
challenges specifically related to current events including
COVID-19 and childcare responsibilities.
7 The time pressure due to child care expectations and
more-frequent scheduled meetings (vs. quick hallway chats)
has definitely slowed the team down. We have explicitly and
officially postponed some work, citing Coronavirus-rooted
challenges as reasons. (S887)
Communication Challenges. (46×) This code captured
issues related to brainstorming sessions, discussions, and meetings, or issues with miscommunications.
7 It is more difficult to land nuanced discussions. 1:1 is
OK, but in a multi-person discussion it is very, very hard
to keep focus. (S1777)
7 Difficulties in communication lead to additional time
necessary to connect and sync. Similar communication
difficulties lead to wasted work, re-work on at least a couple
occasions. (S2072)
Collaboration Challenges. (43×) This code included issues
with collaborative brainstorming, effective discussions, and
other coordination tasks.
7 I think we spend a lot more time trying to coordinate with
each other and driving for clarity and shared understanding
is harder. This means more time solidifying what we need
to be doing and less time doing/building it. (S835)
7 Brainstorming activities that need whiteboard and involve more passionate conversation progresses slower than
before and can be frustrating. (S1833)
B. How has team culture changed during WFH? (RQ2)
Here, we discuss the responses to “How has your team
culture changed?” (WFH-Q2). The most common answer
to this question was actually No Change. After No Change,
the most commonly cited changes were related to social
connection and communication. There appears to be a general
push for increased conscious interactions, especially focused
on social connectedness and communication.
No Change. (109×) No change constituted not noticing or
experiencing any significant change in team culture.
7 I do not think there was any drastic changes (S1642)
7 I feel no difference (S1801)
Social Interaction Emphasized. (49×) Respondents reported teams were investing a conscious effort into promoting,

reinforcing, and improving social interactions and connections
within a team, or a focus on implementing social events.
7 We have had to setup dedicated socializing meetings/channels/chats to fill the void of hallway conversations.
(S232)
Teams were putting an active effort into ensuring they
were able to engage socially during WFH. Participants often
reported that this active effort was necessary due to the loss of
ad-hoc social events that they engaged in when in the office.
7 More explicit efforts to facilitate social events and foster
team relationships. (S1676)
More Meetings. (39×) Respondents described an increased
number of either formal or informal meetings, including sync
up meetings, collaboration meetings, and social meetings.
7 We are trying to adapt to daily sync ups and face time
between all team members. which helps with communication
but adds into the million meetings (S1722)
7 We have more meetings in general, but we also have
had some team meetings to discuss how people are feeling/coping with the situation (S1988)
Missing General Interaction. (39×) Respondents reported
a general lack of communication, interaction, and/or connection with team members.
7 I don’t really interact/talk to them very much anymore
(S110)
7 fewer interactions overall. More interactions with fewer
people. (S1428)
Missing Social Interaction. (36×) Respondents reported
experiencing a lack of casual interpersonal communication and
socialization. Pre-WFH, these informal interactions often used
to be manifested as lunch, quick chats, and other team bonding
experiences. Respondents commonly cited not having found
equivalent remote substitutions for these interactions.
7 Fewer informal sessions of “just chatting” before/after
meetings makes things feel lonely (S1280)
7 We used to have lunches together, and had good comeraderie. No more lunches together, less comeraderie, and less
incidental ‘water cooler’ information exchange. (S2049)
Increased Empathy. (36×) Respondents reported that their
team has an increased understanding, consideration, or empathy for the situations of others on the team.
7 We are definitely acting bit more caring and respectful of
each others struggles during this time. We are going out of
our way to make everyone comfortable. At the same time,
fatigue is seeping in and folks are gradually giving up hope
on this whole situation. (S2269)
C. How have teams supported members during WFH? (RQ3)
We next discuss the responses to “How has your team
supported you during this crisis?” (WFH-Q3) After Peer
Support, the most commonly cited methods of support
focused on communication, social connection, and empathy/understanding. Many participants described a focus on
supporting social connection and an empathetic culture.

Peer Support. (56×) The most commonly cited method
of support was peer support. This constituted respondents
reporting general shows of support from team members.
7 Folks are always there to help each other out. (S577)
7 Everyone is supportive of each other. It is easy to talk
with someone if needed. Feel supported. (S1053)
Social Engagements. (42×) Social engagements were defined as meetings organized with the purpose of fostering
social interaction, including lunch calls and virtual happy hour.
7 We try to organize online events such as Friday night
chats and virtual lunches. (S397)
7 We have weekly social hours, which helps with some of
the social isolation I’ve been feeling. (S1562)
Communication Tools. (41×) Respondents reported the
use of communication tools such as Slack and Microsoft
Teams to connect with other employees across the company.
Respondents reported the use of such tools to help facilitate
meetings, discussions, and other forms of communication.
7 Lots of online meetings. (S169)
7 A lot of interactions, face time via communication tools
to help us feel less socially isolated. (S1663)
Understanding Personal WFH Situations. (40×) The
respondents described team members being understanding
and supportive of child care responsibilities, limited schedule
availability, and various WFH challenges such as needing
personal breaks between meetings.
7 We’ve more intentionally focused on learning about people’s personal lives & situations. “How was your weekend”
has transitioned from a perfunctory pleasantry into real
personal concern/care for others. (S1840)
7 Agreement that meetings should start at 5- or 10- after
the hour to allow for personal breaks. (S2085)
7 Everyone is in the same position and therefore very
understanding of each person’s individual circumstances,
so there is empathy and flexibility. (S438)
7 Everyone has been very supportive when I needed flexibility to help my kids get started with their home schooling
(S546)
Personal Check Ins. (39×) Personal check-ins were defined as check-in meetings with a small number of team
members, often with the objective of exploring personal wellbeing or work progress.
7 More meetings with our direct manager’s team just to
talk and check in. (S1636)
7 Open conversation and checking in during 1:1’s. (S1343)
D. How has team communication and collaboration changed
during WFH? (RQ4)
Issues with communication and collaboration among teams
were commonly cited by developers in the WFH-Survey.
These are important challenges to recognize because previous
research has highlighted the importance of efficient communication flow for developer productivity [23]. The findings

TABLE I
H OW HAS COMMUNICATION WITH YOUR TEAM MEMBERS CHANGED SINCE WORKING FROM HOME ? (T EAM -Q2, 608 RESPONSES )
Communication Method
CM1
CM2
CM3
CM4
CM5
CM6
CM7
CM8
CM9
CM10
CM11
CM12
CM13
CM14
CM15
CM16
CM17
CM18
CM19
CM20

12%

Frequency of scheduled meetings
Frequency of team member notifications
Frequency of ad-hoc meetings
Impactful contributions I make to team
Quality of scheduled meetings
Positive interactions with my team
Ability to collaborate with colleagues 1:1
Positive interactions with my manager
Satisfaction with communication with team
Ability to ask questions in group meetings
Effectiveness of communication with colleagues
Ability to share thoughts in group meetings
Communication ease with colleagues
Communication breakdowns w/in my team
Awareness of colleague’s work
Speed of decision making on my team
Ability to brainstorm with colleagues
Knowledge flow within my team
Ability to make decisions as a team
Feeling socially connected to my team

Significant Decrease

Decrease

About the Same

Increase

15%
36%
16%

37%

51%

40%

46%
26%

37%

56%

28%

23%

54%

24%

25%

52%

23%

34%
20%
29%
20%
28%
21%

43%

23%

58%

23%

51%

20%

61%

19%

53%

19%

63%

16%

51%
18%
40%
25%

34%

15%
45%

Significant Increase

from the WFH-Survey show that communication is (1) often
affected by changes in team culture, (2) used by teams to
support their members, and (3) a common challenge teams face
in reaching milestones. Teams are often being conscious of
communication and working hard to make improvements, but
it is still one of the biggest roadblocks to reaching milestones.
This suggests that while communication is a cornerstone
challenge for WFH teams, this is not a lack of communication
issue, but rather a quality of communication issue.
Numerous WFH-Survey respondents mentioned issues communicating in ways that used to be trivial, like brainstorming
with team members or the ability to collaborate with team
members one-on-one. One survey participant described the
“explosion of meeting requests and heightened expectations
on availability and response time from emails and online
messages. It is much harder to interject in online meetings
due to lack of visual cues, so meetings and decisions end up
monopolized by a small set of people.” (S397) Even though
most teams report they are still meeting regularly, there are
questions regarding the quality and ease of communication.
In the Team-Survey, we therefore sought to further explore
the prevalence of these challenges. When asked about WFH
issues faced, 58% of the Team-Survey respondents reported
being less aware of colleagues’ work, and 47% said they had
difficulty communicating with colleagues.
Table I shows a visualization of the responses to the
question “How has communication with your team members changed since working from home?” (Team-Q2).
The communication aspects that have decreased the most

12%
32%

42%
65%

14%

63%

57%
22%

15%

68%

47%

11%
11%

66%

11%
28%

7%

Percentages may not total 100% due to rounding.

are feeling socially connected to team (65%, CM20),3 ability
to brainstorm with colleagues (57%, CM17), communication
ease with colleagues (51%, CM13), and knowledge flow within
my team (42%, CM18). The communication aspects that have
increased the most are frequency of scheduled meetings (51%,
CM1), frequency of team member notifications (46%, CM2),
and frequency of ad-hoc meetings.
The fact that 65% of respondents reported that they had
experienced a decrease in feeling socially connected to their
team (CM20) is alarming. Previous research has shown that
team camaraderie is an important factor in developer productivity [13]. The majority of respondents reported a decrease
in communication ease with colleagues (51%, CM13) and
the same or a higher frequency of scheduled meetings (88%,
CM1). This supports the hypothesis that although communication is occurring on teams, there are still issues regarding
the quality of the communication.
E. How have social interactions within teams changed during
WFH? (RQ5)
Based on the findings from the WFH-Survey, challenges
regarding social connection and social interaction appear to
be a common thread among developers, motivating our further
analysis. Many respondents are actively missing interactions
with their team members, specifically social interactions, and
numerous teams are using social engagements as a way to
actively support their members. Nonetheless, plenty of respondents still reported deficiencies in social connection. In
3 The labels CM# and SC# refer to the rows in Tables I and II respectively.
CM is short for Communication Method; SC is short for Social Connection.

TABLE II
H OW HAS SOCIAL INTERACTION WITH YOUR TEAM MEMBERS CHANGED SINCE WORKING FROM HOME ? (T EAM -Q3, 608 RESPONSES )
Social Connection
SC1
SC2
SC3
SC4
SC5
SC6
SC7

Frequency of scheduled social activities
Satisfaction with the social interaction from social activities
Connection with team members
Team’s overall sense of connection
Social connection with team members
Frequency of impromptu social activities
Enjoyment of social activities

Significant Decrease

Decrease

About the Same

Increase

Significantly more productive
More productive

3%

2%

About the same
Less productive
Significantly less productive

18%
55%

56%

21%
2%

17%

38%

7%

57%

36%

7%

59%

34%

7%

28%

78%
59%

17%
37%

6%
5%
5%

Percentages may not total 100% due to rounding

frequently, with 1% and 2% respectively using them at least
2-4 times weekly.

Team-Survey

19%

17%

55%

66%

Significant Increase

TABLE III
C HANGES IN PERCEIVED TEAM PRODUCTIVITY.
WFH-Survey

65%

21%
2%

the Team-Survey, 74% of respondents reported missing social
interaction as a WFH challenge they experienced.
Many participants in the WFH-Survey also mentioned feeling disconnected from their team members, and feeling like
they are not connecting with their team members remotely
in the same way they used to in person. The loss of team
lunches, which were a popular low-effort social event, was
commonly cited. One participant described how “we used
to have lunches together, and had good [camaraderie]. No
more lunches together, less [camaraderie], and less incidental
‘water cooler’ information exchange.” (S2049)
Table II shows the responses to the question “How has
social interaction with your team members changed since
working from home?” (Team-Q3). There is a large decrease
in social activities. Over half of the participants reported experiencing a decrease for all items in Team-Q3. The frequency of
impromptu social activities (78%, SC7)3 and scheduled social
activities (65%, SC1) decreased dramatically. Furthermore,
59% of respondents reported a decrease in enjoyment of social
activities (SC7) and 66% of respondents reported a decrease
in social connections with their team members (SC5).
For the responses to the question “How do you stay
socially connected with your colleagues (in place of hallway conversations, coffee breaks, etc.?)” (Team-Q4, not
displayed in a table), we could observe that the most frequently
utilized social activities were relatively low-effort. The two
most frequently utilized social events were starting or ending
meetings with non-work conversations and sharing pictures
and memes, with 40% and 25% of teams respectively using
them at least 2-4 times weekly. Whereas, activities that require
more organization and coordination like external team bonding
activities and playing online games together were used less

F. Which factors are associated with a change in team productivity during WFH? (RQ6)
When we asked participants in the Team-Survey how their
team productivity has changed compared to working in the
office, 20% reported an increase and 23% reported a decrease
(see Table III). The numbers were similar to the WFH-Survey.
To understand which factors are associated with a change in
team productivity, we built a regression model as described in
Section II-B based on the Team-Survey data. As a reminder,
the response variable, perceived change in team productivity
(Team-Q1), was a 5-point response from significantly decreased to significantly increased. The responses were coded
as a numerical variable as follows: −2 means significantly
decreased, −1 means decreased, 0 means about the same, +1
means increased, and +2 means significantly increased. Table
IV shows the model coefficients for the factors that had a
significant relationship with change in team productivity. Table
V lists the ANOVA F-statistic and p-value for all factors in
the reduced model.
Interpreting Model Coefficients. Since the response variables are categorical, each has n-1 dummy variables where n is
the number of categories for a given variable. It is important to
note the dummy variable coefficients do not represent absolute
change, but rather relative change to the baseline category (i.e.,
the category that is not coded with a dummy variable). The
dummy variable coefficients represent the difference between
the team productivity of a given category relative to the team
productivity of the baseline category for that factor.
Baseline Categories. For questions on a 5-point DecreasedIncreased, or Disagree-Agree scale, the baseline categories are
about the same and neither agree nor disagree, respectively.
For questions on a 3-point issue scale, the baseline is not an
issue. For External Team Bonding Activities, the baseline is
rarely or never.
Next, we discuss some observations from Table IV.
Less Awareness of What Colleagues are Working On.
Experiencing this issue was associated with a decrease in team
productivity. This is a concern because 58% of survey respondents reported experiencing this issue. When experienced as a

TABLE IV
FACTORS FROM MODEL THAT HAD STATISTICALLY SIGNIFICANT

TABLE V
F ULL LIST OF FACTORS INCLUDED IN TEAM PRODUCTIVITY MODEL

RELATIONSHIP WITH CHANGE IN PERCEIVED TEAM PRODUCTIVITY

Factor
(Intercept)
Less Awareness of What Colleagues are Working On
Minor Issue
Major Issue
Ability To Brainstorm With Team Members
Significantly Decreased
Decreased
Increased
Significantly Increased
Difficult to Communicate with Colleagues
Minor Issue
Major Issue
Impactful Contributions I Make to Team
Significantly Decreased
Decreased
Increased
Significantly Increased
Ability to Make Decisions as Team
Significantly Decreased
Decreased
Increased
Significantly Increased
Frequency of Scheduled Social Activities
Significantly Decreased
Decreased
Increased
Significantly Increased
Start or End Meetings with Non-Work Conversations
Monthly
Biweekly
Weekly
2-4 times weekly
Daily
Multiple times daily
External Team Bonding Activities
Monthly
Biweekly
Weekly
2-4 times weekly
Daily
My Team Members are Supportive of New Ideas
Strongly disagree
Disagree
Agree
Strongly agree
Adjusted R2

Coef.
0.10
-0.23***
-0.40***
-0.20*
-0.17**
0.09
0.11
-0.16*
-0.35**
-0.35.
-0.12
0.23***
0.79***
-0.48**
-0.08
0.31**
0.11
0.22*
0.18*
0.24**
0.11
0.06
-0.01
-0.13.
-0.24**
0.04
-0.15
0.16.
0.24.
0.07
0.52
1.47***
-0.87**
-0.04
-0.18*
-0.20*
0.45

***p<0.001, **p<0.01, *p<0.05,.p<0.1

major issue, the drop in team productivity was roughly double
the drop when experienced as a minor issue.
Ability to Brainstorm with Team Members. A decrease in
the ability to brainstorm with team members was associated
with a drop in team productivity, and similarly, an increase
in ability to brainstorm was associated with an increase in
team productivity. This is an important finding because 57%
of respondents reported a decrease in the ability to brainstorm
with team members (see Table I), and we can now report that
this is also associated with a decrease in team productivity.
This is also relevant given several respondents made comments

Productivity Factors

F-Statistic

Less awareness of what colleagues are working on
Impactful Contributions I Make to Team
Ability to Make Decisions as Team
External Team Bonding Activities
My Team Members are Supportive of New Ideas
Communication Breakdowns Within my Team
Difficult to Communicate with Colleagues
Ability to Brainstorm with Team Members
Start/End Meetings with Non-Work Talk
Frequency of Scheduled Social Activities
My Manage is Highly Capable
Fun Informal Chats Non-Teams
Ability to Ask Questions in Group Meetings
Satisfaction with Social Interaction from Social Activities

9.86***
9.67***
4.52**
3.97**
3.26*
1.37
5.89**
2.93*
2.94**
2.48*
1.86
1.73
1.63
1.04

***p<0.001, **p<0.01, *p<0.05,.p<0.1

in the WFH-Survey about challenges related to collaboration
work with team members, particularly brainstorming. As one
participant put it, “brainstorming activities that need whiteboard and involve more passionate conversation progresses
slower than before and can be frustrating.” (S1833)
Difficult to Communicate with Colleagues. Experiencing
the issue of having difficulty communicating with colleagues
was associated with a drop in team productivity. From the RQ1
findings, we know difficulty with communication is common
among those working from home, and from Table I we know
that 46% of respondents reported experiencing this challenge.
Additional Significant Factors. For the factors Impactful
Contributions I Make to Team and Ability to Make Decisions
as a Team, an increase was associated with an increase in team
productivity. A decrease in these factors was associated with a
drop in team productivity. Other factors that had a statistically
significant relationship with change in team productivity were
frequency of scheduled social activities, starting or ending
meetings with non-work talk, external team bonding activities,
and my team is supportive of new ideas.
IV. T HREATS TO VALIDITY
We discuss several of the threats to the validity of our work.
The first point is not a threat but an important disclaimer,
this paper does not suggest causal inference of any kind. All
findings are based on survey data it’s statistical analysis. Our
findings show factors that are constructive when modeling
perceived change in team productivity and factors that have
a statistically significant relationship with it, but we are not
implying causality of any manner.
External Validity. The participants for the surveys were all
from Microsoft, a large software company, and all respondents
were based in the United States. This limits the generalizability
of our findings, which cannot be assumed to generalize to
all software developers, especially those who work at smaller
companies, in different regions, or in open source. At Microsoft, we collected a large random sample of developers
across multiple divisions (called organizations at Microsoft)

who worked on a vast number of different kinds of projects
and use a variety of development techniques. Although our
findings cannot be generalized to all software developers, we
believe our findings are still of value to the community because
it has been shown that historically single-case case studies
contribute to scientific discovery [24]. To help increase the
generalizability of our work in the future, we have created
a comprehensive replication package [9] that can be used to
perform our survey and analysis at other companies.
Previous research has shown that people who are inclined
to participate in surveys may have different demeanor and
personality traits than the entire population being sampled
from [25], [26]. In an attempt to minimize the risk of nonresponse and volunteer bias, we aimed to lower the opportunity
cost of participating in the Team-Survey by making the expected completion time 10 minutes, incentivizing engagement
with a donation to a civil rights organization, and anonymizing
survey responses. In the WFH-Survey, we incentivized engagement with entry into a raffle for an Amazon gift card and
anonymizing survey responses.
The time period when the participants took the survey may
have also impacted their perspective, which could potentially
evolve over time. It is also important to note that pandemic
WFH is not the same thing as WFH during normal times, so
there are limits on the generalizability of our findings.
Construct Validity. When measuring the change in productivity, we used a single metric, self-reported perceived
change in productivity. It’s important to note that there is no
single definitive metric for productivity and that we cannot
claim that our findings are true for productivity as a whole,
because the factors that impact productivity inherently depend
on the measures you are using to define productivity [27].
The team productivity scores are from the perspective of an
individual team member. Since the survey was anonymous and
no personal identifiable information was collected (to encourage more candid responses), we were unable to triangulate
responses from members of the same team, which would have
further improved the validity of the findings. While there
are advantages and disadvantages to selecting self-reported
measures of productivity versus automated technical ones, our
choice aligns similar recent work [7], [12], [28].
While we performed a thorough literature review, there may
be additional team culture factors that have an impact on team
productivity that we did not include in our survey. Our findings
are not meant to be an exhaustive list but to rather highlight
some of the team culture factors that are constructive when
modeling team productivity.
The first iteration of qualitative analysis coding was done by
a single author, but were later reviewed by the other authors,
and any responses the first author was unsure of were decided
with discussion with another author.
The response variable for the model, change in team
productivity, was coded in the survey as a 5-point Likert
scale. However, for the sake of the data analysis, it was
coded numerical values from -2 to 2. Since Likert scales are
ordinal categorical scales, there has been a debate within the

statistics community about whether it is appropriate to code
them as numerical values [29]. Norman stated that “parametric
statistics can be used with Likert data” [17], even when the
sample sizes are small and the distributions are non-normal.
It has also been suggested that higher p-values be used with
Likert scores [29], so all p-values have been included in our
model so readers can interpret results with both a standard
p-value of α = 0.05 or a smaller one.
Internal Validity. Due to the nature of surveys, there is
a chance some participants found certain survey questions to
be ambiguous, confusing, or unclear. This means participants
could misunderstand what we’re asking about and respond in
a way that does not align with what we meant to ask. To help
prevent this possibility, we performed a small pilot study with
the first 200 participants, which included a question at the end
of the survey asking about whether there were any ambiguous
or unclear questions or other aspects of the survey.
Since the survey responses were anonymous, there is a
possibility that participants took the survey multiple times.
The structure of the surveys may have had an impact on
the ways the participants responded to questions and could
have potentially primed them. To prevent this from affecting
perceived productivity, which was our response variable, we
put the productivity questions at the beginning of the survey.
V. R ELATED W ORK
A. Working from Home
In 1973, Jack Niles, a NASA engineer, was sick of Los
Angeles traffic. It was then that he coined the term “telecommuting,” and the concept of remote work was conceived
[30]. Granted, his vision for telecommuting was different than
our reality today since his idea was from over a decade
before the public internet [31]. Nonetheless, the concept of
distributed workplaces was present in his proposal for telecommuting [32], and that idea has evolved into the remote work
we know today.
Research on WFH has increased in the last few years [33]–
[36]. There are many benefits to WFH for both the employee
and the employer. For example, employees can reduce or
eliminate their commute to work and save money on gasoline.
They can also control the environment they work in (e.g.,
the air conditioning). Companies can benefit in many ways,
such as saving money from overhead and remote work allows
companies to hire the best talent from any location.
However, employees sometimes find that they are working increased hours when WFH [33]. This may mean they
work unsustainable schedules that may eventually lead to
burnout [37]. Previous work has also shown that increased
work hours can increase the risk of developer disengagement [38]. Remote work can also make it more difficult for
managers to manage their teams effectively. It can be challenging for managers to remain in touch with their employees
and stay on top of their progress [34].
Teamwork can be significantly impacted by remote
work [39]–[42]. Wagstrom et al. found the temporal distribu-

tion of teams had a significant negative impact on communication response time, suggesting that teams bifurcated across
multiple time zones communicate significantly slower [43].
Also, Butler et al. explored the challenges faced by developers
working from home during the COVID-19 pandemic and the
impact that these challenges have had on job satisfaction [44].
They found that having many meetings and feeling overworked
were some of the biggest challenges faced.
In addition, WFH has been found to have an impact on
individual software development productivity. Kazekami found
that when remote work hours are too long, worker productivity
is reduced [45]. In the GitHub Octoverse report, they found
that developers were working longer hours, in some cases up to
two additional 8-hour workdays per week [46]. It is important
to note that Bao et al. also performed a case study and found
that the effect of WFH on productivity varies depending on
which productivity metrics are used and the characteristics
of a project [4] (e.g., its size). Finally, Ralph et al. ran a
large-scale international survey of developers and found that
“software professionals who are working from home during
the pandemic are experiencing diminished emotional well
being and productivity, which are closely related [5].” The
relationship between self-reported productivity and developer
satisfaction was also discussed in previous research [7].
B. Developer Productivity
Software development is a complex process, and doing
it well, on budget, and on time can be hard [47]. Teams
may find challenges in coordination and communication [48].
Therefore, we must study developer productivity, which has
been of interest to researchers for decades [49]–[53].
One fundamental challenge in studying developer productivity is defining and operationalizing factors that encapsulate
‘productivity’ [54]. Generally speaking, there are two overarching types of productivity factors, technical and soft [13].
Some popular technical productivity metrics are the number
of lines of code [55], the number of builds [4], and the number
of commits per unit of time [4]. Soft factors that have been
shown to influence developer productivity include corporate
culture, workplace environment, and team culture factors [13].
However, there has been little work focused on team culture
factors, which are often more complex and nuanced.
Team culture factors are often directly impacted by the
distribution of teams [56], [57]. For example, we know that
communication for teams that are separated across multiple
time zones is often slower than co-located teams [43]. And
previous research also suggests that coordination and communication are some of the biggest challenges faced by developer
teams [48]. Tang et al. found that remote teams customize how
they work together based on their unique situations [58].
The majority of the related work explores individual developer productivity and individual challenges during the
COVID-19 pandemic. However, in our work, we specifically
directed our efforts on studying the impact that WFH has had
on software development teams and their productivity.

VI. D ISCUSSION AND R ECOMMENDATIONS
Through our survey analysis, we learned that many developers are experiencing social connection and communication
challenges with their teams. While many of our respondents
reported challenges, some reported that the transition to WFH
had been a positive experience. Additionally, only 23% of
respondents experienced a decrease in productivity during this
time. In this section, we discuss some of the positive WFH
experiences, implications for teams, and provide recommendations for improving social connection and communication.
A. Benefits of Working from Home
There are multiple benefits to WFH. For example, WFH
can be more accessible for workers with disabilities [59].
WFH can also help create an environment where traditionally
marginalized people (e.g., trans developers) can be empowered
and have more autonomy over workplace interactions [42].
In our survey, we found that one of the benefits of WFH
included the increased inclusion of all team members.
7 [Microsoft] Teams has forced people to be more inclusive. Our in person meetings usually have multiple people
speaking over each other. Online meetings over Teams on
the other hand have enabled people to stop speaking over
each other since they cannot see the other person and people
usually wait for the other person to complete. (S902)
Another one of the reported benefits of WFH was increased
empathy for fellow team members, including increased empathy for teammates who were remote before COVID-19.
7 I already had several employees who didn’t work in
Redmond. This has enabled us to build more empathy with
working with distant co-workers. (S1840)
As many teams were no longer hybrid but fully remote,
teams were now collectively experiencing similar remote work
and WFH problems. This placed teammates on the same
playing field during meetings and increased team bonding.
7 Flexibility, forgiveness of missed meetings and challenges
in connectivity. More mutual bonding over shared difficulties. Time taken to try to connect outside of work-related
tasks. (S1000)
Overall, the benefits of WFH provided an opportunity for
teams to respect one another’s perspective, build empathy, and
understanding of unprecedented home challenges that arise—
all characteristics that hopefully persist after the pandemic.
B. Recommendations
Based on our results, we provide the following recommendations to improve social connection and communication.
Recommendations for improving social connection:
 Build and maintain team culture.
 Include social activities as part of “work.”
 Be mindful of other people’s time.
 Actively work to be inclusive.

Build and maintain team culture. Managers should strive
to create and maintain a team culture where small daily social
interactions are promoted. For example, taking 10 minutes at
the start and end of meetings for small talk to maintain social
connection, as also recommended in [60], [61].
Include social activities as part of “work.” We recommend adding regular social activities to “work.” We suggest
being creative with these social events; for example, an alternative to virtual lunch could be playing an online game or
holding a remote arts and crafts event.
Be mindful of other’s time. Developers are working more
hours [46], and many respondents reported meeting fatigue.
Therefore, we recommend scheduling social events during
work hours and avoiding adding meetings during off-hours.
Be inclusive. We recommend that teams are mindful of
events that include hybrid participants. We suggest that hybrid
teams choose remote-centric activities to maintain accessibility
for team members who remain remote indefinitely [62].
Recommendations for improving communication:
 Managers should stay aware of contributions.
 Managers should hold weekly 1:1 meetings.
 Hold regular team meetings.
 Create communication standards.
Managers stay aware of contributions. One commonly
cited WFH challenge was effectively communicating in group
meetings. During meetings, we recommend managers remain
aware of each participant’s contributions and ensure all voices
are given an opportunity to speak.
Managers hold weekly 1:1 meetings. We found that many
respondents also reported appreciating check-in 1:1s with
managers and team members, which could be a productive
way to increase direct communication. We recommend having
weekly 1:1s regularly scheduled with managers and their team.
Hold regular team meetings. We recommend that teams
meet regularly. These meetings should be at least once a week
and can even be held daily. We recommend that these are
scheduled meetings that are reoccurring and put on the calendar in advance. We also recommend that during the meeting,
each team member provides status updates and discusses any
problems. These meetings allow teams and managers to be
aware of the progress and potentially address problems faster.
Create communication standards. We recommend that
teams collectively create standards around communication.
These standards include which communication tools to use
for specific types of communication and how long a teammate
should expect to wait for a response. This will also help new
hires onboarding remotely as they can be given clear guidance
on how to communicate with their new team [63].
VII. C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK
In conclusion, through the two surveys of developers (2,265
+ 608 responses), we found that software development teams
working from home during the COVID-19 pandemic have
experienced a radical shift in how they work together.

Our first survey, WFH-Survey, probed about a wide range
of topics related to WFH and provided rich insights on
team culture and collaboration factors. The second survey,
Team-Survey, investigated how team culture factors and team
productivity have been impacted by WFH. Using the team
factors that emerged from our surveys and from related work,
we built a model to determine which team factors were most
useful when modeling changes in team productivity.
Just as previous research has associated understanding and
predicting individual developer productivity with social interactions, we found that many of the factors associated with team
productivity were also of a social nature. Social connection and
communication were the most commonly cited team culture
factors. We found that 65% of respondents reported a decrease
in feelings of social connectedness with their team, and 74%
of respondents citing missing social interaction as a WFH
challenge. In terms of communication, 51% cited a decrease in
communication ease with colleagues, and 57% said the ability
to brainstorm with colleagues has decreased.
In understanding team productivity, we note most respondents from the Team-Survey reported that they perceived little
to no change in team productivity (56%), which is consistent
with the prior WFH-Survey. However, from those affected, we
were able to build a model of team productivity factors.
Our model of team productivity factors included the ability
to brainstorm with colleagues, having less awareness of what
colleagues are working on, and having difficulty communicating with colleagues, and these factors all have a significant relationship with changes in team productivity. Other
factors include satisfaction with social interaction from social
activities, while communication breakdowns on teams are also
important factors when modeling change in team productivity.
Understanding team productivity is a new avenue for research and an important topic as developers are now more
distributed during the pandemic and likely will continue to be
so after it. Improving productivity is not just a concern for
companies. It is also important from the individual developer
perspective as previous research has shown a relationship
between productivity and work satisfaction, and between
productivity and well-being. Although effective engineering
processes, collaboration and communication tools and work
environments are important for productivity, understanding
the nuances of how developers socialize, communicate, and
support each other [38] is just as critical.
S UPPLEMENTAL M ATERIAL
A replication package with both surveys and the analysis
codebook is available on Zenodo [9]. DOI 10.5281/zenodo.4456041
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank the survey participants.
Courtney Miller performed this work during a summer internship at Microsoft Research in the Software Analysis and Intelligence Team (http://aka.ms/saintes). Paige Rodeghero and
Margaret-Anne Storey contributed to this work while being
visiting researchers at Microsoft.

R EFERENCES
[1] C. Duffy, “Big tech firms ramp up remote working orders
to
prevent
coronavirus
spread,”
March
2020,
retrieved
August 17, 2020 from https://www.cnn.com/2020/03/10/tech/
google-work-from-home-coronavirus/index.html.
[2] E. Baker, G. C. Avery, and J. Crawford, “Satisfaction and perceived
productivity when professionals work from home,” Research & Practice
in Human Resource Management, 2007.
[3] D. J. Neufeld and Y. Fang, “Individual, social and situational determinants of telecommuter productivity,” Information & Management,
vol. 42, no. 7, pp. 1037–1049, 2005.
[4] L. Bao, T. Li, X. Xia, K. Zhu, H. Li, and X. Yang, “How does working
from home affect developer productivity?–a case study of baidu during
covid-19 pandemic,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.13167, 2020.
[5] P. Ralph, S. Baltes, G. Adisaputri, R. Torkar, V. Kovalenko, M. Kalinowski, N. Novielli, S. Yoo, X. Devroey, X. Tan et al., “Pandemic
programming: How covid-19 affects software developers and how their
organizations can help,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.01127, 2020.
[6] S. Wagner and E. Murphy-Hill, “Factors that influence productivity: A checklist,” in Rethinking Productivity in Software Engineering.
Springer, 2019, pp. 69–84.
[7] M.-A. Storey, T. Zimmermann, C. Bird, J. Czerwonka, B. Murphy,
and E. Kalliamvakou, “Towards a theory of software developer job
satisfaction and perceived productivity,” IEEE Transactions on Software
Engineering, 2019.
[8] C. M. Hewson, D. Laurent, and C. M. Vogel, “Proper methodologies
for psychological and sociological studies conducted via the internet,”
Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, & Computers, vol. 28, no. 2,
pp. 186–191, 1996.
[9] Supplementary Material for ”How Was Your Weekend?” Software
Development Teams Working From Home During COVID-19. Zenodo,
Jan. 2021. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.4456041
[10] E. Smith, R. Loftin, E. Murphy-Hill, C. Bird, and T. Zimmermann,
“Improving developer participation rates in surveys,” in 2013 6th International Workshop on Cooperative and Human Aspects of Software
Engineering (CHASE). IEEE, 2013, pp. 89–92.
[11] M. Schreier, Qualitative content analysis in practice. Sage publications,
2012.
[12] E. Murphy-Hill, C. Jaspan, C. Sadowski, D. Shepherd, M. Phillips,
C. Winter, A. Knight, E. Smith, and M. Jorde, “What predicts software
developers’ productivity?” IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering,
2019.
[13] S. Wagner and M. Ruhe, “A systematic review of productivity factors
in software development,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.06475, 2018.
[14] “Black lives matter global network,” https://blacklivesmatter.com, accessed: 2021-01-21.
[15] J. Fox, Applied regression analysis and generalized linear models. Sage
Publications, 2015.
[16] D. C. Montgomery, E. A. Peck, and G. G. Vining, Introduction to linear
regression analysis. John Wiley & Sons, 2012, vol. 821.
[17] G. Norman, “Likert scales, levels of measurement and the “laws” of
statistics,” Advances in health sciences education, vol. 15, no. 5, pp.
625–632, 2010.
[18] G. M. Sullivan and A. R. Artino Jr, “Analyzing and interpreting data
from likert-type scales,” Journal of graduate medical education, vol. 5,
no. 4, pp. 541–542, 2013.
[19] H. Akaike, “A new look at the statistical model identification,” IEEE
transactions on automatic control, vol. 19, no. 6, pp. 716–723, 1974.
[20] T. Yamashita, K. Yamashita, and R. Kamimura, “A stepwise aic method
for variable selection in linear regression,” Communications in Statistics—Theory and Methods, vol. 36, no. 13, pp. 2395–2403, 2007.
[21] Y. Dodge, The concise encyclopedia of statistics. Springer Science &
Business Media, 2008.
[22] H. Scheffe, The analysis of variance. John Wiley & Sons, 1999, vol. 72.
[23] C. Sadowski and T. Zimmermann, Rethinking productivity in software
engineering. Springer Nature, 2019.
[24] B. Flyvbjerg, “Five misunderstandings about case-study research,” Qualitative inquiry, vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 219–245, 2006.
[25] S. G. Rogelberg, J. M. Conway, M. E. Sederburg, C. Spitzmüller,
S. Aziz, and W. E. Knight, “Profiling active and passive nonrespondents
to an organizational survey.” Journal of Applied Psychology, vol. 88,
no. 6, p. 1104, 2003.

[26] B. Marcus and A. Schütz, “Who are the people reluctant to participate in
research? personality correlates of four different types of nonresponse as
inferred from self-and observer ratings,” Journal of personality, vol. 73,
no. 4, pp. 959–984, 2005.
[27] C. Jaspan and C. Sadowski, “No single metric captures productivity,” in
Rethinking Productivity in Software Engineering. Springer, 2019, pp.
13–20.
[28] B. Johnson, T. Zimmermann, and C. Bird, “The effect of work environments on productivity and satisfaction of software engineers,” IEEE
Transactions on Software Engineering, 2019.
[29] J. Carifio and R. Perla, “Resolving the 50-year debate around using and
misusing likert scales,” Medical education, vol. 42, no. 12, pp. 1150–
1152, 2008.
[30] V. Gan, “The invention of telecommuting,” https://www.bloomberg.com/
news/articles/2015-12-01/what-telecommuting-looked-like-in-1973, accessed: 2021-01-21.
[31] B. M. Leiner, V. G. Cerf, D. D. Clark, R. E. Kahn, L. Kleinrock, D. C.
Lynch, J. Postel, L. G. Roberts, and S. Wolff, “A brief history of the
internet,” ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review, vol. 39,
no. 5, pp. 22–31, 2009.
[32] J. M. Niles, F. Carlson, P. Gray, and G. Hanneman, “The
telecommunications-transportation tradeoff,” John Willey, vol. 88, 1976.
[33] A. Felstead and G. Henseke, “Assessing the growth of remote working
and its consequences for effort, well-being and work-life balance,” New
Technology, Work and Employment, vol. 32, no. 3, pp. 195–212, 2017.
[34] N. Bailey and N. B. Kurland, “The advantages and challenges of working
here, there, anywhere, and anytime,” Organizational dynamics, vol. 28,
no. 2, pp. 53–68, 1999.
[35] J. M. Nilles, Making telecommuting happen: A guide for telemanagers
and telecommuters. Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1994.
[36] Y. Baruch, “Teleworking: benefits and pitfalls as perceived by professionals and managers,” New technology, work and employment, vol. 15,
no. 1, pp. 34–49, 2000.
[37] C. Maslach and M. P. Leiter, “Early predictors of job burnout and
engagement.” Journal of applied psychology, vol. 93, no. 3, p. 498,
2008.
[38] C. Miller, D. G. Widder, C. Kästner, and B. Vasilescu, “Why do people
give up flossing? a study of contributor disengagement in open source,”
in IFIP International Conference on Open Source Systems. Springer,
2019, pp. 116–129.
[39] J. D. Herbsleb, A. Mockus, T. A. Finholt, and R. E. Grinter, “An
empirical study of global software development: distance and speed,”
in Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on Software Engineering. ICSE 2001. IEEE, 2001, pp. 81–90.
[40] J. D. Herbsleb and D. Moitra, “Global software development,” IEEE
software, vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 16–20, 2001.
[41] C. Bird, N. Nagappan, P. Devanbu, H. Gall, and B. Murphy, “Does
distributed development affect software quality? an empirical case study
of windows vista,” in 2009 IEEE 31st International Conference on
Software Engineering. IEEE, 2009, pp. 518–528.
[42] D. Ford, R. Milewicz, and A. Serebrenik, “How remote work can
foster a more inclusive environment for transgender developers,” in 2019
IEEE/ACM 2nd International Workshop on Gender Equality in Software
Engineering (GE). IEEE, 2019, pp. 9–12.
[43] P. Wagstrom and S. Datta, “Does latitude hurt while longitude kills?
geographical and temporal separation in a large scale software development project,” in Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on
Software Engineering, 2014, pp. 199–210.
[44] J. L. Butler and S. Jaffe, “Challenges and gratitude: A diary
study of software engineers working from home during covid-19
pandemic,” August 2020, Microsoft Research Symposium on the New
Future of Work. [Online]. Available: https://www.microsoft.com/enus/research/publication/challenges-and-gratitude-a-diary-study-ofsoftware-engineers-working-from-home-during-covid-19-pandemic/
[45] S. Kazekami, “Mechanisms to improve labor productivity by performing
telework,” Telecommunications Policy, vol. 44, no. 2, p. 101868, 2020.
[46] N. Forsgren, “Octoverse spotlight: An analysis of developer productivity,
work cadence, and collaboration in the early days of covid-19,” May
2020, retrieved June 2, 2020 from https://github.blog/2020-0506-octoverse-spotlight-an-analysis-of-developer-productivity-workcadence-and-collaboration-in-the-early-days-of-covid-19/.
[47] M. Jorgensen and M. Shepperd, “A systematic review of software
development cost estimation studies,” IEEE Transactions on software
engineering, vol. 33, no. 1, pp. 33–53, 2006.
[48] F. P. Brooks Jr, The mythical man-month: essays on software engineering. Pearson Education, 1995.

[49] H. Sackman, W. J. Erikson, and E. E. Grant, “Exploratory experimental
studies comparing online and offline programming performance,” Communications of the ACM, vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 3–11, 1968.
[50] T. R. Lister and T. DeMarco, Peopleware: Productive projects and teams.
Dorset House New York, 1987.
[51] W. D. Brooks, “Software technology payoff: Some statistical evidence,”
Journal of Systems and Software, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 3–9, 1981.
[52] A. Meyer, E. T. Barr, C. Bird, and T. Zimmermann, “Today was a
good day: The daily life of software developers,” IEEE Transactions
on Software Engineering, 2019.
[53] A. N. Meyer, L. E. Barton, G. C. Murphy, T. Zimmermann, and
T. Fritz, “The work life of developers: Activities, switches and perceived
productivity,” IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering, vol. 43,
no. 12, pp. 1178–1193, 2017.
[54] S. Wagner and F. Deissenboeck, “Defining productivity in software engineering,” in Rethinking Productivity in Software Engineering. Springer,
2019, pp. 29–38.
[55] P. Devanbu, S. Karstu, W. Melo, and W. Thomas, “Analytical and
empirical evaluation of software reuse metrics,” in Proceedings of IEEE
18th International Conference on Software Engineering. IEEE, 1996,
pp. 189–199.
[56] E. Carmel, “Global software teams: opportunities and challenges of
technology-enabled work,” LERA For Libraries, vol. 6, no. 2, 2002.
[57] J. A. Espinosa and E. Carmel, “The impact of time separation on coordination in global software teams: a conceptual foundation,” Software
Process: Improvement and Practice, vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 249–266, 2003.

[58] J. C. Tang, C. Zhao, X. Cao, and K. Inkpen, “Your time zone or mine? a
study of globally time zone-shifted collaboration,” in Proceedings of the
ACM 2011 conference on Computer supported cooperative work, 2011,
pp. 235–244.
[59] R. Spark, “Accessibility to work from home for the disabled: The need
for a shift in management style,” in Proceedings of the 14th Web for All
Conference on The Future of Accessible Work, 2017, pp. 1–4.
[60] D. Ford, M.-A. Storey, T. Zimmermann, C. Bird, S. Jaffe, C. Maddila,
J. L. Butler, B. Houck, and N. Nagappan, “A tale of two cities: Software
developers working from home during the covid-19 pandemic,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2008.11147, 2020.
[61] L. Heisman, “Remote work: Reshaping the workplace experience,”
June 2020, retrived January 14, 2021 from https://github.blog/
2020-06-26-remote-work-reshaping-the-workplace-experience/.
[62] P. Rodeghero and T. Hernandez, “Empowering and supporting
remote software development team members through a culture of
allyship,” August 2020, Microsoft Research Symposium on the New
Future of Work. [Online]. Available: https://www.microsoft.com/enus/research/publication/empowering-and-supporting-remote-softwaredevelopment-team-members-through-a-culture-of-allyship-2/
[63] P. Rodeghero, T. Zimmermann, B. Houck, and D. Ford, “Please turn
your cameras on: Remote onboarding of software developers during
a pandemic,” in 2021 IEEE/ACM 43th International Conference on
Software Engineering: Software Engineering in Practice Track (ICSESEIP). IEEE, 2021.

