No More Handshaking: How have COVID-19 pushed
the expansion of computer-mediated communication
in Japanese idol culture?
Hiromu Yakura

arXiv:2101.07999v1 [cs.HC] 20 Jan 2021

University of Tsukuba
Tsukuba, Japan
hiromu.yakura@aist.go.jp

ABSTRACT
In Japanese idol culture, meet-and-greet events where fans were
allowed to handshake with an idol member for several seconds were
regarded as its essential component until the spread of COVID-19.
Now, idol groups are struggling in the transition of such events
to computer-mediated communication because these events had
emphasized meeting face-to-face over communicating, as we can
infer from their length of time. I anticipated that investigating
this emerging transition would provide implications because their
communication has a unique characteristic that is distinct from wellstudied situations, such as workplace communication and intimate
relationships. Therefore, I first conducted a quantitative survey
to develop a precise understanding of the transition, and based
on its results, had semi-structured interviews with idol fans about
their perceptions of the transition. The survey revealed distinctive
approaches, including one where fans gathered at a venue but were
isolated from the idol member by an acrylic plate and talked via
a video call. Then the interviews not only provided answers to
why such an approach would be reasonable but also suggested the
existence of a large gap between conventional offline events and
emerging online events in their perceptions. Based on the results, I
discussed how we can develop interaction techniques to support
this transition and how we can apply it to other situations outside
idol culture, such as computer-mediated performing arts.

CCS CONCEPTS
• Human-centered computing → Empirical studies in HCI; •
Social and professional topics → Cultural characteristics.

KEYWORDS
Japanese idol groups, COVID-19, Computer-mediated communication
ACM Reference Format:
Hiromu Yakura. 2021. No More Handshaking: How have COVID-19 pushed
the expansion of computer-mediated communication in Japanese idol culture?. In CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’21),
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan
© 2021 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-8096-6/21/05. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3411764.3445252

May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 11 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3411764.3445252

1

INTRODUCTION

In Japan, idol groups—which sometimes consists of more than 10
or 20 members—are dominating music record sales [38]. Their success is achieved by their marketing strategy of giving emphasis
on holding meet-and-greet events to cultivate fans’ loyalty to individual members [10]. For example, while “handshaking events”
(akushukai) where fans can talk for several seconds and shake hands
with an idol member in exchange for buying a single CD are the
most popular form [10, 57], “photo-session events” (chekikai) where
fans can take an instant photo with a member are also common [30].
However, the spread of COVID-19 has made it difficult to continue
these events due to the risk of infection, which bereaves idol groups
of the opportunity to maintain fan loyalty. Consequently, in an
analogous manner to other fields such as sales operations [17, 53]
and school education [13, 22], most idol groups have migrated to
computer-mediated communication by introducing new forms of
events.
Here, I anticipate that examining how computer technologies
have been adopted in such situations will provide new insights
for the HCI community regarding the use of computer-mediated
communication. This is because idol culture has a unique characteristic, which is different from other situations that previous studies have examined, such as workplace communication [1, 31] and
intimate relationships [24, 50]. That is, while workplace communication mostly considers business impact rather than connectedness
and intimate relationships usually emphasize connectedness, idol
groups are required to balance both because they are providing the
feeling of being connected with individual members as a part of
their business. This unique aspect that is not observable in daily
conversation is also supported by the fact that, in conventional
meet-and-greet events, fans were allowed to communicate with
idol members for only a few seconds.
Given this context, I explored the following research questions
to sketch future directions of computer-mediated communication
from a new perspective:
RQ1 How Japanese idol groups have adopted computer-mediated
communication in response to COVID-19 under the dilemma
between economical validity, connectedness, and, of course,
technical availability?
RQ2 How idol fans have perceived the transition to computermediated communication, especially about its advantages
and deficiencies?

CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan

To answer RQ1, I first surveyed the current status quantitatively
and identified two main forms of online events that serve as alternatives to meet-and-greet events as well as some unique approaches
reflecting their ingenuity. I then conducted semi-structured interviews with fans of idol groups who had experience taking part in
such events, either online or offline, with regards to RQ2. The interviews revealed the advantages and disadvantages of the transition,
some of which were common to previous discussions on the use of
computer-mediated communication and others that were unique
to idol culture. Based on these results, I discussed how interaction
techniques can further support this transition and what findings
can be applied to other situations outside of idol culture.

2

RELATED WORK

In this section, I first provide the background of Japanese idol culture and its meet-and-greet events, including the current situation
with COVID-19. I then review related work that explored the use
of computer-mediated communication in specific situations to contextualize this work. I also introduce interaction techniques for
supporting performing arts in distanced situations.

2.1

Meet-and-greet events in Japanese idol
culture

As discussed in Section 1, idol groups are at the center of the Japanese music industry, as they have dominated the sales index for
years [38]. However, they do not only sing songs: Holding meetand-greet events is also a crucial component of being an “idol”
[10, 57]. The pioneer of such meet-and-greet events, AKB48, have
promoted themselves as “idols that you can meet” and strategically expanded their handshaking events to exploit fans’ energy by
providing great intimacy and connection with individual members
[10, 25]. In the handshaking events held at stadiums and exhibition
centers in major cities across Japan, participating fans usually wait
in line for several hours to meet individual members in booths [57].
This strategic practice of offering the opportunity of face-to-face
communication is followed by most idol groups, mainly female
idols [15], though their events vary in scale.
However, since the Japanese government requested the cancellation of sports and cultural events in response to the spread of
COVID-19 in February 2020, idol groups have had no choice but
to stop such meet-and-greet events and have been seeking ways
to transition to distanced situations [33, 35]. Here, I acknowledge
that the demand for computer-mediated communication is globally
observed [3, 13, 17, 22, 53] and not specific to idol culture. Still, it
is distinctive that idol groups had previously put emphasis on the
flesh-and-blood aspect of the meet-and-greet events to provide fans
with a realistic and authentic feeling [57]. This point motivates me
to investigate how idol groups have adopted computer-mediated
communication technologies, which would not be optimal to deliver
the flesh-and-blood aspect, during this unexpected crisis.

2.2

Use of computer-mediated communication
in specific situations

In this context, this work shares some interest with previous studies
that have investigated the use of computer-mediated communication in specific situations, such as workplace communication [1, 31].

Hiromu Yakura

However, as discussed in Section 1, this work could not be aligned
with these studies since the aim of introducing computer-mediated
communication in idol culture is to offer connectedness to fans and
not to increase business impact through collaboration or knowledgesharing. Rather, it relates to previous studies focusing on family
[16, 55] and romantic relations [24, 50], as they discussed how
computer-mediated communication can help people feel connected
to each other. For example, it is reported that not only an instant
messenger [16] but also an online game [55] can be an important
communication channel in family relations. Still, idol groups have
a different standpoint that their communication with fans is a part
of their marketing strategy, and thus, they are required to balance
connectedness and economical validity more severely.
This point guided me to previous studies examining the adoption
of live-streaming platforms [28, 29, 46, 52]. For instance, Tang et
al. [46] and Lottridge et al. [28] depicted the personal usage of livestreaming platforms, mainly by young users in North American and
European cultures. Lu et al. [29] focused on live-streamers in China,
a context that is more similar to our situation, as the streamers
there were also forming fan groups. Wang et al. [52] more closely
examined Chinese live-streamers by highlighting streamer–viewer
relationships supported by monetary digital gifts sent by viewers.
Actually, I have observed that Japanese idol groups often use livestreaming platforms for the current transition. But, I also found
that their usage is a bit different from what these studies reported
as they are using such platforms as an alternative to individual
face-to-face communication, which I describe later.
In addition, I acknowledge that some researchers in the field of
fandom studies have investigated the role of computer-mediated
communication, especially social networking services, in idol–fan
relationships. For example, Yan and Yang [59] analyzed the interaction between an idol and fans in Chinese social media based on the
framework of parakin relationships while Sandi and Triastuti [41]
discussed the case of Indonesia. Nevertheless, Japanese idol culture
has not received much research attention regarding its relation to
computer technology, as it has traditionally attached importance to
in-person interactions between idol members and fans. In addition,
different from the context of the above studies, the fact that idol
groups have been forced to adopt computer technologies as an
improvised alternative to face-to-face communication will elicit
distinctive insights. In particular, this rapid transition to computermediated communication is observed globally and its comparison
to face-to-face communication is actively discussed in various fields,
like education [49] and academic conferences [9]. Then, exploring
the effect of the unique characteristic of idol culture, which I described in Section 2.1, on the current situation would add a new
perspective that complements these studies.

2.3

Interaction techniques for
Computer-mediated performing arts

At the same time, I anticipate that the flesh-and-blood aspect of conventional meet-and-greet events can be associated with performing
arts. In particular, it can be understood from the concept of aura,
which Walter Benjamin [4] discussed in light of the introduction
of a camera, as its authentic presence that is hard to reproduce
by mediated technologies is the arguing point. Since his original

No More Handshaking

discussion, a long time has passed that was enough not only for
the computer to be invented but also for researchers to propose
various interaction technologies to address this point, which could
also be applied to the current transition in idol culture. With this
motivation, I will introduce some existing techniques to support
performing arts in distanced situations in a computer-mediated
manner.
While live-streaming performances would be a straightforward
approach, most of such techniques leverage virtual reality [8]. This
is because virtual reality is known to induce a sense of presence
[43, 51], which can in turn elicit authentic emotion from a user [39].
For example, Geigel et al. [12] presented a system that can replicate
theatrical performances in a virtual space. Kasuya et al. [21] implemented a free-viewpoint audio effect in their virtual reality-based
system for distanced musical performances. Yakura and Goto [58]
discussed methods to present realistic audience avatars in a virtual
space to enhance a sense of presence during live performances.
On the other hand, some researchers argue that, in computermediated performance, the interactivity between performers and
audience should be considered, rather than just pursue the reality
of the replication, based on the idea of liveness [2, 23, 54]. For
example, Webb et al. [54] emphasized the sense of co-presence
between performers and audience based on their interviews to
expert performers and recommended constructing hybrid spaces of
digital and virtual experience. Correspondingly, Cerratto-Pargman
et al. [37] and Wu et al. [56] designed interaction techniques for
enabling remote audience members to actively participate in theater
and music performances, respectively.
Here, I suspect that the relationship between idol members and
fans can be understood analogously to that between performers
and audience. In addition, the emphasis on interactivity, which
is attributed to the challenge of how to deliver aura, has some
commonality with idol culture. This point conversely suggests that
investigating the current transition in idol culture has the potential
to provide implications for other fields, including performing arts,
which would be a discussion point later.

3

METHODS

To explore the research questions presented in Section 1, I decided
to use both a quantitative survey and semi-structured interviews.
The survey was prepared to develop a precise understanding of
the current transition observed in idol culture, and based on its
results, I conducted in-depth interviews with idol fans to unveil
their perception of the transition.

3.1

Qualitative survey

Correspondingly to RQ1, I first conducted a quantitative survey
about how Japanese idol groups have adopted computer-mediated
communication. More specifically, I collected announcements of
Japanese idol groups about holding or altering meet-and-greet
events from their websites and official social media accounts. Then,
I categorized the information regarding their approaches to migrating the events into computer-mediated communication for the
purpose of understanding the reasons behind their decisions.

CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan

Here, I mainly focused on female idol groups, since they were
said to have more affinity with meet-and-greet events [15]. However, there are more than 3,000 female idol groups in Japan [14],
though some of them are no longer active. Given that the Japanese
music industry makes a sharp distinction between releases from
independent and major labels [44], I narrowed the target to groups
that had or planned to have a major label release.
Subsequently, I manually crawled the websites and social media
accounts of each group and checked whether the group had released some announcement about meet-and-greet events between
February 261 and August 25, 2020. As a result, I collected the announcements of 53 idol groups, which had over 700 members in
total. I then listed all forms of the events, including ones held physically, from the announcements and categorized them based on
their similarity. For the events held online, I also categorized the
platforms they used.

3.2

Semi-structured Interviews

The semi-structured interviews were designed to illustrate fans’ perceptions of the transition of meet-and-greet events so as to answer
RQ2. Therefore, I recruited fans who had experience participating
in either conventional meet-and-greet events or online alternative
events of Japanese idol groups using word-of-mouth communication in local idol culture communities. As a result, seven people
(six males, one female) voluntarily participated in the interviews. I
note that the demography of the participants potentially reflects
the gender homogeneity of Japanese idol culture [15, 25].
Here, I acknowledge that the questionnaire method would be
an option to reveal fans’ perceptions, as Lu et al. did [29]. However, because this transition is emerging and not documented yet
in the literature, I suspected that there were not enough clues to
prepare a questionnaire that can lead to meaningful results. Instead,
I decided to conduct semi-structured interviews to derive in-depth
perspectives from idol fans. In addition, I note that this work prioritized reporting this living situation rather than recruiting a large
number of participants, which resulted in interviews with seven
participants.
The interviews were conducted via video calls in Japanese, as all
participants were fluent speakers, and later translated into English.
Each interview lasted approximately 30 minutes and consisted of
three main topics: “What do you think are the advantages of this
transition?”; “What do you think are the disadvantages of this transition?”; and “Which would you prefer, conventional offline events
or recent online events, and why?” Guided by previous studies investigating the use of computer-mediated communication [50, 55],
I analyzed the transcription of the interviews using open coding
[45]. Through iterative refinement processes, I obtained several
themes for each topic, which were presented later in Section 5.

4

RESULTS: QUANTITATIVE SURVEY

At first, I found that 17 groups (32%) had already announced that
they would resume physical meet-and-greet events as of August 25.
However, none of them involved handshaking; rather, they intended
to implement an acrylic plate so that members could talk with fans
without physical contact. Some groups had planned to hold an
1 The

Japanese government requested the cancellation of events on this day.

CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan

Hiromu Yakura

  

On the other hand, the major weakness of this approach is its
one-sidedness, which is common to the discussions on computermediated performing arts in Section 2.3. Especially, different from
live-streamers mentioned in Section 2.2, it would be hard for idol
groups to avoid the comparison with traditional handshaking events.
This point might have led them to adopt the other approach: online
one-on-one sessions.

 

4.2




   



Figure 1: Timeline illustrating how Japanese idol groups
have migrated their meet-and-greet events into a computermediated manner. Note that, since some idol groups have
adopted multiple approaches, the total number in the Y-axis
exceeds the number of idol groups mentioned in Section 3.1.

autographing event where their members autographed any items
brought by fans, but they decided instead to give out autographed
cards to avoid transmitting COVID-19 by exchanging items.
Nevertheless, only three had resumed physical events without
making any transition to online events. In other words, 50 groups
(94%) had announced holding online events as an alternative to
physical meet-and-greet events. I determined that the forms of
the alternative events could be divided into two major categories:
autograph streaming and online one-on-one sessions.

This approach has also been adopted by 36 groups (68%), 23 of whom
were using both one-on-one sessions and autograph streaming. In
this approach, fans who purchased CDs or goods are assigned a
time slot, typically 15 to 30 seconds long, during which they can talk
to a member via a video call. Most groups have introduced smartphone apps specifically developed for these one-on-one sessions:
WithLIVE2 is the most popular (12 groups) followed by talkport3
(seven groups). On the other hand, nine groups were using Zoom4
by preparing a breakout room to which the idol member could
connect and manually inviting each fan to the room during the
assigned slot.
These idol groups are emphasizing this special experience by using the term “one-on-one” or “individual talk,” as well as replicating
the interface of a direct video call in the introduced smartphone
apps. However, interestingly, they also emphasize that the conversations are monitored by staff in real time to avoid inappropriate fan
behavior. Moreover, in the case of the groups using Zoom, I found
announcements that the staff was observing the conversations in
the breakout room because there was no other way to monitor
them.

4.3
4.1

Autograph streaming

The most popular approach, adopted by 36 groups (68%), was
streaming sessions where idol members wrote autographs in real
time. More specifically, these idol groups sell a special version of
their CDs or goods in an online shop, and fans who purchase items
can obtain products accompanied by an autograph with their name
written by a member they specify. Moreover, the member streams
while they are writing autographs so that the fans can see the special moment when the member pronounces and writes their names,
which contributes to nurturing their loyalty. In an extreme case I
found, an idol member broadcast a total of about six hours over
two days to write hundreds of autographs.
This approach was initially introduced in 2014 [36] to offer opportunities to interact with idol members to fans who do not live
near major cities and have difficulty attending physical events.
However, it has become much more popular since the spread of
COVID-19. I postulate that the reason why this approach has been
most preferred is the ease of its adoption—that is, this approach can
be realized by combining existing online shops and live-streaming
platforms without an additional cost. In fact, 35 of the 36 groups
were using existing live-streaming platforms to stream themselves
writing autographs, such as Youtube Live (21 groups). This point
is also supported by the fact that, as shown in Figure 1, the announcements made in the early days were mainly categorized as
autograph streaming.

Online one-on-one sessions

Other approaches

I also found other, less widely used approaches. For instance, three
groups (6%) adopted a hybrid of the above two approaches, in which
an idol member writes an autograph while talking with a fan in
an online one-on-one session. I suspect that the reason why this
hybrid approach is minor, although it can take advantage of both
approaches, is its poor efficiency. That is, since writing an autograph takes more time than just conversing, there are fewer fans
that one member can meet in the same amount of time. This point
would be associated with the dilemma of idol groups between providing connectedness and maintaining economical validity, which
I explained in Section 2.1.
An idol group named SKE48 took another interesting approach:
an on-site online one-on-one event. The event was held in a convention center in the same manner as conventional handshaking
events. However, fans were not allowed to get closer than four
meters to members and could not talk to them directly because of
an acrylic plate placed between them. Instead, fans could talk to the
members via a video call using a pair of iPads set up in the venue
while seeing the actual person through the plate. Further, to avoid
infection, fans were required to submit a medical questionnaire and
measure their body temperature before entering the venue.
2 https://www.withlive.jp/
3 https://talkport.com/

4 http://zoom.us/

No More Handshaking

In another unique approach, an idol group named 22/7 held
an on-site avatar-based meeting event. For context, its members
consist of voice actresses who provide the voice and motion capture
for their corresponding anime characters, as well as perform as
a human idol group. Taking advantage of this feature, 22/7 held
the avatar-based event in addition to online one-on-one sessions
with the voice actress members. In this event, fans could interact
with a character avatar on a screen that was controlled in real time
by the corresponding voice actress member using motion capture
techniques. Since the behavior of the fan is also transmitted in real
time to the member in a separate room, they are able to feel as
though they are talking directly to the character (or perhaps to the
member).

4.4

Analysis

So far, I have described how Japanese idol groups have made the
transition to computer-mediated communication in response to
COVID-19. From these results, I can infer several trade-offs in
making these decisions.
First, despite the risk of infection, meeting in the physical world
still seems to be considered important, as many idol groups have
rushed to resume their offline meet-and-greet events. Also, the invention of the on-site online one-on-one event implies that computermediated communication has yet to provide an alternative to the
essential component of conventional meet-and-greet events, which
is common to previous studies that have reported a preference for
face-to-face situations in various fields [9, 49].
Despite the importance of the close relationship between idol
members and fans, the cost and effort of replicating this relationship
online would also be a concern. This not only suggests room for
improvement in computer technologies but also opens up a new
market for specialized applications, such as WithLIVE and talkport.
The risk of building overly intimate connections between fans
and members, which has been discussed in the context of cultural
studies [25], has been reflected in their usage of computer technologies. That is, in real-world events, staff can easily intervene with
fans who demonstrate suspicious behavior [20]. On the other hand,
while the inappropriate use of video calls—such as showing pornographic or hate images [42]—is actively reported, idol groups seem
to be struggling to create an intimate but controlled atmosphere in
online events.

5

RESULTS: SEMI-STRUCTURED
INTERVIEWS

The survey depicted the current transition of conventional meetand-greet events in idol culture to computer-mediated communication as well as some dilemmas and trade-offs behind the transition.
As mentioned in Section 3, I then conducted semi-structured interviews with idol fans based on the results. The interviews that were
designed to illustrate fans’ perceptions of the transition provided
many comments and findings, which were grouped into the advantages and disadvantages of the transition and their preferences
between conventional events and online events.

CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan

5.1

Findings: Fans’ perceptions – Advantages

5.1.1 Fans can interact with idol members. All participants mentioned that the fact that they had opportunities to interact with idol
members during COVID-19 was irreplaceable, as follows:
P1: I used to go to such events almost every weekend until COVID19 spread, but then for several months, I did not have any
means to communicate with members other than seeing updates on their social media. Considering that, it is really nice
to be able to interact with them, regardless of its form.
P3: For me, my oshi [most favorite member] is literally my raison
d’être. So, the few months no events were held were like a hell.
Now, even if it is through a screen, I appreciate the special
moment that oshi energizes me in one-on-one.
In relation to this, one participant mentioned the feeling of contributing to groups that such events created:
P5: One of the reasons I have taken part in handshaking events
is the satisfaction I feel from recognizing the fact that I am
supporting the idol group by purchasing CDs. So I am glad
to be able to contribute to the group through these events,
especially considering that all groups are in a tough situation
due to the cancellation of live concerts.
This comment is consistent with the observation on conventional
meet-and-greet events [10] that the feeling of supporting idol groups
can be a factor in attracting fans. In addition, when it comes to
online events, this feeling can be aligned with the viewers’ motivation to send a monetary gift to live-streamers [52], as mentioned
in Section 2.2, though purchasing CDs would not directly benefit
individual members.
5.1.2 Ease of access. Some participants commented about the ease
of participating in online events compared to conventional offline
events, as follows:
P2: Since I live in the countryside, it always took a lot of travel
time and transportation costs for me to take part in such
events. So I am grateful to be able to interact with the members from my home.
P1: So far, when multiple idol groups hold events on the same
day, I have often wondered which one to go to. But, with the
current online events, I can take part in different events on
the same day.
While this point has often been discussed as a benefit of computermediated communication [9, 49], one participant mentioned a benefit specific to online one-on-one sessions as an alternative to handshaking events:
P5: In handshaking events held at a large venue, it was common
to stand in line for several hours to wait for my turn. In
the online one-on-one event, the wait time is only about 30
minutes, and I can do other things during it.
However, I note that some participants described the lack of waiting
time as degrading their participation experience, as described in
Section 5.2.
5.1.3 Conversation specific to the computer-mediated situation. The
participants who had taken part in online one-on-one sessions commented that they could bring up topics that were never mentioned
in conventional handshaking events, as follows:

CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan

P4: While we are not allowed to bring items to booths at offline
events, it was an advantage of online sessions that I could
talk to the member while showing my handmade cheering
goods, such as a paper fan.
P2: I was so happy when the member saw my room in the background and said it was cute.
However, the participant pointed out that this advantage was related to the freshness of the approach: “If these online sessions
continue for a while, such a conversation would not be special for
me” (P2).
5.1.4 Lower psychological barriers to participation. On the other
hand, autograph streaming was also favored due to its welcoming
atmosphere:
P3: At handshaking events, my heart often beats so fast that I
can’t talk as much as I would like. In this regard, autograph
streaming allows me to watch the member for a long time in
a calm manner, and further, I can attach a short message to
the member through the order form at the time of purchasing
CDs.
P6: Actually, I have never participated in a handshaking event
because of my psychological barrier that is formed as I hear
the various regulations of such events. When it comes to
autograph streaming, I could feel free to participate, as what
I need to do is just purchase a CD and watch a broadcast.
These comments suggested that this approach is not only an alternative to conventional meet-and-greet events but also a helpful
means to bring in new fans. Another participant mentioned an
interesting aspect related to psychological barriers:
P1: In offline events, I feel a bit guilty for joining the queues of
multiple members of the same group one after another. On
the other hand, in online events, I am free of such a feeling
because the members would not know that I am talking to
multiple members.
This comment highlights the unique contribution of computer technologies specific to this situation. Here, I would like to point out that
fans appreciate a simulation game-like experience that is present
in their relations to idol members [25, 57]. I suspect that computer
technologies can further foster such an experience, as I discuss later
in Section 6.

5.2

Findings: Fans’ perceptions – Disadvantages

Despite these advantages, participants mentioned some drawbacks
of the current transition to computer-mediated communication,
which can be categorized into the following four topics.
5.2.1 Technical difficulties. The most actively discussed topic was
technical issues faced by participants, mainly during online oneon-one sessions.
P4: It was my fault for not preparing for participation in advance,
but I realized just before that the OS version of my smartphone was outdated and not compatible with the designated
app for one-on-one sessions. While I was updating the OS, I
missed one of the time slots assigned to me.
P5: My slow internet connection caused a huge delay during the
one-on-one session and hindered smooth conversation, which
left an unsatisfactory impression on me.

Hiromu Yakura

P2: It was my first time using Zoom and I did not know that I
needed to click a “Join Audio” button. So I wasted some time
before I started talking.
I would like to note that, unlike the situation in education in the
context of COVID-19 [49], participants did not mention issues related to device availability. This could be attributed to the relatively
high penetration rate of PCs and smartphones in Japan, especially
in the younger generation, who compromise the majority of fans
of idol groups [34]. On the other hand, other issues caused by the
requirement to provide opportunities for people of various levels
of digital literacy [3] remain consistent.
5.2.2 Specifications of the applications used. Participants also mentioned that some specifications of the applications used for online
one-on-one sessions were not satisfactory:
P4: In offline handshaking events, when I bought multiple CDs,
I could allocate successive slots, which in turn allowed me
to talk to the member for more than a minute continuously.
However, in the app the group used for online one-on-one
sessions, I was disconnected each time I talked for 15 seconds
and had to wait for the next assigned slot, though I had
purchased multiple items. It was completely different for me
to have a 1-minute session and to repeat a 15-second session
four times.
P1: As I have to wait in line for my turn in conventional offline
events, I can anticipate how long will it take and prepare
myself during it. However, in the online session, I was not
braced to talk, as I was not notified of the order while I was
in the so-called “waiting room” and suddenly dropped to the
session.
These issues can be expected to be resolved in the near future,
especially in the applications specifically developed for this purpose.
5.2.3 Less interactivity compared to face-to-face communication.
On the other hand, the quality of interactivity was a more serious
concern, in particular when compared to face-to-face communication.
P5: The handshake event I had planned to attend was canceled
and an autograph streaming event was held instead. The
moment a member said my nickname and the autographed
CD that arrived later is certainly precious to me. Yet I think
that its one-way interaction cannot be compared to a direct
conversation in previous meet-and-greet events.
P1: The idol group has live-streamed on a regular basis, so I
could not feel the autograph streaming event was special. As
a result, I could not stop doing other stuff while watching it.
The comparison to face-to-face communication was also mentioned
regarding online one-on-one sessions:
P7: I could not get myself excited in the online one-on-one session
compared to conventional handshaking events. After all, I
felt it was not as valuable as meeting face-to-face, even if
I could talk for the same amount of time. In usual business
meetings, I do not feel significant differences between online
and offline situations, but when it comes to talking to idol
members, I realized that even the strength of handshaking
was an important part of the interaction.

No More Handshaking

P3: In online sessions, because the only thing I could see was
the face of the member captured through the camera, it was
hard to know with certainty whether my feelings were being
conveyed.
I acknowledge that the lack of interactivity has often been discussed
as an issue in computer-mediated communication [49, 50]. On the
other hand, these comments focusing on interaction at meet-andgreet events emphasize its specialness compared to other situations
like business meetings. I argue that this specialness can be associated with the idea of aura in performing arts, which has motivated
researchers to design specific interaction technologies to augment
its sense, as I mentioned in Section 2.3. I will also discuss this point
later in Section 5.3.
5.2.4 Lack of opportunities for fans to communicate with each other.
The participants also provided a new perspective that I had not
anticipated, namely lack of communication between fans:
P7: It was definitely one of the pleasures of handshaking events
that I went to the venue with friends and chatted about things
like which line to stand in or how the session was. This is not
possible in the current form where I attend from home alone
via the Internet.
P4: For me, participating in handshaking events has included
going for a drink with some fans who are familiar faces
afterward. I know that it is hard to go out for drinks in this
situation, but I miss it.
There were also some mentions of informal interactions between
fans that were available at conventional offline events.
P7: At previous handshaking events, I could hear another fan
talking to the member while I was standing in line for my
turn. Seeing the member affectionately talking to other fans
raised my affinity for her, and it was funny to watch some
fans performing a quick gag in front of the member.
Here, while I have referred to the sense of presence in Section 2.3
based on the analogous correspondence between performer–audience
and idol–fan relationships, the importance of a sense of co-presence
between audience members has also been pointed out with regards
to performing arts in distanced situations [47]. In this context, these
comments can be understood from the same analogy though this
aspect has been completely ignored in the current form of alternative events described in Section 4. Thus, the demand for improving
computational approaches to support communication between fans
is illustrated.

5.3

Findings: Fans’ preferences for face-to-face
vs. computer-mediated communication

Given these contexts, all participants showed a preference for conventional offline events, except for one who did not live near Tokyo,
the capital of Japan, who commented:
P2: So far, I had sometimes passed up on attending such events
because of the cost to participate. In comparison, I prefer the
current situation where I am able to attend all the events
held online.
However, the participant continued:

CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan

P2: On the other hand, it is unthinkable that we will never have
the opportunity to meet the members physically at all. I want
a chance to see them once a year, at least.
The others expressed that they want conventional meet-and-greet
events held offline to return soon.
P1: I believe the current online events are only a temporary
alternative. I cannot wait to meet the members physically.
P6: I was really happy when I saw that my favorite idol group
announced the return of physical meet-and-greet events.
Though I acknowledge the risk of infection, I immediately
purchased the ticket, and I am really looking forward to
meeting the members from now on.
These comments imply the reasons for the quick resumption of
offline events, which I mentioned in Section 4. As for why fans
preferred the conventional form, I obtained the following comments,
which highlight perspectives that have not been actively discussed
in previous literature on computer-mediated communication:
P3: Every time I participated in meet-and-greet events, I appreciated the miracle of living under the same sky as my oshi
and could not help but thank Gods. Even though I know in
my head that this fact does not change regardless of whether
I am talking face-to-face or through a screen, I can’t get this
feeling in online communication.
P7: In my opinion, the core experience of handshaking events is
given by the special distance to a member; that is, it offers
me a fantasy that I would be able to hug the member if I pull
back my hand a little. Of course, I have never thought about
actually trying to do so, but this point makes a huge difference
in regards to whether I can meet the member physically.
P1: The innovation of handshaking events is in the point that
it presents the possibility that we can affect the members
in some way through both a conversation and a handshake,
whereas previous idol groups only allowed us to receive their
performance in a one-way form. So, though it is often said
that interactivity is the essence of offline meet-and-greet
events, I would rather like to argue that the essence is the sense
of what I could call affectability or intervenability, which is
not well supported in the current online communication.
P4: Even if the experience of participating in handshake events
is replicated digitally in a very realistic way, for example
by using expensive VR devices, I do not think it can compete
with the on-site online one-on-one event held by SKE48. This
is because the point is not reality, but the specialness of the
experience that can only be available at the time between
me and the member and cannot be copied at any other place
or time. I feel that online communication inevitably detracts
from this specialness, though it would not be an issue in usual
online conversations.
These comments imply the importance of an aspect that would be
peculiarly crucial to such meet-and-greet events and has not been
well discussed. That is, it is not just about reducing latency [11]
or enhancing the sense of presence by using virtual reality-based
interaction technologies [12, 21, 58] but about how to produce
the specialness of a conversation in computer-mediated situations,
as I have discussed in Section 2.3. Furthermore, one participant

CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan

suggested a convenient solution for enhancing the online one-onone session:
P7: The fact that I am in the personal space of the member carries
a lot of weight in handshake events. On that note, it is hard to
see such closeness from the front camera in the online one-onone session. If there is an additional camera of a third-person
perspective that shows how closely and affectionately the
member is talking to the front camera, I think that I would
be more attracted.
Such an approach of augmenting distanced interactions by adding
a third-person view camera has been proposed [26, 48], but the aim
of these studies was efficient collaboration. Considering that the
third-person perception of one’s own proxemic distance showed a
similar effect as the first-person view [19], this approach of complementing the feeling of being in the member’s personal space would
be effective in fostering intimacy.

6

DISCUSSION

The qualitative survey and semi-structured interviews illustrated
how Japanese idol groups have migrated their meet-and-greet
events to computer-mediated communication and how their fans
have perceived this change. For now, considering the disadvantages
listed in Section 5.2, the on-site online one-on-one event (see Section 4.3) would be the optimal solution with the currently available
technologies. More specifically, fans would not face technical difficulties, as they do not need to set up any devices. Moreover, the
interactivity would be complemented by seeing the member who is
talking to fans through an acrylic plate, which would also provide
the special feeling of conversing under the same roof. In addition,
fans can communicate with each other, as they would gather at an
on-site venue, although they would be required to follow social
distancing restrictions.
However, the above results also imply further room for improvement in computer technologies since most fans preferred the conventional meet-and-greet events, as described in Section 5.3. In this
section, I first discuss how we can provide better computational
support for this situation by referring to previous literature on
interaction techniques. I also discuss which findings drawn from
the results would provide implications for other situations outside
of idol culture.

6.1

How interaction techniques can help the
transition to computer-mediated
communication

One intuitive approach to enhancing the situations would be replicating the experience of handshaking without actually shaking
hands. In fact, there are several proposals for devices to replicate
handshaking in distanced situations [5, 32]. For example, according
to Nakanishi et al. [32], their robot hand that enables handshaking between distanced users in video-mediated communication
improves users’ intimacy. However, requiring such a device for all
fans who connect from their homes would not be practical, considering the cost and difficulty of the setup. Still, it could be deployed
in the on-site online one-on-one event to complement the communication channel between idol members and fans who are distanced
using an acrylic plate.

Hiromu Yakura

In addition, some researchers have suggested that simple tactile
feedback can enhance the intimacy of distanced users in computermediated communication situations [6, 40]. Given that, it is possible to provide better experiences by enabling tactile interaction
between idol members and fans in applications specifically designed for online one-on-one sessions. Since most applications (e.g.,
WithLIVE and talkport) are deployed for smartphones, this can be
realized without any external devices.
Furthermore, the participants in the semi-structured interviews
highlighted the importance of intervenability, a separate idea from
interactivity. As mentioned in Section 5.1, this can be aligned with
discussions about Japanese idol culture that have pointed out the
simulation game-like experience of being a fan of idol groups [25,
57]. More specifically, offline meet-and-greet events have opened
up a way for fans to affect an idol member as players of a simulation
game can intervene in the story of a game by choosing options,
which provides an immersive first-person perspective of being
involved in the story, rather than just appreciating a pre-recorded
story. In other words, intervenability provides a sense of being
involved in the relationship with a member from a first-person
perspective.
In light of this, I suspect that the interaction techniques to enhance computer-mediated communication do not necessarily have
to be used interactively. For example, I might consider deploying
the handshaking device only on the side of an idol member and
allowing fans to manipulate it using buttons while they are talking
to the member in an online one-on-one session. This would resolve
the cost of deploying such devices in fans’ homes while maintaining
intervenability.
Still, the comments in Section 5.3 depicted the existence of the
large gap between conventional offline events and emerging online
events in fans’ perceptions. In particular, it was suggested that fans
are perplexed not only by the transition to computer-mediated
communication but also by its consequent degradation of the fleshand-blood and one-time aspects, namely, aura. This point teaches
us that, as discussed in Section 2.3 with regards to performing arts,
high-fidelity digital replication of a physical experience (e.g., by
using VR devices) might not be a remedy, which was also supported
by the comment in Section 5.3. Rather, we would be required to
design specific interaction techniques that can enhance the special
feeling, for example, by pursuing intervenability, as I have discussed
above in this section.

6.2

Implications for situations outside idol
culture

As I have discussed in relation to distanced performances, the findings of this work can provide implications for the role of computer technologies in performing arts. In particular, as computermediated performing arts are becoming popular during COVID-19
[7, 27], the challenge of how to convey the aura of the performances
would become evident in the same manner as I observed in idol
culture. For example, we need to answer a question: What motivates users to watch the paid live-streaming of a classical music
concert when they have the option to play an already purchased
concert recording on the same screen? The observation in this work
suggests that on-site online events where audiences gather at a

No More Handshaking

venue but are isolated by an acrylic plate to avoid infection while
performances are conveyed digitally would be a reasonable choice
for providing the entire experience of participating in—rather than
merely watching—the performance.
In addition, the distinction of intervenability from interactivity
can also be applied to existing interactive technologies for computermediated performing arts, which I introduced in Section 2.3. More
specifically, the theater performance reported by Cerratto-Pargman
et al. [37] provided interactivity to an audience but not intervenability because its mechanism allowing the audience to post a text
message to be displayed on the stage does not allow the audience
to intervene in the plot of the performance. On the other hand,
Open Symphony proposed by Wu et al. [56] offers intervenability as an audience can control the mode of improvisational music
performance by voting via a web application. In this context, the
discussion in Section 6.1 implies that we have to design interaction
techniques that can offer intervenability rather than interactivity
so as to convey the aura in computer-mediated performing arts.
At the same time, developing such interaction techniques would
also be beneficial in terms of accessibility. As the participants mentioned in Section 5.1, the transition to computer-mediated communication enables people in various circumstances, including not
only people living in the countryside but also people with disabilities, to participate in meet-and-greet events. In fact, some idol
groups have prepared a dedicated queue for people with disabilities
in their conventional meet-and-greet events held physically [18].
However, its access was limited to people who can at least visit
the venue, which is common to performing arts in conventional
theaters. In this sense, designing interaction techniques to support
the current transition that has expanded the access to a wider range
of people would be demanded even if we could overcome this crisis.
Furthermore, our findings can also be connected to computermediated communication in personal situations. For example, previous studies that have investigated the role of computer-mediated
communication in intimate relationships [24, 50] have mainly regarded computers as a side channel to complement face-to-face
communication. However, during COVID-19, it is conceivable that
couples may not be able to meet for long periods of time, especially
if they are in different countries. Then, computer-mediated communication is likely to become the main channel of their communication. In such situations, how to introduce the flesh-and-blood
aspect in computer-mediated communication would become much
more important, as the participants emphasized in Section 5. While
the device-based interactions that we discussed in Section 6.1 are
possible solutions, we expect that simply adding another camera
to provide a third-person perspective, as suggested in Section 5.3,
could enhance this aspect.

7

CONCLUSION

In this work, I investigated how Japanese idol groups have migrated
their meet-and-greet events to computer-mediated communication
due to the spread of COVID-19 and how idol fans have perceived the
transition. Correspondingly, I first surveyed the responses of 53 idol
groups and illustrated the current status, including some unique
approaches, such as the on-site online talk event. I then conducted
semi-structured interviews with idol fans and investigated how

CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan

they perceived the transition, which suggested fans’ preference
for conventional meet-and-greet events due to their specialness
with regards to their flesh-and-blood and one-time aspects. Based
on the results, I discussed how interaction techniques can support
this transition, which not only directed us to the idea of aura but
also implied the importance of pursuing intervenability rather than
interactivity. In addition, the discussion provided implications for
several topics outside idol culture, such as computer-mediated performing arts and communication in intimate relationships, that are
also under the influence of COVID-19.
On the other hand, this work has a limitation; that is, I conducted
the interviews with a relatively small number of participants in
order to report this living situation. As mentioned in Section 3.2,
designing a questionnaire based on the above results and collecting
responses from a large number of idol fans would provide more
precise and general findings. Still, I believe that the findings of this
work originated from grassroots adaptation to computer-mediated
communication are implicational for HCI researchers who are trying to design a new interaction technique.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported in part by JST ACT-X Grant Number
JPMJAX200R, Japan.

REFERENCES
[1] Dinislam Abdulgalimov, Reuben Kirkham, James Nicholson, Vasilis Vlachokyriakos, Pam Briggs, and Patrick Olivier. 2020. Designing for Employee Voice. In
Proceedings of the 2020 ACM CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM, New York, NY, 157:1–157:13. https://doi.org/10.1145/3313831.3376284
[2] Philip Auslander. 2002. Live From Cyberspace: or, I was sitting at my computer
this guy appeared he thought I was a bot. PAJ: A Journal of Performance and Art
24, 1 (2002), 16–21. https://doi.org/10.1162/152028101753401767
[3] Elisabeth Beaunoyer, Sophie Dupéré, and Matthieu J. Guitton. 2020. COVID-19
and digital inequalities: Reciprocal impacts and mitigation strategies. Computers
in Human Behavior 111, 106424 (2020), 1–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2020.
106424
[4] Walter Benjamin. 1968. The work of art in the age of mechanical reproduction.
In Illuminations: Essays and reflections. Schocken, New York, NY. (translated by
Harry Zohn).
[5] Chris Bevan and Danaë Stanton Fraser. 2015. Shaking Hands and Cooperation
in Tele-present Human-Robot Negotiation. In Proceedings of the Tenth Annual
ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot Interaction. ACM, New York,
NY, 247–254. https://doi.org/10.1145/2696454.2696490
[6] Jeffrey R. Blum and Jeremy R. Cooperstock. 2016. Expressing Human State via
Parameterized Haptic Feedback for Mobile Remote Implicit Communication. In
Proceedings of the 7th Augmented Human International Conference. ACM, New
York, NY, 41:1–41:2. https://doi.org/10.1145/2875194.2875225
[7] Leon Botstein. 2020. The Future of Music in America: The Challenge of the
COVID-19 Pandemic. The Musical Quarterly 102, 4 (08 2020), 351–360. https:
//doi.org/10.1093/musqtl/gdaa007
[8] Steve Dixon. 2006. A history of virtual reality in performance. International
Journal of Performance Arts and Digital Media 2, 1 (2006), 23–54. https://doi.org/
10.1386/padm.2.1.23/1
[9] Elina Eriksson, Daniel Pargman, Markus Robèrt, and Jarmo Laaksolahti. 2020.
On the Necessity of Flying and of not Flying: Exploring how Computer Scientists
Reason about Academic Travel. In Proceedings of the 7th International Conference
on ICT for Sustainability. ACM, New York, NY, 18–26. https://doi.org/10.1145/
3401335.3401582
[10] Patrick W. Galbraith and Jason G. Karlin. 2012. Introduction: The Mirror of Idols
and Celebrity. Palgrave Macmillan, London, UK, 1–32. https://doi.org/10.1057/
9781137283788_1
[11] Erik Geelhoed, Aaron Parker, Damien J. Williams, and Martin Groen. 2009. Effects
of Latency on Telepresence. Technical Report 120. Hewlett-Packard Labs, Bristol,
UK.
[12] Joe Geigel, Marla Schweppe, David Huynh, and Brian Johnstone. 2011. Adapting
a Virtual World for Theatrical Performance. Computer 44, 12 (2011), 33–38.
https://doi.org/10.1109/MC.2011.354

CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan

[13] Karen Goldschmidt. 2020. The COVID-19 Pandemic: Technology use to Support
the Wellbeing of Children. Journal of pediatric nursing 53 (2020), 88–90. https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.pedn.2020.04.013
[14] Miki Gonohe. 2019. Various issues in the idol culture (in Japanese). Nikkan
Sports, https://www.nikkansports.com/entertainment/column/gonohe/news/
201901280000337.html. Accessed: August 25, 2020.
[15] Pieter-Jan Van Haecke. 2020. Female idols in Japan: Desiring desire, fantasmatic
consumption and drive satisfaction. East Asian Journal of Popular Culture 6, 1
(2020), 77–92. https://doi.org/10.1386/eapc.00016_1
[16] Wenting Han, Yuxiang Chris Zhao, and Qinghua Zhu. 2019. Exploring the
Blocking Behavior Between Young Adults and Parents on WeChat Moments. In
Proceedings of the 21st HCI International Conference. Springer, Cham, Switzerland,
65–76. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-22015-0_5
[17] Nathaniel N. Hartmann and Bruno Lussier. 2020. Managing the sales force
through the unexpected exogenous COVID-19 crisis. Industrial Marketing Management 88 (2020), 101–111. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.indmarman.2020.05.005
[18] Yasushi Haruta. 2019. A story about participating in a handshaking event
(Keyakizaka46 / Neru Nagahama) with a wheelchairs (in Japanese). https:
//haruta.blog.jp/archives/51998643.html. Accessed: December 24, 2020.
[19] Heiko Hecht, Robin Welsch, Jana Viehoff, and Matthew R. Longo. 2019. The
shape of personal space. Acta Psychologica 193 (2019), 113–122. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.actpsy.2018.12.009
[20] Yosuke Kanai and Takayuki Fujimoto. 2016. Development of a Idol Entertainment
Application with Focus on “Hagashi” Act. In Proceedings of the 14th International
Conference on Software Engineering Research and Practice. CSREA Press, Las Vegas,
NV, 248–252.
[21] Takashi Kasuya, Manabu Tsukada, Yu Komohara, Shigeki Takasaka, Takuhiro
Mizuno, Yoshitaka Nomura, Yuta Ueda, and Hiroshi Esaki. 2019. LiVRation:
Remote VR live platform with interactive 3D audio-visual service. In Proceedings
of the 2019 IEEE Games, Entertainment, Media Conference. IEEE, Washington, DC,
1–7. https://doi.org/10.1109/GEM.2019.8811549
[22] Michael Kerres. 2020. Against All Odds: Education in Germany Coping with
COVID-19. Postdigital Science and Education 2, 3 (2020), 690–694. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s42438-020-00130-7
[23] Suk-Young Kim. 2017. Liveness: Performance of Ideology and Technology in
the Changing Media Environment. In Oxford Research Encyclopedias: Literature. Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK. https://doi.org/10.1093/acrefore/
9780190201098.013.76
[24] Taewook Kim, Jung Soo Lee, Zhenhui Peng, and Xiaojuan Ma. 2019. Love in
Lyrics: An Exploration of Supporting Textual Manifestation of Affection in Social
Messaging. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 3, CSCW
(2019), 79:1–79:27. https://doi.org/10.1145/3359181
[25] Yuya Kiuchi. 2017. Idols You Can Meet: AKB48 and a New Trend in Japan’s
Music Industry. The Journal of Popular Culture 50, 1 (2017), 30–49. https:
//doi.org/10.1111/jpcu.12526
[26] Ryohei Komiyama, Takashi Miyaki, and Jun Rekimoto. 2017. JackIn space: designing a seamless transition between first and third person view for effective telepresence collaborations. In Proceedings of the 8th Augmented Human International
Conference. ACM, New York, NY, 1–9. https://doi.org/10.1145/3041164.3041183
[27] Eric T. Lehman. 2020. “Washing Hands, Reaching Out” – Popular Music, Digital
Leisure and Touch during the COVID-19 Pandemic. Leisure Sciences (in press)
(2020), 1–7. https://doi.org/10.1080/01490400.2020.1774013
[28] Danielle M. Lottridge, Frank Bentley, Matt Wheeler, Jason Lee, Janet Cheung,
Katherine Ong, and Cristy Rowley. 2017. Third-wave livestreaming: teens’ long
form selfie. In Proceedings of the 19th ACM International Conference on HumanComputer Interaction with Mobile Devices and Services. ACM, New York, NY,
20:1–20:12. https://doi.org/10.1145/3098279.3098540
[29] Zhicong Lu, Haijun Xia, Seongkook Heo, and Daniel Wigdor. 2018. You Watch,
You Give, and You Engage: A Study of Live Streaming Practices in China. In
Proceedings of the 2018 ACM CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems. ACM, New York, NY, 466:1–466:13. https://doi.org/10.1145/3173574.
3174040
[30] Gabriella Lukacs. 2015. The Labor of Cute: Net Idols, Cute Culture, and the
Digital Economy in Contemporary Japan. Positions: Asia Critique 23, 3 (2015),
487–513. https://doi.org/10.1215/10679847-3125863
[31] Moira McGregor, Nicola J. Bidwell, Vidya Sarangapani, Jonathan Appavoo, and
Jacki O’Neill. 2019. Talking about Chat at Work in the Global South: An Ethnographic Study of Chat Use in India and Kenya. In Proceedings of the 2019 ACM
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM, New York, NY,
233:1–233:14. https://doi.org/10.1145/3290605.3300463
[32] Hideyuki Nakanishi, Kazuaki Tanaka, and Yuya Wada. 2014. Remote handshaking:
touch enhances video-mediated social telepresence. In Proceedings of the 2014
ACM CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM, New York,
NY, 2143–2152. https://doi.org/10.1145/2556288.2557169
[33] Katsuhiro Nozaki. 2020. Don’t stop idols! (in Japanese). Nikkei X-Trend, https:
//xtrend.nikkei.com/atcl/contents/watch/00013/00987/. Accessed: August 25,
2020.

Hiromu Yakura

[34] Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications. 2019. White Paper: Information
and Communications in Japan.
[35] Takashi Omiya. 2020. Idol industry in ’life-or-death’ situation after the cancellation of events (in Japanese). J-CAST News, https://www.j-cast.com/2020/03/
06381588.html. Accessed: August 25, 2020.
[36] Maya Owada. 2017. Exploring the latest trends in special events of idol groups (in
Japanese). Real Sound, https://realsound.jp/2017/02/post-11502.html. Accessed:
August 25, 2020.
[37] Teresa Cerratto Pargman, Chiara Rossitto, and Louise Barkhuus. 2014. Understanding audience participation in an interactive theater performance. In
Proceedings of the 8th Nordic Conference on Human-Computer Interaction. ACM,
New York, NY, 608–617. https://doi.org/10.1145/2639189.2641213
[38] Matthew Wm. Richardson. 2016. Marketing affect in Japanese idol music. Ph.D.
Dissertation. Northwestern University, Evanston, IL.
[39] Giuseppe Riva, Fabrizia Mantovani, Claret Samantha Capideville, Alessandra
Preziosa, Francesca Morganti, Daniela Villani, Andrea Gaggioli, Cristina Botella,
and Mariano Alcañiz. 2007. Affective Interactions Using Virtual Reality: The
Link between Presence and Emotions. CyberPsychology & Behavior 10, 1 (2007),
45–56. https://doi.org/10.1089/cpb.2006.9993
[40] Hooman Samani, James Teh, Elham Saadatian, and Ryohei Nakatsu. 2013. XOXO:
Haptic interface for mediated intimacy. In Proceedings of the 2013 International
Symposium on Next-Generation Electronics. IEEE, Washington, DC, 256–259.
[41] Zhafira Athifah Sandi and Endah Triastuti. 2020. Fandom as a reward industry
in Indonesia: Pleasures in pop music fan engagement and participation within
online social networking. SEARCH Journal of Media and Communication Research
12, 2 (2020), 73–89.
[42] Ion-Alexandru Secara. 2020. Zoombombing – the end-to-end fallacy. Network
Security 2020, 8 (2020), 13–17. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1353-4858(20)30094-5
[43] Mel Slater and Sylvia Wilbur. 1997. A Framework for Immersive Virtual Environments Five: Speculations on the Role of Presence in Virtual Environments. Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual Environments 6, 6 (1997), 603–616.
https://doi.org/10.1162/pres.1997.6.6.603
[44] Carolyn Stevens. 2012. Japanese Popular Music. Routledge, London, UK. https:
//doi.org/10.4324/9780203945018
[45] Anselm Strauss and Juliet Corbin. 1990. Basics of Qualitative Research: Grounded
Theory Procedures and Techniques. Sage Publications, Newbury Park, CA.
[46] John C. Tang, Gina Venolia, and Kori M. Inkpen. 2016. Meerkat and Periscope:
I Stream, You Stream, Apps Stream for Live Streams. In Proceedings of the 2016
ACM CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM, New York,
NY, 4770–4780. https://doi.org/10.1145/2858036.2858374
[47] Hiroyuki Tarumi, Tomoki Nakai, Kei Miyazaki, Daiki Yamashita, and Yuya
Takasaki. 2017. What Do Remote Music Performances Lack?. In Proceedings
of the 9th International Conference on Collaboration Technologies and Social Computing. Springer, Cham, Switzerland, 14–21. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-31963088-5_2
[48] Aneesh P. Tarun, Nauman Baig, Jack (Shen-Kuen) Chang, Rabia Tanvir, Sumaiyah
Shihipar, and Ali Mazalek. 2019. Third Eye: Exploring the Affordances of ThirdPerson View in Telepresence Robots. In Proceedings of the 11th International
Conference on Social Robotics. Springer, Cham, Switzerland, 707–716. https:
//doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-35888-4_66
[49] Muthuprasad Thiyaharajan, Aiswarya S., K. S. Aditya, and Girish K. Jha. 2020.
Students’ Perception and Preference for Online Education in India during COVID19 Pandemic. Social Sciences & Humanities Open (first look) (2020), 38. https:
//doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3596056
[50] Pei-Yun Tu, Tina Chien-Wen Yuan, and Hao-Chuan Wang. 2018. Do You Think
What I Think: Perceptions of Delayed Instant Messages in Computer-Mediated
Communication of Romantic Relations. In Proceedings of the 2018 ACM CHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM, New York, NY, 101:1–
101:11. https://doi.org/10.1145/3173574.3173675
[51] Martin Usoh, Ernest Catena, Sima Arman, and Mel Slater. 2000. Using Presence
Questionnaires in Reality. Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual Environments 9, 5
(2000), 497–503. https://doi.org/10.1162/105474600566989
[52] Dennis Wang, Yi-Chieh Lee, and Wai-Tat Fu. 2019. “I Love the Feeling of Being
on Stage, but I Become Greedy”: Exploring the Impact of Monetary Incentives
on Live Streamers’ Social Interactions and Streaming Content. Proceedings of
the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 3, CSCW (2019), 92:1–92:24. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3359194
[53] Yonggui Wang, Aoran Hong, Xia Li, and Jia Gao. 2020. Marketing innovations
during a global crisis: A study of China firms’ response to COVID-19. Journal of
Business Research 116 (2020), 214–220. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2020.05.
029
[54] Andrew M. Webb, Chen Wang, Andruid Kerne, and Pablo César. 2016. Distributed Liveness: Understanding How New Technologies Transform Performance Experiences. In Proceedings of the 19th ACM Conference on ComputerSupported Cooperative Work & Social Computing. ACM, New York, NY, 431–436.
https://doi.org/10.1145/2818048.2819974
[55] Jing Wen, Yong Ming Kow, and Yunan Chen. 2011. Online Games and Family Ties:
Influences of Social Networking Game on Family Relationship. In Proceedings

No More Handshaking

of the 13th IFIP TC 13 International Conference. Springer, Cham, Switzerland,
250–264. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-23765-2_18
[56] Yongmeng Wu, Leshao Zhang, Nick Bryan-Kinns, and Mathieu Barthet. 2017.
Open Symphony: Creative Participation for Audiences of Live Music Performances. IEEE Multimedia Magazine 24, 1 (2017), 48–62. https://doi.org/10.1109/
MMUL.2017.19
[57] Wendy Xie. 2014. Japanese “Idols” in Trans-Cultural Reception: the case of
AKB48. Virginia Review of Asian Studies 16 (2014), 74–101.

CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan

[58] Hiromu Yakura and Masataka Goto. 2020. Enhancing Participation Experience
in VR Live Concerts by Improving Motions of Virtual Audience Avatars. In
Proceedings of the 19th IEEE International Symposium on Mixed and Augmented
Reality. IEEE, Washington, DC, 555–565. https://doi.org/10.1109/ISMAR50242.
2020.00083
[59] Qing Yan and Fan Yang. 2020. From parasocial to parakin: Co-creating idols on
social media. New Media & Society [in press] (2020), 1–23. https://doi.org/10.
1177/1461444820933313

