arXiv:2101.07853v1 [cs.HC] 19 Jan 2021

Rapid Convergence: The Outcomes of Making PPE during a Healthcare Crisis
KELLY MACK, Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science, University of Washington, USA
MEGAN HOFMANN, Human Computer Interaction Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, USA
UDAYA LAKSHMI, School of Interactive Computing, Georgia Institute of Technology,, USA
JERRY CAO, Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science, University of Washington, USA
NAYHA AURADKAR, Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science, University of Washington, USA
ROSA I. ARRIAGA, School of Interactive Computing, Georgia Institute of Technology,, USA
SCOTT E. HUDSON, Human Computer Interaction Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, USA
JENNIFER MANKOFF, Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science, University of Washington, USA
The NIH 3D Print Exchange is a public and open source repository for primarily 3D printable medical device designs with contributions
from expert-amateur makers, engineers from industry and academia, and clinicians. In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, a
collection was formed to foster submissions of low-cost, local manufacture of personal protective equipment (Personal Protective
Equipment (PPE)). We systematically evaluated the 623 submissions in this collection to understand: what makers contributed, how
they were made, who made them, and key characteristics of their designs. Our analysis reveals an immediate design convergence
to derivatives of a few initial designs affiliated with NIH partners (e.g., universities, the Veteran’s Health Administration, America
Makes) and major for-profit groups (e.g., Prusa). The NIH worked to review safe and effective designs but was quickly overloaded by
derivative works. We found that the vast majority were never reviewed (81.3%) while 10.4% of those reviewed were deemed safe for
clinical (5.6%) or community use (4.8%). Our work contributes insights into: the outcomes of distributed, community-based, medical
making; features the community accepted as “safe” making; and how platforms can support regulated maker activities in high-risk
domains (e.g., healthcare).
Additional Key Words and Phrases: personal protective equipment, COVID-19, makers, making, survey
ACM Reference Format:
Kelly Mack, Megan Hofmann, Udaya Lakshmi, Jerry Cao, Nayha Auradkar, Rosa I. Arriaga, Scott E. Hudson, and Jennifer Mankoff.
2021. Rapid Convergence: The Outcomes of Making PPE during a Healthcare Crisis. 1, 1 (January 2021), 24 pages. https://doi.org/10.
1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn

Authors’ addresses: Kelly Mack, Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA; Megan Hofmann, Human
Computer Interaction Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA; Udaya Lakshmi, School of Interactive Computing, Georgia Institute of
Technology,, Atlanta, GA, USA; Jerry Cao, Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA; Nayha Auradkar, Paul
G. Allen School of Computer Science, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA; Rosa I. Arriaga, School of Interactive Computing, Georgia Institute of
Technology,, Atlanta, GA, USA; Scott E. Hudson, Human Computer Interaction Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA; Jennifer
Mankoff, Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not
made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components
of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to
redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
© 2021 Association for Computing Machinery.
Manuscript submitted to ACM
Manuscript submitted to ACM

1

2
1

Mack, et al.
INTRODUCTION

Medical making is emerging alongside maker efforts (e.g., hobbyists, engineers, designers, digital fabrication enthusiasts)
to apply crafting and digital fabrication to invent, manufacture, and repair medical devices. Research on maker practices
across domains has developed rich insights into material practices of collaboration in shared repositories [1, 3, 5] and
social norms [11, 26, 46]. Unlike many other domains of making, medical making raises vital concerns about safety
and efficacy because medical devices can pose significant risks to life and limb. Prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, the
National Institute of Health (NIH) 3D Print Exchange served as an “open, comprehensive, and interactive website for
searching, browsing, downloading, and sharing biomedical 3D print files, modeling tutorials, and educational material”
[32]—an open repository for medical making. However, as the demand for PPE in the pandemic overwhelmed global
supply chains, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and NIH began sourcing and reviewing alternative, open
source designs created by a variety of institutions and hobbyist makers. To ensure that designs are safe to use, the
NIH, in partnership with the Veteran’s Health Administration (VHA), FDA, and Center for Disease Control (CDC),
began reviewing these submissions. By analysing this collection, we contribute a better understanding of the effect of a
critical, safety-review process on what maker’s create, reuse, and share.
To understand trends from this extraordinary occurrence of medical making, we present a mixed-methods analysis of
this NIH 3D Print Exchange’s COVID-19 Collection. We use a combination of qualitative data from a thematic analysis
and quantitative data from web scrapped details of the 623 submissions. We reviewed every submission to the COVID
special collection between its start date, March 20th 2020, and January 1st, 2021. Our quantitative analysis shows that:
submissions rapidly dropped off in April after the initial surge of designs and that most (83.5%) designs are variations
of a few key classes of devices reviewed in this early period. Our qualitative analysis further demonstrates designs
within these classes (masks, face shields, and straps) converged to a few common forms. We also find that makers
not affiliated with large institutions struggled to fully document or test their designs. This insufficient documentation
of many designs led to wasted NIH reviewer time and demonstrates a lack of clarity in maker perceptions of review
criteria.
Our results reveal that NIH’s goal of collecting diverse and innovative designs from makers was not met. Instead of
generating a diverse array of designs, the submission requirements and rating designations led to a rapid convergence
of the design space. Even though the NIH did not request any particular types of designs, the majority of designs fell
into three narrow categories of PPE: face shields, masks, and straps (i.e., tension-relief bands, ear-savers). Within these
categories, diversity in the designs was low, particularly among face shields where the main defining design feature
was the presence or absence of a visor to provide protection from above.
Open maker repositories with no formal review process tend to included a wide range of unique designs [3, 23].
Contrary to these observations, we observed only a few design archetypes and numerous derivatives which made small
changes to the manufacturing method (e.g., 3D printer, slicing settings, bed arrangement) or scale (e.g., fit) of the designs.
We discuss possible factors for this shortened idea generation phase resulting in a quick design convergence. We further
discuss the groups who made these designs, how designers interacted on the forum, and factors that contributed better
review outcomes. In short, teams of expert makers outperformed expert-amateur makers in review outcomes. Finally,
we discuss how the current review process led to confusion of requirements among makers; this confusion wasted
scarce reviewer time.
Based on our findings, we recommend different ways that maker repositories with review processes can support
alternative interactions with the community and yield greater design diversity while maintaining safety. First, make the
Manuscript submitted to ACM

Rapid Convergence: The Outcomes of Making PPE during a Healthcare Crisis

3

reviewing process more transparent and effective by 1) ensuring that all key information required for a review is marked
mandatory, and 2) providing feedback about why designs received their review rating. Second, introduce a required
field to explain updates made to a design in remixes. Small updates can be more rapidly reviewed than more involved
changes. Third, pose clear requests to the community. These communications can help ensure that designs diverge
rather than converge on what is already positively reviewed. Finally, support and motivate innovation by denoting
“work-in-progress” submissions and explicitly encouraging designs that diverge from the norm. These features together
save reviewers time and position innovation and creativity as values to the community in addition to safety.
Our work lies at the intersection of CSCW themes on material practices summarized in Rosner’s literature review
[40]. CSCW scholars have explored material practices in collaborative communities engaged in craft [40], music [5],
and sites of peer-production [22, 47]. Our work informs and draws from three related themes. The first has developed
an understanding of materials and tools as non-human actors in collaborative practices. The second discovers emergent,
temporal interactions while the third has evolved around designers’ notions of affordances in digital-physical materials.
Our inquiry specifically extends Rosner’s observations on the temporal and heterogeneous facets of collaboration with
materials [40] aligned with other studies on making [36]. Medical makers balanced safety, urgency, and uncertainty in
the digital-physical fabrication process during a pandemic. Their open source contributions required greater articulation
work that was critical for design remix and reuse designs in a flexible manner. The repository as a material actor is
designed for innovation, not speed, among other factors. We discuss how fabrication work is embedded in material
practices of medical making. We provide novel implications for remix, reuse, and coordination to build open source
infrastructure for medical making. We reflect on social relations in a community marked by norms of safety, reliability,
and regulation. Our findings on rapid design convergence in the NIH 3D Print Exchange challenge expectations of
novelty, variety, and wider reach of open source activity.

2

RELATED WORK

2.1

Digital Fabrication and Peer Production in Medical Making

Maker activities are characterized by their community’s norms and material practices. Tanenbaum et al. describe hobbyist
makers tend towards a hedonistic preference of maker-technologies (i.e., 3D printers) that offer speed, replicability, and
collective skill to democratize material-driven innovation [42]. In contrast to this technocentric/utilitarian view, others
call attention to an ecosystem of sociopolitical actors [26], community structures [11]), and future opportunities [27]
to critique notions of empowerment within material constraints at sites of making. Studies on digital fabrication in
healthcare communities reveal how care for recipients of Assistive Technology devices [3, 38] and motivations in DIY
Health [37, 41] impact peer production. Relatively less is known about a similar trend in digital fabrication practices
applied to medical practice in HCI.
Medical applications for digital fabrication are on the rise with advances in 3D printing [19, 31, 44]. Most studies
track clinician experiments with the novel use of fabrication technologies in bio-printing [45], surgical guides [29],
dentistry [9], implants [8], prosthetics [14], and orthotics [7]. This trend correlates to a history of crafting practices
and device improvisations [12] and open source infrastructures. However, recent HCI studies indicate a wider variety
of ”medical makers” [25] engage in medical device development and deployment in care delivery roles. They adapt
the fabrication process to suit specialized practice [17] and generalized care norms [25]. Hofmann et al. found that
occupational therapists limit material iterations to integrate digital fabrication into their standard practices, packed
schedules, and keep costs to a minimum [17, 41]. Lakshmi et al. discuss how clinician-makers hesitate to distribute
Manuscript submitted to ACM

4

Mack, et al.

prototype designs without due regulatory approval or licensing extending from an ethos of safety and a risk aversion
to personal medical liability [25]. While 3D printing advocates in medicine proved prescient in the COVID-19 PPE
crisis [16, 24, 35], regulatory and policy infrastructure in the medical space is underdeveloped. Similar to the open
source software development communities [47], flexible and ad hoc coordination is key for efficient medical maker
response. Medical makers already defer to their professional norms to uphold safety and reliability with risk-averse
approaches. In uncertain times, these factors may conflict with expectations of novelty and variety with 3D printing
overtly recognized as a tool for innovation within the medical research community (e.g., VA’s Innovator’s Network
[39]). It is unclear how these social and material constraints influence peer production mechanisms for medical makers
engaged in digital fabrication.
2.2

Barriers to Reuse and Remix in Digital Fabrication

Reuse and adaptation of shared designs is a perceived benefit in maker communities [5]. These activities, described as
remixing, are motivated by collective learning among makers by contributing to peer production activity on repositories
[4, 23]. Makers, medical makers included, expect to adapt designs and re-share them with an articulation of their efforts
for future reuse. However, these expectations are constrained by factors specific to the digital-physical material process
for both adaptation and articulation work acting as barriers to collaboration.
Unlike physical artifacts, novelty of an adapted digital artifact can be attributed to the extent of variation from the
original as Cheliotis et al. note in their study on a musician community [5]. On Thingiverse, Kim et al. describe how
popular contributions of preferred digital file types rely on real world constraints around printer filaments and reliable
outcomes [21]. To support collaboration between users, it is better to share the source files generated on modeling
tools (e.g., OpenCAD) to retain the original geometry of the model and make editing easier [18]. However, Alock et al.
reports an overwhelming preference for STLs (84%) over OpenSCAD files (3.7%) on Thingiverse [1] possibly because it
signals a convenience to download-and-print the model. Regardless of their popularity, STLs are inflexible file types
lacking metadata, forcing makers to rebuild designs from scratch.
When makers share editable models, they fail to articulate key details such as the design’s purpose and manufacturing
details (e.g., slicing instructions). Even more experienced users can struggle with inferring the details of a print when
there is insufficient documentation on materials, print settings, and/or assembly [28, 36]. One part of this challenge is
that makers rarely document these aspects of their designs as they go, and they avoid the work when sharing online
[2]. Further, many novices in 3D-modeling struggle to understand the intricacies of models such as dealing with print
uncertainties [21] and figuring how 3D-models interact with real-world geometries [2, 6, 15]. This makes it difficult for
them to explicitly document how their design works. One solution may be to integrate the documentation process
directly into 3D modeling processes [15], however no widely adopted standard tools support this workflow. In the rare
case that all relevant information included, variations in printer and filament can still cause prints to fail [21]. On sharing
platforms, insufficient documentation is partly addressed on user forums by the community’s discussion on specific
3D-models.This reactive process is not sustainable over time as users continue to remix the model. Documentation can
be lost with each iteration leaving gaps for the successive author might not understand everything about the model and
be unable to answer questions [1, 10]. Moreover, the process increases the burden of articulating their designs on the
authors.
Articulation work is embedded in complex cooperative arrangements around the artifact itself [22, 30]. For example,
on Wikipedia, Kriplean et al’s case study analyses how moderators’ contribution from core editing shifts to “meta-work
activities” that ultimately build the collective reputation by overseeing participation, support, and quality of outcome.
Manuscript submitted to ACM

Rapid Convergence: The Outcomes of Making PPE during a Healthcare Crisis

5

Morgan et al. in their analysis of alternate WikiProjects found open collaborations persist when they maintain low
barriers for participation and community-adapted social structures [30]. Most maker communities favor a flexible,
informal structure [20] to maximize participation especially from volunteers [47] over defined roles for critical metawork to ensure quality. Eventually, this leads to inconsistent information on core properties, evaluation methods, or
use cases, leaving most digital fabrication repositories riddled with insufficient documentation of design files. It is not
surprising that time constrained medical makers avoid adopting open source designs [25]. Working within institutional
infrastructure, their efforts to make medical devices are further subject to available technical expertise, uncertainties
around physical materials, and licensing or regulatory mandates to ensure safe use. Yet, repositories like the NIH 3D
Print Exchange and the limited distribution of digital files on hospital sites indicate that medical makers publish their
designs for use, reuse, and distribution. We examine the emergent practices around the recent push to make and design
PPE [16, 24] on the NIH 3D Print Exchange. Novak and Loy undertake a wider analysis of COVID-19 response efforts
in early 2020 [35]. Our study takes a deep dive into the medical maker community on a single platform.
3

BACKGROUND: THE NIH 3D PRINT EXCHANGE AND COVID-19

The NIH 3D Print Exchange is a 3D model repository hosted by the US government with an exclusive focus on collecting
“bioscientific” models. Before the COVID-19 pandemic, the collection was an open library of bio-medical models (e.g.,
molecules, organs), a small collection of open source prosthetic-like devices from e-NABLE, and simple 3D printable
lab equipment (e.g., test tube holders). The goal of the project was to be the authoritative source for medical makers’
designs. It included the extensive documentation needed to reliably make such models wherever physical equipment
was available nationwide. By early 2020, there were efforts to add an expert review process to the exchange that would
enable makers to receive feedback from VHA and FDA experts. The program roll out was hastened to completion in
response to the surging COVID-19 pandemic in March.
Due to the pandemic, traditional PPE and medical device manufactures could not keep up with demand and there
were global shortages of respirators, face shields, masks, and other critical supplies. The NIH 3D Print Exchange
released its new review process early through the new COVID-collection. The collections’ goal was specifically: “to
inform decision-making on PPE and medical device production, without stifling innovation...by filtering designs through a
systematic review process.” The collection was intended to connect innovative makers and manufacturers to produce
products to fill in supply gaps. Anyone could submit their designs to the collection, queuing them for review by medical
and engineering experts within the NIH and other government affiliates.
Makers submit their designs through an extensive, publicly available form [34]. They could provide: a textual
description, manufacturing details (e.g., 3D printer model; materials; design files, pre-processing, assembly, cleaning,
and use instructions), licensing information, and documentation (e.g., images, testing procedures and data); though, few
of these fields were mandatory. All submissions are marked as “prototypes” before they are reviewed. Submissions are
reviewed based on a priority determined by (1) demand (i.e., the design meets an unmet need), (2) feasibility (i.e., it
seems reasonable that the design works as described), and (3) detail (i.e., the submission includes enough information to
make review possible) [33]. Reviewed designs are independently produced and tested with actual materials by reviewers
to determine what classification, if any, is appropriate. More detailed criteria for review is listed on the collection’s
FAQ and in a document detailing the different types of masks (general use face masks, surgical face masks, and N95
respirators). Specific criteria for other types of PPE are not present.
Besides the default prototype status, submissions’ review status can be: “reviewed for clinical use”, “reviewed for
community use”, and “warning”. Note that none of these terms include the word “approved”; this is a purposeful decision
Manuscript submitted to ACM

6

Mack, et al.

to remove confusion between the exchange’s review process and FDA approval processes. Positively reviewed designs
on the NIH 3D Print Exchange still do no have FDA approval. Submissions reviewed for clinical use are deemed to be
the safest and most effective submissions. These are appropriate to use in a high-risk clinical environment. Community
use denotes a lower standard where the device itself is expected to be safe but its efficacy cannot be guaranteed; it will
not hurt the user, but it might not protect them either. The warning category was used in rare cases where the design
itself is not safe. Usually this was received for high risk designs like ventilator parts. If a design did not meet the clinical
or community standards but was not so risky to merit a warning, the reviewers would privately provide feedback and
leave the design marked as a prototype. Occasionally, reviewers left public comments before deciding the design’s final
status. We cannot determine if reviewers left comments in all cases or only in the absence of a private email response.
This review process was quickly overloaded with a surge of new designs. On July 24th, the Exchange stopped
considering common face shield and ear-saver designs for review “due to the volume of submissions, unless the face shield
is a novel design adapted for a specific use”. They turned their review efforts exclusively to nasal swabs for COVID-19
tests which make up only seven of the 623designs.
The NIH 3D Print Exchange presents an unique opportunity for researchers to study what medical makers do when
collectively tasked to address one global problem (i.e., PPE production in a pandemic). Unlike open maker repositories,
the NIH 3D Print Exchange includes an explicit review process and heightened community standards that are in line
with the standards clinicians strive to uphold. However, similar to other traditional repositories, makers contributing to
the exchange likely still face challenges in learning how to make safely and documenting the quality and safety of their
designs so that others can reproduce and build on them.
4

METHODS

To understand NIH 3D Print Exchange PPE submissions, we collected fields from each submission for quantitative
analysis. We further qualitatively coded 520 submissions made before January 1st, 2021. We coded three types of PPE
which made up the majority of the submissions (83.5%): face shields, masks, and ear-savers. Each submission was
reviewed manually to determine if it was a face shield, mask, ear-saver, or another device. Our final sample of masks,
face shields, and ear-savers was 520 of the 623 total submissions made prior to January 1st, 2021.
Based on the submission form structure, for each submission we programatically collected, where ever appropriate,
the:
• Entry name
• Submission date
• Remixing attribution and the original design
• Manufacturing method (e.g., 3D printing, laser cutting)
• 3D printer model, if applicable
• 3D modeling software
• Slicing software
• 3D printer materials
• Review status
• External documentation (e.g.,images, videos, PDFs, website links)
• Pre- and post-processing instructions
• Licenses
Manuscript submitted to ACM

Rapid Convergence: The Outcomes of Making PPE during a Healthcare Crisis

7

• Comment counts
Each of these pieces of information was either scraped from a well-formatted field on the design submission page or
found by searching the text associated with each entry for relevant keywords.
We performed an additional layer of processing on this scraped data to gain insights into makers’ reuse of other
submissions in their designs (i.e, remixing). The form did not require makers to declare changes made in remixes, though
many makers noted it in text. To capture differences across remixes we compared fields between original and derivative
designs and logged differences in key fields (e.g., manufacturing method, materials, modeling software, printer-used).
Additionally, we searched all text associated with a model for a list of qualifying words that we saw repeatedly in our
qualitative coding (e.g., more, less, faster, slower, thicker, thinner, safer).
In addition to this automatically collected data, four authors deductively coded each entry. We derived our codes by
inductively coding 50 entries selected through stratified random sampling across the three design categories. Additional
codes were developed based on a review of the literature and current media coverage of makers’ response to the
pandemic. We applied these codes in a top down fashion to all 520 face shield, mask, and ear-saver entries. We all coded
in batches of 50 stratified random samples until saturation across the coders was reached, updating and removing codes
based on group consensus. We reached saturation with an average inter-rater reliability of 0.87 (range=0.64-1.00) across
all accepted codes. Three of these authors went on to individually review the remainder of the data set. We met weekly
to update each other and discuss any uncertainties that arose.
Based on a thematic analysis of these codes, we present themes on the community’s values, how trade-offs between
values were made in designs, and how remixing behaviors supported convergence of the design space. We developed a
shared understanding of the data through weekly meetings where PPE and codes were examined.

5

RESULTS

In March 2020, the NIH opened the 3D Print Exchange as a place for people to post design ideas and generate discussion
and feedback. In our dataset of the 623 submissions between March 20th and January 1st, the designs fell into three main
categories: face shields (N=263/623, 42.2%), face masks (N=177/623, 28.4%), and ear-savers (N=80/623, 12.8%) (Figure 1).
The remaining submissions (N=103/623, 16.5%) included mask cases, ventilator parts, or door-openers. In this section,
we characterize the dataset of face shield, mask, and ear-savers that we qualitatively coded (N=520). First, we discuss
key properties; how they were designed, manufactured, and by whom. Then, we narrow our focus to key properties for
medical making: replicability and safety.

5.1

Temporal Trends

Submissions surged right after the collection was created in immediate response to the pandemic in the United States.
The total number of submissions steadily increased until and peaked in the first week of April (Figure 2) then the
submission rate dramatically decreased. It increased slightly with the resurgence of the virus in the United States in
May.
Makers tended to submit designs with greater perceived importance or complexity. The first submissions (prior
to March 29th) were two ventilator valves and one face shield, which are simpler to model and manufacture than
a face mask. The media had also expressed that these were more important for saving lives than ear-savers which
only increase mask comfort. This is an early example of a repeated pattern in our data. Makers tended to focus on
Manuscript submitted to ACM

8

Mack, et al.

(a) Face shield; 42.2% of submissions
(3dpx-013359 pictured)

(b) Mask; 28.4% of submissions
(3dpx-013677 pictured)

(c) Ear savers; 12.8% of submissions
(3dpx-013860 pictured)

Fig. 1. Examples of the three types of PPE we use in our analysis. (a) shows a face shield (42.2%), (b) shows a mask (28.4% of
submissions), and (c) shows a tension relief band (ear-savers comprised 12.8% of submissions).

Fig. 2. The number of submissions per type of PPE were most popular at the end of March and early April. Face shields are denoted
by blue bars, masks by orange, and ear-saver by grey.

designing what attracts attention or was deemed important, especially by news sources, rather than what could be
reliably produced to fulfill PPE needs.
5.2

Material Trade-offs

Due to resource scarcity induced by the pandemic, makers made careful trade-offs when selecting manufacturing
methods and materials. Makers had to balance between competing goals of broadening participation, using available
Manuscript submitted to ACM

Rapid Convergence: The Outcomes of Making PPE during a Healthcare Crisis

9

materials, rapid manufacturing, and the safety of a design. We present three examples below that highlight these
tensions and the trade-offs that were made that were perceivable in the designs.
5.2.1 Material Selection, Safety, and Participation. Many submissions could be made by expert-amateur makers. The
most common filaments used were all widely available to consumers: PLA (N=223/520, 42.9%), PET (N=34/520, 6.5%),
PETG (N=140/520, 26.9%), and ABS (N=64/520, 12.3%). PLA, PET, and PETG are common and easy to print with. ABS,
however, requires more advanced setups due to toxic off-gassing. Similarly, for designs that specified a particular 3D
printer, the majority (279/312, 89.4%) used printers available to consumers for less than $10,000. Many submissions
listed multiple filament options (N=147/520, 28.3%) (e.g., printing a face shield in PLA or PETG). Notably, the most
commonly remixed face shields (3DPX-013306, 3DPX-013359) could be made with several variations of PLA or PETG,
and could be manufactured on a consumer printer. The prevalence of easy-to-use materials afforded opportunities for
hobbyists and broadened participation.
On the other hand, more complex materials or printers could improve safety at the expense of participation. 16%
of designs used materials that require special equipment or additional expertise to work with (e.g., TPU, Nylon, PC,
ASA). The most commonly remixed mask was printed with nylon that requires an industrial printer. Nylon was chosen
because it can be sanitized, unlike PLA or PETG. Therefore, substitutions other filaments could be unsafe. Similarly,
some designs combined multiple filaments to meet particular design goals at the expense of easy manufacturability. For
example, the “Helmet-Compatible Community Face Mask” (3DPX-013354) used a rigid material (e.g, PLA, ABS, PETG)
for the snout to ensure the filter was held away from the nose and mouth. It used a flexible material (e.g., TPU) where
the mask touches the face to improve comfort and air-seal. Choices by some makers to trade off manufacturability for
other goals shows that they believed advanced methods were required at the cost of supporting more makers.
5.2.2 Powerful Tools that Limit Participation. A design’s manufacturing method determines who can make a design
and how much work is required. Unsurprisingly, 3D printing was by far the most popular method (N=482/520, 92.7%)
followed by laser cutting (N=49/520, 9.4%) and injection molding (N=22/520, 4.2%). The fact that most designs supported
3D printing by hobbyist makers broadened who could manufacture PPE.
Several entries listed more than one manufacturing method (N=173/520, 33.3%), such as the “Georgia Tech Face
Shield for Injection Molding, 3D Printing, Waterjet, Laser Cutting” (3DPX-013314). Often these gave makers choices. For
example, the “NAVAIR - TDP for 3DVerkstan Protective Face Shield” (3DPX-014090) lists that the submission can either
be “printed on non-industrial 3D printers or laser cut.” While 3D printers are relatively slow and require post processing,
they are widely available. Injection moldering, on the other hand, is fast but inaccessible to most for hobbyists. Makers
designed for multiple manufacturing methods to both support makers and increase manufacturing efficiency.
Other designs utilized multiple manufacturing techniques for the same design. For example, the “Southern Tier
Face Shield” with model ID 3DPX-014082 was one of several face shield designs that required a 3D printed frame
that goes across the wearer’s forehead and a laser cut PC barrier to prevent droplets from reaching the face. They
chose materials like PC because they can be quickly and automatically cut. Alternatively makers may increase post
processing requirements to avoid using additional manufacturing machines. For example, regular, office hole-punchers
could be easily used with transparent, plastic, 3-ring binder sheets to create the clear face shield without laser cut
plastic (N=63/520, 12.1%). The “Livingston Shield v2.2” (3DPX-014416) instructs users to use a hole-puncher to create 4
holes in a transparency sheet to attach to the 3D printed face shield frame. Though the materials were common and
unlikely to run out in the pandemic, this design requires more manual post processing to punch and attach the sheets
Manuscript submitted to ACM

10

Mack, et al.

Table 1. Submission Counts and data set percentages for reported manufacturing methods, 3D printer filaments, CAD tools, and
Slicing Tools.

Manufacturing Method

Submission Count

Portion of All Submission

3D Printing
Laser Cutter
Injection Mold
CNC
None Reported

482
49
22
14
319

92.7%
9.4%
4.2%
2.7%
61.3%

223
34
140
64
47
332

42.9%
6.5%
26.9%
12.3%
9%
63.8%

126
102
13
25
22
161

24.2%
19.6%
2.5%
4.8%
4.2%
31%

59
28
391

11.3%
5.4%
75.2%

3D Printer Filament
PLA
PET
PETG
ABS
TPU
None Reported
CAD Tool
Fusion 360
SolidWorks
Autodesk Inventor
Rhino
TinkerCAD
None Reported
Slicing Tool
Cura
Simplify3D
None Reported

to the 3D printed frame than laser-cut alternatives. Makers traded-off increases in production speed through advanced
manufacturing with slow manual process that increased participation.
Aside from manufacturing tools, makers’ choices of software can effect participation. The most used modeling
and slicing tools are listed in Table 1. Most modeling tools were oriented towards professionals (e.g., Solidworks) or
expert-amateurs (e.g., Autodesk Fusion 360). These require more experience to use than novice-oriented tools (e.g.,
TinkerCAD). 70% (N=364/520) and 25.6% (N=133/520) of submissions provided the modeling and slicing software used,
respectively. The ability to edit another user’s model depends on the software used (e.g., it is difficult to edit a model
made in Blender in Solidworks).
5.3

Community Members and Interactions

Prior work positions maker communities as mainly hobbyists working on independent projects in a shared space [20].
But the NIH 3D Print Exchange’s community additionally included what we call affiliated makers who were affiliated
with a university, healthcare facility, and/or for-profit company. Affiliated makers usually represented larger teams of
experts. Interaction between community members on the exchange was uncommon, making it difficult for makers to
seek support through the repository.
Manuscript submitted to ACM

Rapid Convergence: The Outcomes of Making PPE during a Healthcare Crisis

11

Fig. 3. The 176 mask, face shield, and ear-savers that were designed by an affiliated person divided up according to affiliation of
the members. Though most designs were carried out by a single type of organization, we see 30 designs with multiple types of
contributors.

5.3.1 Individuals and Affiliated Teams. The NIH 3D Print Exchange was built to support the open exchange of designs
and foster collaboration across stakeholders (e.g., healthcare professionals, universities, companies, entrepreneurs,
hobbyist makers). 448 unique authors submitted designs. The median number of designs submitted per person was
1 and the range was 1-9. Our qualitative review revealed that most (N=344/520, 66.2%) authors listed no affiliation
with their submission. We suspect this indicates a lone maker who is not affiliated with a relevant organization. Those
submissions with listed affiliations had team members from industry (N=84/520, 16.2%), academia (N=67/520, 12.9%),
and the healthcare industry (N=59/520, 11.3%).
Numerous designs were the result of collaborations within and across institutions. As shown in Figure 3, 30 projects
involved people with different affiliations. The most common type of collaboration was between universities and health
care facilities (N=19/30, 63.3%). The “Stopgap Surgical Facemask” (3DPX-013429) lists 59 team members from for-profit
institutions, universities, hospitals, the FDA, and the VHA. While affiliated makers often worked in teams, unaffiliated
makers rarely collaborated.
5.3.2 Community Interactions. The NIH 3D Print Exchange supports lightweight interaction between makers through
submission comments, but commenting was rare. 78.5% (N=408/520) of designs had zero comments and 10.8% (N=56/520)
had only one comment. Based on studies on other studies of COVID-19 medical making [16, 24], we expect that makers
were primarily communicating in other platforms. On the exchange itself, feedback between makers was not the norm.
For instance, the “Helmet-Compatible Community Face Mask” (3DPX-013354) designer stated in the submission “I
welcome all feedback in the comments section to further iterate and optimize”, and the “USCSW modified 2 part build
with Pencil Popper” (3DPX-013404) mask designer after receiving a 1/5 star community-rating on the NIH 3D Print
Exchange commented “Please contact me to explain the one star - I’d be happy to modify anything you didn’t like”. Neither
designer received a response. Among the 10.8% of designs that had at least two comments, constituting a conversation,
the median number of comments was 3. The only outlier was the, “Stopgap Surgical Face Mask (SFM)” (3DPX-013429),
the first revision of a mask that later received clinical usage rating (see 3DPX-014168), that had 111 comments. We
found no evidence of the NIH 3D Print Exchange broadly being used to collaborate or directly communicate between
makers and/or other stakeholders (e.g., NIH, clinicians).
Manuscript submitted to ACM

12

Mack, et al.

5.4

Replicability and Documentation

For the NIH 3D Print Exchange to be useful, makers need to be able replicate submissions. We found evidence of
remixing behavior (179/520, 34.4%), but only found 61 (11.7%) entries that comments reported as successfully replicated.
Thus, remixing was prevalent, but its unclear if they were manufacturing others’ designs. We have no way of measuring
the number of people who made a design and chose not to share that on this site. Thus, we examine other factors which
may influence replicability (e.g., documentation, ease of manufacturing, and licensing). We expect that submissions
with more complete documentation, that are easy to make, and have open licences (e.g., public domain) would be more
readily adopted. Other factors, such as media attention or affiliation with famous groups (e.g., Prusa, e-NABLE) are also
likely contributors beyond the scope of this study.
5.4.1 Prototype Remixes. The NIH 3D Print Exchange facilitated collaboration and iteration for “remixing”, similar
to other popular maker forums like Thingiverse and Instructables [5, 36]. 131 out of 520 (25.2%) of entries were listed
as remixes or “other versions” of models on the NIH 3D Print Exchange. Figure 4 presents the remixing network
(186 designs), omitting submissions that are neither a remix or remixed. Many nodes (56, 30.1%) were only remixed
once. There were notable outliers: one design, the “3DVerkstan 3D printed face shield head band” (3DPX-013306), was
remixed 12 times and 4 additional designs were derivative of those remixes. Another, the “DtM-v3.1 Face Shield PPE”
(3DPX-013359), was remixed 16 times with 6 additional derivatives. Both of these designs were made by affiliated
makers. “3DVerkstan 3D printed face shield head band” is made by 3DVerkstan, a European 3D printing company, and
the “DtM-v3.1 Face Shield PPE” involved team members from Microsoft, three universities, and three hospitals. The
mask and ear-saver that had the highest number of remixes were the “Stopgap Surgical Face Mask” (3DPX-013429) (5
remixes), which was made by an expansive team crossing companies, universities, and hospitals, and the “Surgical
Mask Tension Release Band for Ear Comfort & Extended Use” (3DPX-013410) (6 remixes), which was designed by a
VHA employee. It is important to note that three of these four designs were rated for clinical use, and that no designs in
our remixing graph were given a warning usage rating. Makers did not iterate to remix designs flagged with warnings
to fix those flaws; they remixed successful designs to work under their local manufacturing constraints. Overall, we see
that safety and affiliation of designs influenced remixing behavior. This implies that safety was a community norm and
affiliated makers were trusted sources of designs.
Some remixing behavior is not captured by explicit links between submissions. For example, many designs shared a
similar shape to the popular “Montana Mask” (3DPX-013443) which was spotlighted on Good Morning America on
April 12th [13]. Further, not all makers attributed credit. For example, the maker of the “3 Hole Punch Minimal Face
Shield” (3DPX-013501) found that someone had remixed their design by putting two copies of the original design in
their printing file without attributing. They commented: “at least credit the creator”.
Our qualitative analysis showed that remixes were primarily incremental changes to support alternative manufacturing techniques. Few changes were intended to significantly influence use or efficacy. 54 of the remixes listed a change in
materials, of which 20 added new materials not mentioned in the original design. 25 designs strictly limited the number
of materials options/materials used in a design. However, the majority (N=17) of these designs only removed complex
filament to use (e.g., TPU, Nylon, ABS). 21 remixes used different modeling software than the original submission,
which may make it easier for makers to replicate the design in the CAD tool of their choice. 13 remixes used different
3D printers models enabling more people to manufacture the design and 6 tailored a design suited for “many” printers
for an individual printer model. For example, the “FDM Printable version of Stop Gap Mask” (3DPX-013771) remixed
the popular “Stopgap Surgical Mask” to make it “allow printing on hobby style FDM printers (PLA, PET-g etc)”. The
Manuscript submitted to ACM

Rapid Convergence: The Outcomes of Making PPE during a Healthcare Crisis

13

Fig. 4. A network showing remixing relationships. An arrow starts at the original design and points to the remix of that design. Colors
represent usage rating, with blue nodes as unreviewed, yellow nodes as rated for community usage, and green nodes as rated for
clinical usage. The two grey nodes are designs that linked to pages that no longer exist.

original design required an industrial Powder Bed Fusion Nylon printer. Note that this change effects the mask’s
porosity, making it harder to to disinfect. Other common reasons for remixing designs included adjusting designs to fit
different size print beds, take less time to manufacture, require less material, or to print more than one design at a time.
Occasionally, designs affected comfort or ease or use in small ways (e.g., “[This change] makes it a bit more comfortable
for different head sizes” (3DPX-013659)) While some of these changes may effect safety, none constitute divergence
from the original design. On the NIH 3D Print Exchange, remixing behavior was almost exclusively tweaking designs
to support new makers.
There are a few examples of substantial feature changes, often motivated by local user feedback. One face shield
design, “Anvil Verkstan Visor” (3DPX-014089), significantly modified the popular “3DVerkstan V3 - Face Shield” based
on community feedback: “The entire visor has been redesigned and model[ed] from scratch so there will be variances in
widths, curves, length, etc. when compared to the original. We re-made this model to better support our local community
in our efforts to help the workers on the front lines.” Another design, the “Surgical Mask Tension Release Band with
Hair Stabilizer” (3DPX-013819), iterated on a clinically reviewed design to improve it based on issues experienced by
clinician users: “They requested a way to keep the band from moving around/flying off while attempting to put on or
take off their masks. I incorporated a section of hair pick so that the part can be inserted into the hair, where it will stay
on it’s own, allowing both hands to be used for putting on or taking off the mask.” We observed few remixes like these,
which implies that makers either created designs from scratch when addressing more significant design requirements
(e.g., clinical usage, fit) or that more makers were interested in tweaking designs to support manufacturing under their
resource constraints.
5.4.2 Documentation. The NIH 3D Print Exchange was created for sharing PPE materials for collaboration, education,
and practical use. Thus, it is crucial for entries to be documented to foster communication between makers, reviewers,
Manuscript submitted to ACM

14

Mack, et al.

manufacturers, and PPE users. Documentation was often presented as static documents (N=183/520, 35.2%) (e.g., PDFs),
and video links (N=31/520, 6%). Images were also a popular form of documentation. All entries included at least one
thumbnail image, by default a view of the 3D model, and the majority included additional photographs or diagrams
(N=429/520, 82.5%). A majority of entries included at least one web link (N=315/520, 60.6%), often to a portfolio or
alternate repository (e.g., Thingiverse, GitHub). External website content is dynamic, but the NIH required static
documentation to be included on the exchange itself. We stopped reviewing links because we found several broken
links during our qualitative analysis. Finally, a majority of entries (N=290/520, 55.8%) also included pre/post processing
information, such as printer settings, cleaning instructions, and material recommendations, which are critical to ensure
proper manufacturing and safe use. Overall, makers tended to provide documentation that required the least additional
work from them, preferring easy to update websites over creating static documents, or adding easy to capture images
instead of videos. Documentation did not appear to be makers’ top priority.
In the medical domain, reproducible testing procedures and results are critical. Test results are needed to quantify the
level of protection a design provides. Their importance to reviewers is supported by the correlation between presence
of testing and community or clinical approval (𝜒 2 = 4.1, 𝑝 < .05). Only 44 (8.5%) designs documented rigorous testing
results: 6 face shields and 46 mask. A 𝜒 2 test reveals that affiliation with healthcare facilities or universities correlated
with the presence of testing results (healthcare: 𝜒 2 = 22.3, 𝑝 < .00001 ; university: 𝜒 2 = 21.4, 𝑝 < .00001). This is likely
because testing requires specialized equipment that consumers cannot easily access. The community’s importance of
testing advantage affiliated makers over unaffiliated makers.
5.4.3 Licensing. All submissions included a licenses that set permissions for sharing, adapting, selling, or remixing
submissions. Several designs offered little or no restrictions to use and adaptations: N=67/520, 12.9% were public domain
and N=330/520, 63.5% were CC BY or CC BY-SA; both of these do not restrict usage, but require attribution to the original.
Other designs limited themselves to non-commercial use only (N=96/520, 18.5% were CC BY-NC or CC BY-NC-SA),
while still others used the strictest of licenses which do not allow for modifications to be made to the design (N=14/520,
2.7% were CC BY-NC-ND or CC BY-ND). Overall, the tendency for authors to use less restrictive licences is aligns with
prior work that shows that maker communities tend to value openness [23].

5.5

Convergence of Designs

Our dataset was characterized by rapid convergence of design ideas; there was little exploration of new forms of PPE.
The COVID Collection was broad in it’s call for design, stating that it was created to “inform decision-making on PPE and
medical device production, without stifling innovation”. Interestingly, the community who submitted to this collection
narrowed its focus to the production of three types of PPE: masks, face shields, and ear-savers; 520 of the 623 total
submissions (83.5%) fell into these three categories. The 103 “other” submissions focused on meeting a range of needs
(e.g., ventilator parts, shoe covers, gowns, hand-less door openers, nasal swabs).
We further saw convergence of designs within these three overarching PPE categories. Consider face shields. In
our preliminary analysis of a random sample of face shields, the only common difference between the designs was
protection from liquid droplets from above (Figure 5a and b). Besides this feature, face shields almost exclusively
consisted of a 3D printed frame that braces against the forehead and a clear plastic sheet that attaches to the front of the
frame to protect the face. The two most commonly remixed face shields (“3DVerkstan 3D printed face shield head band”
and “DtM-v3.1 Face Shield PPE”) followed this archetype. The convergence to only a few archetypes over a period of
Manuscript submitted to ACM

Rapid Convergence: The Outcomes of Making PPE during a Healthcare Crisis

(a) A face shield without protection from
above (3DPX-013343)

(b) A face shield with protection from
above (3DPX-013325)

15

(c) The scuba mask/face shield design
(3DPX-013396)

Fig. 5. Examples of three types of face shields. The first two examples show the most common arcehtypes we found, those providing
coverage from above (b) and those that do not (a). The third image (c) is an example of the “scuba/snorkel” designs that relied on a
consumer face mask or snorkel mask that covers the whole face and air is breathed through the snorkel pipe.

about a month is unusual. Generally, makers are espoused for their creativity and presentation of novel, innovative,
even wild ideas. But those ideas were largely absent from the NIH 3D Print Exchange.
There was one notable design for a combined face shield-mask that starkly deviated from this norm: the “Five-minute
zero-print full-face snorkel mask with filter” (3DPX-013396), shown in Figure 5c. It required no 3D printing and only
attachment of filtering material over the spout of a full-face, sealed, snorkel mask. There were 13 other scuba-mask-based
designs that all used the same concept but used a 3D printed adapter to attach the filter material. Across our entire
qualitative review, this was the only archetype that varied significantly from a design that was reviewed for clinical use
before the rapid drop off in submissions in April. It is the exception that proves the rule.
5.6

Safety

The review system is the core component that distinguishes the NIH 3D Print Exchange from any other maker repository.
The process enforces clinical norms of safety and quality. Overall, the risks associated with different types of PPE was
the primary determinant in review status. More subtle details that contribute to safety quality were difficult to analyse
because, to date, 81.3% of designs have not been reviewed. However, some traits that we expect contributed to a design’s
safety-level could be found across the whole dataset. Though we are not experts in the safety of PPE, we identified
three relevant safety traits through our analysis: coverage, fit, and the presence of cleaning instructions. The safety
criteria for masks and face shields differ, and so we discuss them separately below. Ear-savers, on the other hand pose
little risk as an accessory to improve comfort, so we do not discuss their safety features. There are no examples of
ear-savers with a “warning” usage rating status.
5.6.1 Usage Ratings and Safety Results. The NIH 3D Print Exchange created four different usage ratings to classify
entries based on the prototype’s level of safety (Table 2). The vast majority of entries (N=464/520, 81.3%) had a “prototype”
status, which is the default rating of submissions uploaded, indicating that the submission has not been fully reviewed.
Though not an official rating, we did note that 8.8% (N=41/464) of these submissions had received notes from the
reviewer which indicates that these submissions were not acceptable given the level of documentation included in
the submission. There were three statuses for designs that completed review, “Clinical Use”, “Community Use”, and
“Warning”. These categories dictate the level of trust reviewers had in the designs’ safety and efficacy. Design affiliation
with healthcare correlated with both likelihood of receiving reviewer attention (𝜒 2 = 11.4, 𝑝 < .001) and community or
Manuscript submitted to ACM

16

Mack, et al.

Table 2. The usage rating given to PPE across the three main categories of face shield, mask, and ear-saver. The majority of designs
received an unreviewed “prototype” status.

Rating

Face Shield

Mask

Ear-Saver

Clinical use
Community use
Warning
Checked but no rating given
Prototype (not checked)

16
2
0
7
238

2
22
2
28
123

11
1
0
6
62

clinical ratings (𝜒 2 = 11.2, 𝑝 < .001). This may indicates that affiliated makers were sought out for review and were
better suited to submit designs that reviewers viewed favorably (i.e., considered safe).
29 entries (5.6%) received clinical usage ratings, meaning the entry had been evaluated in a clinical setting and
reviewers deemed appropriate for healthcare workers in contact with COVID-19 patients—their highest mark of safety.
For example, the “Stopgap Surgical Face Mask (SFM) Revision B” (3DPX-014168) was evaluated in a clinical setting
and was given a clinical usage rating. Others (N=25/520, 4.8%) received a community usage rating, meaning that the
entry is suitable for workers in retail stores, law enforcement, and other community activities. 2 entries (0.4%), both of
which were masks, received a “warning” rating, indicating that the entry needed FDA approval or has design flaws that
make it unsafe to use. Outside of our dataset of masks, face shields, and ear-savers, 5.5% of all submissions (N=34/623)
had a warning rating. A majority of these entries with warning status (N=15/34, 44.1%) were ventilator parts. Many of
these entries had notes from the author saying the entry had not been tested; for example, the author of the “Ventilator
Circuit Splitters - reinforced & thicker walls” (3DPX-013347) stated that they “make no representations as to the safety
of this device.” Other entries with the warning status included parts for other respiration devices and mask sanitizers.
As we expected, classes of devices that pose more risk (e.g., masks, ventilator parts) received the more scrutiny, and
devices that pose less risks (e.g., face shields, ear savers) received less scrutiny.
There were 41 submissions that were not yet reviewed but had reviewer notes. The reviewer notes in a majority of
these submissions (N=31/41, 72.1%) requested documentation, specifically best printing parameters or use instructions.
Some reviewer notes (N=8/41, 18.9%) pointed out that the printing instructions and instructions for use were on external
links and this documentation needed to be statically embedded in the submission to prevent modifications after review.
Other reviewer notes (N=4/41, 9.3%) requested that submissions be renamed so as not to imply incorrect usage and
protection properties. For example, reviewers asked for “respirator” to be taken out of the title of the submission “3D
Printed Respirator Mask, 4 sizes, XSM, SM, M, L” (3DPX-013948) because the term “respirator” is a medical term that
implies a specific level of protection that this mask did not meet [33]. Two reviewer notes on masks requested testing
information. For example, the “The Unity Mask PRO”(3DPX-014364) listed that the mask met or exceeded National
Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) N95 filtration criteria, but did not provide the test results. Based
on these reviewer comments that makers’ and reviewers’ value of documentation were misaligned.
5.6.2 Characteristics of Safe Designs. Beyond the designs that were reviewed, we could only identify three characteristics
of designs that we have a high confidence influence whether or not their reproduction is safe for clinical use: (1) mask
sizing/fit, (2) face shield coverage, and (3) the presence of cleaning/disinfecting instructions).
The main safety trait that varied across masks was the inclusion of different size 3D models. For masks, one size
does not fit all; sizing is a key factor that influences fit and fit ensures safety. Facial features do not scale uniformly, so
Manuscript submitted to ACM

Rapid Convergence: The Outcomes of Making PPE during a Healthcare Crisis

17

scaling model sizes is not a solution. Most masks will not create a secure air seal on a diverse set of human faces. In
these cases, contaminated air could enter through the gaps between the mask and face, rather than through the filter.
Different sizes are needed to ensure that people of different ages and genders are protected. Only 43 (25%) of the masks
offered at least two sizes. In practice, users may find that different designs fit them better, but most wearers do not have
the opportunity to print a range of masks and pick the best fit. The lack of sizing features in this data set shows that
most makers were not considering this key safety feature in their design process.
The main safety trait that varied across face shields was forehead coverage. Face shields at a minimum need to protect
the front of the face (eyes, nose, and mouth) from liquid droplets, and almost all designs did so; 2 did not. However,
several designs (192/263, 36.9% of face shields) also protected the wearer from liquid droplets from above by covering
the forehead. Most designs either created a “visor” like piece to connect to the top of the mask or a closed gap so that
there is no open space between where the frame touches the forehead and the clear sheet (see Figure 5). Forehead
coverage may not be as critical as mask sizing for safety, but the additional feature demonstrates that many designers
were considering increase safety when designing face shields.
A final piece of information that was critical to safe use of reusable PPE in a pandemic was cleaning instructions.
Cleaning instructions are necessary to ensure proper disinfection and safe reuse. Only 84 (16.2%) and were included in
instances of all three types of prototypes. Affiliation and usage rating were both correlated with presence of cleaning
instructions. A 𝜒 2 test reveals that affiliation with a health care organization or a university correlated with the presence
of cleaning instructions (healthcare: 𝜒 2 = 5.0, 𝑝 < .05 ; university: 𝜒 2 = 11.8, 𝑝 < .001), and the presence of cleaning
instructions was correlated with a community or clinical usage rating (𝜒 2 = 33.3, 𝑝 < .00000001). Many cleaning
protocols are based on common protocols for medical devices that are already in clinical use. Perhaps affiliated makers
were more readily aware of these practices than unaffiliated makers. Notably, while cleaning instructions effected the
review process, there was no submission field for including them explicitly.
Overall, there were only a few features that we could demonstrate impacted the safety rating of submissions. This
may be because of how small the sample of reviewed designs is, making it difficult to identify common flaws in makers
designs or characteristics of high-quality designs.

6

DISCUSSION

The COVID-19 pandemic spurred one of the most widespread efforts of medical making to date. Makers sustained efforts
to make PPE with existing technical and human infrastructure [35]. The NIH 3D Print Exchange COVID collection
was meant to “inform decision-making on PPE and medical device production, without stifling innovation” [33]. Decisionmaking was supported by the formal review process, but reviewers were overwhelmed by the surge of designs. Further,
the platform’s goal of fostering innovation was undermined by regulated, inflexible structures which have been shown
to create environments that can be less conducive for maker contributions [20]. The decision to regulate the repository
stems from the medical making community norm of safety and reliability. These prerogatives led medical makers to
limit remixed designs, causing a rapid convergence of ideas. Hobbyist makers’ contributions were subject to social and
institutional structures of medical maker groups. In the context of medical making during a health crisis, we discuss how
these material practices [40] inform future design of online repositories that support supporting innovation through
peer production in high-risk domains.
Manuscript submitted to ACM

18

Mack, et al.

6.1

The Effects of Novel, Scarce Review

NIH reviewers were inundated with hundreds of designs, and few designs were reviewed. Reviewer time is a scarce
resource. Though the NIH provided some guidance for safely designing one type of PPE, masks, it was not widely
adopted by makers; few masks were approved and many lacked documentation. Further, the NIH provided makers little
details on what the review process would consider. We suggest that this unclear reviewing process advantaged makers
affiliated with healthcare institutions over lone-makers.
6.1.1 The Benefits of Affiliation. Makers who were affiliated with a university, the healthcare facility, or for-profit
company were reviewed more positively because they tended to more successfully adhere to the NIH’s value of safety.
The designs affiliated makers contributed received more reviewer attention and higher usage ratings. While the NIH
3D Print Exchange aspired to support collaboration, the collaborations that were positively reviewed tended to rely
on institutional systems for accountability, reliability, and perceived value of contribution. Prior literature shows that
maker communities are driven by social norms [11, 43]. We contribute to this literature by demonstrating that social
norms derived from clinical institutions advantage makers working in the healthcare domain.
Affiliated makers had better access to resources pools that aligned with the NIH’s clinical expectations of safety. For
instance, interviews with makers working in close proximity to healthcare workers helped affiliated makers evaluate
PPE usability [24]. Additionally, they could access rare medical expertise (e.g., infectious disease teams). Another study
of COVID-19 maker communities showed that they struggle to curate and analyze scientific information in an evolving
crisis plagued with widespread misinformation [16]. This challenge further advantages affiliated makers with experience
reading scientific literature (e.g., healthcare workers, university workers). In terms of material resources, universities
and for-profit companies often had resources like 3D printers, filament, and CAD and fabrication experts. Further, many
healthcare and university workers had access to testing facilities, which explains the statistical correlations between
these affiliations and presence of testing results . Finally, affiliated makers had access to teams of specialized experts
when attempting faster iteration. Access to such resources is demonstrative of an institutional culture that supports
and demands thorough documentation in order to decrease safety risks. It is to be expected that affiliated makers would
bring these practices and the values they represent with them to the NIH 3D Print Exchange.
6.1.2 Reviewing Expert-Amateurs. Individual or hobbyist makers may be unfamiliar with formal review processes, while
affiliated makers are often accustomed to peer-review. Review is not common on maker repositories (e.g., Thingiverse),
which support relatively unrestricted sharing of designs. Therefore, makers likely were unclear about expectations
going in. In our study, we saw that most submissions had the level of documentation we would expect to see on
hobbyist repositories. However, the NIH reviewers needed documentation in order to replicate designs to review them.
We see three plausible explanations for the discrepancy. First, makers may be defaulting to their usual practices and
simply following the norms established on other repositories. Second, makers may lack an understanding of what
details reviewers need, particularly early on when few accepted designs could be used as exemplars. Alcock et al.
demonstrated with survey of Thingiverse that makers rarely provide enough documentation to support other makers in
remixing their work [1]. It follows that they would continue to struggle to provide documentation on the NIH 3D Print
Exchange, but with greater consequence since it halts the review process. Finally, makers may not value the review
process as it excludes their contribution to the collaborative in clear terms [30]. Instead, we expect that many makers
are using the NIH 3D Print Exchange as a repository for COVID specific designs. The lack of documentation poses
Manuscript submitted to ACM

Rapid Convergence: The Outcomes of Making PPE during a Healthcare Crisis

19

unique challenges for regulated maker repositories. How can makers be encouraged to document their work for review
without discouraging makers with less resources or experience?
Lone makers seemed to struggle to create safe, documented designs, outside of making minor remixes of affiliated
designs. Based on the designs they provided, unaffiliated makers appear to be unaware of the necessity of cleaning
instructions or manufacturing instructions in the review process; understandably so, since cleaning designs is “invisible”
[30] to makers outside of healthcare settings. However, the correlation between documentation and usage ratings
indicates that this work is valued by reviewers. Therefore, novice medical makers can submit more effective designs if
they are alerted to reviewers’ values by encountering mandatory form fields asking for this safety critical information.
One could argue that affiliated makers appear better prepared than lone makers to support healthcare settings—i.e.,
leave it to the professionals. But, this view erases the contributions of non-affiliated medical makers who provided
critical support in the COVID-19 crisis [16]. It also undermines the potential in harnessing low-skill craft alternatives in
supplementing collective action beyond established practices [24]. Instead, we propose that the NIH 3D Print Exchange
naively positioned lone makers at the same level as large, professional, collaborative institutions. This forces makers
to perform along standards set by larger institutions without those institutional resources. To do this, most makers
tweaked accepted designs, rather than innovating in diverse ways.
6.2

Safety’s Impacts on Design Diversity

There were only a few distinct types of designs on the NIH 3D Print Exchange and remixes with small incremental
changes were frequent. However, the NIH 3D Print Exchange’s goal was not to “stifle innovation”; they wanted makers
to contribute unique and novel solutions. We hypothesize that the norm of safety and the uncertainty of the review
process encouraged individual makers to only make small changes when remixing.
We observed that when makers adapted others’ designs, they limited their edits compared to the remixing behavior
in other creative communities; few makers made large, structural changes to designs. Affiliated makers contributed the
designs that were remixed the most. These had also received community or clinical usage ratings. This data reveals
a tendency of the community to follow norms set by perceived authorities including, these professionally affiliated
groups and the NIH itself. However, as described, lone makers face greater challenges than institutions to document
and test their designs. Instead, most makers likely work with scarce resources (e.g., one 3D printer model, few types of
filament) and need to adapt designs to their emergent needs.
Lone makers had to two main strategies to meet the NIH’s value of safety with their limited resources. One option
was submitting a more innovative design without full documentation, and, therefore, receiving less reviewer attention
or lower usage ratings. Otherwise, they posted derivative works of clinically reviewed designs. However small, there is
inherent value in makers’ incremental modifications of existing designs. Many modifications consisted of adjusting a
design to allow faster manufacturing or printing with a different materials or devices. Unlike a comparable domain of
open source software, Hudson et al. has shown that adapting designs to new fabrication techniques is no trivial feat
[18]. In some cases, small changes (e.g., changing materials) may have unintended safety consequences, but, for the
most part, these changes can help more people make a design.
The remix behavior on the NIH 3D Print Exchange emphasizes the affordances of physical materials and how they
shape the designing and manufacturing process. That many remixes adjusted the materials or tools highlights an
intention to interact with design materials as “heterogeneous enactments” over time rather than “fixed forms” [40].
We question measures of novelty as a degree of divergence from the original (e.g, [5]). The small remixes of designs
modified material-determined affordances and expanded who could make well-rated designs. This helps more makers to
Manuscript submitted to ACM

20

Mack, et al.

aid in supplying PPEduring the pandemic. While we recognize these small and critical innovations, they are not inline
with the NIH’s expectations of makers. In a pandemic characterized by shortages in PPE, using a range of materials or
manufacturing methods and prioritizing speed along with safety are all valuable design goals. Therefore, seeking more
unique design archetypes is a valuable goal.
Finally, makers may submit more divergent designs if they better understood higher level healthcare needs; one
cannot innovate without first understanding stakeholder practices, values, and needs. The large number of masks, face
shields, and ear-savers was linked to the media coverage of need for these types of PPE. As specific designs got more
positive coverage from their NIH reviews, makers were inclined to copy them. One solution to encourage novelty is to
make the repository’s high-level goals explicit. For example, while not directly connected to the NIH, the Department
of Defense’s America Makes initiative’s design innovation contests were successful at producing novel PPE that was
submitted to the NIH exchange. Without clear calls to innovate, makers likely directed their efforts at the meeting
the review process’s afforded value of safety. Rather than “re-imagining what a face shield looks like”, they tweaked
accepted designs.
7

DESIGN RECOMMENDATIONS

The COVID-19 collection within the NIH 3D Print Exchange has been an experiment in online sourcing of community
medical device designs. In many ways, this tool is follows Lakshmi et al’s recommendations to use “partially-open
repositories” to collect, review, and regulate medical makers’ designs [25]. We understand, from the repository’s
statement, that it is intended to create an environment for purpose-driven collaboration with amateurs and experts
[23]. Based on our findings, we conclude there are gaps to bridge in realizing this goal. We found that this iteration
of the exchange was not able to review designs fast enough, and makers tended to submit risk averse designs rather
than proposing novel and unique designs. While this trade-off may be inevitable, we expect that a balance between
novelty and review could be struck with interface variations that support and reinforce community values like safety
and innovation. We offer three suggestions.
7.1

Clarify Reviewing Criteria

A reviewing process is novel for maker repositories, and makers need clarifications to use it effectively. Confusion
could be clarified by including reviewer comments in accepted designs. These comments are needed on incomplete
and accepted designs so that makers can differentiate between the two. Makers would benefit from information about
what made a design safe or effective. An additional way clarify requirements is to mark critical fields as mandatory
for submission. However, the NIH 3D Print Exchange may have limited requirements in an effort to not overwhelm
makers. As a compromise, we propose that fields be marked as “recommended for review”. This option would still
highlight safety and documentation requirements without disenfranchising makers who prioritize sharing a design
over achieving a usage rating. Reviewer time would be conserved since they could easily prioritize designs that have
the details needed to replicate a design.
7.2

Identify Remixes

In it’s current form, the NIH 3D Print Exchange does not include a structure for annotating how a design was remixed.
While this reduces burden of documenting changes, it also obfuscates “material” [40] distinctions between designs.
Without a field to describe changes, it is up to makers to add this information in unrelated fields or to omit it entirely.
Manuscript submitted to ACM

Rapid Convergence: The Outcomes of Making PPE during a Healthcare Crisis

21

Moreover, requiring these details could conserve reviewers’ efforts by reviewing just the highlighted changes rather
that re-reviewing derivative work.
7.3

Motivate Innovation

Designs on the NIH 3D Print Exchange rarely diverged from a few common forms. Instead, it seems that safety was
valued at the expense of innovation. To an extent we agree with how priorities were set; while innovation and creativity
are important, safety is nonnegotiable. However, we expect two strategies can encourage innovation while ensuring
safety. First, more diverse designs can be encouraged through explicit calls (e.g., “build a better face shield”). Second,
innovation can be rewarded along with safety, clarifying to makers that the two do not have to conflict. Safety was
rewarded with clinical usage ratings. Similarly, we recommend that commendable innovation and creativity be noted in
the review process. A “uniqueness votes” or “tags” system could encourage makers to explore new ideas. Reviewers
could prioritize reviewing highly innovative designs over ones similar to reviewed designs. Since makers tend to modify
designs with positive reviews this could have a snow ball effect where more makers remix designs that are increasingly
divergent.
7.4

Support Innovation

To support the sharing of more creative, novel designs, collaboration interfaces for medical making must provide
a structure to indicate the progress and/or intent of a design. All designs submitted to the NIH 3D Print Exchange
automatically received the “prototype” status, which put it in the queue for review. There was no way to designate a
design as an “seeking feedback”, “not intended for production”, or “ready for review.” Consequently, we suspect this
lack of affordance limited the scope of submitted designs to those that were close to current PPE designs or reviewed
designs on the NIH 3D Print Exchange. Indeed, it is hard to determine the safety of a creative, novel design that is
unlike previously reviewed designs. Posting such a design without indicating it is not ready to be manufactured can
be unsafe, especially since new makers to the community may mistakenly view a designs affiliation with the NIH’s
website as a sign of authority or approval. Introducing an “in progress” label to designs will encourage the sharing of
more diverse ideas and seeking out feedback without risk of others adopting a design not ready for production.
8

LIMITATIONS

We recognize that our work was affected by our own experiences. Two of the authors were deeply involved in making
PPE this spring and contributed to designs submitted to the NIH 3D Print Exchange. Though we have established
relationships with the creators of the NIH 3D Print Exchange, in this paper, we only draw from publicly available
evidence. As researchers in computer science fields our recommendations focus on the design of tools, but we recognize
that public policy determines what designs can be created and when and how they can be used. While we engage in
wider discussions of policy, they are out of the scope of this paper. In particular, we have avoided making judgements
about what makes designs safe or who should be doing this work. We leave such questions up to medical makers and
suggest tools that could bolster these critical conversations.
9

CONCLUSION

The NIH 3D Print Exchange houses 623 makers’ designs for PPE, the results of one of the most expansive efforts of
medical making yet recorded. The forum was created to strike a balance between providing guidance through a formal
review process and not stifling creativity. Our analysis of these 623 reveals makers’ misconceptions about the review
Manuscript submitted to ACM

22

Mack, et al.

process and criteria which lead to a rapid convergence of the design space. A few key designs created by university,
for-profit company, and clinically affiliated makers received clinical usage ratings. Following submissions, particularly
those made by unaffiliated makers, were derivatives of these designs. Often these submissions made small changes to
optimize or increase flexibility of manufacturing. Overall, few designs were reviewed, and several of the designs that
received reviewer attention were missing key pieces of information that prevented full review for clinical use.
In sum, our results suggest that affiliated makers received more positive ratings and more reviewer time than
non-affiliated makers due to the knowledge and practices they bring from their clinical work. At the same time, many
makers, particularly unaffiliated makers, often left out key pieces of information from their design submissions, leading
to wasted review cycles. To make a more efficient and understandable review process without stifling maker creativity,
we make three recommendations. First, prioritize unique designs for review to provide more examples of divergent and
safe designs. Second, pose explicit requests to the community calling for diverse ideas and allow for makers to denote a
design as “seeking feedback” so as to be clear that the mask is not ready for mass-manufacturing. Finally, establish clear
metrics of safety. These changes aim to bridge the gap between the NIH’s goals and unaffiliated makers’ understanding
of the review process and the values it implies.

REFERENCES
[1] Celena Alcock, Nathaniel Hudson, and Parmit K. Chilana. 2016. Barriers to Using, Customizing, and Printing 3D Designs on Thingiverse. In
Proceedings of the 19th International Conference on Supporting Group Work (Sanibel Island, Florida, USA) (GROUP ’16). Association for Computing
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 195–199. https://doi.org/10.1145/2957276.2957301
[2] Daniel Ashbrook, Shitao Stan Guo, and Alan Lambie. 2016. Towards Augmented Fabrication: Combining Fabricated and Existing Objects. In
Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems (San Jose, California, USA) (CHI EA ’16).
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1510–1518. https://doi.org/10.1145/2851581.2892509
[3] Erin Buehler, Stacy Branham, Abdullah Ali, Jeremy J. Chang, Megan Kelly Hofmann, Amy Hurst, and Shaun K. Kane. 2015. Sharing is Caring:
Assistive Technology Designs on Thingiverse. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Seoul,
Republic of Korea) (CHI ’15). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 525–534. https://doi.org/10.1145/2702123.2702525
[4] Erin Buehler, Niara Comrie, Megan Hofmann, Samantha McDonald, and Amy Hurst. 2016. Investigating the Implications of 3D Printing in Special
Education. ACM Trans. Access. Comput. 8, 3 (2016), 11:1–11:28. https://doi.org/10.1145/2870640
[5] Giorgos Cheliotis, Nan Hu, Jude Yew, and Jianhui Huang. 2014. The Antecedents of Remix. In Proceedings of the 17th ACM Conference on Computer
Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing (Baltimore, Maryland, USA) (CSCW ’14). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY,
USA, 1011–1022. https://doi.org/10.1145/2531602.2531730
[6] Xiang ’Anthony’ Chen, Stelian Coros, Jennifer Mankoff, and Scott E. Hudson. 2015. Encore: 3D Printed Augmentation of Everyday Objects with
Printed-Over, Affixed and Interlocked Attachments. In Proceedings of the 28th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software & Technology
(Charlotte, NC, USA) (UIST ’15). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 73–82. https://doi.org/10.1145/2807442.2807498
[7] Jairo Chimento, Nathan Crane, and M. Jason Highsmith. 2011. 3D printed tooling for thermoforming of medical devices. Rapid Prototyping Journal
17, 5 (Aug. 2011), 387–392. https://doi.org/10.1108/13552541111156513
[8] Alain Curodeau, Emanuel Sachs, and Salvatore Caldarise. 2000. Design and fabrication of cast orthopedic implants with freeform surface textures
from 3-D printed ceramic shell. Journal of Biomedical Materials Research 53, 5 (2000), 525–535. https://doi.org/10.1002/1097-4636(200009)53:5<525::
AID-JBM12>3.0.CO;2-1
[9] A. Dawood, B. Marti Marti, V. Sauret-Jackson, and A. Darwood. 2015. 3D printing in dentistry. British Dental Journal 219, 11 (Dec. 2015), 521–529.
https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.bdj.2015.914
[10] Christoph M. Flath, Sascha Friesike, Marco Wirth, and Frédéric Thiesse. 2017. Copy, transform, combine: exploring the remix as a form of innovation.
J. Inf. Technol. 32, 4 (Dec 2017), 306–325. https://doi.org/10.1057/s41265-017-0043-9
[11] Sarah Fox, Rachel Rose Ulgado, and Daniela Rosner. 2015. Hacking Culture, Not Devices: Access and Recognition in Feminist Hackerspaces.
In Proceedings of the 18th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing (Vancouver, BC, Canada) (CSCW ’15).
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 56–68. https://doi.org/10.1145/2675133.2675223
[12] Jose Gomez-Marquez and Anna Young. 2016. A History of Nurse Making and Stealth Innovation. Technical Report. SSRN. http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/
ssrn.2778663
[13] Good Morning America 2020. Americans helping create protective gear for health care workers. https://abcnews.go.com/GMA/News/video/
americans-helping-create-protective-gear-health-care-workers-70109335
Manuscript submitted to ACM

Rapid Convergence: The Outcomes of Making PPE during a Healthcare Crisis

23

[14] Kendall F. Gretsch, Henry D. Lather, Kranti V. Peddada, Corey R. Deeken, Lindley B. Wall, and Charles A. Goldfarb. 2016. Development of novel
3D-printed robotic prosthetic for transradial amputees. Prosthetics and Orthotics International 40, 3 (2016), 400–403. https://doi.org/10.1177/
0309364615579317
[15] Megan Hofmann, Gabriella Hann, Scott E. Hudson, and Jennifer Mankoff. 2018. Greater than the Sum of Its PARTs: Expressing and Reusing Design
Intent in 3D Models. In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Montreal QC, Canada) (CHI ’18). Association
for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–12. https://doi.org/10.1145/3173574.3173875
[16] Megan Hofmann, Udaya Lakshmi, Kelly Mack, Scott E. Hudson, Rosa l. Arriaga, and Jennifer Mankoff. 2021. The Right to Help and the Right Help:
Fostering and Regulating Collective Action in a Medical Making Reaction to COVID-19. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors
in Computing Systems (Virtual Event) (CHI ’21). ACM, New York, NY, USA.
[17] Megan Hofmann, Kristin Williams, Toni Kaplan, Stephanie Valencia, Gabriella Hann, Scott E. Hudson, Jennifer Mankoff, and Patrick Carrington.
2019. "Occupational Therapy is Making": Clinical Rapid Prototyping and Digital Fabrication. In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems (Glasgow, Scotland Uk) (CHI ’19). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–13. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3290605.3300544
[18] Nathaniel Hudson, Celena Alcock, and Parmit K. Chilana. 2016. Understanding Newcomers to 3D Printing: Motivations, Workflows, and Barriers of
Casual Makers. In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (San Jose, California, USA) (CHI ’16). Association
for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 384–396. https://doi.org/10.1145/2858036.2858266
[19] Deepak M Kalaskar. 2017. 3D Printing in Medicine. Elsevier Science, Radarweg 29, 1043 NX Amsterdam. https://books.google.com/books?id=
WrcxDQAAQBAJ
[20] Parisa Roshan Khanapour, Kayla DesPortes, Zane Cochran, and Betsy DiSalvo. 2017. Framing Makerspace Communities. In Proceedings of the 7th
Annual Conference on Creativity and Fabrication in Education (Stanford, CA, USA) (FabLearn ’17). Association for Computing Machinery, New York,
NY, USA, Article 15, 4 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3141798.3141814
[21] Jeeeun Kim, Anhong Guo, Tom Yeh, Scott E. Hudson, and Jennifer Mankoff. 2017. Understanding Uncertainty in Measurement and Accommodating
Its Impact in 3D Modeling and Printing. In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Designing Interactive Systems (Edinburgh, United Kingdom) (DIS
’17). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1067–1078. https://doi.org/10.1145/3064663.3064690
[22] Travis Kriplean, Ivan Beschastnikh, and David W. McDonald. 2008. Articulations of Wikiwork: Uncovering Valued Work in Wikipedia through
Barnstars. In Proceedings of the 2008 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work (San Diego, CA, USA) (CSCW ’08). Association for
Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 47–56. https://doi.org/10.1145/1460563.1460573
[23] Stacey Kuznetsov and Eric Paulos. 2010. Rise of the Expert Amateur: DIY Projects, Communities, and Cultures. In Proceedings of the 6th Nordic
Conference on Human-Computer Interaction: Extending Boundaries (Reykjavik, Iceland) (NordiCHI ’10). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 295–304. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/1868914.1868950
[24] Udaya Lakshmi, Megan Hofmann, Kelly Mack, Scott E. Hudson, Jennifer Mankoff, and Rosa l. Arriaga. 2021. Medical Maker Response to COVID-19:
Distributed Manufacturing Infrastructure for Stop Gap Protective Equipment. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems (Virtual Event) (CHI ’21). ACM, New York, NY, USA.
[25] Udaya Lakshmi, Megan Hofmann, Stephanie Valencia, Lauren Wilcox, Jennifer Mankoff, and Rosa I. Arriaga. 2019. "Point-of-Care Manufacturing":
Maker Perspectives on Digital Fabrication in Medical Practice. Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact. 3, CSCW, Article 91 (Nov. 2019), 23 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3359193
[26] Silvia Lindtner, Anna Greenspan, and David Li. 2015. Designed in Shenzhen: Shanzhai Manufacturing and Maker Entrepreneurs. In Proceedings of
The Fifth Decennial Aarhus Conference on Critical Alternatives (Aarhus, Denmark) (CA ’15). Aarhus University Press, 85–96. https://doi.org/10.7146/
aahcc.v1i1.21265
[27] Silvia Lindtner, Garnet D. Hertz, and Paul Dourish. 2014. Emerging Sites of HCI Innovation: Hackerspaces, Hardware Startups & Incubators. In
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Toronto, Ontario, Canada) (CHI ’14). Association for Computing
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 439–448. https://doi.org/10.1145/2556288.2557132
[28] Thomas Ludwig, Oliver Stickel, Alexander Boden, and Volkmar Pipek. 2014. Towards Sociable Technologies: An Empirical Study on Designing
Appropriation Infrastructures for 3D Printing. In Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on Designing Interactive Systems (Vancouver, BC, Canada) (DIS
’14). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 835–844. https://doi.org/10.1145/2598510.2598528
[29] Hammad H. Malik, Alastair R. J. Darwood, Shalin Shaunak, Priyantha Kulatilake, Abdulrahman A. El-Hilly, Omar Mulki, and Aroon Baskaradas.
2015. Three-dimensional printing in surgery: a review of current surgical applications. Journal of Surgical Research 199, 2 (Dec. 2015), 512–522.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jss.2015.06.051
[30] Jonathan T. Morgan, Michael Gilbert, David W. McDonald, and Mark Zachry. 2014. Editing beyond Articles: Diversity & Dynamics of Teamwork in
Open Collaborations. In Proceedings of the 17th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing (Baltimore, Maryland,
USA) (CSCW ’14). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 550–563. https://doi.org/10.1145/2531602.2531654
[31] S. Mukhopadhyay and R. Poojary. 2018. A review on 3D printing: Advancement in healthcare technology. 1–5. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICASET.2018.
8376890
[32] National Institute of Health 2014. About the NIH 3D Print Exchange. https://3dprint.nih.gov/about.
[33] National Institute of Health 2020. COVID-19 Supply Chain Response: Frequently Asked Questions. https://3dprint.nih.gov/collections/covid-19response/faqs.
Manuscript submitted to ACM

24

Mack, et al.

[34] National Institute of Health 2020. Share Model - Open Source Labware & Devices. https://3dprint.nih.gov/share/laboratory-equipment.
[35] James I. Novak and Jennifer Loy. 2020. A critical review of initial 3D printed products responding to COVID-19 health and supply chain challenges.
Emerald Open Research 2 (May 2020), 24. https://doi.org/10.35241/emeraldopenres.13697.1
[36] Lora Oehlberg, Wesley Willett, and Wendy E. Mackay. 2015. Patterns of Physical Design Remixing in Online Maker Communities. In Proceedings of
the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Seoul, Republic of Korea) (CHI ’15). Association for Computing Machinery,
New York, NY, USA, 639–648. https://doi.org/10.1145/2702123.2702175
[37] Aisling Ann O’Kane, Amy Hurst, Gerrit Niezen, Nicolai Marquardt, Jon Bird, and Gregory Abowd. 2016. Advances in DIY Health and Wellbeing.
In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI EA ’16). ACM, New York, NY, USA,
3453–3460. https://doi.org/10.1145/2851581.2856467
[38] Jeremiah Parry-Hill, Patrick C. Shih, Jennifer Mankoff, and Daniel Ashbrook. 2017. Understanding Volunteer AT Fabricators: Opportunities and
Challenges in DIY-AT for Others in e-NABLE. In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Denver, Colorado,
USA) (CHI ’17). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 6184–6194. https://doi.org/10.1145/3025453.3026045
[39] Matthew Razak. 2018. VHA Innovation Experience delivers the future of Veteran health care. https://www.blogs.va.gov/VAntage/52374/vhainnovation-experience-delivers-future-veteran-health-care/
[40] Daniela K. Rosner. 2012. The Material Practices of Collaboration. In Proceedings of the ACM 2012 Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative
Work (Seattle, Washington, USA) (CSCW ’12). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1155–1164. https://doi.org/10.1145/
2145204.2145375
[41] Karin Slegers, Kristel Kouwenberg, Tereza Loučova, and Ramon Daniels. 2020. Makers in Healthcare: The Role of Occupational Therapists in the
Design of DIY Assistive Technology. In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Honolulu, HI, USA) (CHI
’20). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–11. https://doi.org/10.1145/3313831.3376685
[42] Theresa Jean Tanenbaum, Amanda M. Williams, Audrey Desjardins, and Karen Tanenbaum. 2013. Democratizing Technology: Pleasure, Utility and
Expressiveness in DIY and Maker Practice. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Paris, France) (CHI ’13).
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2603–2612. https://doi.org/10.1145/2470654.2481360
[43] Austin Toombs. 2015. Enacting Care Through Collaboration in Communities of Makers. In Proceedings of the 18th ACM Conference Companion on
Computer Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing (Vancouver, BC, Canada) (CSCW’15 Companion). Association for Computing Machinery,
New York, NY, USA, 81–84. https://doi.org/10.1145/2685553.2699326
[44] C. Lee Ventola. 2014. Medical Applications for 3D Printing: Current and Projected Uses. Pharmacy and Therapeutics 39, 10 (Oct. 2014), 704–711.
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4189697/
[45] S. Vijayavenkataraman, W. F. Lu, and J. Y. H. Fuh. 2016. 3D bioprinting – An Ethical, Legal and Social Aspects (ELSA) framework. Bioprinting 1-2
(March 2016), 11–21. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bprint.2016.08.001
[46] Dhaval Vyas. 2019. Altruism and Wellbeing as Care Work in a Craft-Based Maker Culture. Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact. 3, GROUP, Article 239
(2019), 12 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3361120
[47] Yutaka Yamauchi, Makoto Yokozawa, Takeshi Shinohara, and Toru Ishida. 2000. Collaboration with Lean Media: How Open-Source Software
Succeeds. In Proceedings of the 2000 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work (Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA) (CSCW ’00).
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 329–338. https://doi.org/10.1145/358916.359004

Manuscript submitted to ACM

