Noname manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)

Artificial Intelligence for Emotion-Semantic
Trending and People Emotion Detection During
COVID-19 Social Isolation
Hamed Jelodar 1 2 · Rita Orji 2 · Stan
Matwin 2 4 · Swarna Weerasinghe 3 ·
Oladapo Oyebode 2 · Yongli Wang 1

arXiv:2101.06484v1 [cs.AI] 16 Jan 2021

Received: date / Accepted: date

Abstract Taking advantage of social media platforms, such as Twitter, this
paper provides an effective framework for emotion detection among those who
are quarantined. Early detection of emotional feelings and their trends help
implement timely intervention strategies. Given the limitations of medical
diagnosis of early emotional change signs during the quarantine period, artificial intelligence models provide effective mechanisms in uncovering early
signs, symptoms and escalating trends. Novelty of the approach presented
H. Jelodar
jelodar@njust.edu.cn
R. Orji
rita.orji@da.ca
S. Matwin
stan@cs.dal.ca
S. Weerasinghe
swarna.weerasinghe@dal.ca
O. Oyebode
oladapo.oyebode@dal.ca
Y. Wang
yongliwang@njust.edu.cn

1 School

of Computer Science and Technology, Nanjing University of Science and
Technology, Nanjing 210094, China
2 Faculty

of Computer Science, Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS, Canada

3

Faculty of Medicine, Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS, Canada

4

Institute of Computer Science Polish Academy of Sciences, Warsaw, Poland

2

Hamed Jelodar

1 2

et al.

herein is a multitask methodological framework of text data processing, implemented as a pipeline for meaningful emotion detection and analysis, based on
the Plutchik/Ekman approach to emotion detection and trend detection. We
present an evaluation of the framework and a pilot system. Results of confirm
the effectiveness of the proposed framework for topic trends and emotion detection of COVID-19 tweets. Our findings revealed Stay-At-Home restrictions
result in people expressing on twitter both negative and positive emotional semantics (feelings), where negatives are “Anger” (8.5% of tweets), followed by
“Fear” (5.2%), “Anticipation” (53.6%) and positive emotional semantics are
“Joy” (14.7%) and “Trust” (11.7%). Semantic trends of safety issues related
to staying at home rapidly decreased within the 28 days and also negative
feelings related to friends dying and quarantined life increased in some days.
These findings have potential to impact public health policy decisions through
monitoring trends of emotional feelings of those who are quarantined. The
framework presented here has potential to assist in such monitoring by using
as an online emotion detection tool kit.
Keywords Twitter, NLP, Deep Learning, COVID-19, Emontion
1 Introduction
Over 73 million people have been affected by COVID-19 across the globe [3].
This more than a yearlong outbreak is likely to have a significant impact on
mental health of many individuals who lost loved ones, who lost personal contacts with others due to strictly enforced public health guidelines of mandatory
social segregation. Complex psychological reactions to COVID-19 regulatory
mechanisms of mandatory quarantine and related emotional reactions has been
recognized as hard to disentangle [1] – [4]. A study conducted in Belgium found
social media being positively associated with constructive coping for adolescents with anxious feelings during the quarantine period of COVID-19 [4]. Another study conducted among social media users during COVID-19 pandemic
in Spain was able to capture added stress placed on people’s emotional health
during the pandemic period [5]. However, social media providing a platform
of risk communication and exchange of feelings and emotions to curb social
isolation, this text data provides a wealth of information on the natural flow
of people’s emotional feelings and expressions [6]. This rich source of data can
be utilized to curb the data collection barriers during the pandemic. The goal
of this research was to use AI to uncover the hidden, implicit signal related to
emotional health of people subject to mandatory quarantine, embedded in a
latent manner in their twitter messages.
Within the context of this paper, an NLP-based emotion detection system
aims to provide useful information by examining unstructured text data used
in social media. The purpose of the NLP system used herein is to show the
meaning and emotions of users’ expressions related to a particular topic, which
can be used to understand their psychological health and emotional wellbeing.

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length

3

In this regard, use of NLP-based approach for emotion detection from complex
textual structures such as social media (e.g., Twitter) remains a challenge in
biomedical applications of AI.
The goal of this paper is to contribute an AI based methodological framework that can uncover emotion semantic trends that can better understand the
impact and the design of quarantine regulations. The two-fold objectives of this
paper are: (a) to develop and AI framework based on machine learning models
with for emotion detection and (b) to pilot this model on unstructured tweets
that followed quarantine regulation using stay at home messaging during the
first wave of COVID-19. We investigate emotions and semantic structures to
discover knowledge from general public tweeter exchanges. We analyze the
structure of vocabulary patterns used on Twitter with a specific focus on the
impact of the Stay-At-Home public health order during the first wave of the
COVID-19. The AI framework is described and its implemented pipeline pilot herein can be used in the emotion detection of social media information
exchange during the second wave of COVID-19 and beyond to investigate the
impact on any future public health guideline.
We aim to demonstrate the effectiveness of deep learning models for detecting emotions from COVID-19 tweets. In addition, our findings will provide
directions public health decision making on emotion trend detection over a four
weeks period in relation to “Stay at Home” order. The contributions of this
paper can be summarized as follows:
– A cleaned and standardized tweet dataset of COVID-19 issues is built in
this research, and a new database of emotion-annotated COVID-19 tweets
is presented, and this could be used for future comparisons and implementations of detection-systems based on machine learning models.
– We design a triple-task framework to investigate the emotions in eight
standard positions (explained in section II B) via Plutchik’s model using
the COVID-19 tweets in which all three different tasks are complementary
to each other towards a common goal.
– We discover semantic-word trends via various models such as latent Dirichlet allocation (LDA) and probabilistic latent semantic analysis (PLSA). We
aim to have a semantic knowledge discovery based on topic trends and semantic structures during the first wave of the pandemic, which provides
an effective mechanism for managing future waves.
– A deep learning model based convolutional neural network (CNN)) is presented for emotion detection from the COVID-19 tweets. To the best of
our knowledge, this is the first attempt that detects emotion automatically
for people’s reaction to stay at home during the pandemic based on the
online comments, especially for #StayAtHome.
This paper is organized into sections: (a) a review of literature on existing models on emotion detection for social media pertaining to health online
communities (section 3) (b) introduce a multi-tasks framework to COVID-19

4

Hamed Jelodar

1 2

et al.

emotion detection (section 4), (c)describe data collection of twitter and research experiment (section 5), (d) discuss the effectiveness of the presented AI
framework and future research directions (section 6) with final section on the
conclusions on findings of emotion detection during stay at home(section 7).

2 NOVELTY OF THE PROPOSED FRAMEWORK
Although machine learning based emotion detection approaches have been
proposed within social media text analysis with the context of COVID-19,
there are still many challenges remained to be addressed. In this regard, most
of the existing studies related to COVID-19, on Twitter, and other social media platforms were performed on a general public opinion, no research have
specifically investigated emotions related to quarantine “stay at home” order,
public health policy of social segregation, that is widely used across the globe.
Novelty of the methods used in this paper consists of a multi-task framework
that can be directly applied to COVID-19 related mood discovery, using eight
types of emotional reaction and designing a deep learning model to uncover
emotions based on the first wave of the pandemic public health restriction
of mandatory social segregation. We argue that the framework can discover
semantic trends of COVID-19 tweets during the first wave of the pandemic
to predict new concerns that may be associated with furthering into the new
waves of COVID-19 quarantine orders and other related public health regulations. Our novel approach presented herein can help future public health crisis
management in the new waves of the Coronavirus pandemic.
Moreover, public health decision makers need to understand the temporal
patterns of emotional reactions on the population when these public health
regulatory measures are continued. To fulfill this need, we investigate the semantic topic and emotion trends to better understand the people’s reactions
from the initial wave of the pandemic.

3 RELATED WORK
NLP and Machine Learning has been used within the context of identifying
the type of emotions in twitter texts. In this section, we provide a review of literature on recent emotion detection studies with focus on; Emotion detection
in online health communities, Emotion-based Lexical models, Deep learning
and machine learning, and Directions for Public health decision making using
social media during COVID-19 related text analytics.
Emotion detection analytics through information retrieval and NLP as a mechanism have been used to explore large text corpora of online health community
communications in psychiatry, dentistry, cancer and health and fitness. For
example, a communication tool was introduced for mental health care to understand counseling content based on emotion detection and natural language
processing using chat assistants [7] - [12]. Similar to the proposed approach in

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length

5

our work, a research analyzed messages in online health communities (OHCs)
to understand the most prominent emotions in health-related posts and proposed a computational model that can exploit the semantic information from
the text data [9]. They presented a dataset from a cancer forum with the
six common emotions based on the Ekman model and investigated the most
prominent emotions in OHCs. We proposed to use broader types of emotions
using Plutchik’s model that contains eight emotions.
In our previous work [13], sentiment and latent-topics techniques application to COVID-19 comments in social media shed light on the usefulness of
NLP methods in uncovering issues directly related to COVID-19 public health
decision making. We expect to extend the methodology, in this study, within
our goal of extracting meaningful knowledge of emotional expression words
from people’s reactions during mandatory quarantine using the StayAtHome
hashtag on Twitter. This knowledge is essential as it can help decision makers
to take necessary actions to control the adverse emotional effects of various
public health policies, especially during the emerging waves of the pandemic.
Clearly, negative emotional effects such as anger and fear can lead to negative
social reactions. To the best of the authors’ knowledge, little research have
been done to understand the emotional expression during mandatory quarantine, partly due to difficulties in collecting such personal level data during the
pandemic. The authors of a study in India analyzed real-time posts on Twitter during COVID-19, and they were able to identify the expression of mood
of the nation through their analysis [14]. Also, they developed a platform for
viewing the trends in emotional change across the country during a specific
interval. As a result, their system allowed users to view the mood of India on
specific events happening in the country during COVID-19. Development of
such a platform for Canada may be a far reaching goal of this study. This study
presents the first step towards development of such online tools to monitor the
moods and emotions to inform public health decision makers.
4 METHODS
This paper’s methods provide step-by-step approach to text data processing,
emotion detection and intensity scoring, emotion semantic trends calculation
and finally evaluation of the deep learning algorithm using training and testing
data.
4.1 Multi-Task Framework
In this section, we present a multi-task framework based on Plutchik’s Emotion
model [15] and deep learning techniques to address aforementioned research
objectives of this paper. Our approach includes three main tasks. Plutchik’s is
an operationalization of Ekman [16]. The first task is to create models to investigate emotional reaction to mandatory restrictions of Stay-At-Home using

6

Hamed Jelodar

1 2

et al.

tweets. The second task, is to show how to discover semantic and emotional
trends to obtain patterns depicted in the first wave of the pandemic for the
30 days period from April 28th to June 1st, 2020. Finally, the third task, a
machine learning deep neural network is built as an emotion detection system
that can be used for social media exchange data analysis during the quarantine
period. Our framework, including these three tasks, is presented in Fig. 1.
1) #StayAtHome-Related Tweets and Data-Dimension Reduction:
Our inclusion criteria include only tweets related to the COVID-19 and StayAt-Home order. Application of this inclusion criteria is a critical step because
the quality of the input data directly affects the output.Lexical text analysis,
Data-Dimension Reduction, and NLP Preprocessing of data are necessary to
clean the data by removing the noisy and inconsistent tweets and also analyzing the relevant data to identify relevant and appropriate information related
to the topic of interest. For this purpose, four NLP techniques are used: sentence splitting and word tokenization, removing stop-words, HTML cleaning
to remove unnecessary contents, removing of stop-words and hashtags, and
stemming to remove prefixes and suffixes hence returning to the root. The
main purpose of the text data cleaning process is to eliminate all tweets unrelated to the subject of our stay at home public health order. Each tweet
passed through a set of filters that are created based on the points described
above. As stated in the objectives of this paper we want to detect the emotions
expressed in the tweets that are in English language, non-English tweets are
eliminated from the dataset and the classifier is then trained using English
tweets only.
2) Task I: Emotion-detection of #StayAtHome tweets:
To achieve our research goal Task 1 is the most important process for automatic detection of emotions from #StackAtHome tweets. It is the first step
towards the initial determination of the type of COVID-19 emotions, which
also has a direct influence on Tasks 2 and 3. We take advantage of the NRCWord-Emotion [17] lexicon based on Plutchik’s Wheel of Emotions to perform
this task, which is beneficial for standard scoring of the word-emotion association. In this research, three sub processing steps are carried out on every
annotated tweet: (a) identifying type of emotion using Plutchik-theory and
hence reproducibility is warranted, (b) assigning the emotion score obtained
from the National Research Council Canada (NRC)/ NRC Emotion Lexicon
[17] and (c) identifying the emotion and the maximum association score based
on the scores computed according to the following rule. In part (b) for assigning the score, we calculate the total emotion association score as the sum of
scores of the terms depicting higher scores for higher intensity of the emotion
of the tweets (See Table I, example). The scores denote the intensity of the
emotion for the COVID-19 tweets. By default, every emotion in the tweet will
receive a value of 1. This value will be increased or decreased by the intensifier
words used in the tweets. However, if there are multiple mentions of emotion
then the intensity will have a higher score, as shown in Table I. In part (c) the
maximum association score of a tweet represents the maximum score noted

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length

7

Fig. 1: Research framework and pipeline for the COVID-19 tweet emotion
capture and analysis

for any of the eight emotions. A tweet that does not associate with any emotion receives a score of zero (0), as showed in Table 1. This AI based emotion
detection task uncovers emotion semantics with emotion valuation (strength)
attached to each emotion lexicon in each of the tweets.

Since the labelling is done automatically and no human tagging is used, we
will have consistent data annotation. This model defines eight basic emotions
and makes it possible to provide consistent classification of texts to uncover
the trend in the data to reach the objectives of this research. Fig. 2 provides
an example of selecting the score for COVID-19 tweets. For example, from
the tweet after text processing showed “Sad man friend whos livin skin cant
stand company” and will have the emotion SAD associated with FEAR and
this emotional expression provided the highest score from NRC based Lexicon

8

Hamed Jelodar

1 2

et al.

Fig. 2: Example of the process of determining the score for a pure tweet that
is related to #StayAtHome
Table 1: EXAMPLE OF THE TWEETS WITH VARIOUS EMOTIONS
Tweet ID.
Tweet
A
Score
Tweet
B
Score
Tweet
C
Score

Tweet without stop-words
Today has been a challenging day, here’s to tomorrow
Anger=0∼Anticipation=1∼Disgust=0∼Fear=0 ∼Joy=0 ∼Sadness=0∼Surprise=0∼Trust=0
A day is a long time in the coronavirus pandemic.
Anger=0∼Anticipation=2∼Disgust=0∼Fear=0 ∼Joy=0 ∼Sadness=0∼Surprise=0∼Trust=0
Looking forward to those summer days when I can enjoy the beach and the ocean breeze again????. Stay positive and healthy everyone.
Anger=0∼Anticipation=1∼Disgust=0∼Fear=0∼Joy=3∼Sadness=0∼Surprise=0∼Trust=1

Label
Anticipation
Anticipation
Joy

when the process is detecting the predominant emotion.
3) Task II: Emotion/Semantic-Trends of #StayAtHome
Researchers have identified timing of the emotional progression and noted
that positive emotions arose significantly earlier and the negative emotions
took longer [18] – [20]. Identification of the emotion and semantic trends over
time can be helpful and effective to understand temporal changes of the opinions related to the human behavior. In fact, understanding the mood changes
or awareness of the emotion trends can have a practical application for public
health decision making. We use semantic topics [21] discovered in the entire
dataset to detect and describe semantic trends.
In order to obtain semantic topics we need to design a topic model. Infact,
we consider two popular methods for evaluating and determining an optimal
approach to obtain semantic-trends from #StayAtHome tweets of the online
community during the stay-at-home. For applying this task, the PLSA [21]
and LDA [22] models are employed to obtain the best semantic related-words
and discovering semantic structures of the COVID-19 tweets, as described be-

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length

9

low:
- The probabilistic latent semantic analysis (PLSA) model is used as an NLP
technique that can display topical similarities between words.
- The latent Dirichlet allocation (LDA) model has proven very useful for semantic extraction and generating trends over time. LDA has been successfully applied in several applications such as topic discovery, temporal semantic trends, document classification, and finding relations between documents.
Another advantage of this method is the identification of semantic-trends over
time, which we consider in this research as means to discover unusual semantic trends based on the first wave of the pandemic of #StayAtHome tweets.
Overall, The main aim of the task 2 is to capture two kinds of trends based
on emotion and semantic aspects of the COVID-19 tweets. However, we know
that LDA model discover ‘semantic related-words’ from the semantic structure
of the text. Then by investigating the distributions of these semantic-topics in
various days, we obtain semantic trends.
As a second part of this task, we compute the types of each emotion to
identify the trends among different emotions based on task I. By considering
the length and strength of the staying at home public health order in the
first wave, we believe that it is necessary to examine the changes in people’s
emotions by monitoring the time trends and fluctuations of directions using
twitter data.
4) Task III: Modeling Sentence and COVID-19 Emotion-Detection
Machine learning offers the advantage of automatic emotion detection beyond
using existing lexicial dictionaries for emotion analysis. In particular, deep
learning models have proven successful in many NLP applications for emotion detection from health and medical text data [23] – [25]. We focused use
a convolutional neural network (CNN) [26] – [27] to implement an emotion
detection system based on emotion vectors of #StayAtHome tweets. Our network layers involve embedding layers, convolution layers, drop out layers, and
Max-Pooling and filter layers.
In the following, we discuss the details of the designed deep-learning model,
the number of convolutional layers, and dense layers to build our COVID-19
emotion detection framework; since the input layer is the sentence representation, a convolutional layer is then deployed to obtain the sequence level feature
from the sentence sequences. Moreover, the convolutional layer is considered as
the core functional block and includes a collection of filters. These filters serve
as a learner in the network act when they find some certain type of feature at
a determined input. Overall, we consider three flatten layers for the designed
method. Finally, we concatenate the output of all three learned features by
considering dense layers to generate scores and recognize the type of emotion
of the COVID-19 tweets.

10

Hamed Jelodar

1 2

et al.

Table 2: TABLE II. DETAILS OF THE # STAYATHOME DATASET
#StatAtHome Days
28-4 To 6-5
7-5 To 15-5
16-5 To 24-5
25-5 To 6-2
Total

Pure Tweets
409,000
289,000
226,000
122,000
1,046,000

Obviate Duplicate Tweets
145,000
112,000
88,000
54,000
-

After Data-Reduction
92,000
12,000
10,000
6,000
-

5 EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION
This section describes the dataset, generates emotion/semantic trends and the
informative results with various experiments to evaluate the performance of
the research model. In fact, to show the value of the framework, we conduct
experiments on collected COVID-19 tweets and generate informative emotion/semantic trens. We provide a comparison with a standard base-line to
demonstrate the superiority of our CNN model for emotion detection using F1
score and accuracy as standard metrics. In this research, we use 90% of the
data for training and 10% for testing for all experiments. We focused on the
tweets from the first waves of the COVID-19 pandemic based on #StayAtHome. However, NLP pre-processing methods (such as stop-words and stemming) are used to reduce the noises and improve the quality of the output of
the task. Table II shows various times along with the number of tweets based
on pure content and status of data after removing duplicate contents.

5.1 Informative Trends of the first wave: Emotion and Semantic
Trending topics, to a certain extent, describe the opinion of a community and
provide the means to analyze it, knowing where public attention is at a certain
time point and this has become a matter of interest for researchers and health
professionals. Regarding task II, we need to predict the trend of topics and
give some explanations for the important variation of trends about COVID-19
trends. To test our machine learning approach with respect to this task, we
randomly split our dataset into 90% for training and the remaining 10% for
testing.

5.2 Relationship between semantic trends and StayAtHome Tweets
It is difficult to identify the key concepts discussed by users from a million
tweets in traditional ways, so we examine NLP methods (LDA and PLSA) to
extract topics based on semantic aspects to better understand behaviors and
People’s reactions, during stay at home. Then, we investigate the distribution of generated topics on different days of the initial wave of the outbreak,
which as a result of this process can be helpful in managing public health in

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length

11

Fig. 3: The precision metric of word clustering for semantic-topic trending
based on LDA and PLSA

the community. First, we investigate PLSA and LDA models to analyze and
validate the relationship between semantic-topics extracted from COVID-19
tweets and related issues of the pandemic. For this purpose, we use a Mallet
package. Then, we generate 100 topics and only focused on 5 top topics of
all COVID-19 tweets as a result of topic modeling for discovering semantic
related-words. Fig 3, compares the performance of the two topic modeling
methods we have considered to identify emotional trends in our twitter data.
And showed, LDA can capture semantic topics better than the PLSA model
for extracting semantic-topics of #StayAtHome tweets. Therefore, we consider
an LDA model for performing Task II.
To implement our analytic framework’s detection of semantic trends shown
in the topics during the initial wave of the pandemic, we investigate five top
topics (i.e., S1, S2, S3, S4, and S5, Fig.4) to better understand the online community reactions change over time. These topics are distributed over different
days and we were able to isolate time varying nature of the semantic trends
of #StayAtHome tweets labeled by an automatic process described in Task 1.
According to Fig. 4, the highest ranked (most frequent) topic is characterized

12

Hamed Jelodar

1 2

et al.

Fig. 4: Semantic trends of the initial waves of COVID-19 pandemic by #StayAtHome

by the words Home, Staysafe, Lockdown, Love, and Family. These correspond
to the safety issues related to staying at home. We label this topic as S1. It
rapidly decreases over time at the rate of 0.11 (p=0.04) within the 28 days
and the decline was greater within the last 14 days 0.28 (p=0.001) (Fig. 4)
with some day to day fluctuations shown in the graph. Topic S2( words Live,
Free) shows a decline within the first 14 days and then an increasing trend is
detected within the last 14 days. We need to confirm these with data related
to quarantine and it is possible that after the 14 day quarantine period the
individuals feel free to live. It is important to notice that negative feelings
grow over time, eg S4 (words Friends, Die, Virus) increases at a rate of 0.14
(p=0.0001) and S5 (Home, remote, quarantine, health life) increases at a rate
of 0.06 (p=0.0005) over the course of the 28 days of tweet text data collection
period. Herein we show dynamic behaviour of statistically significant trends
of topics from April 27th to June 1st.

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length

13

Fig. 5: Distribution of emotion trends in #StayAtHome tweets over time in
the initial wave of COVID-19 pandemic.

5.3 Relationship Between Emotion Trends and StayAtHome Tweets
In Tasks 1 and 2 of the framework, we take the advantage of NRC emotional
lexical, which is supported by Plutchik’s theory based on 14,000 words for
finding the eight primary emotions: anger, anticipation, joy, surprise, sadness,
disgust, trust, and fear. The NRC dictionary has been widely validated for
emotion analysis on social media such as Twitter emotion; therefore, we consider the advantage of this lexicon for #StayAtHome tweets in this research.
In the application of task II analysis in this stage, we have accomplished the
identification of the relationship between emotion trends in COVID-19 tweets
based on Plutchik theory of classification.
According to Fig. 5 the most of the emotions depict in tweets across time
are “Anticipation”. As shown in Fig. 6 the mean percentage of “anticipation”
detected per day across 30 day period is 53.6 (95% CI: 52.4-55.0) with the
least shown by “Surprise” (mean 1.5% , CI: 1.4-1.6%), and “Sadness” (mean
2.2,CI:2.1-2.3%). Among negative emotions “Anger” is shown with the highest
(mean=8.5,CI:8.2-8.7%), followed by “Fear” (mean=5.2, CI:5.0-5.5%), “dis-

14

Hamed Jelodar

1 2

et al.

Fig. 6: Emotion Trends of the COVID-19 tweets in line graphs.

gust” (mean=2.3, CI:2.2-2.4) and “Sadness” (mean=2.2, CI:2.1-2.3). Among
positive feelings “joy” (mean=14.7,CI:14.4-15.4) is the second highest emotion.

According to psychology literature [36], Anticipation and Surprise can be
related to positive or negative health emotional outcomes. Nevertheless, in this
study anticipation stemmed out of the hashtag “stay-at-home”, a restriction
on a socially undesirable action and therefore, one can assume anticipation
is mostly directed towards a negative emotional feeling, of perceived susceptibility. It is important to consider that these tweets were exchanged during
the early pandemic period of April 28th to June 1st, 2020 of the first wave
and North America reported the peak in May, 2020. Anger may be directed
towards missing summer outdoor activities due to stay-at-home restrictions,
whereas fear may be expressed by those living in high risk clusters of elderly

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length

15

and those with chronic conditions. It is important to note that the negative
feeling of disgust was minimal and people may be aware of the importance of
quarantine regulations. These emotion expressions and trend detection over
time provide important messages where public health decision makers can be
aware of in the future public health regulation ordering. Though people trust
the public health measures, their anticipation towards negative emotions need
to be considered in the way the public health regulations are ordered and imposed. Negative connotation of anticipation and fear can be overcome with
public education using social media.

5.4 Deep learning model configurations and Training details
The objective of task III of this work is to automatically detect emotions
from #StayAtHome tweets by enabling Multi-Channel CNN methodology as
a computational model for the emotion detection of the COVID-19 tweets. The
mode trained on tweets based on the created dataset of COVID-19 emotion
(task II). First we get the input data of the Task I, we leverage our COVID-19
tweet data to train our own word embedding with Word2Vec technique [13]
which provides a much richer text representation than the classical, word-based
approaches. The corpus for training word2vec is generated by selecting all the
necessary words, followed by preprocessing the data and removing all stop
words. The output of word2vec are real values are vectors (we used 100 as the
dimension). For our implementation, we used to Keras library. Then the dense
layers are used to output the result of the deep learning model for COVID-19
emotion detection. As already discussed, every training tweet is automatically
annotated (labelked) using one of eight different emotions including fear, joy,
trust, sadness, anger, surprise, and anticipation. To the best of our knowledge,
this is one of the few studies of automatic emotion detection from COVID-19
tweets by focusing on Stay-At-Home issues.

5.5 Validation and comparison of deep learning model
As Long short-term memory (LSTM) [28] – [29] is a standard base-line for
this research area, we also use that deep model in our study. We compare
the CNN model discussed in sec. IV with the LSTM-Softmax for COVID-19
emotion detection of the #StayAtHome dataset. The LSTM network used in
this research consists of 64 units. Here, we consider various parameters to train
our model with the different number of epochs such as 10, 20, 30, 40 and 50
to ensure the significance of the obtained results. However, for each COVID19 tweet, we have 8 labels that are features for our detection. Therefore, the
output of the deep-learning model can determine the type of COVID-19 tweets
with the labels.

16

Hamed Jelodar

1 2

et al.

Fig. 7: The F1-score for COVID-19 emotion detection by comparing the CNN
model and the LSTM model

5.6 Evaluation of the effectiveness of the framework
We evaluated the performance of the research model with emotions classes.
Fig. 7 provides a clear view of variation with different parameters using word
embedding trained. In particular, our preliminary results indicate that the
multi-channel CNN out performs the LSTM-Softmax in terms of various epochs
based on a multi-class F-score as a standard metric. The advantage of the CNN
model comes for detection of the type of emotions in COVID-19 tweets, which
enables to avoid overfitting and still be able to find complex patterns to emotion detection in the introduced data.

6 DISCUSSION, LIMITATION AND FUTURE WORK
Our results, in general, suggested that the machine learning methods we use
are appropriate for the emotion detection of COVID-19 tweets. The study results clearly demonstrated anticipation as a prominent emotional semantic.
Among various definitions for this emotion semantic analysis, anticipation is
considered as one of “the mature ways of dealing with real stress”[30]. Regarding this definition, people can lower their stress during the COVID-19
pandemic by anticipating and preparing how they are going to deal with it.
Anticipation can be interpreted as either future positive and negative events,

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length

17

according to [31], and are aligned with hope and fear which are the typical anticipatory feelings that arise in response to possibilities of future such events.
A study that included multiple unigrams and bi-grams related to COVID19 twitter feeds were analyzed using machine learning approaches and their
findings were similar to ours in that the dominant theme identified was anticipation with a mixed of feelings of trust, anger and fear [32].
To develop a framework that can understand the type of standard emotions
contained in COVID-19 sentences in social media is among the challenging
topics of NLP for the public health and mental healthcare delivery [33] – [35].
Therefore, in this paper, a multi-task framework is presented to make a smart
emotion detection system based on the Stay-At-Home aspects of COVID-19
tweets. All the experiments are performed using different parameter settings.
The results suggest that the CNN model with two convolutional layers with
filter sizes of 3 and 4 can achieve good performance with various metrics for
emotion detection and classification.
Use of online social network text data to understand user health behaviors and emotions has become an emerging research area in NLP and health
informatics [36] – [49]. COVID-19 introduced an unprecedented global threat
that public health planning and policy making community are still struggling
to find best practices to curb the pandemic. As the pandemic evolved public
health guidelines became strict measures imposed on the general public. This
one track minded approach of combating the spread or better known as flattening the curve, neglected emotional and mental health of the individuals who
were subject to those strict public health ordering. This study findings showed
a mechanism of how the emotions and semantic trends of people’s reactions to
COVID-19 public health restrictions can be obtained for knowledge discovery
and can inform related decision making. The advantage of such an approach
is that identifying these online trends provide easy and helpful information
about public reactions to particular issues and thus it has recently attracted
the attention of medical and computer researchers. The framework proposed
in this research covers three practical tasks that are related to each other
with a common goal to develop a deep-learning system for emotion detection
and analysis of informative trends from COVID-19 tweets of people’s reaction
during the stay-at-home. Our final results uncovered important directions for
public health policy makers [40] and decision makers [41] to pay attention to
emotional issues that stemmed from those strict public health restrictions.
This research has some limitations, e.g the size of dataset, data inclusion
limited to emotions based on texts of COVID-19 issues. Currently, our data
consists of 1,047,968 tweets based on #StatAtHome tweets from 28-April to 2June of 2020. Although more tweets can be extracted based on #StayAtHome,
we believe that the number of current tweets is sufficient to draw reasonable
conclusions to direct possibilities of uncovering importance of consequences
of public health orders and restrictions. We acknowledge that the imbalanced

18

Hamed Jelodar

1 2

et al.

dataset representing different emotions is also a limitation of our work. We did
not consider slang or emoticons to compute emotions in the tweet contents,
it would be useful to build a new emotional lexical to cover slang words related to COVID-19 issues. A significantly longer temporal horizon longitudinal
dataset would allow us using LSTM on sequences of tweets, as well as replacing the cross-validation. train/test approach with one based time-stamp rather
than the cross-validation approach. Further advantage of a temporally larger
dataset is an opportunity of a longitudinal study combining geographicallybased tweeter -detected emotions with COVID-19 incidences and expanded
public health regulations to enable geographic-area targeted public health decision making. The framework we developed showed potential to accurately
uncover emotional responses and temporal trend detection of mood changes
due to quarantine related public health orders.

7 CONCLUSION
This paper presented a novel framework for emotion detection using COVID19 tweets in relation to the “stay-at-home” public health guidelines. For this
framework, a multi-task framework of COVID-19 emotions detection via a
CNN model was presented. The research further shows that the framework
is effective in capturing the emotions and semantics trends in social media
messages during the pandemic. Moreover, it presents a more insightful understanding of COVID-19 tweets by automatically identifying the type of
emotions including both negative and positive reaction and the magnitude
of their presentation. The framework can be applied to uncover reactions to
similar public health policies that affect people’s well being. We identified
ways to improve the findings in future research. We discuss potentially significant, realistic future work, such as extending the longitudinal character of
the results, inclusion of geography-based public health orders and spatiallyannotated COVID-19 case loads.

Ethical Approval
All procedures performed in studies involving human participants were in accordance with the ethical standards of the institutional and/or national research committee and with the 1964 Helsinki declaration and its later amendments or comparable ethical standards.
Declaration of Conflict of Interest : All authors declare no conflict of
interest directly related to the submitted work.

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length

19

References
[1] Becker, M., et al., Natural language processing of German clinical colorectal cancer notes
for guideline-based treatment evaluation. International journal of medical informatics,
2019. 127: p. 141-146.
[2] Ong, D., et al., Modeling emotion in complex stories: the Stanford Emotional Narratives
Dataset. IEEE Transactions on Affective Computing, 2019.
[3] Organization, W.H., Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. 2020: p.
https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novel-coronavirus-2019.
[4] Cauberghe, V., et al., How Adolescents Use Social Media to Cope with Feelings of
Loneliness and Anxiety During COVID-19 Lockdown. Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and
Social Networking, 2020.
[5] de Las Heras-Pedrosa, C., P. Sánchez-Núñez, and J.I. Peláez, Sentiment analysis and
emotion understanding during the covid-19 pandemic in spain and its impact on digital
ecosystems. IJERPH, 2020. 17(15): p. 5542.
[6] Li, Q., et al., Tracking and Analyzing Public Emotion Evolutions During COVID-19: A
Case Study from the Event-Driven Perspective on Microblogs. IJERPH, 2020. 17(18):
p. 6888.
[7] Yu, S., et al. Emoticon analysis for chinese health and fitness topics. in International
Conference on Smart Health. 2014. Springer.
[8] Johnsen, J.-A.K., et al., Differences in Emotional and Pain-Related Language in Tweets
About Dentists and Medical Doctors: Text Analysis of Twitter Content. JMIR public
health and surveillance, 2019. 5(1): p. e10432.
[9] Khanpour, H. and C. Caragea. Fine-grained emotion detection in health-related online
posts. Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing. 2018.
[10] Plaza-del-Arco, F.M., et al., Improved emotion recognition in Spanish social media
through incorporation of lexical knowledge. Future Generation Computer Systems, 2020.
110: p. 1000-1008.
[11] asan, M., E. Rundensteiner, and E. Agu, Automatic emotion detection in text streams
by analyzing twitter data. International Journal of Data Science and Analytics, 2019.
7(1): p. 35-51.
[12] Jelodar, H., et al., Deep sentiment classification and topic discovery on novel coronavirus
or covid-19 online discussions: Nlp using lstm recurrent neural network approach. IEEE
JBHI , 2020.
[13] Aslam, F., et al., Sentiments and emotions evoked by news headlines of coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) outbreak. Humanities and Social Sciences Communications, 2020.
7(1): p. 1-9.
[14] Venigalla, A.S.M., S. Chimalakonda, and D. Vagavolu. Mood of India During Covid-19An Interactive Web Portal Based on Emotion Analysis of Twitter Data. in Conference
Companion Publication of the 2020 on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and
Social Computing. 2020.
[15] Plutchik, R., A general psychoevolutionary theory of emotion, in Theories of emotion.
1980, Elsevier. p. 3-33.
[16] Ekman, P., Basic emotions. Handbook of cognition and emotion, 1999. 98(45-60): p. 16.
[17] Mohammad, S., S. Kiritchenko, and X. Zhu. NRC-Canada: Building the State-of-the-Art
in Sentiment Analysis of Tweets. Proceedings of the Seventh International Workshop
on Semantic Evaluation . 2013.
[18] Kwon, S., MLT-DNet: Speech emotion recognition using 1D dilated CNN based on
multi-learning trick approach. Expert Systems with Applications, 2020: p. 114177.
[19] Sun, X., Y. Song, and M. Wang, Towards sensing emotion with deep visual analysis: A
long-term psychological modeling approach. IEEE MultiMedia, 2020.
[20] Gautam, R. and M. Sharma, Prevalence and Diagnosis of Neurological Disorders Using
Different Deep Learning Techniques: A Meta-Analysis. Journal of Medical Systems,
2020. 44(2): p. 49.
[21] Hofmann, T., Unsupervised learning by probabilistic latent semantic analysis. Machine
learning, 2001. 42(1-2): p. 177-196.

20

Hamed Jelodar

1 2

et al.

[22] Blei, D.M., A.Y. Ng, and M.I. Jordan, Latent dirichlet allocation. Journal of machine
Learning research, 2003. 3(Jan): p. 993-1022.
[23] Li, H. and H. Xu, Deep reinforcement learning for robust emotional classification in
facial expression recognition. Knowledge-Based Systems, 2020. 204: p. 106172.
[24] Lee, R.Y., et al., Identifying Goals of Care Conversations in the Electronic Health
Record Using Natural Language Processing and Machine Learning. Journal of Pain and
Symptom Management, 2020.
[25] Wu, P., et al., Social media opinion summarization using emotion cognition and convolutional neural networks. International Journal of Information Management, 2020. 51:
p. 101978.
[26] Kim, Y. Convolutional Neural Networks for Sentence Classification.Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP). 2014.
[27] Kim, J.-C. and K. Chung, Discovery of knowledge of associative relations using opinion
mining based on a health platform. Personal and Ubiquitous Computing, 2019: p. 1-11.
[28] Hochreiter, S. and J. Schmidhuber, Long short-term memory. Neural computation, 1997.
9(8): p. 1735-1780.
[29] Uddin, Md Zia, and Erik G. Nilsson. ”Emotion recognition using speech and neural
structured learning to facilitate edge intelligence.” Engineering Applications of Artificial
Intelligence 94 (2020): 103775.
[30] Conte, H.R. and R. Plutchik, Ego defenses: Theory and measurement. 1995: John Wiley
& Sons.
[31] MacLeod, A., Prospection, well-being, and mental health. 2017: Oxford University Press.
[32] Xue, J., et al., Twitter Discussions and Emotions About the COVID-19 Pandemic: Machine Learning Approach. Journal of medical Internet research, 2020. 22(11): p. e20550.
[33] Ta, N., et al., Evaluating Public Anxiety for Topic-based Communities in Social Networks. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, 2020.
[34] Yang, X., et al., A big data analytics framework for detecting user-level depression from
social networks. IJIM, 2020. 54: p. 102141.
[35] Xue, J., et al., Twitter Discussions and Emotions About the COVID-19 Pandemic:
Machine Learning Approach. JMIR, 2020. 22(11): p. e20550.
[36] Pérez-Rodrı́guez, Gael, Martı́n Pérez-Pérez, Florentino Fdez-Riverola, and Anália
Lourenço. ”Mining the sociome for Health Informatics: Analysis of therapeutic lifestyle
adherence of diabetic patients in Twitter.” Future Generation Computer Systems (2020).
[37] Puppala, Mamta, Tiancheng He, Shenyi Chen, Richard Ogunti, Xiaohui Yu, Fuhai Li,
Robert Jackson, and Stephen TC Wong. ”METEOR: an enterprise health informatics
environment to support evidence-based medicine.” IEEE Transactions on Biomedical
Engineering 62, no. 12 (2015): 2776-2786.
[38] Fang, R., Pouyanfar, S., Yang, Y., Chen, S. C., & Iyengar, S. S. (2016). Computational
health informatics in the big data age: a survey. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR),
49(1), 1-36.T4
[39] Roberts, K., Boland, M. R., Pruinelli, L., Dcruz, J., Berry, A., Georgsson, M., ... & Jiang,
Y. (2017). Biomedical informatics advancing the national health agenda: the AMIA 2015
year-in-review in clinical and consumer informatics. Journal of the American Medical
Informatics Association, 24(e1), e185-e190.
[40] Zon, Hilaire, Milena Pavlova, and Wim Groot. ”Exploring decision makers’ knowledge,
attitudes and practices about decentralisation and health resources transfer to local
governments in Burkina Faso.” Global Public Health (2020): 1-1432. Karmegam, D.,
T. Ramamoorthy, and B. Mappillairajan, A systematic review of techniques employed
for determining mental health using social media in psychological surveillance during
disasters. Disaster medicine and public health preparedness, 2020. 14(2): p. 265-272.
[41] Stead, William W., and Nancy M. Lorenzi. ”Health informatics: linking investment
to value.” Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association 6, no. 5 (1999):
341-348.

