Spatial K-anonymity: A Privacy-preserving Method for COVID-19
Related Geo-spatial Technologies
Rohan Iyer1

a

, Regina Rex1 b , Kevin P. McPherson1 c , Darshan Gandhi1 , Aryan Mahindra1 ,
Abhishek Singh12 and Ramesh Raskar12
1 PathCheck

arXiv:2101.02556v1 [cs.CR] 4 Jan 2021

2 MIT

Foundation, Cambridge, USA
Media Lab, MIT, Cambridge, USA

Keywords:

spatial k-anonymity, contact tracing, spatial privacy

Abstract:

There is a growing need for spatial privacy considerations in the many geo-spatial technologies that have been
created as solutions for COVID-19-related issues. Although effective geo-spatial technologies have already
been rolled out, most have significantly sacrificed privacy for utility. In this paper, we explore spatial kanonymity, a privacy-preserving method that can address this unnecessary tradeoff by providing the best of
both privacy and utility. After evaluating its past implications in geo-spatial use cases, we propose applications
of spatial k-anonymity in the data sharing and managing of COVID-19 contact tracing technologies as well as
heat maps showing a user’s travel history. We then justify our propositions by comparing spatial k-anonymity
with several other spatial privacy methods, including differential privacy, geo-indistinguishability, and manual
consent based redaction. Our hope is to raise awareness of the ever-growing risks associated with spatial
privacy and how they can be solved with Spatial K-anonymity.

1

INTRODUCTION

1.1 Motivation
The COVID-19 pandemic has presented a multitude
of challenges from public health to economic instability. Solutions for COVID-19 contact tracing and other
purposes involve an exponential rise in the use of geolocation technologies and location-based services at
every level of society. This has presented its own set
of ethical challenges and adoption issues (Cole, 2020;
Hassandoust et al., 2020). Each individual’s physical
location and location history can be exploited by cybercriminals interested in mining personal information such as home, work, and school addresses as well
as a daily itinerary, among others. The threat of leakage of information gets even more amplified in this
scenarios since it also reflects the infection status of
the person. Spatial privacy risks may likely extend beyond the individual, compromising families, coworkers, communities and even enterprises. Appropriate
measures are necessary to ensure spatial privacy to
be maintained in all solutions for the COVID-19 pandemic.
a
b
c

https://orcid.org/0000-0003-3055-9377
https://orcid.org/0000-0003-0327-8916
https://orcid.org/0000-0003-4977-8537

1.2 Contribution
This paper presents a developmental approach to
addressing contact tracing spatial privacy concerns
using Spatial K-anonymity (Ghinita et al., 2010).
Spatial K-anonymity has been implemented in many
pre-COVID-19 use cases (Martin et al., 2015;
Sweeney, 2002;
Allshouse et al., 2010;
Gkoulalas-Divanis et al., 2010); here, we discuss
the unique applications that have emerged for spatial
K-anonymity for the COVID-19 pandemic. We also
compare the spatial K-anonymity approach with other
existing solutions like Geo-indistinguishability and
Consent Redaction to demonstrate the advantage of
utilizing K-anonymity in COVID-19 contact tracing.

2

RELATED WORK

Before the COVID-19 outbreak, concerns about spatial data collection have been echoed worldwide regarding individual security and privacy. Due to
these concerns, several policies, like the European
Union’s General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR)
(Council of European Union, 2014), outline identifying location data as personal, requiring other parties
to anonymize the collected data or gain explicit con-

sent from the user for spatial data collection.
In light of current issues, spatial data plays an
important role in surveillance, data sharing, and
digital contact tracing as used by various government (Park et al., 2020; Jacob and Lawarée, 2020;
Jian et al., 2020) and corporate entities (apple inc., )
in their efforts to combat COVID-19.
Contact Tracing (Lo and Sim, 2020) involves data
collection to help public health officials better control and understand an infectious outbreak, and it also
informs individuals about their probable exposures
to other infected people. Manual Contact Tracing
(MCT) involves caseworkers working with infected
persons to trace who they have been in close contact
with during their infection period. MCT is laborious, and it relies on the infected person’s ability to
accurately recall people there were in close contact
with (Barrat et al., 2020). It is also resource-intensive
and not scalable; if many people are infected, each infected person would need to be assigned a caseworker.
Digital Contact Tracing (DCT) is used to address the
shortcomings of MCTs. It involves using technological devices such as smartphones and smartwatches to
estimate close-range proximity It is more reliable than
MCT, as it is more accurate in sensing people in close
proximity (Smieszek et al., 2016). Despite the effectiveness and efficiency of DCT (hbr, 2020), there has
been a lot privacy concerns regarding spatial data collection (Rowe, 2020; Boulos et al., 2009).
In the privacy domain, there have been efforts to ensure user spatial privacy rights are respected. State-of-the-art methods like k-anonymity
(Gkoulalas-Divanis et al., 2010), l-diversity (), and tcloseness () are some of the few that are applied
to various technologies that utilize spatial data. K
anonymity assures that any query on data will give
limited access and will maintain the anonymity of
at least k individuals. This is usually achieved by
using the concepts of purging or generalization. ldiversity covers for the cons of K anonymity by ensuring that there is significant attribute diversity between equivalence groups. However, it is difficult to
accomplish with data having numerous Quasi Identifiers. t-closeness solves this problem by ensuring
that the distribution of each sensitive attribute in an
equivalence group is close to the distribution in the
complete dataset. Thus, these methods help in maintaining user privacy immensely.
Many spatial data protection measures have also
been used to safeguard users’ spatial privacy rights
in various COVID-19 contact tracing applications.
Some of the privacy measures applied as outlined
in (Wirth et al., 2020) involve pseudonymization or
anonymization of spatial data, aggregation of geo-

spatial and temporal data, data minimization, transparency, explicit consent, and ability to revoke consent by the users.
BlueTrace (Bay et al., 2020) protects the users’
privacy by using local storage for geo-location history and through the users’ explicit consent to data
location. They also provide the ability for a user to
recount their given consent. Another contact tracing application, Epione (Trieu et al., 2020), guarantees more robust privacy protection using a cryptographic protocol that securely delivers users’ status to
health authorities and ensures that users’ contact information is not revealed to other non-desired parties.
These are just some of the methods used to guarantee
users’ spatial data protection in digital contact tracing.
A more unusual approach to this problem is TrackCovid (Yasaka et al., 2020), which avoids handling
personal location data for contract tracing and uses
anonymization via QR codes at specified checkpoints.
(Chan et al., 2020) highlights possible privacy issues
that can arise from the various methods of COVID19 related contact tracing and suggests a Bluetooth
pseudonymization approach to combat these privacy
issues.

3

COVID-19-based Applications of
Spatial k-anonymity

3.1 Contact Tracing
Location-based privacy is growing in popularity due
to the data collection mechanisms of smartphones and
other location-agnostic devices. During the COVID19 pandemic, spatial privacy has proven to be of
paramount concern to government officials, public
health experts, and other medical professionals. In
some countries, it is predicted that because of the consequences of sharing contact-tracing data, over 70%
of patients who have contracted COVID-19 were at
risk of being identified by location, gender and/or age
(Jung et al., 2020).
GPS provides an advantageous solution to contact
tracing than other solutions, given other technologies,
such as outbreak response tools or symptom tracking
tools. Particularly, GPS based solutions can transmit data in background mode via smartphones and
wearable devices, provide public space and infection
proximity data, and have cross-platform functionality inherent to the data (). When digital contact tracing employs a GPS-based solution for tracing individuals, it often queries highly specific geo-location
data of a user. This data is quite sensitive as it tracks

the real time location of a user and stores it onto
a database that could be potentially used for tracking and tracing purposes. Spatial k-anonymity employs certain methodologies that convert highly accurate geo-location data into a more granular form while
preserving the effectiveness of location-based contact
tracing.
Imagine person X queries location-based data
from address Y. An attacker may use this information
to associate person X’s real-time location with high
accuracy. Spatial k-anonymity solves this problem
by employing methods that ensure user X’s locationbased query has a probability larger than 1/k, where k
is a defined anonymity requirement.
A widely used method to calculate k involves
masking a user’s location by deploying specific geomasking techniques and relocating the user to a new
buffer location. Geomasking is a general category
of methods that is used to mask or change the geographical location of a user or patient in an unpredictable way that maintains that user or patient’s relationship to a particular geo-location and their status as it concerns a disease infection or outbreak ().
The k-anonymity value is the number of all potential
residential locations inside this buffer area, including
the original user location. The value of 1/k is thus
a measure of the person’s disclosure risk in question
(the probability of being re-identified) after geomasking. The smaller the 1/k, the more difficult it is to
re-identify the person’s real location.

3.2 Heat Map
The incorporation of heatmaps is primarily for better visualization and understanding of the travel history of the user over a period of time. With the help
of the heatmap feature the user can realise the travel
history and make optimum decisions while planning
their next travel journey.
Case 1: Restricted to an individual user
In this case the user can get detailed information
about their travel history and they can use this information to further make their travel plans.
The user can map a circle or any arbitrary shape
to distinguish the regions as a public or private one.
Based on the segregation, the user can be shown only
their travel history in the public region. This would
help them to understand their travelling trends. Also,
there can be potentially marked several points of danger and caution on the map and accordingly notify the
user if they have crossed paths during their journey. A
track of the last 7-14 days should be kept ideally since
that would help to keep track of the exposure period.
The primary objective of this is to keep the user

aware of their surroundings and help them make
concrete decisions while making their next travel
plan.The first option should be the most suited and
feasible as well.
Case 2: Combination of all the users data
In this case, the methodology is to club the details of all the users around a specific user and with
the help of that a combined heat map can be plotted.
This would potentially help the user get a good understanding of their surroundings. Again, classification of zones can be implemented here with the RED
region as a danger zone and alert the user if they are
travelling by that particular area.
Many of the new metrics are based on uncertainty.
In this paper here the authors suggested a test how
easily and quickly the location of the user can be
traced and identified from the anonymous collection
of users. It was observed that the major focus was on
the path a user might have taken. Thus, one of the
key parameters metric to track would be to identify
the size of the cluster, larger the size, larger the ambiguity and more difficult to track the individual user.
A few suggestions would be to showcase the exact coordinates as street or even the town/ city coordinates, this would add a high amount of ambiguity
in the process of identifying the exact location of the
user thus helping them stay protected and preserve
their privacy.

4

Comparing Spatial K-anonymity
With Other Privacy-Preserving
Methods

In this section we will give a detailed description of
the various spatial privacy approaches: K-anonymity,
geo-indistinguishability, and consent redaction. We
will also show how these approaches differ from
each other and spatial k-anonymity, highlighting their
strengths and weaknesses in digital contact tracing
and other COVID-19 related applications.
K-anonymity (Gkoulalas-Divanis et al., 2010) is a
well known anonymization technique for spatial privacy. This technique refers to the process of transforming a data set that contains personal or identifying information to a dataset that strips away any information that could identify an individual, making
it hard for other parties to determine the identity of
an individual from the transformed data set. In this
paper, we will be focusing on the K-Anonymity algorithm for protecting spatial privacy. K-anonymity
is characterized as the number of individuals, which
is a distinct value ‘k’, associated with alike attributes

Figure 1: An example of a user’s location history represented as a heat map (Red-orange → heavily visited, Green → regularly
visited, Blue → least visited).

like gender, city, etc such that one particular individual cannot be identified from the data set. Since the
dataset consists of geographical identifiers as well, the
traditional k-anonymity algorithm can be expanded to
spatial k-anonymity. Spatial k-anonymity is a widely
used method to evaluate the degree of geoprivacy obtained following the implementation of a particular
geo masking technique.
Spatial k-anonymity () works the best for conventional geo-spatial datasets wherein only one geographical area is identified for each individual, however, it has important shortcomings when dealing with
individual GPS datasets. Spatial K-anonymity algorithm is highly regarded since rather than having a
single geographic location that can disclose a person’s
identity, it provided multiple several everyday activity locations, for example, home, offices, and shopping venues that can be easily identified from a GPS
dataset, which makes it difficult to zero down a single person. Having data of a single location associated with a person can make an individual vulnerable
by providing a wealth of geographic data to hackers
and can be utilized for similar malpractices. However, since most people spend only a small amount of
time at home and spend a significant amount of time
away from home, having multiple locations increases
the scope of user privacy. It is important to consider
the disclosure risk associated with all daily activity

locations in a detailed manner.
Geo-indistinguishability (Andrés et al., 2013) is a
metric used for location-based systems that protect
the user’s exact location while allowing approximate
information, typically needed to obtain a specific desired service, to be released. The underlying motivation for geo-indistinguishability comes from differential privacy but more handcrafted for the spatial data.
It is focused on protecting the user’s location within
a radius, , with a level of privacy that depends on
that corresponds to a generalized version of the wellknown concept of differential privacy. The value must
be optimized in consideration of both privacy and utility, and it must be large enough to fit the notion of
privacy. That is, an attacker with potential auxiliary
information should not be able to pinpoint the user’s
identity. For example, must also be small enough
to allow digital contact tracing to accurately identify users who have been in contact with a user who
has tested positive. Like spatial K-anonymity, geoindistinguishability guarantees spatial privacy needs
for location-based systems such as digital contact
tracing apps. (Vepakomma et al., 2020) uses differential privacy to release a sketching data structure of
location data. Aside from this, there have not been
any application of geo-indistinguishability in digital
contact tracing.
Manual

Consent

Redaction

is

a

privacy-

preserving methodology that enables users to
revoke given consent to data collection for specific
locations or all locations tracked by geo-spatial
technologies. This technique offers users greater
control over their data, as they can choose to opt-in
or out of the service or select what data points to
exclude from external servers. In manual consent
redaction, the user can choose to revoke their consent for geo-spatial technologies to access all their
locations or just for specific locations. If the user
desires the latter, they must manually select which
locations to exclude from the data collection process,
and these would also be removed from the external
servers. Choosing the former means the user can
not use the geo-spatial technology, and all their data
should be removed from the servers. This approach
gives user’s control over their privacy and is a highly
interpretable notion of privacy from a user standpoint.
Its disadvantages includes the risk of human error
and it has less privacy-utility tradeoff.
Most contact tracing apps only give the users the
option of fully consenting to data collection or revoking their consent. Using this approach, the user
can only use the contact tracing app if they agree to
data collection. Otherwise, they can not specify if
they want only specific locations redacted. Unlike
the other privacy-preserving methods above, manual
consent redaction alone does not fully guarantee spatial privacy. It is more restrictive, as revoking consent bars a user from using the technology. For example, (Bay et al., 2020) uses consent revocation in
combination with other privacy-preserving methods
to ensure users’ privacy. The more user-friendly approach, where users can exclude specific data points if
they choose to, does not guarantee the remaining data
collected are non-identifying. i.e., attackers can still
identify users based on their DAL even if they redact
private locations from data collection.

5

Developmental Solution

The idea of a spatial k-anonymity development solution is that it takes a list of user’s locations (L), and
creates a bound portion of anonymized geographical
locations (anonymized-L) that is shared with at least
K-1 other users.
Pulling heavily on the previous work of
(Cassa et al., 2006), which addresses the issues
of using an anonymizing algorithm while preserving
the fidelity of containing an outbreak through epidemiology data, the features of our algorithm are as
follows:
1. Population Density-Based Gaussian Spatial

Skew. We hope to “blur” any location the user
deems as private. As such, we need to take the
user’s addresses that are private (represented in
longitude and latitude), and skew using a random
offset based on Gaussian distribution which has
a standard deviation that is inversely proportional
to the area’s population density. This allows for
smaller transposition of people in high density areas while maintaining k-anonymity.
• Individual point Gaussian Blur. Points will
have to be skewed a minimum distance. To do
this, we develop two randomly selected variables, σx and σy which represent standard deviations from a normal distribution to give the
distance and direction of a user’s displacement.
From here, two displacement values ((dx , dx )).
Gaussian blur, a concept used in image processing, takes a float or integer representation and
applies noise in line with a Gaussian distribution.
2. Combining with the Anonymization Algorithm
of Cassa et al. Assuming we have some context data like US Census or other state-sponsored
data collection, we want anonymization skewed
inversely with population density. That is, if
someone lives in a highly-dense area, they should
move a shorter distance in the anonymized mode,
whereas rural participants move larger distances
in the anonymized mode.
3. Anonymization Multipliers. In order to control for population and age-based density issues, multipliers from the Cassa et al. paper will be employed. They are as follows:
APDM = Age-based population density multiplier
TPDM = Total population density multiplier
AGPD = Average age group population density
UBGAD = User’s block group age density
ATPD = Average total population density
UBGPD = User’s block group population density
AM = Age Multiplier
APD = Age-based population density
CM = Combined multiplier
APDM = AGPD/UBGAD

(1)

T PDM = AT PD/UBGPD

(2)

Equations (1) and (2) combine to form a combined multiplier that looks like this:
CM = AM ∗ APD + (1 − AM) ∗ TPDM

(3)

The overall Anonymization Multiplier is as follows, with c being a scaling factor that can alter
the overall skew of a coordinate pair:
CM = AM ∗ APDM + (1 − AM) ∗ TPDM

(4)

These solutions should prove to hold up to traditional spatial-k anonymity privacy standards that any
nefarious effort to identify the user’s location can
be pinpointed with no greater than 1/K probability
(Ghinita et al., 2010).

6

Conclusions

Currently, we have built an application to demonstrate
the concept of spatial privacy protection of the user.
For the same we managed to build a working front
end and back end product. In future, we plan to upscale this and make it production ready to be deployed
for real life use cases. For the same we plan to shift
from using SQLite as our database to others such as
Postgres for handling heavy load. Also, we plan to
add several new features such as heatmap generation
for the user to help them understand their travel patterns, mark points/places of heavy concentration of
users and declare it to be a zone of high risk, also
identify and mark the points which are public places.
All these features would help the user to plan their
travel journey better and also help understand the surroundings they reside in a better way.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Special thanks to PathCheck Foundation for supporting our paper, including Ramesh Raskar, Aryan
Mahindra, and Haris Nazir.

REFERENCES
(2020). how digital contact tracing slowed covid-19 in east
asia-2020.
Allshouse, W. B., Fitch, M. K., Hampton, K. H., Gesink,
D. C., Doherty, I. A., Leone, P. A., Serre, M. L., and
Miller, W. C. (2010). Geomasking sensitive health
data and privacy protection: an evaluation using an
e911 database. Geocarto International, 25(6):443–
452.
Andrés, M. E., Bordenabe, N. E., Chatzikokolakis, K.,
and Palamidessi, C. (2013). Geo-indistinguishability:
differential privacy for location-based systems. In
Proceedings of the 2013 ACM SIGSAC conference

on Computer & communications security, CCS ’13,
pages 901–914, New York, NY, USA. Association for
Computing Machinery.
apple inc. Apple and google partner on covid-19 contact
tracing technology.
Barrat, A., Cattuto, C., Kivelä, M., Lehmann, S., and
Saramäki, J. (2020). Effect of manual and digital contact tracing on COVID-19 outbreaks: a study on empirical contact data.
Bay, J., Kek, J., Tan, A., and Hau, C. S. (2020). Bluetrace:
A privacy-preserving protocol for community-driven
contact tracing across borders.
Boulos, M., Curtis, A. J., and AbdelMalik, P. (2009). Musings on privacy issues in health research involving disaggregate geographic data about individuals. International Journal of Health Geographics, 8(1):46.
Cassa, C. A., Grannis, S. J., Overhage, J. M., and Mandl,
K. D. (2006).
A context-sensitive approach to
anonymizing spatial surveillance data: Impact on outbreak detection. Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association, 13(2):160–165.
Chan, J., Foster, D., Gollakota, S., Horvitz, E., Jaeger,
J., Kakade, S., Kohno, T., Langford, J., Larson, J.,
Sharma, P., Singanamalla, S., Sunshine, J., and Tessaro, S. (2020). Pact: Privacy sensitive protocols and
mechanisms for mobile contact tracing.
Cole, C. (2020). The safety of privacy: Increased privacy
concerns may prevent effective adoption of contact
tracing apps.
Council of European Union (2014). Council regulation
(EU) no 269/2014.
Ghinita, G., Zhao, K., Papadias, D., and Kalnis, P. (2010).
A reciprocal framework for spatial k-anonymity. Information Systems, 35(3):299–314.
Gkoulalas-Divanis, A., Kalnis, P., and Verykios, V. S.
(2010). Providing k-anonymity in location based
services. ACM SIGKDD Explorations Newsletter,
12(1):3–10.
Hassandoust, F., Akhlaghpour, S., and Johnston, A. C.
(2020). Individuals’ privacy concerns and adoption
of contact tracing mobile applications in a pandemic:
A situational privacy calculus perspective. Journal of
the American Medical Informatics Association.
Jacob, S. and Lawarée, J. (2020). The adoption of contact
tracing applications of COVID-19 by european governments. Policy Design and Practice, pages 1–15.
Jian, S.-W., Cheng, H.-Y., Huang, X.-T., and Liu, D.-P.
(2020). Contact tracing with digital assistance in taiwan’s COVID-19 outbreak response. International
Journal of Infectious Diseases, 101:348–352.
Jung, G., Lee, H., Kim, A., and Lee, U. (2020). Too much
information: Assessing privacy risks of contact trace
data disclosure on people with COVID-19 in south korea. Frontiers in Public Health, 8.
Lo, B. and Sim, I. (2020). Ethical framework for assessing manual and digital contact tracing for COVID-19.
Annals of Internal Medicine.
Martin, M. K., Helm, J., and Patyk, K. A. (2015). An approach for de-identification of point locations of livestock premises for further use in disease spread mod-

eling. Preventive Veterinary Medicine, 120(2):131–
140.
Park, Y. J., Choe, Y. J., Park, O., Park, S. Y., Kim, Y.M., Kim, J., Kweon, S., Woo, Y., Gwack, J., Kim,
S. S., Lee, J., Hyun, J., Ryu, B., Jang, Y. S., Kim, H.,
Shin, S. H., Yi, S., Lee, S., Kim, H. K., Lee, H., Jin,
Y., Park, E., Choi, S. W., Kim, M., Song, J., Choi,
S. W., Kim, D., Jeon, B.-H., Yoo, H., and and, E.
K. J. (2020). Contact tracing during coronavirus disease outbreak, south korea, 2020. Emerging Infectious
Diseases, 26(10):2465–2468.
Rowe, F. (2020). Contact tracing apps and values dilemmas: A privacy paradox in a neo-liberal world.
International Journal of Information Management,
55:102178.
Smieszek, T., Castell, S., Barrat, A., Cattuto, C., White,
P. J., and Krause, G. (2016). Contact diaries versus
wearable proximity sensors in measuring contact patterns at a conference: method comparison and participants’ attitudes. BMC Infectious Diseases, 16(1).
Sweeney, L. (2002). ACHIEVING k-ANONYMITY PRIVACY PROTECTION USING GENERALIZATION
AND SUPPRESSION. International Journal of Uncertainty, Fuzziness and Knowledge-Based Systems,
10(05):571–588.
Trieu, N., Shehata, K., Saxena, P., Shokri, R., and Song,
D. (2020). Epione: Lightweight contact tracing with
strong privacy.
Vepakomma, P., Pushpita, S. N., and Raskar, R. (2020).
Dams meta-estimation of private sketch data structures for differentially private contact tracing.
Wirth, F. N., Johns, M., Meurers, T., and Prasser, F.
(2020). Citizen-centered mobile health apps collecting individual-level spatial data for infectious disease management: Scoping review. JMIR Mhealth
Uhealth, 8(11):e22594.
Yasaka, T. M., Lehrich, B. M., and Sahyouni, R. (2020).
Peer-to-peer contact tracing: Development of a
privacy-preserving smartphone app. JMIR mHealth
and uHealth, 8(4):e18936.

This figure "orcid.png" is available in "png" format from:
http://arxiv.org/ps/2101.02556v1

