A nowcasting approach to generate timely estimates
of Mexican economic activity: An application to the
period of COVID-19
Francisco Corona∗1 , Graciela González-Farı́as2 and Jesús López-Pérez1

arXiv:2101.10383v1 [stat.AP] 25 Jan 2021

1
2

Instituto Nacional de Estadı́stica y Geografı́a
Centro de Investigación en Matemáticas A.C.
This version: November 6, 2020

Abstract
In this paper, we present a new approach based on dynamic factor models (DFMs)
to perform nowcasts for the percentage annual variation of the Mexican Global Economic
Activity Indicator (IGAE in Spanish). The procedure consists of the following steps: i)
build a timely and correlated database by using economic and financial time series and realtime variables such as social mobility and significant topics extracted by Google Trends;
ii) estimate the common factors using the two-step methodology of Doz et al. (2011); iii)
use the common factors in univariate time-series models for test data; and iv) according
to the best results obtained in the previous step, combine the statistically equal better
nowcasts (Diebold-Mariano test) to generate the current nowcasts. We obtain timely and
accurate nowcasts for the IGAE, including those for the current phase of drastic drops in
the economy related to COVID-19 sanitary measures. Additionally, the approach allows us
to disentangle the key variables in the DFM by estimating the confidence interval for both
the factor loadings and the factor estimates. This approach can be used in official statistics
to obtain preliminary estimates for IGAE up to 50 days before the official results.

Keywords: Dynamic Factor Models, Global Mexican Economic Activity Indicator, Google
Trends, LASSO regression, Nowcasts.

∗
Corresponding author: franciscoj.corona@inegi.org.mx. Please, if you require to quote this working progress,
request it to the corresponding author. The views expressed here are those of the authors and do not reflect those
of INEGI.

1

1

Introduction

Currently, the large amount of economic and financial time series collected over several years by
official statistical agencies allows researchers to implement statistical and econometric methodologies to generate accurate models to understand any macroeconomic phenomenon. One of
the most important events to anticipate is the movement of the gross domestic product (GDP)
because doing so allows policy to be carried out with more certainty, according to the expected
scenario. For instance, if an economic contraction is foreseeable, businesses can adjust their
investment or expansion plans, governments can apply countercyclical policy, and consumers
can adjust their spending patterns.
As new economic and financial information is released, the forecasts for a certain period
are constantly also being updated; thus, different GDP estimations arise. In this sense, a new,
unexpected event can drastically affect predictions in the short term; consequently, it might be
necessary to use not only economic and financial information but also nontraditional and highfrequency indicators, such as news, search topics extracted from the Internet, social networks,
etc. The seminal work of Varian (2014) is an obligatory reference for the inclusion of highfrequency information by economists, and Buono et al. (2018) is also an important reference to
characterize the types of nontraditional data and see the econometric methods usually employed
to extract information from these data.
Thus, the term “nowcast”, or real-time estimation, is relevant because we can use a rich
variety of information to model, from a multivariate point of view, macroeconomic and financial
events, plus specific incidents that can affect the dynamics of GDP in the short run. Econometrically and statistically, these facts are related to the literature on large dynamic factor models
(DFMs) because a large amount of time series is useful to estimate underlying common factors.
First introduced in economics by Geweke (1977) and Sargent and Sims (1977), DFMs have recently become very attractive in practice given the current requirements of dealing with large
datasets of time series using high-dimensional DFM; see, for example, Breitung and Eickmeier
(2006), Bai and Ng (2008), Stock and Watson (2011), Breitung and Choi (2013) and Bai and
Wang (2016) for reviews of the existing literature.
An open question in the literature on large DFMs is whether a large number of series is
adequate for a particular forecasting objective. In that sense, preselecting variables has proven
to reduce the error prediction with respect to using the complete dataset Boivin and Ng (2006);
that is, not always by using a large set of variables, we can obtain closer factor estimates with
respect to when we use fewer variables, especially under finite sample performance Poncela and
Ruiz (2016). Even when the number of time series is moderate, approximately 15, we can
accurately estimate the simulated common factors, as shown by Corona et al. (2020) in a Monte
Carlo analysis. The latter also corroborates that the Doz et al. (2011) two-step (2SM) factor
extraction method performs better than other approaches available in the literature above all
when the data are nonstationary.
DFM methodology has already been used to nowcast or predict the Mexican economy.
Corona et al. (2017a), one of the first works in this line, estimated common trends in a large and

2

nonstationary DFM to predict the Global Economic Activity Indicator (IGAE in Spanish) two
steps ahead and concluded that the error prediction was reduced with respect to some benchmarking univariate and multivariate time-series models. Caruso (2018) focuses on international
indicators, mainly for the US economy, to show that its nowcasts of quarterly GDP outperform
the predictions obtained by professional forecasters. Recently, Gálvez-Soriano (2020) concluded
that bridge equations perform better than DFM and static principal components (PCs) when
making the nowcasts of quarterly GDP. An important work related with timely GDP estimation
is Guerrero et al. (2013) where, based on vector autoregression (VAR) models, they generate
rapid GDP estimates (and its three grand economic activities) with a delay of up to 15 days from
the end of the reference quarter, while the official GDP takes around 52 days after the quarter
closes. This work is the main reference to INEGI’s “Estimación Oportuna del PIB Trimestral.”1
Although prior studies are empirically relevant for the case of Mexico, our analysis goes
beyond including nontraditional information to capture more drastic frictions that occur in
the very short run, one or two months. We identify that previous works focus on traditional
information, which limits their capacity to predict the recent historical declines attributed to
COVID-19 and the associated economic closures since March 2020. Our approach maximizes
the structural explanation of the already relevant macroeconomic and financial time series with
the timeliness of other high-frequency variables commonly used in big data analysis.
In this tradition, this work estimates a flexible and trained DFM to verify the assumptions
that guarantee the consistency of the component estimation from a statistical point of view.
That is, we use previous knowledge and attempt to fill in the identified gaps by focusing on the
Mexican case in the following ways: i) build a timely and correlated database by using traditional
economic and financial time series and real-time nontraditional information, determining the
latter relevant variables with least absolute selection and shrinkage operator (LASSO) regression,
a method of variable selection; ii) estimate the common factors using the two-step methodology
of Doz et al. (2011); iii) train univariate time series models with the DFM’s common factors to
select the best nowcasts; iv) determine the confidence intervals for both the factor loadings and
the factor itself to analyze the importance of each variable and the uncertainty attributed to
the estimation; and iv) combine the statistically equal better nowcasts to generate the current
estimates.
In practice, we consider the benefits of this paper to be opportunity and openness. First,
given the timely availability of the information that our approach uses, we can generate nowcasts
of the IGAE up to 50 days before the official data release; thus, our approach becomes an
alternative to obtaining IGAE’s preliminary estimates, which are very important in official
statistics. Second, this paper illustrates the empirical strategy to generate IGAE nowcasts stepby-step to practitioners, so any user can replicate the results for other time series. Third, and
very important, the nowcasting approach allows to known which variables are the most relevant
in the nowcasts, consequently, we emphasize in the structural explanation of our results.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. The next section, 2, summarizes
the Mexican economy evolution in the era of COVID-19. Section 3 presents the methodology
1

https://www.inegi.org.mx/temas/pibo/

3

considered to generate the nowcasts. Section 4 describes the data and the descriptive analysis.
Section 5 contains the empirical results. Finally, Section 6 concludes the paper.

2

The Mexican economy amid the COVID-19 pandemic

The first six months of the COVID-19 pandemic (until September 2020) has had severe impacts on the Mexican economy. The first case of coronavirus in Mexico was documented on
February 27, 2020. Despite government efforts to cope with the effects of the obligatory halt of
economic activity, GDP in the second quarter plummeted with a historic 18.7% yearly contraction. Moreover, the pandemic accelerated economic stagnation that had begun to show signs
of amelioration, following three quarters of negative growth of 0.5, 0.8 and 2.1% since the third
quarter of 2019. However, starting in 2020, the actual values were not foreseen by national
and international institutions such as private and central banks. For example, the November
2019 Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development Economic Outlook estimated
the real GDP variation for 2020 at 1.29%, while the June 2020 report updated it to -8.6%, a
difference of 9.8% in absolute terms. Moreover, even when the Mexican Central Bank expected
barely zero economic growth for 2020, placing its November 2019 outlook between -0.2% and
0.2%, it did not anticipate such a contraction as has seen so far this year.
Between January 2019 and February 2020, before the COVID-19 outbreak started in Mexico,
the annual growth of IGAE2 already showed signs of slowing and fluctuated around -1.75 and
0.76%, and since May 2019, the economy exhibited nine consecutive months of negative growth.
Broken down by sector and using IGAE, the economy suffered devastating consequences in the
secondary and tertiary sectors. Overall, the pandemic brought about -19.7, -21.6 and -14.5%
contractions in total economic activity for April, May and June of 2020, respectively.
The industrial sector registered the deepest contractions, reducing its activity in April and
May by -30.1 and -29.6%, respectively, in annual terms, mainly driven by the closure of manufacturing and construction operations, which were considered nonessential businesses, following
a slight recovery in June, -17.5%, when an important number of activities, including automobile
manufacturing, resumed but remained at low activity levels. The services sector also suffered
from lockdown measures, falling by -15.9, -19 and -13.6% in the three months of the second quarter, respectively, especially due to transportation, retail, lodging and food preparation, mainly
due to the decrease in tourist activity, although restaurants and airports were not closed. The
primary sector showed signs of resilience and even grew in April and May 2020, by 1.4 and 2.7%,
and only shrank in June by -1.5% on an annual basis.
The great confinement in Mexico, which officially lasted from March 23 to May 31 (named
“Jornada Nacional de Sana Distancia”), had severe consequences for the components of the
aggregate demand: consumption, investment and foreign trade suffered consequences. Consumption had been on a deteriorating path since September 2019, and in May 2020, the last
month for which data are available, it exhibited a -23.5% plunge compared to the same period of
2

The IGAE is the monthly proxy variable for Mexican GDP, which covers approximately 95% of the total
economy. Its publication is available two months after the reference month (https://www.inegi.org.mx/temas/
igae/).

4

2019. Similarly, investment, which peaked in June 2018, continued to deteriorate and registered
a drop of -38.4% in May 2020 on a year-over-year basis. Regarding international trade, exports
began to abate in August 2019, hit a record low in May 2020, and despite a slight recovery in
June, the yearly variation in July 2020 was still -8.8% below its 2019 level. Similarly, imports
registered a maximum in November 2018, and despite improvements in May 2020, the yearly
variation as of July 2020 was still -26.3% under its 2019 level.
Prices and employment, to round out description of the Mexican economy, also suffered the
ravages of the pandemic. Prices, unlike during other periods of economic instability in Mexico,
do not seem to be into an inflationary spiral; in fact, the inflation rate in July 2020 compared to
the previous year was 3.6%, and the central bank expects it will hover around 3% for the next
12 to 24 months. Additionally, different job-related statistics also reveal an underutilization of
the labor force. For example, IMSS-affiliated workers, who account for approximately 90% of
the formal sector, suffered 1.3 million in job losses from the peak in November 2019 to July
2020. Similarly, the underemployment rate, an indicator of part-time employment, increased
over twelve months from 7.6% to 20.1% in June 2020. In addition, the labor force participation
rate showed a sharp decline in the first months of the social distancing policies, implying that 12
million people were dropped from the economy’s active workforce thanks to COVID-19. Thus,
the unemployment rate, people actively looking for a remunerated job, registered an annual
increase of 1.32% in June 2020 to stand at 5.5%.
The literature on the effects of the pandemic on the economy has grown rapidly; see, for
instance, Covid Economics from the Center for Economic and Policy Research and numerous
working papers from the National Bureau of Economic Research. For the case of the Mexican
economy, the works of Campos-Vazquez et al. (2020) who analyze online job advertisements in
times of COVID-19 and Lustig et al. (2020) who conducts simulations to project poverty figures
across different population sectors by using survey’s microdata, stand out. Along the same lines,
the journal Economı́aUNAM dedicated its number 51 of volume 17 in its entirety to study the
impacts in Mexico of the pandemic, covering a wide range of issues related mainly to health
economics (Vanegas, 2020, Kershenobich, 2020), labor economics (Samaniego, 2020) , inequality
(Alberro, 2020), poverty (Fernández, 2020) and public policy (Sánchez, 2020, Moreno-Brid,
2020). None of these related to short-term forecasting of the economic activity.
The closest paper to ours is Meza (2020), who projects the economic impact of COVID-19 for
twelve variables, including IGAE, based on a Susceptible-Infectious-Recovered epidemic model
and a novel method to handle a sequence of extreme observations when estimating a VAR model
(Lenza and Primiceri, 2020). To make the forecasts, Meza (2020) first estimates the shocks that
hit the economy since March 2020, and then produce four forecasts considering a path for the
pandemic or not, and if so then considers three scenarios. Opposite to this work, the forecast
horizon focuses in the mid term, June 2020 to February 2023, rather than ours in the short
term, one or two months ahead.

5

3

Methodology

This section describes how we employ DFM to generate the nowcasts of the IGAE. First, we
describe how LASSO regression is used as a variable selection method to select among various
Google Trends topics. Then, we report how the stationary DFM shrinks the complete dataset
in the 2SM strategy to obtain the estimated factor loadings and common factors and in the
Onatski (2010) procedure to detect the number of common factors. Finally, we describe the
nowcasting approach.

3.1

LASSO regression

LASSO regression was introduced by Tibshirani (1996) as a new method of estimation in linear
models by minimizing the residual sum of the squares (RSS) subject to the sum of the absolute
value of the coefficients being less than a constant. In this sense, LASSO regression is related to
ridge regression, but the former focuses on determining the tuning parameter, λ, that controls
the regularization effect; consequently, we can have better predictions than ordinary least squares
(OLS) in a variety of scenarios, depending on its choice.
Let Wt = (w1t , . . . , wKt )0 be a K×1 vector of stationary and standardized variables. Consider
the following penalized RSS:
min = (y − W β)0 (y − W β)
RSS

s.t f (β) ≤ c,

(1)

where y = (y1 , . . . , yT )0 is a T × 1 vector, β = (β1 , . . . βK )0 is a K × 1 vector, W = (W 1, . . . , WT )0
is a T × K matrix and c ≥ 0 is a tuning parameter that controls the shrinkage of the estimates.
PK
2
bRidge = (W 0 W − λIp )−1 W 0 y. In practice, this
If f (b) =
j=1 βj , the ridge solution is βλ
solution never sets coefficients to exactly zero; therefore, ridge regression cannot perform as a
variable selection method in linear models, although its prediction ability is better than OLS.
P
Tibshirani (1996) considers a penalty function as f (β) = K
j=1 |βj | ≤ c; in this case, the
solution of (4) is not closed, and it is obtained by convex optimization techniques. The LASSO
solution has the following implications: i) when λ → 0, we obtain solutions similar to OLS, and
ii) when λ → ∞, βbLASSO → 0. Therefore, LASSO regression can perform as a variable selection
λ

method in linear models. Consequently, if λ is large, more coefficients tend to zero, selecting
the variables that minimize the error prediction.
In macroeconomic applications, Aprigliano and Bencivelli (2013) use LASSO regression to
select the relevant economic and financial variables in a large data set with the goal of estimating
a new Italian coincident indicator.

3.2

Dynamic Factor Model

We consider a stationary DFM where the observations, Xt , are generated by the following
process:
Xt = P Ft + εt ,

6

(2)

Φ(L)Ft = ηt ,

(3)

Γ(L)εt = at ,

(4)

where Xt = (x1t , . . . , xN t )0 and εt = (ε1t , . . . , εN t )0 are N × 1 vectors of the variables and
idiosyncratic noises observed at time t. The common factors, Ft = (F1t , . . . , Frt )0 , and the
factor disturbances, ηt = (η1t , . . . , ηrt )0 , are r × 1 vectors, with r (r < N ) being the number
of static common factors, which is assumed to be known. The N × 1 vector of idiosyncratic
disturbances, at , is distributed independently of the factor disturbances, ηt , for all leads and lags,
denoted by L, where LXt = Xt−1 . Furthermore, ηt and at , are assumed to be Gaussian white
noises with positive definite covariance matrices Ση = diag(ση21 , . . . , ση2r ) and Σa , respectively.
P = (p1 , . . . , pN )0 , is the N × r matrix of factor loadings, where, pi = (pi1 , . . . , pir )0 is an r × 1
P
P
vector. Finally, Φ(L) = I − ki=1 ΦLi and Γ = I − sj=1 ΓLj , where Φ and Γ are r × r and
N × N matrices containing the VAR parameters of the factors and idiosyncratic components
with k and s orders, respectively. For simplicity, we assume that the number of dynamic factors,
r1 , is equal to r.
Alternative representations in the stationary case are given by Doz et al. (2011, 2012), who
assume that r can be different from r1 . Additionally, when r = r1 , Bai and Ng (2004), Choi
(2017), and Corona et al. (2020) also assume possible nonstationarity in the idiosyncratic noises.
Barigozzi et al. (2016, 2017) assume possible nonstationarity in Ft , εt and r 6= r1 .
The DFM in equations (2) to (4) is not identified. As we noted in the Introduction, the
factor extraction used in this work is the 2SM; consequently, in the first step, we estimate the
common factors by using PCs to solve the identification problem and uniquely define the factors;
we impose the restrictions P 0 P/N = Ir and F 0 F being diagonal, where F = (F1 , . . . , FT ) is r×T .
For a review of restrictions in the context of PC factor extraction, see Bai and Ng (2013).
3.2.1

Two-step method for factor extraction

Giannone et al. (2008) popularized the usage of 2SM factor extraction to estimate the common
factors by using monthly information with the goal of generating the nowcasts of quarterly GDP.
However, Doz et al. (2011) proved the statistical consistency of the estimated common factor
using 2SM. In the first step, PC factor extraction consistently estimates the static common
factors without assuming any particular distribution, allowing weak serial and cross-sectional
correlation in the idiosyncratic noises; see, for example, Bai (2003). In the second step, we
model the dynamics of the common factors via the Kalman smoother, allowing idiosyncratic
heteroskedasticity, a situation that occurs frequently in practice. In a finite sample study, Corona
et al. (2020) show that with the 2SM of Doz et al. (2011) based on PC and Kalman smoothing,
we can obtain closer estimates of the common factors under several data generating processes
that can occur in empirical analysis, such as heteroskedasticity and serial and cross-sectional
correlation in idiosyncratic noises. Additionally, following Giannone et al. (2008), this method
is useful when the objective is nowcasting given the flexibility to estimate common factors when
all variables are not updated at the same time.
The 2SM procedure is implemented according to the following steps:

7

1. Set P̂ as

√

N times the r largest eigenvalues of X 0 X, where X = (X1 , . . . , XT )0 is a T × N

matrix. By regressing X on P̂ and using the identifiability restrictions, obtain F̂ = X P̂ /N
and ε̂ = X − F̂ 0 P̂ 0 . Compute the asymptotic confidence intervals for both factor loadings
and common factors as proposed by Bai (2003).
 
2. Set the estimated covariance matrix of the idiosyncratic errors as Ψ̂ = diag Σ̂ε , where
the diagonal of Ψ̂ includes the variances of each variable of X; hence, σ̂i2 for i = 1, . . . , N.
3. Estimate a VAR(k) model by OLS to the estimated common factors, F̂ , and compute
their estimated autoregressive coefficients as the VAR(1) model, denoted by Φ̂. Assuming
that f0 ∼ N (0, Σf ), the unconditional covariance matrix of the factors can be estimated
  
−1
 
as vec Σ̂f = Ir2 − Φ̂ ⊗ Φ̂
vec Σ̂η , where Σ̂η = η̂ 0 η̂/T .
4. Write DFM in equations (2) to (4) in state-space form, and with the system matrices
substituted by P̂ , Ψ̂, Φ̂, Σ̂η and Σ̂f , use the Kalman smoother to obtain an updated
estimation of the factors denoted by F̃ .
In practice, Xt are not updated for all t; in these cases, we apply the Kalman smoother,
E(F̂t |ΩT ), where ΩT is all the available information in the sample, and we take into account the
following two cases:

Ψ̂i =

(
σ̂i2

if xit is available,

∞ if xit is not available.

Empirically, when specific data on Xt are not available, Harvey and Phillips (1979) suggests
using a diffuse value equal to 107 ; however, we use 1032 according to the package nowcast of the
R program, see de Valk et al. (2019).
3.2.2

Determining the number of common factors

To detect the estimated number of common factors, rb, Onatski (2010) proposes a procedure
when the proportion of the observed variance attributed to the factors is small relative to that
attributed to the idiosyncratic term. This method determines a sharp threshold, δ, which
consistently separates the bounded and diverging eigenvalues of the sample covariance matrix.
The author proposes the following algorithm to estimate δ and determine the number of factors:
1. Obtain and sort in descending order the N eigenvalues of the covariance matrix of obserb X . Set j = rmax + 1.
vations, Σ
2. Obtain γ
b as the OLS estimator of the slope of a simple linear regression, with a constant

of {λj , . . . , λj+4 } on (j − 1)2/3 , . . . (j + 3)2/3 , and set δ = 2|b
γ |.
(N )
bk − λ
bk+1 < δ,
3. Let rmax be any slowly increasing sequence (in the sense that it is o(N )). If λ
(N ) b
b
set rb = 0; otherwise, set rb = max{k ≤ rmax | λ
k − λk+1 ≥ δ}.

4. With j = rb + 1, repeat steps 2 and 3 until convergence.

8

This algorithm is known as edge distribution, and Onatski (2010) proves the consistency of rb
for any fixed δ > 0. Corona et al. (2017b) shows that this method works reasonably well in
small samples. Two important features of this method are that the number of factors can be
estimated without previously estimating the common components and that the common factors
may be integrated.

3.3

Nowcasting approach

In this subsection, we describe the nowcasting approach to estimate the annual percentage
variation of IGAE, denoted by y ∗ = (y1 , . . . , yT ∗ ), where T ∗ = T − 2; hence, we focus on
generating the nowcasts two steps ahead.
3.3.1

Selecting relevant Google Trends topics

Currently, Google Trends topics, an up-to-date source of information that provides an index of
Internet searches or queries by category and geography, are frequently used to predict economic
phenomena. See, for instance, Stephens-Davidowitz and Varian (2014) for a full review of this
tool and other analytical tools from Google applied to social sciences. Other recent examples
are Ali et al. (2020), who analyzes online job postings in the US childcare market under stayat-home orders, Goldsmith-Pinkham and Sojourner (2020), who nowcast the number of workers
filing unemployment insurance claims in the US, based on the intensity of search for the term “file
for unemployment”, and Caperna et al. (2020), who develop random forest models to nowcast
country-level unemployment figures for the 27 European Union countries based on queries that
best predict the unemployment rate to create a daily indicator of unemployment-related searches.
In this way, for a sample K topics on Google Trends, the relevant topics l = 0, . . . , ζ, with
ζ > 0 are selected with LASSO regression as follows:
1. Split the data for t = 1, . . . , T ∗ − Hg .
LASSO . Compute the following
2. For h = 1 and for the sample of size T ∗ − Hg + h, estimate βbλ,h

vector of indicator variables:

βbj,h

(
LASSO =
1 if βbλ,h
6 0
=
LASSO = 0
0 if βbλ,h

3. Repeat 2 until Hg .
4. Define the Hg × K matrix, βb = (βb1 , . . . , βbK ), where βbj = (βbj,1 , . . . , βbj,Hg )0 is an Hg × 1
vector.


b
b
b
5. Select the l significant variables that satisfy the condition βl = βl∈j |1β > ϕ , where ϕ is
the 1 − α sample quantile of 1βb with 1 being and vector 1 × Hg of ones.
With this procedure, we select the topics that frequently reduce the prediction error – in
sample – for the IGAE estimates during the last Hg months. We estimate the optimum λ by
using the glmnet package from the R program.

9

3.3.2

Transformations

In our case, to predict y ∗ , the time series Xi = (xi1 , . . . , xiT ∗ ) are transformed such that they
satisfy the following condition:


Xi∗ = f (Xi ) | max(f (Xi ), y ∗ ) .

(5)

corr

Hence, we select the f (Xi ) that maximizes the correlation between y. Consider f (·) as follows:
1. None (n)


t
2. Monthly percentage variation (m): XXt−1
× 100 − 100


Xt
3. Annual percentage variation (a): Xt−12 × 100 − 100
4. Lagged (l): Xt−1
Note that these transformations do not have the goal of achieving stationarity, although intrinsically these transformations are stationary transformations regardless of whether y ∗ is stationary;
in fact, the transformations m and a tend to be stationary transformations when the time series
are I(1), which is frequent in economics; see Corona et al. (2017b). Otherwise, it is necessary
that (f (Xi ), y ∗ ) are cointegrated. The implications of equations (2) to (4) are very important
because it is necessary to stationarize the system in terms that, theoretically, although some
common factor, Ft , can be nonstationary, consistent estimates remain regardless of whether the
idiosyncratic errors are stationary, see Bai (2004). In this way, we use the PANIC test (Bai
and Ng, 2004) to verify this assumption. Additionally, an alternative to estimate nonstationary
common factors by using 2SM when the time series are I(1) is given by Corona et al. (2020).
3.3.3

Nowcasting approach

Having estimated the common factors as described in subsection 3.2.1 by using Xt∗ for t =
1, . . . , T , we estimate a linear regression model with autoregressive moving average (ARMA)
errors to generate the nowcasts
yt∗ = a + bF̃t + ut
where ut = φ(L)ut + γ(L)vt with φ(L) =

Pp

t = 1, . . . , T − 2,

i
i=1 φi L

and γ(L) = 1 +

(6)
Pq

j
j=1 γj L .

The parameters

are estimated by maximum likelihood. Consequently, the nowcasts are obtained by the following
expression:
ybT ∗ +h = b
a + bbF̃T ∗ +h + u
bT ∗ +h

for h = 1, 2.

(7)

Note that Giannone et al. (2008) propose using the model with p = q = 0; hence, the nowcasts
are obtained by using the expression (7). In our case, we estimate different models by the orders
p = 0, . . . pmax and q = 0, . . . qmax ; thus ,the case of Giannone et al. (2008) is a particular case of
this expression. Now, our interest is in selecting models with similar performance for training
data. In this way, we carry out the following procedure:

10

1. Start with p = 0 and q = 0.
2. Estimate the nowcasts for T ∗ + 1 and T ∗ + 2, namely, yb0,0 = (b
yT ∗ +1 , ybT ∗ +2 )0 .
3. Split the data for t = 1, . . . , T ∗ − Ht .
4. For h = 1 and for the sample of size T ∗ − Ht + h, estimate equation (6), generate the
nowcasts with expression (7) one step ahead, and calculate the errors and absolute error
(AE) as follows:
e0,0
bT ∗ −Ht +1
1 = yT ∗ −Ht +1 − y
AE10,0 = |e0,0 |
0,0 0
0,0 =
5. Repeat steps 3 and 4 until Ht . Hence, estimate e0,0 = (e0,0
1 , . . . , eH ) and AE
0,0
). Additionally, we define the weighted AE (WAE) as W AE 0,0 = AE 0,0 Υ
(AE10,0 , . . . , AEH
t

where Υ is a weighted Ht ×1 matrix that penalizes the nowcasting errors such that Υ10 = 1.
6. Repeat steps for all combinations of p and q until pmax and qmax . Generate the following
elements:
yb(p, q) = (b
y 0,0 , yb1,0 , . . . , ybpmax ,qmax ),
e(p, q) = (e0,0 , e1,0 , . . . , epmax ,qmax ),
W AE(p, q) = (W AE 0,0 , W AE 1,0 , . . . , W AE pmax ,qmax )0 ,
where yb is a 2 × (pmax + 1)(qmax + 1) matrix of nowcasts, e is an Ht × (pmax + 1)(qmax + 1)
matrix that contains the nowcast errors in the training data, and W AE is an Ht × 1 vector
of the weighted errors in the training data.
7. We select the best nowcast as a function of p and q, denoted by yb(p∗ , q ∗ ), where p∗ , q ∗ are
obtained as follows:
p∗ , q ∗ =

argmin

W AE(p, q)

0≤p,q≤pmax ,qmax

8. To use models with similar performance, we combine the nowcasts of yb(p∗ , q ∗ ) with models
with equal forecast errors according to Diebold and Mariano (1995) tests, by using the
e(p, q), carrying out pairs of tests between the model with minimum AE(p, q) and the
others. Consequently, from the models with statistically equal performance, we select the
median of the nowcasts, namely, yb.
This nowcasting approach allows the generation of nowcasts based on a trained process, taking
advantage of the information of similar models. It is clear that bb must be significant to exploit
the relationship between the IGAE and the information summarized by the DFM. Note that
Υ is a weighted matrix that penalizes the nowcasts errors. The most common form is Υ =
(1/Ht , . . . , 1/Ht )0 , a Ht ×1 matrix where all nowcasts errors have equal weight named in literature
as mean absolute error (MAE). Therefore, we are not considering by default the traditional

11

MAE, but rather a weighted (or equal) average of the individual AE. For example, we could
have penalized with more weight the last nowcasts errors, that is, in the COVID-19 period.
Also, note that we can obtain AE(p, q) and estimate the median or some specific quantile for
each vector of this matrix.
Note that despite root mean squared errors (RMSEs) are often used in the forecast literature,
we prefer a weighted function of AEs, although in this work we use equal weights i.e., the MAE.
The main advantages of MAE over RMSE are in two ways: i) it is easy to interpret since it
represents the average deviation without considering their direction, while the RMSE averages
the squared errors and then we apply the root, which tends to inflate larger errors and ii) RMSE
does not necessarily increase with the variance of the errors. Anyway, the two criteria are in the
interval [0, ∞) and are indistinct to the sign of errors.

4

Data and descriptive analysis

4.1

Data

The variables to estimate the DFM are selected by using the criteria of timely and contemporaneous correlation with respect to y ∗ . In this sense, the model differs from the traditional
literature on large DFMs, which uses a large amount of economic and financial variables; see, for
example, Corona et al. (2017a) who use 211 time series to estimate the DFM for the Mexican case
with the goal of generating forecasts for the levels of IGAE. On the other hand, Gálvez-Soriano
(2020) uses approximately 30 selected time series to generate nowcasts of Mexican quarterly
GDP. Thus, our number of variables is intermediate between these two cases. However, as noted
by Boivin and Ng (2006), in the context of DFM, we can reduce the forecast prediction error
with selected variables by estimating the common components. Additionally, Poncela and Ruiz
(2016) and Corona et al. (2020) show that with a relativity small sample size, for example,
N = 12, we can accurately estimate a rotation of the common factors.
Consequently, given the timely and possibly contemporaneous correlation with respect to
the y ∗ , the features of the variables considered in this work are described in Annex 1.3
Hence, we initialized with 68 time series divided into three blocks. The first block is timely
traditional information such as the Industrial Production Index values for Mexico and the United
States, business confidence, and exports and imports, among many others. In this block, all
variables are monthly. In the second block, we have the high-frequency traditional variables such
as Mexican stock market index, nominal exchange rate, interest rate and the Standard Poor’s
500. These variables can be obtained daily, but we decide to use the averages to obtain monthly
time series. Finally, for the high-frequency nontraditional variables, we have daily variables
such as the social media mobility index obtained from Twitter and the topics extracted from
Google Trends. These topics are manually selected according to several phenomena that occur
in Mexican society, such as politicians’ names, natural disasters, economic themes and topics
related to COVID-19, such as coronavirus, quarantine, or facemask. The Google Trends variable
3

All variables are seasonally adjusted in the following ways: i) directly downloadable from their source or ii)
by applying the X-13ARIMA-SEATS.

12

takes a value of 0 when the topic is not searched in the time span and 100 when the topic has
the maximum search in the time span. In a similar way, although these variables are expressed
as monthly variables, for the social media mobility index, we average the daily values, and for
Google Trends we download the variables by month.
The social media mobility index is calculated based on Twitter information. We select around
70,000 daily tweets georeferenced to the Mexican, each one is associated with a bounding box.
Then, movement data analysis is performed by identifying users and their sequence of daily
tweets: a trip is considered for each pair of consecutive geo-tagged tweets found in different
bounding boxes. The total number of trips per day is obtained and divided by the average
number of users in the month. The number obtained can be interpreted as the average number
of trips that tweeters make per day.
To select the relevant topics, we apply the methodology described in subsection 3.3.1 by
using Hg = 36 and α = 0.10; consequently, we select the topics that are relevant in 90% of cases
in the training data. In this way, the significant topics are quarantine and facemask.
Once X is defined, we apply the transformations suggested by equation (5) to define X ∗ .
Figure 1 shows each Xi∗ ordered according to its correlation with y ∗ .

Figure 1: Blue indicates the specific Xi∗ , and red indicates the specified y ∗ . Numbers in parentheses indicate the linear correlation and those between brackets the transformation.
We can see the behavior of each variable, and industrial production is the variable with the
most correlated time series with the IGAE, followed by imports and industrial production in the
United States. Note that nontraditional time series are also correlated with y ∗ such as facemask,
quarantine and the social mobility index. Finally, the variables less related to the IGAE are the
variables related to business confidence and the monetary aggregate M4.
To summarize whether the time series capture prominent macroeconomic events as the 2009
financial crisis and the economic deceleration in effect since 2019, Figure 2 shows the heat map

13

by time series plotted in Figure 1

Figure 2: Heat map plot of the variables. The time series inversely related to the IGAE are
converted to have a positive relationship with it. We estimate the empirical quantiles ϕ(·)
according to their historical values. The first quantile (ϕ(Xi∗ ) < 0.25) is in red, the second
quantile (0.25 < ϕ(Xi∗ ) < 0.50) is in orange, the third quantile (0.50 < ϕ(Xi∗ ) < 0.75) is in
yellow, and finally, the fourth quantile (0.75 < ϕ(Xi∗ )) is green. Gray indicates that information
is not available.
We can see that during the 2009 financial crisis, the variables are mainly red, including the
Google Trends variables, which is reasonable because the AH1N1 pandemic also occurred during
March and April of 2009. Additionally, during 2016, some variables related to the international
market were red, for example, the US industrial production index, the exchange rate and the
S&P 500. Note that since 2019, all variables are orange or red, denoting the weakening of
the economy. Consequently, it is unsurprising that the estimated common factor summarizes
these dynamics. Note that this graph has only a descriptive objective. It cannot be employed to
generate recommendations for policy making because that some variables may be nonstationary.

4.2

Timely estimates

The nowcasts depend on the dates of the information released. Depending on the day of the
current month, we can obtain nowcasts with a larger or smaller percentage of updated variables.

14

For example, it is clear that the high-frequency variables are available in real time, but the
traditional and monthly time series, with are timely with respect to the IGAE, are available on
different dates according to the official release dates. Figure 3 shows the approximate day when
the information is released for T ∗ + 2 after the current month T ∗ .

Figure 3: Percentage of updated information to carry out the nowcasts T ∗ + 2 once the current
month T ∗ is closed.
We can see that traditional and nontraditional high-frequency variables, business confidence
and fuel demand, can be obtained on the day after the month T ∗ is closed. This indicates that
on the first day of month T ∗ + 1, we can generate the nowcasts to T ∗ + 2 with approximately
50% of the updated information and 81% for the current month, T ∗ + 1. Note that on day
12, the IMSS variable is updated, and on day 16, the IPI USA is updated. These variables are
highly correlated with yb with linear correlations of 0.77 and 0.80, respectively. Consequently, in
official statistics, we recommend conducting the nowcasts on the first day of T ∗ + 1 and 16 days
after, updating the nowcasts with two timely traditional and important time series, taking into
account the timely estimates but with relevant variables updated.4
In this work, the update of the database is August 13, 2020; consequently, we generate the
4

Note that IPI represents around the 34% of the monthly GDP, and represents more than 97% of the second
grand economic activity. Given that the IPI is updated around 10 days after the end of the reference month, this
information is very valuable to carry out the T ∗ + 1 nowcasts.

15

nowcasts 13 days before the official result of June 2020 and 43 days before the official value of
July 2020, having 88% and 52% of updated variables at T ∗ + 1 and T ∗ + 2, respectively.

5

Nowcasting results

5.1

Estimating the common factors and the loading weights

By applying the Onatski (2010) procedure to the covariance matrix of X ∗ , we can conclude that
r̂ = 1 is adequate to define the number of common factors. Hence, the estimated static common
factor obtained by PCs by using the set of variables, X ∗ , their confidence intervals at 95%, and
the dynamic factor estimates by applying the 2SM procedure with k = 1 lags, are presented in
Figure 4

Figure 4: Factor estimates. The blue line is the static common factor, the red lines are their
confidence intervals, and the green line is the smoothed or dynamic common factor.
We observe the common factors summarizing the previous elements representing the decline
in the economy in 2009 and 2020. Note that in the last period, the dynamic common factor shows

16

a slight recovery of the economy because this common factor supplies more timely information
than the static common factor. Thus, the static common factor has information until May 2020,
while the dynamic factor has information until July 2020. Note that the confidence intervals are
closed with respect to the static common factor, which implies that the uncertainty attributed
to the estimation is well modeled. It is important to analyze the contemporaneous correlation
with respect to IGAE. Thus, Figure 5 shows the correlation coefficient of F̃t with y ∗ since 2008.

Figure 5: Blue line is Corr(F̃t , y ∗ ) from January 2008 to May 2020. Red lines represent the
confidence interval at 95%.
We see that the correlation is approximately 0.86 prior to the financial crisis of 2009, increasing from this year to 0.98, showing a slight decrease since 2011, dropping in 2016 to 0.95
and fully reaching levels of 0.96 since 2020. The confidence intervals are between 0.75 and 0.97
during all sample being the smallest value during the first years of the sample and the largest one
in the final of period. Consequently, we can exploit the contemporaneous relationship between
the dynamic factor and the IGAE to generate their nowcasts for the two following months that
the common factors have estimated with respect to the IGAE.

17

Having estimated the dynamic factor by the 2SM approach, we show the results of the loading
weight estimates that capture the specific contribution of the common factor to each variable,
or in other words, given the PC restrictions, they can be seen as N times the contribution of
each variable in the common factor. We compute the confidence interval at 95% denoted by
CIP̂ ,0.05 . Once the dynamic factor is estimated by using the Kalman smoother, it is necessary
to reestimate the factor loadings to have P̂ = f (F̃ ), such that F̃ = g(P̃ ). To do so, we use
Monte Carlo estimation iterating 1,000 samples and select the replication that best satisfies the
following condition:
F̃ ≈ X P̃ /N

s.t

P̃ ∈ CIP̂ ,0.05 .

The results of the estimated factor loadings are shown in Figure 6. The loadings are ordered
from the most positive contribution to the most negative.

Figure 6: Factor loadings. The blue point is each P̂i with its respective 95% confidence interval.
Red curves are the P̃i .
We observe several similarities with respect to Figure 1. Note that the more important

18

variables in the factor estimates are the industrial production of Mexico and the U.S., exports
and imports along with Google Trends topics such as quarantine and facemask, which makes
sense in the COVID-19 period. Obviously, when these variables are updated, it will be more
important to update the nowcasts. In this way, note that Google Trends are available in real time.
Other timely variables, such as IMO, CONF MANUF, GAS, S&P 500, MOBILITY and E, are
also very relevant. However, note that all variables are significant in all cases, and the confidence
interval does not contain zero. The less important variables are M4, the business confidence of
the construction sector and remittances. Also, note that the most relevant variables are very
timely with respect to the IGAE: the industrial production index of Mexico and the U.S. are
updated around days 10 and 16 for T ∗ + 1 and T ∗ + 2, respectively, once closed the current
month; furthermore, the exports and imports are updated for T ∗ + 2 by 25th day, while IMO
and IMSS are updated since the first day and 12th day, respectively for T ∗ + 2. Consequently,
this allows us to have more accurate and correlated estimates since the first day of the current
month for both, T ∗ + 1 and T ∗ + 2.
As we have previously noted, to obtain a consistent estimation of F̃ and P̂ it is necessary
that ε̂ be stationary. We check this point with the PANIC test of Bai and Ng (2004), concluding
that we achieved stationarity in the idiosyncratic component, obtaining a statistic of 6.6 that
generates a p-value of 0.00; hence, ε̂ does not have a unit root. Additionally, we can verify with
the augmented Dickey-Fuller test that F̃ is stationary with a p-value of 0.026; consequently, we
also achieved stationarity in X ∗ .

5.2

Nowcasts in data test

We apply the procedure described in subsection 3.3.3 by using a Υ = (1/Ht , 1/Ht , . . . , 1/Ht )0 ;
then, we assume that each AE has equal weight over time in step 5. Additionally, we fix
pmax = qmax = 4. The obtained results indicate that the optimums p∗ and q ∗ are selected to be
equal to 4. Consequently, the best model is the following:

yt∗ = 1.7160 + 1.2625F̃t + 0.3664u
bt−1 + 1.0741u
bt−2 + 0.2794u
bt−3 −0.8036 u
bt−4 +
(0.1553)

(0.0393)

(0.0830)

(0.0932)

(0.0912)

0.1001vbt−1 −0.949 vbt−2 −0.4736 vbt−3 + 0.5904vbt−4 + vbt
(0.0893)

(0.098)

(0.1002)

(0.0811)

σ̂ 2 = 0.4763.

(8)

(0.0756)

Note that all coefficients are significant and the contribution of the factor over the IGAE is
positive. Additionally, estimating the Ljung-Box test over the residuals produces a result of
serially uncorrelated. This model generates the following historical nowcasts one step ahead
during Ht = 36 months that are presented in Figure 7

19

Figure 7: Nowcasts of training model. Asterisks are the observed values, the red line depicts
the nowcasts, and the green lines are the confidence intervals.
We can see that the nowcast model performs well given that in 92% of cases, the observed
values are within the confidence interval at 95%. The MAE (equal weights in Υ) is 0.65, and
the mean absolute annual growth of IGAE is 2.55%. Regarding the median of the AEs, the
estimated value is 0.36. These statistics are very competitive with respect to the model estimated
by Statistics Netherlands, see Kuiper and Pijpers (2020). They also estimate common factors
to generate the nowcasts of the annual variation of quarterly Netherlands GDP. According to
Table 7.2 in their work, the root of the mean of squared forecast errors is between 0.91 and 0.67
during 2011 and 2017. Additionally, the confidence interval captures approximately 70% of the
observed values. Therefore, our nowcast approach generates good results even when considering
a monthly variable and COVID-19.
In addition, we compare our results to Corona et al. (2017a), which forecasts IGAE levels
two steps ahead. To have comparable results between such study and this one, we take the
median of the root squared errors obtained by the former just for the first step forward, which
is between 0.4 and 0.5, while the current work generates a median AEs of 0.397 for the last
Ht = 36 months, including the COVID-19 period. Therefore, our approach is slightly more
accurate when nowcasting the IGAE levels. Note that the number of the variables is drastically
less, 211 there versus 68 here. Another nowcasting model to compare with is INEGI’s “Early
Monthly Estimation of Mexico’s Manufacturing Production Level,”5 whose target variable is
manufacturing activity, generating the one step ahead nowcasts by using a timely electricity
indicator. The average MAE for the annual percentage variation of manufacturing activity in
5

https://www.inegi.org.mx/investigacion/imoam/

20

the last 36 months, from August 2017 to July 2020, is 1.35. Consequently, in a similar sample
period, we have a smaller average MAE than another nowcasting model where its monthly target
variable is specified as annual percentage variation.
In order to contrast the results of our approach with those obtained by other procedures, we
consider the following two alternative models:
• Naive model: We assume that all variables have equal weights in the factor, consequently,
we standardize the variables used in the DFM, Xt∗ , and by averaging their rows, we obtain
a Ft∗ . Then, we use this naive factor in a linear regression in order to obtain the nowcasts
by the last Ht = 36 months.
• DFM without nontraditional information: We estimate a traditional DFM similar to
Corona et al. (2017a) or Gálvez-Soriano (2020), but using only economic and financial
time series, i.e. without considering the social mobility index and the relevant topics
extracted from Google Trends. Hence, we carry out the last Ht = 36 nowcasts.
Figure 8 shows the accumulated MAEs for the training period by the previous two models
and the obtained by equation (8).

Figure 8: Cummulative MAEs for models in training data. Blue is the nowcasting approach suggested in this work, red is the naive model, green is the traditional DFM (without nontraditional
information). The vertical line indicates indicates the COVID-19 onset period.

21

We can see that, in training data the named naive model is the one with the weakest performance, followed by traditional DFM. Specifically, the MAE is 1.02 for the naive model, 0.74
when using DFM without nontraditional information and, as we have commented, 0.65 for the
incumbent model, which includes this type of information. Note that the use of nontraditional
information does not affects the behaviour of the MAEs previous to COVID-19 pandemic and
reduces the error during this period. Consequently, the performance of the suggested approach
is highly competitive when compared with i) similar models for nowcasting of GDP, ii) models
that estimate the levels of the objective variable and iii) alternative models that can be used in
practice.

5.3

Current nowcasts

Having verified our approach in the previous section as highly competitive to capture the real
observed values, the final nowcasts for the IGAE annual percentage variation for June and July
2020 are shown in Figure 9. These are obtained after combining the statistically equal models
to the best model with the approach previously described and the traditional nowcasting model
of Giannone et al. (2008), weighting both nowcasts according to their MAEs.6
6

Note that the model of Giannone et al. (2008) uses only the estimated dynamic factors as regressors, i.e.,
linear regression models. Our approach also considers the possibility to model the errors with ARMA models.
In order to consider nowcasts associated to specifically the dynamic of the common factors, we take into account
the Giannone et al. (2008) model although its contribution in the final nowcasts is small given that, frequently,
during the test period, the nowcast errors are greater than the regression models with ARMA errors.

22

Figure 9: Nowcasts for June and July 2020. The blue line indicates the observed values, the red
small dotted line the fit of the model, the red large dotted line the nowcasts and the green lines
the confidence intervals.
We expect a slight recovery of the economy in June and July 2020, obtaining nowcasts of
-15.2% and -13.2%, respectively, with confidence intervals of (-16.3, -14.1) and (-14.1, -12.4) for
both months. Considering the observed values for June, released on August 25 by INEGI, the
annual percentage change for the IGAE was -14.5%; consequently, the model is very accurate
since the deviation from the real value was 0.7% and falls within the confidence interval.

5.4

Historical behaviour of nowcasting model in real time: COVID-19

The procedure described in the previous subsection allows to generate nowcasts using databases
with different cut dates. In this way, we carry out the procedure updating the databases twice a
month during the COVID-19 period. Table 1 summarizes the nowcasts results, comparing them
with the observed values.

23

Table 1: Nowcasts with different updates in COVID-19 times: annual percentage variation of
IGAE
Date of nowcasts
Date
2020/04
2020/05
2020/06
2020/07

Observed
-19.7
-21.6
-14.5

04/06/2020

18/06/2020

-18.3
-20.4

-18.0
-21.0

07/07/2020

16/07/2020

-21.8
-16.6

-20.4
-16.4

06/08/2020

12/08/2020

-15.5
-13.9

-15.2
-13.2

We can see that in June 4, 2020, the nowcasts were very accurate, capturing the drastic
drop occurred in April (previous month was -2.5%) and May, with absolute discrepancies of 1.4
and 1.2% respectively. The update of June 18, 2020 shows a slight accuracy improvement. The
following two nowcasts generate also closes estimates with respect to the observed value of May,
being the more accurate, the updated carried out in July 7, 2020. Note the the last updates
generate nowcasts by June around -16.6 and -15.2%, being the more accurate the last nowcasts
described in this work, with an absolute error of 0.7%. Considering these results, our approach
anticipates the drop attributed to the COVID-19 and foresees and slight recovery since June,
although it is also weak. According to Gálvez-Soriano (2020), the IGAE’s accurate and timely
estimates can drastically improve the nowcasts of the quarterly GDP; consequently, the benefits
of our approach are also related to quarterly time series nowcast models.

6

Conclusions and further research

In this paper, we contribute to the nowcasting literature by focusing on the two step-ahead of
the annual percentage variation of IGAE, the equivalently of the Mexican monthly GDP, during
COVID-19 times. For this purpose, we use statistical and econometric tools to obtain accurate
and timely estimates, even, around 50 days before that the official data. The suggested approach
consists in using LASSO regression to select the relevant topics that affect the IGAE in the short
term, build a correlated and timely database to exploit the correlation among the variables and
the IGAE, estimate a dynamic factor by using the 2SM approach, training a linear regression
with ARMA errors to select the better models and generate current nowcasts.
We highlight the following key results. We can see that our approach is highly competitive
considering other models as naive regressions or traditional DFM, our procedure frequently
captures the observed value, both, in data test and in real time, obtaining absolute errors
between 0.2% and 1.4% during the COVID-19 period. Another contribution of this paper
lies in a statistical point of view, given that we compute the confidence interval of the factor
loadings and the factor estimates, verifying the significance of the factor on each variable and
the uncertainty attributed to the factor estimates. Additionally, we consider some econometric
issues to guarantee the consistency of estimates like stationarity in idiosyncratic noises and
uncorrelated errors in nowcasting models. Additionally, it is of interest to denote in-sample
performance whether the nowcast error increases when using monthly versus quarterly data.
Future research topics emerged when doing this research. One is the implementation of an

24

algorithm to allow to estimate nonstationary common factors and making the selection to the
number of factors flexible, such as the one developed in Corona et al. (2020), to minimize a
measure of nowcasting errors. Another interesting research line is to incorporate machine learning techniques to automatically select the possible relevant topics from Google Trends. Also, it
would be interesting to incorporate IPI information as restrictions to the nowcasts, by exploring some techniques to incorporate nowcasts restrictions when official countable information is
available. Finally, for future research in this area, its worth to deep into the effects of monthly
timely estimate variables versus quarterly time series in nowcasting models, this can be achieved
by Monte Carlo analysis with different data generating process which can occur in practice to
compare the increase in the error estimation when distinct frequencies of time series are used.

Acknowledgements
The authors thankfully acknowledge the comments and suggestions carried out by the authorities
of INEGI Julio Santaella, Sergio Carrera and Gerardo Leyva. The seminars and meetings
organized by them were very useful to improve this research. To Elio Villasenõr who provided
the Twitter social mobility index and Manuel Lecuanda by the discussion about the Google
Trend topics to be considered. Partial financial support from CONACYT CB-2015-25996 is
gratefully acknowledged by Francisco Corona and Graciela González-Farı́as.

References
Alberro, J. (2020). La pandemia que perjudica a casi todos, pero no por igual/The pandemic
that harms almost everyone, but not equally. Economı́aUNAM, 17(51):59–73.
Ali, U., Herbst, C. M., and Makridis, C. (2020). The impact of COVID-19 on the US child care
market: Evidence from stay-at-home orders. Technical report, Available at SSRN 3600532.
Aprigliano, V. and Bencivelli, L. (2013). Ita-coin: a new coincident indicator for the Italian
economy. Banca D’Italia. Working papers, 935.
Bai, J. (2003). Inferential theory for factor models of large dimensions. Econometrica, 71(1):135–
171.
Bai, J. (2004). Estimating cross-section common stochastic trends in nonstationary panel data.
Journal of Econometrics, 122(1):137–183.
Bai, J. and Ng, S. (2004). A PANIC attack on unit roots and cointegration. Econometrica,
72(4):1127–1177.
Bai, J. and Ng, S. (2008). Large dimensional factor analysis. Foundations and Trends in
Econometrics, 3(2):89–163.
Bai, J. and Ng, S. (2013). Principal components estimation and identification of static factors.
Journal of Econometrics, 176(1):18–29.

25

Bai, J. and Wang, P. (2016). Econometric analysis of large factor models. Annual Review of
Economics, 8:53–80.
Barigozzi, M., Lippi, M., and Luciani, M. (2016). Non-Stationary Dynamic Factor Models for
Large Datasets. Finance and Economics Discussion Series Divisions of Research & Statistics
and Monetary Affairs Federal Reserve Board, Washington, D.C., 024.
Barigozzi, M., Lippi, M., and Luciani, M. (2017). Dynamic factor models, cointegration, and
error correction mechanisms. Working Paper.
Boivin, J. and Ng, S. (2006). Are more data always better for factor analysis?

Journal of

Econometrics, 132(1):169–194.
Breitung, J. and Choi, I. (2013). Factor models, in Hashimzade, N. and Thorthon, M.A. (eds.).
Handbook of Research Methods and Applications in Empirical Macroeconomics, United Kingdom: Edward Elgar Publishing.
Breitung, J. and Eickmeier, S. (2006). Dynamic factor models, in Hübler, O. and J. Frohn
(eds.). Modern Econometric Analysis, Berlin: Springer.
Buono, D., Kapetanios, G., Marcellino, M., Mazzi, G., and Papailias, F. (2018). Big data
econometrics: Now casting and early estimates. Technical report, BAFFI CAREFIN, Centre
for Applied Research on International Markets, Banking, Finance and Regulation, Universitá
Bocconi, Milano, Italy.
Campos-Vazquez, R. M., Esquivel, G., and Badillo, R. Y. (2020). How Has Labor Demand Been
Affected by the COVID-19 Pandemic? Evidence from Job Ads in Mexico. Covid Economics,
CEPR, 1(46):94–122.
Caperna, G., Colagrossi, M., Geraci, A., and Mazzarella, G. (2020). Googling unemployment
during the pandemic: Inference and nowcast using search data. Technical report, Available
at SSRN 3627754.
Caruso, A. (2018). Nowcasting with the help of foreign indicators: The case of Mexico. Economic
Modelling, 69(C):160–168.
Choi, I. (2017). Efficient estimation of nonstationary factor models. Journal of Statistical
Planning and Inference, 183:18–43.
Corona, F., González-Farı́as, G., and Orraca, P. (2017a). A dynamic factor model for the
Mexican economy: are common trends useful when predicting economic activity?

Latin

American Economic Review, 27(1).
Corona, F., Poncela, P., and Ruiz, E. (2017b). Determining the number of factors after stationary
univariate transformations. Empirical Economics, 53(1):351–372.
Corona, F., Poncela, P., and Ruiz, E. (2020). Estimating Non-stationary Common Factors:
Implications for Risk Sharing. Computational Economics, 55(1):37–60.

26

de Valk, S., de Mattos, D., and Ferreira, P. (2019). Nowcasting: An R Package for Predicting
Economic Variables Using Dynamic Factor Models. The R Journal, 11(1).
Diebold, F. X. and Mariano, R. (1995). Comparing predictive accuracy. Journal of Business
and Economic Statistics, 13:253–263.
Doz, C., Giannone, D., and Reichlin, L. (2011). A two-step estimator for large approximate
dynamic factor models based on Kalman filtering. Journal of Econometrics, 164(1):188–205.
Doz, C., Giannone, D., and Reichlin, L. (2012). A quasi maximum likelihood approach for large,
approximate dynamic factor models. The Review of Economics and Statistics, 94(4):1014–
1024.
Fernández, C. L. (2020). La pandemia del Covid-19: los sistemas y la seguridad alimentaria en América Latina/Covid-19 pandemic: systems and food security in Latin America.
economı́aUNAM, 17(51):168–179.
Gálvez-Soriano, O. (2020). Nowcasting Mexico’s quarterly GDP using factor models and bridge
equations. Estudios Económicos, 70(35):213–265.
Geweke, J. (1977). The dynamic factor analysis of economic time series, in Aigner, D.J. and
Goldberger, A.S. (eds.). Latent Variables in Socio-Economic Models, Amsterdam: NorthHolland:365–382.
Giannone, D., Reichlin, L., and Small, D. (2008). Nowcasting: The real-time informational
content of macroeconomic data. Journal of Montery Economics, 55:665–676.
Goldsmith-Pinkham, P. and Sojourner, A. (2020). Predicting Initial Unemployment Insurance
Claims Using Google Trends. Technical report, Working Paper (preprint), Posted April 3.
https://paulgp.github.io/GoogleTrendsUINowcast/google_trends_UI.html.
Guerrero, V. M., Garcı́a, A. C., and Sainz, E. (2013). Rapid Estimates of Mexico’s Quarterly
GDP. Journal of Official Statistics, 29(3):397–423.
Harvey, A. and Phillips, G. (1979). Maximum Likelihood Estimation of Regression Models With
Autoregressive-Moving Averages Disturbances. Biometrika, 152:49–58.
Kershenobich, D. (2020). Fortalezas, deficiencias y respuestas del sistema nacional de salud
frente a la Pandemia del Covid-19/Strengths, weaknesses and responses of the national health
system to the Covid-19 Pandemic. Economı́aUNAM, 17(51):53–58.
Kuiper, M. and Pijpers, F. (2020). Nowcasting GDP growth rate: a potential substitute for the
current flash estimate. Technical report, Statistics Netherlands: Discussion Paper.
Lenza, M. and Primiceri, G. E. (2020). How to Estimate a VAR after March 2020. Technical
report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Lustig, N., Pabon, V. M., Sanz, F., Younger, S. D., et al. (2020). The Impact of COVID-19

27

Lockdowns and Expanded Social Assistance on Inequality, Poverty and Mobility in Argentina,
Brazil, Colombia and Mexico. Covid Economics, CEPR, 1(46):32–67.
Meza, F. (2020). Forecasting the impact of the COVID-19 shock on the Mexican economy. Covid
Economics, CEPR, 1(48):210–225.
Moreno-Brid, J. C. (2020). Pandemia, polı́tica pública y panorama de la economı́a mexicana en 2020/Pandemic, public policy and the outlook for the Mexican economy in 2020.
Economı́aUNAM, 17(51):335–348.
Onatski, A. (2010). Determining the number of factors from empirical distribution of eigenvalues.
The Review of Economics and Statistics, 92(4):1004–1016.
Poncela, P. and Ruiz, E. (2016). Small versus big data factor extraction in Dynamic Factor
Models: An empirical assessment in dynamic factor models, in Hillebrand, E. and Koopman,
S.J. (eds.). Advances in Econometrics, 35:401–434.
Samaniego, N. (2020). El Covid-19 y el desplome del empleo en México/The Covid-19 and the
Collapse of Employment in Mexico. Economı́aUNAM, 17(51):306–314.
Sánchez, E. C. (2020).

México en la pandemia:

vs economı́a/Mexico in the pandemic:

atrapado en la disyuntiva salud

caught in the disjunctive health vs economy.

Economı́aUNAM, 17(51):282–295.
Sargent, T. J. and Sims, C. A. (1977). Business cycle modeling without pretending to have too
much a priory economic theory, in Sims, C.A. (ed.). New Methods in Business Cycle Research,
Minneapolis: Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.
Stephens-Davidowitz, S. and Varian, H. (2014). A hands-on guide to Google data. Technical
report, Google Inc.
Stock, J. H. and Watson, M. W. (2011). Dynamic factor models, in Clements, M.P and Hendry,
D.F. (eds.). Oxford Handbook of Economic Forecasting, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Tibshirani, R. (1996). Regression shrinkage and Selection via the Lasso. Journal of the Royal
Statistical Society. Series B (Methodological), 58(1):267–288.
Vanegas, L. L. (2020). Los desafı́os del sistema de salud en México/The health system challenges
in Mexico. Economı́aUNAM, 17(51):16–27.
Varian, H. R. (2014). Big data: New tricks for econometrics. Journal of Economic Perspectives,
28(2):3–28.

28

Annexes
Annex 1: Database
Short
ANTAD
AUTO
CONF COM
CONF CONS
CONF MANU
CONF SERV
GAS
HOTEL
IMO
IMSS
IPI
IPI USA
IRGS
L MANUF
M
M4
REM
U
X
Short
E
IR 28
MSM
SP 500
Short
AH1N1
AMLO
Ayotzinapa
Calderón
Cártel
Casa Blanca
Chapo
China
Coronavirus
Corrupción
Crisis económica
Crisis sanitaria
Cuarentena
Cubrebocas
Desempleo
Dólar
Elecciones
EPN
Gasolina
Homicidios
Huachicol
Inflación
Inseguridad
Mascarilla N95
Medidas económicas
Migración
Migrantes
MOBILITY
Morena
Muertos
Muro
Pacto
PAN
Pandemia
PEMEX
Peso
Petróleo
PRI
Recesión
Reformas
Salario
Sismo
Tipo de cambio
Trump
Violencia

Traditional and timely information
Variable
Source
Total sales of departmental stores
ANTAD
Automobiles production
INEGI
Right time to invest (Commerce)
INEGI
Right time to invest (Construction)
INEGI
Right time to invest (Manufacturing)
INEGI
Right time to invest (Services)
INEGI
Fuel demand
SENER
Hotel occupancy
Tourism secretariat
Index of manufacturing orders
INEGI
Permanent and eventual insureds of the Social Security
IMSS
Industrial Production Index
INEGI
Industrial Production Index (USA)
BEA
Income of retail goods and services
INEGI
Trend of labor in manufacturing
INEGI
Total imports
INEGI
Monetary aggregate M4
Banxico
Total remittances
Banxico
Unemployment rate
INEGI
Total exports
INEGI
High frequency traditional variables
Variable
Source
Nominal exchange rate
Banxico
Interest rate (28 days)
Banxico
Mexican stock market index
Banxico
Standard & Poor’s 500
Yahoo! finance
High frequency nontraditional variables
Variable
Source
AH1N1 online search index
Google
AMLO online search index
Google
Ayotzinapa online search index
Google
Calderón online search index
Google
Cártel online search index
Google
Casa Blanca online search index
Google
Chapo online search index
Google
China online search index
Google
Coronavirus online search index
Google
Corrupción online search index
Google
Crisis económica online search index
Google
Crisis sanitaria online search index
Google
Cuarentena online search index
Google
Cubrebocas online search index
Google
Desempleo online search index
Google
Dólar online search index
Google
Elecciones online search index
Google
EPN online search index
Google
Gasolina online search index
Google
Homicidios online search index
Google
Huachicol online search index
Google
Inflación online search index
Google
Inseguridad online search index
Google
Mascarilla N95 online search index
Google
Medidas económicas online search index
Google
Migración online search index
Google
Migrantes online search index
Google
Media mobility index
Twitter
Morena online search index
Google
Muertos online search index
Google
Muro online search index
Google
Pacto online search index
Google
PAN online search index
Google
Pandemia online search index
Google
PEMEX online search index
Google
Peso online search index
Google
Petróleo online search index
Google
PRI online search index
Google
Recesión online search index
Google
Reformas online search index
Google
Salario online search index
Google
Sismo online search index
Google
Tipo de cambio online search index
Google
Trump online search index
Google
Violencia online search index
Google

29

Time Span
2004/01-2020/06
2004/01-2020/07
2011/06-2020/07
2011/06-2020/07
2004/01-2020/07
2017/01-2020/07
2004/01-2020/07
2004/01-2020/06
2004/01-2020/07
2004/01-2020/07
2004/01-2020/06
2004/01-2020/07
2008/01-2020/05
2007/01-2020/05
2004/01-2020/06
2004/01-2020/06
2004/01-2020/06
2005/01-2020/06
2004/01-2020/06
Time Span
2004/01-2020/07
2004/01-2020/07
2004/01-2020/07
2004/01-2020/07
Time Span
2004/01-2020/07
2004/01-2020/07
2004/01-2020/07
2004/01-2020/07
2004/01-2020/07
2004/01-2020/07
2004/01-2020/07
2004/01-2020/07
2004/01-2020/07
2004/01-2020/07
2004/01-2020/07
2004/01-2020/07
2004/01-2020/07
2004/01-2020/07
2004/01-2020/07
2004/01-2020/07
2004/01-2020/07
2004/01-2020/07
2004/01-2020/07
2004/01-2020/07
2004/01-2020/07
2004/01-2020/07
2004/01-2020/07
2004/01-2020/07
2004/01-2020/07
2004/01-2020/07
2004/01-2020/07
2004/01-2020/07
2004/01-2020/07
2004/01-2020/07
2004/01-2020/07
2004/01-2020/07
2004/01-2020/07
2004/01-2020/07
2004/01-2020/07
2004/01-2020/07
2004/01-2020/07
2004/01-2020/07
2004/01-2020/07
2004/01-2020/07
2004/01-2020/07
2004/01-2020/07
2004/01-2020/07
2004/01-2020/07
2004/01-2020/07

