Current and Emergent Economic Impacts of
Covid-19 and Brexit on UK Fresh Produce and
Horticultural Businesses
Lilian Korir1 , Archie Drake1 , Martin Collison2 , Tania Carolina
Camacho-Villa1 , Elizabeth Sklar1,* , and Simon Pearson1

arXiv:2101.11551v1 [econ.GN] 27 Jan 2021

1

Lincoln Institute for Agri-food Technology (LIAT), College of Science, University of
Lincoln, UK, {lkorir,esklar,spearson}@lincoln.ac.uk
2
Collison & Associates Limited

Abstract. This paper describes a study designed to investigate the current and emergent impacts of Covid-19 and Brexit on UK horticultural
businesses. Various characteristics of UK horticultural production, notably labour reliance and import dependence, make it an important sector for policymakers concerned to understand the effects of these disruptive events as we move from 2020 into 2021. The study design prioritised
timeliness, using a rapid survey to gather information from a relatively
small (n = 19) but indicative group of producers. The main novelty of
the results is to suggest that a very substantial majority of producers
either plan to scale back production in 2021 (47%) or have been unable to make plans for 2021 because of uncertainty (37%). The results
also add to broader evidence that the sector has experienced profound
labour supply challenges, with implications for labour cost and quality.
The study discusses the implications of these insights from producers in
terms of productivity and automation, as well as in terms of broader
economic implications. Although automation is generally recognised as
the long-term future for the industry (89%), it appeared in the study as
the second most referred short-term option (32%) only after changes to
labour schemes and policies (58%). Currently, automation plays a limited role in contributing to the UK’s horticultural workforce shortage due
to economic and socio-political uncertainties. The conclusion highlights
policy recommendations and future investigative intentions, as well as
suggesting methodological and other discussion points for the research
community.

1

Introduction

UK horticultural production is experiencing significant changes as political and
economic conditions shift. Whilst Covid-19 impacts dominated 2020 [Mitchell
et al., 2020], the closing months of the year have seen questions about Brexitrelated issues around labour supply, trade and competitiveness return to the
foreground. The sector is noted for its dependence on seasonal migrant labour,

2

Korir, et al.

not only in the UK but globally. Furthermore, UK fresh food supplies generally have a high dependence on imports which peaks in the winter and early
spring [Grimwood and McGuinness, 2017, Defra, 2019].
The Current and Emergent Economic Impacts of Covid-19 and Brexit on UK
Fresh Produce and Horticultural Businesses, especially soft fruit production, is
the main reason for agriculture needing to find about 64,000 seasonal workers
each year (by DEFRA’s estimate) [ONS, 2018]. Employment is growers’ single
most important cost, and Covid-19 restrictions have increased that cost significantly [Pelham, 2020]. Meanwhile, changes in the immigration regime as part of
Brexit are disrupting the supply of EU workers on whose skills and experience
many producers have come to rely.
Accordingly, seasonal labour supply has become the main focus of policy in
this sector, reflected in evidence to the Environment, Food and Rural Affairs
Committee (EFRA’s) inquiry into labour in the food supply chain [UK Parliament: Environment, Food and Rural Affairs Committee, 2020a].
In its evidence to the EFRA Select Committee the government emphasised
the potential for substitution from the UK’s domestic labour supply, supported
through schemes like‘Pick for Britain’ [AHDB et al., 2021]. Industry experience
through 2020 indicates that this is only a very partial solution though, and in
parallel with the publication of the EFRA Select Committee report, the government announced that the Seasonal Agricultural Workers Scheme (SAWS) for
2021 would be increased to 30,000 places compared to 10,000 in 2020 [Defra,
2020e]. However, this is only a one year scheme and there remains considerable uncertainty about how many places will be allowed under SAWS from 2022
onwards.
Furthermore, the NFU report on the Potential Implications of Covid-19 for
the Cost of Production of UK Fruits and Vegetables in 2020 [Pelham, 2020] gives
a good impression of some of the issues that farmers have reported in practice:
there are not as many suitable UK resident workers available as many imagine;
UK residents like the idea of this work but then are much less likely than migrant
workers to show up, stay for the agreed period; and, overall, UK residents are
less productive workers in these roles.
What remains unclear is whether supply chain vulnerability and the potential
for price increases could represent an opportunity for UK industry expansion.
However, the negatives impact of price rises has also been noted if healthy eating
becomes more difficult [Garnett et al., 2020, Seferidi et al., 2019]. In some circumstances labour constraints might spur innovation and consequently improved
productivity [Acemoglu, 2010].
Around the world, the highly disruptive conditions of 2020 have prompted
scientists to work more quickly; and specifically in agricultural and food systems
research to consider ‘short-term effects as well as those that may be long-lasting
or permanent’ [Kupferschmidt and Cohen, 2020, Stephens et al., 2020]. This
study was designed to provide timely evidence for UK policymakers drawn directly from UK horticultural producers’ perspectives in late November 2020. Its
principal goal was to analyse the current and emergent impacts related to Covid-

Economic Impacts of Covid-19 and Brexit on UK Horticulture

3

19 and Brexit on UK horticultural businesses, especially domestic producers of
fruit and vegetables.

2

Methodology

This study used a rapid survey instrument to gather information from UK
producers. A short questionnaire was developed, consisting principally of openended questions focused on three key themes:
1. The impact of Covid-19 and Brexit on 2020 labour availability and on businesses’ 2021 production plans;
2. Changes observed in labour productivity during 2020 and associated impacts
on market competitiveness; and
3. Market growth expectations and the means to address any growth in demand
over the short- and long-term.
The questionnaire was offered to an initial list of 21 participants comprising existing business contacts of the Lincoln Institute for Agri-Food Technology3 , and
the sample then developed using snowballing. Data collection was undertaken
between November 19th and December 1st, offering a choice of online, email or
telephone response. A final total of 19 producer responses were obtained. The
information collected was mainly qualitative and subjected to thematic analysis, with frequency description for those questions generating quantitative data.
Analysis was supported by a detailed review of secondary information from research publications, as well as policy material and social media. The method in
this study is consistent with the current global uptick in the use of rapid surveys
and appraisals [Eriksson et al., 2020, Harris et al., 2020]. These methods aim to
generate best-available information to support decisions in a timely manner, especially responding to policymakers’ interest in current evidence to help reduce
uncertainty [Shaxson, 2005].

3

Findings

The analysis of this study was prefaced with reflections on strengths and weaknesses. Total responses covered about one sixth of total domestic horticultural
production by value, over 5% of the land area used for fresh produce and horticulture, and about 15% of total UK employment of seasonal workers. In total,
there were 19 responses.
3.1

Descriptive results.

This descriptive analysis section provides an overview of the participants involved in this study. All 19 participants were UK businesses, mainly engaged in
the production of horticultural crops in the UK. The businesses reported that
they employ about 1,700 staff full time and about 9,500 seasonal workers.
3

University of Lincoln, UK, https://www.lincoln.ac.uk/home/liat/

4

Korir, et al.

Fig. 1. Employment of staff

As shown in Figure 1, the total number of seasonal workers represented by
these 19 businesses is a considerable share of the overall employment of seasonal
workers in UK agriculture: about 15% of the national total for agriculture and
24% of the total for the fruit sector only (fruit is ≈ 40k of ≈ 64k total) [ONS,
2018]. The recruitment of seasonal workers has been dominated by migrants
for several decades and participants reported using multiple channels to recruit
seasonal workers. Most use a combination of recruitment agencies (14 out of 19)
and direct recruitment (13 out of 19). Seven out of 19 specifically mentioned
using the Seasonal Agricultural Workers Scheme (SAWS). Only a few (5 out of
19) mentioned engaging UK citizens for seasonal labour, with one recruiting UK
workers nationally/online and the others more on a ‘local’ basis.
3.2

Labour availability

In this section participants’ information about current (2020) labour availability and the implications it has for the future (2021) production planning was
analysed. The main purpose was to investigate current labour challenges and
potential implications for the 2021 growing season.
3.2.1

Impact of Covid-19 and/or Brexit during 2020 on the availability of labour

Impacts of Covid-19 and/or Brexit during 2020 were mainly related to labour
shortages, particularly for those who had not anticipated the magnitude of the
challenge they would face and who had to make do with the available labourers.
This had a direct impact on output and increased the costs of production, i.e.
training cost and low productivity from workers who were not used to this kind
of farm work. The majority of participants (14 out of 19, or 74%) reported
moderate or severe labour shortages during 2020. The sector was faced with
dramatic reduction in the number of available labourers, high turnover, and a
reduction in the number of returnees. Some of the common responses were:

Economic Impacts of Covid-19 and Brexit on UK Horticulture

–
–
–
–
–

5

‘We only received half of our returnee numbers in the spring. . .’
‘Reduced dramatically’
‘Significant shortages’
‘Higher turnover’
‘we tried to employ British staff this season and for us it did not work due
to poor production and work ethic.’

While labour shortages and associated factors were observed by a majority
of the businesses, 5 out of 19 participants reported that their labour was less
affected by the impact of Covid-19 and Brexit because of the existing labour
plans the business had in place. In general, Covid-19 impacts were clearer in
the responses than Brexit-related ones, with a more severe impact apparent
for participants needing or securing labour later in the year. Reported impacts
largely included travel disruptions and general worker incentives. For example:
– ‘Both of these events have created a large amount of uncertainty and fear
amongst workers from abroad which has reduced the amount of people available and also increased unplanned/early departures from the farm leaving us
short staffed.’
Brexit-related impacts were mainly discussed as emergent, contributing to
wider 2020 labour availability issues dominated by Covid-19 impacts. However,
it was apparent from responses that some participants had already undertaken
substantial preparatory work for the end of the Brexit Transition period.
Two participants cited efforts in 2020 to maximise EU worker settlement
in the UK to mitigate impacts. However, others mentioned concerns that they
have been unable to exploit the settlement scheme in this way because workers
have not signed up for the required status or because the exchange rate is not
attractive to overseas workers. Although the question was explicitly limited to
2020, Brexit tended to be treated as a prospective impact in participants’ responses. However, it should be noted that the survey was conducted before the
UK and EU Deal was negotiated, when there was considerable uncertainty as to
whether a deal would be concluded and, even if it was, what it would contain.
Many responses regarded the potential longer term impacts from Brexit as more
significant than those felt in 2020 due to Covid-19. For example:
– ‘Very significant concerns about labour availability for 2021.’
– ‘For 2021 Brexit will be major problem in absence of SAWS scheme.’
3.2.2

Impact of labour challenges on 2021 production plans and
growing season

A clear majority of the respondents (14 out of 19, or 74%) predicted that the
labour challenges experienced in the industry will have an impact on their 2021
production plans, while the remaining 26%, were still unsure if labour supply
issues would have any impact on their production plans. Particularly interesting
was that some businesses said that plans had not been affected because ‘we do
not know how to change’ as opposed to any lack of need to change.

6

Korir, et al.

The dominant impact on production plans in 2021 was reported to be scaling back production. Other cited actions were: increasing efforts to secure new
sources of workforce; accelerating automation; and, over a third were adopting a
wait and see approach (or had no plans to change). In terms of scaling back production, most responses indicated that absolute production levels are expected
to fall in 2021.
Table 1. Impact on 2021 plans
Response Scale back Increase labour Accelerate Unknown / wait and see
production related efforts automation (or no plans to change
– see text)
# (%)
9 (47%)
4 (21%)
2 (11%)
7 (37%)

As indicated in Table 1, three of the participants included in the ‘unknown
/ wait and see’ category simply reported no plans to change and provided no
further information; and a further participant’s responses simply indicated general uncertainty without providing much further detail. Responses showed that
businesses felt that greater automation and reduced labour reliance would be the
right direction for longer term production plans, but many felt that this policy
is currently impossible to deliver as a result:
– ‘[We need to] reduce [our] need [for] staff by [using] more machines. . . [but
there is] no security from customers to make those investments.’
Sensitivity to the need to appeal to local British labour pools and to draw on
them in competitive ways (including through increased automation) was also
apparent:
– ‘[local] pool of people so we want to be most attractive (pay and conditions)
for available labour’
– ‘in heavy competition with Amazon, losing staff to them and so had to put
[wage] rates up’.
Responses which focused on plans to increase labour supply included reflections
on the need for government pilot schemes to continue, to use labour supply
agencies or to adopt new strategies to recruit staff. They also reflected on the
need for managerial challenges associated to language skills, work ethics and
Covid-19 social distancing requirements. Only 2 participants gave answers which
mentioned automation as a key action for 2021.
3.3

Productivity in the workforce

In this section, participants responded about workforce productivity trends and
the wider impacts of productivity i.e. on costs or quality of work (e.g. due to less

Economic Impacts of Covid-19 and Brexit on UK Horticulture

7

skilled workers). 74% of participants (14 of the businesses) had seen changes in
the productivity of their workforce in the 2020 growing season, while 26% (5)
had not seen any changes.
Of the fourteen respondents who had seen changes in productivity: two participants answered exclusively in terms of decreased worker quality and efficiency;
two answered exclusively in terms of increased costs – one estimated the increase
of 8% and the other claiming a year-on-year labour cost increase of about 20%;
with ten participants observing both changes in terms of quality and cost. For
example:
– ‘Our inability to access enough skilled workers and having to “make do” with
a proportion of lower/no experience level people. . . has reduced the productivity of the farm by increasing costs both directly (the worker is less productive)
and indirectly (the worker requires much more supervision and training) as
we strive to maintain our standards.’
– ‘[In] quarantine teams [it is] difficult to drive productivity. People movement
costs up significantly. Costs up. Quality of work down.’
Participants explained quality and efficiency challenges in different terms, for
example social-distancing regulations have had a differential impact on field and
packing work while the most pronounced trend was towards reports of lower
availability of experienced workers and reduced work ethic:
– ‘Of the less experienced workers: productivity is 40% lower than experienced
workers’
– ‘Ongoing drop in motivation.’
– ‘The drive is less noticeable.’
– ‘The main [bulk] of pickers has been less productive and keen to go for the
piece work rates that [enable] them to earn more than basic hourly rate, when
picking.’
Whilst some responses attributed these observations to the increasing employment of UK nationals, others clearly concerned changes in the profile of non-UK
workers:
– ‘Employment of UK nationals was problematic. Training costs, make up pay
and raised piece work rates.’
– ‘Getting people to take on more responsible tasks is proving problematical due
to various reasons, which include, lack of language, understanding, length of
time here, i.e. is it worth spending on training courses for staff that may not
be back next season.’
One participant also reported that an increase in worker average age has been
relevant to fitness. Another participant estimated productivity falls of 10-20%
depending on type of work. Eleven of the participants reported that changes
in productivity impacted overall competitiveness in the marketplace while four
responded no impact, and one participant responded that they did not know. Six
participants reported an impact on their profitability, one in terms of reduced
margins, two in terms of the elimination of profit and three in terms of outright
loss. Another response cited an impact on investment and growth:

8

Korir, et al.

– ‘Quite simply our increased cost of production has reduced/eliminated any
net profit that the business relies upon to reinvest and grow’
Three participants mentioned lack of higher prices as a factor in this context,
one reporting some success in forming a cooperative preventing undercutting by
other producers but the others simply stating:
– ‘Higher prices are hard to achieve.’
– ‘our customers, don’t want to put prices up, as result of covid’
3.4

Growth Potential of the sector

In this section participants responded about their expectations on the future
demand for UK production of their crops and options to meet this demand in
relation to the anticipated workload in the short (2021) and longer term (2022
onwards).
3.4.1

Expectations of future demand for UK crops

A substantial majority of participants expected that demand will increase. Fifteen participants expected an increase, while three responded Don’t know and
none expected a decrease. In terms of participants expectation to changes in demand, both in the short (2021) or the longer term. Participants expected three
aspects of demand to change: (i) quantification of the change, (ii) direct causes
of the change, and (iii) interaction between demand and production. Some participants used only one aspect, but others include all three.
The quantification of the change: participants justified their expectation on
the increase of demand based on their 2020 experience when demand was boosted
by 2-3% on vegetables, 20% on fruits and 40% on flowers. Based on these results,
they were expecting that future demand will increase by 3% in fruits and 30%
on flowers. This is in line with news reports on the increase in demand for fruit
in supermarkets/retailers [BBC, 2020] and, on flowers on-line [May, 2020] during
the stay-at-home order.
Direct causes of the change - participants reported three reasons for the
increase in the demand for domestic production: Changes towards a healthier
diet and lifestyle during and because of the pandemic was the main cause referred
to by seven fruit producers. Three participants, all from the flower sector, also
cited limited EU imports due to Brexit/Covid-19 restrictions and high exchange
rates as drivers of increased demand. Two producers commented on cooking at
home as a factor that increased the demand for fruit and root vegetables. Finally,
one participant considered that their customers’ strategy to reduce risks in the
supply chain made them adopt procurement policies which are more reliant on
domestic production.
Respondents also highlighted that increased year round demand was also
encouraging changes in production systems; like extending the growing season
by using tunnels in soft fruits production and thus reducing imported volumes.

Economic Impacts of Covid-19 and Brexit on UK Horticulture

9

This complex interaction between multiple sources of supply and demand
was also important to describe the influence of supermarkets in affecting production by offering imported fruits during the British fresh fruit season. Three
participants from the fruit and one from the vegetable sector used this type of
interaction in the supply chain to explain that although they expect an increase
in demand for UK production, they will not expand their production because
of a lack of clarity about labour availability and the future of a seasonal labour
permit scheme.
For companies who adopt this position, their strategy to tackle the problem
of labour shortage is by maintaining or reducing the cultivated area, rather
than expanding, and/or by switching to less labour-intensive crops. Participants,
especially the ones who responded that they do not know what changes will
occur in future UK demand for their crops, cited general economic recession or
the negative impact of higher production costs (implicitly felt to imply higher
consumer prices) as key factors in determining their position.
3.4.2

Short, medium and long term solutions to meet the expected
increase in workload

In the short term (i.e. 2021), participants selected the main options they would
adopt to meet increased demand from amongst the following options: Changes in
labour schemes and policies; Automation; Changes in crop/farm management;
and Clients’ (ie retailers’) commitment. Some respondents contemplated using
several options together and others focused only on one. The results are summarised in Table 2.
Changes in labour schemes and policies were the most cited short-term option (58%). Comments on how to address this topic included: Six participants
referred to the need to have clarity in policies ‘that allows the 70,000 seasonal
workers to travel into and out of the UK’ and asked for a Seasonal Agricultural
Workers Scheme (SAWS) enabling the continued recruitment of EU and non-EU
seasonal workers. New labour schemes with more stable access to reliable and
skilled labour by recruiting more local workers and transitioning from seasonal
to permanent jobs were discussed by four participants. Even with the popularity
of this solution, two participants from the fruit sector expressed their concerns
about recruiting local workers due to their lower productivity and poorer performance in comparison to migrant seasonal workers.
Automation appeared as the second most preferred short-term option for
meeting increased short-term workloads, selected by 32% of respondents. Further comments included the following: one participant referred to ‘existing automation or new technologies that are sufficiently developed now i.e. autonomous
vehicles to fetch and carry, thus reducing the fatigue on workers’. Another described the gradual transition to mechanisation depends on farmers’ investment
potential as technology becomes cost-effective and decreases the labour requirement. For another interviewee automation is the only option as he does not see
‘staff as an option’. Similar to labour supply actions, three respondents considered that automation was not an option because:

10

Korir, et al.

– ‘Solutions are not available or unaffordable [for the flower sector].’
– ‘High specifications [on soft fruit tasks that] can only be obtained by manual
picking.’
– ‘Our [vegetable] sector will take a long time to embrace technology and drive
labour requirements down.’
Despite concerns about the ability to adopt automation solutions in the
short term (i.e. 2021) and a focus instead on labour market solutions, in the
medium to long term (i.e. 2022 onwards), participants considered that these
strategies needed to be swapped. Virtually all participants saw automation as a
key medium to long term solution to increased workload, selected by 17 out of
19 (89%), whereas only 3 out of 19 (16%) thought that labour market solutions
were still a main option in the longer term. Results are tallied in Table 2.
Table 2. Summary of responses: short vs. medium and long term options for industry
to meet increased demand.
Options

Short term (2021) Medium to Long term
(2022 onwards)
Automation
6 (32%)
17 (89%)
Farm/crop management
4 (21%)
1 (5%)
Labour supply schemes
11 (58%)
3 (16%)
Clients’ commitment
1 (5%)
2 (11%)

Automation was the dominant response for long term options to meet the
workload demand. Six of the seventeen participants who responded that automation was a major option did not elaborate their answers, but answers from the
rest of the respondents focused on different aspects of automation and its relationship with labour. Six of them gave details on the production processes, tasks
and methods that can be automated. Another five interviewees highlighted how
automation will become the solution for the labour shortage, reduce the reliance
on seasonal workers, respond to the scarcity of skilled and capable workers and,
decrease labour costs. Furthermore, two interviewees argued that automation
will need to be aligned with changes in labour schemes such as upskilling current
workers and ensuring the supply of staff who can operate the equipment effectively. Three participants discussed how important it is that technology becomes
‘more cost-effective’ to reduce input costs (fertiliser, chemicals, and labour) and
to contribute to environmental Key Performance Indicators (KPIs). Two also
highlighted the need for a commitment from retailers to establish longer-term
working and more collaborative relations with suppliers to give certainty and
support investment, as profit margins are too small to make big investments
unless they have a secure long term market. One respondent emphasised the
role of crop/farm management changes by ‘focusing more on cut flower types
with lower labour requirement’. Two participants did not suggest automation as
a long-term option for labour shortage: one did not elaborate on their reasons;

Economic Impacts of Covid-19 and Brexit on UK Horticulture

11

one focused on labour saying ‘We would be given a license to recruit our own
workers’.

3.4.3

Potential of automation as a solution for workload demand

Participants’ responses concerning the types of jobs to automate referred both
to the generic type of job function (e.g. handling) and/or the crop management practices/tasks these were applied to (e.g. weeding, harvesting etc). Crop
tasks were the most referred to followed by joint explanations using type of job
function and crop tasks. Nine participants reported types of job functions like
repetition, transportation, simplification of tasks, and their contribution to improving efficiency and process flow as being important drivers for automation.
Transportation was the most cited (6) with phrases like:
–
–
–
–

‘autonomous transport’,
‘movement of trays/pallets, etc.’,
‘fruit movement from picker to end of field’, and
‘moving fruit from field to coldstore’.

All but 3 respondents talked about both pre- and post-harvest practices
such as: planting, crop protection (plant cleaning/weeding), husbandry, pruning,
picking-harvesting, processing and, packing and packhouse as important areas
for automation, showing that there is demand for automation at every stage of
the production cycle. They also cited fruit retrieval, crop scouting and flower
grading. The most cited crop tasks were:
– Picking-harvesting cited by eleven participants;
– Packing and packhouse cited by six respondents;
– Crop protection (plant cleaning and weeding) cited by four interviewees.
Participants tended to include in their responses two or more crop tasks. The
study received complementary responses associated with the use of data science
and machine learning for yield prediction and labour recording. Some participants consider that other factors will be key considerations in the automation
journey, including:
– Growers and worker capacity development;
– Technology multitask attributes; and
– Crop prioritisation.
The Integration of technology attributes and crop prioritisation were concerns
expressed by farmers with particular crops like cut flowers or root vegetables.
There were some participants who expressed a clear integrated, or systems based,
approach to how robots and autonomous systems can offer improved decision
making across a range of crop tasks.

12

4

Korir, et al.

Discussion and Conclusion

The overall indication from this rapid survey is that British horticultural output
is at risk of falling substantially in 2021 unless solutions to labour supply challenges can be found. The industry welcomed the December 2020 announcement
by government that the SAWS programme would be expanded to 30,000 workers
in 2021. However, there are concerns that even this limit will fail to meet labour
demand, there are concerns that flower production has been excluded from the
2021 scheme and considerable uncertainty about what the plans are for SAWS
from 2022.
The study concludes that production in the fresh produce and horticulture
sector is currently profoundly affected by a combination of Covid-19 and Brexitrelated impacts. For producers the short-term uncertainty surrounding these
impacts appears to outweigh the longer-term expectation that demand will grow,
which is leading to a reluctance to invest and decisions being taken to reduce
production in the short term to reduce risk.
The primary novel result from this study is an indication that UK horticultural production may contract in 2021 to a far greater degree than expected.
Nearly half (47%) of respondents reported plans to scale back production in
2021 due to labour availability challenges. A further third (37%) reported that
it is too early to decide given the uncertainties they face. More than two-thirds
(69%) reported negative competitiveness impacts due to changes in labour supply. Other results tended to conform with observations from secondary sources,
indicating that this sector is experiencing; severe problems with labour availability; and a combination of associated labour cost and quality issues [Bradley and
Hill, 2017, Duong et al., 2020].
Overall, the results of this study suggest that chronic short-term uncertainty
is preventing UK horticultural producers from exploiting Covid-19 (e.g. the demand for healthier food) and Brexit (e.g. potential increases in the demand for
UK products) impacts as opportunities. They appear to be unable to plan or to
justify investment due to labour supply constraints in the context of persistent
supply chain precariousness, despite confidence about general demand growth in
the sector and the potential of automation as the means to address that growth
over the longer term.
Our discussion focuses on sectoral productivity through automation, grounding the challenge of global competitiveness in more localised labour issues. These
results suggest a sector obliged to compete over a lower-quality and higher-cost
labour supply. Rather than one that is supported to innovate in ways that reduces reliance on labour, develops better-quality jobs and delivers on the global
objective of making supply chains more resilient to future disruptions [Aday and
Aday, 2020, Henry, 2020].
A contraction in the scale of UK fresh produce would also restrict the domestic supply of products, which can deliver environmental benefits (UK production
is typically lower carbon and lower water use) and address public health needs
for dietary change. UK consumer preferences are also increasingly focusing on
the UK local and regional supplies. However, if productivity goes down, imports

Economic Impacts of Covid-19 and Brexit on UK Horticulture

13

will go up (along with GHG cost) and food prices (whether UK produced or
imported); a regressive tax on society, especially low-income individuals, and
moves them from eating healthy food (“fresh produce”). The exact opposite of
all UK government policy on many fronts and counter argument to Dimbleby’s
Part one of the National Food Strategy [Dimbleby, 2020], particularly the need
to address public health needs for dietary change.
Closing observations focus on the policy recommendations suggested by this
study. It is clear that growers favour a policy which combines short term labour
supply commitments with the acceleration of medium and long term investments
in automation, aligned with UK Agri-Tech Strategy [Defra et al., 2013] and the
Industrial Strategy. A proactive automation agenda would both meet growers’
workload needs at the same time as delivering higher quality jobs which are more
attractive to UK workers.
The study also suggests additional discussion points for the research community: methodological standards for timely, policy-oriented research on the role of
short-term effects as determinants of economic outcomes are needed because of
the increased speed of response which is needed. Whilst Industry 4.0 and similar
changes in the workforce were already leading to this need, Covid-19 and Brexit
Transition have both accelerated the speed of change, across all industries, driving a need for more responsive policy making.

Acknowledgments
This study was supported by the Lincoln Agri-Robotics grant, funded by UKRI
Research England under the Expanding Excellence in England programme.

References
Acemoglu, 2010. Acemoglu, D. (2010). When Does Labor Scarcity Encourage Innovation? Journal of Political Economy, 118(6):1037–1078.
Aday and Aday, 2020. Aday, S. and Aday, M. S. (2020). Impacts of COVID-19 on
Food Supply Chain. Food Quality and Safety, August 2020. https://www.ncbi.nlm.
nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7499675/.
AHDB et al., 2021. AHDB, Association of Labour Providers, British Growers, Defra, Greater Lincolnshire LEP, and NFU (2021). Pick For Britain. https://
pickforbritain.org.uk/.
BBC, 2020. BBC (2020). Coronavirus: Fruit and veg box demand increases. BBC
News, Wales, April 2020. https://www.bbc.com/news/uk-wales-52328344.
Bingham, 2015. Bingham, J. (2015). Berry good news for strawberry lovers as
Britain set for bumper crop.
https://www.telegraph.co.uk/foodanddrink/
foodanddrinknews/11611172/Berry-good-news-for-strawberry-lovers-asBritain-set-for-bumper-crop.html. 18 May 2015.
Bradley and Hill, 2017. Bradley, D. and Hill, B. (2017). Quantitative Modelling For
Post Brexit Scenarios, Institute of Agricultural Management. https://www.iagrm.
org.uk/news/quantitative-modelling-for-post-brexit-scenarios-/.

14

Korir, et al.

Costa-Font and Revoredo-Giha, 2020. Costa-Font, M. and Revoredo-Giha, C. (2020).
Covid-19: the underlying issues affecting the UK’s food supply chains. LSE Business Review, March 2020. https://blogs.lse.ac.uk/businessreview/2020/03/25/
covid-19-the-underlying-issues-affecting-the-uks-food-supply-chains/.
Defra, 2019. Defra (2019). Results from the labour in horticulture survey 2019 for England. https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/results-from-the-labourin-horticulture-survey-2019-for-england.
Defra, 2020a. Defra (2020a). Agriculture in the United Kingdom 2019. https://www.
gov.uk/government/statistics/agriculture-in-the-united-kingdom-2019.
Defra, 2020b. Defra (2020b).
Farming statistics – land use, livestock populations and agricultural workforce as at 1 June 2019, England. https://www.
gov.uk/government/statistics/farming-statistics-land-use-livestockpopulations-and-agricultural-workforce-as-at-1-june-2019-england.
Defra, 2020c. Defra (2020c). Latest horticulture statistics. https://www.gov.uk/
government/statistics/latest-horticulture-statistics.
Defra, 2020d. Defra (2020d). National Food Strategy - Part One. https://www.
nationalfoodstrategy.org/.
Defra, 2020e. Defra (2020e).
Up to 30,000 workers to help reap 2021 harvest.
https://www.gov.uk/government/news/up-to-30000-workers-to-helpreap-2021-harvest--2.
Defra et al., 2013. Defra, BEIS, and DFID (2013).
UK agricultural technologies strategy. https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/uk-agriculturaltechnologies-strategy.
Dimbleby, 2020. Dimbleby, H. (2020). The National Food Strategy: Part One.
nationalfoodstrategy.org.
Duong et al., 2020. Duong, L., Al-Fadhli, M., Jagtap, S., Bader, F., Martindale, W.,
Swainson, M., and Paoli, A. (2020). A review of robotics and autonomous systems
in the food industry: From the supply chains perspective. Trends in Food Science &
Technology.
Eriksson et al., 2020. Eriksson, H., Ride, A., Boso, D., Sukulu, M., Batalofo, M., Siota, F., and Gomese, C. (2020).
Changes and adaptations in village food systems in Solomon Islands: A rapid appraisal during the early stages of the COVID-19 pandemic, WorldFish Publications.
https://www.worldfishcenter.org/content/changes-and-adaptationsvillage-food-systems-solomon-islands-rapid-appraisal-during-early.
Garnett et al., 2020. Garnett, P., Doherty, B., and Heron, T. (2020). Vulnerability
of the United Kingdom’s food supply chains exposed by COVID-19. Nature Food,
1(6):315–318. https://www.nature.com/articles/s43016-020-0097-7.
Grimwood and McGuinness, 2017. Grimwood, G. and McGuinness, T. (2017). Migrant workers in agriculture. https://commonslibrary.parliament.uk/researchbriefings/cbp-7987/.
Harris et al., 2020. Harris, J., Depenbusch, L., Pal, A. A., Nair, R. M., and Ramasamy,
S. (2020). Food system disruption: initial livelihood and dietary effects of COVID-19
on vegetable producers in India. Food Security, 12(4):841–851.
Henry, 2020. Henry, R. (2020). Innovations in Agriculture and Food Supply in Response to the COVID-19 Pandemic. Molecular Plant, 13(8):1095–1097.
HM Government, 2019. HM Government (2019).
Implications for business and
trade of a no deal exit on 29 March 2019. https://assets.publishing.service.
gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/781768/
Implications_for_Business_and_Trade_of_a_No_Deal_Exit_on_29_March_2019.
pdf.

Economic Impacts of Covid-19 and Brexit on UK Horticulture

15

Klerkx et al., 2012. Klerkx, L. W. A., Mierlo, B. v., and Leeuwis, C. (2012). Evolution of systems approaches to agricultural innovation: concepts, analysis and
interventions. Farming Systems Research into the 21st Century: The New Dynamic, pages 457–483. https://research.wur.nl/en/publications/evolutionof-systems-approaches-to-agricultural-innovation-concep.
Kupferschmidt and Cohen, 2020. Kupferschmidt, K. and Cohen, J. (2020). Race to
find. Covid-19 treatments accelerates. Science, 367(6485):1412–1414.
May, 2020. May, R. (2020). The SEO landscape of the UK online florists market
2020. https://connective3.com/blog/the-seo-landscape-of-the-uk-onlineflorists-market-2020/.
Mitchell et al., 2020. Mitchell, R., Maull, R., Pearson, S., Brewer, S., and Collison,
M. (2020). The impact of COVID-19 on the UK fresh food supply chain. http:
//arxiv.org/abs/2006.00279.
NHS, 2018. NHS (2018). Why 5 A Day? https://www.nhs.uk/live-well/eat-well/
why-5-a-day/.
OECD, 2021. OECD (2021). Real minimum wages. https://stats.oecd.org/Index.
aspx?DataSetCode=RMW. Retrieved 26-Jan-2021.
ONS, 2018. ONS (2018).
Labour in the agriculture industry, UK.
https:
//www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/populationandmigration/
internationalmigration/articles/labourintheagricultureindustry/2018-0206.
Pelham, 2020. Pelham, J. (2020). The Potential Implications of Covid-19 for the Costs
of Production of UK Fruit & Vegetables in 2020. Technical report.
Revoredo-Giha and Costa-Font, 2020. Revoredo-Giha, C. and Costa-Font, M. (2020).
The UK’s fresh produce supply under COVID-19 and a no-deal Brexit. LSE Business
Review, June 2020. https://blogs.lse.ac.uk/businessreview/2020/06/22/theuks-fresh-produce-supply-under-covid-19-and-a-no-deal-brexit/.
Seferidi et al., 2019. Seferidi, P., Laverty, A. A., Pearson-Stuttard, J., Bandosz, P.,
Collins, B., Guzman-Castillo, M., Capewell, S., O’Flaherty, M., and Millett, C.
(2019). Impacts of Brexit on fruit and vegetable intake and cardiovascular disease in England: a modelling study. British Medical Journal Open, 9(1):e026966.
https://bmjopen.bmj.com/content/9/1/e026966.
Shaxson, 2005. Shaxson, L. (2005). Is your evidence robust enough? Questions for
policy makers and practitioners. Evidence & Policy: A Journal of Research, Debate
and Practice, 1(1):101–112.
Stephens et al., 2020. Stephens, E., Martin, G., M, W., J, T., and V, S. (2020). Editorial: Impact of Covid-19 on agricultural and food systems worldwide and on progress
to the sustainable development goals. Agricultural Systems, 183 102873.
UK House of Lords, European Union Committee, 2018. UK House of Lords, European Union Committee (2018). Brexit: food prices and availability.
UK Parliament: Environment, Food and Rural Affairs Committee, 2020a. UK Parliament: Environment, Food and Rural Affairs Committee (2020a). Labour in the food
supply chain - Committees - UK Parliament. https://committees.parliament.uk/
work/190/labour-in-the-food-supply-chain/.
UK Parliament: Environment, Food and Rural Affairs Committee, 2020b. UK Parliament: Environment, Food and Rural Affairs Committee (2020b). Oral evidence:
COVID-19 and food supply, HC 263.

