arXiv:2101.00613v1 [q-bio.PE] 3 Jan 2021

The questionable impact of population-wide
public testing in reducing SARS-CoV-2 infection
prevalence in the Slovak Republic
Jozef Černák∗
January 5, 2021
Department of Nuclear and Sub-Nuclear Physics, Faculty of Science, Institute
of Physics, Pavol Jozef Šafárik University in Košice, Košice, Slovak Republic
Abstract
Mina and Andersen, authors of the Perspectives in Science: "COVID19 Testing: One Size Does Not Fit All" have referred to results and
adopted conclusions from recently published governmental report Pavelka
et al. “The effectiveness of population wide, rapid antigen test based
screening in reducing SARS-CoV-2 infection prevalence in Slovakia” without critical consideration, and rigorous verification. We demonstrate that
the authors refer to conclusions that are not supported by experimental
data. Further, there is a lack of objective, independent information and
studies regarding the widespread, public testing program currently in force
in the Slovak Republic. We offer an alternative explanation of observed
data as they have been provided by the Slovak Republic government to fill
this information gap. We also provide explanations and conclusions that
more accurately describe viral spread dynamics. Drawing from available
public data and our simple but rigorous analysis, we show that it is not
possible to make clear conclusions about any positive impact of the public
testing program in the Slovak Republic. In particular, it is not possible to
conclude that this testing program forces the curve down for the SARSCoV-2 virus outbreak. We think that Pavelka et al. did not consider many
fundamental phenomena in their proposed computer simulations and data
analysis - in particular: the complexity of SARS-CoV-2 virus spread. In
complex spatio-temporal dynamical systems, small spatio-temporal fluctuations can dramatically change the dynamics of virus spreading on large
scales.

INTRODUCTION:
Mina and Andresen in the paper [1] refer to mathematical models that incorporate relevant variation in viral loads and test accuracy [2]. On that basis, they
∗ jozefcernak@gmail.com

1

suggest that - with frequent, large-scale sampling of a population - detection of
herd effects was possible. The authors [1] referred to the public testing currently
in effect in the Slovak Republic [3]. Unfortunately, they have adopted research
conclusions that are not supported by appropriate mathematical models, which
require additional variables and factors. Further, the authors of the initial report [3] have not rigorously compared the results with actual measurement data
from the Slovak Republic over a longer term window, i.e. a few weeks before
and after public -wide testing (31. October - 1. November 2020). Our independent and simple analysis of WHO available global data from Slovak Republic
(S1) shows quit the opposite effect and throws into doubt the conclusions the
authors [3].
RESULTS:
We have analyzed the scaling properties [4] of daily count i(t) as well as
cumulative count I(t) of infected cases where t is time in days during the first and
second SARS-CoV-2 virus waves. Our results Figure 1 show scaling properties of
i(t) ∼ t±β , I(t) ∼ tα where α and β are scaling exponents. Double logarithmic
scales Figure 1 are much more suitable to demonstrate scaling properties and to
identify significant changes of virus spread dynamics, for example to recognize
outbreak waves as well as the dynamics of outbreak growth and decay during a
time of the wave.
A power law decay of daily count of infected cases i(t) ∼ t−β shows that a
decay of outbreak follows a slow dynamics and can take a long time depending
on both an exponent β and a number of daily infected cases N in tipping point
of daily count of infected cases i(t) (in a preparation to publish).
We have analyzed only one component of mobility Figure 2 (S2): retail
and recreation, that carries important information about the effectiveness of
public policy measures i.e. demonstrating that these measures decrease average
mobility and therefore the average number of daily personal contacts.
In Figure 1 we can identify in these neighbor countries a common tipping
point of daily count of infected cases i(t) on 1. November 2020. We compare
a temporal evolution of a retail mobility Figure 2 (A) and rescaled daily count
of infected cases Figure 2 (B) in Czech Republic and Slovak Republic). You
can see common features of retail mobility and daily count of infected cases
before the tipping point and quit different features of mobility as well as daily
count of infected cases subsequent the tipping point. Retail mobility Figure 2
(A) and daily count of infected cases Figure 2 (B) clearly demonstrate that, if
countries applied similar public policy measures to decrease mobility, that the
dynamic of virus spread has similarly decayed in both countries. After publicwide testing in the Slovak Republic (31. October-1. November 2020), mobility
dynamics Figure 2 (A) as well as rescaled daily count of infected cases Figure
2 (B) dramatically changed in the Slovak Republic. The rescaled daily count
of infected cases in Slovak Republic shows a much more higher daily count of
infected cases as when both countries shared similar public policy measures to
control low mobility.
DISCUSSION:
Our criticism is focused on the work of Pavelka et al. [3]. We think that
2

Cumulative count I(t), Daily count i(t) (-)

Czech Republic
1x10

7

1x10

6

Cumulative count
α = 17.10 (60-80 d.)
α = 13.55 (240-300 d.)
Daily count
β = -4.30 (90-120 d.)
β = 13.76 (240-300 d.)

100000

A

10000
1000
100
10
100

Cumulative count I(t), Daily count i(t) (-)

Time t (days)
Slovak Republic

100000
10000

Cumulative count
α = 6.35 (70-110 d.)
α = 14.00 (240-300 d.)
Daily count
β = 13.47 (240-300 d.)

B

1000
100
10
1
100
Time t (days)

Figure 1: Scaling properties of cumulative count I(t) ∼ tα and daily count of
infected cases i(t) ∼ t±β in (A) Czech Republic and in (B) Slovak Republic,
time t is measured from 3. January 2020 (S1).

3

Community Mobility Reports (Google)
Czech Republic
Slovak Republic

20

A

Retail

0
-20
-40
-60
-80
0

20

40

60
80
Time t (days)

100

120

Daily count of infected cases i(t)

Rescaled daily count of infected cases
B

Czech Republic
Slovak Republic

20000
15000
10000
5000
0
0

20

40

60
80
Time t (days)

100

120

Figure 2: (A) Community Mobility Reports in the Czech Republic and Slovak
Republic provided by Google (S2). (B) Linear-linear plot of rescaled daily
count of infected cases i(t) in the Czech Republic and Slovak Republic. Time t
is mesaused from 1. September 2020 (S2).

4

Pavelka et al. [3] made several conceptual mistakes during their analysis of available data and their assumptions regarding governmental public policy measures.
Most egregiously, they did not discuss the potential effects of false negative results in that report [3]. SD Biosensor claims that a combined negative agreement
with PCR tests is 99.7% (see the company data sheet regarding tests results in
Switzerland). Based on data provided by the authors [3] and SD Biosensors,
we estimate 15600 false negative tests (i.e. the infected cases that were falsely
evaluated as negative cases). Shortly after the public testing phase, the Slovak
Republic government permitted the free movement of tested persons Figure 2
(A), while it has drastically restricted the free movement of healthy persons
that opted to not participate in the public testing program.
This increase in mobility of tested population (Figure 2 (A)) - including
persons who have false negative test results - would logically suggest an uncontrolled increase of infection in all regions of the Slovak Republic within the
following 7- 14 days after testing. This has now been confirmed by publicly
available data Figure 1 (B) and Figure 2 (B). We note that it is necessary to
consider the long incubation period of SARS-COV-2 virus and the average time
when first syndromes could occur [5]. The authors [3] have not discussed the
important impacts of other measures that were applied before public testing
began, for example a decrease in mobility - very similar to that experienced
in Czech Republic and Slovak Republic Figure 2 (A) who share the same tipping point of daily count of infected cases at 1. November 2020 Figures 1 (A),
(B) and 2 (B). We note that, at this tipping point, the reproductive number
has been R < 1 and public testing program in the Slovak Republic had been
started. Importantly, the author’s computer simulations [3] did not take into
account the influx of new infected cases from abroad due to periodic - and massive - migration of work forces between the Slovak Republic, Czech Republic
and other countries.
The history of the SARS-CoV-2 outbreak in the Czech Republic and Slovak
Republic - prior to the Slovak’s Republic testing program Figures 1 (A), (B),
and 2 (B) - show that these countries were strongly coupled, with similar daily
counts of infections and similarly decreasing infection trends due to low-mobility
and other important public-policy measures taken in the Slovak Republic and
neighboring countries. Subsequent to the "tipping point", the decreasing trend
in daily infections in the Slovak Republic virtually stopped within a few days.
Daily count of infected cases Figure 2 (B) started again to increase. This is in
contrast to the situation in the Czech Republic Figures 1 (A), (B) and 2 (B).
This directly demonstrates that the public testing program has not had any
positive effect on daily infection rates. We show in Figure 2 (B), that public
testing - in an environment where tests are not precise and there is a relative
high mobility of tested persons (many with false negative test results) - can initiate new outbreaks. Our interpretation of available data is entirely contrary to
the interpretations and conclusions as presented in [3] and uncritically adopted
by other authors [1]. We are confident that our conclusions are well supported
by other authors who have investigated the SARS outbreak and mathematically
investigated the impacts of quarantine and other public-policy measures in the
5

past [6]. These authors concluded that quarantine appears to have formed the
most effective basis for control in several countries and should be equally effective on a smaller scale, likely contributing to the prevention of major outbreaks
in other countries. On the other hand, in the absence of such effective measures, SARS has the potential to spread very widely. Considerable effort will
be necessary to implement such measures in those settings where transmission
is ongoing, but such efforts are essential to quell local outbreaks and reduce the
risk of further global dissemination [6]. We think that in the context of large
scale populations, it is very difficult to control the effectiveness of wide public
quarantine (personal remark: i.e. without drastic violation of human rights)
due to the complexity of virus spread as well as of personal contact interactions
[4].
CONCLUSIONS:
We believe that a detailed and correct analysis of SARS-CoV-2 virus spread
in the Czech and Slovak Republics is very important and could be useful for
a better understanding of dynamic of SARS-CoV-2 outbreak. Both the Czech
Republic and Slovak Republic have been successful in stopping the first wave
of SARS-CoV-2 outbreak Figure 1. On the other hand, the countries have
not be able to smoothly manage the second wave. The current approaches
to manage the outbreak in these countries are quite different. In the case of
the Czech Republic, the main tools are to limit mobility and increase testing,
while the Slovak Republic engages in a model of very intensive and frequent
testing virtually everywhere [2, 3] with a relative high mobility allowed in tested
populations. Since the tipping point (1. November 2020), the data does not
support any positive impact of this approach in the Slovak Republic Figure 2
(B). We think that this is due to the complexity of virus spread, rapid and
uncoordinated shifts in public policy, non-optimal communication with citizens
and a very low effectiveness of quarantine control on large scales [6]

Acknowledgment
We thank Geir Helgesen for valuable discussion and Ben Dowling for reading
the manuscript.

Supplementary materials
References
[1] M. J. Mina and K. G. Andersen, Science, DOI: 10.1126/science.abe9187
(2020).
[2] D. B. Larremore et al., Sci. Adv. DOI: 10.1 126/sciadv.abd5393 (2020).
[3] M. Pavelka et al., CMMID
https://bit.ly/36BkxV5.

Repository,

6

11

November

2020;

[4] M. Tizzoni et al. Sci Rep 5, 15111 (2015) DOI: 10.1038/srep15111.
[5] B. Hu, H. Guo, P. Zhou, et al., Nat Rev Microbiol (2020). DOI:
10.1038/s41579-020-00459-7
[6] M. Lipsitch at.al., Science 300, 1966 (2003).

7

