arXiv:2101.07824v1 [cs.LG] 19 Jan 2021

MACHINE LEARNING APPLICATIONS FOR COVID-19:
A STATE-OF-THE-ART REVIEW.
FIRUZ KAMALOV1∗ , ASWANI CHERUKURI2 , HANA SULIEMAN3 , FADI THABTAH4 , AKBAR HOSSAIN5
A BSTRACT. The COVID-19 pandemic has galvanized the machine learning community to create new solutions that can help in the fight against the virus. The body of literature related to applications of machine
learning and artificial intelligence to COVID-19 is constantly growing. The goal of this article is to present
the latest advances in machine learning research applied to COVID-19. We cover four major areas of research: forecasting, medical diagnostics, drug development, and contact tracing. We review and analyze the
most successful state of the art studies. In contrast to other existing surveys on the subject, our article presents
a high level overview of the current research that is sufficiently detailed to provide an informed insight.

1. I NTRODUCTION
The field of machine learning has made tremendous progress over the past decade. Improved deep
learning algorithms coupled with increased computational capacity catalyzed the growth of the field into
stratosphere. As a result, machine learning has been used in a diverse array of applications. Arguably
the most crucial application of machine learning has been in the fight against COVID-19 pandemic. Researchers have aggressively - and often successfully - pursued a number of different avenues using machine
learning to battle COVID-19. A range of machine learning applications have been developed to tackle various issues related to the virus. In this paper, we present the latest results and achievements of the machine
learning community in the battle against the global pandemic. In contrast, with other existing surveys on
the subject we provide a general overview that is nuanced enough to provide a substantial insight. Our survey includes preprint works to ensure the most up-to-date coverage of the topics. The current applications
of machine learning to COVID-19 can be divided into four groups:
• forecasting
• medical diagnostics
• drug development
• contact tracing
Deep learning algorithms have been successfully deployed to forecast the number of new infections. Recurrent neural networks have shown superior performance in time-series forecasting over traditional approaches such as ARIMA models. Researchers have used recurrent networks, and their variant long shortterm memory networks, to successfully model the spread of the infection and predict the future number
of infections in population. Arguably the most important application of machine learning is in the field
Date: January 21, 2021
∗
Corresponding author.
1

2

F. KAMALOV, A. CHERUKURI, H. SULIEMAN, F. THABTAH, A. HOSSAIN

of medical diagnostics that is made possible by the advances in computer vision. Machine learning has
achieved near human level accuracy in many image recognition tasks. Therefore, it is no surprise that
image recognition software is successfully being used to detect signs of COVID-19 in patient chest Xray images. In many parts of the world where an effective clinical testing procedure is not available or
unaffordable chest X-ray images and CT scans provide the only option to diagnose the virus. Studies
have shown that deep leaning approaches can diagnose COVID-19 based on chest X-ray image with over
99% accuracy. Smart contact tracing using artificial intelligence has helped authorities locate potential
infected persons. A number of software solutions based on artificial intelligence are currently in use to
trace spread of the virus. Machine learning has been used to help guide researchers to new discoveries in
pharmacology. In particular, variational autoencoders have the ability to analyze perturbations in chemical
composition that can lead to possible new medicines. Applying autoencoders to the existing flu vaccines
can help identify potential avenues to creating COVID-19 vaccine.
The challenge to fight off the global pandemic and help the humanity has spurred researchers across
disciplines. In an effort to accelerate scientific research on COVID-19 the publishing community has made
all the related publications freely available to the public. As a result, we are able to access and assess all
the current research and present our survey to the readers. Our goal is to provide a quick, but sufficiently
detailed, overview of the current state of the art in machine learning research applied to COVID-19. We
hope our survey will supply the reader with the necessary information to facilitate a deeper investigation
into the topic.
The paper is structured as follows. In Section 2, we discuss the use of machine learning in forecasting
the number of new infections. Section 3 discusses the use of deep learning in detection and diagnosis of
the infection. Section 4 contains the information about the use of machine learning in drug discovery and
development. Section 5 discusses the current research related to the application of machine learning for
contact tracing. Finally, Section 6 concludes the paper with a few closing remarks.
2. F ORECASTING
Forecasting the number of infections is critical for proper planning and allocation of resources. Modern
machine learning (ML) algorithms such as long short-term memory (LSTM) networks have been shown to
outperform the traditional time series models such ARIMA and GARCH. As a result, LSTMs have been
used in various application involving time series projections [17, 19]. Several countries employ ML based
software to estimate the number of future infections and the trajectory of the infected population. In this
subsection, we will provide an overview of the latest advances in ML related to forecasting the number of
COVID-19 infections. The results of our survey are summarized in Table 1 and a more detailed discussion
follows below.
A comparative study of ML-based algorithms for COVID-19 forecasting was done in [7]. The authors analyzed a number of evolutionary algorithms such as Genetic Algorithm, Particle Swarm Optimization, and Gray Wolf Optimizer as well as ML algorithms such Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) and adaptive
network-based fuzzy inference system (ANFIS). The models were evaluated on the basis of their accuracy
for different prediction lead times. The authors employed data from 5 different countries in their study
experiments revealed that MLP and ANFIS algorithms produce the best results achieving correlation level

ML APPLICATIONS IN COVID

3

of 0.999. A novel approach from Google Research that combines temporal and spatial data is proposed in
[21]. Using graph neural networks and Google mobility data the authors uncover the rich interactions between time and space that is often present in the spread of pandemic. Numerical experiments demonstrate
the power of mobility data with the GNN framework. In [31], the authors employ an ensemble neural
network to predict the number of confirmed cases and deaths in Mexico. The proposed ensemble network
(MNNF) consists of 3 modules: nonlinear autoregressive and function fitting neural networks. The module predictions are combined via a fuzzy integrator - designed to handle uncertainty - into a single output.
The method is tested on data from Mexico. The authors carried out experiments to predict the number
of confirmed cases and deaths 10 days ahead. Results reveal that the MNNF method outperforms single
neural network models. The authors in [9] test 3 LSTM-based models to forecast the number of infected
individuals for 32 states in India. The tested models include stacked, convolutional, and bi-directional
LSTM neural networks. The predictions are made one day and one week ahead. The results show that the
bi-directional LSTM produces the optimal results. Several ML models are compared in [42] to forecast
confirmed cases in Brazil and the US. The models under consideration include Bayesian neural network,
cubist regression, kNN, random forest, and SVR. In addition, variational mode decomposition (VMD) is
applied as a preprocessing step. The authors also consider exogenous variables such as temperature and
precipitation. Numerical experiments produce mixed results with no clear favorite. It can only be noted
that VMD improves model performance when the prediction horizon is 6 days ahead. The authors in [38]
compare statistical and ML approaches to time series forecasting. In particular, they study autoregressive
integrated moving average (ARIMA), support vector regression (SVR), and LSTM models to forecast the
number of infections, deaths, and recoveries. The model input consists of the data from the previous 110
days. The model is used to predict infections for the next 48 days. The study is based on data from 10
countries. The results show that LSTM models generally outperform ARIMA and SVR. Machine learning
approaches do not always outperform traditional methods. In [37], the authors compare classic statistical
methods to SVR to predict the number of positive cases, death rate, and recovery rate. The study covers a
large number of countries. Results show that statistical models outperform SVR. In [15], the authors apply
deep learning to forecast the number of infections and deaths regionally and worldwide. LSTM models
use observed last 3 days of data to forecast 10 days ahead. In their analysis the authors considered Middle
East, Europe, China, and worldwide data. The results show that the forecasts achieve 1.5% root mean
square error (RMSE).
3. M EDICAL

DIAGNOSTICS

Diagnosing COVID-19 infection is a key first step to fighting the virus. The rapid spread of the disease
across the globe has made diagnosis of the disease at early stages not only important for the individual
patient but also for preventing the community spread of the disease. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
tests that are currently employed to detect the presence of the COVID-19 virus require time and capital
to administer. Despite recent improvements PCR tests remain scarce and costly in developing countries
and rural areas. PCR tests may further suffer from sample preparation and quality control which can lead
to insufficient sensitivity [41]. Therefore, developing alternative approaches to testing is a vital research
area. At present there are several ML applications that support diagnostic process. Deep neural networks

4

F. KAMALOV, A. CHERUKURI, H. SULIEMAN, F. THABTAH, A. HOSSAIN

TABLE 1. ML based research studies in COVID-19 forecasting.
S TUDY

O BJECTIVE

M ETHODOLOGY

DATA

R ESULTS

Kapoor et al.,
(2020)

Forecast daily new
cases in the US.

A spacio-temporal graph neural network is used to learn the
complex interactions between
the time and mobility data.
The model is implemented via
GNN framework.

NYT
COVID-19
dataset
and the Google Mobility
Dataset/Reports.
The data
includes positive cases in the
US over the period of Jan-Apr,
2020.

GNN model achieves correlation of 0.998.

Ardabili
et
al., (2020)

Comparative study
of ML forecasting
models.

Compared GA, PSO, GWO
ANFIS, and MLP approaches
and their accuracy for different
lead-times.

Worldometer.
Number of
COVID-19 cases for 5 countries
over the period of Jan-Mar,
2020.

ANFIS and MLP produce the
best results with correlation of
0.999.

Melin et al.,
(2020)

Make up to 10-day
ahead predictions of
number of confirmed
cases and deaths.

Ensemble of neural networks
consististing of 3 modules: 2
nonlinear autoregressive networks (NAR) with different
parameters and 1 function fitting network (FITNET). The
output of the modules is combined via a fuzzy integrator.

Mexico Government (coronavirus.gob.mx).
Confirmed
cases of COVID-19 and related
death cases in Mexico. The data
on the state and country level
over a 110-day period.

%RMSE predicted confirmed
cases on the country level
0.0808; %RMSE for the states
ranges from 0.0322 to 0.2157.
%RMSE predicted number of
deaths on the country level
0.0914; %RMSE for the states
ranges from 0.0175 to 0.2094.

Arora et al.,
(2020)

Predict the number
of next day (and
week) positive cases.

Three LSTM-based models stacked, convolutional, and bidirectional LSTM - are tested.

Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare (India). Number of postive cases in 32 states and territories in India over the period of
Mar 14, 2020 to May 14, 2020.

Average MAPE for stacked,
convolutional, and bi-directional
LSTM model are 5.05%, 4.81%,
and 3.22% respectively.

da Silva et al.,
(2020)

Predict the number
of new cases 1, 3,
and 6 days ahead.

Various ML models - Bayesian
neural network, cubist regression, kNN, random forest, and
SVR - are considered. In addition, variational mode decomposition (VMD) preprocessing
is applied.
Exogenous input variables - temperature and
precipitation - are also considered.

John Hopkins University repository and Brazilian State Health
Offices API. Number of daily
positive cases for 5 states in
the US and Brazil until Apr 28,
2020.

Mixed results with different
models achieving the best outcomes on various subsets of
data. The best models achieved
an out of sample forecasting error of 3%.

Shahid et al.,
(2020)

Predict the number
of positive, death,
and recovery cases

ARIMA, SVR, and LSTM
models are compared. The
models are applied to data
from 10 countries.

China Data Lab, 2020, ”World
COVID-19 Daily Cases.” Number of confirmed, death, and recovery cases over the period of
Jan 22, 2020 to Jun 27, 2020.

Mixed results, but in general
LSTM appears to produce better results. For instance, LSTM
has the lowest MAE values for
confirmed cases and deaths as
2.0463 and 0.0095 respectively.

Rustam et al.,
(2020)

Predictions for the
next 10 days based
on the on data from
previous 56 days.

Linear Regression, LASSO,
Support Vector Regression,
and Exponential Smoothing
(ES) are used. The predictions
are made for infection, death,
and recovery rates.

John Hopkins University repository. Number of confirmed,
death, and recovery cases worldwide over the period of Jan 22,
2020 to Mar 27, 2020.

ES achieves the best results in
death rate prediction with R2 =
0.98. LASSO achieves the best
results in confirmed rate prediction with R2 = 0.98.

Direkoglu et
al., (2020)

Use previous 3 days
to forecast the next
10 days

LSTM model is used to
forecast the number of new
cases and deaths regionally
and worldwide.

WHO, CCDCP, and Worldometer.
Number of confirmed,
death, and recovery cases worldwide over the period until Apr
10, 2020.

The trained LSTM
achieves 1.5% RMSE.

model

ML APPLICATIONS IN COVID

5

demonstrated capability to achieve high accuracy in image detection tasks. Consequently, applying deep
learning and other ML techniques to X-ray and CT scan images has been one of the intensely researched
areas. In addition, detection approaches based on clinical data have also been tried and tested. Artificial
intelligence (AI) based methods augment the diagnosis process and accelerate the treatment of the disease.
These models can assist the physicians and healthcare professionals not only during testing and treatment
but also for planning and managing of the resource [27]. The results of our survey on the current AI/ML
research for COVID-19 diagnostics are summarized in Tables 2 and 3.
Imaging techniques such as X-rays and CT scans are widely used as diagnosis tools for many lung
diseases including tuberculosis, lung cancer, and pneumonia viruses. CT scan images provide fast and
detailed information about the pathology and prognosis of diseases. As a result, ML techniques are being
increasingly integrated with imaging and computer vision methods for applications in disease diagnosis.
The success of deep learning techniques in detecting and diagnosing various types of pneumonia has been
already reported in the literature. The authors in [28] developed a robust model based on 3-dimensional
convolutional neural network (CNN) framework to extract features from CT scan images and distinguish
COVID-19 from the community acquired pneumonia. When diagnosing patients in early stages, AI models proved to be successful by integrating both CT scan imaging and clinical information [32]. Combining
the output of CNN model on CT scan images and the output of ML models such as SVM and Random
Forests on clinical data the accuracy of diagnosis reaches the levels of human healthcare experts. CT scan
imaging is the diagnostic tool predominantly used in treating the pulmonary infections. The same is employed during the current outbreak by many countries in diagnosing COVID-19 patients - particularly at
early stages. Further progress was made by Zhou et al. [50] who identified the importance of segmentation
and proposed deep learning based models to address these issues in ML based diagnosis of COVID-19.
Despite the promising research results there is still a lot of room for growth for ML based diagnostics. Production ready applications that can be used in hospitals require further refinement. A great deal
of of research is yet to be conducted to improve their reliability. The main challenge in deploying the
AI/ML models in the COVID-19 is the generalization ability of these models which is also prevalent in AI
based models in other applications. Another major bottleneck in implementing AL/ML based solutions in
healthcare is the availability of patient data samples of necessary size and quality to train the ML models.
In some instances though the data is available, format and structure of the data pose another challenge. Integrating existing research solutions to practical applications and products is another challenge. Finally it
is vital to ensure that the studies, investigations conducted and reported during this pandemic and pressing
times are technically, scientifically and ethically are correct.
A wide array of ML models has been deployed to try diagnose instances of COVID-19. The list of models includes CNN, RNN, SVM, transfer learning, XGBoost and others. Although these models demonstrate high performance and accuracy they possess limitations such as the lack of sufficient data to train
the models, inability to generalize the results, etc [50]. Despite the ongoing efforts to apply ML/AI in
COVID-19 diagnostics some members of the radiologist community have raised their concerns regarding
possible pitfalls. Laghi [26] has cautioned that while AI/ML should be used for diagnosis of COVID-19,
a more objective and precise quantification is required in understanding the lungs involvement of disease.
Wynants [46] reviewed the validity and usefulness of the various models published in the literature on

6

F. KAMALOV, A. CHERUKURI, H. SULIEMAN, F. THABTAH, A. HOSSAIN

TABLE 2. ML based research studies in COVID-19 medical diagnostics.
S TUDY

O BJECTIVE

M ETHODOLOGY

DATA

R ESULTS

Zhang et al.,
(2020)

Diagnose COVID-19
based on CT scans.

The proposed system consists
of two segmentation models:
one for lung lesion segmentation and another one for diagnosis prediction. 3D convolutional blocks are used for the
classification.

A large database of 532,506
CT scan images of 4,154 patients having COVID-19, common pneumonia and normal
controls.

Results are evaluated over the
dice coefficient and pixel accuracy metrics.
The system achieved the accuracy of
92.49%, sensitivity of 94.93%
and 91.13% specificity.

Apostolopoulos Analyze the adoptet al., (2020)
ability of CNN techniques for diagnosis
of COVID-19 with
the help of X-ray images.

Transfer learning with CNN
is used over the X-ray image
data.

An image dataset of 1427 X
ray images that include COVID19 positive, common pneumonia
and normal conditions.

The model achieved specificity
of 96.46%, sensitivity of
98.66%, and accuracy of
96.78%. Results vary according
to the severity of symptoms.

Zheng et al.,
(2020)

Detect COVID-19
via deep learning.

Deep CNN network with three
stages: first stage with 3D convolution, batchnorm and pooling layers; second stage has
two 3D residual blocks; third
stage is with progressive classifier which abstracts the information by 3D max pooling
and output the probability of
COVID-19. CT scan images
were pre-processed by a simple 2D UNet to create 3D lung
mask.

540 patients chest CT scans are
considered for evaluation. Further, travel and contact history of
these patients, symptoms, clinical lab findings are also considered.

The proposed model achieved
sensitivity of 90.7%, specificity
of 91.1% and AUC of 97.5%.

Sun et
(2020)

al.,

Detect and classify
the COVID-19 from
CT scan images of
chest.

Deep forest algorithm based
on adaptive feature selection.
From the CT scan images, location specific features are extracted. The trained deep forest
model is used to reduce the redundancy of features and classify COVID-19 and community acquired pneumonia.

A dataset of 2522 chest scan images are considered

The proposed model achieved
sensitivity of 93.05%, specificity of 89.95%, accuracy of
96.35%.

Kasani et al.,
(2020)

Automatically detect
the COVID-19 in Xray and CT Scan images.

Compared the performance of
a pool of deep learning based
different feature extraction
models such as DenseNet,
MobileNet, ResNet, InceptionV3, NASNet.
Features
extracted from these models
are fed to classification techniques such as decision trees,
random forests, XGBoost,
AdaBoost, Bagging classifier,
and LightGBM.

A total of 137 images among
which 117 are X-ray and 20
are chest CT scans images.
These are COVID-19 positive
patients data and similar in number healthy patients data.

PMobileNet and Inception V3
with Bagging classifier have
provided the best classification
performance with 99% for precision, recall and F Score. However the data is limited.

Li et
(2020)

Develop automatic
ML framework to
detect coronavirus
with the help of
chest
CT
scan
images.

Three dimensional deep learning framework aimed to extract
two dimensional local features
and 3 dimensional global features. Then the features are
submitted to a fully connected
network with a softmax activation

T4352 CT scans collected from
3322 patients. Among these,
30% were for Coronavirus, 40%
for community acquired pneumonia, and remaining for nonpneumonia abnormalities.

High specificity and sensitivity
is achieved.

al.,

ML APPLICATIONS IN COVID

7

TABLE 3. ML based research studies in COVID-19 medical diagnostics (cont).
S TUDY

O BJECTIVE

M ETHODOLOGY

DATA

R ESULTS

Nour et al.,
(2020)

Detect the positive
cases of COVID-19
automatically from
chest X ray images.

A serial five convolutions layer
network is designed to learn
the model from the scratch.
Optimization of the model parameters are made through
Bayesian optimization. Using
the learned model, deep feature vectors are extracted. For
classification, SVM based on
RBF kernel, C4.5 decision tree
and k-nearest neighbour techniques are adopted.

An open access X ray image
database containing 2905 images are considered. The images are belong to three classes:
COVID-19, normal and viral
pneumonia.

The proposed model with SVM
classification achieved accuracy
of 98.75%, sensitivity of
89.39%, specificity of 99.75%
and F-score of 95.75%. The
main concern is that if X-ray
images are relevant for early
diagnosis.

Wang et al.,
(2020)

Perform diagnosis
and prognosis of
COVID-19
using
CT.

Proposed a DenseNet like
structure with multiple stacks
of convolution, ReLu activation, max pooling and batch
normalization operations.

CT scan images of 5372 patients
among which 4106 patients data
is used to pre-train the model
and 1266 patients data to test
and validate. Prognostics analysis is made with 471 patients
who are tested COVID-19 positive are considered. While considering the ROI, 3D bounding
box of entire lung is considered.

Proposed model exhibited good
performance with AUC of 90%,
specificity of 89.93% and sensitivity of 78.93%. The prognosis
should be based on the severity
of the symptoms.

Mei et
(2020)

al.,

Design an AI model
that can diagnose
the
COVID-19
patients in the early
stage by integrating
CT scans, clinical
symptoms, contact
history and testing.

CNN’s were deployed in two
layers. The first CNN model
is slice selection CNN that select the abnormal lung scans.
The second CNN is to diagnose and predict the likelihood
of COVID. Further, patient details were fed to ML model
such as SVM/ MLP/RF to classify COVID-19 positivity. The
third output was obtained by
integrating result of diagnosis
CNN model and patient’s clinical information to a MLP.

CT Scan image dataset of 905
patients. Further, clinical information details of these patients
are also considered.

Results of the proposed AI
model that combined both CT
images and clinical information
during diagnosis are equivalent
to the accuracy of human experts particularly for early stage
cases.

Burdick et al.,
(2020)

Predict the need and
requirements of ventilation during the diagnosis of COVID19 patients.

XGBoost classifier based
method which uses an ensemble learning technique to learn
and classify the low risk or
high risk category patients.

197 patients with positive diagnosis of COVID-19.

The specificity and sensitivity
results indicate that the model
was able to identify and discriminate the patients who require
the ventilation support.

Elaziz et al.,
(2020)

Detect COVID-19
infection based on
X-ray image.

Feature extraction based on
Fractional Multichannel Exponent Moments and feature
selection based on modified
Manta-Ray Foraging Optimization based on differential
evolution are implemented in a
multicore environment.

216 positive cases and 1675 negative cases of COVID-19. Another dataset with 219 and 1,341
positive and negative cases.

Significant gain in computational time. Accuracy of the
method is proved to be better
than other optimization methods.

8

F. KAMALOV, A. CHERUKURI, H. SULIEMAN, F. THABTAH, A. HOSSAIN

COVID-19 diagnosis, prognosis and risk prediction. Their analysis over 145 models in 107 published
documents showed that there exists a high risk of bias. The results of these models are probabilistic
and hence are not recommended to be adopted for practical use. They call for more rigorous analysis
of these models with proper methodological guidance and provision of description of populations under
study. They also warned that if the studies are unreliable, it would lead to harmful effects in diagnosis and
prognosis of the disease. Based on the careful review of the existing literature on ML based diagnostics
for COVID-19 we conclude that the proposed models have significant potential. The existing models can
be used as stepping stones for building more robust and resilient models that would assist the healthcare
professionals in diagnosis and decision making. AI/ML researchers should learn from the experiences of
this pandemic and focus on developing models in collaboration with healthcare professionals and medical
experts. We note that the most important challenge is the availability of data to train the models as well
as the treatment of the data. Resolving this issue can have a big impact on the robustness, generalization
ability of models for practical applications.
4. D RUG

DEVELOPMENT

Machine learning algorithms are increasingly being used to search for new chemical combinations that
can lead to effective medicine. Artificial intelligence and machine learning techniques have become an
integral part of the pharmaceutical world. Integrating these techniques into the complex drug developing
pipeline has proven to be both cost-effective and less time-consuming. Machine learning techniques are
particularly useful as they provide a set of tools that improve the process of drug discovery and development for specific situations with the help of available data that is reliable and of high quality. As a
results a large effort has been under way to apply AI/ML based solutions in pharmacology. A summary of
the survey of the current literature in the field is provided in Table 5. Several pharmaceutical companies
have employed ML-based algorithms such as artificial neural networks, Support Vector Machines (SVM),
deep learning and many others to develop various drugs and vaccines [36]. The authors in [36] provide
a review of recently developed algorithms to design automated drug development pipelines consisting of
drug discovery, drug testing and drug re-purposing. In drug discovery, the deep learning algorithm Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN) is used to identify DNA sequences associated with specific functions
and Bayesian Optimization (BO) is used to produce proteins of interest with lower costs. In drug testing,
sequential decision-making algorithms such as the Bayesian-based Multi-Armed Bandit (MAB) algorithms are used to test several drug candidates and determine the best treatments. In drug re-purposing,
text mining methods and graph-based recommender systems are used to identify correlations and predict
drug-disease interactions. The authors compiled a list of relevant data sets for drug development pipeline
studies.
In 2019, the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases sponsored the first U.S. clinical trial
to develop a vaccine against SARS-CoV-2 using an AI-based model [5]. An AI program called synthetic
chemist was created to generate trillions of synthetic compounds and another AI-based program called
Search Algorithm for Ligands (SAM) was used to sift through the trillions of compounds and determine
the most suitable candidates as vaccine adjuvants. With the fast spread of COVID-19, there has recently
been a race in utilizing ML techniques and AI capabilities to develop an effective vaccine and antivirals.

ML APPLICATIONS IN COVID

9

The authors in [1] incorporated reverse vaccinology, bioinformatics, immunoinformatics and deep learning
strategies to build a computational framework for identifying probable vaccine candidates and constructing
an epitope-based vaccine against COVID-19. The screening of viral proteome sequences resulted in short
listing of Spike protein or Surface Glycoprotein of SARS-CoV-2 as a potential protein target that can be
used to design the vaccine. The physicochemical properties of the protein were further examined using
LSTMs and the results showed that the protein is the primary responsible for the pathophysiology of
SARS-CoV-2. The authors proposed that their computational pipeline can be used to design effective
and safe vaccine against COVID-19. In [47], the authors used an ’In-Silico’ analysis to design a potent
multi-epitope peptide vaccine against SARS-CoV-2. MLP and SVM algorithms were used to screen for
potential epitopes. The vaccine immunogenicity was enhanced using three potent adjuvants and its tertiary
structure was predicted, refined and validated using appropriate strategies. The results showed that the
vaccine can interact effectively with toll-like receptors (TLR) 3, 5, 8 and by using in silico cloning, it has
demonstrated a high-quality structure, high stability and potential for expression in Escherichia coli. The
authors in [35] surveyed existing literature about COVID-19 and vaccine development. They used Vaxign
Reserve Vaccinology (VRV) tool and Vaxign-ML, a machine learning-based vaccine candidate prediction
and analysis system, to predict and evaluate potential vaccine candidates for COVID-19. The results
showed that in addition to the commonly used S protein, the non-structural protein (nsp3) was found to
be second highest in protective antigenicity. Further investigation of the the sequence conservation and
immunogenicity of the multi-domain nsp3 protein, the authors concluded that the nsp3 can be an effective
and safe vaccine target against COVID19.
For the development of drug treatment for COVID19, the authors in [10] used a pre-trained deep
learning-based drug-target interaction model called Molecule Transformer-Drug Target Interaction (MTDTI) to predict any commercially available antiviral drugs that could be effective against SARS-CoV-2.
The model was compared to CNN-based model called DeepDTA and another two traditional machine
learning based algorithms, gradient boosting and regularized least-squares model, using various data set.
The MT-DTI showed the best performance in predicting the drug–target interactions and was able to identify various antiviral drugs such as redeliver, dolutegravir, efavirenz and atazanavir which could potentially
be used in the treatment of SARS-CoV-2 infection. In [23], the authors used deep neural networks (DNN)
and established an AI platform to identify potential old drugs that could be used against the SARS-CoV2. Different learning data sets consisting of compounds reported or proven active against SARS-CoV,
SARS-CoV-2, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), and influenza virus were generated and used to predict drugs potentially active against coronavirusout of the marketed drugs. The predicted drugs were then
tested and verified to serve as feedbacks to the AI platform for relearning and thus to generate a modified
AI model. The implemented AI-based framework was able to identify eight drugs with activities against
Feline Infectious Peritonitis (FIP) coronavirus. The authors suggested that with prior use experiences in
patients, these identified old drugs can potentially be proven to have anti-SARS-CoV-2 activity and hence
be applied for fighting COVID-19 pandemic. The authors in [25] analyzed over 10 million compounds using a machine learning pipeline in order to predict chemicals that interfere with SARS-CoV-2 targets. The
pipeline involves selection of important physicochemical features for each target using recursive feature
elimination algorithms, followed by fitting aggregated multiple support vector machines (SVM) models

10

F. KAMALOV, A. CHERUKURI, H. SULIEMAN, F. THABTAH, A. HOSSAIN

and regularized random forest algorithm (regRF) to improve generalizability and then evaluating model
performance using various computational validation methods. The authors concluded that their identified
chemicals can accelerate testing of short-term and long-term treatment strategies for COVID19. The importance of AI and Machine learning (ML) techniques that can accelerate the discovery of a possible cure
for COVID-19 is discussed in a recent review article by [8]. The review article by [20] focused on the
recent advances of COVID-19 drug and vaccine development using artificial intelligence and discussed
the potential of intelligent training for the discovery of COVID-19 therapeutics.

5. C ONTACT

TRACING

Effective contact tracing is a major factor in a virus containment strategy [2]. In conventional contact
tracing, a health care professional interviews the infected patient to trace and discover other individuals
who may potentially be infected though contact with the patient. The main challenge of the conventional
approach is the difficulty for an individual to recall all his contacts. In addition, the process requires
availability of specialized clinicians using their experience and other resources [13]. Recent technological
improvements allowed the contact tracing process to be optimized with less human intervention in an
intelligent approach known as digital proximity (DP) contact tracing. The DP approach utilizes network
technologies to identify and locate individuals who could be potentially infected through contact.
With he widespread availability of computing networks and mobile applications - and their associated
technologies including smartphone, smartwatch, and others - most of the technology-based contact tracing systems are built on mobile platforms [4, 30]. These systems, named digital contact tracing (DCT),
enable a registered user’s exposure to be evaluated through wireless signals such as Bluetooth low energy.
Alternative technology-based tracing systems that are non-mobile and application-based utilize tracking
information collected from a variety of sources such as banking transactions, security camera footage,
GPS data from vehicles, mobile phones and others to estimate the proximity of an individual to an infected person.
Artificial intelligence and machine learning - in particular deep learning algorithms - have been successfully used in medical diagnosis and screening systems due to their exceptional learning capabilities.
In the context of DCT systems, these technologies can be incorporated to aid the decision-making process and improve the detection accuracy of contact tracing. Concretely, the data collected from registered
users such as their daily tracks and geo locations in the DCT system are explored by the ML algorithm
within digital platforms to provide medical professionals and government officials with useful insights.
Artificial intelligence and machine learning applications are currently utilized through the entire life cycle
of COVID-19 starting from detection to mitigation [27]. In contact tracing, a virtual AI agent is an alternative to a health professional in the case of classical contact tracing. The virtual AI agent with natural
language capabilities can collect the information previously gathered by a health professional. In DCT
systems, Bluetooth technology is widely employed as a proximity detector for COVID cases. However,
the performance of Bluetooth-based contact tracing apps may be affected by changing signal intensity,
which can be exhibited by different mobile devices, mobile positions, body positions, and physical barriers [51]. Generic wireless multipath effects and shadowing are persistent issues which can lead to false

ML APPLICATIONS IN COVID

11

TABLE 4. ML based research studies in pharmacology.
S TUDY

O BJECTIVE

M ETHODOLOGY

DATA

R ESULTS

Ahuja et al.,
(2020)

Vaccine
development
against
COVID-19.

Deep Neural Network-based
AI programs:
synthetic
chemist and Search Algorithm
for Ligands (SAM) are used.

COVID-19 Open Research
Dataset (CORD-19).

New approaches combining integrative medicine with AI models are emerging in the recent race to utilize ML techniques and AI capabilities to
develop an effective vaccine
against COVID-19.

Abbasi et al.,
(2020)

Identify a suitable
vaccine
candidate
and construct an
epitope-based
vaccine
against
COVID-19.

A computational framework
using reverse vaccinology,
bioinformatics,
immunoinformatics and AI based
strategies.

NCBI database in FASTA format. Crystal structures of human alleles: Protein Data Bank.

Spike protein (Surface glycoprotein), B-cell and T-cell epitopes were predicted for the
construction of an epitope-based
vaccine.

Yazdani et al.,
(2020)

Develop a multiepitope
peptide
vaccine against the
SARS-Cov-2.

A variety of ML methods
including
ANN,
SVM,
BepiPred, ANTIGENpro and
VaxiJen are employed.

NCBI database in FASTA format IEBD database.

Designed-vaccine
construct
consists of several immunodominant epitopes has high
antigenic capacity and induce
humoral and cellular immune
responses against SARS-CoV-2.

Ong et al.,
(2020)

Predict proteins candidate for vaccine
against COVID-19.

Vaxign- RV and Vaxign-ML
strategies are used. The sequence conservation and immunogenicity of the predicted
protein were further investigated.

NCBI and UniProt databases.

S protein had highest protective
antigenicity score. nsp3 protein
- with the second highest antigenicity score -was predicted as
an alternate vaccine candidate.

Beck et al.,
(2020)

Predict binding affinity values between
commercially available antiviral drugs
and target proteins.

Deep learning-based MT-DTI
was compared to DeepDTA,
gradient boosting and regularized least-squares model.

DrugBank, Drug Target Common (DTC) database, BindingDB and NCBI databases.

MT-DTI performance best compared to a DeepDTA and MLbased algorithms(SimBoost and
KronRLS). Atazanavir is the
best chemical compound against
the SARS-CoV-2 3C-like proteinase.

Ke et
(2020)

al.,

Identify pre-existing
drugs
with
anticorona
virus
activities.

Deep learning-based
AIsystem was established. The
predicted drugs were tested in
vitro for verification and the
results were fed back to the AI
system for relearning.

DrugBank:https://www.drugbank.ca8 marketed drugs: VismodDatabase 1: SARS-COV, HIV, egib, Gemcitabine, Clofazimine,
Influenza, other drugs. Database Celecoxib, Brequinar, Conivap2: 210 inhibitors of the 3C-like tan, Bedaquiline and Volcapone
protease of SARS-CoV.
were identified as potential candidates against COVID-19.

Kowalewski
&
Ray,
(2020)

Identify chemicals
that interfere with
SARS-CoV-2
targets.

A machine learning drug discovery pipeline consisting of
multiple support vector machines (SVM) models and random forest algorithm (RFA)
was developed

NUNII, DrugBank, Therapeutic
Targets and bioassay database,
ZINC.

SVM model with the RBF
kernel outperformed regularized
Random Forest or performed
comparably.

Keshavarzi et
al., (2020)

Review of ML-based
drug development.

A multifaceted and comprehensive investigation of existing literature of AI-based
approaches (SUMMIT, GAN,
RF, SVM, RFE, LSTM) used
for COVID-19 drug and vaccine development. The results
were used to create a database:
CoronaDB-AI.

Complete
toxicity
dataset
from distinct databases, including ToxCast and Tox21.
Comprehensive epitope-based
dataset.

SML-aided molecular docking
is one of the most prevalent approaches for virtual screening.
3CLpro is the most popular target for virtual screening. Spike
protein has been the most popular candidate for virtual vaccine
discovery

12

F. KAMALOV, A. CHERUKURI, H. SULIEMAN, F. THABTAH, A. HOSSAIN

positive and false negative identification. To improve the proximity detection accuracy in DCT systems,
ML techniques can be used to analyze the Bluetooth signal and other phone sensors’ data.
Recently, a 2-stage classifier was proposed that utilizes vanilla neural network to extract features from
a signal emanating from different sources [18]. Employing a deep learning technique directly on a smartphone involves high computational cost and power consumption. Therefore, during the first stage raw data
from different sources is converted into fixed-length vectors and stored in the database. In the second stage,
the vanilla deep learning algorithm is applied to detect proximity [18]. A similar project under the TC4TL
challenge compares several deep learning models including Conv 1d [29], support vector machines [40],
and decision tree-based algorithms [14] to evaluate the accuracy of Bluetooth-based distance measurement
[39, 33]. The performance of different techniques is measured based the lowest normalized decision cost
function (NDCF) which represents proximity detection performance considering the combination of false
negatives and false positives. The results show that the Conv 1d network has the lowest NDCF.
It is evident that the performance of classification algorithms varies widely based on proximity thresholds. For example, Song [43] reported that when considering two people six feet apart in classifying
Bluetooth beacon RSSI values, a Gaussian support vector machine classifier yielded better accuracy than
a decision tree classifier. For validation, each experiment was conducted by placing two Raspberry Pi’s
six feet apart and measuring the RSSI values.
An AI-based contact tracing app named COVI developed in Canada leverages probabilistic risk levels
to profile an individual’s infection risk level [3]. COVI uses the advantages of ML algorithms to optimize
and automate the integration of pseudonymized user data in assessing the risk levels. An a priori version
of an epidemiological model-based simulated dataset is used to pre-train the ML models. Upon collection
of real data through an app, the simulator parameters are tuned to match with real data. The impact of
ML in the COVI app is observed by using the ML predictor inside the simulator to influence the behavior
of the agent in recommending the risk levels. The contact tracing application can be used to predict the
lockdown area based on places visited by an infected patient. In [30] the authors proposed a K-Means
clustering algorithm with DASV seeding to predict the lockdown area. The proposed method has been
tested in Denver, USA and successfully identified the area to be locked down as users walking in the area
approach each other very frequently. Despite the significant advantages of using DCT systems, there are
issues related to data privacy and use. However, these are out of the scope of this review paper.
6. C ONCLUSION
Machine learning has become a potent tool in many applications. In particular, it has recently been
employed in the battle against COVID-19. There exists a growing body of literature that is dedicated
to the subject. The decision by the major publishers to make all COVID-19 related research publicly
available has improved information flow. In this paper, we attempt to provide an overview of the rapidly
increasing corpus of research in machine learning related to COVID-19. We discuss the state-of-the-art
research including the material on research archives. In particular, we covered four major areas of ML
research related to COVID-19: forecasting, medical diagnostics, drug development, and contact tracing.
Our survey revealed the following key observations. In forecasting, recurrent neural network such as
LSTMs have been used to predict the future infection and death rates. Many studies are focused on the

ML APPLICATIONS IN COVID

13

TABLE 5. ML based research studies in contact tracing.
S TUDY

O BJECTIVE

M ETHODOLOGY

DATA

R ESULTS

He & Printz,
(2020)

Detect proximity of
individuals.

A 2-stage classifier that utilizes
vanilla neural network to extract features from a signal emanating from different sources.

National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST)
COVID-19 Data repository.
https://covid19-data.nist.gov/

No comparison, however, it
shows the variation of different
phone carriage states and prediction accuracy.

Shankar et al.,
(2020)

Comparative
study to evaluate
the accuracy of
Bluetooth-based distance measurement.

Deep learning, SVM, and decision tree-based classification
models are compared.

MIT
PACT
RangeAngle
Data
set
https://github.com/mitll/MITMatrix-Data
and
MITRE
Covid-19 synthetic data set

Conv 1d exhibits on average
90% better performance than
other classification models.

Song, (2020)

Comparative study
of different algorithms to determine
the proximity within
six feet.

Various ML algorithms are
tested in classification of Bluetooth beacon RSSI values.

piPact, Beaver Works Summer Institute, July 2020,
https://beaverworks.ll.mit.edu
/CMS/bw/pipact

Gaussian SVM shows better
performance than logistic regression, k-nearest neighbors,
and decision tree-based classifier with training, validation
and testing accuracy of 76.12%,
72.60%, and 79.67% respectively.

Alsdurf et al.,
(2020)

Capture the dependencies across the
whole history of the
user.

Transformer deep learning architecture is used as the base
algorithm.

Simulated dataset based on epidemiological model.

ML-based risk prediction could
reduce the reproduction number compared to standard digital
contact tracing applications.

Maghdid et
al., (2020)

Predict the lockdown
area based on people
movement.

K-Nearest unsupervised machine learning algorithm is
used for prediction.

Android based smartphone application for user data collection.

Used a threshold of five meters
the proposed protocol predicts
the lockdown area.

North American region, but also other countries including Brazil and China. The best models achieve
correlation of 0.999. In medical diagnostics, deep learning models that have previously shown success in
other domains are being deployed to detect the presence of the infection based on CT scans and X-rays.
The best models achieve accuracy rate of 99%. In drug discovery, a variety of algorithms are being used
to develop new vaccine against the infection. However, the majority of the studies are still in the initial
stage. In contact tracing, AI based applications are utilized to identify and locate potential virus carriers
though with limited success.
Despite the tremendous progress, the current machine learning approaches suffer from two major drawbacks. First, the underlying algorithms have not yet reached the level of human reasoning. The deep
learning models such as CNNs, LSTMs, Transformer, and others remain imperfect and cannot consistently outperform a human expert. Second, the lack of data hinders the training and development of the
models. Patient data is notoriously difficult to obtain. Since deep learning models rely on abundance of
data the lack of thereof results in suboptimal generalization performance.
Our main recommendation based on the extensive survey of current literature is the involvement of
government agencies to facilitate procurement of COVID-19 related data. Public institutions and government agencies can play a key role in obtaining and disseminating data from hospitals to researchers. Since

14

F. KAMALOV, A. CHERUKURI, H. SULIEMAN, F. THABTAH, A. HOSSAIN

machine learning algorithms rely heavily on large amounts of data its availability can drastically improve
results.
R EFERENCES
[1] Abbasi, B., Saraf, D., Sharma, T., Sinha, R., Singh, S., Gupta, P. et al. (2020). Identification of vaccine targets; design of
vaccine against SARS-CoV-2 coronavirus using computational and deep learning-based approaches.
[2] Ahmed, N., Michelin, R. A., Xue, W., Ruj, S., Malaney, R., Kanhere, S. S., ... & Jha, S. K. (2020). A survey of covid-19
contact tracing apps. IEEE Access, 8, 134577-134601.
[3] Alsdurf, H., Bengio, Y., Deleu, T., Gupta, P., Ippolito, D., Janda, R., Jarvie, M., Kolody, T., Krastev, S., Maharaj, T. and
Obryk, R. (2020). COVI White Paper. arXiv preprint 2020,arXiv:2005.08502.
[4] Ardakani AA, KanafiAR, Acharya UR, Khadem N, Mohammadi A. (2020). Application of deep learning technique to
manage COVID-19 in routine clinical practice using CT images: results of 10 convolutional neural networks. Comput
Biol Med 2020;121:103795. 2020 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compbiomed.2020.103795 .
[5] Ahuja, A., Reddy, V., Marques, O. (2020). Artificial intelligence and COVID-19: A multidisciplinary approach. Integrative Medicine Research, 9(3), 100434. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.imr.2020.100434
[6] Apostolopoulos, I. D., & Mpesiana, T. A. (2020). Covid-19: automatic detection from x-ray images utilizing transfer
learning with convolutional neural networks. Physical and Engineering Sciences in Medicine, 1.
[7] Ardabili, S. F., Mosavi, A., Ghamisi, P., Ferdinand, F., Varkonyi-Koczy, A. R., Reuter, U., ... & Atkinson, P. M. (2020).
Covid-19 outbreak prediction with machine learning. Available at SSRN 3580188.
[8] Keshavarzi Arshadi, A., Webb, J., Salem, M., Cruz, E., Calad-Thomson, S., Ghadirian, N. et al. (2020). Artificial Intelligence for COVID-19 Drug Discovery and Vaccine Development. Frontiers In Artificial Intelligence, 3.
https://doi.org/10.3389/frai.2020.00065
[9] Arora, P., Kumar, H., & Panigrahi, B. K. (2020). Prediction and analysis of COVID-19 positive cases using deep learning
models: A descriptive case study of India. Chaos, Solitons & Fractals, 139, 110017.
[10] Beck, B., Shin, B., Choi, Y., Park, S., Kang, K. (2020). Predicting commercially available antiviral drugs that may
act on the novel coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2) through a drug-target interaction deep learning model. Computational And
Structural Biotechnology Journal, 18, 784-790. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.csbj.2020.03.025
[11] Burdick, H., Lam, C., Mataraso, S., Siefkas, A., Braden, G., Dellinger, R. P., ... & Hoffman, J. (2020). Prediction of
respiratory decompensation in Covid-19 patients using machine learning: The READY trial. Computers in biology and
medicine, 124, 103949.
[12] COVID-19 Rapid Response Virtual Agent — Google Cloud. (n.d.). Retrieved October 22, 2020, from
https://cloud.google.com/solutions/contact-center/covid19-rapid-response
[13] Dar, A. B., Lone, A. H., Zahoor, S., Khan, A. A., & Naaz, R. (2020). Applicability of mobile contact tracing in fighting
pandemic (covid-19): Issues, challenges and solutions. Computer Science Review, 100307.
[14] Eva, L. H., Lui, C., Woo, P. P., CHEUNG, A. T., Lam, P. K., Tang, T. W., & Lee, L. H. (2020). Development of a datadriven COVID-19 prognostication tool to inform triage and step-down care for hospitalised patients in Hong Kong: A
population based cohort study. medRxiv.
[15] Direkoglu, C., & Sah, M. (2020). Worldwide and Regional Forecasting of Coronavirus (Covid-19) Spread using a Deep
Learning Model. medRxiv.
[16] Elaziz, M. A., Hosny, K. M., Salah, A., Darwish, M. M., Lu, S., & Sahlol, A. T. (2020). New machine learning method
for image-based diagnosis of COVID-19. Plos one, 15(6), e0235187.
[17] Gurrib, I., Elsharief, E., & Kamalov, F. (2020). The Effect of Energy Cryptos on Efficient Portfolios of Key Energy Listed
Companies in the S&P Composite 1500 Energy Index. International Journal of Energy Economics and Policy, 10(2),
179-193.
[18] He, T. and Printz, M. (2020). “A 2-stage Classifier for Contact Detection with BluetoothLE and INS Signals” [Online].
Available: https://tc4tlchallenge.nist.gov/pub/4. [Accessed: 12-Oct-2020].

ML APPLICATIONS IN COVID

15

[19] Kamalov, F. (2020). Forecasting significant stock price changes using neural networks. Neural Computing and Applications, 1-13.
[20] Kannan, S., Subbaram, K., Ali, S., Kannan, H. (2020). The Role of Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning Techniques: Race for COVID-19 Vaccine. Archives Of Clinical Infectious Diseases, 15(2).
https://doi.org/10.5812/archcid.103232
[21] Kapoor, A., Ben, X., Liu, L., Perozzi, B., Barnes, M., Blais, M., & O’Banion, S. (2020). Examining COVID-19 Forecasting using Spatio-Temporal Graph Neural Networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.03113.
[22] Kassani, S. H., Kassasni, P. H., Wesolowski, M. J., Schneider, K. A., & Deters, R. (2020). Automatic Detection of
Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19) in X-ray and CT Images: A Machine Learning-Based Approach. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2004.10641.
[23] Ke, Y., Peng, T., Yeh, T., Huang, W., Chang, S., Wu, S. et al. (2020). Artificial intelligence approach fighting COVID-19
with repurposing drugs. Biomedical Journal, 43(4), 355-362. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bj.2020.05.001
[24] Keshavarzi Arshadi, A., Webb, J., Salem, M., Cruz, E., Calad-Thomson, S., Ghadirian, N., ... & Yuan, J. S. (2020).
Artificial Intelligence for COVID-19 Drug Discovery and Vaccine Development. Front. Artif. Intell, 3, 65.
[25] Kowalewski, J., Ray, A. (2020). Predicting novel drugs for SARS-CoV-2 using machine learning from a ¿10 million
chemical space. Heliyon, 6(8), e04639. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heliyon.2020.e04639
[26] Laghi, A. (2020). Cautions about radiologic diagnosis of COVID-19 infection driven by artificial intelligence. The Lancet
Digital Health, 2(5), e225.
[27] Lalmuanawma, S., Hussain, J., & Chhakchhuak, L. (2020). Applications of machine learning and artificial intelligence
for Covid-19 (SARS-CoV-2) pandemic: A review. Chaos, Solitons & Fractals, 110059.
[28] Li, L., Qin, L., Xu, Z., Yin, Y., Wang, X., Kong, B., ... & Cao, K. (2020). Using artificial intelligence to detect COVID-19
and community-acquired pneumonia based on pulmonary CT: evaluation of the diagnostic accuracy. Radiology, 296(2).
[29] Lwowski, B., & Najafirad, P. (2020). COVID-19 Surveillance through Twitter using Self-Supervised Learning and Few
Shot Learning.
[30] Maghdid, H. S., & Ghafoor, K. Z. (2020). A smartphone enabled approach to manage COVID-19 lockdown and economic
crisis.” arXiv preprint 2020, arXiv:2004.12240.
[31] Melin, P., Monica, J. C., Sanchez, D., & Castillo, O. (2020, June). Multiple ensemble neural network models with fuzzy
response aggregation for predicting COVID-19 time series: the case of Mexico. In Healthcare (Vol. 8, No. 2, p. 181).
Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing Institute.
[32] Mei, X., Lee, H. C., Diao, K. Y., Huang, M., Lin, B., Liu, C., ... & Bernheim, A. (2020). Artificial intelligence–enabled
rapid diagnosis of patients with COVID-19. Nature Medicine, 1-5.
[33] NIST Pilot TC4TL Challenge (2020) NIST TC4TL Challenge. [Online]. Available: https://tc4tlchallenge.nist.gov/. [Accessed: 13-Oct-2020].
[34] Nour, M., Cömert, Z., & Polat, K. (2020). A novel medical diagnosis model for COVID-19 infection detection based on
deep features and Bayesian optimization. Applied Soft Computing, 106580.
[35] Ong, E., Wong, M., Huffman, A., He, Y. (2020). COVID-19 coronavirus vaccine design using reverse vaccinology and
machine learning. https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.20.000141
[36] Réda, C., Kaufmann, E., Delahaye-Duriez, A. (2020). Machine learning applications in drug development. Computational
And Structural Biotechnology Journal, 18, 241-252. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.csbj.2019.12.006
[37] Rustam, F., Reshi, A. A., Mehmood, A., Ullah, S., On, B., Aslam, W., & Choi, G. S. (2020). COVID-19 Future Forecasting
Using Supervised Machine Learning Models. IEEE Access.
[38] Shahid, F., Zameer, A., & Muneeb, M. (2020). Predictions for COVID-19 with deep learning models of LSTM, GRU and
Bi-LSTM. Chaos, Solitons & Fractals, 110212.
[39] Shankar, S., Chopra, A. (2020). Kanaparti, R., Kang, M., Singh, A., & Raskar, R. “Proximity Sensing for Contact Tracing,”
arXiv.” [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2009.04991. [Accessed: 13-Oct-2020].
[40] Shubina, V., Holcer, S., Gould, M., & Lohan, E. S. (2020). Survey of Decentralized Solutions with Mobile Devices for
User Location Tracking, Proximity Detection, and Contact Tracing in the COVID-19 Era. Data, 5(4), 87.

16

F. KAMALOV, A. CHERUKURI, H. SULIEMAN, F. THABTAH, A. HOSSAIN

[41] Shi, F., Wang, J., Shi, J., Wu, Z., Wang, Q., Tang, Z., ... & Shen, D. (2020). Review of artificial intelligence techniques in
imaging data acquisition, segmentation and diagnosis for covid-19. IEEE reviews in biomedical engineering.
[42] da Silva, R. G., Ribeiro, M. H. D. M., Mariani, V. C., & dos Santos Coelho, L. (2020). Forecasting Brazilian and American
COVID-19 cases based on artificial intelligence coupled with climatic exogenous variables. Chaos, Solitons & Fractals,
139, 110027.
[43] Song, K. (2020) Using Machine Learning to Perform Proximity Detection-Classifying Bluetooth Beacon RSSI Values. Preprints, 2020
[44] Sun, L., Mo, Z., Yan, F., Xia, L., Shan, F., Ding, Z., ... & Yuan, H. (2020). Adaptive feature selection guided deep forest
for covid-19 classification with chest ct. IEEE Journal of Biomedical and Health Informatics.
[45] Wang, Y., Lu, X., Zhang, Y., Zhang, X., Wang, K., Liu, J., ... & Hao, H. (2020). Precise pulmonary scanning and reducing
medical radiation exposure by developing a clinically applicable intelligent CT system: Toward improving patient care.
EBioMedicine, 54, 102724.
[46] Wynants, L., Van Calster, B., Collins, G. S., Riley, R. D., Heinze, G., Schuit, E., ... & de Jong, V. M. (2020). Prediction
models for diagnosis and prognosis of covid-19: systematic review and critical appraisal. bmj, 369.
[47] Yazdani, Z., Rafiei, A., Yazdani, M., Valadan, R. (2020). Design an efficient Multi-Epitope Peptide vaccine candidate against SARS-CoV-2: An in silico Analysis. Infection And Drug Resistance, 13, 3007-3022.
https://doi.org/10.2147/idr.s264573
[48] Zhang, K., Liu, X., Shen, J., Li, Z., Sang, Y., Wu, X., ... & Ye, L. (2020). Clinically applicable AI system for accurate
diagnosis, quantitative measurements, and prognosis of covid-19 pneumonia using computed tomography. Cell.
[49] Zheng, C., Deng, X., Fu, Q., Zhou, Q., Feng, J., Ma, H., ... & Wang, X. (2020). Deep learning-based detection for
COVID-19 from chest CT using weak label. medRxiv.
[50] Zhou, L., Li, Z., Zhou, J., Li, H., Chen, Y., Huang, Y., ... & Abdelkareem, F. (2020). A rapid, accurate and machineagnostic segmentation and quantification method for CT-based covid-19 diagnosis. IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging, 39(8), 2638-2652.
[51] Zhao, Q., Wen, H., Lin, Z., Xuan, D., & Shroff, N. (2020). On the accuracy of measured proximity of bluetooth-based
contact tracing apps. In International Conference on Security and Privacy in Communication Networks.
1

D EPARTMENT OF E LECTRICAL E NGINEERING , C ANADIAN U NIVERSITY D UBAI , D UBAI , UAE.
Email address: firuz@cud.ac.ae
2

S CHOOL OF IT AND E NGINEERING , V ELLORE I NSTITUTE OF T ECHNOLOGY, V ELLORE , I NDIA
Email address: cherukuri@acm.org

3

D EPARTMENT OF M ATHEMATICS AND S TATISTICS , A MERICAN U NIVERSITY
Email address: hsulieman@aus.edu

OF

S HARJAH , S HARJAH , UAE

4

S CHOOL OF D IGITAL T ECHNOLOGIES , M ANUKAU I NSTITUTE OF T ECHNOLOGY , AUCKLAND , N EW Z EALAND
Email address: fadi.fayez@manukau.ac.nz

3

S CHOOL OF E NGINEERING , AUCKLAND U NIVERSITY
Email address: akbar.hossain@manukau.ac.nz

OF

T ECHNOLOGY , AUCKLAND , N EW Z EALAND

