COVID-19 and Digital Transformation - Developing
an Open Experimental Testbed for Sustainable and
Innovative Environments (ETSIE) using Fuzzy
Cognitive Maps
arXiv:2101.07509v2 [cs.CY] 20 Jan 2021

1st Wolfgang Höhl
Department of Informatics
Technical University of Munich (TUM)
Munich, Germany
wolfgang.hoehl@tum.de

Abstract—This paper sketches a new approach using Fuzzy
Cognitive Maps (FCMs) to operably map and simulate digital
transformation in architecture and urban planning. Today these
processes are poorly understood. Many current studies on digital
transformation are only treating questions of economic efficiency.
Sustainability and social impact only play a minor role. Decisive
definitions, concepts and terms stay unclear. Therefore this
paper develops an open experimental testbed for sustainable
and innovative environments (ETSIE) for three different digital
transformation scenarios using FCMs. A traditional growthoriented scenario, a COVID-19 scenario and an innovative and
sustainable COVID-19 scenario are modeled and tested. All three
scenarios have the same number of components, connections and
the same driver components. Only the initial state vectors are
different and the internal correlations are weighted differently.
This allows for comparing all three scenarios on an equal basis.
The mental modeler software is used (Gray et al. 2013). This
paper presents one of the first applications of FCMs in the context
of digital transformation. It is shown, that the traditional growthoriented scenario is structurally very similar to the current
COVID-19 scenario. The current pandemic is able to accelerate
digital transformation to a certain extent. But the pandemic
does not guarantee for a distinct sustainable and innovative
future development. Only by changing the initial state vectors
and the weights of the connections an innovative and sustainable
turnaround in a third scenario becomes possible.
Index Terms—soft computing; fuzzy cognitive maps; digital
transformation; COVID-19; decision making; sustainability; integrated world system modeling

I. I NTRODUCTION
You probably all know this interactive graphic very well.
Figure 1. shows a real-time visualization of the worldwide
spread of the corona virus by the Johns Hopkins University in
Baltimore [1]. This interactive map was created with ArcGIS
Online. As an architect and planner you probably know similar
GIS software that is used in comparable cases. This graphic
is a good example for emerging technologies in the current
digital transformation. The current pandemic is accelerating
digital transformation. This is not only the opinion of German
Federal Minister Andreas Scheuer [2]. The President of the
German Conference of Ministers of Education and Cultural

Affairs, Dr. Stefanie Hubig, also expects a boost for digital
transformation in schools [3]. But there are also critical voices.
In a petition to the German ministers of education, the Munich
teacher Tina Uthoff calls for ”an end to distance learning” [4].
Not all families are able to provide the same level of care and
are under great pressure. But there are also other interesting
solutions. A Munich wholesale market for gastronomy and
retail now supplies food to senior citizens and social food
banks with the help of taxi drivers. Logistics software provides
the optimized routes for the taxi drivers. The remarkable and
decisive factor here is not only using innovative technologies
and an innovative idea. Much more it is a specific way to think
about solutions, a special ”thought style”, a guiding mission
statement and a clear direction. An effective push always needs
a clear direction. The whole process of digital transformation
today is very poorly understood. Therefore this paper sketches
a new approach using Fuzzy Cognitive Maps (FCMs) to operably map and simulate the process of digital transformation
in architecture and urban planning. Fuzzy Cognitive Maps
(FCMs) belong to the so-called soft computing techniques,
such as fuzzy logic, neural network theory, genetic algorithms and probabilistic reasoning. Zadeh [5], [6] defines soft
computing as an efficient technique that incorporates human
knowledge effectively, deals with imprecision and uncertainty
and learns to adapt to unknown or changing environments
for better performance. Bonissone [7] and Jain [8] mention
that soft computing has been successfully applied in many
scientific areas such as in engineering, medicine, information
systems, business, political and social sciences. FCMs are
flexible tools that have been applied in different contexts
[9] including environmental assessment [10]–[12], engineering
and technological management [13] and energy [14]. Papageorgiou and Groumpos [15] especially consider FCMs to be
capable to deal with situations where the human reasoning
process includes uncertain descriptions. FCMs are usually
used for modelling specialist knowledge. For data gathering
and model building expert interviews and expert opinions
are used. Also the delphi method or similar methods can be

Fig. 1. Coronavirus COVID-19 Global Cases by the Center for Systems Science and Engineering (CSSE) at Johns Hopkins University (JHU)

applied in this initial stage. Secondly FCMs include important
modeling means for describing particular domains showing
the concepts (variables) and the relationships (connections)
between them. For modeling and simulation usually specialized FCM software is used. FCMs are described as a wellestablished artificial intelligence technique that incorporates
ideas from artificial neural networks and fuzzy logic. Thus
they are an attractive modeling approach that encompasses
advantageous features. On FCMs the following weaknesses
can be detected: the main deficiencies of FCMs are the critical
dependence on the initial expert’s beliefs, the recalculation of
the weights corresponding to each concept every time a new
strategy is adopted and the potential convergence to undesired
equilibrium states. In order to update the initial knowledge
of human experts and to combine the human experts’ structural knowledge with training from data, specific automated
learning methodologies for FCMs my be applied. This paper
presents one of the first applications of FCMs in the context of
digital transformation. In the current discussion, a fundamental
clarification of the terms and their correlations in digital transformation seems to make sense. Thus this paper provides an
overview of literature. In this fundamental discourse, fourteen
up-to-date studies on digital transformation in architecture and
urban planning [17]–[30] and twelve studies from the fields
of computer science, philosophy of science and media ethics
have been searched for stakeholders, specific terms or concepts
and correlations in digital transformation [31]–[42]. Terms
are clarified, technologies and trends can be identified. The
specific ”thought styles” and paradigms of the stakeholders are
discovered. These elements are then operably mapped and represented in a suitable, integrated model using FCMs. A value

added open experimental testbed for sustainable and innovative
environments (ETSIE) is developed. Three different digital
transformation scenarios are designed. A traditional growthoriented scenario, a COVID-19 scenario and an innovative
and sustainable COVID-19 scenario are modeled and tested.
All three scenarios have the same number of components,
connections and the same driver components. Only the initial
state vectors are different and the internal correlations are
weighted differently. This allows for comparing all three
scenarios on an equal basis. The mental modeler software is
used [16]. This paper develops the value added ETSIE model
as a general framework using FCMs, provides a discussion
integrating an overview of literature and highlights directions
for future inquiry, but it is not expected to collect extensive
empirical data. It is shown, that the traditional growth-oriented
scenario is structurally very similar to the current COVID-19
scenario. The current pandemic is able to accelerate digital
transformation to a certain extent. But the pandemic does
not guarantee for a distinct sustainable and innovative future
development. Only by changing the initial state vectors and
the weights of the connections an innovative and sustainable
turnaround in a third scenario becomes possible.

II. L ITERATURE R EVIEW
This chapter presents a fundamental discourse, fourteen upto-date studies on digital transformation in architecture and
urban planning [17]–[30] and twelve studies from the fields
of computer science, philosophy of science and media ethics
[31]–[42] have been searched for stakeholders, causes and
key drivers, technologies and trends in digital transformation.
Terms or concepts are clarified, technologies, trends and five
indicators of sustainable development could be identified.
Specific ”thought styles” and paradigms of the stakeholders
are discovered.
A. COVID-19 as an Accelerator of Digital Transformation?
According to Horx [17], Widmann [18], Detting [19] and
von der Gracht [20] there are two general characteristics
of the corona crisis: on the one hand the novelty of the
corona virus and on the other hand the relatively slow course
of the crisis compared to other natural disasters. Horx sees
the corona crisis as ” ... a general slowdown of our world
culture”, which affects both globalization and our forms of
communication. In his opinion, this slowdown will continue
after the crisis. ”If you take stock, this crisis is a general
slowdown of our world culture. This applies to globalization
and to our forms of communication. It is a slowdown that
will remain [17].” On the contrary for Widmann the corona
crisis is not a natural disaster in the conventional sense [18].
According to all we know today, this pandemic is of natural
origin. However, pandemics distinguish between people and
material assets, and they always affect the socially weak most
severely. However, the boundaries to natural disaster remain
blurred. Detting outlines a possible more resilient and robust
future for society between the polar risks of total interstate
and social isolation and the chance of a new sustainable and
glocal social-ecological market economy [19]. Depending on
the duration of the crisis, von der Gracht sketches four polar
scenarios between very moderate and very drastic economic
and social consequences [20]. The strong isolation, social
conflicts and the virtualization of many areas of life face
a rapid recovery and a return to what he calls ”normal
operations”. A positive outlook for a new and innovative social
scenario is unfortunately missing here. COVID-19 is novel
and cannot be fought with conventional means. Innovative
ideas and technologies must be developed. Due to economic
interests, a certain time pressure arises, which pushes the
research and development of new technologies. So COVID19 is an accelerator of digitalization and technological development, in the same sense as other natural disasters can be.
Thus the corona crisis can be described as a natural disaster
in slow motion. Its relatively slow or time-stretched course
compared to other natural disasters allows for a coordinated,
reasonable and gradual technological response. The associated
deceleration and slowing down of everyday life during the
first corona lockdown is certainly still well remembered by us
all. The reduction of many growth-driven processes during the
Corona crisis thus also led to a certain social and ecological
sustainability.

B. Stakeholders of the Digital Transformation
All industries are directly affected by digital transformation.
The processes only differ in speed and intensity. Thierstein describes digital transformation as global and all-encompassing:
”Digital transformation permeates all ways of life ... [21].”
Goger et al. describe digital transformation as a cross-cutting
issue that cuts across all areas of society [22]. The industries
only have a different digitization speed. Roland Berger believe
that the construction industry is less affected by the corona
crisis, as are mechanical engineering and pharmaceutical and
medical technology [23]. They see most other industries as
being heavily affected, such as airlines, tourism and travel,
trade, financing, oil and gas, automotive and logistics. After
examining the aforementioned available literature [8-33] four
different stakeholders groups can be identified: (P) politics, (R)
research and development, (E) economy and (S) civil society
as shown in table I.
TABLE I
G ROUPS OF STAKEHOLDERS
P
R

Groups
Politics

E

Research and Development
Economy

S

Civil Society

Description
Cities, districts and communities, federal, state and local authorities
Research institutions
Companies, architects and urban planners
Population and employees

C. Causes and Drivers of the Digital Transformation
A study by IE.F and Roland Berger defines following drivers
for a successful digital transformation as shown in table II
[24]. These drivers can be easily assigned to the four different
stakeholders groups.
TABLE II
G ROUPS OF STAKEHOLDERS AND ASSIGNED CAUSES AND DRIVERS
ACCORDING TO IE.F AND ROLAND B ERGER [24]

P

Groups
Politics

Causes and Key Drivers
Sufficient funding and better political
coordination (governance)
Extension of the digital infrastructure

R
E
S

Research and Development
Economy
Civil Society

Avoidance of data monopolies and better data protection (data ethics)
A new business and corporate culture
Greater digital literacy

Goger et al. mention following components as key drivers
of digital transformation in architecture and urban planning as
shown in table III [22]:
According to a study by the ”Münchner Kreis”, product and
process quality (79%) and qualified employees training (78%)
are currently considered the most important success factors
in future industrial manufacturing [24]. Alain Thierstein also

TABLE III
G ROUPS OF STAKEHOLDERS AND ASSIGNED CAUSES AND DRIVERS
ACCORDING TO G OGER ET AL . [22]

E

Groups
Politics
Research and Development
Economy

S

Civil Society

P
R

Causes and Key Drivers
Sustainability
Globalization
Sustainability
Efficiency and process optimization
Urbanization
Demographic change
Mobility
Individualization of work and life models

mentions the importance of the structure of creative and
productive processes. He emphasizes the technological competence of the individual (digital literacy), which is necessary
to take responsibility, to evaluate situations and to acquire the
new digital environment [21]. Table IV shows the collected
causes and drivers from the these two references:
TABLE IV
G ROUPS OF STAKEHOLDERS AND ASSIGNED CAUSES AND DRIVERS
ACCORDING TO THE ”M ÜNCHNER K REIS ” [24] AND T HIERSTEIN [21]

P
R
E
S

Groups
Politics
Research and Development
Economy
Civil Society

progress. Simplified surveys could be provided through drone
flights. Innovative manufacturing processes could support or
even replace conventional procedures. IoT and Big Data will
be deployed during building use for automatic building data
collection, automatic ventilation and building climate control.
During demolition, the building can serve as a raw material
store (urban mining). Through a digitally transparent process,
all quantities and materials can be known in advance. Katz
et al. describe digitization speed as a composite factor of affordability, infrastructure investment, network access, capacity,
usage and human capital [25]. As digitization speed can not be
assigned to one stakeholder only, a new category of indicators
for system behaviour is created. With the degree of automation
and the digitization speed the authors name two important
indicators for the social sustainability of digital transformation.
Table V shows the extended list of stakeholders and indicators.
TABLE V
G ROUPS OF STAKEHOLDERS AND INDICATORS WITH ASSIGNED CAUSES
AND DRIVERS ACCORDING TO K ATZ ET AL . [25]

E
S

Groups
Politics
Research and Development
Economy
Civil Society

I

Indicators

P
R

Causes and Key Drivers
Product and process quality
Qualified employees training
Digital literacy

D. Degree of Automation and Digitization Speed as System
Indicators
Roland Berger see digitization in the workplace and the
home office as a direct effect of increasing digital transformation [23]. Thus Berger confirm the interconnections between
the use of digital technology, user behavior and mobility
(e.g. home office, digital collaboration). Goger et al. estimate
that there is a 59% probability of substituting construction
occupations with Industry 4.0. At least they call it ”degree of
automation” or ”probability of automation” and present their
”vision of digital construction” [22]. During the early phases
of development, better variant studies for decision making
become possible through visualization and simulation, better
and significantly more transparent information exchange. Central digital twins of the building and applications of BIM in
integral planning are getting in the field of vision, as well
as processes for automated quality assurance and compliance
with building standards, simplified tendering on a digital basis
and fully automated reading of masses and quantities. During construction, improved logistics through RFID tracking
with location allocation would be possible. Digital recording
of delivery bills and material parameters and a complete
documentation would digitally supplement the construction

Causes and Key Drivers
Infrastructure investment
Affordability
Network Access
Capacity
Digital Usage
Human capital
Digitization speed
Degree of Automation

The ”vision of digital construction” has a high social
relevance in addition to its economic relevance. Schüller developed the term ”digital literacy” [27]. He also names it among
the so-called success factors of the digital transformation.
The speed of digitization in the respective industries will
depend on the digital literacy of those involved in the process
and the quality of products and services. Simondon warns
against such purely economically driven automation [28]. He
describes automation by the well-known image of a fully
automatic and autonomous robot. Simondon sees in it only an
abstract mythical object, without any relevance for a practical
and really innovative technological development. ”Automatism
and its use in the form of the industrial organization called
automation has far more of an economic or social than a technical meaning [28].” In order to ensure a functioning humanmachine interaction, Simondon advocates ”open machines”
with a certain ”margin of uncertainty”. Developments such
as artificial intelligence, algorithms for the individualization
and personalization of interfaces or even autonomous driving
could easily be assigned to this fully digitalized automation.
According to Baumanns, the interdisciplinary collaboration
across all phases of a building’s life cycle (design, construction, operation) also still offers great potential for digital
transformation. This includes a central, digital building model
and digital, interdisciplinary communication and coordination.

Baumanns defines the following megatrends [29] as shown
in table VI.As growth drivers the authors describe residential
construction, infrastructure and transport. The general construction volume is currently benefiting from low loan and
interest rates. As competitive advantages for companies he
sees the areas of Smart Home, Smart Building and Building
Information Modeling (BIM). As current opportunities he
mentions globalization, specialization and expansion of the
company’s own portfolio in the existing value chain and the
increasing use of digital technology. The greatest potential he
assumes in the field of logistics, in the digital collection and
analysis of data and in the automation of construction work.
He names five phases: Logistics, procurement, production,
marketing/sales and after sales.
TABLE VI
G ROUPS OF STAKEHOLDERS AND INDICATORS WITH ASSIGNED CAUSES
AND DRIVERS ACCORDING TO BAUMANNS [29]

P
R
E

Groups
Politics
Research and Development
Economy

S

Civil Society

I

Indicators

VII. To my opinion, the ”virtual project space” and ”cloud
computing” can be described more as distinct technologies and
less as a trend. Established in science, the term ”Collaborative
Virtual Environments” (CVE) has long been used to describe
these technical solutions. The same applies to BIM. I would
only use the term trend in connection with an overarching scenario based on a specific thought style, mindset or paradigm.
TABLE VII
G ROUPS OF STAKEHOLDERS AND INDICATORS WITH ASSIGNED
TECHNOLOGIES AND TRENDS ACCORDING TO G OGER ET AL . [22],
D IGITAL ROADMAP AUSTRIA [30] AND BRZ [31]

E

Groups
Politics
Research and Development
Economy

S

Civil Society

I

Indicators

P
R

Causes and Key Drivers
Sustainability
Low interest rate policy
Digitization and Technology
Globalization
Smart Home / Smart Building
Building Information Modeling (BIM)
Specialization
Extension of the own portfolio (value
chain)
Urbanization
Demographic change
-

E. Technologies, Trends and Primary Energy Consumption
Analogous to Industry 4.0, Goger et al. coined the term
”Construction 4.0” [22]. The Digital Roadmap Austria identifies ten technology areas with enormous development potential
that could also be of significance for architecture and urban
planning [30]. A study by BRZ Deutschland GmbH. names
the following six IT-trends in the construction industry [31].
However, in these studies there is no distinction between conventional and sustainable technologies. Some of the technologies mentioned, such as block chain technology, are currently
heavily criticized, because of their disproportionate energy
consumption. The sustainability of IoT is also under current
discussion. The integrated IT and the lack of software updates
for intelligent household appliances could lead to a shorter
lifetime of usual household appliances such as refrigerators.
Moreover today there is no clear distinction and recommendation between sustainable technologies and non-sustainable
technologies. Additionally there are currently no comparable
indicators of the systemic energy efficiency of the individual
technologies. This could be ensured by a technology-specific
ecological footprint. To take these factors into account, two
further indicators will be introduced to assess the sustainability
of the overall system: primary energy consumption and the
ratio of sustainable processes and technologies to the total
amount of digital processes and technologies as shown in table

Technologies and Trends
Big Data
Artificial Intelligence (AI)
Open Innovation
Intelligent energy networks (smart
grids)
Intelligent materials (4D)
New manufacturing processes (3D
printing)
Extended Reality (xR)
5G mobile phone standard
IoT and cloud computing
Building Information Modeling (BIM)
Blockchain Technology
Virtual Project Space
Mobility
Social security
IT Security
Primary Energy Consumption
Total amount of digital processes and
technologies
Sustainable digital processes and technologies

F. Digitization, Digital Transformation, Innovation and Sustainability
F1. Digitization, Digital Transformation or Innovation?
Many authors mention digitization itself as a driver for
major changes in work processes. It would be much more
accurate to name technological change through research and
development as a driver of digitization. Thus research and
development appeared as a stakeholder on the scene. The
newly developed technology and the associated research and
development (not digitization or digital transformation) are the
drivers. To a large extent new technological developments lead
to changes in work processes. Digital transformation can be
better described as the systemic end result or as a significant
scenario in this macrosocietal transformation. Digitization and
technology are also listed as trends in many studies. What
is missing here is a precise distinction between digitization
(or digital transformation) as a cross-system scenario on the
one hand and digital technology as a subordinate systemic
element resulting from research and development on the other.
Just as BIM, smart homes and smart buildings can be better
described as technologies rather than as trends. Digitization
and digital transformation are not used as congruent terms in

this paper. Digital transformation better desribes the whole
process. While digitization can usually be understood as
the ”conversion of analogue quantities into digital ones”.
But neither digitization nor digital transformation does not
necessarily mean innovation. The digitization of an existing
process does not necessarily have to be innovative per se.
Purely economic and efficiency-oriented digitization is the
adaptation of an existing process to modern technology.
However, this does not necessarily make the process new
and certainly not sustainable. Innovation always means
a previously unknown, new solution to a problem. The
innovative idea is also fundamental to innovation, which then
leads to a new solution by recombining existing resources.
At the beginning of an innovation there is always an idea
and a new mindset, a new way of thinking about things.
The implementation into a suitable technological solution is
subordinated.
F2. Sustainability
In the examined literature sustainability is often used as
an ambiguous term or concept. For example Baumanns cites
sustainability itself as a current megatrend [29]. Thus sustainability appears in a completely different context than in
IE.F and Roland Berger [24] and Goger et al. [22]. There
sustainability is mentioned as a trend. In many studies sustainability is seen as a way of thinking, a thought style or a
paradigm. It can also be interpreted as a social factor, such as
a sustainable lifestyle. Or it can be interpreted as an economic
factor such as a new sustainable business and corporate
culture. Sustainability is often mentioned in connection with an
economically efficiency-oriented process optimization. Many
experts also expect sustainability to have positive effects on
future energy and resource consumption. Last but not least it
could stand for either a sustainable research paradigm or a
sustainable political ”thought style”. The term sustainability
can also be interpreted in a political sense as the amount of
political actions aiming climate protection. Thus sustainability
itself cannot precisely be assigned to one stakeholders group
only. The term finds correspondences in all four stakeholders
groups as a ”thought style” or a specific way of thinking. So it
will reappear again as a political ”thought style”, a ”research
paradigm”, a public ”thought style” and an ”economic business
and corporate culture”. It also can be defined as another
seperate concept, such as political or economical actions for
climate protection. Sustainability also can be seen as a quality
of the whole system behaviour, when we think of technologies
and trends. So indicators such as primary energy consumption,
the degree of automation, digitization speed and the ratio of
sustainable processes and technologies to the total amount of
digital processes and technologies can be seen strongly related
to the main concept of sustainability as well.
G. Thought Styles and Paradigms as Individual Mindsets for
Digital Transformation
In the aforementioned sections another group of causes and
drivers of the digital transformation emerges. It is the group

of thought styles, paradigms, ways of thinking or reasoning.
This group will be explained in more detail in the next
section. Ian Hacking coined the term ”style of reasoning” in
connection with the continuous change in mission statements
[32]. He essentially followed Alistair Crombie (1915-1996),
who claimed that there are different scientific methods of
knowledge that have emerged in certain areas of human history. Ludwik Fleck developed the analogous concept of ”thinking styles” [33]. Rudolf S. Kuhn uses the term ”paradigm
shift” to describe the change in basic conditions for theory
formation in science, such as concept formation, methods
of observation and technology used [34]. Nowadays, terms
such as ”theory dynamics” and ”theory change” are often
used to describe these phenomena. Luca Sciortino [35] also
mentions Michel Foucault’s ’episteme’ [36] and the ”research
program” of Imre Lakatos [37]. All these authors thus describe
phenomena in connection with change on the basis of changed
mindsets and models, ways of thinking and paradigms. These
new perspectives lead to a new basis, enable new methods
and new technologies and, last but not least, lead to real
innovation. Mission statements usually describe a desired goal
or an ideal state. They are at home in many areas. They are
often used in corporate culture. A mission statement serves as
orientation and motivation for the employees of a company,
possibly provides information about the product range and
activities of a company, can provide a certain framework
for the public appearance of a company and even influences
the market value of a company. Kühl distinguishes between
three sides of a company [38]: the so-called ”show side”,
the ”formal side” and the ”informal side”. The front side
shows the external image, the facade of the company. The
so-called formal side forms the official set of rules for all
employees. The informal side describes Kühl as the sum
of ”... ingrained practices and ways of thinking, deviations
from official rules and from cultivated myths, dogmas and
fictions.” But there are also certain mindsets or paradigms
for technical or social developments. They are often closely
related to current research and development and formulate
certain utopias in these fields. They are ideal models or wishful
thinking about future possibilities of technology and society.
These models and utopias are often the initial impetus, also
for new research projects. Some of the guiding paradigms for
digital transformation date back to the 1990s. With ”ubiquitous
computing” Mark Weiser described an omnipresent mobile use
of spatial information accessible to everyone, without visible
interfaces and end devices [39]. Neil Gross expected ”that in
the future spontaneous computer networks will emerge and
form a ’giant digital creature’ [40]. He thus describes the
current Internet of Things (IoT). ”Pervasive Computing” and
”Ambient Intelligence” also describe related topics today, but
with different orientations [41]. Ambient Intelligence deals
with intelligent systems embedded in the environment that
support the user in his activities. In contrast to purely commercial considerations, however, the focus here is often on social
and procedural issues. Smart Cities” and ”Smart Homes” also
belong to these thematic fields. The most important features

of ubiquitous computing are the disappearance of hardware
and user interfaces, the adaptivity and self-organization of
the digital system, automatic context perception, ubiquitous
availability of information, and global and local connectivity.
I fondly remember a photo of Archigram from the sixties. It
shows a telephone in a lying tree trunk, somewhere out in
nature. Technical and social utopias are always intertwined.
Social models are not always easy to grasp. Tanner describes
among other things the concept of ”common sense” [42]. He
understands this to mean social rules and behavior, identityforming myths and stories, the knowledge of things that ”one”
does or does not do. ”Common sense is the ability to think
logically without using specialized or advanced knowledge
[42].” The digital transformation in a pluralistic society therefore does not only know one single mindset or paradigm.
Companies have their own mission statements, research and
development work according to their own ways of thinking and
standards, and the population pursues its own individualized
life and work ideas, as sometimes, among other things, a
sustainable lifestyle. Nevertheless, these mission statements
remain powerful drivers for our everyday life.

of ”globalization”, ”specialization”, ”extension of the own
portfolio”, ”product and process quality” and ”efficiency and
process optimization” such as in tables III, IV and VI. Digital
Usage (S4), affordability (S5), network access (S6), capacity
(S7) were adopted directly from table V. Mobility (S8) was
also listed as in tables III and VII.
TABLE VIII
C LARIFIED CONCEPTS AND TERMS
P

Groups
Politics

P5

R

Research and Development

E

Economy

S

Civil Society

I

Indicators

H. Clarifying terms, concepts and indicators
Table VIII summarizes all clarified concepts and terms
from the former literature examination. We can state four
stakeholders (politics, research and development, economy
and civil society) such as mentioned in table I. Sustainability
shows up in three different correlations such as in table VII.
First it can be a ”thought style” for all four stakeholders
(P1, R1, E1, S1) (”a new business and corporate culture” in
table II, ”sustainability” and ”individualization of work and
life models” in table III. Secondly it can include political
actions for climate protection (P2). Third sustainability can be
related to the indicators of primary energy consumption (I1)
and the ratio of sustainable processes and technologies (I5) to
the total amount of digital processes and technologies (I4) as
mentioned in table 7. These indicators can be completed by
the degree of automation (I2) and the digitization speed (I3)
as mentioned in table V. So we are able to define a group of
five indicators finally. The terms of infrastructure investment
(P3) (”extension of the digital infrastructure”), financing and
coordination (P4) (”governance”, ”low interest rate policy”)
and prevention of data monopolies (P5) (”data ethics” or
”avoidance of data monopolies and better data protection” or
”IT security”) were mentioned in tables II, V, VI and VII. The
terms of ”demographic change” and ”urbanization” as found
in tables III and VI can be expressed in population figures.
So both are summarized in the concept of population (S2).
Digital literacy (S3) and education (P6) were added as social
and political concepts, such as mentioned in table II (”greater
digital literacy”), table IV (”digital literacy” and ”qualified
employees training”) and table V (”human capital”). Research
and Development (R2) was introcuded to reflect the terms
of ”digitization and technology” and terms of technological
development and trends such as in tables VI and VII. Product
and process quality (E2) was inserted to reflect the terms

P1
P2
P3
P4

P6
R1
R2
E1
E2
S1
S2
S3
S4
S5
S6
S7
S8
I1
I2
I3
I4
I5

Concepts
Political ”Thought Style”
Climate Protection
Infrastructure Investment
Financing and Coordination
(Governance)
Prevention of Data Monopolies
(Data Ethics)
Education
Research Paradigm
Research and Development
Business and Corporate Culture
Product and Process Quality
Public ”Thought Style”
Population
Digital Literacy
Digital Usage
Affordability
Network Access
Capacity
Mobility
Primary Energy Consumption
Degree of Automation
Digitization Speed
Total amount of digital processes and technologies
Sustainable digital processes
and technologies

III. M ATERIALS AND M ETHODS
A. Fuzzy Cognitive Maps (FCMs), Definition and Background
As mentioned in the introduction FCMs are usually used
to investigate complex systems. They consist of a network
of concepts and weighted interconnections. The technique
of FCMs is often deployed to reveal a dynamic system’s
behaviour, describing how the system could evolve in time
through causal relationships and for the evaluation of alternatives. Therefore this approach is considered useful in the context of scenario planning and decision making. For example
”Integrated World System Modelling” or an ”Integrated Global
System Model” is particularly suitable for mapping complex
processes using FCMs. The concept of Fuzzy Cognitive Maps
(FCMs) has been introduced by Bart Kosko in 1986 [43].
He suggested their use to those knowledge domains that
involve an high degree of uncertainty. He extended the work
of Axelrod, who found the technique of Fuzzy Cognitive
Maps (FCMs) representing a natural extension of cognitive
maps by embedding to them the use of Fuzzy Logic [44].
He also introduced cognitive maps in the context of decision
making for the representation of social scientific knowledge
and decision making processes in the field of social and
political systems. Mention has to be made to the fact that the
cognitive mapping approach to decision making uses elements
from other fields, such as psychology and graph theory.
Since then, FCMs have proven to be a useful method for
the systematic collection of knowledge and for the graphical
representation of causal relationships and are established in
many ”hard” and ”soft” sciences. Caselles names several
research groups that are currently working on global models
to simulate the consequences of scenarios and intervention
strategies in the world system [45]. As prominent examples
he mentions the ”Regional Earth System” of the Earth System
Science Interdisciplinary Centre at the University of Maryland,
the ”Millennium Project” of the World Bank, the ”Integrated
Global System Model” of MIT and the ”Australian Stocks
and Flows Framework (ASFF)”. Bottero et al. for example,
successfully use FCMs to model urban resilience dynamics
and to support scenario planning and strategic decision making
[46]. The procedure follows the conventional method of a simulation. Cloud describes the usual professional development
of model-building and simulation proceeds in three stages
[47]: Theoretical basis and monitoring (observation), problem
and solution attemts, criticism and elimination of possible
errors and mistakes. In the first step you are confronted with
a kind of ”source system”. This system is real and can be
observed or monitored experimentally. Let us assume this is
the process of digital transformation in architecture and urban
planning. For monitoring and data gathering usually expert
interviews, expert opinions or literature reviews are used. Also
the delphi method or similar methods can be applied in this
initial stage. From there we can derive our input values. The
second step is building an abstract model from that source
system (idealization and abstraction). Usually only one specific
aspect is modeled to clarify one specific question. From the

abstract model we can derive an applicable or operable model,
for example in a computer simulation. Now we could run an
iterative process to test the model and to generate certain scenarios. The output values can be validated against the source
system, errors and mistakes can be eliminated and we can
start the process again from the beginning. From there we can
start an optimization loop. Simulations usually are conducted
within a large parameter space to simulate many possible
situations. To optimize the target size, the input variables must
be varied. This can be done by try-and-error, but this takes a
lot of time and effort. Therefore, in the last years, evolutionary
optimization methods (e.g. data farming) have been developed
to reach the whole realm of a simulation’s test bed. These
solutions usually are performed in iterative steps to find an
optimal solution. Usually this is done by High Performance
Computer (HPC) environments. The results can be depicted in
scenarios. The procedure can be repeated until an optimized
state is reached. Today, independent learning algorithms help
to optimize various system-internal parameters, such as the
weighting of correlations. Different learning paradigms and
software packages can be distinguished. Felix et al. [48] name
seven software applications available today: FCM Modeler,
FCM Designer, FCM Tool, JFCM, Mental Modeler, ISEMK
and FCM Expert. Because of the participatory, web-based
solution and because of the ease of use without programming
knowledge, this paper uses the Mental Modeler software,
developed by Gray et al. [16].
B. Properties of FCMs
•
•

•

•

Concepts or components: C1, C2, ... Cn are the systemconstituting variables;
State vector: A = (a1, a2, ... an) where ai is the initial
state and the value of the general term Ci. The values
assigned to the terms are usually in the range [0;1];
Directed edges: they symbolize the causality between the
terms C1, C2 and are represented as arrows or double
arrows;
Adjacency matrix: E = {eij}, where eij is the weight (w)
of the directed edge CiCj. The values assigned to each
relation are in the range [-1;1]. The value 0 means, that
there is no causal relation between the terms Ci and Cj.

FCMs can be described by different kinds of representation:
On the one hand by a graphical representation, the concepts
or components and the directed edges. On the other hand
by a mathematical representation, which consists of a table
mentioning all state vectors in an adjacency matrix. Figure 2.
shows a graphical representation of a Fuzzy Cognitive Map
(FCM). Table IX shows the corresponding adjacency matrix.
C. Developing an Open Experimental Testbed for Sustainable
and Innovative Environments (ETSIE) using Mental Modeler
One of the great minds of simulation and statistics, George
Edward Pelham Box used to say: ”All models are wrong,
but some of them are useful.” [49] This paper presents one
of the first applications of FCMs in the context of digital

to collect extensive empirical data. The ETSIE model is
developed in the spirit of Open Innovation. The model itself
and all data are openly available to all interested people for
review and further research. From the current literature review
it can be observed that the process of digital transformation
is often seen in a predominantely growth-oriented economic
sense. During the current pandemic it can be observed as
well, that sustainability is not necessarily written in capital
letters. Developing innovative and sustainable social and
economic models is currently not the first priority. Therefore
three different digital transformation scenarios are designed.
A traditional growth-oriented scenario, a COVID-19 scenario
and an innovative and sustainable COVID-19 scenario are
modeled and tested. All three scenarios have the same
number of components, connections and the same driver
components. Only the initial state vectors are different and
the internal correlations are weighted differently. This allows
for comparing all three scenarios on an equal basis. The
following three scenarios are illustrated:
•
•

Fig. 2. Graphical Representation of a Fuzzy Cognitive Map (FCM)

TABLE IX
A DJACENCY M ATRIX OF A F UZZY C OGNITIVE M AP (FCM)

C1
C2
C3
C4
C5

C1
0
0
1
0
1

C2
1
0
0
0
1

C3
0
1
0
0
0

C4
0
0
1
0
0

C5
1
0
0
1
0

•

Five indicators provide information on the quality of the
different scenarios:
•
•
•
•
•

transformation. It aims to design a fuzzy but useful general
framework and proof of concept for future inquiry. In this
paper terms and concepts for model building are collected
from a literature review. Using this ”fuzzy” method it is
also common for experts to define the correlations in the
model. Thus the correlations and causalities correspond
to reasonable assumptions by the author. For simulation
the mental modeler software is used, developed by Gray
et al. [16]. FCMs can describe and simulate the dynamic
behavior of systems. Simulating the system behaviour is
usually based on mathematical operations and takes place in
iterative steps. Unfortunately, the Mental Modeler software
is very limited in this respect and does also not allow for
the use of dedicated learning algorithms. However, scenario
building is very simple, user-friendly and allows for a quick
visualization of results. Therefore, this paper only uses the
given possibilities of scenario building in the Mental Modeler
Software and does not include an additional, algorithmically
supported simulation in iterative steps. This paper develops
an open experimental testbed for sustainable and innovative
environments (ETSIE) as a general framework using FCMs. It
highlights directions for future inquiry, but it is not expected

Traditional, growth-oriented scenario
COVID-19 scenario (natural disaster)
Innovative and sustainable COVID 19 scenario

Primary energy consumption (I1)
Degree of automation (I2)
Digitization speed (I3)
Total number of existing digital processes and technologies (I4)
Number of sustainable digital processes and technologies
(I5)

Inside the given Mental Modeler software platform data
is calculated by the capabilities of the software. For setting
the state vectors the software only allows values between 1 and +1. State vectors are set by a reasonable assumption
by the author to get significant results. One single scenario
is generated at one calculation time. Simulation results are
taken directly from the given software. No further iterations,
no evolutionary optimization methods or learning algorithms
are used. No other than the mentioned scenarios are generated.
The three scenarios then subsequently are compared to each
other to see, if the ETSIE model delivers useful and significant
results and is able to be a proof of concept.

D. Stakeholders

F. Three Alternative Scenarios

The following four different groups of people can be
identified as stakeholders for the ETSIE model:

In the following, three alternative scenarios, including the
COVID-19 scenario, are depicted using FCMs in the ETSIE
model and evaluated according to the five basic indicators
mentioned above. Table XI shows a description of all three
alternative scenarios:

•
•
•
•

(P) Politics (cities, counties and municipalities - federal,
state and local)
(R) Research and development
(E) Economy (companies, architects and urban planners)
(S) Civil society (population and employees)

•
•
•

E. Concepts
The concepts from table VIII are directly transferred to table
X. This table shows the concepts of the ETSIE model with a
detailed description. All concepts are assigned to the different
stakeholders: politics (Pn), research and development (Rn),
economy (En), civil society (Sn) and indicators (In).
TABLE X
L IST OF CONCEPTS
P1
P2
P3
P4
P5
P6
R1
R2

Name
Political Thought Style
Climate Protection
Infrastructure
Investment
Financing and Coordination (Governance)
Prevention of Data Monopolies (Data Ethics)
Education

S1
S2
S3
S4

Research Paradigm
Research and Development
Business and Corporate
Culture
Product and Process
Quality
Public Thought Style
Population
Digital Literacy
Digital Usage

S5
S6

Affordability
Network Access

S7

Capacity

S8

Mobility

I1
I2

Primary Energy Consumption
Degree of Automation

I3

Digitization Speed

I4

Total amount of digital
processes and technologies
Sustainable digital processes and technologies

E1
E2

I5

Description
Common sense or style of reasoning
Political actions for climate protection
Political actions for infrastructure investment
Political actions regarding subsidies
and governmental support
Political actions regarding data ethics
Political actions for educational support
Common sense or style of reasoning
Research actions

Scenario 1 - Traditional, growth-oriented scenario
Scenario 2 - COVID-19 scenario (natural disaster)
Scenario 3 - Innovative and sustainable COVID-19 scenario
TABLE XI
T HREE ALTERNATIVE SCENARIOS

Alternative scenarios
(1) Traditional growthoriented scenario

(2) COVID-19 scenario
(natural disaster)

(3) Innovative and
sustainable COVID-19
scenario

Description
This scenario includes a traditional form of the
growth-oriented economy, no political subsidies for sustainable developments, no sustainable research and development, an increase of
individual life and work forms and an increase
of individual mobility
This scenario is characterized by rising governmental expenses, economical subsidies,
growing investment in research, but no dedicated promotion of sustainable technologies
This scenario shows an innovative approach
towards a sustainable digital transformation
under COVID-19 conditions.

All three scenarios are built from the same number of
concepts (or components) and connections. They all have
the same density and the same number of connections
per component. All three models have exactly the same
complexity score and show six driver components as listed
below:

Common sense or style of reasoning
Economical actions regarding product
and process quality
Common sense or style of reasoning
Total amount of population
Amount of digitally educated people
Average daily usage time of digital
media
Average price of digital technology
Amount of people having digital network acces
Average available bandwidth per inhabitant
Average daily usage time of means of
transport
Primary energy demand (Qp)
Percentage of digital process automation
Composite factor of population, digital
literacy, digital usage, affordability, capacity and network access
Total amount of digital processes and
technologies
Percentage of sustainable processes
and technologies

•
•
•
•
•
•

P1 - Political Thought Style
R1 - Research Paradigm
E1 - Business and Corporate Culture)
S1 - Public Thought Style
S2 - Population
S5 - Affordability

This structural design, the general form of the models,
remains the same in all three scenarios. Only the weights of
the connections between the nodes (or components) change.
This is intended to make it easier and clearer to recognize
deviating results and behaviour of the individual models.

IV. R ESULTS
A. Scenario 1 - Traditional Growth-Oriented Scenario
Figure 3. shows a graphical representation of the first
scenario, the traditional growth-oriented scenario. It is
characterized by following parameters: The state promotes
infrastructure development, research and education. There
is no state support for the economy, mobility is not
encouraged, sustainable technologies are not promoted, and
data monopolies are not avoided. There are no additional
government measures for climate protection. The economy
additionally supports education, infrastructure extension
and the degree of automation. They invest in research for
product and process quality, but do not promote sustainable
technologies decisively. Research develops new technologies
without promoting sustainability. The population is growing
moderately and continues to pursue consumption-oriented
and individual life and work models, without a significant
sustainable share. As a result, government expenses (+0.24)
and expenditure on infrastructure extension (+0.46) are
increasing. Data monopolies are not avoided (0). Climate
protection measures are decreasing (-0.24) and the number of
digital processes and technologies is increasing (+0.65), while
the share of sustainable technologies is decreasing (-0.7). The
digitization speed is increasing (+0.66), as well as the primary
energy consumption (+0.72) and the degree of automation
(+0.22). There is a higher digital literacy (+0.45), better
network access (+0.43), higher capacities (+0.23) and more
digital usage (+0.44) and a corresponding higher mobility
(+0.46). Corresponding to an increasing product and process
quality (+0.44), education (+0.46) and research (+0.44) grow.
Table XV shows the adjacency matrix and the state vectors
in scenario 1. The initial state vectors are depicted in white
colour on grey ground. Figure 4. shows a graphical depiction
of the results of scenario 1 in a bar diagram.
B. Scenario 2 - COVID-19 Scenario (Natural Disaster)
Figure 5. shows a graphical representation of the second
scenario, the COVID-19 scenario (natural disaster). It is characterized by following parameters: The state is promoting
the extension of infrastructure and is also investing more
in research. Education and digital literacy receive additional
support. There is temporary state support for the economy,
mobility is not promoted, sustainable technologies are not
promoted, data monopolies are not avoided. There are no additional government measures for climate protection. Companies
provide additional support for digital education, infrastructure
extension and automation. They also invest in research for
product and process quality, but without providing dedicated
funding for climate protection or sustainable technologies.
Research is increasingly developing new technologies without
promoting sustainability. The population is growing moderately, but continues to pursue consumption-oriented and individualized models of living and working, without a significant
sustainable share.

Government expenses (+0.36) and expenditures for
infrastructure extension (+0.55) are increasing. Data
monopolies are not avoided (0). Climate protection measures
are decreasing (-0.24). The number of digital processes
and technologies is increasing (+0.82), while the share of
sustainable technologies is declining (-0.87). The speed of
digitization (+0.79), primary energy consumption (+0.79)
and the degree of automation (+0.35) are increasing. Digital
literacy is increasing (+0.69), there is better network access
(+0.66), higher capacities (+0.27) and more digital usage
(+0.71). Individual mobility (+0.46) and product and process
quality (+0.72) increase. Education (+0.64) and research
(+0.79) both grow. Table XVI shows the adjacency matrix
and the state vectors in scenario 2. The initial state vectors
are depicted in white colour on grey ground. Figure 6. shows
a graphical depiction of the results of scenario 2 in a bar
diagram.
C. Scenario 3 - Innovative and Sustainable COVID-19 Scenario
Figure 7. shows a graphical representation of the third
scenario, the innovative and sustainable COVID-19 scenario. It
is characterized by following parameters: There are additional
government measures for climate protection. The state promotes the extension of infrastructure and avoids data monopolies. It invests in education, digital literacy and research. There
is less state support for the economy. Sustainable mobility is
promoted through urban structural measures (e.g. Göderitz et
al. ”Die gegliederte und aufgelockerte Stadt” [50]). Individual
traffic is reduced. Sustainable technologies are promoted in
a targeted manner. The companies support climate protection, education and infrastructure development. The degree
of automation is oriented towards a socially sustainable development. The companies invest in research, product and
process quality and in sustainable technologies. The population
is growing moderately and pursues predominantly socially
sustainable and cooperative living and working models, with
a high sustainable proportion.
Government expenses (+0.36) and expenditure on infrastructure extension (+0.46) are increasing. Additional measures
for climate protection (+0.46) and against data monopolies are
taken (+0.24). The share of sustainable technologies (+0.96)
is increasing, while the total number of digital processes
and technologies is being reduced (-0.84). The digitization
speed increases (+0.78) while primary energy consumption
decreases (-0.76). The degree of automation decreases (-0.36).
Digital literacy is increasing (+0.69), there is better network
access (+0.64), higher capacities (+0.23) and more digital
usage (+0.71). Individual mobility decreases (-0.18). Product
and process quality (+0.75), education (+0.64) and research
(+0.89) all three grow. Table XVII shows the adjacency matrix
and the state vectors in scenario 3. The initial state vectors
are depicted in white colour on grey ground. Figure 8. shows
a graphical depiction of the results of scenario 3 in a bar
diagram.

D. State vectors related to the different scenarios
The different state vectors of the three alternative scenarios
are shown in table XII. The COVID-19 scenario 2 shows
higher state vectors compared to scenario 1. These increased
state vectors are applied to illustrate the higher investments, the
increased expenditure in opposition to a traditional, growthoriented scenario 1. Scenario 3 also shows these increased
state vectors in many areas, but is supplemented by moderate
measures for climate protection. Climate protection will be
promoted, general infrastructure expenditure is reduced, data
monopolies are avoided and mobility is reduced.
TABLE XII
S TATE VECTORS RELATED TO THE THREE ALTERNATIVE SCENARIOS
Concept

P1
P2
P3
P4
P5

P6
R1
R2
E1
E2

S1
S2
S3
S4
S5
S6
S7
S8

Political
Thought Style
Climate Protection
Infrastructure
Investment
Financing and
Coordination
(Governance)
Prevention
of
Data
Monopolies
(Data Ethics)
Education
Research
Paradigm
Research and
Development
Business and
Corporate
Culture
Product
and Process
Quality
Public
Thought
Style
Population
Digital Literacy
Digital Usage
Affordability
Network Access
Capacity
Mobility

(1)
Traditional
Growthoriented

(2)
COVID-19

(3)
Innovative
and
Sustainable
COVID-19

±0.00

±0.00

+0.50

+0.50

+0.75

+0.50

+0.50

+0.75

+0.75

±0.00

±0.00

+0.50

+0.50

+0.75

+0.75

+0.50

+0.75

+0.75

+0.50

+0.75

+0.75

+0.50

+0.75

+0.75

+0.50

+0.75

+0.75

+0.50

+0.75

−0.50

shows the results of the simulation, related to the different
scenarios.
Scenario 3 differs from the first two scenarios. However,
its structure is completely different. Additional measures for
climate protection are taken. Conventional government expenses remain at the level of scenario 2. Expenditure on
infrastructure returns to the level of scenario 1. Education
remains at the same high level. Research and development
grow much more strongly than in the first two scenarios.
The digitization speed declines only slightly and can almost
be maintained at the level of scenario 2. The same applies
to network access. Digital usage remains the same. Digital
literacy is increased compared to scenario 1 and corresponds
to the level of scenario 2. The degree of automation is reduced.
Mobility and total energy consumption will decrease. The
network capacity can be maintained at the level of scenario
1. The share of sustainable digital processes and technologies
can be increased significantly while the total number of digital
processes and technologies decreases. Product and process
quality increase.
These results speak for a reachable, innovative and researchdriven, sustainable increase in efficiency in scenario 3. With
almost the same effort as in scenario 2, a real social and
sustainable trend reversal seems possible.
F. Network parameters and centrality

E. Simulation results related to the different scenarios
The results of the scenarios 1 and 2 are similar to a high
degree. In both scenarios, the effort for climate protection
is reduced to the same extent. The share of sustainable
digital processes and technologies decreases in scenario 2 even
more. Mobility remains the same, all other factors increase in
scenario 2 due to the higher initial state vectors. Table XIII

The network parameters in all three scenarios are completely identical, as shown in figures 9., 10. and 11. All
figures and tables shown in this paper you can easily access
in the original version through the provided XML-files in the
supplementary materials. They all have the same number of
components and connections. They have the same density and
the same number of connections per component. All three
models have exactly the same complexity score and the same
six driver components. Sorting the nodes according to their
centrality, you can see the following, as shown in table XIV:
All three scenarios differ from each other in the order and
evaluation of the centrality parameters.
R2 (Research and Development) has the highest centrality
rating in all three scenarios. The centrality of research and
development also increases, in scenarios 1 - 3. In scenario 1
(traditional, growth-oriented scenario), the digitization speed
is in second place, on a par with product and process quality.
Both followed by the share of sustainable processes and
technologies. The total number of digital processes and technologies moves up to the fifth place.
Interestingly, in scenario 2 (COVID-19 scenario), product
and process quality moves up to second place. Third place is
shared by the digitization speed and digital literacy. The order
has clearly changed compared to the first scenario. The share
of sustainable processes and technologies is in fifth place.
In scenario 3 (innovative and sustainable COVID-19 scenario), product and process quality retains second place. However, the third place is now clearly followed by the share of
sustainable processes and technologies. The digitization speed
and digital literacy together fall back to the fourth place.

TABLE XIV
R ANKING OF CONCEPTS DUE TO NETWORK CENTRALITY
(1)
Trad.
Growthoriented

Concept

(2)
COVID19

Concept

TABLE XIII
S IMULATION RESULTS RELATED TO THE THREE ALTERNATIVE SCENARIOS
Concept

P1
P2
P3
P4
P5

P6
R1
R2
E1
E2

S1
S2
S3
S4
S5
S6
S7
S8
I1
I2
I3
I4

I5

Political
Thought Style
Climate Protection
Infrastructure
Investment
Financing and
Coordination
(Governance)
Prevention
of
Data
Monopolies
(Data Ethics)
Education
Research
Paradigm
Research and
Development
Business and
Corporate
Culture
Product
and Process
Quality
Public
Thought
Style
Population
Digital Literacy
Digital Usage
Affordability
Network Access
Capacity
Mobility
Primary
Energy
Consumption
Degree of Automation
Digitization
Speed
Total amount
of
digital
processes and
technologies
Sustainable
digital
processes and
technologies

(1)
Traditional
Growthoriented

(2)
COVID-19

(3)
Innovative
and
Sustainable
COVID-19

−0.24

−0.24

+0.46

+0.46

+0.55

+0.46

+0.24

+0.36

+0.36

±0.00

±0.00

+0.24

+0.46

+0.64

+0.64

+0.44

+0.79

+0.89

+0.44

+0.72

+0.75

+0.45

+0.69

+0.69

+0.44

+0.71

+0.71

+0.43

+0.66

+0.64

+0.23
+0.46
+0.72

+0.27
+0.46
+0.79

+0.23
−0.18
+0.76

+0.22

+0.35

+0.36

+0.66

+0.79

+0.78

+0.65

+0.82

+0.84

−0.70

−0.87

+0.94

4.25

(3)
Innov.
and
Sustainable
COVID19
4.50

Concept

3.50

R2
Research
and
Development

3.00

I3
4.00
Digitization
Speed

3.00

E2
Product
and
Process
Quality

3.00

I3
3.50
Digitization
Speed

I5
Sustainable
digital
processes
and technologies

2.50

I5
Sustainable
digital
processes
and technologies

3.00

S3
Digital
Literacy

3.00

I3
Digitization
Speed

2.00

I4
Total
amount
of digital
processes
and technologies

2.50

I5
Sustainable
digital
processes
and technologies

3.00

S3
Digital
Literacy

R2
Research
and
Development
E2
Product
and
Process
Quality

4.25

R2
Research
and
Development
E2
Product
and
Process
Quality

V. D ISCUSSION AND C ONCLUSIONS
According to the results of this study, a sustainable and
social turnaround is possible. It is described how a reduction
of primary energy consumption and a simultaneous increase in
the share of sustainable digital processes and technologies can
be achieved with the same or a slightly higher effort. The order
of the concepts according to network centrality shows much
of what we can already observe in reality today. In all three
scenarios, research drives the development of new technologies
and is at the center of the digital transformation. All three
scenarios have different initial state vectors and digitization
speeds. In the traditional and growth-oriented scenario 1, the
focus is on digitization speed and on the quality of economic
processes and products. The share of sustainable processes and
technologies comes after these two factors. This scenario best
reflects the well-known and widespread efficiency-oriented and
fordist production factors of performance, quality and acceleration. In COVID-19 scenario 2, the quality of products and

processes takes second place, followed by digitization speed.
With higher initial state vectors and a higher effort the product
and process quality increases. The digitization speed still plays
an important role, but loses centrality. It is shown that there is a
factual connection to a general ”slowdown” in the course of the
current pandemic. Interestingly, digital literacy now appears
to be more prominent. The share of sustainable processes is
slipping further behind. The simulation results show, that in
times of COVID-19, sustainability is not necessarily written
in capital letters, and we can observe this as well in reality. In scenario 3, the innovative and sustainable COVID-19
scenario, research is also at the top of the list, followed by
product and process quality. However, the share of sustainable
processes and technologies now takes on a central position.
The digitization speed and digital literacy are moving further
back, but are still in the focus of our interests. Taking into
account digital education and a moderate digitization speed,
further improvement of our products and processes can lead
to sustainable quality and real innovation? For architecture an
urban planning these results are very important. Innovative
digital transformation will only be possible by a general,
integrative and coordinated change of ”thought styles” of all
stakeholders involved. Innovative sustainability can be reached
through more intensive and target-oriented research and development from both sides, economy as well as science. Research
and development will be the basis for really innovative and
sustainable products and services. Therefore we will need a
reliable classification of sustainable technologies. Additionally
an adequate digital literacy and responsible public handling of
resources will be needed. Mobility can be optimized through
appropriate urban structure planning. It will not only be the
question of a new category of vehicles. We all will have
to review our lifestyle. Urban planning will have to intensively review the city structures for innovative and sustainable
principles and generate ideas for sustainable city quarters of
the future. Where do we want to live, where do we work,
do we really have to travel that much? And we all will see
processes slowing down to a socially compatible, sustainable
and human level. Technological development already fulfils
many future scenarios today. Even if we are not far away
from the adaptivity and self-organisation of digital systems,
there is still a long way to go for automatic context perception
and comprehensive standards. It would also be desirable to
have a solid, worldwide non-profit organization in order to
make high-quality data openly available. For weather data, the
World Meteorological Organization of the UN has been in existence for 70 years. Currently, there are also few standardized
assessments of digital processes and technologies. Often no
clear distinction is made between conventional and sustainable
digital technologies. Often the mutual basics are missing. A
catalog of innovative and sustainable social processes and
technologies for targeted promotion and financing would be
desirable. The degree of automation and social compatibility
of innovative processes and technologies should also play a
key role in this context. A central organization at global or
european level could certainly make a significant contribution

to this. For future work there are many interesting perspectives.
The ETSIE model provided a first proof of concept comparing
three scenarios of digital transformation using a relatively
simple software basis. Of course the figures can be improved
to illustrate the advantages of the innovative and sustainable
model. In the next steps the number of scenarios could be
extended using another software platform or a combination
of advanced software to reach the whole realm of the experimental simulation’s testbed. Generating more scenarios.
using learning algorithms and evolutionary optimization and
evaluation will lead to refinement and general improvement
of the model and should provide new and more detailed
information on the general process of digital transformation in
architecture andurban planning. So, will COVID-19 accelerate
digitization? To a certain extent yes. This study has shown
that COVID-19 can be an accelerator of digitization, but
is no guarantee for sustainable and high quality innovation.
Similar to a natural disaster, COVID-19 can be presented
as just one of many possible digitization scenarios. The
investments and all the stakeholders decision will show which
direction we want to take. Whether we want to continue to
pursue primarily commercial interests, or whether we see the
sustainable benefits of a solidary community in a healthy
and functioning, really innovative environment. It will not
be enough to digitize the existing growth-driven economy.
A fundamental and innovative change is necessary to avert a
dramatic climate catastrophe and to solve our social problems.
This change must be supported by all stakeholders in the
same way and can be implemented with nearly the same or a
moderate higher effort. The current crisis is an opportunity
for new ideas, for the meaningful restructuring of creative
and productive processes. But this does not only include
investment in infrastructure and digital literacy. How we want
to keep it, that way is up to us to decide. The question remains
- in which world do we want to live?
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The author would like to thank Theresa Ramisch and
Alexander Gutzmer from Baumeister Magazine at Georg Media GmbH. in Munich, who asked me to have a closer look at
this interesting topic. My thanks also go to my partner Cornelia
for her patience and support developing this small research
project and her valuable advice. Last but not least, my sincere
gratitude goes to Gudrun Klinker at TUM, who kindly made
this publication possible.
VI. A PPENDIX

Fig. 3. Graphical representation . Traditional growth-oriented scenario (Screenshot from Mental Modeler Software)

Fig. 4. Simulation Results . Traditional growth-oriented scenario (Screenshot from Mental Modeler Software)

TABLE XV
A DJACENCY MATRIX AND STATE VECTORS IN SCENARIO 1 (T RADITIONAL GROWTH - ORIENTED SCENARIO )
P1
P1
P2
P3
P4
P5
P6
R1
R2
E1
E2
S1
S2
S3
S4
S5
S6
S7
S8
I1
I2
I3
I4
I5

P2
0

P3
0.5

P4
0.5

P5
0

P6
0.5

R1

R2

E1

E2

S1

S2

S3

S4

S5

S6

S7

0.5

0.5

S8

I1

I2

I3

I4

I5

0.5
0.5

0

0
0
0.5

0.5
−0.5 0.5

0.5
0.5

0.5
0.5

0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5

0.5

−0.5

0.5

−0.5

0.5

−0.5
−0.5

0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5

0.5
−0.5

Fig. 5. Graphical representation . COVID-19 scenario (Screenshot from Mental Modeler Software)

TABLE XVI
A DJACENCY MATRIX AND STATE VECTORS IN SCENARIO 2 (COVID-19 SCENARIO OR NATURAL DISASTER )
P1
P1
P2
P3
P4
P5
P6
R1
R2
E1
E2
S1
S2
S3
S4
S5
S6
S7
S8
I1
I2
I3
I4
I5

P2
0

P3
P4
P5
0.75 0.75 0

P6
R1
0.75

R2

E1

E2

S1

S2

S3

S4

S5

S6

S7

0.5

0.5

S8

I1

I2

I3

I4

I5

0.5
0.75

0.75

0
0
0.75

0.75
−0.5 0.5

0.5
0.5

0.75
0.75

0.5
0.75
0.75
0.75

0.5

−0.5

0.5

−0.5

0.5

−0.5
−0.5

0.75
0.5
0.75
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5

0.5
−0.5

Fig. 6. Simulation results . COVID-19 scenario (Screenshot from Mental Modeler Software)

Fig. 7. Graphical representation . Innovative and sustainable COVID-19 scenario (Screenshot from Mental Modeler Software)

TABLE XVII
A DJACENCY MATRIX AND STATE VECTORS IN SCENARIO 3 (I NNOVATIVE AND SUSTAINABLE COVID-19 SCENARIO )
P1
P1
P2
P3
P4
P5
P6
R1
R2
E1
E2
S1
S2
S3
S4
S5
S6
S7
S8
I1
I2
I3
I4
I5

P2
0.5

P3
0.5

P4
P5
0.75 0.5

P6
R1
0.75

R2

E1

E2

S1

S2

S3

S4

S5

S6

S7

0.5

0.5

S8

I1

I2

I3

I4

I5

0.5
0.75

−0.5

0.75

0.5
0.75
0.75
0.5

0.5

−0.5 0.75

0.5
0.5

0.75

−0.5

0.75
0.75
0.75

−0.5 0.75

−0.5
0.5

0.75
0.75

0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
−0.5
−0.5 0.5
0.5
−0.5

Fig. 8. Simulation results . Innovative and sustainable COVID-19 scenario (Screenshot from Mental Modeler Software)

Fig. 9. Traditional growth-oriented scenario . Network parameters and centrality (Screenshot from Mental Modeler Software)

Fig. 10. COVID-19 scenario (natural disaster) . Network parameters and centrality (Screenshot from Mental Modeler Software)

Fig. 11. Innovative and sustainable COVID-19 scenario . Network parameters and centrality (Screenshot from Mental Modeler Software)

R EFERENCES
[1] Coronavirus COVID-19 Global Cases by the Center for Systems Science and Engineering (CSSE) at Johns Hopkins University (JHU) in
Baltimore, Maryland / USA.
[2] ”Die Welt und die Gesellschaft in Deutschland wird sich verändern”,
Deutschlandfunk 2020.
[3] KMK-Präsidentin erwartet Schub für Digitalisierung an Schulen,
Deutschlandfunk 2020.
[4] Schmidt, P.; Ebner, S. Petition gegen den Fernunterricht, Münchner
Merkur 2020 Nr. 71, 25-03-2020, p. 16.
[5] Zadeh L. A., The roles of fuzzy logic and soft computing in the conception, design, and deployment of intelligence systems, in: Nwana H.
S., Azarmi N. (eds) 1997. Software agents and soft computing: towards
enhancing machine intelligence concepts and applications. Lecture notes
in computer science, vol. 1198, pp 83–90.
[6] Zadeh L. A., What is Soft Computing. 1997 Soft Comput 1:1–2.
[7] Bonissone P., Soft computing: the convergence of emerging reasoning
technologies. 1997 Soft Comput 1:6–18.
[8] Jain L., Soft computing techniques in knowledge-based intelligent engineering systems: approaches and applications. 1997 Studies in fuzziness
and soft computing, vol. 10, Springer, Berlin Heidelberg New York.
[9] Papageorgiou, E.I., Salmeron, J.L.: A review of fuzzy cognitive maps
research during the last decade. 2013 IEEE Trans. Fuzzy Syst. 21(1),
69–79.
[10] Özesmi, U., Özesmi, S.: A participatory approach to ecosystem conservation: fuzzy cognitive maps and stakeholder group analysis in Uluabat
Lake, Turkey. 2003 Environ. Manage. 31(4), 518–531.
[11] Özesmi, U., Özesmi, S.L.: Ecological models based on people knowledge: A multy – step fuzzy cognitive mapping approach. 2004 Ecol.
Model. 176, 43–64.
[12] Misthos, L.S., Messaris, G., Damigos, D., Menegaki, M.: Exploring
the perceived intrusion of mining into the landscape using the fuzzy
cognitive mapping approach. 2017 Ecol. Eng. 101, 60–74.
[13] Jetter, A.: Fuzzy cognitive maps for engineering and technology management: what works in practice? In: 2006 PICMET Proceedings.
[14] Jetter, A., Schweinfort, W.: Building scenarios with fuzzy cognitive
maps: an exploratory study of solar energy. 2010 Futures 43, 52–66.
[15] Papageorgiou, E.I., Groumpos, P.P. A weight adaptation method for
fuzzy cognitive map learning. 2005 Soft Comput 9, 846–857.
[16] Gray S. A.; Gray, S.; Cox, L. J.; Henly-Shepard, S. Mental Modeler:
A Fuzzy-Logic Cognitive Mapping Modeling Tool for Adaptive Environmental Management, in: Proceedings of 46th Hawaii International
Conference on System Sciences 2013, Wailea, Maui, HI, pp. 965-973.
[17] Horx, Matthias. Die Zukunft nach Corona - Wie eine Krise unsere
Gesellschaft, unser Denken und unser Handeln verändert, 2020, Econ
Verlag, Berlin.
[18] Widmann, Aloysius. Ist die Corona-Pandemie eine Naturkatastrophe?
Der Standard 2020, April 20th.
[19] Detting, Daniel. Zukunftsszenarien nach Corona - Gesundheit wird nicht
mehr nur eine individuelle Angelegenheit sein, Der Tagesspiegel 2020,
April 5th.
[20] von der Gracht, Heiko. Die Zukunft nach Corona, KPMG Klardenker
(eds.) 2020, July 2nd.
[21] Thierstein, Alain. Digitale Transformation im urbanen Raum, Stadt
Bauwelt 2018, Nr. 219 / 19.2018 – Digitale Stadt, pp. 32-35.
[22] Goger, Gerald; Piskernik, Melanie; Urban, Harald. Studie: Potenziale der Digitalisierung im Bauwesen 2018, Bundesministerium für
Verkehr, Innovation und Technologie and Wirtschaftskammer Österreich,
Geschäftsstelle Bau, Vienna / Austria.
[23] Roland Berger Holding GmbH. (eds.). Wirtschaftliche Auswirkungen
des Coronavirus - Teil 2, Roland Berger 2020, March 26th, München.
[24] Internet Economy Foundation (IE.F); Roland Berger Holding GmbH.
(eds.) Deutschland digital - Sieben Schritte in die Zukunft (undated).
[25] Katz, Raul; Koutroumpis, Pantelis; Callorda, Fernando. Using a digitization index to measure the economic and social impact of digital agendas
2014, info. Vol. 16 No. 1, pp. 32-44.
[26] Roland Berger Holding GmbH. (eds.). Digitales Arbeiten in Zeiten von
COVID-19, Roland Berger 2020, April 2nd, München.
[27] Schüller, K.; Förster, A. Digital Literacy für die Stadt, Informationen
zur Raumentwicklung 1 2017, p. 108-121.
[28] Simondon, Gilbert. Die Existenzweise technischer Objekte 2012, diaphanes, Zürich.

[29] Baumanns, Thomas et al. (2016): Bauwirtschaft im Wandel, Trends und
Potenziale bis 2020, Studie Roland Berger GmbH. und UniCredit Bank
AG, München.
[30] Bundeskanzleramt und Bundesministerium für Wissenschaft, Forschung
und Wirtschaft (eds.). Digital Roadmap Austria, 2016, December, Vienna, Austria.
[31] BRZ Deutschland GmbH. (eds.). IT-Trends in der Baubranche 2016 Status quo und Perspektiven, 2016 Nürnberg.
[32] Hacking, Ian. ‘Style’ for historians and philosophers, Studies in History
and Philosophy of Science, March 1992, Part A, Volume 23, Issue 1,
pp. 1-20.
[33] Fleck, Ludwik. Entstehung und Entwicklung einer wissenschaftlichen
Tatsache - Einführung in die Lehre vom Denkstil und Denkkollektiv
1980, Suhrkamp Verlag, Frankfurt
[34] Kuhn, Thomas S. The Structure of Scientific Revolutions, 1962, University of Chicago Press, Chicago
[35] Sciortino, L. On Ian Hacking’s Notion of Style of Reasoning. Erkenntnis
- An International Journal of Scientific Philosophy 2017, 82, pp.
243–264.
[36] Foucault, M. The order of things. 1994, Vintage Books, New York.
[37] Lakatos, I. The methodology of scientific research programmes, 1978,
Cambridge Univ. Press.
[38] Kühl, S. Leitbilder erarbeiten, Eine kurze organisationstheoretisch informierte Handreichung, Universität Bielefeld, 2017, Springer Fachmedien Wiesbaden.
[39] Weiser, Mark. The Computer of the 21st Century, Scientific American
1991, 265 (3)
[40] Gross, Neil. The Earth Will Don An Electronic Skin, Bloomberg
Business, 1999 August 30th.
[41] Wiegerling, Klaus. Ubiquitous Computing als konkrete Utopie, in:
Grimm, Petra; Capurro, Rafael (eds.). Informations- und Kommunikationsutopien, 2008, Franz Steiner Verlag, Stuttgart.
[42] Tanner, Ken. Common Sense: Get It, Use It, and Teach It in the
Workplace, Apress Business, 2013.
[43] Kosko; Bart. Fuzzy cognitive maps, in: International Journal of ManMachine Studies, 1986, Volume 24, Issue 1, Pages 65-75, ISSN 00207373.
[44] Axelrod, R.: Structure of Decision: The Cognitive Maps of Political
Elites. 1976 Princeton University Press, Princeton.
[45] Caselles, Antonio, An application of fuzzy cognitive maps to improve
well-being, sustainability and the globalization process, in: Systems
Research and Behavioral Science, November 2013, Vol.30(6), pp.646660.
[46] Bottero M., Datola G., Monaco R. Exploring the Resilience of Urban
Systems Using Fuzzy Cognitive Maps. in: Gervasi O. et al. (eds)
Computational Science and Its Applications – ICCSA 2017, 2017,
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol 10406. Springer, Cham.
[47] Cloud, David J., Applied Modeling and Simulation, 1998 McGraw-Hill,
New York.
[48] Felix, G., Nápoles, G., Falcon, R. et al. A review on methods and
software for fuzzy cognitive maps. Artif Intell Rev 2019, 52, 1707–1737.
[49] Box, George E. P., Empirical Model-Building and Response Surfaces,
1987 Wiley.
[50] Göderitz, Johannes; Rainer, Roland; Hoffmann, Hubert. Die gegliederte
und aufgelockerte Stadt, 1957, Tübingen.

© 2021 by the author. This publication is licensed
under the terms and conditions of the Creative
Commons
Attribution
(CC
BY-NC-ND)
license
(https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

