1

Digital Contact Tracing: Large-scale Geolocation
Data as an Alternative to Bluetooth-based Apps’
Failure

arXiv:2101.07024v1 [cs.SI] 18 Jan 2021

José González-Cabañas∗ , Ángel Cuevas∗† , Rubén Cuevas∗† , Martin Maier‡ ,
∗ Universidad Carlos III de Madrid, Spain
† UC3M-Santander Big Data Institute, Spain
‡ Institut National de la Recherche Scientifique, Canada

Abstract—The currently deployed contact-tracing mobile apps
have failed as an efficient solution in the context of the COVID-19
pandemic. None of them has managed to attract the number of
active users required to achieve an efficient operation. This urges
the research community to re-open the debate and explore new
avenues that lead to efficient contact-tracing solutions. This paper
contributes to this debate with an alternative contact-tracing
solution that leverages already available geolocation information
owned by BigTech companies with very large penetration rates in
most countries adopting contact-tracing mobile apps. Moreover,
our solution provides sufficient privacy guarantees to protect the
identity of infected users as well as precluding Health Authorities
from obtaining the contact graph from individuals.

I. I NTRODUCTION
There is growing evidence that any strategy to effectively
fight COVID-19 requires an efficient tracing of all contacts
of infected individuals. Recent studies conclude that manual
tracing is not fast enough and recommend the use of digital
contact tracing systems able to use large-scale location information [1]. A key element of the success of a digital contacttracing system is its adoption.
Singapore was one of the first countries implementing a
digital contact-tracing system in early 2020. They opted to
implement a mobile app that uses bluetooth (BT) technology
to identify when two users have been in close proximity. If one
of those users is tested positive in COVID-19, the other one is
identified as a potential contagion. 20% of the population in
Singapore installed the mobile app. But this was not enough.
Indeed, a responsible from the Ministry of Health of Singapore
stated that they would need three quarters of the citizens
installing the app to make the digital contact-tracing strategy
successful [2].
Although it is not clear what is the adoption rate from which
a BT contact-tracing app becomes efficient in controlling a
pandemic, some preliminary studies suggest that to mitigate
the pandemic an adoption by 60% of the population in a
country would be required [1] [3]. Some simulations studies
show that if the adoption is below 20% the benefit of a
BT contact-tracing app is very small, but we can observe a
significant impact with 40+% adoption rate [3]. Note that, by
adoption rate we refer to the rate of people actively using the
app, rather than the number of installations.

BT-based contact-tracing apps have a major problem. They
are newly released and thus they need to achieve the required
high adoption rate in a short period of time from scratch.
To the best of our knowledge, neither researchers nor public
or private institutions have proposed a convincing strategy to
achieve the required adoption rate. For the time being, it seems
that the success of any BT contact-tracing app depends solely
on the self-responsibility of people, and it has not been enough.
Despite of the described problem and the reported failure of
Singapore’s app, most western countries (especially in Europe)
have also opted for mobile apps using BT technology as their
contact-tracing systems. In particular, most of these countries
opted for using the Decentralized Privacy-Preserving Proximity Tracing (DP-3T) protocol [4]. The main design goal of DP3T is to provide full-privacy guarantees. In particular, it aims
at guaranteeing that the contact-tracing applications using this
protocol cannot be misused in the future for privacy-intrusive
practices such as advertising, or even, massive surveillance. To
support Health Authorities willing to deploy contact-tracing
apps, Google and Apple integrated in their mobile operative
systems (OS) a version of the DP-3T protocol. The OS just
records user encounters using BT and offers this information to the mobile app, which implements the algorithm to
identify risk contacts. In spite of this effort, to the best of
our knowledge, none of the existing contact-tracing apps has
significantly contributed to mitigate the virus transmission so
far. For instance, early data from the Swiss Health Authority
indicates that just 12% of infected individuals report their
positive through the app [5]. In Spain this number shrinks
to 2%.
In addition, as scientific evidences about the airbone transmission of COVID-19 become almost irrefutable [6], another
important limitation of existing BT contact-tracing apps arises.
They are designed to identify short-distance contact between
two individuals, i.e., less than 2 meters apart. However, airbone
transmission implies that contagion between two persons at
longer distances is possible. Hence, existing BT contacttracing apps may miss an important fraction of contacts that
should be identified as risk contacts.
Finally, solutions like DP-3T, designed with the main goal
of offering full-privacy, present further important shortcomes
in the fight of a pandemic. Some of them are: 1) Even if the
adoption rate were high, they require infected users voluntarily

2

declare their positive condition through the app, leaving a
very important task such as the control of a pandemic in the
hands of individuals’ decision. For instance, an early study
in Switzerland shows that 1/3 of the users of the app tested
positive did not use the app to report their case [5]; 2) The
performance and efficiency of the contact-tracing app cannot
be assessed. Not even how many infected users have been
detected through the app, as recognized by authors of the DP3T protocol [5]; 3) They are unable to provide even aggregate
(and not privacy invasive) context information, which might be
of great value to improve our knowledge on the transmission
patterns used by COVID-19 (or other viruses). For instance, in
this paper we consider the following one: revealing aggregate
statistics of the type of locations (restaurants, sport facilities,
public transportation, hospitals, etc) infected users visited
while they were contagious may be useful to identify statistical
biases on specific type of locations that may reveal hotspots
for the virus transmission.
Given the described context, the main goal of this paper is to
urge the research community to expand the definition of digital
contact-tracing systems having in mind the following key elements: 1) the experience gained so far invites to avoid solutions
that require to achieve massive adoption from scratch; 2)
contact-tracing solutions must be designed considering airbone
transmission distances (few meters) as reference; 3) guide the
design of the solutions setting the efficiency in fighting the
pandemic (i.e., saving lives and mitigating the impact on the
economy) as the primary goal instead of privacy. Of course,
the proposed solution should be compliant with the existing
data protection and privacy laws in the country where it is
deployed.
In this paper, we propose an alternative digital contacttracing system based on the three previous key elements as
fundamental design principles:
1) High adoption rate: We propose to use real-time
location information from (literally) billions of people
around the world that is already available in databases of
large BigTech companies like Facebook (FB), Google,
Apple, etc. We refer to these players as Location
Providers (LPs) in this paper. Some of these LPs, mainly
Google and Facebook, have a very large rate of active
users, over 50%, in many western countries.
2) Contact identification in airbone transmission range:
To geolocate users at both outdoor [7] and indoor
locations [8] with an accuracy of few meters, these
BigTech firms use a combination of techniques that rely
on multiple signals including: GPS location information,
WiFi SSIDs signal’s power, cellular network signals, etc.
3) Legal and Ethical Requirements: We are interested
in performing contact-tracing just for individuals who
has been tested positive of COVID-19. The identity of
infected individuals is sensitive information handled by
the Health Authority (HA) of each country, which is
also responsible for running the contact-tracing strategy.
Therefore, the HA has the identity of infected individuals while the LP has the data to perform the contacttracing for those individuals. We propose a system that
allows running contact-tracing using LPs data on those

individuals tested positive as reported by HAs. Even
the most restrictive data protection laws, like the GDPR
[9], explicitly provision exceptions in which personal
data can be used to monitor epidemics and their spread
(see GDPR Article 6 Recital 46 [9]). Sustained on this
legal basis an agreement to perform an exchange of data
between LPs and HAs might be possible. However, to
provide higher privacy guarantees, in this paper we propose a simple architecture and communication protocol
that enable the exchange of information between a LP
and a HA significantly limiting the ability of (1) HAs
to obtain the contact graph of an individual and (2) LPs
to learn the identity of infected individuals.
We acknowledge that we have no evidence of whether our
system will solve the contact-tracing problem, but we believe it
is a technically sound alternative worth exploring. In addition,
it serves the main purpose of this paper: to encourage the
research community to revisit the design of digital contacttracing solutions that are efficient to mitigate future waves of
COVID-19 pandemic and if not, at least, future epidemics.
II. S OLUTION R ATIONALE
We propose a novel contact-tracing solution that uses geolocation data of billions of users to find people that have been in
contact to individuals tested positive. We refer to them as risk
contacts. The geolocation information is owned by BigTech
companies referred to as Location Providers (LPs) in this
paper, and the information of users tested positive is owned
by Health Authorities (HA). The core of our solution can be
described as follow: HAs send to LPs the IDs of infected
users. LPs use the location information they own to find the
risk contacts of the received IDs (according to the guidelines
provided by epidemiology experts) and send back the list of
risk contacts IDs to the HA. Finally, HAs reach out the risk
contacts to inform them about the prevention protocol they
have to follow.
Note that for practical purposes, we propose to use the
mobile phone number of individuals as user IDs in our
solution. LPs know the mobile phone number of a major part
of the users using their services, and it is reasonable to assume
HAs record the mobile phone of infected users to communicate
with them.
Unfortunately, the direct exchange of data in clear between
HAs and LPs presents important privacy issues. In particular,
LPs should not receive in clear IDs of infected individuals
and HAs should not be able to link the IDs of risk contacts to
their correspondent infected user. Our solution addresses this
challenge allowing to perform the contact-tracing task with
strong privacy guarantees. To this end, we define an architecture and a communication protocol that involve in addition to
LPs and HAs two more players: an Identity Provider (IDP)
and an Independent Third-Party Authority (ITPA).
A. Why using geolocation data?
Adoption: The main limitation of contact-tracing based on
mobile apps is the need to achieve a high rate of active users.

3

This is a major bottleneck that so far has led every attempt in
this line to fail.
Our solution avoids this bottleneck by using large-scale
already available geolocation data owned by BigTech companies. To explicitly compare the penetration of BigTechs’ data
vs. BT mobile apps, Table I shows for 18 countries we have
found data on the number of installations of contact tracing
apps: 1) the penetration rate of smartphones, Android OS [10]
[11] [12] and the Monthly Active Users (MAU) reported by
FB;1 2) the penetration rate of BT mobile-app in number of
installations as well as an estimation of its penetration in terms
of active users. The list of sources we have used to report the
number of mobile apps installations can be accessed here.2
Note that, to the best of our knowledge, Switzerland is the
unique country reporting the percentage of active users of
its app, 63% as of Dec 21, 2020 [13] . In order to have an
estimation of the fraction of active users for other countries
reporting the number of installations, we apply to their number
of installations the Swiss ratio.
According to our estimation, none of the countries reach
a significant adoption rate close to 40% for the contacttracing mobile apps, and only 5 countries are above 20%. In
contrast, Facebook penetration is beyond 50% in all countries
but Germany (45.5%). Similarly, the penetration of Android is
higher than 40% in all countries but US (32%) and Switzerland
(39%). Note the Android penetration just represents a lower
bound of Google penetration. Google has few other extremely
popular apps such as Gmail and Google Maps that are widely
used by iOS users.
Accuracy: BigTech companies use sophisticated techniques
combining GPS, WiFi and cellular networks signals to geolocate users with high precision both outdoors and indoors [7]
[8]. Indeed, Google claims to be able to geolocate users with
an accuracy of 1 to 2 meters using multilateration algorithms
based on the WiFi signal from 3 access points. [8].
Therefore, high penetration rates and location accuracy of
BigTechs present them as a data source that may be enough to
implement efficient contact-tracing solutions. Recent research
works, which uses data from LPs with much lower penetration
than FB or Google, also backup this hypothesis [14].

B. Other benefits
The proposed solution allows to monitor its performance. In
addition, geographical locations can be associated to specific
categories referred to as Point of Interests (POIs). For instance,
a given location can be mapped to a restaurant, a train
station or a hospital. Our solution exploits this to provide
statistical distribution of the POIs visited by infected users
vs. POIs visited by the general population. The comparison
of these distributions may help to identify statistical biases in
POIs regularly more visited by infected users, that might be
infection hotspots.
1 https://developers.facebook.com/docs/marketing-apis
2 https://fdvt.org/files/COVID

APPS SOURCES.pdf

C. Privacy requirements
On the one hand, privacy experts and Data Protection
Authorities (DPAs) have shown concerns to use geolocation
information for digital contact tracing. They basically argue
that it may ease governments through their HAs to implement
massive surveillance due to the scalability provided by digital
technologies. Therefore, our solution should limit the ability
of HAs to massively infer the contact graph information of
individuals using the data received from LPs. In addition, it
should provide privacy provisions to allow revealing targeted
attacks willing to infer the contact graph of particular individuals.
On the other hand, BigTech companies have means to
infer the identity of infected individuals. They can leverage
geolocation data but also other information sources such as
emails, posts in social networks or queries in search engines
they own. For instance, they can detect a user who visited a
testing facility after visiting its website and then remains at
home for a period similar to the mandatory quarantine period.
Therefore, we believe that proposals, as ours, leveraging
BigTech companies’ geolocation data do not impose any extra
risk to infected users’ privacy. In spite of this, appropriate
privacy guarantees should be provided. In particular, our
solution should not provide LPs explicit information about the
identity of infected users. It also should limit the ability of LPs
to infer such identities from the information received from HAs.

D. Meeting Privacy Requirements
In order to meet the defined privacy requirements we leverage the following principles: K-anonymity, basic cryptography
and non-repudiation auditing.
K-anonymity: In our solution the HA sends a list of user IDs
to the LP and the LP answers with the risk contacts of those
user IDs.
Leveraging K-anonymity principles, the HA mixes in its
request M IDs from infected users and N real random IDs
(i.e., random mobile phone numbers associated to real users)
where M <<< N . This serves to anonymize the identity of
infected users and to hinder the capacity of LPs to easily infer
the IDs belonging to infected users. The random IDs used by
the HA are provided by the Identity Provider (IDP) in order
to guarantee that they are existing IDs. In our solution, IDPs
are represented by mobile network operators.
In addition, the HA must aggregate the IDs into groups.
There are two types of groups: infected groups include exclusively IDs from infected users; random groups include IDs
from random users or a mix of random and infected users.
The messages from the HA to the LP include K groups
from which only L are infected groups, where L <<< K.
Upon the reception of a request message from the HA, the
LP computes the risk contacts of each user ID. After that, it
aggregates together in the reply the risk contacts of all user IDs
in a single group. This aggregation process relies on the Kanonymity concept to prevent the HA from linking the received
risk contacts IDs to a specific individual. Note that the larger
is the size of the groups the higher are the privacy guarantees.

4

Country

Smartphone

Android

Facebook

Australia
Austria
Belgium
Croatia
Czech Rep
Denmark
Finland
France
Germany
Ireland
Italy
Latvia
Netherlands
Portugal
Spain
Switzerland
United Kingdom
United States

105
117
68
71
84
115
140
79
90
78
84
96
82
104
90
97
85
81

44
78
41
59
66
55
97
51
61
42
62
69
48
78
71
39
40
32

71.42
50.25
65.00
50.84
53.32
71.03
59.65
58.35
45.50
65.54
57.80
52.45
63.09
67.47
62.05
52.38
66.64
69.90

BT mobile apps
Estimated
Installations
active users
27.6
17.4
9
5.7
12.2
7.7
2
1,3
14
8.8
34.8
21.9
45.3
28.5
9.5
6
34.5
21.7
40.5
25.5
21.1
13.3
9.1
5.7
25
15.8
1
0.6
11.5
7.2
33.4
21.1
23.8
15,1
2.5
1.6

TABLE I: Penetration in percentage of smartphones, Android, Facebook and contact-tracing apps installations and estimated
active users for 18 countries. The population of each country to compute the penetration is obtained from the World Bank
Database [15].

Cryptography: A honest HA is interested only on the risk
contacts IDs associated to infected groups. To hinder the
ability of HAs to access contacts IDs from random groups,
the LP encrypts the list of contacts of each group (included in
the reply to the HA) using a different key per group. Therefore,
the HA receives the contact IDs of all groups encrypted. To
retrieve the keys of infected groups, the HA has to send a
request to an intermediary that we refer to as Independent
Third-Party Authority (ITPA). In this request, the HA indicates
the total number of groups in the query as well as the ID
of infected groups. In turn, the ITPA requests the keys of
all groups to the LP and forwards to the HA only the keys
associated to the infected groups. Finally, using the received
keys, the HA obtains the risk contact IDs associated only to
infected groups, thus completing the contact tracing procedure.
Non-repudiation auditing: Our solution relies on the concept
of liability to guarantee privacy rights of the users. Note that
this is a widely adopted approach in the legal system of
advanced democracies. For instance, a state cannot prevent
anyone from driving above the speed limit, but anyone doing
so is liable for it. In the case of privacy, a state cannot prevent
a BigTech company implementing privacy intrusive practices,
but punish them in case an auditing process reveals the use
of those practices. Therefore, a HA or a LP that uses the data
they receive for purposes different than contact-tracing will be
liable for it.
For instance, a malicious HA can implement a targeted
attack (see Section IV) to unveil the contact graph of an
individual and leaking it to other government branches. This
would be a crime equivalent to leaking the medical record of
a target individual to other government branches. Our solution
collects the required non-repudiation proofs to be used by the
corresponding auditing entity to unveil any potential attack by
a HA.

III. P ROTOCOL FOR CONTACT- TRACING USING L OCATION
P ROVIDERS INFORMATION
In this section we describe the steps of the communication
protocol including the sequence of messages exchanged by
the four players involved in our solution: Health Authority
(HA), Location Provider (LP), Identity Provider (IDP) and
Independent Third Party Authority (ITPA).
Step 0: This step refers to the basic context our solution relies
on. On the one hand, LPs record historical location information
from users running their OSes, mobile apps, etc. In addition,
they also store the mobile phone number for a major portion
of the users. On the other hand, IDPs (i.e., mobile operators)
provide users with mobile phone numbers that serve as user
IDs in our solution.
Step 1: The HA obtains the IDs of users that have been tested
positive in a given time window (e.g., a day).
Step 2: The HA triggers the contact-tracing process by requesting the IDP a list of N user IDs (i.e., real mobile phone
numbers). The value of N is decided by the HA and may
differ from one request to another.
There are few remarks to be considered: (1) This message
includes a unique identifier referred to as Transaction ID that
will be included in all the remaining messages in the process;
(2) The message is signed with the private key of the HA.
Note that in the rest of the process all entities sign with their
private key the messages they send.
Step 3: The IDP responds the HA request with a a list of N
random user IDs.
Step 4: The HA creates K groups. As explained above, only
L of these groups are infected groups and K − L are random
groups. The resulting groups are included in a Contact-Tracing
Request message that is sent to the LP. It is important to
note that the user IDs included in an infected group cannot

5

LOCATION
PROVIDERS
(LPs)

tio
oca

5. Contact-Tracing Request

1. Tested Positive

0. L

tion
rma
o
f
n In

11. Notification

CITIZENS

Num
ber

IDENTITY
PROVIDERS
(IDPs)

2. Mobile IDs List Request
3. Mobile IDs List Reply

6. Contact-Tracing Reply

8.

0. M
obi
le ID

HEALTH
AUTHORITY
(HA)

Ke
st
INDEPENDENT
ys
ue
Re
q
THIRD-PARTY
qu
Re
9.
es AUTHORITY
ys
Ke
e
t
K
ys
ly
(ITPA)
7.
Re
ep
R
pl
s
y
ey
.K
0
1

Fig. 1: Proposed contact-tracing protocol and architecture.

be present in other infected groups neither in this request nor
in past or future requests.
Step 5: Upon the reception of the Contact-Tracing Request
the LP runs the contact-tracing algorithm to identify the risk
contact IDs of each user ID included in the request. The risk
contact IDs from all users in a group are aggregated so that
any link between a user ID and a risk contact ID is eliminated.
In addition the LP collects the POIs visited by each user
ID in a defined time window in the past (e.g., last 10 days).
Then, it computes the distribution of types of POIs visited by
the user IDs included in each group as well as the overall
distribution of types of POIs visited by all user IDs included
in the request.
The information associated to each group, i.e., list of risk
contact IDs and distribution of type of POIs is encrypted with
an independent key per group.
Finally, the LP aggregates the encrypted information per
group along with the distribution of types of POIs for all users
IDs and creates a Contact-Tracing Reply message that is sent
to the HA.
Three important remarks to consider are: (1) The LP must
keep record of the key used to encrypt each group; (2) The
contact tracing algorithm implemented by the LP as well as
the number of days for the identification of visited POIs must
be defined by epidemiologists and it is out of the scope of
this paper; (3) the LP stores all the Contact-Tracing Request
messages received for auditing purposes.
Step 6: Upon the reception of the Contact-Tracing Reply the
HA needs to decrypt the information associated to infected
groups, i.e., the risk contacts list and type of POIs distribution.

To this end, it sends a Keys Request message to the ITPA
including the total number of groups included in the ContactTracing Request and the identifiers of the infected groups.
Step 7: The ITPA sends to the LP the Keys Request message
but it only includes the Transaction ID.
Step 8: Upon the reception of the Keys Request message, the
LP sends to the ITPA a Keys Reply message including the keys
for all groups.
Step 9: The ITPA checks if the number of keys in the received
reply matches the actual number of groups reported by the HA.
If the numbers are the same, the ITPA generates a Keys Reply
message to the HA that only includes the keys of the infected
groups. Otherwise, the Keys Reply message includes an error
indicating that the reported number of groups does not match
with the number of keys provide by the LP.
Step 10: Upon the reception of the Keys Reply message, the
HA decrypts the information about risk contacts and type of
POIs distributions included in the Contact-Tracing Reply for
the groups of infected users.
Step 11: The HA gets in touch with risk contacts.

IV. P OTENTIAL ATTACKS AND COUNTERMEASURES
As explained above, our solution is designed to hinder both,
LPs and HAs, from misbehaving to get access to information
they are not authorized to obtain. Next, we explain in detail
the countermeasures provided by our solution to avoid: (i) LPs
trying to infer the IDs associated with infected individuals, (ii)
HAs trying to obtain the contact graph of citizens.

6

A. LP inference of infected users identity
A malicious LP may intend to unveil the identity of infected
users based on the information received in Contact-Tracing
Request messages (known as re-identification attack). To this
end they could use a single request or combine subsequent
requests to obtain the identity of infected users.
In order to prevent re-identification attacks, the HA has to
reuse the IDs that have been already used including them in
random groups of subsequent requests. Otherwise, if random
IDs are only used once and discarded, the LP could infer with
very high probability that repeated IDs in different queries
belong to infected individuals.
In addition to reusing IDs, our solution relies on the Kanonymity principle. The number of random IDs, N , in request
messages is several times larger than the number of infected
user IDs, M . The complexity to perform a re-identification
N
. In addition, our solution allows
attack grows with the ratio M
introducing a high level of randomness in the request messages
to avoid that LPs can infer patterns that allow identifying
groups including infected users IDs: (i) the number of infected
and random user IDs differs from message to message, (ii)
the number of groups in a message differs from message to
message, (iii) the length of the different groups within the
same message should also differ. In addition, the HA could
send messages that do not include any infected user ID from
time to time.
Beyond the technical measures, the main argument to support our solution is that powerful LPs such as Google or
Facebook willing to identify infected citizens can easily do it
already with the information they own. Therefore, the privacy
measures adopted in our solution provide sufficient guarantees
to avoid increasing the risk of a potential re-identification
attack by LPs.
B. HAs inference of the contact graph of a user-id
Our solution cannot prevent beforehand a malicious HA
from obtaining the contact graph of a particular individual.
For instance, a HA can perform a targeted attack by using
twice the same ID in two different infected groups (despite
it is forbidden in our solution). The common risk contacts in
the two groups may reveal the contact graph of the targeted
individual.
However, our solution keeps the required non-repudiation
proofs to show such an attack has happened. The auditing
entity just needs to check whether the HA has used the
same ID twice (or more times) in groups of infected users
in the same or different messages. The auditing entity can
retrieve all the Contact-Tracing Request messages from the
LP. Similarly, the auditing entity retrieves from the ITPA,
for each Contact-Tracing Request message, what are the
infected groups declared by the HA. With that information the
auditing entity can easily identify attacks from the HA. The
described auditing capacity provides privacy guarantees based
on undeniable liability, a widely used technique in developed
democracies.
Finally, our recommendation is to run the described auditing
process once a day to detect any malicious HA soon after it
has implemented an attack.

V. C ONCLUSION
The only digital contact-tracing approach used so far to
fight COVID-19 pandemic consists on the utilization of mobile
apps that leverage Bluetooth technology to identify proximity
encounters. The lack of sufficient adoption of such mobileapps has led every single attempt in this direction to fail.
Due to the importance that digital contact-tracing solutions
may have to help fighting the pandemic, it is the obligation
of researchers, public health authorities and technology companies to explore alternatives until an effective contact-tracing
solution is found. To trigger this exploration effort, in this
paper we propose a first alternative solution. We propose to use
already existing scalable and accurate geolocation data, which
is likely to serve to build an efficient digital contact-tracing
solution. Our proposal defines an architecture that leverages
such data and provide sufficient privacy guarantees to citizens.
R EFERENCES
[1] L. Ferretti et al., “Quantifying sars-cov-2 transmission suggests epidemic
control with digital contact tracing,” Science, 2020.
[2] StraitTimes, “Call for more people to use contact-tracing app,”
Apr. 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.straitstimes.com/singapore/
call-for-more-people-to-use-contact-tracing-app
[3] R. Hinch et al., “Effective configurations of a digital contact tracing app:
A report to nhsx,” en. In:(Apr. 2020). Available here. url: https://github.
com/BDI-pathogens/covid-19 instant tracing/blob/master/Report, 2020.
[4] C. Troncoso et al., “Decentralized privacy-preserving proximity tracing,”
2020.
[5] M. Salathé et al., “Early evidence of effectiveness of digital
contact tracing for sars-cov-2 in switzerland,” medRxiv, 2020.
[Online]. Available: https://www.medrxiv.org/content/early/2020/10/04/
2020.09.07.20189274
[6] “Scientific brief: Sars-cov-2 and potential airborne transmission,”
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), Oct. 2020.
[Online]. Available: https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/more/
scientific-brief-sars-cov-2.html
[7] GPS.gov, “Gps accuracy,” Dec. 2017. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.gps.gov/systems/gps/performance/accuracy/
[8] Google, “Wi-fi location: ranging with rtt,” Mar. 2020. [Online]. Available: https://developer.android.com/guide/topics/connectivity/wifi-rtt
[9] EU, “Regulation (eu) 2016/679 of the european parliament (general data
protection regulation),” 27 April 2016, http://eur-lex.europa.eu/eli/reg/
2016/679/oj.
[10] Dimoco, “Market insights,” 04 2020, Accesed on: December 27, 2020.
[Online]. Available: https://dimoco.eu/carrierbilling/coverage/
[11] StatCounter Global Stats, “Mobile operating system market share
worldwide,” Accesed on: December 27, 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://gs.statcounter.com/os-market-share/mobile/
[12] “Demographics of mobile device ownership and adoption in the united
states,” Jun 2020, Accesed on: December 27, 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://www.pewresearch.org/internet/fact-sheet/mobile/
[13] Swiss Federal Statistical Office, “Swiss covid app monitoring,”
Accesed on: December 27, 2020. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.experimental.bfs.admin.ch/expstat/en/home/innovative-methods/
swisscovid-app-monitoring.assetdetail.13407769.html
[14] A. Aleta et al., “Quantifying the importance and location of sars-cov-2
transmission events in large metropolitan areas,” medRxiv, 2020.
[Online]. Available: https://www.medrxiv.org/content/early/2020/12/17/
2020.12.15.20248273
[15] Data World Bank, “Population, total,” Accesed on: December 27, 2020.
[Online]. Available: https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SP.POP.TOTL

A BOUT THE AUTHORS
José González Cabañas is a Ph.D. candidate and FPU
scholarship holder in the Department of Telematic Engineering
at the Universidad Carlos III de Madrid, Spain.

7

Ángel Cuevas received the M.Sc. (2007), and the Ph.D.(2011)
degrees in Telematic Engineering from the Universidad Carlos
III de Madrid. He is currently a Ramón y Cajal Fellow (tenuretrack Assistant Professor) with the Department of Telematic
Engineering, Universidad Carlos III de Madrid, Spain.
Rubén Cuevas is an Associate Professor in the Telematic
Engineering department at Universidad Carlos III de Madrid,
Spain and the Deputy Director of the UC3M-Santander Big
Data Institute, Spain.
Martin Maier is a full professor with INRS, Montréal,
Canada. He was educated at the Technical University of Berlin,
Germany, and received M.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees (both with
distinction) in 1998 and 2003, respectively.

