1

Impact of COVID-19 on Adoption of IoT in
Different Sectors

arXiv:2101.07196v2 [cs.CY] 20 Jan 2021

Muhammad Umair, Muhammad Aamir Cheema, Senior Member, IEEE, Omer Cheema, Huan Li, Member, IEEE,
Hua Lu, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—COVID-19 has disrupted normal life and has enforced a substantial change in the policies, priorities and activities
of individuals, organisations and governments. These changes
are proving to be a catalyst for technology and innovation. In
this paper, we discuss the pandemic’s impact on the adoption
of the Internet of Things (IoT) in various broad sectors namely
healthcare, smart homes, smart buildings, smart cities, transportation and industrial IoT. Our analysis of this impact on IoT
adoption is based on interviews with many industry experts, a
thorough research literature review and a careful examination of
reports from leading consulting firms. For each of these sectors,
we also provide the details of recent initiatives taken in the
wake of COVID-19. We also highlight challenges that need to be
addressed and important research directions that will facilitate
accelerated IoT adoption in these sectors.
Index Terms—COVID-19, Internet of Things (IoT), Healthcare,
Smart Homes, Smart Buildings, Smart Cities, Transportation and
Industrial IoT.

I. I NTRODUCTION

T

HE Internet of Things (IoT) is envisioned as a network
of billions of devices that can sense, communicate and
share data which can then be analyzed to unlock a wealth
of intelligence useful for planning, management, and decision making [1]. IoT promises huge benefits for a variety
of domains such as healthcare, manufacturing, agriculture,
telecommunication and transportation, to name a few. Despite the popularity of the IoT concept and its promised
benefits, adoption of IoT has been significantly slower than
expected [2], [3]. Some of the major reasons behind the
slow adoption include: 1) security, privacy, policy, and trust
issues [3], [4], [5]; 2) organisational inertia, long capital cycles
and shortage of specialist workforce needed to successfully
implement IoT [2], [5]; and 3) lack of convincing use cases
with clear return on investment (ROI) in some sectors.
COVID-19 has impacted all walks of life so much that
we may never return to the old normal. This pandemic is
proving to be a catalyst for digital transformation [6], [7].
It has also forced governments, organisations and individuals
M. Umair is with the Department of Electrical, Electronics and Telecommunication Engineering, New Campus, UET Lahore, Pakistan (e-mail:
m.umair@uet.edu.pk).
M. A. Cheema is with the Faculty of Information Technology, Monash
University, Australia (e-mail: aamir.cheema@monash.edu).
O. Cheema is with Dialog Semiconductor, Netherlands (e-mail:
omer.cheema@diasemi.com).
H. Li is with the Department of Computer Science, Aalborg University,
Denmark (e-mail: lihuan@cs.aau.dk).
H. Lu is with the Department of People and Technology, Roskilde University, Denmark (e-mail: luhua@ruc.dk).

to change/adapt their priorities, their views on societal/ethical
issues, and the way they operate. In many cases, this has
addressed or mitigated many of the above mentioned reasons
behind the slow adoption of IoT across many verticals. For
example, governments have invested huge amount of resources
in IoT and other technologies to combat COVID-19. Lifestyle
changes brought about by COVID-19 such as work/study from
home have also seen the rise of new use cases of IoT with
clear ROI such as remote asset control, workforce tracking
and remote employee collaboration [8]. Consequently, many
organisations have increased investment in IoT and the pace
of their IoT projects [9], [10]. Also, the fight against COVID19 has resulted in less strict stance on privacy issues, higher
trust in technology and fast-tracked approval procedures. This
also paves the way for faster and increased adoption of IoT in
various verticals. Regulatory changes such as stricter cleaning
and tracking requirements for businesses are also accelerating
the IoT adoption in smart buildings.
In this paper, we discuss the impact of COVID-19 on
the adoption of IoT in different sectors namely healthcare,
smart homes, smart buildings, smart cities, transportation and
industrial IoT. As to be detailed in Section III, to better
understand the impact of COVID-19 on IoT adoption, we
have interviewed 20+ experts across industries, extensively analyzed recent research literature by searching for “COVID-19”
and “IoT” on different scholarly databases including Google
Scholar, and examined existing reports from Gartner, Yole,
McKinsey and other consulting firms. We find that COVID19 has not necessarily positively impacted the adoption of IoT
in all sectors, at least in the short-term. For example, mainly
due to the recession, most automotive companies are not in
a position to invest resources in IoT initiatives. Therefore,
we discuss both the short-term and mid- to long-term impact
of COVID-19 on IoT adoption in these sectors. Furthermore,
for each of these sectors, we also discuss new initiatives that
are being taken, challenges that need to be addressed, and
important research directions that will facilitate IoT adoption.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work that
details the impact of COVID-19 on the adoption of IoT in
different sectors. Since the beginning of COVID-19, numerous
papers have been published discussing IoT and COVID19 [11], [12], [13], [14], [15], [16], [17], [18], [19], [20].
However, our work is significantly different from all these in
the following major aspects. Firstly, an overwhelming majority
of the existing works exclusively focus on IoT in healthcare
sector. This is not surprising because COVID-19 is a health
crisis. However, COVID-19 has impacted almost every aspect

2

of our life and we offer the first report about its impact on
IoT in a variety of important sectors including healthcare.
Secondly, the existing studies mostly focus on how IoT and
other digital technologies can be used (or are being used) to
combat COVID-19. On the other hand, despite some overlap,
our focus is largely orthogonal and we aim to report the
impact of COVID-19 on the adoption of IoT in different
verticals. In other words, the existing works focus on how
IoT can or should impact COVID-19, whereas we focus on
how COVID-19 is impacting (or expected to impact) the
IoT sectors. Finally, many of the existing works only discuss
potential applications of IoT for COVID-19 and, in contrast
to this work, do not discuss the impact of COVID-19 on IoT
implementations and the new initiatives being undertaken by
researchers and developers for different IoT verticals.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section II,
we provide an overview of the existing studies that discuss
COVID-19 and digital technologies, particularly focusing on
IoT. In Section III, we detail the impact of COVID-19 on
different IoT sectors namely healthcare, smart homes, smart
buildings, smart cities, transportation and industrial IoT. We
also discuss notable recent initiatives in each of these sectors
taken in the wake of COVID-19. The challenges that must be
addressed and important research directions to facilitate accelerated IoT adoption are discussed in Section IV. Section V
concludes the paper.
II. R ELATED W ORK
In the past year or so, many studies have been discussing
key potentials of IoT and other digital technologies in fighting
against COVID-19 or future pandemics. A consensus of Chinese experts on IoT-aided diagnosis and treatment of COVID19 is presented in [12]. Impacts of IoT implementation in
healthcare in terms of cost, time and efficiency are enlisted
in [13]. Applications of IoT, Big Data, AI and Blockchain
in mitigating the impact of COVID-19 are explored in [14].
Authors in [15] propose some IoT applications that can be
useful to combat COVID-19. In [16], the authors discuss
how different industry 4.0 technologies (e.g., AI, IoT, Virtual
Reality, etc.) can help reduce the spread of disease. Applications of AI for COVID-19 have been proposed in [17]. A
comprehensive review of the COVID-19 pandemic and the
role of IoT, drones, AI, blockchain, and 5G in managing its
impact is explored in [18]. Authors in [19] argue that contact
tracing should be the responsibility of facilities and propose a
contact tracing architecture which is fully automated and does
not depend on user cooperation. In [20], the authors discuss
several IoT healthcare applications during three main phases:
early diagnosis, quarantine time, and after recovery. A recent
survey [21] discusses the use of ML, AI and other intelligent
approaches for the prognosis of COVID-19.
Authors in [22] have compiled potential IoT-based solutions
to combat COVID-19. They present a detailed study on
the capabilities of existing IoT systems at different layers
such as perception layer, network layer, fog layer and cloud
layer. Moreover, they also discuss applications of IoT in
diagnosing symptoms of COVID-19. The researchers in [23]

have proposed a four-layered architecture based on IoT and
Blockchain technologies to help fight against COVID-19. The
Blockchain-based method is proposed to ensure privacy and
security of physiological information shared among IoT nodes.
It also enlists various applications that have been developed for
detecting and tracing potential COVID-19 patients. The role
of IoT in existing digital healthcare infrastructure has been
discussed in [24]. It also debates on the implications of data
generated through IoT enabled healthcare infrastructure on the
decisions made by policy makers. Moreover, existing enablers
and barriers in adopting IoT-based healthcare have also been
enlisted.
A detailed survey on the contributions of IoT in healthcare in wake of COVID-19 is provided in [11]. This is a
detailed study enlisting recent developments in Healthcare
IoT (HIoT). It also outlines comparison of different implementation strategies for IoT systems before and during this
pandemic. Authors in [25] present a survey enlisting early
efforts for the adoption of digital technologies in healthcare
to fight against COVID-19, considering different categories
such as diagnosis, prevention and surveillance. In [26], the
authors emphasize the dire need of using AI techniques to
combat future pandemics. They also highlight the limitations
of the existing AI-based approaches towards eradication of
the pandemic. Finally, they conclude that there is a need of
a union between global health and data science to produce
better predictions helpful for policy makers. In [6], the authors
provide a comparison of adoption of digital technologies
in some specific regions of the world. They highlight that
COVID-19 has acted as a catalyst for adoption of e-Health,
e-Education and e-Commerce. In [27], the authors present an
analysis of how AI and IoT can be potentially used to fight
against the COVID-19 pandemic.
As detailed in Section I, there are some major differences
between our paper and the above mentioned studies. Firstly,
we have a broader focus and discuss IoT not only in healthcare
but also in other important sectors such as smart homes,
smart buildings, smart cities, transportation and industrial IoT.
Secondly, while most of the existing studies focus on how IoT
can impact COVID-19 and future pandemics, our focus is how
COVID-19 is affecting (and expected to affect) the adoption of
IoT in different sectors. Finally, we discuss new IoT initiatives
taken in different sectors, and present the challenges that need
to be addressed to facilitate IoT adoption.
III. I MPACT OF COVID-19 ON I OT AND N EW I NITIATIVES
COVID-19, as a macroeconomic shock, has significantly
impacted not only individual behaviours but has also enforced
governments and organisations to change their policies and
priorities. This is fueling the adoption of IoT and other
technologies in many areas especially in healthcare and smart
cities. On the other hand, financial stress brought by the global
recession has adversely impacted the technology adoption in
the short-term in some sectors such as transportation. However,
in the mid- to long-term when financial stress is eased, this
pandemic is expected to accelerate IoT adoption in a broader
range of sectors.

3

CO VID -19Sho ck

New Co nsu m er B ehav io u r

Shu tdo w ns
Flash Recessio n
Lo w P ro ﬁ t

Changed M arketRequ irem ents

Im po rtantR& D Them es
D igitalTw ins

eSho pping

eEntertainm ent

Rem o teEqu ipm ent Inno v a o n in Healthcare
Co ntro l
Tracking & M o nito ring
Applica o ns

So cialD istancing

W o rk fro m Ho m e

CheapP lu g & D ata Integra o n
& P riv acy
P lay Senso rs

Fig. 1: An example of COVID-19’s Impact on IoT Research and Development

The changes in consumer behavior, government policies,
and organisation priorities open a range of opportunities to
adopt IoT for innovative solutions to prepare for the new
normal. Researchers and developers need to come up with new
products and services that align with the changed consumer
behaviors. The new product and service requirements will
drive the organisations to reconsider their R&D budgets in
order to align with new research themes. Figure 1 shows
an example of how COVID-19 is affecting IoT research and
development.
In this section, we present the impact of COVID-19 on IoT
adoption in healthcare, smart homes, smart buildings, smart
cities, transportation and industrial IoT. We also discuss the
most notable recent initiatives taken in each of these sectors in
the wake of COVID-19. To better understand the broader impact of COVID-19 on different sectors, we interviewed more
than 20 experts in different companies. These interviews were
sourced by expert networks (e.g., Guidepoint) that connect industry experts with people looking for advice. We interviewed
people from various companies and organisations including
Apple, Amazon, Facebook (Oculus), Google (Glasses), Ford,
BMW, Tesla, Honeywell, Stanford, Technion, and Huawei etc.
Questions were asked regarding the short term and long term
impact of COVID-19 on the interviewee’s industry, what was
the industry doing to avoid or mitigate the crisis, how was
the pandemic impacting their technology roadmaps, what new
applications of IoT were being considered in the wake of
COVID-19, and how had market needs changed etc. Questions varied across interviewees depending on interviewee’s
background and industry knowledge. Due to the privacy and
policy requirements of these companies, in this paper, we are
unable to give details of anything specific discussed during the
interviews. Nevertheless, the overall impact of COVID-19 on
different sectors presented in this paper is heavily influenced
by these interviews and we cite relevant research papers,

reports or articles to support the claims wherever necessary.
In addition to the interviews, we conducted an extensive
literature review by searching scholarly databases using the
terms “IoT”, “COVID-19” and other equivalent terms (e.g.,
coronavirus, SARS-CoV-2 and internet of things). We also set
alerts on Google Scholar so that we do not miss recently published papers. We also carefully examined reports from leading
consulting firms such as Gartners, Yole and McKinsey as well
as relevant articles/reports from reputable online sources.
We remark that some of the sectors we discuss in this
paper overlap with each other (e.g., smart transportation and
smart homes are often considered to be encompassed by
smart cities). In each subsection, we focus on themes that
we believe are the most closely related to the sector, e.g., incabin air quality analytics for public transport is discussed in
transportation and not in smart cities.
A. Healthcare
COVID-19 is a healthcare crisis and hence the immediate
impact on healthcare is more obvious. A study from Juniper
Research found that IoT platform revenue is expected to
increase by around 20% in 2020, reaching $66 billion in
2020 from $55 billion in 2019, mainly due to its accelerated
adoption in healthcare sector [28]. Three main themes are
accelerating IoT adoption in healthcare sector.
1) Wearable Devices: While wearables, such as smart
watches, smart bands and finger rings, have been around for
several years, COVID-19 has triggered a huge increase in their
demand. Wearables can play vital roles in fighting against
COVID-19 and other future pandemics [29]. For example, the
data from wearable devices can be used to alert the users when
changes in their metrics match with those associated with
COVID-19 or other diseases [30]. The wearable devices can
also be used for broadcasting health knowledge [31], providing
mental healthcare [32] (e.g., personalised interventions [33])

4

by tracking an individual’s cognition and mood in real-time,
ensuring social-distancing [31] and providing capabilities for
tracking and contact tracing [34]. These and other similar
applications are boosting the demand of wearables. Research
by GlobalData [35] estimates that the market for wearables is
now on track to increase from being worth nearly $27 billion
in 2019 to a whopping $64 billion by 2024. Next, we briefly
discuss some recent relevant success stories in fight against
COVID-19.
WHOOP Inc. in collaboration with some leading research
organizations has developed a COVID-19 identification system
based on their WHOOP strap which measures respiratory rate
using Resting Heart Rate (RHR) and Heart Rate Variability
(HRV). The data from WHOOP strap is communicated to a
mobile application and then forwarded to a cloud, collectively
called WHOOP system [36]. Their system identified 20%
of COVID-19 positive individuals in the two days prior to
symptom onset, and 80% of COVID-19 positive cases by the
third day of symptoms. Philips has also developed disposable
patches for early detection of COVID-19 patients [37] and disposable biosensors for early COVID-19 patient deterioration
detection [38].
Researchers from MIT and Harvard University investigated
whether COVID-19 subjects could be accurately discriminated
only from a forced-cough cell phone recording using Artificial
Intelligence [39]. Their results are based on cough recordings
of over 5000 subjects and demonstrate that their model discriminates officially tested COVID-19 subjects 97.1% accurately, with a 100% asymptomatic detection rate. In the past,
cough recordings had also been used to accurately diagnose
conditions such as pneumonia and asthma [40]. This shows the
potential of integrating such solutions in wearables to enable
a non-invasive, real-time solution for disease diagnosis, prescreening, and outbreak monitoring.
The Scripps Research Translational Institute has conducted
a study named DETECT (Digital Engagement & Tracking for
Early Control & Treatment) that collects data from smartwatch and activity tracker of consenting partners as well as
self-reported symptoms and test results [41]. They recently
reported [42] that the data from wearable devices along with
self-reported symptoms can be used for identifying cases of
COVID-19 with greater success than looking at symptoms
alone. To help address COVID-19, many other similar studies [43], [44], [45], [46], [47] have accelerated deployment to
allow interested individuals to voluntarily share their sensor
and clinical data.
2) Changes in Regulations and Procedures: In the past,
adoption of IoT in healthcare had been slower than expected
due to regulatory policies related to privacy, data security and
approval procedures. In response to COVID-19, emergency
regulations are being adopted by fast-tracked procedures and
many new technologies have been given emergency approvals,
which is accelerating IoT adoption. For example, U.S. Food
and Drug Administration (FDA) has issued an Emergency
Use Authorization certificate to the electrocardiogram low
ejection fraction tool of a digital health company Eko to
help clinicians assess cardiac complications associated with
COVID-19 [48]. Handheld and portable ultrasound solutions

in particular have become valuable tools for clinicians treating
COVID-19 patients due to their imaging capabilities, portability and ease of disinfection. Philips has received clearance
from FDA for Lumify, a portable ultrasound device [49].
Lumify has a transducer which needs to be connected with
the user’s smartphone running Lumify Application. Moreover,
FDA has also allowed Aidoc (a technology company) to use
their AI-CT algorithms for COVID-19 detection [50].
The World Health Organisation (WHO) has warned of
the risk of infections in crowded hospitals and emergency
rooms [51]. Consequently, regulatory response to minimise
hospital and clinic visits has accelerated the adoption of
telehealth and home care. For example, many countries are
encouraging the use of telehealth services and have added
various types of medical services on their public health programs (e.g., Medicare Australia) that can now be accessed via
telehealth [52]. The sharp increase in the use of telehealth
is encouraging the adoption of IoT and related technologies
in healthcare sector. Analysis on the relationship between
IoT technologies, smart telemedicine diagnosis systems, and
virtual care for different age, race/ethnicity, gender, education,
and geographic regions is presented in [53]. Similar analysis
is performed in [54], [55] for AI, Internet of Medical Things
(IoMT) and Big Data enabled healthcare for monitoring, detection and prevention of COVID-19. Recently, a novel IoMT
platform has been proposed for remote health monitoring
offering emotional treatment suggestion to the doctors and
patients [56].
There are various other changes in regulations and procedures that are accelerating the adoption of IoT. For example,
to combat COVID-19, citizens’ privacy and movement rights
have been limited in many countries by introducing confinement measures and tracking of COVID-19 patients using GPS,
bracelets or other technological tools [57]. Furthermore, many
countries have introduced new regulations including stricter
cleaning requirements [58] and record keeping requirements
for contact tracing [59]. This has led to the deployment of
robots for efficient and effective disinfection [60], [61], [62],
[63] as well as technology-assisted record keeping and visitor
tracking/monitoring [64], [65], [66]. We provide more details
of these in Section III-C (Smart Buildings) because these IoT
solutions (disinfectant robots and visitor tracking) are mainly
deployed within buildings.
3) IoT for Test and Trace: IoT-enabled testing and tracing
of COVID-19 can reduce the transmission which is critical in
the fight against this pandemic. Therefore, IoT is now being
extensively used for test and trace applications which is accelerating IoT adoption [67]. A large number of countries and
regions have adopted digital test and trace efforts, including
UK, South Korea, Germany, Spain, Vietnam, Taiwan, etc. [68],
[69]. While some of these efforts have not been very successful
in tracing COVID-19, the countries that have extensively used
technology in their solutions have done much better in their
fight against this pandemic. For example, it is reported in [70]
that UK’s test and trace system has only traced 20% of the
targets. On the other hand, Taiwan has successfully used IoT to
fight against COVID-19 [71]. Figure 2 shows an architecture
diagram for a test and trace system similar to the solution

5

Fig. 2: An Example of a Test and Trace IoT Architecture

employed by Taiwan. There are mainly two layers of such
advanced test and trace system, namely Data Acquisition and
Data Integration.
Data Acquisition. Mobility data is acquired from multiple
sources including immigration department database, GSM
and GPS based mobile phone tracking, and QR code based
tracking etc. This helps Taiwan in tracking international as
well as local travellers. Resources from smart city are also
utilized including CCTV cameras based surveillance [72].
Credit card based payments are also detected and tracked to
locate users and predict their activities [73]. Similarly, hospital
visits of the individuals are also recorded and tracked to help
contact tracing [74].
Data Integration. In this layer, the data from different sources
are integrated and shared with the relevant departments [75].
For example, the immigration database and National Health
Insurance (NHI) database are shared with the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention [71]. Location information
is shared with local authorities. For example, surveillance
data from smart city setup is shared with police officers for
necessary actions [71]. Data extracted from certain sources
such as public transport and shopping malls is also shared
with public to help them make informed decisions about their
daily routines [76].
B. Smart Homes
ABI Research predicts that, despite the economic disruption
by COVID-19, smart homes revenue will reach $85 billion in
2020, an increase of 4% over 2019 [77]. However, this is well
below the pre-pandemic prediction that forecasted a growth of
20% in 2020. Fortunately, this negative impact is predicted to
be temporary and the pandemic is expected to have a positive
impact in the long-term with revenue reaching $317 billion
by 2026, an increase of 5% over pre-pandemic forecasts [77].
This is mainly because the changes in lifestyles and consumer
behaviors that will drive adoption are here to stay even
after the pandemic is over. For example, many organisations
have announced that they will be adopting work from home

as a long-term policy. Microsoft, Twitter, and Square have
announced that workers can continue working from home even
after we overcome the pandemic. A Gartner survey points out
that 74% of CFOs are already considering work from home
as a permanent policy because of cost savings [78]. A survey
from Redfin shows that more than 50 percent of New York,
Seattle, San Francisco and Boston workers would move if
work from home became permanent in order to save on rent
and cost of living [79].
As more people will be working/studying from home,
they are expected to adopt various IoT devices to create a
more comfortable work/study environment. For example, in
Australia, smart speakers, security lighting, and energy &
HVAC sensors are showing strong sales growth in 2020 [80].
Figure 3 summarizes some current and expected developments
in smart homes as a consequence of COVID-19. Below, we
give the details of some of these.
1) New Features and New Sensors: Many Smart Home
devices have introduced various new features in the wake of
COVID-19. For example, Amazon’s Alexa Care Hub can help
people to remotely check in on their family members who
they are not able to visit due to COVID-19 restrictions [81].
When family members agree to connect on Care Hub, their
activity profiles on Echo devices are shared with each other
and alerts/notifications can be generated for certain situations.
Infermedica, a health tech startup, has developed a mobile
application called Symptom Checker which interviews home
occupants and guides them about their current health. They
have also developed an Alexa skill to integrate Symptom
Checker with smart homes [82]. Technologies and tools are
also being developed to diagnose COVID-19 using speech
analysis. Vocalis, a technology company providing voice-based
solutions on healthcare, is developing a mobile application
(Alexa skill will be developed later) which will be able
to detect symptoms of COVID-19 using voice signals [83].
They had previously developed solutions to detect flare-ups
of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease by identifying the
signs that users were short of breath when speaking. WiFi

6

-Alexa Sk ills
-Algorithm s to
detect C OVID -19
-Vocalis forAlexa
-En ergy savin g for
Echo D evices

-C are Hu b
-Sym p tom
C heck er

Sm artW ear
ables Sen sors to Alexa C om p a ble Alexa Sk illfor
Google Nest
D etectFever Sm artEn ergy
forSm art
M eters
Therm ostat
& C ou gh
Q u ar
an n e

Fig. 3: Recent Developments in Smart Homes in the Wake of
COVID-19

signals have also been used as a non-intrusive approach to
measure respiratory rate of COVID-19 patients [84]. Alexa is
now also connected with wearables [85]. These new features
are helping researchers to propose smart quarantine solutions
[86]. IoT systems to detect fever, cough, sneezing, etc. are also
being proposed to better analyze the health profile of home
occupants [87]. Sensors to monitor social distancing are being
adopted [88]. These new advancements enable web dashboards
and mobile applications to better monitor and analyse the
health profiles of smart home residents.
2) New Home Energy Management Solutions: Homes are
increasingly being equipped with smart energy management
systems. Nowadays, homes typically have multiple power
sources such as solar, battery bank, and grid [89]. Due to
COVID-19, daily routines of people have changed and they
spend more time at home. So, domestic energy consumption
has increased significantly [90]. To help save energy, Amazon
has introduced new features in Alexa to keep users updated
about the energy consumed by Echo devices and suggest
energy saving features [91]. COVID-19 is acting as a trigger for smart meter installations in many countries. Energy
Efficiency Services Limited (EESL), the agency responsible
for the implementation of smart meters in India, reports that
smart meter adoption in India has increased since the COVID19 outbreak [92]. Some energy suppliers have also started
offering Alexa-based services for managing energy utilities
at home [93]. Similarly, smart thermostats are seeing rapid
expansions [94], e.g., Google Nest Thermostat has introduced new feature named Savings Finder to save energy at
homes [95].
3) New Features to Assist xFH: Home confinement due
to COVID-19 has led researchers and developers to explore
new ways and features to assist different modes of “x from
home” (xFH), i.e., work from home, education from home,
shopping from home, and healthcare from home etc. Re-

searchers in [96] have enlisted impacts of COVID-19 on
education and tools available for online-cum-distance learning.
Similarly, to assist work from home, Google has launched
Google Workspace which is a rebranding of existing products
with new features [97]. It supports creating new documents
within a room in Chat, Google’s Slack-like chatrooms, without
having to switch tabs. It also allows videoconferencing while
collaborating on documents, sheets, and slides. People are
also investing time and money in setting up home offices
by using IoT-related technologies (e.g., smart lights, smart
thermostats) to create smarter and more comfortable work
environments. Researchers are also proposing new healthcare
systems that enable remote monitoring of patients’ health from
their homes [98].
C. Smart Buildings
COVID-19 has had profound impact on built environments [99]. Strict lockdown measures have significantly reduced foot traffic in buildings which has resulted in bankruptcies of various notable offline stores including Ascena Retail
Group and Brooks Brothers. Malls are being converted to
warehouses mainly because of the growth of e-commerce
in the wake of pandemic [100]. One of the largest owners
of shopping mall real estate in the USA, Simon Property
Group, has been talking to Amazon about transforming its
anchor department stores into Amazon distribution hubs [101].
Microsoft Azure suffered capacity shortages of data centers
in Europe. So, more data centers are being built to meet the
increased demand of the “x from home” trends [102].
COVID-19 has also fundamentally changed the way buildings are expected/required to operate, e.g., social distancing,
occupancy tracking/monitoring, smart Heating, Ventilation and
Air-Conditioning (HVAC) systems and stricter cleaning requirements. This has significantly increased the importance
and demand of IoT in buildings [103], [104] because smart
buildings can enable more efficient facilities management and
help support a safe and healthy environment [105]. However,
despite the increased importance and demand, investment in
smart buildings has been mostly negatively affected in the
short-term mainly due to the financial stress on organisations.
Consequently, it is predicted that market for global smart
buildings is expected to decline from $49.23 billion in 2019
to $41.72 billion in 2020. However, this is expected to recover
and reach $54.94 billion in 2023 [106].
We remark that while the overall investment in smart
buildings is expected to decrease in the short-term, certain
applications of smart buildings (e.g., safety and health applications) are expected to see increased investment even in the
short-term. A recent global corporate survey of 250 executives
conducted by Verdantix [107] found that, while the COVID-19
outbreak has caused 24% of organizations to slow down their
digitization, 47% are planning to make new investments in
workplace safety technology, including investment in thermal
imaging technology, mobile workplace apps and space monitoring analytics. Figure 4 shows a summary of new initiatives
across some major themes that are significantly impacted
by COVID-19 and are accelerating IoT adoption in smart
buildings. We discuss the details below.

7

Fig. 4: Recent Developments in Smart Buildings in the Wake
of COVID-19

1) Smart HVAC Systems: Several studies have analysed
the effect of ventilation, indoor air quality, lighting and the
deposition on the surfaces of materials on the transmission
of COVID-19 [108]. It is suggested that indoor air quality
and HVAC systems can significantly reduce the airborne
transmission of viruses [109], [110]. Consequently, best practices on HVAC to minimize the airborne transmission of the
coronavirus in indoor environments have been proposed [111].
This is leading to a renewed focus on smart HVAC systems in
buildings [112]. HVAC systems are adopting UV irradiation
for killing viruses while increased rate of air change is
recommended to keep indoor air fresh [113]. Researchers are
also putting emphasis on flushing the buildings overnight while
limiting the air circulation during the day [114].
Indoor air quality sensors can capture level of pollutants,
CO2 and volatile organic compounds in indoor environment.
Thus, IoT-enabled HVAC systems can be used to analyse air
quality and formulate an action plan, track progress and assess
mitigation effectiveness [112]. For example, Arup Group developed a digital platform called Neuron [115] that measures
indoor air quality to predict or monitor high-risk conditions
and allows remedies such as ventilation, UV light, or air
purification to improve the indoor air quality. It can also sense
the body temperature to identify individuals with elevated
temperatures and send them to separate queues for further
screening.
2) Visitor Management: Health and safety of visitors are
among the highest priorities for the businesses and organisations that are open/reopening. In fact, many states now
legally require organisations to implement COVID safe plans
to prevent the spread of COVID-19 [116], [117]. This has
increased the demand of smart visitor management to enable social distancing, contact tracing, and occupancy tracking/monitoring. For example, office buildings are installing
temperature sensors and thermal cameras to detect employees
with fever [118]. QR code based contact tracing is being
used in public places such as gyms, restaurants and coffee
shops [119]. Proximity sensors based fast contact tracing has
been proposed in [66]. A review on the recently developed

contact tracing mobile applications has been provided in [65].
Techniques are being proposed to visualise distance between
visitors in indoor environments [120] and to provide indoor
navigation for visitors while ensuring social distancing [121].
Motion sensors, occupancy sensors and distance sensors are
also being installed to track real-time status of office occupancy. Proofs of concept are being implemented by using
LIDAR and radar to ensure social distancing without compromising the privacy of visitors [122], [123].
3) Facility Management and Cleaning: COVID-19 demands improved facility management and cleaning capabilities
to avoid the virus spread. New SOPs are being adopted
for cleaning and disinfection [124]. Smart buildings should
include efficient and effective disinfection of indoor spaces
especially frequently used surfaces such as door handles,
and elevator buttons and switches. To this end, companies
are deploying robots to disinfect venues frequently and efficiently [125]. Researchers at the Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory (CSAIL) at MIT have developed
a robot to ensure spaces are kept as clean as possible [126].
The robot works on the principle of ultraviolet germicidal
irradiation and utilizes short wavelength ultraviolet light to kill
microorganisms. Similarly, UVD Robots, a subsidiary of Blue
Ocean Robotics, have developed a robot equipped with mobile
base and LIDAR [62] that creates a navigation map of patient
rooms to be disinfected. Furthermore, the data from various
sensors deployed in a smart building can be used to identify the
spots that need to be disinfected, e.g., areas visited by many
people or surfaces touched by someone who is detected to have
elevated temperature or other symptoms. Robots developed
by Boston Dynamics [60] are being used in Brigham And
Women’s Hospital of Harvard University. Researchers in [61]
have developed an i-Robot equipped with eight UVC lamps
for disinfection purposes. A recent study [63] elaborates on
disinfection robots being used in different types of buildings.
D. Smart Cities
COVID-19 has affected many facets of urban life including
reduced traffic and public transport usage, change in energy
demand patterns, disruption in supply chain and increase
in web traffic etc. According to a recent report from ABI
Research, governments are striving to improve their urban
resilience and digital transformation to fight against COVID19 and its impacts [127]. Drones, new types of surveillance,
digital twins, real-time dashboards and autonomous freights
are among the technologies being deployed for the new use
cases emerged during the pandemic [127]. Despite the financial strain, governments are investing heavily in technology
to help combat COVID-19 [128]. For example, to boost the
economy and support businesses recovering from COVID19, the Government of Singapore announced an increase in
its investment towards digitalisation by 30 percent increasing
from $2.7 billion in 2019 to $3.5 billion in 2020 [129]. China
has also announced a dramatic increase in investments in IoT
and related technologies such as 5G, smart grids, and data
centers. Figure 5 summarizes the impact of COVID-19 on
smart cities. Next, we discuss the details of some of the key
initiatives and factors driving IoT adoption in smart cities.

8

1) Initiatives From Some Leading Smart Cities: By definition, cities that are “smarter” are more likely to be better
prepared for disasters and pandemics, e.g., they may already
have an established crisis operation centre connected to a
number of IoT devices such as sensors and cameras [130].
Some of the leading smart cities (e.g., Hong Kong, Singapore,
Seoul, Taipei) had already invested heavily in IoT and related
technologies before the pandemic hit. For example, in 2017,
Hong Kong’s Smart City Blueprint outlined its mission to
make the city more livable, sustainable, resilient and competitive. Consequently, these smart cities were able to act
more swiftly and effectively during the COVID-19 crisis [131].
Below, we briefly discuss some initiatives by some of the
leading smart cities in their fight against COVID-19.
Singapore has launched a mobile application called TraceTogether that helps with contact tracing by tracking the events
when people with the application installed in their mobile
devices are in close vicinity of one another [132]. The mobile
application is also capable of scanning “Safe Entry” QR code
at the entry point of public places. The data generated is
helpful in tracking the coronavirus in the city. They have also
introduced contact tracing using wearable technology and are
planning to distribute wearables nationwide for contact tracing.
Helsinki is using Laboratory registry data for the categorized
surveillance of COVID-19 suspects [133]. Seoul has developed a dynamic COVID-19 dashboard containing important
information of the confirmed COVID-19 patients including
their mobility details. This information is updated multiple
times throughout a day and is helpful for the individuals to
take precautionary measures [134]. Taiwan’s ability to quickly
implement additional arrival screening as well as enforcing
contact tracing has helped keep mortality rate low [131].
2) Enhanced Sensing Coverage: More sensors are being
installed in smart cities since the beginning of COVID-19
pandemic. China has capitalized well on its SkyNet initiative.
More than 20 million cameras installed under this project
have been used in identifying and monitoring densely populated areas in cities [135]. Some countries have adopted
more privacy-aware monitoring solutions based on radars and
LIDARs [136]. Thermal cameras for fever detection have seen
83 percent growth in 2020 [137]. Drones are not only being
used for contactless delivery [138] but are also being used
for monitoring social distancing [139] in many countries such
as Israel, UK and Singapore. Apart from enhanced sensing
coverage, an advanced surveillance system to fight against
COVID-19 is also the need of the hour. Many researchers have
proposed new cloud-based solutions for effective surveillance
of probable cases of COVID-19. The Honghu Hybrid System (HHS) [140] is designed for the collection, integration,
standardization, and analysis of COVID-19-related data from
multiple sources. HHS includes a case reporting system,
diagnostic labs, electronic medical records, and social media
on mobile devices. Such systems can also be used for data
analytics for regulating foot traffic and to trigger warnings for
crowds.
3) Resilience in Smart Cities: COVID-19 is not the only
catastrophe which we have ever faced or will face. There are
always possibilities of future pandemics, recurring natural dis-

Fig. 5: Recent Developments in Smart Cities in the Wake of
COVID-19

asters (e.g., earthquakes, floods and droughts) and disruptions
caused by humans (e.g., strikes, cyber attacks and terrorism).
It should not be very surprising that urban areas are typically
more vulnerable to disasters, e.g., around 95% of the COVID19 cases have been reported in urban areas. COVID-19 has
proven to be a catalyst to ensure resilience in smart cities and
there has been an increased interest in developing smart cities
that are economically and environmentally resilient against
natural disasters and human created troubles. Boston, Helsinki,
Riyadh, Singapore and Vienna have shown extraordinary efforts in building resilient smart cities. PWC Middle East has
derived a smart city resiliency cyclic framework from these
leading smart cities [141]. The proposed framework is claimed
to provide resiliency across societal, environmental and financial matters within a smart city. Japan has also set an example
in implementing smart cities resiliency. Its National Resiliency
plan covers smart communications, sustainable energy systems
and resilient water networks. Initiative taken in Japan for
National Resiliency has been enlisted in [142].
E. Transportation
Smart transportation market was growing at a substantial
pace before COVID-19 and was projected to grow from $94.5
billion in 2020 to $156.5 billion by 2025 [143]. COVID-19 is
a threat to this significant expected growth and has already
slowed down the rise of this market. A steep decrease in
number of trips on public transport has been seen in the
last year or so. Subways are also seeing a sharp decline in
number of passengers. Moreover, delays in shipments have
also been seen due to closure of ports in many countries. Road
transport remained operational but with minimal itineraries.
Theses changes have resulted in increased volatility of freight
charges, according to European Road Freight Rate Benchmark
Q1 2020 report [144].
Automotive industry was already in recession even before COVID-19. The pandemic has created another dip to
this recession which is expected to delay the recovery until
2025 [145]. The current recession has resulted in a delay of
Autonomous Driving (AD) and Advanced Driver Assistance

1) In-Cabin Sensing and Analytics: Modern cars are increasingly being equipped with climate control features including in-cabin air quality control systems. Sensors and
technologies are being deployed in vehicles to measure CO,
CO2 and other pollutants within the vehicles [148]. It was
reported that low doses of far-UVC light inactivate airborne
coronaviruses without harming human tissues [149]. Several
automakers including GM and Hyundai have proposed the
use of UV light to clean the vehicle cabins [150]. Uber has
introduced facial mask detection in their navigation application
to assure riders that the drivers are following SOPs [151].
Techniques are also being developed to monitor indoor air
quality and occupancy in public transport, which is crucial to
curb the transmission of COVID-19 [152]. Many jurisdictions
are deploying IoT solutions to monitor real-time occupancy on
public transport. This data is also often shared with passengers
to help them make informed decisions and comply with social
distancing requirements [153].
2) Smart Logistics: Smart logistics market is expected to
grow at a compound annual growth rate (CAGR) of 8.5%
from 2020 to 2027 [154]. This is partly due to the dire need
of IoT in smart logistics created by COVID-19. China is the
world’s largest logistics market and it has also responded well
to COVID shock. Cainiao Logistics has built China Smart
Logistic Network based on IoT and AI to achieve fast express
delivery services [155]. China’s smart logistics developments
in wake of COVID-19 have been detailed in [156]. XPO
Logistics, a world leading logistics company, has enhanced
its existing smart logistics platform named XPO Connect by
introducing various new features including enhanced inventory
tracking precision and contactless delivery [157]. Since the
beginning of COVID-19 pandemic, cold chain logistics have
been emphasized by many scientists and researchers. It will
not only allow safe transport of coronavirus vaccines but also
help existing supply chain systems to better preserve food
and pharmaceutical items during transportation. Researchers
are working on enhanced IoT adoption in cold chain logistics [158], [159], [160]. Smart fleet management solutions
are also gaining more attention. IoT enabled connected fleets
reduces the operational hours and allows decentralized operations [161]. Researcher are also proposing optimization
procedures to operate minimum number of fleets for maximum
utility [162].

D ecentralized Fleet
M anag em ent

U VC L ig ht based Cleaning
D ecreased A d op on

Systems (ADAS) adoption in cars [146]. Research and development projects are being scaled down and corresponding
timelines have been adjusted. Most LIDAR and radar startups
in ADAS space are pivoting to non-automotive use cases
such as industrial automation and mobile devices. Specifically,
introduction of LIDARs in iPhones by Apple has re-ignited the
interest of LIDAR players in smartphone and consumer space
where they expect higher volumes in shorter time because of
shorter design cycles in consumer segments [147]. Although
the transportation sector has been hit pretty hard by the
pandemic, there are still some areas within the sector that are
attracting increasing attention such as in-cabin analytics and
smart logistics. Figure 6 shows the summary of these. Below,
we give the details.

Increased A d op on

9

U se of L IDA Rs and rad ars

InCabinEnvironm ent
Control

Cold ChainL og is cs

A DA S

Fig. 6: Summary of IoT Adoption in Transportation

F. Industrial IoT
Decrease in economic activity due to COVID-19 will have
an adverse impact on factory automation as many companies
are cutting on their industrial IoT (IIoT) budget. That being
said, in mid- to long-term, IIoT is expected to see significant
growth due to its importance especially during pandemics
or other disasters. A recent McKinsey survey found that
93% of supply chain and manufacturing professionals plan
to focus on smart and resilient solutions [163]. A report on
India’s initiatives for IIoT in wake of COVID-19 focuses on
supply chain visibility and sustainable IIoT solutions [164]. It
also shows how IIoT can have a bigger impact on returning
industries back to normal as compared to other technologies
like AI and Big Data. Thus, despite an adverse impact on
IoT adoption in industries in the short-term, this pandemic is
expected to result in accelerated growth of IIoT in the long
run. According to a research analysis, IIoT market will reach
$263.4 billion by 2027 [165]. Similarly, Juniper Research
forecasts that the number of IIoT sensors will increase from
17.7 billion in 2020 to 36.8 billion in 2025 [166]. Next, we
discuss recent developments in some key IIoT areas impacted
by COVID-19. These are summarized in Figure 7.
1) Remote Monitoring and Machine Health Prognostics:
IoT can help industries to continue production during pandemics. Examples of IoT solutions helping to fulfill SOP
requirements (such as maintaining distance among factory
workers and intelligent equipment disinfection) can be found
in recent literature [167], [168]. IoT is also used for remote
monitoring and operation of the industrial machines [169]. The
remote monitoring and operation need installation of various
sensors in predictive maintenance space. One such system for

10

Remote M onitoring and
Control Sy
stems

Proac ve
M aintenance

Remote
M onitoring

Smart M anufacturing &
InventoryM anagement

G eo Tags

NFC

Ad d i ve
M anufacturing

D istance betw een Staﬀ

Fig. 7: Recent Increased Adoptions in Industries in Wake of
COVID-19

textile sector is proposed in [170]. Machine health prognostics
has been a prime focus of many industries as lockdowns have
led to loss of revenues. Remote identification and predication of machine failure have become even more important
because on-site repair and maintenance are more expensive
and challenging (or even impossible) during the pandemic.
Recent efforts in developing a framework for machine health
prognostics can be found in literature [171]. Different AIbased approaches to diagnose and predict a machine fault have
also been proposed by many researchers (e.g., see [172] and
references therein).
2) Smart Manufacturing and Inventory Management: Increased demand, fewer operational hours and limited number
of on-site staff have made it difficult for the industries to
fulfill manufacturing demands. This is giving rise to additive
manufacturing to meet the increased demand of various items
such as personal protection equipment and other medical
supplies [173]. The role of additive manufacturing in medical
applications have been discussed in details in [174]. Authors
in [175] have proposed an intelligent collaborative framework
to improve the resiliency and viability of the existing manufacturing processes.
Due to the highly fluctuating demands, inventory management has become even more important. A smart inventory
management system that can monitor items and available
space, and communicate it to the concerned warehouse team is
much more needed during the pandemic. Geotags, ultrasound
transducer and NFC are being used to build autonomous
inventory management systems [176].
IV. C HALLENGES AND K EY R ESEARCH D IRECTIONS
COVID-19 has brought about opportunities as well as many
real challenges for IoT adoption. From a macro perspective,
IoT adoption needs to cater to the profound societal and
economic changes caused by COVID-19. Since the beginning
of the global pandemic, behaviors of individuals, communities
and organisations have undergone a major shift [177]. Moreover, some of this shift will not be restored in the next few
years or even beyond that. The focus of social construction
is on well-being during the pandemic and in post-pandemic
world. In the context of financial constraints, IoT adoption

must be more effective, efficient, purposeful, and have a
significant ROI.
From a micro perspective, IoT technology requires faster
and more revolutionary innovation to ensure the functioning
of society, promote civil construction, and respond to possible
crises in the future. The global IoT market was growing
before the pandemic, but some of its shortcomings have been
magnified during the pandemic such as the ease and economy
of device installation and data security. Also, new specific
problems are emerging in multiple IoT sectors and effective
solutions for these problems will be the key in accelerated IoT
development and adoption in these sectors.
In this section, we discuss challenges as well as key research
directions across different IoT verticals. Specifically, in Section IV-A, we focus on general challenges that are ubiquitous
to the whole IoT industry. From Section IV-B to Section IV-G,
we go deeper and summarize the existing and new challenges
specific to each IoT vertical. We also discuss key research
directions important to facilitate and accelerate IoT adoption.
A. Challenges Ubiquitous to All Verticals
1) Financial Constraints: A large number of companies,
organisations and individuals are facing financial stress which
is one key factor negatively affecting IoT adoption. Many
organisations have reduced or stopped altogether their investment on many new or planned initiatives such as IoT
projects. Another financial challenge caused by COVID-19 is
the increasing labor costs for device installation under social
contact restrictions.
A key challenge that needs attention is to reduce the cost of
IoT system development, installation, and usage. Convergence
of IoT and cloud services is important, making the IoT
infrastructure that is heavily related to geographic space a
virtualized and sustainable resource. Furthermore, open source
IoT data processing softwares, analytics tools and testbeds
need to be developed to enable organisations to avoid/reduce
the cost of outsourcing or developing these in-house.
It has become ever more important to develop IoT sensors
and devices that are cheap and easier to install and maintain.
For example, it is important to invent devices that operate
on minimal power [178] as this can reduce the maintenance
cost, i.e., replacing batteries. One such example is the Ultra
Low Power SoC for battery powered IoT devices [179],
developed by Dialog Semiconductor, which can provide more
than one year battery life for many IoT applications. Also, it is
critical to develop cheap plug-and-play sensing devices [180],
[181] that can be easily integrated into ordinary facilities
without additional hardware investment and deployment cost.
It will also be helpful to explore self-configuration and selfadaptation of IoT devices [182] as well as intelligent humancomputer interaction [183] to ease the installation and usage
of IoT systems.
2) Data Security and Privacy: Many countries have introduced various emergency regulations during the pandemic
such as limits on people’s movements, social distance requirements and less strict privacy obligations [184]. Once the
pandemic is over, such regulations will need to be carefully reviewed to ensure people’s rights and privacy are protected [57].

11

In order to be better prepared for future pandemics and
emergencies, the research community needs to work on robust
data access policies, security protocols and privacy-preserving
solutions for tracking, monitoring and analytics etc. Also,
instead of conventional data centers, decentralized data pools
at personal devices may be considered to give more control to
the end users over their own data. IoT sensors do not actively
collect and upload data but transfer the created data to user
devices. Users can choose to distribute data peer-to-peer to
their trusted users or third-party applications for data analysis
and decision-making. Moreover, lightweight but reliable encryption and network transmission technology are needed for
personal devices. The solution should be efficiently integrated
with emerging technologies such as 5G, edge computing, and
blockchain [185].
B. Healthcare
COVID-19 has made it even more important for healthcare to be ubiquitous, low threshold, and more efficient in
monitoring, testing and diagnosis. This brings about many
new challenges. First, ubiquity means that IoT-based medical
services must be available on-demand and accessible to a
wider population. However, most people do not own professional medical equipment, whereas more affordable devices
such as smartphones and wearables have limited capabilities
in healthcare. Second, the low threshold requires reducing the
cost and difficulty of using IoT-based medical services. However, medical service processes are typically complicated and
expensive. Moreover, many people find it hard to adopt and use
new technologies such as IoT systems for healthcare. Third, it
is important to address energy requirements and computational
efficiency of healthcare sensors, e.g., to enable continuous
monitoring and high-quality testing/diagnosis. Based on these
challenges, below we enumerate some promising R&D directions for healthcare IoT.
1) Upgraded Wearable Technology: There is a need to
make wearables more comfortable to wear/carry. Some recent
studies [186], [187] have pointed out that the product design of
wearables should be optimized for different groups with different lifestyles and circumstances. For example, to adapt to the
needs of patients with respiratory diseases, [188] incorporates
an optical sensor array into a wearable face mask for continuous cardiovascular monitoring. There is also a need to develop
energy harvesting sensors for wearables since smart algorithms
on wearables can drain its battery quickly. Therefore, energy
harvesting technology utilizing thermometric principle can be
applied to wearables, e.g., [189] demonstrates the feasibility
of operating a commercial glucose sensor using only the body
heat as its energy source.
2) AIoT (AI + IoT) for Healthcare: Algorithms currently
running on off-the-shelf IoT devices (e.g., smartphones and
wearables) must be able to provide quality comparable to
medical grade equipment [190]. In the recent years, AI for
healthcare has achieved remarkable progress in screening,
disease diagnosis, and telemedicine, using machine learning
models driven by massive health data [191]. It is important
to accelerate the integration of IoT and AI for healthcare.

However, one urgent issue to solve is the model training and
deployment on IoT devices that have limited computational
and memory resources. There are preliminary works in this
direction. [192] discusses the split AI architecture for mobile healthcare systems, where lightweight AI solutions can
work locally on the client side. [193] presents a multi-task
convolutional network on an ARM CPU to enable real-time
cardiovascular and respiratory measurement based on mobile
videos. Still, more work is needed.
3) Making Health Services More Accessible: People may
be unwilling or unable to invest in specialized medical devices or wearables. To make healthcare services accessible
to a wider population, a multi-faceted approach is needed.
For example, there is a need to establish community-based
unmanned clinics [194]. Similarly, it is important to develop
low-cost and self-help medical solutions that work on off-theshelf devices such as smartphones and home audio systems.
A recent survey [32] found that most existing studies rely
on expensive research-grade wearable devices and there is
a need to replace these research-grade wearables with the
current smartwatches. Some recent breakthroughs in making
health services more accessible include COVID-19 screening
using cough recording [39], smartphone-based capture and
interpretation of Rapid Diagnostic Tests [195], and on-device
vitals measurement [193], [196].

C. Smart Homes
One of the biggest obstacles in smart homes IoT adoption
is the cost and technical skills required for home automation.
This requires data generated and collected from disparate
sources to be effectively integrated and analyzed. Therefore,
currently, mostly hobbyists and tech enthusiasts invest time
and efforts in smart homes. Reducing the setup threshold is
critical in facilitating and accelerating user adoption. Thus,
there is a need to develop plug-and-play solutions that can
be easily deployed and used by people who are not necessarily tech-savvy. Also, most of the current smart home
devices/services are driven by simple rules such as IFTTT (ifthis-then-that), which lacks flexibility and can hardly meet the
needs of users considering their daily workloads. To go beyond
the simple rules, there is a need to equip home devices with
intelligence and context-awareness that can define rules and
operations with no or little human intervention.
Energy sector needs to adapt to the changes brought to
our lifestyles and energy consumption patterns by COVID-19.
People are spending more time at home and there is a shift
in energy consumption from commercial buildings/offices to
homes and this trend is expected to stay. Energy supply and
billing should be optimized based on the occupancy profiles
in smart homes and smart buildings in general. Considering
that energy consumption is a stochastic dynamic process, techniques such as time series analysis and reinforcement learning
will help optimize the sustainability of energy supply. Also,
efforts should be made to maximize the usage of renewable
energy resources especially on the edge IoT devices.

12

D. Smart Buildings
Smart buildings are an integral part of infection control in
the wake of COVID-19. Disinfection and contactless operations implemented by robots and smart devices promise to
address a long-standing necessity. However, several challenges
need to be addressed. First, a building compacts together
many different functional areas and objects in a relatively
small space. They form complex pathways and space usage
rules. The automation of robots and smart devices must grasp
spatial indoor topology (e.g., connectivity and accessibility),
semantics (e.g., occupation and usage), and dynamic information (e.g., flow, density, and air quality) of these areas,
to better serve people in the building. Second, privacy and
access policies place strict requirements on sensor deployment
in buildings. This is exacerbated by disparate data created by
different types of sensors that must be integrated for analysis
and decision making. We highlight two interesting directions
for smart buildings in the presence of COVID-19.
1) Semantic-aware and Dynamics-aware Modeling: It is
critical for the effective operation of a smart building to
properly capture and represent the semantics and dynamics
of the building. Semantic-aware [197], [198] and dynamicsaware [199], [200] models and indexes are required to facilitate data analysis and decision-making processes in smart
buildings. For example, using crowd and occupancy information, effective and safe indoor navigation services can be
provided to users to avoid contact with other people while
navigating indoor spaces. Similarly, analytics techniques must
be developed that use indoor mobility data collected from
various IoT sensors to understand how indoor spaces are used.
This is critical for important smart building operations such
as studying potential impact of occupancy and movement on
virus transmission and identifying the areas that need frequent
cleaning.
2) Sensor Data Integration for Context-Awareness: It is
important to equip robots and other smart devices with contextawareness. This requires data generated and collected from
disparate sources to be effectively integrated and analyzed.
For example, disinfection robots can be made to utilize data
from other in-building sources such as CCTV, swipe-cards
access database, temperature sensors, and location data from
mobile devices, to identify and clean the areas that were
visited by people with elevated temperatures. Similarly, smart
HVAC systems can utilize the data obtained from the visitor
management system to optimize ventilation and temperature
management such that not only the indoor air quality is
improved but the power usage is also reduced.
E. Smart Cities
To better prepare for future public health emergencies, smart
cities need to embrace IoT and other emerging technologies for
critical tasks such as social distance measurement, viral testing
and infection case reporting [201]. Governments typically
have data from many different departments and sources that
are essentially stored and managed in different formats and
systems. One critical challenge is to efficiently and effectively
integrate data from different sources for data analysis while

guaranteeing proper access control. Several future directions
exist for efficient data integration and integrity [202]. First, it
is important to study the open standards to encode IoT sensory
data for better interoperability. Second, it is useful to design
smart city ontology representing particular domain knowledge
to enrich context information to IoT sensory data before data
exploitation. Third, it is helpful to formulate data sharing and
integration schemes to facilitate different authorities sharing
their sensor data without costly restructuring of existing data
architecture.
COVID-19 has given a huge blow to the brick-and-mortar
retail and entertainment industries. People are expected to
continue spending more time and money online. In this case,
the services provided by brick-and-mortar stores need to
be innovative to attract customers and meet their demands.
The retail and entertainment industry could better integrate
AI, IoT, and big data analysis, to achieve a comprehensive
understanding of customers, places and products. To this
end, personalized modeling and graph representation of user
interactions are directions worth exploring.

F. Transportation
COVID-19 has significantly impacted the transportation
networks, both in urban transport sector (e.g., metro, bus, taxi)
and long-distance transport sector (e.g., air travel and train). To
avoid person-to-person contact, people’s travel patterns (time
and route planning), selection and operating mode of pickup
sites, social behavior of drivers and passengers, and security
checks have all changed. IoT adoption to transportation must
adapt to these new changes fast, to facilitate the activities of
passengers and drivers. This calls for data-driven and selfadaptive decision-making processes over IoT data. An urgent
need is to use the tracking and monitoring capabilities of
IoT to share data with the travelers. Travelers are often eager
to obtain information regarding their upcoming travel, e.g.,
the number of passengers in the cabin, the waiting time
to pass the security and viral checks, and the number of
positive cases detected recently along their travel routes. A key
challenge is to seamlessly integrate data from different sources
while ensuring the accuracy and reliability of the information
demanded [203], [199].
It is also critical to improve the logistics to avoid delays,
minimize social contact, and hoarding of supplies useful
in dealing with the pandemic. This requires rethinking of
previous tenets and ontologies in supply chain [204]. To
improve the efficiency of logistics, it is necessary to consider and prioritize the tasks in supply chain, capabilities
and preferences of carriers, and real-time traffic that has
shown the prospects of combining spatial crowdsourcing and
personalized modeling [205], [206]. Moreover, logistics should
be made fully traceable and transparent. Current promising
research directions include the development of sustainable
tracking tags and ultra-low-power tracing solutions [207], and
the adoption of blockchain to achieve trustworthy and longterm preservation of product histories [208].

13

Sector

Demand

Short-term
Investment

Adoption

Mid- to Long-term
Demand
Investment
Adoption

333

333

333

333

333

333

Smart Homes

3

7

7

3

3

3

Smart Buildings

3

77

7

3

3

3

33

33

33

33

333

333

Transportation

7

77

7

3

–

–

Industrial IoT

33

77

77

33

33

33

Healthcare

Smart Cities

Explanation
There is a huge demand for efficient and effective
healthcare driven by larger number of patients, overburdened facilities and overworked hospital staff due
to the COVID-19. Governments and organisations
have invested heavily to combat the pandemic and
IoT adoption is expected to grow at a significant pace
both in the short-term and mid- to long-term.
People are spending more and more time at home
due to lockdowns and work/study from home trends
that are expected to stay. Financial stress on households is holding back the IoT adoption in the shortterm but an accelerated adoption is expected in the
mid- to long-term.
Tracking, monitoring and cleaning requirements imposed by governments have increased the demand
for IoT. However, the recession has made it difficult
for most of the organisations to invest in new IoT
projects. Thus, despite some initiatives, the shortterm impact is negative on IoT adoption. However,
in the mid- to long-term, accelerated adoption is
expected once the financial stress is eased.
Smart and resilient cities have become even more
important to be prepared for future pandemics and
emergencies. IoT is being deployed for various applications especially tracking and monitoring. Adoption
is expected to gain pace in mid- to long- term when
financial stress is eased.
Sharp decline in transportation usage has adversely
affected revenue, which has negatively affected the
adoption of IoT. Although some areas (e.g., logistics,
in-cabin analytics) are still gaining some attention,
overall trend is negative. Mid- to long-term impact
appears to be mixed with accelerated adoption expected in logistics but relatively stable in public and
private transports.
Applications like remote equipment monitoring and
inventory management have increased the demand
but the industries are finding it hard to invest in
IoT due to the financial strain. In the mid- to longterm, an accelerated growth is expected due to the
importance of IoT to keep industries operational in
future pandemics or emergencies.

TABLE I: Summary of COVID-19 impact on short-term and mid- to long-term IoT adoption in different sectors. 3 indicates
accelerated adoption, 7 indicates decelerated adoption, and – indicates that the adoption is both positively and negative impacted
in different subareas. The numbers of 3 and 7 indicate how strong the positive and negative impacts are, respectively.
G. Industrial IoT
COVID-19 has disrupted industries and IoT has become
even more important for industries to ensure business continuity, employee safety, remote asset control, and remote
collaboration etc. To ensure that industries are ready for future
pandemics, research and development into various important
directions are needed such as digital maintenance of equipment, end-to-end automation, advanced remote collaboration
and asset control etc. Virtual reality is becoming more important to allow workers effectively operate equipment remotely.
Digital twins [209] are also essential for industries to adapt to
the new normal, e.g., to identify potential equipment failures
and to automate operations.
V. C ONCLUSIONS
COVID-19 is proving to be a catalyst for technology adoption and innovation. To analyze the impact of COVID-19 on
IoT adoption, we have interviewed many experts in different
sectors, thoroughly analyzed recent research literature and

examined reports from leading consulting firms. In this paper,
we present our findings on the impact of COVID-19 on IoT
adoption in different sectors namely healthcare, transportation,
industrial IoT, smart homes, smart buildings and smart cities.
Table I presents a summary of expected short-term and midto long-term impact across these sectors. We also discuss
different initiatives being undertaken in different sectors in
the wake of this pandemic. Furthermore, we highlight various
challenges that must be addressed and important research
directions that need attention to facilitate accelerated IoT
adoption in different sectors.

R EFERENCES
[1] K. K. Patel, S. M. Patel et al., “Internet of things-IoT: definition,
characteristics, architecture, enabling technologies, application & future
challenges,” International journal of engineering science and computing, vol. 6, no. 5, 2016.
[2] M. Patel, J. Shangkuan, and C. Thomas, “What’s new with the Internet
of Things,” McKinsey &, 2017.

14

[3] L. Farhan, S. T. Shukur, A. E. Alissa, M. Alrweg, U. Raza, and
R. Kharel, “A survey on the challenges and opportunities of the Internet
of Things (IoT),” in 2017 Eleventh International Conference on Sensing
Technology (ICST). IEEE, 2017, pp. 1–5.
[4] D. Lin, C. Lee, and K. Lin, “Research on effect factors evaluation of
internet of things (IOT) adoption in chinese agricultural supply chain,”
in 2016 IEEE International Conference on Industrial Engineering and
Engineering Management (IEEM). IEEE, 2016, pp. 612–615.
[5] M. S. Jalali, J. P. Kaiser, M. Siegel, and S. Madnick, “The Internet
of Things promises new benefits and risks: A systematic analysis of
adoption dynamics of IoT products,” IEEE Security & Privacy, vol. 17,
no. 2, pp. 39–48, 2019.
[6] T. H. El Kadi, “Uneven disruption: COVID-19 and the digital divide in
the euro-mediterranean region,” IEMed Mediterranian Yearbook, 2020.
[7] C. Anderson, C. Bieck, and A. Marshall, “How business is adapting
to covid-19: Executive insights reveal post-pandemic opportunities,”
Strategy & Leadership, 2020.
[8] S. Fahrni, C. Jansen, M. John, T. Kasah, B. Koerber, and N. Mohr. (2020 (accessed December, 2020))
Coronavirus: Industrial IoT in challenging times. [Online].
Available: https://www.mckinsey.com/industries/advanced-electronics/
our-insights/coronavirus-industrial-iot-in-challenging-times
[9] S. Stahie. (2020 (accessed December, 2020)) COVID-19
pandemic increased iot adoption, research finds. [Online].
Available: https://www.bitdefender.com/box/blog/iot-news/covid-19pandemic-increased-iot-adoption-research-finds/
[10] J.
O’Halloran.
(2020
(accessed
December,
2020))
Nearly half of firms to increase investments in iot
despite the impact of COVID-19. [Online]. Available:
https://www.computerweekly.com/news/252491333/Nearly-half-offirms-to-increase-investments-in-IoT-despite-the-impact-of-Covid-19
[11] M. Ndiaye, S. S. Oyewobi, A. M. Abu-Mahfouz, G. P. Hancke, A. M.
Kurien, and K. Djouani, “IoT in the wake of COVID-19: A survey
on contributions, challenges and evolution,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp.
186 821–186 839, 2020.
[12] L. Bai, D. Yang, X. Wang, L. Tong, X. Zhu, N. Zhong, C. Bai, C. A.
Powell, R. Chen, J. Zhou et al., “Chinese experts’ consensus on the
internet of things-aided diagnosis and treatment of coronavirus disease
2019 (COVID-19),” Clinical eHealth, vol. 3, pp. 7–15, 2020.
[13] R. P. Singh, M. Javaid, A. Haleem, and R. Suman, “Internet of things
(IoT) applications to fight against COVID-19 pandemic,” Diabetes &
Metabolic Syndrome: Clinical Research & Reviews, 2020.
[14] D. S. W. Ting, L. Carin, V. Dzau, and T. Y. Wong, “Digital technology
and COVID-19,” Nature medicine, vol. 26, no. 4, pp. 459–461, 2020.
[15] M. S. Rahman, N. C. Peeri, N. Shrestha, R. Zaki, U. Haque, and
S. H. Ab Hamid, “Defending against the novel coronavirus (COVID19) outbreak: How can the internet of things (IoT) help to save the
world?” Health Policy and Technology, 2020.
[16] M. Javaid, A. Haleem, R. Vaishya, S. Bahl, R. Suman, and A. Vaish,
“Industry 4.0 technologies and their applications in fighting COVID19 pandemic,” Diabetes & Metabolic Syndrome: Clinical Research &
Reviews, 2020.
[17] R. Vaishya, M. Javaid, I. H. Khan, and A. Haleem, “Artificial intelligence (AI) applications for COVID-19 pandemic,” Diabetes &
Metabolic Syndrome: Clinical Research & Reviews, 2020.
[18] V. Chamola, V. Hassija, V. Gupta, and M. Guizani, “A comprehensive
review of the COVID-19 pandemic and the role of IoT, drones, AI,
blockchain, and 5G in managing its impact,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp.
90 225–90 265, 2020.
[19] M. F. Mokbel, S. Abbar, and R. Stanojevic, “Contact tracing: Beyond
the apps,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.04585, 2020.
[20] M. Nasajpour, S. Pouriyeh, R. M. Parizi, M. Dorodchi, M. Valero, and
H. R. Arabnia, “Internet of things for current COVID-19 and future
pandemics: An exploratory study,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.11147,
2020.
[21] J. Nayak, B. Naik, P. Dinesh, K. Vakula, B. K. Rao, W. Ding, and
D. Pelusi, “Intelligent system for COVID-19 prognosis: a state-of-theart survey,” Applied Intelligence, pp. 1–31, 2021.
[22] Y. Dong and Y.-D. Yao, “Iot platform for COVID-19 prevention and
control: A survey,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.08056, 2020.
[23] T. Alam, “Internet of Things and blockchain-based framework for
coronavirus (Covid-19) disease,” Available at SSRN 3660503, 2020.
[24] J. T. Kelly, K. L. Campbell, E. Gong, and P. Scuffham, “The Internet
of Things: Impact and implications for health care delivery,” Journal
of medical Internet research, vol. 22, no. 11, p. e20135, 2020.
[25] D. Golinelli, E. Boetto, G. Carullo, A. G. Nuzzolese, M. P. Landini,
and M. P. Fantini, “Adoption of digital technologies in health care

[26]
[27]

[28]

[29]

[30]

[31]

[32]

[33]
[34]
[35]

[36]
[37]

[38]

[39]
[40]

[41]

[42]

[43]
[44]

during the COVID-19 pandemic: Systematic review of early scientific
literature,” Journal of Medical Internet Research, vol. 22, no. 11, p.
e22280, 2020.
A. C. Chang, “Artificial intelligence and COVID-19: Present state and
future vision,” Intelligence-Based Medicine, p. 100012, 2020.
S. Abir, S. N. Islam, A. Anwar, A. N. Mahmood, and A. M. T.
Oo, “Building resilience against covid-19 pandemic using artificial
intelligence, machine learning, and iot: A survey of recent progress,”
IoT, vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 506–528, 2020.
Juniper Research. (2020 (accessed November 2020)) IOT platform
revenue to grow 20% in 2020, despite global COVID-19 pandemic.
[Online]. Available: https://www.juniperresearch.com/press/pressreleases/iot-platform-revenue-to-grow-20-in-2020
J. Sawyer, “Wearable internet of medical things sensor devices, artificial intelligence-driven smart healthcare services, and personalized
clinical care in COVID-19 telemedicine,” American Journal of Medical
Research, vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 71–77, 2020.
D. R. Seshadri, E. V. Davies, E. R. Harlow, J. J. Hsu, S. C. Knighton,
T. A. Walker, J. E. Voos, and C. K. Drummond, “Wearable sensors
for COVID-19: a call to action to harness our digital infrastructure
for remote patient monitoring and virtual assessments,” Frontiers in
Digital Health, vol. 2, p. 8, 2020.
A. Waheed and J. Shafi, “Successful role of smart technology to combat
COVID-19,” in 2020 Fourth International Conference on I-SMAC (IoT
in Social, Mobile, Analytics and Cloud)(I-SMAC). IEEE, 2020, pp.
772–777.
K. Ueafuea, C. Boonnag, T. Sudhawiyangkul, P. Leelaarporn, A. Gulistan, W. Chen, S. C. Mukhopadhyay, T. Wilaiprasitporn, and S. Piyayotai, “Potential applications of mobile and wearable devices for psychological support during the COVID-19 pandemic: A review,” IEEE
Sensors Journal, 2020.
B. Sahakian, D. Vatansever, and S. Wang, “COVID-19 and promising
solutions to combat symptoms of stress, anxiety and depression,”
Neuropsychopharmacology, 2021.
L. Lin and Z. Hou, “Combat COVID-19 with artificial intelligence and
big data,” Journal of travel medicine, vol. 27, no. 5, p. taaa080, 2020.
NRi Digital. (2020 (accessed December, 2020)) Wearable
wonderland: How tech is tackling COVID-19. [Online]. Available: https://medical-technology.nridigital.com/medical technology
oct20/wearable tech covid-19#
D. J. Miller, J. V. Capodilupo, M. Lastella, C. Sargent, G. D. Roach,
V. H. Lee, and E. R. Capodilupo, “Analyzing changes in respiratory
rate to predict the risk of COVID-19 infection.” medRxiv, 2020.
FDA. (2020 (accessed December, 2020)) FDA clears philips’
disposable patch for COVID-19 patient deterioration. [Online].
Available: https://www.fdanews.com/articles/print/197314-fda-clearsphilips-disposable-patch-for-covid-19-patient-deterioration
K. O’Reilly. (2020 (accessed December, 2020)) Philips launches next
generation wearable biosensor for early patient deterioration detection,
including clinical surveillance for COVID-19. [Online]. Available:
https://www.philips.com/a-w/about/news/archive/standard/news/
press/2020/20200526-philips-launches-next-generation-wearablebiosensor-for-early-patient-deterioration-detection-including-clinicalsurveillance-for-covid-19.html
J. Laguarta, F. Hueto, and B. Subirana, “COVID-19 artificial intelligence diagnosis using only cough recordings,” IEEE Open Journal of
Engineering in Medicine and Biology, 2020.
P. Porter, U. Abeyratne, V. Swarnkar, J. Tan, T.-w. Ng, J. M. Brisbane,
D. Speldewinde, J. Choveaux, R. Sharan, K. Kosasih et al., “A
prospective multicentre study testing the diagnostic accuracy of an
automated cough sound centred analytic system for the identification
of common respiratory disorders in children,” Respiratory research,
vol. 20, no. 1, p. 81, 2019.
J. M. Radin, N. E. Wineinger, E. J. Topol, and S. R. Steinhubl,
“Harnessing wearable device data to improve state-level real-time
surveillance of influenza-like illness in the USA: a population-based
study,” The Lancet Digital Health, vol. 2, no. 2, pp. e85–e93, 2020.
G. Quer, J. M. Radin, M. Gadaleta, K. Baca-Motes, L. Ariniello,
E. Ramos, V. Kheterpal, E. J. Topol, and S. R. Steinhubl, “Wearable
sensor data and self-reported symptoms for COVID-19 detection,”
Nature Medicine, pp. 1–5, 2020.
T. Mishra, M. Wang, A. A. Metwally, G. K. Bogu, A. W. Brooks,
A. Bahmani, A. Alavi, A. Celli, E. Higgs, O. Dagan-Rosenfeld et al.,
“Early detection of COVID-19 using a smartwatch,” medRxiv, 2020.
A. Natarajan, H.-W. Su, and C. Heneghan, “Assessment of physiological signs associated with COVID-19 measured using wearable devices,”
medRxiv, 2020.

15

[45] Evidation. (2020 (accessed November, 2020)) Evidation health and
barda partner on early warning system for COVID-19. https://evidation.
com/news/evidationhealthandbardapartner/.
[46] Oura Health. (2020 (accessed November, 2020)) UCSF TemPredict
study. https://blog.ouraring.com/ucsf-tempredict-study/.
[47] Robert Koch Institut. (2020 (accessed November, 2020)) Corona datenspende. https://corona-datenspende.de/science/en/.
[48] L. Lovett. (2020 (accessed November 10, 2020)) Eko
lands
EUA
for
device
that
helps
detect
coronavirus patients with cardiac complications. [Online]. Available: https://www.mobihealthnews.com/news/eko-lands-eua-devicehelps-detect-coronavirus-patients-cardiac-complications
[49] M. Groves. (2020 (accessed November 10, 2020)) Philips
receives FDA clearance for the use of its ultrasound
portfolio to manage COVID-19-related lung and cardiac
complications. [Online]. Available: https://www.philips.com/aw/about/news/archive/standard/news/press/2020/20200513-philipsreceives-fda-clearance-for-the-use-of-its-ultrasound-portfolio-tomanage-covid-19-related-lung-and-cardiac-complications.html
[50] News Release. (2020 (accessed November 10, 2020))
Aidoc’s ai-ct algorithms fda cleared for COVID-19. [Online]. Available: https://www.appliedradiology.com/communities/CTImaging/aidoc-s-ai-ct-algorithms-fda-cleared-for-covid-19
[51] J. R. Barr, D. D’Auria, and F. Persia, “Telemedicine, homecare in the
era of COVID-19 & beyond,” in 2020 Third International Conference
on Artificial Intelligence for Industries (AI4I). IEEE, 2020, pp. 48–51.
[52] Australian
Government,
Department
of
Health.
(2020
(accessed
November,
2020))
Providing
health
care
remotely
during
COVID-19.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.health.gov.au/news/health-alerts/novel-coronavirus2019-ncov-health-alert/coronavirus-covid-19-advice-for-the-healthand-disability-sector/providing-health-care-remotely-during-covid-19
[53] G. Clarke, “Remote treatment of patients during the COVID-19 pandemic: Digital technologies, smart telemedicine diagnosis systems, and
virtual care,” American Journal of Medical Research, vol. 7, no. 2, pp.
29–35, 2020.
[54] A. Hughes, “Artificial intelligence-enabled healthcare delivery and realtime medical data analytics in monitoring, detection, and prevention of
COVID-19,” American Journal of Medical Research, vol. 7, no. 2, pp.
50–56, 2020.
[55] R. Davis, “Integrating digital technologies and data-driven telemedicine
into smart healthcare during the COVID-19 pandemic,” American
Journal of Medical Research, vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 22–28, 2020.
[56] T. Zhang, M. Liu, T. Yuan, and N. Al-Nabhan, “Emotion-aware and
intelligent internet of medical things towards emotion recognition
during COVID-19 pandemic,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 2020.
[57] OECD. (2020 (accessed November, 2020)) Regulatory quality
and COVID-19: Managing the risks and supporting the recovery.
[Online]. Available: http://www.oecd.org/regreform/regulatory-policy/
Regulatory-Quality-and-Coronavirus%20-(COVID-19)-web.pdf
[58] Australian
Government,
Department
of
Health.
(2020
(accessed November, 2020)) Environmental cleaning and
disinfection
principles
for
COVID-19.
[Online].
Available: https://www.health.gov.au/sites/default/files/documents/2020/03/
environmental-cleaning-and-disinfection-principles-for-covid-19.pdf
[59] Coronavirus (COVID-19) Victoria. (2020 (accessed November, 2020))
Record keeping for contact tracing - information for business. [Online].
Available: https://www.coronavirus.vic.gov.au/record-keeping-contacttracing-information-business
[60] N. Statt. (2020 (accessed November 10, 2020)) Boston dynamics’
spot robot is helping hospitals remotely treat coronavirus patients.
[Online]. Available: https://www.theverge.com/2020/4/23/21231855/
boston-dynamics-spot-robot-covid-19-coronavirus-telemedicine
[61] M. Guettari, I. Gharbi, and S. Hamza, “UVC disinfection robot,”
Environmental Science and Pollution Research, pp. 1–6, 2020.
[62] E. Ackerman, “Autonomous robots are helping kill coronavirus in
hospitals,” IEEE Spectrum, 2020.
[63] Z. Zeng, P.-J. Chen, and A. A. Lew, “From high-touch to high-tech:
COVID-19 drives robotics adoption,” Tourism Geographies, pp. 1–11,
2020.
[64] M. F. Mokbel, S. Abbar, and R. Stanojevic, “Contact tracing: Beyond
the apps,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.04585, 2020.
[65] N. Ahmed, R. A. Michelin, W. Xue, S. Ruj, R. Malaney, S. S. Kanhere,
A. Seneviratne, W. Hu, H. Janicke, and S. K. Jha, “A survey of COVID19 contact tracing apps,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 134 577–134 601,
2020.

[66] Y. Xia and G. Lee, “How to return to normalcy: Fast and comprehensive
contact tracing of COVID-19 through proximity sensing using mobile
devices,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.12576, 2020.
[67] M. Russo and T. Feng. (2020 (accessed November 2020))
Contact tracing accelerates IoT opportunities and risks.
[Online]. Available: https://www.bcg.com/en-au/publications/2020/
contact-tracing-accelerates-iot-opportunities-and-risks-2
[68] J. Moon, C. K. Chekar, D. Barberá, G. Davey, S. Gaisser, T. Gaisser,
C. Iwuji, E. Meseguer, J. G. Ryan, and M. M. Hopkins, “Optimising’test and trace’systems: Early lessons from a comparative analysis
of six countries,” Available at SSRN, 2020.
[69] H.-L. Cao, H. A. D. Nguyen, T. H. Luu, H. T. T. Vu, D. Pham, H. H.
Le, D. X. B. Nguyen, T. T. Truong, H.-D. Nguyen, C.-N. Nguyen
et al., “Localized automation solutions in response to the first wave of
COVID-19: a story from vietnam,” International Journal of Pervasive
Computing and Communications, 2020.
[70] A. O’Dowd, “COVID-19: uk test and trace system still missing 80%
target for reaching contacts,” 2020.
[71] C. Lin, W. E. Braund, J. Auerbach, J.-H. Chou, J.-H. Teng, P. Tu, and
J. Mullen, “Policy decisions and use of information technology to fight
coronavirus disease, taiwan,” Emerging infectious diseases, vol. 26,
no. 7, p. 1506, 2020.
[72] M. Shorfuzzaman, M. S. Hossain, and M. F. Alhamid, “Towards the
sustainable development of smart cities through mass video surveillance: A response to the COVID-19 pandemic,” Sustainable Cities and
Society, p. 102582, 2020.
[73] C.-M. Chen, H.-W. Jyan, S.-C. Chien, H.-H. Jen, C.-Y. Hsu, P.-C. Lee,
C.-F. Lee, Y.-T. Yang, M.-Y. Chen, L.-S. Chen et al., “Containing
COVID-19 among 627,386 persons in contact with the diamond
princess cruise ship passengers who disembarked in taiwan: big data
analytics,” Journal of Medical Internet Research, vol. 22, no. 5, p.
e19540, 2020.
[74] C. J. Wang, C. Y. Ng, and R. H. Brook, “Response to COVID-19
in taiwan: big data analytics, new technology, and proactive testing,”
Jama, vol. 323, no. 14, pp. 1341–1342, 2020.
[75] S.-F. Su and Y.-Y. Han, “How taiwan, a non-who member, takes actions
in response to COVID-19,” Journal of Global Health, vol. 10, no. 1,
2020.
[76] F. Zuo, J. Wang, J. Gao, K. Ozbay, X. J. Ban, Y. Shen, H. Yang,
and S. Iyer, “An interactive data visualization and analytics tool to
evaluate mobility and sociability trends during COVID-19,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2006.14882, 2020.
[77] ABI Research. (2020 (accessed November 2020)) Assessing
the impact of COVID-19 on the smart home market.
[Online]. Available: https://www.abiresearch.com/market-research/
product/7778310-assessing-the-impact-of-covid-19-on-the-sm/
[78] Press Release. (2020 (accessed December, 2020)) Gartner
cfo survey reveals 74% intend to shift some employees
to
remote
work
permanently.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.gartner.com/en/newsroom/press-releases/2020-04-03gartner-cfo-surey-reveals-74-percent-of-organizations-to-shift-someemployees-to-remote-work-permanently2
[79] T. Ellis. (2020 (accessed December, 2020)) Post-pandemic migration
from expensive cities likely as 1 in 4 newly remote employees
expect work-from-home to continue. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.redfin.com/news/wfh-leaving-new-york-san-francisco/
[80] Telsyte.
(2020
(accessed
November
2020))
IoT@Home
gathers pace with home-bound australians. [Online]. Available: https://www.telsyte.com.au/announcements/2020/10/20/iohomegathers-pace-with-home-bound-australians
[81] B. F. Rubin. (2020 (accessed November 11, 2020)) Alexa is
more vital than ever during coronavirus, and amazon knows it.
[Online]. Available: https://www.cnet.com/news/alexa-is-more-vitalthan-ever-during-coronavirus-and-amazon-knows-it/
[82] N. Munsch, A. Martin, S. Gruarin, J. Nateqi, I. Abdarahmane,
R. Weingartner-Ortner, and B. Knapp, “Diagnostic accuracy of webbased COVID-19 symptom checkers: Comparison study,” Journal of
medical Internet research, vol. 22, no. 10, p. e21299, 2020.
[83] E. Enthes. (2020 (accessed November 11, 2020)) Alexa, do
i have COVID-19?. [Online]. Available: https://www.nature.com/
articles/d41586-020-02732-4
[84] F. Li, M. Valero, H. Shahriar, R. A. Khan, and S. I. Ahamed, “WiCOVID: A COVID-19 symptom detection and patient monitoring
framework using WiFi,” Smart Health, p. 100147, 2020.
[85] S. Higginbotham. (2020 (accessed December, 2020)) Welcome
to the post-COVID wearables world. [Online]. Available: https:
//staceyoniot.com/welcome-to-the-post-covid-wearables-world/

16

[86] A. S. Alrumayh and C. C. Tan, “Supporting home quarantine with smart
speakers,” in Proceedings of Deep Learning for Wellbeing Applications
Leveraging Mobile Devices and Edge Computing, 2020, pp. 3–8.
[87] M. Arun, E. Baraneetharan, A. Kanchana, S. Prabu et al., “Detection
and monitoring of the asymptotic COVID-19 patients using IoT devices and sensors,” International Journal of Pervasive Computing and
Communications, 2020.
[88] C. T. Nguyen, Y. M. Saputra, N. Van Huynh, N.-T. Nguyen, T. V. Khoa,
B. M. Tuan, D. N. Nguyen, D. T. Hoang, T. X. Vu, E. Dutkiewicz et al.,
“A comprehensive survey of enabling and emerging technologies for
social distancing—part ii: Emerging technologies and open issues,”
IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 154 209–154 236, 2020.
[89] M. Umair, B. Afzal, A. Khan, A. U. Rehman, Y. A. Sekercioglu, and
G. A. Shah, “Self-configurable hybrid energy management system for
smart buildings,” in 2018 15th International Conference on Control,
Automation, Robotics and Vision (ICARCV). IEEE, 2018, pp. 1241–
1246.
[90] C.-f. Chen, G. Z. de Rubens, X. Xu, and J. Li, “Coronavirus
comes home? energy use, home energy management, and the socialpsychological factors of COVID-19,” Energy research & social science,
vol. 68, p. 101688, 2020.
[91] A. Al-Heeti. (2020 (accessed December, 2020)) Amazon will let
you see how much power your echos are sucking up. [Online].
Available: https://www.cnet.com/news/amazon-unveils-dashboard-forecho-users-to-track-energy-consumption/
[92] N. Nhede. (2020 (accessed December, 2020)) Smart metering
to dominate south asia’s $25.9 billion smart grid market.
[Online]. Available: https://www.smart-energy.com/industry-sectors/
smart-meters/covid-19-a-trigger-for-smart-metering-rollouts/
[93] EDF Energy. (2020 (accessed December, 2020)) Voice controlled
devices. [Online]. Available: https://www.edfenergy.com/smart-home/
voice-controlled-energy
[94] T. Craig. (2020 (accessed December, 2020)) Smart thermostats set
for rapid expansion. [Online]. Available: https://www.achrnews.com/
articles/144003-smart-thermostats-set-for-rapid-expansion
[95] R. Desai. (2020 (accessed December, 2020)) The new nest thermostat:
more energy savings for more people. [Online]. Available: https://blog.
google/products/google-nest/new-nest-thermostat-energy-savings/
[96] M. LM, B. Reddy, and S. Aithal, “Impact of COVID-19 on redefining
the services of educational institutions using ubiquitous technology,”
International Journal of Management, Technology, and Social Sciences,
2020.
[97] J. Soltero. (2020 (accessed December, 2020)) Introducing
google workspace. [Online]. Available: https://cloud.google.com/
blog/products/workspace/introducing-google-workspace/
[98] O. Taiwo and A. E. Ezugwu, “Smart healthcare support for remote patient monitoring during COVID-19 quarantine,” Informatics in
Medicine Unlocked, vol. 20, p. 100428, 2020.
[99] N. A. Megahed and E. M. Ghoneim, “Antivirus-built environment:
Lessons learned from COVID-19 pandemic,” Sustainable Cities and
Society, vol. 61, p. 102350, 2020.
[100] B. Galhotra and A. Dewan, “Impact of COVID-19 on digital platforms
and change in e-commerce shopping trends,” in 2020 Fourth International Conference on I-SMAC (IoT in Social, Mobile, Analytics and
Cloud)(I-SMAC). IEEE, 2020, pp. 861–866.
[101] J. Shieber. (2020 (accessed December, 2020)) Abandoned mall
department stores may become amazon’s next fulfillment centers.
[Online]. Available: https://techcrunch.com/2020/08/09/abandonedmall-department-stores-may-become-amazons-next-fulfillment-center
[102] C. Donnelly. (2020 (accessed November 10, 2020)) Coronavirus:
Microsoft azure suffers datacentre capacity shortages in europe. https://www.computerweekly.com/news/252481265/CoronavirusMicrosoft-Azure-suffers-datacentre-capacity-shortages-in-Europe.
[103] E. Strom. (2020 (accessed November, 2020)) Short and long-term
impacts of COVID-19 on the smart building market. [Online].
Available: https://www.asmag.com/showpost/31877.aspx
[104] C. R.-R. Hainz. (2020 (accessed November, 2020)) Smart
buildings in the light of COVID-19 pandemic. [Online].
Available: https://www.lexology.com/library/detail.aspx?g=4c651a701b71-4ce4-af48-19ad95968463
[105] Deloitte. (2020 (accessed November, 2020)) The use of
smart building technology can enable more efficient facilities
management and help support a safe and healthy environment.
[Online]. Available: https://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/Deloitte/
us/Documents/process-and-operations/us-smart-building-tech-pov.pdf
[106] The Business Research Company. (2020 (accessed November,
2020)) Smart buildings (nonresidential buildings) global

[107]

[108]

[109]

[110]
[111]

[112]

[113]

[114]

[115]
[116]

[117]
[118]
[119]

[120]

[121]

[122]

[123]

[124]

[125]

[126]

[127]

[128]

market report 2020-30: COVID-19 growth and change.
[Online]. Available: https://www.reportlinker.com/p05917857/SmartBuildings-Nonresidential-Buildings-Global-Market-Report-30-Covid19-Growth-and-Change.html?utm source=PRN
S. Clarke and B. Hext. (2020 (accessed November, 2020)) The
new digitization agenda for smart buildings during COVID19. [Online]. Available: https://research.verdantix.com/report/the-newdigitization-agenda-for-smart-buildings-during-covid-19
L. Dietz, P. F. Horve, D. A. Coil, M. Fretz, J. A. Eisen, and K. Van
Den Wymelenberg, “2019 novel coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic:
Built environment considerations to reduce transmission,” Msystems,
vol. 5, no. 2, 2020.
T. Smieszek, G. Lazzari, and M. Salathé, “Assessing the dynamics and
control of droplet-and aerosol-transmitted influenza using an indoor
positioning system,” Scientific reports, vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 1–10, 2019.
M. D. Pinheiro and N. C. Luı́s, “COVID-19 could leverage a sustainable built environment,” Sustainability, vol. 12, no. 14, p. 5863, 2020.
A. F. Santos, P. D. Gaspar, A. Hamandosh, E. B. d. Aguiar, A. C.
Guerra Filho, and H. J. L. d. Souza, “Best practices on HVAC design to
minimize the risk of COVID-19 infection within indoor environments,”
Brazilian Archives of Biology and Technology, vol. 63, 2020.
Arup. Smart buildings: how a virus might lead to healthier buildings. https://www.arup.com/perspectives/smart-buildings-how-a-virusmight-lead-to-healthier-buildings.
M. Guo, P. Xu, T. Xiao, R. He, M. Dai, and Y. Zhang, “Review and
comparison of HVAC operation guidelines in different countries during
the COVID-19 pandemic,” Building and Environment, p. 107368, 2020.
R. Guo, P. Heiselberg, Y. Hu, C. Zhang, and S. Vasilevskis, “Optimization of night ventilation performance in office buildings in a cold
climate,” Energy and Buildings, vol. 225, p. 110319, 2020.
Arup. (2020 (accessed November, 2020)) Neuron: AI smart building
console. https://www.arup.com/projects/neuron.
State Government of Victoria. (2020 (accessed November,
2020))
Creating
a
COVID
safe
workplace.
https://www.coronavirus.vic.gov.au/creating-a-covidsafe-workplace.
NSW Government. (2020 (accessed November, 2020)) COVID safe.
https://www.nsw.gov.au/covid-19/covid-safe.
A. Chase, “Automatic fever detection system and method,” Aug. 25
2020, uS Patent 10,750,953.
I. Nakamoto, S. Wang, Y. Guo, and W. Zhuang, “A QR code–based
contact tracing framework for sustainable containment of COVID-19:
Evaluation of an approach to assist the return to normal activity,” JMIR
mHealth and uHealth, vol. 8, no. 9, p. e22321, 2020.
M. Cristani, A. Del Bue, V. Murino, F. Setti, and A. Vinciarelli, “The
visual social distancing problem,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.04813,
2020.
M. Fazio, A. Buzachis, A. Galletta, A. Celesti, and M. Villari, “A
proximity-based indoor navigation system tackling the COVID-19
social distancing measures,” in 2020 IEEE Symposium on Computers
and Communications (ISCC). IEEE, 2020, pp. 1–6.
T. Fan, Z. Chen, X. Zhao, J. Liang, C. Shen, D. Manocha, J. Pan, and
W. Zhang, “Autonomous social distancing in urban environments using
a quadruped robot,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2008.08889, 2020.
A. J. Sathyamoorthy, U. Patel, Y. A. Savle, M. Paul, and D. Manocha,
“COVID-Robot: Monitoring social distancing constraints in crowded
scenarios,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2008.06585, 2020.
R. Gharpure, C. M. Hunter, A. H. Schnall, C. E. Barrett, A. E. Kirby,
J. Kunz, K. Berling, J. W. Mercante, J. L. Murphy, and A. G. GarciaWilliams, “Knowledge and practices regarding safe household cleaning
and disinfection for COVID-19 prevention—united states, may 2020,”
2020.
D. Hu, H. Zhong, S. Li, J. Tan, and Q. He, “Segmenting areas
of potential contamination for adaptive robotic disinfection in built
environments,” Building and Environment, vol. 184, p. 107226, 2020.
R. Gordon. (2020 (accessed December, 2020)) CSAIL robot disinfects
greater boston food bank. [Online]. Available: https://news.mit.edu/
2020/csail-robot-disinfects-greater-boston-food-bank-covid-19-0629
ABI Research. (2020 (accessed November 2020)) Smart
cities and smart spaces quarterly update. [Online]. Available: https://www.abiresearch.com/market-research/product/7778264smart-cities-and-smart-spaces-quarterly-up/
ARC Advisory Group. (2020 (accessed November 2020))
Governments increase smart city investments to mitigate impact of COVID-19 pandemic. [Online]. Available: https://www.arcweb.com/blog/governments-increase-smart-cityinvestments-mitigate-impact-covid-19-pandemic

17

[129] Singapore Government Technology Agency. (2020 (accessed
November 2020)) 30% increase in FY2020 ICT spend to
accelerate digitalisation & support businesses. [Online]. Available:
https://www.tech.gov.sg/media/media-releases/thirty-percent-increasefy2020-ict-spend-to-accelerate-digitalisation-and-support-businesses
[130] MSCI. (2020 (accessed November 2020)) Smart cities:
Defining
the
trend,
describing
the
transition.
[Online]. Available: https://www.msci.com/documents/1296102/17292317/
ThematicIndex-SmartCities-cbr-en.pdf/
[131] MSCI
Inc.
(2020
(accessed
November
2020))
Post-pandemic
reflections:
Smart
cities.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.msci.com/documents/1296102/18941732/
ThematicIndex-SmartCities-Post-COVID-cbr-en.pdf/
[132] T. Lee and H. Lee, “Tracing surveillance and auto-regulation in singapore:‘smart’responses to COVID-19,” Media International Australia,
p. 1329878X20949545, 2020.
[133] H. Jarva, M. Lappalainen, O. Luomala, P. Jokela, A. E. Jaaskelainen,
A. J. Jaaskelainen, H. Kallio-Kokko, E. Kekalainen, L. Mannonen,
H. Soini et al., “Laboratory-based surveillance of COVID-19 in the
greater helsinki area, finland, february-june 2020,” medRxiv, 2020.
[134] S. Reynolds. (2020 (accessed November 10, 2020)) Smart cities
during COVID-19: How cities are turning to collective intelligence
to enable smarter approaches to COVID-19. [Online]. Available:
https://digileaders.com/smart-cities-during-covid-19-how-cities-areturning-to-collective-intelligence-to-enable-smarter-approaches-tocovid-19/
[135] L. Khalil. (2020 (accessed November 10, 2020)) Digital authoritarianism, china and COVID. [Online]. Available: https://www.lowyinstitute.
org/publications/digital-authoritarianism-china-and-covid
[136] M. HALL. (2020 (accessed November 10, 2020)) Robots
supporting COVID-19 response and public health. [Online].
Available: https://velodynelidar.com/blog/robots-supporting-covid-19and-public-health/
[137] M. Van Natta, P. Chen, S. Herbek, R. Jain, N. Kastelic, E. Katz,
M. Struble, V. Vanam, and N. Vattikonda, “The rise and regulation of
thermal facial recognition technology during the COVID-19 pandemic,”
Journal of Law and the Biosciences, vol. 7, no. 1, 2020.
[138] M. Vartabedian. (2020 (accessed November 2020)) Drone startups aim
to carve out role in delivery of potential COVID-19 vaccine. [Online].
Available: https://www.wsj.com/articles/drone-startups-aim-to-carveout-role-in-delivery-of-potential-covid-19-vaccine-11604239201
[139] A. Kumar, K. Sharma, H. Singh, S. G. Naugriya, S. S. Gill, and
R. Buyya, “A drone-based networked system and methods for combating coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic,” Future Generation
Computer Systems, vol. 115, pp. 1–19, 2020.
[140] M. Gong, L. Liu, X. Sun, Y. Yang, S. Wang, and H. Zhu, “Cloud-based
system for effective surveillance and control of COVID-19: Useful
experiences from hubei, china,” Journal of Medical Internet Research,
vol. 22, no. 4, p. e18948, 2020.
[141] PWC Middle East. (2020 (accessed December, 2020)) Building more
resilient cities to endure COVID-19 and future shocks. [Online].
Available: https://www.pwc.com/m1/en/publications/building-resilientsmart-cities-endure-covid-19-future-shocks.html
[142] A. DeWit, R. Shaw, and R. Djalante, “An integrated approach to
sustainable development, national resilience, and COVID-19 responses:
The case of japan,” International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction,
p. 101808, 2020.
[143] Anonymous. (2020 (accessed December, 2020)) Smart transportation
market by transportation mode (roadways, railways, airways, and
maritime), solution (smart ticketing, pis, freight management), service,
communication technology, application, and region - global forecast
to 2025. [Online]. Available: https://www.marketsandmarkets.com/
Market-Reports/smart-transportation-market-692.html
[144] Teleroute. (2020 (accessed December, 2020)) How IoT can
help the transport sector in managing the corona crisis.
[Online]. Available: https://teleroute.com/en-en/blog/article/how-iotcan-help-the-transport-sector-in-managing-the-corona-crisis/
[145] J. Grzelewski. (2020 (accessed November 11, 2020)) Auto
recovery may take years, with $72 billion in new debt
to pay off amid projected sales slump. [Online]. Available:
https://www.detroitnews.com/story/business/autos/2020/06/04/autoindustry-may-not-recover-peak-sales-volume-until-2025/3144967001/
[146] C. R. Boll. (2020 (accessed November 11, 2020)) The impact
of COVID-19 on adoption of autonomous vehicle technology.
[Online]. Available: https://www.foley.com/en/insights/publications/
2020/08/covid-19-adoption-autonomous-vehicle-technology

[147] S. Stein. (2020 (accessed December, 2020)) LIDAR on the iPhone
12 pro: What it can do now, and why it matters for the future.
[Online]. Available: https://www.cnet.com/how-to/lidar-apple-iphone12-pro-pro-max-faq-what-it-can-do-now-future/
[148] J.-j. Chung and H.-J. Kim, “An automobile environment detection
system based on deep neural network and its implementation using IoTenabled in-vehicle air quality sensors,” Sustainability, vol. 12, no. 6,
p. 2475, 2020.
[149] B. Manuela, D. Welch, S. Igor, and D. J. Brenner, “Far-uvc light (222
nm) efficiently and safely inactivates airborne human coronaviruses,”
Scientific Reports (Nature Publisher Group), vol. 10, no. 1, 2020.
[150] J. Chen, “Cleaning system for a vehicle,” Mar. 28 2019, US Patent
15/713,146.
[151] Uber. (2020 (accessed December, 2020)) Uber launches 10 safety
measures and new on-trip protocol as egypt moves to coexist with
COVID-19. [Online]. Available: https://www.uber.com/en-EG/blog/10safety-features-during-covid-19-in-egypt/
[152] İ. F. ŞENTÜRK, N. G. ADAR, S. PANIĆ, Č. STEFANOVIĆ,
M. YAĞANOĞLU, and B. PRILINČEVIĆ, “COVID-19 risk assessment in public transport using ambient sensor data and wireless
communications,” Bulletin of Natural Sciences Research, 2020.
[153] Department of Transport, Victoria State Government. (2020
(accessed December, 2020)) Preparing victorians to travel
again. [Online]. Available: https://transport.vic.gov.au/about/transportnews/news-archive/preparing-victorians-to-travel-again
[154] News Release. (2020 (accessed December, 2020)) 19 Impact
and Global Analysis by Component ; Organization Size ;
Industries. [Online]. Available: https://www.globenewswire.com/newsrelease/2020/09/15/2094171/0/en/Digitization-in-Logistics-SupplyChain-Market-Forecast-to-2027-COVID-19-Impact-and-GlobalAnalysis-by-Component-Organization-Size-Industries.html
[155] W. Liu, Y. Liang, X. Bao, J. Qin, and M. K. Lim, “China’s logistics
development trends in the post COVID-19 era,” International Journal
of Logistics Research and Applications, pp. 1–12, 2020.
[156] X. Wang, X. Le, and Q. Lu, “Analysis of china’s smart city upgrade and
smart logistics development under the COVID-19 epidemic,” in Journal
of Physics: Conference Series, vol. 1570, no. 1. IOP Publishing, 2020,
p. 012066.
[157] News Release. (2020 (accessed December, 2020)) XPO
Logistics Manages COVID-19 Surge in Last Mile Demand
with New XPO Connect Capabilities. [Online]. Available:
https://www.globenewswire.com/news-release/2020/08/05/2073137/0/
en/XPO-Logistics-Manages-COVID-19-Surge-in-Last-Mile-Demandwith-New-XPO-Connect-Capabilities.html
[158] I. Masudin and N. T. Safitri, “Food Cold Chain in Indonesia during
the Covid-19 Pandemic: A Current Situation and Mitigation,” Jurnal
Rekayasa Sistem Industri, vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 99–106, 2020.
[159] Y. Tsang, C. Wu, H. Lam, K. Choy, and G. Ho, “Integrating internet
of things and multi-temperature delivery planning for perishable food
e-commerce logistics: a model and application,” International Journal
of Production Research, pp. 1–23, 2020.
[160] W. Wu, F. Zhao, C. Ma, and G. Q. Huang, “Experimental investigation
of a real-time monitoring system for cold chain logistics,” in 2020 IEEE
16th International Conference on Automation Science and Engineering
(CASE). IEEE, 2020, pp. 1201–1206.
[161] D. Bhatia. (2020 (accessed November 11, 2020)) Can IoT
connected trucks help you manage through COVID? [Online].
Available: https://theiotmagazine.com/can-iot-connected-trucks-helpyou-manage-through-covid-3eed6477299
[162] L. J. Basso, F. Sepúlveda, and H. E. Silva, “Public transport policies
after COVID-19 confinement,” Available at SSRN 3693098, 2020.
[163] M. M. Mayank Agrawal, Karel Eloot and A. Patel.
(2020 (accessed December, 2020)) Industry 4.0: Reimagining
manufacturing operations after COVID-19. [Online]. Available:
https://www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/operations/our-insights/
industry-40-reimagining-manufacturing-operations-after-covid-19#
[164] Deloitte.
(2020
(accessed
December,
2020))
Internet
of Things (IoT) The rise of the connected world.
[Online].
Available:
https://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/
Deloitte/in/Documents/technology-media-telecommunications/in-tmtIoT Theriseoftheconnectedworld-28aug-noexp.pdf
[165] Meticulous Market Research Pvt. Ltd. (2020 (accessed December,
2020)) Industrial IoT (IIoT) market by component, application
(robotics, maintenance, monitoring, resource optimization, supply
chain, management), industry (aerospace, automotive, energy,
healthcare, manufacturing, retail), and geography - global forecast

18

[166]

[167]

[168]

[169]

[170]

[171]

[172]

[173]

[174]

[175]

[176]

[177]

[178]

[179]

[180]

[181]

[182]

[183]

to 2027. [Online]. Available: https://www.globenewswire.com/newsrelease/2020/12/07/2140283/0/en/Industrial-IoT-IIoT-Market-toReach-263-4-Billion-by-2027-Growing-at-a-CAGR-of-16-7-From2020-With-COVID-19-Impact-Meticulous-Research-Analysis.html
S. Woodford. (2020 (accessed December, 2020)) Industrial
revolution 4.0 - the future of IIOT. [Online]. Available: https://www.juniperresearch.com/document-library/white-papers/
industrial-revolution-4-the-future-of-iiot
T. Chen and C.-W. Lin, “Smart and automation technologies for
ensuring the long-term operation of a factory amid the COVID-19
pandemic: an evolving fuzzy assessment approach,” The International
Journal of Advanced Manufacturing Technology, pp. 1–14, 2020.
H. Zhang, Y. Cai, H. Zhang, and C. Leung, “A hybrid framework
for smart and safe working environments in the era of COVID-19,”
International Journal of Information Technology, vol. 26, no. 1, 2020.
X. Huang, “Intelligent remote monitoring and manufacturing system
of production line based on industrial internet of things,” Computer
Communications, vol. 150, pp. 421–428, 2020.
Y. Xiao, H. Zhang, C. Yuan, N. Gao, Z. Meng, and K. Peng, “The
design of an intelligent high-speed loom industry interconnection
remote monitoring system,” Wireless Personal Communications, pp.
1–21, 2020.
V. Atamuradov, K. Medjaher, F. Camci, N. Zerhouni, P. Dersin, and
B. Lamoureux, “Machine health indicator construction framework for
failure diagnostics and prognostics,” Journal of Signal Processing
Systems, pp. 1–19, 2020.
K. Umair, X. Guanghua, F. Liu, L. Chen, R. Liang, N. Ben, and
B. A. Waqas, “Machine health monitoring using artificial intelligence
(AI),” in Advances in Asset Management and Condition Monitoring.
Springer, 2020, pp. 1359–1374.
N. L. Bragazzi, “Digital technologies-enabled smart manufacturing
and industry 4.0 in the post-COVID-19 era: lessons learnt from a
pandemic,” 2020.
P. Patel and P. Gohil, “Role of additive manufacturing in medical application COVID-19 scenario: India case study,” Journal of manufacturing
systems, 2020.
W. Shen, C. Yang, and L. Gao, “Address business crisis caused by
COVID-19 with collaborative intelligent manufacturing technologies,”
IET Collaborative Intelligent Manufacturing, vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 96–99,
2020.
A. M. Vamsi, P. Deepalakshmi, P. Nagaraj, A. Awasthi, and A. Raj,
“IOT based autonomous inventory management for warehouses,” in
EAI International Conference on Big Data Innovation for Sustainable
Cognitive Computing. Springer, 2020, pp. 371–376.
Northumbria University Newcastle, “5 ways psychology explains
our changing behaviour during the COVID-19 pandemic,”
https://www.northumbria.ac.uk/study-at-northumbria/courses/mscpsychology-distance-learning-dtdppy6/social-psychologycoronavirus/, 2020 (Accessed on 12/02/2020).
M. Gulati, F. S. Parizi, E. Whitmire, S. Gupta, S. S. Ram, A. Singh,
and S. N. Patel, “Capharvester: A stick-on capacitive energy harvester
using stray electric field from ac power lines,” Proc. ACM Interact.
Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 110:1–110:20,
Sep. 2018. [Online]. Available: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/3264920
Dialog Semiconductor. (2020 (accessed December, 2020)) Ultra low
power Wi-Fi SoC for battery powered IoT devices. [Online]. Available:
https://www.dialog-semiconductor.com/products/da16200
R. Ravichandran, E. Saba, K.-Y. Chen, M. Goel, S. Gupta, and
S. N. Patel, “Wibreathe: Estimating respiration rate using wireless
signals in natural settings in the home,” in Pervasive Computing and
Communications (PerCom), 2015 IEEE International Conference on.
IEEE, 2015, pp. 131–139.
C. Zhao, K.-Y. Chen, M. T. I. Aumi, S. Patel, and M. S. Reynolds,
“Sideswipe: Detecting in-air gestures around mobile devices using
actual GSM signal,” in Proceedings of the 27th Annual ACM
Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology, ser. UIST
’14. New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2014, pp. 527–534. [Online].
Available: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2642918.2647380
I. Chatzigiannakis, H. Hasemann, M. Karnstedt, O. Kleine, A. Kröller,
M. Leggieri, D. Pfisterer, K. Römer, and C. Truong, “True selfconfiguration for the IoT,” in 2012 3rd IEEE International Conference
on the Internet of Things. IEEE, 2012, pp. 9–15.
P. Chhikara, P. Singh, R. Tekchandani, N. Kumar, and M. Guizani,
“Federated learning meets human emotions: A decentralized framework
for human-computer interaction for IoT applications,” IEEE Internet of
Things Journal, 2020.

[184] A. do Carmo Barriga, A. F. Martins, M. J. Simões, and D. Faustino,
“The COVID-19 pandemic: yet another catalyst for governmental mass
surveillance?” Social Sciences & Humanities Open, p. 100096, 2020.
[185] K. Fan, Y. Ren, Y. Wang, H. Li, and Y. Yang, “Blockchain-based
efficient privacy preserving and data sharing scheme of content-centric
network in 5G,” IET Communications, vol. 12, no. 5, pp. 527–532,
2017.
[186] D. Metcalf, S. T. Milliard, M. Gomez, and M. Schwartz, “Wearables
and the internet of things for health: Wearable, interconnected devices
promise more efficient and comprehensive health care,” IEEE pulse,
vol. 7, no. 5, pp. 35–39, 2016.
[187] M. L. Hall, C. Harty, H. Knutsen, and J. Yoo, “Wearables for health:
developing designs for functional practicality,” in Adjunct Proceedings
of the 2019 ACM International Joint Conference on Pervasive and
Ubiquitous Computing and Proceedings of the 2019 ACM International
Symposium on Wearable Computers, 2019, pp. 1034–1036.
[188] P. S. Ruth, J. Cao, M. Li, J. E. Sunshine, E. J. Wang, and S. N.
Patel, “Multi-Channel Facial Photoplethysmography Sensing,” in 42nd
Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine
Biology Society (EMBC), Jul. 2020, pp. 4179–4182.
[189] J. Kim, S. Khan, P. Wu, S. Park, H. Park, C. Yu, and W. Kim, “Selfcharging wearables for continuous health monitoring,” Nano Energy,
vol. 79, p. 105419, 2021.
[190] H. Kinnunen, A. Rantanen, T. Kenttä, and H. Koskimäki, “Feasible
assessment of recovery and cardiovascular health: accuracy of nocturnal
HR and HRV assessed via ring PPG in comparison to medical grade
ECG,” Physiological Measurement, vol. 41, no. 4, p. 04NT01, 2020.
[191] S. A. Lim, T. H. Lim, and A. N. Ahmad, “The applications of
biosensing and artificial intelligence technologies for rapid detection
and diagnosis of COVID-19 in remote setting,” in Diagnostic Strategies
for COVID-19 and other Coronaviruses. Springer, 2020, pp. 109–134.
[192] N. N. Di Zhuang, K. Chen, and J. M. Chang, “Saia: Split artificial
intelligence architecture for mobile healthcare systems,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2004.12059, 2020.
[193] X. Liu, J. Fromm, S. Patel, and D. McDuff, “Multi-task temporal shift
attention networks for on-device contactless vitals measurement,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2006.03790, 2020.
[194] “Unmanned medical clinic opened in china,” https://www.retailnews.
asia/unmanned-medical-clinic-opened-in-china/, 2020 (Accessed on
12/03/2020).
[195] C. Park, A. Mariakakis, J. Yang, D. Lassala, Y. Djiguiba, Y. Keita,
H. Diarra, B. Wasunna, F. Fall, M. S. Gaye, B. Ndiaye, A. Johnson,
I. Holeman, and S. Patel, “Supporting smartphone-based image capture
of rapid diagnostic tests in low-resource settings,” in Proceedings of
the 2020 International Conference on Information and Communication
Technologies and Development, ser. ICTD2020. New York, NY, USA:
Association for Computing Machinery, 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1145/3392561.3394630
[196] E. J. Wang, J. Zhu, M. Jain, T.-J. Lee, E. Saba, L. Nachman,
and S. N. Patel, “Seismo: Blood pressure monitoring using built-in
smartphone accelerometer and camera,” in Proceedings of the 2018
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, ser. CHI
’18. New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2018, pp. 425:1–425:9. [Online].
Available: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/3173574.3173999
[197] M. Belsky, R. Sacks, and I. Brilakis, “Semantic enrichment for building information modeling,” Computer-Aided Civil and Infrastructure
Engineering, vol. 31, no. 4, pp. 261–274, 2016.
[198] Z. Feng, T. Liu, H. Li, H. Lu, L. Shou, and J. Xu, “Indoor topk keyword-aware routing query,” in 2020 IEEE 36th International
Conference on Data Engineering (ICDE). IEEE, 2020, pp. 1213–
1224.
[199] S. Misra, P. K. Deb, N. Koppala, A. Mukherjee, and S. Mao, “Snav: Safety-aware iot navigation tool for avoiding COVID-19 hotspots,”
IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 2020.
[200] S. Alamri, D. Taniar, M. Safar, and H. Al-Khalidi, “Spatiotemporal
indexing for moving objects in an indoor cellular space,” Neurocomputing, vol. 122, pp. 70–78, 2013.
[201] M. Gupta, M. Abdelsalam, and S. Mittal, “Enabling and enforcing
social distancing measures using smart city and its infrastructures: a
COVID-19 use case,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.09246, 2020.
[202] S. Raghavan, B. Y. L. Simon, Y. L. Lee, W. L. Tan, and K. K. Kee,
“Data integration for smart cities: Opportunities and challenges,” in
Computational Science and Technology. Springer, 2020, pp. 393–403.
[203] D. Darsena, G. Gelli, I. Iudice, and F. Verde, “Safe and reliable public
transportation systems (salutary) in the COVID-19 pandemic,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2009.12619, 2020.

19

[204] J. Sarkis, “Supply chain sustainability: learning from the COVID19 pandemic,” International Journal of Operations & Production
Management, 2020.
[205] S. Ruan, Z. Xiong, C. Long, Y. Chen, J. Bao, T. He, R. Li, S. Wu,
Z. Jiang, and Y. Zheng, “Doing in one go: Delivery time inference
based on couriers’ trajectories,” in Proceedings of the 26th ACM
SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data
Mining, 2020, pp. 2813–2821.
[206] X. Ding, R. Zhang, Z. Mao, K. Xing, F. Du, X. Liu, G. Wei, F. Yin,
R. He, and Z. Sun, “Delivery scope: A new way of restaurant retrieval
for on-demand food delivery service,” in Proceedings of the 26th ACM
SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data
Mining, 2020, pp. 3026–3034.
[207] C. Pérez-Penichet, D. Piumwardane, C. Rohner, and T. Voigt, “A fast
carrier scheduling algorithm for battery-free sensor tags in commodity
wireless networks,” in INFOCOM 2020, June 13-19, 2020, Las Vegas,
Nevada, 2020.
[208] K. Francisco and D. Swanson, “The supply chain has no clothes:
Technology adoption of blockchain for supply chain transparency,”
Logistics, vol. 2, no. 1, p. 2, 2018.
[209] R. Magargle, L. Johnson, P. Mandloi, P. Davoudabadi, O. Kesarkar,
S. Krishnaswamy, J. Batteh, and A. Pitchaikani, “A simulation-based
digital twin for model-driven health monitoring and predictive maintenance of an automotive braking system,” in Proceedings of the 12th
International Modelica Conference, Prague, Czech Republic, May 1517, 2017, no. 132. Linköping University Electronic Press, 2017, pp.
35–46.

Muhammad Umair is a Lecturer at Department of
Electrical, Electronics and Telecommunication Engineering, New Campus, UET Lahore. He completed
his B.Sc. Electrical Engineering and M.Sc. Electrical Engineering from University of Engineering
& Technology (UET) Lahore in 2014 and 2017,
respectively. He has worked as a Research Officer
at Internet of Things (IoT) lab at Al-Khwarizmi
Institute of Computer Sciences, UET Lahore. He has
also worked at Sultan Qaboos IT Research lab as a
Research Officer. His survey on Social IoT platforms
is the most cited survey for SIoT applications. He has designed graduate level
courses on IoT. His areas of interests include Internet of Things, Embedded
Systems, Network Systems, Machine Learning, Algorithms Development,
Pervasive Computing, Ubiquitous Computing, Cloud Based Systems, Data
Analytics and working on application layer of any of the defined problems.

Muhammad Aamir Cheema is an ARC Future
Fellow, an Associate Professor and Director of Research at the Department of Software Systems and
Cybersecurity, Faculty of Information Technology,
Monash University, Australia. He obtained his PhD
from UNSW Australia in 2011. He is the recipient
of 2012 Malcolm Chaikin Prize for Research Excellence in Engineering, 2013 Discovery Early Career
Researcher Award, 2014 Dean’s Award for Excellence in Research by an Early Career Researcher,
2018 Future Fellowship, 2018 Monash Student Association Teaching Award and 2019 Young Tall Poppy Science Award. He
has also won two CiSRA best research paper of the year awards, two invited
papers in the special issue of IEEE TKDE on the best papers of ICDE,
and three best paper awards at ICAPS 2020, WISE 2013 and ADC 2010,
respectively. He is the Associate Editor of IEEE TKDE and DAPD and served
as PC co-chair for ADC 2015, ADC 2016, 8th ACM SIGSPATIAL Workshop
ISA 2016 & 2018, IWSC 2017, proceedings chair for DASFAA 2015 & ICDE
2019,

Omer Cheema is the head of IoT Wi-Fi business
unit at Dialog Semiconductor. Prior to Dialog, Dr.
Cheema was working at Samsung leading marketing
teams of its IoT business. Dr. Cheema is a technology veteran with about 20 years experience in corporate strategy, marketing, management consulting
and technology development. Earlier in his career,
he worked as an ASIC design engineer at AMD. Dr.
Cheema holds a PhD in semiconductor design from
ENSTA Paris and MBA from INSEAD.

Huan Li is an Assistant Professor and the EU Marie
Curie IF Fellow with the Department of Computer
Science, Aalborg University, Denmark. He received
the PhD degree in computer science from Zhejiang
University, China in 2018. His research interests
include IoT data management, spatio-temporal data
analytics, and mobile/pervasive computing. He is a
member of the IEEE and the ACM.

Hua Lu is a Professor of Computer Science in
the Department of People and Technology, Roskilde
University, Denmark. He received the BSc and MSc
degrees from Peking University, China, and the PhD
degree in computer science from National University
of Singapore. His research interests include database
and data management, geographic information systems, and mobile computing. He has served as PC
cochair or vice chair for ISA 2011, MUE 2011,
MDM 2012 and NDBC 2019, demo chair for SSDBM 2014, and PhD forum cochair for MDM 2016.
He has served on the program committees for conferences such as VLDB,
ICDE, KDD, WWW, CIKM, DASFAA, ACM SIGSPATIAL, SSTD, MDM,
PAKDD, and APWeb. He is a senior member of the IEEE.

