Studying Leaders During Times of Crisis Using Online
Social Media - A COVID Case Study
Rahul Goela,1 , Rajesh Sharmaa
a Institute

arXiv:2101.03002v1 [cs.SI] 8 Jan 2021

of Computer Science
University of Tartu, Estonia

Abstract
Online Social media (OSM) has become a primary platform for discussion on diverse topics. Even famous and public figures often express their views on various
topics through OSM platforms. Novel Coronavirus officially called COVID-19,
which has become a pandemic and has created a crisis in human history, is one
such topic that has attracted a lot of attention on Twitter in recent times. In
this work, we analyze 29 million tweets spanning across three months, to study
highly influential users, which we called as leaders. We identify these leaders
using social network analysis and analyze their tweets using text analysis techniques. We group these leaders in four clusters, namely research, news, health
and politics. Our analysis shows that i) all clusters show a similar amount of
fear in their tweets, ii) researchers and news cluster display more sadness compared to others and, iii) health organizations and politicians try to gain public
trust. The text analysis shows that the researchers are more concerned about
understanding symptoms and developing vaccination; news and politicians are
mainly discussing about travel and hygiene; and health organizations focuses
on hygiene. Our descriptive analysis helps us to extract various features that we
used to classify tweets among the four clusters with an accuracy of 96% AUC
ROC.
Keywords: Twitter, Leaders, COVID-19, WordCloud, NLP.

1 Corresponding

author: rahul.goel@ut.ee

Preprint submitted to Elsevier

January 11, 2021

1. Introduction
A leader is a person who can reach and inspire a large number of people with
his/her opinions. Crisis times provide an opportunity to test these leaders and
assess their ability to take timely and necessary actions. Although the leaders
are often prepared for the anticipated crisis scenario, the true challenge arises
in unforeseen circumstances. Starting from Arab spring [1, 2], to hurricane
[3], to financial crisis [4], leaders have used social media platforms to share their
opinions and supervision. Such supervisions provide support and trust to people
to overcome the crisis situation. Social media platforms help these leaders to
efficiently communicate their message with a large number of crisis-affected
people.
OSM platforms such as Facebook2 , Instagram3 , Twitter4 , etc. have become
an important part of individuals. The nature of these platforms allow users to
broadcast their opinions, discuss current issues, and express about things that
influence their daily life. In fact Politicians and famous public figures also use
online social media (OSM) platforms as a medium for sharing their opinions
and getting a sense of general view of how people think about them. These
famous users, which have considerable followers on OSM often function as a
leaders of OSM platforms as they can communicate with a large number of
people effectively and influence them with their opinions.
In this work, we study Twitter, as a representative of OSM, for understanding leaders during the time of crisis by taking COVID-19 as a case study. We
define Leaders as users with high PageRank values. We group leaders into clusters5 and study them by analyzing their tweets. This reveals the inclination and
concerns of the various clusters during COVID-19 (refer Section 5 for detail).
Given the fact that the COVID-19 pandemic affected more than 180 countries
2 https://www.facebook.com/
3 https://www.instagram.com/
4 https://twitter.com/
5 Note:

In this work, “leader” represents a Twitter handle and “cluster” represents a group

of Twitter handles.

2

and territories worldwide [5], it impacted the life of a huge number of individuals
by keeping them in isolation, quarantine, emergency or total lockdown. During
these conditions, individuals are inclined to use social media platforms to share
their experiences or concerns during COVID-19. Twitter is a significant OSM
platform to study COVID-19 since it attracts more than 628 million tweets by
May 8, 20206 .
In this paper, we analyze 29 million tweets from 6 million unique users,
collected using Twitter’s streaming API and Tweepy by using COVID-19 related keywords (“coronavirus”, “coronovirusoutbreak” and “COVID-19”). Our
dataset spans from February 01, 2020 to May 02, 2020 to covers the following
research directions:
1. Identifying leaders and their concerns: We analyze our dataset to
identify the leaders during COVID-19 crisis using social network analysis
techniques. We present leaders in four leading clusters namely research,
news, health, and politics. Our finding shows that leaders are mostly
concern about five major topics that are related to (1) symptoms; (2)
vaccination; (3) hygiene; (4) travel ; and (5) pandemic (Section 4).
2. Leaders alignment towards concerns: We use text analysis technique
to understand the alignment of clusters with respect to various concerns
during the COVID-19 crisis. We observe that researchers are more concerned about understanding the symptoms and developing vaccination;
news about travel and hygiene; health organization about hygiene; and
politicians about travel and hygiene (Section 5).
3. Tweet classification : On the insights of the leader’s tweet, emotions
and public concerns, we build a model to estimate the probability that a
tweet belongs to a specific cluster. Our findings can be used to classify
tweets among clusters with an accuracy of 96% AUC ROC (Section 6).
In the past, various studies have been performed to study leadership during
6 https://www.tweetbinder.com/blog/covid-19-coronavirus-twitter/

3

a crisis. These studies have mostly used qualitative approaches such as organizational experiences [4, 6] and military lessons [7, 8]. Some studies like Tunisian
[9] or Middle Eastern revolutions [10] which have used social media data are
mainly country-specific or have focused on political leadership. To the best of
our knowledge, this is the first study that has studied multiple types of leaders
during a pandemic crisis by exploiting Twitter data.
The rest of the paper is as follows. Next, we discuss the related work. We
then describe the dataset in Section 3. Section 4 presents the study of leaders
during COVID-19 and their alignments towards various concerns are covered
in Section 5. In Section 6, we use various machine learning models to classify
tweets into various leading clusters with promising accuracy. We conclude with
a discussion of future directions in Section 7.

2. Related Work
Our work lies at the intersection of leadership, social media and epidemics.
Thus, in this section, we first present literature concerning various works which
have studied the leadership during a crisis. Next, we present related works
about epidemics study with respect to OSM platforms.
2.1. Leadership study during crisis time
The majority of works have studied the leadership crisis in the political
domain. For example, in [11], the authors highlighted that there is very little
scope of reform during crisis times against the common belief that these times
are best suited for change. A finding based on gulf leaders echoed this idea
more strongly as the leaders missed the opportunity to take stands conclusively
[11]. In contrast, during crisis time individuals can even allow their democratic
government to propose technocratic guidelines for the safety of the society [12].
In another study based on social media posts about the Egyptian revolution,
the researchers reported that leaders are no more than connective leaders [13].
Apart from political domains, leadership during crisis times has also been
studied in administration settings. For example, in the aftermath of Hurricane
4

Katrina in the US, the mixed approach studies reveal that school employees
expect their leaders to create a proper plan [14], and take quick actions in addition to regular engagement with them [15]. In a different study, the portrayal
by media for administrators dealing with the Katrina crisis was criticized in [3].
Industry settings are another area where leadership plays an essential role
in crisis management. In [4], the authors analyses more than 30 crises and
investigated the role of the chief executive officer (CEO). The study pointed out
that CEOs need to be proactive at the start of the crisis. Simulations based
approach was proposed in [16], for training leaders to handle crises effectively.
For professionals working under uncertain circumstances and especially those
exposed to crisis situations, there is a strong likelihood that they may experience more negative emotions like stress and anxiety [17, 18]. Such emotional
reactions often arise from the potential risk of losing one’s job and from the
need to have immediate and effective responses [19, 20]. To handle these situation, organizational leaders have a crucial role to play in allowing long-term
preparation for the benfits of employees and organization [21, 22].
2.2. Social media and epidemics study
Researchers have analysed Twitter data for studying various epidemic outbreaks such as Ebola [23, 24], H1N1 [25], flu [26], swine flu [27] etc. In [28], the
authors illustrate the potential of monitoring public health using social media
during the H1N1 pandemic. In another work [29], authors track the disease level
and public concern during the H1N1 pandemic in the US using Twitter data.
A set of work have also focused on understanding the epidemic spreading patterns at different geographic locations using social media data. In [30], authors
track the spread of influenza-A (H1N1) in India using Twitter data. Vaccination
and anti-viral uptake during H1N1 in the UK are studied in [31] using tweets.
In [32], the authors studied the Nipah virus in India. In a very recent work [33],
researchers compared Google and Twitter data for predicting influenza cases in
Greece.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work related to the coronavirus,
5

which has analyzed online social media such as Twitter for identifying leaders
across different domains and their respective concerns.

3. Dataset Description
This section first provides information about the coronavirus (officially known
as COVID-19), and Twitter, an online social media platform. Next, the data
collection and pre-processing are discussed in the following subsections.
3.1. COVID-19 and Social Media
In the last decade, humanity has faced many different pandemics such as
SARS, H1N1, and presently novel coronavirus (COVID-19) [34]. The severity
of these pandemics can be understood by the death toll claimed by them. The
COVID-19 pandemic, which started in December 2019 from Wuhan [35, 36],
China has infected 21,160,149 individuals and claimed 759,166 (as of August
14th , 2020) deaths worldwide [5, 37]. Given the fact that this pandemic originated from Wuhan, China and as of 14 August, 2020 China is not even on
COVID-19’s top 25 nations, shows the fast spread of this pandemic to other
nations around the world. This impacted individuals life by keeping them in
isolation, quarantine, emergency, or total lockdown. During these lockdown
conditions, individuals are inclined to use social media platforms to share their
thoughts and experiences. By May 8, 2020, Twitter has attracted more than
628 million tweets related to coronavirus which makes it a significant online
social media platform for COVID-19 study7 .
3.2. Twitter
Twitteris an online social media platform classified as a microbloging site
with which users can share messages, links to external Web sites, images, or
videos that are visible to their followers. Messages that are posted are short in
contrast to traditional blogs. Blogging becomes ‘micro’ by shrinking it down to
7 https://www.tweetbinder.com/blog/covid-19-coronavirus-twitter/

6

its bare essence and relaying the heart of the message and communicating the
necessary as quickly as possible in real-time. Twitter, in 2016, limited its messages to 140 characters [38] and presently the maximum length of its message
(also called a tweet) has been increased to 280 characters8 . Apart from Twitter, there are other microblogging platforms such as Tumblr9 , FourSquare10 ,
Google+11 , and LinkedIn12 of which Twitter is the most popular microblogging
site. In the past, researches have shown that Twitter data is well suited for
sentiment analysis and opinion mining [39].
3.3. Data Collection From Twitter
The data collection is done using Twitter Streaming Application Programming Interface (API) and Python (see Figure 1). API is a tool that facilitates
the interaction between computer programs and Web services. It enables the
real-time collection of data by tracking the live stream of public tweets. Many
Web services provide developers with APIs for interacting with their services,
and for programmatically accessing data. Python library such as tweepy 13 also
assist this task by providing functions that can track live streams of public
tweets using hashtags or usernames.
In this work, we use the Twitter Streaming API and Python package tweepy
to download tweets related to various keywords regarding rapidly increasing
coronavirus disease (COVID-19). We collect and store a large sample of public tweets beginning February 1, 2020, that matched a set of pre-defined keywords: “coronavirus” and “coronovirusoutbreak”. The additional keyword is
later added such as “COVID-19” (On February 11, 2020, COVID-19 was the
official name given to novel coronavirus by WHO). The objective of using these
specific keywords is to collect tweets belonging to COVID-19. The Twitter data
8 https://developer.twitter.com/en/docs/basics/counting-characters
9 https://www.tumblr.com/
10 https://foursquare.com/
11 http://plus.google.com
12 http://linkedin.com/
13 https://www.tweepy.org/

7

Data collection using Twitter API and Python package tweepy

Tweets preprocessing

Clean text

Emotion Analysis

Public concerns Identification

Figure 1: Tweets collection, preprocessing, emotions and public concern identification flow.

we collect is stored in JSON format to make it easy for parsing and analysis.
3.4. Tweets Preprocessing
Figure 2 shows the basic steps we took in preprocessing the tweet dataset.
We start our tweet preprocessing by removing all the URL’s as they do not
include any useful information for text analysis. Afterward, the tweets are
subjected to lowercasing. The emojis, emoticon14 , numbers, mentions (@) and
hashtags (#) are excluded from the tweets due to their specific semantics in
tweets and overall text. In addition, all slang text15 are converted into its real
meaning to understand the real context of the tweet.
Furthermore, we proceeded with removing every punctuation marks and a
variety of different stopwords available in nltk package. We also perform the
spell correction using SpellChecker package in Python. Using nltk package, we
14 https://gist.github.com/slowkow/7a7f61f495e3dbb7e3d767f97bd7304b
15 https://github.com/rishabhverma17/sms

slang translator/blob/master/slang.txt

8

Tweets

Clean
Text

To
Lower

Remove
URLs

Remove Top
10 Rare Words

Remove
Emoticons

Remove Top
10 Freq Words

Remove
Emojis

Stemming,
Lemmatization

Remove
HTML
Tags

Remove
Numbers

Remove
Mentions,
Hashtags

Remove
Stopwords

Spelling
Correction

Convert
Slang

Remove
Punctuations

Figure 2: Tweets preprocessing.

Parameter

Value

Time period

01-02-2020 to 02-05-2020

#Tweets

29,469,349

#Original tweets

6,494,657

#Retweets

22,974,692

#Users

7,875,334

#Features

91

Table 1: Description of the dataset.

did the stemming and lemmatization of the tweet text.The dataset’s size in
terms of total number of tweets, original tweets, retweets, number of distinct
users, and the number of distinct features are shown in Table 1.

4. Studying Leaders During COVID-19 Crisis
To understand the users’ interactions and to identify leaders, we first build
a network by capturing the user’s social connections. We build the directed
“retweet” network among users (Figure 3) where an edge a −→ b indicates that
user a retweet user b. To identify users with similar alignment, we grouped them
into communities using the Louvain modularity method and for better representation each community is color-coded. Furthermore, to identify important
nodes in the network, we employ the PageRank algorithm [40], a well-known
algorithm to characterize the centrality of nodes. PageRank reflects the importance of a node in the retweet network, and a higher PageRank value represents
influential users who can spread their tweet content to a community much faster
9

compared to users with lower PageRank value. Therefore, these influential users
which are the major sources of information in the network regarding COVID-19
are termed as leaders.
The top-200 leaders are categorized (in Figure 3, leaders are shown using
relatively bigger nodes indicating higher PageRank values) into four clusters,
Health Organizations, Politics, News Organizations and Research Organizations, depending upon their publicly available information such as profile description. Some of the examples of users under four different clusters
are as follows, (i) health organizations: which includes health organizations
related Twitter handlers such as World Health Organization (@WHO), Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (@CDCgov), Director General WHO
(@DrTedros), Global Health Strategies (@GHS) and World Health Organization
Western Pacific (@WHOWPRO); (ii) politics: includes Twitter profiles related
to U.S. President (@realDonaldTrump) and U.S. House Candidate; (iii) news
organizations: examples of Twitter handlers include China Global Television
Network (@CGTNOfficial), Al Jazeera English (@AJEnglish) and Global Times
(@globaltimesnews); and (iv) research organizations: such as ISCR. This indicate that, on Twitter, users are (re)sharing information from more reliable
sources regarding COVID-19.
Figure 3 shows that these leaders also interact with each other. CDC is at the
center of the network and all other leaders such as WHO, CGTN, GHS, Directorgeneral WHO and U.S House candidates are well connected with CDC. We also
noticed that the U.S. President is closely connected with the director-general
of WHO. News handlers other than @CGTNOfficial are tightly connected with
few leaders. For example, Al Jazeera English (@AJEnglish) is closely following
the tweets from WHO and WHO Western Pacific. We further analyze the
dominant emotions for each cluster as well as their alignment towards various
public concerns during COVID-19.
Dominant emotions for various clusters:

10

We analyze tweets to discover

ISCR

CGTN

Global
Times
U.S.
House
Candidate

GHS

CDC
WHO
Western
Pacific

Director-General
WHO
WHO

Al
Jazeera
English

U.S.
President

Figure 3: COVID-19 Related Users Network. Color-coded group represents communities. To identify important users (or major sources of information), PageRank algorithm is
used.

each clusters’ dominant emotions. We use the Syuzhet 16 package [41] available
in R for emotions extractions. The Syuzhet package is designed to work on a
sentence level and repeated words do not count towards the emotion assignment.
This means that annotation is performed on sentence level and not on paragraph
level.
We observe that Anticipation, Fear, Sadness and Trust are dominant emotions for all clusters compared to Anger, Disgust, Joy and Surprise (see Figure
16 https://github.com/mjockers/syuzhet

11

4). Furthermore, this can be observe that all clusters show similar amount of
fear and anticipation in their tweets. Political and health organizations clusters
indicate higher trust compared to others. On the other hand, researchers and
news clusters display greater sadness towards the COVID-19 situation. Therefore, we can infer that leaders are displaying fear, anticipation and sadness but
at the same time, they are trying to build a trust environment among public.

Figure 4: Dominant emotions in tweets from various leaders.

In addition, we perform the text analysis to understand the focus of the
interest of leaders during the COVID-19. We use the topic modeling technique
to extract these interests. In particular, we use the Latent Dirichlet Allocation
(LDA) [42] method with Gibbs sampling [43] which is an unsupervised and
probabilistic machine-learning topic modeling method that extracts topics from
text data. The key assumption behind LDA is that each given text is a mix of
multiple topics.
12

We extract ten topics from tweets’ text. The LDA returns a set of ten words
related to each identified topic (but not the title of the topic). We then assign appropriate topics to each set of words that closely reflect the topic at an
abstract level. It has been observed that leaders are mostly discuss five topics related to various public concerns during the COVID-19. These concerns
are: (1) disease symptoms, (2) disease vaccination, (3) disease countermeasures
or hygiene, (4) disease transmission during travel and (5) COVID-19 as pandemic/epidemic. In the next section, we analyze the clusters’ alignment toward
these public concerns.

5. Clusters Alignment Towards Various Concerns
To study the alignment of various clusters towards five most discussed topics
or concerns discovered in Section 4 regarding rapidly increasing coronavirus disease (COVID-19), we annotate each tweet using specific keywords. For example,
disease symptoms tweets are annotated (i.e., using keyword symptom); vaccination (i.e., using keywords vaccine and vaccination); disease countermeasures
(i.e., keywords hygiene, wash, hand and mask ); disease transmission during
travel (i.e., keywords travel, flying, fly, airplane, flight and trip) and pandemic
(i.e., keywords pandemic and epidemic). In this section, we start by uncovering
the specifics of these public concerns to understand them in more detail. Next,
we explain the alignment of leading clusters towards the above mentioned public
concerns.
5.1. Disease symptoms
Tweets analysis belonging to the symptoms category shows that the daily
percentage of observed COVID-19 tweets related to symptoms is higher than
other concerns which reflects that users on Twitter are more concerned about
symptoms of the disease. Furthermore, we extract the symptoms for coronavirus
from tweets (see Figure 5a). The identified symptoms are fever, cough and cold.
Leaders are also discussing the similarity of COVID-19 and influenza/flu, as

13

both spreads among people in a similar way, that is, via respiratory droplets
from coughing or sneezing [44]. Leaders are calling the COVID-19 as an asymptomatic disease as the time between exposure and symptom onset is typically five
days, but may range from two to fourteen days with mild fever among healthy
people [44]. In particular, we also observe that research cluster is more concern
about understanding the COVID-19 symptoms compared to other clusters (see

treatment
trials
sars

Figure 6).

testing

flu spread
quarantine

fever cold
severe
risk

days sick

care

italy

china
transmission

public

china

cdc human

research

pandemic test

(b) Vaccine

government

hand

south kenya

infected

sanitizer

spread wuhan
ban

risk restrictions
japan quarantine news
korea pandemic
india
world

water
flu

home

masks

spread

safe
stay protect
touching
prevent cough
pandemic

stop

flu

scientists won
influenza rate

(a) Symptoms

sick
time

world

effective

spread

mild cdc
symptomatic

rate

spreading
infection
respiratory

home contact

cough

asymptomatic

cure stop

death sta
newsinfected

cdc

avoid

infected

chinese

ethiopiatouch soap

traveling

washyourhands public avoid

international canada

wash

iran

italy

(c) Countermeasures

(d) Travel
Figure 5: Wordcloud

14

cancel

cdc

Figure 6: Leaders alignment towards various public concerns.

5.2. Disease vaccination
The analysis of tweets belonging to the vaccination category indicates that
as currently there is no vaccine and no specific treatment for COVID-19 is
available, leaders are discussing the effectiveness of flu vaccination for COVID19 as both flu and COVID-19 cause respiratory disease (see Figure 5b). We
can also infer that leaders are discussing intensely the ongoing research to cure
COVID-19. Therefore, we can infer that leaders on Twitter are very conscious of
the symptoms of COVID-19 and also keeping an eye on the ongoing vaccination
research for COVID-19. As no vaccine is presently available, all clusters are
cautiously tweeting regarding the vaccination (see Figure 6).
5.3. Disease countermeasures
We identify the tweets belonging to countermeasures category using keywords such as hygiene, wash, hand and mask. Furthermore, we partition countermeasures category tweets into Hygiene (i.e., keywords hygiene, wash, hand )
and Mask (i.e., keywords mask ). Note that the volume of tweets pertaining to

15

Mask is higher than Hygiene before February 24, and after that leader started focusing more on Hygiene compared to Mask. This indicates that initially, leaders
were tweeting about wearing masks but later they shifted their countermeasures
strategy towards taking proper Hygiene against COVID-19.
To explore the countermeasures against COVID-19, we created a wordcloud
from countermeasures category tweets (see Figure 5c) indicating prevention suggestions including handwashing, respiratory hygiene, self-isolation and
self-quarantine. Hand wash using soap and water or sanitizer is highly discussed for countermeasures. Handwashing is also recommended by the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) to prevent the spread of the
disease. It recommends that people wash hands often with soap and water for
at least 20 seconds, especially after going to the toilet or when hands are visibly
dirty; before eating; and after blowing one’s nose, coughing, or sneezing. It
further recommended using an alcohol-based hand sanitizer with at least 60%
alcohol by volume when soap and water are not readily available 17 . The advice
from CDC to avoid touching the eyes, nose, or mouth with unwashed hands
and for respiratory hygiene, cover the mouth with masks and take precautions
in case of coughing18 are also highly tweeted.
Tweeting percentage for Health organizations and politicians are higher regarding hygiene compared to news and research clusters (see Figure 6). We can
conclude that leaders on Twitter are spreading awareness towards taking proper
hygiene measures against COVID-19 issued by WHO and CDC.
5.4. Disease transmission during travelling.
We focus on traveling via flight to understand the effect of COVID-19 on
travel. We identify the tweets belonging to the travel category using keywords
such as travel, flying, fly, airplane, flight and trip. To explore the effect of
COVID-19 on traveling, we create a wordcloud from travel category tweets
17 https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/about/steps-when-sick.html
18 https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/travelers/index.html

16

(see Figure 5d). This indicates that in order to control pandemic or avoid
spreading infection, countries quarantined traveler from many countries. Some
of the mention countries that either quarantined traveler from other countries
or banned by others such as China, Italy, South Korea, Japan, Iran, Canada,
India, and Kenya. CDC has also issued guidelines for flight travelers and crew19 .
Among clusters, News and political clusters are more focusing on travelling
compared to researchers and health organizations (see Figure 6).
5.5. COVID-19 as a pandemic
As COVID-19 outbreak is first identified in Wuhan, China, in December
2019 [35]. The World Health Organization (WHO) declared the outbreak a
Public Health Emergency of International Concern on January 30th 2020 and a
pandemic on March 11th 2020 [45]. Our analysis on tweets shows that among
clusters, researchers, news and health clusters are frequently using pandemic or
epidemic while discussing about COVID-19 compared to politicians (see Figure
6).
To summarize, on analyzing the clusters’ alignment towards various public
concerns (see Figure 6), we find that researchers are highly concerned about
understanding the COVID-19 by studying its symptoms and development of
the vaccination. News are discussing travel and hygiene. Health organizations
are focusing on hygiene. Whereas, political people are highly concerned about
travel and hygiene. This indicates that the different clusters are focused on
specific public concerns. This can be viewed as a positive approach, since various
clusters are focusing on specific issues as well as engaging with each other on
common concerns.

6. Tweet Classification In Clusters
Next, taking insights from previous sections, we build a model to estimate
the likelihood that a tweet belongs to a specific cluster. The tweets percentage
19 https://www.cdc.gov/quarantine/air/managing-sick-travelers/ncov-airlines.html

17

Tweet clean text

Emotions

Public concerns

Embedding

Concatenate

Multi-label Classification
(SVC, RF, NN or BERT)

Output

Figure 7: Flow diagram for features concatenation and model selection.

and count belonging to different clusters are as follows: News (36%; 15,289),
Health (33%; 14,023), Research (18%; 7,635) and Politics (13%; 5,521). As
tweet distribution among clusters is imbalanced, this problem is represented as
an imbalanced multi-label classification [46].
6.1. Features used for learning
To illustrate the predictive power of various features sets as mentioned in
the earlier section, we define a series of models, each with a different feature set.
We focus on three different types of features:
1. Tweet text: This refers to the clean text extracted after preprocessing
the original tweets (see Section 3.4).
2. Emotions: This refers to the emotions associated with respect to each
tweet (see Section 4).
3. Public concerns: This corresponds to the public concerns revealed in
Section 5.

18

6.2. Experimental setup and results
We aim to estimate the likelihood that a tweet belongs to a specific cluster by
using the features mentioned in Section 6.1. As in Section 4, we filter the leaders
and cluster them into four groups. We remove all user tweets that are not in any
of the leader clusters. We also deleted all blank tweets after tweet preprocessing.
After applying these filters, we obtain a dataset containing 42,468 tweets.
Since the dataset is imbalanced, we use Synthetic Minority Over-sampling
Technique (SMOTE) [47] to resolve this problem. SMOTE works by selecting
examples that are close in the feature space, drawing a line between the examples
in the feature space and drawing a new sample at a point along that line.
Specifically, a random example from the minority class is first chosen. Then k
of the nearest neighbors for that example is found (typically k=5). A randomly
selected neighbor is chosen and a synthetic example is created at a randomly
selected point between the two examples in feature space.
We experiment with several classification models, including Support Vector Classifier (SVC) [48, 49], and Random Forests (RF) [50], Random neural
network (NN, see Figure 8 for framework) [51, 52] and Bidirectional Encoder
Representations from Transformers (BERT) [53]. Figure 7 displays the data
flow to the models. We find that the Random Forest model is the most effective
for our task. As the dataset is imbalanced and the trade-off between true and
false positive rates associated with classification, we choose to compare models
using the area under the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve (AUC)
[54, 55]. Thus, a random baseline will score 50% on AUC ROC. We use 5-fold
cross-validation for estimation and we run all models three times. Therefore,
15 iterations in total for each model. We also standardize emotion and public
concern features to have zero mean and unit variance.
Results: Table 2 shows the classification accuracy for our models. With
the RF model trained on all available features, we achieve a mean accuracy of
96% AUC ROC with 0.2% as standard deviation. The low value of standard
deviation indicates that the model is robust. All model shows that the most
important feature for the classification is clean text. We can note that our
19

Conv_1
Convolution
(dropout=0.2)

Fully-Connected
Fully-Connected
LSTM Layer
Neural Network
Softmax activation
Max-Pooling
(2 x 2)

Politics
Health
Research
News
Output
Input
Figure 8: Random neural network framework.

best model, that is, RF is trained with the TF-IDF embedding for the words
a user used in their tweets. We also see that public concerns and emotions are
important characteristics for classifying a tweet in different clusters.

7. Conclusion
With a quest to understand the role of various leaders during COVID-19, we
study a large number of tweets using techniques such as network analysis, text
analysis and sentiment analysis. On the basis of network analysis, users are categorized into four different clusters, namely research, news, health and politics.
The results using text analysis shows that leaders of different clusters are focusing on various public concerns. In particular, researchers about understanding
the pandemic symptoms and develop vaccination; news about travel and hygiene; health organization about hygiene; and political people about travel and
hygiene. Sentiment analysis indicates that emotions such as anticipation, fear,
20

Model

SVC

RF

NN

BERT

Text

91.9(2)

95.3(2)

91.8(9)

92.5(8)

Text+Concerns

92.4(3)

95.3(2)

92.7(9)

92.8(9)

Text+Emotions

93.2(3)

96.0(2)

93.5(9)

93.6(8)

Text+Emotions+Concerns

93.6(2)

96.0(2)

94.1(9)

95.2(8)

Data

Table 2: Model mean AUC ROC and standard deviation for various dataset features. For
example, the BERT model with the dataset (Text+Emotion) achieves 93.6% mean AUC ROC
accuracy with 0.8% standard deviation.

sadness and trust are dominated for all clusters. Finally, we show that the
features presented in this work can be used to classify tweets in various clusters with an accuracy of up to 96% AUC ROC. Our findings suggest that tweets
themselves carry some features which can be used to identify a user’s profession.
Note that the Twitter stream is filtered following Twitter’s API documentation; hence the tweets analyzed here still constitute a representative subset of
the stream as opposed to the entire stream. For the future, we intend to analyze
the tweets’ data to a greater extent for different category users to understand
their pattern. Future work should also explore more sophisticated models and
more deeply analyze how the writing style of various cluster can be exploited in
greater depth to capture their signature in their tweets.

Acknowledgment
This research was funded by ERDF via the IT Academy Research Programme and SoBigData++.

References
[1] R. Schroeder, S. Everton, R. Shepherd, Mining twitter data from the arab
spring, Combating Terrorism Exchange 2 (4) (2012) 54–64.
21

[2] A. Bruns, T. Highfield, J. Burgess, The arab spring and social media audiences: English and arabic twitter users and their networks, American
behavioral scientist 57 (7) (2013) 871–898.
[3] R. S. Littlefield, A. M. Quenette, Crisis leadership and hurricane katrina:
The portrayal of authority by the media in natural disasters, Journal of
Applied Communication Research 35 (1) (2007) 26–47.
[4] M. Goodman, M. Lucero, A. T. T. Kwang, A. Pang, Crisis leadership: when
should the ceo step up?, Corporate Communications: An International
Journal (2009).
[5] J. CSSE, Coronavirus covid-19 global cases by the center for systems science
and engineering (csse) at johns hopkins university (jhu) (2020).
[6] A. Rego, M. P. e Cunha, S. R. Clegg, The virtues of leadership: Contemporary challenges for global managers, OUP Oxford, 2012.
[7] M. R. Weeks, Organizing for disaster: Lessons from the military, Business
Horizons 50 (6) (2007) 479–489.
[8] G. Klann, Crisis leadership: Using military lessons, organizational experiences, and the power of influence to lessen the impact of chaos on the
people you lead, Center for Creative Leadership, 2003.
[9] L. B. Ware, The role of the tunisian military in the post-bourgiba era, The
Middle East Journal (1985) 27–47.
[10] A. Joya, The egyptian revolution: crisis of neoliberalism and the potential
for democratic politics, Review of African political economy 38 (129) (2011)
367–386.
[11] A. Boin, P. Hart, Public leadership in times of crisis: mission impossible?,
Public administration review 63 (5) (2003) 544–553.
[12] F. Amat, A. Arenas, A. Falcó-Gimeno, J. Muñoz, Pandemics meet democracy. experimental evidence from the covid-19 crisis in spain (2020).
22

[13] T. Poell, R. Abdulla, B. Rieder, R. Woltering, L. Zack, Protest leadership
in the age of social media, Information, Communication & Society 19 (7)
(2016) 994–1014.
[14] L. Smith, D. Riley, School leadership in times of crisis, School Leadership
& Management 32 (1) (2012) 57–71.
[15] A. Haddon, C. Loughlin, C. McNally, Leadership in a time of financial
crisis: what do we want from our leaders?, Leadership & Organization
Development Journal (2015).
[16] K. P. Yusko, H. W. Goldstein, Selecting and developing crisis leaders using
competency-based simulations, Journal of contingencies and crisis management 5 (4) (1997) 216–223.
[17] C. C. Manz, Self-leadership: Toward an expanded theory of self-influence
processes in organizations, Academy of Management review 11 (3) (1986)
585–600.
[18] C. M. Pearson, J. A. Clair, Reframing crisis management, Academy of
management review 23 (1) (1998) 59–76.
[19] M. P. Leiter, Burn-out as a crisis in self-efficacy: Conceptual and practical
implications, Work & stress 6 (2) (1992) 107–115.
[20] B. M. Staw, L. E. Sandelands, J. E. Dutton, Threat rigidity effects in organizational behavior: A multilevel analysis, Administrative science quarterly
(1981) 501–524.
[21] I. F. Kesner, T. C. Sebora, Executive succession: Past, present & future,
Journal of management 20 (2) (1994) 327–372.
[22] W. Rothwell, Effective succession planning: Ensuring leadership continuity
and building talent from within, Amacom, 2010.
[23] S. O. Oyeyemi, E. Gabarron, R. Wynn, Ebola, twitter, and misinformation:
a dangerous combination?, Bmj 349 (2014) g6178.
23

[24] M. Carter, How twitter may have helped nigeria contain ebola, BMJ:
British Medical Journal (Online) 349 (2014).
[25] T. O. Smith, A little birdie told me: H1n1 information and misinformation
exchange on twitter, UALR-William H. Bowen School of Law Legal Studies
Research Paper (11-03) (2010).
[26] H. Achrekar, A. Gandhe, R. Lazarus, S.-H. Yu, B. Liu, Predicting flu trends
using twitter data, in: 2011 IEEE conference on computer communications
workshops (INFOCOM WKSHPS), IEEE, 2011, pp. 702–707.
[27] J. Ritterman, M. Osborne, E. Klein, Using prediction markets and twitter
to predict a swine flu pandemic, in: 1st international workshop on mining
social media, Vol. 9, 2009, pp. 9–17.
[28] C. Chew, G. Eysenbach, Pandemics in the age of twitter: content analysis
of tweets during the 2009 h1n1 outbreak, PloS one 5 (11) (2010).
[29] A. Signorini, A. M. Segre, P. M. Polgreen, The use of twitter to track levels
of disease activity and public concern in the us during the influenza a h1n1
pandemic, PloS one 6 (5) (2011).
[30] V. K. Jain, S. Kumar, An effective approach to track levels of influenzaa (h1n1) pandemic in india using twitter, Procedia Computer Science 70
(2015) 801–807.
[31] A. McNeill, P. R. Harris, P. Briggs, Twitter influence on uk vaccination
and antiviral uptake during the 2009 h1n1 pandemic, Frontiers in public
health 4 (2016) 26.
[32] A. A. Kumar, A. A. Kumar, Deadly nipah outbreak in kerala: Lessons
learned for the future, Indian journal of critical care medicine: peerreviewed, official publication of Indian Society of Critical Care Medicine
22 (7) (2018) 475.

24

[33] L. Samaras, E. Garcı́a-Barriocanal, M.-A. Sicilia, comparing social media
and google to detect and predict severe epidemics, Scientific Reports 10 (1)
(2020) 1–11.
[34] R. Goel, R. Sharma, Mobility based sir model for pandemics–with case
study of covid-19, arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.13015 (2020).
[35] W. H. Organization, Novel coronavirus—china (2020).
[36] C. Huang, Y. Wang, X. Li, L. Ren, J. Zhao, Y. Hu, L. Zhang, G. Fan,
J. Xu, X. Gu, et al., Clinical features of patients infected with 2019 novel
coronavirus in wuhan, china, The lancet 395 (10223) (2020) 497–506.
[37] C. COVID, Global cases by johns hopkins csse (19).
[38] A. Giachanou, F. Crestani, Like it or not: A survey of twitter sentiment
analysis methods, ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR) 49 (2) (2016) 1–41.
[39] A. Tumasjan, T. O. Sprenger, P. G. Sandner, I. M. Welpe, Predicting elections with twitter: What 140 characters reveal about political sentiment,
in: Fourth international AAAI conference on weblogs and social media,
2010.
[40] L. Page, S. Brin, R. Motwani, T. Winograd, The pagerank citation ranking:
Bringing order to the web., Tech. rep., Stanford InfoLab (1999).
[41] M. L. Jockers, Syuzhet: Extract sentiment and plot arcs from text, Retrieved October 21 (2015) 2015.
[42] D. M. Blei, A. Y. Ng, M. I. Jordan, Latent dirichlet allocation, Journal of
machine Learning research 3 (Jan) (2003) 993–1022.
[43] I. Porteous, D. Newman, A. Ihler, A. Asuncion, P. Smyth, M. Welling, Fast
collapsed gibbs sampling for latent dirichlet allocation, in: Proceedings of
the 14th ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery
and data mining, 2008, pp. 569–577.

25

[44] H. A. Rothan, S. N. Byrareddy, The epidemiology and pathogenesis of
coronavirus disease (covid-19) outbreak, Journal of Autoimmunity (2020)
102433.
[45] W. H. Organization, Statement on the second meeting of the international
health regulations (2005) emergency committee regarding the outbreak of
novel coronavirus (2019-ncov) (2020).
[46] M.-L. Zhang, Y.-K. Li, X.-Y. Liu, Towards class-imbalance aware multilabel learning, in: Twenty-Fourth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2015.
[47] N. V. Chawla, K. W. Bowyer, L. O. Hall, W. P. Kegelmeyer, Smote: synthetic minority over-sampling technique, Journal of artificial intelligence
research 16 (2002) 321–357.
[48] K. Tsuda, Support vector classifier with asymmetric kernel functions, in:
in European Symposium on Artificial Neural Networks (ESANN, Citeseer,
1999.
[49] D. Lee, J. Lee, Domain described support vector classifier for multiclassification problems, Pattern Recognition 40 (1) (2007) 41–51.
[50] L. Breiman, Random forests, Machine learning 45 (1) (2001) 5–32.
[51] L. K. Hansen, P. Salamon, Neural network ensembles, IEEE transactions
on pattern analysis and machine intelligence 12 (10) (1990) 993–1001.
[52] Z. Alom, B. Carminati, E. Ferrari, A deep learning model for twitter spam
detection, Online Social Networks and Media 18 (2020) 100079.
[53] J. Devlin, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, K. Toutanova, Bert: Pre-training of
deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding, arXiv preprint
arXiv:1810.04805 (2018).

26

[54] J. Davis, M. Goadrich, The relationship between precision-recall and roc
curves, in: Proceedings of the 23rd international conference on Machine
learning, 2006, pp. 233–240.
[55] P. Flach, The many faces of roc analysis in machine learning, ICML Tutorial
(2004).

27

