A National Research Agenda for Intelligent Infrastructure: 2021 Update
Daniel Lopresti
Lehigh University

Shashi Shekhar
University of Minnesota

Executive Summary
Strategic, sustained Federal investments in intelligent infrastructure will increase safety and
resilience, improve efficiencies and civic services, and broaden employment opportunities and job growth
nationwide. The technologies that comprise intelligent infrastructure can also provide keys to solving
some of the most vexing challenges we face today, including confronting future pandemics and natural
disasters, achieving sustainability and energy efficiency goals, and advancing social justice. Enabling
those technologies effectively will require investment in the associated computing research as well,
beyond and in concert with the basic building projects. In 2017, the Computing Community Consortium
(CCC) produced a series of intelligent infrastructure whitepapers, and in 2020 CCC issued a set of
companion whitepapers on closely related topics. Here we briefly survey those earlier works, and then
highlight four themes of rising national prominence where intelligent infrastructure can also play an
enabling role, driven by experiences with the COVID-19 pandemic and the social justice movement. We
conclude with recommendations for the necessary research investments.
The Research Landscape in Intelligent Infrastructure
Intelligent infrastructure is the embedding of sensing, computing, and communications
capabilities into traditional urban and rural physical infrastructures such as roads, buildings, and bridges,
along with a wide range of techniques to assemble and analyze the data that is generated and make it
useful to decision makers and society as a whole. In 2017, the Computing Community Consortium (CCC)
produced a series of 10 whitepapers that made the case for significant Federal investment in intelligent
infrastructure, identifying a number of major challenges that would have to be addressed including basic
research, support for community/industry partnerships, and the special role played by universities in
charting the path forward. These earlier whitepapers focused on the necessary computing research in
next-generation transportation [B17]; the smart grid [C17]; disaster management, public safety, and
community resilience [D17]; smart cities [E17]; smart agriculture [F17]; cybersecurity [G17] and privacy
[J17]; intelligent infrastructure in a rural context [H17], and wireless networking [K17].
An overarching whitepaper [A17] argued that building for the 21st Century and beyond demands
the incorporation of intelligence at the very foundations of our infrastructure. To do otherwise would
deprive the U.S. of the significant advancements this would bring to society, including increased safety
and resilience, improved efficiencies and civic services, and broader employment opportunities and job
growth. Infrastructure is the springboard for international economic competitiveness, and a race in which
we cannot afford to fall behind. As noted in that earlier whitepaper, sustained Federal investment in the
nation’s infrastructure after World War II led to an era of increasing prosperity for the country. We are now
on the cusp of a similar opportunity, and intelligent infrastructure must play a central role.
Much of what was written in the CCC’s 2017 whitepapers remains relevant today. Here we
highlight four key themes that have recently risen to national attention as a result of the tumultuous events
of 2020: the COVID-19 pandemic and worldwide natural disasters, sustainability and energy efficiency,
job recovery and employment opportunities, and the advancement of social justice. For each of these
existential challenges to our society, intelligent infrastructure can be seen as a key enabler for the
solutions we seek. After this overview, we provide a list of recommendations for investments in the
associated computing research. At the end of this whitepaper we provide a short bibliography of CCC’s
2017 intelligent infrastructure whitepapers, along with a companion set of whitepapers released in
November 2020 in the areas of AI and machine learning, privacy and security, robotics, networking, and

informatics; technologies that will support intelligent infrastructure and where research investments are
also required.
The Nexus Between Intelligent Infrastructure and Social Justice
Recent events have highlighted a set of important interrelated challenges: the growing presence
of public surveillance by governmental and commercial entities and the attendant privacy issues, along
with the rising demands for social justice. The latter can either be advanced or diminished by new-found
capabilities to monitor the actions of both public servants and the public, and hold those who violate the
law accountable. Body-worn video cameras for law enforcement provides an early example of this, but
widespread deployment of intelligent infrastructure will be a key enabler in the transition and provides the
classic “double-edged sword”: safety, security, and civil rights versus the privacy of the individual. These
ethics and technology issues are best approached from an interdisciplinary perspective [C20].
AI analytics at the edge of pervasive networks in smart and connected communities could
improve privacy by maintaining a level of anonymity when implemented properly, but more research is still
needed [A20, R20]. Experiences with the abuse of private data on the commercial side hints at what we
can expect when ubiquitous government surveillance in physical spaces becomes prevalent [J20]; it is not
clear who will own the data captured while watching you drive down a public street: the county
government? The vendor who installed and operates the system monitoring traffic on the roadway? The
company storing the data and providing the analytics? How can effective policies be developed and
adherence guaranteed? These are questions that also require research.
Other applications may prove less controversial. The embedding of pervasive environmental
sensors across a city landscape, including in underprivileged sections of the city, and making the data
public, will allow the identification, monitoring, and remediation of air quality issues that have frequently
plagued the less fortunate in our society [E17], again assuming key research issues can be addressed.
Another pressing issue, even before the pandemic but certainly exacerbated by it, are the
disparities in broadband access across the U.S., which presents significant barriers to achieving equality
in employment, education, and healthcare. This is especially an issue in rural and tribal areas [H17], but
even some cities still have problems with equal access to broadband for all of their residents. Advances in
next-generation wireless networking have the potential to help [R20], but much research is also needed in
developing new and better ways to deliver vital services to remote users (e.g., [K17]). A related realization
and topic for ongoing research is the recognition that many of the accommodations developed to support
people with disabilities in the physical world (often mandated by Federal law) do not automatically carry
over to the online world; more research needs to be done here as well. Finally, the recognition that
underserved communities are often the hardest hit when disasters strike provides another opportunity
where intelligent infrastructure can be applied to help level the playing field and create a more equitable,
supportive living environment [D17].
Resilience to Pandemics and Other Disasters
The COVID-19 pandemic, the recent devastating wildfires in the American West and elsewhere,
and the terrorist attacks of 9-11 remind us that modern society is not immune from natural disasters (e.g.,
infectious disease outbreak, hurricanes earthquake) and man-made disasters (e.g., terrorism, social
unrest), and their large-scale consequences (e.g., fiscal, social, built and natural environment).
Computing and intelligent infrastructure are key to enhancing resilience by improving preparation and
plans for responding to and recovering from and effectively adapting to high-risk disasters [K20].
Computing breakthroughs ranging from broadband to robotics to spatial computing (e.g., COVID-19
maps, contact notification apps, local and regional disease transmission-dynamics models) to GeoSocial
media (e.g., geo-targeted amber alerts, Ushahidi, OpenStreetMap, tweets, facebook, tiktok) have
provided game-changing capabilities and become key tools for disaster management [D17]. For example,
the broadband telecommunication infrastructure proved invaluable to enabling stay-at-home orders during
the COVID-19 pandemic by supporting tele-education, tele-health, and remote work. In addition,
computational simulation models (e.g., SEIR COVID-19 spread models) were useful in projecting
COVID-19 trajectories to protect hospital capacity. In addition, ​Wireless Emergency Alerts that are used

2

to warn ​geo-targeted people at risk of flash floods, dust storms, hurricanes, etc. ​are now being used to
inform people to take actions to reduce their COVID-19 exposure and risk [D17].
As a result many compelling and life changing computing opportunities have recently emerged.
For example, there is a critical need to strengthen the ​National Pandemic Informatics Infrastructure ​[K20]
by modernizing the public-health databases and information systems as well as provisioning of high
performance computing resources to support simulation of disease transmission dynamics models and
analysis of disease big data.​ Other compelling opportunities include next generation computational
simulation leveraging AI [D20] and spatially-detailed ​Digital Twins (big-data and physical/social science
driven computational models of our world and society), which can help preparation and planning by
projecting the impact of disaster scenarios and comparing benefits from alternative interventions. The
cyber vulnerabilities of grid components must also be characterized and mitigated to prevent cyber
threats. Privacy of sensitive power system data should be preserved by efficient data protection and
encryption techniques [C17]. Basic computing research is necessary to address many of these open
issues.
Addressing the Impact on Jobs and Employment
At the same time the move to intelligent infrastructure increases efficiencies and lowers costs for
communities, improves public safety and security, and preserves natural resources and enhances
sustainability, there will be a significant impact on jobs across a wide variety of sectors. Some of this
impact will be negative, with whole job categories disappearing due to automation, while other aspects of
the impact will be positive, with new careers arising that do not exist today, many in high tech fields.
Addressing this impact to maintain and enhance employment opportunities will require a substantial
coordinated effort involving government, industry, and academia, the latter both to address open research
challenges as well as to provide the educational services necessary to “re-tool” workers to be successful
in the greener careers of tomorrow made possible by intelligent infrastructure. We see tremendous
potential for humans to work side-by-side with AI systems and robots, increasing productivity, job safety
and satisfaction, and international competitiveness.
As noted in the 2017 version of this whitepaper [A17], future communities infused with intelligent
infrastructure will look and act very different from today. Some changes will be dramatic and especially
disruptive, such as the transition to autonomous vehicles, while others will flow more naturally and indeed
have even started taking place, accelerated by current pandemic (highly automated grocery store
check-outs, smartphone-based commerce-at-a-distance replacing physical interactions of the past, e.g.,
feeding a parking meter). As we observed in 2017, investments in lifelong learning and technical training
will be critically important to help workers remain employed and take full advantage of the benefits
provided by these new technologies. The Internet of Things (IoT) is sometimes considered synonymously
with intelligent infrastructure, and as more and more AI is embedded in these so-called edge devices
[A20], worker training will be needed here as well.
Even though the phrase “intelligent infrastructure” may conjure up images of the smart city of
tomorrow, in our earlier whitepapers we have also discussed the tremendous positive impacts on
agriculture and rural communities and the job opportunities there as well [F17, H17]. Once again,
embedded intelligence brings on sustainability and productivity gains that will be a critical contribution to
the international competitiveness of U.S. agriculture. And, likewise, there will be a significant demand for
continuing education so that workers can be prepared for these major changes. In [H17] we also
observed that the growth of the digital economy in an increasingly connected world would lead to new
remote work opportunities that could benefit rural communities with their lower costs of living and higher
quality of life. Indeed, the pandemic has accelerated this transition in dramatic fashion; the net benefit of
remote work opportunities on depressed rural communities could be a notable positive at a time of so
many negatives.
Robotics has the potential to magnify and amplify the capabilities and productivity of teams
involving both humans and robots. As we discuss in our 2020 whitepaper [M20], this does not necessarily
mean the introduction of robots will lead to fewer jobs. Indeed, by some measures employment in
industries making greater use of robots has actually increased. We must also focus, however, on the
nature and the quality of those jobs, and matching workers' skills with the increasing technical demands

3

of maintaining and operating their robot “teammates,” so that the work available to humans is rewarding
and not menial. Research in human-robot teaming can help with this, as can investments in education.
Next-generation vehicles come in a variety of different types: automated, connected, eco/electric,
and shared (ACES). The sustainability and productivity gains from these vehicles will be substantial as
will the economic benefits, but attention must be paid both to the enabling research and also to helping
the workers who will be displaced if they are not supported in their attempts to adapt to the new demands
of the day.
Cooperation between AI and humans is a common theme across a range of intelligent
infrastructure applications. Human workers must cooperate with each other to do their jobs, and if AI is to
be a good teammate it must be able to cooperate with humans and other AIs, too. This will require AI that
understands human preferences, can model ethical behavior, and operates within current laws and
regulations. The AI must be trustworthy and helpful at all times, avoiding any form of manipulation that
could mislead or even endanger human co-workers. All of these issues are topics of current research and
have important implications for supporting humans in the workplace as well.
Sustainability and Energy Efficiency
Our planet is facing challenges ranging from environmental degradation to climate change. Life
threatening weather events (e.g., floods, droughts) are becoming more extreme and frequent.
Consequently, the United Nations has identified a set of sustainable development goals including food,
energy and water security, climate action, sustainable communities, biodiversity, and addressing
inequality. There are a number of social justice aspects to consider with these as well. Poor communities
are often located in the most risky areas in terms of climate disasters. They also need the most support
when disaster strikes. Computing is crucial to addressing these challenges facing our changing planet
[F17]. For example, sensor networks and new methods to analyze their data are needed to monitor our
planet to help us understand biological, physical, and social changes. Computational simulations may
help forecast rates of sea level change, loss of polar ice, and predict critical geo-events. It is also
important for societal priorities including security, public health, smart cities, transportation, climate,
environment, food, energy, water [A17]. Thus, Microsoft announced that the goal of being Carbon
negative (removing more carbon than they emit) by 2030 and launched ​“AI for Earth'' to address global
environmental challenges. In addition, multiple planetary-scale platforms for Earth data have emerged
including the Earth on Amazon Web Services, the Google Earth Engine, and the NASA Earth Explorer.
This high-frequency and high spatial resolution data is being used to monitor global crops to avoid future
Arab spring like events. Furthermore, researchers are becoming aware of the impacts of research
activities, such as the greenhouse gases and energy use associated with cloud computing as well as
training of very large AI models (e.g., GPT-3), and a conference-driven publication culture [E20]. While
industry involvement is a valuable piece of the puzzle, the broad importance of these issues to our society
calls out for Federal investments as well in independent, unbiased academic research. For example, it
can catalyze a drive to become carbon-negative, if not carbon negative. Further, a global-dashboard to
monitor the health of our planet may support early detection of unsustainable events (e.g., deforestation)
and trends (e.g., shrinking Aral sea) towards timely interventions.
It should be noted that computing to address climate and environmental challenges, namely,
spatial computing, has unique characteristics [F17]. For example, there are significant interactions among
the vexing geo-challenges. Optimizing solutions for one problem may have unintended side-effects for
other problems, such as the increased use of fertilizers for food production have adversely affected water
quality. Current computational models need to be viewed as approximations to geo-phenomena, whether
physical, biological, or cultural. Progress is made by either improving the approximation or reducing
computational cost or both. In addition, the training of machine learning and geospatial AI models faces
great challenges due to non-stationarity of Earth phenomena (e.g., climate change) as well a lack of
training samples as significant geo-events can be very rare and ground truth data are labor-intensive and
time-consuming to collect. Thus, it is timely for a new computing research initiative to engage the broad
computing community along with complementary disciplines to better understand and protect our
changing planet. Among the risks is the substantial carbon footprint required for developing current AI

4

technologies, including large machine learning models. Intelligent infrastructure opens the door to
dramatically better energy efficiency and sustainability [A20, D20].
Call to Action
Infrastructure is vital to our nation’s ongoing health, wealth, and well-being. The time is ripe for
substantial, sustained Federal investments in basic infrastructure (e.g., transportation, power grid, utilities,
networking) for both maintenance and modernization to maintain our global economic competitiveness.
Such investments will also provide a much-needed economic stimulus to accelerate the post-COVID
recovery by creating new jobs in traditional engineering and construction fields, supporting associated
short-term and long-term economic growth.
However, infrastructure has a long lifespan and thus it is very important for infrastructure
investments to be made with a keen eye toward the future. For illustration, Table 1 lists transportation
trends along with some associated infrastructure recommendations. First, vehicles are increasingly
automated, connected, environment-conscious (e.g., electric) and shared. This demands a move toward
an Internet of Infrastructure Things (IoIT) approach, with increased sensing, communication, computing
and data analytics (e.g., AI) capabilities. Second, transportation ranks among the largest sources of
greenhouse gas emissions which drives climate change. This status quo is not healthy or acceptable, and
future transportation infrastructure should reduce its carbon footprint by using sustainable technologies.
For example, street navigation apps may be encouraged to recommend routes that reduce emissions and
energy use, which will further the appeal and adoption of electric vehicles. Third, COVID-19
demonstrates the need for infrastructure resilience as our society has realized its massive dependence on
broadband for tele-work, tele-health and tele-education. It has also highlighted significant inequalities
across neighborhoods and communities, including rural and tribal areas that have limited access to
broadband. The pandemic has also highlighted the importance of long-haul transportation (e.g., trains,
trucks) as well as last mile on-demand delivery (e.g., doordash, UberEats) during stay-at-home orders as
a valuable measure in controlling disease spread. Other disasters during 2020, including widespread
flooding due to hurricanes and destructive wildfires, also argue in favor of building infrastructure that is
resilient; intelligence adds this. Furthermore, low-income neighborhoods often have weaker transportation
infrastructures leading to long travel times to access jobs, healthcare, education, and other basic
services. In addition, there is often a geographic mismatch between jobs and affordable housing. Future
infrastructure should work to reduce existing inequalities and provide strong evidence to allow us to
monitor progress. Fifth, there is a growing misalignment between the jobs of the future and our current
workforce. We need to create education and training programs to provide the needed skills and
knowledge (e.g., in areas relating to the design, deployment, and uses of intelligent infrastructure, AI, and
cyber-security) so that American workers are prepared for the future.
Table 1: Example Trends and Infrastructure Recommendations
Trends

Intelligent Infrastructure recommendation

1. Automated, Connected,
Move towards an Internet of Infrastructure Things (IoIT) by
Environment-conscious and Shared increasing sensing, telecommunication (e.g., broadband),
(ACES) Vehicles
computing (cloud, edge) and data analytics including AI on
highways and other critical infrastructure
2. Sustainability, Energy Efficiency:
Transportation is a major source of
greenhouse gases and driver of
climate change

Reduce (transportation) infrastructure carbon footprint via
sustainable technologies such as electric vehicles and
eco-routing service which recommend routes and schedules to
reduce energy use and emissions.

3. Increasing frequency and
magnitude of natural and
man-made disasters

Universal access to broadband for tele-commuting, tele-health,
distance education, etc. to improve resilience to natural and
man-made disasters

4. Increasing inequality, needs for
social justice

Intelligent infrastructure to improve quality of life and reduce
inequalities in access to jobs, healthcare, education and other
essential activities

5

5. Structural mismatch between jobs
and skills in labor market

Grow education and training in intelligent infrastructure to
create workforce of the future

Importance of Federal Leadership and Investment
The Federal Government has a crucial role in shaping intelligent infrastructure investments and
deciding the foundations on which the national economy will be built going forward. As we have noted
above (and in our previous whitepapers), there is a significant amount of basic research required to
achieve the promise of intelligent infrastructure. Some of this research can be resourced through current
programs such as NSF’s Smart and Connected Communities in conjunction with the MetroLab Network
spanning numerous cities, counties, local governments and universities. However, existing programs
provide only modest investments in basic research and are not of a sufficient scale to support the broad,
national transition we must make to achieve the full benefits of intelligent infrastructure. Any such effort
must leverage our world-class universities via Federal funding of basic research and development to
invent, deploy, and evaluate the necessary new technologies, to participate in the all-important
discussions of policies and ethics, and to train the intelligent infrastructure workforce of the future.

6

November 2020 Whitepapers
Artificial Intelligence
A20 Artificial Intelligence at the Edge
B20 Artificial Intelligence and Cooperation
​

C20 Interdisciplinary Approaches to Understanding Artificial Intelligence’s Impact on Society
D20 The Rise of AI-Driven Simulators: Building a New Crystal Ball
E20 Next Wave Artificial Intelligence: Robust, Explainable, Adaptable, Ethical, and Accountable
Socio-Technical Computing
F20 An Agenda for Disinformation Research
J20 Modernizing Data Control: Making Personal Digital Data Mutually Beneficial for Citizens and
Industry
Broad Computing
K20 Pandemic Informatics: Preparation, Robustness and Resilience
L20 Infrastructure for Artificial Intelligence, Quantum and High Performance Computing
M20 Robotics Enabling the Workforce
N20 A Research Ecosystem for Secure Computing
Core Computer Science
P20 Post Quantum Cryptography: Readiness Challenges and the Approaching Storm
Q20 Theoretical Computer Science: Foundations for an Algorithmic World
R20 Computing Research Challenges in Next Generation Wireless Networking
S20 Advancing Computing’s Foundation of US Industry & Society

March 2017 Whitepapers
Intelligent Infrastructure
A17 A National Research Agenda for Intelligent Infrastructure
B17 MOBILITY21: Strategic Investments for Transportation Infrastructure & Technology
C17 Digital Grid: Transforming the Electric Power Grid into an Innovation Engine for the United States
D17 Research Agenda in Intelligent Infrastructure to Enhance Disaster Management, Community
Resilience and Public Safety
E17 City Scale Intelligent Systems and Platforms
F17 Intelligent Infrastructure for Smart Agriculture: An Integrated Food, Energy and Water System
G17 Safety and Security for Intelligent Infrastructure
H17 A Rural Lens on a Research Agenda for Intelligent Infrastructure
J17 Privacy in Information-Rich Intelligent Infrastructure
K17 Smart Wireless Communication is the Cornerstone of Smart Infrastructures
This whitepaper is part of a series of papers compiled every four years by the CCC Council and
members of the computing research community to inform policymakers, community members and the
public on important research opportunities in areas of national priority. The topics chosen represent areas
of pressing national need spanning various subdisciplines of the computing research field. The
whitepaper attempts to portray a comprehensive picture of the computing research field detailing potential
research directions, challenges and recommendations.
This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant No.
1734706. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation.

7

