STUDY OF MENTAL HEALTH AND LEARNING ENGAGEMENT
DURING COVID-19 PANDEMIC BASED ON AN
ELECTROENCEPHALOGRAM HEADSET
Iuliana Marin
University Politehnica of Bucharest, Faculty of Engineering in Foreign Languages
(ROMANIA)

Abstract
The COVID-19 pandemic and the measures which were taken had effect over the mental health of
persons. In this case, students, as well as their learning process is affected. Isolation, panic, deficit of
attention, confusion, depression, uncertainty and stress are words which characterize the lives of
students. Virtual family care, schools and universities create new realities that can cause the evolution
of severe mental conditions and study habits that need to be avoided by persons. The current paper
proposes a concept that supports the performance of students by analyzing three ways of distance
learning, namely text; text and illustrations, including charts; video. An electroencephalogram headset
allows the detection of brainwaves and the developed web application enhances the process of
distance learning. The electrodes of the headset are placed at contact with the user’s head and
monitor the activity of the left and right frontal regions, along with the temporal lobe. Mood, focus,
stress, relaxation, engagement, excitement and interest are triggered as numerical values by using the
headset. The users provide information about their daily activities, including learning and evaluation
processes.
According to the study, users had the highest long-term attention while using text and illustrations,
followed by watching videos. This is caused by the fact that the text contained the code for the
programs which were presented in the video. Also, the users feel comfortable while using the
application and they started to pay more attention to the connection between stress, health, education
and well-being. The results triggered by the headset had higher values while students studied for the
first-time using videos. When they wanted to remember the information, the text and illustrations way
of learning was the best option. Based on the study outcomes, the instructional design can be
enhanced. Moreover, the results improved as the students became more equilibrated and confident in
themselves. Teachers, professors and parents are able to collaborate and enhance training, as well as
support according to the data which was gathered. While studying online under lockdown, students
have found the proposed solution to be good because their inner state influences their productivity
while solving problems.
Keywords: education; headset; electroencephalogram; brainwaves.

1

INTRODUCTION

The coronavirus disease pandemic had impact on the psychosocial life aspects of every person and
determined the occurrence of mental health problems for a part of the individuals due to lockdown.
Students are also affected due to this situation. In China, at the beginning of the pandemic, it was
observed that online public education and psychological counselling have helped individuals to
eliminate some of the negative mental health aspects caused by the COVID-19 pandemic [1]. In
Australia and New Zealand, the request of mental health services increased by 25% due to the
COVID-19 context and support was offered to them via phone, video, as well as by providing more
beds in hospitals in order to treat them [2].
Mental health problems impact directly and indirectly the persons who are ill, like the ones with
cardiovascular diseases. Their situations influence the lifestyle and health of their families. Rural and
remote settings are in need of support services, including the post-COVID era [3]. During and after this
pandemic, food security availability, access, utilization and stability have to be overviewed, because
disruptions cause negative effects [4-7].
The learning process is greatly affected by the pandemic and isolation, panic, deficit of attention,
confusion, depression, uncertainty and stress are words which characterize the states through which
the students have to go during such times. 7143 Chinese students have reported the same daily life

Proceedings of ICERI2020 Conference
9th-10th November 2020

7734

ISBN: 978-84-09-24232-0

characteristics after answering a questionnaire [8]. A Psychology teacher from Hubei, China, affirmed
that online physical education and psychology classes were done online in order to keep the students
and professors physically and mentally well [9]. This was caused by the need to avoid the occurrence
of severe mental conditions and bad study habits.
The current paper presents how the best learning strategy can be chosen when studying online by
analyzing the results coming from an electroencephalogram headset. The brainwaves triggered by the
headset electrodes and are interpreted numerically in terms of focus, stress, relaxation, engagement,
excitement and interest, along with the mood of the user. The values are entered by the user via a
developed web application. In the same application, information about daily activities, learning and
evaluation are also provided by the user. Three ways of studying are tested as the user has the
headset placed on his/her head, namely text; text and illustrations, including charts; and video. In
Section 2 is outlined the proposed system which was designed to make the students more aware of
their learning process engagement and inner state during the time of the COVID-19 pandemic, based
on the results obtained by using an electroencephalogram (EEG) headset. Section 3 describes the
results which were triggered after testing the proposed system by using three kinds of learning
materials, namely text; text and illustrations; and video. The last section presents the conclusions.

2

METHODOLOGY

Brain-computer interface (BCI) systems use neural activity to control signals, but this is only possible
after training specific cortical activity patterns [10]. Computer assisted learning is characterized by two
concepts, respectively flow zone and shaping [10]. The psychologist Csikszentmihalyi introduced the
notion of flow zone, meaning that the difficulty of a task is in balance with the individual’s capability to
be engaged without getting stressed or bored [11]. The concept of shaping was identified by a
researcher, Skinner, and it represents the repetitive process through which performance is refined
[12]. The individual will gradually perform complex tasks with high precision.
Neurophysiological signals triggered by an EEG based learning environment were tested in Germany
and it resulted that students can adapt better to the learning content, improving in this way their efforts
and the context did lead to good results [13]. An EEG headset was found to be useful to determine if
there exists the need of medical intervention for the students who suffer due to anxiety [14]. Along with
the EGG data, behavior and respiratory data played a key role. Breathing deeply enhances attention
and proper brain electrical activity modulation which is required during the learning process.
The paper's system is dedicated to analyze the student performance during the online learning
process, while being exposed to three ways of notion presentation, namely text; text and illustrations,
including charts; and video. The collaboration between teachers, students and parents is desired in
order to improve their education and well-being.
The gadgets which are used in the system are an Emotiv Insight headset [15], along with a personal
computer and a mobile phone which are owned by the student, plus the system server, as illustrated
in Fig. 1. The headset exchanges data with the student’s personal computer and mobile phone via
Bluetooth. The EmotivBCI [16] program is installed on the student’s personal computer and it helps
the user to place the headset for functioning in optimal conditions by analyzing the contact quality
between the EEG electrodes and the user’s head. The electrodes can get dry and cause a lower
signal to noise ratio that would trigger a low prediction accuracy. Contact lens fluid or saline can be put
on the electrodes for improved results.

Figure 1. System architecture

7735

The MyEmotiv mobile application determines based on the brainwaves which are the numerical values
for focus, stress, relaxation, engagement, excitement and interest. The values are introduced
manually into the system’s web application, along with data about daily activities, and their learning
and evaluation processes.
The student has access to different study materials that can involve just text; text and illustrations, but
also videos, while using the Emotiv Insight headset. The data transfer between the user’s personal
computer/mobile phone and the system server is done via a route that includes a firewall to define
rules which determine forbidden inbound and outbound traffic that passes through the ports of the
system.

3

RESULTS

The Emotiv Insight headset has five EEG electrodes which trigger the brainwaves that can be
visualized using the EmotivBCI program. The five channels, respectively AF3, T7, Pz, T8 and AF4,
can be seen in Fig. 2.

Figure 2. Channels of the EEG waves

The headset has two electrodes which are put on the user’s forehead (Fig. 3). The shorter arm has the
AF3 electrode which monitors the left frontal region activity, while to longer arm’s AF4 electrode
observes the right frontal region activity. The T7 and T8 electrodes are placed near the ear and at the
back of the user’s head. Both of them monitor the temporal lobe activity. The Pz electrode resides on
the top of the head and it ensures the proper fitting of the headset.

Figure 3. Headset setup for testing the system

The Centre for Neuro Skills stated that the left frontal lobe manages the control of movements. The
right frontal lobe is responsible for the non-verbal abilities [17]. The temporal lobe ensures auditory

7736

perception, visual input, verbal material categorization and comprehension, memory for long term,
personality [18].
The student has the MyEmotiv application [19] installed on his/her Android or iPhone mobile phone
and data regarding focus, stress, relaxation, engagement, excitement and interest are given in
numerical format while he/she has the headset on and studies the provided learning materials. The
materials can have just text; text and illustrations; and videos. The EmotivBCI program can also
determine the user’s mood. The program is installed on the student’s personal computer. All the
student profiles are saved in the cloud of Emotiv. The student can type the triggered numerical values
in the system’s web interface, along with data about daily activities, learning and evaluation
processes. The input values are saved at the system server side for further analysis.
The results triggered after testing the system on 10 students, showed that information is well received
firstly when the learning materials are presented in video format (100%). In contrast, the long-term
attention is kept when the learning materials contain text and illustrations (80%), followed by watching
videos (70%). The students opted for text and illustrations due to the code of the software programs
which are just illustrated in the videos. The triggered values can be used in order to enhance the
design of the instructional materials which are provided to the students. Teachers, professors and
parents can use the triggered values and influence positively the training process by collaborating
between them.
The students were very interested in the results which are triggered by the MyEmotiv application, in
what regards their focus, stress, relaxation, engagement, excitement and interest. In this way, they
started to pay more attention to their state and this action had as outcome a decreased level of stress
over a period of time, an improvement of their mental state, as well as in their overall distance learning
educational process during the COVID-19 pandemic lockdown. The students confessed that after
being conscious of the changes that occur in their body as they study, they tried to be more
equilibrated and confident in themselves. As an outcome of this decision, the inner state of the
students did lead to an increased productivity while solving problems.

4

CONCLUSIONS

The proposed solution would help the students while learning, as well as it would avoid overburdening
the health care system due to the unpleasant outcomes related to mental health which are caused by
the COVID-19 pandemic. The solution would also be useful for students with learning disabilities.
Students who suffer due to test anxiety can be supported, because the system will trigger their state
and their professors, and their parents can interfere to manage the situation.
The current paper draws attention upon the changes which occur inside the world of students, during
the COVID-19 pandemic. The obtained results that were obtained using the Emotiv Insight EEG
headset have showed that a special attention should be given to the students who develop
themselves during lockdown. Their teachers, professors and parents can use the triggered results of
the system server in the management of their teaching style. The learning materials should be more
practical and be delivered in video format, as well as in text format by having solved examples. At the
end of the test, the students started to be aware how their inner state influences greatly their learning
process. Their daily activities, including the learning and evaluation processes are key elements in
growing up healthy, satisfied and productive individuals.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The article was financed by the University Politehnica of Bucharest, Romania, through the project
"Inginer în Europa", in online system, registered at MEC under no. 457/GP/06.08.2020.

REFERENCES
[1]

Y.-T. Xiang, Y. Jin, T. Cheung, "Joint International Collaboration to Combat Mental Health
Challenges During the Coronavirus Disease 2019 Pandemic," JAMA Psychiatry, vol. 77(10), pp.
989-990, 2020.

[2]

D. A. Hon, "Surge Funding Helping Our Mental Health System During Crisis". Retrieved from
https://www.premier.vic.gov.au/surge-funding-helping-our-mental-health-system-during-crisis/.
Accessed at 20.05.2020.

7737

[3]

A. O’Neil, S. J. Nicholls, J. Redfern, A. Brown, D. L. Hare, "Mental Health and Psychosocial
Challenges in the COVID-19 Pandemic: Food for Thought for Cardiovascular Health Care
Professionals," Heart, Lung and Circulation, vol. 29(7), pp. 960-963, 2020.

[4]

International Food Policy Research Institute, "New Research: COVID-19 Economic and Food
Supply
Chain
Disruptions
Endanger
Global
Food
Security".
Retrieved
from
https://reliefweb.int/report/world/new-research-covid-19-economic-and-food-supply-chain-disrup
tions-endanger-global-food. Accessed at 03.08.2020.

[5]

M. Marin, C. Hodosan, G. Dinita, C. G. Nicolae, "The influence of the chemical composition of
maize, barley and peas hybrids on the digestibility of compound feed for pigs," AgroLife Scientific
Journal, vol. 6(2), pp. 127-132, 2017.

[6]

C. G. Nicolae, S. C. Sava, M. P. Marin, E. Pogurschi, B. A. Sava, "Innovative solutions for
removing nitrogen compounds from water of recirculating aquaculture systems using clinoptilolite
natural zeolites," Current Trends in Natural Sciences, vol. 6(11), pp. 105-109, 2017.

[7]

M. Marin, C. Hodosan, C. G. Nicolae, G. Dinita, T. Dragotoiu, L. Nistor, "Researches regarding the
chemical composition and gross energy of sorghum in comparison to other forages for feeding
cattle and pigs," Current Trends in Natural Sciences, vol. 6(11), pp. 105-109, 2017.

[8]

W. Cao, Z. Fang, G. Hou, M. Han, X. Xu, J. Dong, J. Zheng, "The psychological impact of the
COVID-19 epidemic on college students in China," Psychiatry Research, vol. 287, pp. 1-5, 2020.

[9]

UNESCO, "Learning never stops: testimonies from students and educators". Retrieved from
https://en.unesco.org/covid19/educationresponse/learningneverstops/testimonies. Accessed at
25.05.2020.

[10]

S. V. Hiremath, W. Chen, W. Wang, S. Foldes, Y. Yang, E. C. Tyler-Kabara, J. L. Collinger, M. L.
Boninger, "Brain computer interface learning for systems based on electrocorticography and
intracortical microelectrode arrays," Frontiers in Integrative Neuroscience, vol. 9, pp. 1-40, 2015.

[11]

M. Csikszentmihalyi, "Flow: The Psychology of Optimal Experience," Harper & Row, 1990.

[12]

B. F. Skinner, C. B. Ferster, "Schedules of Reinforcement," Skinner Foundation, 1997.

[13]

M. Spüler, T. Krumpe, C. Walter, C. Scharinger, W. Rosenstiel, P. Gerjet, "Brain-Computer
Interfaces for Educational Applications," Informational Environments, pp. 1-27, 2017.

[14]

K. H. Khng, R. Mane, "Beyond BCI—Validating a wireless, consumer-grade EEG headset against
a medical-grade system for evaluating EEG effects of a test anxiety intervention in school,"
Advanced Engineering Informatics, vol. 45, 2020.

[15]

Emotiv, "EMOTIV Insight Advanced Brainwear® for Brain Computer Interface". Retrieved from
https://www.emotiv. com/insight/. Accessed at 17.04.2020.

[16]

EmotivBCI, "EmotivBCI Application". Retrieved from https://www.emotiv.com/product/emotiv-bci/.
Accessed 18.04.2020.

[17]

Centre for Neuro Skills, "Frontal lobes". Retrieved from https://www.neuroskills.com/braininjury/frontal-lobes/#:~:text=The%20left%20frontal%20lobe%20is,involved%20in%20nearly%20
all%20behavior. Accessed at 21.04.2020.

[18]

B. Kolb, I. Q. Whishaw, "Fundamentals of Human Neuropsychology," W. H. Freeman and
Company, 1990.

[19]

MyEmotiv, "MyEmotiv Application". Retrieved from https://www.emotiv.com/myemotiv/. Accessed
at 17.04.2020.

7738

