Ancillary services in Great Britain during the COVID-19 lockdown:
a glimpse of the carbon-free future
Luis Badesaa , Goran Strbaca , Matt Magillb , Biljana Stojkovskab
a Imperial
b National

College London, Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, London SW7 2AZ, UK
Grid Energy System Operator, Faraday House, Warwick Technology Park, Warwick CV34 6DA, UK

arXiv:2101.04387v2 [eess.SY] 20 Jan 2021

Abstract
The COVID-19 pandemic led to partial or total lockdowns in several countries during the first half of 2020, which in
turn caused a depressed electricity demand. In Great Britain (GB), this low demand combined with large renewable
output at times, created conditions that were not expected until renewable capacity increases to meet emissions targets in
coming years. The GB system experienced periods of very high instantaneous penetration of non-synchronous renewables,
compromising system stability due to the lack of inertia in the grid. In this paper, a detailed analysis of the consequences
of the lockdown on the GB electricity system is provided, focusing on the ancillary services procured to guarantee stability.
Ancillary-services costs increased by £200m in the months of May to July 2020 compared to the same period in 2019 (a
threefold increase), highlighting the importance of ancillary services in low-carbon systems. Furthermore, a frequencysecured scheduling model is used in the present paper to showcase the future trends that GB is expected to experience,
as penetration of renewables increases on the road to net-zero emissions by 2050. Several sensitivities are considered,
demonstrating that the share of total operating costs represented by ancillary services could reach 35%.
Keywords: Ancillary Services, Flexibility, Power System Stability, Renewable Energy

Nomenclature
ηsc
ηsd
π(n)
∆fmax
BESS
BECSS
CCS
CfD
Cg
cst
g
cnl
g
cm
g
D
Dshed
Es

Charge efficiency for storage unit s.
Discharge efficiency for storage unit s.
Probability of reaching node n in the
stochastic scheduling.
Maximum admissible frequency deviation
at the nadir (Hz).
Battery Storage Energy Systems.
Bio-Energy with Carbon Capture and
Storage.
Carbon Capture and Storage.
Contract for Difference.
Operating cost of generator g (£).
Startup cost of generator g (£).
No-load cost of generator g (£/h).
Marginal cost of generator g (£/MWh).
Total system demand (MWh).
Demand shed (MWh).
State of charge of storage unit s (MWh).

Email addresses: luis.badesa@imperial.ac.uk (Luis Badesa),
g.strbac@imperial.ac.uk (Goran Strbac),
Matthew.Magill@nationalgrideso.com (Matt Magill),
Dr.Biljana.Stojkovska@nationalgrideso.com (Biljana
Stojkovska)

Preprint accepted for publication in Applied Energy

Emax
s
Emin
s
EFR
EFRs
EFRmax
s
f0
g
GB
H
Hg
HLoss
n
OCGT
OFDM
PFR
PFRg
PFRmax
g
PHES
Psc

Maximum charge level for storage unit s
(MWh).
Minimum charge level for storage unit s
(MWh).
Enhanced Frequency Response (MW).
EFR delivered by storage unit s (MW).
EFR capacity of storage unit s (MW).
Nominal frequency of the power grid (Hz).
Index for thermal generators.
Great Britain.
Total system inertia (MVA · s).
Inertia constant of generator g (s).
Inertia constant of outaged unit (s).
Index for nodes in the scenario tree of
the stochastic scheduling.
Open-Cycle Gas Turbine.
Optional Downward Flexibility
Management.
Primary Frequency Response (MW).
PFR delivered by generator g (MW).
PFR capacity of generator g (MW).
Pumped Hydroelectric Energy Storage.
Charge rate of storage unit s (MW).

max
Pc,
s

Psd
max
Pd,
s
Pg
Pmax
g
Pmsg
g
Prr
g
PLoss
Pmax
Loss
PRES
curt
PRES
RES
RoCoF
RoCoFmax
Tmdt
g
Tmut
g
Tst
g
UC
VoLL
ys
yg
ygsd
ygsg
ygst

Maximum charge rate for storage unit
s (MW).
Discharge rate of storage unit s (MW).
Maximum discharge rate for storage
unit s (MW).
Power output of generator g (MW).
Rated power of generator g (MW).
Minimum stable generation of generator
g (MW).
Maximum ramp rate of generator g
(MW/h).
Largest power infeed loss (MW).
Rated power of the largest unit (MW).
RES power output (MW).
RES power curtailed (MW).
Renewable Energy Sources.
Rate-of-Change-of-Frequency.
Maximum admissible RoCoF (Hz/s).
Minimum down time for generator g (h).
Minimum up time for generator g (h).
Startup time for generator g (h).
Unit Commitment.
Value of Lost Load (£/MWh).
Charge/discharge state variable for
storage unit s.
Commitment state of generator g.
Shutdown variable for generator g.
‘Start generating’ state of generator g.
Startup variable for generator g.

March 2020, driven by the surplus of emissions allowances
as thermal generators were largely pushed out of electricity
markets due to low demand. The authors in [6] analysed
the demand reduction in Great Britain during the first
week of the lockdown, highlighting some of the challenges
that the system operator was expected to experience. The
present paper focuses on another important aspect, that
will only increase in importance as energy systems shift
towards net-zero emissions: ancillary services.
A main challenge caused by low demand is related to
grid stability: maintaining the network magnitudes, such
as voltage and frequency, within safe levels is far from being trivial given these exceptional conditions. The authors
in [7] discuss the preventive reactive-power management
undertaken by the Indian system operator to avoid potentially dangerous voltage rises in the network. Such voltage rises could have been caused by an excess of reactive
power, as there was a decrease in load while distributed
renewable generation output did not decrease. In Great
Britain, an island with no synchronous interconnection to
other countries, low levels of inertia driven by high penetrations of non-synchronous renewable generation are a
concern, which require large volumes of ancillary services
to guarantee stability in the event of a contingency. A recent report [8] focused on the British system, highlighting
that a significant proportion of demand in GB has been
covered at times from non-synchronous renewables such as
wind and solar PV, and providing a summary of balancing costs. However, no publication to date has provided
a comprehensive analysis of the challenges experienced in
GB, or the specific actions taken by the system operator
and the reasoning behind them.
Furthermore, the lessons learned in GB are of uttermost relevance for the future decarbonised electricity grids.
Some works such as [9] have already quantified the future cost of ancillary services, demonstrating that these
will represent a very significant share of total operating
costs for the electricity grid. However, an updated analysis is necessary given two major recent changes: 1) the
ambition to sharply reduce emissions has greatly increased
recently: as an example, the British system operator National Grid envisions that net emissions from the power
sector will be negative by 2033 in 3 out of 4 future scenarios
(achieved by including certain capacity of bio-energy with
carbon capture) [10]. And 2) previous modelling tools did
not have the capabilities to account for fast frequency response, which has been demonstrated as key to tackle the
low-inertia problem (with 1GW of fast response expected
to be procured by mid-2021 in GB [11]).
Several works have proposed optimisation models to
schedule operating reserves [12], frequency response from
thermal units [13] and synchronous inertia [14]. While
frequency response is already co-optimised along with energy in some countries like the US, only the quasi-steadystate value is considered (i.e. the same volume of frequency
response is scheduled as MW’s would be lost after the
largest generator outage). The quasi-steady-state value

1. Introduction
The outbreak of the disease COVID-19 in the final
months of 2019 had a significant impact on electricity systems worldwide. Partial or total lockdowns were enforced
by governments of several states, starting in China, followed by Italy and several European countries, as well as
the United States. The measures taken varied from country to country, with several governments forbidding citizens from leaving their homes except for essential activities, and most of the industrial activity being put on halt.
In Great Britain (GB), these measures caused the electricity demand to drop by up to 28% compared to levels in
the same period in previous years [1].
Several studies have discussed the effects of lockdowns
due to COVID-19 on electricity systems. Most of the focus has been put on the reduction in demand [2], with the
subsequent drop in energy prices and carbon emissions
[3], since demand in many countries was mostly covered
by emissions-free renewables, which also benefit from low
short-run marginal costs. Reference [4] has documented
the correlation between reduction in electricity consumption in the United States and the rise in number of COVID19 cases, degree of social distancing, and level of commercial activity. The work in [5] analyses the sharp drop of
almost 40% in prices in the European carbon market in
2

of frequency after a contingency was the only concern until recent years due to the high level of inertia in the grid,
provided by synchronous generators as a by-product of
energy. Nevertheless, decreasing inertia levels imply that
a co-optimisation of inertia and response is necessary to
compute the required volume of these services, as demonstrated by [14]. Furthermore, only recently has grid-scale
battery storage become a cost-effective option, and this
technology is the main provider of ‘fast frequency response’
in grids such as GB. The recent development of modelling
tools that allow to also co-optimise fast frequency response
[15] make it possible to analyse ancillary services requirements under the latest expectations for future generation
mix.
In this context, the present work analyses the challenge
of procuring ancillary services in GB during the COVID-19
lockdown, and demonstrates how these challenges will also
be present in the future system as it becomes decarbonised.
The contributions of this paper are two-fold:

1. Depressed electricity demand.
2. Most renewables are not affected by market prices,
due to their special market arrangements.
3. Nuclear stations are also not significantly affected by
market prices, due to their inflexibility.

1. To provide a comprehensive analysis of the stability
challenge faced by the British electricity system during the COVID lockdown, as well as discussing the
additional ancillary services procured by the system
operator in this period and their associated costs.
2. To quantify the future costs for stability actions in
GB and analyse their main drivers. To do so, a
frequency-secured scheduling model is used, which
explicitly considers the stability boundary within the
optimisation. Several sensitivities are considered,
demonstrating the importance of fast frequency response and size of the largest possible contingency.
The remainder of this paper is organised as follows:
Section 2 reviews the need for and types of ancillary services procured by the GB system operator to guarantee
stability during the lockdown period. Section 3 illustrates
why the lessons learned during this period can inform the
challenges that will be faced by the future high-renewable
grids, using several results from a frequency-secured scheduling model that co-optimises energy production and ancillary services. Finally, Section 4 provides the conclusion
and discusses future lines of work needed to enhance our
understanding of best practices in ancillary-services procurement.
2. Ancillary services in GB during COVID-19
In this section a discussion on the operational challenges experienced in GB during the lockdown period is
provided, as well as the actions taken by the system operator to overcome them. Finally, the consequences of this
unique period are explained, both in terms of economic
and environmental impact.
2.1. Challenges experienced
The challenges faced by the British electricity system
during the lockdown period were due to three factors:
3

The first and second factors above caused periods of
low net-demand (i.e. demand minus renewable generation,
which must be covered by dispatchable generation), which
in turn caused low system inertia: inertia is provided by
synchronous generators (mainly gas- and coal-fired power
stations), which were displaced by non-synchronous renewables such as wind and solar PV. The challenge of operating a low-inertia grid, which is further explained in
Section 3.1, means that a higher volume of alternative ancillary services is needed to guarantee system stability.
The drop in demand caused a drop in energy prices, but
most renewables in GB are incentivised to produce as much
energy as possible regardless of the energy price. The reason for this is not only the low short-run marginal costs of
these technologies (given that they do not incur fuel costs),
but also their special market arrangements in GB: many
renewable generators benefit from special financial instruments such as feed-in tariffs, Renewable Obligation Certificates and Contracts for Difference (CfDs). Although
these three instruments vary in their characteristics, they
all share a common feature: they shield renewables from
low market prices, allowing these generators to still profit
from generating even during periods of negative energy
prices. A CfD, which is the financial support currently
being awarded by the UK government to renewable generators successful in CfD auctions, guarantees a fixed strike
price per MWh of energy paid to the generator, regardless
of the price set in the wholesale market. This strike price
effectively incentivises the renewable producer to output
as much energy as possible, making it profitable even in
the event of negative energy prices (since generators under CfDs are currently allowed to bid negatively in the
wholesale market).
Simultaneously, the third factor contributing to the operational challenge during lockdown was that large nuclear
units were predicted to maintain a high load factor, which
would have increased the need for ancillary services. The
reason for this increased need for ancillary services is that
these units, in particular station Sizewell B, typically drive
the largest power infeed loss in GB: since the system operator enforces the ‘N -1’ reliability requirement (meaning
that the grid must withstand any single failure of a device), there must be enough ancillary services to cover for
the outage of the largest plant online at any time.
Nuclear plants were likely to maintain high load factors because they are somewhat indifferent to low energy
prices: given the inflexibility of these units in GB (long
commitment times and high startup costs), it is typically
preferable for these plants to stay online through periods
of low prices rather than turn off.
In summary, the periods of very low net-demand com-

(22nd to 25th of May 2020), since demand is traditionally
lowest in GB during bank holidays and weekends.
Another measure taken by the system operator was to
sign a bilateral contract with the nuclear power station
Sizewell B. Through this contract, National Grid can instruct Sizewell B to halve its output: given that this is
the largest generator in GB (with 1.3GW rated power),
it defines the needed volume of ancillary services through
the ‘N -1’ reliability requirement; therefore, part-loading
this unit effectively reduces the need for ancillary services.
The cost of this bilateral contract has been reported to be
of up to £73m [19].
Furthermore, National Grid also takes actions to guarantee system stability by committing out-of-merit synchronous generators in the balancing market, called the
Balancing Mechanism in GB. As an example, 2.3GW of gas
plants were brought online through the Balancing Mechanism on the Easter Monday bank holiday (13th April 2020)
with the purpose of increasing inertia and procuring additional frequency capability [20].
Finally, the last measure taken was to create a fasttrack application process to the Accelerated Loss of Mains
Change Programme [21], targeted to embedded resources.
Through this fast-track programme, generators receive payments from National Grid to change their protection settings, so that they stay connected to the grid under high
Rate-of-Change-of-Frequency conditions. The programme
will be completed in coming years, but the fast track created during the lockdown had the goal of decreasing the
need for one key ancillary service that was scarce during
this period of low net-demand: inertia.
In summary, the GB system operator took four different measures to avoid blackouts during the challenging
lockdown period:

bined with high nuclear output increased the need for ancillary services in GB during the COVID-19 lockdown. As
an illustrative example, the lowest ever observed national
demand occurred during the lockdown: 13.4GW, overnight
on Sunday June 28th 2020 [16]. To compare with 2019,
the lowest demand was of roughly 18GW that year. In the
next section, a discussion on the actions taken by the system operator in GB to overcome this operational challenge
is presented.
2.2. Measures taken
The British government enforced a lockdown some days
after other European countries had: lockdown in the United
Kingdom started on 23rd March 2020, while in Spain it
had started on 13th March and in the Lombardy region
of Italy restrictions had been in place since around 21st
February. This delay gave some valuable days to the GB
system operator, National Grid, to conduct studies on how
low demand could drop during coming months, since there
was some concern were the lockdown to extend into the
summer (which is the period of lowest demand in GB).
By early April 2020, roughly a week after the lockdown
was enforced, National Grid had developed a projection
for the expected levels of demand in coming months: demand was expected to drop by up to 20% compared to the
same periods in previous years [17].
These studies conducted by National Grid foresaw periods when it would be impossible to guarantee system
stability. The system operator estimates that the capacity
of synchronous units needed online to guarantee stability is
in the order of 8 to 9GW, while the lowest possible demand
foreseen during the summer was just above 12GW. Given
that the installed renewable generation and about 5GW
of nuclear power stations on the system were expected to
generate as usual, as they are somewhat indifferent to demand drops (explained in Section 2.1), National Grid realised that there was a key necessity: the system was going
to require more downward flexibility [18].
To obtain this downward flexibility, National Grid created a new product, called Optional Downward Flexibility
Management (OFDM). The goal was to either increase
the demand of the transmission system, or decrease the
amount of non-flexible providers outputting onto the system. This OFDM product provided a commercial route
for providers with whom National Grid did not have a
commercial flexibility arrangement with: over 4.5GW of
assets signed up for this service, predominantly embedded
wind and solar, but also a fair share of demand turn-up
assets.
The OFDM service was used 4 times, with a total cost
of the actions of approximately £7m [18]. These instructions were used both during daytime (such as from 6am to
4.30pm due to high solar output) and nighttime periods
(as demand is lowest during night, which was combined
with high wind in these periods). It is notably illustrative that three of these four OFDM instructions happened
on the second bank-holiday weekend in the month of May

1. To create the OFDM product in order to procure
downward flexibility.
2. To sign a bilateral contract with the large power station Sizewell B, allowing to halve its power output.
3. To take stability-related actions through the Balancing Mechanism, as usual practice before the lockdown.
4. To create a fast-track route for the Accelerated Loss
of Mains Change Programme, which will reduce the
need for inertia.
2.3. Economic and environmental consequences
The actions to procure additional ancillary services explained in Section 2.2 implied additional costs. Ancillaryservices costs were 3 times higher in the period May-July
2020 compared to the same months in 2019: £302m in
2020 compared to £101m in 2019 [22].
On the positive side, the high penetration of renewable
generation during this period has produced records of minimal carbon intensity: May 2020 was the lowest carbonintensity month for electricity so far in Great Britain, with
May 24th showing the lowest ever carbon intensity of the
4

PFR

Power
(MW)

system (46gCO2 /kWh produced on the transmission network) [18]. One of the reasons for this drop in carbon
emissions during lockdown was the halt in coal usage: the
UK did not use any coal for power generation for just under 68 consecutive days, from April to June 2020. This set
a record for the longest coal-free period since the industrial revolution, exceeding by far the previous record of 18
days achieved in 2019 [23].

EFR

Frequency (Hz)

time (seconds)
50
Generation loss

RoCoF

Frequency Nadir

49.2

Figure 1: Post-contingency frequency evolution and the limits that
must be respected in GB, along with the power contribution from
the two frequency-response services: Enhanced Frequency Response
(EFR) and Primary Frequency Response (PFR).

3. Future trends
Even though electric demand is expected to increase in
GB in coming decades due to the electrification of heat and
transport, net-demand is expected to further decrease due
to an even higher rate of increase of renewable penetration
to meet the emission targets [10]. In addition, an increase
in the largest power infeed loss with the commissioning of
large nuclear plants such as Hinkley Point C in coming
years [24], will increase the need for ancillary services to
maintain system stability.
These two effects, the low inertia caused by low netdemand and the high value of the largest power infeed,
will exacerbate in coming decades the operational challenge already experienced during the lockdown of 2020. To
illustrate this point, a frequency-secured scheduling tool is
used in this section considering National Grid’s latest view
on the generation mix of the future, demonstrating that
the cost of ancillary-services provision will increase as GB
decarbonises its grid to meet the target of net-zero carbon
emissions by 2050.
Note that the present analysis focuses on ancillary services to guarantee frequency stability, which is the main
concern in low-inertia power systems. With increasing
loading level in the grid, voltage stability could also be
compromised. Other concerns could also arise, such as
a higher difficulty in respecting rotor-angle stability, and
even new types of potential instability driven by the fast
dynamics of power-electronics-based generation [25]. These
types of stability are not considered in this paper.

2. The lowest frequency value, the frequency nadir, must
not drop below 49.2Hz. This boundary avoids the activation of Low Frequency Demand Disconnection,
which would entail significant economic penalties for
the parties responsible, as occurred after the large
power outage of August 9th 2019 [27].
In order to guarantee that the two above frequency
boundaries are respected, the energy market must be constrained so that the generation dispatch contains sufficient
ancillary services. These ancillary services for frequency
support in GB are: 1) inertia; 2) Enhanced Frequency Response (EFR); and 3) Primary Frequency Response (PFR)
[28]. These ancillary services help contain the frequency
drop that would be caused by a generation outage, as described in Figure 1.
Mathematically, the conditions to guarantee frequency
stability take the following shape. The RoCoF is guaranteed to be within safe limit if the following inequality holds
[29]:
P Loss
H
≥
f0
2 · RoCoFmax

(1)

where H is the system inertia provided by all synchronous
generators online (with units of GVA · s), f0 is the nominal
frequency of the grid (50Hz in European grids), P Loss is
the largest power infeed loss (units of GW) and RoCoFmax
is the maximum admissible RoCoF (units of Hz/s).
The frequency nadir is guaranteed to be above the predefined limit if the following inequality is respected [15]:

3.1. Conditions for frequency stability
National Grid, as the system operator in Great Britain,
must take actions to guarantee that the frequency of the
grid is kept within safe boundaries after the loss of any
generator (an operational practice commonly known as the
‘N -1 reliability requirement’). These safe boundaries are
defined as:
1. The Rate-of-Change-of-Frequency (RoCoF) must not
exceed 0.125Hz/s, in order to avoid triggering RoCoFsensitive relays that could further exacerbate the generation loss by disconnecting distributed generation.
This RoCoF limit is currently being relaxed to 0.5Hz/s
and 1Hz/s in certain locations through the Accelerated Loss of Mains Change Programme, as the cost
of RoCoF-related ancillary services is expected to
significantly increase in coming years if this limit is
not relaxed [26].



EFR · 1s
H
−
f0
4 · ∆f max


·

PFR
(P Loss − EFR)2
≥
10s
4 · ∆f max

(2)

where ∆f max is the maximum admissible frequency deviation (in Hz), EFR is the aggregate from all devices providing this service (units of MW, EFR must be fully delivered
by 1s after the contingency), and PFR is the aggregate
from all devices providing this service (units of MW, PFR
must be fully delivered by 10s after the contingency).
Note that the EFR service is currently being migrated
into a service with similar characteristics named Dynamic
Containment [30].
5

Number of Units
Rated Power (MW)
Min Stable Generation (MW)
Ramp Rate (MW/h)
No-Load Cost (£/h)
Marginal Cost (£/MWh)
Startup Cost (£’000)
Startup Time (h)
Min Up Time (h)
Min Down Time (h)
Inertia Constant (s)
Max PFR deliverable (MW)

Hinkley Point C
1
1800
1350
100
400
8
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
5
0

Nuclear
2
1350
1000
100
400
8
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
5
0

Gas CCS
45
500
250
250
4500
46
10
4
4
1
5
50

OCGT
10
100
50
50
3000
200
0
0
0
0
5
20

Biomass
9
500
450
50
5000
25
20
4
4
1
5
0

BECSS
7
500
450
50
3500
15
20
4
4
1
5
0

Table 1: Characteristic of thermal plants

3.2. Frequency-secured scheduling
In order to understand the need for ancillary services
in the future carbon-free GB grid, several relevant case
studies are run here using a frequency-secured stochastic
Unit Commitment model with two important characteristics: 1) Considers uncertainty from renewable generation,
by using a scenario tree of possible RES realisations; and
2) Guarantees frequency stability, by enforcing frequency
constraints.
The objective function of this frequency-secured scheduling minimises the expected value of system operating costs
(fuel costs, start-up costs) to meet demand:


X
X
Cg (n) + VoLL · Dshed (n)
min
π(n) 
(3)
∀n

These masses act as an energy buffer that stores kinetic energy as they rotate: this energy is spontaneously released
in the event of a generation outage, decreasing the rotating
speed of these masses and therefore decreasing the electrical frequency of the grid. A higher number of synchronous
generators committed increases system inertia.
Frequency Response is a power injection from different
assets such as generators and batteries. Generators have
slower dynamics in frequency-response provision, making
them candidates for the PFR service (which has a requirement of being fully delivered by 10s after a contingency).
Batteries and other devices controlled through power electronics converters have much faster dynamics, allowing
them to provide EFR (which must be fully delivered by
1s after a contingency).
All these ancillary services can be thought of as a form
of ‘insurance’ to prevent blackouts: for example, partloaded generators providing frequency response operate at
a lower-than-optimal power output, therefore increasing
their per MWh operating cost. The headroom in partloaded generators provides this insurance in the form of
frequency response, that will act if a generation outage
occurs. Another example of this insurance consists in
bringing out-of-merit thermal units to increase the system inertia: these thermal units brought online displace
non-synchronous renewables, therefore increasing the fuel
costs in the system, as demonstrated in detail in [31].

∀g

Where the operating cost of thermal units is given by:
sg
nl
m
Cg (n) = cst
g · yg (n) + cg · yg (n) + cg · Pg (n)

(4)

The objective function is subject to engineering constraints in the generation mix, such as start-up times and
ramp rates for thermal plants. The full description of these
constraints can be found in Appendix A. The binary variables in the UC are relaxed to continuous in order to decrease computation time. The objective function is also
subject to the frequency-stability constraints (1) and (2),
to guarantee that the scheduling solution would allow to
keep the RoCoF and frequency nadir within required limits
in the event of any credible contingency.
The frequency-stability constraints in Section 3.1 map
the sub-second dynamics of post-contingency frequency
evolution (shown in Figure 1), into any timescale desired
for the optimisation, such as the hourly timescale used in
this scheduling model. These constraints make sure that
sufficient ancillary services will be available to contain any
credible frequency drop: inertia, EFR and PFR are decision variables in the scheduling optimisation.
Inertia refers to the energy stored in the rotating masses
on synchronous generators (e.g. nuclear, gas, biomass).

3.3. Ancillary services costs by 2030
The frequency-secured scheduling introduced in Section 3.2 is used here to understand the future trends on
ancillary services provision. The generation mix considered is described in Table 1, and corresponds to the ‘Leading the way’ scenario within National Grid’s 2020 Future
Energy Scenarios [10], described as the ‘fastest credible
path to decarbonisation’. This scenario achieves a carbonneutral electricity system by 2030, and is the result of a
capacity-expansion optimisation which considers a set of
different technologies as generation candidates, subject to
regulatory constraints such as emissions limits.
6

Figure 2: Energy and ancillary services costs in GB in 2015 [9] and
projected costs in 2030 for National Grid’s ‘Leading the way’ scenario.

Figure 3: Annual distribution of system inertia for 2016 [29] and projected distribution for 2030 under National Grid’s ‘Leading the way’
scenario. The dashed lines represent peaks of the 2030 distribution
that correspond to a single value of system inertia and fall outside
the scale of the graph.

Electric demand has an annual peak of 60GW and a
minimum value of 20GW [10], accounting for daily and
seasonal trends. The RES fleet is composed of 30GW of
solar PV and 68GW of wind. In addition, the system
contains 14 GW of storage, including the 2.8GW existing Pumped Hydroelectric Energy Storage (PHES) plus
a further 2GW assumed to be built by 2030, and 9.2GW
of Battery Energy Storage Systems (BESS). PHES has a
round-trip efficiency of 75% and 5h duration, while BESS
has a round-trip efficiency of 90% and 2h duration. In the
base case, 1GW of EFR is procured, as per current plans
by National Grid from mid-2021 onwards [11].
The results for a scheduling simulation spanning one
full year of operation are presented in Figure 2. The cost of
ancillary services is computed by running two simulations,
one with the frequency-stability constraints (1) and (2) enforced, and another one without these constraints (therefore corresponding to an energy-only scheduling). The difference between the operating cost in the first simulation
and the operating cost in the second simulation gives the
cost of ancillary-services provision.
Figure 2 illustrates that the share of total system operating costs corresponding to ancillary services would rise
to 15% by 2030 under the ‘Leading the way’ scenario. For
comparison, Figure 2 also displays the estimated energy
and ancillary services costs in 2015, when only 2% of costs
corresponded to ancillary services [9].
It is insightful to consider the distribution of system
inertia throughout the year, as presented in Figure 3. In
2016, 220GVA · s was the most common value [29], therefore inertia-related actions taken by the system operator
were rare. On the other hand, the simulation results for
2030 show a distribution of inertia skewed towards significantly lower values. This distribution contains three peaks
corresponding to the most common values of system inertia throughout the year:

Figure 4: One week example of the projected system operation for
2030.

imum stable generation of gas plants make them
preferable in these hours as a source of inertia: this
lower minimum stable generation allows to accommodate more energy from RES, which are assumed
to have zero marginal costs, therefore reducing overall system costs.
• Peak 2, at 92GVA · s, corresponds to periods of high
RES output when it is effective to commit a combination of biomass plants to provide inertia (since the
inertia provided by biomass plants is cheaper than
that from gas plants, given the lower marginal costs
of biomass units), and some gas plants to provide
the necessary PFR.
• Peak 3, at 165GVA · s, corresponds to periods of high
net-demand, when dispatchable, synchronous plants
must be turned on for energy purposes, and therefore
inertia effectively becomes a by-product of energy.

• Peak 1, at 74GVA · s, corresponds to hours for which
only nuclear and gas plants are online providing a
baseline of inertia, in order to respect the nadir limit
given by eq. (2). Although biomass plants have lower
marginal costs than gas plants in Table 1, the min-

To further understand the annual distribution of inertia
for 2030 presented in Figure 3, an example of a week of operation of the system is included in Figure 4. The first two
7

Figure 5: Projected cost of ancillary services for 2030, considering
three different cases of volumes of EFR procured.
Figure 6: Projected cost of ancillary services for 2030, considering
three different cases for the reliability standard enforced.

days of this week show periods of high net-demand, when
the gas plants increase their output to cover the system
demand. On the other hand, the last three days show periods of zero net-demand, when RES curtailment is present
for a sustained period. Even though in these days all the
demand could be covered by non-synchronous RES generation, a minimum amount of gas plants is kept online
to provide inertia: in the current GB system, this would
be achieved by bringing online out-of-merit thermal units
through the Balancing Mechanism, in order to increase
inertia and therefore guarantee system stability.
On a final note, it is important to clarify that RES do
not provide ancillary services in the studies presented in
this paper. That is currently the case in most countries
in the world, as significant market barriers exist for these
generators. Notably, ancillary services markets in GB are
currently cleared well ahead of real time, which makes it
impossible for RES to accurately forecast their potential
contribution to these services. In addition, the current
RES fleets, which are based on grid-following inverters,
are widely agreed to be less effective than synchronous
machines to contain frequency drops. Nevertheless, system operators are working to remove market barriers, and
the adoption of grid-forming inverters could remove the
technical limitations. Once RES are fully able to provide
ancillary services, the stability challenge in decarbonised
grids could be reduced, but the trend of increasing overall
costs for these services projected in this paper is still likely
to occur.

1.5GW) would reduce ancillary-services costs by roughly
£700m/year, highlighting the system value of this service.
Note that during the 2020 lockdown, 200MW of EFR were
being procured [33].
It is important to clarify that, since EFR is provided
by BESS which do not incur fuel costs, the only system
operating cost associated to EFR is a lost opportunity
to use the BESS fully for energy arbitrage. In practice,
BESS would be remunerated for providing EFR with a
certain price set in an auction for this service. This revenue, along with other revenue streams such as the price
differentials from doing arbitrage in the energy market,
would allow BESS owners to recover the investment cost
on these assets. Note however that the scheduling model
used in this paper only considers the operational timescale of the power system, assuming a fixed capacity mix,
and therefore investment costs are out of the scope of this
analysis.
3.5. Impact of largest loss and reliability standards
In previous sections, the largest loss infeed driven by
the large nuclear plant Hinkley Point C has been considered to be fixed, i.e. PLoss = 1.8GW. Here, we consider
two alternative cases:
• The system is secured against an ‘N -2’ loss, which
considers the simultaneous loss of Hinkley Point C
power station and half of the 2GW rated capacity of
the double-circuit HVDC interconnector IFA. The
value of PLoss is then set to 2.8GW.

3.4. Fast frequency response to compensate for low inertia
One of the keys to tackle the low-inertia challenge is
the procurement of fast frequency-response services (such
as EFR in GB), as demonstrated by works like [32]. Here
we run a sensitivity analysis for the volume of EFR procured by 2030, for which the results are presented in Figure 5. These results demonstrate that the cost of ancillary
services could more than double if the volume of EFR procured is halved from the currently planned 1GW, reaching
a share of total system costs of 35% in this case (since
projected energy costs for 2030 are of £6.5bn/year, as presented in Figure 2). On the other hand, procuring an
additional 0.5GW of EFR (making the total volume of

• A variation of the above case, where the size of the
largest possible loss is optimised in the scheduling
model, by optimally part-loading the large nuclear
station if beneficial for the system as a whole. To
compute this optimal part-loading strategy, PLoss
is considered a decision variable in constraints (1)
and (2), while respecting the minimum stable generation for Hinkley Point C in Table 1.
The results for these cases are presented in Figure 6. A
volume of 1.5GW of EFR is considered to be procured
8

in all three cases, since it was verified that 1GW of EFR
would not be enough to secure the ‘N -2’ case, given the
generation mix considered in Table 1.
These studies are motivated by the need to understand
the cost of a tighter reliability standard, since the most
recent large power outage in GB (on the 9th of August
2019) was caused by an ‘N -2’ outage [27]. The results
in Figure 6 demonstrate that securing the system against
any two simultaneous losses increases the cost of ancillary services by more than 6 times, even in the presence
of 1.5GW of EFR. On the other hand, optimally sizing
the largest possible loss is shown to achieve very significant savings. However, in this third case Hinkley Point C
station is chosen by the optimal scheduling to operate on
average at 1.45GW throughout the year; therefore, these
savings from optimal part-loading can only be considered
as an ideal scenario, since energy and ancillary services
are fully co-optimised in the scheduling simulation in this
case. In practice, nuclear part-loading would be done expost (e.g. through the Balancing Mechanism in GB, which
can adjust the day-ahead energy market dispatch), since
Hinkley Point C will benefit from a CfD and therefore is
incentivised to produce as much energy as possible. This
matter is further discussed in the next section.

overall emissions [36], therefore mechanisms for making
this strategy compatible with a CfD should be designed.
3.7. Applicability of the results to other countries
The results presented in this paper have been obtained
by using the projected future British electricity system as
a test case. As an island, Great Britain is already suffering the low-inertia problem induced by increasing renewable penetration, which was particularly acute during the
COVID-19 lockdown. Other island nations such as Ireland
and Australia are experiencing the same issue, as well as
Texas, which has no synchronous interconnection to other
grids in the continental United States.
However, the results presented here could also be of
relevance to system operators and stakeholders in the energy sector in other countries. While continental grids like
the US and Europe currently benefit from sharing inertial support through AC transmission corridors, once renewable penetration is sufficiently high in all the interconnected countries, the low-inertia issue will also appear in
continental grids. Therefore, the lessons drawn from the
simulations conducted in this paper will be of interest for
these systems.
Note that the present paper makes no assumption on
the particular market arrangements for procuring ancillary services in GB: the cost of ancillary services presented
here is simply the opportunity cost computed with the
frequency-secured Unit Commitment, as explained in Sections 3.2 and 3.3. The only British particularity in terms of
ancillary services that is considered in this paper is the existence of the ‘fast frequency response’ service (i.e. EFR),
which also exists with different terminology in Australia,
Ireland and Texas. While this product does not yet exist
in most countries, it is not unreasonable to expect that a
similar product will eventually be created by other system
operators to counteract the low-inertia problem. The advantage of defining a ‘fast frequency response’ product is
to recognise the faster dynamics of certain grid-connected
assets such as battery storage, and the results presented
here demonstrate that such service can bring significant
cost savings.
For quantifying the value of and need for the different
ancillary services in a given country, it might nonetheless be relevant to consider its particular market arrangements. A working group within the ‘Conseil international
des grands réseaux électriques’ (CIGRE), gathering experts from system operators and academia across the world,
is in the process of collecting operational practices for
ancillary-services procurement in different countries. The
interested reader can refer to the technical brochure which
summarises the findings of the working group, expected to
be published in Q1 2021 under the title ‘Impact of high
penetration of inverter-based generation on system inertia
of networks’.

3.6. Future market arrangements for renewables and nuclear plants
In addition to the increased need for ancillary services
in a low-inertia system, the special market arrangements
currently in place for most renewables in GB complicated
the challenge during the 2020 lockdown. In coming years,
renewables might still benefit from instruments such as
Contracts for Difference (CfDs), as the business case for
merchant renewables (i.e. renewables that simply obtain
revenue from the wholesale market) is still under debate,
due to issues such as price cannibalisation (i.e. renewables
would not be able to capture high prices, given the correlation between wind or solar output at different locations,
respectively). Under a CfD, renewable generators would
still be incentivised to produce as much energy as possible,
regardless of the level of demand. Nevertheless, the latest
round of CfD auctions held in GB forbids any recipient
of a CfD to bid negatively [34], which could help alleviate
the renewable output during periods of very low demand
(when energy prices could potentially be negative).
Furthermore, the large nuclear plant Hinkley Point C,
which will drive the largest loss in GB in coming years, will
operate under a CfD with a strike price of £92.5/MWh (in
2012 prices, to which inflation must be added) [24], placing it at around 45% above average wholesale day-ahead
electricity prices in the last decade [35]. This implies that
it will be incentivised to run at output roughly at all times,
which would highly increase the need for ancillary services
due to the large size of this plant driving the ‘N -1’ reliability requirement. Some studies have proved that partloading large nuclear units when net-demand is low can
significantly decrease system operating costs and reduce
9

4. Conclusion and future work
The lockdown measures following the COVID-19 outbreak in GB has provided some valuable insights on the
practical challenges of operating a system with low netdemand. While these challenges had already been predicted, they were not expected to be present until some
years in the future, as the penetration of renewables keeps
increasing to eventually reach the legal requirement of netzero emissions by 2050 imposed by the British parliament.
The exceptional circumstances of the pandemic, and the
subsequent depression in electric demand, have shown that
these challenges are very much real.
This paper has demonstrated and discussed why these
challenges will become increasingly relevant as the share
of renewables in the system grows. While the difficulty
in managing the GB system will likely be higher than in
continental grids, given that it is an island where the lowinertia problem is already present, other countries will certainly experience similar issues in the future as they progressively move towards a carbon-free energy system.
Regarding future work that could lead to improved
practices in procurement of ancillary services, it is notably relevant to understand how to make compatible the
energy-based, financial-support mechanisms for certain generators (e.g. Contracts for Difference) with the provision
of inertia, frequency response and an optimised largest infeed loss. This issue is particularly key in GB, where the
future driver of the largest possible loss will be a nuclear
plant benefiting from a CfD, which could exacerbate the
stability challenge during periods of low net-demand.
Acknowledgements
The authors are grateful for the valuable support and
funding received by the UK EPSRC project ‘Integrated
Development of Low-Carbon Energy Systems’ (IDLES, Grant
EP/R045518/1) and EU H2020 TradeRES project (ID:
864276).
The first author is also grateful to Dr. José Enrique
“Villica” Villa Escusol for the conversation that sparked
the writing of this paper.

References
[1] ESO operational transparency forum, COVID-19 preparedness,
Report, National Grid ESO (August 2020).
URL
https://data.nationalgrideso.com/
plans-reports-analysis/covid-19-preparedness-materials
[2] J. López Prol, S. O, Impact of COVID-19 measures on shortterm electricity consumption in the most affected EU countries
and USA states, iScience (2020) 101639doi:10.1016/j.isci.
2020.101639.
[3] Global energy review 2020: The impacts of the Covid-19 crisis
on global energy demand and CO2 emissions, Report, International Energy Agency (June 2020).

10

[4] G. Ruan, D. Wu, X. Zheng, H. Zhong, C. Kang, M. A. Dahleh et
al., A cross-domain approach to analyzing the short-run impact
of COVID-19 on the U.S. electricity sector, Joule (September
2020). doi:10.1016/j.joule.2020.08.017.
[5] M. Elkerbout, L. Zetterberg, Can the EU ETS weather the impact of Covid-19?, Report, Centre for European Policy Studies
(June 2020).
[6] K. Bell, G. Hawker, Electricity demand during week one of
COVID-19 lockdown, article, UK Energy Research Centre
news (March 2020).
URL
https://ukerc.ac.uk/news/
electricity-covid-lockdown/
[7] H. Zhong, Z. Tan, Y. He, L. Xie, C. Kang, Implications of
COVID-19 for the electricity industry: A comprehensive review,
CSEE Journal of Power and Energy Systems 6 (3) (2020) 489–
495.
[8] I. Staffell, R. Green, R. Gross, T. Green, Electric insights Q-2
2020 quarterly report, Report, Imperial College London & Drax
Group plc (September 2020).
[9] Roadmap for flexibility services to 2030: A report to the Committee on Climate Change, Report, Imperial College London
and Pöyry Management Consulting (2017).
[10] Future energy scenarios, Report, National Grid ESO (2020).
[11] Dynamic containment, Report, National Grid ESO (January
2020).
URL https://www.nationalgrideso.com/document/162381/
download
[12] A. Sturt, G. Strbac, Efficient stochastic scheduling for simulation of wind-integrated power systems, IEEE Transactions on
Power Systems 27 (1) (2012) 323–334. doi:10.1109/TPWRS.
2011.2164558.
[13] H. Chávez, R. Baldick, S. Sharma, Governor rate-constrained
OPF for primary frequency control adequacy, IEEE Transactions on Power Systems 29 (3) (2014) 1473–1480. doi:10.1109/
TPWRS.2014.2298838.
[14] F. Teng, V. Trovato, G. Strbac, Stochastic scheduling with
inertia-dependent fast frequency response requirements, IEEE
Transactions on Power Systems 31 (2) (2016) 1557–1566. doi:
10.1109/TPWRS.2015.2434837.
[15] L. Badesa, F. Teng, G. Strbac, Optimal portfolio of distinct
frequency response services in low-inertia systems, IEEE Transactions on Power Systems 35 (6) (2020) 4459–4469. doi:
10.1109/TPWRS.2020.2997194.
[16] National Grid ESO coronavirus preparedness, Report, National
Grid (1st July 2020).
[17] Electricity summer outlook report, Report, National Grid ESO
(April 2020).
URL https://www.nationalgrideso.com/document/167541/
download
[18] Power responsive summer insights: Covid-19 system operability
challenges, Industry podcast series, National Grid ESO (July
2020).
[19] National Grid pays Sizewell B owner for halving power output,
News article, The Times (August 2020).
[20] National Grid ESO coronavirus preparedness, Report, National
Grid (15th April 2020).
[21] Assessment of risks resulting from the adjustment of RoCoF
based loss of mains protection settings, Report, Energy Networks Association (2015).
[22] Monthly Balancing Services Summary (MBSS), Report, National Grid ESO (August 2020).
URL https://data.nationalgrideso.com/balancing/mbss
[23] 67 days coal free - a major milestone on the journey to a greener
Britain, News article, Ecotricity (July 2020).
[24] Hinkley Point C, Report, National Audit Office (2017).
[25] N. Hatziargyriou, J. V. Milanovic, C. Rahmann, V. Ajjarapu,
C. Canizares, I. Erlich et al., Definition and classification of
power system stability revisited & extended, IEEE Transactions
on Power Systems (2020). doi:10.1109/TPWRS.2020.3041774.
[26] Frequency changes during large disturbances and their impact
on the total system, Report, Ofgem (2014).

the current time-step, unless it has been shut down in the
current time-step:

[27] Investigation into 9 August 2019 power outage, Report, Ofgem
(2020).
[28] Future requirements for balancing services, Report, National
Grid (2016).
[29] System operability framework, Report, National Grid (2016).
[30] Response and reserve roadmap, Report, National Grid ESO
(December 2019).
[31] L. Badesa, F. Teng, G. Strbac, Pricing inertia and frequency response with diverse dynamics in a Mixed-Integer Second-Order
Cone Programming formulation, Applied Energy 260 (2020)
114334. doi:10.1016/j.apenergy.2019.114334.
[32] L. Badesa, F. Teng, G. Strbac, Simultaneous scheduling of multiple frequency services in stochastic unit commitment, IEEE
Transactions on Power Systems 34 (5) (2019) 3858–3868. doi:
10.1109/TPWRS.2019.2905037.
[33] Enhanced Frequency Response market information report, Report, National Grid (2016).
[34] Contracts for Difference (CfD): Allocation round 3, Report, UK
Department for Business, Energy & Industrial Strategy (2019).
[35] Wholesale market indicators, Report, Ofgem (2020).
[36] L. Badesa, F. Teng, G. Strbac, Optimal scheduling of frequency services considering a variable largest-power-infeed-loss,
in: 2018 IEEE Power & Energy Society General Meeting
(PESGM). doi:10.1109/PESGM.2018.8586125.

yg (t) = yg (t − 1) + ygsg (t) − ygsd (t)

The thermal unit starts generating if it was started up
‘Tst
g ’ hours before:
ygsg (t) = ygst (t − Tst
g )

ygst (t) ≤ [1 − yg (t − 1)] −

(A.10)

Appendix A.2. Constraints for storage units
PHES and BESS units are subject to the following constraints. The only binary variable is the charge/discharge
switch, ys , which prevents the storage unit from charging
and discharging simultaneously. All other variables are
continuous.
The energy stored is defined by:
Emin
≤ Es ≤ Emax
s
s

(A.11)

Es (t) = Es (t − 1) + ηsc · Psc (t) −

(A.12)

0 ≤ Psc ≤ (1 − ys ) · Pc,max
s

(A.13)

0 ≤ Psd ≤ ys · Pd,max
s

(A.14)

The contribution of BESS to EFR is determined by:

(A.3)

· yg (t)

Psd (t)
ηsd



The charge and discharge power are constrained by:

The ramp limits:
· yg (t − 1) ≤ Pg (t) − Pg (t − 1) ≤

(A.9)

PFRg ≤ PFRmax
g

The thermal units described in Table 1 are subject to
the following constraints. The power limits:

Prr
g

(A.8)

PFRg ≤ yg · Pmax
− Pg
g

Appendix A.1. Constraints for thermal units

−Prr
g

ygsg (i)

Regarding the contribution of a thermal unit to PFR,
this is limited by its headroom and by the PFR capacity
of the unit:

(A.2)

Pmax
g

(A.7)

i=t−Tmut
g

∀s

≤ Pg ≤ y g ·

t
X

ygsd (t) ≤ yg (t − 1) −



curt
0 ≤ PRES
≤ PRES

ygsd (i)

The unit is allowed to be shut down if it was generating
in the previous time-step, but also has been generating for
at least ‘Tmut
g ’ hours:

Where RES curtailment is limited by these inequalities:

yg ·

t
X

i=t−Tmdt
g

The optimisation problem described in Section 3.2 is
subject to the constraints included in this appendix. Decision variables are italicised to distinguish them from constants. For the sake of simplicity, the formulation presented here corresponds to the deterministic UC, while the
interested reader can refer to [12] for a detailed description
of the generalisation of these constraints to be applied to
the stochastic UC.
The only binary decision variables in this formulation
are ygst and ygsd , while all other are continuous. The results
presented in Section 3.3 through Section 3.5 have been obtained with these binary variables being relaxed, in order
to decrease computational time.
The load balance constraint, assuming an hourly timestep in the scheduling optimisation, is determined by:
X
X

curt
Pg +
Psd − Psc + PRES − PRES
= D − Dshed (A.1)

Pmsg
g

(A.6)

The generator is allowed to be started up if it was ‘off’
in the previous time-step and has been ‘off’ for at least
‘Tmdt
’ hours:
g

Appendix A. Unit Commitment formulation

∀g

(A.5)

(A.4)

EFRs ≤ EFRmax
s

(A.15)

EFRs ≤ ys · Pd,max
− Psd + Psc
s

(A.16)

The last constraint accounts for the fact that BESS can
swiftly switch from charging to discharging, therefore effectively providing a higher volume of EFR if it operates
in charging mode.

The commitment state of a unit is ‘on’ if it was generating in the previous time-step or has started generating in
11

The ‘fixed’ largest loss is defined as:
PLoss = Pmax
Loss

(A.20)

While the ‘optimised’ largest loss, achieved by optimally
part-loading large units in the scheduling, is determined
by:
PLoss = Pg

for g = Largest Unit

(A.21)

The above constraint assumes that the largest unit is a
must-run unit, i.e. it is committed at all times. This is the
case for the GB system described in Table 1, where the
largest unit is the nuclear plant Hinkley Point C.

Figure A.7: Schematic of the characterisation of uncertainty in RES
generation within the stochastic UC.

Appendix A.3. Definitions of frequency-related magnitudes
This frequency-secured UC guarantees frequency stability by including constraints (1) and (2). The expressions that appear in these two constraints are defined in
this subsection.
The total system PFR is given by:
X
PFR =
PFRg
(A.17)

Appendix A.4. Uncertainty from RES
Uncertainty in RES generation is included in the stochastic Unit Commitment through a scenario tree. This scenario tree discretises the probability density function of
forecast errors for the RES generation. Full details on
how to compute this discretisation and the probabilities of
reaching each of the nodes, π(n), can be found in [12].
Figure A.7 displays a generic example of the use of scenario trees within the stochastic scheduling. The stochastic UC is run with a 24h lookahead: at each time-step, a
scenario tree is built for the following 24h hours. A rollingplanning approach is also used, consisting in only keeping
the optimisation solution for the current-time node in the
scenario tree (the progenitor of all nodes) and discarding
all other decisions. This approach has been shown to provide lower cost solutions for systems with a high renewable
penetration.

∀g

The total system EFR is defined by:
X
EFR =
EFRs

(A.18)

∀s

System inertia is the aggregate of the inertia from each
thermal plant online at a given time:
X
(A.19)
· yg − Pmax
H=
Hg · Pmax
Loss · HLoss
g
∀g

which accounts for the loss of inertia from the outaged
generator.

12

