1

Internet of Everything Enabled Solution for
COVID-19, its new variants, and Future Pandemics:
Framework, Challenges, and Research Directions

arXiv:2101.02030v3 [cs.CY] 8 Jan 2021

Sunder Ali Khowaja, Parus Khuwaja, and Kapal Dev*, Member IEEE

Abstract—After affecting the world in unexpected ways,
COVID-19 has started mutating which is evident with the
insurgence of its new variants. The governments, hospitals,
schools, industries, and humans, in general, are looking for
a potential solution in the vaccine which will eventually be
available but its timeline for eradicating the virus is yet unknown.
Several researchers have encouraged and recommended the use of
good practices such as physical healthcare monitoring, immunityboosting, personal hygiene, mental healthcare, and contact tracing for slowing down the spread of the virus. In this article, we
propose the use of wearable/mobile sensors integrated with the
Internet of Everything to cover the spectrum of good practices in
an automated manner. We present hypothetical frameworks for
each of the good practice modules and propose the COvid-19 Resistance Framework using the Internet of Everything (CORFIE)
to tie all the individual modules in a unified architecture. We
envision that CORFIE would be influential in assisting people
with the new normal for current and future pandemics as well
as instrumental in halting the economic losses, respectively. We
also provide potential challenges and their probable solutions in
compliance with the proposed CORFIE.
Index Terms—Internet of Everything, IoT Architectures, Wearable Sensors, COVID-19, Emerging Technologies

I. I NTRODUCTION

T

HE novel coronavirus (COVID-19) has affected the world
on a large scale and has compelled people to significantly alter the course of their lifestyles. At the time of
this writing, COVID-19 has been transmitted to more than
78.5 million people along with unprecedented deaths, i.e.
around 1.7 million [1]. Multidimensional changes have been
observed in people due to COVID-19 situations such as job
loss, educational changes, shortage of supplies, interpersonal
relationships, loss of loved ones, fear of infection or illness,
occupational stress, social isolation, mental health, financial
distress, and so forth. Similarly, countries are also facing
societal, healthcare, and financial challenges in this pandemic.
The novel coronavirus (COVID-19) has affected the world
on a large scale and has compelled people to significantly
alter the course of their lifestyles. At the time of this writing,
COVID-19 has been transmitted to more than 78.5 million
*Corresponding and senior author
Sunder Ali Khowaja is an Assistant Professor with Department of
Telecommunication, Faculty of Engineering and Technology, University of
Sindh, Pakistan.)
Parus Khuwaja is an Assistant Professor with Institute of Business
Administration, University of Sindh, Pakistan.)
Kapal Dev is with the Nimbus Research Centre, Munster Technological
University, Ireland e-mail:kapal.dev@ieee.org

people along with unprecedented deaths, i.e. around 1.7 million [1]. Multidimensional changes have been observed in people due to COVID-19 situations such as job loss, educational
changes, shortage of supplies, interpersonal relationships, loss
of loved ones, fear of infection or illness, occupational stress,
social isolation, mental health, financial distress, and so forth.
Similarly, countries are also facing societal, healthcare, and
financial challenges in this pandemic. Patients are experiencing
a lack of healthcare services due to the shortage of facilities. The government’s ban on gatherings, congregations, and
travel restrictions, had a drastic impact on both the country’s
economy as well as the financial dynamics of the citizens.
Work from the home strategy was chosen as an alternative
which made specific occupations archaic, hence, affecting
the lifestyle to great lengths. The contraction of COVID-19
causes loss of smell and taste, breathing problems, cough, and
fever, respectively. The extended length of the aforementioned
symptoms in vulnerable patients might result in heart issues,
respiratory problems, hypertension, organ failure, and in the
worst case death [2]. In the beginning, older populations
were considered to be at risk but as per WHO guidelines
“the children and young people are not invulnerable to this
virus” [3]. Recently, a COVID-19 variant and mutation, i.e.
VUI-202012/01 is under investigation by the Genomics UK
consortium [4]. One thing which is of great concern is that
N501Y mutation has been discovered which allows the virus
to get bonded with the human ACE2 receptor using spike
proteins. This bondage allows the virus to be more infectious
and easily spreadable [5]. Although it’s still in question
whether it is deadlier than its former version and the existing
vaccine (ChAd0x1 nCoV-19 and BNT162b2) can be effective
for the mutated virus or not? Furthermore, the variant was
discovered in the UK recently, therefore with utmost certainly
the virus can have mutated in different countries as well.
According to the study [4], [5],the Genomics UK consortium
has revealed that around 4000 mutations have already been
recorded in the spike protein and that more mutations will
occur as it is naturally part of the evolution process. It
has been observed with the seasonal flu vaccines that they
need to be altered every year due to the constant mutations,
therefore, it is not wrong to say that the vaccines for COVID19 and future pandemics need respective adjustments with
respect to the mutation which prolongs the pandemic itself
[5], [6]. Furthermore, it should be noted that the flu vaccine
after alteration does not take much time as the base process
is available to the manufacturers whereas for Coronavirus

2

the manufacturers are not yet licensed and the base process
has not been laid out [7]. Hence, the vaccine is a potential
solution but it might take months or years to eliminate COVID19 provided that either the vaccine effectively handles the
variants or the virus stops mutating altogether. The experts
have been repeatedly asked the question regarding the possible
timeline for COVID-19 expulsion. Currently, there are a total
of 5 vaccines that have entered phase 3 trails BBIBP-CorV
(Sinopharm), Sputnik V from Gamaleya Research Institute,
ChAd0x1 nCoV-19 from AstraZeneca and University of Oxford, mRNA-1273 from Moderna, and BNT162b2 from the
Moderna as well [6]. Out of the five, the data for only
ChAd0x1 nCoV-19 [8] and BNT162b2 [9] has been published
and approved by the drug regulatory authority for use in
this emergency. Some countries in the middle east such as
Bahrain and the United Arab Emirates have approved the
usage of BBIBP-CorV and Russia has allowed Sputnik V to
be used widely while ignoring the consequences and safety
protocols [10]. Despite the availability of data, the answers to
unknown variables remain at large. For instance, the duration
of immunity, viral transmission, the safety protocols for a
vulnerable group such as pregnant women and elders, and the
risks associated with the vaccine’s adverse reactions [6]. The
availability of the data regarding these questions is limited
to none. Still, the question regarding the logistics, financial,
and social implications are not touched upon. According to
Anthony Fauci (Head of the National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases), the only prominent and long-term solution to this pandemic is to follow the public health guidelines
which include frequent hand wash, indoor activities, physical
and social distancing, wearing masks, and enhancing immunity
through natural means [11]. It has also been concluded by a
recent study [5], [6] that even though the vaccines will play
a vital role in controlling the pandemic but the immediate
effects will not be observed at all due to the challenges
regarding global distribution and lack of data availability.
Furthermore, Jonathan Samet (MD dean of Colorado school
of public health) in a recent interview suggested that even
though an individual gets vaccine, that individual will not
be allowed to physically or socially interact as well as the
condition of wearing masks still holds, therefore, hygiene,
distancing, and masking needs to be prioritized [12]. As per
the Colorado department of public health and environment, it
is still possible for an individual to get mild infection even
after vaccination and that they might still be the transmitters
of virus [7]. It is evident from the facts provided that the long
term setting for dealing with this pandemic is to slow down the
transmission by changing our lifestyle and complying with the
public health guidelines. Unfortunately, it has been observed
that the guidelines are not being followed by the general
population. Furthermore, a global survey conducted from 19
countries recently concluded that 71.5% of people have shown
acceptance for the COVID-19 vaccine provided that their
employer or the government recommends it [13]. The study
also states that the acceptance ratio is higher, i.e. 90%, where
the people have trust in their respective governments such
as (China, South Korea, and Singapore) but the acceptance
drops to 55%for the countries like Russia. One more thing to

consider is that the people who showed acceptance rely on
the recommendations of the employer or the country which
has not been taken into account for the acceptance model.
Considering the constraints of logistics, mutations, and vaccine
acceptance, personal and public monitoring systems are in
dire need which not only helps to provide recommendations
regarding the safety guidelines and hygiene but also helps
to improve the lifestyle and immune system at the same
time. One way to accomplish the aforementioned task is to
perform continuous monitoring while collecting huge amounts
of data. With the advent of microelectromechanical systems
(MEMS) the sensors have evolved to be small in size as well
as effective. The miniaturization of the sensors has allowed the
production of wearable sensors that can collect large amounts
of data as well as help in improving an individual’s health.
Furthermore, combining the use of wearable and miniaturized
sensors with ICT technologies such as 5G/6G communication,
Big Data, Artificial Intelligence, and the Internet of Everything
will be able to improve healthcare services, personal hygiene,
immunity boost, mental healthcare, and contact tracing problems, accordingly. It has been proven by many studies that
wearable devices and mobile sensors, are widely accepted by
the audience varying from children to the elders [14]–[17].
The integrated services will help to alleviate the COVID19 and future pandemic related issues on a personal level
which will eventually lead to facilitate the financial issues of
a country on a macro level. This article focuses on the use
of the Internet of Everything (Wearable sensor analytics) to
deal with physical healthcare monitoring, personal hygiene and
immunity-boosting, Mental healthcare, and Contact tracing
which are considered to be good practice adaptations to slow
down the transmission of infection. We provide possible implementation strategies, the challenges, and potential solutions
for each of the aforementioned issues. To the best of our
knowledge, a framework in compliance with the Internet of
Everything guidelines for long term setting to deal with current
and future pandemics has not been provided. Particularly, the
contributions of this study are given below:
•
•

•

Realistic process flows or frameworks for societal issues
based on the wearable sensor characteristics.
Analyzing the limitations and challenges for each of the
societal issues from the perspective of wearable sensor
analytics.
We propose the Covid-19 Resistance Framework using
the Internet of Everything (CORFIE) to help align the
good practices in this new normal.

The rest of the paper is structured as follows: We present
preliminaries for Internet of Everything based architectures
and the layers involved in Section 2. We propose hypothetical
frameworks for physical healthcare monitoring, personal hygiene and immunity-boosting, mental healthcare, and contact
tracing in Section 3, 4, 5, and 6, respectively. Section 7
presents the details regarding the proposed CORFIE. Section 8
highlights some potential challenges and issues when adapting
CORFIE architecture and Section 9 concludes this study.

3

II. P RELIMINARY U NDERSTANDING
The following subsections will extensively use some terminologies which are specific to Internet of Everything. The IoE
is derived from Internet of Things (IoT) which combined the
network and the things. However, IoE extends the relationship
and network and things with people, data, and processes. Some
studies referred IoE as Internet of Things, Services, and People
(IoTSP) [18]. The core idea and architecture used behind IoE
and IoTSP is the same. As we present realistic frameworks for
the prevention of COVID-19 and future pandemics, we define
some terminologies related to IoE, accordingly. It should also
be noticed that the presented frameworks and the layers are
in line with the IoTSP architecture.
•

•

•

•

•

Sensor Layer: This layer either acts as a standalone or
a collection of memory-constrained, small, and battery
operated sensing devices. The scope of IoE expands the
scope of this layer and considers it as a collection of
devices that is connected via Internet and is capable of
sensing data.
Access/Communication Layer: As the name suggests,
this layer comprises of set of communication protocols
that can relay the data from sensor devices to the middleware or directly to the server. The communication
protocols include but are not limited to Sub-GHz proprietary, long range (LoRa) WAN, Zigbee, Bluetooth,
radio frequency (RF), long term evolution (LTE), LTEadvanced (LTE-A), and Wireless Fidelity (WiFi) Direct.
Middleware: This layer is mostly considered as a software but in this study we consider the smartphone as the
middleware which acts as an intermediary for collecting
the data from sensor layer and sending it to the server
layer. Furthermore, the middleware can be used for data
management, API management, authentication, messaging, and application services, respectively. In the present
architectures, middleware is also responsible for fetching
the decisions related to specific services from server layer
and send it to the notification center.
Server Layer: Although the server layer varies with
respect to the evolution of IoT studies. However, the
common aspect of this layer is to receive the data from
middleware, process, analyze, and store it to provide
specific services. In this study, server layer comprises
of two components, i.e. context (bag of contexts) and
services (pool of services). The context can either be
recognized automatically or derived from statistical inferences (implicit service). The context selection needs to
be performed in order to select explicit services (pool of
services), accordingly. The service layer is also equipped
with decision making and data analytic techniques.
Notification Center: Once the middleware acquires decision based on the explicit services, it is pass to the
notification center in form of alerts and recommendations.
The notification center also allows the user to visualize
the measurements obtained from sensing devices in realtime.

The flow of the architectural layers presented in the subsequent sections is given below:

a. The data is acquired from the sensor layer and sent to
middleware via access/communication layer.
b. The middleware stores the data temporarily acquired from
the sensor layer via access/communication layer.
c. The temporarily stored data is accessed by the context (a
component in the service layer) to determine the context.
(The determination of context is an implicit service
which will be carried out without the user preference or
intervention).
d. Based on the selected context, an individual service or
pool of services will be activated and perform the desired
task.
e. Middleware acquires the decision obtained from the activation of desired service(s).
f. Middleware sends the result of the activated service to
the notification center.
III. P HYSICAL H EALTHCARE M ONITORING
Monitoring of physical human health is of utmost importance during this pandemic especially if an individual is
self-isolated in case of getting infected or due to voluntary
isolation after getting vaccinated. It is also a way to offload the
bottleneck from the hospitals or healthcare provision institutes
that are overwhelmed with the inflow of patients even with
mild symptoms. We present a summary of the embedded
sensors with smart devices (not limited to) in Table 1. The
increase in embedded sensors leads to an increase in price as
well. However, some good and not so expensive smartwatches
can be used for basic physical healthcare monitoring. Furthermore, some of the digital instruments which monitor the
physical health of a patient in an individual manner can also
be used for monitoring purpose. There are many aspects of
physical healthcare that can be monitored using a smartwatch
in connection with smartphones such as, physical activity,
skin temperature, oxygen saturation, and anomaly detection.
Physical activity is an important aspect that not only can be
used to check the patient’s activities but also helps in boosting
immunity. We will shed light on the immunity-boosting using
physical health in the subsequent section. In this section,
we focus on the monitoring of physical activities while in
isolation and its compliance with the routine suggested by the
caregiver/doctor.
The inertial measurement units such as accelerometer, gyroscope, magnetometer, and orientation sensors embedded in
smartphones, as well as smartwatches, has been used extensively for physical activity recognition over the years [18]–
[21]. The problem with the adaptation of activity monitoring
approaches is the lack of personalized data and the variation in
wearable sensor devices in terms of sampling rate, recording
units, and so forth. Some studies solve the problem to an
extent by either using a semi-population calibration approach
so that personalized activity recognition could be carried out
with a minimum level of annotated data, and transfer learning
approaches that take into account the domain adaptation of
varying sensor characteristics. Recently, a study [21] proposed
the use of behavior for personalized activity recognition using
a semi-population calibration approach which not only considers the diverse nature of human behavior when performing

4

certain activities but also the varying class labels. Physical
activity recognition will allow the monitoring of patients
in an automated way without physical interaction with the
caregiver/doctor.
Skin temperature and oxygen saturation monitoring are of
utmost importance with regards to the COVID-19 pandemic.
As COVID-19 (SARS-nCOV-19) is a respiratory syndrome it
causes high fever as well as breathing issues to the infected individual. The fever and respiration issues are the most common
symptoms of COVID-19 virus contraction listed by the world
health organization. Considering that the skin temperature and
the oxygen saturation (SpO2) can be monitored continuously
through the smartwatches is a relief to both the patients as
well as doctors. In the isolation phase, the spike in skin
temperature or decline in oxygen levels might recommend
the patient to take necessary action or notify the concerned
doctor for immediate response in time. Furthermore, the sensor
modalities can be used to log the temperature and oxygen
responses in case of voluntary isolation after the vaccination.
The field of anomaly detection using wearable sensors has
been in discussion for quite some time. In many countries,
elders prefer to live alone which make them vulnerable to some
anomalous activities such as fall or slip and also allow them
to skip their medications due to memory loss. The anomaly
detection in the isolation phase can be used to monitor the
same anomalous activities which might alert the authorities
in case of sudden fall that require immediate attention or
recommend an individual about their medication which needs
to be taken at a specified time. There are many studies
which propose the use of smartwatch and smartphones for
detecting falls accurately [18], [20]. Furthermore, the isolation
center or the place where individuals get isolated can be
equipped with an object, infrared, or location sensors, to detect
anomalous behaviors as well such as sleeping, eating, and
physical behaviors that may help the caregivers to understand
more about the progression of the virus, accordingly.
We propose a hypothetical framework, physical healthcare
monitoring module (PHM) as shown in figure 1. The framework is compliant with the sensor devices shown in table 1
except the beacons which could be used as location sensors.
The smartphone acts as a middleware that will be responsible
for sending the data acquired from sensors to the service
layer for specific service provision. The smartphone is also
responsible for fetching the decision obtained from the service
layer and display it to the mobile application interface or send
the decision to the doctor/caregiver for necessary action. The
steps indicated by the small letters in figure 1 are compliant
with the steps mentioned in Section 2. The PHM is one of
the modules which could help in monitoring a patients’ health
while in the isolation phase which is an essential phase if one
gets infected or vaccinated alike. Furthermore, the module can
transform even an individual room of a distant house into an
isolation ward in terms of healthcare service provision.
IV. P ERSONAL HYGIENE AND I MMUNITY BOOSTING
According to the world health organization’s public safety
guidelines with regards to the COVID-19 pandemic, personal

hygiene is of utmost importance in order to slow down the
spread of viral infection. Personal hygiene includes washing
hands with water and soap for more than 20 seconds, use of
sanitizer in case the former option is not available, repeating
the steps if cough or sneeze is detected, accordingly. Furthermore, it’s not just sneezing or coughing that releases the
droplets, even talking to someone or having a conversation can
release the droplets as well. Therefore, having a recommender
system that reminds an individual for taking care of personal
hygiene can play a vital role in reducing viral transmission.
When it comes to wearable sensors, personal hygiene can
be monitored and recommendations can be suggested using
a camera from smartphones, a microphone from smartphones
as well as smartwatches and the inertial measurement units.
The IMUs in smartwatches will help in detecting the washing
hands and brushing teeth actions, and the recommendations
might be provided at specific timelines to repeat the respective
actions. The smartphone camera could be used to scan the
barcode of the sanitizer in case the option of washing hands
is not feasible. The barcode will provide the information to
the users about the alcohol level and recommend its usage
as per the WHO guidelines. The crucial part of such a
recommender system related to personal hygiene will be based
on microphones available in smartphones and smartwatches.
The acquisition of sound waves can distinguish between the
cough, sneeze, and normal sounds. In case of cough and
sneeze sound detection, the user can be provided with the
recommendation of washing hands again or using sanitizer
immediately. Furthermore, as per WHO recommendation, the
distance of the droplets from cough or sneeze depends on
several factors such as a person having a full set of teeth,
blocked nose, larger viral load, and louder voice. These
factors determine an individual as a super spreader as their
sneeze can travel up to 60% further and can produce 4 times
more droplets [22], [23]. If such information can be gathered
through a profiling system, the recommendation based on userprofiles and the microphone sensor can be made regarding
the physical distance that needs to be maintained. Another
aspect of maintaining personal hygiene is proper ventilation
and maintaining good air quality at the place of isolation.
Many mobile sensors can be directly paired with smartphones
to provide information regarding air quality so that a feasible
recommendation can be provided. A crucial aspect of being
probably safe during this pandemic is to boost the immune
system through healthy foods and diet. Students have proved
that the use of water in large quantities, the use of zinc
and magnesium, foods rich in vitamins C, D, and E, herbs,
and the use of some specific ingredients can improve an
individual’s immune system. However, it is not always possible
for everyone to consume such enlisted food items for immunity
boosting due to allergies, health constraints, and so forth. Most
of the food items in the marts have a barcode or QR code that
provides the information related to the ingredients used in the
product. The camera in a smartphone can easily capture the bar
or QR code to scan the items used in the product and provide
a recommendation of its usage in compliance with the health
standards and the individual’s profile so that the respective
allergies and health issues can be kept in check. Several

5

TABLE I: List of some smartwatches embedded with wearable sensors
Company & Device Name
Honor Magic Watch 2
Samsung Galaxy Watch Active 2
Garmin Fenix 6
Huawei GT 2
Apple Watch Series 1
Fitbit Sense
Samsung Galaxy Gear S3
Biobeat Smartwatch
Biostrap EVO
Empatica Embrace
Empatica E4
Xiaomi Mi Band 5
Realme Watch S

ST
7
7
7
7
7
3
7
3
7
3
3
7
7

BR
7
7
7
7
7
3
7
3
3
7
7
7
7

GSR
7
7
7
7
7
3
7
3
7
3
3
7
7

IMU
X
X
X
X
X
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3

HR
X
X
X
X
X
3
3
3
3
7
3
3
3

SpO2
7
7
7
7
7
3
3
3
3
7
3
3
3

Other
SLQ
SLQ
SLQ
SLQ
AFib, SLQ
SLQ
BP, CI, MAP, SL, SV
SLQ
SLQ
SLQ
SLQ
SLQ

Price*
$171
$330
$550
$170
$280
$280
$310
$2800
$250
$250
$1640
$50
$94

*Price may vary, ST → Skin temperature, BR → Breathing rate, GSR → Galvanic skin response, IMU
→ Inertial measurement unit, HR → Heart rate, SpO2 → Oxygen saturation, SLQ → Sleep quality, AFib
→ Atrial fibrillation, BP → Blood pressure, CI → Cardiac index, MAP → Mean arterial pressure, SL →
Sweat level, SV → Stroke volume.

Fig. 1: The physical healthcare monitoring module for patient monitoring during the isolation phase. ST → Skin temperature,
SpO2 → Oxygen saturation, PAM → hysical activity monitoring, AD → Anomaly detection.
smartphone apps provide such information while scanning
the aforementioned codes such as myfitnesspal * and more. A
question can be made that homemade foods do not come with
any bar codes or QR codes. In that case, the natural language
processing characteristics can be used to search the ingredients
in a certain food item online in an automated way as well
as providing a voice command to search for an immunityboosting recipe, accordingly. The use of microphones and the
keyboard input either from a smartphone or smartwatch can
be leveraged for the said purpose. Google’s speech recognition
* https://www.myfitnesspal.com/

and search packages in python help in performing such tasks
†
. As mentioned earlier, physical activities can also help in
boosting immunity. According to studies [24]–[26], physical
exercise can help flush bacteria out of airways and lungs which
reduces the chances of catching flu, cold, or other bacterial
infections. Physical exercises can also help in changing white
blood cells and antibodies which are an essential aspect
in dealing with viral diseases. Similar to the food items,
all physical exercises are not meant to be performed for
individuals due to their body types, health constraints, and
† https://github.com/sander-ali/News-Scraper

6

other issues. Based on an individual’s profile, the system can
recommend the type of exercises that are considered to be
safe. The hypothetical framework for personal hygiene and
immunity-boosting (PHIB) module is shown in figure 2. The
framework only opts for the wearable and mobile sensors
that could be connected via smartphone for data acquisition.
The framework is also compliant with the Internet of Things
(IoT) layers for real-life applicability. The data from multiple
sensors is acquired and stored in a temporary database in
the middleware. The camera can help in reading bar and QR
codes, respectively. The microphone sensor can be used to
detect cough or sneeze sounds as well as recording users’
queries for relevant exercises and food ingredients. The GPS
sensor in the smartphone helps recognize the context as the
person is indoor or outdoor. The indoor location context will
activate a certain set of services such as recommendations for
indoor exercises, cooking, hand wash by detecting coughing
and sneezing sound at home, air quality index, and more,
while the outdoor location triggers physical distance alert,
foods available in restaurants, sanitization alert, and outdoor
exercises. The data is then pushed to the server for further
processing, detection, recognition, and recommendation, accordingly. The user gets notified on their mobile screens for
the desired service.
V. M ENTAL H EALTHCARE
A surge in stress, anxiety, and depression has been observed
as an after effect of the COVID-19 pandemic. Although the
pandemic is not over yet the stress and anxiety continue to
play a causal role in mental health conditions. Researchers
have even related the emotional and behavioral response of
individuals in this pandemic to the terror management theory
where the fear of death plays an important part in making
daily life decisions [27]–[29]. Furthermore, many studies have
concluded that self-isolation may lead to prolonged stress
which might result in anxiety, distress, or depression, depending on the length of the isolation period. Studies have also
suggested that the fear and anxiety in the times of COVID19 have increased the crisis on public healthcare services.
Recently center for disease control and prevention (CDC) had
also emphasized managing stress and anxiety levels as stress
during the infectious period can result in abnormal eating and
sleep patterns, an increase in chronic health issues, reduced
immunity, and panic attacks [30]. According to CDC, elders,
front-line health workers, socially isolated, people who lost
their loved ones, people who lost jobs, and people facing
financial crisis might react strongly to stress crisis during
the pandemic. Another recent study [31] suggested that as
the stress gets prolonged, it could result in suicidal behavior if not intervened with a timely and relevant response.
Reports from CDC, John Hopkins University, and Boston
university of public health have concluded that anxiety and
depression have been tripled and quadrupled this year in
comparison to the preceding years [32], [33]. According to
CDC, coping with stress will not only be helpful for an
individual’s health but it would affect the overall community
in terms of extended empathy, voluntary support, increased

social connection, and less strain on public health services.
However, in achieving community-wide benefit the emotional
distress needs to be diagnosed in time. Mental health disorders
such as emotional distress and stress can be measured with
wearable sensors including electrocardiograph (ECG), GSR,
and electroencephalogram (EEG) [18], [34], [35]. Some of
the smartwatches listed in Table 1 comprise of such sensors
that could help in recognizing the emotions of an individual,
accurately. However, mobile sensors for such modalities are
also available commercially which could be connected with
smartphones for continuous data collection. Timely stress
recognition may notify doctors/caregivers, family members,
friends, loved ones, and volunteers to help relieve the stress
of an individual. Moreover, timely detected stress can also
be handled with home automation as COVID-19 is not the
only cause for inducing anxiety. Some studies have also
considered the usage of smartphones and posts on social
media to determine stress levels. The use of natural language
processing can be leveraged for determining stress as well
while considering text or voice conversation with the chatbot
as an input.
A hypothetical framework for the mental healthcare (MHC)
module is presented in Figure 3. The middleware can acquire the data from the wearable and mobile sensors on a
continuous basis and store the data temporarily in the buffer
for some seconds before sending it to the server. The server
will be able to detect anomalous emotions such as anxiety,
depression, distress (prolonged stress), and suicidal tendencies.
The context of isolation and non-isolation is selected based
on the studies [27], [29], [32], [33] which concluded that
the stress related to self-isolation, infection in COVID-19
pandemic has a different characteristic than that of financial,
job, and occupational stress. The context of pre-and postCOVID infection can also be taken into account for the
MHC module. Based on the detected anomalous emotion
multiple actions/recommendations can be provided such as
variations in lighting conditions, calling to family or friends,
having a conversation with an emotional chatbot, and so forth.
Furthermore, this system can also be employed for stress in
people driving cars or with long commute times for suggesting
them an alternative fast route.
VI. C ONTACT T RACING
The importance of contact tracing was highlighted when
“patient 31” in South Korea infected hundreds of patients over
the span of days. With the outbreak of COVID-19 manual
contact, tracing procedures were performed by the health departments of different countries. The process is time extensive,
prone to errors, and is not scalable, thus, appears to be ineffective so far. Since then, government officials and policymakers
have moved towards a digital solution based on intelligent
decision support systems. Recent studies [36]–[38] have urged
the use of smartphones and mobile sensors for contact tracing
in order to limit the transmission of the virus, hence resulting
in smart lockdowns. Although solutions have been provided
for proximity tracing and alerts, the roll-out plan and tracing
of contacts have been limited due to mainly two reasons. The

7

Fig. 2: Personal hygiene and immunity-boosting module for indoor and outdoor locations.

Fig. 3: Mental Healthcare module for isolation and non-isolation phases.
first is the tracing only using GPS sensors using smartphones
and the second is the lack of behavioral consideration. The
first-ever contact tracing protocol for dealing with the COVID19 pandemic was developed by Singapore’s government which
used Bluetooth to perform the respective tracing. The protocol
was based on OpenTrace ‡ , an open-source implementation of
Android and iOS apps along with baseline calibration data
and cloud server backend. The protocol can be called by its
alternative terms such as BlueTrace and TraceTogether. The
Australian government in April 2020 launched an app that
traces the contact manually that complies with the BlueTrace
‡ https://bluetrace.io/

protocol and was termed as COVIDSafe § . The Chinese app
(Chinese health code system), South Korean app (Corona
100m), and the United Kingdom’s (NHS COVID-19) app has
been proposed with similar characteristics. There have been
other studies that proposed the contact tracing algorithms but
face the same fate of being ineffective when it comes to
scalability. A recent study [21] highlighted the importance of
behavior analysis when it comes to activities of daily life. The
use of behavior analysis can be incorporated with the activity
recognition using wearable sensors to derive context rather
than just tracing the persons gathered at a common place. A
§ https://www.health.gov.au/resources/apps-and-tools/covidsafe-app

8

person who works as a waiter in a restaurant performs an
activity and exhibits behavior differently than the one who
visited for having lunch or dinner. Both of them have different
levels of exposure while coming in a contact with an infected
individual. Furthermore, the use of natural language processing
can be garnered in order to get additional information about
the places where an individual has traveled. Furthermore, the
ones who visited the probable infected places can be notified
in the same time span. The activity combined with the given
context can reveal whether the person has just passed by a
certain restaurant in a vehicle or by walk which again provides
a different perspective of infection spread via an individual.
With the emergence of new COVID-19 variants and mutations, the importance of contact tracing has been raised
manifold. It is a necessity to keep the track of individuals
that have traveled back and forth from a certain location
where the variants are prominently discovered. Moreover,
such a kind of contact tracing will help to identification of
vaccine variants that need to be injected with respect to the
location of the mutation. The GPS sensor along with inertial
measurement units, speech analysis, and social media content,
the automation of contact tracing could be improved with reallife applicability.
We present a hypothetical framework for the contact tracing
(CTC) module in figure 4. The CTC block considers the data
from GPS sensors, inertial measurement units, voice input,
and travel history of individuals using the system. The data is
temporarily stored in the middleware and is pushed to the
server for necessary detection based on the location, time,
and travel history contexts. The location and time context
have been used to integrate behavioral characteristics when
recognizing high-level activities, therefore, the recognition of
activities at specific locations can provide insights of a person
either infected or not. With the unified location history of
the individual using the system, contact tracing can be made
easy based on the intersection of locations. Furthermore, in
the case of a person traveling from a specific area where a
new mutation or variant of COVID-19 has been found, an
alert can be generated to users in the travelers’ proximity.
The system can also highlight locations where the COVID-19
infection risk is high so that the users may avoid the route or
place altogether. An additional feature of distance measuring
can be added between the smartwatches of different people to
recognize handshake activity which could help trace the users
in case of either one being infected in prior.
VII. COVID-19 RESISTANCE FRAMEWORK USING I O E
Based on the four hypothetical modules, we propose a general hypothetical COvid-19 Resistance Framework using the
Internet of Everything (CORFIE). It can be noticed from the
modules that more-or-less the sensor, access/communication,
and middleware layer are similar. However, the context and
server layer vary with respect to the targeted module. Furthermore, a general dashboard in an app could be constructed for
either automatic or manual activation of a particular service.
The proposed COFIE framework is shown in figure 5. We
briefly define each of the layers in the CORFIE framework.

The sensor layer in the CORFIE framework is responsible for data acquisition from various wearable and mobile
sensors. The only constraint we put on the selection of the
sensors is their ubiquity and pervasiveness. Although a single
sensor device may house multiple sensors, for instance, an
inertial measurement unit might comprise of accelerometer,
gyroscope, magnetometer, and other sensors as well, but the
sensor layer of CORFIE framework considers each of the
sensor measurement separately despite the device used or
embedded in. The reason for considering individual sensor
measurements is due to the diversified characteristics of embedded sensors and associated applications. For example, the
breathing sensor can be used for anomaly detection in an
isolation phase whereas the same sensor is used for physical
activity or exercise recognition in the non-isolation phase. In
this regard, the CORFIE framework assumes that there are
τ sensor devices, i.e. DEV= {devt | t=1,....,τ } and ρ sensor
types in each devt , i.e. SD= {sdp | p=1,....,ρ}. Using the
sensor device and its types we can define an individual sensor
measurement as shown in equation 1.
*

IM S =

IM S − id , devt , , sdp ,

(1)

where IMS refers to the individual measurement of sensors,
IMS - id is the unique id for each individual measurement
from sensors, and devt , , sdp , are the sensor device and
sensor type, respectively. The acquired IMS will then be
transferred to the middleware via the access/communication
layer. This layer acts as a source of communication between
the sensor layer and middleware by using abstract protocols
such as serial peripheral interface (SPI), inter-integrated circuits (I2C), Zigbee, infrared, and Bluetooth. The CORFIE
is a general framework, therefore, the protocols in the access/communication layer are not limited to the aforementioned ones and can be extended to other protocols such
as RFID, depending on the given context and service. As
the CORFIE framework is mainly designed considering the
wearable and mobile sensors, therefore, the smartphone is
considered to be the middleware that acts as an intermediary
device for all the layers, respectively. The data acquired from
the sensor devices via the access/communication layer is stored
temporarily in the memory which then is pushed to the server
via a gateway or 5G/6G services. Once the data is pushed,
new data acquired from the sensors will be overwritten,
accordingly. It has been proved in the existing studies that
the storage of data in memory temporarily is a light-weight
operation [18]. The pre-processing of IMS for opting context
and triggering desired service will be performed on the server
layer. The decision from the desired service is then collected
from the middleware while using REST API endpoints to
call a specific function. The decision is then either shown
to the application dashboard or sent to the doctor/caregiver,
respectively. The bag of contexts is of vital importance and is
considered to be an implicit service in the CORFIE framework.
The consideration of context from IMS can be performed
either using knowledge-based or data-driven approaches. Some
studies also considered the use of hybrid methods which

9

Fig. 4: Contact Tracing Module based on the location, time, and travel history.

Fig. 5: Proposed Covid-19 Resistance Framework using the Internet of Everything (CORFIE)

leverages the characteristics of both the knowledge- and datadriven approaches for recognizing the context in an automated
manner. The knowledge-driven approaches use resource description framework (RDF), web ontology language (OWL),
and simple protocol and RDF query language (SPARQL),
whereas the data-driven approaches use machine learning
techniques to perform the desired task. The bag of contexts

in the CORFIE framework is represented as BoCm = cm
| m=1,...,M where M represents the number of available
contexts. Once the individual measurement from sensors is

obtained the data could be sent to the pool of services for
activation based on the selected context. The pool of services
might include a web-server for a decision support system, a
self-designed app in a smartphone, or a third-party app such as
Samsung Health, myfitnesspal, and so forth. Furthermore, the
pool of services will implicitly store the data for summarizing
the data, provision of logs, and alerts for the use of medical
assistance. The pool of services in the CORFIE framework is

10

TABLE II: Search algorithm for service selection in CORFIE
framework
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

Search Algorithm
Initializing
 Pool of Services
PoS = posn | n=1,...,N
For posn in PoS
CSV = posz | z=1,...,Z , where Z ≤ N and CSV ⊆ PoS
For posz in CSV
Check IMS ,n
IF sensor measurements available
Activate the service

•

IMS1 = 1, 1, Acc , IMS2 = 2, 1, Gyr , IMS3 = 3, 2, BR ,
IMS4 = 4, 3, HR , IMS5 = 5, 4, Maps
BoC1 =  Time and Location
PoS1 = 1, IMS1 , IMS2 , IMS3 , IMS4 , Time and Location
PoS2 = 2, IMS1 , IMS2 , IMS5 , Time and Location

defined in equation 2

P oSn = pos − idn , IM S ,n , BoCm ,n

(2)

The PoSn , pos-idn refer to the selection of a specific service
and its unique id, respectively. It should be noticed that similar
context can be associated with multiple services, for instance,
location and time contexts are considered for the services listed
in PHMM and CTC modules. Therefore, multiple services can
be triggered with respect to the selected contexts. A search
algorithm for initializing a particular service is given in table
2. The algorithm looks into all the services available (Line
2), lists the services with similar context requirements (Line
4), and for all similar services (Line 5) checks the availability
of the sensor measurements (Line 6). In the case of available
measurements, the CORFIE will activate the desired service,
respectively.
In the above example, five individual sensor types from four
sensor devices have been acquired. Based on the Time and
Location context two services, i.e. physical activity monitoring
(PoS1 ) and COVID-19 tracking in the area of your activity
(PoS2 ), are selected automatically.

•

•

VIII. I SSUES AND C HALLENGES
Despite the use of IoE and wearable sensors, a number of
challenges including privacy, security, scalability, and quality
of service might impact the use of the proposed solution. We
briefly highlight the issues and their probable solution.
• Challenge related to privacy: Data privacy is of major
concern for the CORFIE framework as the data gathered
from wearable and mobile sensors contain personal information and an individual would not risk the data privacy
even if it helps to protect him/her from the contagious
virus. Furthermore, information theft due to the privacy
breach can be used for illegal benefits. The privacy issue
has been highlighted by some legal frameworks such
as the health insurance portability and accountability
act (HIPAA) [39] and general data protection regulation
(GDPR) [40].
• Potential solutions and research directions for privacy
concerns: To deal with privacy issues, one of the solutions
is to move the analytical processes to the middleware or

•

edge devices having light-weight operations for critical or
highly sensitive data while transmitting only the decision
label to the server for further action. Another solution to
the privacy issue is the use of software defined privacy
[41], privacy by design [42], Federated learning [43], and
other solutions in compliance with the privacy life-cycle.
Challenge related to security: The security issues have
garnered a lot of attention from researchers recently due
to the versatility of attacks and fast pace modifications.
The data collected from wearable sensors are quite sensitive due to the high-risk involved with the decision
analysis part. Such attacks could manipulate the data
for the change of decision at the analysis stage which
might result in actions involving risks or negative impact.
The security issues are also directly related to scalability
suggesting that the security gets vulnerable with the
increase of devices.
Potential solutions and research directions for security
concerns: One of the possible solutions is similar to the
privacy concern, i.e. to move essential services to the edge
devices or middleware for reducing the communication
flow of the data to the server. The CORFIE framework
can be fused with a secure REST approach or lightweight
anonymous authentication protocol to increase network
security. Conventional authentication mechanisms such as
IDs and passwords can be used for securing the data.
However, for more efficient approaches the use of machine learning and distributed services such as Blockchain
can be leveraged to secure the data, accordingly.
Challenge related to scalability and quality of services:
As the number of wearable sensors and devices is increasing drastically, it poses scalability and quality of service
issues to a great extent. Similar to the devices and with
the emergence of IoE, the number of users and other
service requesting entities have also increased manifold.
The service provision to all the users and devices lead to
network congestion problem which could probably delay
the decision outcome of CORFIE framework. In this
regard, the framework and the network service provider
both need to support scalability in order to facilitate
hard- and soft-real time systems, especially in these
desperate times. With reference to the increase in devices,
it requires the framework to handle the data generation
and storage process.
Potential solutions and research directions for scalability
and quality of service concerns: Distributed data storage
services could be used which include Cassandra, MongoDB, and Apache HBase. Keeping in mind the CORFIE
framework, the middleware could use “s3cmd utility” to
send the acquired data to Amazon storage in a distributed
manner which then will be permanently stored to the
online server. For network scalability, many methods
based on machine learning and optimization have been
proposed for active user detection in 5G/6G networks.
This benefits the CORFIE framework in two ways. The
first is the reduction of communication between devices
that are not involved in the desired service being selected
and the second is the grant-free access to the base

11

station in an efficient way. Moreover, virtual software
network functions and network slicing approaches can
also be used to reduce the network congestion problem,
respectively.
• Challenge related to society: Societal issues due to the
continuously revolving conspiracy theories and technology acceptance have been there for most of the advancements that have happened in the last decades. Recently,
the link of COVID-19 and 5G technology has made a
lot of headlines which not only impacts the technology
acceptance but also affects the intrinsic issues of a particular new technology and advancements in the specific
directions.
• Potential solutions and research directions for societal
issues: As mentioned earlier regarding the acceptance
of the COVID-19 vaccination, the employers and the
governments could be taken in confidence in order to
provide technical literacy regarding the breakthrough or
advancements. The collaboration with governments and
employers could reduce the impact of conspiracies and
help the people to accept the technology which is mainly
proposed to assist people with their everyday activities as
well as facilitate them in protecting from the contagious
virus.
• Challenges related to legal implications: Whenever the
collection of data is involved especially if the same data
is used to track your activities without your consent, the
legal issues will pave their way. Furthermore, the collection of such data without consent have legal implications.
This problem is also related to technology acceptance and
so does its solution.
• Potential solutions and research directions for legal implications: Similar to the participants who are willing
to volunteer for vaccines, employers, and government
organizations, in collaboration, can call for participants
who are willing to volunteer for providing their data
regarding contact tracing. This procedure could also involve standardization and regulatory bodies to provide
guidelines regarding the collection and use of such data.
It will not only reduce the legal implications but will help
individuals (who have faith in their employers and governments) to understand the importance of such systems.
There are several other constraints, challenges, and research
directions that include connectivity issues, battery consumption of the middleware and wearable sensors, memory profiling, and others but those have not been touched upon in this
work.
IX. C ONCLUSION
The future is unpredictable but so do the events that lead
to that future. It has been established that vaccines for coronavirus and in case of future pandemics will either take time
to reach out in every corner of the world or need continuous
modifications/alterations due to the mutations and variants. In
the latter case, the life-cycle of vaccine developments needs
to be revised along with the time to get approval from the
drug regulatory authority. It has also been learned in previous

months while dealing with pandemics that if one occurs in
the future, the solution of vaccines will take at least 2 – 3
years for reaching to an individual (depending on the several
medical and technical constraints) and that the good practices,
immunity-boosting, personal hygiene, healthcare monitoring,
and contact tracing might help in slowing down the transmission of infection. The aforementioned good practices can
be brought to realization with macro solutions based on wearable/mobile sensors and integrated technologies. In this article,
we emphasize the importance of using integrated technologies
to help in dealing with the COVID-19 and future pandemics
till the vaccine shows up at the doorstep. We presented
hypothetical frameworks for physical healthcare monitoring,
personal hygiene and immunity-boosting, mental healthcare,
and contract tracing applications. Furthermore, we presented
COvid-19 Resistance Framework using the Internet of Everything (CORFIE) which combines the aforementioned modules
into a single framework. We briefly defined the technical
details and provided a summary of potential challenges along
with the probable solutions and research directions to make
CORFIE a realization. We assume that CORFIE in general can
prevent individuals from contracting novel coronavirus while
adopting good practices. We believe that CORFIE will not only
highlight the importance of using wearable/mobile sensors for
individual prevention but also will help in making statuary
bodies, governments, and industries redirect some part of their
funding to the proposed initiative. We believe that the proposed
work will also shed light on potential future works that could
be branched off from the CORFIE architecture. We intend to
develop an Android app based on the CORFIE architectural
attributes and to show the potential benefits while avoiding
any legal implications in terms of data collection and analysis.
We also intend to conduct an agent-based simulation that
could help understand the economic benefits if the CORFIE
architecture is used at a large scale.
R EFERENCES
[1] “Coronavirus Update (Live),” 2020. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.worldometers.info/coronavirus/
[2] K. Dev, S. A. Khowaja, A. S. Bist, V. Saini, and S. Bhatia, “Triage
of Potential COVID-19 Patients from Chest X-ray Images using
Hierarchical Convolutional Networks,” nov 2020. [Online]. Available:
http://arxiv.org/abs/2011.00618
[3] D. Dickinson, “Young people ‘not invincible’ in COVID-19 pandemic:
WHO chief,” 2020. [Online]. Available: https://news.un.org/en/story/
2020/07/1069301
[4] “COG UK News and Updates,” 2020. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.cogconsortium.uk/news/
[5] J. Wise, “Covid-19: New coronavirus variant is identified in UK,” BMJ,
p. m4857, dec 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.bmj.com/lookup/
doi/10.1136/bmj.m4857
[6] The Lancet Microbe, “COVID-19 vaccines: the pandemic will not
end overnight,” The Lancet Microbe, dec 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S2666524720302263
[7] “COVID-19 Vaccine frequently asked questions,” 2020. [Online].
Available: https://covid19.colorado.gov/vaccine-faq
[8] M. Voysey, S. A. C. Clemens, S. A. Madhi, L. Y. Weckx, P. M. Folegatti,
P. K. Aley, B. Angus, V. L. Baillie, S. L. Barnabas, Q. E. Bhorat et al.,
“Safety and efficacy of the chadox1 ncov-19 vaccine (azd1222) against
sars-cov-2: an interim analysis of four randomised controlled trials in
brazil, south africa, and the uk,” The Lancet, 2020.
[9] F. P. Polack, S. J. Thomas, N. Kitchin, J. Absalon, A. Gurtman,
S. Lockhart, J. L. Perez, G. Pérez Marc, E. D. Moreira, C. Zerbini
et al., “Safety and efficacy of the bnt162b2 mrna covid-19 vaccine,”
New England Journal of Medicine, 2020.

12

[10] D. Cyranoski, “Arab nations first to approve Chinese COVID
vaccine — despite lack of public data,” 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://www.nature.com/articles/d41586-020-03563-z
[11] C. Schmidt, “Fauci Explains How to End the COVID Pandemic,”
2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/
fauci-explains-how-to-end-the-covid-pandemic1/
[12] J. Mccoy, “The COVID-19 Vaccine Is Rolling Out Across
Colorado. But When Will the Local Epidemic Actually Be
Over?” 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.5280.com/2020/12/
the-covid-19-vaccine-is-rolling-out-across-colorado-but-when-will-\
-local-epidemic-actually-be-over/
[13] J. V. Lazarus, S. C. Ratzan, A. Palayew, L. O. Gostin, H. J.
Larson, K. Rabin, S. Kimball, and A. El-Mohandes, “A global survey
of potential acceptance of a COVID-19 vaccine,” Nature Medicine,
pp. 1–9, oct 2020. [Online]. Available: http://www.nature.com/articles/
s41591-020-1124-9
[14] B. Dai, E. Larnyo, E. A. Tetteh, A. K. Aboagye, and A.-A. I.
Musah, “Factors Affecting Caregivers’ Acceptance of the Use of
Wearable Devices by Patients With Dementia: An Extension of
the Unified Theory of Acceptance and Use of Technology Model,”
American Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease & Other Dementias®,
vol. 35, p. 153331751988349, jan 2020. [Online]. Available: http:
//journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/1533317519883493
[15] J. Li, Q. Ma, A. H. Chan, and S. Man, “Health monitoring
through wearable technologies for older adults: Smart wearables
acceptance model,” Applied Ergonomics, vol. 75, pp. 162–169, feb
2019. [Online]. Available: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/
S0003687018305167
[16] H. Wang, D. Tao, N. Yu, and X. Qu, “Understanding consumer
acceptance of healthcare wearable devices: An integrated model of
UTAUT and TTF,” International Journal of Medical Informatics,
vol. 139, p. 104156, jul 2020. [Online]. Available: https://linkinghub.
elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S1386505619311438
[17] V. Dutot, V. Bhatiasevi, and N. Bellallahom, “Applying the
technology acceptance model in a three-countries study of smartwatch
adoption,” The Journal of High Technology Management Research,
vol. 30, no. 1, pp. 1–14, may 2019. [Online]. Available: https:
//linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S1047831019300033
[18] S. A. Khowaja, A. G. Prabono, F. Setiawan, B. N. Yahya, and
S.-L. Lee, “Contextual activity based Healthcare Internet of Things,
Services, and People (HIoTSP): An architectural framework for
healthcare monitoring using wearable sensors,” Computer Networks,
vol. 145, pp. 190–206, nov 2018. [Online]. Available: https:
//linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S1389128618308594
[19] S. A. Khowaja, B. N. Yahya, and S.-L. Lee, “Hierarchical classification
method based on selective learning of slacked hierarchy for activity
recognition systems,” Expert Systems with Applications, vol. 88, pp.
165–177, dec 2017. [Online]. Available: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/
retrieve/pii/S0957417417304645
[20] S. A. Khowaja, F. Setiawan, A. G. Prabono, B. N. Yahya, and S.-L.
Lee, “An Effective Threshold Based Measurement Technique for Fall
Detection Using Smart Devices,” International Journal of Industrial
Engineering: Theory, Applications, and Practice, vol. 23, no. 5, 2016.
[21] S. A. Khowaja, B. N. Yahya, and S.-L. Lee, “CAPHAR: context-aware
personalized human activity recognition using associative learning
in smart environments,” Human-centric Computing and Information
Sciences, vol. 10, no. 1, p. 35, dec 2020. [Online]. Available: https:
//hcis-journal.springeropen.com/articles/10.1186/s13673-020-00240-y
[22] S. Chaudhuri, S. Basu, P. Kabi, V. R. Unni, and A. Saha, “Modeling
the role of respiratory droplets in Covid-19 type pandemics,” Physics
of Fluids, vol. 32, no. 6, p. 063309, jun 2020. [Online]. Available:
http://aip.scitation.org/doi/10.1063/5.0015984
[23] D. Fontes, J. Reyes, K. Ahmed, and M. Kinzel, “A study of fluid
dynamics and human physiology factors driving droplet dispersion from
a human sneeze,” Physics of Fluids, vol. 32, no. 11, p. 111904, nov
2020. [Online]. Available: http://aip.scitation.org/doi/10.1063/5.0032006
[24] K. Khoramipour, A. Basereh, A. A. Hekmatikar, L. Castell,
R. T. Ruhee, and K. Suzuki, “Physical activity and nutrition
guidelines to help with the fight against COVID-19,” Journal of
Sports Sciences, pp. 1–7, aug 2020. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/02640414.2020.1807089
[25] A. Damiot, A. J. Pinto, J. E. Turner, and B. Gualano, “Immunological
Implications of Physical Inactivity among Older Adults during the
COVID-19 Pandemic,” Gerontology, vol. 66, no. 5, pp. 431–438, 2020.
[Online]. Available: https://www.karger.com/Article/FullText/509216

[26] L. J. Vorvick and D. Zieve, “Exercise and immunity: Medline Plus,”
2020. [Online]. Available: https://medlineplus.gov/ency/article/007165.
htm
[27] N. K. Fofana, F. Latif, S. Sarfraz, Bilal, M. F. Bashir, and B. Komal,
“Fear and agony of the pandemic leading to stress and mental illness:
An emerging crisis in the novel coronavirus (COVID-19) outbreak,”
Psychiatry Research, vol. 291, p. 113230, sep 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0165178120310970
[28] R. E. Menzies and R. G. Menzies, “Death anxiety in the time
of COVID-19: theoretical explanations and clinical implications,”
The Cognitive Behaviour Therapist, vol. 13, p. e19, jun 2020.
[Online]. Available: https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/identifier/
S1754470X20000215/type/journal{ }article
[29] S. Madigan, N. Racine, J. E. Cooke, and D. J. Korczak, “COVID-19
and telemental health: Benefits, challenges, and future directions.”
Canadian Psychology/Psychologie canadienne, oct 2020. [Online].
Available: http://doi.apa.org/getdoi.cfm?doi=10.1037/cap0000259
[30] D. o. V. D. National Center for Immunization and
Respiratory Diseases (NCIRD), “Coping with Stress,” 2020.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/
daily-life-coping/managing-stress-anxiety.html
[31] L. Sher, “The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on suicide rates,”
QJM: An International Journal of Medicine, vol. 113, no. 10, pp.
707–712, oct 2020. [Online]. Available: https://academic.oup.com/
qjmed/article/113/10/707/5857612
[32] C. K. Ettman, S. M. Abdalla, G. H. Cohen, L. Sampson, P. M.
Vivier, and S. Galea, “Prevalence of Depression Symptoms in US
Adults Before and During the COVID-19 Pandemic,” JAMA Network
Open, vol. 3, no. 9, p. e2019686, sep 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jamanetworkopen/fullarticle/2770146
[33] E. E. McGinty, R. Presskreischer, H. Han, and C. L. Barry,
“Psychological Distress and Loneliness Reported by US Adults in 2018
and April 2020,” JAMA, vol. 324, no. 1, p. 93, jul 2020. [Online].
Available: https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jama/fullarticle/2766941
[34] F. Setiawan, S. A. Khowaja, A. G. Prabono, B. N. Yahya, and
S.-L. Lee, “A Framework for Real Time Emotion Recognition
Based on Human ANS Using Pervasive Device,” in 2018 IEEE
42nd Annual Computer Software and Applications Conference
(COMPSAC). IEEE, jul 2018, pp. 805–806. [Online]. Available:
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8377754/
[35] S. A. Khowaja, A. G. Prabono, F. Setiawan, B. N. Yahya, and S.-L.
Lee, “Toward soft real-time stress detection using wrist-worn devices
for human workspaces,” Soft Computing, sep 2020. [Online]. Available:
http://link.springer.com/10.1007/s00500-020-05338-0
[36] M. J. M. Chowdhury, M. S. Ferdous, K. Biswas, N. Chowdhury, and
V. Muthukkumarasamy, “COVID-19 Contact Tracing: Challenges and
Future Directions,” IEEE Access, pp. 1–1, 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9252092/
[37] N. Ahmed, R. A. Michelin, W. Xue, S. Ruj, R. Malaney,
S. S. Kanhere, A. Seneviratne, W. Hu, H. Janicke, and S. K.
Jha, “A Survey of COVID-19 Contact Tracing Apps,” IEEE
Access, vol. 8, pp. 134 577–134 601, 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9144194/
[38] M. E. Kretzschmar, G. Rozhnova, M. C. J. Bootsma, M. van
Boven, J. H. H. M. van de Wijgert, and M. J. M. Bonten,
“Impact of delays on effectiveness of contact tracing strategies
for COVID-19: a modelling study,” The Lancet Public Health,
vol. 5, no. 8, pp. e452–e459, aug 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S2468266720301572
[39] R. Nosowsky and T. J. Giordano, “The Health Insurance Portability
and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA) Privacy Rule: Implications
for Clinical Research,” Annual Review of Medicine, vol. 57, no. 1, pp.
575–590, feb 2006. [Online]. Available: http://www.annualreviews.org/
doi/10.1146/annurev.med.57.121304.131257
[40] M. Goddard, “The EU General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR):
European Regulation that has a Global Impact,” International Journal
of Market Research, vol. 59, no. 6, pp. 703–705, nov 2017. [Online].
Available: http://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.2501/IJMR-2017-050
[41] F. Kemmer, C. Reich, M. Knahl, and N. Clarke, “Software Defined
Privacy,” in IEEE International Conference on Cloud Engineering
Workshop (IC2EW). IEEE, apr 2016, pp. 25–29. [Online]. Available:
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/7527810/
[42] F. H. Semantha, S. Azam, K. C. Yeo, and B. Shanmugam, “A
Systematic Literature Review on Privacy by Design in the Healthcare
Sector,” Electronics, vol. 9, no. 3, p. 452, mar 2020. [Online].
Available: https://www.mdpi.com/2079-9292/9/3/452

13

[43] M. Hao, H. Li, X. Luo, G. Xu, H. Yang, and S. Liu, “Efficient
and Privacy-Enhanced Federated Learning for Industrial Artificial
Intelligence,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, vol. 16,
no. 10, pp. 6532–6542, oct 2020. [Online]. Available: https:
//ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8859260/

Dr. Sunder Ali Khowaja is an Assistant Professor at Department of
Telecommunication, Faculty of Engineering and Technology, University of
Sindh, Jamshoro, Pakistan. He has worked with Comstar ISA Ltd. and New
Horizon IT Ltd. as RF/VSAT Engineer and Network Engineer from 20082011.
He was awarded the Ph.D. degree in Industrial and Information Systems
Engineering from Hankuk University of Foreign Studies, South Korea funded
by Foreign Students Scholarship. He has secured M.E. degree in Communication Systems and Networks; and B.E. degree in Telecommunication
from Mehran University of Engineering and Technology, Pakistan. He is
serving as a reviewer for many reputed journals including IEEE Access,
IET Image Processing, IET Electronic Letters, IET Signal Processing, IET
Wireless Sensor Systems, International Journal of Imaging Systems and
Technology, Artificial Intelligence Review, Computational and Mathematical
Methods in Medicine, Computers in Human Behavior, Mathematical Problems
in Engineering, Multimedia Systems, and Neural Processing Letters. His
research interests include Data Analytics and Machine Learning for Ambient
Intelligence, Image Analysis and Computer Vision applications.
Parus Khuwaja is pursuing her Ph.D. degree in financial analytics from University of Sindh, Jamshoro. She is currently working as an Assistant Professor
at Institute of Business Administration, University of Sindh, Jamshoro. Her
interests include Data analytics, Machine learning for Ambient Intelligence,
Stock Portfolios, and Financial securities.
Kapal Dev is Senior Researcher at Nimbus Research Centre, Munster
Technological University, Ireland. Previously, he was a Postdoctoral Research
Fellow with the CONNECT Centre, School of Computer Science and
Statistics, Trinity College Dublin (TCD). Previously, he worked as 5G Junior
Consultant and Engineer at Altran Italia S.p.A, Milan, Italy on 5G use cases.
He worked as Lecturer at Indus university, Karachi back in 2014. He is also
working for OCEANS Network as Head of Projects to manage OCEANS
project processes and functions to improve efficiency, consistency and best
practice integration.
He was awarded the PhD degree by Politecnico di Milano, Italy under the
prestigious fellowship of Erasmus Mundus funded by European Commission.
His education Profile revolves over ICT background i.e. Electronics (B.E and
M.E), Telecommunication Engineering (PhD) and Post-doc (Fusion of 5G
and Blockchain). His research interests include Blockchain, 6G Networks and
Artificial Intelligence. He is very active in leading (as Principle Investigator)
Erasmus + International Credit Mobility (ICM) and Capacity Building for
Higher Education and H2020 Co-Fund projects. Received a few Million
Euros funding and few are in review as well as in the writing phase.
He is evaluator of MSCA Co-Fund schemes, Elsevier Book proposals and
top scientific journals and conferences including IEEE TII, IEEE TITS,
IEEE TNSE, IEEE IoT, IEEE JBHI, FGCS, COMNET, TETT, IEEE VTC,
WF-IoT. TPC member of IEEE BCA 2020 in conjunction with AICCSA
2020, ICBC 2021, DICG Co-located with Middleware 2020 and FTNCT
2020. He is also serving as Associate Editor in Wireless Networks, IET
Quantum Communication and Review Editor in Frontiers in Communications
and Networks. He is also serving as Guest Editor (GE) in COMCOM
(I.F: 2.8), GE in COMNET (I.F 3.11), Lead chair in one of CCNC 2021
workshops, and editing a book for CRC press. He is a member of the ACM,
IEEE, and actively involved with various working groups and committees
of IEEE and ACM related to 5G and beyond, Blockchain and Artificial
Intelligence.

