Bias in ontologies – a preliminary assessment
C. Maria Keet

arXiv:2101.08035v1 [cs.AI] 20 Jan 2021

Department of Computer Science
University of Cape Town, South Africa
mkeet@cs.uct.ac.za

Abstract
Logical theories in the form of ontologies and similar artefacts in computing and IT are used for structuring, annotating, and querying data, among others, and therewith influence data analytics regarding what is fed into the algorithms.
Algorithmic bias is a well-known notion, but what does bias
mean in the context of ontologies that provide a structuring
mechanism for an algorithm’s input? What are the sources
of bias there and how would they manifest themselves in
ontologies? We examine and enumerate types of bias relevant for ontologies, and whether they are explicit or implicit.
These eight types are illustrated with examples from extant
production-level ontologies and samples from the literature.
We then assessed three concurrently developed COVID-19
ontologies on bias and detected different subsets of types of
bias in each one, to a greater or lesser extent. This first characterisation aims contribute to a sensitisation of ethical aspects
of ontologies primarily regarding representation of information and knowledge.

Introduction
Bias in models is a well-known topic, which has been popularised to the public with a catchy term “weapons of math
destruction” (O’Neil 2016). Nearly all investigations on
‘models’ concern statistical models created from Big Data
by means of knowledge discovery, machine learning, and
deep learning techniques. There are many more types of
models, however. The other main category of models within
Artificial Intelligence (AI) are ontologies, which are staple
in the knowledge representation and reasoning side of AI.
Informally, an ontology is a logical theory of a subject domain, capturing its classes, relations, and constraints that
hold among them, which are used for tasks such as data integration, information retrieval, electronic health records, and
e-learning (Keet 2018). For instance, one may have multiple
databases that have to be merged due to a company take-over
and one needs to know whether some entity type Customer
or COVID19-Patient in database1 has the same meaning as
Custm or or COVIDPatient in database2 , respectively, and if
it is, a way to declare that, or, e.g., to define precisely what
COVID-19 death means in the mortality statistic. Ontologies
can help with it by providing an application-independent

representation of the subject domain as a common vocabulary and unambiguous specification of the intended meaning. Besides integration, one also can choose an ontology
upfront and use that across applications, such as an electronic patient record system with a medical terminology for
classifying or annotating patients’s symptoms, disorders and
a treatment that is shared with the insurer; SNOMED and
the ICD-10 are popular for that. An example of their Webscale use is Google’s Knowledge Graph that drives search
and the creation and maintenance of its infoboxes. The one
who builds and controls the graph, then, is the one who
has the power to control presentation and access to information and possibly also the recording of information, and,
as (Juel Vang 2013) argues in case of Google’s Graph, “to
some degree contests the autonomy of the user”.
We illustrate the general idea of possible issues in the next
example with ontology-mediated artificial moral agents.
Example 1 The Genet ontology aims to provide a framework to represent multiple ethical theories such as utilitarianism and divine command theory (Rautenbach and Keet
2020) so that one can tailor the actions of a robot to the
moral preferences of its owner or enhance argumentation
in multi-agent systems (Liao, Slavkovik, and van der Torre
2019). A section of its version 1 is shown in Fig. 1 in blackand-white informally on the left and a selection of the axioms in Description Logics (DL) notation (Baader et al.
2008) on the right. That the ontology admitted four distinct
entities of moral value, rather than just humans, is already
an ideaological statement and therewith a bias.
Now assume that you want to expand the moral circle
beyond those four in the ontology, with Robot. By design,
you cannot unless you have the rights and the technology to
change it. Let’s assume you have those.
There are three options. First, you add Robot as a PatientKind and since you are sure robots are neither humans, nor
nature, nor non-human animals, add those disjointness axioms. It will deduce
Robot v OtherSentient

regardless whether you wanted that or not. If not—perhaps
because you are religiously convinced inanimate objects
cannot be sentient—then, second, you could add that they
are distinct as well:
Robot u OtherSentient v ⊥

Copyright © 2021, the author(s).

but then the reasoner will deduce

* SetOfPatient 1..*
1..*
*
has
has
Kinds
member
component
{disjoint,complete}

PatientKind

Human

Nature

NonHumanAnimal

Ethical
Theory

OtherSentient

{disjoint}
Robot

Figure 1: Small section of the OWL version of the Genet model of (Rautenbach and Keet 2020) (in black-and-white), a hypothetical addition with Robot as entity of possible moral value (in blue, solid lines bottom-left), and the deduction (in green,
dashed arrow). On the right, a selection of the relevant axioms in DL notation.
Robot v ⊥

i.e., the class is unsatisfiable (cannot have instances). The
third option is to modify the original axioms and losing compatibility with Genet; e.g., to remove some disjointness axioms or change the completeness axiom.
Ontologies in computing and IT have been popularised
since the mid 1990s, with as a major success story the Gene
Ontology (Gene Ontology Consortium 2000) as ontology
and the OWL language as the W3C standard (Motik, PatelSchneider, and Parsia 2009) to represent ontologies in. The
popular ontology repository for bio-ontologies BioPortal
lists 831 ontologies and the repository of repositories OntoHub claims to have indexed 22460 ontologies of 139 repositories1 . Regarding possible bias in ontologies, aside from
“encoding bias” (Uschold and Gruninger 1996) that refers
to different formalisations of the same thing, there are few
articles. An early paper discusses it in context of the “Dirty
War Index” tool that claimed to aim to inform public heath
in armed conflict settings, which had several biases, such
as including ex-army in the civilian group whereas the primary source database did not (Keet 2009). (Gomes and Bragato Barros 2020) assessed the FOAF terminology through
the lens of discursive semiotics as a method. This aimed to
mean one has to consider “the concretization, in language, of
a particular social, historical, ideological, and environmental context”, using the specific framework with the “Generative Trajectory of Meaning” of Greimas and Courtés2 .
The bias analysis, however, was limited to a few well-known
ones, being first & last name vs given & family name, gender, and the meaning of document. While valid, bias and
their causes are more intricate and varied than these. For
instance, consider religion, which may be a specialisation
of their “ideological”, as was the case of the issue of inclusion of homosexuality in the classification of mental disorders3 in the United States until DSM-III in 1987. What
their approach cannot capture, but is certainly an issue for
declarative models, is, among others, the menopausal hormone therapy case: there were at least economic incentives
1

figures from https://ontohub.org/; last checked on 13-1-2021.
referenced as “Greimas, A. J. and J. Courtés. 2013. Dicionário
de Semiótica. São Paulo: Contexto.”
3
for a brief overview of its history, see https://en.wikipedia.org/
wiki/Homosexuality in DSM
2

that determined which attributes ended up in the model with
what threshold values in order to classify who is eligible for
treatment4 .
In this paper, we aim to contribute to systematising the
sort of bias that can enter or be present in ontologies and
similar artefacts, such as conceptual data models and thesauri. We will seek to provide a preliminary answer to what
bias means for ontologies, what their sources or causes are,
and how that manifests itself in ontologies. The identified
biases types are structured along three categories: high-level
philosophical ones, scope or purpose, and subject domain issues. Some of these biases are intentional biases that insiders
know very well, but outsiders and newcomers may have to
be notified of. For the unintentional biases that can creep
in, this will be harder to manage; we do not aim to solve
that here, but first inventarise them. Second, we assess a set
of COVID-19 ontologies on these biases. These ontologies
are under active development, competing, and merging, and
highly relevant for data management of the pandemic. The
assessment showed that none is free of bias.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. We
first systematise and illustrate the principal sources, to continue with the COVID-19 ontologies assessment. We then
discuss the outcomes and touch upon automated reasoning,
and close with conclusions.

Principal sources of bias in ontologies
Of most interest practically ethically, is the bias with respect
to the subject domain. To be able to discuss it properly, we
first need to note and ‘set aside’ the straightforward ones of
philosophical and engineering (encoding) bias. A summary
of the resultant eight types, or sources, of bias is included in
Table 1.

High-level philosophical issues
Ontologies as an engineering version of the original idea of
Ontology by philosophers, and its branch of analytic philosophy in particular. Most subject domain ontology developers may not care much about the finer distinctions of core
4
In essence, they narrowed the range of natural variability of
concentrations of key molecules to increase the number of women
who would be ‘abnormal’ and therewith qualifying for medication,
which unintentionally led to an increase in cancer incidence.

Class hierarchy DOCLE-lite

Class hierarchy BFO v2.0

Pattern A

Pattern B

Continuant

ClassC
*

*

1 ..*

ClassC
hasB: anyType

ClassA

Pattern C
ClassC
BT Continuant
RT ClassB

participant
1
participant

Figure 2: Illustration of some philosophical differences
between foundational ontologies: DOLCE-Lite.owl has
Abstract, but bfo20.owl does not due to its realist stance,
and while perdurant and occurrent roughly align (dashed arrow), their respective subclasses do not, admitting to different types of perdurant in existence.

Occurrent

ClassB

Figure 3: Three different patters with a purpose bias: Pattern A is biased toward a scientific approach with increasing
precision (and a bias toward 3-dimensionalism philosophically), Pattern B indicates a conceptual data modelling influence or purpose, and Pattern C takes a thesaurus-like approach useful for document annotation.

Scope or purpose
Type
Philosophical
Purpose

Subject domain

Subtype
Science
Granularity
Linguistic
Socio-cultural
Political or religious
Economics

[im/ex]plicit bias
explicit
explicit
explicit
either
either
either
either
explicit

Table 1: Summary of typical possible biases in ontologies
grouped by type, with an indication whether such biases
would be explicit choices or whether they may creep in unintentionally.

notions, but they are there. Practically, for domain ontology
development, one would choose a particular foundational or
top-level ontology that provides the main types of entities
and relations so as to help structuring the content. There are
multiple such foundational ontologies in active use, such as
BFO, DOLCE, UFO, SUMO, and YAMATO, which make
different commitments. Its developers are mostly clear about
that on general principles and how it affects the ontology’s
content, such as acknowledging the existence of abstract entities (Masolo et al. 2003) or what the core relations in the
world would be (Smith et al. 2005). See Fig. 2 for an example. While it is not trivial to choose which foundational
ontology suits the modeller best, it is a deliberated decision,
hence, an upfront explicit bias.
There are related debates on whether what is represented
is a representation of reality or merely our understanding
thereof, or whether there would even be a reality. This is an
old and recurring debate (see, e.g., (Merrill 2010)) that has
no resolve that everyone agrees on. For ontology development, the key take-away is whether one aims to be faithful to reality (or our best understanding of it) versus ulterior
motives, be it rejecting reality or not caring (‘post-truth’) or
knowingly violating it for whatever reason. These different
stances act out at the subject domain level where the bias can
have most effect, as we shall see further below, and could result either in an explicit or implicit bias.

In theory, ontologies are supposed to be applicationindependent, so as to be a solution to the data integration
problem; if they are tailored to the application nonetheless,
they may become part of the problem. In praxis, this application independence may not always hold. Developing an
ontology for the sake of it may be an interesting endeavour,
but someone has to fund it and it helps to have a use case scenario to motivate for the development of it. This may affect
what is represented and how and is, or at least should have
been, an explicitly stated bias motivated by pragmatics, if it
can be considered a bias—as (Uschold and Gruninger 1996)
do—since they are engineering choices rather than bias on
the knowledge itself.
Three patterns of representation for different purposes are
shown in Fig. 3, summarising common encoding biases. To
illustrate those, consider the following situation, represented
in DL for brevity. Ventilation is an undisputed treatment for
COVID-19 patients and is being used, and so let us consider
three options:
• If the scope or purpose is the be as detailed and reusable
as possible, and knowing that Treatment is a perdurant in philosophical terms, operating within the 3dimensionalism bias, then
Ventilation v Treatment
is the bare minimum to declare, and availing of the core
relation of participation, then also
HospitalisedPatient v ∃participatesIn.Treatment
One then could assert that our hospitalised COVID-19 patients participate in the ventilation treatment.
• A compact representation of the same state of affairs results in faster data processing; e.g.,
Patient v ∃isOnVentilator.Boolean
so as to use the ontology language to develop a conceptual data model for database development, rather than the
traditional EER language for relational databases.
• Another purpose could be annotation of literature to better manage it. Then neither the boolean nor all those constraints and relations are needed, but it would focus on
casting the net wide on terminology with one preferred
and several alternative labels including, but not limited to,

ventilator support, ventilation therapy, mechanical ventilation, and invasive ventilation with BT Ventilation and RT
Patient.

The ontologist may complain about the latter two options
as woefully underspecified, which is their bias, whereas the
two tool developers may complain that the first option is
needlessly complicated due to their bias for simplicity.

Subject domain
The list of bias sources described in this section overlaps
with Gomes and Bragato Barros’ one (Gomes and Bragato
Barros 2020), but is extended with three categories, including one from (Keet 2009). In addition, we indicate whether
they concern mainly intended or unintended biases, or both,
and illustrate each one in order to demonstrate relevance.
Difference of opinion on reality and science. Even under
the assumption of a commitment to the existence of reality,
one still could disagree. A common example is whether
a virus is an organism or not—it is not by any extant
definition of what an organism is—and even bio-ontologies
and medical terminologies do not agree; compare, e.g., the
CIDO (He et al. 2020) versus the SIO (Dumontier et al.
2014) and the NCI Thesaurus5 . More broadly, it concerns
either the insufficient insight or competing theories that the
scientists still have to investigate, of which it is assumed that
eventually there will be an agreement, or there are delays in
propagating discoveries into the ontologies. In other fields
of research, there are inherently competing theories, such
as capitalism and socialism, that would result in a different
domain ontology of economy. They are all intended choices
and biases.
Required or chosen level of precision/granularity. It is a
general question in ontology development how detailed it
should be and how deep the taxonomy should go. Less detail therefore may be an act of omission, an indication of ‘not
needed’, or a ‘ran out of time’ to be included for a next version. Inspecting an ontology in isolation, this is impossible
to determine unless either of the latter two are indicated in
the annotations. For instance, The Gene Ontology has three
versions: a GO basic that excludes several relations between
entities, the GO, and a GO plus with additional axioms6 .
An act of omission is aforementioned aggregation of
ex-military persons with, say, non-involved persons as
one group of Civilians: the source had a more detailed
categorisation that was abstracted away so that it resulted in
one party (of the authors’ side) shown in a more favourable
light (Keet 2009). Similar issues exist for other conflict
databases, which may be intentional or unintentional. For
instance, a bombing target may be recorded as an instance
of having targeted a Government building if that is the
only category available, or more precisely if it had any
subclasses, such as, say, State hospital, State medicine
5

https://ncit.nci.nih.gov/ncitbrowser/ConceptReport.jsp?
dictionary=NCI Thesaurus&ns=ncit&code=C14283; 18-1-2021.
6
http://geneontology.org/docs/download-ontology/; last accessed 13 January 2021.

manufacture plant, Military base, and Homeland security
torture bunker, and more, rather than one layer of subclasses

as in (Veerasamy, Grobler, and Solms 2012). Similarly, one
could have one aggregate group, say, Foreign National with
as alt-label Alien for the USA, or also include subclasses
such as Migrant and Refugee, and further subclasses such as
Economic migrant, Spousal migrant, Critical skills migrant,
and so on. Such differentiations, or absence thereof, may be
intended or they may be unintended and even change over
time when the subject changes, such as new immigration
policies and different ways of conducting conflict (e.g.,
cyber attacks rather than bombings).
Cultural-linguistic motivations. Anyone who has learned
a second language has come across untranslatable words or
at least fine semantic distinctions. The question then arises
if, and if so, when, a difference ends up as a bias in the ontology or not. For instance, English has only one term for
river—all rivers are just rivers—whereas French makes a
distinction between a fleuve and a rivière—one flows into
another river, the other flows into the sea—that somehow
has to be represented and the ontologies aligned (McCrae
et al. 2012), and likewise for observed differences in partwhole relations (Keet and Khumalo 2018). One may argue
that in both examples, the reality is the same but they have
varying descriptions, or take reality with a grain of salt and
state there are different realities depending on language, or
that there are different conceptualisations.
A borderline case between cultural-linguistic preferences
and political bias are the false friends, where a term in a
language has a different meaning or connotation in different
countries where the language is spoken, due to historical differences across countries. For instance, ‘herd immunity’ is a
common term in American and British English, but is being
rebranded as ‘population immunity’ in South African English, since the former has the connotation of non-human animals that people do not want to be associated with. It is also
different in other languages; e.g., in Spanish, it is inmunidad
de grupo and Dutch groepsimmuniteit, i.e., ‘group’ immunity rather than ‘herd’. Note that this is distinct from mere
synonym confusion, such as a Football Ontology where it
is unclear from the name whether it refers to the soccer
football or American football or eraser/rubber/condom mixups, and orthographic differences (e.g., color vs colour),
which can be accommodated in the ontology with labels and
finer-grained language-coding schemes (e.g., @en-uk and
@en-us etc.).
The chance that a monolingual ontology development
team from one cultural identity in one country builds in such
a bias is substantial, and it can be reduced by constituting
a more diverse team of ontology developers who at least
speak several languages among them. Any bias built in
may be intentional or unintentional. For instance, McCrae’s
team (McCrae et al. 2012) was very multilingual and so it
was easy to observe the difference and propose a solution.
In contrast, if one then develops an ontology afterward
knowingly only including the non-differentiating River, then
that is an explicit bias.

Socio-cultural factors. This concerns hows society is organised, with the assumptions that underlie it and history
how it came about, and practical effects it may have when
developing the ontology. This may be organisational structures, who lives with whom, demographics, allocation of resources, or social geography that influences what is salient
and what not.
For instance, who can marry whom and how many is
a well-known point of variation across the world, which
can cause difficulties for multinational organisations to harmonise that in one system. For instance, it may be a company policy that one can insure the spouse of the employee,
requiring a statement alike
Employee v ∀marriedTo.Spouse
but should the model also include
Employee v ≤ 1 marriedTo.Spouse
i.e., at most one spouse? Should the gender of the spouse
be recorded or marriedTo be defined as holding between humans and no more? Any answer will have a bias baked into
it. For an ontology to be as general as possible the most permissive combination represented, and any constraints would
have to go into the conceptual data model for the specific
database.
A concrete example is the relatively popular GoodRelations Ontology for e-commerce (Hepp 2008). It lists several
payment methods, such as invoice, cash, and PayPal, and
limits the ‘on delivery’ to cash, but cash-less options on delivery are just as possible, such as a pre-paid card or QRcode payment option, is missing, which is a non-uncommon
mode of payment in areas where robberies are common.
Also, its Business assumes that they are legally registered,
which may well hold in Europe where the ontology was developed, but in many other countries there is a vast network
of the informal economy that does trade online with their
smartphones and it has no specific opening hours.
Socio-cultural factors may also influence the content of
medical terminologies, such as the perception of alcohol
use across cultures, in-groups, and age, and what would
be considered as having a drinking problem. A recent
example is demonstrated by a comparison between the
DSM-IV, DSM-V, and ICD-10 medical terminologies on
issues with alcohol intake, where the criteria were changed.
This resulted in an increase in Alcohol Use Disorder using
DSM-V compared to the DSM-IV criteria (based on the
same data), primarily due to lowering the threshold for the
number of diagnostic criteria required for it and increasing
the number of criteria through replacing one class with
four new classes that were arguably features of it (Lundin
et al. 2015). This change in the lightweight ontology has
been blamed on a combination of socio-cultural factors and
scientific disagreement (Wakefield 2015).
Political and religious motivations. The line between societal bias, political, and religious may be difficult to draw
depending on the case. Aforementioned DSM, which ought
to be based on science, was not entirely and likely was influenced by religious viewpoints at least in some instances.
Since the separation between state and church may not be
all that separate, it practically may not be possible to dis-

entangle the two. A clear-cut case is where the entity type
Aggrieved group, as a neutral term, enters the ontology as
Terrorist organisation as preferred label; concretely, there are
terrorist and terroristgroup in the terrorism ontology of (Jindal, Seeja, and Jain 2020) whereas there is an ActorEntity
with various types of Insiders and Protestors in the Cyberterrorism ontology (Veerasamy, Grobler, and Solms 2012).
As with society and language matters, these issues more
easily come to light if the team of ontology developers is
diverse or at least has diverse knowledge to bring in. Also
here, such differences—biases—may be intentional or not.
Economic motivations. The, perhaps, most well-known
arena where economic motivations play a role, is the recognition of something as a disorder or disease, from which follows that it deserves at least funding of a treatment if there
is one as well as resources for prevention and research. The
Obesity Society’s panel of experts even stated this bluntly as
the main reason in favour of classifying obesity as a disease
(TOS Obesity as a Disease Writing Group et al. 2008). Its
recognition is good for big pharma and possibly also the patients, but costly for insurers, which results in tension. For
the ontology, it means that it is in our out, where the ontology comes into play in particular in electronic health records
(how an observed finding is noted in the record, which treatments are linked to it) and further down the pipeline when
the electronic records with their ontology, such as SNOMED
CT, are linked to the pharmacy and the insurer’s databases.
There is a benefit to the data integration if the ontology used
for it is grounded on evidence-based medicine and in one’s
favour; if it is not, it can be an uphill battle on multiple
fronts. These issues are well-known and therefore can be
classified as intended biases.

Assessment of ontologies: the COVID-19
Ontologies
To assess the notion of bias in ontologies beyond the concrete selected examples in the previous section, it would support the bias source identification for a set of ontologies in
roughly the same subject domain. The reasoning is that since
there are several ontologies in that given domain, there must
have been a reason to develop more than one rather than
to stick with one effort or to combine efforts. This may be
due to bias, but not necessarily so. This limits the choices
for assessment. Comparisons of foundational ontologies are
abound (see (Partridge et al. 2020) for the most recent attempt) and would have a less clear impact on domain ontologies’ possible biases that affect applications that people
use. Of the core and domain ontologies, there are a few on
time and measurements, many on health and medicine (e.g.,
37 are contextualised in (Haendel et al. 2018)), data mining,
organisations and government, and others, which are more
or less stable and more or less maintained.
We identified a set of ontologies in a same subject domain, of which the authors have sufficient knowledge about
the domain to assess it, and that are under active development and maintenance, so that it has an increased chance of
the assessment outcomes to be taken into account. A down-

side of the latter selection criterion may be that any issues
observed may have been resolved in the meantime between
assessment and review or publication of this paper. Nonetheless, given the urgency of the theme, we chose to assess the
COVID-19 ontologies on bias. The next section will contextualise each ontology briefly and the section thereafter
contains the assessment.

Ontology descriptions
The Coronavirus Infectious Disease Ontology (CIDO) (He
et al. 2020) is an ontology that was developed within the
overarching OBO Foundry approach (Smith et al. 2007): it
took a community-based development approach and reuses,
among others, the Infections Disease Ontology that in turn
is linked to the top-level ontology BFO (Arp, Smith, and
Spear 2015) and therewith adhering to some of its principles of structuring knowledge and philosophical stance of
realism. The scope of the ontology was aimed at knowledge
and information about the SARS-CoV-2 virus and host taxonomy data, its phenotype, and drugs and vaccines to foster
data integration. The CIDO v1.0.109 was used for the assessment, to keep with the time frame where all ontologies
were released around July-August 2020, therewith reducing the chance of mutual influence; in particular, the smaller
cido-base.owl file (downloaded on 20-7-2020) with the
relevant imports was assessed, which contains 82 classes, 15
object properties (relations), no data properties (attributes)
and one individual, and 90 logical axioms and is within the
OWL Full profile due to issues with undeclared annotation
properties and a few undeclared classes. Aside from that,
logically, it is expressible in ALEHO in DL terminology,
that is, a basic hierarchy with existentially quantified properties and an occasional nominal (instances made into a class).
The CODO (Dutta and DeBellis 2020) has as purpose
to assist in representing and publishing of COVID-19 data
from the disease course perspective and has subject domain scope COVID-19 cases and patient information. That
is, it aims to be an component in IT systems for healthcare, rather than take a medical or research angle. The
CODO V1.2-16July2020.owl was used for the assessment, which contains 51 classes, 61 object properties, 45
data properties, 56 individuals, and 463 logical axioms. It
is within the OWL 2 DL profile, and SHOIQ(D) more
specifically, or: it is an expressive ontology that uses many
of the OWL 2 DL constructs available in the language.
The COVoc, developed by the European Bioinformatics
Institute, has as purpose to support navigating and curating the literature on COVID-19, and in particular the scientific research of it; documentation of its rationale is available as a workshop presentation (Pendlington et al. 2020).
Its first, and latest, released version is slightly later than that
of CIDO and CODO, although all had their drafts in June
20, which did not affect its contents. The covoc.owl was
used for the assessment (v d.d. 28-8-2020), which contains
541 classes, 179 object properties, no data properties or individuals, and 672 logical axioms. It is within the OWL Full
profile due to a subset property issue with the annotation
properties; without that and just the logical theory, it is expressible in ALCHI, consisting of a basic hierarchy with

Bias
Philosophical
Purpose
Science
Granularity
Linguistic
Socio-cultural
Political or religious
Economics

CIDO
+
±
+
+
+
-

CODO
+
+
+
+
-

COVoc
+
+
+
+
+
+
-

Table 2: Presence or absence of bias in the three COVID-19
ontologies examined.
existentially quantified properties and a few subproperties
and inverses.
The “vocabulary for COVID-19 data”, available at http://
covid19.squirrel.link/ontology/, has been excluded, because
its contents is different from the other three, in that it is not
for COVID-19 data but to label datasets of COVID-19 data,
such as Dataset of the Robert Koch-Institut.

Bias assessment
The presence and absence of the different types of bias is
summarised in Table 2, and will be illustrated and discussed
in the remainder of this section.

CIDO
There are two socio-cultural biases in the CIDO. First, there
is a COVID-19 diagnosis class with three subclasses: negative, positive, and presumptive positive. There are two aspects to this: the [disease]-positive/negative labeling, which
has clear HIV connotations with all the stigmatisation that
comes with it. This may be less prevalent in a country like
the USA where the incidence is relatively very low, but in
countries where it is endemic, such as South Africa, such
labelling can be harmful. It easily could have been, e.g, ‘infected’, ‘detected’, or ‘present’ and ‘not infected’, ‘absent’
or ‘free’; that said, the positive/negative is a pervasive issues
across languages and countries. The third category, ‘presumptive positive’, elicits a negative connotation, plays into
people’s fears, and would brand people that are statistically
unlikely to have it, since many countries aim for at most 510% positivity rate. Neutral, and more accurate, terminology
would be, e.g., ‘pending result’, ‘awaiting test outcome’, or
‘under investigation’.
A similar bias in the other direction—of unwarranted
optimism—is the assumption of
COVID-19 experimental drug in clinical trial v
COVID-19 drug

noting that
COVID-19 drug v
∃ treatment for.COVID-19 disease process

is asserted in the ontology, and thus entails that COVID-19
experimental drug in clinical trial is a drug already and is being part of regular treatment processes of COVID-19, since
the property of ∃treatment for.COVID-19 disease process is
inherited down into the hierarchy. This is wishful thinking.
A substance under investigation that is being evaluated is not

necessarily effective or safe and for it to be a drug, it has to
be that and also have been approved by the regulatory body.
A minor language note is drive-thru instead of drivethrough for testing stations, but this can easily be addressed
by providing alternative labels. Other US-centric indications
are naming SARS-CoV-2 also the Wuhan virus, which was
rarely used outside the USA since it was advocated by President Trump and his policies toward China, and FDA EUAauthorized organization as the only other organisation as sibling of drive-thru COVID-19 testing facility. The latter may
also be an instance of ran-out-of-time, since the authors of
the accompanying paper ((He et al. 2020)) have diverse affiliations.
Regarding philosophical bias, this is evident by its embedding in the OBO Foundry suite (Smith et al. 2007), through
its partial reuse of ontologies within that framework, such as
OBI and IAO, as well as the organisational principles how
the ontology is structured, which follows the BFO foundational ontology design principles (He et al. 2020).
In sum, it does try to take the science angle to representing
knowledge about COVID-19, but with a few biases toward
USA-centrism, which reduces its off-the-shelf potential. Or:
if this were to be used in Europe or any of the key Global
South countries with ample research, testing, or production
capacities, such as India and South Africa, then they would
have to modify it first.

CODO
The CODO fares slightly better on the Laboratory test finding, which can be negative, positive, or pending, rather, although also here the positive/negative may benefit from a
relabeling. Also, it does have the well-known gender issue,
captured in the axiom
Gender type ≡ {Female, Male}

A clear socio-cultural axiom in the ontology is
InfectedSpouse v InfectedFamilyMember
InfectedFamilyMember v Exposure to COVID-19

One can argue about omissions or time constraints, since the
only family member that can be infected is the spouse according to CODO, but there may be more family members.
The cultural bias here is the concept of the nuclear family
that consists of the parents and their children. Globally more
applicable would be to talk of a household, however that
may be composed. This, since there may be live-in grandparents, cousins, nannies, domestic workers, and so on, and
spouses may not live together in one household due to being migrant workers. An early example of such complexities in the context of COVID-19 can be found in (Parker and
de Kadt 2020) and if CODO were to be used elsewhere, it
would have to revise this branch in the ontology.
The purpose is indicated through its heavy use of data
properties, hence, more alike a model for recording data than
for representing the science of COVID-19 or SARS-CoV-2.
A substantial amount of information would be usable across
countries trying to record data about patients. One class is
specific to the country of its developers, India, which is the
Mild and very mild COVID-19, which is one of the three categories mandated by its government rather than the mod-

ellers’ granularity bias, as the authors noted in the annotations of Patient.

COVoc
COVoc clearly states that its purpose is COVID-19 scientific literature ‘triage’, and it is informally well-known that
knowledge organisation systems for literature annotation is
focused in facilitating that rather than being concerned with
ontological precision or correctness. Its contents are not
clearly structured as a result of this bias, in the sense that
there are many top-level terms and mixing of classes and instances, but some aspects, such as the use of the IAO and
import of the RO, may indicate some leaning to the OBO
Foundry stack as well. Its actual contents regarding bias
raises several questions.
One is of granularity, and perhaps also focus or time,
which are straightforward omissions, such as listing only
two continents, Asia and Europe (there are 4-7, depending
on how one categories), and a mixture of omission and politics regarding the countries, since there are 10 subclasses
of Country, of which two are disputed (Hong Kong and Taiwan) and one is definitely an error, since West Africa is not
a country but a region on the African continent.
Scientifically, the low-hanging fruit for bias detection is
Virus v Organism

because a virus is not an organism, and that there are several
disorders that are subclasses of Disease, such as
headache disorder v Disease
anxiety disorder v Disease

whereas they are distinct medically. With a benefit of the
doubt, one might argue they may be layperson commonsense assumptions, but these would then be rather serious
ones for an ontology for scientific literature. Further scientific perspectives are built in by recording symptoms, such as
Cough and Diarrhea as subclasses of phenotype, with phenotype defined as “The detectable outward manifestations of
a specific genotype.”. This a very gene-centric view on the
body.
Gender is not present, but biological sex is used instead.
The only biological sex recorded in COVoc is male. Published literature on women and COVID-19 easily dates back
to March 2020 (e.g., (Li et al. 2020)), however, which is well
before COVoc’s development.
Since CIDO and CODO had different test statuses, it was
examined in COVoc as well. It has seven options: there
is a possible case (meeting clinical criteria), a probable
case (meeting clinical criteria, with epidemiological link, or
meeting the diagnostic criteria), and once confirmed there
are five types of infection: asymptomatic, mild, moderate,
severe, and critical. There are no test outcomes, only, rapid
testing and serology test.
Since many terms are plain science terms, like replicase
polyprotein 1a (BtCoV) and cryogenic electron microscopy,
there are no obvious language or linguistic issues in the
sense of bias, other than an English bias that nearly all existing ontologies have. One arguably may be COVoc’s Social
distance compared to physical distancing, but the latter has
the former as net effect and so the line is not clear. Economic

motivations or possible benefits or losses are not evident either.

Discussion: Consequences of bias in ontologies
Having established that there are indeed biases in ontologies,
does it really matter beyond the hypothetical issues and the
increased morbidity and mortality in case of the hormone
replacement therapy? They do and there are several ways
where it can affect it, with the three principle ones being due
to omissions, incorrect attributions, and undesirable deductions that are logically correct but not ontologically or not
according to the other bias.
Omissions and incorrect attributions have a direct effect on data analysis, since they increase the amount of
noise (technically speaking) when the ontology is used for
ontology-based data access and literature annotation and
search. For instance, while mortality rates of men are higher
for COVID-19, relatively more women get infected; if that
cannot be annotated, since absent in COVoc, then the emerging literature is harder to search to find studies on possible causes for why women are tested positive more often
than men. Similarly, the lack of the concept of household,
or at least more family members, in CODO, prohibits finergrained recording of the chain of infection and thus more
likely to lose control of the spread of the virus.
Incorrect attributions have to do with the annotator not
finding the desired knowledge in the ontology and then using something else for it. For instance, if, say, Ireland were
to use CIDO, then the walk-through testing facility at Dublin
Airport can be approximated by CIDO’s drive-thru one in the
sense of passing by or FDA authorised in the sense of being
an official test location. More generally: annotators choose
approximations based on different criteria, so any data analysis then will both miss instances and have false positives.
Also, and aside from the fact that the different variations on
test outcomes contributes to the data integration problem, a
presumptive positive annotation is, on the whole, an incorrect label in about 45-95% of the time and would seriously
distort epidemiological investigations and overload tracking
and tracing efforts on top of it. That is, as long as the ontology does not fully characterise all the properties of an entity
type so as to be clear on the exact semantics, there is a heavier reliance on the term, with language alone being an easier
target to be used or interpreted with bias.
An example of an undesirable deduction resulting from a
bias built into an ontology would be the drugs with CIDO,
which is illustrated in Fig. 4. CIDO aims to facilitate data
integration (He et al. 2020), which could be done with,
say, ontology-based data access (OBDA) and integration
to link data to ontologies (Poggi et al. 2008) where each
class and object property in the ontology is mapped to a
query over the database(s). A query over the ontology then
avails of those mappings to retrieve the answer, together
with the knowledge represented in the ontology. Hydroxychloroquine is still used as an experimental drug in COVID19 clinical trials and is listed as such in the clinical trials
registry database7 , so then the query “retrieve all COVID7

There

are

24

active

trials

with

hydroxychloroquine

Mapping: SELECT Drug FROM fda
WHERE Condition = ‘COVID-19’;
FDA database

COVID-19
drug

COVID-19
experimental drug

COVID-19 experimental
drug in clinical trial

Mapping:
SELECT Intervention FROM CTgov
WHERE Condition = ‘COVID-19’;

ClinicalTrials.gov database

Query
“retrieve all COVID-19 drugs”
Answer

Figure 4: Ontology-based data access and integration scenario with CIDO and two database tables, from the ClinicalTrials.gov and FDA (selection shown, and mappings to the
OWL classes are abbreviated). Retrieving COVID-19 drug
recursively fetches from the subclasses in the hierarchy and
takes the union of the query answer to each subclass, thus
then returning that hydroxychloroquine is already a COVID19 drug, which is an undesirable deduction from both a scientific and regulatory standpoint.

19 drugs” will include in the query answer hydroxychloroquine, since it recursively retrieves the instances down in
the class hierarchy for all COVID-19 drug subclasses. Hydroxychloroquine is definitely not a drug to effectively treat
COVID-19, however, nor has it been approved for that purpose in any country.
None of the COVID-19 ontologies have any meaningful
deductions along the line of the protein phosphatase experiment that deduced a novelty for human understanding of it at
the theory level (Wolstencroft, Stevens, and Haarslev 2007),
nor are they aimed at achieving that at present. Issues such
as the robot in Example 1 and Fig. 1, which similarly can be
transposed on the gender binary bias, would likely surface
during ontology development since typically the reasoner is
used to eliminate errors and then the deductions are materialsed so that the reasoner is not needed in time-sensitive
applications other than for query answering. Alternatively, a
light-wight ontology language is used from the start so that
for COVID-19 at the time of writing (of the 47 in total)
https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/results?term=Hydroxychloroquine&
Search=Apply&recrs=d&age v=&gndr=&type=&rslt=;
last
accessed on 15-1-2021.

disagreements do not surface due to lack of language expressiveness, notably because of the absence of disjointness
and qualified cardinality constraints. Therefore, our expectation is that the effects of bias with respect to reasoning
consequences may be more salient in data management and
retrieving information rather than in reasoning over the logical theory itself.

Conclusions
Bias in the models easily creep into an ontology for various reasons. Eight types of sources of bias for ontologies
were identified and illustrated: philosophical, purpose, science, granularity, linguistic, socio-cultural, political or religious, and economic motives. Some of them are explicit, and
some may be either explicit or implicit. Three COVID-19
ontologies that were developed at the same time by different
groups were assessed on these types of bias, which showed
that each one exhibited a subset of the types of sources of
bias. This first characterisation and comparative assessment
may contribute to further research into ethical aspects of ontologies, both the modelling component and how it affects
their use in applications.
As future work, we plan to look into a systematic way assessing and annotating explicit choices in the ontology, since
ontologies tend to be decoupled from any possible related
ontology paper that otherwise could have provided context.

References
Arp, R.; Smith, B.; and Spear, A. D. 2015. Building Ontologies with Basic Formal Ontology. USA: The MIT Press.
Baader, F.; Calvanese, D.; McGuinness, D. L.; Nardi, D.;
and Patel-Schneider, P. F., eds. 2008. The Description Logics Handbook – Theory and Applications. Cambridge University Press, 2 edition.
Dumontier, M.; Baker, C.; Baran, J.; Callahan, A.; Chepelev, L.; Cruz-Toledo, J.; Del Rio, N.; Duck, G.; Furlong,
L.; Keath, N.; Klassen, D.; McCusker, J.; Queralt-Rosinach,
N.; Samwald, M.; Villanueva-Rosales, N.; Wilkinson, M.;
and Hoehndorf, R. 2014. The Semanticscience Integrated
Ontology (SIO) for biomedical research and knowledge discovery. Journal of Biomedical Semantics 5(1): 14. ISSN
2041-1480. doi:10.1186/2041-1480-5-14.
Dutta, B.; and DeBellis, M. 2020. CODO: an ontology for
collection and analysis of COVID-19 data. In Proc. of 12th
Int. Conf. on Knowledge Engineering and Ontology Development (KEOD’20). INSTICC.
Gene Ontology Consortium. 2000. Gene Ontology: tool for
the unification of biology. Nature Genetics 25: 25–29.
Gomes, D. L.; and Bragato Barros, T. H. 2020. The Bias in
Ontologies: An Analysis of the FOAF Ontology. In Lykke,
M.; Svarre, T.; Skov, M.; and Martı́nez-Ávila, D., eds., Proceedings of the Sixteenth International ISKO Conference,
236 – 244. Ergon-Verlag. doi:10.5771/9783956507762-236.
Haendel, M. A.; McMurry, J. A.; Relevo, R.; Mungall, C. J.;
Robinson, P. N.; and Chute, C. G. 2018. A Census of Disease

Ontologies. Annual Review of Biomedical Data Science 1:
305–331.
He, Y.; Yu, H.; Ong, E.; Wang, Y.; Liu, Y.; Huffman, A.;
hui Huang, H.; Beverley, J.; Lin, A. Y.; Duncan, W. D.; Arabandi, S.; Xie, J.; Hur, J.; Yang, X.; Chen, L.; Omenn, G. S.;
Athey, B.; and Smith, B. 2020. CIDO: The Communitybased CoronavirusInfectious Disease Ontology. In Hastings, J.; and Loebe, F., eds., Proceedings of the 11th international Conference on Biomedical Ontologies, volume 28xx.
CEUR-WS.
Hepp, M. 2008. GoodRelations: An Ontology for Describing Products and Services Offers on the Web. In Proceedings of the 16th International Conference on Knowledge Engineering and Knowledge Management (EKAW’08), volume
5268 of LNCS, 332–347. Springer.
Jindal, R.; Seeja, K.; and Jain, S. 2020. Construction of domain ontology utilizing formal concept analysis and social
media analytics. International Journal of Cognitive Computing in Engineering 1: 62 – 69. ISSN 2666-3074. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijcce.2020.11.003.
Juel Vang, K. 2013. Ethics of Google’s Knowledge Graph:
some considerations. Journal of Information, Communication and Ethics in Society 11(4): 245–260.
Keet, C. M. 2009.
Dirty wars, databases, and indices. Peace & Conflict Review 4(1): 75–78. URL
http://www.review.upeace.org/index.cfm?opcion=0&
ejemplar=18&entrada=94.
Keet, C. M. 2018. An introduction to ontology engineering,
volume 20 of Computing. UK: College Publications. 334p.
Keet, C. M.; and Khumalo, L. 2018. On the ontology of
part-whole relations in Zulu language and culture. In Borgo,
S.; and Hitzler, P., eds., 10th International Conference on
Formal Ontology in Information Systems 2018 (FOIS’18),
volume 306 of FAIA, 225–238. IOS Press. 17-21 September,
2018, Cape Town, South Africa.
Li, N.; Han, L.; Peng, M.; Lv, Y.; Ouyang, Y.; Liu, K.; Yue,
L.; Li, Q.; Sun, G.; Chen, L.; and Yang, L. 2020. Maternal and Neonatal Outcomes of Pregnant Women With Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) Pneumonia: A CaseControl Study. Clinical Infectious Diseases 71(16): 2035–
2041. ISSN 1058-4838. doi:10.1093/cid/ciaa352.
Liao, B.; Slavkovik, M.; and van der Torre, L. 2019. Building Jiminy Cricket: An Architecture for Moral Agreements Among Stakeholders. In Proceedings of the 2019
AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society, AIES
2019, Honolulu, HI, USA, January 27-28, 2019, 147–153.
doi:10.1145/3306618.3314257.
Lundin, A.; Hallgren, M.; Forsman, M.; and Forsell, Y.
2015. Comparison of DSM-5 Classifications of Alcohol Use
Disorders With Those of DSM-IV, DSM-III-R, and ICD-10
in a General Population Sample in Sweden. J Stud Alcohol
Drugs 76(5): 773–780.
Masolo, C.; Borgo, S.; Gangemi, A.; Guarino, N.;
and Oltramari, A. 2003.
Ontology Library.
WonderWeb Deliverable D18 (ver. 1.0, 31-12-2003).
Http://wonderweb.semanticweb.org.

McCrae, J.; de Cea, G. A.; Buitelaar, P.; Cimiano, P.;
Declerck, T.; Gómez-Pérez, A.; Gracia, J.; Hollink, L.;
Montiel-Ponsoda, E.; Spohr, D.; and Wunner, T. 2012.
The Lemon Cookbook. Technical report, Monnet Project.
Www.lemon-model.net.
Merrill, G. H. 2010. Ontological realism: Methodology or
misdirection? Applied Ontology 5(2): 79–108.
Motik, B.; Patel-Schneider, P. F.; and Parsia, B. 2009. OWL
2 Web Ontology Language Structural Specification and
Functional-Style Syntax. W3c recommendation, W3C. http:
//www.w3.org/TR/owl2-syntax/.
O’Neil, C. 2016. Weapons of Math Destruction: How
Big Data Increases Inequality and Threatens Democracy.
Crown.
Parker, A.; and de Kadt, J. 2020.
Household characteristics in relation to COVID-19 risks in Gauteng.
URL
https://gcro.ac.za/data-gallery/interactive-datavisualisations/detail/household-characteristics-relationcovid-19-risks-gauteng/.
Partridge, C.; Mitchell, A.; Cook, A.; Leal, D.; Sullivan, J.;
and West, M. 2020. A Survey of Top-Level Ontologies - to
inform the ontological choices for a Foundation Data Model.
Technical report, The Construction Innovation Hub, Centre
for Digital Built Britain. doi:ttps://doi.org/10.17863/CAM.
58311.
Pendlington, Z. M.; Roncaglia, P.; Matentzoglu, N.;
Osumi-Sutherland, D.; Caucheteur, D.; Gobeill, J.; Mottin, L.; Agosti, D.; Ruch, P.; and Parkinson, H. 2020.
COVoc: a COVID-19 ontology to support literature
triage.
URL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/CIDOontology/WCO/master/day-1/Zoe COVoc.pdf. WCO-2020:
Workshop on COVID-19 Ontologies.
Poggi, A.; Lembo, D.; Calvanese, D.; De Giacomo, G.;
Lenzerini, M.; and Rosati, R. 2008. Linking Data to Ontologies. J. on Data Semantics X: 133–173.
Rautenbach, J.; and Keet, C. 2020. Toward equipping Artificial Moral Agents with multiple ethical theories. In RobOntics: International Workshop on Ontologies for Autonomous
Robotics, volume 2708 of CEUR-WS, 7.
Smith, B.; Ashburner, M.; Rosse, C.; Bard, J.; Bug,
W.; Ceusters, W.; Goldberg, L.; Eilbeck, K.; Ireland, A.;
Mungall, C.; OBI Consortium, T.; Leontis, N.; Rocca-Serra,
A.; Ruttenberg, A.; Sansone, S.-A.; Shah, M.; Whetzel, P.;
and Lewis, S. 2007. The OBO Foundry: Coordinated Evolution of Ontologies to Support Biomedical Data Integration.
Nature Biotechnology 25(11): 1251–1255.
Smith, B.; Ceusters, W.; Klagges, B.; Köhler, J.; Kumar,
A.; Lomax, J.; Mungall, C.; Neuhaus, F.; Rector, A. L.;
and Rosse, C. 2005. Relations in biomedical ontologies.
Genome Biology 6: R46.
TOS Obesity as a Disease Writing Group; Allison, D. B.;
Downey, M.; Atkinson, R. L.; Billington, C. J.; Bray, G. A.;
Eckel, R. H.; Finkelstein, E. A.; Jensen, M. D.; and Tremblay, A. 2008. Obesity as a Disease: A White Paper on
Evidence and Arguments Commissioned by the Council

of The Obesity Society. Obesity 16(6): 1161–1177. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1038/oby.2008.231.
Uschold, M.; and Gruninger, M. 1996. Ontologies: principles, methods and applications. Knowledge Engineering Review 11(2): 93–136. URL https://doi.org/10.1017/
S0269888900007797.
Veerasamy, N.; Grobler, M.; and Solms, B. V. 2012. Building an Ontology for Cyberterrorism. In Filiol, E.; and Erra,
R., eds., Proceedings of the11th European Conference on
Information Warfare and Security, 286–295. Academic Publishing International.
Wakefield, J. C. 2015. DSM-5 substance use disorder: How
conceptual missteps weakened the foundations of the addictive disorders field. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica 132(5):
327–334.
Wolstencroft, K.; Stevens, R.; and Haarslev, V. 2007. Applying OWL reasoning to genomic data. In Baker, C.; and
Cheung, H., eds., Semantic Web: revolutionizing knowledge
discovery in the life sciences, 225–248. Springer: New York.

