Remote Learners, Home Makers: How Digital Fabrication Was
Taught Online During a Pandemic
Gabrielle Benabdallah
University of Washington

Nadya Peek

University of Washington

arXiv:2101.11054v2 [cs.HC] 28 Jan 2021

ABSTRACT
Digital fabrication courses that relied on physical makerspaces
were severely disrupted by COVID-19. As universities shut down
in Spring 2020, instructors developed new models for digital fabrication at a distance. Through interviews with faculty and students
and examination of course materials, we recount the experiences
of eight remote digital fabrication courses. We found that learning
with hobbyist equipment and online social networks could emulate using industrial equipment in shared workshops. Furthermore,
at-home digital fabrication offered unique learning opportunities
including more iteration, machine tuning, and maintenance. These
opportunities depended on new forms of labor and varied based on
student living situations. Our findings have implications for remote
and in-person digital fabrication instruction. They indicate how
access to tools was important, but not as critical as providing opportunities for iteration; they show how remote fabrication exacerbated student inequities; and they suggest strategies for evaluating
trade-offs in remote fabrication models with respect to learning
objectives.

CCS CONCEPTS
• Applied computing → Education; • Human-centered computing → HCI theory, concepts and models.

KEYWORDS
Digital Fabrication, Remote Learning, Pandemic
ACM Reference Format:
Gabrielle Benabdallah, Samuelle Bourgault, Nadya Peek, and Jennifer Jacobs. 2021. Remote Learners, Home Makers: How Digital Fabrication Was
Taught Online During a Pandemic. In CHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems (CHI ’21), May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan. ACM, New
York, NY, USA, 14 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3411764.3445450

1

INTRODUCTION

The COVID-19 pandemic created drastic societal changes at a global
scale. In the United States, a public health emergency was declared
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan
© 2021 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-8096-6/21/05.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3411764.3445450

Samuelle Bourgault

University of California, Santa Barbara

Jennifer Jacobs

University of California, Santa Barbara
in early March 2020. In response to stay-at-home orders and socialdistancing restrictions, higher education pivoted to online instruction. This change posed challenges for all types of learning. Educators had to adopt new forms of remote instruction with limited time
to plan or share approaches. Classes that were centered around
physical making required particularly radical changes because universities were forced to shut down physical workshops, labs, and
studios. Educators across art, design, and engineering had to rapidly
develop new strategies to compensate for the loss of these spaces.
In this paper, we examine the impacts of remote instruction for
a particular form of physical making: digital fabrication. Physical making offers unique learning opportunities [22]. Digital fabrication extends these opportunities by enabling students to design and manufacture custom physical objects through a combination of computer-aided design and machining (CAD and CAM)
and physical computer-numerical-control (CNC) machines [10].
Digital fabrication technologies are often a central component of
makerspaces—shared workshops with access to tools and materials that support physical making. Makerspaces are increasingly
prevalent in universities [30], providing students with access to
shared digital fabrication tools and software such as 3D printers,
laser cutters, and CAD/CAM software, as well as opportunities
for community support through fostered cultures of making and
tinkering [21].
Despite losing access to digital fabrication equipment and inperson communities, many educators still held their digital fabrication classes in the Spring of 2020 [17]. Given the unique challenges of teaching digital fabrication without a makerspace, we
sought to understand what happened during those classes. Our
work is guided by two research questions. First, how did people
teach digital fabrication remotely during the pandemic? In
particular, we wanted to examine how instructors remotely taught
computer-aided design and computer-controlled fabrication, how
they provided and organized community, and what trade-offs they
had to consider in the process. Second, how can we learn from
instructors’ efforts to teach digital fabrication in a crisis to
improve remote instruction of digital fabrication in the future? The pivot to remote instruction was the result of a terrible
crisis; however, it also created a unique opportunity to examine
new strategies for learning through digital fabrication. We sought
to understand what elements of these strategies were effective and
how they could be improved in the future.
As digital fabrication researchers, as well as educators and students who taught or took remote digital fabrication courses in the
spring of 2020, the authors of this paper were both observers and
subjects of the phenomena we examined. As a result, our research is

CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan

structured around analysis of remote fabrication instruction in both
our own courses and in the courses of others. We used a preliminary
analysis of our course outcomes to guide a formal set of interviews
with instructors and students in six remote fabrication courses
from different universities. These interviews examined peoples’
experiences planning, teaching, and participating in remote digital
fabrication courses, as well as the challenges and opportunities that
emerged from the remote format.
Our paper makes the following contributions. First, drawing
from both our classes and the classes of others, we define and document five models of remote fabrication instruction that were used
over the spring of 2020. Second, through a recounting of our course
outcomes and a thematic analysis of our interviews, we surface
themes on shifts in labor caused by remote fabrication access, learning opportunities of remote fabrication instruction, approaches to
gaining tacit knowledge remotely, and remote collaborative practices for physical making. These themes highlight assumptions
about home-work, and remote-work, as well as the tensions that
arise from different ways of combining them. Third, we discuss
what was lost and what was gained in the remote format, what
was crucial about work performed by instructors and students, and
what factors contributed to equity in outcomes. Combined, these
contributions have implications for human-computer interaction
(HCI) researchers studying digital fabrication and learning. Moreover, as the risks of the novel coronavirus persist and the future of
in-person instruction remains uncertain, our work provides practical details on viable approaches for remote instruction for physical
making in the future.

2

BACKGROUND

Digital fabrication encompasses a wide range of practices. At a high
level, it can describe any form of computer-controlled fabrication.
This means digital fabrication contains many different elements,
including computer-aided design (CAD), robotic path planning and
computer-aided manufacturing (CAM), computer-numerically controlled (CNC) processes, and (robotic) placement or assembly. These
processes happens across length scales, ranging from the fabrication and assembly of Frank Gehry architecture [7] to the nanometer
scale fabrication of micro-electromechanical systems such as the
accelerometers in a game controller [34]. HCI contributes to digital
fabrication research in many ways, including through novel tools
for computational design [16, 31], materials [15, 35], fabrication
[18, 33], and collaboration [14, 38].
Teaching digital fabrication might take place in anywhere from
a cleanroom [23], to a mechanical engineering shop [19], to an
architecture studio [11]. University digital fabrication research labs
may have equipment that rivals industrial digital fabrication production factories, featuring large scale 6-axis robotic arms, milling
machines, water jet cutters, and other pieces of $100k+ equipment
[13, 26, 27]. The courses we studied were slated to be taught in
university spaces that ranged in tool sophistication and application
from large robot arms to programmable embroidery machines.
Beyond differences in equipment, courses incorporating digital fabrication can also differ in their learning goals. While some
courses focus on developing particular skills such as designing in
3D or fabricating with a CNC mill [36], others might emphasize

Benabdallah, et al.

more abstract learning goals, such as providing students with the
environment in which they will conduct self-directed projects while
managing resources such as materials, shared equipment, and time
[37], or using making for critical inquiry [24]. Managing spaces
with diverging goals has unique challenges, including equipment
cost, staffing, hours of operation, rent, community organization,
maintenance, and safety.
The rise of the maker movement [8] and increased demand for
makerspaces (academic and otherwise) has led to the development
of maker-oriented, lower-cost digital fabrication equipment. These
more affordable machines have increased access to digital fabrication tools and reduced cost of managing spaces with digital fabrication capabilities. The growth of makerspaces has also led to
research on the efficacy of makerspaces as a learning environment
[2]. Early advocates of makerspaces in formal education include
Mike and Ann Eisenberg, who argued that hands-on interacting
with materials can offer a tangible way of thinking through important and expressive ideas [9], and Paulo Blikstein, who stated that
digital fabrication and maker culture could be considered the “the
ultimate construction kit” with significant advantages for interdisciplinary and contextualized learning, powerful experiences, and
team building [3]. Scholarship in digital fabrication and learning is
now extensive and covered in new places including the FabLearn
conference [12], first held in 2011, which focuses on hands-on learning and the role of digital fabrication in education, and International
Symposium of Academic Makerspaces (ISAM) [28], first held in
2016, which focuses on starting and running academic makerspaces.
Makerspaces make up more than just tools in a space. They are
also places for gathering, peer-learning environments, and an attitude [21]. The makerspace environment shapes the ways students
learn, therefore integrating makerspaces into formal education has
not been without growing pains. Researchers have found that social
interaction and discourse, especially as means to build community
and maker attitudes, are crucial for learning in K-12 [6] and other
[21] makerspaces. Makerspaces located at universities increasingly
show a diversity of implementation, from large digital fabrication
research labs to small student groups focused on making. We refer
to all spaces where digital fabrication was taught on campus as
makerspaces, despite their breadth. Regardless, none of the courses
we surveyed were able to work on campus. Our study is unique, as
it was held at a time of unprecedented changes to higher education.
Well before the pandemic, websites such as Instructables, Thingiverse, and YouTube provided online community gathering spaces
for making and sharing designs. These online spaces have their own
online-specific challenges in terms of onboarding newcomers, welcoming diversity, and encouraging sharing and remixing [1, 25, 32].
Nonetheless, online maker sites demonstrate a thriving practice
of online documentation, sharing experiences, and encouraging
participation. Many of the instructors we surveyed drew from such
sites when restructuring their courses.
HCI contributes crucial analysis of the promises and practices
of maker culture by engaging with and unpacking the complex
social, cultural, and economic conditions that makers operate within
[20, 29]. These critical analyses improve the culture and spaces in
which we teach and learn, and we aim for the work in this paper to
contribute to this discussion.

Remote Learners, Home Makers

3

METHODS

Our research is centered on two datasets: 1) autobiographical from
our own remote fabrication courses from the spring of 2020, and 2)
interviews with instructors and students who taught or attended
remote fabrication courses at other universities. In this section
we outline our methodology for assembling and analyzing these
two datasets to provide context to the claims we make in following
sections. To contextualize our methods and analysis, we also provide
background on the research team.

3.1

Author Background

Nadya and Jennifer are professors at public universities who collaborate in research on digital fabrication. They both taught remote graduate-level digital fabrication courses in the spring 2020.
Gabrielle and Samuelle are PhD students in interdisciplinary art,
design, and engineering departments who research design and making. Gabrielle and Samuelle were students in Nadya and Jennifer’s
courses, respectively.

3.2

Preliminary Analysis of Author Courses

Following the conclusion of the Spring 2020 academic quarter,
Nadya and Jennifer theorized that deeper examination of approaches
to remote digital fabrication could inform instruction efforts in the
future. They initiated their research efforts by analyzing the outcomes of their own courses. They collected public online posting of
student projects and written student reflections. They met regularly
for three weeks to review this data and discuss their experiences as
instructors. They extracted preliminary themes from their course
data through the collaborative writing and editing of a written reflection. Their writing process was organized around 1) examining
of the effects of the remote format to learning outcomes and 2)
evaluating of the impacts of at-home fabrication equipment [17].

3.3

Interview and Analysis Methods for
External Instructors

Following the analysis of Nadya and Jennifer’s courses, Samuelle
and Gabrielle were brought on as collaborators. Together, we used
the preliminary themes from Nadya and Jennifer’s course analysis
to determine selection criteria and interview structure for instructors and students in remote fabrication courses at other universities.
We identified potential interview candidates through a short online survey that collected information on the general approaches
university educators used to teach digital fabrication remotely. We
received 23 survey responses over a period of one week. We selected
eight individuals representing six different courses for interviews—
five instructors via the survey and three additional co-instructors
of the same course who were recommended by a colleague. We
selected instructors who represented a range of models of remote
fabrication instruction to study how different people compensated
for the loss of in-person makerspaces. Instructors were our primary
focus, however we also conducted interviews with three students
in three of the external courses to contrast instructor and student
experiences.
Interviews were conducted remotely over video conference and
lasted one hour. Interviews with instructors and students focused

CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan

on their experiences planning, teaching, and participating in remote digital fabrication courses, challenges and opportunities that
emerged from the remote format, and how the experience impacted
their perspective on teaching or participating in digital fabrication
in the future. All interviews were audio recorded and transcribed. To
analyze the data we conducted a reflexive thematic analysis [4, 5] focusing on latent themes. Following each interview, the authors met
and discussed initial aspects of the data. After all interviews were
complete, each author open-coded a subset of interview transcripts.
Gabrielle performed an initial conceptualization of the codes into
preliminary themes and all authors discussed these initial themes.
Based on the outcomes of this discussion, Jennifer performed a secondary review and refinement of the themes identified by Gabrielle.
The themes were further refined in a final group discussion. Out of
a list of eleven themes, we selected a subset of four that we believed
were the most important due to their consistent presence in all the
interviews and the amount of data we compiled on them.

3.4

Limitations

We relied, in part, on autobiographical data. The shutdown offered
a unique opportunity to study the uncommon practice of remote
digital fabrication instruction in its early stages. We incorporated
autobiographical data in this research because we used an instruction model that was not present in our external data. Furthermore,
by including an analysis of our own experiences, we provide context
for the motivation of this research and the conclusions we made. We
compared courses in different departments and subjects; however,
instructors apply digital fabrication technologies for different learning objectives. This factor was evident in our data and impacted
the approaches individual instructors took when selecting models
for remote instruction. We saw value in surveying the ways remote
digital fabrication supports learning across domains, however future studies which examine remote fabrication in a specific area
will likely provide domain-specific insights. We discussed how the
remote learning format exacerbated uneven access to resources for
students. We believed this was a point of particular importance for
current and future remote digital fabrication instruction. Our data
did not allow us to provide a more detailed picture of how discrepancies among students’ living situations impacted their learning
during the pandemic. Further research is needed to understand and
address this key factor in successful and equitable remote teaching
of digital fabrication.

4

COURSE SUMMARIES

In total, we analyzed the outcomes of eight remote courses involving digital fabrication ( table 1). In this section, we summarize
the structure of each course, focusing on the models instructors
used to retain access to digital fabrication technologies and hands
on making.

4.1

Author Course Summaries

Nadya and Jennifer’s courses used the same model for remote digital
fabrication instruction: students were shipped hobbyist 3D printers
and all digital fabrication instruction was oriented around these
machines (at home machines).

CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan

Benabdallah, et al.

Figure 1: A wide range of student work was produced in remote digital fabrication classes in Spring 2020. A) Yanrong Chen’s
sculpture with many interlocking parts iteratively printed in HCDE598 B) Design of a space frame from a single node to
robotic assembly in R.A.W. C) A marble maze collaborative CAD project in ME102 D) Samuelle’s bioplastic cast in 3D printed
molds in MAT594X E) Conductive silicone mixed with a fork-drill in kitchen containers by Pippa Kelmenson in ITP-Tangible
Interaction F) Vinyl lamp iterations by Aidan Lincoln in ITP-Subtraction G) Pen holder designs for a robotic arm by Samuel
Rushenberg in Arch438X H) Jaideep Cherukuri, Scout Handford, Jahangir Abbas Mohammed, Abrar Syed & Miyuki Weldon
combining electronics and 3D prints in DESINV190/290-9 I) Kat Sung using found and recycled objects in DESMA160-4.

Remote Learners, Home Makers

4.1.1 HCDE598 - Digital Fabrication. HCDE598 was a course developed by Nadya in Human-Centered Design and Engineering,
an interdisciplinary department at the University of Washington.
Twenty students enrolled in this quarter-long course in Spring 2020,
supported by two TAs. The course introduced students to CAD and
prototyping tools for making physical artifacts. For remote instruction students were asked to purchase a $250 3D printer alongside
hand tools (e.g., calipers and Exacto knives) and materials (e.g., 3D
printing filament, silicone, plaster, and cardboard.) The total cost
per student was ±$350.
4.1.2 MAT594X - Computational Fabrication. MAT594X was a course
developed by Jennifer in Media Arts and Technology, an interdisciplinary graduate department at the University of California, Santa
Barbara. The course included twelve students from Media Arts and
Technology and Computer Science. The course emphasized computational fabrication; students used programming languages to
design for and control digital fabrication machines. For the Spring
2020 quarter, Jennifer used a combination of research funds and
departmental resources to purchase low-cost 3D printers, PLA filaments and additional supplies, such as specialty filament, casting
materials, and electronic and lighting components, to send to students. The total cost per student ranged from $250-350.

4.2

External Course Summaries

We identified four additional models for remote digital fabrication across the six external courses we surveyed: simulation of
fabrication with CAD/CAM (simulation), ordering from online
fabrication vendors (online-vendors), converting the university
makerspace to a service (makerspace-to-jobshop) , and having
students or instructors fabricate parts for other students with athome equipment (instructor/student-technicians). In addition
to these models of digital fabrication access, we observed three
supplemental strategies for retaining hands on making: shipping
materials and hand tools directly to students (material shipping),
requiring students to independently source their own materials
and hand tools (student sourcing), and having students rely on
materials and tools already in their homes (home materials).
4.2.1 ME102 - Foundations of Product Realization. ME102 was
a quarter-long Mechanical Engineering course taught by Mark
Cutkosky at Stanford University. Sixty engineering undergraduate
students enrolled. Approximately 10 TAs were also assigned to this
course. The course objective was to engage students with a designto-fabrication process through the making of iterative prototypes
using digital fabrication machines in a shared workshop. To adapt
to remote-learning, the focus of the course shifted to emphasize
online collaboration in CAD. Students constructed physical projects
as low fidelity prototypes using materials at home (e.g., cardboard,
foam core, Exacto knives, and glue.) In one assignment, instructors
used on-demand fabrication services to 3D print students’ designs.
The total cost was less than $100 per student and covered by the
department.
4.2.2 Arch438X - Architectural Robotics. Arch438X was developed
and taught for the first time in Spring 2020 by Shelby Doyle in the

CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan

Architecture Department at Iowa State University. This semesterlong course became remote mid-semester. Twenty-four undergraduate students enrolled. Arch438X acted as an introduction to robotics
and aimed to expand students’ perception of the role of robots in
architecture. The course was designed to give hands-on experience
in making small robots and in using a KUKA industrial robot recently acquired by the ISU Computation+Construction Lab (CCL).
The CCL lab also included digital fabrication equipment, robotic
devices, hand tools and power tools. In the shutdown, the robots
became unavailable and the goal of the course shifted to focus on
simulation and speculative design.
4.2.3 DESMA160-4 - Survival Tools in Weird Times. This quarterlong course was a variation of DESMA22 - Form, and was created
specifically for remote instruction in Spring 2020. It was taught by
Paul Esposito in the Department of Design and Media Arts (DMA)
at the University of California, Los Angeles. Twenty-one undergraduate art students with different levels of experience with fabrication
enrolled. To adapt to the lack of fabrication lab equipment and materials, DESMA160-4 focused on the theme of survivalism and its
intersection with maker culture. Paul had two 3D printers and a
sewing machine at home and offered to print and sew the designs
of his students and mail them the results. Students who wanted to
hand sew their own designs were also shipped a sewing kit. The
course budget included $12 kits for each student and an additional
$500 materials budget which Paul used for 3D printing filament.
4.2.4 R.A.W. - Robotic Architecture Workshop. R.A.W. was a remote workshop that was taught at Princeton University during
Summer 2020 by James Coleman through the Black Box Research
Group in the Architecture department. The workshop was two
weeks long and James and two graduate TAs met with students
six times over this period. Six students enrolled, including civil
engineering Ph.D. students, architecture graduate students, and
undergraduate students from the Engineering and Architecture
departments. The objective was to familiarize participants with
the design-to-fabrication-to-assembly workflow required to make
space frames using sheet metal. The in-person format would have
involved making metal parts in an industrial shop then assembling
them robotically. This experience was replaced with robotic simulation and paper prototyping using a Silhouette Cameo 4 vinyl cutter.
Some of the students received a $280 vinyl cutter and all students
had a materials stipend of $90.
4.2.5 ITP-Subtraction & ITP-Tangible Interaction. ITP-Subtraction
& ITP-Tangible Interaction were two semester-long graduate classes
taught and co-taught by Ben Light at the New York University
Tisch School of the Arts within the Interactive Telecommunications Program (ITP). Fifteen students enrolled in ITP-Subtraction
and fourteen enrolled in ITP-Tangible Interaction. ITP-Subtraction
was intended to be an introduction to subtractive fabrication techniques with hands-on experience with machines and ITP-Tangible
Interaction was intended to focus on making physical interfaces.
For in person courses, each student paid $300 in lab fees and could
either buy their own material or use lab scrap for free. Both courses
moved online half way through the semester. To adapt, Ben shipped
a Silhouette Cameo vinyl cutter to each ITP-Subtraction student
and focused on two-dimensional fabrication techniques for the rest

CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan

Benabdallah, et al.

Interview Subjects
Course

Instructors

Students

Fabrication Access Models

Field

School

HCDE598

Nadya Peek

N/A

at-home machines, material
shipping

HCI/Engineering/
Design

University of Washington

MAT594X

Jennifer Jacobs

N/A

at-home machines

HCI/CS/New Media Art

University of California
Santa Barbara

ME102

Mark Cutkosky

S1

simulation, online-vendor,
student sourcing, home
materials

Engineering

Stanford

Arch438X

Shelby Doyle

S2

simulation,
makerspace-to-jobshop

Architecture

Iowa State

DESMA160-4

Paul Esposito

N/A

instructor-technician,
material shipping

Fine Arts

UCLA

R.A.W.

James Coleman

S4

student-technician

Architecture

Princeton

ITP-Subtraction

Ben Light

N/A

at-home machines,
student-technician, student
sourcing

Fine Arts

NYU

DESINV190/290-9

Vivek Rao,
Adam Patrick
Hutz, George
Moore

N/A

online-vendor

Engineering/Design

Berkeley

Table 1: Summary of Surveyed Courses

of the course. The machines cost $200 each and were covered by
the department. Ben removed the digital fabrication aspect of ITPTangible Interaction during the second half of the semester to focus
mainly on physical computing.
4.2.6 DESINV190/290-9 - Technology Design Foundations.
DESINV190/290-9 was taught by Vivek Rao, Adam Patrick Hutz,
and George Moore within the Jacobs Institute for Design Innovation in the College of Engineering at the University of California,
Berkeley. The course was originally designed for graduate students
but most of the twenty students enrolled during the Spring 2020
semester were undergraduates. DESINV190/290-9 was developed
to familiarize students with a human-centered design process. This
process included sketching ideas, conducting interviews and analyzing data in order to validate a design, prototyping at different
levels of fidelity, using digital fabrication machines, and integrating
interactive digital systems to fabricate objects. When the university
makerspace closed midway through the curriculum, the instructors
decided to use on-demand fabrication services for the rest of the
semester. The students received a budget of $250 per team to order
parts from several online fabrication vendors.

5

REMOTE INSTRUCTION WITH AT HOME
3D PRINTERS

In this section, we describe the themes that emerged from analysis
of author-led courses, HCDE598 and MAT594X, in response to our
first research question (How did people teach digital fabrication

remotely during the pandemic?). We focused on: 1) the impacts
of at-home 3D printers on student workflows and domestic activities, 2) the unique learning opportunities of hobbyist machines
in comparison to workshop equipment, and 3) the ways students
developed tacit knowledge while engaged in remote instruction.

5.1

Impacts of At-Home 3D Printers

Shipping printers to students’ homes created a situation where students were simultaneously living with printers and creating objects
for personal use with them. Several students also took personal
initiative or assignment contexts to use the printers to design home
goods or to repair or augment existing objects in their home. One
MAT594X student created a program that generated designs for a
customizable self-watering planter, and one student in HCDE598
created a modular lamp integrated with internal lighting components to create different patterns of light diffusion.
Projects such as these conformed to many aspects of personal fabrication; the objects were custom-designed and fabricated by their
maker as opposed to mass-manufactured and purchased. At-home
access to the machines did not simplify or accelerate production, or
lead to fundamentally new design and manufacturing workflows.
Instead, producing these products required students to engage in
design workflows that reflected elements of real-world design, manufacturing, and craft. Students in both HCDE598 and MAT594X
engaged in learning, design, testing, and iteration; and required
peer support when fabricating personal objects for home use. These

Remote Learners, Home Makers

processes were odds with product-focused visions of personal fabrication where consumers create custom objects with minimal effort
and knowledge.
The presence of the printers in students’ homes also resulted in
changes to students’ routines and daily activities. Because students
often lived with roommates or occupied small studio apartments,
they often kept their printers in their bedrooms. This, coupled with
long print times and heat, smells, and machine noises generated by
printers, resulted in students coordinating their schedules around
their printers. These factors also created additional stress when
prints failed. The students managed to accommodate the requirements of the printer, but it was not difficult to envision scenarios
where such constraints would be infeasible. There were also elements of at-home 3D printing that provided important forms of
stress relief and pleasure. Students in both courses repeatedly expressed their delight at being able to make physical objects and
seeing the products made by their classmates.

5.2

Learning Opportunities of Hobbyist 3D
Printers

The use of at-home printers had unique opportunities when compared with how students accessed machines in a workshop. Unlike
staff-managed workshop equipment, individual printers required
students to learn about machine maintenance. The Ender 3 Pro required assembly and fine-tuning the printer could greatly improve
printing outcomes. Nadya built this opportunity directly into her
curriculum by making the printer’s assembly and initial calibration one of the first assignments in HCDE598. By the end of the
spring quarter, students in both courses had tuned and modified
their machines to a degree that went significantly beyond the manufacturer documentation. Several students in HCDE598 upgraded
components (such as the fans or power supplies) or 3D printed
components to improve performance (such as clips for wire management, holders for work surface illumination, or filament guides).
These activities enabled students to familiarize themselves with the
machine’s implementation details and performance possibilities in
a form that would not have been feasible in a shared-use setting.
The at-home setup also allowed for constant access to the printers, which in turn allowed students to iterate extensively on their
designs. Repeated design iterations were common in both courses
and went beyond simple optimizations. For example, one student
in MAT594X went through multiple iterations to find a successful printing strategy for sculptures generated from complex photogrammetry data that she had previously only used for digital
designs. Students were also able to create different kinds of artifacts
by developing custom fabrication processes for their machines. In
some cases this involved close integration of manual manipulation and machine fabrication. One student in HCDE598 created a
complex sculpture of interlocking chains and birdhouses, which
were printed as interlocking structures by pausing the printer at
key moments and inserting previously-completed parts (shown in
Figure 1A). Completing the sculpture involved many tens of hours
of print time that were interspersed with regular adjustments or
actions made by the student.

CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan

The quality and sophistication of many student projects in both
classes suggested that at-home 3D printers provided unique learning opportunities for machine maintenance and modification, while
supporting increased design iteration. Such opportunities are often
obstructed when machines are shared and maintained by others.

5.3

Gaining Tacit Knowledge Remotely

The use of at-home 3D printers enabled students to work across
CAD, CAM, and CNC throughout the courses. We observed students iterating in CAD based on initial machine prints, learning to
modify CAM settings based on model geometry, and iterating on
machine and material settings based on settings they looked up and
tuned. These outcomes demonstrate how learning opportunities in
integrating CAD, CAM, and machine operation remained present in
the remote format with some key differences. Students were limited
to learning these concepts with one form of additive fabrication.
In a makerspace they would have had the opportunity to learn
CAD-CAM-CNC design processes for additional subtractive fabrication processes. This limitation was highlighted in a subtractive
CNC/CAM assignment in MAT594X where several students ran
into errors of scale—attempting to fabricate parts that were much
too large or small for the target (simulated machine) or similarly
selecting tooling that was much too small. Direct exposure to subtractive milling hardware and tooling would have likely provided a
way to inform this process in a way that was less feasible through
simulation.
All digital fabrication machines place constraints on what can be
fabricated. Producing successful products requires learning how to
design for these constraints in CAD, how to engage in incremental
testing when working with new equipment and materials, and how
to systematically adjust machine and CAM parameters to optimize
for different geometries. The hobbyist printers imposed more severe
constraints than machines we had used in prior courses, but they
still enabled students to develop these forms of knowledge in the
domain of additive manufacturing.

5.4

Summary

The combined outcomes from two author-led classes that used the
at-home machine model suggested that remote instruction with distributed hobbyist 3D printers is a viable method for graduate-level
digital fabrication courses. Shifting the workshop to the home led
to complex forms of personal fabrication while creating a mix of
positive and negative lifestyle changes. This model offered learning
opportunities that were less feasible in shared makerspaces, such
as maintenance and increased iteration. It also enabled the understanding of tacit knowledge associated with the constraints of the
3D printers.

6

REMOTE INSTRUCTION WITH OTHER
FABRICATION MODELS

In this section we describe the themes that emerged from our
analysis of external remote fabrication courses. We conceptualized themes across three dimensions that built on the analysis of
the author-led courses. 1) We further examine how home life was
impacted by remote fabrication by highlighting how other models

CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan

of instruction introduced new forms of at-home labor for instructors and students. 2) We examine how simulation, online-vendor,
and makerspace-to-jobshop models of machine access shaped learning outcomes in comparison to the at-home machine model of our
courses. 3) We contrast the ways instructors in different disciplines
valued tacit knowledge and attempted to preserve it in a remote
learning environment. We also explore a fourth theme (4) unique to
the external data. We compare strategies for collaboration in remote
fabrication courses through the experience of student teams.

6.1

Benabdallah, et al.

In comparison to the makerspace-as-jobshop and instructor/studenttechnician models, there was evidence that the at-home machines
model led to higher rates of machine access and use. Ben described
how students who received machines were able to use them at
greater rates, and at irregular hours:
The thing I loved about the vinyl cutters more than
anything that actually came out of it, is that students got
to live with the machines. And I think that’s really the
only way to get good at it, right?. . . You get a crazy idea
and then you immediately make it. . . . you somehow
learn [the machine] inside and out. It starts having
quirks that you know. . . . That’s something that never
happened in the past because no one had the machines.
They did it here [on campus] and then they left and
there were 10 people behind them waiting for their turn.
I think it just may not have been the machine they
wanted, but having total access to something and the
time . . . being trapped indoors with nothing but your
vinyl cutter... you know, they learned it.

New Home Labor Through Remote
Fabrication Access

Instructors in the majority of the courses we surveyed worked hard
to create some form of remote digital fabrication access. Each model
of access created new forms of labor for instructors. In cases where
instructors and students fabricated parts for other students with
machines in their homes, they took on the role of shop technicians.
In R.A.W., one student and two TAs acted as vinyl cutter operators
for the other five participants. In ITP-Subtraction several students
took initiative to create their own job shop. As Ben described:
One person bought an Othermill or a Bantam mill and
someone bought 3D printer. [The students] were all sort
of like, “I’ve got this. If you need a part, I’ll run one.”
When students or instructors worked as fabrication technicians,
they took on non-trivial tasks of monitoring production and delivering parts. Mark raised the concern of relying on TAs as technicians
rather than educators.
I need to be a little careful. . . TAs didn’t sign up to become a printing service. They signed up to become teaching assistants and that’s what they want to do.
James described how R.A.W. fabricators were not able to mail the
parts in time and resorted to photographing the pieces, assembling them and sending the photos to the students. These delivery issues were similar to the challenges instructors encountered
when using professional online fabrication services. ME102 and
DESINV190/290-9 used online fabrication vendors, and in both
cases students experienced delays in receiving the parts. The logistics of using online vendors disrupted students’ ability to personally test and revise their parts. Mark described how ME102 TAs
tested on-demand printed parts for students in the lab and Adam
in DESINV190/290-9 explained how shipping delays constrained
students to “only one iteration on the timeline.”
Different models of fabrication access resulted in different degrees of use, depending on how they were implemented. Arch438X
had the option of using the university makerspace as a jobshop,
however students could only receive their parts by picking them
up directly. S2 pointed out that the makerspace-as-jobshop model
was “really only an option for a few people,” adding that “a lot of
people that I know moved home, which could be a couple hours
away. . . a couple of states away.” The student/instructor-technician
model also resulted in limited use in the courses we surveyed. For
DESMA160-4, only two of the 21 students had their parts printed by
Paul. He described how the students who used his home-printing
service were those most motivated to develop their existing CAD
and digital fabrication skills.

When considering the limited use of the instructor/student-technician
model in comparison to at-home machines it is important to note
that instructors made using this model optional. If it were required,
the use rates would likely have been different.
Similar to student experiences in our courses, the presence of
machines at home was also disruptive to home life for instructors
and students to a certain extent. For example, Shelby described
noise interference from her 3D printers when she was on Zoom
calls. She could also hear the printers at night when going to bed.
Machines were not the only source of at-home disruptions. The
expectation to do any physical prototyping could also be a burden
for some students. S1 in ME102 described being unable to prototype
effectively in his home, saying “There’s not really a lot of places in
my house where I can do that kind of work.”
Overall, instructors relied on a wide range of strategies to palliate
the absence of traditional fabrication spaces. Whether they chose
at-home fabrication, a student/instructor-technician model or a
an online-vendor model, the choices they made were closely tied
to the learning objectives of their course. No models were clearly
superior or inferior; rather, each emphasized different aspects of
digital fabrication practice and each surfaced new forms of labor.

6.2

Learning Opportunities of Remote
Fabrication Instruction

Remote instruction required instructors to make major changes to
curricula in a short period. Similar to the experience of the authors,
these changes created new learning opportunities, which were often
the result of how instructors responded to the constraints of their
chosen model of fabrication access.
Mark altered ME102 to focus on collaborative CAD with minimal elements of hands-on making. Paul created an entirely new
course (DESMA160-4) because his department determined it was
infeasible to teach the original digital fabrication course in a remote
format with limited preparation time. Creating a new course gave
Paul freedom to experiment with new forms of hands-on making
including manual sewing and knot tying.

Remote Learners, Home Makers

Instructors also changed how they interacted with students. Four
instructors said they increased the amount of pedagogical support
they provided to individual students. Paul had weekly progress
check-ins with each of his 23 students, ranging from five to twenty
minutes. Mark and his TAs swapped longer lectures for more targeted sessions so that the students could “have more detailed coaching on the projects they’re working on.” Mark’s student, S1, felt this
form of coaching was very effective in comparison to his experience
in some in-person Mechanical Engineering courses.
The online-vendor and student-technician models created conditions where only some students had access to machines or physical parts. Instructors found they could use this structure to better
simulate the multi-party design workflows of industry. As James
described:
I think it’s artificial to say that the designer is the fabricator, and is also the erector, [and] is also the project
manager. And so I think there’s actually something
interesting about the fact that we were forced to be separate. That made it easier to show the tensions between
these groups. As opposed to me simulating that in a
workshop environment where I would separate teams
into different groups to force the sort of miscommunications that typically happen.
The teaching staff of DESINV190/290-9 also found that the onlinevendor model aligned better with some students’ learning objectives. Adam described how some students were more interested
in learning how to fabricate and prototype on their own whereas
other students are more interested in the design process and “don’t
really care about the actual product.”
While learning opportunities in machine use were reduced in
classes that relied on simulation, online-vendors and student/instructortechnicians, instructors created new opportunities in response to
these constraints. Because these models reflected the realities of
distributed expertise and resources in industrial design and manufacturing, they offered the chance for students to learn about supply
chains and division of labor. It’s important to note that exposing
these new opportunities required substantial additional instructor
and TA labor.

6.3

Gaining Tacit Knowledge Remotely

In all the surveyed courses, instructors shared the perception that
physical making was a critical component of the learning objectives.
Describing the ethos of his department, Ben mentioned that the
“first ugly cardboard prototype” is “like a rite of passage, I think for
every student.” He added that learning CAD is only one component
of the fabrication pipeline and that physical making is required to
understand materiality.
I think material is something that is rarely thought of
in the CAD stage and, or the CAM stage, even, other
than speeds and feeds. I think they learn that not all
material is equal. I think they learned that how more,
you know, like be prepared for it’ll work 20 times in
the 21st time it won’t work or, you know, that there’s a
reality to these things and it’s not magic. I think that
translates no matter what machine or whatever you’re
doing.

CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan

This sentiment was echoed by students and instructors in other
courses. Overall interview subjects felt that CAD and simulation
alone could not teach students the critical material elements of
digital fabrication including fit, surface finish, and tolerance.
Shelby also described the technical understanding that results
from physical making. Before the pandemic, in one of her regular
first assignments she required students to create a “cast without
undercuts.” She described how students often did not initially grasp
the concept of designing for undercuts. Only when “they pour the
plaster” do they “understand it.” Shelby believed that this physical
experimentation was important for students because it simultaneously helped them learn techniques and develop confidence when
using the machines.
As universities shut down, the instructors we surveyed felt the
need to emphasize the important learning factors for physical making, sometimes pushing back against detractors in the process.
For Shelby, moving online reinforced the importance of in-person
teaching of physical making, especially in a context where she
was “constantly having to kind of defend the value of that kind of
teaching” in her own institution:
I do think moving online made it me more aware of how
valuable that in-person teaching was, if that makes
sense. I’ve never been very good at explaining it. . . it
matters that we stand in a space together and we make
things and there’s a sense of community and shared
intelligence that comes out of that.
Shelby was hopeful that the shift to remote instruction would underscore the critical importance of in-person fabrication courses in
the future. For S2, one of Shelby ’s students, the complications in
reviewing physical objects remotely made the full-online format
difficult to adhere to. She described the awkwardness of having
to showcase a physical project through video calls in comparison
to walking around, touching, or otherwise interacting with such a
project in an in-person studio critique.
For courses that required only some students to engage in fabrication, like R.A.W., or courses where fabrication was optional, like
DESMA160-4, students’ motivation to purse learning elements of
physical making was sometimes reduced. In the R.A.W., S4, who was
already highly skilled in digital fabrication, expressed ambivalence
about her role as a student-technician for the class:
It wasn’t a waste of time, but it would have been easier
if someone else had done it, but I still think it was useful
to me to like actually do it myself, but I still feel like
the other participants still learn equally.
All the instructors we interviewed stressed the importance of
hands-on making to acquire the tacit knowledge required for digital fabrication. Not all curricular changes reflected this concern.
Instead, instructors made decisions about hands on fabrication in
relation to the specific aspects of the larger fabrication ecosystem
they originally sought to target in their course. In cases where instructors chose to preserve tacit learning opportunities, instructors
and TAs undertook additional labor in the form of acquiring and
distributing equipment and materials.

CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan

6.4

Remote Collaboration for Physical Making

Pre-pandemic, in-person collaboration was often a central component of both professional and student digital fabrication practices.
The instructors and students we interviewed worked to maintain
elements of collaborative design and construction of physical objects despite being unable to meet in person. Student collaboration
was built into the structure of 3 classes we surveyed. In ME102,
DESINV190/290-9 and Arch438X, students were assigned a team
for the duration of the class. Initially, remote collaboration was
demotivating for students accustomed to collaborative physical
construction in makerspaces. S2 in Arch438X described how “asynchronous collaboration” was frustrating when “you’re so used to
liking touching things and working together.” In addition to collaborative construction, students and instructors valued the peer
learning, motivation and support opportunities of physical makerspace communities. As S1 put it:
There’s something really, really fun about biking across
campus to the [workshop] late at night and seeing all
the other people working on their projects, bouncing
ideas off each other, asking TAs that are there for help.
Instructors relied primarily on online communication technologies and collaborative CAD tools to retain collaborative workflows
in the remote format. Students also developed new organizational
strategies to coordinate at a distance. In ME102, S1 and his team
established a workflow in order to optimize synchronous collaborative CAD development over Zoom, where they would alternate
between brainstorming, prototyping, and assembling 3D models
collaboratively using Onshape, and working individually on their
respective parts of the design. According to S1, it was actually easier to meet over Zoom than in person for CAD-based issues; they
could simply “get on zoom and fix it” quickly. When it came to
manufacturing and building physical objects, remote collaboration
often involved asynchronous assembly or division of labor. Students
teams in DESINV190/290-9 assigned one member—usually the one
with the most prior digital fabrication experience—to receive and
assemble all parts from an on-demand fabrication service. A limited
number of teams sent duplicate parts to other members to enhance
their understanding of the part physicality.
Remote CAD collaboration also required divisions of labor and
advanced planning. A team-based assignment in ME102 required
each student to design a system in CAD that interfaced with their
teammates’ systems to generate a continuous marble run (see Figure 1C). Working remotely required teams to define the spatial
placement of each 3D model in relation to the others in advance
and create a modular design with different components assigned to
each team member.
In addition to the frustration students experienced transitioning from in-person to remote collaboration, later issues arose with
teamwork and communication. Mark found that creating team cohesion over online social networks was more difficult, especially
if students were new to the subject or did not know each other
in person. These tensions were exacerbated when team members
were unable or unwilling to use the same software tools in collaborative CAD, which produced dissatisfaction among students and
discrepancies in the outcome.

Benabdallah, et al.

In spite of these tensions, one student and one instructor saw
potential benefits to the logistical challenges imposed by remote
collaboration. Interviewees described that remote format provided
field-specific workflows. S1 pointed out that “a lot of what you do
now with CAD is collaborative. . . So [ME102 ] was the most perfect
training for that.” In R.A.W., James felt that the remote setting
enabled participants to select roles in line with their interests.
This separation of roles I think is really interesting. . . People
who are interested in the digital workflow and the file
prep in the parametric design jumped into that in a
physical workshop. It would have been excellent to have
the people who want to be the “hands-on folks” designing the jigs and doing the assembly.
He described further how the remote setting could simulate the
division of expertise that is common in professional architecture
and manufacturing practice. The absence of a makerspace created
significant shifts in patterns of collaboration. Students were assigned explicit roles and labor was divided based on interest and
expertise. The pleasurable collaboration of in-person makerspaces
was absent, however some students and instructors saw alternative learning opportunities that reflected professional design and
fabrication practice.

6.5

Summary

The fabrication access models in the six courses that we surveyed
were chosen by the instructors to comply to specific course objectives. These models created different learning opportunities
depending on their implementation and often created additional
labor for instructors and TAs. The use of simulation, online vendors, makerspace-as-jobshop, and student/instructor-technicians
reduced the amount of tacit knowledge students could gain from operating machines but still allowed students to engage in workflows,
collaborative practices, and division of tasks reflecting industrial realities. Similar to the authors’ courses courses, students with home
access to machines and physical materials were able to develop
greater levels of machine familiarity and physical construction experience while undergoing disruptions and new forms of labor in
their daily routines.

7

DISCUSSION

The COVID-19 pandemic called attention to implicit elements of
digital fabrication instruction which, as soon as they became absent
or more difficult to access, required more labor to maintain: the
tacit elements of physical making; the facilitation of collaboration
in the classroom; and providing equal access to resources. In this
section, we discuss three main takeaways from the analysis of our
data:
(1) The courses’ learning objectives had a great impact on which
tacit elements of digital fabrication were transmitted to students. This stresses the importance of articulating course
objectives and structure over access to fabrication spaces
when teaching digital fabrication, especially remotely.
(2) Proper scaffolding, providing students with opportunities for
exploration and iteration, and facilitating peer collaboration
yielded stronger learning outcomes, according to our data,
than a focus on access to tools and materials alone.

Remote Learners, Home Makers

(3) Uneven access to both material and human resources among
students was exacerbated in a remote context. Clearly defining learning objectives became critical for instructors so that
they could make more informed decisions about what material resources to incorporate in their curriculum and how to
manage them.
Each of these takeaways provides insights for our second research question (how can we learn from instructors’ efforts to teach
digital fabrication in a crisis to improve remote instruction of digital
fabrication in the future?).

7.1

What Do We Lose When We Lose the
Makerspace?

There are many definitions of what a successful digital fabrication course looks like. This reality was brought into sharp relief
during the pandemic, as instructors needed to make quick decisions on what to preserve and what to change when transitioning
their course online. This is in part because digital fabrication encompasses many forms of practice. There are workflows that are
directly relevant to industry, such as the production of architectural elements or medical devices. There are specific workflows
developed by artists for their unique work. Individuals may practice
digital fabrication as a form of craft. There are many workflows
which combine elements of digital fabrication alongside elements
of traditional manufacturing or craft. Each of these forms of practice corresponds to distinct categories of artifacts that can be made.
The shape of what is possible in turn shapes attitudes about digital
fabrication.
Because of this, the tacit learning components of digital fabrication are difficult to situate. While all instructors agreed that these
tacit components are tied to the experiential nature of digital fabrication, how this experiential component is conveyed varied widely.
Nadya and Jennifer opted for an at-home fabrication model, where
students acquired hobbyist machines and lived with them. The instructors we interviewed described a range of strategies, which we
can divide in two main categories: at-home fabrication (Ben) and
diffused fabrication, where the whole group relied on one or a few
fabricators, whether they were the instructor (as was the case in
Paul’s course), the TAs (in Mark’s class), other students (in James’),
the makerspace staff (in Shelby’s) or an external fabrication service
(Vivek/Adam/George, Mark).
Both types of approaches had pros and cons. Nadya and Jennifer observed that living with machines was not without challenges for their students—with issues of noise, fumes, and space
management—but when properly accommodated, provided many
learning opportunities for machine maintenance, modification, and
design iteration. For instructors who consider a similar fabrication
model, paying particular attention to how hobbyist machines fit
into the students’ living context can smooth eventual frustrations
and hindrances to learning.
The instructors we interviewed who chose an at-home fabrication model also reported gains and trade-offs to this approach. In
Ben’s class, there were issues distributing vinyl cutters to students,
resulting in two students not receiving equipment at all. Students
who did get access to equipment, however, gradually became used

CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan

to their vinyl cutter, exploring and trying different approaches, ultimately settling for usages that suited their interests and learning
goals. The fact that the students “got to live with the machines”
meant that they not only developed a deeper knowledge of their
tool but also that they could expand their fabrication practice.
In the diffused fabrication model, the fabrication process was
shared between several parties and usually circulated from students (who designed the part) to technicians (either other students,
a TA, the instructor or a professional service) and back to students
(either in physical or virtual form). For this model, the external
data showed that particular attention needed to be paid to both the
course logistics—planning timelines to receive files, debug them,
print parts and ship them to students—and the course scaffolding
so that students could take advantage of these resources. The experience of Paul showed that only students who were ready in
terms of skills and vision took advantage of his fabrication setup.
Without proper scaffolding, students were not always motivated
or comfortable using the services made available to them. A diffused fabrication model, however, provided the opportunity to learn
another type of tacit knowledge in digital fabrication, that is the
ebb and flow of collaborating on larger projects, where fabricators,
designers, and project managers are often separated. In this scenario, the tacit learning component was not conveyed to students
through access to tools or parts but through access to a collaborative
fabrication workflow.
What do we lose, then, when we lose the makerspace? We might
think that with the loss of physical fabrication spaces, the tacit
learning components of digital fabrication disappear. Instead, our
data shows that these tacit components resurfaced in students’
homes, in collaborative processes and in virtual environments, and
that these manifestations are intrinsically linked to the course’s
learning objectives. For instance, the experiential aspect of digital
fabrication in James’s course was tied to the level of the course
(the students had experience in fabrication) and its topic (architectural robotics, which often involves multi-party workflows). For
Ben’s class, which focused on expression, getting students access
to machines so that they could explore and create was critical.
There is not, therefore, one set of tools or materials that will
guarantee successful learning of digital fabrication. Rather, different
learning objectives will result in different decisions for choosing
what material resources are most appropriate for a given class.
These decisions are tied to the class’ level, the field of study, and
the students’ backgrounds.
The challenges of teaching the tacit elements of digital fabrication were exacerbated in remote formats but also presented an
opportunity to better articulate them. Making learning objectives
explicit is crucial, as well as understanding how they are tied to certain digital fabrication practices, how they lead to specific choices in
material sourcing and distribution, and how they are are sometimes
at odds with other curricular goals. This is an occasion to reconsider
the locus of experiential learning in digital fabrication not in the
makerspace, but in the practices each instructor facilitates.

CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan

7.2

“What Works is to Teach a Process”:
Exploration, Iteration, Contextualization

When analyzing our data, we found that students having the ability
to explore and iterate was more important for successful learning outcomes than what means of fabrication they had access to—
whether it was students 3D printing on inexpensive printers at
home, or sending parts out to be fabricated. Iteration happened
especially when the instructors gave assignments that encouraged
exploration and experimentation, as was the case in Shelby’s class
where the students had to come up with several versions of a KUKA
robotic arm end-effector. Creating a space for exploration and expression for students goes hand in hand with a proper contextualization of how the approaches they learn fit into a larger landscape
of computation and fabrication. For example, James spent a significant amount of time explaining exactly how the problems they
were going to solve with paper craft corresponded to problems they
would have encountered had they been using sheet metal. In Vivek,
Adam, and George’s class, the workflow established for students via
an on-demand fabrication service recreated workflows they were
likely to encounter in the workplace, according to the instructors.
Another important factor for successful learning outcomes we
observed was individual or targeted support for students. Working
with a small group of students and a mentor relieved some of the
anxiety of being in a large class. As remote learning lingers on the
horizon, increasing the role of Teaching Assistants in mentoring
might prove beneficial to students, especially as it recreates the
more targeted assistance that can be found in makerspaces.
The data showed no indication that some minimal amount of
equipment would be sufficient to catalyze learning. Rather, we observed that learning outcomes were more strongly tied to instructors’ ability to contextualize the learning environment, challenge
students, and support community and iteration. This happened in
each of the courses we analyzed, but with emphasis on different
aspects and practices of digital fabrication.

7.3

Inequities in Distribution of Machines,
Materials, and Labor

The pandemic is calling attention to many existing issues, among
them unequal student access to both human and material resources.
These inequities became particularly prevalent in the context of
digital fabrication learning, which is resource-intensive. During
remote instruction, access to tools and a peer community strongly
depended on individual student situations. These can vary widely,
with some students having ample space to accommodate tools in
their living environment as well as established rapport with peers,
while others faced isolation and challenging home situations. These
inequalities can lead to inequities if instructors and institutions
do not work to provide and facilitate equal access of human and
material resources to their entire student body. Instructors play
a crucial role in how access to resources is managed. By being
specific about what the learning objectives are, they can make
better decisions about what material resources are needed and how
best to distribute them.
There were many ways in which access to equipment ended up
being uneven. For example, not all students had space for machines
in their living quarters. These students performed additional work

Benabdallah, et al.

of packing machines when not in use, then taking them out again
when working. When given credits to use towards fabrication services, some students delayed the fabrication of parts in favor of
more CAD revisions. This delayed the learning of tacit elements of
digital fabrication such as the unintended effects of computational
design decisions on production. Shared living spaces are also not
immune to unfortunate accidents, such as when the roommate of
one student in Vivek, Adam, and George’s class stepped on the assembled model for the course’s final showcase and entirely broke it.
One student reported that “the bigger discrepancy between students
is internet connection.” Material sent out to students in countries
other than the US was often more expensive to buy and ship and
sometimes impossible to get to the students.
Access to human resources is as critical as access to material ones.
Open and welcoming communities for peer-learning contributed
extensively to positive outcomes in the remote digital fabrication
classes we surveyed. In some cases, these communities pre-dated
the classes and the pandemic but in others they were scaffolded
during the class. Instructors established and organized online communities. Paul reported initiating a Discord group for students to
ask questions to each other. Nadya observed the evolution of her
class’ online community, which remained active after the course
ended. Ensuring students had access to one or several people—
whether the instructor, a TA, or another student—created positive
learning outcomes. This is the case not only during online teaching,
but required more labor to create in a distance learning format.
Instructors also reported inequities in labor among students. For
instance, Vivek explained that despite the instructors’ efforts to
provide a collaborative video editing platform, students still relied
on the most experienced editor. While not unique to remote instruction, these inequities were exacerbated in a remote context where
asynchronous collaborative processes can be difficult and where
in-person accountability mechanisms are absent. More importantly,
fabrication models influenced how work was shared between peers.
On-demand fabrication services meant that iteration and exploration was often not possible for students, which pushed them to
rely more heavily on their more experienced peers.
Having more materials to iterate and experiment with helped
students understand possibilities and trade-offs in fabrication. Overall, the classes we surveyed did not find good ways of providing
students with a centralized repository for materials, access to which
is nonetheless critical to experimentation. For Jennifer, ensuring
consistent material access to her students is crucial for the next
iterations of her computational fabrication course online. Nadya
considers institutional support as key to managing equal distribution of resources for students.
As we are writing this paper, our departments are communicating that remote instruction of digital fabrication courses in the
Spring of 2021 is not unlikely. Instructors and institutions can work
towards developing approaches to remote instruction of digital
fabrication that are not provisional but cohesive and integrated into
the students’ living situations. What was evident from the courses
we surveyed is that with greater possibilities for planning, remote
instruction of digital fabrication could, if not completely address
inequities in access to resources, work towards not aggravating
them and even creating new opportunities for students. For Shelby,
teaching her studio class this Fall meant coming up with other

Remote Learners, Home Makers

assignments that engage her students’ creativity and surface the
opportunities hidden in their living spaces, such as “conceptual
robots that [the students] build at home out of things that they
have. They won’t necessarily need to be mechanized.” She added:
I think if we were teaching online on purpose rather
than kind of as an emergency, I could be really, I could
feel more creative about it, you know? Like, it would be
fun.

8

CONCLUSION

The COVID-19 pandemic has endured in the US substantially beyond the day in spring 2020 when campuses shut down. This research shows the work of students and instructors teaching and
learning digital fabrication in a crisis. We examined how students
were provided with remote access to digital fabrication, whether
through at-home fabrication or diffused fabrication, and what their
respective challenges were. We identified unique learning opportunities of remote instruction of digital fabrication, including increased opportunities to iterate with at-home equipment and increased opportunities for collaboration, documentation, and engagement through remote learning technologies. We recounted
different approaches instructors took in teaching important tacit elements of digital fabrication remotely. We found that overall, there
was no minimum requirement for equipment to still learn important elements of digital fabrication. Rather, it was more important
that instructors framed the work, established buy-in, and supported
students’ iteration. Furthermore, we called attention to the ways
inequities persist across education, including remote digital fabrication education, and reiterated that it is of paramount importance
for instructors and institutions to work together towards more just
student experiences. We are now in a protracted crisis, or “the new
normal.” While the future remains uncertain, we hope that it will
hold sustainable and equitable opportunities for students to have
hands-on learning experiences, even if those learning opportunities
need to happen at a safe distance.

9

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We are grateful to all of the instructors and students who shared
their experiences with us, including Mark Cutkosky, Shelby Doyle,
Paul Esposito, James Coleman, Ben Light, Vivek Rao, Adam Patrick
Hutz, and George Moore. We also greatly appreciate the guidance
and input from Madeline Gannon, Daniela Rosner, and Audrey
Desjardins. This research was funded in part by the NSF IIS HumanCentered Computing program (#2007045) and the UCSB Academic
Senate Faculty Research Grant program.

REFERENCES
[1] Celena Alcock, Nathaniel Hudson, and Parmit K. Chilana. 2016. Barriers to
Using, Customizing, and Printing 3D Designs on Thingiverse. In Proceedings
of the 19th International Conference on Supporting Group Work (Sanibel Island,
Florida, USA) (GROUP ’16). Association for Computing Machinery, New York,
NY, USA, 195–199. https://doi.org/10.1145/2957276.2957301
[2] Morgan G. Ames, Jeffrey Bardzell, Shaowen Bardzell, Silvia Lindtner, David A.
Mellis, and Daniela K. Rosner. 2014. Making Cultures: Empowerment, Participation, and Democracy - or Not?. In CHI ’14 Extended Abstracts on Human
Factors in Computing Systems (Toronto, Ontario, Canada) (CHI EA ’14). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1087–1092. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/2559206.2579405

CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan

[3] Paulo Blikstein. 2013. Digital fabrication and ‘making’in education: The democratization of invention. In FabLabs: Of machines, makers and inventors. Vol. 4.
Bielefeld: Transcript Publishers, 1–21.
[4] Virginia Braun and Victoria Clarke. 2006.
Using thematic
analysis in psychology.
Qualitative Research in Psychology 3,
2 (2006), 77–101.
https://doi.org/10.1191/1478088706qp063oa
arXiv:https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/pdf/10.1191/1478088706qp063oa
[5] Virginia Braun and Victoria Clarke. 2019. Reflecting on reflexive thematic analysis.
Qualitative Research in Sport, Exercise and Health 11, 4 (2019), 589–597.
[6] Fabio Campos, Tatiana Soster, and Paulo Blikstein. 2019. Sorry, I Was in Teacher
Mode Today: Pivotal Tensions and Contradictory Discourses in Real-World Implementations of School Makerspaces. In Proceedings of FabLearn 2019 (New York,
NY, USA) (FL2019). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA,
96–103. https://doi.org/10.1145/3311890.3311903
[7] James Coleman and Shannon Cole. 2017. By Any Means Necessary: Digitally
Fabricating Architecture at Scale. Proceedings of the 37th Annual Conference of
the Association for Computer Aided Design in Architecture (ACADIA) (2017).
[8] D. Dougherty, A. Conrad, and T. O’Reilly. 2016. Free to Make: How the Maker
Movement is Changing Our Schools, Our Jobs, and Our Minds. North Atlantic
Books.
[9] Mike Eisenberg and Ann Eisenberg. 1998. Middle tech: blurring the division
between high and low tech in education. In The design of children’s technology.
Morgan Kaufmann, 244–273.
[10] Eva Eriksson, Ole Sejer Iversen, Gökçe Elif Baykal, Maarten Van Mechelen, Rachel
Smith, Marie-Louise Wagner, Bjarke Vognstrup Fog, Clemens Klokmose, Bronwyn Cumbo, Arthur Hjorth, Line Have Musaeus, Marianne Graves Petersen,
and Niels Olof Bouvin. 2019. Widening the Scope of FabLearn Research: Integrating Computational Thinking, Design and Making. In Proceedings of the
FabLearn Europe 2019 Conference (Oulu, Finland) (FabLearn Europe ’19). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 15, 9 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3335055.3335070
[11] Philipp Eversmann. 2017. Digital Fabrication in Education-Strategies and Concepts for Large-Scale Projects. Proceedings of the 35th eCAADe Conference 1,
333–342.
[12] FabLearn. 2020. The Annual FabLearn Conference. https://fablearn.org/, accessed
Aug 2020.
[13] Institute for Computational Design and Construction Stuttgart. 2020. Computational Construction Laboratory. https://www.icd.uni-stuttgart.de/research/
research-infrastructure/, accessed Aug 2020.
[14] Michelle Gantt and Bonnie A. Nardi. 1992. Gardeners and Gurus: Patterns of
Cooperation among CAD Users. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems (Monterey, California, USA) (CHI ’92).
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 107–117. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/142750.142767
[15] Alexandra Ion, Johannes Frohnhofen, Ludwig Wall, Robert Kovacs, Mirela
Alistar, Jack Lindsay, Pedro Lopes, Hsiang-Ting Chen, and Patrick Baudisch.
2016. Metamaterial Mechanisms. In Proceedings of the 29th Annual Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology (Tokyo, Japan) (UIST ’16). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 529–539. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/2984511.2984540
[16] Jennifer Jacobs, Sumit Gogia, Radomír Mundefinedch, and Joel R. Brandt. 2017.
Supporting Expressive Procedural Art Creation through Direct Manipulation. In
Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
(Denver, Colorado, USA) (CHI ’17). Association for Computing Machinery, New
York, NY, USA, 6330–6341. https://doi.org/10.1145/3025453.3025927
[17] Jennifer Jacobs and Nadya Peek. 2020. Learning remotely, making locally: Remote digital fabrication instruction during a pandemic. Interactions
(2020). http://interactions.acm.org/blog/view/learning-remotely-making-locallyremote-digital-fabrication-instruction-dur.
[18] Benjamin Lafreniere, Tovi Grossman, Fraser Anderson, Justin Matejka, Heather
Kerrick, Danil Nagy, Lauren Vasey, Evan Atherton, Nicholas Beirne, Marcelo H.
Coelho, Nicholas Cote, Steven Li, Andy Nogueira, Long Nguyen, Tobias Schwinn,
James Stoddart, David Thomasson, Ray Wang, Thomas White, David Benjamin,
Maurice Conti, Achim Menges, and George Fitzmaurice. 2016. Crowdsourced Fabrication. In Proceedings of the 29th Annual Symposium on User Interface Software
and Technology (Tokyo, Japan) (UIST ’16). Association for Computing Machinery,
New York, NY, USA, 15–28. https://doi.org/10.1145/2984511.2984553
[19] John S. Lamancusa. 2006. The Reincarnation of the Engineering “Shop”
(International Design Engineering Technical Conferences and Computers and
Information in Engineering Conference, Vol. Volume 4c: 3rd Symposium on
International Design and Design Education). 849–857.
https://doi.org/
10.1115/DETC2006-99723 arXiv:https://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/IDETCCIE/proceedings-pdf/IDETC-CIE2006/42584c/849/2652532/849_1.pdf
[20] Silvia Lindtner, Garnet D. Hertz, and Paul Dourish. 2014. Emerging Sites of HCI
Innovation: Hackerspaces, Hardware Startups & Incubators. In Proceedings of the
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Toronto, Ontario,
Canada) (CHI ’14). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA,
439–448. https://doi.org/10.1145/2556288.2557132

CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan

[21] Lee Martin. 2015. The promise of the maker movement for education. Journal of
Pre-College Engineering Education Research (J-PEER) 5, 1 (2015), 4.
[22] S.L. Martinez and G.S. Stager. 2016. Invent to Learn: Making, Tinkering, and
Engineering in the Classroom. Constructing Modern Knowledge Press. https:
//books.google.com/books?id=4C5evgAACAAJ
[23] DF Moore and JA Williams. 2004. Laser prototyping of MEMS structures and
SiN cantilevers: experience teaching a practical undergraduate course. IEE
Proceedings-Science, Measurement and Technology 151, 2 (2004), 54–59.
[24] Dean Nieusma and James W Malazita. 2016. ’Making’ a Bridge: Critical Making
as Synthesized Engineering/Humanistic Inquiry. Proceedings of the 2016 American
Society for Engineering Education (2016).
[25] Lora Oehlberg, Wesley Willett, and Wendy E. Mackay. 2015. Patterns of Physical
Design Remixing in Online Maker Communities. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual
ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Seoul, Republic of
Korea) (CHI ’15). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA,
639–648. https://doi.org/10.1145/2702123.2702175
[26] Princeton University School of Architecture. 2020. Embodied Computation
Lab. https://soa.princeton.edu/content/embodied-computation-lab, accessed
Aug 2020.
[27] Taubman College University of Michigan. 2020. Digital Fabrication Lab. https:
//taubmancollege.umich.edu/labs-workshops/digital-fabrication-lab/, accessed
Aug 2020.
[28] International Symposium on Academic Makerspaces. 2020. The Annual International Symposium on Academic Makerspaces. https://isam2020.hemimakers.org/, accessed Aug 2020.
[29] David Roedl, Shaowen Bardzell, and Jeffrey Bardzell. 2015. Sustainable Making?
Balancing Optimism and Criticism in HCI Discourse. ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum.
Interact. 22, 3, Article 15 (June 2015), 27 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/2699742
[30] Leah F Rosenbaum and Björn Hartmann. 2017. Where be dragons? Charting
the known (and not so known) areas of research on academic makerspaces. In
International Symposium on Academic Makerspaces (ISAM).

Benabdallah, et al.

[31] Ryan Schmidt and Matt Ratto. 2013. Design-to-Fabricate: Maker Hardware
Requires Maker Software. IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications 33, 6 (Nov.
2013), 26–34. https://doi.org/10.1109/MCG.2013.90 Conference Name: IEEE
Computer Graphics and Applications.
[32] John T. Sherrill. 2017. Gender, Technology, and Narratives in DIY Instructions. In Proceedings of the 35th ACM International Conference on the Design
of Communication (Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada) (SIGDOC ’17). Association
for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 9, 8 pages. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3121113.3121214
[33] Rundong Tian, Sarah Sterman, Ethan Chiou, Jeremy Warner, and Eric Paulos.
2018. MatchSticks: Woodworking through Improvisational Digital Fabrication.
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–12. https://doi.
org/10.1145/3173574.3173723
[34] JF Walker, DF Moore, and JT Whitney. 1996. Focused ion beam processing for
microscale fabrication. Microelectronic engineering 30, 1-4 (1996), 517–522.
[35] Guanyun Wang, Humphrey Yang, Zeyu Yan, Nurcan Gecer Ulu, Ye Tao, Jianzhe
Gu, Levent Burak Kara, and Lining Yao. 2018. 4DMesh: 4D Printing Morphing Non-Developable Mesh Surfaces. In Proceedings of the 31st Annual ACM
Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology (Berlin, Germany) (UIST
’18). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 623–635.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3242587.3242625
[36] Richard Whalen. 2013. Augmenting a First-year Design Course with an Undergraduate Student Ad-ministered SolidWorks Module. Proceedings of the 120th
Annual Conference of the American Society of Engineering Education 23 (2013).
[37] Vincent Wilczynski, Aubrey Wigner, Micah Lande, and Shawn Jordan. 2017. The
Value of Higher Education Academic Makerspaces for Accreditation and Beyond.
Planning for Higher Education 46, 1 (2017), 32–40.
[38] Nur Yildirim, James McCann, and John Zimmerman. 2020. Digital Fabrication
Tools at Work: Probing Professionals’ Current Needs and Desired Futures. In
Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
(Honolulu, HI, USA) (CHI ’20). Association for Computing Machinery, New York,
NY, USA, 1–13. https://doi.org/10.1145/3313831.3376621

