Model-based cellular kinetic analysis of SARS-CoV-2 infection:
different immune response modes and treatment strategies

Zhengqing Zhou1*, Ziheng Zhao2*, Shuyu Shi3*, Jianghua Wu4*, Dianjie Li1, Jianwei Li1, Jingpeng
２

Zhang1, Ke Gui , Yu Zhang2, Heng Mei4#, Yu Hu4 #, Qi Ouyang1 #, and Fangting Li1 #
1

School of Physics, Center for Quantitative Biology, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China

2

Department of Immunology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, NHC Key Laboratory of Medical

Immunology, Peking University, Beijing 100191, China.
3 Peking

University Third Hospital, Peking University, Beijing 100191, China.

4 Institute

of Hematology, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science

and Technology, Wuhan, 430022, China
* These authors contribute equally to this work
# To whom correspondence should be addressed. dr_huyu@126.com, hmei@hust.edu.cn,
qi@pku.edu.cn, lft@pku.edu.cn

Abstract

Increasing number in global COVID-19 cases demands for mathematical model to
analyze the interaction between the virus dynamics and the response of innate and
adaptive immunity. Here, based on the assumption of a weak and delayed response of
the innate and adaptive immunity in SARS-CoV-2 infection, we constructed a
mathematical model to describe the dynamic processes of immune system. Integrating
theoretical results with clinical COVID-19 patients’ data, we classified the COVID-19
development processes into three typical modes of immune responses, correlated with
the clinical classification of mild & moderate, severe and critical patients. We found that
the immune efficacy (the ability of host to clear virus and kill infected cells) and the
lymphocyte supply (the abundance and pool of naïve T and B cell) play important roles
in the dynamic process and determine the clinical outcome, especially for the severe and
critical patients. Furthermore, we put forward possible treatment strategies for the three
1 / 18

typical modes of immune response. We hope our results can help to understand the
dynamical mechanism of the immune response against SARS-CoV-2 infection, and to
be useful for the treatment strategies and vaccine design.

Introduction
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) caused by the coronavirus SARS-CoV-2 has
spread globally, having a huge impact on global politics, economy and society.
Compared to other viral infectious diseases, such as influenza, severe acute respiratory
syndrome (SARS), Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS), and acquired immune
deficiency syndrome (AIDS), COVID-19 exhibits multiscale different characteristics.
Epidemiologically, COVID-19 has a relatively longer incubation period (~5.8 days) with
a number of asymptomatic patients, which intensifies the difficulty of management and
prevention (1). For the within-host viral infection, about 80% COVID-19 patients exhibit
mild symptoms and recover within 3~4 weeks after regular treatments (2). The severe
and critical COVID-19 patients (~20%) are related to lymphopenia, high neutrophil
counts and cytokine release syndrome (CRS) or cytokine storm, characterized by
elevated inflammatory cytokines levels like IL-6. CRS and succeeding comorbidities
usually cause bad clinical outcome and even death, although the overall intensity of the
cytokine storm in COVID-19 patients is milder than SARS patients (3).
More studies and evidences show that the SARS-CoV-2 virus, compared to SARSCoV and MERS-CoV, in the early infection period tends to induce less effective antiviral innate immune responses with a delayed or lower type-I interferon (IFN) response
and lower HLA-II expression level (4, 5). Furthermore, marked lymphopenia and
impaired humoral immunity with the loss of germinal centers (6) suggest that the weak
adaptive immune response could contribute to damped clearance of virus and thus
chronic infection.
Though the knowledge and clinical data of COVID-19 is increasing, a systemic view
of immunologic response in SARS-CoV-2 infection remains necessary. Due to the
variance in immune status and response dynamic processes among patients, it is hard to
make up an effective therapeutic schedule, for example, the effects of remdesivir, IFN-γ
and antibodies remain controversial (7-13).
Here, we investigated the immune response against SARS-CoV-2 infection by
analyzing the longitudinal hemogram data of 194 patients from Wuhan Union Hospital
2 / 18

and also by mathematical modeling the within-host immune dynamics. We constructed
within-host virus-immune interaction network, together with a mathematical model
depicting the dynamic processes and the response of the innate immunity and adaptive
immunity against SARS-CoV-2 infection. We simulated and classified the different
modes of patient’s immune responses, which correspond to the longitudinal data of
COVID-19 patients, and we propose the possible treatment strategies to improve the
immune status of COVID-19 patients.

Immune network and model, immune efficacy and T cell supply

The human immune system is a complex defense system involving dozens of
different cell types and hundreds of interacting molecular pathways, protecting human
body from dangerous pathogens. A mathematical model, which describes the complex
interactions in immune system and the demographic differences in patient’s health
status, should help us to understand the underlying immune response, to classify the
patients based on their immune response processes, and provide possible definitive
treatment strategies.
We analyzed 194 COVID-19 patients’ longitudinal data from Union Hospital of
Tongji Medical College in Huazhong University of Science and Technology (Wuhan,
P. R. China), including the hemogram, the serum cytokine profile and treatments at
different time points, as well as their clinical classification and outcome. We found that
among mild, severe and critical COVID-19 patients, the time sequences of counts of
white blood cell, neutrophil and lymphocyte, together with IL-6 levels in peripheral
blood behave significant different, indicating the severity of patients (Fig. 2B). In
critical patients, the elevated neutrophil counts and myeloid-derived suppressor cell
(MDSC) fraction are significantly greater than the mild and severe patients, which
could be accredited to the chronic viral and bacterial co-infection (Fig. S5B).
Based on the recent evidences and clinical data about COVID-19, we put forward a
possible immune mechanism during SARS-CoV-2 infection: a slow innate immune
response in the early infection stage leading to extensive tissue damage and
inflammation, and a weak adaptive immune response in later stage resulting in the
chronic infection and bad clinical outcome.
3 / 18

We simplified both innate and adaptive immune response processes within-host
caused by the SARS-CoV-2 infection, and constructed a virus-immune interaction
network with the viral infection module, innate immunity, cellular immunity, humoral
immunity, and immunosuppression modules (Fig. 1). During the SARS-CoV-2 infection,
infected lung epithelial cells recruit innate immune cells through chemokine secretion,
including neutrophils (Neut), macrophages (MΦ), dendritic cells (DC), and natural killer
cells (NK). These cells serve as the initial immune defense in the virus-immune
interaction network against the virus, and secrete the inflammatory cytokines like IL-6
and TNF-α. The DC and MΦ engulf and process SARS-CoV-2 specific antigens they
encounter, and then they work as antigen-presenting cells (APC) to activate naïve T and
B cells. The activated CD4+ and CD8+ T cells proliferate and differentiate into effective
helper T cells (Th) and cytotoxic T cells (CTL), then travel to the airway and lung
fighting against the pathogens. Meanwhile, the germinal centers in lymph nodes form
around the pathogen-loaded dendritic cells, where naïve B cells go through affinity
maturation with clonal selection and differentiate into plasma cells that produce
immunoglobulin (Ig) to clear the virus. During this process, regulatory T cells (Treg) are
also activated to prevent the over activation of immune system and turn off the immune
response when the virus is cleared.
For the sake of simplicity and clarity of the model, we made the following main
simplifications and assumptions. (1) We focus on the host immune response in lung
and nearby draining lymph nodes (lung area). (2) IL-6 is selected as the key indicator
of inflammation. (3) To compare with clinical data, we add the antiviral drug term
(parameter  in Eq.2) in our model. (4) We discuss the primary virus infection and
immune response, and ignore the process and function of SARS-CoV-2-specific
memory T and B cells. (5) The cytokine level in lung is estimated to be 10 times of the
peripheral blood cytokines, providing a reference for comparison between modeling
results and clinical data. More details about the interactions among virus, immune cells
and cytokines can be found in Table 1 of Supplemental Material (SM), and our other
assumptions are listed in section 1.2 of SM.

4 / 18

Fig. 1.The immune system response network against SARS-CoV-2 infection. (A) The network can be
divided into five modules: viral infection, innate immunity, cellular immunity, humoral immunity and
immunosuppression modules, each part including complex and nonlinear interactions among immune
cells and cytokines. (B) The overall interactions among the five modules.

Then we built a 24-variable ODE model to depict the dynamical process of immune
response against SARS-CoV-2 infection. Clinical data and results, together with the
evidence on the lower IFN-I response (4, 5), provide a reference for the construction
and parameterization of the model. In lung area, we define [nCoV] as the concentration
of free viral load, [H] and [If] denote respectively the concentrations of healthy
pulmonary epithelial cell and productively infected cell. The concentrations of
neutrophils, APC (DC and MΦ), natural killer cells and cytotoxic T lymphocytes
(CTL) are denoted as [Neut], [APC], [NK] and [CTL] respectively. [Ig] is the
concentration of antibodies. The viral load and lymphocytes are in the unit of 106/mL,
5 / 18

the unit of cytokines is pg/mL, and the unit of antibodies is μg/mL.
In the viral infection module, we have the following equations to depict how the
SARS-CoV-2 virus infects the lung epithelial cells.
d [nCoV ]
  N1d If [ If ]  (k1clear [ Neut ]  k2clear  A  [ Ig ])[nCoV ]
dt

(1)

d [ If ]
  kinfect [nCoV ][ H ]  k1kill [ APC ]  k2kill [ NK ]  k3kill [CTL][ If ]  d If [ If ] (2)
dt
d[ H ]
 rH   kinfect [nCoV ][ H ]  d H [ H ]
dt

(3)

The viral dynamics is described in Eq.1. The virion particles are produced from
infected cells at the rate of  N1d If [ If ] , where γ stands for a conversion factor between
particle count and extracellular particle number density, N1 is the burst size of SARSCoV-2 virus, dIf is the death rate of infected cells that release new virions. The viruses
are cleared by neutrophils [Neut] and antibodies [Ig] at the rate of

(k1clear [ Neut ]  k2clear  A  [ Ig ])[nCoV ] . In Eq.2, the epithelial cells are infected by free
virions at rate

 kinfect [nCoV ][ H ] , where  stands for the effect of antiviral drugs,

kinfect is the infection rate of virus. The infected cells are killed by APC (DC and MΦ),
natural killer cells and CTL at the rate

k

kill
1

[ APC ]  k2kill [ NK ]  k3kill [CTL][ If ] . The

infected cells die at rate d If [ If ] and release new free virion particles. In Eq.3, the
healthy lung epithelial cells regenerate at the rate rH and undergo normal apoptosis at
rate d H [ H ] .
kill
kill
kill
kill
We define e (t )  k1 [ APC ]  k2 [ NK ]  k3 [CTL]  d If and

eclear (t )  k1clear [ Neut ]  k2clear  A  [ Ig ] . Under adiabatic approximation of change of the
infected cells, we have
is defined as R0 

d [nCoV ]
 eclear ( R0  1)[nCoV ] , where the reproductive ratio
dt

 N1d If kinfect [ H ]
. To represent the ability of immune system to
eclear  e kill

clear the virus and kill the infected cells, we define the host immune efficacy at time
point t as e(t )  eclear (t )ekill (t ) . Thus, at time point t , if R0 (t )  1 and

e(t )   N1d If kinfect [ H ] , the population of virus will decrease; otherwise the population
6 / 18

of virus will increase.
When the naïve CD8+T cells meet and interact with antigen-loaded APCs in the
lymph nodes, they are activated, proliferate and differentiate to CTL, then move to the
lung area to fight against the virus. We use a logistic term to describe the homeostasis of
naïve CD8+ T cell supply with capacity KCD8 and growth rate rCD8, kCTL represents the
activation rate to CTL from the naïve CD8+ T cell by APC interaction. Thus, we wrote
the dynamics of naïve CD8+T cell as:
 [CD8 T0 ] 
d [CD8 T0 ]
[ APC ]5
 rCD8 [CD8 T0 ] 1 

k
[CD8 T0 ]
 CTL 5
5
dt
K
K

[
APC
]
CD 8
A



(4)

 kCTL
[ APC ]5 

[
CD
8
T
]

1



 KCD8 . We define
0
Steady state solution gives out
rCD8 K A5  [ APC ]5 


the host supply ability of naïve CD8+T cell as sCD 8 

rCD 8 K A5  [ APC ]5
, which
kCTL [ APC ]5

indicates the ability of CD8+ T cell supply to produce more CTL. If sCD8  1 , there
will have sufficient naïve CD8+T cell. Once chronic infection takes place, the patients
with sCD8  1 might experience CD8+ T cell exhaustion. When [ APC ]  K A ,

sCD 8 

rCD 8
. Thus, the host supply ability sCD 8 determine whether the CD8+ T cell
kCTL

pool can supply more CTL cells in the ‘killing’ infected cell process, which works as

k3kill [CTL] term in the e kill (t ) and e(t ) . Similar supply analysis and results can be
applied to CD4+ T cells.
More details concerning immune cell and cytokine dynamics can be found in the
section 2 of SM.
Furthermore, we also utilized the model to simulate other viral infectious diseases,
including influenza and severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS). The differences in
virus infection rate, burst size and activation strength of the immune system lead to
significant differences in epidemical features among influenza, SARS and SARS-CoV2, especially the incidence rate, incubation period and critical rate. Detailed parameter
settings and results are shown in the section 3 of SM.

7 / 18

Modeling typical modes of immune response against SARS-CoV-2
Demographically, the immune system’s capability and response vary individually,
susceptible to age, fitness and gender differences (14, 15). In Fig. 2A, we adopted
Latin hypercube sampling method (16) to search across the parameter space and
identified three typical modes of the immune responses against SARS-CoV-2 infection,
where they differ in the extent of tissue damage, final state viral load and immune
response, in particular the levels of host immune efficacy e and supply ability sCD 8 .
We also defined asymptomatic patients by underactive immune and inflammatory
response. Full trajectory of the three immune modes and asymptomatic patients can be
found in Fig. S2A and their definitions in Table S2 of SM. Parameter sample range and
initial value choice can be found in section 7 of SM. Sampled curves are aligned at
[nCoV]=106/mL.
During the early stage of infection, the post admission days (PAD) 0~7, a faster and
stronger innate immunity is evoked in the mode 1 patients, protecting lung tissue from
viral damage. For the mode 2 and 3 patients, delayed and weaker innate immunity
brings about more extensive damages with higher viral load, manifested in Fig. S2C
and D of SM. During the middle stage (PAD 7~14), the adaptive immunity of mode 1
and 2 patients is built up successfully, providing the patients with strong immune
efficacy, averaged at emax  12 , which is enough to clear the virus and kill the infected
cells. For the mode 2 patients, the accumulated tissue damage at early stage overactivates the innate immunity, especially neutrophils and monocytes and thus causes
temporary cytokine storm. The mode 3 patients’ immune response stays low at about

e  3.5 , possibly attributed to limited antibody production and inadequate CD8+ T cell
supply. During the late stage (PAD 14+), the mode 1 and 2 patients recover from the
infection, however the mode 3 patients experience chronic infection and 23% end up
with naïve CD8+T cell pool insufficiency (denoted as insufficient sCD8 ). Time course of

1/ sCD 8 and e of the three modes are shown in Fig. 2C and Fig. 2D.
In comparison to mode 2, mode 3 is more likely to appear in older patients with
underlying diseases, including but not limited to hypertension and diabetes mellitus,
for their fragile immune systems. This view is also supported by recent study on the
association between adaptive immunity and age (18). In addition to these, in mode 3,
8 / 18

long-termed damage of lung epithelial cells and inadequate immune efficacy could
possibly induce secondary bacterial or fungal infection, discussed in section 7 of SM,
thus lead to overactive inflammatory response and cytokine storm. Therefore, patients
with mode 3 response are more likely to be critical and should be paid with extra
attention.
Figure 2.

Fig. 2. Sampling result of host immune response against SARS-CoV-2 infection. (A)
Schematic illustration of three typical modes of immune response, the sampled curves are aligned
at [nCoV]=106/mL. Innate immunity is defined by the summation of APC and NK density,
cellular immunity is defined by CTL density and humoral immunity is defined by antibody level.
(B) Time course of immune efficacy e of the three immune modes. During early stage, mode 1
has higher e compared to mode 2 and 3, leading to less extensive tissue damage and thus milder
level of cytokine storm. At around day 14, e value of mode 1 and 2 rises to the peak,
corresponding to the fully activation of immune system. Meanwhile, mode 3 patients do not show
the peak, suggesting underactive adaptive immunity leads to chronic infection. (C) Time course of
inverted CD8+ T cell supply 1/ sCD 8 of mode 1, 2 and 3. Both mode 1 and 2 pass sCD 8  1
temporarily, corresponding to the maximum activation from innate immunity to adaptive
immunity, while mode 3 patients show a durative sCD 8  1 , leading to insufficient CD8+ T cell
supply. (D) Mode 3 patients are further divided in to naïve CD8+T cell insufficient ones
(insufficient sCD8 ) and sufficient ones (sufficient sCD8 ).
9 / 18

Classification of patients and relevant treatment strategies

To understand the dynamical features and processes of COVID-19 patients’
immune response, we investigated the longitudinal data of hemogram and cytokine
profile of 64 patients (out of 194 patients) with multiple cytokine data points (≥4)
from Wuhan Union Hospital in China. All patients were divided into mild & moderate,
severe and critical groups based on their clinical symptoms, according to the 7th
Version of the Novel Coronavirus Pneumonia Diagnosis and Treatment Guidance (19).
Here we mainly focus on the immune response features of the COVID-19 patients,
which imposes huge impact on patient’s clinical status. Similar to the immune efficacy
e , we define the clinical efficacy of innate and adaptive cellular immunity of patients

as e* (t )  Neut %(t )   Monocyte%(t )  Lymphocyte%(t )  , where Neut %(t ) ,

Monocyte%(t ) , Lymphocyte%(t ) are respectively the proportion of neutrophils,
monocytes and lymphocytes in peripheral blood at time point t .
In Fig. 3A, we classified the patients by their IL-6 level and averaged e* value ( e* )
into three classes. The class 1 profile (31 patients) has

e*  0.15

and

IL-6max < 200 pg/mL , includes 15 mild patients and 16 severe patients. The class 2
profile (20 patients) has e*  0.15 and IL-6max > 200 pg/mL , includes 9 mild, 10
severe and 1 critical patient. The class 3 profile (8 patients) has e*  0.15 and

IL-6max > 200 pg/mL , includes 1 severe and 7 critical patients. 5 patients belong to none
of the above groups and are taken as exceptions.
In Fig. 3B, we aligned and averaged the time course of the three classes patients’
peripheral blood cell and cytokine profile. We particularly fixed the class 2 and 3
patients’ IL-6 peak at the 30th day and smoothed the curve using a triple-window
averaging method (see this method in section 5.1 of SM). Time series data of the three
classes patients differ significantly in the neutrophil, lymphocyte, IL-6, IL-10 level and
immune efficacy. The class 1 patients exhibit low neutrophil counts, low IL-6 level
(milder inflammatory response), high lymphocyte counts and high e* level, indicating
mild symptom and effective immune response. The class 1 patients are less likely to
develop into critical cases and would recover smoothly. The class 2 patients show
10 / 18

temporarily stronger inflammatory response (higher IL-6 level) than the class 1, whose
IL-6 peak usually has a 3-day full width at half maximum (FWHM). The class 3
patients show a longer period of cytokine storm status with IL-6 peak and a 13-day
FWHM. In addition, the class 3 patients with lymphopenia and low e* value suggest
the incompetent immune response and possible exhaustion of T cells; the significantly
elevated level of neutrophils and IL-10 peak with a 7-day FWHM might indicate the
occurrence of secondary bacterial infection and the emergence of MDSC, both could
attribute to chronic infection and poor clinical outcome.
Thus, we correspond the class 1, 2 and 3 COVID-19 patients to the in silico mode
1, 2 and 3 immune response against SARS-CoV-2 infection respectively. We hope our
immunity-based classification method can serve as an indicator of patient’s immune
response and clinical conditions.
Figure 3.

Fig. 3. The 64 clinical patients are classified by their IL-6 level and the immune efficacy in peripheral
blood. (A) We identify 31 patients as the class 1 profile (15 mild & moderate patients, 16 severe patients),
20 patients as the class 2 profile (9 mild & moderate patients, 10 severe patients and 1 critical patient) and
8 patients as the class 3 profile (1 severe patient and 7 critical patients). (B) Averaged time series of the
class 1, 2 and 3 patients. Compared to the steady curve of class 1 patients, class 2 and 3 patients show
different extent of inflammation, characterized by the level and width of IL-6 peak. In addition, the class
3 patients show low e* level.

Combing the theoretical results and clinic classification, for the in silico patients
11 / 18

with different immune response modes, we simulated their disease processes and
possible clinic outcomes, and try to put forward the available treatment strategies.
The main treatment strategies of COVID-19 are to prevent the potential chronic
infection and cytokine storm, increase the immune efficacy, and moderately inhibit
excessive inflammatory response. Here we consider several mostly discussed agents for
COVID-19: (1) Antiviral drugs (AntV), preventing viral cell entry or inhibiting the
production of new progeny virus (20). (2) IFN-γ, increasing innate immune response and
augmenting the successive adaptive immune response (21). (3) Monoclonal antibody
(Ig), blocking viral receptor activation, suppressing the virus and modifying the
inflammatory response (22). (4) Glucocorticoids (GC), preventing excessive immune
response that causes extensive tissue damage and inhibiting cytokines from production
and taking effects (23, 24).
We simulated the course of disease of in silico patients without any treatments, and
examined the outcome of different treatment strategies to determine the effect of the
above drugs and find reasonable combination of treatments. To quantify our results, we
defined a model-based Q value to assess patient’s status and examine the effects of the
above medications. The scoring function Q includes patient’s maximum immune
*
efficacy emax
, respiratory capacity (defined by minimum healthy lung epithelial cells

[ H ]min ), inflammation level (defined by maximum IL-6 level [ IL  6]max ), and whether
chronic infection happens. It is formulated as:
*




emax
[ IL  6]c
[ H ]min
Q  1  q1 * * 1  q2
1  q3
 1  q4[ nCoV ]  ,
ec  emax 
[ H ]c  [ H ]min 
[ IL  6]c  [ IL  6]max 


where we set q1  0.4 , q2  0.4 , q3  3 , q4  1 , ec*  10 , H c  30  106 / mL ,

[ IL  6]c  2000 pg / mL . The Kronecker function [ nCoV ] equals to 1 when final viral
load is zero, equals to 0 when virus is not cleared.
We first assessed the effect of the above drugs used singly on the in silico patients
in different modes, illustrated by the change in Q value, as in Fig. 4A. Treatment
periods are divided into early (PAD 0~7), middle (PAD 7~14) and late stage (PAD
14+) referred to the estimation in (17). Effects of AntV, IFN-γ, Ig are positive during
early stage for their role in limiting virus invasion and tissue damage, effect of GC is
also positive during early stage for prevention of CRS. During middle stage, AntV and
12 / 18

IFN-γ change little of the patients’ score, but AntV is still recommended during the
whole course of disease for preventing superinfection (this situation is seen in our
simulation results). Usage of GC on mode 1 and 2 patients during middle stage
decreases patient’s Q score and is not recommended. Middle and late stage Ig benefits
the most on mode 3 patients for their role in cooperating with host’s immunity.
We next tested all combinations of treatment strategies with different kinds of drugs
used during different stages of in silico patients with reasonable treatment strategies
summarized in Fig. S8. Antiviral drugs are recommended during the whole course of
infection. The mode 1 patients only need antiviral drugs for their recovery. For mode 2
patients, usage of IFN-γ accents innate immune efficacy and helps contain the initial
tissue damage, while usage of GC can reduce inflammation in advance of cytokine storm.
For mode 3 patients, cytokine storm lasts longer thus it is desired to prolong the usage
of GC during early and middle stage, while during the late stage monoclonal antibodies
act as backup for adaptive immunity and help clear the virus. Simulation results
(ensemble averaged) for mode 2 and 3 patients with the above treatment strategies are
shown in Fig. 4C and D. To assist with the formation of treatment plans, we adopted
CPCA on our simulation results and identified several early stage biomarkers
distinguishing the patients into mode 1, 2, and 3, including viral load, IL-6, IL-10, TNFα and Ig, shown in Fig. S5 in SM.
Bacterial co-infection is tested positive in more than 50% of the deceased patients
(2, 25), which we also found clinically. We simulated the course of disease with
bacterial co-infection arising from mode 2 and 3, and denoted them as mode 2*, mode
3.1* and mode 3.2*, where mode 3.1* patients end up with uncleared virus, while
mode 2* and mode 3.2* patients become virus-negative. Detailed assumptions,
definitions and time courses concerning bacterial co-infection are in section 7 in SM.
In bacterial co-infection, antibiotics (AntBio) is also included into treatment plans.
Similar to Fig. 4A, we assessed the effect of each drug in mode 2*, 3.1* and 3.2*
patients, shown in Fig. 4B. Effect of early usage of GC alone turns negative due to its
immunosuppressive effect, which in turn increases tissue damage and chances of
bacterial co-infection, leading to extensive inflammatory response induced by bacteria.
However, early and middle usage of GC, accompanied by AntBio, still makes a
favorable plan, as shown in Fig. 4E.
13 / 18

Figure 4

Fig. 4 Treatment strategies on in silico patients. (A) Effects of different drugs in improving patient’s status
(Q value) when used singly at different COVID-19 development stages. Median value of

Q in the

whole sample is taken to assess the efficacy of the drugs. (B) Effects of different drugs on patients with
bacterial co-infection. (C~E) The ensemble averaged immune response trajectories untreated (in dashed
line) and the trajectories treated (in solid line) of the mode 2 patients (C), the mode 3 patients (D) and the
mode 3.1* patients with bacterial co-infection (E).

14 / 18

We summarized our results in flowchart in Fig. 5, as a reference for an ideal procedure
in treating COVID-19 patients.
Figure 5

Fig. 5. Procedure for identifying the different immune modes and formulating proper therapeutic schedules.

Discussion
The immune system is a complex defense system that protects us from the pathogens,
including virus, bacteria, parasites and other invaders. The response and regulation of
immune system involve dozens of cell types and hundreds of signal molecules with
different ligand-receptor interactions, while these lymphocytes and molecules circulate
in the whole body to clear invaders and kill infected cells. The immune system usually
works quickly, effectively and resiliently. It prepares in advance through lymphocyte
abundance and pool; it learns from experience by memory lymphocyte. On the other
15 / 18

hand, it has checks and balance to prevent the over activation of immune system.
However, when a new virus or invader infect the host and there is no effective drug
treatment, the host immune system might lose the balance and exhaust the lymphocyte
abundance and pool. This may result in poor clinical outcome and even the epidemic
spread. In the last decade of the twentieth century, during the treatment of HIV, hepatitis
B virus and hepatitis C virus infection, the mathematical modeling interpreting
quantitative clinical data has made a significant contribution to understand the dynamics
of these viruses and the drug treatment strategy (26-30).
Since 2019, the ongoing of COVID-19 pandemic has sickened millions and killed
more than 1 million people worldwide. There is still a lack of reliable effective treatment
strategies toward the different immune status in patients. In this study, we constructed a
mathematical model to describe the dynamic response of immune system. We classified
the COVID-19 development processes into three typical modes of immune responses,
and put forward effective treatment strategies for relevant immune response processes.
In this work, we only focus on the immune response, and ignore other clinical symptoms
such as multiple system and organ failure and pathological damage of other organs. We
simplified the innate and adaptive immune network and chose CD4+ and CD8+ T cells
to motivate and orchestrate the immune responses to SARS-CoV-2 infection. More
quantitative and multiple time point clinical data are needed to verify our model and
predictions, especially the treatment strategies for different modes of immune response.
In our recent unpublished work, we are investigating more types of immune cells
including the memory T and B cells, the bacteria infection and MDSC, together with the
recirculation among blood, lung, lymph node, spleen and bone marrow. In addition, we
hope our work can help to classify the patients clinically by their early period hemograms
and cytokine profiles, and to choose effective treatments based on their dynamic immune
status. Furthermore, we hope that our approach can be adapted to other kinds of viral
and bacterial infections, and can be applied to describe and predict the cytokine storm
on CAR-T immune treatment (31, 32).
In summary, our work provides a quantitative framework about the complex
interactions between virus infection and host immune response. More feedbacks with
clinical treatment and data will help us to obtain the systemic and quantitative
understanding of dynamics that immune system responds to the infection of SARS-Cov2 virus.
16 / 18

Acknowledgements

The authors are grateful to Hangle Wang, Siyue Yu, Xin Gao, Dr. De Zhao for their
helpful cooperation and discussions.
The authors appreciate Dr. Zhengfan Jiang, Dr. Bin Li, Dr. San Wang, Dr. Leihan Tang,
Dr. Zhiyuan Li, Dr. Long Qian and Dr. Chao Tang for helpful discussions.
This work was supported by National Key R&D Program in China (Grants No.
2018YFA0900200 and 2020YFA0906900) and National Natural Science Foundation of
China (Grant No. 12090051).

References
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
17 / 18

E. Petersen et al., Comparing SARS-CoV-2 with SARS-CoV and influenza pandemics. The
Lancet Infectious Diseases 20, e238-e244 (2020).
F. Zhou et al., Clinical course and risk factors for mortality of adult inpatients with COVID19 in Wuhan, China: a retrospective cohort study. The Lancet 395, 1054-1062 (2020).
C. Huang et al., Clinical features of patients infected with 2019 novel coronavirus in
Wuhan, China. The Lancet 395, 497-506 (2020).
J. Hadjadj et al., Impaired type I interferon activity and inflammatory responses in severe
COVID-19 patients. Science 369, 718-724 (2020).
A. J. Wilk et al., A single-cell atlas of the peripheral immune response in patients with
severe COVID-19. Nature medicine 26, 1070-1076 (2020).
N. Kaneko et al., Loss of Bcl-6-Expressing T Follicular Helper Cells and Germinal Centers
in COVID-19. Cell 183, 143-157.e113 (2020).
Repurposed Antiviral Drugs for Covid-19 — Interim WHO Solidarity Trial Results. New
England Journal of Medicine, (2020).
J. H. Beigel et al., Remdesivir for the Treatment of Covid-19 — Final Report. New England
Journal of Medicine 383, 1813-1826 (2020).
S. T. H. Liu et al., Convalescent plasma treatment of severe COVID-19: a propensity
score–matched control study. Nature medicine 26, 1708-1713 (2020).
P. J. M. Brouwer et al., Potent neutralizing antibodies from COVID-19 patients define
multiple targets of vulnerability. Science 369, 643-650 (2020).
W. S. Lee, A. K. Wheatley, S. J. Kent, B. J. DeKosky, Antibody-dependent enhancement
and SARS-CoV-2 vaccines and therapies. Nature microbiology 5, 1185-1191 (2020).
C. D. Russell, J. E. Millar, J. K. Baillie, Clinical evidence does not support corticosteroid
treatment for 2019-nCoV lung injury. Lancet 395, 473-475 (2020).
H. Ledford, Coronavirus breakthrough: dexamethasone is first drug shown to save lives.
Nature 582, 469 (2020).
J. B. Dowd et al., Demographic science aids in understanding the spread and fatality rates
of COVID-19. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 117, 9696 (2020).
W.-J. Guan et al., Comorbidity and its impact on 1590 patients with COVID-19 in China: a
nationwide analysis. Eur Respir J 55, 2000547 (2020).
J. C. Helton, F. J. Davis, Latin hypercube sampling and the propagation of uncertainty in
analyses of complex systems. Reliability Engineering & System Safety 81, 23-69 (2002).
B. Hu, H. Guo, P. Zhou, Z. L. Shi, Characteristics of SARS-CoV-2 and COVID-19. Nat Rev
Microbiol, 1-14 (2020).
C. Rydyznski Moderbacher et al., Antigen-Specific Adaptive Immunity to SARS-CoV-2 in

19.
20.
21.
22.

23.
24.

25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.

31.
32.

18 / 18

Acute COVID-19 and Associations with Age and Disease Severity. Cell 183, 9961012.e1019 (2020).
Diagnosis and Treatment Protocol for Novel Coronavirus Pneumonia (Trial Version 7).
Chin Med J (Engl) 133, 1087-1095 (2020).
J. M. Sanders, M. L. Monogue, T. Z. Jodlowski, J. B. Cutrell, Pharmacologic Treatments for
Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19): A Review. JAMA 323, 1824-1836 (2020).
A. Mohammed, Pathogenesis of IL-6 and potential therapeutic of IFN-γ in COVID-19. 10,
307-313 (2020).
L. Li et al., Effect of Convalescent Plasma Therapy on Time to Clinical Improvement in
Patients With Severe and Life-threatening COVID-19: A Randomized Clinical Trial. Jama
324, 460-470 (2020).
J. Cai et al., The Neutrophil-to-Lymphocyte Ratio Determines Clinical Efficacy of
Corticosteroid Therapy in Patients with COVID-19. Cell Metabolism.
B. Russell et al., Associations between immune-suppressive and stimulating drugs and
novel COVID-19-a systematic review of current evidence. Ecancermedicalscience 14,
1022-1022 (2020).
L. Wang et al., Coronavirus disease 2019 in elderly patients: Characteristics and
prognostic factors based on 4-week follow-up. J Infect 80, 639-645 (2020).
S. Bonhoeffer, R. M. May, G. M. Shaw, M. A. Nowak, Virus dynamics and drug therapy.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 94, 6971-6976 (1997).
A. U. Neumann et al., Hepatitis C Viral Dynamics in Vivo and the Antiviral Efficacy of
Interferon-α Therapy. Science 282, 103 (1998).
M. A. Nowak et al., Viral dynamics in hepatitis B virus infection. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences 93, 4398 (1996).
A. S. Perelson, Modelling viral and immune system dynamics. Nature Reviews
Immunology 2, 28-36 (2002).
A. S. Perelson, A. U. Neumann, M. Markowitz, J. M. Leonard, D. D. Ho, HIV-1 dynamics in
vivo: virion clearance rate, infected cell life-span, and viral generation time. Science 271,
1582-1586 (1996).
D. C. Fajgenbaum, C. H. June, Cytokine Storm. New England Journal of Medicine 383,
2255-2273 (2020).
S. L. Maude et al., Chimeric Antigen Receptor T Cells for Sustained Remissions in
Leukemia. New England Journal of Medicine 371, 1507-1517 (2014).

