arXiv:2101.04057v1 [cs.MA] 11 Jan 2021

VIDA: A simulation model of domestic VIolence
in times of social DistAncing
Lı́gia Mori Madeira1,2 , Bernardo Alves Furtado2,3 , and Alan Rafael
Dill1,2
1

Department of Political Science at Federal University of Rio
Grande do Sul (UFRGS)
2
National Council for Technological Development (CNPq)
3
Institute for Applied Economic Research (Ipea)
January 12, 2021
Abstract
Violence against women occurs predominantly in the family and domestic context. The COVID-19 pandemic led Brazil to recommend and,
at times, impose social distancing, with the partial closure of economic
activities, schools, and restrictions on events and public services. Preliminary evidence shows that intense coexistence increases domestic violence,
while social distancing measures may have prevented access to public services and networks, information, and help. We propose an agent-based
model (ABM), called VIDA, to illustrate and examine multi-causal factors
that influence events that generate violence. A central part of the model is
the multi-causal stress indicator, created as a probability trigger of domestic violence occurring within the family environment. Two experimental
design tests were performed: (a) absence or presence of the deterrence
system of domestic violence against women and (b) measures to increase
social distancing. VIDA presents comparative results for metropolitan regions and neighbourhoods considered in the experiments. Results suggest
that social distancing measures, particularly those encouraging staying
at home, may have increased domestic violence against women by about
10%. VIDA suggests further that more populated areas have comparatively fewer cases per hundred thousand women than less populous capitals or rural areas of urban concentrations. This paper contributes to the
literature by formalising, to the best of our knowledge, the first model
of domestic violence through agent-based modelling, using empirical detailed socioeconomic, demographic, educational, gender, and race data at
the intraurban level (census sectors).

Keywords:
Domestic Violence, Violence against Women, Agent-based
Models (ABMs), Pandemics, Simulation, Metropolitan Regions
1

1

Introduction

Domestic violence is a global public health and human rights violation issue
(OPAS and WHO 2017). It is estimated that around 30% of women in the world
suffer, or have suffered violence, usually committed by intimate male partners.
Many cases result in homicides, with almost 40% of female murders committed
by their partners. UN Women estimates that in countries like France, Cyprus,
Singapore, and Argentina, social distancing has increased cases of domestic
violence by 25% to 30% (Women 2020). A report by WHO and PAHO also
denounces that domestic violence against women tends to increase in times of
emergency, including epidemics, victimising more vulnerable female groups such
as the elderly, women with disabilities, refugees, and those living in conflictaffected areas (WHO and OPAS 2020).
Under normal circumstances, this panorama reveals the seriousness with
which the problem must be addressed. During the pandemic with the recommendations for isolation and social distancing, authorities, media, and researchers have pointed to an increase in domestic violence rates in many countries. This is also the case in Brazil, if not worse (Warken 2020). Data released
by the National Ombudsman for Human Rights, office linked to the Ministry
of Women, Family, and Human Rights, indicate that calls to the hotline grew
14%, with an increase of 37.6% in April compared to the same month in 2019
(Antunes 2020).
Social distancing alters the internal dynamics of domestic violence against
women by intensifying the factors at the root of this violence, such as gender inequality, the patriarchal system, the macho culture, and misogyny. Also,
domestic violence may increase in the context of the pandemic due to the consequent economic impact, the overload of reproductive labour on women, stress
and other emotional effects, alcohol or drug abuse, and the reduction of helplines
and services (Alencar et al. 2020).
This study seeks to illustrate situations of domestic violence against women
before and after the COVID-19 pandemic using agent-based simulation modelling, reproducing the main findings in the literature regarding the causes of
domestic violence. The model proposed (called VIDA) contributes to understanding the mechanisms behind the hypothesis that staying at home as a social distancing measure affects the magnitude of numbers related to domestic
violence. Our experimental design introduces deterrence and social distancing
measures in the model, to compare with the baseline model that reflected the
context before the pandemic.
The simulation demonstrated that the difference in the effects of deterrence
in each cohort due to the availability of the criminal justice system and informal
control networks (community) was the mechanism guiding the explanation for
the increase in cases of domestic violence against women while following social
distancing measures. Specifically, the study estimated metrics for the economic
decline and for the behaviour of staying at home as a social distancing measure
that allows comparing Brazilian metropolitan regions. Therefore, the simulation
could grasp regional differences while contributing to understanding the main
2

factors around social distancing and economic decline, as well as the existence
and features of deterrence measures.
Section two provides an overview of the literature on the causes of domestic
violence committed by intimate partners. Section three describes the methodology and presents the model VIDA. We explain the model’s idea, assumptions,
and implementation based on the construction of the indicator of stress and
the characterisation of the artificial population. Also, we discuss the model’s
validation, calibration, and tests of policies that illustrate domestic violence,
before and during the application of social distancing measures. Section four
shows the general results and analysis, based on weighted areas, for each of the
Brazilian metropolitan regions. Section five closes this article, presenting our
final considerations.

2

Domestic violence and femicides: a brief literature review

The literature review on partner abuse perpetration (Rothman 2018) lists several causes and determinants of this type of violence. The discussion starts
from the definition of the very concept of dating abuse, now understood as
physical, sexual, verbal, and emotional abuse directed at a partner (present or
ex), occurring in relationships of people of the opposite or same sex (Center for
Disease Control 2019), not distinguishing between the type of abuse, its severity,
the consequences of these acts, the frequency with which they occur, or differentiating the gender of perpetrator and victim. This concept does not include
violence characterised as being chronic, severe, resulting in physical or sexual injury, caused by a person in a position of advantage over the victim. These types
generally characterise the domestic violence against women and are taken by
social movements as a core element in their definition, given the characteristic
of power and control, involving what the literature calls patriarchal terrorism,
of the abuser towards the victim.
Based on a sociological perspective, Johnson (1995) demonstrates two different ways to approach the issue of domestic violence. One is the family violence
perspective, in which the object refers to family conflicts due to their frequency,
the role of stress, and the adherence to normative standards that would accept
some form of violence in a family context. The other is the feminist perspective, which restricts the focus to specific factors of the perpetration of violence
against women by intimate partners, prevailing the historical, cultural, and
social patterns of patriarchy. Other concepts observed in the literature are intimate terrorism, a form of violence aimed at controlling the relationship; and
situational violence between partners, which does not result from patterns of
abuse and control but escalates to violence in the emergence of specific situations
of conflict (Johnson and Leone 2005).
According to Stark (2012), the conceptualisation and, consequently, how to
address domestic violence, are divided into two models, the “violent incident

3

model” and the “coercive control model”. The first defines violence between
partners as a criminal offence since the late 1990s. It considers measures such
as restricting access to victims, children, and firearms, and is based on shelter
programs, legal assistance, and other support for victims. In the violent incident
model, incarceration is the preferred response for offenders, and the level of danger observed is the main factor determining how the police respond to domestic
abuse. Abusers who continue their actions – with sufficient time between each
event – are considered, by analogy to criminals in general, as repeat offenders.
Despite the contribution to reducing severe forms of violence, scholars question
whether incarceration and judicial protection can have a long-term impact.
The coercive control model is defended as a more comprehensive approach.
It considers that most female victims of violence are subjected to a pattern
of dominance that includes techniques of isolation, degradation, exploitation,
control, and physical violence. It is a pattern of psychological and emotional
abuse that the literature calls patriarchal or intimate terrorism (Johnson 2008),
or coercive control (Stark and Hester 2019; Stark 2020). Stark shares that
“this gap between what the law defines as the crime of domestic violence and
the actual tactics abusers use to subjugate their partners severely limits the
efficacy of even the most dedicated and well-trained police” (2012, p. 201).
For advocates of this model, it is necessary to change from a pattern based on
specific incident response to a proactive response that redefines partner abuse
as ongoing conduct. It is crucial to apply appropriate sanctions to stop the
course of such conduct and the risk of escalation. Studies have advanced in
understanding the risk to children living in environments of domestic violence
(Katz 2016). Despite criticism, scholars argue that police intervention in events
of domestic violence has prevented thousands of injuries and deaths, in addition
to changing the normative pattern regarding violence against women (Stark
2012).
The concern with causal explanations for violence between intimate partners began in the last century, involving different mechanisms, ranging from
psychoanalytic theories, explanations of intergenerational transmission, and social learning, to theories of situational background. Bell and Naugle (2008)
review the main theories of intimate partner violence (IPV) with variables of
interest and theoretical limitations. The main explanations encompass (a) the
idea that frustration in one area of life can lead to aggression – for example,
low autonomy in the workplace could lead to abusive compensation at home
–, (b) the assumption that childhood and the environment where a person was
raised play a role in predicting future abusive partners, and (c) the theories
mixing explanations of distal background, such as childhood abuse, exposure to
interparental aggression, and situations that trigger violence (alcohol consumption, jealousy, and other conflicts with the partner). The authors propose a
framework that, based on different theories, offers a contextual analysis of IPV
including distal and proximal aspects, proposing that the perpetration of abuse
can be explained by antecedent factors, motivators, unwritten rules, and legal
and social consequences of violent behaviour (Bell and Naugle 2008). According to the authors, the advantage of this integrating theoretical framework is
4

the flexibility in presenting common points between apparently contradictory
findings.
Sociocultural theories range from economic explanations to approaches of
structural inequality (present in explanations of feminist theories). Models
based on inequality consider that domestic abuse reflects the power structure in
society, taking into account income, unemployment, culture, race, and gender.
Feminist theories share the understanding that an unequal society influences
the emergence of incidents of violence. They emphasise, however, that male
privilege overcomes any other social inequality in a society with a patriarchal
structure. Feminist theories originally proposed that the primary reasons for
domestic violence were related to a reinforcement of gender standards, but later
adjustments suggested the need to accommodate inter-gender relations. Because of the prevalence of feminists in the political coalitions that formulated
programs against this type of violence, these initiatives tend to assume that
gender norms and traditional roles lead to perpetration and victimisation.
Criminology theories have taken advantage of recent developments in the
study of urban crime and criminal “hot spots” and have relied on the routine
activity theory of criminal events and on the explanations related to target or
victim suitability to understand domestic and intimate violence (Mannon 1997).
These approaches consider crime as predatory, involving a motivated offender,
an available target, and the absence of capable guardians. Family isolation
also contributes to increasing victimisation, making the home one of the most
dangerous places for women and children.
Finally, socio-ecological models organise multiple determinants at different
levels (individual, family, peer, community, institutional, and societal). Violent
behaviour cannot be attributed to a single factor but to a wide range of possible
grouped factors, including biological and psychological risk factors, childhood
experiences, economic status, substance use, social characteristics (friends, for
instance), aspects of the intimate relationship with the partner, workplace culture, and level of involvement with education, public policies, disadvantaged
neighbourhood, violence in the community, access to weapons, cultural norms
related to aggression, the woman’s social status, intersectional nature, and multiple forms of oppression (Rothman 2018).
More recent studies have distinguished the lethal risk of IPV from domestic
and family violence (DFV). The prediction of each of these types of violence has
different numbers and causes. For Ferguson and McLachlan (2020), many tools
to access risk are designed to predict violence and its escalation, including revictimisation and repeated offences, not necessarily to predict homicides. While
IPV is consistently identified as one of the high-risk factors for femicides, the
risk factors may not be the same, for example, for the use and abuse of drugs and
alcohol. The prevalence of drugs and alcohol abuse is much higher in cases of
physical violence than in the prediction of femicides (Ferguson and McLachlan
2020). On the other hand, having a gun increases the risk of femicide by 1000%,
but such a risk would not be confirmed in cases of domestic violence. Also, the
characteristics of the relationship, the presence of children, marital status, and
the duration of the relationship do not appear to be significant risk factors for
5

femicides, although they may contribute to the risk of intimate violence.

3

Methodology

This section explains the concept of agent-based models (ABMs) and describes
the proposed model, VIDA. After this introductory part, subsection 3.1 will
address the model’s intuition, followed by subsection 3.2 that describes the
generation of the indicator of stress. Subsection 3.3 explains the experimental
design and the proposed changes in parameters related to measures of social
distancing and deterrence of domestic violence. Finally, subsection 3.4 presents
the model’s sensitivity analysis and validation.
Agent-based models (ABMs) are built by describing agents (individual and
active subjects) and the interrelationship between them, as well as the environment where these interactions occur (Epstein and Axtell 1996). ABMs are
artificial simulations made in a computational environment. They mimic the
core mechanisms of a phenomenon under examination (Abdou et al. 2012).
Therefore, ABMs are simulacra, artificial, in silico, reduced to core aspects of
the phenomenon, and their purpose is well-defined.
Epstein and Axtell (1996) synthesise ABMs as the analysis of the functions of
transformation of agents and environment, as a result of the present interaction
between the agents and the environment. These transformation algorithms, the
sequence, and how interactions occur, are formally described and can be verified
and reproduced through the computational code provided, which is considered
a best practice (Grimm et al. 2010, 2020). ABMs are subject to verification
and scrutiny of the background theory, and the processes and empirical data
adopted.
Understanding criminal processes is an area of criminology in which ABMs
can be useful and contribute to the construction of public policies and the action of public managers. Among the aspects of criminology, opportunity theories investigate the motivations of aggressors to understand the environmental
contexts in which crimes occur. When developing models to test these opportunities, it is necessary to predict the dynamic interactions of individuals involved
in each criminal event, their interactions with other agents and the environment.
A criminal system is guided by a wide range of interrelated factors. These
factors include and are not limited to the individual perception of the offender,
the configuration and knowledge of the physical environment, the convenience
and attractiveness of the target or victim, the cognitive representation of the
environment, and other factors related to the community.
The criticisms and importance of ABMs result from the difficulty of criminology theories hitherto addressing the importance of individual incidents located
in specific time and space. The theories have always been concerned with general and aggregate standards, making it difficult to draw conclusions regarding
the behaviour of victims and offenders that could affect crime rates and occurrence. It is necessary to examine the individual actors who play essential roles
in criminal events in order to understand the patterns and characteristics of

6

crimes better.

3.1

The Intuition of the Model VIDA

In normal circumstances, the reality of families encompasses individual members participating in professional or social activities, most of the time outside the
home. During a pandemic where society is upstanding social distancing measures, family reality changes, and individuals are at home most of the time, even
when carrying out work activities. Environmental and socioeconomic factors
continue to contribute to this experience, intensifying social and pathological
factors such as the use and abuse of drugs and alcohol.
Regarding the issue of domestic violence against women, it is noted that the
deterrent mechanisms are compromised in a context of social distancing by at
least two aspects. First, it is hard or even impossible to be distant from the
abuser. Second, there are fewer opportunities to denounce the abusive situation
to the community, as well as less access to the police and reduced response by
the justice system.
The purpose of the model VIDA is to illustrate causal elements intrinsic
to the domestic and family environment that favours the likelihood of violence
against women. It contributes to the increase in the theory’s explanatory capacity and offers quantitative elements to support the validity of the causal
elements embedded in the model. When the general behaviour of conditions
for violence is calibrated according to the figures available for Brazil, it is possible to construct indicators of the magnitude of adverse effects resulting from
a specific contextual situation. In this study, VIDA explicitly tested the increase in families’ permanence at home due to social distancing measures taken
to prevent the spread of the virus Sars-CoV-2 in the context of the COVID-19
pandemic and the restriction to deterrence systems available to women victims
of domestic abuse.
The model is based on the following family situation: male abuser and female
victim, with or without children. The characteristics of men, women, and the
family environment are derived as samples of the population as observed in the
census of 2010 conducted by the Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics
(IBGE), for Brazilian metropolitan regions. Based on the family nucleus, we
build a risk indicator (stress) that accumulates additively (Berge et al. 2014)
theoretical hypotheses that contribute as a trigger to domestic violence. This
risk indicator serves as a probabilistic factor that leads to violence.

3.2

Construction of the indicator of stress from familial
and model context

The indicator of stress is the central part of the model and aims at systematically
weighing in the findings of the literature. The indicator is created successively
adding: (a) exogenous characteristics of each family member (model’s agents),
(b) endogenous agents’ variables that accumulate throughout the simulation,
and (c) variables chosen by the modeller.
7

Aspects related to income, gender, years of education, age, race, and the typical size of families are exogenously included. The variables are collected from
census sectors and weighted statistical areas. Endogenous variables result from
other variables or the interaction promoted by the model’s algorithm. The modeller may change some variables to assess the model’s response. These variables
include the proportion of those staying at home (before and during the pandemic), the relevance of gender to the indicator of stress, level of employment,
the possession or not of weapons, and presence of substance use disorder.
The starting point to establish the indicator of stress is gender, considering
that being male leads to a higher indicator (see table 1). After that, we add
individual, household and per capita income influence, specifying that lower
income leads to comparatively higher indicators. Household income works as a
proxy for neighbourhood quality and income per capita as a proxy for domestic
(dis)comfort.
The literature review in section two further suggests four hypotheses related
to the composition of the indicator of stress. The variable years of schooling
is added to the indicator based on the hypothesis that fewer than six years of
study leads to a higher indicator of stress of 60%, and the greater the number
of years of schooling, the lower the indicator. Another hypothesis is that being
older than 18 and younger than 29 years old is a characteristic relevant to the
indicator of stress. The third hypothesis concerns the victim’s race. In this case,
black agents receive a proportional increase of 30% in the indicator of stress.
Finally, the fourth hypothesis leads to an increase in the indicator of stress for
women who are employed.
Some factors undergo multiplicative proportionality of the value to be added,
according to their relevance (see table 1). Those considered highly relevant
are multiplied by ten, and medium relevant, by five. For years of schooling
(which ranges from 0 to 17) and history of domestic abuse (number of events
of violence), values are divided by a constant (10). These values were chosen
to maintain a sensible balance among factors influencing the indicator of stress
and were validated via the sensitivity analysis performed.
Access to firearms and substance use disorder are included as aggravating
factors. Firearms are considered twice as highly relevant. Access to firearms,
once confirmed, is deterministic (always added to the indicator). Substance use
disorder, in turn, is implemented as a random additional factor because it may
or may not occur.
As such, the indicator of stress is the result of the addition and multiplication
of a number of composition individual and familial census characteristics that
follow existing literature reasoning and degree of relevance. The composite
measure is then used probabilistically as a violence trigger that accumulates
endogenously. This tentative construction captures the subjective findings of
the literature in a systemic way and enables our implementation of a deterrence
system mechanism.
VIDA is a model with simple dynamics. In each simulation, VIDA starts by
generating the artificial population sample according to the choices made by the
modeller. The model then runs for a brief period of 10 steps. During this pe8

Indicator of stress

Values added

Observations

Source

Gender
Income
Household income
Income per capita
Yrs. of schooling
Age
Spouse’s race
Employment
Staying at home
Firearms
Substance use
Hist. domestic abuse

Male 0.8, female 0.2
1 – income
– household income
1 – income pc
1 – (schooling / 10)
1, If >18 age <29
1, if black female
1, if employed
0.67, if no work; 0.34
1, if access; 0
1, if addicted; 0
Events violence / 10

Initial value

Modeller
IBGE 2010
IBGE 2010
IBGE 2010
IBGE 2010
IBGE 2010
IBGE 2010
Modeller
Endogenous
Modeller
Modeller
Endogenous

+ 60% if <6
+ 30%
Def.: 80% pop.
Def.: 10% pop.
Def.: 10% pop.

Table 1: The table lists the components of the indicator of stress, how they affect
it, the source of the data and the relevance of the multiplicative proportionality.
riod, there is some stochastic neutral volatility associated with employment and
income. Moreover, there is enough time for an endogenous history of violence
to build up. After 200 steps, the violence levels have stabilized and the model
is interrupted and output is generated. The model also includes a fixed model
scale that divides the indicator by a 1,000 so to calibrate the cases of attacks to
the available empirical data. The execution of each step of the model consists
of:
1. Update of the indicator of stress for all agents.
2. Verification of the violence trigger.
3. Verification of the need to seek help from public policies against violence,
the deterrence process.
The full model is available at the COmSES platform and GitHub. It is built
upon the Mesa framework (Masad and Kazil 2015). The reader interested in
using VIDA should focus on the ’violence’ folder. Basically, the construction
of the stress indicator is included as an agent step at agents.py and the creation of the sampled families from data is made within model.py, using data
and processes from the folder ’input’. Generalization.py iterates the model
200 times and tests the experimental design. Outputs are also included in the
repository.

3.3

Experimental design: social distancing and deterrence
of domestic violence

When the model appropriately represents the phenomena researched, it is possible to ask what-if questions. Therefore, it is possible to test the likely effects of
9

Relevance
High
Medium
Medium
High
High
Medium
Medium
High * High
High, random
High

Indicator of stress

Values added

Source

Relevance

Denounce
Protective measure
Conviction

–1
–1
–1

Endogenous
Endogenous
Endogenous

Medium
High
High

Table 2: Influence of deterrence system on aggressor’s indicator of stress.
interventions that have not yet taken place. Our experimental design includes
two consequences of the pandemic: (a) the imposition of social distancing measure of staying at home, and (b) the access (or lack thereof) of the victim to
protective measures in case of domestic violence (deterrence system).
Victims searching for help when suffering from domestic violence typically
have three similarly-sized behaviour patters, according to data compiled by the
Brazilian Senate. The first group is of victims that never denounce. Victims
from the second group in contrast denounce immediately after the first case
of violence. Victims from the third group denounce after the third event of
violence. Following this segmentation, the victims in the model VIDA are distributed equally among these three groups and act accordingly.
The model then considers that women who denounce have a 50% chance of
obtaining protection. Among those who denounce and obtain protection, 50%
have the chance to see their abuser convicted. The victim’s situation (denounce,
protection, or abuser conviction) is included in the model as an element that
reduces the abuser’s indicator of stress (see table 2. Therefore, it works to
reduce the chances of further violence cases, and each request for support in the
deterrence system reduces the likelihood of future violent events.

3.4

Comments on calibration, validation and sensitivity
analysis

VIDA is simulated with different sampled data. The results presented refer
to the median of results obtained after the 200-fold simulation. The model
was calibrated in order to approximate the number of notifications of domestic
violence against women made by health agencies in 2011, using data from the
2010 census. In 2011, data from the Senate indicated 73.7 notifications per
100,000 women.
The literature offers different concepts of model validation (Galán et al.
2009; Guerini and Moneta 2017; Moss 2008; Ngo and See 2012; Wilensky and
Rand 2015). However, there is some consensus around the idea that models
are validated according to their purpose, context and ontology (Edmonds and
Meyer 2017). A model proposed for predicting is expected to offer accurate
and confirmed results that were not part of the model beforehand. A model
designed to help to understand a given mechanism does not have to prove a
predicted empirical data. In any case, a model must be anchored in its purpose
and reflect the available literature.

10

Accordingly, VIDA’s purpose is to illustrate causal elements that are subjectively present in the literature, thus helping understand the phenomena and
enable the implementation of what-if analysis. As a first tentative to systematically represent a multi-causal intricate theoretical mechanism – that of domestic
violence trigger – and the empirical foundation of the input of the model, we
believe VIDA results are sufficiently validated to enable comparisons among
metropolitan regions and insights into intraurban differences.
The sensitivity analysis results presented in the next section contributes
to demonstrate the robustness of the model as it assesses how the variation
of parameters and processes interfere in the results. Moreover, the analysis
of parameter changes contributes to comprehending the effects these changes
generate.
The modeller running VIDA can control the variation of the parameters
that are not endogenous or derived directly from the IBGE population sampling. Thus, the modeller may alter data on: relevance of gender; employment
percentage (and consequently the population staying at home and whether receiving salaries); access to firearms, and substance use disorder. It is possible
to test volatility of employment and income value, increasing the chances of
moving from employed to unemployed and vice versa, as well small increases or
decreases in income.

4

Results

First, we present the results of the sensitivity analysis, where the parameters
chosen by the modeller are submitted to variation. Second, we present the baseline results and those for the experimental design. Then, we show a comparison
of results across 46 metropolitan regions in Brazil. Finally, we detail intraurban
results for Brası́lia and Porto Alegre. Once the model was calibrated with nationwide data from 2011, showing 73.7 reports of violence per 100,000 women,
it was possible to observe the differences resulting from the implicit variation
of race, gender, age, family size, presence of weapons, and economic capacity
of families in different metropolitan regions and intrametropolitan neighbourhoods.

4.1

Sensitivity analysis

The results presented adopt the standard parameters of the model for the
metropolitan region of Brası́lia (see table 3), with the presence of deterrence
and absence of social distancing measures, that is, the situation before the pandemic. The model runs 200 simulations for each tested parameter.
The indicator of stress according to gender, fixed at 0.2 for women and
varying for men between 0.1 and 0.9, has little influence on the results related
to increasing cases and denounces. The percentage increase between the lowest
and highest value was 2.24% for cases of violence and 2.48% for denounces.

11

Indicator component level

Cases

Denounces

Gender stress
0.1
0.44
0.9

169.57
172.28
173.45

60.05
61.72
61.58

Percentage of employed
0.1
0.44
0.9

165.66
169.14
174.11

58.65
60.81
61.98

Firearms
0.1
0.44
0.9

173.33
368.05
628.79

62.4
115.29
186.41

Substance use disorder
0.01
0.22
0.5

170.99
178.09
184.73

60.94
63.68
66.14

Table 3: Sensitivity analysis: results of cases and denounces per 100,000 women
when varying modeller choices of indicator os stress components.
The percentage of employment between 0.1 and 0.9, led to an increase of
4.85% in domestic violence against women, and an increase of 5.36% in the
number of denounces. This slight increase is in accordance with the suggestion
of the literature that working women are more subject to domestic violence.
As expected, the introduction of a high * high relevance multiplicative proportionality for access to firearms into the model resulted in an increase in cases
and denouncing. Varying from 0.1 to 0.9, access to firearms increased violence
cases significantly by 72.43% and denouncing by 66.52%.
The occurrence of cases of domestic violence related to substance use disorder
included an additional random factor, considering that such cases may or may
not occur. Thus, the increase (from 0.01 to 0.5) in the chances of being addicted
resulted in an increase in violence cases of 7.44% and the number of denounces
of 7.86%.

4.2

Simulation results

The model VIDA with typical parameters (see table 1) was simulated 200 times
to report the average numbers obtained. The average number of denounces
was 61.73, in an environment with 174.49 domestic violence cases per 100,000
women.
Table 4 shows the results for the experimental design tests. Social distancing
measures, which forces the agents to stay at home, regardless of whether they

12

Deterrence

Social distancing

Cases

Denounces

FALSE
FALSE

FALSE
TRUE

180.38
197.35

0
0

TRUE
TRUE

FALSE
TRUE

173.62
190.74

61.97
47.38

Table 4: Results per 100,000 women for different alternatives of social distancing
and deterrence system.
are working, leads to an increase in violence cases of 8.86%. At the same time,
denounces reduced by almost a third (29.25%), compared with the baseline
simulated model with the default parameters.
Additionally, the inclusion of the deterrence system in the model demonstrated a reduction in domestic violence cases by only 3.53%, when compared
with its absence (178.89 versus 172.79 cases per 100,000 women). These findings
corroborate the literature (Campbell et al. 2003), which states that judicial protection and incarceration have a greater long-term impact and work to reduce
severe forms of violence, especially femicides. According to the literature, other
aspects contribute to reducing the risk of severe forms of domestic violence,
such as the expansion of employment, preventing substance use disorder, and
restricting access to weapons.
A relevant contribution of the simulation is the ability to compare the results across different metropolitan regions with varying composing attributes,
such as age and gender, family size, average wages, years of schooling, and race
distribution, according to the 2010 demographic census sample data. Figure 1
shows the number of cases of domestic violence per 100,000 women in the highpopulated areas in Brazilian metropolitan regions. The data simulated in the
model suggest that larger and wealthier metropolitan regions have proportionately fewer cases of domestic violence against women than regions with smaller
and poorer populations.
Empirical analysis for Brazil have shown increasing rates in the regions North
and Northeast, and decreasing rates in the South and Southeast of Brazil in
the past decade. When shifting the focus of analysis to the size of the municipalities, there is a general decrease in homicides in large cities (with more
than 500,000 inhabitants) and an increase in medium-sized (between 100,000
and 500,000 inhabitants) and small municipalities (with less than 100,000 inhabitants) (Cerqueira et al. 2019). Despite their sizes, another important explanatory element that may affect the results is the lack of infrastructure and
deterrence systems in regions with a larger number of domestic violence cases
(Madeira et al. 2018). Our simulation results reveal patterns that are similar to
the empirical data, showing notably fewer cases in metropolitan regions of the
South and Southeast. When cases are more frequent in these regions, they are
identified in metropolitan regions that encompass smaller cities, located inland
and with less access to deterrence apparatus.

13

Figure 1: Number of domestic violence cases per 100,000 women in Brazilian
high-populated areas metropolitan regions as classified by the IBGE.
Further, we compared intraurban simulation results with the current reality
(see figure 2). The comparison data was retrieved from the database of Indicators of Violence Against Women — Maria da Penha Law, for the year 2019. 1
The analysis from the municipalities located in the metropolitan region of Porto
Alegre 2 suggest that results show similar patterns of domestic violence when
comparing the simulation and reality. Neighbourhoods corresponding to municipalities with high rates of violence, such as Viamão, Taquara, Cachoeirinha and
Guaı́ba figure in the simulation among the groups with the highest incidence.
Alvorada, with a proven record of violence, appears in the simulation with an
1 Retrieved
2 Retrieved

from https://www.ssp.rs.gov.br/indicadores-da-violencia-contra-a-mulher
from https://atlassocioeconomico.rs.gov.br/regiao-metropolitana-de-porto-

alegre-rmpa

14

Figure 2: Cases per 100,000 women. Mean obtained from 500 simulations for
domestic violence cases per 100,000 women in weighted areas (IBGE), for the
metropolitan region of Porto Alegre
western portion that is in the second tier of highest violence, along with an eastern, more sparsely inhabited area that is less violent. The small municipality
of Nova Santa Rita which is comprised by a single neighbourhood (statistically
weighted area) shows a dispersed average and stands out from a simulated low
number of attacks, as compared to intermediate levels in the obtained data.
Figure 3 shows the violence cases in the metropolitan region of Brası́lia
(Federal District). In this case, it appears that the eastern, very large and
sparsely populated rural portion of the region and some peripheral urban centres
are more susceptible to violence against women than in the most populated
areas. Our results show neighboring areas of high violence, side by side with
less violent areas out of the Federal District bounds, in peripheral areas of the
south, namely Valparaı́so de Goı́as and Luziânia, and Águas Lindas de Goiás to
the west. Those results suggest the possibility of high intraurban distinctions
of violence that are not captured by municipalities averages, but that may be
corroborated by police hot-spot analysis.
This exercise can be replicated for all metropolitan regions. The adoption of
real data allows studying specific weighted areas and simulating the geospatial
distribution of domestic violence cases, which contributes to the formulation of

15

Figure 3: Cases per 100,000 women. Mean obtained from 500 simulations for
domestic violence cases per 100,000 women in weighted areas (IBGE), for the
metropolitan region of Brasilia.
policies to address this issue.

5

Final considerations

This article presents a first attempt to formalise a multi-causal model of domestic violence, based on a series of family characteristics and comparable artificial data, generated from intra-urban (large neighbourhoods) census data. The
model illustrates theoretical mechanisms and quantifies explanatory aspects of
violence against women. Additionally, it incorporates aspects that emerged with
the COVID-19 pandemic – forced coexistence in the home environment due to
social distancing measures – and elements of the deterrence system to address
domestic abuse. As such, the paper contributes to the understanding of the
complex mechanisms encompassing violence against women in Brazil.
The results suggest an increase in violence against women of about 10% with
the implementation of social distancing measures emphasising staying at home,

16

which is confirmed by recent data that point to a 30% decrease in denounces in
several countries and 25% in some Brazilian states (Bueno et al. 2020). More
densely populated metropolitan regions appear to have fewer violence cases per
100,000 women compared to smaller metropolitan regions. The same comparative pattern appears in the intra-metropolitan analysis between high-populated
areas and rural or peripheral areas.
In addition, the model, its codification, and the process of generating artificial population samples based on census data are publicly available. This
practice aims to facilitate the dissemination of the model and its use by the
scientific community, analysts, and public policy managers.
Future work involves detailing empirical data in the model, specifically identifying possession of firearms per household, and feedback effects within the
neighbourhood. Data on the access of firearms can greatly contribute to the reliability of the proposed spatial analysis because the presence of firearms seems
to be the strongest among the causes of femicides.
The elaboration of public policies depends on the right diagnoses capable
of supporting appropriate interventions. The area of violence and crime routinely deals with the problem of lack of data, even more so in cases of high
underreporting such as domestic violence. The ethical limitations of producing
experiments in the area can also be overcome by using agent-based simulating
models, which make it possible to replicate reality and illustrate different effects
in an auspicious way. However, researchers who have been trying to understand
the risks related to domestic abuse, especially in the context of the pandemic,
have suggested the need to use data parsimoniously since it takes time to understand the changes in the dynamics of collecting and recording information.
The model demonstrated to be useful to simulate and anticipate data, allowing
to illustrate this type of violence and its georeferenced disparities. This tool
proves to be of great importance in this particular moment where all kinds of
inequalities stand out in the country.

References
Abdou, M., Hamill, L., and Gilbert, N. (2012). Designing and Building an
Agent-Based Model. In Heppenstall, A. J., Crooks, A. T., See, L. M., and
Batty, M., editors, Agent-Based Models of Geographical Systems, pages 141–
165. Springer Netherlands, Dordrecht.
Alencar, J., Stuker, P., Tokarski, C., Alves, I., and de Andrade, K. (2020).
Polı́ticas Públicas e Violência Baseada no Gênero Durante a Pandemia Da
Covid-19: Ações Presentes, Ausentes e Recomendadas. Nota Técnica 78,
Instituto de Pesquisa Econômica Aplicada: Diretoria de Estudos e Polı́ticas
Sociais, Brası́lia.
Antunes, L. (2020). Violência doméstica: denúncias no Ligue 180 subiram 14%
nos quatro primeiros meses do ano.

17

Bell, K. M. and Naugle, A. E. (2008). Intimate partner violence theoretical
considerations: moving towards a contextual framework. Clinical psychology
review, 28(7):1096–1107. Place: United States.
Berge, J. M., Wall, M., Larson, N., Eisenberg, M. E., Loth, K. A., and NeumarkSztainer, D. (2014). The unique and additive associations of family functioning and parenting practices with disordered eating behaviors in diverse
adolescents. Journal of Behavioral Medicine, 37(2):205–217.
Bueno, S., Lima, R. S. d., Sobral, I., Pimentel, A., Franco, B., Marques, D.,
Martins, J., and Nascimento, T. (2020). Violência Doméstica Durante Pandemia de Covid-19. Nota Técnica, Fórum Brasileiro de Segurança Pública,
Brası́lia.
Campbell, J. C., Webster, D., Koziol-McLain, J., Block, C., Campbell, D.,
Curry, M. A., Gary, F., Glass, N., McFarlane, J., Sachs, C., Sharps, P.,
Ulrich, Y., Wilt, S. A., Manganello, J., Xu, X., Schollenberger, J., Frye, V.,
and Laughon, K. (2003). Risk factors for femicide in abusive relationships:
results from a multisite case control study. American journal of public health,
93(7):1089–1097. Publisher: © American Journal of Public Health 2003.
Center for Disease Control, C. (2019). Preventing Intimate Partner Violence.
Cerqueira, D., Bueno, S., Lima, R. S. d., Cristina, N., Helder, F.,
Paloma Palmieri, A., David, M., Reis, M., Cypriano, O., and Sobral, I. (2019).
Atlas da violência 2019. Technical report, Instituto de Pesquisa Econômica
Aplicada (IPEA).
Edmonds, B. and Meyer, R., editors (2017). Simulating Social Complexity: A
Handbook. Understanding Complex Systems. Springer International Publishing, 2 edition.
Epstein, J. M. and Axtell, R. (1996). Growing artificial societies: social science
from the bottom up. Brookings/MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Ferguson, C. and McLachlan, F. (2020). Predicting and assessing lethal risk in
domestic and family violence situations in Australia.
Galán, J. M., Izquierdo, L. R., Izquierdo, S. S., Santos, J. I., Del Olmo, R.,
López-Paredes, A., and Edmonds, B. (2009). Errors and artefacts in agentbased modelling. Journal of Artificial Societies and Social Simulation, 12(1):1.
Grimm, V., Berger, U., DeAngelis, D. L., Polhill, J. G., Giske, J., and Railsback,
S. F. (2010). The ODD protocol: a review and first update. Ecological
Modelling, 221(23):2760–2768.
Grimm, V., Railsback, S. F., Vincenot, C. E., Berger, U., Gallagher, C., DeAngelis, D. L., Edmonds, B., Ge, J., Giske, J., and Groeneveld, J. (2020). The
odd protocol for describing agent-based and other simulation models: A second update to improve clarity, replication, and structural realism. Journal of
Artificial Societies and Social Simulation, 23(2).
18

Guerini, M. and Moneta, A. (2017). A method for agent-based models validation. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 82:125–141.
Johnson, M. (2008). A Typology of Domestic Violence: Intimate Terrorism,
Violent Resistance, and Situational Couple Violence. Northeastern series on
gender, crime, and law. Northeastern University Press.
Johnson, M. P. (1995). Patriarchal Terrorism and Common Couple Violence:
Two Forms of Violence against Women. Journal of Marriage and Family,
57(2):283–294. Publisher: [Wiley, National Council on Family Relations].
Johnson, M. P. and Leone, J. M. (2005). The Differential Effects of Intimate Terrorism and Situational Couple Violence: Findings From the National Violence
Against Women Survey. Journal of Family Issues, 26(3):322–349. Publisher:
SAGE Publications Inc.
Katz, E. (2016). Beyond the Physical Incident Model: How Children Living with
Domestic Violence are Harmed By and Resist Regimes of Coercive Control.
Child Abuse Review, 25(1):46–59.
Madeira, L. M., Geliski, L., Salvarrey, G., Boessio, A. P., and Trindade, K.
(2018). Capacidade estatal na segurança pública municipal das capitais
brasileiras. In A Polı́tica, as Polı́ticas e os Controles: Como São Governadas
as Cidades, pages 146–170. Tomo Editorial, Porto Alegre.
Mannon, J. M. (1997). Domestic and intimate violence: An application of
routine activities theory. Aggression and Violent Behavior, 2(1):9–24.
Masad, D. and Kazil, J. (2015). MESA: an agent-based modeling framework.
In 14th PYTHON in Science Conference, pages 53–60.
Moss, S. (2008). Alternative approaches to the empirical validation of agentbased models. Journal of Artificial Societies and social simulation, 11(1):5.
Ngo, T. A. and See, L. (2012). Calibration and Validation of Agent-Based
Models of Land Cover Change. In Heppenstall, A. J., Crooks, A. T., See,
L. M., and Batty, M., editors, Agent-Based Models of Geographical Systems,
pages 181–197. Springer Netherlands, Dordrecht.
OPAS and WHO (2017). Folha informativa - Violência contra as mulheres.
Rothman, E. F. (2018). Chapter 2 - Theories on the Causation of Partner Abuse
Perpetration. In Wolfe, D. A. and Temple, J. R., editors, Adolescent Dating
Violence, pages 25–51. Academic Press, San Diego.
Stark, E. (2012). Looking Beyond Domestic Violence: Policing Coercive Control. Journal of Police Crisis Negotiations, 12(2):199–217. Publisher: Routledge.

19

Stark, E. (2020). The ‘Coercive Control Framework’: Making Law Work for
Women. In McMahon, M. and McGorrery, P., editors, Criminalising Coercive
Control : Family Violence and the Criminal Law, pages 33–49. Springer,
Singapore.
Stark, E. and Hester, M. (2019). Coercive Control: Update and Review. Violence Against Women, 25(1):81–104.
Warken, J. (2020). Assassinatos de mulheres em casa quase dobram em São
Paulo na quarentena.
WHO and OPAS (2020). COVID-19 e a violência contra a mulher. Technical
Report WHO/SRH/20.04, World Health Organization.
Wilensky, U. and Rand, W. (2015). An Introduction to Agent-Based Modeling:
Modeling Natural, Social, and Engineered Complex Systems with NetLogo.
The MIT Press. MIT Press.
Women, U. (2020). COVID-19 and Ending Violence Against Women and Girls.
Technical report, UN Women.

20

