Predicting regional COVID-19 hospital admissions in Sweden
using mobility data
Philip Gerlee,1, ∗ Julia Karlsson,2 Ingrid Fritzell,2 Thomas Brezicka,2
Armin Spreco,3, 4 Toomas Timpka,3, 4 Anna Jöud,5, 6 and Torbjörn Lundh1
1

Mathematical Sciences, Chalmers University of

arXiv:2101.00823v1 [q-bio.PE] 4 Jan 2021

Technology and University of Gothenburg, Sweden
2
3

Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Gothenburg, Sweden

Department of Health, Medicine and Caring Science, Linköping University
4

Center for Health Services Development,

Region Östergötland, Linköping, Sweden
5
6

Department of Laboratory Medicine, Lund University, Sweden

Skåne University Hospital, Department of Research and Development, Lund, Sweden
(Dated: January 5, 2021)

1

Abstract
The transmission of COVID-19 is dependent on social contacts, the rate of which have varied
during the pandemic due to mandated and voluntary social distancing. Changes in transmission
dynamics eventually affect hospital admissions and we have used this connection in order to model
and predict regional hospital admissions in Sweden during the COVID-19 pandemic. We use an
SEIR-model for each region in Sweden in which the infectivity is assumed to depend on mobility
data in terms of public transport utilisation and mobile phone usage. The results show that the
model can capture the timing of the first and beginning of the second wave of the pandemic. Further, we show that for two major regions of Sweden models with public transport data outperform
models using mobile phone usage. The model assumes a three week delay from disease transmission
to hospitalisation which makes it possible to use current mobility data to predict future admissions.

I.

INTRODUCTION

Infectious diseases are disseminated through transmission of infectious agents in association with physical meetings (social contacts) between individuals. These meetings occur
at home or at other locations such as workplaces or schools, which are reached using some
means of transportation, e.g. by car, public transport or foot. The meetings tend to take
on regular patterns and variations, and these can be used for different types of analytic
purposes [1, 2].
The COVID-19 pandemic has affected the society in numerous ways. One striking feature is the reduction in individual mobility, which has been enforced either by strict legal
lockdowns or, as in the case of Sweden, by recommendations to the general public. This
reduction in mobility has had the intended effect of “flattening the curve” during the first,
second and possibly future waves of the pandemic.
Obtaining an understanding of the effect of mobility on the transmission of COVID19 requires an ability to measures and quantify said changes. This has been achieved by
geographically tracking cell phone usage , either directly by mobile phone operators [3] or
via usage of Google services [4] that are readily available for all regions. In addition to this,
mobility has also been measured by considering the utilisation of public transport [5].
∗

gerlee@chalmers.se

2

This type of information has been used in a number of studies in order to model and
understand the pandemic. Linka et al. used mobility data to obtain a correlation between
the reproduction number and public health interventions [6], while Zhou et al. investigated
the delay of outbreaks caused by mobility restrictions [7]. Another application of mobility
data is to make model-informed choices between different reopening strategies [8].
Given the time delay between initial infection and potential hospital treatment, mobility
data, such as records of daily commuters, also offer an opportunity to make predictions about
the coming number of cases [9]. Such models can be useful for hospital administration since
it allows for planning and a higher degree of preparedness for coming surges in the need of
hospital beds. The aim of this study was to investigate whether variations in data reflecting
weekly commuting rates were associated with later COVID-19 hospitalisation rates and also
compare the ability of different data sources to achieve this aim. The underlying assumption
is that decreased levels of local commuting reflect a corresponding decrease in COVID-19
transmission.

II.

METHODS

A retrospective design was used for data collection and analysis. We developed an SEIRmodel of disease transmission which outputs the expected number of hospital admissions.
Here we describe the hospital admission and mobility data, the epidemiological model that
we have used as well as the method for fitting the model to data. The code for the model
and the data used is available at: http://www.math.chalmers.se/~gerlee/SEIR.html

A.

Data

Endpoint data: We consider hospital admission data from Sweden at the regional level
aggregated by National Board of Health and Welfare [10]. The data contains the total
number of newly admitted patients diagnosed with COVID-19 per week, starting with week
10. The data is reported separately for each of the 21 regions in Sweden. Missing data
points were replaced by zeroes for all regions.
Syndromic data: In order to account for changes in behaviour due to governmental
recommendations we have made use of mobility data from two sources: public transport
3

data from the public transport authorities in Region Västra Götaland and Region Skåne
called Västtrafik (VT) and Skånetrafiken (ST), and Google mobility reports (GMR). The
VT- and ST-data describe the total number of journeys made by public transport in the
region and are reported on a weekly basis. Data are given in terms of a percent change
compared to travel during week 9. The GMR-data also describes the change in mobility
compared to a baseline, which is the median value from the 5-week period Jan 3 – Feb
6, 2020. Mobility is split into place categories and we have used values from the category
’transit stations’. The GMR-data is reported on a daily basis and in order to make it
compatible with the model we calculate weekly averages. Figure 6 in the Appendix shows
the above mobility measures as a function of time.

B.

Epidemiological model

To model the weekly time series of COVID-19 related hospital admissions we have used an
SEIR-model with time-dependent infectivity β(t) which is informed by mobility measures.
Infectivity is assumed to vary with mobility such that the number of new social contacts for
each infected individual increases with travel.
We assume that mobility measured by public transport utilisation and mobile phone
usage reflects the general level of mobility in each region, which is then assumed to impact
the contact rate and consequently the infectivity. Note that we do not assume that disease
transmissions occurs exclusively during travel, but rather that the above mobility measures
serve as a useful proxy for the rate of social contacts.
The model is defined in terms of the following set of coupled ordinary differential equations:

β(t)SI
dS


= −


dt
N




dE
β(t)SI



=
− ρE
dt
N
(1)

dI


= ρE − γI


dt





 dR = γI.
dt
Here ρ is the rate at which people leave the exposed compartment, γ is the rate of recovery
and N is the population size of the region. In order to solve the system we also need to
4

specify an initial condition and when in time it occurs. We assume that all individuals are
susceptible except an initial number of I0 of infectious individuals at t0 weeks prior to the
first data point in the admission data (week 10).
To connect the dynamics of the SEIR-model with hospital admissions we assume that
individuals in the infectious compartment give rise to future hospital admissions. To model
this we assume that the number of hospital admissions ta weeks into the future is given by
a fraction p of the present number of infectious individuals.

C.

Model parametrisation and fitting

The parameters of the SEIR-model were taken from previously published studies and we
have used ρ = 1.37 week−1 (corresponding to a latency period of on average 5.1 days) and
recovery rate γ = 1.4 week−1 (corresponding to a infectious period of on average 5 days)
[11].
Since testing was limited during the early stages of the pandemic in Sweden it is difficult
to estimate the initial condition for our model. For simplicity we assume a single infected
individual in a population of susceptibles appearing t0 = 4 weeks prior to the first data point.
Adjusting the initial condition for each region could possibly yield more accurate prediction,
but here we have chosen a robust initial condition which gives sensible predictions for all
regions.
The scaling that relates the number of infected to hospital admissions was set to p = 0.023
in accordance with a previous study [11]. The time lag from infection to hospital admission
was set to ta = 3 weeks. This value is related to the time from infection to hospital admission,
which has been reported to be 17 days (5 days latency [11] plus 12 days from symptom onset
to admission [12]). However, it should not be interpreted as a parameter describing the fate
of an individual patient, but should rather be interpreted as the time it takes for changes in
disease transmission to propagate (sometimes via secondary cases) to hospital admissions.
A previous study using mobility data has shown a time delay in admissions due to mobility
restrictions in the range of 9-25 days [13], which covers our assumed value of 21 days.
Given the uncertainty in many of the above parameter values we have carried out a
sensitivity analysis by varying one parameter at a time within a reasonable range. The
results of this analysis is presented in the Appendix.
5

The infectivity β(t) is informed by the mobility data in the following way: For Västra
Götaland and Skåne we use the public transport data and assume a linear relationship
β(t) = a + bV (t)
where a, b are parameters that are fitted to the admission data (see below for details) and
V (t) is the change in travel during week t. For all other regions we use the GMR-data in a
similar way and assume that

β(t) = a + bGi (t)
where Gi (t) is the GMR-data (place category ’transit stations’) for region i, and a, b are
parameters that are estimated.
In order to account for the fact that not only mobility changed at the onset of the
pandemic, but also other circumstances such as physical distancing and increased hand
hygiene, we adjust the baseline values for V (t) and Gi (t) from 0 to 0.2.
The infectivity parameters a, b are estimated by minimising the mean squared error
(RMSE)
v
u n
u1 X
(pI(ti + ta , θ) − A(ti ))2
E(θ) = t
n i=0
with respect to θ = (a, b). Here pI(ti + ta , θ) is the predicted number of hospital admissions
and A(ti ) is the actual number of admissions and the sum runs over all time points ti . To
find the minimum RMSE we use the grid search method with 80 linearly spaced values in
the range 1-12 for both a and b [14]. For each region i we thus obtain a set θ̂i = (âi , b̂i )
of estimated parameters. When comparing the model error between different regions we
normalise the RMSE by dividing with the maximum number of weekly admissions for each
region.
In order to quantify the uncertainty in our parameter estimates we select all parameter
sets (a, b) that achieve an RMSE of within 20% of E(θ̂). We solve the SEIR-model for all
those parameter combinations and remove the lower and upper 5th percentile to obtain a
95% credible interval. This procedure corresponds to sampling from the posterior in an
Approximate Bayesian Computation framework with E(θ) as our summary statistic [15].
6

For Region Västra Götaland we fit the mobility-driven SEIR-model (1) using increasing
amounts of reported hospital admissions. We start by including data up until week 20 and
test the models predictive ability in terms of the mean average predictive error (MAPE) on
the coming three weeks. This procedure is repeated for increasing amounts of training data.
To illustrate the robustness of the model we also plot how the estimated model parameters
â and b̂ change as we include more weekly data.

III.
A.

RESULTS
Predicting hospital admissions using public transport utilisation

For Region Västra Götaland the resulting model error in terms of MAPE can be seen
in figure 1A. By successively increasing the training data, we see in fig. 1B that the model
remains largely unchanged beyond week 30, which timewise corresponds to the end of the
first wave of the pandemic.
When using all available data we find that â = 4.16 and b̂ = 5.74 (fig. 1C), and we note
that the model captures the dynamics of admissions during both the first and beginning of
the second wave, although the rate of decline during the first wave is overestimated.

B.

Using Google mobility data to predict hospital admissions

For all other regions we make use of Google mobility data (see Methods for details).
Figure 2 shows model fits for Östergötland and Stockholm (see fig. 5 in the Appendix
for model fits to admissions in all Swedish regions and table I for normalised RMSE and
estimated parameters). Again, we note that the model correctly describes the timing of the
first and second wave. Visual inspection of the model fits for all regions suggest that the
model performs better for regions with a larger population.

C.

Public transport data improves model fit compared to google mobility reports

For Skåne Region we have both public transport data and GMR-data, which was used on
all other regions. Figure 3 shows the best model fits using the mobility data from the public
transport agency Skånetrafiken compared to GMR-data. We note that although the model
7

A

B

C

FIG. 1. Model fit to admission data from Region Västra Götaland. A The model error in terms of
the MAPE on 3 week predictions as a function of the number of weeks of data used in the fitting.
B The estimated model parameters (â, b̂) as a function of the number of weeks of data used in the
fitting. C The optimal fit when all data points are used (until week 45). The dashed lines show
the 95% credible interval for the model fit (see Methods).

using GMR fits the data during the second wave better the overall fit is considerably improved by using data from public transport. In terms of the RMSE we observe that the model
error is 23 admissions/week for the public transport model compared to 40 admissions/week
for the model that uses GMR. A similar trend is seen for Region Västra Götaland where
public transport data yields an RMSE of 40 admissions/week whereas GMR-data gives an
error of 90 admissions/week.
8

A

B

FIG. 2. Optimal model fit for A Stockholm (â = 4.68 and b̂ = 6.37) and B Östergötland (â = 3.79
and b̂ = 5.89). In both panels the dashed lines show 95 % credible intervals for the model fit.

IV.

DISCUSSION

We set out to investigate whether variations in data reflecting weekly commuting rates
were associated with later COVID-19 hospitalisation rates. It was found that COVID-19
hospital admission can be modelled using time-dependent mobility data and that a SEIR
model can be fitted using two free parameters to regional data from Sweden.
Our approach is similar to a recent study by Chang et al. [14] who used spatially resolved
mobility data in order to model disease transmission in metropolitan areas in the US. They
compared their model output to COVID-19 incidence, whereas we have focused on hospital admissions. The reasons for this are twofold: firstly, the data on incidence in Sweden
is unreliable due to limited testing and secondly hospital admissions is a more interesting
9

FIG. 3. Optimal model fit for Skåne Region using mobility data from public transport (red line)
and Google Mobility Report (black line).

metric for healthcare providers. Given the time lag between current mobility which drives
infections and future hospital admissions, the model provides a tool for predicting the demands on hospital beds up to three weeks in advance. Although the SEIR-model describes
the transmission of the disease, the model details were not in focus in the present study.
Uncertainty in model parameters such as the initial condition and the fraction of individuals
that become hospitalised implies that the model dynamics in terms of the number of susceptible, infectious and recovered individuals are unreliable. It is also worth pointing out that
the connection between infection and hospitalisation is not assumed to be direct. It may
well be that an individual who contributes to the measured mobility transmits the virus in
several steps to an individual with an increased risk of severe illness who is subsequently
hospitalised.
Despite these simplifications, the model was able to capture the general shape and timing
of both the first and the beginning of the second wave for most regions. There appears to
be a link between the population size of the region and the goodness of fit. The model
fits the admission data for larger regions better, and a possible explanation for this is the
large degree of randomness seen in the smaller regions. A recurring feature seen across most
regions is the inability of the model to accurately describe the width of the first peak. The
model tends to underestimate the actual width, and this is likely due to the lack of detail
10

in the model or inaccuracy in the assumed parameter values. Moreover, it is noteworthy
that the model captured the timing of the onset of the second peak without accounting
for seasonal or temperature-driven infectivity. Instead, the results suggest that mobility in
itself, which might contain seasonal variation is sufficient to capture the dynamics of hospital
admissions.
The present research has some limitations that should be taken in consideration when
interpreting the results. When trained on admission data until week 20 for Region Västra
Götaland the model initially performs well in terms of the model error (MAPE) on the 3
consecutive weeks (Fig. 1A). This is followed by an increase in the MAPE during week 2530, which is due to an increase in admissions that the model is unable to capture, and then a
subsequent decline. In terms of the model robustness, we observe that the parameters remain
largely unchanged after week 30, suggesting that data from the first wave was sufficient to
fit the model (Fig. 1B).
In the model we have disregarded any kind of age-structure, migration of cases between
regions and assumed a highly simplified connection between infection and hospital admission. In addition, we have assumed that the disease was introduced in an identical way
in all regions. These choices were made in order to formulate a simple and general model,
which could be applied directly to all regions. We have shown for Region Skåne that public
transport data provides a better fit between model and admission data, and further tailoring the model to each region will most likely improve model fit even further. In terms
of numerical methods, we have also made a couple of simplifications. We carried out the
parameter estimation one region at a time. Here it would be beneficial to consider a hierarchical mixed-effects model that considers all regions simultaneously [16]. We have performed
a sensitivity analysis with respect to the initial condition, the parameters that relate the size
of the infectious compartment to hospital admissions s and the initial mobility (see Fig. 4).
The results show that the model fit can be somewhat improved by making slight adjustment
to the baseline parameter values. However, given the uncertainty in these parameter values
we do not find it motivated to adjust our baseline values.
This study should be seen as a first attempt to model regional-level hospital admissions
in Europe using mobility data. The assumed delay of three weeks between infection and
admission implies that the model can, with current mobility data, make predictions three
weeks into the future. The results encourage continued research on use of mobility data in
11

health service capacity planning during the COVID-19 pandemic.

V.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We would like to thank Jonas Hägglund at Västtrafik for providing the public transport
data. PG and TL would like to acknowledge seed funding from Chalmers University of
Technology Areas of Advance “Information and Communication Technology” and “Health
Engineering”.

[1] E. Holm, T. Timpka, et al., A discrete time-space geography for epidemiology: from mixing
groups to pockets of local order in pandemic simulations, in MedInfo (2007) pp. 464–468.
[2] M. Strömgren, E. Holm, Ö. Dahlström, J. Ekberg, H. Eriksson, A. Spreco, and T. Timpka,
Place-based social contact and mixing: a typology of generic meeting places of relevance for
infectious disease transmission, Epidemiology & Infection 145, 2582 (2017).
[3] B. Klein, T. LaRocky, S. McCabey, L. Torresy, F. Privitera, B. Lake, M. U. Kraemer, J. S.
Brownstein, D. Lazer, T. Eliassi-Rad, et al., Assessing changes in commuting and individual
mobility in major metropolitan areas in the united states during the covid-19 outbreak (2020).
[4] Google

covid-19

community

mobility

reports,

https://www.google.com/covid19/

mobility/, accessed: 2020-12-14.
[5] E. Jenelius and M. Cebecauer, Impacts of covid-19 on public transport ridership in sweden:
Analysis of ticket validations, sales and passenger counts, Transportation Research Interdisciplinary Perspectives 8, 100242 (2020).
[6] K. Linka, M. Peirlinck, and E. Kuhl, The reproduction number of covid-19 and its correlation
with public health interventions, medRxiv (2020).
[7] Y. Zhou, R. Xu, D. Hu, Y. Yue, Q. Li, and J. Xia, Effects of human mobility restrictions on
the spread of covid-19 in shenzhen, china: a modelling study using mobile phone data, The
Lancet Digital Health 2, e417 (2020).
[8] M. Liu, R. Thomadsen, and S. Yao, Forecasting the spread of covid-19 under different reopening strategies, medRxiv (2020).

12

[9] N. Picchiotti, M. Salvioli, E. Zanardini, and F. Missale, Covid-19 pandemic: a mobilitydependent seir model with undetected cases in italy, europe and us, arXiv preprint
arXiv:2005.08882 (2020).
[10] Statistik

om

antal

slutenvårdade

covid-19

patienter,

https://www.

socialstyrelsen.se/statistik-och-data/statistik/statistik-om-covid-19/
statistik-om-slutenvard-av-patienter-med-covid-19/, accessed: 2020-12-14.
[11] Estimates of the peak-day and the number of infected individuals during the
covid-19 outbreak in the stockholm region, sweden february – april 2020, https:
//www.folkhalsomyndigheten.se/publicerat-material/publikationsarkiv/e/

estimates-of-the-peak-day-and-the-number-of-infected-individuals-during-the-covid-19-outb
accessed: 2020-12-14.
[12] F. Zhou, T. Yu, R. Du, G. Fan, Y. Liu, Z. Liu, J. Xiang, Y. Wang, B. Song, X. Gu, et al.,
Clinical course and risk factors for mortality of adult inpatients with covid-19 in wuhan, china:
a retrospective cohort study, The lancet (2020).
[13] M. Vinceti, T. Filippini, K. J. Rothman, F. Ferrari, A. Goffi, G. Maffeis, and N. Orsini,
Lockdown timing and efficacy in controlling covid-19 using mobile phone tracking, EClinicalMedicine 25, 100457 (2020).
[14] S. Chang, E. Pierson, P. W. Koh, J. Gerardin, B. Redbird, D. Grusky, and J. Leskovec,
Mobility network models of covid-19 explain inequities and inform reopening, Nature , 1
(2020).
[15] A. A. Alahmadi, J. A. Flegg, D. G. Cochrane, C. C. Drovandi, and J. M. Keith, A comparison
of approximate versus exact techniques for bayesian parameter inference in nonlinear ordinary
differential equation models, Royal Society open science 7, 191315 (2020).
[16] M. J. Lindstrom and D. M. Bates, Nonlinear mixed effects models for repeated measures data,
Biometrics , 673 (1990).

13

VI.
A.

APPENDIX
Sensitivity analysis

Figure 4 shows how the model error (RMSE) of the best fit for Region Västra Götaland
changes when the parameters p, ta ,I0 and V (t = 0) are varied. We note that it is possible
to achieve a slightly better model fit when the probability of hospitalisation is lowered to
p = 0.1, but the improvement in model fit is minor. For the delay we see that our value of
ta = 3 weeks lies close to a local minimum, but little would be gained (in terms of RMSE)
by increasing the delay. The number of infected individuals at t = 0 has a more complicated
impact on the error. A smaller RMSE could be achieved by increasing I0 from its default
value of 1, but the improvement is again minor. Lastly, the initial infectivity has a minor
impact on the model error as long as it remains below 0.6.
A

C

B

D

FIG. 4. Sensitivity analysis of model parameters for Region Västra Götaland. The defauly values
are p = 0.023, ta = 3, I0 = 1 and V (t = 0) = 0.2.

14

B.

Fitting the model to 20 Swedish regions

Here we present model fits for all Swedish regions expect Gotland for which no data was
available from the National Board of Health and Welfare.

FIG. 5.

Optimal model fit for all Swedish regions except Gotland. Estimated parameter values

can be found in table I.

15

Region

Population, N

â

b̂

normalised RMSE

Sthlm

2389923 4.76 9.22

0.18

VGR

1725881 3.85 9.49

0.30

Skåne

1387650 3.62 8.24

0.39

Östergötland

467095 3.73 8.38

0.09

Jönköping

364750 3.28 10.05

0.28

Södermanland

299101 3.73 9.22

0.11

Uppsala

387628 3.51 6.43

0.23

Gävleborg

287660 3.16 10.75

0.30

Västmanland

277074 3.51 6.85

0.12

Örebro

305726 3.39 8.38

0.18

Norrbotten

249768 3.05 7.13

0.31

Dalarna

287806 2.94 10.61

0.20

Västernorrland

244855 2.94 9.63

0.35

Värmland

282840 2.71 9.08

0.34

Halland

336132 2.59 10.19

0.42

Kalmar

245992 2.37 11.16

0.34

Kronoberg

202163 2.94 6.85

0.31

Västerbotten

273061 2.94 7.96

0.13

Jämtland

130972 2.82 5.18

0.21

Blekinge

159349 1.68 1.28

0.27

TABLE I. Population size, estimated parameters and model error (normalised RMSE) for all
considered regions.

16

C.

Mobility data for Västra Götaland

FIG. 6. Mobility data for Region Västra Götaland in terms of public transport usage (blue) and
Google mobility report (red). See methods for details.

17

