Accepted for presentation in: 15th IEEE International Systems Conference (SYSCON) 2021

Flying Robots for Safe and Efficient Parcel
Delivery Within the COVID-19 Pandemic
Manuel Patchou, Benjamin Sliwa, and Christian Wietfeld

arXiv:2101.07877v1 [cs.NI] 19 Jan 2021

Communication Networks Institute, TU Dortmund University, 44227 Dortmund, Germany
e-mail: {Manuel.Mbankeu, Benjamin.Sliwa, Christian.Wietfeld}@tu-dortmund.de

Abstract—The integration of small-scale Unmanned Aerial
Vehicles (UAVs) into Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITSs)
will empower novel smart-city applications and services. After
the unforeseen outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic, the public
demand for delivery services has multiplied. Mobile robotic
systems inherently offer the potential for minimizing the amount
of direct human-to-human interactions with the parcel delivery
process. The proposed system-of-systems consists of various
complex aspects such as assigning and distributing delivery
jobs, establishing and maintaining reliable communication links
between the vehicles, as well as path planning and mobility
control. In this paper, we apply a system-level perspective for
identifying key challenges and promising solution approaches
for modeling, analysis, and optimization of UAV-aided parcel
delivery. We present a system-of-systems model for UAV-assisted
parcel delivery to cope with higher capacity requirements induced
by the COVID-19. To demonstrate the benefits of hybrid vehicular delivery, we present a case study focusing on the prioritization
of time-critical deliveries such as medical goods. The results
further confirm that the capacity of traditional delivery fleets
can be upgraded with drone usage. Furthermore, we observe
that the delay incurred by prioritizing time-critical deliveries can
be compensated with drone deployment. Finally, centralized and
decentralized communication approaches for data transmission
inside hybrid delivery fleets are compared.

I. I NTRODUCTION
The integration of small-scale UAVs into future ITS [1]
has been an emerging topic in recent years. Due to the
unique mobility potential of these airborne vehicles, significant
efficiency improvements in applications such as aerial traffic
monitoring [2] and parcel delivery [3] have been anticipated.
Despite promising initial case studies, the existing approaches
have been dominated by academic analyses. However, the
public interest in implementing mobile robotics-based delivery
systems has been massively increased after the outbreak of the
COVID-19 pandemic [4].
In this paper, we present a system-of-systems approach for
implementing the various aspects of hybrid vehicular delivery
systems, which consist of collaborating vehicles on the ground
and in the air. Our work is motivated by the following core
observation in the context of COVID-19, which are also
illustrated in Fig.1:
• Human-to-human interactions should be minimized
in order to avoid the further spread of the virus. Mobile robotic vehicles can serve as non-infective delivery
agents.
• Capacity enhancement of delivery services is required
to cope with the increasing demand for delivered goods.

Increased Delivery
Capacity

Priorization of
Critical Deliveries
Safety
Criteria

Efficiency
Criteria

ü

Proposal - UAV-Enabled
Hybrid Parcel Delivery

Social
Distancing

Reliable
Communcations

Fig. 1. Overview of the upgraded challenges faced by the parcel delivery
sector during the COVID-19 pandemic.

Time-critical goods such as medical equipment need
to be prioritized over standard consumer goods. Aerial
vehicles are not affected by traffic jams and can be
utilized for rapid shipment even in highly crowded innercity scenarios.
• Reliable communications are required for the safe operation and monitoring of the hybrid delivery fleet and
networking of the delivery truck and the UAV while
proposing command and control features.
Due to the resulting complexity, the systems thinking is applied to propose a solution. The contributions are summarized
as follows:
• A system-of-systems concept for an optimized UAVenabled last-mile delivery platform.
• A proof-of-concept study in a real-world scenario to
analyze capacity gains and suitable network approaches.
• The prioritization of time-critical deliveries such as
medical goods and its effects on the delivery performance.
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. After
discussing the related work in Sec. II, the proposed system
model is presented in Sec. III. Afterwards, an overview of the
methodological aspects is given in Sec. IV. Finally, detailed
results about conducted case studies are provided in Sec. V.
•

II. R ELATED W ORK
UAV-assisted delivery systems: Last-mile delivery is often
completed by trucks driving over relatively short distances in
an urban setting. The number and the variety of shipments, the
complexity, and frequent congestion of the urban environment
pose a challenge in terms of reliability and efficiency. The

© 2021 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses,
including reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional purposes, collecting new collected works
for resale or redistribution to servers or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works.

inclusion of UAVs in the last mile delivery fleet is now under
active consideration and testing.
A novel approach in this direction lets the delivery truck
carry the drones when leaving the depot center. These are then
dispatched along the route to autonomously deliver parcels up
to a certain distance from the truck. This approach requires
finding an optimal route for the delivery truck, taking into
account the mobility range of its associated delivery drones,
which is limited by their battery capacity thereby leading to
a new class of hybrid Travelling Salesman Problem (TSP).
This optimization problem was labeled the Flying Sidekick
Travelling Salesman Problem (FSTSP) in one of its earliest
formulations as a Mixed Integer Programming (MIP) problem
and presented with a heuristic solution approach in [5]. The
initial TSP tour is iteratively updated by checking whether the
next node shall be served by a drone and assigning it accordingly. The work in [6] derived several worst-case results on
the hybrid routing problem with drones, such as the maximal
savings, which can be obtained by their usage. A dynamic
pickup and delivery approach, allowing aerial vehicles to pick
up packets from a moving truck and autonomously complete
deliveries, was investigated in [7]. Comparing this approach
to the more traditional one, where the drones deliveries may
only be started when the truck stops to complete a delivery,
shows further performance improvements.
Drone aided parcel delivery must be, like all autonomous
vehicles applications, guaranteed sufficient networking resources for monitoring, safety, and operational purposes. As
such, providing cellular connectivity to low altitude UAVs has
gathered increasing interest from the industry [8] 3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP). The variation in resource
availability is also of importance, for example, forecasting the
data rate along vehicular trajectories. Use cases and standard
mechanisms proposals for predictive Quality of Service (QoS)
are presented in [9]. An overview of distinct communication
QoS requirements for UAV applications, differentiated, among
other criteria, by the nature of transmitted data is given in [10].
An additional UAV enabled application is presented in [11],
where a ground vehicular network is enhanced with multiple
UAVs forming an aerial sub-network through Air-to-Air (A2A)
and Air-to-Ground (A2G) links.
Simulation of UAV networks: Simulation is still the
leading approach for validating and evaluating vehicular
network solutions, as shown in [12]. Different simulation frameworks for UAV networks have already been
proposed. CommUnicationS-Control distribUted Simulator
(CUSCUS)[13] provides interconnection of ns-3 and Framework libre AIR (FL-AIR) based on Linux containers with
some limitations regarding simulated network connectivity,
as Long Term Evolution (LTE), is currently not supported.
FlyNetSim[14] is a Hardware-in-the-Loop (HIL) focused platform, which follows a middleware-based approach to couple ns-3 with Ardupilot. LIghtweight ICT-centric Mobility
Simulation (LIMoSim) [15] applies a shared codebase approach, thus avoiding Inter-Process Communications (IPC)
overhead, to couple ns-3 with the LIMoSim mobility kernel

supporting hybrid combinations of ground and aerial vehicles.
A dedicated extension was provided in [3] to bring native
simulation support of UAV-aided parcel delivery mobility and
communications.
Machine learning: Data-Driven Network Simulation
(DDNS) [16] is a novel concept for analyzing the end-toend performance of anticipatory mobile networking systems
while leveraging an accurate and fast network simulation,
based on the observation of concrete environments in combination with machine learning models. The generated network behavior’s accuracy is comparable to what system-level
simulations provide without the usual overhead associated to
protocol simulation. [17] proposes a lightweight alternative to
computationally expensive ray tracing evaluations often based
on extensive knowledge of scenario topology. The model aided
deep learning extracts radio propagation characteristics from
aerial images of the receiver environment. A comprehensive
summary of machine learning methods and their different communication networks related applications is provided in[18].
III. P ROPOSED S YSTEM - OF -S YSTEMS M ODEL FOR
UAV-A IDED PARCEL D ELIVERY
In this section, we present a hybrid vehicular delivery
service concept to cope with increasing demand, which can
be induced by special situations such as the COVID-19 pandemic, and we identify requirements and promising solution
approaches. The overall system-of-systems architecture model
of the proposed hybrid vehicular delivery service is shown in
Fig. 2. It consists of three closely related building blocks which
are explained in further details in the following paragraphs.
A. Core Delivery System
The core delivery system provides the interfaces of service
which can be used to provision and interact with consumer
facing applications or internal service provider tools. It is
further divided into two specialized subsystems for delivery
and fleet management.
Delivery management subsystem: One major requirement
of the service is a channel through which delivery jobs can
be created. The service must offer interfaces allowing external
provisioning of deliveries with additional metadata specification to allow categorization. These interfaces must support
common communication protocols and standards for flexible
integration. The aforementioned job categorization is used to
classify delivery requests into time-critical (e.g., for medical
applications) and best-effort deliveries. This classification is
used by the job scheduling algorithm to increase service
performance and meet the deadlines of time-critical deliveries
by respecting a set of prioritization rules for the final job
assignment process.
Fleet management subsystem: Operating such a decentralized system requires monitoring in order to assess the system’s
performance, detect optimization potential or bottlenecks, and
provide tracking features. One very common feature directed
to consumers in last-mile delivery is parcel tracking, allowing
them to follow the journey of their parcel. Tracking of delivery

Job Scheduling with
Priorization Rules

Parcel
Tracking
?

Monitoring
Vehicle
Tracking
?

QoS
Metrics

Status
Information

Fleet Management Interface

Path
Planning

Real Time
Teleoperation

Control
Commands

Online
Ray Tracing

Context
Knowledge

Context Awareness and Prediction

Mobility-Aware
Communications

Opportunistic
Data Transfer
Data

Communication Technologies
4G/5G
C-V2X
IEEE 802.11

Sec.
III-C

Geo. Maps and
Height Profiles

Road Network
Topology

Traffic Flow
Information

Traffic Rules and
Air Space Regulations

Communication-aware
Mobility Strategies

Pick Up and
Delivery Routines

Collision Avoidance

Battery-Aware
Trajecory Design

Environmental
Awareness

Delivery Service Interface

Connectivity
Maps

Airborne Vehicles

Job
Assignments

Mobility
Prediction

Mobility Control and
Environmental Awareness

Sec.
III-B

Hybrid Fleet Coordination and
Dynamic Job Assignment
Link Lifetime Prediction and
Network Quality Assessment

Dynamic RAT
Selection

Ground Vehicles

Best effort
Delivery

Anticipatory Mobile Networking

Time-critical
Delivery

Reliable and Efficient
Communications

Sec.
III-A

Multi-RAT Communications

Fleet Management
Subsystem

Delivery Management Subsystem

Core Delivery
System

Multi-RAT and
Multi-Path
Networking

Command and Control

Congestion-Aware
Path Planning

Rendezvous
Coordination

Parcel Restock
Coordination

Fuel-Efficient
Trajecory Design

Fig. 2. System-of-systems architecture model of hybrid vehicular delivery service implementation. The delivery fleet comprises cooperating vehicles on the
ground and in the air.

agents is important to the service provider and is provided as
well.
In addition to the monitoring feature, remote command
and control is needed to constantly watch over the delivery
fleet and promptly react to unforeseen events. Control can be
exerted in a soft way, using path planning to reroute delivery
agents, by defining waypoints to which they autonomously
navigate. A strict control mode is provided as well to allow
taking full remote control of the delivery drones in urgent and
delicate circumstances.
While path planning may only consist of sending waypoints
amounting to a few bytes to the delivery UAVs, full vehicle
teleoperation requires guaranteeable network performance for
the end-to-end latency, data rate, and Packet Delivery Ratio
(PDR). As a consequence, the usage of drones as delivery
agents has specific requirements which are discussed next.
B. Reliable and Efficient Communications
The availability of a reliable and efficient means of communication between the different agents and the command and
control service is one of the prerequisites for implementing
UAV enabled delivery services and autonomous vehicular
applications in general. Taken from [10], general network
requirements for typical UAV applications are shown in the
table Tab. I, while more network requirements for more
specific UAV use cases can be seen from Tab. II.
For establishing and maintaining communication links with
the delivery fleet, we propose the exploitation of two network
optimization principles, which are further introduced in the
following paragraphs.

TABLE I
G ENERAL REQUIREMENTS OF TYPICAL UAV APPLICATIONS
Link Data Type

Data Rate

Reliability

Latency

DL C&C
UL C&C

60-100 kbps
60-100 kbps

10− 3

UL Application Data

up to 50 Mbps

-

50 ms
Similar to
terrestrial user

PER
10− 3 PER

C&C: Command and Control DL: Downlink, UL: Uplink, PER: Packet
Error Rate
TABLE II
N ETWORK REQUIREMENTS FOR UAV APPLICATIONS
Application

Latency

Data rate (DL/UL)

Drone delivery
Drone filming
Access point
Infrastructure inspection
Search and rescue

500 ms
500 ms
500 ms
3000 ms
500 ms

300
300
300
300
300

Kbps
Kbps
Kbps
Kbps
Kbps

/
/
/
/
/

200 Kbps
200 Kbps
200 Kbps
10 Mbps
6 Mbps

DL: Downlink, UL: Uplink

Anticipatory mobile networking: Opportunistic data transfer for delay-tolerant data allows saving network resources
by transmitting large data chunks in a context-aware manner,
preferably during connectivity hotspots [19]. This improves
power consumption, which is critical for battery-constrained
devices. The context-aware transmission predicts the network
quality based on the variation of network indicators and
the vehicle’s position over time. An advanced version uses
machine learning models to produce more accurate predictions. Inversely, local routing decisions [20] can be made

using these predictions, thereby preferring the routes with
better network conditions. Using these models on the delivery
agents requires rapid prototyping of the targeted systems
and a suitable methodology to migrate high-level machine
learning models to resource-constrained Internet of Things
(IoT) platforms. LIghtweight Machine learning for IoT System
(LIMITS) [21] allows automating high-level machine learning
tasks and automatically deriving C/C++ implementations of
trained prediction models that can be executed on real-world
platforms as well as in system-level network simulations such
as Network Simulator 3 (ns-3).
Multi-Radio Access Technology (RAT) allows utilizing
redundant communication interfaces for network communications, thus freeing systems from a critical dependency on the
network infrastructure of a sole provider. This approach can
be implemented within a defined communication technology
standard, for example, by bundling the networks of multiple
Mobility Network Operators (MNOs) together to offer reliable
network access, while even including complimentary base
station deployments [22]. Technology switching, e.g. through
joint usage of ad-hoc networks and cellular, harnessing the
advantages of both centralized and decentralized network
approaches, is also possible. SKATES [23] is a multi-link
capable communication module that fully aggregates the available RATs and offers such switching capabilities by using
a Multi-Path Transmission Control Protocol (MPTCP) Linux
kernel to seamlessly distribute traffic over all available network
interfaces without connection interruption. Connectivity is
given so long as one interface still has network access. Such
a device is a suitable candidate to equip delivery drones, and
more generally, autonomously operating or remote-controlled
agents.
C. Mobility Control and Environmental Awareness
Strong interdependency between environment, mobility, and
communication calls for joint consideration of these aspects
and their influence on one another.
Environment: Knowledge about the static and mobile obstacles is of crucial importance for the collision avoidance
and mobility control of autonomous UAVs. These obstacles
can also act as attenuators which impact the radio propagation
effects. Importing map data from OpenStreetMap (OSM) in a
simulator offers real environment models with urban obstacles.
A further obstacle, often not considered in most network
simulations, is the ground. We can account for terrain profile
in the simulation by extracting it from the OSM database as
well. This accurate representation of real-world scenarios can
be used to create Radio Environmental Maps (REMs) for a
preparatory analysis for strategic service deployment.
Mobility: The physical and logistical characteristics of the
agents are a prominent factor in delivery performance and
define their suitable usage in the fleet. The traditional truck
has a high parcel capacity and is used to deliver multiple
parcels in one tour. Its performance is, however, constrained
by the road network rules and eventual traffic congestion. A
UAV is, on the contrary, free of such constraints as it can

maneuver in three dimensions. Its capacity is, however, limited
as it can only carry one parcel. The reach is limited as well,
due to its battery capacity. Combining these two vehicle types
in a hybrid delivery fleet brings performance benefits when
applying a joint path planning of aerial- and ground-based
vehicles [3]. An optimal path can be found by solving the
resulting hybrid TSP with drones.
A cross-layer approach that leverages knowledge from the
mobility control routines for proactive optimization of the
communication performance is envisaged. On the one hand,
mobility-aware communication methods allow considering the
estimations about the future mobility of the vehicles to
proactively schedule data transmissions. On the other hand,
communication-aware mobility approaches actively perform
navigation while privileging routes with better network conditions estimates. Reinforcement learning can be used to train an
agent to this effect and create a complex navigation behavior
that can combine or alternate priorities between taking the
shortest path to the target and experiencing optimized network
conditions along the way.
IV. S IMULATION -BASED P ERFORMANCE A NALYSIS
In this section, we present the methodological aspects of
the simulation-based performance analysis. In order to jointly
analyze the mobility behavior of the different vehicles and the
corresponding communication between the logical entities, we
utilize the LIMoSim [15] mobility simulator in combination
with ns-3.
A. Parcel Delivery Simulation
We use the LIMoSim extension presented in [3] to simulate
last-mile parcel delivery. The en-route scheme was applied
to allow drone dispatching and recovery along the truck’s
route without stopping due to its confirmed time gains. This
framework transforms the delivery problem in a TSP, which is
then solved using an adequate algorithm. The simulations are
run while using different communication technologies. Two
global approaches are compared for indicated usage in droneaided parcel delivery communications.
B. Prioritization Scheduling
Deliveries may be prioritized differently, based on various
criteria and factors. Even more so, during pandemics where
medical supply is of great importance. We consider this fact by
applying a simple scheme for prioritizing important deliveries,
further labeled as medical over normal deliveries. The delivery
list is divided between medical deliveries and normal ones. the
medical delivery set is considered as a standalone problem and
solved first. The last delivery of the medical delivery set is then
used as the starting point for finding the optimal delivery path
for the normal delivery set as shown in Fig 3.
To observe the performance of the delivery process, we
consider the waiting time for each delivery. The communication technologies are evaluated using performance metrics
such as latency for responsiveness and PDR for reliability.
The evaluations are performed within a suburban environment

Time-critical delivery

8

Cumulative Distribution

6

1

1000

Normal delivery
Truck route
Drone route

500

Prioritization of
time-critical
deliveries

5
Transitioning
to normal deliveries

y [m]

3

1

0

-500

7

0.8
Deliveries

0.6
Buildings

0.4
0.2
0

-1000

2

0

4

1000
x [m]

0

2000

(a) Delivery targets
Fig. 3.

Prioritization scheduling used for medical deliveries.

(b) Delivery distribution

Fig. 5. The spatial distribution of the deliveries over the scenario. The InterPoint Distance (IPD) of the deliveries being almost identical to the buildings’
indicates an equal distribution of deliveries over the available buildings.

1
Normal deliveries
14% slower through
prioritization

40

Prioritization delay
compensated by
drone usage

30
Normal Deliveries

20
No Prioritization

10

Prioritized deliveries
at least 10% faster

Cumulative Probability

Waiting Time [min]

50

Time Critical
Deliveries

0

eNode B
Location

1000
2000
Inter Point Distance [m]

0

1

0.8
0.6
Truck Only
1 UAV
2 UAVs
3 UAVs
4 UAVs
5 UAVs
6 UAVs

0.4
0.2
0

2
3
4
Drone Count

5

6

0

(a)

20

40

60

80

Waiting Time [min]

(b)

Fig. 6. Influence of the fleet drone count over waiting time of delivery
categories and delivery capacity.

were generated for the evaluations are analyzed in Fig.5. The
delivery distribution nearly overlapping with the buildings’
shows the deliveries were equally distributed over the available
possible recipients in the scenario.
Fig. 4. Map of the evaluation scenario: The Dortmund university campus.
(Map data: © OpenStreetMap Contributors, CC BY-SA).

around a university campus. A map of the considered simulation scenario within LIMoSim is shown in Fig. 4.
Tab. III summarizes the key simulation parameters.
TABLE III
D EFAULT PARAMETERS OF THE EVALUATION SETUP
Parameter

Value

Delivery sets
Deliveries per set
Medical Deliveries per Set
UAV count

50
15
5
{ 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 }

V. R ESULTS OF THE P ROOF - OF -C ONCEPT E VALUATION
In this section, we present initial results for the proof-ofconcept evaluation of different aspects of the overall delivery
system. First, the characteristics of the delivery sets which

A. Capacity and Time Requirements
The delivery performance with different fleet compositions
ranging from only a truck to a hybrid fleet composed of a
truck aided by up to 6 drones is shown in Fig. 6. The simple
prioritization of medical deliveries shortens their waiting time
by at least 50%. This, however, delays normal deliveries. In
our case study, the noticed waiting time increase for normal
deliveries is up to 30%. Furthermore, it shortens when an
increasing number of drones is deployed to assist the truck
and is almost compensated when six drones are used. This
variation in waiting times suggests an increase in delivery
capacity, which we illustrated in Fig. 6 by analyzing the
waiting time distribution with increased drone usage in the
fleet. In our example, 80% of the deliveries can be completed
in under 20 minutes when the truck is assisted by 4 delivery
drones.
B. Suitable Network Approaches
Next, we compare centralized and decentralized approaches
in their suitability for connecting the delivery fleet and in their
satisfaction of the requirements presented in Sec. III-B, for

Centralized

Decentralized

Coordinated
Medium Access

Direct
Medium Access

Centralized

Decentralized

Lower NLOS
probability due
to direct
communication

Delay
Constraint

Higher NLOS
probability due to
base station
intervention

(a)

(b)

Fig. 7. Comparison of end-to-end metrics for different networking approaches
for the delivery fleet.

UAV applications and especially drone aided parcel delivery.
These are a maximal delay of 50 ms and nearly 99% PDR.
LTE is used as benchmark technology to represent centralized
and coordinated medium access approaches. Cellular Vehicleto-Everything (C-V2X) and Wireless Access for Vehicular
Environment (WAVE)-based IEEE 802.11p are used as representatives of decentralized medium access approaches. The
simulated traffic is a 100 ms periodic transmission of 190
Bytes Cooperation Awareness Messages (CAMs) to the delivery truck.
The results for latency and PDR of the investigated communication technologies are shown in Fig. 7. It can be seen
that each technology can provide robust communication links.
Still, a higher latency can be observed in the centralized approach represented by LTE, which handles resource allocations
centrally. The decentralized approaches, which implement
direct medium access strategies, yield a smaller latency. The
decentralized approaches also show more promising reliability
with a PDR very close to 1. The direct transmission path
between sender and receiver gives a higher probability for Line
of Sight (LOS) situations than when using LTE, where the
base station - the evolved NodeB (eNB) - must be involved in
the communication process. Newer LTE releases may however
perform better in this regard. It can be further observed that
C-V2X offers slightly better reliability than WAVE. This can
be explained by the Semi-Persistent Scheduling (SPS)-based
medium access which takes previous resource reservations
into account to avoid resource conflicts in future reservation
periods.
VI. C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we elaborate on the potential of UAVs to
help meet the surging demand brought about by the sanitary
measures taken to mitigate the COVID-19 pandemic. We
presented a system concept to enhance existing last-mile
delivery services with drone usage using advances in various
research areas. Within different case studies, we presented
our groundwork results of various system aspects, namely the
delivery capacity gains deriving from the enhanced mobility
that hybrid delivery fleets of aerial and ground vehicles offer
and the network communications requirements to operate such

a fleet. A simple scheduling strategy is used to prioritize
time-critical deliveries such as medical goods, and its effects
on overall delivery performance are observed. Furthermore, a
comparison between centralized and decentralized approaches
for communications between hybrid delivery fleet members
is carried out. Similar to other services and applications
(such as video conferencing), the unforeseen outbreak of the
pandemic creates unexpected demands that will catalyze the
development of solutions beyond the COVID-19 pandemic’s
scope. In future work, we will focus on the development of
scheduling algorithms to better balance short waiting times
for time-critical deliveries with minimal additional delay to
the normal ones while using a small number of drones. The
development of communication-aware-mobility strategies is
also considered.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Part of the work on this paper has been supported by the German
Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF) in the project ADRZ (13N14857) as well as by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG)
within the Collaborative Research Center SFB 876 “Providing Information by
Resource-Constrained Analysis”, projects A4 and B4.

R EFERENCES
[1] H. Menouar, I. Guvenc, K. Akkaya, A. S. Uluagac, A. Kadri, and
A. Tuncer, “UAV-enabled intelligent transportation systems for the smart
city: Applications and challenges,” IEEE Communications Magazine,
vol. 55, no. 3, pp. 22–28, March 2017.
[2] B. Sliwa, T. Liebig, T. Vranken, M. Schreckenberg, and C. Wietfeld,
“System-of-systems modeling, analysis and optimization of hybrid vehicular traffic,” in 2019 Annual IEEE International Systems Conference
(SysCon), Orlando, Florida, USA, Apr 2019.
[3] M. Patchou, B. Sliwa, and C. Wietfeld, “Unmanned aerial vehicles in
logistics: Efficiency gains and communication performance of hybrid
combinations of ground and aerial vehicles,” in IEEE Vehicular Networking Conference (VNC), Los Angeles, USA, Dec 2019.
[4] V. Chamola, V. Hassija, V. Gupta, and M. Guizani, “A comprehensive
review of the COVID-19 pandemic and the role of IoT, drones, AI,
blockchain, and 5G in managing its impact,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp.
90 225–90 265, 2020.
[5] C. C. Murray and G. A. Chu, “The flying sidekick traveling salesman
problem: Optimization of drone-assisted parcel delivery,” Transportation
Research Part C: Emerging Technologies, vol. 54, pp. 86–109, May
2015.
[6] X. Wang, S. Poikonen, and ·. B. Golden, “The vehicle routing problem
with drones: Several worst-case results,” Optimization Letters, vol. 11,
pp. 679–697, 2017.
[7] M. Marinelli, L. Caggiani, M. Ottomanelli, and M. Dell’Orco, “En route
truck–drone parcel delivery for optimal vehicle routing strategies,” IET
Intelligent Transport Systems, 2018.
[8] 3GPP, “3GPP TR 36.777 - Study on Enhanced LTE Support for Aerial
Vehicles,” 3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP), Tech. Rep., Dec
2017, v15.0.0.
[9] 5GAA, “White paper: Making 5G proactive and predictive for the
automotive industry,” 5G Automotive Association, Tech. Rep., Jan 2020.
[10] Y. Zeng, Q. Wu, and R. Zhang, “Accessing from the sky: A tutorial on
UAV communications for 5G and beyond,” Proceedings of the IEEE,
vol. 107, no. 12, pp. 2327–2375, Dec 2019.
[11] Y. Zhou, N. Cheng, N. Lu, and X. S. Shen, “Multi-UAV-aided networks:
Aerial-ground cooperative vehicular networking architecture,” IEEE
Vehicular Technology Magazine, vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 36–44, Dec 2015.
[12] E. R. Cavalcanti, J. A. R. de Souza, M. A. Spohn, R. C. d. M. Gomes,
and A. F. B. F. d. Costa, “VANETs’ research over the past decade:
Overview, credibility, and trends,” SIGCOMM Comput. Commun. Rev.,
vol. 48, no. 2, pp. 31–39, May 2018.
[13] N. R. Zema, A. Trotta, E. Natalizio, M. Di Felice, and L. Bononi, “The
CUSCUS simulator for distributed networked control systems,” Ad Hoc
Netw., vol. 68, no. C, pp. 33–47, Jan 2018.

[14] S. Baidya, Z. Shaikh, and M. Levorato, “FlyNetSim: An open source
synchronized UAV network simulator based on ns-3 and ardupilot,” in
Proceedings of the 21th ACM International Conference on Modelling,
Analysis and Simulation of Wireless and Mobile Systems, ser. MSWiM
’18. Montreal, Canada: ACM, Oct 2018.
[15] B. Sliwa, M. Patchou, and C. Wietfeld, “Lightweight simulation of
hybrid aerial- and ground-based vehicular communication networks,”
in 2019 IEEE 90th Vehicular Technology Conference (VTC-Fall), Honolulu, Hawaii, USA, Sep 2019.
[16] B. Sliwa and C. Wietfeld, “Data-driven network simulation for performance analysis of anticipatory vehicular communication systems,” IEEE
Access, Nov 2019.
[17] J. Thrane, B. Sliwa, C. Wietfeld, and H. Christiansen, “Deep learningbased signal strength prediction using geographical images and expert knowledge,” in 2020 IEEE Global Communications Conference
(GLOBECOM), Taipei, Taiwan, Dec 2020.
[18] J. Wang, C. Jiang, H. Zhang, Y. Ren, K. Chen, and L. Hanzo, “Thirty
years of machine learning: The road to pareto-optimal wireless networks,” IEEE Communications Surveys Tutorials, pp. 1–1, 2020.
[19] B. Sliwa, R. Falkenberg, T. Liebig, N. Piatkowski, and C. Wietfeld,
“Boosting vehicle-to-cloud communication by machine learning-enabled

[20]

[21]

[22]

[23]

context prediction,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation
Systems, vol. 21, no. 8, pp. 3497–3512, 2019.
B. Sliwa, C. Schüler, M. Patchou, and C. Wietfeld, “PARRoT: Predictive ad-hoc routing fueled by reinforcement learning and trajectory
knowledge,” in 2021 IEEE 93rd Vehicular Technology Conference (VTCSpring), Helsinki, Finland, Apr 2021.
B. Sliwa, N. Piatkowski, and C. Wietfeld, “LIMITS: Lightweight machine learning for IoT systems with resource limitations,” in 2020 IEEE
International Conference on Communications (ICC), Dublin, Ireland,
Jun 2020, Best paper award.
J. Güldenring, P. Gorczak, F. Eckermann, M. Patchou, J. Tiemann,
F. Kurtz, and C. Wietfeld, “Reliable long-range multi-link communication for unmanned search and rescue aircraft systems in beyond visual
line of sight operation,” Drones, vol. 4, no. 2, May 2020.
J. Güldenring, P. Gorczak, M. Patchou, C. Arendt, J. Tiemann, and
C. Wietfeld, “SKATES: Interoperable multi-connectivity communication
module for reliable search and rescue robot operation,” in 2020 International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Computing, Networking and
Communications (WiMob), Thessaloniki, Greece, Oct. 2020.

