Work Patterns of Software Engineers
in the Forced Working-From-Home Mode
Darja Šmite†

Nils Brede Moe

Eriks Klotins

Javier Gonzalez-Huerta

Blekinge Institute of
Technology
Karlskrona, Sweden
darja.smite@bth.se

SINTEF
Trondheim, Norway
nils.b.moe@sintef.no

Blekinge Institute of
Technology
Karlskrona, Sweden
eriks.klotins@bth.se

Blekinge Institute of
Technology
Karlskrona, Sweden
javier.gonzalez.huerta@bth.se

ABSTRACT
The COVID-19 outbreak has admittedly caused a major disruption
worldwide. The interruptions to production, transportation and
mobility have clearly had a significant impact on the wellfunctioning of the global supply and demand chain. But what
happened to the companies developing digital services, such as
software? Were they interrupted as much or at all? And how has
the enforced Working-From-Home (WFH) mode impacted their
ability to continue to deliver software. We hear that some managers
are concerned that their engineers are not working effectively from
home, or even lack the motivation to work in general, that teams
lose touch and that managers do not notice when things go wrong.
At the same time, some companies, like Twitter and Facebook,
announce their permanent remote-work policies. In this article, we
share our findings from monitoring the situation in an international
software company with engineers located in Sweden, USA and the
UK, by analyzing archives of commit data, calendar invites and
Slack communication, as well as the internal reports of WFH
experiences and 18 interviews. We find that company engineers
continue committing code and carry out their daily duties without
major disruptions, while their routines have gradually adjusted to
“the new norm” with new emerging practices and various changes
to the old ones.

KEYWORDS
Working from home, WFH, Telework, COVID-19, software
engineering, case study, empirical study

1

The Work-From-Home Mode

One of the first studies of pioneers working from home (WFH) or
doing home telework published in 1984 [1] starts with a futuristic
vision of the white-collar labor force working in home offices. Just
36 years later, IT industry giants Twitter and Facebook announced
their permanent remote-work policies based on the experiences
from the forced WFH mode during the pandemic. What is the role
of “working-from-home” and why is it the likely future after the
fight against the COVID-19 ends?
Working from home is not a new phenomenon. First studies of
home teleworking originate in the 1970s along with the declining
costs of data communications and the influx of microcomputers
into homes and offices [1, 2]. Back then, the motivation for

teleworking was either related to the energy shortages and the
willingness to decrease the daily commute, or a clear gender
segregated motivation. The typical teleworkers at the time included
“self-disciplined full-time clerical women seeking income at
reduced personal expense, managerial and professional mothers
wanting to nurture young children without dropping completely
behind in their careers; and male managers or professionals who
value the part-time integration of work and family life more than
they do competition for further advancement in their
organizations” [1]. Since then a lot of things have changed, the
accessibility and advancement of telecommunication services and
equipment, increase in the need for employee empowerment and
improvement of the work life balance. In fact, commute reduction
and family obligations, the prime motivators in the past, have
stopped being instrumental a while ago [2].
Quite a few companies today implement WFH as an element of
flexibility leading to a regular but partial practice (a few days a
week) [3] and some even as a general company practice (also
known as teleworking) [4]. Telework is often associated with the
perceived increase of productivity and job satisfaction, although
mostly self-reported by home workers, but also a great managerial
issue and a loss of control as reported by the managers [2].
Managers repeatedly raise the question whether “working-fromhome” would not lead to “shirking from home” [5]. The typical
“Theory X style managers” [6] with a low perception of selfefficacy, i.e. who do not rely on their employees' ability to handle
remote infrastructure, solve situations independently, manage time
properly or working without supervision have an especially
skeptical attitude towards telework [7]. The mistrust is also felt by
the teleworkers themselves who confirm that their supervisors
tolerate their preference for WFH [1]. Even some coworkers share
the skeptical attitudes towards teleworkers, thinking that the offpremise colleagues are not working full time, while others express
acceptance and occasional awe, envy, jealousy, or resentment [1].
Motivated by the willingness to understand the actual state and
future of the WFH, we share our findings from studying the
changes in performance and work routines in the first eleven weeks
after all company employees in the company, which we for
anonymity reasons call “InterSoft”, were sent to work from home.
InterSoft is an international software company with development
offices in Sweden, the UK and USA. Thanks to the geographic
distribution, the company has had the facilitating conditions and
infrastructure to enable distributed work already before the

Communications of ACM
pandemic (usually associated with both the ease to implement
telework, and the positive attitude toward it [7]). At the same time,
as an agile company, InterSoft promotes collaboration and
teamwork, which often highly depend on collocation. This is
another reason why we were so curious to study InterSoft’s ability
to transit into WFH.

2 Overview of the Study
Our goal is to understand how company employees are coping with
the WFH mode and what changes in daily routines have they
implemented. The situation, i.e. enforced WFH mode in a corporate
setting, is unique compared to previous studies of WFH, which are
biased towards workers who voluntarily choose to telework [2]. It
also addresses the common definitional issue of who qualifies as a
teleworker, since many previous studies have focused on
individuals following the practice only partially [2]. Our study
delves into the changes in performance and work routines and is
driven by the following research questions:
RQ1: How is individual performance in terms of code production
affected by WFH?
RQ2: How did the daily work routines change due to WFH?
To answer our questions, we collected quantitative and qualitative
data from a variety of sources.
Quantitative data collection and analysis focused on
understanding the daily routines of developers. We looked into
when and how much code engineers commit to main branches in
all version control repositories, accepted meeting invites, and Slack
posts in public channels with >10 members. We based our analysis
on obfuscated datasets cleaned from the information that would
allow identifying a person.
For analyzing changes in the relative distribution of commits
during the day, we analyzed commits pushed to main branch
between 2020-01-01 –2020-03-10 for the “office” control period
and from 2020-03-11 –2020-05-30 for the WFH period. The
changes in commit volume has been also compared to the previous
year. Further, we filtered out the top 25% of the commits
considering size, because these are likely to be committed by
automated bots.
We also delve into the meeting data distinguishing the meeting
invitations accepted by engineers, non-recurring and recurring
(programmed to occur in a certain cadence). We filtered out: i)
meetings longer than 8 hours because these are likely to be events
which do not reflect the meeting habits; ii) meetings with less than
2 participants or more than 20, to exclude self-bookings and large
gatherings. We analyze the same periods as the “office” control
period and the WFH period as in the case of commits. We compared
the daily routines as well as analyzed the changes in the average
number of meetings, the average duration of meetings, the total
time spent in meetings per engineer per week, as well as the total
number of meetings scheduled per week.
Finally, we analyzed the Slack data by considering posts done by
engineers to public channels with more than 10 subscribers. We use
the Slack data to compare the daily routines and visualize the
changes in asynchronous communication.

D. Smite et al.
The quantitative analysis was performed from the point of view of
the user performing different actions (commits, meetings or Slack
messages) happening in the user’s timezone. Therefore, the same
events, e.g. a meeting, will be accounted as happening in different
hours for different users in different time zones, depending on the
user’s location, although happening at the same time. NumPy,
Scipy, Pandas and MatPlotLib libraries for Python 3.7.4 were used
to carry out the analysis.
Qualitative data collection and analysis sought explanations for
our findings from quantitative analysis. We conducted 18 semistructured interviews with 15 engineers and three managers.
Interviewees were selected by convenience sampling, at the same
time aiming at having representatives from the main locations, age
groups and family situations. All interviews were 45-60 min long,
conducted by two researchers in English via Zoom. All interviews
but one were audio-recorded with the consent of the interviewees.
The interviewees were asked to describe their workspace, detail a
typical day from the early start until the late evening, reflect on the
changes in the daily routines (schedule, tasks, meetings, teamwork,
ceremonies, etc.), reflect on what works and what does not work in
the WFH mode, and hopes for the future. One of the interviewers
led the interview, while the other took detailed notes (close to
transcription). After the interview, notes were refined and
complemented if necessary. Qualitative data analysis started with
thematic coding, during which we coded information describing the
home office, daily routines and their changes, benefits and
shortcomings of the WFH as well as openly coded some interesting
quotes from each of the interviews. Finally, we had access to four
internal company reports of the WFH experiences, which served as
1) an input for identifying interesting questions and categories for
our analysis, and 2) an additional source of company-wide inquiry,
verifying some of our findings by representing a wider sample.
To answer our research questions, we looked at the patterns
emerging from thematic analysis and quantitative data analysis. We
linked the quantitative findings with possible explanations obtained
during the interviews, and constructed narratives portraying the
experiences with WFH, which were sent to all interviewees for
verification.

3 Work Patterns in the Forced WFH Mode
In March, 2020 all InterSoft employees in all locations were
instructed to work from home, initially for a period of two weeks,
which during our study was extended four times. Evidently, nobody
could foresee that the WFH mode would last so long. From the
start, many employees realized that their homes do not provide
sufficiently ergonomic work conditions. In support, InterSoft
management launched a program for reimbursing home office
equipment, which for the majority meant buying a monitor, an
office chair, and/or an external keyboard. Many of the common
routines had to adjust too. In the following, we capture the WFH
experiences during the first eleven weeks (w11-22) based on the
quantitative data collected from the company repositories, and the
qualitative data obtained through interviews.

Commit activity

Confirmed
calendar
invitations
Example: Sweden
1
Example: Sweden 1

Example: Sweden 1

Postings in public Slack channels
Example: Sweden 2
Example: Sweden 2

Example: USA 1
Example: USA 1

Example: Sweden 2
Example: Sweden 2

Figure 1: Daily activity. The blue area represents
25-75%
Example:
USA 1 quantiles during the office work (2020-01-01 – 2020-03-11) with the blue
Example: Sweden 2
line denoting the average value, while the read area
andUSA
line1represent the WFH period (2020-03-12 – 2020-05-30).
Example:

3.1

Daily routines during the transition

The analysis of the daily activities at InterSoft based on Git
commits, calendar invitations and Slack communication in public
channels shows that engineers follow similar daily routines, as
compared with working in the office (see Figure 1). One reason for
what can be regarded as a smooth transition into the WFH is related
toExample:
the fact USA
that 1the InterSoft has operated in multiple locations for
many years and is experienced with distributed collaborative work.
Another reason is the high level of autonomy given to InterSoft
teams, so decisions are not hindered by such outstanding
circumstances as COVID-19 outbreak and inability to meet. Yet,
some practices and work routines have changed, to make work
possible for some and more effective for the others, as described in
what follows and summarized in Table 1.

3.2

Longer hours in the first weeks of WFH

While many routines outlined in Figure 2 are comparable with
those in the office times, what we can observe is that engineers start
the day a bit earlier (about 30 min on average), since nobody has to
commute to work, especially in the larger cities. As one engineer
explained: “I usually get up, take a glass of water, and just start
working. It’s what differs now – I don’t take a shower or eat
breakfast”. When discussing the daily routines and comparing the
quantitative data analysis week by week, we noticed that some
engineers initially worked longer days, as also found in a large
study of GitHub projects conducted by the GitHub Data Science
Team [8] and an early WFH study published by Bloomberg based
on the first week’s user activity data from the network service
provider NordVPN Teams [9]. Some engineers we talked to said
they have been unable to distinguish work and personal life and
continued working late or exchanged emails and Slack messages in
the evenings. This is confirmed by a manager, who said: “I see a
lot of people tired”. One practice we found to address this was a

“hard stop”, i.e. a preset time for logging off or turning off the
computer. Many people that had a problem with stopping working
late said to have shifted to a stricter routine after the first 2-4 weeks
of the WFH.

3.3

Shorter lunches, no coffee or chit-chat
breaks

The exhaustion comes not only from just working longer hours.
Our data shows that the lunch breaks became shorter (increased
activity between 12-13 o’clock in Figure 2). Many engineers we
spoke to confessed that they are not good at taking breaks. Away
from the office, the usual breaks and positive interruptions from
colleagues, or invitations to grab a coffee or a snack in the kitchen
were suddenly gone. Even attempts to have a joint virtual break are
not always successful, as an engineer explains: "If you write
someone on email, “Hey, are you free?” There is always a delay,
then you wait for 10 minutes, and then you are back to work again.
It would be nice to take more breaks, but I want to take breaks and
talk to people”.
Staying at home, especially in solitude, for many means that the
walk to the kitchen or the restroom and back takes just a few
minutes, after which you are back at the work desk. Thus, the first
weeks of the WFH showed a significant decrease in the physical
activity without extra efforts (not to mention the lack of gym
exercise for many out of precaution or because of the lockdown).

3.4

No major effects on code production

To understand how WFH has affected engineers’ performance we
analyzed the total lines of code committed to version control main
branches per week – total for the company and normalized per
developer (see Figure 2). The 2020 data covering the transition to
the WFH mode (the red line) shows a dip in code production in the
first three weeks of WFH. Comparing the results from 2020 with

Example: USA

Communications of ACM

D. Smite et al.

Totalproduced
lines of codeper
produced
per week
Total lines of code
week
Lines of code produced per developer per week

Total lines of code produced per week

2019

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

Hack
week

10

11

12 13

14

15

16 17

18 19

20

LOC per week when working at the office

LOC per week when working from home

the same period from 2019 (the blue line), we observe that overall
the total lines of code produced has increased, which can be
explained by the increased number of developers, their competence
and other staff changes. This is why, it makes more sense to
compare the code production figures in the first 10 weeks of 2020
with the WFH period, normalized per developer. These results
show that on average engineers merge slightly more code (+6%) in
the WFH in comparison with the work in the office (see the red dot
lines of code produced per week
in Figure 3). In general, it is fair to note that theTotalshape
of lines is
very similar, which means that WFH did not have any pronounced
effect on performance measured in the lines of code produced and
merged to the main branch.

2020

21

22

Easter
week

WFH

Occasional contributors

Lines of code produced per developer per week
of code produced
per developer
per
week
Lines of codeLines
produced
per developer
per
week

Core contributors

60% produce more LOC
2019

1

2

3

4

5

6
Hack
week

7

8

9

10

11

12 13 14

WFH

15 16

17 18

19

20

22

Figure 3: Comparison of the LOC produced at the office and
WFH. Each dot denotes an engineer.

2020

Figure 2: Total LOC produced per week. The blue line denotes
the time period in 2020, while the red line represents 2019.

3.5

40% produce fewer LOC

2020

21

Easter
week

2019

Top contributors

84% of occasional
11% of core contributors 26% of top contributors
contributors produce more are doing substantially have a substantial drop
code
better, while 28% have
in code production
a substantial drop

Increased flow and productivity

Since the spontaneous interruptions from colleagues and some of
the other reasons for taking regular breaks are gone during WFH,
many engineers reported feeling an increased level of focus and
“being in the flow”. As an engineer explains: “There is a great
sense of productivity when you get into that momentum”. These
were primarily engineers who worked on independent tasks and
were familiar with the work they did. To understand how
representative our findings are, we compared the amount of code
individual engineers produced before and after WFH (see Figure
3). Each dot in the figure denotes an engineer, a dot above the
diagonal indicates increase in code production in the WFH period
as compared to when working at the office.
The plot shows that 60% of developers are producing more code
than before WFH. The large number of outliers above the diagonal
further shows that some developers produce substantially more
when working from home, which confirms statements about the
improved flow. The downside of having the increased focus was
that engineers felt exhausted earlier than normally. But the feeling
of gained productivity still appears to be more important, as
explained by the same engineer: “It is not necessarily a bad thing.
A more focused but shorter workday is nice”.

3.6

Feelings of loneliness

Emotional and social isolation often cause loneliness. Many of our
interviewees admitted that their social life due to the lockdown or
social distancing measures suffered. This was especially tough for
single expats, who lived abroad from their families. However, this
was not the case for everybody. Some people, and especially those
recovering from a recent burnout, enjoyed working in isolation.
Similarly, prior research suggests that the lack of social contacts at
the office will not necessarily make everybody feel lonely, but only
those having high desire for social relations [10].

3.7

Substitute to office socialisation

Those in need of social contact, sought ways to interact virtually.
Conversations by the coffee machines and kitchen gathering
traditions are deep-rooted in the daily routines of InterSoft.
Spontaneous interactions are used to discuss work, resolve
problems, learn something new or just catch up on non-workrelated topics. While working remotely, all teams and departments
have tried to carry out virtual coffee breaks at least once a week,
although, with mixed success. Many complained that the ease of
socialisation is gone and there was often an awkward silence. Some
joked that with the lack of sweet pastry the extra motivation to
attend coffee breaks disappeared. As a result, the virtual hangouts
had often few participants, and the daily stand-ups have become the
main or even the only contact times for some engineers.

Work Patterns in the Forced Working-From-Home Mode
Many engineers discussed that the level of socialisation in the
teams dropped. Some revealed they had a feeling of becoming less
connected with their teammates, while others, on the contrary, said
they feel more connected than before. The latter was because
engineers could see the glances of the family life during the video
sessions, which they have not seen before. Socialisation challenges
have become the regular topic in the team retrospectives, and many
sought and quickly adjusted new approaches, such as regular videogame sessions, scheduled drop-in video channels for team
members, regular short virtual “Hey, good morning” greetings,
shared lunches, fruit breaks and afterwork in front of the video chat.

3.8

Decreased pairing

The practices of pairing and mob programming suffered similarly
to all interactions that have been previously held spontaneously.
Even big fans of pairing reveal that they hardly pair remotely. As
an engineer explains: “(WFH) is a barrier of doing pair
programming or mob programming. It’s easier in the office. We’ve
tried it once since we started working from home and I think it
worked quite well, but I think it’s hard, I am not sure why. I’ve tried
to say that I want to pair, and then it’s ‘Yeah, sure. Let’s do it after
lunch’. And then things change after lunch and then you don’t do
it. Maybe it’s because we need to schedule this more explicitly”.
One solution has been to pair while doing parallel work with
frequent synchronisation. As another engineer explains: “Now we
sync several times a day, without sharing the screen. When needed,
we say ‘Are you free?’ and either jump on a call, or start
screensharing”. Many have successfully used Zoom or Mural
(IBM tool for remote collaboration). To our surprise, one engineer
reported doing more pairing in their team during WFH. These were
daily dedicated sessions (between the stand up and the lunch,
sometimes continuing after lunch) with an open video channel.

CACM
posts, e.g. on Zoom fatigue. This was especially noticeable for
those having several meetings in a row – since people are no longer
changing rooms and switching between meetings results in pressing
the “leave call” button and then the “join call” button. This is a
possible explanation for why the duration of the meetings became
slightly shorter already in the second week of WFH. The change is
especially noticeable in the decrease in time spent in non-recurring
meetings and the shift between the recurring and non-recurring
meetings (see Figure 6). The increasing number of recurring
meetings might be because many spontaneous conversations that
would happen organically in the office space become scheduled on
a regular basis, such as virtual coffee breaks, socialization hours or
time slots for pair programming.
Minutes spent in meetings per week
600
500
400
300
200
100
0

Number of meetings per week
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0

Number of participants per meeting
8
6
4
2
0

Meeting duration in minutes
120
100
80

3.9

Virtual meetings and “Zoom fatigue”

To understand the daily routines and challenges that engineers
might face when working from home, we analysed calendar
invitations for work meetings not longer than 8h and involving 220 people (the larger meetings we regard as social gatherings). In
Figure 5, we illustrate the changes in meeting patterns.
When comparing the calendar invitations in the beginning of the
year with the WFH period, we can see that median values across all
plots have only negligible changes, if any. Yet, when looking into
the more outlining cases, we spot differences. For example,
changes in the number of meetings illustrate a slight increase in the
number of meetings after transitioning to the WFH mode. This
might be because of the shift from spontaneous face-to-face
meetings to scheduled online meetings. We also see a trend of
meetings becoming shorter (no meetings longer than 1h during
WFH resulting in a slight decrease in the median duration of a
meeting) and engineers having fewer long meetings (changes for
those who used to spend more than 5h in meetings per week).
Engineers we talked to explained that in the beginning of the WFH,
everybody tried to mimic the office routines and carry on with the
usual meetings. Soon everybody realized that online meetings are
much more exhausting, as discussed in numerous WFH-related

60
40
20
0

1

2

3

4

5 Hack
6
7
week

8

9 WFH
10 11
start

12

13

14 Easter
15
16
week

17

18

19

20

21

22

Figure 5: Changes in meeting patterns for engineers. Shades of
blue denote 5%-95% quantiles, the solid line is the median.

3.10 From spontaneous discussions to more
individual problem-solving
We learned that spontaneous discussions, part of which are related
to problem-solving, are hard to facilitate in the virtual space.
InterSoft employees we talked to all echoed each other saying that
there are no “over-the-shoulder” conversations anymore, for good
and for bad. On one hand, this meant that one could no longer shout
out a question and get a quick answer, thus engineers can be
blocked for a longer time than usual. On the other hand, many felt
less distracted by colleagues and benefitted from uninterrupted
flow. Besides, solving problems individually especially for novices
led to becoming more independent. At the end, some speculated
that the effect of having a better flow and being stuck for longer
might compensate each other productivity wise.

Communications of ACM

D. Smite et al.

Some of the “over-the-shoulder” conversations have moved to
Slack chats. As a recent hire explains: “I usually gather
Total lines of code produced per week
perspectives and ideas
from others, and then start working on the
problem. When I get stuck I ask others about the possible solutions.
Now it is a little bit different. If … I am unsure how to do (a task),
I usually ping someone in Slack who has done something similar
and have a brief discussion. If I need more ideas, I can ping the
same person or post it in the team Slack channel. You have to know
who to ping”. The Slack records show a significant increase in the
number of slack messages posted per week in the public channels
alone (see Figure 7).
Lines of code produced per developer per week

Total lines
of code produced
Minutes in recurring versus
non-recurring
meetingsper
perweek
engineer per week

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

Hack
week

10 11 12 13 14

Recurring
Non-recurring
15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22
Easter
week

WFH

Number of recurring versus non-recurring meetings per week

Total lines of code produced per week
Recurring
2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

Hack
week

10 11 12 13 14
WFH
2019

Non-recurring

15 16 17 18 19 20

21 22

Easter
week
2020

Figure 6: Analysis of recurring versus non-recurring meetings.
Number of Slack messages in public channels per week

Lines of code produced per developer per week

1

2

3

4

5

6
Hack
week

7

8

9

10 11 12 13 14

15 16 17 18 19 20

21 22

Easter
week

WFH
2019

2020

Figure 7: Total number of Slack messages in public channels.

3.11

4 Conclusions and Lessons Learned
COVID-19 pandemic provided humanity with a unique opportunity
to learn from experiencing the world with a forced working-fromhome practice and the lack of so common global travel and even
local face-to-face interaction. The situation is unique also because
there is hardly any existing guidance, since nobody knows how to
manage global lockdown of such a scale. In this paper, we
documented the experiences of one company and demonstrated the
transition InterSoft employees made to adjust to the WFH (see our
summary in Table 1), which many refer to as “the new norm”.
Our results show that software companies can indeed work
remotely with no significant impact on performance. Similar
conclusions are reported by such IT giants like Twitter and
Facebook, who have already announced their permanent remote
work policies. But what can we learn from these experiences?

4.1

2019
2020
Lines of code produced per developer per week

1

the same office, and report increased communication with people
they were unfamiliar with before.

More open collaboration in distributed
teams

Many members of teams split across locations experience said to
experience better times than before the WFH. As an engineer
explained: “Everyone is now on the same terms. […] Now I
collaborate as much with [Location 1] people as with [Location 2]
people”. Meetings in split teams and department meetings are said
to happen on a more equal basis with everybody dialing in. There
are no obvious cliques situated in a meeting room, and no locationspecific disadvantages, since the physical group division and colocation does not exist anymore. Some engineers even said that
they perceive everybody (within the same time zone) to be equally
accessible, removing the distance between offices and the floors of

What is needed to succussed with WFH?

Our analysis does not allow deriving any success factors. Yet,
several findings from InterSoft point to a few characteristics of
individuals, teams and the company as a whole, that might have
played a role in contributing to a smooth transition to WFH, as also
suggested in related work.
Individuals:
● Fully onboarded digitally workers with low need for close
supervision, clear instructions or extensive feedback [1],
● Have full access to all needed information and artefacts,
● Have an equipped ergonomic workspace,
● Know who knows what and are able to communicate and
collaborate with everyone in their network.
Teams:
● Exhibit high levels of trust in each other and maintain
significant social communication, predictable communication
patterns and substantial feedback [11],
● Experiment and quickly adjust their practices to the WFH by
not only questioning whether the team is doing things right
(single-loop learning), e.g. mirroring the office practice, but
also questioning whether the team is doing the right things
(double-loop learning [12], [13), e.g. by adopting new and
radically changing the existing practices to achieve the goals.
Company management:
● Exhibit high levels of trust in the ability of the individuals and
teams to cope with uncertainty and adjust to the situation [6],
● Cultivate the culture of self-management and increased
autonomy with decentralized decision-making structures,
● Implement policies for supporting the employees with the
needed equipment as well as software support for establishing
an effective work situation.
● Provide support for psychological safety of the employees,
focus on their well-being over focusing solely on productivity.

Work Patterns in the Forced Working-From-Home Mode

4.2

Who benefits from WFH?

One important finding in our study is that WFH is not for
everybody. It is thus important to understand who benefits and
enjoys working from home, and who is hindered by the WFH, both
individuals hindered by their own isolation and others hindered by
having their colleague absent from the office.
In the study of WFH pioneers, the ones that rejected home telework
were single men and women whose social life stemmed from office
contacts, workers whose families objected to their presence at
home, individuals who were not self-disciplined enough to perform
their job without supervision and workers whose productivity could
not be easily measured by their supervisors [1]. Our results confirm
many of these findings. For example, we found that single expats
whose social life happens in the office prefer to return. And that
some have experienced challenges when balancing work and
family life or focusing on the work when being at home. However,
we see that many have found ways to overcome the challenges,
such as adjusting their family routines or equipping a more isolated
workspace. Thus, WFH turned out to be a plausible way of working
for many more people than initially thought.
We also found new factors with perhaps stronger impact on the
individual motivation to work from home, such as supporting
recovery from a burnout and a vested interest in remote work
stemming from the eventual plans to move abroad or positive
experiences from creating closer bonds with the family during the
forced WFH.

4.3

What is lost in the work from home setting?

Yet, we found challenges in the current form of WFH questioning
WFH as a part of a future permanent practice.
We found that spontaneous interactions, ad-hoc meetings and
peer support to be significantly hindered in the virtual ways of
working. It is reasonable to claim that the reduction of such
meetings reduces speed and even value as found in previous
research [14]. While there is a belief that engineers can learn to
facilitate spontaneous discussions virtually, rich group awareness
information (up-to-the-minute understanding of the whereabouts of
the members and theit actions) is needed in fully virtual teams for
team members to be able to reach out spontaneously [15].
Regularity of interactions among people who do not have a
regular touch base has decreased. This means that while many
engineers still feel connected with their teammates, they feel less
connected with those further away (within and outside the
department). The “water cooler” conversations, coffee machines,
cafeterias, lounges and gaming areas are absent in the WFH world
as the places where people gather and have casual conversations
and communicate informally with each other [15]. These organic
encounters offer serendipitous moments to exchange not only task
related information but also socio-emotional information, and
opportunities to be introduced to until then unfamiliar colleagues.
Pairing and mob programming are important practices for many
teams, however, the practices have significantly decreased even
among those preferring working on task resolution together. This is
likely to affect the choice of solutions and the very ability to solve
complex programming tasks together [1].

CACM
Initiating new unfamiliar things is usually done by gathering
several people around a whiteboard. Starting new things is
perceived to be more difficult without personal interaction. As it is
perceived as more difficult, WFH could contribute to slowing down
development of new ideas and for planning the next period. As a
member of one team put it “[I] have not seen any reduced
productivity due to WFH. But planning Q2 takes time”.
Onboarding new employees has become more challenging.
Similarly to the difficulties in organizing virtual pairing sessions,
mentoring has also changed to more individual work with regular
synching. As a consequence, some mentors choose to assign fewer
complex tasks to new hires to be able to progress independently.
Internal conferences and gatherings have been an important
arena for aligning the company and developing competence groups.
Since WFH many gatherings, such as offsites and retreats, have
been moved forward in the calendar, but eventually tried out
virtually. While the organizers of the virtual equivalents for these
events have been recognized for doing an amazing job, many
admitted that the level of socialization (the main purpose of the
events) significantly suffered.
Similarly, as WFH is not for everyone, WFH mode also falls short
to fulfill all of the goals of software engineers, teams and
organizations have. We found that carrying out individual duties
when working from home is more beneficial. However, the
examples given above suggest that mimicking teamwork,
collaboration and networking in a virtual space have been difficult
and engineers, even those considering regularly working from
home part time, prefer to have an opportunity to meet and interact
with their colleagues in person.

4.4 What is the future of WFH?
The futuristic future portrayed in the study of WFH pioneers
published in 1984 with extensive practice of work from home [1],
which was also forecasted in a more recent study of telework [7],
seems to be one likely scenario for the post-pandemic times. Based
on the attitudes and future expectations of the InterSoft employees
who participated in our study, it is obvious that many will likely
work from home at least a few days a week. This, however, has
several important implications.
First, we attribute the successful transition into the WFH at
InterSoft to the fact that the teams were fully distributed, i.e. all
members worked remotely. But future voluntary WFH policy is
likely to result in teams becoming partially distributed. This will
strengthen the challenges identified in our study (less pairing, fewer
socialization activities, less attended events, more isolated tasks).
Besides, the information in partially distributed teams is likely to
circulate in the office clusters and not reach those who work from
home [16]. This is why it is important to align the individual
decisions to work from home with the interests and needs of a
team and perhaps larger parts of the company.
Second, we believe that another reason why InterSoft had a smooth
transition into WFH is the strong networking and cooperation
culture, which is achieved through close teamwork and numerous
collaboration opportunities. Yet, we found that these opportunities
become less frequent, rich and attended when run remotely.

Communications of ACM

D. Smite et al.

Therefore, another important question for the future is to identify
the must-happen in-the-office or in-collocation practices,
ceremonies and events that will help to maintain the
organizational culture.

Finally, even though we found WFH to help those recovering from
a burnout, we also found that without proper adjustments,
remote work can lead to an increased exhaustion (long hours of
uninterrupted work, fewer breaks, more exhausting virtual
meetings), which might have a potential to result in a burnout.

Table 1: Overview of the WFH practices, ceremonies and routines: changes and novelties
Practices and routines

Adjustments for WFH

Daily
rhythm

Many start the day earlier because of the lack of commute time, and/or because they skip the regular
morning routines.
Timing changed from a socially-imposed “Time for lunch now” to self-imposed “I’ll eat when I finish
this” and/or “I’ll eat when I am hungry”. Very few teams hold a joint virtual lunch. For many the social
part of joint lunches is lost (including social conversations by the table and playing video games during
lunch time).
The number of organic coffee or chit-chat breaks significantly decreased due to the absence of company.

Start of the
workday
Lunch break

Spontaneous
breaks
End of the
workday
Meetings

One-on-one
meetings
Stand-up
meetings
Meeting
duration
Walk-and-talk
meetings
COVID-19
meetings

Work
sessions
and tactics

Remote
meetings
Solo work
sessions
Pairing work
sessions
Approach to
problem solving

Virtual joint
work sessions
Spontaneous
discussions
Social
activities

Afterworks and
social activities

Changed from leaving the office in regular hours to a “softer” stop and possibly extended work hours,
especially in the beginning of the WFH. Some introduce a hard stop as a consequence of working too
much.
Less individual career development more personal well-being (“How are the things?”)
Extended duration and inclusion of personal status updates and discussions around the member wellbeing (typically from 15 to 30 minutes).
Shifted from ending the meeting earlier to starting a meeting with a short break (“Let’s have 5 min to
get a coffee) to replace a natural break when walking between the meeting rooms in the office. More
meetings run shorter and end on time because of increased fatigue of virtual meetings.
Meetings that do not require the use of computers are increasingly moving from face-to-face or virtual
meetings by a computer screen to a phone mediated “walk-and-talk” meetings.
Extra meetings clarifying the company policy regarding the COVID-19 and WFH have been held,
especially during the first months of the pandemic. Later changed from frequent company-wide meetings
to management-only meetings and company-wide emails.
From divided between the meeting rooms and localized discussions to fully virtual having increased
visibility for everybody, i.e. a “level playing field”.
Became longer with fewer interruptions and increased focus.
Less practiced. Changed from sitting by one computer to either virtual sessions with screen sharing and
the use of Mural or having parallel work sessions with frequent synchronisation.
Problem solving changed from shouting out “I have a problem” to all colleagues nearby to individual
search for solutions or primarily peer-to-peer inquiries via direct messaging. When asking colleagues,
the prime contact from “always ask team members first” for some drifted to directly contacting the
source of knowledge. Increased use of online material over the help from colleagues.
A repeating joint virtual work session for the team or a part of the team. Typically 1-2 hours after the
Stand-up, where everyone stays in the virtual meeting room.
Changed from organic to scheduled discussions. Some engineers schedule meetings promptly (from
“let’s talk now” to “in 1-2 hours”). In some teams spontaneous discussions are facilitated in virtual
sessions or in drop-in video rooms that are available all day long.
Changed from being regular, well-attended to less frequent and less attended. Afterworks and social
activities such as video-gaming, having a coffee or a beer, now changed to the virtual setup.

Work Patterns in the Forced Working-From-Home Mode

REFERENCES
[1] Pratt JH. Home Teleworking: A Study of its Pioneers. Technological Forecasting
and Social Change, 1984, 25(1): 1-14.
[2] Bailey DE, Kurland NB. A review of telework research: Findings, new
directions, and lessons for the study of modern work. Journal of Organizational
Behavior: The International Journal of Industrial, Occupational and
Organizational Psychology and Behavior. 2002; 23(4): 383-400.
[3] Tietze S, Musson G. Identity, Identity Work and the Experience of Working from
Home. Journal of Management Development, ISSN: 0262-1711. 2010.
[4] Dullemond K, Van Gameren B, Van Solingen R. Supporting Distributed
Software Engineering in a Fully Distributed Organization. In the International
Workshop on Co-operative and Human Aspects of Software Engineering
(CHASE), 2012, pp. 30-36.
[5] Bloom N, Liang J, Roberts J, Ying ZJ. Does Working from Home Work?
Evidence from a Chinese Experiment. The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
2015, 130(1): 165–218.
[6] McGregor, D.M.: The Human Side of Enterprise. In: Readings in Managerial
Psychology. The University of Chicago Press, 1960, pp. 310–321.
[7] Silva-C A, The Attitude of Managers Toward Telework, Why is it so Difficult to
Adopt it in Organizations?. Technology in Society, 2019, 59: 101133.
[8] N. Forsgren, An analysis of developer productivity, work cadence, and
collaboration in the early days of COVID-19. Octoverse spotlight, May 6, 2020,
https://github.blog/2020-05-06-octoverse-spotlight-an-analysis-of-developerproductivity-work-cadence-and-collaboration-in-the-early-days-of-covid-19/
[9] L. Meakin, "Working From Home Means Working Longer Hours for Many",
March
23,
2020,
https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2020-0323/working-from-home-means-working-longer-hours-for-many-chart
[10] Wright S, Silard A. Unravelling the antecedents of loneliness in the workplace.
Human Relations, 2020, doi: 0018726720906013.
[11] Jarvenpaa SL, Leidner DE. Communication and trust in global virtual teams.
Organization science. 1999 Dec;10(6):791-815.
[12] Argyris, C., Schön, D.A.: On Organizational Learning II: Theory, Method and
Practise. Addison Wesley, Reading, 1996
[13] Moe NB. Key challenges of improving agile teamwork. InInternational
conference on agile software development 2013 Jun 3 (pp. 76-90). Springer,
Berlin, Heidelberg.
[14] Moe NB, Dingsøyr T, Rolland K. "To schedule or not to schedule? An
investigation of meetings as an inter-team coordination mechanism in large-scale
agile software development." 2018.
[15] Kreijns K, Kirschner PA, Jochems W, Van Buuren H. Measuring perceived
sociability of computer-supported collaborative learning environments.
Computers & Education. 2007 Sep 1;49(2):176-92.
[16] Šablism A, Šmiten D, Moe NB, Exploring Cross-Site Networking in Large-Scale
Distributed Projects. In Proceedings of the International Conference on ProductFocused Software Process Improvement, Springer, 2018, pp. 318-333.
[17] Overby E., Bharadwaj A., Sambamurthy V. (2005) A Framework for Enterprise
Agility and the Enabling Role of Digital Options. In: Baskerville R.L.,
Mathiassen L., Pries-Heje J., DeGross J.I. (eds) Business Agility and Information
Technology Diffusion. TDIT 2005. IFIP International Federation for Information
Processing, vol 180. Springer, Boston

CACM

