arXiv:2102.02509v1 [cs.RO] 4 Feb 2021

An Analysis of International Use of Robots for
COVID-19
Robin R. Murphy
Depart. of Computer Science & Engineering
Texas A&M University
College Station, TX 77843-3112
robin.r.murphy@tamu.edu

Vignesh B.M. Gandudi
Depart. of Computer Science & Engineering
Texas A&M University
College Station, TX 77843-3112
vigneshbabu.gm@tamu.edu

Trisha Amin
School of Public Health
Texas A&M University
College Station, TX 77843-3112
trishaamin@tamu.edu

Angela Clendenin
Department of Epidemiology
Biostatistics
Texas A&M University
College Station, TX 77843-3112
clendenin@tamu.edu

Jason Moats
Texas A&M Engineering Extension Service
College Station, TX 77843-3112
jason.moats@teex.tamu.edu

Abstract

This article analyses data collected on 338 instances of robots used explicitly in response to
COVID-19 from 24 Jan, 2020, to 23 Jan, 2021, in 48 countries. The analysis was guided
by four overarching questions: 1) What were robots used for in the COVID-19 response?
2) When were they used? 3) How did different countries innovate? and 4) Did having
a national policy on robotics influence a country’s innovation and insertion of robotics for
COVID-19? The findings indicate that robots were used for six different sociotechnical work
domains and 29 discrete use cases. When robots were used varied greatly on the country;
although many countries did report an increase at the beginning of their first surge. To
understand the findings of how innovation occurred, the data was examined through the
lens of the technology’s maturity according to NASA’s Technical Readiness Assessment
metrics. Through this lens, findings note that existing robots were used for more than 78%
of the instances; slightly modified robots made up 10%; and truly novel robots or novel use
cases constituted 12% of the instances. The findings clearly indicate that countries with
a national robotics initiative were more likely to use robotics more often and for broader
purposes. Finally, the dataset and analysis produces a broad set of implications that warrant
further study and investigation. The results from this analysis are expected to be of value
to the robotics and robotics policy community in preparing robots for rapid insertion into
future disasters.

1

Introduction

The COVID-19 pandemic provides an unique opportunity to examine the in situ operationalization of robots
during a pandemic, and, by extension, disasters in general. Several articles have already been published that
attempt to summarize how robots have been widely used to mitigate the medical, economic, and social
impacts of COVID-19, notably (Murphy et al., 2020; Murphy, 2020; Shen et al., 2020). More often, survey
articles such as (Clipper, 2020; Madurai Elavarasan and Pugazhendhi, 2020; Mardani et al., 2020; Yang
et al., 2020) focus on how robots could be used and on technological gaps or deficiencies preventing such
uses.
While such analyses are valuable to the robotics community, they neglect larger questions as to whether
there are patterns of how different countries have employed robots to cope with COVID-19. Establishing
which robots have been used for what purposes and how quickly they were deployed provides a baseline for
future work. Analyzing the influences on why and how those robots were put into practice is valuable in
determining research investments and national policies to prepare for effective response to future disasters.
In order to provide this larger view of the use of robotics for COVID-19, this article surveys the state of the
practice and addresses four specific questions:
• What were robots used for? Investigating what robots were used for during the coronavirus pandemic
provides a de facto work domain analysis that can guide R&D for future pandemics and possibly future disasters in general. Variations in applications by country may help identify cultural, economic,
and policy differences that impact adoption and economic markets.
• When were robots used? Documenting whether robots were operational before, contemporaneously
with, or lagged after the surge for a country captures the overall readiness of robots for a disaster.
• How did different countries innovate? Documenting the types of robotics innovations exhibited
by individual countries to cope with pandemics can inform research, development, and technology
transfer for future disasters. This understanding can be used to craft appropriate policies, including
national robotics initiatives.
• Did having a national policy on robotics influence a country’s innovation and implementation of
robots for COVID-19? Six countries have national or economic union initiatives in robotics. While
those policies differed in scope and size, the existence of a formal commitment to robotics could be
expected to foster rapid insertion or adaption for a disaster. Documenting the performance of those
countries with initiatives can be useful for creating new or modifying existing policies.
The analysis in this article is based on the open source Robotics For Infectious Diseases (R4ID) dataset
(Robotics for Infectious Diseases, 2021). R4ID captures the use of ground, aerial, and marine robots from
the first reported instance, 24 Jan 2020, to 23 Jan 2021, covering a calendar year. As of 23 Jan 2021, R4ID
contained 338 distinct instances of robots being used explicitly to cope with the COVID-19 pandemic. The
instances were from 48 countries in six continents, Africa, Asia, Australia, Europe, North America, and
South America. Table 1 provides a list of countries, while Figure 1 shows those 48 countries on a map.
In order to examine international trends in more detail, this article provides summative data for all 48
countries and delves deeper into the eight countries with the largest number of instances of robot use: US,
China, India, Great Britain, Italy, South Korea, Spain, and Singapore. Thailand is tied with Singapore for
number of instances, but for the purposes of this article and space limitations, Singapore is considered as
occupying the eighth position because it has an earlier date for the first use. Two of these eight countries,
Italy and Great Britain are also among the ten countries with the highest per capita incidence of COVID19 deaths (Worldometers, 2021). Thus, the top eight provides a tractable number for investigation while
representing countries with large COVID-19 impacts and sizable deployments of robots. Furthermore, six

Table 1: List of countries organized by number of instances of robot use for COVID-19 with the associated
first date of use. * indicates that the date was inferred.

of the eight countries, China, Great Britain, Italy, Spain, South Korea, and the US, have formal robotics
initiative programs, possibly providing insights into the impact of national policies.
The article is organized as follows. It begins with a description of the R4ID dataset and the data collection
and analysis methodology. Next, each of the following sections explores one of the motivating questions
by presenting relevant data and then extracting findings. The article concludes with observations for the
robotics and policy communities.

2

Data Collection and Analysis Methodology

The robot instances analyzed in this article are extracted from the R4ID database. Each instance documents
an operational robot explicitly used for COVID-19, the robot’s modality, manufacturer and model, geographic
location of use, and date of use. The database is restricted to operational robots, which are defined as those
situated in the work place, not a laboratory or simulation, and in use by end-users, not developers, for actual
use, not a strictly controlled experiment. This eliminates many of the speculative robots currently under
development cited in the surveys by (Clipper, 2020; Madurai Elavarasan and Pugazhendhi, 2020; Mardani
et al., 2020; Shen et al., 2020; Yang et al., 2020) and allows the analysis in this article to be based on actual
documented use.
The R4ID instances enable the analysis of when robots were used and cumulative frequency plots by country.
The extracted instances were clustered into sociotechnical work domains and use cases using the constant
comparative method of quantitative analysis (Glaser, 1965; Glaser and Strauss, 1967; Merriam, 1998; Ruona,

Figure 1: 48 countries reporting use of robots for COVID-19 shown in dark blue; map generated through
Microsoft Excel.

2005) to describe what robots were used for internationally. Each robot instance were also rated for technical
maturity using the NASA Technical Readiness Assessment process (Hirshorn and Jefferies, 2016; Frerking
and Beauchamp, 2016) that will be described in more detailed in Section 5.
The roboticsForInfectiousDiseases database was created by weekly searches of online press reports, social
media, and the scientific robotics and medical literature. The searches began in March, 2020, when a
pandemic was declared. English phrases and keywords (COVID, COVID19, COVID-19 robots, COVID19
Robots, COVID 19 Drone, COVID 19 UAS, COVID Drone, COVID UAS, “COVID-19 and Robots”, “Use
of Robots for COVID-19”, “Use of Robots for the present pandemic”, and “COVID-19 Robot uses”) were
used. The search often uncovered non-English reports as “robot” and “COVID” are generally expressed as
those words regardless of language. In addition, the comments section of the social media posts, and press
reports were manually scraped as well to obtain additional links. Every effort was made to determine the
date of actual use of a robot, and if that was unknown, it was noted and the date was considered the day
of the report for analysis purposes. The search discovered the first reported instance of a robot being used
for COVID-19 in the world occurring on 24 Jan, 2020, in a hospital in Seattle, Washington, US (A man
diagnosed with Wuhan coronavirus near Seattle is being treated largely by a robot, 2020). The searches
were discontinued on 23 Jan, 2021, providing a calendar year of robotics reports.
The database contains 424 reports leading to 338 distinct instances of use. The 424 reports were filtered
to retain only the 400 reports that discussed actual robots put into operational use explicitly because of
COVID-19. The reports often did not given any indication of the length of operational use or quality of use;
therefore, the instances include situations where the robot was probably a working demonstration rather
than placed in regular service. However, this filtering did eliminate reports about robots in laboratories
or under development with no explicit date of deployment. The 400 reports contained duplicates, either
retweets and repostings or a different news agency covering the same robot. These were merged, resulting in
272 entries. Since several news articles described multiple robots or how a model of robot had been used for
multiple applications, those entries were split into 338 separate instances of a robot and application tuple.
While every effort has been made to produce a comprehensive, replicable search, there are numerous limitations of the R4ID dataset. For example, the R4ID dataset is most certainly incomplete and noisy. Robots

in service may not have been the subject of press or research reports and thus skipped. Also, the use of
English keywords may have likely limited discovery, though as noted earlier “robot” and “covid” appear in
those forms in many non-English postings. From both a robotics and epidemiological standpoint, the data
is usually coarse. The robotics reports typically did not provide technical descriptions of the work envelope,
though the general characteristics could be inferred from photos and videos, metrics used to evaluate the
performance of the robots, or the duration of the operation. However, the volume of reports suggest that
it is sufficient to detect general trends in robotics and robotics policy and to identify topics for further investigation. It is difficult to precisely correlate lockdown and surge dates with robot instances as surges and
lockdowns were often local rather than national, multiple media sources can be inaccurate, and lockdowns
did not occur in some countries. However, examining the trends in cases and deaths for entire countries
provides helpful insights.
The 338 instances were iteratively clustered into sociotechnical work domains and use cases using the constant comparative method of quantitative analysis (Glaser, 1965; Glaser and Strauss, 1967). The grouping
into sociotechnical work domains was based on similarities in the stakeholders and regulations impacting
implementation, the end-user skills and expectations, the general work envelope, and the general mission or
objective for having robots.
. Six sociotechnical work domains emerged:
• Clinical Care. This refers to hospital and patient related functions that generally occur in structured medical environments with specialized personnel. These activities are regulated by the government and medical insurers who ultimately must approve the use of robots and cost reimbursement.
The term Clinical Care is used in its broadest sense and includes intensive care units as well as
patient assessment and the diagnosis and treatment processes discussed in robot surveys for medicine
such as (DiLallo et al., 2021).
• Non-hospital Care. This covers medical facilities outside of hospital care, such as quarantine
camps, nursing homes, and private clinics. These facilities share some of the trained personnel and
processes as Clinical Care but operate under different budgets and regulations.
• Laboratory and Supply Chain Automation. This sociotechnical work domain represents the
medical support industry which performs specialized functions such as processing tests for coronavirus and supplying hospitals and public health workers. While they are part of the medical
response, they are economically and functionally distinct.
• Public Safety. This refers to public health activities carried out by law enforcement or other
emergency management agencies. These activities include disinfecting public spaces and enforcing
quarantine restrictions by trained personnel.
• Continuity of Work and Education. This sociotechnical work domain encompasses activities
by private businesses and educational institutions to maintain operations. While businesses and
educational institutions have different funding streams, they share similar work envelopes and have
to contend with workers or students who may not be trained to use or interact with robots.
• Quality of Life. This sociotechnical work domain refers to the ways in which robots are used
to support individuals, either by private companies delivering goods and services or facilitating
pandemic-appropriate social interactions. Individuals themselves may use personal robots in new
ways to cope with pandemic lockdowns, for example, walking a dog with a small unmanned aerial
system.
The constant comparative method was also used to cluster the instances within a sociotechnical work domain
into use cases. These use cases are shown in Figure 2 with largely self-explanatory labels. Perhaps the
most confusing labels are for Observational Telepresence and Interventional Telepresence in
Clinical Care; observational refers to non-contact interactions such as remote patient assessment while

interventional refers to teleoperating a robot that makes physical contact with a patient. It should be
noted that several work domains have a delivery use case. These are considered different use cases for
many reasons. Consider robot delivery of medical supplies in a hospital ward (Clinical Care) differs from
a small aerial vehicle dropping of a lightweight package of test vials at a laboratory (Laboratory and
Supply Chain Automation.), which is in turn different from a robot car dropping off a week’s worth of
groceries to a surburban household (Quality of Life). Likewise disinfecting outdoor public spaces or large
indoor spaces such as covered stadiums (Public Safety) poses different technical challenges and personnel
than disinfecting a hospital room (Clinical Care) or sanitizing a office (Continuity of Work and
Education).

98

85
10

65

Public Safety

85

Clinical Care

57

32
1

1

41
3
21

Decreasing frequency of reported uses

17
17
5
4

7
2

1

Quarantine
Enforcement

26

Disinfecting
public spaces

20

Identification of
Infected

20

Public Service
Announcements

9

Monitoring
traffic flow

5

5

Disinfecting
Point of Care
Observational
Telepresence
Delivery &
Inventory
Interventional
Telepresence
Patient & family
socializing
Patient intake
& visitors

22
3

21

68

41

Continuity of
Work and
Education

Laboratory and
Supply Chain
Automation

24

17

4
23

Telepresence

7

Laboratory
Automation

34

Manufacture
or Decon PPE

4
1
3

1

Infectious
mat. handling

3

4
2

6

1
1

WH & Process
automation
Construction &
Agriculture
Private Health
Surveillance

Delivery

1

Quality of Life

10

10
5

Delivery food

5

Delivery to
quarantined

Delivery non
-food purchases

4

Quarantine
Socializing

Attend public
social events

1

Public Health
Surveillance

4

5

1

10
Non-Hospital
Care

18

Sanitation
work/school

1
6

18
10

36

77
4
1

2

1
2
2

Interpersonal
socializing
Other personal
activities

Private
Security

Figure 2: Instances of ground (brown), aerial (blue), and marine (gold) robot by sociotechnical work domain
and use case.
Figure 2 summarizes the 338 instances by use of robots by sociotechnical work domain, use case, and
modality. Note that two earlier versions of this visualization (Murphy et al., 2020; Murphy, 2020) have
appeared previously. This version has more instances than and due to the content of the instances, the
clustering of work domains and use cases changed. The top row shows the number of instances for that work
domain. The work domain icons are ordered by decreasing frequency, left to right. Each icon has sidebars
decomposing the instances into aerial (117), ground (219), and marine (2) vehicle modalities. Under each
domain icon is a column of use cases, with the icon for each use case also containing a sidebar with number
of instances by modality.
Note that this criteria for comparison based on sociotechnical work domains and then by use case produces a
different taxonomy from other surveys. The taxonomy in this article is most similar to the one by (Cardona
et al., 2020), which appears to be based on one of the two earlier iterations of the R4ID database (Murphy
et al., 2020). Cardona et al. restricts their survey to operational robots but provides only nine robots, much
less than the 338 in this article. This article’s focus on sociotechnical work domains is broader that the
strictly economic partitioning used by (Madurai Elavarasan and Pugazhendhi, 2020). The employment of
the constant clustering method resulted in distinctly different clustering of work domains and use cases from
the categories in (Shen et al., 2020). That survey surveys 200 robots, some of which appear to be laboratory
prototypes, and does not provide any motivation for categorization. Their categorization appears to be by
functionality and skewed toward medical applications: diagnosis and screening, disinfection, surgery and
telehealth, social and care, logistics and manufacturing, and other. In the clustering used by this article,
disinfection is a function that appears as distinct use cases in multiple sociotechnical work domains. For
example, disinfecting indoor, sparse hospital rooms which can be closed off (Clinical Care) poses different

Table 2: Instances of robots by country for each of the six sociotechnical work domains.

robot design considerations and implementation constraints than robotic disinfection of large outdoor public
spaces in Public Safety.

3

What Were Robots Used For?

All three modalities (air, ground, marine) of robots were used for wide variety of applications, spanning
six work domains and 29 use cases. While front-line uses of robots for public health were the majority
overall and in most countries, there was an almost equally large use of robots for economic and individual
applications, especially in the top eight adopters (US, China, India, Great Britain, Italy, South Korea, Spain,
and Singapore).
Table 2 breaks out the data in Figure 2 for each of the 48 countries distributed by work domain. The rows
are organized in descending order of total number of instances.
As would be expected, the majority of instances of use were for aspects of public health, primarily for frontline Public Safety (98) and Clinical Care (85), with smaller numbers for Laboratory and Supply Chain
Automation (41) and Non-Hospital Care (10). However, Continuity of Work and Education,
which is driven by businesses and individuals, not by public health or the medical industry, was the third
most reported use of robots with 68 instances. While each of the 29 use cases differed in some notable way,
Figure 2 suggests that the majority of the largest use cases could be categorized as robots for disinfection or
sanitation to provide effective cleaning without increasing manpower or risking exposure, telepresence robots
to protect users from exposure, and robots delegated for transport and delivery to handle increased surge in

demand.
The majority of robots used were ground vehicles (219), though aerial vehicles (117) were a close second,
and two marine vehicles, both unmanned surface vehicles, were used for safety and security applications.
Figure 2 shows that ground robots were used exclusively for Clinical Care and Non-Hospital Care,
while aerial vehicles were used extensively for Public Safety.
Reported uses were not uniformly distributed by country. As seen in Table 2, only two countries, China and
South Korea, had reported instances covering all six work domains. The US had the largest total number of
instances but none for Non-Hospital Care, perhaps reflecting cultural and economic differences in eldercare
or a lack of quarantine camps employed in countries such as China. 17 countries (United Arab Emirates,
Kenya, France, Nigeria, Australia, Equatorial Guinea, Rwanda, Croatia, Czech Republic, Egypt, Honduras,
Israel, Kuwait, Malaysia, Mexico, Tunisia, Turkey) out of the 48 reported only Public Safety or Clinical
Care applications. Another 14 countries (South Africa, Austria, Chile, Cyprus, Denmark, Estonia, Ghana,
Jordan, Lithuania, Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Russia, Sweden) did not report any use of robots Public
Safety or Clinical Care; this could be an artifact of the reporting process or reflect more flexibility in
innovation for non-governmental domains.
These findings suggest:
• Research, development, and policies should not limit or conceptualize innovation solely to “obvious”
work domains, in this case to Public Safety or Clinical Care. The volume of instances by
businesses and individuals is almost equal to that of public health applications. While the impact
of these non-health use cases cannot be assessed from the data, the descriptions suggest that robots
were helpful in reducing economic consequences and maintaining society.
• Even after one year, only 9 instances were reported of interventional telepresence (e.g., requiring
physical interaction with a human such as for mouth or nose swabbing) were reported. While such
robots are an important topic in fundamental robotics research for medicine, the near term benefits
of more mundane and general uses of robots should not be overlooked.
• Unmanned aerial vehicles may be as important as ground robots for a pandemic, but there may be
barriers to developing such technologies without a motivating disaster. While reports indicated that
emergency waivers of aviation regulations were successfully invoked, the need for waivers suggests
that the return of aviation restrictions may restrict further development and insertion into routine
operation.

4

When Were Robots Used?

Table 1 captures the first reported date of use of a robot for COVID-19 by country. The World Health
Organization declared a pandemic on 11 March, 2020 (WHO Director-General’s opening remarks at the
media briefing on COVID-19 - 11 March 2020, 2020). The first eight rows shows countries that had already
witnessed operational deployment of a robots, with the US on 24 Jan, 2020, was nearly two months before
the pandemic was declared. Note that only three of the early adopters were also the countries with the
largest deployment, shown in boldface.
Figure 3 illustrates the cumulative number of reports over time from the eight countries superimposed over
the worldwide daily case count epidemic curve. However, the pandemic reached individual countries at
different times and with dissimilar impacts. Therefore, it is more informative to examine the first use of a
robot in a country relative to its unique epidemic curve. Figure 3 shows the cumulative plot of robot use
overlaid with the epidemic curve for the eight countries with the largest reported instances of robot use.
Figure 4 and Table 1 indicate that three of the eight countries, US, India, and Singapore, began deploying

Figure 3: Cumulative number of reports over time from the eight countries superimposed over the worldwide
daily case count epidemic curve.
robots before their surge, that is, their use led the surge. Four countries, China, Spain, Great Britain, and
South Korea, saw reports of initial robot use concurrent with their surges. One of the eight exhibited a lag,
Italy’s first reported use was well after its surge peak.
Figure 4 also suggests that early insertions of robots do not guarantee large scale use. For example, the US
had the earliest reported operational use of a robot explicitly for COVID-19 but the cumulative plot shows
that it was closer to 11 March, 2020, before reports of robots accelerated. Those reports could be misleading
as social media could have been focusing on any unfamiliar technology for coping with the rising concern,
but if this is a true trend, then it suggests that early successes may not be adequately communicated to
other potential users.
Figure 3 also shows that the rate of operationalization varies. All but the US and China showed a rapid rise
in reports of robot use followed by a plateau that persisted despite a second (or third) surge. The increasing
use rate in the US could be an artifact of the data collection methodology favoring English, however, the
data also shows China with a similar curve.
These findings suggest
• the application of robotics was mostly reactive, either concurrent with, or lagging, the initial local
surge. This may indicate that countries do not have sufficient existing capacity or adopters do not
have confidence in robotics except as a last resort; Section 5 will discuss this in more depth.
• the rate of sustained application of robots varies by country, and could reflect economic and regulatory frameworks and existing robotics capabilities.

5

How Did Different Countries Innovate?

There are numerous ways to categorize innovation; this article uses the NASA Technical Readiness Assessment (TRA) system and follows NASA’s formal process for categorizing innovation by TRA (Hirshorn and

Figure 4: Cumulative plot of robot use overlaid with the epidemic curve for the eight countries with the
largest number of instances of robots used for the pandemic.

Jefferies, 2016; Frerking and Beauchamp, 2016). The TRA system has two advantages. One is that it has a
formal decision tree for classifying technology so that the categorization should be uniform and repeatible.
The second is that it ranks the robot within the human-robot interaction context of its intended use case, not
solely by the technical maturity of the robot components. Thus, TRA is well-suited for discussing innovation
and inferring why certain robots were adopted.
TRA is an expansion of technical readiness levels (TRL) into a broader classification that ranks both the
maturity of a platform (the earlier TRL) and the usability for the work processes (Hirshorn and Jefferies, 2016;
Frerking and Beauchamp, 2016). TRA divides readiness into three categories: Heritage, Engineering, and
New. A Heritage system is one that is an existing proven technology being applied to a similar mission and
work envelope, thus it should not lead to any surprises in usability. An Engineering system is a modification
of an existing proven technology for a well-defined mission and work envelope. Such a system is highly likely
to work and not introduce unintended consequences of increased human cognitive workload or hidden work.
A New system either involves new hardware, software, or a new mission or notably different work envelope.
It is high risk because it is unknown if it will work reliably and without introducing unanticipated demands
on the user.
Table 3: Technical Readiness Assessment of robots by country.

Following the categorization method in (Hirshorn and Jefferies, 2016; Frerking and Beauchamp, 2016),
Table 3 shows the distribution of Heritage, Engineering, and New robots by country, arranged in descending

order of total instances of robots. The overall pattern is for countries to deploy existing robots for established
use cases (Heritage) for 78% of the instances, adapt or repurpose existing robots for established use cases
(Engineering) for 10%, and create novel robots or address novel use cases (New) for 12% of the instances.
Table 4: Comparison of technical readiness of robots by top eight countries.
Country
All Countries
US
CN
IN
GB
IT
KR
ES
SG

Heritage
Engineering
New
Instances Percentage Instances Percentage Instances Percentage
265
78%
34
10%
39
12%
81
85%
9
10%
5
5%
58
81%
8
11%
6
8%
17
52%
9
27%
7
21%
16
100%
0
0%
0
0%
9
69%
0
0%
4
31%
10
83%
1
8%
1
8%
9
75%
1
8%
2
17%
5
72%
1
14%
1
14%

Table 4 details the innovation for the top eight countries. While six of the eight countries generally follow
the global trend, India stood out for having a larger percentage of Engineering systems, while Italy had a
larger percentage of New systems. An explanation for why India and Italy would differ from the general
trend is unclear and worth investigating.

Figure 5: Cumulative plots of robot use by technical readiness for all countries overlaid with the worldwide
epidemic curve.
The data shows a pattern of innovation over time. Figure 5 plots the reports of Heritage, Engineering, and
New robots by all 48 countries over time. The cumulative graph shows that Heritage robots were deployed
first, as would be expected given that users would work with what was available and familiar. However,
surprisingly, it indicates that Heritage uses continued to grow over the year and outpace the growth rate
of Engineering and New. The data suggests that novel Engineering and New innovations have not been
sustained. Figure 6 provides plots of innovation for the top eight adopting countries; the eight, especially
the top four, follow the pattern in Figure 5. Returning to Table 2 and Table 1, it can be seen that smaller
countries, such as Rwanda and Poland, typically add Heritage robots; this continued addition of Heritage
systems may also explain why Heritage reports continue to increase over time.
The data also shows that robots were reported for multiple sociotechnical work domains from the very
beginning of the outbreak and from the beginning of a country’s use. Figure 7 illustrates that within
approximately a month, robots were being fielded for multiple work domains and not restricted to Clinical

Figure 6: Individual country cumulative plots of robot use by technical readiness overlaid with the epidemic
curve for the eight countries with the largest instances of robots for the pandemic.
Care. Figure 8 shows that operational robots in multiple work domains were announced within one month
of that country’s initial foray. Clinical Care was not necessarily the first reported use of robots, even
though a pandemic is a public health crisis. Three of the top eight countries reported Quality of Life (China)
or Public Safety (Spain, Italy) as the first application
The findings on innovation are that:
• Heritage robots, that is, existing robots for known use cases, overwhelming dominated implementations, accounting for 78% of robots. Engineering and New systems accounted for only 10% and
12% respectively, suggesting that even for a long lasting disaster, users adopt existing systems while
developers become immediately engaged in near-term solutions or not at all.
• the global pattern for implementation over time was the immediate use of Heritage robots and the
continued addition of Heritage robots over time. Engineering and New robots experienced an early
burst that was not sustained.
• innovation did not concentrate on public health priorities; reports of implementation of robots

Figure 7: Cumulative plots of robot use by work domain overlaid with the epidemic curve for all countries.
began within one month for all six work domains. This is contrast to the use of robots for high
priority public health functions inPublic Safety or Clinical Care first, then shifting to economic
concerns captured by Continuity of Work and Education or impacts on individual citizens
represented by Quality of Life. This scattershot pattern of applications was the same for the US
and China, suggesting that innovation is ultimately independent of government controls of technology
development.

6

Did Having a National Policy on Robotics Influence
Innovation?

Six countries or unions have formal robotics initiatives: China, the European Union, Germany (in addition
to the European Union), Japan, South Korea, and the US (How nations around the world are investing in
robotics research, 2020). Of these, Japan and Germany were not in the top eight for reported instances of
robotics (recall they are US, China, India, Great Britain, Italy, South Korea, Spain, and Singapore. As part
of the EU, Great Britain, Italy, and Spain can be considered as having a robotics initiative during this time
period. Therefore, of the top eight adopters, six countries had robotics initiatives and two (India, Singapore)
did not.
Having a robotics initiative did appear to impart some advantages. As seen in Table 2, the US, China, Great
Britain, Italy, South Korea, and Spain reported instances for more work domains than other countries, as
the average number of domains covered by a country was 2. Tables 3 and 4 indicates that at least five,
the US, China, Great Britain, South Korea, and Spain, had a high percentage of Heritage robots to draw
upon. This is presumably an outcome of investment in robotics and general societal awareness of robot
capabilities. However, having a robotics initiative did not ensure that a country visibly deployed robots in
a timely manner. Figure 4 shows that Italy lagged behind its surge.
The findings suggest:
• that a national robotics initiative appears helpful in terms of prior availability of existing robots and
enabling a breadth of applications. In addition, it may be helpful in creating end-user awareness

Figure 8: Cumulative plots of robot use by work domain overlaid with the epidemic curve for the eight
countries with the largest instances of robots for the pandemic.
and acceptance of robots.
• The data is less clear as to whether national initiatives impart a clear advantage on rapid innovation,
as there were relatively little need for novel robots to meet previously unknown use cases.

7

Conclusions

The R4ID dataset show that robots were used for the first year of the COVID-19 outbreak for an unexpectedly
broad set of six work domains and 29 use cases by 48 countries, many of whom are not an advanced economy
according the International Monetary Fund (Developed Country, IMF Advanced Economies, 2021). This
suggests that robotics is becoming more mainstream and could auger accelerated adoption by businesses and
individuals. Creating or expanding existing national robotics initiatives could increase robotics preparedness
for future pandemics or disasters. It should be emphasized that the R4ID dataset is imperfect and thus any
conclusions are speculative and offered for discussion.
Returning to the questions posed in the Introduction, 219 ground, 117 aerial, and 2 marine robots, for a total

338, have been documented in use in 48 countries in Africa, Asia, Australia, Europe, North America, and
South America. Robot use was spread across six distinct work domains: Public Safety, Clinical Care,
Continuity of Work and Education, Laboratory and Supply Chain Automation, Quality of
Life, and Non-Hospital Care. The majority of robots globally have been used in the Public Safety
(98 instances or 29% of the total) and Clinical Care (85 or 25%) work domains, which are driven by
government and public health policy. protect front-line workers (including administrative staff), help cope
with surge in demand for medical services However, the Continuity of Work and Education work
domain, at 68 or 20%, was almost as large as Clinical Care. This suggests that private industry and
individuals are acquiring and implementing robots. The majority of use cases utilized robots to protect
workers, maintain output, or to replace sick workers or enable social distancing. While the majority did not
displace workers and would not be a threat to jobs long term, there is a possibility that increased robotics
for warehouse and production automation will permanently displace workers.
In terms of when robots were used, they were used before, during, and throughout the first year of the
pandemic. Reports show that robots were in service to explicitly cope with the public health crisis in
countries such as the US, India, and Singapore before the declaration of the pandemic or their local surges.
It appears that the majority of countries, such as China, Spain, Great Britain, and South Korea, deployed
robots concurrent with sharp increases in their local surges, while others such as Italy lagged behind their
local surge. There is no clear indicator of why some countries were early adopters and others appeared to
deploy robots rather late.
Robotics innovation for the COVID-19 pandemic was primarily a priori innovation. Technically mature
Heritage robots which had been proven in established user cases comprised the largest number of instances,
265 or 78% of the total. Innovation during the pandemic appeared to follow a “low hanging fruit” strategy,
where existing (Heritage) and easy to modify robots (Engineering) are used for established use cases. New
innovation for novel use cases, such as mouth or nose swabbing, or to offer novel robot designs appears to
emerge quickly but then slows over time, possibly because of the time it takes to build and program reliable
robots with high usability for new applications. It is not possible to know whether New robots would have
made a difference, but the high propensity of established use cases suggests that a pandemic does not call
for new solutions so much as rapidly scaling the availability of existing robots and end-user’s familiarity and
trust of such robots.
The existence of a national robotics policy appeared to roughly correlate with a country’s use of robots
for COVID-19. Six of the top eight countries in terms of reported instances, US, China, Great Britain,
Italy, South Korea, and Spain, had national robotics initiatives. A national robotics policy appears to be
associated with earlier insertion of robots and a greater breadth of work domains that robots are applied
to. This positive association with government policy may be because many of the instances were for public
health work domains which are funded or regulated by the government. It could also be that having a
national robotics initiative is a reflection of a country’s intrinsic platform availability, talent, and awareness
of, or comfort with, robotics.
It is hoped that this analysis will inform research and development of robots for the next disaster. The
data suggests that national policies are useful and might be expanded to incentivize the development of
Heritage robots with rapid manufacturing capacity as well as platforms suitable for supporting opportunistic
Engineering and New innovations.

Acknowledgments

This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant IIS-2032729.
Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation.

References
A man diagnosed with Wuhan coronavirus near Seattle is being treated largely by a robot (2020).
https://edition.cnn.com/2020/01/23/health/us-wuhan-coronavirus-doctor-interview/index.html.
Cardona, M., Cortez, F., Palacios, A., and Cerros, K. (2020). Mobile robots application against covid-19
pandemic. In 2020 IEEE ANDESCON, pages 1–5.
Clipper, B. (2020). The influence of the covid-19 pandemic on technology: Adoption in health care. Nurse
Leader, 18(5):500–503.
Developed Country, IMF Advanced Economies (2021). https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Developed country.
DiLallo, A., Murphy, R., Krieger, A., Zhu, J., Taylor, R. H., and Su, H. (2021). Medical robots for infectious
diseases: Lessons and challenges from the covid-19 pandemic. IEEE Robotics and Automation Magazine,
page to appear.
Frerking, M. A. and Beauchamp, P. M. (2016). Jpl technology readiness assessment guideline. In 2016 IEEE
Aerospace Conference, pages 1–10.
Glaser, B. G. (1965). The constant comparative method of qualitative analysis*. Social Problems, 12(4):436–
445.
Glaser, B. G. and Strauss, A. L. (1967). The Discovery of Grounded Theory: Strategies for Qualitative
Research. Aldine de Gruyter.
Hirshorn, S. R. and Jefferies, S. A. (2016). Final report of the nasa technology readiness assessment (tra)
study team).
How

nations
around
the
world
are
investing
in
robotics
research
(2020).
https://www.themanufacturer.com/articles/how-nations-around-the-world-are-investing-in-roboticsresearch/.

Madurai Elavarasan, R. and Pugazhendhi, R. (2020). Restructured society and environment: A review on
potential technological strategies to control the covid-19 pandemic. Science of The Total Environment,
725:138858.
Mardani, A., Saraji, M. K., Mishra, A. R., and Rani, P. (2020). A novel extended approach under hesitant
fuzzy sets to design a framework for assessing the key challenges of digital health interventions adoption
during the covid-19 outbreak. Applied Soft Computing, 96:106613.
Merriam, S. B. (1998). Qualitative Research and Case Study Applications in Education. A Joint Publication
in the Jossey-Bass Education Series and the Jossey-Bass Higher Education Series. San Francisco :
Jossey-Bass Publishers.
Murphy, R. (2020). How robots are helping with covid-19 and how they can do more in the future. In 2020
IEEE International Symposium on Safety, Security, and Rescue Robotics (SSRR), pages 1–1.
Murphy, R., Adams, J., and Gandudi, V. (2020). Robots are playing many roles in the coronavirus crisis –
and offering lessons for future disasters. The Conversation.
Robotics for Infectious Diseases (2021). http://roboticsforinfectiousdiseases.org/index.html.
Ruona, W. E. A. (2005). Analyzing Qualitative Data. Chap. 14 In Research in Organizations: Foundations
and Methods of Inquiry, edited by Richard A. Swanson and Elwood F. Holton, 233-63. San Francisco,
CA: Berrett-Koehler.
Shen, Y., Guo, D., Long, F., Mateos, L. A., Ding, H., Xiu, Z., Hellman, R. B., King, A., Chen, S., Zhang,
C., and Tan, H. (2020). Robots under covid-19 pandemic: A comprehensive survey. IEEE Access, pages
1–1.

WHO Director-General’s opening remarks at the media briefing on COVID-19 - 11 March
2020 (2020). https://www.who.int/director-general/speeches/detail/who-director-general-s-openingremarks-at-the-media-briefing-on-covid-19—11-march-2020.
Worldometers (2021). https://www.worldometers.info/coronavirus/.
Yang, G.-Z., J. Nelson, B., Murphy, R. R., Choset, H., Christensen, H., H. Collins, S., Dario, P., Goldberg,
K., Ikuta, K., Jacobstein, N., Kragic, D., Taylor, R. H., and McNutt, M. (2020). Combating covid19—the role of robotics in managing public health and infectious diseases. Science Robotics, 5.

