Revealing Critical Characteristics of Mobility Patterns in New York City during the Onset
of COVID-19 Pandemic
Akhil Anil Rajput1*, Qingchun Li2, Xinyu Gao3, Ali Mostafavi4

arXiv:2102.01918 [physics.soc-ph] 3 Feb 2021

1

Ph.D. Student, UrbanResilience.AI Lab, Zachry Department of Civil and Environmental
Engineering, Texas A&M University, College Station, USA 77843-3136; email:
akhil.rajput@tamu.edu
2

Ph.D. Student, UrbanResilience.AI Lab, Zachry Department of Civil and Environmental
Engineering, Texas A&M University, College Station, USA 77843-3136; email:
qingchunlea@tamu.edu
3

Ph.D. Student, UrbanResilience.AI Lab, Zachry Department of Civil and Environmental
Engineering, Texas A&M University, College Station, USA 77843-3136; email:
xy.gao@tamu.edu
4

Assistant Professor, UrbanResilience.AI Lab, Zachry Department of Civil and Environmental
Engineering, Texas A&M University, College Station, USA 77843-3136; email:
amostafavi@tamu.edu
*Corresponding Author. Email address: akhil.rajput@tamu.edu (Mr. Akhil Anil Rajput)
Keywords: COVID-19, Human Mobility, New York City, Multi-dataset, Public transport
Abstract
New York has become one of the worst-affected COVID-19 hotspots and a pandemic epicenter
due to the ongoing crisis. This paper identifies the impact of the pandemic and the effectiveness
of government policies on human mobility by analyzing multiple datasets available at both macro
and micro levels for the New York City. Using data sources related to population density,
aggregated population mobility, public rail transit use, vehicle use, hotspot and non-hotspot
movement patterns, and human activity agglomeration, we analyzed the inter-borough and intraborough moment for New York City by aggregating the data at the borough level. We also assessed
the internodal population movement amongst hotspot and non-hotspot points of interest for the
month of March and April 2020. Results indicate a drop of about 80% in people's mobility in the
city, beginning in mid-March. The movement to and from Manhattan showed the most disruption
for both public transit and road traffic. The city saw its first case on March 1, 2020, but disruptions
in mobility can be seen only after the second week of March when the shelter in place orders was
put in effect. Owing to people working from home and adhering to stay-at-home orders, Manhattan
saw the largest disruption to both inter- and intra-borough movement. But the risk of spread of
infection in Manhattan turned out to be high because of higher hotspot-linked movements. The
stay-at-home restrictions also led to an increased population density in Brooklyn and Queens as
people were not commuting to Manhattan. Insights obtained from this study would help
policymakers better understand human behavior and their response to the news and governmental
policies.

1. INTRODUCTION
With more than 90 million confirmed cases and 1.9 million deaths worldwide at the time of this
writing, the COVID-19 global pandemic has caused unprecedented social, economic, and
environmental impacts (WHO Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19) Dashboard, 2021; Bashir et al.,
2020). New York City, which became a major hotspot in the United States during the early stages
of the pandemic, had more than 500,000 confirmed cases as of January 15, 2021. New York City
observed its first peak during the first week of April. Public policy and implementation of control
measures are essential to support social distancing, which might help slow the spread of COVID19 (Lasry et al., 2020; Kraemer et al., 2020). Huang et al. (2020a) have shown that mobility
changes correspond well with the declaration of mitigation measures, implying effectiveness.
Additionally, a study done in the U.K. analyzed the impact of government control measures on
human mobility reduction and identified a relationship between human mobility trends and
COVID-19 cases (Hadjidemetriou et al., 2020). They found out that reduction in mobility led to
lower COVID-19 related casualties.
This study assesses the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and government policies on human
mobility for four major boroughs of New York City. The city was an early epicenter of the COVID19 pandemic in the United States (Thompson et al., 2020). New York City is also one of the most
densely populated cities in the United States, has a well-established intracity public rail, and
diversity in transport options. Studies have shown that human mobility correlates directly with the
number of positive cases with some time lag (Glaeser et al., 2020; Carteni et al., 2020; Badr et al.,
2020; Xiong et al., 2020) and disease reproduction number (Linka et al., 2020). Iacus et al. (2020)
found that mobility alone can explain more than 90% of the initial spread of the COVID-19 virus.
Furthermore, Gatto et al. (2020) have found that policies restricting population movement in Italy
and resulting lessened mobility reduce virus transmission by 45%. Yabe et al. (2020) found that
even non-compulsory measures in Tokyo resulted in a 50% drop in mobility and led to 70% fewer
social contacts. Therefore, understanding the effectiveness of government policies on reducing
human mobility will help shape these policies and better control any future outbreaks.
Almagro et al. (2020) found that crowded spaces play a more critical role than population density
in spreading the infection. Gao et al. (2020) used Venables distance as a means to understand the
agglomeration of human activities at the county level for 194 US counties. Li et al. (2020)
classified points of interest (POIs) as hotspots or non-hotspots and assessed the mobility patterns
among them for US cities. They found that while visits to hotspots decreased in some cities, some
did not show a considerable drop; however, these studies did not focus on a granular level. Our
study was focused on finding these measures at the borough level for New York City to understand
whether boroughs show any disparity in movement patterns. We aggregated the POIs at the
borough level for New York City to assess the inter-borough and intra-borough hotspot and nonhotspot mobility trends. This knowledge may enable policymakers to better manage the control
measures for different boroughs.
Researchers have also analyzed the effect of mobility on greenhouse gas emissions by the aviation
and transport sectors (Abu-Rayesh and Dincer, 2020). For instance, Jiang et al. (2020) identified
the impact of human behavior and mobility on Singapore's environment. They also reported a 30%
reduction in mobility leads to about 44% to55% reduction in air emissions related to transportation.

Zhou et al. (2020) used mobile phone data to build an exposure model for Shenzhen, China, and
found that the reduction in mobility helped flatten the peak number of cases and lead to a delayed
peak.
Studies have looked at mobility data from different sources for the same dataset but not different
types of datasets (Huang et al., 2020b, Iacus et al., Yabe et al.). To the best of our knowledge, our
research is a first of a kind that incorporates various datasets, such as population density,
aggregated population mobility, intracity rail use, vehicle use, hotspot and non-hotspot movement
patterns, and human activity agglomeration. The novelty of our research lies not only in
performing the analysis at a finer scale but also in considering multiple datasets to reduce the
uncertainties and gain multi-dimensional insights. The goal is to understand how a pandemic
impacts mobility in different sectors, such as transportation—intracity rail and vehicular traffic.
Looking across six different datasets, we endeavor to answer the following research questions: 1)
How COVID-19 and government policies to counteract the spread of the virus influence human
mobility within and across New York City boroughs? 2) How changes in overall mobility are
explained by mobility through different means? 3) Does reduced mobility lead to reduced highrisk movements? The first research question gives us insights on how mobility is affected by
COVID-19 awareness, state policies, and news (Figure 1) and whether these policies have a
significant impact on mobility. Focusing on different datasets gives a holistic perspective on
human mobility. The second research question identifies if people switch from high-risk
transportation means (New York City subway) to low risk (vehicle) or show similar mobility
reduction. The third research question gives insights as to whether reduced mobility causes
reduced movements to and from hotspots, as movements linked to hotspots exhibit high risks of
spreading the infection. Even a small minority of super-spreader POIs can account for a large
number of infections (Chang et al., 2020).

Figure 1. Timeline of policies and COVID-19-related news for the month of March for New
York City and New York State

2. DATA AND PROCESSING
For our study, we obtained mobility data from five sources: Facebook, the Metropolitan
Transportation Authority database, New York State open data portal (data.ny.gov), and from
studies by Li et al. (2020) and Gao et al. (2020).
From Facebook, we acquired the Facebook Population and Movement datasets for March and
April 2020. Facebook anonymizes data by adding a small random noise, implementing spatial
smoothing, and dropping small counts. For these datasets, the metrics were aggregated over each
tile and linked to the center of a tile or a polygon (or a combination of both). The density dataset
consisted of population density, user count (number of users with the location on), among other
measures for each data point. The mobility dataset consisted of start and end coordinates and the
corresponding movement associated with the start-end coordinate pair. These datasets were
available at a frequency of 8 hours but were aggregated over days for the movement dataset and
at a weekly resolution for the density dataset. Baseline and crisis values are available for both
population and movement datasets. Facebook computed the baseline values in the dataset for each
data point using 5 to 13 weeks of pre-crisis data. Baseline values were calculated using data from
the previous weeks of the pre-crisis period (Maas et al., 2019). We used crisis and baseline values
of population density for our study. Similarly, we used crisis and baseline values for movement
from the movement dataset from the start-end coordinate pairs.
We obtained MTA turnstile data from New York State open data portal for January through April
2020. The turnstile dataset consisted of the cumulative entry and exit counts for each turnstile for
all subway stations in New York City at an hourly interval. To obtain the hourly entry and exit
count, first the difference was computed for entry and exit time series. We then aggregated the
entry and exits for these turnstiles at 1-day intervals. Tunnels and bridges toll data from MTA
contained the number of transiting vehicles (cars, buses, trucks and motorcycles).
Mobility data for 16 US cities (including New York City) across points of interest classified as
hotspots and non-hotspots were acquired from the study by Li et al. They used SafeGraph data to
map the origin-destination network and identified the hotspots and non-hotspots on the mapped
network. Here, hotspots represent high-risk zones, and non-hotspots represent the low-risk zones
in terms of infection risk (Li et al., 2020). Hotspot and non-hotspot movement data for New York
City were taken from this study and aggregated at the borough level for our analysis.
To consider the agglomeration of human activities, we used data Venables distance data for the
study by Gao et al. (2020). They calculated Venables distance for 193 counties in the United States
by using digital trace data from Mapbox. Venables distance aggregates the spatial distribution of
human activities of different tiles in a county. For more information on the calculation of Venables
Distance in this dataset, please refer to Gao et al. (2020). In our study, we performed the analysis
at the borough level for New York City.
Table 1 gives an overview of the datasets used in this paper and unique insights offered by each
of these datasets.
Table 1. Data description and insights obtained from each dataset

Data

Information

Insights

Facebook density

Baseline and crisis population Changes in population density
density values at each grid
with time
point

Facebook movement

Aggregated and anonymized
baseline and crisis movement
between grid points

Changes in overall movement
patterns across different
boroughs

Metro turnstile

Subway entry and exit count
for each turnstile for all
stations in New York City

Entry and exit count for
subway stations in each
borough

MTA tunnels and bridges toll
data

Number of vehicles passing
Count of vehicles entering
through toll gates in tunnels
and exiting different boroughs
and bridges of New York City

Venables distance data

Agglomeration of human
activities across cities

Changes in agglomeration of
human activities with time for
each borough

POI movement data (hotspots
and non-hotspots)

Patterns of movement across
hotspot and non-hotspot in
New York City

Movement trends between
hotspots and non-hotpots
across different boroughs

3. METHODOLOGY
This section describes methods used to analyze datasets for aspects of human mobility and to
compute baseline values for Facebook Movement and subway turnstile dataset. Figure 2 illustrates
the steps followed for the analysis in this paper with further explanation below.

Figure 2. The process followed for analyzing human mobility using six datasets
3.1 Baseline calculation
Datasets, other than those acquired from Facebook, did not have baseline values from previous
data. To assess the change in mobility, for Facebook Movement and Metro Turnstile datasets, the
baseline values were computed by taking the average value of the data from months January and
February was a combined average for both months. We used a two-month combined average
instead of a day-wise average over the weeks for two reasons: 1) We did not have sufficient precrisis data; 2) We adopted a seven-day rolling mean approach to assess mobility for various
datasets to remove the variations in mobility on weekdays and weekends, so a precise averaging
was not necessary.
3.2 Population density
To assess the pandemic-related variation in population density for March and April, we first
extracted the population density data for four main boroughs of New York City: Brooklyn,
Manhattan, Queens, and Bronx. Then, we computed weekly averages of baseline and crisis values
for population density from March 1through through April 30. After aggregating the data weekly
for each grid point, we estimated the percentage change in population density with respect to the
baseline values. We then mapped the density change for New York City for different weeks.
3.3 Aggregated population movement
We analyzed inter-borough and intra-borough population movement using the Facebook
Movement dataset, which represents users' general mobility patterns based on the location data of
mobile phones. We spatially aggregated the baseline and crisis values from Facebook Movement

data at the borough level. Each start or end coordinate was assigned to a borough if it was within
that borough boundary. The resampled data, therefore, instead of capturing start-end coordinate
movements, captured inter-borough and intra-borough movements. Borough-to-borough
movements lacking enough data points to produce statistically significant results were discarded.
Then movement change time series (7-day moving average) for inter-borough and intra-borough
movement for March and April were plotted.
A similar approach was adopted for the turnstile data. Analyzing subway turnstile data gives
insights into how mobility in the subway compares to that observed from the Facebook Movement
dataset, which corresponds to general mobility trends. MTA does not directly provide turnstile
location (coordinates). We first obtained a dataset containing the coordinates of subway stations
from MTA. Then we merged these with the primary dataset consisting of turnstile data for each
station using station names as the common joining parameter (station names). Since these datasets
were not produced in the same year, the station names had minor changes (updated name, shortform, long-form, etc.).We linked these stations manually to a coordinate. After geocoding these
stations, the entry and exit data were aggregated over boroughs, applying the same approach as for
the Facebook Movement dataset. The exit numbers were slightly less than the entry number for
each station because people tend to use emergency exit to exit the station to save time. We therefore
considered both entry and exit numbers separately for this analysis.
3.4 On-road movement
Restrictions on public gatherings may have a different impact on travel via personal vehicles, as
they conform to the social-distancing measures and are safer from the standpoint of contact than
public transport. To assess road traffic, we considered tunnel and bridge toll data as a proxy to
measure the inter-borough road traffic. Since these bridges or tunnels did not connect places within
a borough, we could not use this dataset to compute intra-borough vehicle statistics. All of the
tunnels and bridges in New York City link different boroughs, so we grouped the toll dataset on
the basis of the direction of flow and the linked boroughs. For example, incoming traffic to
Brooklyn and outgoing traffic from Brooklyn were grouped separately. This gives an idea about
the net inflow or outflow of traffic from a particular borough. The dataset contained the count for
vehicles that pay using E-Z pass or cash (includes payment by mail). Because of the pandemic,
however, some toll gates did not accept cash, and the exact date of this transition was not available
publicly, so this study analyzed only total traffic flow and not the payment methods (contactless
or cash). Baseline traffic values were computed for each toll plaza considering total vehicle traffic.
The percent change in traffic was calculated using the baseline values for March and April. Time
series plots (7-day moving average) for inbound and outbound traffic for four main boroughs were
plotted for further analysis.
3.5 Hotspot and non-hotspot movements
Knowing movements linked to high-risk zones (hotspots) is crucial as they might contribute to the
faster spreading of the infection (Almagro et al., 2020). Li et al. (2020) mapped the OriginDestination (O.D.) networks from SafeGraph data as directed and weighted bipartite networks.
They classified POIs based on a threshold in-flux and out-flux values obtained from the O.D. biadjacency matrix. For our study, these POI (hotspots and non-hotspots) datasets from the study by
Li et al. (2020) were reclassified into different boroughs then the movements between POIs were

spatially aggregated borough-wise to obtain the inter- and intra-borough movement. For each
borough movement case (16 cases, – inter- and intra-borough movement), we obtained movement
patterns for the hotspot to hotspot (H.H.), hotspot to non-hotspot (H.N.), non-hotspot to hotspot
(N.H.), and non-hotspot to non-hotspot (N.N.) movements for March and April. This classification
would give additional insights into the composition of overall movement patterns into high-risk
and low-risk movements, where high-risk movements correspond to those linked with hotspots
and low-risk to non-hotspot.
3.6 Human activity agglomeration
While higher population density and movement activity may correspond to a higher risk of
infection, studying the agglomeration of human activities is also important. Higher agglomeration
would imply that the average distance between people is less and could lead to a higher risk of
disease spread. This measure takes into consideration the areas (ZIP code or census tract) where
population density might be lower, yet still show higher agglomeration. Therefore, such areas
might have a higher risk of infection spread than would be expected from assessing only population
density. We obtained more-granular level data from the study by Gao et al. 2020 for New York
City at the borough level to observe the activity density for Manhattan, Queens, Brooklyn, and
Bronx.
Venables distance
Venables distance is calculated by the following equation:
Dv =

∑𝑖≠𝑗 𝑎𝑖 (𝑡)× 𝑎𝑗 (𝑡)× 𝑑𝑖𝑗
∑𝑖≠𝑗 𝑎𝑖 (𝑡)× 𝑎𝑗 (𝑡)

(1)

where ak(t) represents the metrics of human activities at tile k at time t, dij represents the center-tocenter distance between tiles i and j. The numerator represents the weighted distance of these
activities, and, by dividing by the denominator, the value is normalized, and we obtain the
weighted average, or Venables distance (Louail et al., 2014).
4. RESULTS
We observed the changes in population density for the four boroughs in New York City by
analyzing the weekly aggregated density data from Facebook. Figure 3 shows the results for the
density change (in percentage) for four boroughs of New York City—Manhattan, Brooklyn, Bronx
and Queens—for March and April. We observe that in the first week of March (Figure 3 (a)) the
variations in density changes are within five percent. In the second week of March (Figure 3 (b))
we begin to see a slight reduction in density in Manhattan. From the 3rd week of March (Figure 3
(c) and (d)), the changes are more apparent, and it is observed that there is a significant decrease
in population density in Manhattan and other boroughs show an increase in population density.
For some places in Manhattan, the reduction is more than 75%. Since Manhattan is a hub for
offices and commercial spaces, results suggest that after a national emergency was declared on
March 13 and office strength was reduced by 50% on March 18, people started working from
home. The area of Queens showing a decrease in population density can be attributed to the
location of John F. Kennedy International Airport. The airport has nearly equal passengers for both
domestic and international travel (New York City data portal, 2015 data). Due to travel restrictions

put on by many countries after the third week of March, people traveled less globally and also
domestically, leading to lower footfall in the airport region.
It is observed that in the third week of March, the reduction in population density is the highest in
comparison to previous weeks; the reduced population density in the last week of March remains
similar for the month of April. The majority of the change happened in the third week of March,
which coincides the announcement of a state of emergency and stay-at home orders. Moreover,
the changed density state remains the same for the entire month of April (figures are available in
the Appendix), which could imply that the populace effectively followed the guidelines
throughout, and a steady state was achieved.

(a)

(b)

(c)
(d)
Figure 3. Percent population density change (with respect to baseline values) timeline for four
boroughs of New York City. (a), (b), (c), and (d) represent the population density for the first,
second, third, and fourth week of March, respectively. Red represents higher population
density; blue represents lower population density compared to baseline
The above results indicate a reduction in population density for Manhattan, which may reduce the
risk for infection spread. For other boroughs, which show an increase in population density, it is
not clear whether this increases the risk. We analyzed the mobility patterns and measured the interand intra-borough movement through Facebook Movement and subway turnstile data to address
this question. Figure 4 shows the inter- and intra-borough movement patterns for four boroughs
for New York City for general mobility using Facebook Movement data. Figure 5 shows subway
ridership for each of the boroughs’ stations. Figures 4 and 5 show that the reduction in mobility
happens in the third and fourth week of March.
Figure 4 suggests that for the aggregated movement patterns to and from Manhattan saw a
significant drop. Also, movements from Manhattan to other boroughs reduced by 60% to 80%, the
largest percentage among the four boroughs. For inter- or intra-borough movements that are not
Manhattan linked, the reduction was between 50% to 60%. From Figure 5, analyzing the percent
change in entry counts at stations in each of the boroughs, it is evident that subway ridership
dropped by more than 80% for the four boroughs. Similar to observations from Figure 4,
Manhattan showed the highest drop in subway entry count (90% reduction). The use of the subway
remains reduced for the month of April. This suggests that people, in general, were following the
recommendations of social distancing, working from home, and avoiding the use of public
transport. Movements within Bronx, Brooklyn, and Queens were slightly higher than their inter-

Percent Change

borough movements in general, which may indicate commute for purchase of essential goods. In
contrast, for Manhattan, the intra-borough movement was the lowest (compared to movement from
Manhattan to other boroughs), which could be due to reduction in the population density in
Manhattan; therefore, the local commute by people who come from other boroughs is
comparatively less, though people working with essential services may commute to Manhattan
and back from other boroughs.

(b)

Percent Change

(a)

(c)
(d)
Figure 4: Seven-day rolling mean aggregated movement among four boroughs of New York
City. Some borough-to-borough movement plots are not shown due to insufficient data. (a),
(b), (c) and (d) show the movement from Manhattan, Queens, Brooklyn, and Bronx,
respectively, to other boroughs
Results from the Facebook Movement data and Metro turnstile data indicate that while subway
usage dropped by more than 80% for all the major boroughs, the overall movement within and
across different boroughs showed a drop between 50% to 80%. For movements not liked with
Manhattan, this reduction was only about 60%. This suggests that other means of travel might
results in a lesser reduction in the overall movement than observed from the Facebook Movement
data. One aspect that we have not considered yet is people traveling via road. People may resort to
traveling by personal vehicles for essential shopping or for jobs exempt from having reduced
workforce capacity. Analyzing mobility through roads may give additional insights into the
observed difference.

Percent Change
(a)
(b)
Figure 5: Seven day rolling mean of percent change of Metro ridership in four boroughs of
New York City. (a) and (b) represent the percent change in entry and exit counts respectively
for Manhattan, Queens, Bronx, and Brooklyn
The above results give insights into the total movement patterns and mobility through the subway
system. But people involved with essential facilities may commute through roads for work, or
people may travel to shop for essentials. We analyzed the tunnels and bridge toll data to observe
if decreased ridership in the subway leads to an increased flow of vehicles. Figure 6 shows traffic
through the tunnels and bridges connecting the boroughs. We used tunnels and bridges toll data as
a proxy to study road movement. The results indicate that incoming traffic to Manhattan from the
boroughs showed a drop of 70%. Incoming traffic to Queens and Bronx boroughs was reduced by
about 60%. Outbound traffic to boroughs other than Manhattan shows a drop of 50% to 70%.
These results show that the traffic towards Manhattan shows the highest decrease, and in general,
we see about 60% less movement through roads to other boroughs.
We observe similar mobility reduction patterns in road movement as observed before for different
boroughs, but the magnitude of reduction is not as much as that observed with Metro ridership.
This could be because commute by car is a safer means of transportation vis-à-vis possible
contagious diseases as compared to public modes of transportation. Moreover, people employed
in the operation of critical facilities or emergency response would still need to commute.
Additionally, this dataset accounts only for the number of vehicles that pass through a toll plaza,
and there is no information about the number of passengers per vehicle. If people shared rides
before the pandemic, they may not do so anymore, which could implicate slightly higher than the
observed movement of cars per passenger.

Percent Change
(a)
(b)
Figure 6: Seven- day moving average of (a) incoming traffic for Manhattan, Queens, and
Bronx; and (b) outgoing traffic from Queens, Bronx, and Brooklyn
Our analysis so far only accounted for mobility patterns and trends for different boroughs. While
it may be true that reduced mobility may mean lesser risk if there are still significant movements
that are linked with hotspots, there may be some movement types that contribute to the spread of
the infection. In order to determine whether reduced mobility leads to a reduction in high-risk
movements, we investigated the H.H., NH, H.N., and N.N. movement patterns for the four main
boroughs for New York City. Figure 7 shows the H.H., NH, H.N., and N.N. movement patterns
between Manhattan, Bronx, Queens, and Brooklyn (more borough to borough movement results
can be accessed in the Appendix section).
Results indicate that movement towards Manhattan involved a high number of H.H. movements.
In contrast, movement from Manhattan to other boroughs involved a higher number of N.N.
movements. Intra borough movements showed declining trends for H.H. movements and had low
H.N. movements except for Manhattan. In other inter and intra-borough movements, N.N.
movements were in higher numbers but did not show a significant drop in activity. This suggests
that even though Manhattan saw the highest reduction in mobility, the risk of infection is still high
as hotspot linked movements are higher in comparison to other movement pairs. Moreover, the
H.N. type movement does not show a declining trend implying that people from hotspots, if
infected, may infect people in non-hotpots. Other inter and intra-borough movements have
dominated N.N. type of movement, which is favorable if traveling cannot be avoided. N.N. type
of movement corresponds to the least risk travel, compared to other movement types in terms of
likelihood of spreading the infection.

Visit Count

(b)

Visit Count

(a)

(c)
(d)
Figure 7: H.H., H.N., NH, N.N. movement patterns across four boroughs of New York City at
weekly resolution. (a), (b), (c) and (d) show the movements from Manhattan to Manhattan,
Manhattan to Queens, Bronx to Brooklyn, and Queens to Brooklyn, respectively. (For all
figures, please refer to the appendix section 2)
To further understand the perturbed state where we have reduced mobility, we investigated the
Venables distance for these boroughs to get insights into how clustered the activities are with
respect to distance. Figure 8 shows the Venables Distance for four boroughs of New York City.
The results suggest that the clustering of human activities increased significantly only for
Manhattan in the first two weeks of March. Other boroughs showed small increment till the end
of March then had a gradual decline. This indicates that Manhattan showed the most clustering of
activities in comparison to other boroughs, but it was still a twenty percent increase. Combining
insights from hotspot linked movement to Manhattan, results suggest that even though the distance
between people is increasing, it may not reduce the risk substantially as hotspot linked movements
dominate. Other boroughs like Queens, Bronx, and Brooklyn show only a marginal increase in the
Venables distance.
These results indicate that the average distance between people did not change significantly for
boroughs other than Manhattan. When people started working from home, they did not commute
to their offices in Manhattan; hence, the Venables distance increased by roughly twenty percent
only for Manhattan. For other boroughs, it is unclear why Venables distance only increases
marginally. It may be because of the balancing effect of increased population density and a reduced
number of trips within a borough.

Venables Distance
Figure 8: Venables distance time series for four boroughs of New York City

5. DISCUSSION
This study shows how human mobility was affected by the pandemic and how the influence
exerted by the first COVID-19 positive case, government policies, and major news had on them.
The estimates of aggregate flows of people can help officials understand which policies are most
effective (Buckee et al., 2020). The news of the first case of the COVID-19 in New York City and
the declaration of the state of emergency did not have much impact on mobility. We see a steep
decrease in mobility only when the curfew is imposed on restaurants and bars by the Governor of
New York followed school closures in an attempt to stop the spread of the virus. We see that in
March, inter- and intra-borough movement of population declines, and towards the end of March,
it reduces to a 60%-90% lower value that continues until the end of April. The highest drop in
mobility is observed for Manhattan since it is a business hub and has a smaller number of
residential complexes. This trend of decrease in mobility is consistent across different datasets, but
we observe slight variations in the magnitude. This variation could be because data from Facebook
relies on users who keep their location services enabled. While it may give valuable insights into
the movement trends, we can expect some variations as they do not represent all the people.
Moreover, the dataset captures general mobility trends and does not specify whether this
movement is associated with traveling via road, subway, bicycle, or walking.
Subway turnstile data results indicate that the reduction in subway ridership is 10% more for
Manhattan and 20% to30% more for other boroughs. Overall, the reduction in subway ridership is
more than 80% for all the boroughs, indicating the effectiveness of government control measures.
Vehicular mobility shows similar patterns to that of general mobility patterns, but for boroughs
other than Manhattan, the reduction is slightly more. Venables distance shows high variation only
for Manhattan because it is dominated by office space and has a relatively small percentage of
residential population. When the workforce started to work from home, only these areas showed
clustered activities. Higher-density areas in Manhattan may be associated with residential areas.
Moreover, people did not commute to work to Manhattan, which contributed to an increased
average distance among people. Although we see an increase in population density for boroughs

like Queens, Brooklyn, and Bronx, the mobility remains between 60% and 90%: low for both interand intra-borough movement. This suggests that people were commuting less frequently and
strictly following the stay-at-home orders. This is substantiated by a reduction in subway ridership
did not increase vehicle traffic, which showed a similar reduction in movement. But the risk of
infection in Manhattan is not reduced significantly, as hotspot-linked movements still dominate
even after a significant drop in overall mobility.
6. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The authors would like to acknowledge funding supports from the National Science Foundation
RAPID project #2026814: "Urban Resilience to Health Emergencies: Revealing Latent Epidemic
Spread Risks from Population Activity Fluctuations and Collective Sense-making. The authors
would also like to acknowledge that Safegraph, Mapbox, and Facebook provided datasets under
their Data for Good initiatives. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions, or recommendations
expressed in this research are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the view of the
funding agency and the data providers.
7. REFERENCES
Abu-Rayash, A., & Dincer, I. (2020). Analysis of mobility trends during the COVID-19
coronavirus pandemic: Exploring the impacts on global aviation and travel in selected
cities. Energy Research and Social Science, 68(July), 101693.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.erss.2020.101693
Almagro, M., & Orane-Hutchinson, A. (2020). JUE insight: The determinants of the differential
exposure to COVID-19 in New York city and their evolution over time. Journal of Urban
Economics, October, 103293. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jue.2020.103293
Badr, H. S., Du, H., Marshall, M., Dong, E., Squire, M. M., & Gardner, L. M. (2020).
Association between mobility patterns and COVID-19 transmission in the USA: a
mathematical modelling study. The Lancet Infectious Diseases, 20(11), 1247–1254.
https://doi.org/10.1016/S1473-3099(20)30553-3
Bashir, M. F., Ma, B., & Shahzad, L. (2020). A brief review of socio-economic and
environmental impact of Covid-19. In Air Quality, Atmosphere and Health.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11869-020-00894-8
Buckee, C. O., Balsari, S., Chan, J., Crosas, M., Dominici, F., Gasser, U., … Schroeder, A.
(2020). Aggregated mobility data could help fight COVID-19. Science.
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.abb8021
Cartenì, A., Di Francesco, L., & Martino, M. (2020). How mobility habits influenced the spread
of the COVID-19 pandemic: Results from the Italian case study. Science of the Total
Environment, 741, 140489. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.140489

Chang, S., Pierson, E., Koh, P. W., Gerardin, J., Redbird, B., Grusky, D., & Leskovec, J. (2020).
Mobility network models of COVID-19 explain inequities and inform reopening. Nature,
June. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-2923-3
Gao, X., Fan, C., Yang, Y., Lee, S., Li, Q., Maron, M., & Mostafavi, A. (2020). Early Indicators
of COVID-19 Spread Risk Using Digital Trace Data of Population Activities. September.
http://arxiv.org/abs/2009.09514
Gatto, M., Bertuzzo, E., Mari, L., Miccoli, S., Carraro, L., Casagrandi, R., & Rinaldo, A. (2020).
Spread and dynamics of the COVID-19 epidemic in Italy: Effects of emergency
containment measures. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
States of America, 117(19), 10484–10491. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2004978117
Glaeser, E. L., Gorback, C., & Redding, S. J. (2020). JUE insight: How much does COVID-19
increase with mobility? Evidence from New York and four other U.S. cities. Journal of
Urban Economics, October, 103292. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jue.2020.103292
Hadjidemetriou, G. M., Sasidharan, M., Kouyialis, G., & Parlikad, A. K. (2020). The impact of
government measures and human mobility trend on COVID-19 related deaths in the UK.
Transportation Research Interdisciplinary Perspectives, 6(March), 100167.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trip.2020.100167
Huang, X., Li, Z., Jiang, Y., Li, X., & Porter, D. (2020a). Twitter reveals human mobility
dynamics during the COVID-19 pandemic. PLoS ONE, 15(November 11), 1–21.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0241957
Huang, X., Li, Z., Jiang, Y., Ye, X., Deng, C., Zhang, J., & Li, X. (2020b). The characteristics of
multi-source mobility datasets and how they reveal the luxury nature of social distancing in
the U.S. during the COVID-19 pandemic. https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.31.20143016
Iacus, S. M., Santamaria, C., Sermi, F., Spyratos, S., Tarchi, D., & Vespe, M. (2020). Human
mobility and COVID-19 initial dynamics. Nonlinear Dynamics, 101(3), 1901–1919.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11071-020-05854-6
Jiang, P., Fu, X., Fan, Y. Van, Klemeš, J. J., Chen, P., Ma, S., & Zhang, W. (2021). Spatialtemporal potential exposure risk analytics and urban sustainability impacts related to
COVID-19 mitigation: A perspective from car mobility behaviour. Journal of Cleaner
Production, 279. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2020.123673
Kraemer, M. U. G., Yang, C. H., Gutierrez, B., Wu, C. H., Klein, B., Pigott, D. M., du Plessis,
L., Faria, N. R., Li, R., Hanage, W. P., Brownstein, J. S., Layan, M., Vespignani, A., Tian,
H., Dye, C., Pybus, O. G., & Scarpino, S. V. (2020). The effect of human mobility and
control measures on the COVID-19 epidemic in China. Science, 368(6490), 493–497.
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.abb4218

Lasry, A., Kidder, D., Hast, M., Poovey, J., Sunshine, G., … Willis, M. (2020). Timing of
Community Mitigation and Changes in Reported COVID-19 and Community Mobility ―
Four U.S. Metropolitan Areas, February 26–April 1, 2020. MMWR. Morbidity and
Mortality Weekly Report. https://doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6915e2
Li, Q., Bessell, L., Xiao, X., Fan, C., Gao, X., & Mostafavi, A. (2020). Disparate Patterns of
Movements and Visits to Points of Interests Located in Urban Hotspots across U.S.
Metropolitan Cities during COVID-19. ArXiv, June.
Linka, K., Goriely, A., & Kuhl, E. (2020). Global and local mobility as a barometer for COVID19 dynamics. MedRxiv : The Preprint Server for Health Sciences, 1–26.
https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.13.20130658
Louail, T., Lenormand, M., Cantu Ros, O. G., Picornell, M., Herranz, R., Frias-Martinez, E.,
Ramasco, J. J., & Barthelemy, M. (2014). From mobile phone data to the spatial structure of
cities. Scientific Reports, 4, 1–12. https://doi.org/10.1038/srep05276
Maas, P., Gros, A., McGorman, L., Alex Dow, P., Iyer, S., Park, W., & Nayak, C. (2019).
Facebook disaster maps: Aggregate insights for crisis response & recovery. Proceedings of
the International ISCRAM Conference.
Rader, B., Scarpino, S. V., Nande, A., Hill, A. L., Adlam, B., Reiner, R. C., … Kraemer, M. U.
G. (2020). Crowding and the shape of COVID-19 epidemics. Nature Medicine,
26(December). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-020-1104-0
Thompson, C. N., Baumgartner, J., Pichardo, C., Toro, B., Li, L., Arciuolo, R., & Chan, P. Y.
(2020). COVID-19 Outbreak — New York City , February 29 – June 1 , 2020. 69(46),
1725–1729.
WHO Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19) Dashboard | WHO Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19)
Dashboard. (n.d.). Retrieved January 15, 2021, from https://covid19.who.int/
Xiong, C., Hu, S., Yang, M., Luo, W., & Zhang, L. (2020). Mobile device data reveal the
dynamics in a positive relationship between human mobility and COVID-19 infections.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 117(44),
27087–27089. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2010836117
Yabe, T., Tsubouchi, K., Fujiwara, N., Wada, T., Sekimoto, Y., & Ukkusuri, S. V. (2020). Noncompulsory measures sufficiently reduced human mobility in Tokyo during the COVID-19
epidemic. Scientific Reports, 10(1), 1–9. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020-75033-5
Zhou, Y., Xu, R., Hu, D., Yue, Y., Li, Q., & Xia, J. (2020). Effects of human mobility
restrictions on the spread of COVID-19 in Shenzhen, China: a modelling study using
mobile phone data. The Lancet Digital Health, 2(8), e417–e424.
https://doi.org/10.1016/S2589-7500(20)30165-5

