Data-Driven Methods for Present and Future Pandemics:
Monitoring, Modelling and Managing ?
Teodoro Alamoa , Daniel G. Reinab , Pablo Millán Gatac , Victor M. Preciadod , Giulia Giordanoe
a Departamento

de Ingenierı́a de Sistemas y Automática, Universidad de Sevilla, Escuela Superior de Ingenieros, Sevilla
de Ingenierı́a Electrónica, Universidad de Sevilla, Escuela Superior de Ingenieros, Sevilla
c Departamento de Ingenierı́a, Universidad Loyola Andalucı́a, Seville, Spain
d Department of Electrical and Systems Engineering, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, USA
e Department of Industrial Engineering, University of Trento, Trento, Italy

arXiv:2102.13130v2 [eess.SY] 30 May 2021

b Departamento

Abstract
This survey analyses the role of data-driven methodologies for pandemic modelling and control. We provide a
roadmap from the access to epidemiological data sources to the control of epidemic phenomena. We review the
available methodologies and discuss the challenges in the development of data-driven strategies to combat the spreading of infectious diseases. Our aim is to bring together several different disciplines required to provide a holistic
approach to epidemic analysis, such as data science, epidemiology, and systems-and-control theory. A 3M-analysis is
presented, whose three pillars are: Monitoring, Modelling and Managing. The focus is on the potential of data-driven
schemes to address three different challenges raised by a pandemic: (i) monitoring the epidemic evolution and assessing the effectiveness of the adopted countermeasures; (ii) modelling and forecasting the spread of the epidemic; (iii)
making timely decisions to manage, mitigate and suppress the contagion. For each step of this roadmap, we review
consolidated theoretical approaches (including data-driven methodologies that have been shown to be successful in
other contexts) and discuss their application to past or present epidemics, such as Covid-19, as well as their potential
application to future epidemics.
Keywords: Pandemic control, epidemiological models, machine learning, forecasting, surveillance systems,
epidemic control, optimal control, model predictive control.

1. Introduction
The 2019 coronavirus pandemic (Covid-19) is one
of the most critical public health emergencies in recent
human history. While facing this pandemic, governments, public institutions, healthcare professionals, and
researches of different disciplines address the problem
of effectively controlling the spread of the virus while
minimizing the negative effects on both the economy
? The authors belong to the CONtrol COvid-19 Team, including
more than 35 researches from universities of Spain, Italy, France,
Germany, United Kingdom and Argentina. The main goal of the
CONCO-Team is to develop data-driven methods to better understand
and control the Covid-19 pandemic.
This work was supported by the Agencia Estatal de Investigación (AEI)-Spain under Grant PID2019-106212RBC41/AEI/10.13039/501100011033. VP acknowledges the support of
the US National Science Foundation under grants CAREER-ECCS1651433 and NSF-III-200884556. GG acknowledges the support of
the Strategic Grant MOSES at the University of Trento.

Preprint submitted to Journal Name

and society. The challenges raised by this pandemic
require a holistic approach. In this document, we analyze the interplay between data science, epidemiology
and control theory, which is crucial to understand and
manage the spread of diseases both in human and animal populations. In line with current epidemiological
needs, this paper aims to review available methodologies, while anticipating the difficulties and challenges
encountered in the development of data-driven strategies to combat pandemics. We consider the Covid-19
pandemic as a case study and summarise some lessons
learned from this pandemic with the hope of improving
our preparedness at handling future outbreaks.
In the context of epidemics outbreaks, data-driven
tools are fundamental to: (i) monitor the spread of the
epidemic and assess the potential impact of adopted
countermeasures, not only from a healthcare perspective but also from a socioeconomic one; (ii) model and
forecast the epidemic evolution; (iii) manage the epiJune 1, 2021

demic by making timely decisions to mitigate and suppress the contagion. Optimal decision making in the
context of a pandemic is a complex process involving
a significant amount of uncertainty; at the same time,
not reacting timely and with adequate intensity, even in
the presence of overwhelming uncertainties, can lead to
severe consequences. This survey provides a holistic
roadmap that encompasses from the process of retrieving epidemiological data to the decision-making process aimed at controlling, mitigating and preventing the
epidemic spread. A 3M-analysis is proposed, covering
three main aspects: Monitoring, Modelling and Managing, as shown in Figure 1. A more detailed document,
focused on the Covid-19 pandemic, can be found in the
preprint [3]. Each step of this roadmap is presented
through a review of consolidated theoretical methods
and a discussion of their potential to help us understand and control pandemics. When possible, examples of applications of these methodologies on past or
current epidemics are provided. Data-driven methodologies that have proven successful in other biological
contexts, or have been identified as promising solutions
in the Covid-19 pandemic, are highlighted. This survey
does not provide an exhaustive enumeration of methodologies, algorithms and applications. Instead, it is conceived to serve as a bridge between those disciplines required to develop a holistic approach to the epidemic,
namely: data science, epidemiology, and control theory.
Data are a fundamental pillar to understand, model,
forecast, and manage many of the aspects required to
provide a comprehensive response against an epidemic,
or pandemic, outbreak. There exist many different open
data resources and institutions providing relevant information not only in terms of specific epidemiological
variables but also of other auxiliary variables that facilitate the assessment of the effectiveness of the implemented interventions (see [5] for a review on open data
resources and repositories for the Covid-19 case). Since
the available epidemiological data suffer from severe
limitations, methodologies to detect anomalies in the
raw data and generate time-series with enhanced quality
(like data reconciliation, data-fusion, data-clustering,
signal processing, to name just a few) play a crucial role.
Another important aspect of the 3M-approach is the
real-time surveillance of the epidemic, which can be implemented by monitoring mobility, using social media
to assess the compliance to restrictions and recommendations, pro-active testing, contact-tracing, etc. The design and implementation of surveillance systems capable of early detecting secondary epidemic waves is also
very important.
Modelling techniques are also fundamental in the

Figure 1: 3M-Approach to data-driven control of an epidemic: Monitoring, Modelling and Managing.

fight against pandemics. Epidemiological models range
from coarse compartmental models to complex networked and agent-based models. Fundamental parameters characterizing the dynamics of the virus can be
identified using these models. Besides, data-driven parameter estimation provides mechanisms to forecast the
epidemic evolution, as well as to anticipate the effectiveness of adopted interventions. However, fitting the
models to the available data requires specific techniques
because of critical issues like partial observation, nonlinearities and non-identifiability. Sensitivity analysis,
model selection and validation methodologies have to
be implemented [153], [40]. Apart from the forecasting possibilities that epidemiological models offer, alternative forecasting techniques from the field of data
science can be applied in this context. The choice
ranges from simple linear parametric methods to complex deep-learning approaches. The methods can be
parametric or non-parametric in nature. Some of these
techniques provide probabilistic characterizations of the
provided forecasts.
Several measures to mitigate the epidemic can be
found in the literature, but one needs to be careful about
their effectiveness [237]. Some measures, like an aggressive lockdown of an entire country, have a devas2

tating effect on the economy and they might be adopted
at very precise moments, preferably as early as possible and for short time periods. Other measures, like
pro-active testing and contact-tracing, can be very effective while having a minor impact on the economy
[75]. In this direction, control theory provides a consolidated framework to formulate and solve many relevant
decision-making problems [168], such as the optimal allocation of resources (e.g. test reagents and vaccines)
and the determination of the optimal time to implement
certain interventions. The use of optimal control theory and (distributed) model predictive control has great
potential in epidemic control. Mathematical tools from
the fields of control theory and dynamic systems, such
as bifurcation theory and Lyapunov theory, have been
extensively used to characterize the different possible
qualitative behaviours of epidemics.
This survey is organized as follows: Section 2 describes different methodologies to monitor the current
state of a pandemic. An overview of different techniques to model an epidemic is provided in Section 3.
The main forecasting techniques are described in Section 4. The question of how to assess the effectiveness
of different non-pharmaceutical measures is analyzed in
Section 5. The decision making process and its link with
control theory is addressed in Section 6. The review paper is finished with a section describing some conclusions and lessons learned.

In this section, we cover the most relevant techniques
to monitor the state of the pandemic, focusing on approaches oriented towards (i) real-time monitoring of
different aspects of the pandemic (real-time epidemiology); (ii) early detection of infected cases and immune response estimation (pro-active testing); (iii) estimation of the current fraction of infected population,
both symptomatic and asymptomatic (state estimation
methods); (iv) early detection of new waves (epidemic
wave surveillance).
2.1. Real-time epidemiology
The use of a large number of real-time data streams
to infer the status and dynamics of a population’s health
presents enormous opportunities as well as significant
scientific and technological challenges [27], [247], [64].
Real-time epidemic data can vary widely in nature and
origin (e.g., mobile phone data, social media data, IoT
data and public health systems) [5], [218]. During
the Covid-19 pandemic, mobile phone data, when used
properly and carefully, have provided invaluable information for supporting public health actions across early,
middle, and late-stage pandemic phases [174]. Voluntary installation of Covid-19 apps or web-based tools
have allowed the active retrieval of data related to exposure and infections. The information stemming from
these sources has provided real-time epidemiological
data that have then been used to identify hot spots for
outbreaks [64]. Social media have also been relevant to
assess the mobility of the population and its awareness
with regard to physical distancing, as well as the state
of the economy and many other key indicators [250].
Our ability to extract information regarding population mobility is essential to predict spatial transmission,
identify risk areas, and decide control measures against
the disease. Nowadays, the most effective tool to access
real-time mobility data is through Big Data technologies
and Geographic Information Systems (GIS). These systems have played a relevant role when addressing past
epidemics like SARS and MERS [178], providing efficient aggregation of multi-source big data, rapid visualization of epidemic information, spatial tracking of confirmed cases, surveillance of regional transmission and
spatial segmentation of the epidemic risk [250], [233].

2. Monitor– Estimation of the state of a pandemic
There is a plethora of indicators that can be monitored in order to contain a pandemic. This includes
not only estimations of the current incidence of the disease in the population and the healthcare system, but
also the (daily) surveillance of measures that directly
or indirectly affect its spread, such as physical distancing and mobility, as well as testing and contact tracing.
In order to design an effective response to an epidemic
outbreak, it is of utmost importance to build up-to-date
estimations of the epidemic state. This estimation process is hindered by the presence of an incubation period
of the infectious disease, which introduces a time-delay
between the beginning of a new infection and its potential detection. Another challenge in the estimation
process is the presence of infectious but asymptomatic
cases, which is an important transmission vector in the
case of several pathogens, including HIV, Zika virus and
SARS-CoV-2 [75]. These (and other) challenges motivate the need for specific surveillance and estimation
methodologies capable of using available information in
order to design quick and effective control measures [4].

2.2. Proactive testing
Proactive testing is key in the control of infectious
diseases, since it allows us to identify and isolate infected individuals. It also provides relevant information
to identify risk areas, fraction of asymptomatic carriers,
and attained levels of immunization in the population
3

[235], [241]. There are different methodologies to approach proactive testing:

These methodologies are essential both to the estimation problem and to the inference of the parameters that
describe the model (see [205] and [1]).

• Risk-based approach: In this approach, one must
test first those individuals with the highest probability of being carriers of the disease (i.e. not
only those with symptoms, but also those who have
been heavily exposed to the disease). For example,
healthcare workers are at high risk and can also be
relevant transmission vectors. Second, test those
individuals that have been exposed to a confirmed
case according to contact tracing. Finally, test
those individuals who have recently travelled to hot
spots [233]. The determination of hot spots can
be done by means of government mobility surveillance or by personal software environments [64].

2.4. Epidemic wave surveillance
Infectious diseases often lead to recurring epidemic
waves interspersed with periods of low-level transmission, as observed, for example, in the “Spanish” flu
[192], Influenza [224] and Covid-19 [87]. In this context, it is crucial to implement a surveillance system able
to detect, or even predict, recurring epidemic waves,
so as to enable an immediate response aiming to reduce the potential burden of the outbreak. Detecting
outbreaks requires methodologies able to process huge
amount of data stemming from various surveillance systems [13], [65], [68] and determine whether the spread
of the virus has surpassed a threshold requiring mitigation measures; see, e.g. [135]. A large body of literature
focuses on epidemiological detection problems, since
many infectious diseases undergo considerable seasonal
fluctuations with peaks seriously impacting the healthcare systems [211], [222]. National surveillance systems are implemented world-wide to rapidly detect outbreaks of influenza-like illnesses, and assess the effectiveness of influenza vaccines [224], [215]. Specific
methodologies to determine the baseline influenza activity and epidemic thresholds have been proposed and
implemented [225]. These methods aim at reducing
false alarms and detection lags. Outbreak detection can
be implemented in different ways that range from simple predictors based on moving average filters [73] and
fusion methods [65] to complex spatial and temporal
analyses [51], [22].
In the early phases of a new pandemic, such as the
recent Covid-19, the detection of recurring epidemic
waves is particularly challenging because: (i) historical seasonal data are lacking, (ii) determining the current fraction of infected population can be difficult when
many asymptomatic infected are present, and (iii) determining baselines and thresholds requires a precise characterization of the regional (time-varying) reproduction
number.

• Voucher-based system: In this system, people
who test positive are given an anonymous voucher
that they can share with a limited number of people
whom they think might have infected. The recipients can use this voucher to book a test and receive their test results without ever revealing their
identity. People receiving positive result are given
vouchers to further backtrack the path of infection;
see [197] and [164] for the Covid-19 case.
• Serology studies: Some tests (such as RT-PCR
revealing viral load) are unable to detect past infection. Conversely, serological tests, carried out
within the correct time frame after disease onset,
can detect both active and past infections, since
they detect antibodies produced in response to the
disease. Serological analysis can be useful to identify clusters of cases, to retrospectively delineate
transmission chains, to ascertain how long transmission has been ongoing, or to estimate the fraction of asymptomatic individuals in the population
[235].
2.3. State-space estimation methods
As we will see in the next section, dynamic statespace epidemiological models are fundamental to characterize how the virus spreads in a specific region and
estimate time-varying epidemiological variables that are
not directly measurable [49], [203]. Classical statespace estimation methods, like the Kalman filter [194],
are employed to estimate the fraction of currently infected population. The objective of the Kalman filter is
to update our knowledge about the state of the system
whenever a new observation is available [66]. Different
modifications and generalizations of the Kalman filter
have been developed and tailored to epidemic models.

3. Model– Epidemiological models
Mathematical epidemiology is a well-established
field aiming to model the spread of diseases both in human and animal populations [198], [153], [216]. Given
the high complexity of these phenomena, models are
key to understand epidemiological patterns and support
decision making processes [106]. There are in-host
4

models that take into account the complexity of virushost dynamics at the microscopic scale, describing how
the pathogen interacts with cellular biomolecular processes and with the immune system, and between-host
models that describe how the epidemic spreads within
a population at the macroscopic scale, by considering
the contagion either at an aggregate level (compartmental models) or through agent-based networked models
of the population. Approaches for epidemic multi-scale
modelling, which include the interplay between immunological and epidemiological phenomena, are very
recent and mostly rely on partial differential equations,
sometimes reduced to small-size ordinary differentialequation systems, see e.g. [12], [11], [21], [42], [74],
[81], [93], [99]. Multi-scale epidemic modelling with
an interdisciplinary approach integrating epidemiology,
immunology, economy and mathematics is advocated in
[24].

this implies that a substantial proportion of secondary transmission may occur prior to illness onset [105].
• Infectiousness profile: It characterizes the infectiousness of an infected individual over time. For
Covid-19, the median duration of viral shedding
estimation was 20 days in survivors, while the most
prolonged observed duration of viral shedding in
survivors was 37 days [251].
• Basic reproduction number R0 : It represents the
average number of new infections generated by an
infectious person at the early stages of the outbreak, when everyone is susceptible, and no countermeasures have been taken [107], [231], [146].
For the original strain of SARS-CoV-2, first estimations range from 2.24 to 3.58 [248]; the effect
of temperature and humidity in this parameter is
addressed in different studies, see e.g. [157].

3.1. Time-response and viral shedding

The basic reproduction number, along with the serial
interval, can be used to estimate the number of infections that are caused by a single case in a given time period. Without any control measure, at the early stages of
the outbreak, more than 400 people can be infected by
a single Covid-19 case in one month [166]. Estimates
of the basic reproductive number are of interest during
an outbreak because they provide information about the
level of intervention required to interrupt transmission
and about the potential final size of the outbreak [107].
The aforementioned parameters are often inferred
from epidemiological models, once they have been fitted to available data on the number of confirmed infection cases and deaths [198], [231].

In-host infection dynamics capture the interplay between virus and host. Models describing the dynamics
of the immune response [47] in the presence of an infectious disease have been proposed for influenza [96],
[141], [239], [246] and generic viral infections [160].
Very recently an immunological description for Covid19 has been provided [154] and has enabled the characterization of virus-host dynamics for SARS-CoV-2 [2],
[110].
The evolution of a disease and its infectiousness over
time can be characterized through some key epidemiological parameters (see e.g. [107], [231], [227], and
[109]):

3.2. Simple Compartmental models
Compartmental models partition a population into
different groups, called compartments, associated with
mutually exclusive stages of the disease. Each compartment is associated with a variable that counts the individuals who are in that stage of the infection [35].
The simplest compartmental models are the SI, SIS,
and SIR models, introduced by Kermack and McKendrick at the beginning of the 20th century [121]. The
SIR model includes three compartments: Susceptible
(S ), representing healthy individuals susceptible of getting infected, Infected (I), and Recovered/Removed (R).
For possibly fatal diseases, this last compartment can
take into account both recovered (with permanent immunity) and deceased individuals; however, for low
mortality rate diseases, including only recovered individuals can be a good approximation.

• Latency time: Time during which an individual
is infected but not yet infectious. For Covid-19,
initial estimates are of 3-4 days [143].
• Incubation time: Time between infection and onset of symptoms. For Covid-19, the median incubation period is estimated to be 5.1 days, and
97.5% of those who develop symptoms will do so
within 11.5 days of infection [134]; the median
time from the onset of symptoms to death is close
to 3 weeks [251].
• Serial interval: Time between symptom onsets
of successive cases in a transmission chain [227].
For Covid-19, initial estimates of the median serial interval yield a value of around 4 days, which
is shorter than its median incubation period [167];
5

The SIR model describes the dynamics of an epidemic according to the following set of nonlinear differential equations:
dS (t)
dt
dI(t)
dt
dR(t)
dt

=

−βS (t)I(t),

(1)

=

βS (t)I(t) − µI(t),

(2)

=

µI(t),

(3)

where β is the infection rate, while µ is the recovery
rate; the variables S , I and R represent the fraction of
susceptible, infected and recovered (or removed) individuals within the population, and S (t) + I(t) + R(t) = 1
at all times t. At the onset of a new epidemic, S equals
approximately the entire population, and thus from (2)
it holds that I(t) = I0 e(β−µ)t = I0 eµ(R0 −1)t , where I0 represents the initial number of infected I0 = I(0) and
R0 = β/µ is the basic reproduction number, i.e. the
average number of secondary cases produced by an infectious individual when S ≈ 1. Clearly, when R0 is
greater than 1, there is an exponential increase in the
number of infected individuals during the early days of
the epidemic. The same equation can also be used to estimate the point at which the number of newly infected
individuals begins to decrease, S (t) = 1/R0 . At this
point, the given population has reached what is known
as herd immunity [78].
To account for the latency time, an extended version
of the SIR model, called the SEIR model, includes an
extra compartment for Exposed (E) individuals, who
have been infected but are not yet infectious, and are
transitioning into the Infectious compartment at a fixed
rate.

Figure 2: Illustration of an extended compartmental epidemic model
with seven compartments used in [195] to model SARS : Susceptible
(S), Latent (L), Asymptomatic and potientially infectious (I), Symptomatic Diagnosed (Y), Hospitalized that die (HD ), Hospitalized that
recover (HR ) and Recovered R .

modelling seasonal influenza, it is relevant to distinguish between vaccinated and unvaccinated populations
[35]. Many diseases, like malaria, West Nile virus, etc.,
are transmitted not directly from human to human but
by infected animals (usually insects) [214]. For these
cases, the corresponding animal compartments are included in the model. Another relevant factor influencing
what compartments to include in a model is the quantity
and quality of available data. Complex models require
more data to fit the parameters, so in the early stages of
a new disease outbreak simple compartmental models
are often employed.
Many applications of extended compartmental models can be found in the literature. For example, in [195],
the authors use a dynamical compartmental model to
analyze the effective transmission rate of the SARS epidemic in Hong Kong. The model consists of 7 compartments: Susceptible individuals (S) become infected
and enter a latent state (L). They then progress to a
short asymptomatic and potentially infectious state (I)
followed by a symptomatic state that leads to diagnose
(Y) and hospitalization. It is assumed that every symptomatic case is eventually hospitalized and either dies

3.3. Extended Compartmental models
To model the specific dynamics of a given infectious disease, extended compartmental models including additional compartments and transitions are often
proposed. In particular, it is possible to consider symptomatic and asymptomatic compartments, vaccinated
and unvaccinated, the possibility of reinfection after recovery, quarantined individuals, hospitalized, etc. Comprehensive books, surveys and works on compartmental
models and their extensions are [15], [36], [38], [45],
[61], [94], [111].
The number of compartments required to model a disease depends on a variety of factors. For example, when
modeling the dynamics of a new disease, for which no
vaccine is available, it makes no sense to consider the
vaccinated group. However, in other cases, as when
6

(HD ) or, after treatment in the hospital (HR ), recovers
(R) (see Figure 2). In [52], a stochastic SEIR model
is used to estimate the basic reproduction number of
MERS-CoV in the Arabian Peninsula, distinguishing
between cases transmitted by animals and secondary
cases.
In the spread of the Covid-19 pandemic, asymptomatic infected individuals play a crucial role (see [75]
and [85]); the large prevalence of asymptomatic infections makes it harder to detect all cases and, thus,
timely break the contagion chain. In [85], a SIDARTHE
model with eight compartments is proposed. This
model distinguishes between asymptomatic and symptomatic infected, as well as detected and undetected infection cases, and partitions the population into Susceptible, Infected (asymptomatic infected, undetected),
Diagnosed (asymptomatic infected, detected), Ailing
(symptomatic infected, undetected), Recognised (symptomatic infected, detected), Threatened (infected with
life-threatening symptoms, detected), Healed (recovered) and Extinct (dead) individuals. In [75], the
epidemic model includes a transmission rate β that
takes into account the contributions of asymptomatic,
presymptomatic and symptomatic transmissions, as
well as environmental transmission. In both works, the
results indicate that the contribution of asymptomatic
infected to R0 is higher than that of symptomatic infected and other transmission modalities. In fact, symptomatic infected are often rapidly detected and isolated.

mate can substantially alter the dynamics of a given pandemic, specially in the case of high susceptibility [18].
3.5. Spatial epidemiology
Compartmental models are well-suited to describe
the evolution of epidemics in a single, well-mixed population where each individual is assumed to interact with
every other at a common rate (homogeneous contacts).
While this can be a reasonable approximation in some
contexts, it is not appropriate to study the global spread
of a pandemic over a large, geographically dispersed
population. In the last decades, compartmental models
have been successfully extended to spatial epidemiological models in order to analyze spreading phenomena
where spatial patterns need to be more accurately described. Graphs and networks have often been used to
achieve this, see for instance [112], [120], [124], [158],
[168], [177], [140], [172], [171], [176], [175], [252].
Three widely used classes of models are described in
the following sub-subsections.
3.5.1. Meta-population models
Meta-population models integrate two types of dynamics: one related to the disease, typically driven by
a compartmental model, and the other to the mobility of individuals (agent-based model) across the subpopulations that build the meta-population under analysis [91], [19]. As a representative example, in [39]
the authors introduce the notion of effective distance
to capture the spatio-temporal dynamics of epidemics,
combining the SIR model of n = 1, 2, . . . , p populations with mobility among them. The resulting model
for each population is
X
dS n (t)
= −βS n (t)In (t) +
(wnm S m − wmn S n )
dt
m,n

3.3.1. Age-structured models
Age-structured epidemic models incorporate heterogeneous, age-dependent contact rates between individuals [59]. In [238] and [200], stability results for different
age-structured SEIR models are given. For Covid-19,
an age-structured model, aiming at estimating the effect
of physical distancing measures in Wuhan, is presented
in [185]. In [201], a stratified approach is used to model
the epidemic in France.

dIn (t)
dt

=

βS n (t)In (t) − µIn (t)
X
+
(wnm Im − wmn In ),
m,n

dRn (t)
dt

3.4. Seasonal behaviour
Some works have studied the influence of temperature and humidity on the spread of viruses [90], [229].
In the case of Covid-19, it has been reported that both
variables have an effect on the basic reproduction number R0 [157], [115]. This influence might be included in
the epidemic models to capture the seasonal behaviour
of Covid-19; for instance, by considering the parameters β and µ as functions of both temperature and relative humidity. Yet, it remains unclear under which circumstances seasonal and geographic variations in cli-

=

µIn (t) +

X

(wnm Rm − wmn Rn ),

m,n

where wnm is the per capita traffic flux from population m to population n. In [8], the authors use a SEIR
compartmental model together with stochastic datadriven simulations to capture the mobility in all Spanish
provinces. The work focuses on evaluating the effectiveness of containment measures in Spain on February
28th, when a few dozen cases of Covid-19 had been detected. Meta-population models to capture the spatiotemporal dynamics of the Covid-19 epidemics in Italy
7

have been proposed in [26], [83] and [60]. By capturing
both temporal and spatial evolution of epidemics, metapopulation models are also capable of forecasting the
effectiveness of mobility restrictions.

3.6. Computer-based models
Computer-based simulation methods to predict the
spread of epidemics can take into account numerous
factors, such as heterogeneous behavioural patterns,
mobility patterns, both at long and short scales, demographics, epidemiological data, or disease-specific
mechanisms [152], [108]. The real-world accuracy of
mathematical and computational models used in epidemiology has been considerably improved by the integration of large-scale data sets and explicit simulations
of entire populations down to the scale of single individuals. These computational tools have recently gained
importance in the field of infectious disease epidemiology, by providing rationales and quantitative analysis to
support decision-making and policy-making processes
[220]. As a representative example, the Global Epidemic and Mobility simulation framework (GLEAM)
allows performing stochastic simulations of a global
epidemic with different global-local mobility patterns,
as well as data regarding demographics or hospitalization [223].
However, detailed simulation-based methods depend
on a significant number of parameters, which need to be
chosen and fixed for a specific simulation. This is especially difficult in the early days of an epidemic outbreak.
Furthermore, these approaches might not reveal which
factors are actually relevant in the spread of epidemics.
Simpler data-driven tools have also been developed to
overcome these difficulties [152].

3.5.2. Social networks models
Social network models consider that transmission can
only occur along linked or connected individuals [67],
which allows to explicitly model heterogeneity in contact patterns. Small-world networks have been used in
combination with compartmental models to model disease transmission of SARS [210] and Covid-19 [217],
and also to assess the efficacy of contact tracing [123].
In general, network models produce a more accurate
prediction of the disease spread [176]. In particular,
the use of homogeneous compartmental models in populations with heterogeneous contacts tends to underestimate disease burden early in the outbreak and overestimate it towards the end, although for certain kinds
of networks compartmental models can be modified to
prevent this problem [20]. Another interesting aspect
of studying epidemic spreads with network models is
the observation of a percolation phase transition [112],
[177], i.e., an abrupt change in the global dynamics of
the epidemics. Percolation theory has been widely studied in random networks [6]. In the context of epidemic
modelling, the transition phase occurs where isolated
clusters of infected people join to form a giant component that is able to infect many people [98].

3.7. Modelling the effect of containment measures
Controlling an emerging infectious disease requires
both the prompt implementation of countermeasures
and the rapid assessment of their efficacy [48], [94],
[53], [37], [101], [92]. In what follows, we enumerate the most relevant non-pharmaceutical interventions,
focusing on different research works that assess their efficacy.

3.5.3. Self-exciting spatio-temporal point processes
In epidemiology, it is natural to register each new
infection event with a pair (t, x) in which t refers to
time and x to location. The underlying stochastic model
for this kind of data is called spatio-temporal point
process [62]. Since each infection event potentially
causes new ones, an epidemic can be modelled as a
self-exciting spatio-temporal point process in which
the rate of infections depends on the past history of the
process [193], [252]. In this setting, the objective is to
estimate an intensity function which predicts the rate
of infections at any spatial location x and time t [62],
[230]. This modelling framework, which constitutes
a generalization of Hawkes processes [103], permits
the incorporation of the distributions of the duration of
incubation, pre-symptomatic and asymptomatic phases,
along with the modulating effect of time-varying
counter-measures and detection efforts [82].

• Quarantine: Quarantine of diagnosed cases, or
probably infected, is crucial in every epidemic outbreak. In order to model the effect of quarantine,
specific compartments are included in the epidemic
models for SARs [94], [53]. If a significant fraction of the infected population is not diagnosed (or
diagnosed with a significant delay), then the modelling is harder and non-diagnosed groups are included in the models [155], [85], [16].
Quarantine of a whole population (i.e., lockdown)
is the most extreme measure in the scope of physical distancing/mobility restrictions. The extreme
8

impact of Covid-19 yield to the quarantine of the
epicentre of the pandemic (Wuhan) on January
24th, 2020, and the same measures were subsequently adopted in different countries of Europe
and America [83]. In this case, the effect of a lockdown can be modelled by means of time-varying
epidemic models, see e.g. [43].

3.8. Fitting epidemic models to data
Dynamic epidemiological models rely on a set of parameters that have to be tuned in order to provide realistic predictions and/or infer essential features, such as
the (time-varying) effective reproduction number [58],
or the latent period. Fitting epidemic models to data is
a fundamental problem in epidemiology that can be approached in different ways. We can distinguish between
classical methods, in which the parameters of the model
are unknown but fixed, and Bayesian methods, in which
they are assumed to be random variables [131]. Another
classification follows from the accessibility to the populations considered in the compartments of the model:

• Physical distancing: Physical (or social) distancing is another measure promoted by governments,
public and private institutions in an attempt to
reduce disease transmission [185], [162], [182].
Population-wide wearing of masks, capacity reduction on public transport, reducing or stopping
the activity in educational institutions or factories
are examples of this. In [148], the authors conduct a simulation-based analysis to determine the
effects of physical distancing both in public health
and in the economy. Two social network models (regular and small-world networks) are combined with a compartmental SIR model, and the
economic impact takes into account the costs of
individuals falling ill and the cost of a reduction
in social contacts.

• Full access to the evolution of the number of cases
in each compartment: In most models, the parameters that determine the dynamics multiply linear or
bi-linear terms, depending on the current number
of cases in each compartment. This means that a
(vector) equality constraint, that depends (bi-) linearly on the parameters to fit, can be obtained at
each sample time. In the case of linear constraints,
standard linear identification techniques, such as
least-square methods, can be applied to estimate
the parameters that best fit the model to the data.
See, for example, [153, Chapter 6] and [10].

• Mobility restrictions: Governments often introduce long-range or local mobility restrictions
aimed at reducing disease transmission. Spatial
epidemiology is particularly useful to model the effects of such measures. For instance, in [217], the
authors show, by means of a small-world network
model, that the onset of mobility restrictions influences the final size of the outbreak, which is well
below the levels of herd immunity.

• Partial access to the number of cases in each compartment: In many situations, there are no available time series for one or more of the groups considered in the model. This complicates the datafitting process considerably because it is no longer
possible to obtain, in a simple way, the equality
constraints described in the full access case. The
standard approach in this case is to resort to nonlinear identification techniques (see [205] and [1]).
In this context, Monte Carlo based methods (e.g.
Markov Chain Monte Carlo and Sequential Monte
Carlo algorithms) play a crucial role in addressing
the challenges that lie in reconciling predictions
and observations [156].

• Proactive testing: Proactive testing of asymptomatic individuals is very relevant for the monitoring and control of the Covid-19 pandemic [236],
since it allows to isolate infectious individuals and
implement contact tracing strategies, which have
been shown to be crucial for an effective control of
the pandemic [85].

3.8.1. Sensitivity analysis
Sensitivity analysis (SA) is the study of how the uncertainty in the output of a model (numerical or otherwise) can be apportioned to different sources of uncertainty in the model input [202]. See the review paper
[188] on the use of this technique in the context of biological sciences. A monovariate and multivariate sensitivity analysis for a data-fitted SARS model is given in
[14]. The use of SA is common in many research papers
on modelling Covid-19 (see e.g. [72] and [201]).

• Contact tracing: Contact tracing is a widely used
epidemic control measure that aims to identify and
isolate infected individuals by following the social
contacts of individuals that are known to be infectious. A review of contact-tracing based epidemic models for SARS and MERS can be found
in [130]. In [123], a small-world, free-scale network model is combined with a compartmental
model to assess the efficacy of contact tracing.
9

machine learning literature) are used to learn a model
able to predict the future value of an output variable of
interest [30]. In our context, we focus on forecasting
methods aiming to predict the future evolution of epidemiological variables [212], [54]. We find in the literature numerous approaches to forecast temporal variables describing the evolution of Covid-19 [213], [179],
[43], from black-box approaches to estimates based on
learning the internal parameters of compartmental epidemic models. Forecasting in the context of global
pandemics faces many difficulties [114] and requires
the implementation of validation and sensitivity analysis [40]. We now introduce some considerations that
should be taken into account in order to select and train
a suitable forecasting model.
First, we start with some statistical considerations:

3.8.2. Validation and model selection
The ultimate test of the validity of any model is that
its behaviour is in accord with real data. Because of the
simplifications introduced in any mathematical model
of a biological system, we must expect some divergence
between the results of a model and reality, even for the
most carefully collected data and most detailed model.
Different questions arise in this context: (i) How can we
determine if a model describes data well? (ii) How can
we determine the parameter values in a model that are
appropriate for describing real data? These questions
are too broad to have a single answer [10], [228].
Epidemic models depend on their data calibration.
However, many possible models are potentially suited
to analyze the spread of a pandemic in a given moment.
The models are inherently linked to the goal for which
they were envisaged. For a given goal (for example second outbreak detection), different models can be considered. Model selection techniques are used on a regular
basis in epidemiology [180]. They address the problem of choosing, among a set of candidate models, the
most suitable for a given purpose [40]. The selection is
based on different aspects: (i) How the calibrated model
is able to reconcile and match observations and (ii) the
complexity of the model. Under similar adjustment to
observations, simpler models are preferred since they
are more robust from an information-theoretic point of
view [113].
There are often different sets of parameters yielding
a similar fit to data, but providing significantly different estimations of the main characteristics of the spread
of the epidemic (like peak size, reproduction number,
etc.). This issue is known as non-identifiability [196],
[95]. Identifiability issues may lead to inferences that
are driven more by prior assumptions than by the data
themselves [145]. There are some approaches to address this difficulty. The first one is to resort to simplified models (SIR and SEIR models, for example) in
which the number of parameters to adjust is small, see
[196] and [181]. The second one is to use data from
different regions in a not aggregated way, which reduces the probability of parametric over-fitting [76]. In
this context, model selection theory provides systematic
methodologies to determine which model structure best
suits the purposes of the model [40], [180].

• Frequentist versus Bayesian statistical methods: In
the former, probabilities are assigned according to
experiment repetition and occurrence. In the latter,
the parameters of a model are learned using Bayes’
theorem and prior knowledge about the probability
distributions of unknown variables [33].
• Parametric versus non-parametric approaches: In
the former, we assume a parametric function mapping past variables input into future predictions.
This function contains several unknown parameters that are learned using historic time series. In
the non-parametric approach, we do not assume
such a parametric function [149]; for example, one
can make future predictions for a given time series
by analyzing the behavior of historic past behaviors resembling the behavior of the time series under consideration.
Other considerations to keep in mind are:
• The model should be trained with reliable data. If
the available data is poor, the forecasts produced
will be unreliable. In this direction, data-cleaning
techniques such as data reconciliation, standardization, filtering, and outlier detection should be
utilized to improve the quality of the input data collected [7].
• The amount of data collected should be appropriate for the forecasting technique under consideration. For instance, black-box models, such as deep
learning, require vast amounts of data compared
with compartmental models [221], [240]; therefore, while dealing with relatively short time series,
making predictions using compartmental models

4. Model– Forecasting
The task of forecasting a time series can be stated as a
supervised learning problem in which a number of temporal variables (also called predictors or features in the
10

is more appropriate than using deep learning (and
other black-box techniques).

the impact and costs of all possible interventions, as
well as their actuation limits [48], [37]. In this direction, we can quantify the impact of our actions by using
suitable indexes such as the mean reproductive number,
the mortality index, or the unemployment rate or public
debt, to name just a few. Once the decision-maker has
decided how to use these indexes to measure the impact and cost of potential actions, the decision-making
process can be stated as a formal optimization problem
with constraints. For example, the goal could be the
minimization of a weighted index measuring the economic and social impact of our actions while keeping
the reproductive number smaller than one.
We would like to remark that the numerical estimation of certain indexes is not an easy task because they
require the design of data-driven strategies to assess the
effect of each potential decision on different indexes.
This could be done by means of predictive models and
forecasting schemes analyzed in the previous sections.
In some cases, quantifying the effect of one intervention over the spread of an epidemic is a non-trivial task,
since multiple interventions are typically present at the
same time [102]. In these scenarios, correlation analyses, like Pearson Correlation Coefficient (PCC), can be
a naive way to assess causalities. Whenever possible, a
reliable approach to establish causalities is to perform
Randomized Control Trials (RTC) [63], [102]. In an
RTC, a subset of randomly chosen individuals receives
an intervention, while the rest of individuals receives no
intervention. A standard statistical analysis of the observed results can be used to reliably evaluate the impact
of this intervention. In the following subsections, we
discuss a collection of indexes that could be included in
the decision-making process of managing a pandemic.

• Learning procedures should include training, validation, and test phases executed separately. In
other words, available data set should be divided
into three parts, each one used for a different purpose. In the training stage, model parameters are
learned using training data. In the validation step,
one adjusts model hyper-parameters and performs
comparisons with other competing approaches. Finally, the final test of a model should be carried out
with data that has not been used during the training
or validation phases [40].
• Interpretability of the model. While deep learning (and other black-box techniques) may produce high-quality predictions, the obtained model
is hard to interpret; in other words, we typically
do not have an intuitive understanding of why the
model is making a prediction [17]. However, when
policy-makers make critical decisions based on the
forecast of a model, it is important for them to understand why the model is behaving in a certain
way. Therefore, it is sometimes reasonable to use
more interpretable models, with parameters having a clear physical/biological interpretation, even
at the expense of having a lower performance than
with black-box approaches.
5. Model– Impact Assessment Tools
In order to design effective control strategies, it is important to define the control goals first. In the context
of the current pandemic, the ultimate goal is to maintain the spread of the virus within an adequate threshold (e.g., a low level of infection cases [186]), while
minimizing the economic and social impacts of the interventions. Once this goal is quantified in terms of a
cost function, we should then consider the types of interventions that can be taken to achieve our goals, as well
as their associated costs. For example, there are several non-pharmaceutical interventions that can be used
before a vaccine is widely available, such as physical
distancing, border closures, school closures, isolation
of symptomatic individuals, among others (see Section
3.7). Each of these interventions has an associated economic and social cost that should be considered while
making a decision.
In order to use disciplined decision-making techniques, like the ones described below, one needs to
clearly state the control objectives in a precise, quantitative form. Furthermore, it is necessary to quantify

5.1. Spread of the virus and reproductive number
It is natural to express the effectiveness of control
strategies in terms of the effective reproductive number
R(t). As introduced in Section 3, the basic reproduction number R0 determines the potential of an epidemic
to spread exponentially at its early stage by measuring
the number of secondary infections induced by a typical
infectious individual in a population when everyone is
susceptible. In contrast, when an epidemic is ongoing,
the effective reproduction number, denoted by R(t), is
used to quantify the average number of secondary infections per infectious case in a population with both
susceptible and non-susceptible hosts. The effective reproduction number can be used to assess the ability of
available control measures to contain the spread of an
epidemic. By implementing interventions able to maintain R(t) below 1, the incidence of new infections de11

creases and the spread of epidemics fades with time. In
[58], the authors presented a software tool that was validated with 5 different epidemics, including SARS and
influenza. This tool can be used to estimate the daily reproductive number R(t) and its variation in the presence
of vaccination and super-spreading events.
For Covid-19, a numerical analysis of the effective
reproductive number can be found in [72], where, using real data and a SEIR model, the authors estimate
R(t) in Wuhan and quantify the effectiveness of government measures. Based on the number of deaths, in [79],
the Imperial College Covid-19 Response Team used a
semi-mechanistic Bayesian model to estimate the evolution of R(t) when non-pharmaceutical measures, such as
physical distancing, self-isolation, school closure, public events banned, and complete lock-down, were recommended/enforced.
Limitations in the use of R(t) as an assessment tool
stem from the unreliability of available data sources.
As a result, determining the real value of R(t) is difficult. Other indirect measures, like the number of deaths,
ICU cases, saturation of healthcare systems can also be
employed to assess the current epidemic burden, as described in the next subsection.

potential seasonal behaviour of a pandemic. Another issue is the uncertain adherence of the population to the
interventions (see next subsection). In order to partially
circumvent these issues, forecasts of cumulative disease
burden are often looked for. While missing the intensity
and timing of the peaks, these projections can at least
allow to identify areas with heavy present and/or future
pandemic incidence.
5.3. Adherence to interventions and social impact
Analyses of the relationship between risk perception and preventive behaviours can be found in the social epidemiology literature [25], [139]. Moreover, the
level of belief in the effectiveness of recommended behaviours and trust in authorities are important predictors
of adherence to preventive behaviour (see the survey paper [29]), which is fundamental to deploy effective containment strategies [161]. Here, we review some of the
methodologies that could be helpful to design indexes
aiming to monitor the adherence of the population to
interventions and the social burden of the pandemic.
• Social network analysis: Online social networks,
such as Facebook and Twitter, can be used to assess
the impact of an infectious disease on society. People post in these social networks their feelings and
worries. In [208], 530,206 tweets in the USA were
analyzed to measure the social impact of Covid19. The hashtags were classified into six categories, including general covid, quarantine, school
closures, panic buying, lockdowns, frustration and
hope. Thus, the number of tweets in each category
can be used as a metric of social impact and overall
sentiment. Similarly, Weibo microblogging social
network was used in [142] to study the propagation of situational information related to Covid-19
in China. In [116], the political polarization with
regards to Covid-19 in the United States was analyzed using a large Twitter dataset.

5.2. Healthcare systems capacity
The capacity of a country to prevent, detect, and respond to epidemic outbreaks varies widely across countries. The preparedness and resilience of a healthcare
system is a particularly relevant factor to analyze the future impact of an infectious outbreak in the population
[119]. The capacity of a healthcare system to continue
delivering the same level (quantity, quality and equity)
of basic healthcare services and protection to the population can severely degrade during an epidemic outbreak
[31], [69]. At the early stages of the Covid-19 outbreak,
its virulence and high contagiousness quickly saturated
the healthcare system of many cities around the world,
resulting in higher mortality rates [159], [132]. Furthermore, in countries with low capacity, like African and
South American countries, saturation levels are reached
even with a significantly smaller number of cases [226],
[162].
To limit the saturation of healthcare systems and plan
resource distribution effectively, tools that assess the effect of different interventions on the magnitude and timing of the epidemic peak during first and secondary outbreaks (see Sections 3 and 4) are fundamental. However, precise tools to forecast these peaks are challenging to obtain, due to the limitations of the available data
and the time-varying nature of the mitigation efforts and

• Search engines: Online searches made by citizens in search engines, such as Google, Bing, or
Baidu, can be used to measure the social impact
of the epidemic in different locations. Normally,
people try to find information about unknown diseases, drugs, vaccines, and treatments on the Internet. Along this line, the authors of [84] found a
correlation between the relative frequency of certain queries in Google and the percentage of physician visits in which a patient presents influenzalike symptoms. Furthermore, other works have
performed similar studies for other epidemics like
12

Influenza Virus A (H1N1) [57]. Regarding Covid19, in [189], the Baidu engine is used to estimate
the number of new cases of Covid-19 in China by
the number of searches of five keywords, such as
dry cough, fever, chest distress, coronavirus, and
pneumonia. These five keywords showed a high
correlation with the number of new cases.

spreads through the susceptible population out of control and eventually fades out, a mitigated pandemic
presents waves. For example, a first wave grows when
a very transmissible disease appears and decreases due
to, for example, social distancing measures. However,
as soon as social distancing measures are relaxed, a new
wave can appear as long as we have a large number of
individuals susceptible to the infection. To avoid recurrent waves, it is important to put in place surveillance
systems and reactive mechanisms to reduce the potential burden of secondary epidemic waves. The decisionmaking process in this context is complex for many reasons:

• News: The number and the content of posts in
online newspapers can also be used to assess the
spread of the virus. Along this line, in [249], Natural Language Processing (NLP) is used to extract
the relevant features of news media in China.
• Online questionnaires: Another tool for measuring the social impact of a sanitary emergence is through online questionnaires such as
[173] (Spain, 146,728 participants), [190] (China,
52,730 participants) and [126] (UK, 2,500 participants), which were implemented for the Covid-19
pandemic. These questionnaires allow to rapidly
ask citizens multiple questions related to adherence to interventions, as well as psychological, social and economic impact, among other aspects.
The main difficulty is to spread the questionnaires
throughout the population, although social networks and web-based tools help to reach a large
amount of population.

• The presence of uncertainty in some crucial parameters characterizing the spread, such as seasonality, extent and duration of immunity of a new pandemic outbreak [56], [125].
• The difficulties in assessing the quantitative effect
of a specific set of mitigation interventions on the
effective reproduction number [102].
• The possibility of significant non-symptomatic
transmission (as in the case of Covid-19), which
renders some interventions less effective [167],
[182].
• The different regional incidence and adherence to
interventions, which motivates spatially distributed
decisions [206], [60].

• Mobility: One of the most relevant indexes to
understand the spread of a pandemic is mobility
[219]. See Section 8.4 in [5] for a relation of mobility data sets in the context of Covid-19. The
reduction of mobility is not only due to the imposed quarantines and lockdowns by governments
but also due to the increasing population’s fear of
getting infected. In [70], a perceived risk index
of contracting Covid-19 is defined. This metric
measures the individuals’ perception of risk, and it
is determined by several variables, such as prevalence in both local and neighbouring locations, as
well as population demographics. The results in
[70] indicate that a rise of local infection rate from
0% to 0.003% reduces mobility by 2.31%.

• The limited capacity of healthcare systems and
the logistic challenges to address mass testing and
mass vaccination.
• The necessity to mitigate the spread of the epidemic and, at the same time, reduce the socioeconomic impact.
• The time-delay induced by the incubation period
of the disease, as well as the testing system, which
does not allow for a prompt evaluation of the effect
of the implemented actions.
• The difficulties of assessing in a quantitative way
the disruptive effects of the undertaken measures
on relevant macroeconomic variables.

6. Manage– Managing and Decision Making
Deciding which of the far-reaching social and economic restrictions are the most effective to contain the
spread of a disease, as well as the conditions under
which they can be safely lifted, is one of the main
goals of data-driven decision approaches to combat
pandemics. Unlike an unmitigated pandemic, which

In what follows, we analyze under which circumstances the epidemic can be mitigated (controllability
of the pandemic). After that, we also discuss some
methodologies that have been applied to combat infectious diseases, including the Covid-19 pandemic, and
that could potentially be applied in the context of future
13

pandemics. See also the review papers [168], [41] for
the use of control theory in the context of disease control, or [184], [176], [16] for the stability analysis of an
epidemic.

sists in detecting infected cases and setting them
into quarantine [53]. Challenges are posed by relatively short latent periods and by the presence of
many asymptomatic cases, as in the Covid-19 pandemic; then, the impact of quarantine measures depends very much on how fast the detection is taking place. It has been shown that the probability of
effectively controlling the outbreak decreases with
long delays from symptom onset to isolation [109],
[75]. A large prevalence of asymptomatic cases is
indeed an issue due to the significant probability
that transmission occurs before the onset of symptoms (when the median latent delay is smaller than
the median incubation time), hence before the infection can be detected [75], [85].

6.1. Controllability of the pandemic
In this subsection, we review the most important factors determining the controllability of a pandemic: the
aspects that have a relevant impact on the effective reproduction number. We link them with standard epidemic threshold theorems (e.g. [23], [234], [121]).
The epidemic threshold theorem of Kermack and
McKendrick [121], stated in 1927, and in particular its
stochastic form as given by Whittle [234] are fundamental to predict the size and nature of an infectious
disease outbreak. The theorem indicates that, in homogeneously mixed communities, major epidemics can be
prevented by keeping the product of the size of the susceptible population, the infection rate, and the mean duration of the infectious period, sufficiently small [23].
We now discuss how to have an impact on each of these
factors by means of control actions.

6.2. Optimal allocation of limited resources
During a major health crisis, policy makers face
the problem of optimally allocating limited resources,
such as intensive care beds, ventilators, tests, highfiltration masks and Individual Protection Equipment
(IPE), medicines, vaccines, etc. [34], [245]. This fact
has led to the problem of how to ethically and consistently allocate resources [69]. In this context, the term
“resource allocation problem” extends to issues such as
where and when to allocate available resources.
A rigorous and precise allocation method should lead
to the formulation of an optimization problem, composed of a mathematical formulation and efficient algorithms to obtain its numerical solution [97]. In the
mathematical model, resource allocations are the decision variables while the objectives are encoded in cost
functions and equality or inequality constraints. For example, in [245] and [34], budget allocation models for
multiple populations are provided. In [183], a network
model is used to optimally allocate vaccines to eradicate
an initial epidemic outbreak using linear matrix inequalities. An extension of this work to the case of directed
and weighted networks can be found in [184] and [170],
where geometric programming was proposed to find an
optimal solution. The same authors extend this last result to more general compartmental models in [169].
See also [104] for an application of geometric programming and multi-task learning in the context of Covid-19.
In [133] an optimization problem is formulated to
find the number of tests to be performed in the different Italian regions in order to maximize the overall detection capabilities. The problem is a quadratic, convex
optimization program. In [88], a group testing [232]
approach is considered, and it is shown how the optimization of the group size can save between 85% and
95% of tests with respect to individual testing. See also

• Size of the susceptible population: The most effective way to reduce the susceptible population is
by means of vaccines: vaccination campaigns increase herd immunity to a level that prevents further spread of the disease [204], [86]. Protection
against an infectious disease can either be achieved
by widespread vaccination or by repeated waves of
infection over the years, until a large enough fraction of the population is immunized [89]. However, an issue is the duration of the acquired immunity [125], which in some infectious diseases,
like the seasonal influenza, is not long enough to
prevent recurring seasonal peaks [56].
• Infection rate: This factor can be reduced by
means of different control actions like physical distancing, mobility constraints or prohibition of certain activities [129], [165]. Depending on the seasonality and the specific demographic characteristics of a given population, the implemented measures can exhibit a time-varying effect on the infection rate [58], [72]. This might cause flows
from tropical to temperate regions and back in each
hemisphere’s respective winter, limiting opportunities for global disease declines [56] and implying
that surveillance methods to detect a seasonal peak
should be put in place.
• Mean duration of the infectious period: An effective way to reduce the infectious period con14

[241] for a strategy that optimizes testing resources in
the context of the Covid-19 pandemic.
Estimation, forecasting, and impact assessment techniques are often used to allocate resources, as they
enable decision-makers to predict imbalances between
supply and demand and to evaluate the overall efficiency
of different alternatives of allocation. In [69], the authors propose fair resource allocation guidelines in the
time of Covid-19, which can be a reference for future
pandemics. These guidelines come from four fundamental values: (i) maximizing the benefits, (ii) treating
people equally, (iii) promoting instrumental value, and
(iv) giving priority to the worst off. As a result, these
guidelines are condensed in some recommendations:

1. Epidemiological criteria showing that the spread
of the disease has significantly decreased and stabilised for a sustained period of time. This can, for
example, be indicated by a sustained reduction in
the number of new infections, hospitalisations and
patients in intensive care.
2. Sufficient health system capacity, in terms of,
for instance, occupancy rate for Intensive Care
Units; adequate number of hospital beds; access to
pharmaceutical products required in intensive care
units; reconstitution of stocks of equipment; access
to care, in particular for vulnerable groups; availability of primary care structures, as well as sufficient staff with appropriate skills to care for patients discharged from hospitals or maintained at
home and to engage in measures to lift confinement
(testing for example). This criterion is essential
as it indicates that the different national healthcare
systems can cope with future increases in cases after lifting the measures. At the same time, hospitals are likely to face a backlog of elective interventions that had been temporarily postponed during the pandemic peak. Therefore, healthcare systems should have recovered sufficient capacity in
general, and not only related to the management of
Covid-19.
3. Appropriate monitoring capacity, including largescale testing capacity to detect and monitor the
spread of the virus combined with contact tracing
and possibilities to isolate people in case of resurgence and further spread of infections. Antibody
detection capacities, e.g. in the case of Covid-19,
provide complementary data on the share of the
population that has successfully overcome the disease and eventually measure the acquired immunity.

1. To maximize the number of saved lives and lifeyears, with the latter metric subordinated to the former.
2. To prioritize critical interventions for healthcare
workers and others who take care of sick patients
because of their instrumental value.
3. For patients with similar prognoses, equality
should be invoked and operationalized through
random allocation.
4. To distinguish priorities depending on the interventions and the scientific evidence (e.g. vaccines
could be prioritized for older persons while allocation ICU resources depending on prognosis might
mean giving priority to younger patients).
5. People who participate in research to prove the
safety and effectiveness of vaccines and therapeutics should receive some priority for interventions.
6.3. Trigger Control
A strategy to modulate the intensity of nonpharmaceutical interventions consists in implementing
a trigger mechanism to maintain the effective reproduction number close to one, avoiding the saturation of
the healthcare system while reducing, when possible,
the economic and social burden of the pandemic [48],
[184], [60], [28]. The on-line surveillance of the pandemic permits to estimate the time-varying value of the
effective reproduction number. Three cases are possible:
The effective reproduction number is largely under
1: in this case, one could consider lifting one, or more
non-pharmaceutical measures. However, other criteria
should be met in order to implement a reduction on the
confinements measures in a safe way [186]. The three
criteria highlighted by the European Commission to decide on the lifting of confinement measures for Covid19 [71] are:

The effective reproduction number has increased to a
level clearly above 1: this would demand, in most cases,
extremely prompt strengthening of the mitigation interventions. The stringency of the new measures should
guarantee that the healthcare system is not overwhelmed
by a new epidemic wave. This requires the implementation of forecasting tools that help decision-makers to
determine the most suitable set of mitigating measures.
The effective reproductive factor is close to 1: in
this case, a deeper analysis is required. The decision
on whether to keep the same set of current mitigation
measures or not will depend on the current fraction
of infected population, the healthcare system capacity,
and the potentiality of implementing in a short period
of time a mitigating intervention, which is capable of
15

bringing the effective reproductive number to admissible values. That is, the decision could be determined by
the worst-case cost of delaying in one week the implementation of new measures. It is worth stressing that
preemptive actions are always preferable: the earlier a
countermeasure is adopted, the better in terms of its efficacy and potential to save lives [86].
In order to develop a timely and appropriate response,
different methodologies from the field of control theory
are available (see the review paper [168]). Relying on
Pontryagin’s maximum principle, optimal control approaches have been proposed to design optimal treatment plans, or vaccination plans, that minimize the cost
of the epidemics, including both the cost of infection
and the cost of treatment or vaccination [32] [80] [97]
[163]. Robust control approaches have also been proposed to control the spreading of infectious diseases,
seen as uncertain dynamical systems [136] [137]. We
provide more details on optimal control approaches in
the following subsections.

on x(·) and u(·) whereas the (pure) constraint (5) can be
used to impose limits on the size of the components of
x(·). Finally, (6) and (7) are terminal constraints. The
question of existence of optimal pairs (x∗ (·), u∗ (·)) was
studied in [50] and [77]. See also [100, Section 3] and
the references therein.
Pontryagin’s maximum principle provides necessary
conditions that characterize the optimal solutions in the
presence of inequality constraints [144], [122]. These
necessary conditions become sufficient under certain
convexity conditions on the objective and constraint
functions [151], [117]. In general, the solution of the
optimal problem in the presence of nonlinear dynamics and constraints requires iterative numerical methods to solve the so-called Hamiltonian system, which is
a two-point boundary value problem, plus a maximum
(minimum) condition of the Hamiltonian (see e.g. [122,
Chapter 6]).
We now describe some examples of the use of optimal control theory in epidemic control. In [244], the dynamic optimal vaccination strategy for a SIR epidemic
model is described. The optimal solution is obtained using a forward-backward iterative method with a RungeKutta fourth-order solver. An example of how to deploy
scarce resources for disease control when epidemics occur in different but interconnected regions is presented
in [199]. The authors solve the optimal control problem of minimizing the total level of infection when the
control actions are bounded.
In [243] the authors apply Pontryagin’s Theorem to
obtain an optimal Bang-Bang strategy to minimize the
total number of infection cases during the spread of SIR
epidemics in contact networks. Optimal control theory
is employed to design the best policies to control the
spread of seasonal and novel A-H1N1 strains in [187].
An example of the use of optimal control theory to control the present Covid-19 pandemic is presented in [150]
and [104], where the authors design an optimal strategy,
for a five compartmental model, in order to minimize
the number of infected cases while minimizing the cost
of non-pharmaceutical interventions.

6.4. Optimal Control Theory
Optimal control theory [144] can be applied to reduce
in an effective way the burden of an epidemic [138],
[153, Chapter 9]. The dynamic optimization techniques
of the calculus of variations and of optimal control theory provide methods for solving planning problems in
continuous time. The solution is a continuous function
(or a set of functions) indicating the optimal path to be
followed by the variables through time or space [118].
We present here a common formulation of a continuous
dynamical optimization problem [100, Section 2]:
min

x(·),u(·)

S (x(T ), T ) +

ZT
F(x(T ), u(t), t)dt
0

s.t.

x(0) = x0 ,
ẋ = f (x(t), u(t), t),
g(x(t), u(t), t) ≥ 0,

(4)

h(x(t), t) ≥ 0,

(5)

a(x(T ), T ) ≥ 0,

(6)

b(x(T ), T ) = 0.

(7)

6.5. Model Predictive Control
Model predictive control (MPC) provides optimal solutions to a control decision problem subject to constraints [44], [191]. MPC is a receding horizon methodology that involves repeatedly solving a constrained optimization problem, using predictions of future costs,
disturbances, and constraints over a moving time horizon. In epidemic control, the aforementioned optimization problem is solved daily, or weekly, in order to decide the optimal control action (for example, the inten-

In an epidemic control problem x(t) represents the state
of the pandemic at time t (for example, in terms of the
populations of the different compartments), u(t) is the
control action which can be stated in a direct way (intensity of the interventions, number of vaccines, treatments), or in an indirect way (infection rate, immunologic protection, recovery rate). The differential equation ẋ(·) = f (·, ·, ·) represents the epidemic model, inequality (4) allows us to incorporate (mixed) constraints
16

sity of mitigation interventions, or the optimal allocation of resources). The output of the model predictive
controller is adaptive in the sense that it takes into consideration the latest available information on the state
of the pandemic [207], [41]. See, for example, [162],
[128], [9] for MPC formulations that address the control
of the Covid-19 pandemic. See [46] for a review paper
on the application of MPC in the context of Covid-19
pandemic.
Because of the spatial clustered distribution of an epidemic, it is possible to apply specific control techniques
from the field of distributed model predictive control
[147], [55]. For example, non-linear model predictive
control can be used to control the epidemics by solely
acting upon the individuals’ contact pattern or network
[206]. Another example of distributed MPC in the control of epidemics is given in [127], where the problem of
dynamically allocating limited resources (vaccines and
antidotes) to control an epidemic spreading process over
a network is addressed.

been reviewed, without claiming exhaustiveness, given
the huge and continuously growing literature on this
subject. Although the relevant body of literature is extremely large and many approaches have been studied
in the past, further research is still needed. Implementing effective control strategies to mitigate a pandemic is
difficult because of various reasons: (i) the unavoidable
uncertainty affecting some crucial parameters that characterize the spread, including compliance issues due to
the unpredictable human behaviour, (ii) the difficulties
in assessing the quantitative effect of mitigating interventions, (iii) the impossibility of obtaining a prompt
evaluation of the effect of the implemented interventions, due to the intrinsic time-delay, and at the same
time the critical importance of acting quickly, due to the
exponential nature of the spreading phenomenon: even
a small delay in interventions can lead to a much heavier healthcare burden and a much larger death toll (see
e.g. [86]).
The first step for modelling different aspects of the
pandemic is the processing of the available raw data
to obtain consolidated time-series. In order to obtain
predictive models, which are crucial for the decisionmaking process, we have discussed several techniques
from epidemiology and machine learning. We have described the most relevant modelling and forecasting approaches, focusing on the adjustment of the prediction
models to the available data, model selection and validation processes.
Different surveillance systems able to detect, or anticipate, possible recurring epidemic waves have been
surveyed. These systems enable an immediate response
that reduces the potential burden of the outbreak. Different methods from control theory can be applied to
provide an optimal, robust and adaptive response to the
time-varying incidence of an epidemic. These methods
can be applied to the optimal allocation of resources,
useful for testing campaigns and vaccination plans, and
to determine trigger control schemes that modulate the
stringency of the adopted interventions. We have reviewed the control-theory literature focused on the analysis and the design of feedback structures for the efficient control of an epidemic. Besides, we have also
mentioned some techniques from distributed model predictive control that can be applied to control the temporal and spatial evolution of an infectious disease.
Preventing and controlling pandemics will be an increasingly important challenge in the future, due to the
likelihood of new virus spillovers resulting from the increasing ecological footprint of humans. The systems
and control community has powerful tools available to
contribute and take on this fundamental challenge.

6.6. Multi-objective control
Pareto optimality is used in multi-objective control
problems with counter-balanced objectives. For instance, in a counter-balanced bi-objective problem, improving one objective implies to worsen the other one.
Pareto optimality is based on the Pareto dominance,
which defines that one solution dominates another one
if it is strictly superior in all the objectives. Thus, the
goal of the optimization algorithm is to find the Pareto
front, which includes all dominant solutions of the control problem. Therefore, there is a set of optimal solutions instead of one optimal solution. The Pareto front is
a useful tool for decision-makers that allows to visualize all the possible optimal solutions (for two objectives
is a curve, for three objectives a plane, and so forth) and
to evaluate the trade-off between different strategies. In
the context of epidemic control [209], Pareto optimality
has been used in [242] in a bi-objective control problem, the goals are related to epidemic measures like the
number of cases and economic costs.
7. Conclusions
This review has presented a roadmap for controlling
present and future pandemics from a data-driven perspective, based on three pillars: Monitoring, Modelling,
and Managing. We have highlighted the interplay between data science, epidemiology, and control theory to
address the different challenges raised by a pandemic.
Methodologies and approaches proposed for previous epidemics and the present Covid-19 pandemic have
17

References
[20]
[1] Abreu, D., Dutra, A., 2020. Uncertainty estimation in equalityconstrained MAP and maximum likelihood estimation with applications to system identification and state estimation. Automatica 116, 108935.
[2] Abuin, P., Anderson, A., Ferramosca, A., Hernandez-Vargas,
E.A., Gonzalez, A.H., 2020. Characterization of SARS-CoV-2
dynamics in the host. Annual Reviews in Control 50, 457 –
468.
[3] Alamo, T., Reina, D., Millán, P., 2020a. Data-driven methods to monitor, model, forecast and control Covid-19 pandemic: Leveraging data science, epidemiology and control theory. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.01731 .
[4] Alamo, T., Reina, D.G., Gata, P.M., Preciado, V.M., Giordano,
G., 2021. Challenges and future directions in pandemic control. IEEE Control Systems Letters (L-CSS) .
[5] Alamo, T., Reina, D.G., Mammarella, M., Abella, A., 2020b.
Covid-19: Open-data resources for monitoring, modeling, and
forecasting the epidemic. Electronics 9(5), 827.
[6] Albert, R., Barabási, A.L., 2002. Statistical mechanics of complex networks. Reviews of modern physics 74, 47–97.
[7] Albuquerque, J.S., Biegler, L.T., 1996. Data reconciliation and
gross-error detection for dynamic systems. AIChE Journal 42,
2841–2856.
[8] Aleta, A., Moreno, Y., 2020. Evaluation of the potential incidence of COVID-19 and effectiveness of containment measures in Spain: a data-driven approach. BMC medicine 18,
1–12.
[9] Alleman, T., Torfs, E., Nopens, I., 2020. Covid-19: from
model prediction to model predictive control. Technical Report. Ghent University.
[10] Allman, E.S., Rhodes, J.A., 2004. Mathematical Models in
Biology. An Introduction. Cambridge University Press.
[11] Almocera, A.E.S., Hernandez-Vargas, E.A., 2019. Coupling
multiscale within-host dynamics and between-host transmission with recovery (SIR) dynamics. Mathematical Biosciences
309, 34 – 41.
[12] Almocera, A.E.S., Nguyen, V.K., Hernandez-Vargas, E.A.,
2018. Multiscale model within-host and between-host for viral infectious diseases. Journal of Mathematical Biology 77,
1035–1057.
[13] Althouse, B.M., Scarpino, S.V., Meyers, L.A., Ayers, et al.,
2015. Enhancing disease surveillance with novel data streams:
challenges and opportunities. EPJ Data Science 4, 1–8.
[14] Álvarez, E., Donado-Campos, J., Morilla, F., 2015. New coronavirus outbreak. Lessons learned from the severe acute respiratory syndrome epidemic. Epidemiology and Infection 143,
2882–2893.
[15] Anderson, R.M., May, R.M., 1991. Infectious Diseases of Humans: dynamics and control. Oxford University Press.
[16] Ansumali, S., Kaushal, S., Kumar, A., Prakash, M.K.,
Vidyasagar, M., 2020. Modelling a pandemic with asymptomatic patients, impact of lockdown and herd immunity, with
applications to SARS-CoV-2. Annual Reviews in Control 50,
432–447.
[17] Arrieta, A.B., Dı́az-Rodrı́guez, N., Del Ser, J., Bennetot, A.,
Tabik, S., et al., 2020. Explainable Artificial Intelligence
(XAI): Concepts, taxonomies, opportunities and challenges toward responsible AI. Information Fusion 58, 82–115.
[18] Baker, R.E., Yang, W., Vecchi, G.A., Metcalf, C.J.E., Grenfell,
B.T., 2020. Susceptible supply limits the role of climate in the
early SARS-CoV-2 pandemic. Science 369(6501), 315–319.
[19] Ball, F., Britton, T., House, T., Isham, V., Mollison, D., et al.,

[21]

[22]

[23]
[24]

[25]
[26]

[27]

[28]

[29]

[30]
[31]

[32]

[33]
[34]

[35]

[36]
[37]

[38]

18

2015. Seven challenges for metapopulation models of epidemics, including households models. Epidemics 10, 63–67.
Bansal, S., Grenfell, B.T., Meyers, L.A., 2007. When individual behaviour matters: Homogeneous and network models in
epidemiology. Journal of the Royal Society Interface 4, 879–
891.
Barbarossa, M.V., Röst, G., 2015. Immuno-epidemiology of a
population structured by immune status: a mathematical study
of waning immunity and immune system boosting. Journal of
Mathematical Biology 71, 1737–1770.
Batlle, P., Bruna, J., Fernandez-Granda, C., Preciado, V.M.,
2020.
Adaptive test allocation for outbreak detection
and tracking in social contact networks. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2011.01998 .
Becker, N.G., 1977. On a general stochastic epidemic model.
Theoretical Population Biology 11, 23–36.
Bellomo, N., Bingham, R., Chaplain, M.A.J., Dosi, G., Forni,
G., et al., 2020. A multiscale model of virus pandemic: Heterogeneous interactive entities in a globally connected world.
Mathematical Models and Methods in Applied Sciences 30,
1591–1651.
Berkman, L.F., Kawachi, I., Glymour, M.M., 2014. Social epidemiology. Oxford University Press.
Bertuzzo, E., Mari, L., Pasetto, D., Miccoli, S., Casagrandi,
R., et al., 2020. The geography of COVID-19 spread in Italy
and implications for the relaxation of confinement measures.
Nature Communications 11(4264).
Bettencourt, L.M., Ribeiro, R.M., Chowell, G., Lant, T.,
Castillo-Chavez, C., 2007. Towards real time epidemiology:
data assimilation, modeling and anomaly detection of health
surveillance data streams, in: NSF Workshop on Intelligence
and Security Informatics, Springer. pp. 79–90.
Bin, M., Cheung, P., Crisostomi, E., Ferraro, P., Lhachemi,
H., et al., 2021. Post-lockdown abatement of COVID-19 by
fast periodic switching. PLoS Computational Biology 17,
e1008604.
Bish, A., Michie, S., 2010. Demographic and attitudinal determinants of protective behaviours during a pandemic: A review.
British journal of health psychology 15, 797–824.
Bishop, C.M., 2006. Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning. Springer.
Blanchet, K., Nam, S.L., Ramalingam, B., Pozo-Martin, F.,
2017. Governance and capacity to manage resilience of health
systems: towards a new conceptual framework. International
Journal of Health Policy and Management 6, 431–435.
Bloem, M., Alpcan, T., Başar, T., 2009. Optimal and robust
epidemic response for multiple networks. Control Engineering
Practice 17, 525 – 533.
Bonamente, M., 2013. Statistics and analysis of scientific data.
Springer.
Brandeau, M.L., Zaric, G.S., Richter, A., 2003. Resource allocation for control of infectious diseases in multiple independent populations: Beyond cost-effectiveness analysis. Journal
of Health Economics 22, 575–598.
Brauer, F., 2008. Compartmental models in epidemiology, in:
Brauer, F., van den Driessche, P., Wu, J. (Eds.), Mathematical
Epidemiology. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, pp. 19–79.
Brauer, F., Castillo-Chavez, C., 2012. Mathematical models in
population biology and epidemiology. Springer, 2nd edition.
Brauner, J.M., Mindermann, S., Sharma, M., Johnston, D., Salvatier, et al., 2020. Inferring the effectiveness of government
interventions against COVID-19. Science , eabd9338doi:10.
1126/science.abd9338.
Breda, D., Diekmann, O., de Graaf, W.F., Pugliese, A., Vermiglio, R., 2012. On the formulation of epidemic models (an

[39]

[40]

[41]

[42]

[43]

[44]
[45]

[46]

[47]
[48]

[49]

[50]

[51]

[52]

[53]

[54]

[55]

[56]
[57]

appraisal of Kermack and McKendrick). Journal of Biological
Dynamics 6, 103–117.
Brockmann, D., Helbing, D., 2013. The hidden geometry of
complex, network-driven contagion phenomena. Science 342,
1337–1342.
Burnham, K.P., Anderson, D.R., 2010. Model Selection and
Multimodel Inference: A practical Information Theoretic Approach. Second ed., Springer.
Bussell, E.H., Dangerfield, C.E., Gilligan, C.A., Cunniffe,
N.J., 2019. Applying optimal control theory to complex epidemiological models to inform real-world disease management. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 374,
20180284.
Cai, L., Tuncer, N., Martcheva, M., 2017. How does withinhost dynamics affect population-level dynamics? Insights from
an immuno-epidemiological model of malaria. Mathematical
Methods in the Applied Sciences 40, 6424–6450.
Calafiore, G.C., Novara, C., Possieri, C., 2020. A time-varying
SIRD model for the COVID-19 contagion in Italy. Annual reviews in control 50, 361–372.
Camacho, E.F., Bordons, C., 2013. Model predictive control.
Springer Science & Business Media.
Capasso, V., Serio, G., 1978. A generalization of the KermackMcKendrick deterministic epidemic model. Mathematical Biosciences 42, 43 – 61.
Carli, R., Cavone, G., Epicoco, N., Scarabaggio, P., Dotoli,
M., 2020. Model predictive control to mitigate the COVID19 outbreak in a multi-region scenario. Annual Reviews in
Control , 373–393.
Castiglione, F., Celada, F., 2015. Immune System Modeling
and Simulation. CRC Press, Taylor & Francis Group.
Cauchemez, S., Boëlle, P.Y., Thomas, G., Valleron, A.J., 2006.
Estimating in real time the efficacy of measures to control
emerging communicable diseases. American Journal of Epidemiology 164, 591–597.
Cazelles, B., Chau, N.P., 1997. Using the Kalman filter and
dynamic models to assess the changing HIV/AIDS epidemic.
Mathematical Biosciences 140, 131–154.
Cesari, L., 1965. Existence Theorems for Optimal Solutions in
Pontryagin and Lagrange Problems. Journal of the Society for
Industrial and Applied Mathematics Series A Control 3, 475–
498.
Chan, T., King, C., 2011. Surveillance and Epidemiology of Infectious Diseases using Spatial and Temporal Clustering Methods, in: Zeng, D., Chen, H., Castillo-Chavez, C., Lober, W.,
Thurmond, M. (Eds.), Infectious Disease Informatics and Biosurveillance. Springer, pp. 207–234.
Chowell, G., Blumberg, S., Simonsen, L., Miller, M.A., Viboud, C., 2014. Synthesizing data and models for the spread of
MERS-CoV, 2013: Key role of index cases and hospital transmission. Epidemics 9, 40–51.
Chowell, G., Fenimore, P.W., Castillo-Garsow, M.A., CastilloChavez, C., 2003. SARS outbreaks in Ontario, Hong Kong
and Singapore: the role of diagnosis and isolation as a control
mechanism. Journal of theoretical biology 224(1), 1–8.
Chowell, G., Tariq, A., Hyman, J.M., 2019. A novel subepidemic modeling framework for short-term forecasting epidemic waves. BMC Medicine 17:164.
Christofides, P.D., Scattolini, R., Muñoz de la Peña, D., Liu,
J., 2013. Distributed model predictive control: A tutorial review and future research directions. Computers & Chemical
Engineering 51, 21 – 41.
Cobey, S., 2020. Modeling infectious disease dynamics. Science 368, 713–714.
Cook, S., Conrad, C., Fowlkes, A.L., Mohebbi, M.H., 2011.

[58]

[59]

[60]

[61]

[62]
[63]

[64]

[65]

[66]
[67]

[68]

[69]

[70]

[71]

[72]

[73]

[74]

[75]

19

Assessing Google Flu trends performance in the United States
during the 2009 influenza virus A (H1N1) pandemic. PLoS
ONE 6(8), e2361.
Cori, A., Ferguson, N.M., Fraser, C., Cauchemez, S., 2013.
A new framework and software to estimate time-varying reproduction numbers during epidemics. American Journal of
Epidemiology 178(9), 1505–1512.
Del Valle, S., Hyman, J.M., Chitnis, N., 2013. Mathematical
models of contact patterns between age groups for predicting
the spread of infectious diseases. Mathematical Biosciences
and Engineering 10, 1475–1497.
Della Rossa, F., Salzano, D., Di Meglio, A., De Lellis, F., Coraggio, M., et al., 2020. A network model of Italy shows that intermittent regional strategies can alleviate the COVID-19 epidemic. Nature Communications 11(5106), 1–9.
Diekmann, O., Heesterbeek, J.A.P., 2000. Mathematical epidemiology of infectious diseases: Model building, analysis and
interpretation. Wiley.
Diggle, P.J., 2006. Spatio-temporal point processes: methods
and applications. volume 107. Chapman & Hall.
Donner, A., Klar, N., 1994. Cluster randomization trials in
epidemiology: theory and application. Journal of Statistical
Planning and Inference 42, 37 – 56.
Drew, D.A., Nguyen, L.H., Steves, C.J., Menni, C., Freydin,
M., et al., 2020. Rapid implementation of mobile technology
for real-time epidemiology of COVID-19. Science 368(6497),
1362–1367.
Dubrawski, A., 2011. Detection of events in multiple streams
of surveillance data, in: Zeng, D., Chen, H., Castillo-Chavez,
C., Lober, W., Thurmond, M. (Eds.), Infectious Disease Informatics and Biosurveillance. Springer, pp. 145–171.
Durbin, J., Koopman, S.J., 2012. Time Series Analysis by State
Space Methods. Second ed., Oxford University Press.
El-Sayed, A.M., Scarborough, P., Seemann, L., Galea, S.,
2012. Social network analysis and agent-based modeling in
social epidemiology. Epidemiologic Perspectives and Innovations 9, 1–9.
Elliot, A.J., Harcourt, S.E., Hughes, H.E., Loveridge, P., Morbey, R.A., et al., 2020. The COVID-19 pandemic: A new challenge for syndromic surveillance. Epidemiology and Infection
148, e122, 1–5.
Emanuel, E.J., Persad, G., Upshur, R., Thome, B., Parker, M.,
et al., 2020. Fair allocation of scarce medical resources in the
time of Covid-19. The New England journal of medicine , 1–7.
Engle, S., Stromme, J., Zhou, A., 2020. Staying at Home:
Mobility Effects of COVID-19. SSRN Electronic Journal
doi:10.2139/ssrn.3565703.
European Commission, 2020. Joint European Roadmap towards lifting COVID-19 containment measures. Technical Report. European Commission.
Fang, Y., Nie, Y., Penny, M., 2020. Transmission dynamics of
the COVID-19 outbreak and effectiveness of government interventions: A data-driven analysis. Journal of Medical Virology
, 1–15.
Farrington, C., Andrews, N.J., Beale, A., Catchpole, M., 1996.
A statistical algorithm for the early detection of outbreaks of
infectious disease. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series A (Statistics in Society) 159, 547–563.
Feng, Z., Cen, X., Zhao, Y., Velasco-Hernandez, J.X., 2015.
Coupled within-host and between-host dynamics and evolution
of virulence. Mathematical Biosciences 270, 204 – 212.
Ferretti, L., Wymant, C., Kendall, M., Zhao, L., et al.,
2020. Quantifying SARS-CoV-2 transmission suggests epidemic control with digital contact tracing. Science 368,
eabb6936.

[76] Fiacchini, M., Alamir, M., 2021. The Ockham’s razor applied
to COVID-19 model fitting french data. Annual Reviews in
Control .
[77] Filippov, A., 1962. On Certain Questions in the Theory of Optimal Control. Journal of the Society for Industrial and Applied
Mathematics Series A Control 1, 76–84.
[78] Fine, P., Eames, K., Heymann, D.L., 2011. “Herd immunity”:
a rough guide. Clinical infectious diseases 52, 911–916.
[79] Flaxman, S., Mishra, S., Gandy, A., Unwin, H.J.T., Mellan,
T.A., Coupland, H., Whittaker, C., Zhu, H., Berah, T., Eaton,
J.W., et al., 2020. Estimating the effects of non-pharmaceutical
interventions on COVID-19 in Europe. Nature 584, 257–261.
[80] Forster, G.A., Gilligan, C.A., 2007. Optimizing the control of
disease infestations at the landscape scale. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences 104, 4984–4989.
[81] Gandolfi, A., Pugliese, A., Sinisgalli, C., 2015. Epidemic dynamics and host immune response: a nested approach. Journal
of Mathematical Biology 70, 399–435.
[82] Garetto, M., Leonardi, E., Torrisi, G.L., 2021. A timemodulated Hawkes process to model the spread of COVID-19
and the impact of countermeasures. Annual Reviews in Control doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.arcontrol.2021.
02.002.
[83] Gatto, M., Bertuzzo, E., Mari, L., Miccoli, S., Carraro, L.,
Casagrandi, R., Rinaldo, A., 2020. Spread and dynamics of
the COVID-19 epidemic in Italy: Effects of emergency containment measures. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences 117, 10484–10491.
[84] Ginsberg, J., Mohebbi, M.H., Patel, R.S., Brammer, L.,
Smolinski, M.S., Brilliant, L., 2009. Detecting influenza epidemics using search engine query data. Nature 457, 1012–
1014.
[85] Giordano, G., Blanchini, F., Bruno, R., Colaneri, P., Di Filippo, A., Di Matteo, A., Colaneri, M., 2020. Modelling the
COVID-19 epidemic and implementation of population-wide
interventions in Italy. Nature Medicine 26, 855–860.
[86] Giordano, G., Colaneri, M., Di Filippo, A., Blanchini,
F., Bolzern, P., De Nicolao, G., Sacchi, P., Colaneri, P.,
Bruno, R., 2021. Modeling vaccination rollouts, SARSCoV-2 variants and the requirement for non-pharmaceutical
interventions in Italy.
Nature Medicine doi:10.1038/
s41591-021-01334-5.
[87] Glass, D.H., 2020. European and US lockdowns and second
waves during the COVID-19 pandemic. Mathematical Biosciences 330, 108472.
[88] Gollier, C., Grossner, O., 2020. Group Testing Against Covid19. Covid Economics 2.
[89] Graham, B.S., 2020. Rapid COVID-19 vaccine development.
Science 368, 945–946.
[90] Grassly, N.C., Fraser, C., 2006. Seasonal infectious disease
epidemiology. Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological
Sciences 273, 2541–2550.
[91] Grenfell, B., Harwood, J., 1997. (Meta) population dynamics
of infectious diseases. Trends in ecology & evolution 12, 395–
399.
[92] Guan, L., Prieur, C., Zhang, L., Prieur, C., Georges, D., Bellemain, P., 2020. Transport effect of COVID-19 pandemic in
france. Annual Reviews in Control 50, 394 – 408.
[93] Gulbudak, H., Browne, C.J., 2020. Infection severity across
scales in multi-strain immuno-epidemiological dengue model
structured by host antibody level. Journal of Mathematical Biology 80, 1803–1843.
[94] Gumel, A.B., Ruan, S., Day, T., Watmough, J., Brauer, F.,
van den Driessche, P., et al., 2004. Modelling strategies for
controlling SARS outbreaks. Proceedings of the Royal Soci-

ety of London. Series B: Biological Sciences 271, 2223–2232.
[95] Gustafsson, F., Soltesz, K., Jaldén, J., Bernhardsson, B., 2020.
Identifiability of non-pharmaceutical intervention effects on
Covid-19 Spread in Europe, in: 59th IEEE Conference on Decision and Control.
[96] Handel, A., Longini, I.M., Antia, R., 2010. Towards a quantitative understanding of the within-host dynamics of influenza
A infections. Journal of The Royal Society Interface 7, 35–47.
[97] Hansen, E., Day, T., 2011. Optimal control of epidemics
with limited resources. Journal of Mathematical Biology 62,
423–451.
[98] Harding, N., Spinney, R.E., Prokopenko, M., 2020. Phase transitions in spatial connectivity during influenza pandemics. Entropy 22, 133.
[99] Hart, W.S., Maini, P.K., Yates, C.A., Thompson, R.N., 2020.
A theoretical framework for transitioning from patient-level to
population-scale epidemiological dynamics: influenza A as a
case study. Journal of The Royal Society Interface 17(166),
20200230.
[100] Hartl, R.F., Sethi, S.P., Vickson, R.G., 1995. Survey of the
maximum principles for optimal control problems with state
constraints. SIAM Review 37, 181–218.
[101] Haug, N., Geyrhofer, L., Londei, A., Dervic, E., DesvarsLarrive, A., et al., 2020. Ranking the effectiveness of worldwide COVID-19 government interventions. Nature human behaviour 4, 1303–3318.
[102] Haushofer, J., Jessica, C., Metcalf, E., 2020. Which interventions work best in a pandemic? Science 368(6495), 1063–
1065.
[103] Hawkes, A.G., 1971. Spectra of some self-exciting and mutually exciting point processes. Biometrika 58, 83–90.
[104] Hayhoe, M., Barreras, F., Preciado, V., 2020. Data-driven control of the COVID-19 outbreak via non-pharmaceutical interventions: A geometric programming approach. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2011.01392 .
[105] He, X., Lau, E.H., Wu, P., Deng, X., Wang, J., et al., 2020.
Temporal dynamics in viral shedding and transmissibility of
COVID-19. Nature Medicine , 1–4.
[106] Heesterbeek, H., Anderson, R.M., Andreasen, V., Bansal, S.,
De Angelis, D., et al., 2015. Modeling infectious disease dynamics in the complex landscape of global health. Science
347(6227).
[107] Heffernan, J.M., Smith, R.J., Wahl, L.M., 2005. Perspectives
on the basic reproductive ratio. Journal of the Royal Society
Interface 2, 281–293.
[108] Helbing, D., Brockmann, D., Chadefaux, T., Donnay, K.,
Blanke, U., et al., 2015. Saving human lives: What complexity science and information systems can contribute. Journal of
Statistical Physics 158, 735–781.
[109] Hellewell, J., Abbott, S., Gimma, A., Bosse, N.I., Jarvis, C.I.,
et al., 2020. Feasibility of controlling COVID-19 outbreaks by
isolation of cases and contacts. The Lancet Global Health 8,
e488–e496.
[110] Hernandez-Vargas, E.A., Velasco-Hernandez, J.X., 2020. Inhost mathematical modelling of COVID-19 in humans. Annual
Reviews in Control 50, 448 – 456.
[111] Hethcote, H.W., 2000. Mathematics of infectious diseases.
SIAM Review 42, 599–653.
[112] House, T., 2012. Modelling epidemics on networks. Contemporary Physics 53, 213–225.
[113] Huyvaert, K.P., Burnham, K.P., Anderson, D.R., 2011. AIC
model selection and multimodel inference in behavioral ecology: some background, observations, and comparisons. Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology 65, 23–35.
[114] Ioannidis, J.P., Cripps, S., Tanner, M.A., 2020. Forecasting

20

[115]

[116]

[117]

[118]

[119]

[120]
[121]

[122]
[123]

[124]

[125]

[126]

[127]

[128]

[129]

[130]

[131]

[132]

for COVID-19 has failed. International Journal of Forecasting
doi:10.1016/j.ijforecast.2020.08.004.
Iqbal, M.M., Abid, I., Hussain, S., Shahzad, N., Waqas, M.S.,
Iqbal, M.J., 2020. The effects of regional climatic condition on
the spread of COVID-19 at global scale. Science of The Total
Environment 739, 140101.
Jiang, J., Chen, E., Yan, S., Lerman, K., Ferrara, E., 2020. Political polarization drives online conversations about COVID19 in the United States. Human Behavior and Emerging Technologies 2(3), 200–211.
Kamien, M.I., Schwartz, N.L., 1971. Sufficient conditions in
optimal control theory. Journal of Economic Theory 3, 207–
214.
Kamien, M.I., Schwartz, N.L., 2012. Dynamic Optimization:
The Calculus of Variations and Optimal Control in Economics
and Management. Fourth ed., Dover.
Kandel, N., Chungong, S., Omaar, A., Xing, J., 2020. Health
security capacities in the context of COVID-19 outbreak: an
analysis of International Health Regulations annual report data
from 182 countries. The Lancet 395(10229), 1047–1053.
Keeling, M.J., Eames, K.T., 2005. Networks and epidemic
models. Journal of The Royal Society Interface 2, 295–307.
Kermack, W.O., McKendrick, A.G., 1927. A contribution to
the mathematical theory of epidemics. Proceedings of the royal
society of london. Series A 115, 700–721.
Kirk, D.E., 2004. Optimal Control Theory. An Introduction.
Dover.
Kiss, I.Z., Green, D.M., Kao, R.R., 2006. Infectious disease
control using contact tracing in random and scale-free networks. Journal of the Royal Society Interface 3, 55–62.
Kiss, I.Z., Miller, J., Simon, P.L., 2017. Mathematics of Epidemics on Networks: From Exact to Approximate Models.
Springer.
Kissler, S.M., Tedijanto, C., Goldstein, E., Grad, Y.H., Lipsitch, M., 2020. Projecting the transmission dynamics of
SARS-CoV-2 through the postpandemic period. Science 368,
860–868.
Kleinberg, B., van der Vegt, I., Mozes, M., 2020. Measuring Emotions in the COVID-19 Real World Worry Dataset, in:
Proceedings of the 1st Workshop on NLP for COVID-19 at
ACL 2020, Association for Computational Linguistics.
Köhler, J., Enyioha, C., Allgöwer, F., 2018. Dynamic resource
allocation to control epidemic outbreaks. A model predictive
control approach. Proceedings of the American Control Conference 2018-June, 1546–1551.
Köhler, J., Schwenkel, L., Koch, A., Berberich, J., Pauli, P.,
Allgöwer, F., 2020. Robust and optimal predictive control of
the COVID-19 outbreak. Annual Reviews in Control .
Kraemer, M.U., Yang, C.H., Gutierrez, B., Wu, C.H., Klein, B.,
et al., 2020. The effect of human mobility and control measures
on the COVID-19 epidemic in China. Science , eabb4218.
Kwok, K.O., Tang, A., Wei, V.W., Park, W.H., Yeoh, E.K., Riley, S., 2019. Epidemic models of contact tracing: Systematic
review of transmission studies of severe acute respiratory syndrome and middle east respiratory syndrome. Computational
and structural biotechnology journal 17, 186–194.
Kypraios, T., Neal, P., Prangle, D., 2017. A tutorial introduction to Bayesian inference for stochastic epidemic models using Approximate Bayesian Computation. Mathematical Biosciences 287, 42–53.
Lai, C.C., Wang, C.Y., Wang, Y.H., Hsueh, S.C., Ko, W.C.,
Hsueh, P.R., 2020. Global epidemiology of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19): disease incidence, daily cumulative
index, mortality, and their association with country healthcare
resources and economic status. International Journal of An-

timicrobial Agents 55(4), 105946.
[133] Lampariello, L., Sagratella, S., 2021. Effectively managing
diagnostic tests to monitor the COVID-19 outbreak in Italy.
Operations Research for Health Care 28, 100287.
[134] Lauer, S.A., Grantz, K.H., Bi, Q., Jones, F.K., Zheng, Q.,
et al., 2020. The incubation period of coronavirus disease 2019
(COVID-19). from publicly reported confirmed cases: Estimation and application. Annals of internal medicine 172, 577–
582.
[135] Lazarus, R., 2010. Automated, High-throughput Surveillance
Systems for Public Health, in: Sintchenko, V. (Ed.), Infectious
Disease Informatics. Springer. chapter 16, pp. 323–344.
[136] Lee, C.S., Leitmann, G., 1994. Control strategies for an endemic disease in the presence of uncertainty, in: Agarwal, R.P.
(Ed.), Recent Trends in Optimization Theory and Applications,
pp. 221–238.
[137] Leitmann, G., 1998. The use of screening for the control of an
endemic disease, in: Birkhäuser, B. (Ed.), Variational Calculus, Optimal Control and Applications. volume 124 of International Series of Numerical Mathematics, p. 291–300.
[138] Lenhart, S., Workman, J.T., 2007. Optimal control applied to
biological models. Chapman & Hall/CRC.
[139] Lep, Z., Babnik, K., Hacin Beyazoglu, K., 2020. Emotional responses and self-protective behavior within days of the
COVID-19 outbreak: The promoting role of information credibility. Frontiers in Psychology 11, 1846.
[140] Lewien, P., Chapman, A., 2019. Time-scale separation on networks for multi-city epidemics, in: 2019 IEEE 58th Conference on Decision and Control (CDC), pp. 746–751.
[141] Li, K., McCaw, J.M., Cao, P., 2021. Modelling within-host
macrophage dynamics in influenza virus infection. Journal of
Theoretical Biology 508, 110492.
[142] Li, L., Zhang, Q., Wang, X., Zhang, J., Wang, T., Gao, T.L.,
et al., 2020a. Characterizing the propagation of situational information in social media during COVID-19 epidemic: A case
study on Weibo. IEEE Transactions on Computational Social
Systems 7, 556–562.
[143] Li, R., Pei, S., Chen, B., Song, Y., Zhang, T., et al., 2020b.
Substantial undocumented infection facilitates the rapid dissemination of novel coronavirus (SARS-CoV2). Science 368,
489–493.
[144] Liberzon, D., 2012. Calculus of Variations and Optimal Control Theory: A Concise Introduction. Princeton University
Press.
[145] Lintusaari, J., Gutmann, M.U., Kaski, S., Corander, J., 2016.
On the identifiability of transmission dynamic models for infectious diseases. Genetics 202, 911–918.
[146] Liu, Y., Gayle, A., Wilder-Smith, A., Rocklöv, J., 2020. The reproductive number of COVID-19 is higher compared to SARS
coronavirus. Journal of Travel Medicine 27(2), 1–4.
[147] Maestre, J.M., Negenborn, R.R., 2014. Distributed Model Predictive Control Made Easy. volume 69. Springer.
[148] Maharaj, S., Kleczkowski, A., 2012. Controlling epidemic
spread by social distancing: do it well or not at all. BMC
public health 12:679.
[149] Malley, J.D., Kruppa, J., Dasgupta, A., Malley, K.G., Ziegler,
A., 2012. Probability machines: consistent probability estimation using nonparametric learning machines. Methods of
information in medicine 51(1), 74.
[150] Mandal, M., Jana, S., Nandi, S.K., Khatua, A., Adak, S., Kar,
T., 2020. A model based study on the dynamics of covid19: Prediction and control. Chaos, Solitons & Fractals 136,
109889.
[151] Mangasarian, O.L., 1966. Sufficient Conditions for the Optimal Control of Nonlinear Systems. SIAM Journal on Control

21

4, 139–152.
[152] Marathe, M., Vullikanti, A.K.S., 2013. Computational epidemiology. Communications of the ACM 56, 88–96.
[153] Martcheva, M., 2015. An Introduction to Mathematical Epidemiology. Springer Science and Business Media LLC.
[154] Matricardi, P.M., Dal Negro, R.W., Nisini, R., 2020. The first,
holistic immunological model of COVID-19: Implications for
prevention, diagnosis, and public health measures. Pediatric
Allergy and Immunology 31, 454–470.
[155] May, R.M., Anderson, R.M., 1987. Transmission dynamics of
HIV infection. Nature 326, 137–142.
[156] McKinley, T., Cook, A.R., Deardon, R., 2009. Inference in
epidemic models without likelihoods. International Journal of
Biostatistics 5(1), 1–37.
[157] Mecenas, P., Travassos da Rosa Moreira Bastos, R., Rosário
Vallinoto, A., Normando, D., . Effects of temperature and humidity on the spread of COVID-19: A systematic review. PLoS
ONE 15(9), e0238339.
[158] Mei, W., Mohagheghi, S., Zampieri, S., Bullo, F., 2017. On
the dynamics of deterministic epidemic propagation over networks. Annual Reviews in Control 44, 116 – 128.
[159] Miller, I.F., Becker, A.D., Grenfell, B.T., Metcalf, C.J.E., 2020.
Disease and healthcare burden of COVID-19 in the United
States. Nature medicine 26, 1212–1217.
[160] Moore, J.R., Ahmed, H., Manicassamy, B., Garcia-Sastre, A.,
Handel, A., Antia, R., 2020. Varying inoculum dose to assess
the roles of the immune response and target cell depletion by
the pathogen in control of acute viral infections. Bulletin of
Mathematical Biology 62.
[161] Moran, K.R., Fairchild, G., Generous, N., Hickmann, K., Osthus, D., Priedhorsky, R., Hyman, J., Del Valle, S.Y., 2016.
Epidemic forecasting is messier than weather forecasting: The
role of human behavior and internet data streams in epidemic
forecast. The Journal of infectious diseases 214, S404–S408.
[162] Morato, M.M., Bastos, S.B., Cajueiro, D.O., Normey-Rico,
J.E., 2020. An optimal predictive control strategy for COVID19 (SARS-CoV-2) social distancing policies in Brazil. Annual
Reviews in Control 50, 417 – 431.
[163] Morton, R., Wickwire, K.H., 1974. On the optimal control of
a deterministic epidemic. Advances in Applied Probability 6,
622–635.
[164] Nanni, M., Andrienko, G., Barabási, A.L., Boldrini, C.,
Bonchi, F., et al., 2021. Give more data, awareness and control
to individual citizens, and they will help COVID-19 containment. Ethics and Information Technology , 1–6.
[165] Ngonghala, C.N., Iboi, E., Eikenberry, S., Scotch, M., MacIntyre, C.R., et al., 2020. Mathematical assessment of the impact
of non-pharmaceutical interventions on curtailing the 2019
novel Coronavirus. Mathematical Biosciences 325, 108364.
[166] Nicola, M., O’Neill, N., Sohrabi, C., Khan, M., Agha, M.,
et al., 2020. Evidence Based Management Guideline for the
COVID-19 Pandemic - Review article. International Journal
of Surgery 77, 206–216.
[167] Nishiura, H., Linton, N.M., Akhmetzhanov, A.R., 2020. Serial
interval of novel coronavirus (COVID-19) infections. International Journal of Infectious Diseases 93, 284–286.
[168] Nowzari, C., Preciado, V., Pappas, G., 2016. Analysis and control of epidemics: A survey of spreading processes on complex
networks. IEEE Control Systems 36, 26–46.
[169] Nowzari, C., Preciado, V., Pappas, G., 2017. Optimal resource
allocation for control of networked epidemic models. IEEE
Transactions on Control of Network Systems 4, 159–169.
[170] Nowzari, C., Preciado, V.M., Pappas, G.J., 2015. Optimal resource allocation for control of networked epidemic models.
IEEE Transactions on Control of Network Systems 4, 159–

169.
[171] Ogura, M., Preciado, V.M., 2016a. Epidemic processes over
adaptive state-dependent networks. Physical Review E 93(6),
062316.
[172] Ogura, M., Preciado, V.M., 2016b. Stability of spreading processes over time-varying large-scale networks. IEEE Transactions on Network Science and Engineering 3(1), 44–57.
[173] Oliver, N., Barber, J.X., Roomp, K., Roomp, K., 2020a. Assessing the impact of the covid-19 pandemic in spain: Largescale, online, self-reported population survey. Journal of medical Internet research 22, e21319.
[174] Oliver, N., Lepri, B., Sterly, H., Lambiotte, R., Deletaille, S.,
et al., 2020b. Mobile phone data for informing public health
actions across the COVID-19 pandemic life cycle. Science Advances 0764, eabc0764.
[175] Paré, P.E., Beck, C.L., Nedić, A., 2018. Epidemic processes
over time-varying networks. IEEE Transactions on Control of
Network Systems 5, 1322–1334.
[176] Paré, P.E., Beck, C.L., Başar, T., 2020. Modeling, estimation,
and analysis of epidemics over networks: An overview. Annual Reviews in Control 50, 345–360.
[177] Pastor-Satorras, R., Castellano, C., Van Mieghem, P., Vespignani, A., 2015. Epidemic processes in complex networks. Rev.
Mod. Phys. 87, 925–979.
[178] Peeri, N.C., Shrestha, N., Rahman, M.S., Zaki, R., Tan, Z.,
Bibi, S., Baghbanzadeh, M., Aghamohammadi, N., Zhang, W.,
Haque, U., 2020. The SARS, MERS and novel coronavirus
(COVID-19) epidemics, the newest and biggest global health
threats: what lessons have we learned? International Journal
of Epidemiology 49, 717–726.
[179] Petropoulos, F., Makridakis, S., 2020. Forecasting the novel
coronavirus COVID-19. PloS one 15, e0231236.
[180] Portet, S., 2020. A primer on model selection using the Akaike
Information Criterion. Infectious Disease Modelling 5, 111–
128.
[181] Postnikov, E.B., 2020. Estimation of COVID-19 dynamics
“on a back-of-envelope”: Does the simplest SIR model provide quantitative parameters and predictions? Chaos, Solitons
and Fractals 135, 109841.
[182] Prather, K.A., Wang, C.C., Schooley, R.T., 2020. Reducing
transmission of SARS-CoV-2. Science 368(6498), 1422–1424.
[183] Preciado, V.M., Zargham, M., Enyioha, C., Jadbabaie, A., Pappas, G., 2013. Optimal vaccine allocation to control epidemic
outbreaks in arbitrary networks, in: 52nd IEEE Conference on
Decision and Control, IEEE. pp. 7486–7491.
[184] Preciado, V.M., Zargham, M., Enyioha, C., Jadbabaie, A., Pappas, G.J., 2014. Optimal resource allocation for network protection against spreading processes. IEEE Transactions on
Control of Network Systems 1, 99–108.
[185] Prem, K., Liu, Y., Russell, T.W., Kucharski, A.J., Eggo, R.M.,
et al., 2020. The effect of control strategies to reduce social
mixing on outcomes of the COVID-19 epidemic in Wuhan,
China: a modelling study. The Lancet Public Health 5, e261–
e270.
[186] Priesemann, V., Brinkmann, M.M., Ciesek, S., Cuschieri, S.,
Czypionka, T., Giordano, G., et al., 2021. Calling for panEuropean commitment for rapid and sustained reduction in
SARS-CoV-2 infections. The Lancet 397, 92–93.
[187] Prosper, O., Saucedo, O., Thompson, D., Torres-Garcia, G.,
Wang, X., et al., 2011. Modeling control strategies for concurrent epidemics of seasonal and pandemic H1N1 influenza.
Mathematical Biosciences and Engineering 8, 141–170.
[188] Qian, G., Mahdi, A., 2020. Sensitivity analysis methods in the
biomedical sciences. Mathematical Biosciences 323, 108306.
[189] Qin, L., Sun, Q., Wang, Y., Wu, K.F., Chen, M., et al.,

22

[190]

[191]

[192]

[193]

[194]

[195]

[196]

[197]

[198]
[199]

[200]

[201]

[202]
[203]

[204]
[205]
[206]

[207]

[208]

[209]

2020. Prediction of number of cases of 2019 novel coronavirus (COVID-19) using social media search index. International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health
17, 2365.
Qiu, J., Shen, B., Zhao, M., Wang, Z., Xie, B., Xu, Y., 2020.
A nationwide survey of psychological distress among chinese
people in the COVID-19 epidemic: implications and policy
recommendations. General psychiatry 33(2).
Rawlings, J.B., Mayne, D.Q., Diehl, M., 2017. Model predictive control: theory, computation, and design. Nob Hill Publishing Madison, WI.
Reid, A.H., Taubenberger, J.K., Fanning, T.G., 2001. The 1918
spanish influenza: integrating history and biology. Microbes
and Infection 3, 81 – 87.
Reinhart, A., et al., 2018. A review of self-exciting spatiotemporal point processes and their applications. Statistical Science 33, 299–318.
Riad, M.H., Scoglio, C.M., Cohnstaedt, L.W., McVey, D.S.,
2019. Short-term forecast and dual state-parameter estimation for Japanese Encephalitis transmission using ensemble
Kalman filter, in: Proceedings of the American Control Conference, IEEE. pp. 3444–3449.
Riley, S., Fraser, C., Donnelly, C.A., Ghani, A.C., AbuRaddad, L.J., et al., 2003. Transmission dynamics of the etiological agent of SARS in Hong Kong: Impact of public health
interventions. Science 300, 1961–1966.
Roda, W.C., Varughese, M.B., Han, D., Li, M.Y., 2020. Why
is it difficult to accurately predict the COVID-19 epidemic?
Infectious Disease Modelling 5, 271–281.
Roomp, K., Oliver, N., 2020. ACDC-Tracing: Towards
anonymous citizen-driven contact tracing. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2004.07463 .
Rothman, K.J., Greenland, S., Lash, T.L., 2008. Modern Epidemiology. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
Rowthorn, R.E., Laxminarayan, R., Gilligan, C.A., 2009. Optimal control of epidemics in metapopulations. Journal of the
Royal Society Interface 6, 1135–1144.
Safi, M.A., Gumel, A.B., Elbasha, E.H., 2013. Qualitative
analysis of an age-structured SEIR epidemic model with treatment. Applied Mathematics and Computation 219(22), 10627–
10642.
Salje, H., Kiem, C.T., Lefrancq, N., Courtejoie, N., et al., 2020.
Estimating the burden of SARS-CoV-2 in France. Science
369:6500, 208–211.
Saltelli, A., 2002. Sensitivity analysis for importance assessment. Risk Analysis 22, 579–590.
Scharbarg, E., Moog, C.H., Mauduit, N., Califano, C., 2020.
From the hospital scale to nationwide: observability and identification of models for the COVID-19 epidemic waves. Annual
Reviews in Control 50, 409–416.
Scherer, A., McLean, A., 2002. Mathematical models of vaccination. British Medical Bulletin 62(1), 187–199.
Schön, T., Wills, A., Ninness, B., 2011. System identification
of nonlinear state-space models. Automatica 47, 39–49.
Sélley, F., Besenyei, Á., Kiss, I.Z., Simon, P.L., 2015a. Dynamic control of modern, network-based epidemic models.
SIAM Journal on Applied Dynamical Systems 14, 168–187.
Sélley, F., Besenyei, Á., Kiss, I.Z., Simon, P.L., 2015b. Dynamic control of modern, network-based epidemic models.
SIAM Journal on applied dynamical systems 14, 168–187.
Shanthakumar, S.G., S., A., Ramesh, A., 2020. Understanding the socio-economic disruption in the united states during
COVID-19’s early days. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.05451 .
Sharomi, O., Malik, T., 2017. Optimal control in epidemiology. Annals of Operations Research 251, 55–71.

[210] Small, M., Tse, C.K., 2005. Clustering model for transmission
of the SARS virus: Application to epidemic control and risk
assessment. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications 351, 499–511.
[211] Sparks, R., 2013. Challenges in designing a disease surveillance plan: What we have and what we need? IIE Transactions
on Healthcare Systems Engineering 3, 181–192.
[212] Suárez, E., Pérez, C.M., Rivera, R., Martı́nez, M.N., 2017. Applications of regression models in epidemiology. John Wiley
& Sons.
[213] Tayarani-N, M.H., 2020. Applications of artificial intelligence
in battling against Covid-19: A literature review. Chaos, Solitons & Fractals , 110338.
[214] Taylor, L.H., Latham, S.M., Woolhouse, M.E., 2001. Risk factors for human disease emergence. Philosophical Transactions
of the Royal Society of London. Series B: Biological Sciences
356:1411, 983–989.
[215] Thompson, W., Comanor, L., Shay, D.K., 2006. Epidemiology
of seasonal influenza: Use of surveillance data and statistical
models to estimate the burden of disease. The Journal of Infectious Diseases 194, 82–91.
[216] Thrusfield, M., 2018. Veterinary epidemiology. John Wiley &
Sons.
[217] Thurner, S., Klimek, P., Hanel, R., 2020. A network-based
explanation of why most COVID-19 infection curves are linear. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 117(37),
22684–22689.
[218] Ting, D.S.W., Carin, L., Dzau, V., Wong, T.Y., 2020. Digital
technology and COVID-19. Nature Medicine 26, 459–461.
[219] Tizzoni, M., Bajardi, P., Decuyper, A., King, G.K.K., Schneider, C.M., Blondel, V., Smoreda, Z., González, M.C., Colizza,
V., 2014. On the use of human mobility proxies for modeling
epidemics. PLoS Comput Biol 10(7), e1003716.
[220] Tizzoni, M., Bajardi, P., Poletto, C., Ramasco, J.J., Balcan, D.,
et al., 2012. Real-time numerical forecast of global epidemic
spreading: case study of 2009 A/H1N1pdm. BMC medicine
10(165), 1–31.
[221] Torrealba-Rodriguez, O., Conde-Gutiérrez, R., HernándezJavier, A., 2020. Modeling and prediction of COVID-19
in Mexico applying mathematical and computational models.
Chaos, Solitons & Fractals , 109946.
[222] Unkel, S., Farrington, C.P., Garthwaite, P.H., Robertson, C.,
Andrews, N., 2012. Statistical methods for the prospective
detection of infectious disease outbreaks: A review. Journal
of the Royal Statistical Society. Series A: Statistics in Society
175, 49–82.
[223] Van den Broeck, W., Gioannini, C., Gonçalves, B., Quaggiotto,
M., Colizza, V., et al., 2011. The GLEaMviz computational
tool, a publicly available software to explore realistic epidemic
spreading scenarios at the global scale. BMC infectious diseases 11, 1–14.
[224] Vega, T., Lozano, J.E., Meerhoff, T., Snacken, R., Beauté, J.,
et al., 2015. Influenza surveillance in europe: comparing intensity levels calculated using the moving epidemic method.
Influenza and other respiratory viruses 9, 234–246.
[225] Vega, T., Lozano, J.E., Meerhoff, T., Snacken, R., Mott, J.,
et al., 2013. Influenza surveillance in Europe: Establishing epidemic thresholds by the Moving Epidemic Method. Influenza
and other Respiratory Viruses 7, 546–558.
[226] Velavan, T.P., Meyer, C.G., 2020. The COVID-19 epidemic.
Tropical medicine & international health 25(3), 278–280.
[227] Vink, M.A., Bootsma, M.C.J., Wallinga, J., 2014. Serial intervals of respiratory infectious diseases: a systematic review and
analysis. American journal of epidemiology 180, 865–875.
[228] Vittinghoff, E., Glidden, D.V., Shiboski, S.C., McCulloch,

23

[229]

[230]

[231]

[232]

[233]

[234]
[235]

[236]

[237]

[238]

[239]

[240]

[241]

[242]

[243]

[244]

[245]

[246]

[247]

C.E., 2012. Regression Methods in Biostatistics. Linear, Logistic, Survival, and Repeated Measures Models. Springer.
Waikhom, P., Jain, R., Tegar, S., 2016. Sensitivity and stability
analysis of a delayed stochastic epidemic model with temperature gradients. Modeling Earth Systems and Environment 2:49,
1–18.
Waller, L., 2010. Point process models and methods in spatial epidemiology, in: Gelfand, A.E., Diggle, P., Guttorp, P.,
Fuentes, M. (Eds.), Handbook of spatial statistics. CRC press,
pp. 403–423.
Wallinga, J., Lipsitch, M., 2007. How generation intervals
shape the relationship between growth rates and reproductive
numbers. Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 274, 599–604.
Walter, S.D., Hildreth, S.W., Beaty, B.J., 1980. Estimation
of infection rates in populations of organisms using pools of
variable size. American Journal of Epidemiology 112, 124–
128.
Wang, C.J., Ng, C.Y., Brook, R.H., 2020. Response to COVID19 in Taiwan: big data analytics, new technology, and proactive
testing. Jama 323, 1341–1342.
Whittle, P., 1955. The Outcome of a Stochastic Epidemic–A
Note on Bailey’s Paper. Biometrika 42, 116–122.
Winter, A.K., Hegde, S.T., 2020. The important role of serology for COVID-19 control. The Lancet Infectious Diseases 20,
758–759.
World Health Organization (WHO), 2020. Considerations in
the investigation of cases and clusters of COVID-19. Technical
Report 2nd April. World Health Organization.
Xiao, Y., Torok, M.E., 2020. Taking the right measures to
control COVID-19. The Lancet Infectious Diseases 20, 523–
524.
Xue-Zhi, L., Gupur, G., Guang-Tian, Z., 2001. Threshold and
stability results for an age-structured SEIR epidemic model.
Computers and Mathematics with Applications 42, 883–907.
Yan, A.W., Cao, P., Heffernan, J.M., McVernon, J., Quinn,
K.M., et al., 2017. Modelling cross-reactivity and memory in
the cellular adaptive immune response to influenza infection in
the host. Journal of Theoretical Biology 413, 34 – 49.
Yang, Z., Zeng, Z., Wang, K., Wong, S.S., Liang, W., et al.,
2020. Modified SEIR and AI prediction of the epidemics trend
of COVID-19 in China under public health interventions. Journal of Thoracic Disease 12, 165–174.
Yilmaz, S., Dudkina, E., Bin, M., Crisostomi, E., Ferraro, P.,
Murray-Smith, R., Parisini, T., et al., 2020. Kemeny-based
testing for COVID-19. PLoS ONE 15(11), e0242401.
Yousefpour, A., Jahanshahi, H., Bekiros, S., 2020. Optimal policies for control of the novel coronavirus (COVID-19).
Chaos, Solitons & Fractals 136, 109883.
Youssef, M., Scoglio, C., 2013. Mitigation of epidemics in
contact networks through optimal contact adaptation. Mathematical Biosciences and Engineering 10, 1227–1251.
Zaman, G., Kang, Y.H., Jung, H., 2008. Stability analysis and
optimal vaccination of an SIR epidemic model. BioSystems
93, 240–249.
Zaric, G.S., Brandeau, M.L., 2002. Dynamic resource allocation for epidemic control in multiple populations. IMA Journal of Mathematics Applied in Medicine and Biology 19, 235–
255.
Zarnitsyna, V.I., Handel, A., McMaster, S.R., Hayward, S.L.,
Kohlmeier, J.E., Antia, R., 2016. Mathematical model reveals
the role of memory CD8 T cell populations in recall responses
to influenza. Frontiers in Immunology 7:165.
Zeng, D., Chen, H., Castillo-Chavez, C., Lober, W., Thurmond, M., 2010. Infectious disease informatics and biosurveil-

lance. Springer.
[248] Zhao, S., Lin, Q., Ran, J., Musa, S.S., Yang, G., et al., 2020.
Preliminary estimation of the basic reproduction number of
novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) in China, from 2019 to 2020:
A data-driven analysis in the early phase of the outbreak. International Journal of Infectious Diseases 92, 214–217.
[249] Zheng, N., Du, S., Wang, J., Zhang, H., Cui, W., et al., 2020.
Predicting COVID-19 in China using hybrid AI model. IEEE
Transactions on Cybernetics 50, 2891–2904.
[250] Zhou, C., Su, F., Pei, T., Zhang, A., Du, Y., et al., 2020a.
COVID-19: Challenges to GIS with Big Data. Geography and
Sustainability 1, 77 – 87.
[251] Zhou, F., Yu, T., Du, R., Fan, G., Liu, Y., Liu, Z., et al., 2020b.
Clinical course and risk factors for mortality of adult patients
with COVID-19 in Wuhan, China: a retrospective cohort study.
The Lancet 395, 1054 – 1062.
[252] Zino, L., Rizzo, A., Porfiri, M., 2020. Analysis and control
of epidemics in temporal networks with self-excitement and
behavioral changes. European Journal of Control 54, 1–11.

24

