1st IFSA Winter Conference on Automation, Robotics & Communications for Industry 4.0 (ARCI’ 2021),
3-5 February 2021, Chamonix-Mont-Blanc, France

Topic: Robotics (Human-Robot Interaction)

Oral

Human-Robot Interaction: Applications
Abdel-Nasser Sharkawy
Mechatronics Engineering, Mechanical Engineering Department
Faculty of Engineering, South Valley University
Qena 83523, Egypt
E-mail: eng.abdelnassersharkawy@gmail.com

Summary: Recently, human-robot interaction (HRI) is an extensive research topic and theme which gained importance and
significance. HRI aims at the complementary combination between the robot capabilities and human skills. The robots assist
humans in terms of precision, speed, and force. The humans contribute in terms of the experience, knowledge of executing the
task, intuition, and easy adaptation and learning, and understanding of control strategies. In this work, the applications of
human-robot interaction are reviewed. These applications could be industrial, medical, agricultural, servical, and educational.
HRI can be found in industrial applications in picking and placing in the production lines, welding processes, parts assembly,
and painting. Assistive robotics are one from the highest profile areas in HRI. For people with the physical and the mental
challenges, the robots can provide the opportunity of interaction and therapy. In addition, HRI can be widely applied in
hospitals. Nowadays, HRI is very important for facing the new coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic. In agriculture, the
cooperation between human and the robot helps with many tasks including harvesting, seeding, fertilizing, spraying, weed
detection, hauling, and mowing. HRI can also be found in other applications such as education, mining, and home use.
Keywords: Human-Robot Interaction, Industrial Applications, Medical and Rehabilitation Applications, Precision
Agriculture.

1. Introduction
HRI is the field of the study referring to
understanding, designing, and evaluating the robotic
systems used by or collaborating with the human
operator. Interaction needs the communication
between the robots and the humans. The human
communication with the robot could take many forms.
However, these forms are highly affected by whether
the human operator closeness to the robot. Therefore,
the communication or interaction between both the
human and the robot is separated into two main
categories [1], [2]: The first category is the remote
interaction and the second is poximate interaction. In
the remote one, the human does not exist in nearby the
robot. In addition, they are spatially or even
temporarily separated. An example for this category is
the Mars Rovers which is separated from earth in space
and time as well. In the proximate category, the human
and robot coexist in the same location. An example for
this category is the service robots during their sharing
with the humans in the same room.
These categories can help distinguish between the
applications requiring the mobility, physical
interaction, or social interaction. Remote interaction
using mobile robots refers to the tele-operation or the
supervised control. Remote interaction using the
physical manipulator refers to the tele-manipulation.
Proximate interaction using the mobile robots takes the
form of the robot assistant. Proximate interaction
includes the physical interaction. In social interaction,
the social and the emotive as well as the cognitive
interaction aspects are included. In social interaction,

the humans and the robots interact using the form of
peers or companions. Importantly, social interactions
with the robots take the form of proximate interaction
rather than remote interaction.
From these categories, this manuscript addresses
the proximate interaction. It presents some real
applications for HRI in industrial environment,
medical and rehabilitation, agriculture, education, and
other environments. These applications show the
importance of the interaction happening between the
robot and human operator in our real life.
The rest of this paper is divided as follows. section
2 presents the industrial applications of HRI. In section
3, the HRI in the medical and rehabilitation
applications is presented. HRI in agriculture is
presented in section 4, whereas section 5 illustrates
some other applications. Section 6 concludes the main
important point of this manuscript.

2. HRI in Industry
HRI is widely used in industrial applications such
as picking and placing in the production lines, welding
processes, parts assembly, painting, and so on.
Some examples for HRI in the industrial
application are presented from Fig. 1 to Fig. 4. The
robot workstation is running in the plant of BMW in
South Carolina in which the robot helps human
operators to perform the assembly of the final door [3]
(see Fig. 1). In the door assembly operation, human
operator and robots work together. BMW plant has
succeeded to implement and develop the direct human-

1

1st IFSA Winter Conference on Automation, Robotics & Communications for Industry 4.0 (ARCI’ 2021),
3-5 February 2021, Chamonix-Mont-Blanc, France

robot cooperation and interaction in the series
production.
Human-robot teams are found also in the flexible
production lines [4], [5], as presented in Fig. 2. In this
figure, the robotic manipulators and the human
operators collaborate in handling of the workpieces.
Safety is also is very important in such environments,
since the proximity of the human operator to the robot
that can lead to potential injuries.

which point the human operator carries out the welding
task under favourable ergonomic conditions. In
comparison with the standard welding bench, the
human operator does not need to assume the
uncomfortable postures or the work overhead. All
necessary positioning and orientation of the
workpieces can be performed by the robot. This also
includes presenting of the components in the optimal
position for the process of welding, allowing proper
flow of the welding bead. Since the robotic
repositioning motion is quite fast, the handling time
which is about one third of the total process time is
reduced to a minimum in comparison to welding
processes in which HRI is not implemented.

Fig. 1. The robot helps the human performing the final door
assembly in the BMW plant [3].
Fig. 3. Example for the repetitive co-manipulation tasks [6].

Fig. 4. The multi-robot system assists the worker in the
welding process [7].

Fig. 2. The robot and the human workers cooperate in
handling workpieces [4], [5].

Repetitive co-manipulation tasks as shown in Fig.
3 [6] can be performed in suitable poses of the human
body. The poses can minimise the effects of the
overloading joint torque. Furthermore, they can
maximise the capacity of the manipulation of the
human.
For handling of heavy and bulky components in
welding situations, the multi-robot system with
collaborative functionality assists the worker [7], as
shown in Fig. 4. Two robots help position the
components to be joined in the welding process, at

3. HRI in
Applications

Rehabilitation

and

Medical

Assistive robotics are one of the highest profile
areas in HRI. For people with the physical and the
mental challenges, robots can provide the opportunity
for the interaction and therapy. This work is explored
with autistic children in ref. [8], [9]. Many of them
cannot respond strongly to the social cues but they
respond very well to the mechanical devices. Robots

2

1st IFSA Winter Conference on Automation, Robotics & Communications for Industry 4.0 (ARCI’ 2021),
3-5 February 2021, Chamonix-Mont-Blanc, France

give the possible therapeutic role for using the
mechanical device for improving the social
interactions [10]. Robots are being considered also for
different domains in which children benefit, for
example, children with experienced trauma. The social
dimension of human-robot interaction is necessary not
only in the assistive roles, but also in many areas and
domains of the proximate interaction [11]–[15].
For people with physical disabilities, the robot
embodiment provides the unique opportunities which
are not possible with other technology forms. For
example, the researchers are working on the design of
the robots which provide and give the support for the
physical therapy. Efforts include the providing of the
prescribed force and the movement trajectories to help
rebuild flexibility as well as strength [16]. Other work
for detecting the motivational state and adjusting the
therapy in order to maximize the benefits is presented
in ref. [17]. Intelligent wheelchairs are the type of the
robot which use the external sensors for supporting the
path planning and the collision avoidance for the
person that requires the wheelchair [18], [19].
An example of the rehabilitation robotics was
presented in [20], in which, a robotic system was built
as shown in Fig. 5, that performs correctly the exercise
for the conventional physiotherapy such as the
shoulder flexion, in similar way to what the
physiotherapist do during the co-manipulating with
KUKA LWR robot. In this way, the excellent
characteristics of the human (the capacity of the
decision) and the robot (the precision, the work
capacity, and the repeatability) could be combined to
achieve better results in the musculoskeletal
rehabilitation of the arm. Furthermore, the second as
well as the main objective was evaluating the nonpathological shoulder behaviour while performing the
shoulder flexion movements.

Fig. 5. An Example illustrates the rehabilitation robotics
[20].

coronavirus. The severity of COVID-19 symptoms can
range from mild to severe. The cooperation between
the human and the robot help to fight against the new
pandemic. Two cases of the human-robot cooperation
can be used in the hospital to fight against
Coronavirus. The robot can add the solution to the
nasopharyngeal swabs from the patients for detecting
the coronavirus genetic material [21]. The positive test
result illustrates that the patient is infected with the
coronavirus. In that case, the samples which are taken
from the patients’ mouth, nose, and throat are tested
for the genetic material of the coronavirus in the
laboratory. The staff of the laboratory must only load
the samples into the tray and then the COVID-19 test
robot takes care with the pipetting. In the second case,
a mobile unit is provided to the manipulator. The
mobile robot works hand in hand with the human and
align to the workpiece with high precision. The mobile
robot can be used for providing the patients with the
food and medicine. In addition, the robot can measure
the temperature of the patients. This would minimize
the direct contact between the patients and medical
staff and others, and therefore, minimizes the infection
potential. The robot can also help the humans for
sweeping and washing the floors and the walls. This
also minimizes the virus infection.

4. HRI in Agriculture
The cooperation between human and robot in
agriculture helps with many tasks such as harvesting,
seeding, fertilizing, spraying, weed detection, hauling,
and mowing.
In the precision agriculture as presented in Fig. 6
[22], the robot helps the human-operator or farmer in
picking the strawberry. In that case, safety between the
human operator and the robot must be included.
Furthermore, the robot was controlled remotely by a
co-located operator. Their task was to navigate the
robot to the location of pickers when they requested it,
allow the filled crates to be loaded onto the robot, and
then transport these to the storage facility.In Fig. 7
[23], intelligent robot is installed in the greenhouse to
care and help farmers for the melon harvesting.
In Scaffold Mode, the concept of HRI is observed
clearly. The human operator and the robot work as a
collaborative unified system in which the vehicle
autonomously navigates along the structured trees
rows whereas the humans on the vehicle concentrate
on performing and doing some activities such as 1)
thinning, 2) pruning, 3) harvesting, 4) tying trees to
wire. Tree trimming tasks were presented with
Bergerman et al. [24] and Freitas et al. [25] (see Fig.8)
in which the humans working on the robot in the
Scaffold Mode were able to trim trees more than twice
as fast as humans using the traditional approach based
on ladder.

Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) is the infectious
disease which is caused by the newly discovered
3

1st IFSA Winter Conference on Automation, Robotics & Communications for Industry 4.0 (ARCI’ 2021),
3-5 February 2021, Chamonix-Mont-Blanc, France

(b)

(a)

Fig. 6. The Thorvald robot in the evaluation environment interacting with the pickers: (a) in the open strawberry fields, (b)
in the polytunnel environment [22].

5. Other Applications

Fig. 7. The robot is installed in the greenhouse for helping
the farmers for harvesting the melon [23].

Fig. 8. Human operators performing tree trimming while
standing in a robot [24], [25].

HRI can be found in other applications, which
include service, home use, inventory management, and
mining. In addition, robots is used for promoting the
education for the typical children, whether in the home
or in the schools [26], [27]. Space exploration and
UAVs are also some applications.
Fig. 9 [28] shows the robot helps the human
operator in mining industry. Using the robots increases
the arsenal of the tools that help and support the miners
to work in more safe and more efficient environment.
Caitlyn Clabaugh and her team [29], [30]
developed the socially assistive robot (SAR) tutoring
system (Fig. 10) for supporting the educators efforts to
teach the number concepts to the preschool children.
This system was designed iteratively with the input of
the education experts for being developmentally
appropriate. The system was investigated and tested in
the real-world preschool classroom. The collected data
were used for training personalized models of the
number concepts learning, leveraging the multimodal
data, domain knowledge, and also learning style.
To achieve highly efficient human-robot
cooperation for all applications discussed above, safety
system should be found and implemented in the
robotic system. In addition, adapted controllers should
follow the human collaborator intention and the
environment changes. Therefore, this can lead to
human-friendly robots.

4

1st IFSA Winter Conference on Automation, Robotics & Communications for Industry 4.0 (ARCI’ 2021),
3-5 February 2021, Chamonix-Mont-Blanc, France

University, Qena, Egypt, for revising and checking the
English writing of the manuscript.

References
[1] K. Dautenhahn, “Methodology & Themes of HumanRobot Interaction : A Growing Research Field,” Int. J.
Adv. Robot. Syst., vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 103–108, 2007.
[2] M. A. Goodrich and A. C. Schultz, “Human-Robot
Interaction : A Survey,” Found. Trends® Human–
Computer Interact., vol. 1, no. 3, pp. 203–275, 2007.
[3] W. Knight, “Smart Robots Can Now Work Right Next
to Auto Workers,” MIT Technology Review,
September 17, 2013.
Fig. 9. Robot helps human in mining industry [28].

[4] J. Kruger, T. K. Lien, and A. Verl, “Cooperation of
human and machines in assembly lines,” CIRP Ann. Manuf. Technol., vol. 58, pp. 628–646, 2009.
[5] C. Liu and M. Tomizuka, “Algorithmic Safety
Measures for Intelligent Industrial Co-Robots,” in IEEE
International Conference on Robotics and Automation
2016, 2016, pp. 3095–3102.
[6] L. Peternel, W. Kim, J. Babic, and A. Ajoudani,
“Towards ergonomie control of human-robot comanipulation and handover,” IEEE-RAS Int. Conf.
Humanoid Robot., no. October, pp. 55–60, 2017.

Fig. 10. The tutoring system using robot for supporting the
educators efforts to teach the number concepts to the
preschool children [29], [30].

6. Conclusions
This manuscript has summarized some real
applications of HRI. HRI could be found in industrial
applications in picking and placing in the production
lines, welding processes, assembling parts, and
painting. Assistive robotics are one of the highest
profile areas of HRI. For people with the physical and
the mental disabilities, robots provide the opportunity
for the interaction and the therapy. In addition, HRI
could be commonly be widely applied in hospitals and
nowadays HRI is very crucial for fighting against the
new coronavirus (COVID-19). In agriculture, HRI
helps with many tasks such as harvesting, seeding,
fertilizing, spraying, hauling, weed detection, and
mowing. HRI can also be found in other applications
such as service, home use, inventory management,
mining, education, and space exploration.

Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank Dr. Ahmed
Elsheikh, Assistant Professor, Mechanical Engineering
Department, Faculty of Engineering, South Valley

[7] C. Thomas, B. Matthias, and B. Kuhlenkötter, “Human
‐ Robot Collaboration – New Applications in Industrial
Robotics,” in International Conference in Competitive
Manufacturing 2016 (COMA’16), 2016, pp. 1–7.
[8] A. Billard, B. Robins, J. Nadel, and K. Dautenhahn,
“Building Robota , a Mini-Humanoid Robot for the
Rehabilitation of Children With Autism,” Assist.
Technol., vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 37–49, 2007.
[9] B. Robins, P. Dickerson, P. Stribling, and K.
Dautenhahn, “Robot-mediated joint attention in
children with autism: A case study in robot-human
interaction,” Interact. Stud., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 161–198,
2004.
[10] W. I., D. K., O. B., and H. W., “Can Social Interaction
Skills Be Taught by a Social Agent? The Role of a
Robotic Mediator in Autism Therapy,” in Cognitive
Technology: Instruments of Mind. CT 2001. Lecture
Notes in Computer Science, B. M., N. C.L., and D. K.,
Eds. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2001.
[11] C. Breazeal, “Emotion and social humanoid robots,”
Int. J. Hum. Comput. Stud., vol. 59, pp. 119–155, 2003.
[12] C. Breazeal, “Toward sociable robots,” Rob. Auton.
Syst., vol. 42, pp. 167–175, 2003.
[13] K. Dautenhahn, “Socially intelligent robots :
dimensions of human – robot interaction,” Phil. Trans.
R. Soc. B, vol. 362, no. 1480, pp. 679–704, 2007.
[14] D. Feil-seifer and M. J. Mataric, “Defining Socially
Assistive Robotics,” in In proceedings of the 2005 IEEE
9th International Conference on Rehabilitation
Robotics, 2005, no. July 2005, pp. 465–468.

5

1st IFSA Winter Conference on Automation, Robotics & Communications for Industry 4.0 (ARCI’ 2021),
3-5 February 2021, Chamonix-Mont-Blanc, France
[15] T. Kanda, T. Hirano, D. Eaton, and H. Ishiguro,
“Interactive robots as social partners and peer tutors for
children: a field trial,” Human-Computer Interact., vol.
19, no. 1, pp. 61–84, 2004.
[16] P. S. Lum, C. G. Burgar, P. C. Shor, M. Majmundar,
and M. Van der Loos, “Robot-Assisted Movement
Training Compared With Conventional Therapy
Techniques for the Rehabilitation of Upper-Limb Motor
Function After Stroke,” Arch Phys Med Rehabil Vol,
vol. 83, no. July, pp. 952–959, 2002.
[17] P. Rani, N. Sarkar, C. A. Smith, and J. A. Adams,
“Anxiety detection for implicit human-machine
interaction,” in in IEEE International Conference on
Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, 2003.
[18] I. Moon, S. Joung, and Y. Kum, “Safe and Reliable
Intelligent Wheelchair Robot with Human Robot
Interaction,” in Proceedings of the 2002 IEEE
International Conference on Robotics 8 Automation,
2002, no. May, pp. 3595–3600.
[19] H. A. Yanco, “Development and Testing of a Robotic
Wheelchair System for Outdoor Navigation,” in In
Proceedings of the 2001 Conference of the
Rehabilitation Engineering and Assistive Technology
Society of North America, 2001, pp. 1–3.
[20] R. G. C. Antunes, “A Robotic System for
Musculoskeletal Rehabilitation of the Shoulder
Biomedical Engineering,” 2016.
[21] COVID-19 test robot as a tireless colleague in the fight
against
the
virus,
https://www.kuka.com/ende/press/news/2020/06/robot-helps-with-coronavirustests, 2020. .

[23] https://www.shutterstock.com/image-photo/smartrobot-installed-inside-greenhouse-care-765510412.
[24] M. Bergerman et al., “Robot farmers: Autonomous
orchard vehicles help tree fruit production,” IEEE
Robot. Autom. Mag., vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 54–63, 2015.
[25] G. Freitas, J. Zhang, B. Hamner, M. Bergerman, and G.
Kantor, “A low-cost, practical localization system for
agricultural vehicles,” in Lecture Notes in Computer
Science (including subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial
Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics), vol.
7508 LNAI, no. PART 3, 2012, pp. 365–375.
[26] M. Cooper, D. Keating, W. Harwin, and K.
Dautenhahn, “Robots in the classroom - tools for
accessible education,” in In: Assistive Technology on
the Threshold of the New Millennium, Assistive
Technology Research Series, C. Buhler and H. Knops,
Eds. Düsseldorf, Germany: ISO Press, 1999, pp. 448–
452.
[27] J. Han, M. Jo, S. Park, and S. Kim, “The Educational
Use of Home Robots for Children,” in ROMAN 2005.
IEEE International Workshop on Robot and Human
Interactive Communication, 2005., 2005, pp. 378–383.
[28] https://eos.org/features/underground-robots-howrobotics-is-changing-the-mining-industry.
[29] C. Clabaugh, K. Tsiakas, and M. Matarić, “Predicting
Preschool Mathematics Performance of Children with a
Socially Assistive Robot Tutor,” in Proceedings of the
Synergies between Learning and Interaction
Workshop@ IROS, 2017, no. November, pp. 24–28.
[30] http://caitlynclabaugh.info/.

[22] P. Baxter, G. Cielniak, M. Hanheide, and P. From, “Safe
Human-Robot Interaction in Agriculture,” in HRI’18
Companion, Session: Late-Breaking Reports, 2018, no.
March.

6

