A Novel Magnetic Respiratory Sensor for Human Healthcare
Kee Young Hwang1, Valery Ortiz Jimenez1, Baleeswaraiah Muchharla1, Tatiana Eggers1,
Anh-Tuan Le2, Vu Dinh Lam3, and Manh-Huong Phan1,*
1
2
3

Department of Physics, University of South Florida, Tampa, Florida 33620, USA

Phenikaa University Nano Institute (PHENA), Phenikaa University, Hanoi 12116, Vietnam

Gradduate University of Science and Technology (GUST), Vietnam Academy of Science and
Technology, 18 Hoang Quoc Viet, Ha Noi, Vietnam

Breathing is vital to life. Therefore, the real-time monitoring of a patient’s breathing pattern is
crucial to respiratory rehabilitation therapies such as magnetic resonance exams for respiratorytriggered imaging, chronic pulmonary disease treatment, and synchronized functional electrical
stimulation. While numerous respiratory devices have been developed, they are often in direct
contact with a patient, which can yield inaccurate or limited data. In this study, we developed a
novel, non-invasive, and contactless magnetic sensing platform that can precisely monitor a
patient’s breathing, movement, or sleep patterns, thus providing efficient monitoring at a clinic
or home. A magneto-LC resonance (MLCR) sensor converts the magnetic oscillations generated
by a patient’s breathing into an impedance spectrum, which allows for a deep analysis of one’s
breath variation to identify respiratory-related diseases like COVID-19. Owing to its ultrahigh
sensitivity, the MLCR sensor yields a distinct breathing pattern for each patient tested. The
sensor also provides an accurate measure of the strength of a patient’s breath at multiple stages
as well as anomalous variations in respiratory rate and amplitude. This suggests that the MLCR
sensor can detect symptoms of COVID-19 in a patient due to shortness of breath or difficulty
breathing as well as track the disease’s progress in real time.
*Corresponding author: phanm@usf.edu (M.H.P)

1. Introduction
Bacteria and viruses threaten our lives on a daily basis and are responsible for severe
plagues. To prevent further infection, it is essential to develop high-performance healthcare
monitoring devices that can detect a pathogen and provide accurate health condition data and
progress [1,2]. For instance, the development of novel respiratory devices to monitor breathing
has advanced healthcare service, especially for those experiencing asthma or chronic obstructive
pulmonary diseases.
In December 2019, the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2),
also known as COVID-19, began to spread across the globe and has since caused the suffering
and loss of life of millions of people [3,4]. This deadly virus has a structure similar to severe
acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) and is highly contagious as it can spread from one person to
another through air [5]. To limit the spread of COVID-19 and to help doctors in clinical decision
making, it is critical to have fast screening and real-time monitoring of symptoms and growth at
all stages (early, intermediate, and severe). Although detecting and tracking COVID-19
represents an incredibly challenging task, recent efforts have been devoted to achieving this
ultimate goal [6-13].
One well-known method to detect the virus is based on the reverse transcriptase
quantitative polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR) [6,7]. By collecting samples from subjects
and using the reverse transcriptase enzyme, a complementary viral DNA (cDNA) is created from
the RNA of the virus. Some portions of cDNA go through a polymerase chain reaction and can
thus be detected after an amplification process [8]. Another method for detecting COVID-19
uses an electronic sensor. A field-effect transistor (FET), which can bind to COVID-19, has been
developed and real-time changes to the electric signal have been demonstrated [9]. Optical

biosensors and biochemical tests have also been employed to detect this deadly virus [10-12].
Despite the advantages they provide, these sensors are vulnerable to human contact, inaccuracy
with small amounts of sample, and usually have long processing times [13].
Common symptoms of COVID-19 include: (i) shortness of breath or difficulty breathing,
(ii) cough, and (iii) fever. Some patients suffer symptoms similar to lung disease such as
pneumonia [5]. During the infection period, a patient likely experiences shortness of breath or
difficulty breathing, which can be detected using a real-time respiratory monitoring device [1416]. Current respiratory monitoring techniques are based on the impedance pneumography of the
respiratory inductance plethysmography (RIP). By attaching electrodes to a patient’s chest, the
expansion and contraction of the chest causes a change in electrical impedance that can be
expressed as the motion of respiration [15]. However, this contact-based method comes with
limited sensitivity and reliability. It is also an inconvenient method to perform actual tests, such
as children’s respiratory monitoring. Therefore, there is an urgent need for the development of
contactless devices that enable early and fast detection of COVID-19 or related diseases and
track their growth rates in real time.
In this paper, we present a novel, non-invasive, and contactless magnetic sensing
platform that integrates an ultrasensitive magneto-LC resonance (MLCR) sensor with a tiny
permanent magnet for applications in healthcare monitoring. We demonstrate how to use this
sensing platform to monitor respiratory motion (frequency, amplitude, shortness of breath, etc.)
in real time and the analysis of patients’ breathing pattern at different ages, at multiple stages,
after holding breath, in both wake-up and sleep modes. Based on these findings, we propose an
innovative approach that integrates magnetic sensing with machine learning for the fast
screening and real-time tracking of COVID-19 and related viruses.

2. Magneto-LC Resonance Based Respiratory Monitoring
The MLCR sensor that utilizes the advantages of the giant magneto-impedance (GMI)
effect of an ultrasoft magnetic Co-rich microwire [16] and an LC resonance circuit of an
inductive coil made of the Co-rich microwire has recently been developed by our group for real
time respiratory monitoring [17] and for spintronics applications [18]. Details of the design and
fabrication of the MLCR sensor have been reported in Ref. [17]. In this study, we aimed to
optimize the sensing capacity of the MLCR sensor. To do so, we performed a systematic
investigation on the sensitivity of the MLCR sensor as a function of the operation frequency and
the distance between the sensor and the targeted sensing object. To determine the optimized
operation frequency and distance from the MMC sensor to a tiny permanent magnet, a vibrator
with a non-magnetic arm was used. The waveform driving the vibrator was sinusoidal wave with
0.1 Hz frequency with 3.3 V amplitude, which was 0.5 cm from top to bottom. Changes in the
external magnetic field, due to vibration of the permanent magnet, drives a change in the
impedance of the MLCR sensor, corresponding to the highest and lowest peaks, which is defined
as the sensitivity of the MLCR sensor (i.e. sensitivity = Zh – Zl, where Zh and Zl are the highest
and lowest values of impedance). Figure 1a displays a typical vibrating (or breathing) pattern
measured by the MLCR sensor as it detects the magnetic signal of a vibrating permanent magnet
that was located 5 cm away from the sensor. By studying the effect of variation of operation
frequency from 60 to 140 MHz on the sensor’s sensitivity, we found the optimal operation
frequency of 80 MHz to achieve the highest sensitivity (see Fig. 1b). Using this optimal
operation frequency, we investigated the effect of changing the distance between the sensor and
the permanent magnet on the sensor sensitivity and found that the 5 cm distance is optimal for
magnetic respiratory monitoring using the MLCR sensor (see Fig. 1c). Therefore, in the thesis

research, we operated the MLCR sensor at f = 80 MHz and placed it at d = 5 cm from the
permanent magnet for all breathing monitoring experiments.

Fig. 1 (a) Real-time monitoring of a vibrator’s motion with a vibration frequency of 0.1 Hz and
an optimal distance of 5 cm from a tiny permanent magnet. This simulates the normal breathing
patterns of a patient; (b) The sensitivity of the MLCR sensor versus frequency at a distance 5 cm
away from a vibrating tiny permanent magnet; (c) the sensitivity of the MLCR sensor versus
distance (d) for f = 80 MHz; (d) a patient lays down on a comfortable bed for real-time
respiratory monitoring.
To examine the sensing capacity and consistency of the MLCR sensor in monitoring
human respiratory motion in real time, we designed experiments with the sensor held on a non-

magnetic arm at a distance of 5 cm away from a tiny permanent magnet (e.g., NdFeB) mounted
to the skin of a test subject. As the test subject breathes in and out, the chest will rise and fall,
which generates a corresponding magnetic field change of the permanent magnet tracked by the
MLCR. In other words, the motion of the permanent magnet is converted into an impedance
change of the MLCR sensor. To perform human respiratory motion tests, we have designed a
comfortable test configuration as illustrated in Fig. 1d.
3. Real-Time Human Healthcare Monitoring
3.1. Real-time monitoring of human respiratory motion at different ages
Research has shown that respiratory rate or breathing frequency decreases with age [1925]. For instance, an infant (1 to 12 moths) breathes between 30 to 60 times per minute, toddlers
(1-2 years) breathe anywhere from 24 to 40 times per minute, and preschoolers (3-5 years)
breathe between 22 to 34 times per minute. While school-aged children (6-18 years) breathe
anywhere from 18 to 30 times per minute, an adult (18-35 years) breathes between 12 to 18 times
per minute. Elderly people (> 50 years) have respiratory rates between 16 and 25 breaths per
minute. A respiratory rate of more than 25 breaths per minute may indicate a respiratory issue
such as tachypnea [24,25].
Therefore, it is essential to examine if the magnetic respiratory device can precisely
monitor and distinguish breathing patterns of people at different ages. The tests were performed
on three volunteered subjects (a, b, c) of ages 30, 36, and 42 years old (YO). The results shown
in Fig. 2(a-c) indicated that the 30 YO breathed the strongest and at a rate of 13 times per
minute. The 36 YO breathed 15 times per minute and the 42 YO breathed 17 times per minute.
The tests were repeated several times and showed reproducible and consistent results (see Fig.

2(d-f)). These results demonstrate that each person has a characteristic breathing pattern. When
one gets older, they breathe weaker and the number of breaths per minute increases. This finding
is consistent with those reported in previous works [19-25].

Fig. 2 Normal breathing patterns of three subjects of ages (a) 30, (b) 36, and (c) 42 years old.
Tests were repeated five times and showed consistent and reproducible results in number of
breaths per minute for each subject (d-f).
Shortness of breath or abnormal breathing is noticed near t = 20 s for the 30 YO, between
20-40 s for the 36 YO, and at 35 and 45 s for the 42 YO in Fig. 2(a-c). To gain more information
from these features, we analyzed the peak-to-peak time and plotted it as a function of time. As
one can see in Fig. 3(a-c), there are some abnormal changes in the breathing pattern at the
previously mentioned times. Such features of abnormal breathing or shortness of breath are not
detectable by an Apple Watch tracker or a commercially available respiratory monitor. This
demonstrates the increased capacity of our ultrasensitive magnetic respiratory device for human
healthcare monitoring.

Fig. 3 Peak-to-peak time as a function of time for three subjects aged (a) 30, (b) 36, and (c) 42
years old. These abnormal breathing patterns are related to those seen in Fig. 2.
3.2 Real-time monitoring of human respiratory motion in multiple breathing states
In practical applications, it is essential that a sensor is able to precisely monitor a
patient’s breathing in various and complex states in real time [24,25]. Existing respiratory
monitoring devices are unable to provide this information. In this study, we tested the ability of
the MLCR sensor to monitor a patient’s respiratory motion in simple and complex breathing
states. Subject 1 was instructed to breathe in two different states, namely, the normal and deep
breathing states. The MLCR sensor precisely tracked how his/her breath (breathing amplitude
and rate) varied and transitioned from one state to another (Fig. 4), which demonstrates the
excellent capacity of the MLCR sensor for real-time tracking of a patient’s health progress.

Fig. 4 Breathing patterns of Subject 1 (30 YO) in normal (State 1) and deep (State 2) breathing
states. The sensor provided an accurate measure of the strength of breath at these two states. An
obvious breathing transition from the first to the second state is observed.
It has been reported that breathing training can significantly enhance health and physical
performance in humans [24]. A proper breath holding technique can increase the amount of
carbon dioxide in our cells and help us reveal personal issues we need to confront [25,26]. It has
been shown that breath control improves lung function, which in turn preserves the health of
stem cells and improves longevity, as well as promotes the regeneration of new tissues in the
brain [27]. It has been reported that daily exercise of breath control can positively impact the
sympathetic nervous system and the immune system by increasing the production of antiinflammatory mediators [24-26].
In this regard, we explored the ultrahigh sensitivity of the MLCR sensor for real-time
tracking of a patient’s breathing in multiple/complex states from holding breath (State 1) to the
release of breath (State 2) and the return to normal breathing (State 3). A clear understanding of

this complex breathing process provides valuable information of the patient’s health and may
help doctors to develop an appropriate treatment plan for the patient. In our study, subjects 2 and
3 were instructed to first hold their breath as long as they could (State 1), then release their
breath (State 2), and finally come back to normal breathing (State 3). The selected test results are
displayed in Fig. 5.

Fig. 5 Breathing patterns of subjects aged (a) 36 and (b) 42 years old at three different states;
State 1: breath holding, State 2: breath releasing, and State 3: normal breathing.
It is worth noticing in this figure that both the subjects underwent three distinguishable
states, which were precisely tracked by the MLCR sensor. Subject 2 held the longest breath for
47 s (State 1) and, after releasing the breath, took 15 s to catch their breath (State 2) before
returning to normal breathing (State 3). Meanwhile, Subject 3 held their longest breath for 30 s
(State 1) and, after releasing the breath, took only 10 s to catch their breath (State 2) before
returning to normal breathing (State 3). Compared to Subject 3, Subject 2 breathed more
regularly after releasing their breath toward the normal breathing state. These findings seem to
suggest that when getting older, one’s ability to hold his/her breath decreases to a shorter period

of time and they may experience more respiratory issues. Using this testing method, one can be
aware of their current health status and be encouraged to follow an appropriate breathing control
method to improve health and physical performance.
3.3 Real-time monitoring of human respiratory motion in wake-up and sleep modes
Nowadays, many people experience insomnia, sleep difficulties, dream sleep, or chronic
trouble falling asleep. According to the American Sleep Association (ASA), insomnia is the most
common sleep disorder [28]. Currently, about 30 percent of American adults are facing with
insomnia. Insomnia can arise for various reasons such as irritability, depression or anxiety, stress
from multiple work tasks, medical conditions, or mental health disorders and it can reduce our
health, work performance, and quality of life. Research has shown that breathing training
techniques can help us relax, sleep, and breathe more naturally and effectively [24,29]. Before
using such techniques, it is essential to understand what affects our breathing before, during, and
after our sleep [29]. In this context, there is an urgent need for the development of a highly
sensitive, contactless respiratory monitoring device that can precisely monitor human respiratory
motion in real time in these states. Owing to its ultrahigh sensitivity, the MLCR sensor is
expected to fulfil this requirement.
In this study, we examined the capacity of the MLCR sensor in monitoring a patient’s
respiratory motion during sleep, as well as tracking a transition of his/her respiratory motion
from wake-up mode to sleep mode. First, we show how respiratory motion of a patient can be
tracked in real time during sleep by the MLCR sensor. In this case, the breathing pattern of
Subject 2 (36 YO) was tracked while the subject was sleeping. As one can see clearly in Fig. 6,
the sleeping patterns were clearly recorded. It is worth noticing that an abnormal breathing or a

shortness of breath occurred around t = 80 s. This may suggest that this subject experiences some
respiratory problems or associated diseases.

Fig. 6 Breathing pattern of Subject 2 (36 YO) during 180 s of sleep and periodic sleeping
patterns were observed.
Next, we tracked how the respiratory motion of a patient (Subject 1 and Subject 3)
changed during their wake-up or sleep period, as well as from the transition from wake to sleep
mode. The breathing patterns of Subject 1 (30 YO) were continuously tracked from wake to
sleep mode, the result of which is shown in Fig. 7. This figure clearly shows a clear breathing
transition of the subject from the wake-up to the sleep mode. It is also worth noting that in sleep
mode, the subject breathed more deeply (higher amplitude) and slowly (11 times per minute) as
compared to the wake mode (12 times per minute). In a similar fashion, the breathing patterns of
Subject 3 (42 YO) were continuously tracked from wake to sleep mode (see Fig. 8). The sensor
precisely tracked how his breath transitioned from wake to sleep mode. In sleep mode, the
subject breathed more deeply (higher amplitude) and slowly (14 times per minute) as compared

to the wake mode (20 times per minute). The results obtained from both Subject 1 and Subject 2
consistently pinpoint the fact that, in a normal sleep mode, one tends to relax and sleep better
than during the wake mode. Relative to Subject 1, there is more of a difference in the respiratory
rate between the wake and sleep mode found for Subject 3. This suggests that older people tend
to relax more during sleep [29].

Fig. 7 (a) Breathing patterns of Subject 1 in both wake and sleep modes. An obvious transition
from the wake to sleep mode was observed. (b) and (c) show the wake and sleep breathing
patterns over 1 min.
In addition, the ultrahigh sensitivity of the MLCR sensor enables the detection of
abnormal breathing around t = 40 s in both the wake-up and sleep breathing patterns for Subject
3. This indicates that the noticed abnormal breathing is intrinsic to Subject 2 and that this subject
should be aware of this potential respiratory issue or related disease (e.g., chronic pulmonary
disease) and should thus perform daily breathing training/exercises to resolve it [24,29].

Fig. 8 (a) Breathing patterns of Subject 3 in both wake and sleep modes. An obvious transition
from the wake to the sleep mode was observed. (b) and (c) show the wake-up and sleep breathing
patterns per 1 min.
4. Summary and Future Outlook
We have developed an innovative, contactless magnetic respiratory monitoring platform
based on ultrasensitive magneto-LC resonance (MLCR) technology and a permanent magnet.
This technology has been successfully applied to test human respiratory motion in real time and
in different states. We demonstrated that the MLCR sensor can track a person’s breathing pattern
very precisely in real time over the course of multiple states (normal breathing, holding breath,
and sleeping). Owing to its ultrahigh sensitivity, the sensor yielded a distinct breathing pattern
for each person tested and revealed abnormal breathing, which is superior to existing respiratory
monitoring devices. We have shown that when getting older, one usually manifests weaker
breathing marked by an increasing breathing rate. He/she tends to hold his/her breath for a

shorter period of time and often experiences more with respiratory issues than younger people.
People become more relaxed, thus breath more regularly and slowly while sleeping as compared
to the wake-up mode. Our highly sensitive magnetic respiratory monitor provides not only
valuable information on a patient’s current health status, but also a novel breathing control tool
for improving our health and physical performance.
Through these studies, we also identify several exciting and important applications of our
novel magnetic respiratory monitoring technology for advanced human healthcare systems. In
particular, research on the practical implementation of this technique for the fast screening and
real-time tracking of COVID-19 or associated viruses is very exciting and worth pursuing.
Monitoring COVID-19 patients remotely with the MLCR detector and collecting data from
numerous physiological signals, with the help of machine learning, would improve clinical
decision making for providers [29-32]. The Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) algorithm, which
converts a signal from the time domain to the frequency domain and vice versa, can be used to
extract spectral features from breathing patterns. This can also be used by machine learning and
other algorithms for signal processing and to provide comprehensive information on a patient’s
health status and physical performance.
Acknowledgements
Research at USF was supported by the USF Covid19 Research Foundation under Grant number
125300. The work was also supported by Vietnam Ministry of Science and Technology through
the national-level project ĐTĐLCN.17/19.

References
1. C. Higgins, Temperature correction of blood gas and pH measurement - an unresolved
controversy, January 2016
2. L. Shaw-Taylor, An introduction to the history of infectious diseases, epidemics and the
early phases of the long-run decline in mortality, The Economic History Review. 73
(2020) E1, 19 p.
3. A. C. Walls, Y.-J. Park, M. A. Tortorici, A. Wall, A.T. McGuire, D. Veesler, Structure,
Function, and Antigenicity of the SARSCoV-2 Spike Glycoprotein. Cell 181 (2020)
281−292.
4. P. Zhou, X.-L. Yang, X.-G. Wang, B. Hu, L. Zhang, W. Zhang, H.-R. Si, Y. Zhu, B. Li,
C.-L. Huang, H.-D. Chen, J. Chen, Y. Luo, H. Guo, R.-D. Jiang, M.-Q. Liu, Y. Chen, X.R. Shen, X. Wang, X.-S. Zheng, et al., A Pneumonia Outbreak Associated with a New
coronavirus of probable bat origin, Nature 579 (2020) 270–273.
5. D. Kumar, O. Manuel, Y. Natori, H. Egawa, P. Grossi, S.-H. Han, M. Fernandez- Ruiz,
A. Humar, COVID-19: A Global Transplant Perspective on Successfully Navigating a
Pandemic. Am. J. Transplant. 27 (2020) 1773-1779.
6. E. Spackman, D. A. Senne, T. J. Myers, L. L. Bulaga, L. P. Garber, M. L. Perdue, K.
Lohman, L. T. Daum, D. L. Suarez, Development of a Real-Time Reverse Transcriptase
PCR Assay for Type A Influenza Virus and the Avian H5 and H7 Hemagglutinin
Subtypes. J. Clin. Microbiol. 40 (2002) 3256−3260.
7. J. Wu, J. Liu, S. Li, Z. Peng, Z. Xiao, X. Wang, R. Yan, J. Luo, Detection and Analysis
of Nucleic Acid in Various Biological Samples of COVID-19 Patients, Travel Med.
Infect. Dis. 2020, 101673.

8. S. A. Marras, Selection of Fluorophore and Quencher Pairs for Fluorescent Nucleic Acid
Hybridization Probes. Methods Mol. Biol. 335 (2006) 3−16.
9. G. Seo, G. Lee, M. J. Kim, S.-H. Baek, M. Choi, K. B. Ku, C.-S. Lee, S. Jun, D. Park, H.
G. Kim, et al., Detection of COVID-19 Causative Virus (SARS-CoV-2) in Human
Nasopharyngeal Swab Specimens Using Field-Effect Transistor-Based Biosensor. ACS
Nano 14 (2020) 5135−5142.
10. S. A. Maier, Plasmonics: Fundamentals and Applications; Springer Science & Business
Media: New York, NY, 2007; pp 6−10.
11. F. S. Ligler, M. Breimer, J. P. Golden, D. A. Nivens, J. P. Dodson, T. M. Green, D. P.
Haders, O. A. Sadik, Integrating Waveguide Biosensor. Anal. Chem. 74 (2002) 713−719.
12. K. K.-W. To, O. T.-Y. Tsang, W.-S. Leung, A. R. Tam, T.-C. Wu, D. C. Lung, C. Yip,
C.-Y.; J.-P. Cai, J. M.-C. Chan, T. S.-H. Chik, et al., Temporal Profiles of Viral Load in
Posterior Oropharyngeal Saliva Samples and Serum Antibody Responses During
Infection by SARS-CoV-2: An Observational Cohort Study. Lancet Infect. Dis. 20 (2020)
565−574.
13. N. Bhalla, Y. Pan, Z. Yang, and A. Farokh Payam, Opportunities and Challenges for
Biosensors and Nanoscale Analytical Tools for Pandemics: COVID-19, ACS Nano 14
(2020) 7783-7807.
14. S. R. Braun, Respiratory rate and pattern, in: H.K. Walker, W.D. Hall, J.W. Hurst (Eds.),
Clinical Method: The History, Physical, and Laboratory Examinations, fourth ed.,
Butterworths, Massachusetts, 1990, pp. 226–230 (Ch. 43).
15. D.R. Hess, N.R. MacIntyre, W.F. Galvin, Respiratory Care: Principles and Practice, third
ed., Jones & Bartlett Learning, Massachusetts, 2016.

16. M.H. Phan, H.X. Peng, Giant magnetoimpedance materials: Fundamentals and
applications, Prog. Mater. Sci. 53 (2008) 323-420.
17. O. Thiabgoh, T. Eggers, M.H. Phan, A new contactless magneto-LC resonance
technology for real-time respiratory motion monitoring, Sensors and Actuators A 265
(2017) 120–126.
18. V.O. Jimenez, V. Kalappattil, T. Eggers, M. Bonilla, S. Kolekar, P. T. Huy, M. Batzill,
M.H. Phan, A magnetic sensor using a 2D van der Waals ferromagnetic material, Nature:
Scientific Reports 10 (2020) 4789.
19. A.R. Fekr, M. Janidarmian, K. Radecka, Z. Zilic, A medical cloud-based platform for
respiration rate measurement and hierarchical classification of breath disorders, Sensors.
14 (2014) 11204-11224.
20. F.Q. Al-Khalidi, R. Saatchi, D. Burke, H. Elphick, S. Tan, Respiration rate monitoring
methods: a review, Pediatr. Pulmonol. 46 (2011) 523-529.
21. B. Padasdao, E. Shahhaidar, C. Stickley, O. Boric-Lubecke, Electromagnetic biosensing
of respiratory rate, IEEE Sens. J. 13 (2013) 4204-4211.
22. L. Battista, A new system for continuous and remote monitoring of patients receiving
home mechanical ventilation, Rev. Sci. Instrum. 87 (2016) 095105.
23. S.D. Min, J.K. Kim, H.S. Shin, Y.H. Yun, C.K. Lee, M. Lee, Noncontact respiration rate
measurement system using an ultrasonic proximity sensor, IEEE Sensors. J. 10 (2010)
1732-1739.
24. T. Daiana da Costa, M. de Fatima Fernandes Vara, C. Santos Cristino, T. Zoraski
Zanella, G. Nunes Nogueira Neto and P. Nohama, Breathing Monitoring and Pattern

Recognition with Wearable Sensors, Book Chapter 2019, DOI:
10.5772/intechopen.85460
25. S.D. Kelley, M.A.E. Ramsay, Respiratory rate monitoring: characterizing performance
for emerging technologies, Anesth. Analg. 119 (2014) 1246-1248.
26. R.J. Skow, T.A. Day, J.E. Fuller, C.D. Bruce, and C.D. Steinback, The ins and outs of
breath holding: simple demonstrations of complex respiratory physiology, Adv. Physiol.
Educ. 39 (2015) 223–231.
27. A. Ocampo and J. Carlos Izpisua Belmonte, SIRT7 and Stem Cell Aging: Holding Your
Breath for Longevity, Science. 347 (2015) 1319–1320.
28. https://www.sleepassociation.org/
29. B. Shan, Y. Y. Broza, W. Li, Y. Wang, S. Wu, Z.Z. Liu, J. Wang, S. Gui, L. Wang, Z.H.
Zhang, W. Liu, S.B. Zhou, et al., Multiplexed Nanomaterial-Based Sensor Array for
Detection of COVID-19 in Exhaled Breath, ACS Nano 14 (2020) 12125-12132.
30. R. Funari, K.Y. Chu, A.Q. Shen, Detection of antibodies against SARS-CoV-2 spike
protein by gold nanospikes in an opto-microfluidic chip, Biosensors and
Bioelectronics 169 (2020) 112578.
31. R.R.X. Lim, A. Bonanni, The potential of electrochemistry for the detection of
coronavirus-induced infections. TrAC Trends in Analytical Chemistry 133 (2020)
116081.
32. M. Fani, M. Zandi, S. Soltani, S. Abbasi. Future developments in biosensors for field‐
ready SARS‐CoV‐2 virus diagnostics, Biotechnology and Applied
Biochemistry 2020, https://doi.org/10.1002/bab.2033.

