Effect of Social Media Use on Mental Health during Lockdown in
India
Sweta Swarnam
Symbiosis Centre for Information Technology,
Symbiosis International (Deemed University), Pune, India
Email:sweta.swarnam@associates.scit.edu

Abstract
This research paper studies about the role of social media use and increase the risk factor of
mental health during covid 19 or lockdown. Although few studies have been conducted on the role
about the effect of social media use on mental health during lockdown and impact on human
reactive nature during lockdown. As a rapidly spreading pandemic, a biomedical disease has
serious physical and tremendous mental health implications. An occupational community of
internal migrant workers is one of the most vulnerable, but neglected, and is likely to develop
psychological ill-effects due to COVID-19's double whammy impact. Mental health is a crucial
aspect that needs to be addressed during this lock-down as all modes of communication revolve
around the virus. There are many difficulties with the unprecedented changes that have occurred
so quickly due to the pandemic and stay-at - home confinement to achieve social distance and
mitigate the risk of infection. These include impaired health, well-being, and sleep as a result of
daily routine disruption, anxiety, worry, isolation, greater stress on family and work, and excessive
screen time. An essential part of our overall health and well-being is mental and emotional health.
An important skill is managing emotions and maintaining emotional balance. It helps you face
challenges and stress when you manage your emotional health. Lack of skills in emotional
regulation may lead to poor mental health and relationship difficulties. It is as important to look
after our mental health as it is to look after our physical health. For mental health professionals,
the pandemic has also brought many ethical challenges. Personal protection, personal treatment
needs if they get infected, impact on others if they get infected, economic crisis, ethical problems
for themselves and others, and training are the issues that concern mental health professionals. In
the wake of the pandemic, the training of residents has also been compromised. The ways of
learning for medical students and residents may also change, leading to an opportunity to
innovate. This research concentrates upon the above-mentioned purpose and tries to bring out the
fact about the same. This study shows us the effect on mental health by spending more time in
social media during lockdown, what its impact on their mental health during lockdown in different
age groups and how to reduce spending more time on social media to avoid depression and keep
mental condition positive.

Keywords
Social Media, Mental health, depression, Lockdown and Covid 19.

1

1. Introduction
During this lockdown people are started spending huge amount of time on social media and for
many youths nowadays, social media has been popular aspects of life. Whether positive or
negative, most people engage with social media without stopping to think about what the effects
are on our lives. Social networking is a perfect place to rapidly distribute content across the world,
with posts like "breaking news" earning hundreds of thousands of retweets in minutes. Although
social media impacts people positively, it also has negative impacts on people. Social networking
has been described primarily to refer to "the many fairly inexpensive and widely available online
resources that make it easier for everyone to publish and access knowledge, cooperate on a
collaborative project or create relationships. It has become a forum of discussion of every single
social issue that is taking place. In the current situation, one of the most pathetic and to – bother
social media use and increase the risk factor of mental health of humans. This has been increasing
day by day at nook and corner of the country. Mindfulness simply means being in the present
without thinking about the past or the future; choosing what you react to, rather than being carried
away by everything that appears in your mind or experience; being non-judgmental and cultivating
an attitude of impermanence towards things and situations, focusing on one thing at a time. This
allows us to remain open to experiences and allows you not to be overly affected by them.
The sparse literature on the effects of epidemics on mental health relates more to the sequelae of
the disease itself than to social distancing (e.g., mothers of children with congenital Zika
syndrome). Large-scale disasters, however, whether traumatic (e.g., World Trade Center attacks
or mass shootings), natural (e.g., hurricanes), or environmental (e.g., Deep-water Horizon oil spill),
are almost always accompanied by increased depression, posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD),
drug use disorder It seems likely that there will be significant increases in anxiety and depression,
substance use, loneliness, and domestic violence in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic; and
with schools closed, there is a very real possibility of an epidemic of child abuse In most developed
countries, suicide is the second leading cause of death among young people, exceeded only by
accidents. One of the strongest known suicide predictors is self-harm. In the India both suicide and
self-harm have increased in young people, and social media has played a prominent role in how
young people communicate about self-harm in lockdown. No matter people are staying with their
family, friends or alone reason behind this people are not allowed to go out of home and getting
more free time as compare to normal situation, how long they talk with others so at last they started
using Facebook, whasapp, twitter etc.
Originality and value: A lot of studies have been conducted an effect of social media use on mental
health during lockdown human behavior but the catalytic effects of said media is still under
studied. Our research aims to address this gap by undertaking a primary study to understand how
social media plays the part of a mental health in lockdown. Social networking sites like Facebook
and Twitter are being widely used as an open forum to discuss social and public issues like politics,
human rights, climate change etc. Research on the catalytic effects of these platforms is invaluable
in today's time.
Not everything is bad: the positive effects of social media on people in lockdown. Social media is
here to stay and can be a tool that is useful and efficient. The following positive functions can be
served by social media:

2

a) Connection: Social media, especially if you can't connect in person, can be a great way to
stay in touch with friends and family. It can also help us to meet new individuals and find
individuals with similar interests. Social media can also be a way to connect with
individuals you admire or inspire and can be a way to inspire and motivate others.
b) Self-promotion/Marketing: Social media is a legitimate way to promote our brand or
company and to raise awareness of your interests, hobbies, charities or business ventures.
It can be a way to disseminate quality information if used effectively and can be an avenue
to improve our financial position and help with future opportunities for employment.
c) Positive feedback: Social media can impact your psyche positively because, let's face it,
praise feels good. The idea is not to post only to receive positive feedback, but if you post
about something you feel good about or something you have discovered or accomplished,
receiving encouragement and praise can have a positive impact on your mindset, it can
improve your self-concept and it can increase your motivation to continue pursuing your
goals.
d) Health & Well-being: In improving both their physical and psychological well-being, many
individuals have found social media helpful. Examples include applications, websites, and
online forums that promote self-care, resilience, and a healthy lifestyle and provide
accurate information and strategies to help individuals create and maintain emotional wellbeing.
Social Media’s Dark Side: Negative Effects of Social Media on people
a) Self-promotion: When you present a false view of your life for no other purpose than to get
followers or to be a follower, inauthentic self-promotion is. It has no real meaning or
purpose, and rather than based on a strong sense of identity and values, your self-concept
is highly influenced by the perception of you by others. Instagram has recently started a
trial in Australia, Brazil, Canada and four other nations, eliminating the ability for others
to see how many likes a post has received, perhaps as a way to enhance the significance
and authenticity of responses to posts from individuals.
b) Vulnerable to cyber-bullying & trolling: Participating in social media opens you up from
both people you know and from strangers to threats and potentially psychologically and
physically dangerous situations. The risk of being trolled or stalked is run by everyone who
has set up a public profile. Alternatively, individuals, and perhaps mostly young people,
have the ability to say or do something that is deemed inappropriate or irresponsible online,
and this can have a significant impact on their future job prospects, their relationships, and
even their community status.
c) Isolation: One of the most important factors in maintaining mental health and well-being
is social connexion, and although social media can help increase connexions with others,
it can also account for the rise in our society's loneliness. People choose to interact more
and more through social media platforms and experience less and less interaction between
individuals. This lack of real-life interaction practice can lead to problems such as social
anxiety, avoidance behaviors, problems with self-esteem and depression.
d) Distraction: Social media can be a major distraction from important aspects of life, such
as spending quality time or achieving life goals with loved ones. Overuse can lead to poor,
procrastinating and even dependent sleeping habits. During assignments that require focus
and attention, social media can make people less aware. One of the most relevant

3

behaviours that have arisen from the rise of social media and smartphones is distraction
while driving.
In this context, the purpose of our research is to find out how social media effecting and increasing
the risk factor of mental health like depression during this lockdown and what will be the solution
to avoid more use of social media in free time how to engage our self in other work to keep mental
condition positive. In today's world, many of us rely on social media platforms to find and connect
with each other, including Facebook, Twitter, Snap chat, YouTube and Instagram.

2. Literature Review
All social media sources play a major role in the online information ecosystem and generate
engagement from millions of social media users. We define junk health news and information
sources by evaluating whether or not their content is extremist, sensationalist, conspiratorial, or
commentary masked as news in Lockdown. India reported the first case of COVID-19 on 30
January 2020 and the numbers have steadily increased since then, albeit at an alarming rate in the
final days of March. Since 24 March 2020, the world's largest democracy has implemented the
world's largest nationwide lockdown in order to control community transmission (The Lancet,
2020). Given the high population density, socio-economic fabric and overstretched health-care
infrastructure, the country remains vulnerable to COVID-19. The only immediately available, best
and ideal solution to the COVID-19 pandemic control in India was the overall lockdown. At
multiple levels, the Indian government has responded appropriately, adequately and quickly to the
COVID-19 pandemic. The lockdown has helped India to buy crucial time: time for extensive
contact tracking, time to ramp up testing, and most importantly, time to prepare our health system,
enhance its health care infrastructure, and prevent it from overwhelming. During this covid 19
India is under lockdown and forcing people into home confinement. We were interested in
characterizing the change in social media use before going to bed, in sleep quality and timing, and
in the subjective experience of time passing, and their relationship with depression, anxiety and
stress levels. Some aspects of students’ mental health 80 will improve (e.g., aspects of daily stress)
while others will worsen (e.g., loneliness).To get a better understanding of factors explaining
change in mental health, we 82 further explore the impact of different individual and social factors
on change in mental 83 health. We consider COVID-19-related stressors, social network
integration within the 84 student community, social ties outside the student community, and
demographic factors. During crisis events, people often seek out event-related information to stay
informed of what is happening. However, when information from official channels is lacking or
disseminated irregularly, people may be at risk for exposure to rumors that fill the information
void. Stressful life events, extended home confinement, brutal grief, interfamilial violence, overuse
of the Internet and social media are factors that could influence the mental health of adolescents
during this period. The COVID-19 pandemic could result in increased psychiatric disorders such
as Post-Traumatic Stress, Depressive, and Anxiety Disorders, as well as grief-related symptoms.
Adolescents with psychiatric disorders are at risk of a break or change in their care and
management; they may experience increased symptoms. The new onset of Illness Anxiety
Disorder is likely to increase the COVID-19 pandemic and country-wide lockdown and cause
symptoms to worsen in diagnosed cases. Any simple flu-like sign increases anxiety and COVID19 is expected to have a more severe effect under current circumstances. Patients with Obsessive
Compulsive Disorder, particularly those with compulsive control, hoarding and washing, are at
4

higher risk. The contamination obsessions and washing compulsions could increase advice on
improving personal hygiene measures. Patients are more likely to resort to panic buying and
excessive hoarding of essential items in the face of ongoing lockdown, even though the states
guarantee continuous supply of essential items. For patients with recurrent depressive disorder,
lockdown is a major stress that jeopardizes normal daily routine, social rhythm and thus increases
levels of stress, which would further increase the level of cortisol, leading to a vicious exacerbation
of depressive symptoms. This is the same for chronic insomnia, generalized anxiety disorder, and
even suicide. It is the same for chronic insomnia, generalized anxiety disorder, and even suicide.
Pandemics, moreover, are not only a medical phenomenon. Inability to join, diminishing finances
and the long-term economic impact will have an impact on new and pre-existing common mental
health disorders. At the end of the day on 24 March, India, home to about one sixth of the world's
population, imposed a nationwide lockdown to combat the COVID-19 pandemic. India's lockdown
continued until June 7 after multiple extensions, followed by phased relaxations, barring
containment zones, where lockdowns are in place until the end of June. Although the state of
Kerala in India, through aggressive testing, contact tracing, and cooked meals, exemplified the
response to a pandemic of this scale, the country overall has been overwhelmed. Despite possible
underreporting of COVID-19 cases and deaths, India's lockdown or stay-at - home order strategy,
coupled with aggressive contact tracing, quarantining, and monitoring, is likely to have been
successful in initially keeping the spread of the virus in check The existence of the Integrated
Disease Surveillance Program, a national surveillance network, enabled India to deploy hundreds
of public health workers in rural, suburban, and urban communities to monitor millions of citizens
and identify disease clusters early enough to put in place containment measures. However, since
the lockdown was announced with less than 4 hours' notice, such measures have come at a steep
cost. In India, the COVID-19 outbreak began to escalate and, from 25 March 2020, a lockdown
was introduced to resist disease transmission. As India is a populous country, an inevitable method
of prevention was lockdown. Restrictions on different social practices and behavior were included
in the decrees imposed during the lockdown. People had to spend their time confined mostly to
their homes. Initially, school, college, and offices were closed and later partially or fully resumed
with the help of electronic devices and Internet facilities on the virtual platform. As part of the
regular schedule, extensive use of electronic equipment was included. Online classes are being
carried out for school and college students, meetings as well as office work. Sleep is a behavior
that includes various aspects, some of which can be evaluated using multiple quantitative
parameters such as sleep latency, inertia, sleep duration, and debt while daytime sleepiness; nap
details provide a qualitative overview. This change in the mode of work involving prolonged
screen time is understood to affect sleep. The psychological and physiological impact of
compromised sleep is well established. It can lead to mental health problems, metabolic disorders,
and circadian de-synchronization. The sedentary activity involving screen exposure time is
adversely affected by sleep rhythm. A non-governmental organization working on children's rights
and health has already reported that 88 percent of respondents experienced a massive increase in
screen exposure duration among Indian urban children. Digital media has become essential among
adolescents that affect sleep duration, cause late bed time and wake time along with other sleep
problems. Obesity and related co-morbidities may also result from erratic sleep behavior along
with increased sedentary activities. Strengthening immunity is extremely necessary in this specific
condition and good sleep practices can be helpful for this purpose. Immunity and sleep have
already been observed to follow a relationship where both interact with effect. During this
lockdown phase, many of our activity patterns and sleep habits had to undergo a visible
5

transformation. The mitigation of a worldwide COVID-19 pandemic threat is crucial for human
life and to reduce livelihood distortions. With considerable confirmed cases and deaths, the
COVID-19 pandemic has swept into more than 200 countries and has caused public panic and
mental health stress. Full lockdown with strict social distancing measures to break the transmission
chain has been implemented by most nations around the world. Global health and mental health
are strongly affected by the current outbreak of COVID-19. Despite all the resources used to
counteract the spread of the virus, additional global strategies are needed to deal with the mental
health issues involved.
People from all walks of life have been severely affected by the emergence of the COVID -19
pandemic. The rapid spread of the disease to almost all parts of the country has presented the entire
human population with enormous health, economic, environmental and social challenges. The only
alternatives are social distancing and other preventive measures, in the absence of any effective
drugs and vaccines for treatment. Due to the complexities of pandemics and the scarcity of
evidence about the epidemiology of pandemic-related MH problems and the potential
interventions to address them, the emergence of mental health (MH) problems during a pandemic
is extremely common, though difficult to address. Policymakers, stakeholders and researchers
have so far devoted little attention to this topic, resulting in a lack of replicable, scalable and
applicable frameworks to help plan, develop and deliver MH care during pandemics. As a
response, during the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, we have attempted to develop a conceptual
framework (CF) that could guide the development, implementation, and assessment of MH
interventions. The threat is multiplied by the additional concern of a strong alcohol lobby led by
multinational corporations targeting India's emerging market for young drinkers. The company's
enthusiasm is fuelled by a steady change from a culture of abstinence to ambivalence to covertly
permissive in the level of acceptance and attitude towards alcohol. In order to minimize the public
health impact of the aforementioned factors, India needed a national level alcohol policy. A semistructured questionnaire was used to elicit their views. They were asked to provide their views on
the current situation of MH in their countries and to elaborate on existing myths and
misinformation. The course of the India Pandemic In terms of mortality and spread, there are
different Infection in comparison to some other infections. The world's countries at the present
time. The economic, social and psychological. The impact of the pandemic is apparent. Think that
exploring the ways is essential, how individuals have found that they can deal with the Pandemic
situation with social situation on one side. The other side of isolation that might have Never-beforeseen-before. It is a chance to find out how people modify their routines while staying inside their
homes, and habits. The concerned government, hospitals, educational institutions, organizations,
and even individuals need to look into psychological intervention during such stressful situations
and take the necessary measures. In addition to educating people to remain isolated, educating and
preparing them to face the mental health problems they may endure during the period is essential.
They were also requested to name the available resources and to suggest solution. The
psychological and mental wellbeing of health care Providers are another worry. Healthcare
providers constantly work in fearful, stressful, resource-constrained environments Settings where
they are exposed and infected under the continuous threat of being exposed. In such a situation,
the mental health and psychosocial well-being of health care providers is as important as managing
the health of the infected population. There are various online resources that can be available.
Helpful in managing and dealing with the stress resulting from stress about the pandemic. For
individuals, it is essential to take care of their own family members and their friends. The World
Health Organization (WHO) has suggested reducing the spread of the virus. On March 22, 2020,
6

India was quick to close its international borders and enforce the world's biggest COVID
lockdown. The present study seeks to highlight, along with an analysis of lifestyle changes, the
effect of the imposed national lockdown on society and the environment. The COVID-19
pandemic and lockdown may have a negative impact on the mental health of adolescents, although
there is still no data on the long term impact of this crisis. Adolescents’ individual, familial, and
social vulnerability, as well as individual and familial coping abilities, are factors related to
adolescent mental health in times of crisis.

3. Population Identification
3.1 Sampling Process
Our study focuses on the influence of social media on mental health of people during lockdown.
The target population for the study is the population of India in the age group of 20-60.This
population covers the demographic cohort Millennial and Generation Z, as these subsections of
the populace are highly active on Social media platforms.
The data sample covers responses from most of citizens Bihar, Jharkhand and Maharashtra region
who are staying in different parts of the country. It will be based on the voluntary participation of
the students in the survey. Convenience sampling method will be used to gather inputs from the
students. I collected the responses during July 2020. Number of responses collected are 120.
3.2 Data Collection
Data was collected through an online survey which was emailed to all the expected respondents.
The objective of the questionnaire prepared was to find out the respondents’ engagement to the
social platforms as well as the traditional mediums i.e. electronic or print media and it intended to
find out the impact of the media to the respondent.
Primary Data:
Main source of primary data has included the responses from students who are pursuing higher
education in Pune as well as some of our friends and families. The demographic data of the
respondents was collected with appropriate privacy in scales like Liker and Agree- Disagree form.
The primary data includes the usage of all social media platforms like Facebook, Instagram etc.
and we tried to inculcate the people aged between 20-60 in order to determine different correlates
that impact the mental health of people during lockdown.
3.3 Objectives
1. To study whether use of social media increases depression, irritation and suicide rate in
people during this lockdown.
2. To study whether people are spending most of their free time in social and how it is going
to impact mental health of different age group.
3. To study if one particular social media platform has more impact on the mental health of
people when compared to others.
4. Social media platforms like Facebook, Instagram etc. and I tried to inculcate the people
aged between 20-60 in order to determine different correlates that effect of social media
use on mental health during lockdown.

7

3.4 Statistical Tools
To perform the analysis of the collected data we used the tools like Microsoft Excel and Tableau.
Assumptions
We will be presuming that the Convenience sampling should be taken into consideration. The
sample size of the data will be sufficiently large. The sample correctly represents the population.
It is assumed that the personal issues of the respondents have no impact on their mental health
and nature in regards to social media users in this situation.

4. Methodology
To Carry out the analysis I have followed the below methodology
1. Questionnaire has prepared to know view of people related to this topic.
2. Data was collected through online survey where 14 question was add to know view or mind
set of people during lockdown.
3. Almost 120 response I got from this survey to performed analysis I use satirical tool
Microsoft Excel.
4. I have found the how many people is using social media and what is the purpose of using
like for news, entertainment, social communication or for some other reason.
5. I have found no of people they belongs to which occupation and how much time they are
spending on social media during this lockdown daily.
6. I have found no of people how much time they spend on social media and which time they
use to sleep at night.
7. I have found how many people if they are depress, upset or sad while communicating in
social media with their friends or family helped them to overcome from that situation.

5. Analysis and Result
Data is collected from people who use social media to analyze the mental health of humans. The
people who use social media and who do not use social media were interviewed on the same set
of questions regarding the way they of using social media in free time during lockdown. Altogether
I have frames five types of reactions a person could react in such scenarios. Respondents were
asked to answer those questions. Then we calculated the average reactive score of people based on
these questions of the questionnaire. This average reactive score is considered as the quantity
which denotes the reaction of a person towards social media users.
1) No of people vs Purpose of using social media

8

Figure 1: Purpose of using social media.
Number of people using social media, not for a platform for communication and sharing data I
have observed from data most of the people is using social media for Fun/Entertainment is most
those are watching movies on YouTube, watching Facebook video, posting some important thing
of life on instagram, using instagram for live session. In these day people like to spend much time
on social media. Social networking is a better for TV and movies than physical content. The global
dialog about events and interactions viewed by people based on what they see tells us about
customer preferences. Most specifically, conduct is influenced by their action.
2) No of People Vs Occupation/Spend time on social media

NO OF PEOPLE

No of people Vs Occupation/spend time
on social media
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0

39
33
27
21

Less than 1 hr
Business

2 to 3 hrs

1 to 2 hrs

Not Working
Working
SPENDING TIME ON SOCIAL MEDIA

More than 4 hrs
Student

Figure 2: Occupation and spend time on social media.
9

Student use to spend more than 4 hrs. Time on social media daily because it’s convenient for all
media to communicate with people who have more control than you do. If they have more
Instagram followers, own a business, play in a sweet band or have a public office, social media
makes connections to celebrities from all levels easier than ever. They can check various views
with social media and see which ideas we prefer. You have the freedom to share your opinions
and should change them as much as possible. There are clear reasons why people use social media
for hours.

SLEEP TIME/SPEND TIME ON SOCIAL
MEDIA
12AM to 10PM to Before After 2
2AM
12 PM 10PM
AM

3) No of people Vs Sleep time/Spend time on social media

No of people Vs Sleep time/Spend time
on social media
More than 4 hrs
1 to 2 hrs

28

22

2 to 3 hrs

23

Less than 1 hr

21
0

5

NO
10 OF PEOPLE
15

20

25

30

Figure 3: Spend time on social media.

Social media usage around bedtime can negatively effect how long and how well you sleep.
Looking at social media in bed can make it harder for you to fall asleep. It can also
reduce the amount of time you sleep for and leave you feeling unrefreshed the next day. I have
observed from survey people who is spending late night on social media they sleep late night which
is not good for mental health.
4) No of People Vs person over social media affecting positively to you while in depression

10

No of People Vs person over social media affecting
positively to you while in depression

20%

30%

26%

7%
17%

Never experienced

Moderately

Not much

Never experienced

Very much

Figure 4: Social Media affection positively in depression.

Many people enjoying staying in social media in my survey I found while in depression social
media is useful for people very much because its connect people if someone is in tension or
depression they can communicate with their family, parents or friends.
5) No of People Vs Activity for peace of mind

Figure 5: Activity for peace of mind
Most of people do meditation to keep mind peace during lockdown, Meditation practice also helps
in knowing our bodies. We sense physical movements when we become more sensitive and aware.
This is not easy, it takes time and regular practice but gives relative to state of body mental and
physical.

11

6) Rate of Social Media to reduce the Stress during lockdown.

Figure 6:Feedback of reducing stress by social media during lockdown
Maximum people are agree that social media use reduce the stress during lockdown no one can
meet their family or friends but they can communicate with them through social media.

6. Conclusion
I have found through this research most of the people use social media for their entertainment
purpose during covid time. Student use to spend much time in social media all most 3 to 4 hrs. Per
day to spend their time. Communicating in social media with friends and family is helping most
of the people to overcome from depression, Irritation or any negativity. People like to do yoga to
keep them positive or mentally stable. Most of working people feeling happy in lockdown because
they got time to spend with their family but student are feeling irritated or bore because class in
not continue they do not have much work to do because of this they use most of the time social
media. People does mediation to keep mental health balance during lockdown mediation gives
relief to physical and mental health both. Suggestion given by most people to be positive in this
situation is do what you love to do. It may be writing, reading, watching movies, if you are at home
then help your parents with work, talk to them spend time with them, talk to your friends via phone
call or video call. This may help people to avoid negativity, depression or any mental health issue.

7. Limitations
My sample contains majority of people of age group between 20 - 40 years. Hence whatever
conclusions are made cannot be inferred to all age groups.
12

All most 80 % response got from male gender so we cannot inferred to all gender whatever
conclusions are made.
Also, the sample contains people mostly from Pune and whatsoever conclusion would be made
cannot be inferred to the world population.
I collected 120 responses. So, the results cannot be generalized due to the small sample size.
The questionnaire and research was carried only for a short period of time. Hence, the conclusion
might not be true in the future.
Lastly, not all the people might be honest while answering the questionnaire. So, the validation of
the responses is a question.

References
[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

Holmes, E.A.; O’Connor, R.C.; Perry, V.H.; Tracey, I.; Wessely, S.; Arseneault, L.; Ballard,
C.; Christensen, H.; Cohen Silver, R.; Everall, I.; et al. Multidisciplinary research priorities
for the COVID-19 pandemic: A call for action for mental health science. Lancet Psychiatry
2020, 7, 547–560. [CrossRef]
Brooks,S.K.;Webster,R.K.;Smith,L.E.;Woodland,L.;Wessely,S.;Greenberg,N.;Rubin,G.J.
Thepsychological
impactofquarantineandhowtoreduceit:
Rapidreviewoftheevidence.
Lancet2020, 395, 912–920. [CrossRef]
Taylor, M.R.; Agho, K.E.; Stevens, G.J.; Raphael, B. Factors inﬂuencing psychological
distress during a disease epidemic: Data from Australia’s ﬁrst outbreak of equine inﬂuenza.
BMC Public Health 2008, 8, 347. [CrossRef]
Hawryluck, L.; Gold, W.L.; Robinson, S.; Pogorski, S.; Galea, S.; Styra, R. SARS control
and psychological eﬀects of quarantine, Toronto, Canada. Emerg. Infect. Dis. 2004, 10,
1206–1212. [CrossRef]
Altena, E.; Baglioni, C.; Espie, C.A.; Ellis, J.; Gavriloﬀ, D.; Holzinger, B.; Schlarb, A.;
Frase, L.; Jernelöv, S.; Riemann, D. Dealing with sleep problems during home conﬁnement
due to the COVID-19 outbreak: Practical recommendations from a task force of the
European CBT-I Academy. J. Sleep Res. 2020, e13052. [CrossRef]
Ahmed, M.Z.; Ahmed, O.; Aibao, Z.; Hanbin, S.; Siyu, L.; Ahmad, A. Epidemic of COVID19 in China and associated Psychological Problems. Asian J. Psychiatry 2020, 51, 102092.
[CrossRef]
Huang, Y.; Zhao, N. Generalized anxiety disorder, depressive symptoms and sleep quality
during COVID-19 outbreak in China: A web-based cross-sectional survey. Psychiatry Res.
2020, 288, 112954. [CrossRef]
Lei, L.; Huang, X.; Zhang, S.; Yang, J.; Yang, L.; Xu, M. Comparison of prevalence and
associated factors of anxiety and depression among people aﬀected by versus people
unaﬀected by quarantine during the COVID-19 epidemic in Southwestern China. Med. Sci.
Monit. 2020, 26, e924609. [CrossRef]
Zhang, C.; Yang, L.; Liu, S.; Ma, S.; Wang, Y.; Cai, Z.; Du, H.; Li, R.; Kang, L.; Su, M.; et
al. Survey of insomnia and related social psychological factors among medical staﬀ

13

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]
[20]
[21]

involved in the 2019 novel coronavirus disease outbreak. Front. Psychiatry 2020, 11, 306.
[CrossRef]
Yuan, S.; Liao, Z.; Huang, H.; Jiang, B.; Zhang, X.; Wang, Y.; Zhao, M. Comparison of the
indicators of psychological stress in the population of Hubei Province and non-endemic
provinces in China during two weeks during the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19)
outbreak in February 2020. Med. Sci. Monit. 2020, 26, e923767. [CrossRef]
Government of Italy Decree of the President of the Council of Ministers 9 March 2020.
Available
online:
https://www.gazzettauﬃciale.it/eli/id/2020/03/09/20A01558/sg
(accessed on 30 May 2020).
González-Sanguino, C.; Ausín, B.; Castellanos, M.Á.; Saiz, J.; López-Gómez, A.; Ugidos,
C.; Muñoz, M. Mental health consequences during the initial stage of the 2020 Coronavirus
pandemic (COVID-19) in Spain. Brain Behav. Immun. 2020. [CrossRef]
Ozamiz-Etxebarria, N.; Dosil-Santamaria, M.; Picaza-Gorrochategui, M.; IdoiagaMondragon, N. Stress, anxiety, and depression levels in the initial stage of the COVID-19
outbreak in a population sample in the northern Spain. Cad. Saude Publica 2020, 36,
e00054020. [CrossRef] 2
Bert, F.; Lo Moro, G.; Corradi, A.; Acampora, A.; Agodi, A.; Brunelli, L.; Chironna, M.;
Cocchio, S.; Coﬁni, V.; D’Errico, M.M.; et al. Prevalence of depressive symptoms among
Italian medical students: The multicentre cross-sectional “PRIMES” study. PLoS ONE
2020, 15, e0231845. [CrossRef]
Ahmad, A.R.; Murad, H.R. The impact of social media on panic during the COVID-19
pandemic in Iraqi Kurdistan: Online questionnaire study. J. Med. Internet Res. 2020, 22,
e19556. [CrossRef].
Garﬁn, D.R.; Silver, R.C.; Holman, E.A. The novel coronavirus (COVID-2019) outbreak:
Ampliﬁcation of public health consequences by media exposure. Health Psychol. 2020, 39,
355–357. [CrossRef].
Newman M, Zainal N. The value of maintaining social connections for mental health in
older
people.
Lancet
Public
Health;
Jan
2020
retrieved
from
https://www.thelancet.com/journals/lanpub/
article/PIIS2468-2667(19)30253-1/fulltext
Richard Armitage March 19, 2020 COVID.
IANS, April 11, 2020, Work From Home, Amid Covid-19 Lockdown, Changed Sleep
Schedule Of 67% Indians: Survey; https://www.news18.com/news/lifestyle/wor k-fromhome-amid-covid-19-lockdownchanged-sleep-schedule-of-67-indianssurvey2573703.html
Nass SJ, Levit LA, Gostin LO. Beyond the HIPAA privacy rule: enhancing privacy,
improving health through research: National Academies Press; 2009.
Misro A, Hussain M, Jones T, Baxter M, Khanduja V. A quick guide to survey research.
The Annals of the Royal College of Surgeons of England. 2014; 96(1):87
2019 Novel coronavirus, Wuhan, China. 2020. https://www.cdc.gov/ coronavirus/2019nCoV/summary.html. Accessed 1 Feb 2020. 16. National Health Commission of People’s
Republic of China. Notice on printing and distributing the work plan for prevention and
control of pneumonia caused by novel coronavirus infection in the near future. 2020.

14

[22] World Health Organization. (2020b). Helping children cope with stress during the 2019nCoV outbreak. https://www.who.int/docs/default- source/coronaviruses/helping-childrencope-with-stress-print.pdf? Sfvrsn=f3a063ff_2&ua=1 World Health Organization. (2020c).
[23] Mental health and COVID-19. http://www.euro.who.int/en/health-topics/healthemergencies/coronavirus-covid-19/novel-coronavirus-2019-ncov-technical-guidance/
coronavirus-disease-covid-19-outbreak-technical-guidance-europe/
mental-health-andcovid-19
[24] World Health Organization. (2020d). Mental health and psychosocial considerations during
the COVID-19 outbreak. WHO reference num- ber: WHO/2019-nCoV/Mental
Health/2020.1? https://www.who.int/ docs/default-source/coronaviruse/mental-healthconsiderations.pdf.
[25] Hall, R., Hall, R., & Chapman, M. (2008). The 1995 Kikwit Ebola outbreak: Lessons
hospitals and physicians can apply to future viral epidemics. General Hospital Psychiatry,
30(5), 446–452. Https: //doi.org/10.1016/j.genho sppsy ch.2008.05.003.
[26] Smith, R.D. Responding to global infectious disease outbreaks: Lessons from SARS on the
role of risk perception, communication and management. Soc. Sci. Med. 2006, 63, 3113–
3123. [CrossRef]
[27] Ng, E. The pandemic of hate is giving novel coronavirus disease (COVID-19) a helping
hand. Am. J. Trop. Med. Hyg. 2020, 102, 1158–1159. [CrossRef]
[28] Tonkin son, P. How Did Runners Become Public Enemy Number One? The Telegraph.
Available online: https: //www.telegraph.co.uk/health-ﬁtness/body/did-runners-becomepublic-enemy-number-one/ (accessed on 30 May 2020).
[29] Jónsdóttir, U.; Þórðardóttir, E.B.; Aspelund, T.; Jónmundsson, Þ.; Einarsdóttir, K. The eﬀect
of the 2008 recession on well-being and employment status of people with and without
mental health problems. Eur. J. Public Health 2019. [CrossRef]
[30] ISTAT Istituto Nazionale di Statistical. Indicatori Demograﬁci Anno 2019; ISTAT Istituto
Nazionale di Statistica: Rome, Italy, 2020.

15

