Describing, modelling and forecasting the spatial
and temporal spread of COVID-19 – A short
review

arXiv:2102.02457v1 [q-bio.PE] 4 Feb 2021

Julien Arino

Abstract SARS-CoV-2 started propagating worldwide in January 2020 and has now
reached virtually all communities on the planet. This short review provides evidence
of this spread and documents modelling efforts undertaken to understand and forecast
it, including a short section about the new variants that emerged in late 2020.

1 Introduction
On 21 February 2003, a disease now known as the severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) arrived in Hong Kong when a physician from Guandong Province
in Mainland China bearing the SARS coronavirus (SARS-CoV), checked in at the
Metropole Hotel [54]. The primary case in Hong Kong was by no means the index
case: the virus had been circulating in Guandong since at least November 2002 [52].
However, that patient triggered a chain of infections that, together with earlier cases
in China, led to 8,098 known cases and 774 deaths in 28 countries [42] and was
declared a pandemic by the World Health Organisation (WHO).
Similarly, it is not certain at the time of writing that SARS-CoV-2 and its associated disease COVID-19 had its index case in Wuhan, Hubei Provice, China. What is
certain, on the other hand, is that it is in Wuhan that COVID-19 underwent its first
noticeable amplification phase, following which it spread rapidly across the world,
to the point that there are now very few top level jurisdictions not having reported
COVID-19 cases.
SARS-CoV-2 is the third novel Coronavirus to emerge in the 21st century (after
SARS and the Middle East respiratory syndrome – MERS [28]) and the second to
generate a pandemic (a third pandemic was triggered by the H1N1 influenza outbreak

Julien Arino
Department of Mathematics, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada, e-mail:
Julien.Arino@umanitoba.ca

1

2

Julien Arino

in 2009). COVID-19 is also the most devastating pandemic in over a century in terms
of its death toll as well as its economic and societal impact.
Here, I review some aspects of the spatio-temporal spread of COVID-19. Some
caveats are in order. Firstly, while spatial epidemiology is not the most popular topic
among modellers, it does remain a vast field where a myriad of approaches coexist;
surveying the work done on the topic would require an entire monograph. While I
have tried to be inclusive, it is certain that I have omitted some topics or techniques. I
am for instance making the choice to describe mostly mechanistic models of spread,
be they deterministic or stochastic, mathematical or computational. Some very good
statistical work has been published on the topic of COVID-19, but I focus here to a
large extent on models that can explain reality perhaps at the detriment of forecasting
power. Secondly, I am aware that many modellers who have worked or are working
with public health authorities may not have had the time yet to publish their work.
Except for my work, I report here only on papers already published or available on
recognised preprint servers. Thirdly, new variants of concern (VoC) were detected
while this paper was under review. A short section at the end of this document to
describe what little is known in terms of spatio-temporal spread of these variants.
Finally, even though some work makes use of data at a very fine spatial resolution,
in keeping with the philosophy of some prior work [13], I focus on models that can
be used with publicly available data.
This review is organised as follows. First, in Section 2, I provide an overview of
the mechanisms that lead to the spatial spread of infections and three of the major
types of models that have been used to study it. In Section 3, I then describe the
spread of COVID-19 from a chronological point of view. Finally, in Section 4, I
discuss modelling work specific to COVID-19.

2 Spatialised infections – mechanisms and models
Before considering work specific to COVID-19, let me spend some time on the
spatialisation of infectious diseases in general. Indeed, while COVID-19 presents
specific challenges, it is by no means the first spatial epidemic that humanity is
confronted to; for instance, a simple description of the spatio-temporal trajectory
of the Plague of Athens can be found in the History of the Peloponnesian War
[176], which was written almost 2,500 years ago; on a more local scale, spatial
epidemiology can be traced to the cholera epidemic of London in 1854 [171]. There
is therefore much understanding to be gained about the current crisis by considering
what was known prior to its start.

Spatio-temporal spread of COVID-19

3

2.1 How does an infectious disease become spatial?
Different conceptual models explain the mechanisms that lead to the spatialisation
of an infectious disease, leading to potentially different modelling paradigms.
Working at the level of the individual, one can envision spatial spread as the
repetition of inter-individual spread events. Individuals are mobile in space and it
is their movement while bearing the infectious pathogen that leads to the disease
becoming spatial, when they come into contact with susceptible individuals who
are also mobile. This description falls mostly into what have been called Markovian
contact processes [146]. When considered at the population level, this leads to models
using partial differential equations and is particularly appropriate for describing the
spread of a disease where the hosts can move freely, such as epizooties. Such a
description can also lead to network or agent-based models.
Work with my collaborators usually instead focuses on locations and adopts a
vision of spatial spread articulated in [17]: an infectious disease becomes spatialised
by the repetition of processes summarised as importation, amplification, exportation
and transport. Importation itself is the event when an individual infected with the
disease reaches a new location. Importation is successful if the imported case leads
to at least one local transmission event. This way of thinking about spread is easy to
reconcile with data, since locations are jurisdictions in the context of public health.
It also matches the cones of resolution that some geographers use when they think
about the spatial spread of epidemics; see [11] and references therein. See also
[110, 111], which consider the roles of the different levels of mobility on the spread
of SARS in and to and from Beĳing.

2.2 What are the main drivers of spatial spread?
Whatever the way one conceptualises the spatialisation process, the main driver of
spatial spread is human mobility. Long range fast movements using air travel have
considerably changed the way diseases spread and while amplification in a location
remains driven by population effects, the initial spread is to a large extent driven by
air travel. This was shown for SARS [42], the 2009 H1N1 influenza pandemic [119]
and MERS [90], for instance. Long distance high speed train travel has also been
associated to spread; see, e.g., [47]. It is interesting to note, though, that despite the
highly heterogeneous nature of spatio-temporal spread brought on by modern travel
modalities, continental-level effects can still be observed [93].

2.3 How does one model a spatialised infectious disease?
As mentioned in the Introduction, I focus here on mechanistic models. There are
many ways to model the spatio-temporal spread of infectious diseases. Let me present

4

Julien Arino

the main contenders; see an interesting and more complete list in [161] or [147].
I do not detail reaction-diffusion equations, because, to the best of my knowledge,
they have seen very little use in modelling the spatio-temporal spread of COVID-19;
readers are referred to [158], for instance, for more details on deterministic aspects
involving such systems. See [145] for a seminal review of the link between stochastic
and deterministic spatial models, as well as interesting overviews in [61].

2.3.1 Agent-based models
Agent-based models (ABM) consider populations of autonomous agents that interact
following some rules [76]. Agents have a set of characteristics that can be modified
through their interactions with other agents. Although there are some attempts to
mathematise some of the properties of such systems, they remain for the most part
computational tools that need to be studied using a large number of simulations.
Their strength lies in their realism: an agent can be given realistic behavioural
characteristics (schedule, place of residence or of work, etc.). ABM are also easier to
implement because they require very little mathematical background. Agent-based
models have proved most useful when considering the effect of individual behaviours
on the spread of infection in smaller populations. For instance, they have been used to
study individual protective behaviour [116], the effect of presenteism while infected
with a disease [126], the risk in small isolated communities [49, 129], the effect of
social distancing [169] or the role of avoidance behaviour when vaccines have low
effectiveness [177]. Examples of spatialised problems (all about influenza) that were
studied using agent-based models include its spread in slums of Delhi [5], the use of
a hybrid approach involving networks to describe the social structure and ABM to
describe inter-individual spread in Forsyth Country, NC [98], the potential for social
structure to generate inequalities in incidence in different areas of a county [127] or
the spread within an airport terminal [165]. See also [154, 155], which use a detailed
location survey to conduct a simulation of the spread of influenza in Japan. ABM
are also useful as a means to model evolution; see, for instance, [96], where an ABM
is used to model evolution of virulence at the front line of a spreading epidemic
The area where ABM have proved most informative is when considering spread
of infections within areas where movement is constrained and generalised contact
is impossible, such as buildings or cruise ships. For instance, when considering
nosocomial infections, it is possible to monitor health care personnel movement and
use this data to parametrise an ABM of spread within a hospital [109], or to formulate
a model of spread between beds within an intensive care unit [109].
However, ABM lose in value when populations become larger, except in rare
instances where unexpected emergent behaviour occurs. Where the law of large
number applies, it is indeed less computationally onerous to use “classic” deterministic or stochastic models. For instance, the model in [18] reproduces almost exactly
the behaviour of the agent-based model in [134], but furthermore gives access to
explicit expressions of the basic reproduction number R 0 and the final size of the
epidemic. See also the comparisons in [7, 66].

Spatio-temporal spread of COVID-19

5

Altogether, agent-based models are powerful tools of investigation at the hyperlocal scale. Considering agents consisting of groups of individuals instead of
individuals also allows to operate at a higher spatial scale, although models then lose
some of the interesting properties they have at the finer scale.

2.3.2 Network models
Network models are very similar to agent-based models, of which they were, essentially, the inspiration. The two types of models are sometimes difficult to distinguish.
In epidemiology, work on networks and ABM was popularised in particular by the
NIGMS Models of Infectious Disease Agent Study, which led for instance to EpiSimS
[56, 77]. In network models, nodes are typically simpler than agents in agent-based
models; the most straightforward example would be a network consisting of nodes
(individuals) that can be in two states: susceptible to the disease or infected and
infectious with it. If there is an edge in the network between two nodes, this means
the two nodes came into contact; in the case of a network used to model disease
spread, this indicates that a contact took place, which could lead to the transmission
of the disease. One promising direction of research that has been explored using
networks is that of the link between network structure and shape of the epidemic
curve; see, e.g., [48, 57]. This is particularly important during the early spread of a
disease and has been considered in a variety of contexts using network models.
Because they are simpler than ABM, network models are more amenable to analysis; see, e.g., [34, 38]. Originally, tools used to study the dynamics of network
epidemic models originated in statistical mechanics [139, 140]. Because networks
allow to incorporate a more realistic description of the contact process while maintaining some level of analytic tractability, comparing their dynamics with that of
classical models is useful. In [8], this is done for instance for a two-strains influenza
model with vaccination. [156] There has been a move lately towards characterising
the dynamics of smaller networks using the properties of individual nodes rather
than through distributions of these properties; see, e.g., [32].
While examples of use of network models in mathematical epidemiology abound,
their use in situations that are specifically spatial are not as common. Instances
include [79], who considered an SEIR model set in a lattice and simulated using a
Monte Carlo process, to incorporate both stochasticity and space, [33], who consider
the spread of dengue in city blocks or [82], who consider the spread of equine
influenza. The latter paper illustrates the strength of the method, in that they have
access to extensive data on horse movement between locations and are able to assess
the effect of the topology of the networks, both for long range movement and shorter
contact patterns with locations, on the spread of the infection.
Networks are also a natural candidate for considering the spread of infections
using the air transportation network as a conduit. This was done for instance with
SARS [42].

6

Julien Arino

2.3.3 Metapopulation models
Also known as patch models, metapopulations couple together (typically similar)
models, with each model encoding for the dynamics of the disease in a population
and coupling representing the movement of individuals between the populations
[16], the average time spent in remote locations [37] or the interactions between
populations. Metapopulation models had been used computationally since the early
1970s, for instance to consider the spread of influenza within countries [83, 164].
They have known a resurgence since the beginning of the 21st century, because, on
the one hand, computing resources made simulating them easier and, on the other
hand, papers such as [15, 19] showed that linear algebra techniques could be used
to render the study of such systems very similar to that of their constituting systems.
See [31] for a list of problems the authors identify as interesting challenges in the
field.
Metapopulations are now quite popular and have been used in a variety of settings.
A lot of work concerns investigation of properties of spatial models. For instance,
with coauthors, I investigated the effect of lowering travel rates between locations
[20] and of interconnection between a large urban centre and smaller satellite cities
[22]. Other interesting issues studied include the effect of vaccination targeted at
high risk areas [29], cooperation between governments on vaccination policy [123].
Geographically targeted vaccination has also been considered at smaller spatial
scales; see, e.g., [26, 29, 101, 118, 121, 135]. Other spatial control issues have been
considered in [41, 92, 95, 102, 122, 130, 136].
Papers addressing issues that are present also with COVID-19 have considered
infection during transport [25], in particular in relation to entry screening [133] as
well as exit and entry screening [132]. Exit and entry screening were also considered
in [178]. Some work has also considered the effect of media-induced social distancing
[87, 173].
Metapopulation models were used to consider specific diseases as well; the spread
of SARS [162], age-structured contact patterns during the 2009 H1N1 pandemic [12],
chikungunya [50], dengue [141], cholera [73] or malaria [14, 88, 89]; see also [160].
Standard metapopulation models are not well suited to consider the hyperlocal
scale, because they assume homogeneity within the constituting units. In [12], an
interesting approach is used that allows more heterogeneous contacts within patches.
Similarly, in [148], the authors consider behaviour at the hyperlocal scale but still
within a metapopulation model. In [7], the behaviour of an ABM is compared with
that of a stochastic metapopulation model.

3 Chronology and characteristics of COVID-19 spread
To describe the spatio-temporal spread of COVID-19, I use the previously discussed
framework of [17]. There is some discrepancy in reporting units, but to some extent,
one can think along the lines of the ISO 3166 standard [114]. Global spread occurs

Spatio-temporal spread of COVID-19

7

between ISO 3166-1 codes (countries, dependent territories and special areas of
geographical interest). Local spread within ISO 3166-1 codes occurs between ISO
3166-2 codes (provinces in Australia and Canada, départements in France, states
in Brazil and the USA, etc.). Many countries also report at a finer geographical
scale, which I still call local: counties, regional health authorities or cities. Anything
below the city level is hyperlocal; typically, this corresponds to commuting to work,
school or shopping, but can even be mobility within a building. In keeping with my
avowed preference for publicly available data, my description involves higher level
jurisdictions rather than spread at the hyperlocal scale, which is typically associated
to confidential data.
Throughout the description that follows, one should bear in mind that data used
to describe the spread is very likely wrong in some instances, or rather, some
jurisdictions might be reporting with a delay because of a lower capacity to detect
cases. See for instance [100], in which two health security indices, the Global Health
Security Index and the Joint External Evaluation, are used to assess the likelihood
that countries detected COVID-19 early. (The work also shows that countries with
higher values of these indices also saw reduced mortality from the disease to 1 July
2020, although this is likely not true anymore.)

3.1 Chronology and characteristics of global spread
There is evidence that COVID-19 could have started its global spread in December
2019, with reports of a case in France [68] as well as suspicious cases [39] and positive
wastewater samples [128] in Italy. However, these retrospective analyses have yet
to be confirmed, so at the time of writing, the first ten locations to have confirmed
importations are those listed in Table 1. The remainder of January saw cases being
confirmed in several other countries. Of note is that China imposed a cordon sanitaire
in Wuhan on 23 January 2020 and that the first successful importation (in the
terminology of [17], i.e., a local transmission event) was reported by Vietnam on 24
January 2020 [182].
Starting in February 2020 and with more and more of the locations having reported
importations earlier seeing local transmission chains, global spread accelerated.
Figure 1 shows the number of ISO 3166-1-alpha3 codes (top level jurisdictions)
reporting their first confirmed case as a function of the time since the first confirmed
international exportation event.
While I do not detail them in the modelling section because of my focus there
on models able to provide explanations of the phenomena, it is worth noting that
interesting time series analyses were performed during the early stages of spread. For
instance, [58] used ARIMA analysis of travel data together with disease propagation
data to forecast future destinations. The authors find that uncertainty as to the percentage of asymptomatic cases makes previsions complicated; this conclusion is in
line with personal work [23]. Likewise, [99, 105] considered spatial autoregressive
models. Also, although not global, continental-level spread as documented for Africa

8

Julien Arino
Date
13 Jan.
16 Jan.
20 Jan.
20 Jan.
23 Jan.
23 Jan.
24 Jan.
24 Jan.
25 Jan.
25 Jan.

Location
Thailand
Japan
Republic of Korea
USA
Nepal
Singapore
France
Vietnam
Australia
Malaysia

Note
Arrived 8 Jan.
Arrived 6 Jan.
Airport detected on 19 Jan.
Arrived Jan. 15
Arrived 13 Jan.
Arrived 20 Jan.
Arrived 22 Jan.
Arrived 13 Jan.
Arrived 19 Jan.
Arrived 24 Jan.

Source
[181]
[168, 179]
[180]
[107]
[35]
[2]
[1]
[60, 152]
[27]
[151, 74]

50

100

150

SARS
COVID−19

0

# C/T with confirmed cases

Table 1 First ten international locations having reported imported COVID-19. Date refers to the
date the case was reported. All dates are in 2020. All cases in this table were imported from China,
except for Vietnam, which concerned both an imported case and a local contact.

0

20

40

60

80

100

Days post start of global spread
Fig. 1 Number of countries and territories (ISO-3166-1-alpha3 codes) having reported confirmed
cases of SARS-CoV (red) and SARS-CoV-2 (blue) as a function of the number of days since
importation in HKG (SARS-CoV) and importation in THL (SARS-CoV-2).

in [91] is included here because the focus is not on the transition between the global
level to the continental level but on spread within the continent. Finally, [138] use
self-organising maps to look for similarities in epidemic curves to identify countries
seeing propagation of the same type.

3.2 Attempts to slow down the global spread
Using the terminology of the conceptual model of spatialisation, when COVID-19
started its international spread, there were very few jurisdictions that were exporters

Spatio-temporal spread of COVID-19

9

of COVID-19 and an immense majority of potential importers. Public health authorities in those jurisdictions that did not have cases at that point therefore took
measures to try to stop or at least delay importations. To this end, they used three
main types of measures: restriction or suspension of travel, entry screening and
post-arrival self-isolation measures.

Travellers screened

2.5M
2M
1.5M
1M
0.5M

2019
2020

0
Mar

Apr

May

Jun

Jul

Aug

Sep

Oct

Month

Fig. 2 Daily number of passengers processed by the United States Transport Security Agency (TSA)
in 2019 and 2020; data from https://www.tsa.gov/coronavirus/passenger-throughput.

Starting early on and ongoing at the time of writing, various jurisdictions took
measures to curtail or even interrupt travel. Passengers themselves also abstained
from travelling. The result of this was a precipitous drop in travel volumes. The
intensity of this effect can be seen in Figure 2, which shows the daily number
of passengers processed by the United States Transport Security Agency, i.e., the
number of individuals undertaking a trip originating in the USA, in 2019 (red)
and 2020 (blue). The data shown for 2019 is for a year earlier, but shifted so it
corresponds to the same day in the week. At the lowest point, on Thursday 16
April 2020, TSA screened 3.63% of the number of travellers they had screened on
Thursday 18 April 2019. The same trend can be observed for instance in tourism,
with the United Nations World Tourism Organisation Tourism Dashboard (https://
www.unwto.org/international-tourism-and-covid-19) reporting that the
number of international tourists arrivals in April and May 2020 was 97% less than
the same months in 2019.
In [6], an analysis of the global air transportation network is undertaken using
the network distance defined in [44], attempting to tease out the effect of travel
interruptions on the spread. While both of these studies provide very interesting
insights into the issue, a precise quantification of the effect of such fundamental
changes to travel is hard.
Entry screening is typically implemented at ports of entry (ports, airports, border
crossings) and seeks to identify individuals who are bearing the disease of concern,
in order to isolate them and thereby avoid potential transmission of the disease in

10

Julien Arino

the local population. There is some debate about the usefulness of entry screening,
especially during the early stages of a global spread event. See [149] for an extensive
review. The sensitivity and specificity of the thermal detection equipment used is
questionable [40]. In the case of COVID-19, it has also been argued that this low
sensitivity would combine with the fact that fever detection would often fail because
of the frequency of asymptomatic cases [45]. Entry screening at the beginning of
a health crisis also means looking for a needle in a haystack, since the volume of
incoming passengers from all locations vastly dominates the volume of passengers
coming from the location of interest [120]. Since prevalence is low at the beginning
of the event, this further compounds the lack of efficacy and results in poor characteristics for the method [67]. Also, screening protocols themselves vary widely from
location to location [86], rendering a general evaluation of the value of a protocol
difficult. Despite these reservations, in the case of COVID-19, some of the evidence
of early international spread comes through entry screening, so there seems to have
been some limited benefit to thermal imaging entry screening.
After the initial few days during which testing was thermal imaging-based, screening switched to using much more reliable PCR tests. This became possible because
sequencing of the virus genome was performed remarkably quickly. As a consequence, currently, there are four main attitudes towards screening: no screening at
all; “soft” screening, i.e., verbal or written questionnaires; testing on entry; testing
prior to entry. Some countries use a combination of approaches, for instance requiring testing only for individuals arriving from regions considered particularly at
risk.
A jurisdiction still has one option to combat the risk that successful importations
take place: it can recommend or impose that individuals arriving from another
jurisdiction spend some time in quarantine. Canada, for instance, has insisted on a
two-weeks quarantine period for all incoming travellers since the beginning of the
crisis, with exemptions.

3.3 From global to local spread
The first step in switching from a purely global vision of spread to a local one is
to consider when COVID-19 could arrive in “one’s backyard”. In the early stages
of the pandemic, before most top-level jurisdictions reported reported human-tohuman transmission chains, it was of interest to those jurisdictions having no or few
local cases to understand the risks that their connectedness to other jurisdictions
carried. Because of evidence gathered during past pandemics and other notable
public health events (see Section 2.2), this evaluation was mostly carried out by
investigating a given jurisdiction’s connection to the rest of the world by means of
the air transportation network. This was the method used for instance in Mexico
[64], India [97] or Europe [157]. Much practical work on this aspect has come to
rely on global airline transportation data such as that provided by the International
Air Transport Association (IATA). However, it should be noted that this dataset

Spatio-temporal spread of COVID-19

11

quickly became unreliable because of the dramatic fall in travel volumes discussed
in Section 3.2.

3.4 Chronology and characteristics of local spread
Most of the very early work on local spread concerned China, since it was the first
country to experience this. The same type of method was used in [78] as is detailed
at the start of this section, but with past data on mobility during the Spring Festival
of millions of migrant workers residing in Wuhan. The aim was to assess the risk
to locations visited by the migrant workers. Since Chinese New Year was on 25
January 2020, while the cordon sanitaire was imposed in Wuhan on 23 January, a lot
of individuals did make the trip. This allowed the authors to venture which places
were probably under-reporting cases. See also [184], which uses GIS techniques to
study the spread within China and the factors contributing to this spread. As do the
authors of the previous paper, they find that connection to Wuhan, both in terms of
population flow and economically, was the main driver of the initial spread.
Tracing transmission chains originating from importations allowed to better understand the consequences of importations. See, for instance, [36], which breaks
down such a transmission chain that started on 27 January 2020 in Bavaria (Germany). In [46], the early spread in Brazil is documented, from importation from
Europe (as evidenced by genome typing of the strains) to local spread within states,
finally followed by exportation from urban centres. This is confirmed by [84], who
consider spread among 604 cities in São Paulo State, Brazil. They show that in the
heterogeneous setting they consider, there are two patterns of spread: one spatial,
where the disease spreads to the nearest spatial component; the other hierarchical,
where within one unit, spread starts with the top level urban centre then makes its way
to smaller cities. In [80], the authors use genomic and transportation data to consider
the spread within the USA and conclude that quite early on in the spread, importations into uninfected locations in the country were much more likely to originate
elsewhere in the country than abroad. Propagation within the USA was also studied
by [106], in which the occurrence of space-time clusters is studied. This interestingly
shows that as the epidemic took hold, there occurred more and more smaller clusters,
confirming in some sense the similar observations in Brazil. Another investigation
of continental spread in the USA is carried out in [144] using a multilayer perceptron neural network. The authors use the Moran index computed on the incidence
rates and a large number (57) of explanatory variables: socioeconomic, behavioural,
environmental, topographic, demographic, age-adjusted mortality rates from several
diseases, both infectious and chronic. They find that some of the most important
factors predicting COVID-19 incidence rates are the age-adjusted mortality rates of
ischemic heart disease, pancreatic cancer and leukemia, median household income
and total precipitation. In [3], the time evolution in several countries and the time
evolution within France are investigated using time series methods incorporating

12

Julien Arino

spatial components. While mostly methodological, this provides interesting tools to
consider the spatio-temporal evolution of the disease across multiple jurisdictions.
Other authors considered mechanisms for slowing down the spatial spread within
a country. The authors of [142] advocate for a disconnection between locked-down
urban centres and rural areas in India as a means to avoid complete country-wide
lockdown. This position is justified; indeed, authors in [63], for instance, found
strong correlation between population density and the spread of SARS-CoV-2 in
China, so it could be that forbidding movement between locations at high risk (the
cities) and those at lower risk is a valid approach. However, to the best of our
knowledge, no nation implemented such a system; indeed, during the initial wave,
most countries implemented country-level lockdowns that also relied on severely
limiting or completely interrupting mobility within their territory. In [70], the authors
consider the effect of containment measures on the spread of COVID-19 between
provinces in Italy. In [124], the authors used human mobility data in China to consider
the spread of COVID-19 within China, in particular in relation to the impact of control
measures.

3.5 Chronology and characteristics of hyperlocal spread
Hyperlocal spread was documented early on during the course of the pandemic
because of cases that happened onboard cruise ships that were under quarantine.
These events, while unfortunate for those involved, have provided a wealth of data. In
particular, they were extremely helpful in finding out key epidemiologic parameters
such as reproduction number [185], prevalence of asymptomatic infections [75],
incidence [153], transmissibility of the disease [143] or case fatality ratio [163].
Because cruise ships have records of who was infected together with the room they
were in, it should become possible to build a good understanding of spatial aspects,
although to the best of our knowledge, this data has not yet been released.
Many countries faced and are facing outbreaks in long-term care facilities (LTC).
There are a variety of reasons for this elevated risk; see, e.g., [172, 175]. This led to
trememdous effort to control such outbreaks [175]. Movement within LTC can be
documented (and modelled) accurately; see, e.g., [51, 150]. The health of residents is
also monitored (usually) well. As a consequence, nosocomial COVID-19 outbreaks
also provide valuable data at the hyperlocal level. See documented outbreaks in
[113, 125, 137, 166, 167].
Note an interesting “twist” on hyperlocal spread: in [108], the authors conduct
a wide-ranging analysis at the hyperlocal scale, in the sense that the consider the
movements of individuals at the local scale but over the entire territory of the United
States of America. This allows them to consider the effect of spatial heterogeneity
of public health orders.

Spatio-temporal spread of COVID-19

13

4 COVID-19-specific models
I replicate here the hierarchical spatial structure in Section 3 rather than the methodological one in Section 2.3. Indeed, while most work detailed here falls within one
of the three classes of methods in Section 2.3, I also report on other methods that
gave interesting results.

4.1 Models of global spread
To the best of my knowledge, most models for the global spread had in their objectives
to study how to slow down the global spread of the infection or considered spread
within specific countries or groups of countries; these are discussed in the relevant
later sections.
In [21, 24], we set the 𝑆𝐿 1 𝐿 2 𝐼1 𝐼2 𝐴1 𝐴2 𝑅 model of [23] in a metapopulation
context and focused on the risk of importation in different countries. The model was
run daily to provide the Public Health Agency of Canada with an assessment of the
most likely countries to import the disease in the coming days. The model includes
travel at different levels, which, as pointed out in Section 3.3, was a documented
feature of spread.
In [170], an SIR-type metapopulation model in the GLEAM framework [30] is
used that combines population densities, commute patterns and long-range travel.
Used at the early stage of the spread, the authors find that it is likely that the value of
the basic reproduction number R 0 and the prevalence are badly estimated in some
locations, with estimates in the literature at the time driven by locations with a large
population. They conclude that the number of cases was probably underestimated.

4.2 Modelling the slowing down of global spread
In [55], a metapopulation model for the global spread of COVID-19 is used to
consider in particular the role of international travel bans. The authors show that
while the cordon sanitaire in Wuhan did little to slow spread within China, its impact
internationally was more pronounced. The combined effect of travel restrictions and
community effort is also studied, with the interesting finding that travel restrictions
alone do not suffice to have an effect on propagation. In [4], a stochastic SEIR
metapopulation model is used, together with Official Airlines Guide (OAG) data, to
consider the role of travel restrictions taking place after 24 January 2020. The authors
found good adequation with the number of imported cases in several countries as
of the end of January. They focused in particular on Australia and establish that the
travel ban there might have delayed the onset of widespread propagation by four
weeks.

14

Julien Arino

A stochastic simulation model is used in [69] to consider different scenarios
regarding testing (rather than screening) of incoming individuals and the duration of
quarantine periods. Similarly, [59] use a stochastic model to quantify the effectiveness
of screening and so-called sensitisation of travellers, i.e., the provision of health
information in an effort to trigger compliance with self-isolation recommendations.
In [159], the example of air transportation in Brazil is considered using an SIRtype metapopulation. The speed of spread in relation to network measures such as
centrality was explored, with closeness centrality shown to be a good predictor of
the vulnerability of a city.
In [17], we considered the risk of disease importation in a location that is seeing
little to no local transmission chains. As with most of our work on the subject, we used
a modified version of the model in [23]. In this case, we used a stochastic version,
which we subjected to stimulations to represent the inflow of infected individuals into
a location. The model also allowed us to quantify precisely the effect of quarantine
in terms of its effect on the inflow rate.

4.3 Modelling the transition from global to local spread
In [94], the risk of importation of COVID-19 in African countries was considered
using air travel data as well as data from the Monitoring Evaluation Framework
(MEF) of the WHO International Health Regulations. The model is quite simple and
comprises no dynamic components, meaning that it provides a snapshot evaluation
of the risk of importation. As it was formulated at the beginning of the spread event,
when most of the exportation was assumed to come from China, it does nonetheless
provide meaningful results.
In the already cited [17], we focused on the risk of importation of COVID19 in locations that are seeing little to no local transmission, thereby considering
the interface between the rest of the world and such locations. We showed that
the probability of importation was most dependent on the rate at which cases are
imported in the locations, but that the outcome of a successful importation was
then determined to a large extent by the intensity of public health measures in the
locations.

4.4 Models of local spread
The location for which data became readily available the soonest was China. Since
China is also a very large country, some very interesting work was carried out in the
context of spread within that country. The authors of [183] considered the spread of
COVID-19 within China using an interesting idea: they estimated the size of the outbreak in Wuhan from known international exportations, then used a metapopulation
model with Wuhan as the source of infection to estimate spread within China. In

Spatio-temporal spread of COVID-19

15

[131], the role of undocumented infections is investigated in relation with the spread
of COVID-19 between 372 Chinese cities using a metapopulation SEIR model incorporating documented and undocumented infections. In [112], spread within Hubei
Province and in the rest of China is investigated using statistical tools (the Moran
index and a logistic model). Then an ODE SEIR model is used to compute R 0 in the
different locations. In [174], an SEIR-type model with additional compartments for
diagnosed and confirmed, suspected and infected as well as suspected but uninfected
individuals is set in a metapopulation framework with two patches: Hubei Province
and the rest of China. The model is used to consider the effect of lifting lockdown
measures.
In [10], a simulation platform is used to consider the spread in France. The model
operates at the level of subregions (départements) and supposes that individuals can
be susceptible, asymptomatic, symptomatic, recovered, hospitalised and diseased.
An interesting feature of the paper is a comparison between the results of continuous
time deterministic and discrete stochastic methods, with the latter showing better
adequation with observed data.
The authors of [46] considered spread of SARS-CoV-2 within Brazil. This colossal endeavour considers actual genotyping of the virus and prior to modelling work
proper, details importations and the spatio-temporal spread of various genomes
of the virus. Spatio-temporal modelling then uses a continuous phylogeographic
model. The model is not predictive but sheds light on the spread process: they
find that spread was mostly local, i.e., within state borders. Both within-state and
between-state spread was also found to have decreased after the implementation of
NPI.
In [9], the effect of heterogeneity of policies in the USA is investigated. A model is
formulated that is a metapopulation in essence; based on data on people movement
to places of gathering such as churches, the model allows the redistribution of
individuals between locations following different types of policies. They observe
that spatial heterogeneity in measures tends to increase the likelihood of subsequent
infection waves. Spatial heterogeneity is also investigated in [65], which uses a
metapopulation model to probe the impact of disparity of healthcare capacity in
Ohio. In [53], the effect of changing travel rates within and between locations is
investigated, with data for Taiwan.
Finally, note that because COVID-19 is spreading globally and that national
level jurisdictions (and sometimes even lower level ones) implemented a variety of
responses, it is useful to compare the situation in different jurisdictions. Even though
this is not spatial modelling stricto sensu, such works are worth mentioning here as
they provide the underpinning to spatial models. In [104], the authors use an SEIR
model to compare transmission patterns in China, South Korea, Italy and Iran. In
[103], an age-structured SEIR model is used to compare the dynamics of disease
spread in Hubei Province and six European regions. The focus is on the estimation
of the case-fatality (CFR), symptomatic case-fatality (sCFR) and infection-fatality
(IFR) ratios. The authors find that the latter two indicators are better suited to
describe the potential impact of the pandemic and note that they find geographic
heterogeneity of the estimated values. This heterogeneity is not only between Hubei

16

Julien Arino

Province and the European locations under consideration, but also between the
European locations themselves. With collaborators, we used the model in [23] to
provide a daily forecast of spread in several Canadian provinces [21] and found that
estimates for some parameters were consistent across provinces while estimates for
others varied widely, in particular, the proportion of asymptomatic cases.

4.5 Models for spread at the hyperlocal level
A lot of work during this pandemic has focused implicitly on the hyperlocal level,
but recall that here the object is models in which I found an explicit reference to
spatial aspects.
In [115], a network model is used to model the spread of SARS-CoV-2 onboard
the Diamond Princess cruise ship, with nodes representing individual passengers
and crew members. Age-structure was used as well. The model was calibrated to
known transmission data and the effect of control measures was then considered.
See also the already cited [75, 143, 153, 185] for more modelling work related to
spread aboard the Diamond Princess.
The authors of [43] used an SLIAR agent-based model to consider the effect of
social distancing, viral shedding and what they call the social distance threshold.
They find that the three lead to threshold behaviour (“phase transitions”) that have
different effects on the course of the epidemic.
In [81], ABM are used to consider in particular the effect of testing policies.
Agents are distributed on a map depending on the population density in the areas
under consideration. They are also assigned movement patterns that can cover the
whole map, a medium range or a small one. Some interesting observations are that
when tests have low reliability or that the ability to trace contact is low, a large fraction
of the testing capacity remains unused despite an increasing incidence. They also
find that mixed testing policies are useful to contain spread.

5 New variants
SARS-CoV-2 is an RNA virus and as such is subject to high mutation rates leading
potentially to variants [72, 117]. Thus the emergence of new variants was expected
from the onset of the crisis. At this point, there are several major variants to the original variant that have been detected. This number can be expected to rise: detection
of most variants requires genome sequencing, which is performed at different rates
in different countries [85], meaning that capacity to detect variants varies greatly
globally. Of particular interest at the time of writing is B.1.1.7, which was first detected in the United Kingdom in early December 2020 but is presumed to have been
spreading since as early as September 2020. This variant is particularly concerning
as it appears to be more transmissible than the original variant. It seems that this

Spatio-temporal spread of COVID-19

17

variant should not, however, be detrimental to the ongoing vaccination efforts [62].
Many countries took preventive measures in order to delay the arrival of the variant,
essentially forbidding all travel originating from the United Kingdom, but given that
circulation probably started several months before these measures, their efficacy is
debatable. For instance, [71] estimates that, of 19 countries evaluated, 16 had at least
a 50% chance of having already imported the variant by 7 December 2020. The
novel variants led some countries to consider exit control measures; some European
Union (EU) countries (Belgium and France, for instance) decided late January 2021
or early February 2021 to forbid both entry from and exit to non-EU countries for
non-essential travel. In the context of pandemic H1N1 influenza, exit screening was
shown to have the potential to be more an efficacious control measure than entry
screening [120]. It is therefore interesting to see this type of control finally being
applied, although the intent is not the one we were advocating in [120].
Modelling the spatio-temporal spread of these novel variants can be conducted
in very much the same manner as was done for the original variant. For instance,
metapopulation models for multiple species such as those considered in [19, 20] can
be readily adapted to a multiple variant situation. However, it is important to bear in
mind that because of the detection issues mentioned earlier, these models are hard
to parametrise when considering the initial spread of the variants.

6 Discussion
This is but a brief and very incomplete snapshot of the state of knowledge about the
spread of COVID-19 at the time of writing in December 2020, with a few additional
details about the new variants added in January 2021. As indicated, it is likely that I
omitted a lot of publications on the subject, given the immense amount of literature
COVID-19 has generated.
From the perspective of the spatio-temporal spread of the disease, although there
is still much to learn, I think we also now have the luxury of hindsight: many
groups, mine included, have produced a variety of models in the first few months of
the crisis, which can and should now be confronted to the reality of the outbreak.
Because COVID-19 is so widespread, there is less urgency to consider its spatial
spread in the perspective of emergency response and the focus could now evolve,
at least in part, to the evaluation of the models we produced. The problem of reimportation of the disease in locations having managed to drive it away remains an
important one, so I am not advocating to stop all work regarding spatial spread; I
am only pointing out that understanding what worked and what did not during the
initial spread would actually help for these subsequent importation events.
Going forward, though, I believe that there is still a lot to be done on one key aspect
of spatio-temporal models: most of the work carried out by those of us working in
this area has come to rely on one particular dataset, the so-called IATA air transport
data. Figure 2 shows that in the particular instance of COVID-19, the quality of
this data leaves a lot to be desired. When the data for 2020 becomes available in

18

Julien Arino

2021, it will be extremely important to scrutinise it in order to understand what type
of changes took place. Another important point to ponder will be the use of other
data sources to compensate for this loss of relevance of IATA-type data. Cell phone
location data is showing promise, but it suffers from several limitations, the most
important of which being that it is most useful and detailed at the country level and,
more importantly, that it is either proprietary or extremely expensive to acquire.
Acknowledgements I am supported in part by NSERC and by CIHR through the Canadian COVID19 Mathematical Modelling Task Force. I acknowledge support both financial and logistical from
the Public Health Agency of Canada.

References
1. 20 minutes avec AFP. Coronavirus: Trois cas confirmés en France, 15 nouveaux
décès en Chine. 20 minutes, January 2020. https://www.20minutes.fr/sante/
2703111-20200125-coronavirus-trois-cas-confirmes-france-15-nouveaux-deces-chine.
2. Z. Abdullah and H. Salamat. https://www.channelnewsasia.com/news/singapore/wuhanvirus-pneumonia-singapore-confirms-first-case-12312860.
CNA
Asia,
January
2020.
https://www.channelnewsasia.com/news/singapore/
wuhan-virus-pneumonia-singapore-confirms-first-case-12312860.
3. P. Abry, N. Pustelnik, S. Roux, et al. Spatial and temporal regularization to estimate COVID19 reproduction number R(t): Promoting piecewise smoothness via convex optimization.
PloS One, 15:e0237901, 2020.
4. A. Adekunle, M. Meehan, D. Rojas-Alvarez, et al. Delaying the COVID-19 epidemic in
Australia: evaluating the effectiveness of international travel bans. Australian and New
Zealand Journal of Public Health, July 2020.
5. A. Adiga, S. Chu, S. Eubank, et al. Disparities in spread and control of influenza in slums of
Delhi: findings from an agent-based modelling study. BMJ Open, 8:e017353, January 2018.
6. A. Adiga, S. Venkatramanan, J. Schlitt, et al. Evaluating the impact of international airline
suspensions on the early global spread of COVID-19. medRxiv, February 2020.
7. M. Ajelli, B. Gonçalves, D. Balcan, et al. Comparing large-scale computational approaches to
epidemic modeling: agent-based versus structured metapopulation models. BMC Infectious
Diseases, 10:190, June 2010.
8. M. E. Alexander and R. Kobes. Effects of vaccination and population structure on influenza
epidemic spread in the presence of two circulating strains. BMC Public Health, 11 Suppl
1:S8, February 2011.
9. B. M. Althouse, B. Wallace, B. Case, et al. The unintended consequences of inconsistent
pandemic control policies. medRxiv, August 2020.
10. P. Amar. Pandæsim: an epidemic spreading stochastic simulator. Biology, 9, September 2020.
11. J. J. Angulo, C. K. Takiguti, C. A. Pederneiras, et al. Identification of pattern and process
in the spread of a contagious disease. Social Science & Medicine, 13D:183–189, November
1979.
12. A. Apolloni, C. Poletto, and V. Colizza. Age-specific contacts and travel patterns in the spatial
spread of 2009 H1N1 influenza pandemic. BMC Infectious Diseases, 13:176, April 2013.
13. J. Arino. Mathematical epidemiology in a data-rich world. Infectious Disease Modelling,
5:161–188, 2020.
14. J. Arino, A. Ducrot, and P. Zongo. A metapopulation model for malaria with transmissionblocking partial immunity in hosts. Journal of Mathematical Biology, 64(3):423–448, 2012.
15. J. Arino and P. van den Driessche. A multi-city epidemic model. Mathematical Population
Studies, 10(3):175–193, 2003.

Spatio-temporal spread of COVID-19

19

16. J. Arino. Spatio-temporal spread of infectious pathogens of humans. Infectious Disease
Modelling, 2:218–228, May 2017.
17. J. Arino, N. Bajeux, S. Portet, and J. Watmough. Assessing the risk of COVID-19 importation
and the effect of quarantine. medRxiv, 2020.
18. J. Arino, F. Brauer, P. van den Driessche, et al. Simple models for containment of a pandemic.
Journal of the Royal Society, Interface, 3:453–457, June 2006.
19. J. Arino, J. R. Davis, D. Hartley, et al. A multi-species epidemic model with spatial dynamics.
Mathematical Medicine and Biology, 22:129–142, June 2005.
20. J. Arino, R. Jordan, and P. van den Driessche. Quarantine in a multi-species epidemic model
with spatial dynamics. Mathematical Biosciences, 206:46–60, March 2007.
21. J. Arino, S. Portet, N. Bajeux, and A. Ciupeanu. Investigation of global and local COVID-19
importation risks. Technical report, Public Health Agency of Canada, 2020.
22. J. Arino and S. Portet. Epidemiological implications of mobility between a large urban centre
and smaller satellite cities. Journal of Mathematical Biology, 71(5):1243–1265, 2015.
23. J. Arino and S. Portet. A simple model for COVID-19. Infectious Disease Modelling,
5:309–315, 2020.
24. J. Arino, S. Portet, and E. Rees. A method for assessing the most likely next destinations of
COVID-19. In preparation.
25. J. Arino, C. Sun, and W. Yang. Revisiting a two-patch SIS model with infection during
transport. Mathematical Medicine and Biology, 33(1):29–55, 2016.
26. E. Asano, L. J. Gross, S. Lenhart, and L. A. Real. Optimal control of vaccine distribution
in a rabies metapopulation model. Mathematical Biosciences and Engineering, 5:219–238,
April 2008.
27. Australian Government Department of Health.
First confirmed case of
novel coronavirus in Australia.
Media release, January 2020.
https:
//www.health.gov.au/ministers/the-hon-greg-hunt-mp/media/
first-confirmed-case-of-novel-coronavirus-in-australia.
28. E. I. Azhar, S. Lanini, G. Ippolito, and A. Zumla. The Middle East Respiratory Syndrome
coronavirus - a continuing risk to global health security. Advances in Experimental Medicine
and Biology, 972:49–60, 2017.
29. A. S. Azman and J. Lessler. Reactive vaccination in the presence of disease hotspots.
Proceedings. Biological Sciences, 282:20141341, January 2015.
30. D. Balcan, B. Gonçalves, H. Hu, et al. Modeling the spatial spread of infectious diseases: the
GLobal Epidemic and Mobility computational model. Journal of Computational Science,
1(3):132–145, 2010.
31. F. Ball, T. Britton, T. House, et al. Seven challenges for metapopulation models of epidemics,
including households models. Epidemics, 10:63–67, March 2015.
32. F. Ball and T. House. Heterogeneous network epidemics: real-time growth, variance and
extinction of infection. Journal of Mathematical Biology, 75:577–619, September 2017.
33. D. H. Barmak, C. O. Dorso, M. Otero, and H. G. Solari. Dengue epidemics and human
mobility. Physical Review E, 84:011901, July 2011.
34. R. C. Barnard, L. Berthouze, P. L. Simon, and I. Z. Kiss. Epidemic threshold in pairwise
models for clustered networks: closures and fast correlations. Journal of Mathematical
Biology, 79:823–860, August 2019.
35. A. Bastola, R. Sah, A. J. Rodriguez-Morales, et al. The first 2019 novel coronavirus case in
Nepal. The Lancet Infectious diseases, 20:279–280, March 2020.
36. M. M. Böhmer, U. Buchholz, V. M. Corman, et al. Investigation of a COVID-19 outbreak
in Germany resulting from a single travel-associated primary case: a case series. The Lancet
Infectious Diseases, 20:920–928, August 2020.
37. D. Bichara and A. Iggidr. Multi-patch and multi-group epidemic models: a new framework.
Journal of Mathematical Biology, 77:107–134, July 2018.
38. N. Bifolchi, R. Deardon, and Z. Feng. Spatial approximations of network-based individual level infectious disease models. Spatial and Spatio-Temporal Epidemiology, 6:59–70,
September 2013.

20

Julien Arino

39. L. I. Birtolo, V. Maestrini, P. Severino, et al. Coronavirus disease 2019 in Rome: was it
circulating before December? Journal of Cardiovascular Medicine, 21:835–836, October
2020.
40. D. Bitar, A. Goubar, and J. C. Desenclos. International travels and fever screening during
epidemics: a literature review on the effectiveness and potential use of non-contact infrared
thermometers. Euro Surveillance, 14(2):1–5, February 2009.
41. W. Bock and Y. Jayathunga. Optimal control of a multi-patch Dengue model under the
influence of Wolbachia bacterium. Mathematical Biosciences, 315:108219, September 2019.
42. J. T. Bowen and C. Laroe. Airline networks and the international diffusion of severe acute
respiratory syndrome (SARS). The Geographical Journal, 172:130–144, June 2006.
43. B. Braun, B. Taraktaş, B. Beckage, and J. Molofsky. Simulating phase transitions and control
measures for network epidemics caused by infections with presymptomatic, asymptomatic,
and symptomatic stages. PLoS One, 15:e0238412, 2020.
44. D. Brockmann and D. Helbing. The hidden geometry of complex, network-driven contagion
phenomena. Science, 342:1337–1342, December 2013.
45. G. M. Bwire and L. S. Paulo. Coronavirus disease-2019: is fever an adequate screening for
the returning travelers? Tropical Medicine and Health, 48:14, 2020.
46. D. S. Candido, I. M. Claro, J. G. de Jesus, et al. Evolution and epidemic spread of SARSCoV-2 in Brazil. Science, 369:1255–1260, September 2020.
47. Z. Cao, D. Zeng, X. Zheng, et al. Spatio-temporal evolution of Beĳing 2003 SARS epidemic.
Science China. Earth Sciences, 53:1017–1028, 2010.
48. N. B. Carnegie. Effects of contact network structure on epidemic transmission trees: implications for data required to estimate network structure. Statistics in Medicine, 37:236–248,
January 2018.
49. C. Carpenter and L. Sattenspiel. The design and use of an agent-based model to simulate the
1918 influenza epidemic at Norway House, Manitoba. American Journal of Human Biology,
21:290–300, 2009.
50. S. Chadsuthi, B. M. Althouse, S. Iamsirithaworn, et al. Travel distance and human movement
predict paths of emergence and spatial spread of chikungunya in Thailand. Epidemiology &
Infection, 146:1654–1662, October 2018.
51. D. Champredon, M. Najafi, M. Laskowski, et al. Individual movements and contact patterns
in a Canadian long-term care facility. AIMS Public Health, 5:111–121, 2018.
52. M. Chan-Yeung and R.-H. Xu. SARS: epidemiology. Respirology, 8 Suppl:S9–14, November
2003.
53. M.-C. Chang, R. Kahn, Y.-A. Li, et al. Variation in human mobility and its impact on the risk
of future COVID-19 outbreaks in Taiwan. medRxiv, August 2020.
54. J. D. Cherry. The chronology of the 2002-2003 SARS mini pandemic. Paediatric Respiratory
Reviews, 5:262–269, December 2004.
55. M. Chinazzi, J. T. Davis, M. Ajelli, et al. The effect of travel restrictions on the spread of the
2019 novel coronavirus (covid-19) outbreak. Science, 368:395–400, April 2020.
56. G. Chowell, J. M. Hyman, S. Eubank, and C. Castillo-Chavez. Scaling laws for the movement
of people between locations in a large city. Physical Review E, 68:066102, December 2003.
57. G. Chowell, L. Sattenspiel, S. Bansal, and C. Viboud. Mathematical models to characterize
early epidemic growth: A review. Physics of Life Reviews, 18:66–97, September 2016.
58. P. Christidis and A. Christodoulou. The predictive capacity of air travel patterns during the
global spread of the COVID-19 pandemic: risk, uncertainty and randomness. International
Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 17, May 2020.
59. S. Clifford, C. A. B. Pearson, P. Klepac, et al. Effectiveness of interventions targeting air
travellers for delaying local outbreaks of SARS-CoV-2. Journal of Travel Medicine, 27,
August 2020.
60. J. Coleman. Vietnam reports first coronavirus cases. The Hill, January 2020.
61. V. Colizza, M. Barthélemy, A. Barrat, and A. Vespignani. Epidemic modeling in complex
realities. Comptes rendus Biologies, 330:364–374, April 2007.

Spatio-temporal spread of COVID-19

21

62. P. Conti, A. Caraffa, C. E. Gallenga, et al. The British variant of the new coronavirus-19
(Sars-Cov-2) should not create a vaccine problem. Journal of Biological Regulators and
Homeostatic Agents, 35, December 2020.
63. S. Copiello and C. Grillenzoni. The spread of 2019-nCoV in China was primarily driven by
population density. Comment on "Association between short-term exposure to air pollution
and COVID-19 infection: Evidence from China" by Zhu et al. The Science of the Total
Environment, 744:141028, November 2020.
64. G. Cruz-Pacheco, J. F. Bustamante-Castañeda, J. G. Caputo, et al. Dispersion of a new
coronavirus SARS-CoV-2 by airlines in 2020: temporal estimates of the outbreak in mexico.
Revista de Investigacion Clinica, 72:138–143, 2020.
65. D. F. Cuadros, Y. Xiao, Z. Mukandavire, et al. Spatiotemporal transmission dynamics of the
covid-19 pandemic and its impact on critical healthcare capacity. Health & Place, 64:102404,
July 2020.
66. O. O. Dalgıç, O. Y. Özaltın, W. A. Ciccotelli, and F. S. Erenay. Deriving effective vaccine
allocation strategies for pandemic influenza: Comparison of an agent-based simulation and a
compartmental model. PLoS One, 12:e0172261, 2017.
67. M. Dell’Omodarme and M. C. Prati. The probability of failing in detecting an infectious
disease at entry points into a country. Statistics in Medicine, 24:2669–2679, September 2005.
68. A. Deslandes, V. Berti, Y. Tandjaoui-Lambotte, et al. SARS-CoV-2 was already spreading
in France in late December 2019. International Journal of Antimicrobial Agents, 55:106006,
June 2020.
69. B. L. Dickens, J. R. Koo, J. T. Lim, et al. Strategies at points of entry to reduce importation
risk of COVID-19 cases and re-open travel. Journal of Travel Medicine, August 2020.
70. M. M. Dickson, G. Espa, D. Giuliani, et al. Assessing the effect of containment measures
on the spatio-temporal dynamic of COVID-19 in Italy. Nonlinear Dynamics, pages 1–14,
August 2020.
71. Z. Du, L. Wang, B. Yang, et al. International risk of the new variant COVID-19 importations
originating in the United Kingdom. medRxiv : the preprint server for health sciences, January
2021.
72. E. A. Duarte, I. S. Novella, S. C. Weaver, et al. RNA virus quasispecies: significance for viral
disease and epidemiology. Infectious Agents and Disease, 3:201–214, August 1994.
73. M. C. Eisenberg, Z. Shuai, J. H. Tien, and P. van den Driessche. A cholera model in a patchy
environment with water and human movement. Mathematical Biosciences, 246:105–112,
November 2013.
74. A. Elengoe. COVID-19 outbreak in Malaysia. Osong Public Health and Research Perspectives, 11:93–100, June 2020.
75. J. C. Emery, T. W. Russell, Y. Liu, et al. The contribution of asymptomatic SARS-CoV-2
infections to transmission on the Diamond Princess cruise ship. eLife, 9, August 2020.
76. J. M. Epstein. Generative Social Science: Studies in Agent-Based Computational Modeling,
volume 13. Princeton University Press, 2006.
77. S. Eubank. Network based models of infectious disease spread. Japanese Journal of Infectious
Diseases, 58:S9–13, December 2005.
78. C. Fan, L. Liu, W. Guo, et al. Prediction of epidemic spread of the 2019 novel coronavirus
driven by Spring Festival transportation in China: a population-based study. International
Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 17, March 2020.
79. H. Fang, J. Chen, and J. Hu. Modelling the SARS epidemic by a lattice-based Monte-Carlo
simulation. Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and
Biology Society, 2005:7470–7473, 2005.
80. J. R. Fauver, M. E. Petrone, E. B. Hodcroft, et al. Coast-to-coast spread of SARS-CoV-2
during the early epidemic in the United States. Cell, 181:990–996.e5, May 2020.
81. V. G. Fiore, N. DeFelice, B. S. Glicksberg, et al. Containment of future waves of COVID-19:
simulating the impact of different policies and testing capacities for contact tracing, testing,
and isolation. medRxiv, June 2020.

22

Julien Arino

82. S. M. Firestone, M. P. Ward, R. M. Christley, and N. K. Dhand. The importance of location
in contact networks: Describing early epidemic spread using spatial social network analysis.
Preventive Veterinary Medicine, 102:185–195, December 2011.
83. A. Flahault, S. Letrait, P. Blin, et al. Modelling the 1985 influenza epidemic in France.
Statistics in Medicine, 7:1147–1155, November 1988.
84. C. M. C. B. Fortaleza, R. B. Guimarães, G. B. de Almeida, et al. Taking the inner route:
spatial and demographic factors affecting vulnerability to COVID-19 among 604 cities from
inner São Paulo State, Brazil. Epidemiology & Infection, 148:e118, June 2020.
85. Y. Furuse. Genomic sequencing effort for SARS-CoV-2 by country during the pandemic.
International Journal of Infectious Diseases, 103:305 – 307, 2021.
86. W. Gaber, U. Goetsch, R. Diel, et al. Screening for infectious diseases at international airports:
the Frankfurt model. Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine, 80:595–600, July 2009.
87. D. Gao and S. Ruan. An SIS patch model with variable transmission coefficients. Mathematical Biosciences, 232:110–115, August 2011.
88. D. Gao and S. Ruan. A multi-patch malaria model with logistic growth populations. SIAM
Journal on Applied Mathematics, 72:819–841, January 2012.
89. D. Gao, P. van den Driessche, and C. Cosner. Habitat fragmentation promotes malaria
persistence. Journal of Mathematical Biology, 79:2255–2280, December 2019.
90. L. M. Gardner, A. A. Chughtai, and C. R. MacIntyre. Risk of global spread of Middle East
respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) via the air transport network. Journal of
Travel Medicine, 23, June 2016.
91. E. Gayawan, O. O. Awe, B. M. Oseni, et al. The spatio-temporal epidemic dynamics of
COVID-19 outbreak in Africa. Epidemiology & Infection, 148:e212, September 2020.
92. K. Gaythorpe and B. Adams. Disease and disaster: Optimal deployment of epidemic control facilities in a spatially heterogeneous population with changing behaviour. Journal of
Theoretical Biology, 397:169–178, May 2016.
93. J. L. Geoghegan, A. F. Saavedra, S. Duchêne, et al. Continental synchronicity of human
influenza virus epidemics despite climatic variation. PLoS Pathogens, 14:e1006780, January
2018.
94. M. Gilbert, G. Pullano, F. Pinotti, et al. Preparedness and vulnerability of African countries
against importations of COVID-19: a modelling study. The Lancet, 395:871–877, March
2020.
95. K. Glass and B. Barnes. Eliminating infectious diseases of livestock: a metapopulation model
of infection control. Theoretical Population Biology, 85:63–72, May 2013.
96. Q. Griette, G. Raoul, and S. Gandon. Virulence evolution at the front line of spreading
epidemics. Evolution, 69:2810–2819, November 2015.
97. S. S. Gunthe and S. S. Patra. Impact of international travel dynamics on domestic spread
of 2019-nCoV in India: origin-based risk assessment in importation of infected travelers.
Globalization and Health, 16:45, May 2020.
98. D. Guo, K. C. Li, T. R. Peters, et al. Multi-scale modeling for the transmission of influenza
and the evaluation of interventions toward it. Scientific Reports, 5:8980, March 2015.
99. C. M. Hafner. The spread of the Covid-19 pandemic in time and space. International Journal
of Environmental Research and Public Health, 17, May 2020.
100. N. Haider, A. Yavlinsky, Y.-M. Chang, et al. The Global Health Security Index and Joint
External Evaluation score for health preparedness are not correlated with countries’ COVID19 detection response time and mortality outcome. Epidemiology & Infection, 148:e210,
September 2020.
101. I. M. Hall, J. R. Egan, I. Barrass, et al. Comparison of smallpox outbreak control strategies
using a spatial metapopulation model. Epidemiology & Infection, 135:1133–1144, October
2007.
102. P. Harvim, H. Zhang, P. Georgescu, and L. Zhang. Transmission dynamics and control
mechanisms of vector-borne diseases with active and passive movements between urban and
satellite cities. Bulletin of Mathematical Biology, 81:4518–4563, November 2019.

Spatio-temporal spread of COVID-19

23

103. A. Hauser, M. J. Counotte, C. C. Margossian, et al. Estimation of SARS-CoV-2 mortality
during the early stages of an epidemic: A modeling study in Hubei, China, and six regions in
Europe. PLoS Medicine, 17:e1003189, July 2020.
104. J. He, G. Chen, Y. Jiang, et al. Comparative infection modeling and control of COVID19 transmission patterns in China, South Korea, Italy and Iran. The Science of the Total
Environment, 747:141447, August 2020.
105. A. Hernandez-Matamoros, H. Fujita, T. Hayashi, and H. Perez-Meana. Forecasting of COVID19 per regions using ARIMA models and polynomial functions. Applied Soft Computing,
96:106610, November 2020.
106. A. Hohl, E. M. Delmelle, M. R. Desjardins, and Y. Lan. Daily surveillance of COVID-19 using
the prospective space-time scan statistic in the United States. Spatial and Spatio-Temporal
Epidemiology, 34:100354, August 2020.
107. M. L. Holshue, C. DeBolt, S. Lindquist, et al. First case of 2019 novel coronavirus in the
United States. The New England Journal of Medicine, 382:929–936, March 2020.
108. D. Holtz, M. Zhao, S. G. Benzell, et al. Interdependence and the cost of uncoordinated
responses to covid-19. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States
of America, 117:19837–19843, August 2020.
109. T. Hornbeck, D. Naylor, A. M. Segre, et al. Using sensor networks to study the effect of
peripatetic healthcare workers on the spread of hospital-associated infections. The Journal
of Infectious Diseases, 206:1549–1557, November 2012.
110. B. Hu, J. Gong, J. Sun, and J. Zhou. Exploring the epidemic transmission network of SARS
in-out flow in mainland China. Chinese Science Bulletin, 58:1818–1831, 2013.
111. B. Hu, J. Gong, J. Zhou, et al. Spatial-temporal characteristics of epidemic spread in-out
flow-using SARS epidemic in Beĳing as a case study. Science China. Earth Sciences,
56:1380–1397, 2013.
112. R. Huang, M. Liu, and Y. Ding. Spatial-temporal distribution of COVID-19 in China and its
prediction: A data-driven modeling analysis. Journal of Infection in Developing Countries,
14:246–253, March 2020.
113. O. Iritani, T. Okuno, D. Hama, et al. Clusters of COVID-19 in long-term care hospitals and
facilities in Japan from 16 January to 9 May 2020. Geriatrics & Gerontology International,
20:715–719, July 2020.
114. ISO. Iso 3166 code lists, 2013.
115. S. M. Jenness, K. S. Willebrand, A. A. Malik, et al. Modeling dynamic network strategies
for SARS-CoV-2 control on a cruise ship. medRxiv, September 2020.
116. E. Karimi, K. Schmitt, and A. Akgunduz. Effect of individual protective behaviors on
influenza transmission: an agent-based model. Health Care Management Science, 18:318–
333, September 2015.
117. T. F. Kautz and N. L. Forrester. RNA virus fidelity mutants: a useful tool for evolutionary
biology or a complex challenge? Viruses, 10, November 2018.
118. M. R. Kelly, J. H. Tien, M. C. Eisenberg, and S. Lenhart. The impact of spatial arrangements
on epidemic disease dynamics and intervention strategies. Journal of Biological Dynamics,
10:222–249, 2016.
119. K. Khan, J. Arino, W. Hu, et al. Spread of a novel influenza A (H1N1) virus via global airline
transportation. The New England Journal of Medicine, 361:212–214, July 2009.
120. K. Khan, R. Eckhardt, J. S. Brownstein, et al. Entry and exit screening of airline travellers
during the A(H1N1) 2009 pandemic: a retrospective evaluation. Bulletin of the World Health
Organization, 91:368–376, May 2013.
121. A. Khatua, T. K. Kar, S. K. Nandi, et al. Impact of human mobility on the transmission
dynamics of infectious diseases. Energy, Ecology & Environment, pages 1–18, May 2020.
122. J. E. Kim, H. Lee, C. H. Lee, and S. Lee. Assessment of optimal strategies in a two-patch
dengue transmission model with seasonality. PloS One, 12:e0173673, 2017.
123. P. Klepac, I. Megiddo, B. T. Grenfell, and R. Laxminarayan. Self-enforcing regional vaccination agreements. Journal of the Royal Society, Interface, 13:20150907, January 2016.
124. M. U. G. Kraemer, C.-H. Yang, B. Gutierrez, et al. The effect of human mobility and control
measures on the COVID-19 epidemic in China. Science, 368:493–497, May 2020.

24

Julien Arino

125. C. Kuhn and A. Rose. Tall Pines Healthcare COVID-19 outbreak experience in rural Waldo
County, Maine, April 2020. The Journal of Ambulatory Care Management, 43:294–300,
2020.
126. S. Kumar, J. J. Grefenstette, D. Galloway, et al. Policies to reduce influenza in the workplace: impact assessments using an agent-based model. American Journal of Public Health,
103:1406–1411, August 2013.
127. S. Kumar, K. Piper, D. D. Galloway, et al. Is population structure sufficient to generate
area-level inequalities in influenza rates? An examination using agent-based models. BMC
Public Health, 15:947, September 2015.
128. G. La Rosa, P. Mancini, G. Bonanno Ferraro, et al. SARS-CoV-2 has been circulating in
northern Italy since December 2019: Evidence from environmental monitoring. The Science
of the Total Environment, 750:141711, August 2020.
129. M. Laskowski, V. R. Duvvuri, D. L. Buckeridge, et al. Influenza H3N2 variant viruses with
pandemic potential: preventing catastrophe in remote and isolated Canadian communities.
Preventive Medicine, 57:910–913, December 2013.
130. S. Lee and C. Castillo-Chavez. The role of residence times in two-patch dengue transmission
dynamics and optimal strategies. Journal of Theoretical Biology, 374:152–164, June 2015.
131. R. Li, S. Pei, B. Chen, et al. Substantial undocumented infection facilitates the rapid dissemination of novel coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2). Science, 368:489–493, May 2020.
132. X. Liu, X. Chen, and Y. Takeuchi. Dynamics of an SIQS epidemic model with transportrelated infection and exit-entry screenings. Journal of Theoretical Biology, 285:25–35,
September 2011.
133. X. Liu and Y. Takeuchi. Spread of disease with transport-related infection and entry screening.
Journal of Theoretical Biology, 242:517–528, September 2006.
134. I. M. Longini, A. Nizam, S. Xu, et al. Containing pandemic influenza at the source. Science,
309:1083–1087, August 2005.
135. L. Matrajt, M. E. Halloran, and I. M. Longini. Optimal vaccine allocation for the early
mitigation of pandemic influenza. PLoS Computational Biology, 9:e1002964, 2013.
136. L. Matthews, D. T. Haydon, D. J. Shaw, et al. Neighbourhood control policies and the spread
of infectious diseases. Proceedings. Biological Sciences, 270:1659–1666, August 2003.
137. T. M. McMichael, S. Clark, S. Pogosjans, et al. COVID-19 in a Long-Term Care Facility
- King County, Washington, February 27-March 9, 2020. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly
Report, 69:339–342, March 2020.
138. P. Melin, J. C. Monica, D. Sanchez, and O. Castillo. Analysis of spatial spread relationships of
coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic in the world using self organizing maps. Chaos, Solitons,
and Fractals, 138:109917, September 2020.
139. L. A. Meyers, M. E. J. Newman, and B. Pourbohloul. Predicting epidemics on directed
contact networks. Journal of Theoretical Biology, 240:400–418, June 2006.
140. L. A. Meyers, B. Pourbohloul, M. E. J. Newman, et al. Network theory and SARS: predicting
outbreak diversity. Journal of Theoretical Biology, 232:71–81, January 2005.
141. A. Mishra, B. Ambrosio, S. Gakkhar, and M. A. Aziz-Alaoui. A network model for control of
dengue epidemic using sterile insect technique. Mathematical Biosciences and Engineering,
15:441–460, April 2018.
142. S. Mishra, A. Mohapatra, R. Kumar, et al. Restricting rural-urban connect to combat infectious
disease epidemic as India fights COVID-19. Journal of Family Medicine and Primary Care,
9:1792–1794, April 2020.
143. K. Mizumoto and G. Chowell. Transmission potential of the novel coronavirus (COVID-19)
onboard the Diamond Princess Cruises ship. Infectious Disease Modelling, 5:264–270, 2020.
144. A. Mollalo, K. M. Rivera, and B. Vahedi. Artificial neural network modeling of novel
coronavirus (COVID-19) incidence rates across the continental United States. International
Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 17, June 2020.
145. D. Mollison. Spatial contact models for ecological and epidemic spread. Journal of the Royal
Statistical Society: Series B (Methodological), 39(3):283–313, 1977.
146. D. Mollison. Markovian contact processes. Advances in Applied Probability, 10(1):85–108,
1978.

Spatio-temporal spread of COVID-19

25

147. D. Mollison and K. Kuulasmaa. Spatial epidemic models: theory and simulations. Population
Dynamics of Rabies in Wildlife, 8:291–309, 1985.
148. R. Moss, E. Naghizade, M. Tomko, and N. Geard. What can urban mobility data reveal about
the spatial distribution of infection in a single city? BMC Public Health, 19:656, May 2019.
149. V. A. Mouchtouri, E. P. Christoforidou, M. An der Heiden, et al. exit and entry screening
practices for infectious diseases among travelers at points of entry: looking for evidence on
public health impact. International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health,
16, November 2019.
150. M. Najafi, M. Laskowski, P. T. de Boer, et al. The effect of individual movements and
interventions on the spread of Influenza in long-term care facilities. Medical Decision
Making, 37:871–881, November 2017.
151. New Straits Times. 3 coronavirus cases confirmed in Johor Baru. New Straits
Times, January 2020. https://www.nst.com.my/news/nation/2020/01/559563/
breaking-3-coronavirus-cases-confirmed-johor-baru.
152. T. H. D. Nguyen and D. C. Vu. Summary of the COVID-19 outbreak in Vietnam - Lessons
and suggestions. Travel Medicine and Infectious Disease, 37:101651, 2020.
153. H. Nishiura. Backcalculating the incidence of infection with COVID-19 on the Diamond
Princess. Journal of Clinical Medicine, 9, February 2020.
154. Y. Ohkusa and T. Sugawara. Application of an individual-based model with real data for transportation mode and location to pandemic influenza. Journal of Infection and Chemotherapy,
13:380–389, December 2007.
155. Y. Ohkusa and T. Sugawara. Simulation model of pandemic influenza in the whole of Japan.
Japanese Journal of Infectious Diseases, 62:98–106, March 2009.
156. B. Pourbohloul, A. Ahued, B. Davoudi, et al. Initial human transmission dynamics of the
pandemic (H1N1) 2009 virus in North America. Influenza and Other Respiratory Viruses,
3:215–222, September 2009.
157. G. Pullano, F. Pinotti, E. Valdano, et al. Novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) early-stage importation risk to Europe, January 2020. Euro Surveillance, 25, January 2020.
158. L. Rass and J. Radcliffe. Spatial Deterministic Epidemics, volume 102 of Mathematical
Surveys and Monographs. American Mathematical Society, 2003.
159. S. P. Ribeiro, A. Castro E Silva, W. Dáttilo, et al. Severe airport sanitarian control could slow
down the spreading of covid-19 pandemics in brazil. PeerJ, 8:e9446, 2020.
160. S. Riley. Large-scale spatial-transmission models of infectious disease. Science, 316:1298–
1301, June 2007.
161. D. A. Robertson. Spatial transmission models: A taxonomy and framework. Risk Analysis,
39:225–243, January 2019.
162. S. Ruan, W. Wang, and S. A. Levin. The effect of global travel on the spread of SARS.
Mathematical Biosciences and Engineering, 3:205–218, January 2006.
163. T. W. Russell, J. Hellewell, C. I. Jarvis, et al. Estimating the infection and case fatality ratio for
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) using age-adjusted data from the outbreak on the Diamond
Princess cruise ship, February 2020. Euro Surveillance, 25, March 2020.
164. L. A. Rvachev and I. M. Longini Jr. A mathematical model for the global spread of influenza.
Mathematical Biosciences, 75(1):3–22, 1985.
165. Q. Shao and M. Jia. Influences on influenza transmission within terminal based on hierarchical
structure of personal contact network. BMC Public Health, 15:257, March 2015.
166. S. M. Shi, I. Bakaev, H. Chen, et al. Risk factors, presentation, and course of Coronavirus
Disease 2019 in a large, academic long-term care facility. Journal of the American Medical
Directors Association, 21:1378–1383.e1, October 2020.
167. C. D. Shrader, S. Assadzandi, C. S. Pilkerton, and A. M. Ashcraft. Responding to a
COVID-19 outbreak at a long-term care facility. Journal of Applied Gerontology, page
733464820959163, September 2020.
168. W. Sim. Japan confirms first case of infection from Wuhan coronavirus; Vietnam quarantines
two tourists. The Straits Times, January 2020.

26

Julien Arino

169. M. Singh, P. Sarkhel, G. J. Kang, et al. Impact of demographic disparities in social distancing
and vaccination on influenza epidemics in urban and rural regions of the United States. BMC
Infectious Diseases, 19:221, March 2019.
170. M. Siwiak, P. Szczesny, and M. Siwiak. From the index case to global spread: the global
mobility based modelling of the COVID-19 pandemic implies higher infection rate and lower
detection ratio than current estimates. PeerJ, 8:e9548, 2020.
171. J. Snow. On the Mode of Communication of Cholera. John Churchill, second edition, 1855.
172. N. M. Stall, A. Jones, K. A. Brown, et al. For-profit long-term care homes and the risk of
COVID-19 outbreaks and resident deaths. Canadian Medical Association Journal, 192:E946–
E955, August 2020.
173. C. Sun, W. Yang, J. Arino, and K. Khan. Effect of media-induced social distancing on disease
transmission in a two patch setting. Mathematical Biosciences, 230:87–95, April 2011.
174. X. Sun, Y. Xiao, and X. Ji. When to lift the lockdown in Hubei province during COVID-19
epidemic? an insight from a patch model and multiple source data. Journal of Theoretical
Biology, 507:110469, August 2020.
175. C. T. Telford, U. Onwubiko, D. P. Holland, et al. Preventing COVID-19 outbreaks in longterm care facilities through preemptive testing of residents and staff members - Fulton County,
Georgia, March-May 2020. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, 69:1296–1299, September 2020.
176. Thucydides.
The History of the Peloponnesian War.
Circa 430 BCE.
http://classics.mit.edu/Thucydides/pelopwar.html.
177. T. N. Vilches, M. Jaberi-Douraki, and S. M. Moghadas. Risk of influenza infection with low
vaccine effectiveness: the role of avoidance behaviour. Epidemiology & Infection, 147:e75,
January 2019.
178. X. Wang, S. Liu, L. Wang, and W. Zhang. An epidemic patchy model with entry-exit
screening. Bulletin of Mathematical Biology, 77:1237–1255, July 2015.
179. World Health Organization. Novel Coronavirus – Japan (ex-China). Online, January 2020.
180. World Health Organization. Novel Coronavirus – Republic of Korea (ex-China). Online,
January 2020.
181. World Health Organization. Novel Coronavirus – Thailand (ex-China). Online, January 2020.
182. World Health Organization. Novel Coronavirus (2019-nCoV) – Situation report 4. Online,
January 2020. 24 January 2020.
183. J. T. Wu, K. Leung, and G. M. Leung. Nowcasting and forecasting the potential domestic and
international spread of the 2019-nCoV outbreak originating in Wuhan, China: a modelling
study. The Lancet, 395:689–697, February 2020.
184. Z. Xie, Y. Qin, Y. Li, et al. Spatial and temporal differentiation of COVID-19 epidemic
spread in mainland China and its influencing factors. The Science of the Total Environment,
744:140929, November 2020.
185. S. Zhang, M. Diao, W. Yu, et al. Estimation of the reproductive number of novel coronavirus
(COVID-19) and the probable outbreak size on the Diamond Princess cruise ship: A datadriven analysis. International Journal of Infectious Diseases, 93:201–204, April 2020.

