Paper card-based vs application-based vaccine credentials: a comparison

PAPER CARD - BASED VS APPLICATION - BASED VACCINE
CREDENTIALS : A COMPARISON
Aryan Mahindra1 , Anshuman Sharma1 , Priyanshi Katiyar1 , Rohan Sukumaran1 , Ishaan
Singh1 , Albert Johnson1 , Kasia Jakimowicz1,2,3 , Akarsh Venkatasubramanian1,5 , Chandan CV1 ,
Shailesh Advani1,4 , Rohan Iyer1 , Sheshank Shankar1 , Saurish Srivastava1 , Sethuraman TV1 ,
Abhishek Singh2 , Ramesh Raskar1,2
1

PathCheck Foundation, 02139 Cambridge, USA.
MIT Media Lab, 02139 Cambridge, USA.
3
Harvard Kennedy School Ash Centre for Democratic Governance and Innovation, 02138 Cambridge, USA.
4
Terasaki institute for biomedical innovation, University of California, Los Angeles, USA.
5
International Labour Organization, United Nations, Geneva, Switzerland.
raskar@media.mit.edu
2

A BSTRACT
In this early draft, we provide an overview on similarities and differences in the
implementation of a card-based vaccine credential system and an app-based vaccine credential system. A vaccine credential’s primary goal is to regulate entry and ensure safety of individuals within densely packed public locations and
workspaces. This is critical for containing the rapid spread of COVID-19 in
densely packed public locations since a single individual can infect a large majority of people in a crowd. A vaccine credential can also provide information
such as an individual’s COVID-19 vaccination history and adverse symptom reaction history to judge their potential impact on the overall health of individuals
within densely packed public locations and workspaces. After completing the
comparisons, we believe a card-based implementation will benefit regions with
less socioeconomic mobility, limited resources, and stagnant administrations. An
app-based implementation on the other hand will benefit regions with equitable
internet access and lower technological divide. We also believe an interoperable system of both credential systems will work best for regions with enormous
working-class populations and dense housing clusters.

1

I NTRODUCTION

Despite the preventive measures taken to tackle the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), it has
caused unprecedented human deaths (534,099 as of March 17, 2021 CDC (2020)). Over the past year
there have been multiple studies looking at the pandemic through digital and clinical lenses(Gandhi
et al. (2020b), Gandhi et al. (2020a)). Particularly, the process of testing individuals for COVID-19
has also become an increasingly privacy-invasive process(Morales et al. (2021)).
The introduction of vaccines for the general population creates opportunities to slow down the
rapid spread of the virus (News (2021)). However, this opportunity poses new challenges including
the strategic, equitable, and privacy-preserving approach of distribution as the world extends mass
vaccination drives (EliseoLucero-PrisnoIII (2021)). The current vaccination roll-out has favored
highly centralized systems for symptom reporting and vaccine administration. However, a recent
paper (Bae et al. (2021b)) proposed a novel solution for decentralized vaccine coordination through
the augmentation of CDC’s vaccine card with encrypted QR stickers.
In the proposed MIT SafePaths Paper Card (MiSaCa), there are four digitally signed QR
code stickers that function as components of a card-based vaccine credential. The distribution
mechanism for each, as described in the paper (Bae et al. (2021b)) is as follows - the first QR
1

Paper card-based vs application-based vaccine credentials: a comparison

code is called “coupon” and contains a digital certificate consisting of alpha-numeric codes that
are ideally issued by central authorities and get distributed by local governments/employers. The
second QR code is termed as “badge” and contains encrypted information such as time, date, and
vaccine manufacturer information issued by the vaccination clinic. The third and fourth QR codes
are termed as “status” and “passkey” that contain un-encrypted vaccination status and encrypted
personal information such as age, name, and sex, respectively. These four coupon codes formulate
a workflow that encapsulates the entire user journey for an individual to receive vaccines and show
proof of vaccination. After the vaccine recipient receives a coupon QR code, they can enter the
coupon’s alphanumeric identification into a smartphone application to continue their vaccination
journey using app-based vaccine credentials.

Figure 1: The 4 pillars of vaccine credentials

2

M ETRICS F OR C OMPARISONS

This paper compares the two types of vaccine credentials in the domains of fraud and impersonation, adverse event reporting, feasibility, scalability, equity, importability of health data, future data
aggregation, and operability to explore each system’s features and drawbacks.
2.1

F RAUD & I MPERSONATION

Vaccine credentials allow public authorities to verify an individual’s vaccination status. This is critical for containing the rapid spread of COVID-19 in densely packed public locations since a single
individual can infect a large majority of people in a crowd (Baylor & Marshall (2013)). Jurisdictions can promulgate digital and physical vaccine credentials containing sensitive information such
as date of birth, name, and occupation that can be used to extract more sensitive information from
an individual. Furthermore, impersonation and fraud of a vaccine credential allow individuals to
fake their vaccination status while putting the health of not only themselves, but also that of other
individuals at huge risk.
Card-based implementation - A recent statement from the Better Business Bureau exemplifies
how scammers in Britain were able to sell fake vaccination cards on digital platforms (like eBay)
by extracting personal information from publicly shared vaccination cards (Bureau (2021)).
Counterfeit paper cards adhered with QR stickers can be easily created for duplication of vaccine
cards and there is a high possibility of identity impersonation when a card is lost or stolen from an
2

Paper card-based vs application-based vaccine credentials: a comparison

individual. Since MiSaCa’s QR code stickers are encrypted, an individual’s digital certificate and
vaccination data is secure from such events.
App-based implementation - Digital credential apps with authentication systems such as onetime passwords (OTPs) and biometric barriers(eg.fingerprints) prevent digitally stored QR codes
from duplication. However, there exists a possibility for users to lose their login credentials because
of the recent COMB data breach (Bernard Meyer (2021)). This breach has comprised a significant
amount of Gmail account’s passwords that are often linked to Google’s login authentication systems
in smartphone applications. Thus, the breach may potentially enable malicious hackers to gain
access to the digitally stored vaccine credentials in the app.
2.2

A DVERSE E VENT R EPORTING

Every publicly available vaccine undergoes excessive testing against a large population of biologically diverse individuals for understanding side-effects, response rates, and complications caused
after receiving a vaccination shot in randomized clinical trials (Alaran et al. (2021)). However, the
current FDA approved vaccines used to immunize individuals against COVID-19 in the U.S. and
globally have been approved at an accelerated pace to curtail the growing mortality and infection
rates. This has created an acute need for effective tracking response and adverse reactions to vaccines for the general population. But the methodologies and systems proposed to facilitate such data
aggregation using vaccine credentials vary in significant ways.
Card-based implementation - Vaccine recipients are required to report their symptoms by contacting their healthcare provider who uses the Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System (for
Disease Control & Prevention (2020)) to track adverse events from a vaccine recipient in the US.
Since this process reveals the person’s personal information to the healthcare provider , a card-based
implementation provides a new frontier for identifying individuals that prevents exposure of any
personally identifiable information. Instead of directly revealing their name, a recipient can provide
their vaccination credentials encoded on their coupon sticker on the vaccine paper card as a means
of identification for symptom reporting. Because the coupon sticker contains alpha-numeric codes,
the vaccine recipient’s data is kept secure while they report their symptoms to a healthcare system.
However, card-based vaccine credentials require additional interfaces to report adverse events via
SMS, web app, or interactive voice response. This creates a need for external infrastructure to be
integrated into a card-based vaccine credential system.
App-based implementation - Since apps have the ability to generate noise on servers while
registering data, all the information provided can be securely added and transferred across different
databases (Bae et al. (2021a)).The ability to anonymize and arrange data without using personally
identifiable information is possible with the implementation of differential privacy and secure
multiparty computation (Pettai & Laud (2015)). This system, if used by a vaccine recipient
makes adverse event reporting through an app extremely privacy preserving. Furthermore, this
implementation’s approach allows for improved data aggregation and triangulation from various
data sources across different geographic locations while functioning as a differential privacy system
(Cynthia Dwork (2014)).

Figure 2: Anonymous adverse event reporting
3

Paper card-based vs application-based vaccine credentials: a comparison

2.3

F EASIBILITY

For the implementation of a vaccine credential system to positively impact the current vaccine rollout, it requires every individual to have a physical or digital vaccine credential. But ensuring that
everyone gains access to physical paper cards or software applications on their mobile phone is questionable, given current socio-economic inequalities and digital divides in developed, developing, and
underdeveloped countries.
Card-based implementation - In the MiSaCa vaccine credential, the coupon QR code sticker is
issued by a jurisdiction while the status, badge, and passkey stickers are issued by vaccination sites.
This unidirectional process creates problems for backward compatibility. The lack of multi-channel
on-boarding for gaining a card-based vaccine credential complicates the process of distribution in
expanding rural and suburban populations. New mechanisms have to be put in place to distribute
the coupon, status, badge, and passkey stickers in a more distributed manner. Not only does the
new system have to be localized, but also provide more avenues for vaccine recipients to gain a
card-based vaccine credential that does not depend on a single jurisdictional authority. Paper-based
vaccine credentials also eliminate the need for a smartphone, allowing issuance in multi pen
languages and also allow non-personally identifiable information solutions so that private data is
not centralized.
App-based implementation - With an app-based vaccine credential system, the vaccine credentials are digitally issued by central authorities and vaccination clinics. This eliminates the
friction and chaos of distributing vaccine credentials physically since software applications can
digitally transfer and upload data in an efficient and rapid manner. Moreover, the fear of losing QR
codes stickers is eliminated as the QR code badges are stored onto the app’s permanent storage.
However, the challenge concerning adoption of public health-related software applications is
extremely difficult to overcome. Without the appropriate allocation of funds to promote and educate
communities on using the software correctly, the application will never experience large-scale
usage. The lack of technical literacy in communities is another frontier that creates friction in
adoption of such public health-related software applications.
2.4

S CALABILITY

Challenges for vaccine distribution in the domains of logistics, health outcomes, user-centric impact,
and communication are extremely important for performing equitable vaccine distribution(cite).
Since vaccine distribution expands its user base by increasing distribution to entire geographic sectors as a whole, the demand for vaccine credentials will accelerate in an exponential manner. This is
because entire cohorts of people will be eligible for vaccines at once. The increased demand from
different regions will require specific distribution mechanisms to work effectively in a localized
manner while targeting different populations in an effective way. Moreover, the state-based vaccine
distribution plans vary in significant ways in the US. This causes each state to have entirely separate
modes of vaccine credential distribution that can cause scalability issues since the distribution of
vaccine, and potentially vaccine credentials, depend solely on the state’s limited resources (Freed
(2021)). Additionally, the different ways each region prioritize certain segments of their population
varies in a significant manner (Chapman et al. (2021)). This compounds the already complex problem of firstly scaling vaccine credential distributions in a region-specific manner, and then delivering
vaccine credentials based on a prioritization schema.
Card-based implementation - The MiSaCa paper card containing thestatus, passkey, and badge QR
sticker allocated at vaccination sites will be harder to produce with an expanding user base. The
ability to increase paper card production with distinct digital certificates will require an airtight
system that coordinates sticker productions in new locations effectively. Moreover, the need for all
printers to work effectively while producing stickers will be a logistical challenge at all vaccination
sites.
App-based implementation - Since the application will always be accessible on the AppStore
and Play Store for every user, an expanding user base will not require the system to change in order
to meet user demand. However, ensuring that every software update reaches a user is improbable
and uncertain, unless the user allows the application to self update within the smartphone. But
still, the inertia in making a user sign-up for the application is incredibly high. This is because
4

Paper card-based vs application-based vaccine credentials: a comparison

on-boarding a user through an application would require excessive advertisement and outreach
which makes the process slow and expensive.
2.5

E QUITY

Vaccine credentials will help communities revitalize their day-to-day operations by allowing businesses and administrations to reopen and function in a scaled manner. But the type of vaccine
credential that gets deployed will significantly impact how regular citizens participate in the economy. Without a vaccine credential, individuals will lack a proof of vaccination. And that could
result in them being disqualified from joining the workforce. If vaccine credentials are inaccessible,
low-income working class individuals in particular will not be able to participate in the reopening
workforce. Thus, the choice of a physical or digital vaccine credential impacts a community and its
citizens in a significant way.
Card-based implementation - Card-based credentials have been operational for a very long time so
vaccinators and the general public are familiar with the concept. . State-issued paper cards are the
only way vaccines can be distributed to rural and urban populations while ensuring access to all
socio-economic sectors in society. Moreover, card-based vaccine credentials account for the lowest
common denominator while ensuring equitable access to vaccines.
App-based implementation - In the US, inaccessibility to stable cellular and broadband internet is excessively large(Linda Poon (2020)). Implementing an app-based vaccine credential on top
of this digital divide would further decrease a significant portion of the population from getting
vaccines. m, and functional smartphones is an expensive necessity required for app-based vaccine
credentials to function properly. However, if app-based vaccine credentials integrate into vaccine
distribution software, they can ensure transparent and equitable distribution of vaccines in remote
regions (Hasanat et al. (2020)).This is because app-based vaccine credentials create a new frontier
for gathering vaccination-related information in a localized manner.
2.6

I MPORTABILITY OF H EALTH DATA

The current digital infrastructure within the healthcare industry is highly inflexible and rigid
(Elhauge (2010)). This causes information transmission from one system to another to occur
slowly. Within the scope of vaccine credentials integrating into this system, the barriers and
potential challenges are significantly immense and difficult to overcome. The lack of standardized
formatting and generalized entry points makes it harder for a vaccine credential system to fully
participate within the current healthcare systems. The main challenge with a vaccine credential
is that there is no standard implementation. Because there are no standards, it’s hard to imagine
vaccine credentials being stored on a centralized healthcare system.
Card-based implementation - Paper cards act as effective end-to-end touch points across the
entire vaccination journey. Consequently they can operate with existing legacy systems such as
V-safe and VAMS while also entering and transmitting health data using digitally signed QR codes.
App-based implementation - With the implementation of differential privacy in a fully decentralized application, the data stored onto a smartphone will require additional layers of adjustment
to integrate with existing legacy systems such as VAMS and V-safe.
2.7

F UTURE DATA AGGREGATION

Gathering and assessing health data is of critical importance for deploying vaccines in different geographic sectors. Public health authorities can utilize this aggregated data to target specific geographic
regions, deploy vaccines with urgent care to vulnerable populations, and compute the scarcity or
abundance of vaccines/vaccination material in different regions. After the deployment and usage of
vaccine credentials by the general public, the same credentials can act as access points for gathering
data that can be used by public health authorities. This is possible because other than proving an
individual’s vaccination status, a vaccine credential can record and register an individual’s vaccine
dose information and symptom history.
5

Paper card-based vs application-based vaccine credentials: a comparison

Card-based implementation - Since paper cards are issued by central authorities and distributed by
employers or regional entities, the collection and triangulation of data will be easier to gather and
compute from varying demographic regions with higher specificity. However, the management of
garbage data rendered after linking vaccination records to a central authority poses a significant
challenge as there is no entity put in place for handling or disposing this type of sensitive data.
App-based implementation - With a direct user-to-issuer pipeline implemented in the app,
gathering and computing logistical data would come at the loss of user privacy. However, apps
have the ability to generate noise on servers while registering data, all the information provided
can be securely added and transferred across different databases (Bae et al. (2021a)).The ability
to anonymize and arrange data without using personally identifiable information from a vaccine
recipient makes adverse event reporting through an app extremely privacy preserving. Furthermore,
this implementation’s approach allows for improved data aggregation and triangulation from
various data sources across different geographic locations while functioning as a differential privacy
system.

Figure 3: Region-based vaccine data aggregation

2.8

O PERABILITY

The vaccine credentials implemented must function properly in all settings to benefit an individual.
They must operate with ease while showcasing proof of vaccination without any depreciation of
information. The credentials should also showcase data in the easiest manner for a healthcare
professional to verify and validate. An app-based vaccine credential and a card-based vaccine
credential would achieve this in different ways.
Card-based implementation - Because digitally signed QR codes can function with intermittent connectivity, their implementation does not require additional infrastructure such as cellular
data connection and internet access. Moreover, this implementation works for resource constrained
environments in an effective and equitable manner.
App-based implementation - With the implementation of a Zero-Knowledge Proof system,
parties can validate confidential information without actually actually revealing the information
(Bamberger et al. (2021)). The implementation of such cryptographic protocols add to the
privacy-preserving operability of an app-based vaccine credential. However, to generate and render
additional QR codes into a vaccine recipient’s smartphone, intermittent internet and cellular data
access would be required. Thus, transferring encrypted QR codes digitally from a vaccine administrator to a vaccine recipient in a cellular dead zone creates barriers for vaccine administration.

6

Paper card-based vs application-based vaccine credentials: a comparison

Figure 4: Vaccine credentials working in different environments

3
3.1

OTHER D IGITAL C REDENTIAL I NITIATIVES
VACCINATION C REDENTIAL I NITIATIVE (VCI)

VCI is a user-centric initiative program started in collaboration with Microsoft, Oracle, and Mayo
Clinic (Initiative (2021)). VCI’s goal is to empower individuals with digital access to vaccination
records using open and interoperable standards so that an individual can : protect and improve their
health, and demonstrate their health status to safely return to travel, work, and school while preserving data privacy.The digital COVID-19 Vaccination Credential Initiative (VCI) makes vaccination
records available to patients using an accessible and inter-operable digital format based on globallyaccepted standards such as HL7FHIR (HLV.org (2021)). Through VCI, digital vaccination records
are provided with a unique QR code that acts as proof for vaccination. These QR codes are stored
in health wallets like CommonHealth and AppleHealth and act as a pass for entering public places.
3.2

C OVID -19 C REDENTIALS I NITIATIVE

This decentralized digital credentials initiative is hosted by the Linux Foundation Public Health
(Health (2020)). It primarily focuses on gaining the public’s trust by implementing an online digital
identity called self-sovereign identity. This approach is an alternative to traditional authentication
mechanisms through which an individual has unique pivot points for sharing their health records in
a digitized manner without the involvement of any 3rd party medium or legacy system integration.

7

Paper card-based vs application-based vaccine credentials: a comparison

4

S UMMARY OF COMPARISONS

Paper card-based implementation
QR stickers

Adverse
Event
Reporting

Fraud

Efficiency

Feasibility

Scalability

Equity

Application-based implementation
Users enter a code in the app to
generate encrypted QR codes
that get stored into the app
digitally.

Users have a paper copy of
the encrypted QR codes.

Users directly report their
symptoms while revealing
personally identifiable
information to healthcare
administrators.

Users report their symptoms
anonymously without revealing
any personally identifiable
information.
Implementation of authentication
systems using OTPs and passwords
prevent access to digitally stored
QR codes. This helps eliminate the
possibility of fraud and impersonation.

Paper-based credentials will
be easier to duplicate because
there is a high possibility for
impersonation when a paper
card is lost or stolen.

App generated QR stickers will be
hard to display at venues since the
uncertainty of cellular batteries will
create circumstances where a user
cannot access their digitally stored
coupon codes.

Paper-based cards are easier
to carry around because they
don’t rely on cellular battery
and are easy to display.

Paper-based cards are difficult
to produce and distribute since
there is no clear issuance
source. A constant and regular
supply of materials is required
at all vaccination sites to produce
paper-based credentials in an
efficient manner.
Paper-based card credentials
will be harder to safely deliver
with an expanding user base.
The logistical challenge of
distributing paper cards requires
additional support from external
services for delivery
in remote regions.

App-generated QR stickers are easy
to produce and distribute to every
potential vaccine recipient.

The process of facilitating user
on-boarding with app-based
vaccine credentials demands
aggressive advertisement and
branding.

State-issued paper cards are an
efficient way vaccines can be
distributed to rural and urban
populations while ensuring
equitable vaccination access
to all socio-economic
sectors in society.

The technological divide is
quite significant in all countries.
Thus, creating an app based
solution automatically disqualifies
lower socio-economic sectors
of society.

8

Paper card-based vs application-based vaccine credentials: a comparison

5

C ONCLUSION

In this early draft, we have evaluated the benefits and potential challenges posed by the implementation of card-based vaccine credential system and an app-based vaccine credential system.
The verticals of comparison included domains of symptom reporting, fraud and impersonation,
feasibility, scalability, equity, future data aggregation, importability, and operability. Overall, we
see the card-based implementation acting as the ideal end point for a user’s vaccination journey to
function within intermittent offline environments, although the implementation requires multiple
systems to be in place for effective QR sticker generation and card distribution. The credentials
formulate the lowest common denominator for distributing vaccines in an equitable manner. The
app based implementation, on the other hand, allows for quick, securite and efficient transfer of
encrypted QR codes, but cannot function in a setting where both the vaccine administrator and
user are offline. The implementation of app-based vaccine credentials would require cellular /
internet infrastructure to function properly which may create expensive barriers within sectors of
the population that have low resources who are trying to re-enter the workforce through proof
of vaccination. Some domains favored the implementation of a card-based vaccine credentials
system while others favored the implementation of an app-based vaccine credentials system.
The impact and choice of solely choosing either approach invites equity and privacy concerns.
An implementation of both systems in an interoperable manner will work best for successfully
implementing a vaccine credential system.

9

Paper card-based vs application-based vaccine credentials: a comparison

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We are grateful to Riyanka Roy Choudhury, CodeX Fellow, Stanford University, Adam Berrey, CEO
of PathCheck Foundation, Dr. Brooke Struck, Research Director at The Decision Lab, Canada,
Vinay Gidwaney, Entrepreneur and Advisor, PathCheck Foundation, and Paola Heudebert, cofounder of Blockchain for Human Rights, Alison Tinker, Saswati Soumya, Sunny Manduva, Bhavya
Pandey, and Aarathi Prasad for their assistance in discussions, support and guidance in writing of
this paper.

R EFERENCES
Aishat Jumoke Alaran, Yusuff Adebayo Adebisi, Abubakar Badmos, Fahd Khalid-Salako,
Sa’id Khalid Gaya, Esther Bosede Ilesanmi, Damilola Quazeem Olaoye, Adeola Bamisaiye, and
Don Eliseo Lucero-Prisno. Uneven power dynamics must be levelled in covid-19 vaccines access and distribution, 2021. ISSN 2666-5352. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S2666535221000215.
Joseph Bae, Rohan Sukumaran, Sheshank Shankar, Saurish Srivastava, Rohan Iyer, Aryan Mahindra, Qamil Mirza, Maurizio Arseni, Anshuman Sharma, Saras Agrawal, Orna Mukhopadhyay,
Colin Kang, Priyanshi Katiyar, Apurv Shekhar, Sifat Hasan, Krishnendu Dasgupta, Darshan
Gandhi, Sethuramen TV, Parth Patwa, Ishaan Singh, Abhishek Singh, and Ramesh Raskar. Mobile
apps prioritizing privacy, efficiency and equity: A decentralized approach to covid-19 vaccination
coordination, 2021a.
Joseph Bae, Rohan Sukumaran, Sheshank Shankar, Saurish Srivastava, Rohan Iyer, Aryan Mahindra, Qamil Mirza, Maurizio Arseni, Anshuman Sharma, Saras Agrawal, Orna Mukhopadhyay,
Colin Kang, Priyanshi Katiyar, Apurv Shekhar, Sifat Hasan, Krishnendu Dasgupta, Darshan
Gandhi, Sethuramen TV, Parth Patwa, Ishaan Singh, Abhishek Singh, and Ramesh Raskar. Mit
safepaths card (misaca): Augmenting paper based vaccination cards with printed codes, 2021b.
Kenneth A. Bamberger, Ran Canetti, Shafi Goldwasser, Rebecca Wexler, and Evan Zimmerman.
Verification dilemmas, law, and the promise of zero-knowledge proofs, 2021. URL http://
dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3781082.
Norman W. Baylor and Valerie B. Marshall. 73 - regulation and testing of vaccines‡‡all material in this chapter is in the public domain, with the exception of any borrowed figures or
tables., 2013. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
B9781455700905000732.
Cybernews Bernard Meyer.
Comb:
largest breach of all time leaked online
with 3.2 billion records, 2021.
URL https://cybernews.com/news/
largest-compilation-of-emails-and-passwords-leaked-free/.
Better Business Bureau.
Bbb tip: Don’t share your covid-19 vaccine card on social media, 2021.
URL https://www.bbb.org/article/news-releases/
23675-bbb-tip-dont-share-your-vaccine-card-on-social-media.
CDC.
Cdc covid data tracker, 2020.
URL
covid-data-tracker/#cases_totaldeaths.

https://covid.cdc.gov/

Lloyd A C Chapman, Poojan Shukla, Isabel Rodrı́guez-Barraquer, Priya B. Shete, Tomás M. León,
Kirsten Bibbins-Domingo, George W Rutherford, Robert Schechter, and Nathan C Lo. Comparison of covid-19 vaccine prioritization strategies in the united states, 2021. URL https:
//www.medrxiv.org/content/early/2021/03/08/2021.03.04.21251264.
Aaron Roth Cynthia Dwork. The algorithmic foundations of differential privacy, 2014. URL
https://www.cis.upenn.edu/˜aaroth/Papers/privacybook.pdf.
Einer Elhauge. The fragmentation of u.s. health care: Causes and solutions, 02 2010.
10

Paper card-based vs application-based vaccine credentials: a comparison

Aishat Jumoke Alaran Yusuff Adebayo Adebisi1 Abubakar Badmos FahdKhalid-SalakoSa’id
Khalid GayaEsther Bosede IlesanmiDamilola Quazeem Olaoye Adeola Bamisaiye Don
EliseoLucero-PrisnoIII. Uneven power dynamics must be levelled in covid-19 vaccines access
and distribution, 2021.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Vaccine adverse event reporting system, 2020. URL
https://vaers.hhs.gov.
Gary L. Freed. Actionable lessons for the us covid vaccine program, 2021. URL https://
wwwnc.cdc.gov/eid/article/26/6/20-0495_article.
Darshan Gandhi, Sanskruti Landage, Joseph Bae, Sheshank Shankar, Rohan Sukumaran, Parth
Patwa, Sethuraman T V au2, Priyanshi Katiyar, Shailesh Advani, Rohan Iyer, Sunaina Anand,
Aryan Mahindra, Rachel Barbar, Abhishek Singh, and Ramesh Raskar. Clinical landscape of
covid-19 testing: Difficult choices, 2020a.
Darshan Gandhi, Rohan Sukumaran, Priyanshi Katiyar, Alex Radunsky, Sunaina Anand, Shailesh
Advani, Jil Kothari, Kasia Jakimowicz, Sheshank Shankar, Sethuraman T. V., Krutika Misra,
Aishwarya Saxena, Sanskruti Landage, Richa Sonker, Parth Patwa, Aryan Mahindra, Mikhail
Dmitrienko, Kanishka Vaish, Ashley Mehra, Srinidhi Murali, Rohan Iyer, Joseph Bae, Vivek
Sharma, Abhishek Singh, Rachel Barbar, and Ramesh Raskar. Digital landscape of covid-19
testing: Challenges and opportunities, 2020b.
R. T. Hasanat, M. Arifur Rahman, N. Mansoor, N. Mohammed, M. S. Rahman, and M. Rasheduzzaman. An iot based real-time data-centric monitoring system for vaccine cold chain, Sep. 2020.
ISSN 2472-761X.
Linux Foundation Public Health. Covid-19 vaccine credentials initiative, 2020. URL https:
//www.covidcreds.org.
HLV.org. Hl7fhir release 4, 2021. URL https://hl7.org/FHIR/.
Vaccine Credentials Initiative.
Vaccination credential initiative, 2021.
vaccinationcredential.org.

URL https://

Bloomberg US Linda Poon. There are far more americans without broadband access than
previously thought, 2020. URL https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/
2020-02-19/where-the-u-s-underestimates-the-digital-divide.
Manuel Morales, Rachel Barbar, Darshan Gandhi, Sanskruti Landuge, Joseph Bae, Arpita Vats, Jil
Kothari, Sheshank Shankar, Rohan Sukumaran, Himi Mathur, Krutika Misra, Aishwarya Saxena,
Parth Patwa, Sethuraman T. V., Maurizio Arseni, Shailesh Advani, Kasia Jakimowicz, Sunaina
Anand, Priyanshi Katiyar, Ashley Mehra, Rohan Iyer, Srinidhi Murali, Aryan Mahindra, Mikhail
Dmitrienko, Saurish Srivastava, Ananya Gangavarapu, Steve Penrod, Vivek Sharma, Abhishek
Singh, and Ramesh Raskar. Covid-19 tests gone rogue: Privacy, efficacy, mismanagement and
misunderstandings, 2021.
BBC News. Covid-19: Study showing oxford vaccine slows virus spread ’superb’ - hancock, 2021.
Martin Pettai and Peeter Laud. Combining differential privacy and secure multiparty computation,
2015. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/2818000.2818027.

11

