Dietary Supplements and Nutraceuticals
Under Investigation for COVID-19
Prevention and Treatment
This manuscript (permalink) was automatically generated from greenelab/covid19review@61b73a3 on February 2, 2021.
This in progress manuscript is not intended for the general public. This is a review paper
that is authored by scientists for an audience of scientists to discuss research that is in
progress. If you are interested in guidelines on testing, therapies, or other issues related to your
health, you should not use this document. Instead, you should collect information from your
local health department, the CDC’s guidance, or your own government.

Authors
•

Ronan Lordan 0000-0001-9668-3368 RLordan el_ronan Institute for Translational
Medicine and Therapeutics, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA 19104-5158, USA

•

Halie M. Rando 0000-0001-7688-1770 rando2 tamefoxtime Department of Systems
Pharmacology and Translational Therapeutics, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, United States of America; Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Genetics, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, Colorado, United States of
America · Funded by the Gordon and Betty Moore Foundation (GBMF 4552)

•

COVID-19 Review Consortium

•

Casey S. Greene 0000-0001-8713-9213 cgreene GreeneScientist Department of Systems
Pharmacology and Translational Therapeutics, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, United States of America; Childhood Cancer Data Lab, Alex’s Lemonade
Stand Foundation, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of America; Department of
Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora,
Colorado, United States of America; Center for Health AI, University of Colorado School of
Medicine, Aurora, Colorado, United States of America · Funded by the Gordon and Betty
Moore Foundation (GBMF 4552); the National Human Genome Research Institute (R01
HG010067)

COVID-19 Review Consortium: Vikas Bansal, John P. Barton, Simina M. Boca, Christian
Brueffer, James Brian Byrd, Stephen Capone, Shikta Das, Anna Ada Dattoli, John J. Dziak,
Jeffrey M. Field, Soumita Ghosh, Anthony Gitter, Rishi Raj Goel, Casey S. Greene, Marouen
Ben Guebila, Fengling Hu, Nafisa M. Jadavji, Sergey Knyazev, Likhitha Kolla, Alexandra J. Lee,
Ronan Lordan, Tiago Lubiana, Temitayo Lukan, Adam L. MacLean, David Mai, Serghei Mangul,

David Manheim, Lucy D'Agostino McGowan, YoSon Park, Dimitri Perrin, Yanjun Qi, Diane N.
Rafizadeh, Bharath Ramsundar, Halie M. Rando, Sandipan Ray, Michael P. Robson, Elizabeth
Sell, Lamonica Shinholster, Ashwin N. Skelly, Yuchen Sun, Gregory L Szeto, Ryan Velazquez,
Jinhui Wang, Nils Wellhausen
Authors with similar contributions are ordered alphabetically.

Abstract
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) has caused global disruption and a significant loss of
life. Existing treatments that can be repurposed as prophylactic and therapeutic agents could
reduce the pandemic’s devastation. Emerging evidence of potential applications in other
therapeutic contexts has led to the investigation of dietary supplements and nutraceuticals for
COVID-19. Such products include vitamin C, vitamin D, omega 3 polyunsaturated fatty acids,
probiotics, and zinc, all of which are currently under clinical investigation. In this review, we
critically appraise the evidence surrounding dietary supplements and nutraceuticals for the
prophylaxis and treatment of COVID-19. Overall, further study is required before evidencebased recommendations can be formulated, but nutritional status plays a significant role in
patient outcomes, and these products could help alleviate deficiencies. For example, evidence
indicates that vitamin D deficiency may be associated with greater incidence of infection and
severity of COVID-19, suggesting that vitamin D supplementation may hold prophylactic or
therapeutic value. A growing number of scientific organizations are now considering
recommending vitamin D supplementation to those at high risk of COVID-19. Because research
in vitamin D and other nutraceuticals and supplements is preliminary, here we evaluate the
extent to which these nutraceutical and dietary supplements hold potential in the COVID-19
crisis.

Importance
Sales of dietary supplements and nutraceuticals have increased during the pandemic due to
their perceived “immune-boosting” effects. However, little is known about the efficacy of these
dietary supplements and nutraceuticals against the novel coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2) or the
disease it causes, COVID-19. This review provides a critical overview of the potential
prophylactic and therapeutic value of various dietary supplements and nutraceuticals from the
evidence available to date. These include vitamin C, vitamin D, and zinc, which are often
perceived by the public as treating respiratory infections or supporting immune health.
Consumers need to be aware of misinformation and false promises surrounding some
supplements, which may be subject to limited regulation by authorities. However, considerably
more research is required to determine whether dietary supplements and nutraceuticals exhibit
prophylactic and therapeutic value against SARS-CoV-2 infection and COVID-19. This review
provides perspective on which nutraceuticals and supplements are involved in biological
processes that are relevant to recovery from or prevention of COVID-19.

Introduction
The year 2020 saw scientists and the medical community scrambling to repurpose or discover
novel host-directed therapies against the coronavirus diseases 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic
caused by the spread of the novel Severe acute respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus 2
(SARS-CoV-2). This rapid effort led to the identification of some promising pharmaceutical
therapies for hospitalized patients, such as remdesivir and dexamethasone. Furthermore, most
societies have adopted non-pharmacological preventative measures such as utilizing public
health strategies that reduce the transmission of SARS-CoV-2. However, during this time, many
individuals sought additional protections via the consumption of various dietary supplements
and nutraceuticals that they believed to confer beneficial effects. While a patient’s nutritional
status does seem to play a role in COVID-19 susceptibility and outcomes [1,2,3,4,5], the
beginning of the pandemic saw sales of vitamins and other supplements to soar despite a lack
of any evidence supporting their use against COVID-19. In the United States, for example,
dietary supplement and nutraceutical sales have shown modest annual growth in recent years
(approximately 5%, or a $345 million increase in 2019), but during the six-week period
preceding April 5, 2020, they increased by 44% ($435 million) relative to the same period in
2019 [6]. While growth subsequently leveled off, sales continued to boom, with a further 16%
($151 million) increase during the six weeks preceding May 17, 2020 relative to 2019 [6]. In
France, New Zealand, India, and China, similar trends in sales were reported [7,8,9,10]. The
increase in sales was driven by a consumer perception that dietary supplements and
nutraceuticals would protect consumers from infection and/or mitigate the impact of infection
due to the various “immune-boosting” claims of these products [11,12].
Due to the significant interest from the general public in dietary additives, whether and to what
extent nutraceuticals or dietary supplements can provide any prophylactic or therapeutic benefit
remains a topic of interest for the scientific community. Nutraceuticals and dietary supplements
are related but distinct non-pharmaceutical products. Nutraceuticals are classified as
supplements with health benefits beyond their basic nutritional value [13,14]. The key difference
between a dietary supplement and a nutraceutical is that nutraceuticals should not only
supplement the diet, but also aid in the prophylaxis and/or treatment of a disorder or disease
[15]. However, dietary supplements and nutraceuticals, unlike pharmaceuticals, are not subject
to the same regulatory protocols that protect consumers of medicines. Indeed, nutraceuticals do
not entirely fall under the responsibility of the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), but they are
monitored as dietary supplements according to the Dietary Supplement, Health and Education
Act 1994 (DSHEA) [16] and the Food and Drug Administration Modernization Act 1997
(FDAMA) [17]. Due to increases in sales of dietary supplements and nutraceuticals, in 1996 the
FDA established the Office of Dietary Supplement Programs (ODSP) to increase surveillance.
Novel products or nutraceuticals must now submit a new dietary ingredient notification to the
ODSP for review. There are significant concerns that these legislations do not adequately
protect the consumer as they ascribe responsibility to the manufacturers to ensure the safety of
the product before manufacturing or marketing [18]. Manufacturers are not required to register
or even seek approval from the FDA to produce or sell food supplements or nutraceuticals.
Health or nutrient content claims for labeling purposes are approved based on an authoritative
statement from the Academy of Sciences or relevant federal authorities once the FDA has been
notified and on the basis that the information is known to be true and not deceptive [18].

Therefore, there is often a gap between perceptions by the American public about a
nutraceutical or dietary supplement and the actual clinical evidence surrounding its effects.
Despite differences in regulations, similar challenges exist outside of the United States. In
Europe, where the safety of supplements are monitored by the European Union (EU) under
Directive 2002/46/EC [19]. However, nutraceuticals are not directly mentioned. Consequently,
nutraceuticals can be generally described as either a medicinal product under Directive
2004/27/EC [20] or as a ‘foodstuff’ under Directive 2002/46/EC of the European council. In order
to synchronize the various existing legislations, Regulation EC 1924/2006 on nutrition and
health claims was put into effect to assure customers of safety and efficacy of products and to
deliver understandable information to consumers. However, specific legislation for
nutraceuticals is still elusive. Health claims are permitted on a product label only following
compliance and authorization according to the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA)
guidelines on nutrition and health claims [21]. EFSA does not currently distinguish between food
supplements and nutraceuticals for health claim applications of new products, as claim
authorization is dependent on the availability of clinical data in order to substantiate efficacy
[22]. These guidelines seem to provide more protection to consumers than the FDA regulations
but potentially at the cost of innovation in the sector [23]. The situation becomes even more
complicated when comparing regulations at a global level, as countries such as China and India
have existing regulatory frameworks for traditional medicines and phytomedicines not commonly
consumed in Western society [24]. Currently, there is debate among scientists and regulatory
authorities surrounding the development of a widespread regulatory framework to deal with the
challenges of safety and health claim substantiation for nutraceuticals [18,22], as these products
do not necessarily follow the same rigorous clinical trial frameworks used to approve the use of
pharmaceuticals. Such regulatory disparities have been highlighted by the pandemic, as many
individuals and companies have attempted to profit from the vulnerabilities of others by
overstating claims in relation to the treatment of COVID-19 using supplements and
nutraceuticals. The FDA has written several letters to prevent companies marketing or selling
products based on false hyperbolic promises about preventing SARS-CoV-2 infection or treating
COVID-19 [25,26,27]. These letters came in response to efforts to market nutraceutical
prophylactics against COVID-19, some of which charged the consumer as much as $23,000
[28]. There have even been some incidents highlighted in the media because of their potentially
life threatening consequences; for example, the use of oleandrin was touted as a potential
“cure” by individuals close to the former President of the United States despite its high toxicity
[29]. Thus, heterogeneous and at times relaxed regulatory standards have permitted high-profile
cases of the sale of nutraceuticals and dietary supplements that are purported to provide
protection against COVID-19, despite a lack of research into these compounds.
Notwithstanding the issues of poor safety, efficacy, and regulatory oversight, some dietary
supplements and nutraceuticals have exhibited therapeutic and prophylactic potential. Some
have been linked with reduced immunopathology, antiviral and anti-inflammatory activities, or
even the prevention of acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) [11,30,31]. A host of
potential candidates have been highlighted in the literature that target various aspects of the
COVID-19 viral pathology, while others are thought to prime the host immune system. These
candidates include vitamins and minerals along with extracts and omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty
acids (n-3 PUFA) [32]. In vitro and in vivo studies suggest that nutraceuticals containing

phycocyanobilin, N-acetylcysteine, glucosamine, selenium or phase 2 inductive nutraceuticals
(e.g. ferulic acid, lipoic acid, or sulforaphane) can prevent or modulate RNA virus infections via
amplification of the signaling activity of mitochondrial antiviral-signaling protein (MAVS) and
activation of Toll-like receptor 7 [33]. While promising, further animal and human studies are
required to assess the therapeutic potential of these various nutrients and nutraceuticals against
COVID-19. For the purpose of this review, we have highlighted some of the main dietary
supplements and nutraceuticals that are currently under investigation for their potential
prophylactic and therapeutic applications. These include n-3 PUFA, zinc, vitamins C and D, and
probiotics.

n-3 PUFA
One category of supplements that has been explored for beneficial effects against various viral
infections are the n-3 PUFAs [32], commonly referred to as omega-3 fatty acids, which include
eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA). EPA and DHA intake can come
from a diet high in fish or through dietary supplementation with fish oils or purified oils [34].
Other, more sustainable sources of EPA and DHA include algae [35,36], which can also be
exploited for their rich abundance of other bioactive compounds such as angiotensin converting
enzyme inhibitor peptides and antiviral agents including phycobiliproteins, sulfated
polysaccharides, and calcium-spirulan [37]. n-3 PUFAs have been investigated for many years
for their therapeutic potential [38]. Supplementation with fish oils is generally well tolerated [38],
and intake of n-3 PUFAs through dietary sources or supplementation is specifically encouraged
for vulnerable groups such as pregnant and lactating women [39,40]. As a result, these wellestablished compounds have drawn significant interest for their potential immune effects and
therapeutic potential.
Particular interest has arisen in n-3 PUFAs as potential therapeutics against diseases
associated with inflammation. n-3 PUFAs have been found to mediate inflammation by
influencing processes such as leukocyte chemotaxis, adhesion molecule expression, and the
production of eicosanoids [41,42]. This and other evidence indicates that n-3 PUFAs may have
the capacity to modulate the adaptive immune response [14,34,41]; for example, they have
been found to influence antigen presentation and the production of CD4(+) Th1 cells, among
other relevant effects [43]. Certainly, preliminary evidence from banked blood samples from 100
COVID-19 patients suggests that patients with a higher omega-3 index, a measure of n-3 and n6 fatty acids in red blood cells, had a lower risk of death due to COVID-19 [44]. Interest has also
arisen as to whether nutritional status related to n-3 PUFAs can also affect inflammation
associated with severe disease, such as ARDS or sepsis [45,46]. ARDS and sepsis hold
particular concern in the treatment of severe COVID-19; an analysis of 82 deceased COVID-19
patients in Wuhan during January to February 2020 reported that respiratory failure (associated
with ARDS) was the cause of death in 69.5% of cases, and sepsis or multi-organ failure
accounted for 28.0% of deaths [47]. Research in ARDS prior to current pandemic suggests that
n-3 PUFAs may hold some therapeutic potential. One study randomized 16 consecutive ARDS
patients to receive either a fish oil-enriched lipid emulsion or a control lipid emulsion (comprised
of 100% long-chain triglycerides) under a double-blinded design [48]. They reported a
statistically significant reduction in leukotriene B4 levels in the group receiving the fish oilenriched emulsion, suggesting that the fish oil supplementation may have reduced

inflammation. However, they also reported that most of their tests were not statistically
significant, and therefore it seems that additional research using larger sample sizes is required.
A recent meta-analysis of 10 randomized controlled trials (RCTs) examining the effects of n-3
PUFAs on ARDS patients did not find evidence of any effect on mortality, although the effect on
secondary outcomes could not be determined due to a low quality of evidence [49]. However,
another meta-analysis that examined 24 RCTs studying the effects of n-3 fatty acids on sepsis,
including ARDS-induced sepsis, did find support for an effect on mortality when n-3 fatty acids
were administered via enteral nutrition, although a paucity of high-quality evidence again limited
conclusions [50]. Therefore, despite theoretical support for an immunomodulatory effect of n-3
PUFAs in COVID-19, evidence from existing RCTs is insufficient to determine whether
supplementation offers an advantage in a clinical setting that would be relevant to COVID-19.
Another potential mechanism that has led to interest in n-3 PUFAs as protective against viral
infections including COVID-19 is its potential as a precursor molecule for the biosynthesis of
endogenous specialized proresolving mediators (SPM), such as protectins and resolvins, that
actively resolve inflammation and infection [51]. SPM have exhibited beneficial effects against a
variety of lung infections, including some caused by RNA viruses [52,53]. Indeed, protectin D1
has been shown to increase survival from H1N1 viral infection in mice by affecting the viral
replication machinery [54]. Several mechanisms for SPM have been proposed, including
preventing the release of pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines or increasing
phagocytosis of cellular debris by macrophages [55]. In influenza, SPM promote antiviral B
lymphocytic activities [56], and protectin D1 has been shown to increase survival from H1N1
viral infection in mice by affecting the viral replication machinery [54]. It has thus been
hypothesized that SPM could aid in the resolution of the cytokine storm and pulmonary
inflammation associated with COVID-19 [57,58]. Another theory is that some comorbidities,
such as obesity, could lead to deficiencies of SPM, which could in turn be related to the
occurrence of adverse outcomes for COVID-19 [59]. However, not all studies are in agreement
that n-3 PUFAs or their resulting SPM are effective against infections [60]. At a minimum, the
effectiveness of n-3 PUFAs against infections would be dependent on the dosage, timing, and
the specific pathogens responsible [61]. On another level, there is still the question of whether
fish oils can raise the levels of SPM levels upon ingestion and in response to acute inflammation
in humans [62]. Currently, Karolinska University Hospital is running a trial that will measure the
levels of SPM as a secondary outcome following intravenous supplementation of n-3 PUFAs in
hospitalized COVID-19 patients to determine whether n-3 PUFAs provides therapeutic value
[63,64]. Therefore, while this mechanism provides theoretical support for a role for n-3 PUFAs
against COVID-19, experimental support is still needed.
A third possible mechanism by which n-3 PUFAs could benefit COVID-19 patients arises from
the fact that some COVID-19 patients, particularly those with comorbidities, are at a significant
risk of thrombotic complications including arterial and venous thrombosis [65,66]. Therefore, the
use of prophylactic and therapeutic anticoagulants and antithrombotic agents is under
consideration [67,68]. Considering that there is significant evidence that n-3 fatty acids and
other fish oil-derived lipids possess antithrombotic properties and anti-inflammatory properties
[34,69,70], they may have therapeutic value against the prothrombotic complications of COVID19. In particular, concerns have been raised within the medical community about using
investigational therapeutics on COVID-19 patients who are already on antiplatelet therapies due

to pre-existing comorbidities because the introduction of such therapeutics could lead to issues
with dosing and drug choice and/or negative drug-drug interactions [67]. In such cases, dietary
sources of n-3 fatty acids or other nutraceuticals with antiplatelet activities could hold particular
value for reducing the risk of thrombotic complications in patients already receiving
pharmaceutical antiplatelet therapies. A new clinical trial [71] is currently recruiting COVID-19
positive patients to investigate the anti-inflammatory activity of a recently developed, highly
purified nutraceutical derivative of EPA known as icosapent ethyl (VascepaTM) [72]. Other
randomized controlled trials that are in the preparatory stages intend to investigate the
administration of EPA and other bioactive compounds to COVID-19 positive patients in order to
observe whether anti-inflammatory effects or disease state improvements occur [73,74]. Finally,
while there have been studies investigating the therapeutic value of n-3 fatty acids against
ARDS in humans, there is still limited evidence of their effectiveness [75]. It should be noted that
the overall lack of human studies in this area means there is limited evidence as to whether
these supplements could affect COVID-19 infection. Consequently, the clinical trials that are
underway and those that have been proposed will provide valuable insight into whether the antiinflammatory potential of n-3 PUFAs and their derivatives can be beneficial to the treatment of
COVID-19. All the same, while the evidence is not present to draw conclusions about whether
n-3 PUFAs will be useful in treating COVID-19, there is likely little harm associated with a diet
rich in fish oils, and interest in n-3 PUFA supplementation by the general public is unlikely to
have negative effects.

Zinc
Zinc is nutrient supplement that may exhibit some benefits against RNA viral infections. Zinc is a
trace metal obtained from dietary sources or supplementation and is important for the
maintenance of immune cells involved in adaptive and innate immunity [76]. Supplements can
be administered orally as a tablet or as a lozenge and are available in many forms, such as zinc
picolinate, zinc acetate, and zinc citrate. Zinc is also available from dietary sources including
meat, seafood, nuts, seeds, legumes, and dairy. The role of zinc in immune function has been
extensively reviewed [76]. Zinc is an important signaling molecule, and zinc levels can alter host
defense systems. In inflammatory situations such as an infection, zinc can regulate leukocyte
immune responses and activate the nuclear factor kappa-light-chain-enhancer of activated B
cells, thus altering cytokine production [77,78]. In particular, zinc supplementation can increase
natural killer cell levels, which are important cells for host defense against viral infections
[76,79]. As a result of these immune-related functions, zinc is also under consideration for
possible benefits against COVID-19.
Adequate zinc intake has been associated with reduced incidence of infection [80] and antiviral
immunity [81]. A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial that administered zinc
supplementation to elderly subjects over the course of a year found zinc deficiency to be
associated with increased susceptibility to infection and that zinc deficiency could be prevented
through supplementation [80]. Clinical trial data supports the utility of zinc to diminish the
duration and severity of symptoms associated with common colds when it is provided within 24
hours of the onset of symptoms [82,83]. An observational study showed that COVID-19 patients
had significantly lower zinc levels in comparison to healthy controls and that zinc-deficient
COVID-19 patients (those with levels less than 80 μg/dl) tended to have more complications

(70.4% vs 30.0%, p = 0.009) and potentially prolonged hospital stays (7.9 vs 5.7 days, p =
0.048) relative to patients who were not zinc deficient [84]. In coronaviruses specifically, in vitro
evidence has demonstrated that the combination of zinc (Zn2+) and zinc ionophores (pyrithione)
can interrupt the replication mechanisms of SARS-CoV-GFP (a fluorescently tagged SARSCoV-1) and a variety of other RNA viruses [85,86]. Currently, there are over twenty clinical trials
registered with the intention to use zinc in a preventative or therapeutic manner for COVID-19.
However, many of these trials proposed the use of zinc in conjunction with hydroxychloroquine
and azithromycin [87,88,89,90], and it is not known how the lack of evidence supporting the use
of hydroxychloroquine will affect investigation of zinc. One retrospective observational study of
New York University Langone hospitals in New York compared outcomes among hospitalized
COVID-19 patients administered hydroxychloroquine and azithromycin with zinc sulfate (n =
411) versus hydroxychloroquine and azithromycin alone (n = 521). Notably, zinc is the only
treatment that was used in this trial that is still under consideration as a therapeutic agent due to
to the lack of efficacy and potential adverse events associated with hydroxychloroquine and
azithromycin against COVID-19 [91,92,93]. While the addition of zinc sulfate did not affect the
duration of hospitalization, the length of ICU stays or patient ventilation duration, univariate
analyses indicated that zinc did increase the frequency of patients discharged and decreased
the requirement for ventilation, referrals to the ICU, mortality [94]. However, a smaller
retrospective study at Hoboken University Medical Center New Jersey failed to find an
association between zinc supplementation and survival of hospitalized patients [95]. Therefore,
whether zinc contributes to COVID-19 recovery remains unclear. Other trials are now
investigating zinc in conjunction with other supplements such as vitamin C or n-3 PUFA [74,96].
Though there is, overall, encouraging data for zinc supplementation against the common cold
and viral infections, there is currently limited evidence to suggest zinc supplementation has any
beneficial effects against the current novel COVID-19; thus, the clinical trials that are currently
underway will provide vital information on the efficacious use of zinc in COVID-19 prevention
and/or treatment. However, given the limited risk and the potential association between zinc
deficiency and illness, maintaining a healthy diet to ensure an adequate zinc status may be
advisable for individuals seeking to reduce their likelihood of infection.

Vitamin C
Vitamins B, C, D, and E have also been suggested as potential nutrient supplement
interventions for COVID-19 [32,97]. In particular vitamin C has been proposed as a potential
therapeutic agent against COVID-19 due to its long history of use against the common cold and
other respiratory infections [98,99]. Vitamin C can be obtained via dietary sources such as fruits
and vegetables or via supplementation. Vitamin C plays a significant role in promoting immune
function due to its effects on various immune cells. It affects inflammation by modulating
cytokine production, decreasing histamine levels, enhancing the differentiation and proliferation
of T- and B-lymphocytes, increasing antibody levels, and protecting against the negative effects
of reactive oxygen species, among other effects related to COVID-19 pathology [100,101,102].
Vitamin C is utilized by the body during viral infections, as evinced by lower concentrations in
leukocytes and lower concentrations of urinary vitamin C. Post-infection, these levels return to
baseline ranges [103,104,105,106,107]. It has been shown that as little as 0.1 g/d of vitamin C
can maintain normal plasma levels of vitamin C in healthy individuals, but higher doses of at
least 1-3 g/d are required for critically ill patients in ICUs [108]. Indeed, vitamin C deficiency

appears to be common among COVID-19 patients [109,110]. COVID-19 is also associated with
the formation of microthrombi and coagulopathy [111] that contribute to its characteristic lung
pathology [112], but these symptoms can be ameliorated by early infusions of vitamin C to
inhibit endothelial surface P-selectin expression and platelet-endothelial adhesion [113].
Intravenous vitamin C also reduced D-dimer levels, which are notably elevated in COVID-19
patients [114,115], in a case study of 17 COVID-19 patients [116]. There is therefore preliminary
evidence suggesting that vitamin C status and vitamin C administration may be relevant to
COVID-19 outcomes.
Larger-scale studies of vitamin C, however, have provided mixed results. A recent metaanalysis found consistent support for regular vitamin C supplementation reducing the duration of
the common cold, but that supplementation with vitamin C (> 200 mg) failed to reduce the
incidence of colds [117]. Individual studies have found Vitamin C to reduce the susceptibility of
patients to lower respiratory tract infections, such as pneumonia [118]. Another meta-analysis
demonstrated that in twelve trials, vitamin C supplementation reduced the length of stay of
patients in intensive care units (ICUs) by 7.8% (95% CI: 4.2% to 11.2%; p = 0.00003).
Furthermore, high doses (1-3 g/day) significantly reduced the length of an ICU stay by 8.6% in
six trials (p = 0.003). Vitamin C also shortened the duration of mechanical ventilation by 18.2%
in three trials in which patients required intervention for over 24 hours (95% CI 7.7% to 27%; p =
0.001) [108]. Despite these findings, an RCT of 167 patients known as CITRUS ALI failed to
show a benefit of a 96-hour infusion of vitamin C to treat ARDS [119]. Clinical trials specifically
investigating vitamin C in the context of COVID-19 have now begun, as highlighted by Carr et
al. [99]. These trials intend to investigate the use of intravenous vitamin C in hospitalized
COVID-19 patients. The first trial to report initial results took place in Wuhan, China [120].
These initial results indicated that the administration of 12 g/12 hr of intravenous vitamin C for 7
days in 56 critically ill COVID-19 patients resulted in a promising reduction of 28-day mortality (p
= 0.06) in univariate survival analysis [121]. Indeed, the same study reported a significant
decrease in IL-6 levels by day 7 of vitamin C infusion (p = 0.04) [122]. Additional studies that are
being conducted in Canada, China, Iran, and the USA will provide additional insight into whether
vitamin C supplementation affects COVID-19 outcomes on a larger scale.
Even though evidence supporting the use of vitamin C is beginning to emerge, we will not know
how effective vitamin C is as a therapeutic for quite some time. Currently (as of January 2021)
over fifteen trials are registered with clinicaltrials.gov that are either recruiting, active or are
currently in preparation. When completed, these trials will provide crucial evidence on the
efficacy of vitamin C as a therapeutic for COVID-19 infection. However, the majority of
supplementation studies investigate the intravenous infusion of vitamin C in severe patients.
Therefore, there is a lack of studies investigating the potential prophylactic administration of
vitamin C via oral supplementation for healthy individuals or potentially asymptomatic SARSCoV-2 positive patients. Once again, vitamin C intake is part of a healthy diet and the vitamin
likely presents minimal risk, but its potential prophylactic or therapeutic effects against COVID19 are yet to be determined. To maintain vitamin C status, it would be prudent for individuals to
ensure that they consume the recommended dietary allowance of vitamin C to maintain a
healthy immune system [1]. The recommended dietary allowance according to the FDA is 75-90
mg/d, whereas EFSA recommends 110 mg/d [123].

Vitamin D
Of all of the supplements currently under investigation, vitamin D has become a leading
prophylactic and therapeutic candidate against SARS-CoV-2. Vitamin D can modulate both the
adaptive and innate immune system and is associated with various aspects of immune health
and antiviral defense [124,125,126,127,128]. Vitamin D can be sourced through diet or
supplementation, but it is mainly biosynthesized by the body on exposure to ultraviolet light
(UVB) from sunlight. Vitamin D deficiency is associated with an increased susceptibility to
infection [129]. In particular, vitamin D deficient patients are at risk of developing acute
respiratory infections [130] and ARDS [130]. 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 is the active form of
vitamin D that is involved in adaptive and innate responses; however, due to its low
concentration and a short half life of a few hours, vitamin D levels are typically measured by the
longer lasting and more abundant precursor 25-hydroxyvitamin D. The vitamin D receptor is
expressed in various immune cells, and vitamin D is an immunomodulator of antigen presenting
cells, dendritic cells, macrophages, monocytes, and T- and B-lymphocytes [129,131]. Due to its
potential immunomodulating properties, vitamin D supplementation may be advantageous to
maintain a healthy immune system.
Early in the pandemic it was postulated that an individual’s vitamin D status could significantly
affect their risk of developing COVID-19 [132]. This hypothesis was derived from the fact that
the current pandemic emerged in Wuhan China during winter, when 25-hydroxyvitamin D
concentrations are at their lowest due to a lack of sunlight, whereas in the Southern
Hemisphere, where it was nearing the end of the summer and higher 25-hydroxyvitamin D
concentrations would be higher, the number of cases was low. This led researchers to question
whether there was a seasonal component to the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic and whether vitamin D
levels might play a role [132,133,134,135]. Though it is assumed that COVID-19 is seasonal,
multiple other factors that can affect vitamin D levels should also be considered. These factors
include an individual’s nutritional status, their age, their occupation, skin pigmentation, potential
comorbidities, and the variation of exposure to sunlight due to latitude amongst others. Indeed,
it has been estimated that each degree of latitude north of 28 degrees corresponded to a 4.4%
increase of COVID-19 mortality, indirectly linking a persons vitamin D levels via exposure to
UVB light to COVID-19 mortality [133].
As the pandemic has evolved, additional research of varying quality has investigated some of
the potential links identified early in the pandemic [132] between vitamin D and COVID-19.
Indeed, studies are beginning to investigate whether there is any prophylactic and/or therapeutic
relationship between vitamin D and COVID-19. A study in Switzerland demonstrated that 27
SARS-CoV-2 positive patients exhibited 25-hydroxyvitamin D plasma concentrations that were
significantly lower (11.1 ng/ml) than those of SARS-CoV-2 negative patients (24.6 ng/ml; p =
0.004), an association that held when stratifying patients greater than 70 years old [136]. These
findings seem to be supported by a Belgian observational study of 186 SARS-CoV-2 positive
patients exhibiting symptoms of pneumonia, where 25-hydroxyvitamin D plasma concentrations
were measured and CT scans of the lungs were obtained upon hospitalization [137]. A
significant difference in 25-hydroxyvitamin D levels was observed between the SARS-CoV-2
patients and 2,717 season-matched diseased controls. Both female and male patients
possessed lower median 25-hydroxyvitamin D concentrations than the control group as a whole

(18.6 ng/ml versus 21.5 ng/ml; p = 0.0016) and a higher rate of vitamin D deficiency (58.6%
versus 42.5%). However, when comparisons were stratified by sex, evidence of sexual
dimorphism became apparent, as female patients had equivalent levels of 25-hydroxyvitamin D
to females in the control group, whereas male patients were deficient in 25-hydroxyvitamin D
relative to male controls (67% versus 49%; p = 0.0006). Notably, vitamin D deficiency was
progressively lower in males with advancing radiological disease stages (p = 0.001). These
studies are supported by several others that indicate that vitamin D status may be an
independent risk factor for the severity of COVID-19 [138,139,140,141] and in COVID-19
patients relative to population-based controls [142]. Indeed, serum concentrations of 25hydroxyvitamin D above 30 ng/ml, which indicate vitamin D sufficiency, seems to be associated
with a reduction in serum C-reactive protein, an inflammatory marker, along with increased
lymphocyte levels, which suggests that vitamin D levels may modulate the immune response by
reducing risk for cytokine storm in response to SARS-CoV-2 infection [142]. A study in India
determined that COVID-19 fatality was higher in patients with severe COVID-19 and low serum
25-hydroxyvitamin D (mean level 6.2 ng/ml; 97% vitamin D deficient) levels versus
asymptomatic non-severe patients with higher levels of vitamin D (mean level 27.9 ng/ml; 33%
vitamin D deficient) [143]. In the same study, vitamin D deficiency was associated with higher
levels of inflammatory markers including IL-6, ferritin, and tumor necrosis factor α. Collectively,
these studies add to a multitude of observational studies reporting potential associations
between low levels of 25-hydroxyvitamin D and COVID-19 incidence and severity
[136,141,142,144,145,146,147,148,149,150].
Despite the large number of studies establishing a link between vitamin D status and COVID-19
severity, an examination of data from the UK Biobank did not support this thesis [151,152].
These analyses examined 25-hydroxyvitamin D concentrations alongside SARS-CoV-2
positivity and COVID-19 mortality in over 340,000 UK Biobank participants. However, these
studies have caused considerable debate that will likely be settled following further studies
[153,154]. Overall, while the evidence suggests that there is likely an association between low
serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D and COVID-19 incidence, these studies must be interpreted with
caution, as there is the potential for reverse causality, bias, and other confounding factors
including that vitamin D deficiency is also associated with numerous pre-existing conditions and
risk factors that can increase the risk for severe COVID-19 [1,133,155,156].
While these studies inform us of the potential importance of vitamin D sufficiency and the risk of
SARS-CoV-2 infection and severe COVID-19, they fail to conclusively determine whether
vitamin D supplementation can therapeutically affect the clinical course of COVID-19. In one
study, 40 vitamin D deficient asymptomatic or mildly symptomatic participants patients were
either randomized to receive 60,000 IU of cholecalciferol daily for at least 7 days (n = 16) or a
placebo (n = 24) with a target serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D level >50 ng/ml. At day 7, 10 patients
achieved >50 ng/ml, followed by another 2 by day 14. By the end of the study, the treatment
group had a greater proportion of vitamin D-deficient participants that tested negative for SARSCoV-2 RNA, and they had a significantly lower fibrinogen levels, potentially indicating a
beneficial effect [157]. A pilot study in Spain determined that early administration of high dose
calcifediol (~21,000 IU days 1-2 and ~11,000 IU days 3-7 of hospital admission) with
hydroxychloroquine and azithromycin to 50 hospitalized COVID-19 patients significantly
reduced ICU admissions and may have reduced disease severity versus hydroxychloroquine

and azithromycin alone [158]. Although this study received significant criticism from the National
Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) in the UK [159], an independent follow-up
statistical analysis supported the findings of the study with respect to the results of
cholecalciferol treatment [160]. Another trial of 986 patients hospitalized for COVID-19 in three
UK hospitals administered cholecalciferol supplementation (≥ 280,000 IU in a time period of 7
weeks) to 151 patients and found an association with a reduced risk of COVID-19 mortality,
regardless of baseline 25-hydroxyvitamin D levels [161]. However, a double-blind, randomized,
placebo-controlled trial of 240 hospitalized COVID-19 patients in São Paulo, Brazil administered
a single 200,000 IU oral dose of vitamin D. While levels of 25-hydroxyvitamin D did increase
from 21% to ~27% (p = 0.001) and the supplementation was well tolerated, there was no
reduction in the length of hospital stay or mortality and no change to any other relevant
secondary outcomes [162]. These early findings are thus still inconclusive with regards to the
therapeutic value of vitamin D supplementation. However, other trials are underway, including
one trial that is investigating the utility of vitamin D as an immune-modulating agent by
monitoring whether administration of vitamin D precipitates an improvement of health status in
non-severe symptomatic COVID-19 patients and whether vitamin D prevents patient
deterioration [163]. Other trials are examining various factors including mortality, symptom
recovery, severity of disease, rates of ventilation, inflammatory markers such as C-reactive
protein and IL-6, blood cell counts, and the prophylactic capacity of vitamin D administration
[163,164,165,166]. Concomitant administration of vitamin D with pharmaceuticals such as
aspirin [167] and bioactive molecules such as resveratrol [168] are also under investigation.
The effectiveness of vitamin D supplementation against COVID-19 remains open for debate. All
the same, there is no doubt that vitamin D deficiency is a widespread issue and should be
addressed not only because of its potential link to SARS-CoV-2 incidence [169], but also due to
its importance for overall health. There is a possibility that safe exposure to sunlight could
improve endogenous synthesis of vitamin D, potentially strengthening the immune system.
However, sun exposure is not sufficient on its own, particularly in the winter months. Indeed,
while the possible link between vitamin D status and COVID-19 is further investigated,
preemptive supplementation of vitamin D and encouraging people to maintain a healthy diet for
optimum vitamin D status is likely to raise serum levels of 25-hydroxyvitamin D while being
unlikely to carry major health risks. These principles seem to be the basis of a number of
guidelines issued by some countries and scientific organizations that have advised
supplementation of vitamin D during the pandemic. The Académie Nationale de Médecine in
France recommends rapid testing of 25-hydroxyvitamin D for people over 60 years old to
identify those most at risk of vitamin D deficiency and advises them to obtain a bolus dose of
50,000 to 100,000 IU vitamin D to limit respiratory complications. It has also recommended that
those under 60 years old should take 800 to 1,000 IU daily if they receive a SARS-CoV-2
positive test [170]. In Slovenia, doctors have been advised to provide nursing home patients
with vitamin D [171]. Both Public Health England and Public Health Scotland have advised
members of the Black, Asian, and minority ethnic communities to supplement for vitamin D in
light of evidence that they may be at higher risk for vitamin D deficiency along with other
COVID-19 risk factors, a trend that has also been observed in the United States [172,173].
However, other UK scientific bodies including the NICE recommend that individuals supplement
for vitamin D as per usual UK government advice but warn that people should not supplement
for vitamin D solely to prevent COVID-19. All the same, the NICE has provided guidelines for

research to investigate the supplementation of vitamin D in the context of COVID-19 [174].
Despite vitamin D deficiency being a widespread issue in the United States [175], the National
Institutes of Health have stated that there is “insufficient data to recommend either for or against
the use of vitamin D for the prevention or treatment of COVID-19” [176]. These are just some
examples of how public health guidance has responded to the emerging evidence regarding
vitamin D and COVID-19. Outside of official recommendations, there is also evidence that
individuals may be paying increased attention to their vitamin D levels, as a survey of Polish
consumers showed that 56% of respondents used vitamin D during the pandemic [177].
However, some companies have used the emerging evidence surrounding vitamin D to sell
products that claim to prevent and treat COVID-19, which in one incident required a federal
court to intervene and issue an injunction barring the sale of vitamin-D-related products due to
the lack of clinical data supporting these claims [178]. It it clear that further studies and clinical
trials are required to conclusively determine the prophylactic and therapeutic potential of vitamin
D supplementation against COVID-19. Until such time that sufficient evidence emerges,
individuals should follow their national guidelines surrounding vitamin D intake to achieve
vitamin D sufficiency.

Probiotics
Probiotics are “live microorganisms that, when administered in adequate amounts, confer a
health benefit on the host” [179]. Some studies suggest that probiotics are beneficial against
common viral infections, and there is modest evidence to suggest that they can modulate the
immune response [180,181]. As a result, it has been hypothesized that probiotics may have
therapeutic value worthy of investigation against SARS-CoV-2 [182]. Probiotics and nextgeneration probiotics, which are more akin to pharmacological-grade supplements, have been
associated with multiple potential beneficial effects for allergies, digestive tract disorders, and
even metabolic diseases through their anti-inflammatory and immunomodulatory effects
[183,184]. However, the mechanisms by which probiotics affect these various conditions would
likely differ among strains, with the ultimate effect of the probiotic depending on the
heterogeneous set of bacteria present [184]. Some of the beneficial effects of probiotics include
reducing inflammation by promoting the expression of anti-inflammatory mediators, inhibiting
Toll-like receptors 2 and 4, competing directly with pathogens, synthesizing antimicrobial
substances or other metabolites, improving intestinal barrier function, and/or favorably altering
the gut microbiota and the brain-gut axis [184,185,186]. It is also thought that lactobacilli such
as Lactobacillus paracasei, Lactobacillus plantarum and Lactobacillus rhamnosus have the
capacity to bind to and inactivate some viruses via adsorptive and/or trapping mechanisms
[187]. Other probiotic lactobacilli and even non-viable bacterium-like particles have been shown
to reduce both viral attachment to host cells and viral titers, along with reducing cytokine
synthesis, enhancing the antiviral IFN-α response, and inducing various other antiviral
mechanisms [187,188,189,190,191,192,193,194,195]. These antiviral and immunobiotic
mechanisms and others have been reviewed in detail elsewhere [31,182,196]. However, there
is also a bi-directional relationship between the lungs and gut microbiota known as the gut-lung
axis [197], whereby gut microbial metabolites and endotoxins may affect the lungs via the
circulatory system and the lung microbiota in return may affect the gut [198]. Therefore, the gutlung axis may play role in our future understanding of COVID-19 pathogenesis and become a
target for probiotic treatments [199]. Moreover, as microbial dysbiosis of the respiratory tract

and gut may play a role in some viral infections, it has been suggested that SARS-CoV-2 may
interact with our commensal microbiota [31; 200; 10.3389/fmicb.2020.01840] and that the lung
microbiome could play a role in developing immunity to viral infections [201]. These
postulations, if correct, could lead to the development of novel probiotic and prebiotic
treatments. However, significant research is required to confirm these associations and their
relevance to patient care, if any.
Probiotic therapies and prophylactics may also confer some advantages for managing
symptoms of COVID-19 or risks associated with its treatment. Probiotics have tentatively been
associated with the reduction of risk and duration of viral upper respiratory tract infections
[202,203,204]. Some meta-analyses that have assessed the efficacy of probiotics in viral
respiratory infections have reported moderate reductions in the incidence and duration of
infection [203,205]. Indeed, randomized controlled trials have shown that administering Bacillus
subtilis and Enterococcus faecalis [206], Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG [207], or Lactobacillus
casei and Bifidobacterium breve with galactooligosaccharides [208] via the nasogastric tube to
ventilated patients reduced the occurrence of ventilator-associated pneumonia in comparison to
the respective control groups in studies of viral infections and sepsis. These findings were also
supported by a recent meta-analysis [209]. Additionally, COVID-19 patients carry a significant
risk of ventilator-associated bacterial pneumonia [210], but it can be challenging for clinicians to
diagnose this infection due to the fact that severe COVID-19 infection presents with the
symptoms of pneumonia [211]. Therefore, an effective prophylactic therapy for ventilatorassociated pneumonia in severe COVID-19 patients would carry significant therapeutic value.
Additionally, in recent years, probiotics have become almost synonymous with the treatment of
gastrointestinal issues due to their supposed anti-inflammatory and immunomodulatory effects
[212]. Notably, gastrointestinal symptoms commonly occur in COVID-19 patients [213], and
angiotensin-converting enzyme 2, the portal by which SARS-CoV-2 enters human cells, is
highly expressed in enterocytes of the ileum and colon, suggesting that these organs may be a
potential route of infection [214,215]. Indeed, SARS-CoV-2 viral RNA has been detected in
human feces [216,217], and fecal-oral transmission of the virus has not yet been ruled out [218].
Rectal swabs of some SARS-CoV-2 positive pediatric patients persistently tested positive for
several days despite negative nasopharyngeal tests, indicating the potential for fecal viral
shedding [219]. However, there is conflicting evidence for the therapeutic value of various
probiotics against the incidence or severity of gastrointestinal symptoms in viral or bacterial
infections such as gastroenteritis [220,221]. Nevertheless, it has been proposed that the
administration of probiotics to COVID-19 patients and healthcare workers may prevent or
ameliorate the gastrointestinal symptoms of COVID-19, a hypothesis that several clinical trials
are now preparing to investigate [222,223]. Other studies are investigating whether probiotics
may affect patient outcomes following SARS-CoV-2 infection [224].
Generally, the efficacy of probiotic use is a controversial topic among scientists. In Europe,
EFSA has banned the term probiotics on products labels, which has elicited either criticism for
EFSA or support for probiotics from researchers in the field [179,225,226]. This regulation is due
to the hyperbolic claims placed on the labels of various probiotic products, which lack rigorous
scientific data to support their efficacy. Overall, the data supporting probiotics in the treatment or
prevention of many different disorders and diseases is not conclusive, as the quality of the
evidence is generally considered low [202]. However, in the case of probiotics and respiratory

infections, the evidence seems to be supportive of their potential therapeutic value.
Consequently, several investigations are underway to investigate the prophylactic and
therapeutic potential of probiotics for COVID-19. The blind use of conventional probiotics for
COVID-19 is currently cautioned against until the pathogenesis of SARS-CoV-2 can be further
established [227]. Until clinical trials investigating the prophylactic and therapeutic potential of
probiotics for COVID-19 are complete, it is not possible to provide an evidence-based
recommendation for their use. Despite these concerns, complementary use of probiotics as an
adjuvant therapeutic has been proposed by the Chinese National Health Commission and
National Administration of Traditional Chinese Medicine [228]. While supply issues prevented
the probiotics market from showing the same rapid response to the COVID-19 as some other
supplements, many suppliers are reporting growth during the pandemic [229]. Therefore, the
public response once again seems to have adopted supplements promoted as bolstering the
immune response despite a lack of evidence suggesting they are beneficial for preventing or
mitigating COVID-19.

Discussion
In this review, we report the findings to date of analyses of several dietary supplements and
nutraceuticals. While existing evidence suggests potential benefits of n-3 PUFA and probiotic
supplementation for COVID-19 treatment and prophylaxis, clinical data is still lacking, although
trials are underway. Both zinc and vitamin C supplementation in hospitalized patients seem to
be associated with positive outcomes; however, further clinical trials are required. In any case,
both vitamin C and zinc intake are part of a healthy diet and both likely presents minimal risk
when supplemented for, though their potential prophylactic or therapeutic effects against
COVID-19 are yet to be determined. On the other hand, mounting evidence from observational
studies indicates that there is an association between vitamin D deficiency and COVID-19
incidence has also been supported by meta-analysis [230]. Indeed, scientists are working to
confirm these findings and to determine whether a patient’s serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D levels
are also associated with COVID-19 severity. Clinical trials are required to determine whether
preemptive vitamin D supplementation may mitigate against severe COVID-19. In terms of the
therapeutic potential of vitamin D, initial evidence from clinical trials are conflicting, but seem to
indicate that vitamin D supplementation may reduce COVID-19 severity [158]. The various
clinical trials currently underway will be imperative to provide information on the efficacious use
of vitamin D supplementation for COVID-19 prevention and/or treatment.
The purported prophylactic and therapeutic benefits of dietary supplements and nutraceuticals
for multiple disorders, diseases, and infections has been the subject of significant research and
debate for the last few decades. Inevitably, scientists are also investigating the potential for
these various products to treat or prevent COVID-19. This interest also extends to consumers,
which led to a remarkable increase of sales of dietary supplements and nutraceuticals
throughout the pandemic due to a desire to obtain additional protections from infection and
disease. The nutraceuticals discussed in this review, namely vitamin C, vitamin D, n-3 PUFA,
zinc, and probiotics, were selected because of potential biological mechanisms that could
beneficially affect viral and respiratory infections and because they are currently under clinical
investigation. Specifically, these compounds have all been found to influence cellular processes
related to inflammation. Inflammation is particularly relevant to COVID-19 because of the

negative outcomes (often death) observed in a large number of patients whose immune
response becomes hyperactive in response to SARS-CoV-2, leading to severe outcomes such
as ARDS and sepsis [231]. Additionally, there is a well-established link between diet and
inflammation [232], potentially mediated in part by the microbiome [233]. Thus, the idea that
dietary modifications or supplementation could be used to modify the inflammatory response is
tied to a broader view of how diet and the immune system are interconnected. The supplements
and nutraceuticals discussed here therefore lie in sharp contrast to other alleged nutraceutical
or dietary supplements that have attracted during the pandemic, such as colloidal silver [234],
which have no known nutritional function and can be harmful. Importantly, while little clinical
evidence is available about the effects of any supplements against COVID-19, the risks
associated with those discussed above are likely to be low, and in some cases, they can be
obtained from dietary sources alone.
There are various other products and molecules that have garnered scientific interest and could
merit further investigation. These include polyphenols, lipid extracts, and tomato-based
nutraceuticals, all of which have been suggested for the potential prevention of cardiovascular
complications of COVID-19 such as thrombosis [31,68]. Melatonin is another supplement that
has been identified as a potential antiviral agent against SARS-CoV-2 using computational
methods [235], and it has also been highlighted as a potential therapeutic agent for COVID-19
due to its documented antioxidant, anti-apoptotic, immunomodulatory, and anti-inflammatory
effects [68,236,237]. Notably, melatonin, vitamin D and zinc have attracted public attention
because they were included in the treatment plan of the former President of the United States
upon his hospitalization due to COVID-19 [238]. These are just some of the many substances
and supplements that are currently under investigation but as of yet lack evidence to support
their use for the prevention or treatment of COVID-19. While there is plenty of skepticism put
forward by physicians and scientists surrounding the use of supplements, these statements
have not stopped consumers from purchasing these products, with one study reporting that
online searches for dietary supplements in Poland began trending with the start of the pandemic
[177]. Additionally, supplement usage increased between the first and second wave of the
pandemic. Participants reported various reasons for their use of supplements, including to
improve immunity (60%), to improve overall health (57%), and to fill nutrient gaps in their diet
(53%). Other efforts to collect large datasets regarding such behavior have also sought to
explore a possible association between vitamin or supplement consumption and COVID-19. An
observational analysis of survey responses from 327,720 users of the COVID Symptom Study
App found that the consumption of n-3 PUFA supplements, probiotics, multivitamins, and
vitamin D was associated with a lower risk of SARS-CoV-2 infection in women but not men after
adjusting for potential confounders [239]. According to the authors, the sexual dimorphism
observed may in part be because supplements may better support females due to known
differences between the male and female immune systems, or it could be due to behavioral and
health consciousness differences between the sexes [239]. Certainly, randomized controlled
trials are required to investigate these findings further.
Finally, it is known that a patient’s nutritional status affects health outcomes in various infectious
diseases [5], and COVID-19 is no different [3,240,241]. Some of the main risk factors for severe
COVID-19, which also happen to be linked to poor nutritional status, include obesity,
hypertension, cardiovascular diseases, type II diabetes mellitus, and indeed age-related

malnutrition [1,3,242]. Although not the main focus of this review, it is important to consider the
nutritional challenges associated with severe COVID-19 patients. Hospitalized COVID-19
patients tend to report an unusually high loss of appetite preceding admission, some suffer
diarrhea and gastrointestinal symptoms that result in significantly lower food intake, and patients
with poorer nutritional status were more likely to have worse outcomes and require nutrition
therapy [243]. Dysphagia also seems to be a significant problem in pediatric patients that
suffered multisystem inflammatory syndrome [244] and rehabilitating COVID-19 patients,
potentially contributing to poor nutritional status [245]. Almost two-thirds of discharged COVID19 ICU patients exhibit significant weight loss, of which 26% had weight loss greater than 10%
[241]. As investigated in this review, hospitalized patients also tend to exhibit vitamin D
deficiency or insufficiency, which may be associated with greater disease severity [230].
Therefore, further research is required to determine how dietary supplements and nutraceuticals
may contribute to the treatment of severely ill and rehabilitating patients, who often rely on
enteral nutrition.

Conclusions
Despite all the potential benefits of nutraceutical and dietary supplement interventions
presented, currently there is a paucity of clinical evidence to support their use for the prevention
or mitigation of COVID-19 infection. Nevertheless, optimal nutritional status can prime an
individual’s immune system to protect against the effects of acute respiratory viral infections by
supporting normal maintenance of the immune system [1,5]. Nutritional strategies can also play
a role in the treatment of hospitalized patients, as malnutrition is a risk to COVID-19 patients
[245]. Overall, supplementation of vitamin C, vitamin D, and zinc may be an effective method of
ensuring their adequate intake to maintain optimal immune function, which may also convey
beneficial effects against viral infections due to their immunomodulatory effects. Individuals
should pay attention to their nutritional status, particularly their intake of vitamin D, considering
that vitamin D deficiency is widespread. The prevailing evidence seems to indicate an
association between vitamin D deficiency with COVID-19 incidence and, potentially, severity
[133]. As a result, some international authorities have advised the general public, particularly
those at high risk of infection, to consider vitamin D supplementation. However, further wellcontrolled clinical trials are required to confirm these observations.
Many supplements and nutraceuticals designed for various ailments that are available in the
United States and beyond are not strictly regulated [246]. Consequently, there can be safety
and efficacy concerns associated with many of these products. Often, the vulnerable members
of society can be exploited in this regard and, unfortunately, the COVID-19 pandemic has
proven no different. As mentioned above, the FDA has issued warnings to several companies
for advertising falsified claims in relation to the preventative and therapeutic capabilities of their
products against COVID-19 [247]. Further intensive investigation is required to establish the
effects of these nutraceuticals, if any, against COVID-19. Until more effective therapeutics are
established, the most effective mitigation strategies consist of encouraging standard public
health practices such as regular hand washing with soap, wearing a face mask, and covering a
cough with your elbow [248], along with following social distancing measures, “stay at home”
guidelines, expansive testing, and contact tracing [249,250]. Indeed, in light of this review, it
would also be pertinent to adopt a healthy diet and lifestyle following national guidelines in order

to maintain optimal immune health. Because of the broad public appeal of dietary supplements
and nutraceuticals, it is important to evaluate the evidence regarding the use of such products.
We will continue to update this review as more findings become available.

Additional Items
Competing Interests
Author

Competing Interests

Last Reviewed

Ronan Lordan

None

2020-11-03

Halie M. Rando

None

2021-01-20

COVID-19 Review Consortium

None

2021-01-16

Casey S. Greene

None

2021-01-20

Author Contributions
Author

Contributions

Ronan Lordan

Conceptualization, Project Administration, Writing - Original Draft, Writing Review & Editing

Halie M. Rando

Writing - Original Draft, Writing - Review & Editing

COVID-19 Review
Consortium

Project Administration

Casey S. Greene

Project Administration, Supervision

Acknowledgements
We thank Nick DeVito for assistance with the Evidence-Based Medicine Data Lab COVID-19
TrialsTracker data and Vincent Rubinetti and Daniel Himmelstein for feedback on and support
with Manubot. We thank Yael Evelyn Marshall who contributed writing (original draft) as well as
reviewing and editing of pieces of the text but who did not formally approve the manuscript, as
well as Ronnie Russell, who contributed text to and helped develop the structure of the
manuscript early in the writing process and Matthias Fax who helped with writing and editing
text related to diagnostics. We are grateful to the following contributors for reviewing pieces of
the text: Nadia Danilova, James Eberwine and Ipsita Krishnan.

References
1. COVID-19: The Inflammation Link and the Role of Nutrition in Potential Mitigation
Ioannis Zabetakis, Ronan Lordan, Catherine Norton, Alexandros Tsoupras
Nutrients (2020-05-19) https://doi.org/ggxdq3
DOI: 10.3390/nu12051466 · PMID: 32438620 · PMCID: PMC7284818

2. Could nutrition modulate COVID-19 susceptibility and severity of disease? A
systematic review
Philip T. James, Zakari Ali, Andrew E. Armitage, Ana Bonell, Carla Cerami, Hal Drakesmith,
Modou Jobe, Kerry S. Jones, Zara Liew, Sophie E. Moore, … Andrew M. Prentice
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory (2020-10-21) https://doi.org/ghr94g
DOI: 10.1101/2020.10.19.20214395
3. Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) and Nutritional Status: The Missing Link?
Renata Silverio, Daniela Caetano Gonçalves, Márcia Fábia Andrade, Marilia Seelaender
Advances in Nutrition (2020-09-25) https://doi.org/ghhqjd
DOI: 10.1093/advances/nmaa125 · PMID: 32975565 · PMCID: PMC7543263
4. Nutritional status of patients with COVID-19
Jae Hyoung Im, Young Soo Je, Jihyeon Baek, Moon-Hyun Chung, Hea Yoon Kwon, Jin-Soo
Lee
International Journal of Infectious Diseases (2020-11) https://doi.org/gg7t5t
DOI: 10.1016/j.ijid.2020.08.018 · PMID: 32795605 · PMCID: PMC7418699
5. Optimal Nutritional Status for a Well-Functioning Immune System Is an Important
Factor to Protect against Viral Infections
Philip C. Calder, Anitra C. Carr, Adrian F. Gombart, Manfred Eggersdorfer
Nutrients (2020-04-23) https://doi.org/gg29hh
DOI: 10.3390/nu12041181 · PMID: 32340216 · PMCID: PMC7230749
6. Peak dietary supplement sales leveling off during COVID-19 pandemic, but growth still
remains strong over last year, market researchers report during webcast
Nutritional Outlook
https://www.nutritionaloutlook.com/view/peak-dietary-supplement-sales-leveling-during-covid19-pandemic-growth-still-remains-strong
7. Dietary Diversity among Chinese Residents during the COVID-19 Outbreak and Its
Associated Factors
Ai Zhao, Zhongyu Li, Yalei Ke, Shanshan Huo, Yidi Ma, Yumei Zhang, Jian Zhang, Zhongxia
Ren
Nutrients (2020-06-06) https://doi.org/ghc6d9
DOI: 10.3390/nu12061699 · PMID: 32517210 · PMCID: PMC7352896
8. Lockdown impact: Grocery stores bolstered NZ supplements sales as pharmacies
slumped
nutraingredients-asia.com
nutraingredients-asia.com https://www.nutraingredients-asia.com/Article/2020/07/06/Lockdownimpact-Grocery-stores-bolstered-NZ-supplements-sales-as-pharmacies-slumped
9. COVID-19 temporarily bolsters European interest in supplements
.nutritioninsight.com/
https://ni.cnsmedia.com/a/EHHJsDOG2oc=

10. India’s immune health surge: Nation leads APAC in number of new product launches
– new data
nutraingredients.com
nutraingredients.com https://www.nutraingredients.com/Article/2020/07/21/India-s-immunehealth-surge-Nation-leads-APAC-in-number-of-new-product-launches-new-data
11. Food policy, nutrition and nutraceuticals in the prevention and management of
COVID-19: Advice for healthcare professionals
Yasemin Ipek Ayseli, Nazli Aytekin, Derya Buyukkayhan, Ismail Aslan, Mehmet Turan Ayseli
Trends in Food Science & Technology (2020-11) https://doi.org/ghjtcp
DOI: 10.1016/j.tifs.2020.09.001
12. 5 Food and Beverage Trends in Europe During COVID-19
https://kerry.com/insights/kerrydigest/2020/5-food-and-beverage-trends-in-europe-during-covid19
13. Structural Design Principles for Delivery of Bioactive Components in Nutraceuticals
and Functional Foods
David Julian McClements, Eric Andrew Decker, Yeonhwa Park, Jochen Weiss
Critical Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition (2009-06-16) https://doi.org/dt68m4
DOI: 10.1080/10408390902841529 · PMID: 19484636
14. Nutraceutical therapies for atherosclerosis
Joe W. E. Moss, Dipak P. Ramji
Nature Reviews Cardiology (2016-07-07) https://doi.org/f9g389
DOI: 10.1038/nrcardio.2016.103 · PMID: 27383080 · PMCID: PMC5228762
15. Nutraceutical-definition and introduction
Ekta K. Kalra
AAPS PharmSci (2015-07-10) https://doi.org/cg5wc9
DOI: 10.1208/ps050325 · PMID: 14621960 · PMCID: PMC2750935
16. Dietary Supplement Health and Education Act of 1994
National Institutes of Health Office of Dietary Supplements
https://ods.od.nih.gov/About/DSHEA_Wording.aspx
17. Food and Drug Administration Modernization Act (FDAMA) of 1997
Office of the Commissioner
FDA (2018-11-03) https://www.fda.gov/regulatory-information/selected-amendments-fdcact/food-and-drug-administration-modernization-act-fdama-1997
18. Nutraceuticals - shedding light on the grey area between pharmaceuticals and food
Antonello Santini, Ettore Novellino
Expert Review of Clinical Pharmacology (2018-04-23) https://doi.org/ggwztk
DOI: 10.1080/17512433.2018.1464911 · PMID: 29667442
19. https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/ALL

20. https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT
21. EU Register of nutrition and health claims made on foods (v.3.5)
https://ec.europa.eu/food/safety/labelling_nutrition/claims/register/public/
22. Nutraceuticals: opening the debate for a regulatory framework
Antonello Santini, Silvia Miriam Cammarata, Giacomo Capone, Angela Ianaro, Gian Carlo
Tenore, Luca Pani, Ettore Novellino
British Journal of Clinical Pharmacology (2018-04) https://doi.org/ggwztm
DOI: 10.1111/bcp.13496 · PMID: 29433155 · PMCID: PMC5867125
23. Reviewing the Nutrition and Health Claims Regulation (EC) No. 1924/2006: What do
we know about its challenges and potential impact on innovation?
Stefanie Bröring, Sukhada Khedkar, Stefano Ciliberti
International Journal of Food Sciences and Nutrition (2016-08-02) https://doi.org/ghr936
DOI: 10.1080/09637486.2016.1212816 · PMID: 27484163
24. Dietary Supplements: Regulatory Challenges and Research Resources
Johanna Dwyer, Paul Coates, Michael Smith
Nutrients (2018-01-04) https://doi.org/ghr949
DOI: 10.3390/nu10010041 · PMID: 29300341 · PMCID: PMC5793269
25. Noetic Nutraceuticals - 607572 - 05/15/2020
Center for Drug Evaluation and Research
Center for Drug Evaluation and Research (2020-05-18) https://www.fda.gov/inspectionscompliance-enforcement-and-criminal-investigations/warning-letters/noetic-nutraceuticals607572-05152020
26. Regulations.gov https://beta.regulations.gov/document/FDA-2020-S-0023-0068
27. Spartan Enterprises Inc. dba Watershed Wellness Center - 610876 - 10/30/2020
Center for Drug Evaluation and Research
Center for Drug Evaluation and Research (2020-11-02) https://www.fda.gov/inspectionscompliance-enforcement-and-criminal-investigations/warning-letters/spartan-enterprises-incdba-watershed-wellness-center-610876-10302020
28. FTC Sues California Marketer of $23,000 COVID-19 “Treatment” Plan
Federal Trade Commission
(2020-07-31) https://www.ftc.gov/news-events/press-releases/2020/07/ftc-sues-californiamarketer-23000-covid-19-treatment-plan
29. https://cen.acs.org/biological-chemistry/natural-products/oleandrin-compound-toutedpossible-COVID/98/web/2020/08
30. Reducing mortality from 2019-nCoV: host-directed therapies should be an option
Alimuddin Zumla, David S Hui, Esam I Azhar, Ziad A Memish, Markus Maeurer
The Lancet (2020-02) https://doi.org/ggkd3b
DOI: 10.1016/s0140-6736(20)30305-6 · PMID: 32035018 · PMCID: PMC7133595

31. Diet Supplementation, Probiotics, and Nutraceuticals in SARS-CoV-2 Infection: A
Scoping Review
Fabio Infusino, Massimiliano Marazzato, Massimo Mancone, Francesco Fedele, Claudio Maria
Mastroianni, Paolo Severino, Giancarlo Ceccarelli, Letizia Santinelli, Elena Cavarretta, Antonino
G. M. Marullo, … Gabriella d’Ettorre
Nutrients (2020-06-08) https://doi.org/gg8k58
DOI: 10.3390/nu12061718 · PMID: 32521760 · PMCID: PMC7352781
32. Potential interventions for novel coronavirus in China: A systematic review
Lei Zhang, Yunhui Liu
Journal of Medical Virology (2020-03-03) https://doi.org/ggpx57
DOI: 10.1002/jmv.25707 · PMID: 32052466 · PMCID: PMC7166986
33. Nutraceuticals have potential for boosting the type 1 interferon response to RNA
viruses including influenza and coronavirus
Mark F. McCarty, James J. DiNicolantonio
Progress in Cardiovascular Diseases (2020-05) https://doi.org/ggpwx2
DOI: 10.1016/j.pcad.2020.02.007 · PMID: 32061635 · PMCID: PMC7130854
34. Inflammation and cardiovascular disease: are marine phospholipids the answer?
Ronan Lordan, Shane Redfern, Alexandros Tsoupras, Ioannis Zabetakis
Food & Function (2020) https://doi.org/gg29hg
DOI: 10.1039/c9fo01742a · PMID: 32270798
35. The Potential Beneficial Effect of EPA and DHA Supplementation Managing Cytokine
Storm in Coronavirus Disease
Zoltán Szabó, Tamás Marosvölgyi, Éva Szabó, Péter Bai, Mária Figler, Zsófia Verzár
Frontiers in Physiology (2020-06-19) https://doi.org/gg4hz4
DOI: 10.3389/fphys.2020.00752 · PMID: 32636763 · PMCID: PMC7318894
36. Exploitation of Microalgae Species for Nutraceutical Purposes: Cultivation Aspects
Sushanta Saha, Patrick Murray
Fermentation (2018-06-14) https://doi.org/ghv64j
DOI: 10.3390/fermentation4020046
37. Prospective options of algae-derived nutraceuticals as supplements to combat
COVID-19 and human coronavirus diseases
Sachitra K. Ratha, Nirmal Renuka, Ismail Rawat, Faizal Bux
Nutrition (2021-03) https://doi.org/ghr93z
DOI: 10.1016/j.nut.2020.111089 · PMID: 33412367 · PMCID: PMC7680017
38. Safety Aspects of Fish Oils
Erik Berg Schmidt, Jørn Munkhof Møller, Niels Svaneborg, Jørn Dyerberg
Drug Investigation (2012-10-14) https://doi.org/ghvqm8
DOI: 10.1007/bf03257413

39. Update on Seafood Consumption During Pregnancy
https://www.acog.org/en/Clinical/Clinical Guidance/Practice Advisory/Articles/2017/01/Update
on Seafood Consumption During Pregnancy
40. Omega-3 Fatty Acid supplementation during pregnancy
James A Greenberg, Stacey J Bell, Wendy Van Ausdal
Reviews in obstetrics & gynecology (2008)
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2621042/
PMID: 19173020 · PMCID: PMC2621042
41. Omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids and inflammatory processes: nutrition or
pharmacology?
Philip C. Calder
British Journal of Clinical Pharmacology (2013-03) https://doi.org/ggqmgg
DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2125.2012.04374.x · PMID: 22765297 · PMCID: PMC3575932
42. Marine omega-3 fatty acids and inflammatory processes: Effects, mechanisms and
clinical relevance
Philip C. Calder
Biochimica et Biophysica Acta (BBA) - Molecular and Cell Biology of Lipids (2015-04)
https://doi.org/gf8pc6
DOI: 10.1016/j.bbalip.2014.08.010 · PMID: 25149823
43. N-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids modulate B cell activity in pre-clinical models:
Implications for the immune response to infections
Jarrett Whelan, Kymberly M. Gowdy, Saame Raza Shaikh
European Journal of Pharmacology (2016-08) https://doi.org/f8xn7q
DOI: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2015.03.100 · PMID: 26022530 · PMCID: PMC4662641
44. Blood omega-3 fatty acids and death from COVID-19: A pilot study
Arash Asher, Nathan L. Tintle, Michael Myers, Laura Lockshon, Heribert Bacareza, William S.
Harris
Prostaglandins, Leukotrienes and Essential Fatty Acids (2021-03) https://doi.org/ghv63m
DOI: 10.1016/j.plefa.2021.102250 · PMID: 33516093 · PMCID: PMC7816864
45. n-3 Polyunsaturated Fatty Acids Improve Inflammation via Inhibiting Sphingosine
Kinase 1 in a Rat Model of Parenteral Nutrition and CLP-Induced Sepsis
Tao Tian, Yunzhao Zhao, Qian Huang, Jieshou Li
Lipids (2016-02-08) https://doi.org/ghvqm9
DOI: 10.1007/s11745-016-4129-x · PMID: 26856322
46. Polyunsaturated fatty acids and sepsis
Undurti N. Das
Nutrition (2019-09) https://doi.org/ghvqnb
DOI: 10.1016/j.nut.2019.02.016 · PMID: 31029920

47. Clinical characteristics of 82 cases of death from COVID-19
Bicheng Zhang, Xiaoyang Zhou, Yanru Qiu, Yuxiao Song, Fan Feng, Jia Feng, Qibin Song,
Qingzhu Jia, Jun Wang
PLOS ONE (2020-07-09) https://doi.org/gg4sgx
DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0235458 · PMID: 32645044 · PMCID: PMC7347130
48. Effects of an omega-3 fatty acid-enriched lipid emulsion on eicosanoid synthesis in
acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS): A prospective, randomized, double-blind,
parallel group study
Joan Sabater, Joan Masclans, Judit Sacanell, Pilar Chacon, Pilar Sabin, Mercè Planas
Nutrition & Metabolism (2011) https://doi.org/bg2kpp
DOI: 10.1186/1743-7075-8-22 · PMID: 21477318 · PMCID: PMC3080285
49. Immunonutrition for Adults With ARDS: Results From a Cochrane Systematic Review
and Meta-Analysis
Ahilanandan Dushianthan, Rebecca Cusack, Victoria A Burgess, Michael PW Grocott, Philip
Calder
Respiratory Care (2020-01) https://doi.org/fj2p
DOI: 10.4187/respcare.06965
50. Correlation analysis of omega-3 fatty acids and mortality of sepsis and sepsisinduced ARDS in adults: data from previous randomized controlled trials
HuaiSheng Chen, Su Wang, Ying Zhao, YuTian Luo, HuaSheng Tong, Lei Su
Nutrition Journal (2018-05-31) https://doi.org/gdpjtq
DOI: 10.1186/s12937-018-0356-8 · PMID: 29859104 · PMCID: PMC5984323
51. Proresolving Lipid Mediators and Mechanisms in the Resolution of Acute
Inflammation
Christopher D. Buckley, Derek W. Gilroy, Charles N. Serhan
Immunity (2014-03) https://doi.org/f5wntr
DOI: 10.1016/j.immuni.2014.02.009 · PMID: 24656045 · PMCID: PMC4004957
52. Specialized pro-resolving mediators: endogenous regulators of infection and
inflammation
Maria C. Basil, Bruce D. Levy
Nature Reviews Immunology (2015-12-21) https://doi.org/f9fgtd
DOI: 10.1038/nri.2015.4 · PMID: 26688348 · PMCID: PMC5242505
53. Specialized mediators in infection and lung injury
Shayna Sandhaus, Andrew G. Swick
BioFactors (2020-11-28) https://doi.org/ghr93m
DOI: 10.1002/biof.1691 · PMID: 33249673 · PMCID: PMC7744833
54. The Lipid Mediator Protectin D1 Inhibits Influenza Virus Replication and Improves
Severe Influenza
Masayuki Morita, Keiji Kuba, Akihiko Ichikawa, Mizuho Nakayama, Jun Katahira, Ryo Iwamoto,
Tokiko Watanebe, Saori Sakabe, Tomo Daidoji, Shota Nakamura, … Yumiko Imai

Cell (2013-03) https://doi.org/f4rbgb
DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2013.02.027 · PMID: 23477864
55. Pro-resolving lipid mediators are leads for resolution physiology
Charles N. Serhan
Nature (2014-06-04) https://doi.org/ggv53d
DOI: 10.1038/nature13479 · PMID: 24899309 · PMCID: PMC4263681
56. The Specialized Proresolving Mediator 17-HDHA Enhances the Antibody-Mediated
Immune Response against Influenza Virus: A New Class of Adjuvant?
Sesquile Ramon, Steven F. Baker, Julie M. Sahler, Nina Kim, Eric A. Feldsott, Charles N.
Serhan, Luis Martínez-Sobrido, David J. Topham, Richard P. Phipps
The Journal of Immunology (2014-12-15) https://doi.org/f6spr8
DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1302795 · PMID: 25392529 · PMCID: PMC4258475
57. Inflammation resolution: a dual-pronged approach to averting cytokine storms in
COVID-19?
Dipak Panigrahy, Molly M. Gilligan, Sui Huang, Allison Gartung, Irene Cortés-Puch, Patricia J.
Sime, Richard P. Phipps, Charles N. Serhan, Bruce D. Hammock
Cancer and Metastasis Reviews (2020-05-08) https://doi.org/ggvv7w
DOI: 10.1007/s10555-020-09889-4 · PMID: 32385712 · PMCID: PMC7207990
58. Pro resolving inflammatory effects of the lipid mediators of omega 3 fatty acids and
its implication in SARS COVID-19
Pedro-Antonio Regidor, Fernando Gonzalez Santos, Jose Miguel Rizo, Fernando Moreno Egea
Medical Hypotheses (2020-12) https://doi.org/ghr93x
DOI: 10.1016/j.mehy.2020.110340 · PMID: 33069094 · PMCID: PMC7543931
59. Obesity-Driven Deficiencies of Specialized Pro-resolving Mediators May Drive
Adverse Outcomes During SARS-CoV-2 Infection
Anandita Pal, Kymberly M. Gowdy, Kenneth J. Oestreich, Melinda Beck, Saame Raza Shaikh
Frontiers in Immunology (2020-08-11) https://doi.org/ght38j
DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2020.01997 · PMID: 32983141 · PMCID: PMC7438933
60. Fish Oil-Fed Mice Have Impaired Resistance to Influenza Infection
Nicole M. J. Schwerbrock, Erik A. Karlsson, Qing Shi, Patricia A. Sheridan, Melinda A. Beck
The Journal of Nutrition (2009-08) https://doi.org/dv45f4
DOI: 10.3945/jn.109.108027 · PMID: 19549756 · PMCID: PMC2709305
61. Modulation of host defence against bacterial and viral infections by omega-3
polyunsaturated fatty acids
Marie-Odile Husson, Delphine Ley, Céline Portal, Madeleine Gottrand, Thomas Hueso, JeanLuc Desseyn, Frédéric Gottrand
Journal of Infection (2016-12) https://doi.org/f9pp2h
DOI: 10.1016/j.jinf.2016.10.001 · PMID: 27746159

62. Bioactive products formed in humans from fish oils
Carsten Skarke, Naji Alamuddin, John A. Lawson, Xuanwen Li, Jane F. Ferguson, Muredach P.
Reilly, Garret A. FitzGerald
Journal of Lipid Research (2015-09) https://doi.org/f7pm5g
DOI: 10.1194/jlr.m060392 · PMID: 26180051 · PMCID: PMC4548785
63. Resolving Inflammatory Storm in COVID-19 Patients by Omega-3 Polyunsaturated
Fatty Acids - A Single-blind, Randomized, Placebo-controlled Feasibility Study
Magnus Bäck
clinicaltrials.gov (2020-11-27) https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT04647604
64. Stimulating the Resolution of Inflammation Through Omega-3 Polyunsaturated Fatty
Acids in COVID-19: Rationale for the COVID-Omega-F Trial
Hildur Arnardottir, Sven-Christian Pawelzik, Ulf Öhlund Wistbacka, Gonzalo Artiach, Robin
Hofmann, Ingalill Reinholdsson, Frieder Braunschweig, Per Tornvall, Dorota Religa, Magnus
Bäck
Frontiers in Physiology (2021-01-11) https://doi.org/ghv64h
DOI: 10.3389/fphys.2020.624657 · PMID: 33505321 · PMCID: PMC7830247
65. COVID-19 and its implications for thrombosis and anticoagulation
Jean M. Connors, Jerrold H. Levy
Blood (2020-06-04) https://doi.org/ggv35b
DOI: 10.1182/blood.2020006000 · PMID: 32339221 · PMCID: PMC7273827
66. COVID-19 update: Covid-19-associated coagulopathy
Richard C. Becker
Journal of Thrombosis and Thrombolysis (2020-05-15) https://doi.org/ggwpp5
DOI: 10.1007/s11239-020-02134-3 · PMID: 32415579 · PMCID: PMC7225095
67. COVID-19 and Thrombotic or Thromboembolic Disease: Implications for Prevention,
Antithrombotic Therapy, and Follow-Up
Behnood Bikdeli, Mahesh V. Madhavan, David Jimenez, Taylor Chuich, Isaac Dreyfus, Elissa
Driggin, Caroline Der Nigoghossian, Walter Ageno, Mohammad Madjid, Yutao Guo, … Gregory
Y. H. Lip
Journal of the American College of Cardiology (2020-06) https://doi.org/ggsppk
DOI: 10.1016/j.jacc.2020.04.031 · PMID: 32311448 · PMCID: PMC7164881
68. Thrombosis and COVID-19: The Potential Role of Nutrition
Alexandros Tsoupras, Ronan Lordan, Ioannis Zabetakis
Frontiers in Nutrition (2020-09-25) https://doi.org/ghr945
DOI: 10.3389/fnut.2020.583080 · PMID: 33102511 · PMCID: PMC7545367
69. Regulation of platelet function and thrombosis by omega-3 and omega-6
polyunsaturated fatty acids
Reheman Adili, Megan Hawley, Michael Holinstat
Prostaglandins & Other Lipid Mediators (2018-11) https://doi.org/ggvv73
DOI: 10.1016/j.prostaglandins.2018.09.005 · PMID: 30266534 · PMCID: PMC6242736

70. Platelet activation and prothrombotic mediators at the nexus of inflammation and
atherosclerosis: Potential role of antiplatelet agents
Ronan Lordan, Alexandros Tsoupras, Ioannis Zabetakis
Blood Reviews (2020-04) https://doi.org/ggvv7x
DOI: 10.1016/j.blre.2020.100694 · PMID: 32340775
71. An Investigation on the Effects of Icosapent Ethyl (VascepaTM) on Inflammatory
Biomarkers in Individuals With COVID-19 - Full Text View - ClinicalTrials.gov
https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT04412018
72. Cardiovascular Risk Reduction with Icosapent Ethyl for Hypertriglyceridemia
Deepak L. Bhatt, P. Gabriel Steg, Michael Miller, Eliot A. Brinton, Terry A. Jacobson, Steven B.
Ketchum, Ralph T. Doyle, Rebecca A. Juliano, Lixia Jiao, Craig Granowitz, … Christie M.
Ballantyne
New England Journal of Medicine (2019-01-03) https://doi.org/gfj3w9
DOI: 10.1056/nejmoa1812792 · PMID: 30415628
73. A Randomised, Double-blind, Placebo Controlled Study of Eicosapentaenoic Acid
(EPA-FFA) Gastro-resistant Capsules to Treat Hospitalised Subjects With Confirmed
SARS-CoV-2
S.L.A. Pharma AG
clinicaltrials.gov (2020-10-29) https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT04335032
74. Anti-inflammatory/Antioxidant Oral Nutrition Supplementation on the Cytokine Storm
and Progression of COVID-19: A Randomized Controlled Trial
Mahmoud Abulmeaty FACN M. D.
clinicaltrials.gov (2020-09-18) https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT04323228
75. Functional Role of Dietary Intervention to Improve the Outcome of COVID-19: A
Hypothesis of Work
Giovanni Messina, Rita Polito, Vincenzo Monda, Luigi Cipolloni, Nunzio Di Nunno, Giulio Di
Mizio, Paolo Murabito, Marco Carotenuto, Antonietta Messina, Daniela Pisanelli, … Francesco
Sessa
International Journal of Molecular Sciences (2020-04-28) https://doi.org/ggvb88
DOI: 10.3390/ijms21093104 · PMID: 32354030 · PMCID: PMC7247152
76. Zinc and immunity: An essential interrelation
Maria Maares, Hajo Haase
Archives of Biochemistry and Biophysics (2016-12) https://doi.org/f9c9b5
DOI: 10.1016/j.abb.2016.03.022 · PMID: 27021581
77. Zinc-Dependent Suppression of TNF-α Production Is Mediated by Protein Kinase AInduced Inhibition of Raf-1, IκB Kinase β, and NF-κB
Verena von Bülow, Svenja Dubben, Gabriela Engelhardt, Silke Hebel, Birgit Plümäkers, Holger
Heine, Lothar Rink, Hajo Haase
The Journal of Immunology (2007-09-15) https://doi.org/f3vs45
DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.179.6.4180 · PMID: 17785857

78. Zinc activates NF-κB in HUT-78 cells
Ananda S. Prasad, Bin Bao, Frances W. J. Beck, Fazlul H. Sarkar
Journal of Laboratory and Clinical Medicine (2001-10) https://doi.org/cnc6fr
DOI: 10.1067/mlc.2001.118108 · PMID: 11574819
79. Innate or Adaptive Immunity? The Example of Natural Killer Cells
E. Vivier, D. H. Raulet, A. Moretta, M. A. Caligiuri, L. Zitvogel, L. L. Lanier, W. M. Yokoyama, S.
Ugolini
Science (2011-01-06) https://doi.org/ckzg9g
DOI: 10.1126/science.1198687 · PMID: 21212348 · PMCID: PMC3089969
80. Zinc supplementation decreases incidence of infections in the elderly: effect of zinc
on generation of cytokines and oxidative stress
Ananda S Prasad, Frances WJ Beck, Bin Bao, James T Fitzgerald, Diane C Snell, Joel D
Steinberg, Lavoisier J Cardozo
The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition (2007-03) https://doi.org/ggqmgs
DOI: 10.1093/ajcn/85.3.837 · PMID: 17344507
81. The Role of Zinc in Antiviral Immunity
Scott A Read, Stephanie Obeid, Chantelle Ahlenstiel, Golo Ahlenstiel
Advances in Nutrition (2019-07) https://doi.org/ggqmgr
DOI: 10.1093/advances/nmz013 · PMID: 31305906 · PMCID: PMC6628855
82. Efficacy of Zinc Against Common Cold Viruses: An Overview
Darrell Hulisz
Journal of the American Pharmacists Association (2004-09) https://doi.org/cf6pmt
DOI: 10.1331/1544-3191.44.5.594.hulisz · PMID: 15496046 · PMCID: PMC7185598
83. Zinc Lozenges May Shorten the Duration of Colds: A Systematic Review
Harri Hemilä
The Open Respiratory Medicine Journal (2011-06-23) https://doi.org/bndmfq
DOI: 10.2174/1874306401105010051 · PMID: 21769305 · PMCID: PMC3136969
84. COVID-19: Poor outcomes in patients with zinc deficiency
Dinesh Jothimani, Ezhilarasan Kailasam, Silas Danielraj, Balaji Nallathambi, Hemalatha
Ramachandran, Padmini Sekar, Shruthi Manoharan, Vidyalakshmi Ramani, Gomathy
Narasimhan, Ilankumaran Kaliamoorthy, Mohamed Rela
International Journal of Infectious Diseases (2020-11) https://doi.org/ghr93t
DOI: 10.1016/j.ijid.2020.09.014 · PMID: 32920234 · PMCID: PMC7482607
85. Zn2+ Inhibits Coronavirus and Arterivirus RNA Polymerase Activity In Vitro and Zinc
Ionophores Block the Replication of These Viruses in Cell Culture
Aartjan J. W. te Velthuis, Sjoerd H. E. van den Worm, Amy C. Sims, Ralph S. Baric, Eric J.
Snijder, Martijn J. van Hemert
PLoS Pathogens (2010-11-04) https://doi.org/d95x4g
DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1001176 · PMID: 21079686 · PMCID: PMC2973827

86. The SARS-coronavirus papain-like protease: Structure, function and inhibition by
designed antiviral compounds
Yahira M. Báez-Santos, Sarah E. St. John, Andrew D. Mesecar
Antiviral Research (2015-03) https://doi.org/f63hjp
DOI: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2014.12.015 · PMID: 25554382 · PMCID: PMC5896749
87. A Randomized Study Evaluating the Safety and Efficacy of Hydroxychloroquine and
Zinc in Combination With Either Azithromycin or Doxycycline for the Treatment of
COVID-19 in the Outpatient Setting
Avni Thakore MD
clinicaltrials.gov (2020-12-08) https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT04370782
88. A Study of Hydroxychloroquine and Zinc in the Prevention of COVID-19 Infection in
Military Healthcare Workers - Full Text View - ClinicalTrials.gov
https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT04377646
89. Therapies to Prevent Progression of COVID-19, Including Hydroxychloroquine,
Azithromycin, Zinc, Vitamin D, Vitamin B12 With or Without Vitamin C, a Multi-centre,
International, Randomized Trial: The International ALLIANCE Study
National Institute of Integrative Medicine, Australia
clinicaltrials.gov (2020-09-09) https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT04395768
90. Early Intervention in COVID-19: Favipiravir Verses Standard Care - Full Text View ClinicalTrials.gov https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT04373733
91. Hydroxychloroquine with or without Azithromycin in Mild-to-Moderate Covid-19
Alexandre B. Cavalcanti, Fernando G. Zampieri, Regis G. Rosa, Luciano C. P. Azevedo,
Viviane C. Veiga, Alvaro Avezum, Lucas P. Damiani, Aline Marcadenti, Letícia KawanoDourado, Thiago Lisboa, … Otavio Berwanger
New England Journal of Medicine (2020-11-19) https://doi.org/gg5343
DOI: 10.1056/nejmoa2019014 · PMID: 32706953 · PMCID: PMC7397242
92. The efficacy and safety of hydroxychloroquine for COVID-19 prophylaxis: A
systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized trials
Kimberley Lewis, Dipayan Chaudhuri, Fayez Alshamsi, Laiya Carayannopoulos, Karin
Dearness, Zain Chagla, Waleed Alhazzani, for the GUIDE Group
PLOS ONE (2021-01-06) https://doi.org/ghsv36
DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0244778 · PMID: 33406138 · PMCID: PMC7787432
93. Effect of hydroxychloroquine with or without azithromycin on the mortality of
coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) patients: a systematic review and meta-analysis
Thibault Fiolet, Anthony Guihur, Mathieu Edouard Rebeaud, Matthieu Mulot, Nathan PeifferSmadja, Yahya Mahamat-Saleh
Clinical Microbiology and Infection (2021-01) https://doi.org/gg9jk2
DOI: 10.1016/j.cmi.2020.08.022 · PMID: 32860962 · PMCID: PMC7449662

94. Zinc sulfate in combination with a zinc ionophore may improve outcomes in
hospitalized COVID-19 patients
Philip M. Carlucci, Tania Ahuja, Christopher Petrilli, Harish Rajagopalan, Simon Jones, Joseph
Rahimian
Journal of Medical Microbiology (2020-10-01) https://doi.org/ghnws7
DOI: 10.1099/jmm.0.001250 · PMID: 32930657 · PMCID: PMC7660893
95. The Minimal Effect of Zinc on the Survival of Hospitalized Patients With COVID-19
Jasper Seth Yao, Joseph Alexander Paguio, Edward Christopher Dee, Hanna Clementine Tan,
Achintya Moulick, Carmelo Milazzo, Jerry Jurado, Nicolás Della Penna, Leo Anthony Celi
Chest (2021-01) https://doi.org/gg5w36
DOI: 10.1016/j.chest.2020.06.082 · PMID: 32710890 · PMCID: PMC7375307
96. Coronavirus Disease 2019- Using Ascorbic Acid and Zinc Supplementation
(COVIDAtoZ) Research Study A Randomized, Open Label Single Center Study
Milind Desai
clinicaltrials.gov (2021-01-28) https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT04342728
97. Vitamin B12 May Inhibit RNA-Dependent-RNA Polymerase Activity of nsp12 from the
COVID-19 Virus
Naveen Narayanan, Deepak T. Nair
Preprints (2020-03-22) https://doi.org/ggqmjc
DOI: 10.20944/preprints202003.0347.v1
98. The Long History of Vitamin C: From Prevention of the Common Cold to Potential Aid
in the Treatment of COVID-19
Giuseppe Cerullo, Massimo Negro, Mauro Parimbelli, Michela Pecoraro, Simone Perna, Giorgio
Liguori, Mariangela Rondanelli, Hellas Cena, Giuseppe D’Antona
Frontiers in Immunology (2020-10-28) https://doi.org/ghr943
DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2020.574029 · PMID: 33193359 · PMCID: PMC7655735
99. The Emerging Role of Vitamin C in the Prevention and Treatment of COVID-19
Anitra C. Carr, Sam Rowe
Nutrients (2020-10-27) https://doi.org/ghr95c
DOI: 10.3390/nu12113286 · PMID: 33121019 · PMCID: PMC7693980
100. Vitamin C Mitigates Oxidative Stress and Tumor Necrosis Factor-Alpha in Severe
Community-Acquired Pneumonia and LPS-Induced Macrophages
Yuanyuan Chen, Guangyan Luo, Jiao Yuan, Yuanyuan Wang, Xiaoqiong Yang, Xiaoyun Wang,
Guoping Li, Zhiguang Liu, Nanshan Zhong
Mediators of Inflammation (2014) https://doi.org/f6nb5f
DOI: 10.1155/2014/426740 · PMID: 25253919 · PMCID: PMC4165740
101. Intravenous infusion of ascorbic acid decreases serum histamine concentrations in
patients with allergic and non-allergic diseases
Alexander F. Hagel, Christian M. Layritz, Wolfgang H. Hagel, Hans-Jürgen Hagel, Edith Hagel,
Wolfgang Dauth, Jürgen Kressel, Tanja Regnet, Andreas Rosenberg, Markus F. Neurath, …

Martin Raithel
Naunyn-Schmiedeberg’s Archives of Pharmacology (2013-05-11) https://doi.org/f48jsb
DOI: 10.1007/s00210-013-0880-1 · PMID: 23666445
102. Vitamin C and Immune Function
Anitra Carr, Silvia Maggini
Nutrients (2017-11-03) https://doi.org/gfzrjs
DOI: 10.3390/nu9111211 · PMID: 29099763 · PMCID: PMC5707683
103. Changes in Leucocyte Ascorbic Acid during the Common Cold
R. Hume, Elspeth Weyers
Scottish Medical Journal (2016-06-25) https://doi.org/ggqrfj
DOI: 10.1177/003693307301800102 · PMID: 4717661
104. ASCORBIC ACID FUNCTION AND METABOLISM DURING COLDS
C. W. M. Wilson
Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences (1975-09) https://doi.org/bjfdtb
DOI: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.1975.tb29312.x · PMID: 1106304
105. Metabolism of ascorbic acid (vitamin C) in subjects infected with common cold
viruses
J. E. W. Davies, R. E. Hughes, Eleri Jones, Sylvia E. Reed, J. W. Craig, D. A. J. Tyrrell
Biochemical Medicine (1979-02) https://doi.org/fd22sv
DOI: 10.1016/0006-2944(79)90058-9
106. Vitamin C and Infections
Harri Hemilä
Nutrients (2017-03-29) https://doi.org/gfkb9n
DOI: 10.3390/nu9040339 · PMID: 28353648 · PMCID: PMC5409678
107. Vitamin C and the common cold
Harri Hemilä
British Journal of Nutrition (2007-03-09) https://doi.org/fszhc6
DOI: 10.1079/bjn19920004 · PMID: 1547201
108. Vitamin C Can Shorten the Length of Stay in the ICU: A Meta-Analysis
Harri Hemilä, Elizabeth Chalker
Nutrients (2019-03-27) https://doi.org/gfzscg
DOI: 10.3390/nu11040708 · PMID: 30934660 · PMCID: PMC6521194
109. Serum Levels of Vitamin C and Vitamin D in a Cohort of Critically Ill COVID-19
Patients of a North American Community Hospital Intensive Care Unit in May 2020: A
Pilot Study
Cristian Arvinte, Maharaj Singh, Paul E. Marik
Medicine in Drug Discovery (2020-12) https://doi.org/ghnwqt
DOI: 10.1016/j.medidd.2020.100064 · PMID: 32964205 · PMCID: PMC7499070

110. Vitamin C levels in patients with SARS-CoV-2-associated acute respiratory distress
syndrome
Luis Chiscano-Camón, Juan Carlos Ruiz-Rodriguez, Adolf Ruiz-Sanmartin, Oriol Roca, Ricard
Ferrer
Critical Care (2020-08-26) https://doi.org/ghbr97
DOI: 10.1186/s13054-020-03249-y · PMID: 32847620 · PMCID: PMC7447967
111. COVID-19, microangiopathy, hemostatic activation, and complement
Wen-Chao Song, Garret A. FitzGerald
Journal of Clinical Investigation (2020-06-22) https://doi.org/gg4b5c
DOI: 10.1172/jci140183 · PMID: 32459663 · PMCID: PMC7410042
112. Targeting coagulation activation in severe COVID-19 pneumonia: lessons from
bacterial pneumonia and sepsis
Ricardo J. José, Andrew Williams, Ari Manuel, Jeremy S. Brown, Rachel C. Chambers
European Respiratory Review (2020-10-01) https://doi.org/ghr94s
DOI: 10.1183/16000617.0240-2020 · PMID: 33004529 · PMCID: PMC7537941
113. Vitamin C and Microvascular Dysfunction in Systemic Inflammation
Karel Tyml
Antioxidants (2017-06-29) https://doi.org/ghr947
DOI: 10.3390/antiox6030049 · PMID: 28661424 · PMCID: PMC5618077
114. “War to the knife” against thromboinflammation to protect endothelial function of
COVID-19 patients
Gabriele Guglielmetti, Marco Quaglia, Pier Paolo Sainaghi, Luigi Mario Castello, Rosanna
Vaschetto, Mario Pirisi, Francesco Della Corte, Gian Carlo Avanzi, Piero Stratta, Vincenzo
Cantaluppi
Critical Care (2020-06-19) https://doi.org/gg35w7
DOI: 10.1186/s13054-020-03060-9 · PMID: 32560665 · PMCID: PMC7303575
115. Immune mechanisms of pulmonary intravascular coagulopathy in COVID-19
pneumonia
Dennis McGonagle, James S O’Donnell, Kassem Sharif, Paul Emery, Charles Bridgewood
The Lancet Rheumatology (2020-07) https://doi.org/ggvd74
DOI: 10.1016/s2665-9913(20)30121-1 · PMID: 32835247 · PMCID: PMC7252093
116. The use of IV vitamin C for patients with COVID-19: a case series
Raul Hiedra, Kevin Bryan Lo, Mohammad Elbashabsheh, Fahad Gul, Robert Matthew Wright,
Jeri Albano, Zurab Azmaiparashvili, Gabriel Patarroyo Aponte
Expert Review of Anti-infective Therapy (2020-08-01) https://doi.org/ghr938
DOI: 10.1080/14787210.2020.1794819 · PMID: 32662690 · PMCID: PMC7441798
117. Vitamin C for preventing and treating the common cold
Harri Hemilä, Elizabeth Chalker
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews (2013-01-31) https://doi.org/xz5
DOI: 10.1002/14651858.cd000980.pub4 · PMID: 23440782

118. Vitamin C intake and susceptibility to pneumonia
HARRI HEMILÄ
The Pediatric Infectious Disease Journal (1997-09) https://doi.org/fkvs9d
DOI: 10.1097/00006454-199709000-00003 · PMID: 9306475
119. Effect of Vitamin C Infusion on Organ Failure and Biomarkers of Inflammation and
Vascular Injury in Patients With Sepsis and Severe Acute Respiratory Failure
Alpha A. Fowler, Jonathon D. Truwit, R. Duncan Hite, Peter E. Morris, Christine DeWilde, Anna
Priday, Bernard Fisher, Leroy R. Thacker, Ramesh Natarajan, Donald F. Brophy, … Matthew
Halquist
JAMA (2019-10-01) https://doi.org/ggqmh8
DOI: 10.1001/jama.2019.11825 · PMID: 31573637 · PMCID: PMC6777268
120. Intravenous high-dose vitamin C for the treatment of severe COVID-19: study
protocol for a multicentre randomised controlled trial
Fang Liu, Yuan Zhu, Jing Zhang, Yiming Li, Zhiyong Peng
BMJ Open (2020-07-08) https://doi.org/gg4sgj
DOI: 10.1136/bmjopen-2020-039519 · PMID: 32641343 · PMCID: PMC7348463
121. Pilot Trial of High-dose vitamin C in critically ill COVID-19 patients
Jing Zhang, Xin Rao, Yiming Li, Yuan Zhu, Fang Liu, Guangling Guo, Guoshi Luo, Zhongji
Meng, Daniel De Backer, Hui Xiang, Zhi-Yong Peng
Research Square (2020-08-03) https://doi.org/ghr94x
DOI: 10.21203/rs.3.rs-52778/v2
122. High-dose vitamin C infusion for the treatment of critically ill COVID-19
Jing Zhang, Xin Rao, Yiming Li, Yuan Zhu, Fang Liu, Guangling Guo, Guoshi Luo, Zhongji
Meng, Daniel De Backer, Hui Xiang, Zhi-Yong Peng
Research Square (2020-08-03) https://doi.org/ghr94v
DOI: 10.21203/rs.3.rs-52778/v1
123. Dietary Reference Intakes for Vitamin C, Vitamin E, Selenium, and Carotenoids
Panel on Dietary Antioxidants and Related Compounds, Subcommittee on Upper Reference
Levels of Nutrients, Subcommittee on Interpretation and Uses of Dietary Reference Intakes,
Standing Committee on the Scientific Evaluation of Dietary Reference Intakes, Food and
Nutrition Board, Institute of Medicine
The National Academies Press (2000-07-27) https://doi.org/ghtvqx
DOI: 10.17226/9810 · PMID: 25077263
124. Vitamin D and Infectious Diseases: Simple Bystander or Contributing Factor?
Pedro Gois, Daniela Ferreira, Simon Olenski, Antonio Seguro
Nutrients (2017-06-24) https://doi.org/ggpcwr
DOI: 10.3390/nu9070651 · PMID: 28672783 · PMCID: PMC5537771
125. Vitamin D and Influenza—Prevention or Therapy?
Beata M. Gruber–Bzura

International Journal of Molecular Sciences (2018-08-16) https://doi.org/ggndrj
DOI: 10.3390/ijms19082419 · PMID: 30115864 · PMCID: PMC6121423
126. Immunologic Effects of Vitamin D on Human Health and Disease
Nipith Charoenngam, Michael F. Holick
Nutrients (2020-07-15) https://doi.org/gg45fp
DOI: 10.3390/nu12072097 · PMID: 32679784 · PMCID: PMC7400911
127. Vitamin D and respiratory health
D. A. Hughes, R. Norton
Clinical & Experimental Immunology (2009-10) https://doi.org/b3n6wc
DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2249.2009.04001.x · PMID: 19737226 · PMCID: PMC2759054
128. Regulation of Immune Function by Vitamin D and Its Use in Diseases of Immunity
An-Sofie Vanherwegen, Conny Gysemans, Chantal Mathieu
Endocrinology and Metabolism Clinics of North America (2017-12) https://doi.org/gcm7h9
DOI: 10.1016/j.ecl.2017.07.010 · PMID: 29080635
129. Vitamin D and the Immune System
Cynthia Aranow
Journal of Investigative Medicine (2015-12-15) https://doi.org/f3wh87
DOI: 10.2310/jim.0b013e31821b8755 · PMID: 21527855
130. Vitamin D in the prevention of acute respiratory infection: Systematic review of
clinical studies
David A. Jolliffe, Christopher J. Griffiths, Adrian R. Martineau
The Journal of Steroid Biochemistry and Molecular Biology (2013-07) https://doi.org/ggqmh9
DOI: 10.1016/j.jsbmb.2012.11.017 · PMID: 23220552
131. Vitamin D: modulator of the immune system
Femke Baeke, Tatiana Takiishi, Hannelie Korf, Conny Gysemans, Chantal Mathieu
Current Opinion in Pharmacology (2010-08) https://doi.org/d43qtf
DOI: 10.1016/j.coph.2010.04.001 · PMID: 20427238
132. Evidence that Vitamin D Supplementation Could Reduce Risk of Influenza and
COVID-19 Infections and Deaths
William B. Grant, Henry Lahore, Sharon L. McDonnell, Carole A. Baggerly, Christine B. French,
Jennifer L. Aliano, Harjit P. Bhattoa
Nutrients (2020-04-02) https://doi.org/ggr2v5
DOI: 10.3390/nu12040988 · PMID: 32252338 · PMCID: PMC7231123
133. Perspective: Vitamin D deficiency and COVID-19 severity – plausibly linked by
latitude, ethnicity, impacts on cytokines, ACE2 and thrombosis
J. M. Rhodes, S. Subramanian, E. Laird, G. Griffin, R. A. Kenny
Journal of Internal Medicine (2020-07-22) https://doi.org/ghc7dh
DOI: 10.1111/joim.13149 · PMID: 32613681 · PMCID: PMC7361294

134. COVID-19 fatalities, latitude, sunlight, and vitamin D
Paul B. Whittemore
American Journal of Infection Control (2020-09) https://doi.org/ghr93r
DOI: 10.1016/j.ajic.2020.06.193 · PMID: 32599103 · PMCID: PMC7319635
135. Editorial: low population mortality from COVID-19 in countries south of latitude 35
degrees North supports vitamin D as a factor determining severity
Jonathan M. Rhodes, Sreedhar Subramanian, Eamon Laird, Rose A. Kenny
Alimentary Pharmacology & Therapeutics (2020-06) https://doi.org/ggtw4b
DOI: 10.1111/apt.15777 · PMID: 32311755 · PMCID: PMC7264531
136. 25-Hydroxyvitamin D Concentrations Are Lower in Patients with Positive PCR for
SARS-CoV-2
Antonio D’Avolio, Valeria Avataneo, Alessandra Manca, Jessica Cusato, Amedeo De Nicolò,
Renzo Lucchini, Franco Keller, Marco Cantù
Nutrients (2020-05-09) https://doi.org/ggvv76
DOI: 10.3390/nu12051359 · PMID: 32397511 · PMCID: PMC7285131
137. Vitamin D deficiency as risk factor for severe COVID-19: a convergence of two
pandemics
D. De Smet, K. De Smet, P. Herroelen, S. Gryspeerdt, G. A. Martens
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory (2020-05-05) https://doi.org/ggvv75
DOI: 10.1101/2020.05.01.20079376
138. Vitamin D sufficiency, a serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D at least 30 ng/mL reduced risk
for adverse clinical outcomes in patients with COVID-19 infection
Zhila Maghbooli, Mohammad Ali Sahraian, Mehdi Ebrahimi, Marzieh Pazoki, Samira Kafan,
Hedieh Moradi Tabriz, Azar Hadadi, Mahnaz Montazeri, Mehrad Nasiri, Arash Shirvani, Michael
F. Holick
PLOS ONE (2020-09-25) https://doi.org/ghdzx8
DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0239799 · PMID: 32976513 · PMCID: PMC7518605
139. Role of vitamin D in preventing of COVID-19 infection, progression and severity
Nurshad Ali
Journal of Infection and Public Health (2020-10) https://doi.org/ghdzw9
DOI: 10.1016/j.jiph.2020.06.021 · PMID: 32605780 · PMCID: PMC7305922
140. Low plasma 25(OH) vitamin D level is associated with increased risk of COVID-19
infection: an Israeli population-based study
Eugene Merzon, Dmitry Tworowski, Alessandro Gorohovski, Shlomo Vinker, Avivit Golan
Cohen, Ilan Green, Milana Frenkel-Morgenstern
The FEBS Journal (2020-08-28) https://doi.org/gg7b5c
DOI: 10.1111/febs.15495 · PMID: 32700398 · PMCID: PMC7404739
141. Association of Vitamin D Status and Other Clinical Characteristics With COVID-19
Test Results
David O. Meltzer, Thomas J. Best, Hui Zhang, Tamara Vokes, Vineet Arora, Julian Solway

JAMA Network Open (2020-09-03) https://doi.org/ghdzw6
DOI: 10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2020.19722 · PMID: 32880651 · PMCID: PMC7489852
142. Vitamin D Status in Hospitalized Patients with SARS-CoV-2 Infection
José L Hernández, Daniel Nan, Marta Fernandez-Ayala, Mayte García-Unzueta, Miguel A
Hernández-Hernández, Marcos López-Hoyos, Pedro Muñoz-Cacho, José M Olmos, Manuel
Gutiérrez-Cuadra, Juan J Ruiz-Cubillán, … Víctor M Martínez-Taboada
The Journal of Clinical Endocrinology & Metabolism (2020-10-27) https://doi.org/ghh737
DOI: 10.1210/clinem/dgaa733 · PMID: 33159440
143. Analysis of vitamin D level among asymptomatic and critically ill COVID-19 patients
and its correlation with inflammatory markers
Anshul Jain, Rachna Chaurasia, Narendra Singh Sengar, Mayank Singh, Sachin Mahor, Sumit
Narain
Scientific Reports (2020-11-19) https://doi.org/ghm3zn
DOI: 10.1038/s41598-020-77093-z · PMID: 33214648 · PMCID: PMC7677378
144. Low 25-Hydroxyvitamin D Levels on Admission to the Intensive Care Unit May
Predispose COVID-19 Pneumonia Patients to a Higher 28-Day Mortality Risk: A Pilot
Study on a Greek ICU Cohort
Alice G. Vassiliou, Edison Jahaj, Maria Pratikaki, Stylianos E. Orfanos, Ioanna Dimopoulou,
Anastasia Kotanidou
Nutrients (2020-12-09) https://doi.org/ghr95d
DOI: 10.3390/nu12123773 · PMID: 33316914 · PMCID: PMC7764169
145. Vitamin D deficiency as a predictor of poor prognosis in patients with acute
respiratory failure due to COVID-19
G. E. Carpagnano, V. Di Lecce, V. N. Quaranta, A. Zito, E. Buonamico, E. Capozza, A.
Palumbo, G. Di Gioia, V. N. Valerio, O. Resta
Journal of Endocrinological Investigation (2020-08-09) https://doi.org/gg7kqp
DOI: 10.1007/s40618-020-01370-x · PMID: 32772324 · PMCID: PMC7415009
146. Vitamin D Deficiency and Outcome of COVID-19 Patients
Aleksandar Radujkovic, Theresa Hippchen, Shilpa Tiwari-Heckler, Saida Dreher, Monica
Boxberger, Uta Merle
Nutrients (2020-09-10) https://doi.org/ghgfmp
DOI: 10.3390/nu12092757 · PMID: 32927735 · PMCID: PMC7551780
147. Impact of Vitamin D Deficiency on COVID-19—A Prospective Analysis from the
CovILD Registry
Alex Pizzini, Magdalena Aichner, Sabina Sahanic, Anna Böhm, Alexander Egger, Gregor
Hoermann, Katharina Kurz, Gerlig Widmann, Rosa Bellmann-Weiler, Günter Weiss, … Judith
Löffler-Ragg
Nutrients (2020-09-11) https://doi.org/ghr95b
DOI: 10.3390/nu12092775 · PMID: 32932831 · PMCID: PMC7551662

148. Does Serum Vitamin D Level Affect COVID-19 Infection and Its Severity?-A CaseControl Study
Kun Ye, Fen Tang, Xin Liao, Benjamin A. Shaw, Meiqiu Deng, Guangyi Huang, Zhiqiang Qin,
Xiaomei Peng, Hewei Xiao, Chunxia Chen, … Jianrong Yang
Journal of the American College of Nutrition (2020-10-13) https://doi.org/ghr935
DOI: 10.1080/07315724.2020.1826005 · PMID: 33048028
149. Lower levels of vitamin D are associated with SARS-CoV-2 infection and mortality in
the Indian population: An observational study
Sunali Padhi, Subham Suvankar, Venketesh K. Panda, Abhijit Pati, Aditya K. Panda
International Immunopharmacology (2020-11) https://doi.org/ghr93w
DOI: 10.1016/j.intimp.2020.107001 · PMID: 33182040 · PMCID: PMC7489890
150. Vitamin D Deficiency Is Associated with COVID-19 Incidence and Disease Severity in
Chinese People
Xia Luo, Qing Liao, Ying Shen, Huijun Li, Liming Cheng
The Journal of Nutrition (2021-01) https://doi.org/ghr939
DOI: 10.1093/jn/nxaa332 · PMID: 33188401
151. Vitamin D concentrations and COVID-19 infection in UK Biobank
Claire E. Hastie, Daniel F. Mackay, Frederick Ho, Carlos A. Celis-Morales, Srinivasa Vittal
Katikireddi, Claire L. Niedzwiedz, Bhautesh D. Jani, Paul Welsh, Frances S. Mair, Stuart R.
Gray, … Jill P. Pell
Diabetes & Metabolic Syndrome: Clinical Research & Reviews (2020-07) https://doi.org/ggvv72
DOI: 10.1016/j.dsx.2020.04.050 · PMID: 32413819 · PMCID: PMC7204679
152. Vitamin D and COVID-19 infection and mortality in UK Biobank
Claire E. Hastie, Jill P. Pell, Naveed Sattar
European Journal of Nutrition (2020-08-26) https://doi.org/ghr93p
DOI: 10.1007/s00394-020-02372-4 · PMID: 32851419 · PMCID: PMC7449523
153. Low serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D (25[OH]D) levels in patients hospitalized with
COVID-19 are associated with greater disease severity
Grigorios Panagiotou, Su Ann Tee, Yasir Ihsan, Waseem Athar, Gabriella Marchitelli, Donna
Kelly, Christopher S. Boot, Nadia Stock, James Macfarlane, Adrian R. Martineau, … Richard
Quinton
Clinical Endocrinology (2020-08-06) https://doi.org/gg5gbj
DOI: 10.1111/cen.14276 · PMID: 32621392 · PMCID: PMC7361912
154. Letter in response to the article: Vitamin D concentrations and COVID-19 infection in
UK biobank (Hastie et al.)
W. B. Grant, S. L. McDonnell
Diabetes & Metabolic Syndrome: Clinical Research & Reviews (2020-09) https://doi.org/ghc7p4
DOI: 10.1016/j.dsx.2020.05.046 · PMID: 32563941 · PMCID: PMC7293469
155. Vitamin D deficiency in African Americans is associated with a high risk of severe
disease and mortality by SARS-CoV-2

Virna Margarita Martín Giménez, Felipe Inserra, León Ferder, Joxel García, Walter Manucha
Journal of Human Hypertension (2020-08-13) https://doi.org/ghr933
DOI: 10.1038/s41371-020-00398-z · PMID: 32792611 · PMCID: PMC7425793
156. Evidence for possible association of vitamin D status with cytokine storm and
unregulated inflammation in COVID-19 patients
Ali Daneshkhah, Vasundhara Agrawal, Adam Eshein, Hariharan Subramanian, Hemant Kumar
Roy, Vadim Backman
Aging Clinical and Experimental Research (2020-09-02) https://doi.org/ghr93q
DOI: 10.1007/s40520-020-01677-y · PMID: 32876941 · PMCID: PMC7465887
157. Short term, high-dose vitamin D supplementation for COVID-19 disease: a
randomised, placebo-controlled, study (SHADE study)
Ashu Rastogi, Anil Bhansali, Niranjan Khare, Vikas Suri, Narayana Yaddanapudi, Naresh
Sachdeva, GD Puri, Pankaj Malhotra
Postgraduate Medical Journal (2020-11-12) https://doi.org/ghnhpq
DOI: 10.1136/postgradmedj-2020-139065 · PMID: 33184146
158. “Effect of calcifediol treatment and best available therapy versus best available
therapy on intensive care unit admission and mortality among patients hospitalized for
COVID-19: A pilot randomized clinical study”
Marta Entrenas Castillo, Luis Manuel Entrenas Costa, José Manuel Vaquero Barrios, Juan
Francisco Alcalá Díaz, José López Miranda, Roger Bouillon, José Manuel Quesada Gomez
The Journal of Steroid Biochemistry and Molecular Biology (2020-10) https://doi.org/ghd79r
DOI: 10.1016/j.jsbmb.2020.105751 · PMID: 32871238 · PMCID: PMC7456194
159. COVID-19 rapid evidence summary: vitamin D for COVID-19 | Advice | NICE
https://www.nice.org.uk/advice/es28
160. Mathematical analysis of Córdoba calcifediol trial suggests strong role for Vitamin D
in reducing ICU admissions of hospitalized COVID-19 patients
Irwin Jungreis, Manolis Kellis
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory (2020-12-21) https://doi.org/ghr94h
DOI: 10.1101/2020.11.08.20222638
161. High-Dose Cholecalciferol Booster Therapy is Associated with a Reduced Risk of
Mortality in Patients with COVID-19: A Cross-Sectional Multi-Centre Observational Study
Stephanie F. Ling, Eleanor Broad, Rebecca Murphy, Joseph M. Pappachan, Satveer PardesiNewton, Marie-France Kong, Edward B. Jude
Nutrients (2020-12-11) https://doi.org/ghr95f
DOI: 10.3390/nu12123799 · PMID: 33322317 · PMCID: PMC7763301
162. Effect of Vitamin D 3 Supplementation vs Placebo on Hospital Length of Stay in
Patients with Severe COVID-19: A Multicenter, Double-blind, Randomized Controlled Trial
Igor H. Murai, Alan L. Fernandes, Lucas P. Sales, Ana J. Pinto, Karla F. Goessler, Camila S. C.
Duran, Carla B. R. Silva, André S. Franco, Marina B. Macedo, Henrique H. H. Dalmolin, …
Rosa M. R. Pereira

Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory (2020-11-17) https://doi.org/ghr94j
DOI: 10.1101/2020.11.16.20232397
163. Effect of Vitamin D Administration on Prevention and Treatment of Mild Forms of
Suspected Covid-19
Manuel Castillo Garzón
clinicaltrials.gov (2020-04-03) https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT04334005
164. Improving Vitamin D Status in the Management of COVID-19
Aldo Montano-Loza
clinicaltrials.gov (2020-06-03) https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT04385940
165. Cholecalciferol to Improve the Outcomes of COVID-19 Patients - Full Text View ClinicalTrials.gov https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT04411446
166. COvid-19 and Vitamin D Supplementation: a Multicenter Randomized Controlled
Trial of High Dose Versus Standard Dose Vitamin D3 in High-risk COVID-19 Patients
(CoVitTrial) - Full Text View - ClinicalTrials.gov
https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT04344041
167. The LEAD COVID-19 Trial: Low-risk, Early Aspirin and Vitamin D to Reduce COVID19 Hospitalizations
Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center in New Orleans
clinicaltrials.gov (2020-04-24) https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT04363840
168. Randomized Double-Blind Placebo-Controlled Proof-of-Concept Trial of a Plant
Polyphenol for the Outpatient Treatment of Mild Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19)
Marvin McCreary MD
clinicaltrials.gov (2020-09-22) https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT04400890
169. Current vitamin D status in European and Middle East countries and strategies to
prevent vitamin D deficiency: a position statement of the European Calcified Tissue
Society
Paul Lips, Kevin D Cashman, Christel Lamberg-Allardt, Heike Annette Bischoff-Ferrari, Barbara
Obermayer-Pietsch, Maria Luisa Bianchi, Jan Stepan, Ghada El-Hajj Fuleihan, Roger Bouillon
European Journal of Endocrinology (2019-04) https://doi.org/ggr42p
DOI: 10.1530/eje-18-0736 · PMID: 30721133
170. Communiqué de l’Académie nationale de Médecine : Vitamine D et Covid-19 –
Académie nationale de médecine | Une institution dans son temps https://www.academiemedecine.fr/communique-de-lacademie-nationale-de-medecine-vitamine-d-et-covid-19/
171. Covid-19: NHS bosses told to assess risk to ethnic minority staff who may be at
greater risk
Gareth Iacobucci
BMJ (2020-05-04) https://doi.org/ggv2zq
DOI: 10.1136/bmj.m1820 · PMID: 32366503

172. Covid-19: Public health agencies review whether vitamin D supplements could
reduce risk
Ingrid Torjesen
BMJ (2020-06-19) https://doi.org/ghr94p
DOI: 10.1136/bmj.m2475 · PMID: 32561509
173. Avoidance of vitamin D deficiency to slow the COVID-19 pandemic
Martin Kohlmeier
BMJ Nutrition, Prevention & Health (2020-06) https://doi.org/ghr94q
DOI: 10.1136/bmjnph-2020-000096 · PMID: 33230496 · PMCID: PMC7295862
174. COVID-19 rapid guideline: vitamin D
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE)
https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng187/resources/covid19-rapid-guideline-vitamin-d-pdf66142026720709
175. Prevalence of Vitamin D Deficiency and Associated Risk Factors in the US
Population (2011-2012)
Naveen R Parva, Satish Tadepalli, Pratiksha Singh, Andrew Qian, Rajat Joshi, Hyndavi
Kandala, Vinod K Nookala, Pramil Cheriyath
Cureus (2018-06-05) https://doi.org/gg7kqq
DOI: 10.7759/cureus.2741 · PMID: 30087817 · PMCID: PMC6075634
176. Vitamin D
COVID-19 Treatment Guidelines
https://www.covid19treatmentguidelines.nih.gov/adjunctive-therapy/vitamin-d/
177. Dietary Supplements during COVID-19 Outbreak. Results of Google Trends Analysis
Supported by PLifeCOVID-19 Online Studies
Jadwiga Hamulka, Marta Jeruszka-Bielak, Magdalena Górnicka, Małgorzata E. Drywień, Monika
A. Zielinska-Pukos
Nutrients (2020-12-27) https://doi.org/ghtvq3
DOI: 10.3390/nu13010054 · PMID: 33375422 · PMCID: PMC7823317
178. Court Orders Georgia Defendants to Stop Selling Vitamin D Products as Treatments
for Covid-19 and Other Diseases (2021-01-08) https://www.justice.gov/opa/pr/court-ordersgeorgia-defendants-stop-selling-vitamin-d-products-treatments-covid-19-and-other
179. The International Scientific Association for Probiotics and Prebiotics consensus
statement on the scope and appropriate use of the term probiotic
Colin Hill, Francisco Guarner, Gregor Reid, Glenn R. Gibson, Daniel J. Merenstein, Bruno Pot,
Lorenzo Morelli, Roberto Berni Canani, Harry J. Flint, Seppo Salminen, … Mary Ellen Sanders
Nature Reviews Gastroenterology & Hepatology (2014-06-10) https://doi.org/f6ndv7
DOI: 10.1038/nrgastro.2014.66 · PMID: 24912386
180. The Effect of Probiotics on Prevention of Common Cold: A Meta-Analysis of
Randomized Controlled Trial Studies

En-Jin Kang, Soo Young Kim, In-Hong Hwang, Yun-Jeong Ji
Korean Journal of Family Medicine (2013) https://doi.org/gg3knf
DOI: 10.4082/kjfm.2013.34.1.2 · PMID: 23372900 · PMCID: PMC3560336
181. Probiotics and Paraprobiotics in Viral Infection: Clinical Application and Effects on
the Innate and Acquired Immune Systems
Osamu Kanauchi, Akira Andoh, Sazaly AbuBakar, Naoki Yamamoto
Current Pharmaceutical Design (2018-05-10) https://doi.org/gdjnpk
DOI: 10.2174/1381612824666180116163411 · PMID: 29345577 · PMCID: PMC6006794
182. Using Probiotics to Flatten the Curve of Coronavirus Disease COVID-2019 Pandemic
David Baud, Varvara Dimopoulou Agri, Glenn R. Gibson, Gregor Reid, Eric Giannoni
Frontiers in Public Health (2020-05-08) https://doi.org/gg3knd
DOI: 10.3389/fpubh.2020.00186 · PMID: 32574290 · PMCID: PMC7227397
183. Next-generation probiotics: the spectrum from probiotics to live biotherapeutics
Paul W. O’Toole, Julian R. Marchesi, Colin Hill
Nature Microbiology (2017-04-25) https://doi.org/ggzggv
DOI: 10.1038/nmicrobiol.2017.57 · PMID: 28440276
184. Mechanisms of Action of Probiotics
Julio Plaza-Diaz, Francisco Javier Ruiz-Ojeda, Mercedes Gil-Campos, Angel Gil
Advances in Nutrition (2019-01) https://doi.org/gft8sh
DOI: 10.1093/advances/nmy063 · PMID: 30721959 · PMCID: PMC6363529
185. Probiotic mechanisms of action
Katrina Halloran, Mark A. Underwood
Early Human Development (2019-08) https://doi.org/gg3jc4
DOI: 10.1016/j.earlhumdev.2019.05.010 · PMID: 31174927
186. Probiotic Mechanisms of Action
Miriam Bermudez-Brito, Julio Plaza-Díaz, Sergio Muñoz-Quezada, Carolina Gómez-Llorente,
Angel Gil
Annals of Nutrition and Metabolism (2012) https://doi.org/gg3knb
DOI: 10.1159/000342079 · PMID: 23037511
187. A novel eukaryotic cell culture model to study antiviral activity of potential probiotic
bacteria
T BOTIC, T KLINGBERG, H WEINGARTL, A CENCIC
International Journal of Food Microbiology (2007-04-30) https://doi.org/fks5cz
DOI: 10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2006.10.044 · PMID: 17261339
188. Oral administration of Lactobacillus brevis KB290 to mice alleviates clinical
symptoms following influenza virus infection
N. Waki, N. Yajima, H. Suganuma, B. M. Buddle, D. Luo, A. Heiser, T. Zheng
Letters in Applied Microbiology (2014-01) https://doi.org/f5j37w
DOI: 10.1111/lam.12160 · PMID: 24329975

189. Antiviral activity of Lactobacillus brevis towards herpes simplex virus type 2: Role
of cell wall associated components
Paola Mastromarino, Fatima Cacciotti, Alessandra Masci, Luciana Mosca
Anaerobe (2011-12) https://doi.org/bcpvm5
DOI: 10.1016/j.anaerobe.2011.04.022 · PMID: 21621625
190. Critical Adverse Impact of IL-6 in Acute Pneumovirus Infection
Caroline M. Percopo, Michelle Ma, Todd A. Brenner, Julia O. Krumholz, Timothy J. Break,
Karen Laky, Helene F. Rosenberg
The Journal of Immunology (2019-02-01) https://doi.org/ghr95h
DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1800927 · PMID: 30578308 · PMCID: PMC6365009
191. Antiviral Activity of Exopolysaccharides Produced by Lactic Acid Bacteria of the
Genera Pediococcus, Leuconostoc and Lactobacillus against Human Adenovirus Type 5
Biliavska, Pankivska, Povnitsa, Zagorodnya
Medicina (2019-08-22) https://doi.org/ghr948
DOI: 10.3390/medicina55090519 · PMID: 31443536 · PMCID: PMC6780409
192. Prevention of respiratory syncytial virus infection with probiotic lactic acid
bacterium Lactobacillus gasseri SBT2055
Kei Eguchi, Naoki Fujitani, Hisako Nakagawa, Tadaaki Miyazaki
Scientific Reports (2019-03-18) https://doi.org/ghr934
DOI: 10.1038/s41598-019-39602-7 · PMID: 30886158 · PMCID: PMC6423325
193. Effect of probiotic on innate inflammatory response and viral shedding in
experimental rhinovirus infection – a randomised controlled trial
R. B. Turner, J. A. Woodfolk, L. Borish, J. W. Steinke, J. T. Patrie, L. M. Muehling, S. Lahtinen,
M. J. Lehtinen
Beneficial Microbes (2017-04-26) https://doi.org/f955fh
DOI: 10.3920/bm2016.0160 · PMID: 28343401 · PMCID: PMC5797652
194. Immunobiotic lactobacilli reduce viral-associated pulmonary damage through the
modulation of inflammation–coagulation interactions
Hortensia Zelaya, Kohichiro Tsukida, Eriko Chiba, Gabriela Marranzino, Susana Alvarez, Haruki
Kitazawa, Graciela Agüero, Julio Villena
International Immunopharmacology (2014-03) https://doi.org/f5wd93
DOI: 10.1016/j.intimp.2013.12.020 · PMID: 24394565
195. Nasal priming with immunobiotic lactobacilli improves the adaptive immune
response against influenza virus
Fernanda Raya Tonetti, Md. Aminul Islam, Maria Guadalupe Vizoso-Pinto, Hideki Takahashi,
Haruki Kitazawa, Julio Villena
International Immunopharmacology (2020-01) https://doi.org/ghr93v
DOI: 10.1016/j.intimp.2019.106115 · PMID: 31841753
196. The potential application of probiotics and prebiotics for the prevention and
treatment of COVID-19

Amin N. Olaimat, Iman Aolymat, Murad Al-Holy, Mutamed Ayyash, Mahmoud Abu Ghoush,
Anas A. Al-Nabulsi, Tareq Osaili, Vasso Apostolopoulos, Shao-Quan Liu, Nagendra P. Shah
npj Science of Food (2020-10-05) https://doi.org/ghggq4
DOI: 10.1038/s41538-020-00078-9 · PMID: 33083549 · PMCID: PMC7536434
197. Pulmonary-intestinal cross-talk in mucosal inflammatory disease
S Keely, NJ Talley, PM Hansbro
Mucosal Immunology (2011-11-16) https://doi.org/b5knk2
DOI: 10.1038/mi.2011.55 · PMID: 22089028 · PMCID: PMC3243663
198. The role of the lung microbiota and the gut-lung axis in respiratory infectious
diseases
Alexia Dumas, Lucie Bernard, Yannick Poquet, Geanncarlo Lugo-Villarino, Olivier Neyrolles
Cellular Microbiology (2018-12) https://doi.org/gfjds9
DOI: 10.1111/cmi.12966 · PMID: 30329198
199. Gut microbiota and Covid-19- possible link and implications
Debojyoti Dhar, Abhishek Mohanty
Virus Research (2020-08) https://doi.org/gg3jc5
DOI: 10.1016/j.virusres.2020.198018 · PMID: 32430279 · PMCID: PMC7217790
200. Oral Microbiome and SARS-CoV-2: Beware of Lung Co-infection
Lirong Bao, Cheng Zhang, Jiajia Dong, Lei Zhao, Yan Li, Jianxun Sun
Frontiers in Microbiology (2020-07-31) https://doi.org/ghr944
DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2020.01840 · PMID: 32849438 · PMCID: PMC7411080
201. Lung microbiome and coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19): Possible link and
implications
Saroj Khatiwada, Astha Subedi
Human Microbiome Journal (2020-08) https://doi.org/gg7m83
DOI: 10.1016/j.humic.2020.100073 · PMID: 32835135 · PMCID: PMC7405772
202. Probiotics in respiratory virus infections
L. Lehtoranta, A. Pitkäranta, R. Korpela
European Journal of Clinical Microbiology & Infectious Diseases (2014-03-18)
https://doi.org/f583jr
DOI: 10.1007/s10096-014-2086-y · PMID: 24638909 · PMCID: PMC7088122
203. Probiotics for preventing acute upper respiratory tract infections
Qiukui Hao, Bi Rong Dong, Taixiang Wu
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews (2015-02-03) https://doi.org/gg3jc3
DOI: 10.1002/14651858.cd006895.pub3 · PMID: 25927096
204. Probiotics for the prevention of respiratory tract infections: a systematic review
Evridiki K. Vouloumanou, Gregory C. Makris, Drosos E. Karageorgopoulos, Matthew E. Falagas
International Journal of Antimicrobial Agents (2009-09) https://doi.org/dn8kw8
DOI: 10.1016/j.ijantimicag.2008.11.005 · PMID: 19179052

205. Effectiveness of probiotics on the duration of illness in healthy children and adults
who develop common acute respiratory infectious conditions: a systematic review and
meta-analysis
Sarah King, Julie Glanville, Mary Ellen Sanders, Anita Fitzgerald, Danielle Varley
British Journal of Nutrition (2014-04-29) https://doi.org/f57hq5
DOI: 10.1017/s0007114514000075 · PMID: 24780623 · PMCID: PMC4054664
206. Effect of probiotics on the incidence of ventilator-associated pneumonia in critically
ill patients: a randomized controlled multicenter trial
Juan Zeng, Chun-Ting Wang, Fu-Shen Zhang, Feng Qi, Shi-Fu Wang, Shuang Ma, Tie-Jun Wu,
Hui Tian, Zhao-Tao Tian, Shu-Liu Zhang, … Yu-Ping Wang
Intensive Care Medicine (2016-04-04) https://doi.org/f8jnrt
DOI: 10.1007/s00134-016-4303-x · PMID: 27043237
207. Probiotic Prophylaxis of Ventilator-associated Pneumonia
Lee E. Morrow, Marin H. Kollef, Thomas B. Casale
American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine (2010-10-15) https://doi.org/d5hh4t
DOI: 10.1164/rccm.200912-1853oc · PMID: 20522788 · PMCID: PMC2970846
208. Synbiotics modulate gut microbiota and reduce enteritis and ventilator-associated
pneumonia in patients with sepsis: a randomized controlled trial
Kentaro Shimizu, Tomoki Yamada, Hiroshi Ogura, Tomoyoshi Mohri, Takeyuki Kiguchi, Satoshi
Fujimi, Takashi Asahara, Tomomi Yamada, Masahiro Ojima, Mitsunori Ikeda, Takeshi Shimazu
Critical Care (2018-09-27) https://doi.org/gfdggj
DOI: 10.1186/s13054-018-2167-x · PMID: 30261905 · PMCID: PMC6161427
209. Probiotics for the Prevention of Ventilator-Associated Pneumonia: A Meta-Analysis
of Randomized Controlled Trials
Minmin Su, Ying Jia, Yan Li, Dianyou Zhou, Jinsheng Jia
Respiratory Care (2020-05) https://doi.org/gg3kng
DOI: 10.4187/respcare.07097 · PMID: 32127415
210. COVID-19: An Alert to Ventilator-Associated Bacterial Pneumonia
Helvécio Cardoso Corrêa Póvoa, Gabriela Ceccon Chianca, Natalia Lopes Pontes Póvoa Iorio
Adis Journals (2020) https://doi.org/gg3knh
DOI: 10.6084/m9.figshare.12340496
211. The challenge of ventilator-associated pneumonia diagnosis in COVID-19 patients
Bruno François, Pierre-François Laterre, Charles-Edouard Luyt, Jean Chastre
Critical Care (2020-06-05) https://doi.org/gg3knc
DOI: 10.1186/s13054-020-03013-2 · PMID: 32503590 · PMCID: PMC7273812
212. Prophylactic use of probiotics for gastrointestinal disorders in children
Celine Perceval, Hania Szajewska, Flavia Indrio, Zvi Weizman, Yvan Vandenplas
The Lancet Child & Adolescent Health (2019-09) https://doi.org/d2qp
DOI: 10.1016/s2352-4642(19)30182-8

213. Effect of Gastrointestinal Symptoms in Patients With COVID-19
Zili Zhou, Ning Zhao, Yan Shu, Shengbo Han, Bin Chen, Xiaogang Shu
Gastroenterology (2020-06) https://doi.org/ggq8x8
DOI: 10.1053/j.gastro.2020.03.020 · PMID: 32199880 · PMCID: PMC7270807
214. The digestive system is a potential route of 2019-nCov infection: a bioinformatics
analysis based on single-cell transcriptomes
Hao Zhang, Zijian Kang, Haiyi Gong, Da Xu, Jing Wang, Zifu Li, Xingang Cui, Jianru Xiao, Tong
Meng, Wang Zhou, … Huji Xu
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory (2020-01-31) https://doi.org/ggjvx2
DOI: 10.1101/2020.01.30.927806
215. Cryo-electron microscopy structures of the SARS-CoV spike glycoprotein reveal a
prerequisite conformational state for receptor binding
Miao Gui, Wenfei Song, Haixia Zhou, Jingwei Xu, Silian Chen, Ye Xiang, Xinquan Wang
Cell Research (2016-12-23) https://doi.org/f9m247
DOI: 10.1038/cr.2016.152 · PMID: 28008928 · PMCID: PMC5223232
216. Prolonged presence of SARS-CoV-2 viral RNA in faecal samples
Yongjian Wu, Cheng Guo, Lantian Tang, Zhongsi Hong, Jianhui Zhou, Xin Dong, Huan Yin,
Qiang Xiao, Yanping Tang, Xiujuan Qu, … Xi Huang
The Lancet Gastroenterology & Hepatology (2020-05) https://doi.org/ggq8zp
DOI: 10.1016/s2468-1253(20)30083-2 · PMID: 32199469 · PMCID: PMC7158584
217. Evidence for Gastrointestinal Infection of SARS-CoV-2
Fei Xiao, Meiwen Tang, Xiaobin Zheng, Ye Liu, Xiaofeng Li, Hong Shan
Gastroenterology (2020-05) https://doi.org/ggpx27
DOI: 10.1053/j.gastro.2020.02.055 · PMID: 32142773 · PMCID: PMC7130181
218. Enteric involvement of coronaviruses: is faecal–oral transmission of SARS-CoV-2
possible?
Charleen Yeo, Sanghvi Kaushal, Danson Yeo
The Lancet Gastroenterology & Hepatology (2020-04) https://doi.org/ggpx7s
DOI: 10.1016/s2468-1253(20)30048-0 · PMID: 32087098 · PMCID: PMC7130008
219. Characteristics of pediatric SARS-CoV-2 infection and potential evidence for
persistent fecal viral shedding
Yi Xu, Xufang Li, Bing Zhu, Huiying Liang, Chunxiao Fang, Yu Gong, Qiaozhi Guo, Xin Sun,
Danyang Zhao, Jun Shen, … Sitang Gong
Nature Medicine (2020-03-13) https://doi.org/ggpwx5
DOI: 10.1038/s41591-020-0817-4 · PMID: 32284613 · PMCID: PMC7095102
220. Modulation of rotavirus severe gastroenteritis by the combination of probiotics and
prebiotics
Guadalupe Gonzalez-Ochoa, Lilian K. Flores-Mendoza, Ramona Icedo-Garcia, Ricardo GomezFlores, Patricia Tamez-Guerra

Archives of Microbiology (2017-06-20) https://doi.org/gbsb4d
DOI: 10.1007/s00203-017-1400-3 · PMID: 28634691 · PMCID: PMC5548957
221. Multicenter Trial of a Combination Probiotic for Children with Gastroenteritis
Stephen B. Freedman, Sarah Williamson-Urquhart, Ken J. Farion, Serge Gouin, Andrew R.
Willan, Naveen Poonai, Katrina Hurley, Philip M. Sherman, Yaron Finkelstein, Bonita E. Lee, …
Suzanne Schuh
New England Journal of Medicine (2018-11-22) https://doi.org/gfkbsf
DOI: 10.1056/nejmoa1802597 · PMID: 30462939
222. Synbiotic Therapy of Gastrointestinal Symptoms During Covid-19 Infection: A
Randomized, Double-blind, Placebo Controlled, Telemedicine Study (SynCov Study)
Medical University of Graz
clinicaltrials.gov (2021-01-14) https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT04420676
223. Multicentric Study to Assess the Effect of Consumption of Lactobacillus
Coryniformis K8 on Healthcare Personnel Exposed to COVID-19
Biosearch S.A.
clinicaltrials.gov (2020-04-28) https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT04366180
224. The Intestinal Microbiota as a Therapeutic Target in Hospitalized Patients With
COVID-19 Infection
Bioithas SL
clinicaltrials.gov (2021-01-26) https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT04390477
225. Probiotics: definition, scope and mechanisms of action
Gregor Reid
Best Practice & Research Clinical Gastroenterology (2016-02) https://doi.org/f8m79k
DOI: 10.1016/j.bpg.2015.12.001 · PMID: 27048893
226. Health benefits and health claims of probiotics: bridging science and marketing
Ger T. Rijkers, Willem M. de Vos, Robert-Jan Brummer, Lorenzo Morelli, Gerard Corthier,
Philippe Marteau
British Journal of Nutrition (2011-08-24) https://doi.org/cb78rx
DOI: 10.1017/s000711451100287x · PMID: 21861940
227. Probiotics and COVID-19: one size does not fit all
Joyce WY Mak, Francis KL Chan, Siew C Ng
The Lancet Gastroenterology & Hepatology (2020-07) https://doi.org/d2qq
DOI: 10.1016/s2468-1253(20)30122-9 · PMID: 32339473 · PMCID: PMC7182525
228. 2019 Novel coronavirus infection and gastrointestinal tract
Qin Yan Gao, Ying Xuan Chen, Jing Yuan Fang
Journal of Digestive Diseases (2020-03) https://doi.org/ggqr86
DOI: 10.1111/1751-2980.12851 · PMID: 32096611 · PMCID: PMC7162053

229. Bloomberg - Are you a robot?
https://www.bloomberg.com/tosv2.html?vid=&uuid=a9a62de0-6563-11eb-bdda5f604b5cc36f&url=L3ByZXNzLXJlbGVhc2VzLzIwMjAtMDgtMDMvcHJvYmlvdGljcy1tYXJrZXQtd
29ydGgtNzYtNy1iaWxsaW9uLWJ5LTIwMjctZXhjbHVzaXZlLXJlcG9ydC1jb3ZlcmluZy1wcmUtY
W5kLXBvc3QtY292aWQtMTktbWFya2V0LWFuYWx5c2lzLWJ5LW1ldGljdWxvdXM=
230. Vitamin D deficiency aggravates COVID-19: systematic review and meta-analysis
Marcos Pereira, Alialdo Dantas Damascena, Laylla Mirella Galvão Azevedo, Tarcio de Almeida
Oliveira, Jerusa da Mota Santana
Critical Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition (2020-11-04) https://doi.org/ghr937
DOI: 10.1080/10408398.2020.1841090 · PMID: 33146028
231. Cytokine Storm
David C. Fajgenbaum, Carl H. June
New England Journal of Medicine (2020-12-03) https://doi.org/ghnhm7
DOI: 10.1056/nejmra2026131 · PMID: 33264547 · PMCID: PMC7727315
232. Diet and Inflammation
Leo Galland
Nutrition in Clinical Practice (2010-12-07) https://doi.org/b7qgx7
DOI: 10.1177/0884533610385703 · PMID: 21139128
233. Obesogenic diet in aging mice disrupts gut microbe composition and alters
neutrophi:lymphocyte ratio, leading to inflamed milieu in acute heart failure
Vasundhara Kain, William Van Der Pol, Nithya Mariappan, Aftab Ahmad, Peter Eipers, Deanna
L. Gibson, Cecile Gladine, Claire Vigor, Thierry Durand, Casey Morrow, Ganesh V. Halade
The FASEB Journal (2019-02-15) https://doi.org/ghwfq8
DOI: 10.1096/fj.201802477r · PMID: 30768364 · PMCID: PMC6463911
234. Colloidal Silver
NCCIH
https://www.nccih.nih.gov/health/colloidal-silver
235. Network-based drug repurposing for novel coronavirus 2019-nCoV/SARS-CoV-2
Yadi Zhou, Yuan Hou, Jiayu Shen, Yin Huang, William Martin, Feixiong Cheng
Cell Discovery (2020-03-16) https://doi.org/ggq84x
DOI: 10.1038/s41421-020-0153-3 · PMID: 32194980 · PMCID: PMC7073332
236. Role of Melatonin on Virus-Induced Neuropathogenesis—A Concomitant
Therapeutic Strategy to Understand SARS-CoV-2 Infection
Prapimpun Wongchitrat, Mayuri Shukla, Ramaswamy Sharma, Piyarat Govitrapong, Russel J.
Reiter
Antioxidants (2021-01-02) https://doi.org/ghr946
DOI: 10.3390/antiox10010047 · PMID: 33401749 · PMCID: PMC7823793
237. Nutraceutical Strategies for Suppressing NLRP3 Inflammasome Activation:
Pertinence to the Management of COVID-19 and Beyond

Mark F. McCarty, Simon Bernard Iloki Assanga, Lidianys Lewis Luján, James H. O’Keefe,
James J. DiNicolantonio
Nutrients (2020-12-25) https://doi.org/ghr95g
DOI: 10.3390/nu13010047 · PMID: 33375692 · PMCID: PMC7823562
238. Update: Here’s what is known about Trump’s COVID-19 treatment
Jon Cohen
Science (2020-10-05) https://doi.org/ghr94n
DOI: 10.1126/science.abf0974
239. Dietary supplements during the COVID-19 pandemic: insights from 1.4M users of the
COVID Symptom Study app - a longitudinal app-based community survey
Panayiotis Louca, Benjamin Murray, Kerstin Klaser, Mark S Graham, Mohsen Mazidi, Emily R
Leeming, Ellen Thompson, Ruth Bowyer, David A Drew, Long H Nguyen, … Cristina Menni
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory (2020-11-30) https://doi.org/ghr94k
DOI: 10.1101/2020.11.27.20239087
240. ESPEN expert statements and practical guidance for nutritional management of
individuals with SARS-CoV-2 infection
Rocco Barazzoni, Stephan C. Bischoff, Joao Breda, Kremlin Wickramasinghe, Zeljko Krznaric,
Dorit Nitzan, Matthias Pirlich, Pierre Singer
Clinical Nutrition (2020-06) https://doi.org/ggtzjq
DOI: 10.1016/j.clnu.2020.03.022 · PMID: 32305181 · PMCID: PMC7138149
241. Nutritional status assessment in patients with Covid-19 after discharge from the
intensive care unit
Nassim Essabah Haraj, Siham El Aziz, Asma Chadli, Asma Dafir, Amal Mjabber, Ouissal
Aissaoui, Lhoucine Barrou, Chafik El Kettani El Hamidi, Afak Nsiri, Rachid AL Harrar, … Moulay
Hicham Afif
Clinical Nutrition ESPEN (2021-02) https://doi.org/ghjhdq
DOI: 10.1016/j.clnesp.2020.09.214 · PMID: 33487301 · PMCID: PMC7552965
242. Nutrition Status Affects COVID-19 Patient Outcomes
Mette M Berger
Journal of Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition (2020-07-15) https://doi.org/gg5qv4
DOI: 10.1002/jpen.1954 · PMID: 32613691 · PMCID: PMC7361441
243. Evaluation of Nutrition Risk and Its Association With Mortality Risk in Severely and
Critically Ill COVID-19 Patients
Xiaobo Zhao, Yan Li, Yanyan Ge, Yuxin Shi, Ping Lv, Jianchu Zhang, Gui Fu, Yanfen Zhou, Ke
Jiang, Nengxing Lin, … Xin Li
Journal of Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition (2020-07-20) https://doi.org/ghr93n
DOI: 10.1002/jpen.1953 · PMID: 32613660 · PMCID: PMC7361906
244. Multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children: A systematic review
Mubbasheer Ahmed, Shailesh Advani, Axel Moreira, Sarah Zoretic, John Martinez, Kevin
Chorath, Sebastian Acosta, Rija Naqvi, Finn Burmeister-Morton, Fiona Burmeister, … Alvaro

Moreira
EClinicalMedicine (2020-09) https://doi.org/ghsv27
DOI: 10.1016/j.eclinm.2020.100527 · PMID: 32923992 · PMCID: PMC7473262
245. Nutritional management of COVID-19 patients in a rehabilitation unit
Luigia Brugliera, Alfio Spina, Paola Castellazzi, Paolo Cimino, Pietro Arcuri, Alessandra Negro,
Elise Houdayer, Federica Alemanno, Alessandra Giordani, Pietro Mortini, Sandro Iannaccone
European Journal of Clinical Nutrition (2020-05-20) https://doi.org/gg29hf
DOI: 10.1038/s41430-020-0664-x · PMID: 32433599 · PMCID: PMC7237874
246. The frontier between nutrition and pharma: The international regulatory framework
of functional foods, food supplements and nutraceuticals
Laura Domínguez Díaz, Virginia Fernández-Ruiz, Montaña Cámara
Critical Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition (2019-03-29) https://doi.org/ggqs3w
DOI: 10.1080/10408398.2019.1592107 · PMID: 30924346
247. Coronavirus Update: FDA and FTC Warn Seven Companies Selling Fraudulent
Products that Claim to Treat or Prevent COVID-19
Office of the Commissioner
FDA (2020-03-27) https://www.fda.gov/news-events/press-announcements/coronavirus-updatefda-and-ftc-warn-seven-companies-selling-fraudulent-products-claim-treat-or
248. COVID-19 and Your Health
CDC
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2021-01-30)
https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/prevent-getting-sick/prevention.html
249. Potential roles of social distancing in mitigating the spread of coronavirus disease
2019 (COVID-19) in South Korea
Sang Woo Park, Kaiyuan Sun, Cécile Viboud, Bryan T. Grenfell, Jonathan Dushoff
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory (2020-03-30) https://doi.org/gg3mhg
DOI: 10.1101/2020.03.27.20045815 · PMID: 32511429 · PMCID: PMC7217070
250. Evaluating the Effectiveness of Social Distancing Interventions to Delay or Flatten
the Epidemic Curve of Coronavirus Disease
Laura Matrajt, Tiffany Leung
Emerging Infectious Diseases (2020-08) https://doi.org/ggtx3k
DOI: 10.3201/eid2608.201093 · PMID: 32343222 · PMCID: PMC7392458

