Pathogenesis, Symptomatology, and
Transmission of SARS-CoV-2 through
analysis of Viral Genomics and Structure
This manuscript (permalink) was automatically generated from greenelab/covid19review@7d93765 on February 12, 2021. It represents one section of a larger evolving review on
SARS-CoV-2 and COVID-19 available at https://greenelab.github.io/covid19-review/
This in progress manuscript is not intended for the general public. This is a review paper
that is authored by scientists for an audience of scientists to discuss research that is in
progress. If you are interested in guidelines on testing, therapies, or other issues related to your
health, you should not use this document. Instead, you should collect information from your
local health department, the CDC’s guidance, or your own government.

Authors
•

Halie M. Rando 0000-0001-7688-1770 rando2 tamefoxtime Department of Systems
Pharmacology and Translational Therapeutics, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, United States of America; Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Genetics, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, Colorado, United States of
America; Center for Health AI, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora,
Colorado, United States of America · Funded by the Gordon and Betty Moore Foundation
(GBMF 4552)

•

Adam L. MacLean 0000-0003-0689-7907 alavendelm adamlmaclean Department of
Biological Sciences, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California, United
States of America

•

Alexandra J. Lee 0000-0002-0208-3730 ajlee21 Department of Systems Pharmacology
and Translational Therapeutics, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania,
United States of America · Funded by the Gordon and Betty Moore Foundation (GBMF
4552)

•

Sandipan Ray 0000-0002-9960-5768 rays1987 Department of Biotechnology, Indian
Institute of Technology Hyderabad, Kandi, Sangareddy 502285, Telangana, India

•

Vikas Bansal 0000-0002-0944-7226 bansalvi VikasBansal1989 Biomedical Data Science
and Machine Learning Group, German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases, Tübingen
72076, Germany

•

Ashwin N. Skelly 0000-0002-1565-3376 anskelly Perelman School of Medicine,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of America; Institute
for Immunology, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia,

United States of America · Funded by NIH Medical Scientist Training Program T32
GM07170
•

Elizabeth Sell 0000-0002-9658-1107 esell17 Perelman School of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of America

•

John J. Dziak 0000-0003-0762-5495 dziakj1 Edna Bennett Pierce Prevention Research
Center, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA, United States of America

•

Lamonica Shinholster 0000-0001-6285-005X LSH2126 Mercer University, Macon, GA,
United States of America · Funded by the Center for Global Genomics and Health Equity at
the University of Pennsylvania

•

Lucy D'Agostino McGowan 0000-0001-7297-9359 LucyMcGowan LucyStats
Department of Mathematics and Statistics, Wake Forest University, Winston-Salem, North
Carolina, United States of America

•

Marouen Ben Guebila 0000-0001-5934-966X marouenbg marouenbg Department of
Biostatistics, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of
America

•

Nils Wellhausen 0000-0001-8955-7582 nilswellhausen Department of Systems
Pharmacology and Translational Therapeutics, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, United States of America

•

Sergey Knyazev 0000-0003-0385-1831 Sergey-Knyazev SeKnyaz Georgia State
University, Atlanta, GA, United States of America

•

Simina M. Boca 0000-0002-1400-3398 SiminaB Innovation Center for Biomedical
Informatics, Georgetown University Medical Center, Washington, District of Columbia,
United States of America

•

Stephen Capone 0000-0001-7231-1535 scapone01 St. George’s University School of
Medicine, St. George’s, Grenada

•

Yanjun Qi 0000-0002-5796-7453 qiyanjun Department of Computer Science, University of
Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, United States of America

•

YoSon Park 0000-0002-0465-4744 ypar yoson Department of Systems Pharmacology
and Translational Therapeutics, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania,
United States of America · Funded by NHGRI R01 HG10067

•

Yuchen Sun kevinsunofficial Department of Computer Science, University of Virginia,
Charlottesville, VA, United States of America

•

David Mai 0000-0002-9238-0164 davemai daveomai Department of Bioengineering,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA

•

Christian Brueffer 0000-0002-3826-0989 cbrueffer cbrueffer Department of Clinical
Sciences, Lund University, Lund, Sweden

•

James Brian Byrd 0000-0002-0509-3520 byrdjb thebyrdlab University of Michigan School
of Medicine, Ann Arbor, Michigan, United States of America · Funded by NIH
K23HL128909; FastGrants

•

Jinhui Wang 0000-0002-5796-8130 jinhui2 Perelman School of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of America

•

Ronan Lordan 0000-0001-9668-3368 RLordan el_ronan Institute for Translational
Medicine and Therapeutics, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA 19104-5158, USA

•

Ryan Velazquez 0000-0002-3655-3403 rdvelazquez Azimuth1, McLean, VA

•

Gregory L Szeto 0000-0001-7604-1333 gregszetoAI greg_szeto Allen Institute for
Immunology, Seattle, WA, United States of America

•

John P. Barton 0000-0003-1467-421X johnbarton _jpbarton Department of Physics and
Astronomy, University of California-Riverside, Riverside, California, United States of
America

•

Rishi Raj Goel https://orcid.org/0000-0003-1715-5191 rishirajgoel rishirajgoel Institute for
Immunology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, United States of America

•

Serghei Mangul 0000-0003-4770-3443 smangul1 serghei_mangul Department of Clinical
Pharmacy, School of Pharmacy, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, United
States of America

•

Tiago Lubiana 0000-0003-2473-2313 lubianat lubianat Department of Clinical and
Toxicological Analyses, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of São Paulo, São
Paulo, Brazil

•

COVID-19 Review Consortium

•

Anthony Gitter 0000-0002-5324-9833 agitter anthonygitter Department of Biostatistics
and Medical Informatics, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin, United
States of America; Morgridge Institute for Research, Madison, Wisconsin, United States of
America · Funded by John W. and Jeanne M. Rowe Center for Research in Virology

•

Casey S. Greene 0000-0001-8713-9213 cgreene GreeneScientist Department of Systems
Pharmacology and Translational Therapeutics, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, United States of America; Childhood Cancer Data Lab, Alex’s Lemonade
Stand Foundation, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of America; Department of
Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora,
Colorado, United States of America; Center for Health AI, University of Colorado School of
Medicine, Aurora, Colorado, United States of America · Funded by the Gordon and Betty

Moore Foundation (GBMF 4552); the National Human Genome Research Institute (R01
HG010067)
COVID-19 Review Consortium: Vikas Bansal, John P. Barton, Simina M. Boca, Christian
Brueffer, James Brian Byrd, Stephen Capone, Shikta Das, Anna Ada Dattoli, John J. Dziak,
Jeffrey M. Field, Soumita Ghosh, Anthony Gitter, Rishi Raj Goel, Casey S. Greene, Marouen
Ben Guebila, Fengling Hu, Nafisa M. Jadavji, Sergey Knyazev, Likhitha Kolla, Alexandra J. Lee,
Ronan Lordan, Tiago Lubiana, Temitayo Lukan, Adam L. MacLean, David Mai, Serghei Mangul,
David Manheim, Lucy D'Agostino McGowan, YoSon Park, Dimitri Perrin, Yanjun Qi, Diane N.
Rafizadeh, Bharath Ramsundar, Halie M. Rando, Sandipan Ray, Michael P. Robson, Elizabeth
Sell, Lamonica Shinholster, Ashwin N. Skelly, Yuchen Sun, Gregory L Szeto, Ryan Velazquez,
Jinhui Wang, Nils Wellhausen
Authors with similar contributions are ordered alphabetically.

Abstract
The novel coronavirus SARS-CoV-2, which emerged in late 2019, has since spread around the
world infecting tens of millions of people with coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19). While this
viral species was unknown prior to January 2020, its similarity to other coronaviruses that infect
humans has allowed for rapid insight into the mechanisms that it uses to infect human hosts, as
well as the ways in which the human immune system can respond. Here, we contextualize
SARS-CoV-2 among other coronaviruses and identify what is known and what can be inferred
about its behavior once inside a human host. Because the genomic content of coronaviruses,
which specifies the virus’s structure, is highly conserved, early genomic analysis provided a
significant head start in predicting viral pathogenesis. The pathogenesis of the virus offers
insights into symptomatology, transmission, and individual susceptibility. Additionally, prior
research into interactions between the human immune system and coronaviruses has identified
how these viruses can evade the immune system’s protective mechanisms. We also explore
systems-level research into the regulatory and proteomic effects of SARS-CoV-2 infection and
the immune response. Understanding the structure and behavior of the virus serves to
contextualize the many facets of the COVID-19 pandemic and can influence efforts to control
the virus and treat the disease.

Importance
COVID-19 involves a number of organ systems and can present with a wide range of
symptoms. Understanding how the virus infects epithelial cells, however, serves to contextualize
how these systems connect. Similarly, while the modes of viral transmission have been under
debate throughout much of 2020 and the beginning of 2021, the available research suggests
that these patterns are very similar to those seen in the closely related viruses SARS-CoV-1
and possibly MERS-CoV. Exploring the structure, phylogeny, and pathogenesis of the virus
therefore helps to guide interpretation of the broader impacts of the virus on the human body
and on human populations. For this reason, an in-depth exploration of viral mechanisms is
critical to a robust understanding of the COVID-19 pandemic.

Introduction
The current coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic, caused by the Severe acute
respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) virus, represents an acute global
health crisis. Symptoms of the disease can range from mild to severe or fatal [1] and can affect
a variety of organs and systems [2]. Outcomes of infection can include acute respiratory distress
(ARDS) and acute lung injury, as well as damage to other organ systems [2,3]. Understanding
the progression of the disease, including these diverse symptoms, depends on understanding
how the virus interacts with the host. Additionally, the fundamental biology of the virus can
provide insights into how it is transmitted among people, which can, in turn, inform efforts to
control its spread. As a result, a thorough understanding of the pathogenesis of SARS-CoV-2 is
a critical foundation on which to build an understanding of COVID-19 and the pandemic as a
whole.
The rapid identification and release of the genomic sequence of the virus in January 2020 [4]
provided early insight into the virus in a comparative genomic context. The viral genomic
sequence clusters with known coronaviruses (order Nidovirales, family Coronaviridae, subfamily
Orthocoronavirinae). Phylogenetic analysis of the coronaviruses reveals four major subclades,
each corresponding to a genus: the alpha, beta, gamma, and delta coronaviruses. Among them,
alpha- and betacoronaviruses infect mammalian species, gammacoronaviruses infect avian
species, and deltacoronaviruses infect both mammalian and avian species [5]. The novel virus
now known as SARS-CoV-2 was identified as a betacoronavirus belonging to the B lineage
based on phylogenetic analysis of a polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplicon fragment from
five patients along with the full genomic sequence [6]. This lineage also includes the Severe
acute respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus (SARS-CoV-1) that caused the 2002-2003
outbreak of Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS) in humans [6]. Because viral structure
and mechanisms of pathogenicity are highly conserved within the order, this phylogenetic
analysis provided a basis for forming hypotheses about how the virus interacts with hosts,
including which tissues, organs, and systems would be most susceptible to SARS-CoV-2
infection. Coronaviruses that infect humans (HCoV) are not common, but prior research into
other HCoV such as SARS-CoV-1 and Middle East respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus
(MERS-CoV), as well as other viruses infecting humans such as a variety of influenza species,
established a strong foundation that accelerated the pace of SARS-CoV-2 research.
Coronaviruses are large viruses that can be identified by their distinctive “crown-like” shape
(Figure 1). Their spherical virions are made from lipid envelopes ranging from 100 to 160
nanometers in which peplomers (protruding structures) of two to three spike (S) glycoproteins
are anchored, creating the crown [7,8]. These spikes, which are critical to both viral
pathogenesis and to the response by the host immune response, have been visualized using
cryo-electron microscopy [9]. Because they induce the human immune response, they are also
the target of many proposed therapeutic agents. Viral pathogenesis is typically broken down into
three major components: entry, replication, and spread [10]. However, in order to draw a more
complete picture of pathogenesis, it is also necessary to examine how infection manifests
clinically, identify systems-level interactions between the virus and the human body, and
consider the possible effects of variation or evolutionary change on pathogenesis and virulence.

Thus, clinical medicine and traditional biology are both important pieces of the puzzle of SARSCoV-2 presentation and pathogenesis.

Coronavirus Structure and Pathogenesis
Structure of Coronaviruses
Genome structure is highly conserved among coronaviruses, meaning that the relationship
between the SARS-CoV-2 genome and its pathogenesis can be inferred from prior research in
related viral species. The genomes of viruses in the Nidovirales order share several
fundamental characteristics. They are non-segmented, which means the viral genome is
contained in a single capsid, and are enveloped, which means that the genome and capsid are
encased by a lipid bilayer. Coronaviruses have large positive-sense RNA (ssRNA+) genomes
ranging from 27 to 32 kilobases in length [11,12]. The SARS-CoV-2 genome lies in the middle of
this range at 29,903 bp [12]. Genome organization is highly conserved within the order [11].
There are three major genomic regions: one containing the replicase gene, one containing the
genes encoding structural proteins, and interspersed accessory genes [11] (Figure 1). The
replicase gene comprises about two-thirds of the genome and consists of two open reading
frames that are translated with ribosomal frameshifting [11]. This polypeptide is then translated
into 16 non-structural proteins (nsp), except in gammacoronaviruses where nsp1 is absent, that
form replication machinery used to synthesize viral RNA [13]. The remaining third of the
genome encodes structural proteins, including the spike, membrane, envelope, and
nucleocapsid proteins. Additional accessory genes are sometimes present between these two
regions, depending on the species or strain. Much attention has been focused on the S protein,
which is a critical structure involved in cell entry.

Figure 1: Structure of SARS-CoV-2 capsid and genome. A) The genomic structure of
coronaviruses is highly conserved and includes three main regions. Open reading frames (ORF)
1a and 1b contain two polyproteins that encode the non-structural proteins (nsp). The nsp
include proteases such as RNA-dependent RNA Polymerase (RdRp). The last third of the
genome encodes structural proteins, including the spike (S), envelope (E), membrane (M) and
nucleocapsid (N) proteins. Accessory genes can also be interspersed throughout the genome
[11]. B) The physical structure of the coronavirus virion, including the components determined
by the conserved structural proteins S, E, M and N.

Pathogenic Mechanisms of Coronaviruses
While, like most viruses, it is possible that SARS-CoV-1 and SARS-CoV-2 can enter cells
through endocytosis, coronaviruses are also able to target cells for entry through fusion with the
plasma membrane [14,15]. This process is conserved among coronaviruses and is closely
associated with the content of their genomes. Cell entry proceeds in three steps: binding,
cleavage, and fusion. First, the viral spike protein binds to a host cell via a recognized receptor
or entry point. Coronaviruses can bind to a range of host receptors [16,17], with binding
conserved only at the genus level [5]. Viruses in the betacoronavirus genus, to which SARSCoV-2 belongs, are known to bind to the CEACAM1 protein, 5-N-acetyl-9-O-acetyl neuraminic
acid, and to the angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) [16]. SARS-CoV-2 has a high affinity
for human ACE2, which is expressed in the vascular epithelium, other epithelial cells, and
cardiovascular and renal tissues [18,19], as well as many others [20]. The binding process is

guided by the molecular structure of the spike protein, which is structured in three segments: an
ectodomain, a transmembrane anchor, and an intracellular tail [21]. The ectodomain forms the
crown-like structures on the viral membrane and contains two subdomains known as the S1 and
S2 subunits [22]. The S1 (N-terminal) domain forms the head of the crown and contains the
receptor binding motif, and the S2 (C-terminal) domain forms the stalk that supports the head
[22]. The S1 subunit guides the binding of the virus to the host cell, and the S2 subunit guides
the fusion process [21].
After the binding of the S1 subunit to an entry point, the spike protein is often cleaved at the S1S2 boundary by a host protease [23,24,25]. Similar to SARS-CoV-1, SARS-CoV-2 exhibits
redundancy in which host proteases can cleave the S protein [26]. Specifically, both
transmembrane protease serine protease-2 (TMPRSS2) and cathepsins B/L have been shown
to mediate SARS-CoV-2 S protein proteolytic priming, and small molecule inhibition of these
enzymes fully inhibited viral entry in vitro [26,27]. Proteolytic priming prepares the S protein for
fusion [24,25]. The two subunits remain bound by van der Waals forces, with the S1 subunit
stabilizing the S2 subunit during the membrane fusion process [23]. Electron microscopy
suggests that in some coronaviruses, including SARS-CoV-1 and MERS-CoV, a six-helix
bundle separates the two subunits in the postfusion conformation, and the unusual length of this
bundle facilitates membrane fusion through the release of additional energy [5]. Cleavage at a
second site within S2 by these same proteases activates S for fusion by inducing
conformational changes [23]. The viral membrane can then fuse with the endosomal membrane
to release the viral genome into the host cytoplasm. Once the virus enters a host cell, the
replicase gene is translated and assembled into the viral replicase complex. This complex then
synthesizes the double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) genome from the genomic ssRNA(+). The
dsRNA genome is transcribed and replicated to create viral mRNAs and new ssRNA(+)
genomes [11,28]. From there, the virus can spread into other cells. In this way, the genome of
SARS-CoV-2 provides insight into the pathogenic behavior of the virus.

Immune Evasion Strategies
Research in other HCoV provides some indication of how SARS-CoV-2 infection proceeds in
spite of the human immune response. By infecting the epithelium, viruses such as SARS-CoV-1
are known to bypass the physical barriers, such as skin and mucus, that comprise the immune
system’s first line of defense [29]. Once the virus infiltrates host cells, it is adept at evading
detection. CD163+ and CD68+ macrophage cells are especially crucial for the establishment of
SARS-CoV-1 in the body [29]. These cells most likely serve as viral reservoirs that help shield
SARS-CoV-1 from the innate immune response. According to a study on the viral dissemination
of SARS-CoV-1 in Chinese macaques, viral RNA could be detected in some monocytes
throughout the process of differentiation into dendritic cells [29]. This lack of active viral
replication allows SARS-CoV-1 to escape the innate immune response because reduced levels
of detectable viral RNA allow the virus to avoid both natural killer cells and Toll-like receptors
[29]. Even during replication, SARS-CoV-1 is able to mask its dsRNA genome from detection by
the immune system. Although dsRNA is a pathogen-associated molecular pattern that would
typically initiate a response from the innate immune system [30], in vitro analysis of nidoviruses
including SARS-CoV-1 suggests that these viruses can induce the development of doublemembrane vesicles that protect the dsRNA signature from being detected by the host immune

system [31]. This protective envelope can therefore insulate these coronaviruses from the
innate immune system’s detection mechanism [32].
HCoVs are also known to interfere with the host immune response, rather than just evade it. For
example, the virulence of SARS-CoV-2 is increased by nsp1, which can suppress host gene
expression by stalling mRNA translation and inducing endonucleolytic cleavage and mRNA
degradation [33]. SARS-CoV-1 also evades the immune response by interfering with type I IFN
induction signaling, which is a mechanism that leads to cellular resistance to viral infections.
SARS-CoV-1 employs methods such as ubiquitination and degradation of RNA sensor adaptor
molecules MAVS and TRAF3/6 [34]. Also, MERS-CoV downregulates antigen presentation via
MHC class I and MHC class II, which leads to a reduction in T cell activation [34]. These
evasion mechanisms, in turn, can facilitate systemic infection. Coronaviruses such as SARSCoV-1 are also able to evade the humoral immune response through other mechanisms, such
as inhibiting certain cytokine pathways or down-regulating antigen presentation by the cells [31].

Host Cell Susceptibility
ACE2 and TMPRSS2 have been identified as the primary entry portal and as a critical protease,
respectively, in facilitating the entry of SARS-CoV-1 and SARS-CoV-2 into a target cell
[9,26,35,36,37]. This finding has led to a hypothesized role for ACE2 and TMPRSS2 expression
in determining which cells, tissues, and organs are most likely to be infected by SARS-CoV-2.
ACE2 is expressed in numerous organs, such as the heart, kidney, and intestine, but it is most
prominently expressed in alveolar epithelial cells; this pattern of expression is expected to
contribute to the virus’ association with lung pathology [18,38,39] as well as that of SARS [40].
Clinical investigations of COVID-19 patients have detected SARS-CoV-2 transcripts in
bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) (93% of specimens), sputum (72%), nasal swabs (63%),
fibrobronchoscopy brush biopsies (46%), pharyngeal swabs (32%), feces (29%), and blood
(1%) [41]. Two studies reported that SARS-CoV-2 could not be detected in urine specimens
[41,42]; however, a third study identified four urine samples (out of 58) that were positive for
SARS-CoV-2 nucleic acids [43]. Although respiratory failure remains the leading cause of death
for COVID-19 patients [44], SARS-CoV-2 infection can damage many other organ systems
including the heart [45], kidneys [46,47], liver [48], and gastrointestinal tract [49,50]. As it
becomes clear that SARS-CoV-2 infection can damage multiple organs, the scientific
community is pursuing multiple avenues of investigation in order to build a consensus about
how the virus affects the human body.

Clinical Presentation of COVID-19
SARS-CoV-2 pathogenesis is closely linked with the clinical presentation of the COVID-19
disease. Reports have described diverse symptom profiles associated with COVID-19, with a
great deal of variability both within and between institutions and regions. A large study from
Wuhan, China conducted early in the pandemic identified fever and cough as the two most
common symptoms that patients reported at hospital admission [51], while a retrospective study
in China described the clinical presentations of patients infected with SARS-CoV-2 as including
lower respiratory tract infection with fever, dry cough, and dyspnea (shortness of breath) [52].
This study [52] noted that upper respiratory tract symptoms were less common, suggesting that

the virus preferentially targets cells located in the lower respiratory tract. However, data from the
New York City region [53,54] showed variable rates of fever as a presenting symptom,
suggesting that symptoms may not be consistent across individuals. For example, even within
New York City, one study [53] identified low oxygen saturation (<90% without the use of
supplemental oxygen or ventilation support) in 20.4% of patients upon presentation, with fever
being present in 30.7%, while another study [51] reported cough (79.4%), fever (77.1%), and
dyspnea (56.5%) as the as the most common presenting symptoms; both of these studies
considered only hospitalized patients. A later study reported radiographic findings such as
ground-glass opacity and bilateral patchy shadowing in the lungs of many hospitalized patients,
with most COVID-19 patients having lymphocytopenia, or low levels of lymphocytes (a type of
white blood cell) [51]. Patients may also experience loss of smell, myalgias (muscle aches),
fatigue, or headache. Gastrointestinal symptoms can also present [55], and the CDC includes
nausea and vomiting, as well congestion and runny nose, on its list of symptoms consistent with
COVID-19 [1]. A preprint using data from an app-based survey of 500,000 individuals in the US
found that among those tested for SARS-CoV-2, a loss of taste or smell, fever, and a cough
were significant predictors of a positive test result [56]. It is important to note that in this study,
the predictive value of symptoms may be underestimated if they are not specific to COVID-19.
This underestimation could occur because the outcome measured was a positive, as opposed
to a negative, COVID-19 test result, meaning an association would be more easily identified for
symptoms that were primarily or exclusively found with COVID-19. At the time the surveys were
conducted, due to limits in US testing infrastructure, respondents typically needed to have some
symptoms known to be specific to COVID-19 in order to qualify for testing. Widespread testing
of asymptomatic individuals may therefore provide additional insight into the range of symptoms
associated with COVID-19.
Consistent with the wide range of symptoms observed and the pathogenic mechanisms
described above, COVID-19 can affect diverse body systems in addition to causing respiratory
problems [57]. For example, COVID-19 can lead to acute kidney injury, especially in patients
with severe respiratory symptoms or certain preexisting conditions [58]. It can also cause
neurological complications [59,60], potentially including stroke, seizures or meningitis [61,62]. In
fact, autopsy samples suggest that SARS-CoV-2 may be able to enter the central nervous
system via the neural–mucosal interface [63]. COVID-19 has also been associated with an
increased incidence of large vessel stroke, particularly in patients under the age of 40 [64], and
other thrombotic events including pulmonary embolism and deep vein thrombosis [65]. The
mechanism behind these complications has been suggested to be related to coagulopathy, with
reports indicating the presence of antiphospholipid antibodies [66] and elevated levels of ddimer and fibrinogen degradation products in deceased patients [67]. Other viral infections have
been associated with coagulation defects and changes to the coagulation cascade; notably,
SARS was also found to lead to disseminated intravascular coagulation and was associated
with both pulmonary embolism and deep vein thrombosis [68]. The mechanism behind these
insults has been suggested to be related to inflammation-induced increases in the von
Willebrand factor clotting protein, leading to a pro-coagulative state [68]. Abnormal clotting
(thromboinflammation or coagulopathy) has been increasingly discussed recently as a possible
key mechanism in many cases of severe COVID-19, and may be associated with the high ddimer levels often observed in severe cases [69,70,71]. This excessive clotting in lung

capillaries has been suggested to be related to a dysregulated activation of the complement
system, part of the innate immune system [72,73].

Cytokine Release Syndrome
Symptoms of a disease can be caused by a pathogen, but they can also be caused by the
immune system’s reaction to the pathogen. A dysregulated immune response can cause
significant damage to the host [74,75,76]. The inflammatory response has received particular
attention for its role in both a healthy response to infection and a pathogenic one. Inflammation
is one of the most visible components of the immune response, as it is responsible for the
hallmarks of injury, such as pain, heat, and swelling [77]. In response to injury or to signaling by
pattern recognition receptors indicating the detection of a molecular pattern associated with a
pathogen or foreign body, the immune system stimulates leukocytes that travel to the site of the
threat, where they then produce cytokines [77]. Cytokines are a diverse group of small proteins
that play an important role in intercellular signaling [78]. Cytokines can be both pro- and antiinflammatory, which means they can either stimulate or inhibit the production of additional
cytokines [78,79]. Some notable pro-inflammatory cytokines include the interleukins IL-1β and
IL-6 and tumor necrosis factor α (TNF-α) [79]. Anti-inflammatory cytokines play an
immunoregulatory role complementary to the cascading effect of pro-inflammatory cytokines
[78,79]. A number of interleukins and interferons play anti-inflammatory roles, and receptors or
receptor antagonists for inflammatory cytokines are also important for regulating inflammation
[79]. IL-10 is an anti-inflammatory cytokine of particular note because it regulates the expression
of TNF-α, IL-1, and IL-6 [79]. When the pro- and anti-inflammatory responses are both
commensurate with the threat posed, the immune system drives a shift back to homeostasis
[80]. However, when the responses are disproportionate, the cytokine response can become
dysregulated. Too low of an inflammatory response will not eliminate the immune threat [80]. In
contrast, if the response is dysregulated towards excessive pro-inflammatory cytokine activity,
inflammation can cascade [81] and cause cell damage, among other problems [77]. Elevated
levels of inflammation over the long-term are associated with many chronic health conditions,
including type 2 diabetes, dementia and Alzheimer’s, and arthritis [82]. On a shorter timescale,
dysregulated systemic inflammation can cause sepsis, which can lead to multi-organ failure and
death [78,83].
Cytokines have been investigated for their role in the immune response to lung infections long
before the COVID-19 pandemic. Dysregulation of the inflammatory response, including elevated
levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines, is found in patients with ARDS, which is a severe condition
that can arise from pneumonia, SARS, and COVID-19 [81]. One study of patients with and at
risk for ARDS, specifically those who were intubated for medical ventilation, found that shortly
after the onset of ARDS, anti-inflammatory cytokine concentration in BALF increased relative to
the concentration of pro-inflammatory cytokines [84]. The results suggest that an increase in
pro-inflammatory cytokines such as IL-6 may signal the onset of ARDS, but recovery depends
on an increased anti-inflammatory response [84]. However, patients with severe ARDS were
excluded from this study. Acute phase response to an infection can also cause damage to the
capillary endothelium, allowing leaks that disrupt the balance between pro-inflammatory
cytokines and their regulators [84]. Hyperactivity of the pro-inflammatory response due to lung
infection is commonly associated with acute lung injury and more rarely with the more severe

manifestation, ARDS [78]. The heightened inflammatory response in the lungs can also serve
as a source for systemic inflammation, or sepsis, and potentially multi-organ failure [78]. The
shift from local to systemic inflammation is a phenomenon often referred to broadly as a
cytokine storm [78] or, more precisely, as cytokine release syndrome [85]. Sepsis is a known
possible complication of pneumonia, and in an analysis of over 1,400 US pneumonia patients,
IL-6, tumor necrosis factor (TNF), and IL-10 were found to be elevated at intake in patients who
developed severe sepsis and/or ultimately deceased [86]. However, unlike the study analyzing
pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokines in ARDS patients [84], this study reported that unbalanced
pro-/anti-inflammatory cytokine profiles were rare. This discrepancy could be related to the fact
that the sepsis study measured only three cytokines. Regardless of variation in the antiinflammatory response, prior work has therefore made it clear that pulmonary infection and
injury are associated with systemic inflammation and with sepsis. While IL-6 is a biomarker
sometimes used to assess cytokine storm activity in sepsis [78], the relationship between
cytokine profiles and the risks associated with sepsis may be more complex. In fact, although
IL-6 has traditionally been considered pro-inflammatory, its pleiotropic effects via both classical
and trans-signaling allow it to play an integral role in both the inflammatory and antiinflammatory responses [87], leading it to be associated with both healthy and pathological
responses to viral threat [88].
The inflammatory response was identified early on as a potential driver of COVID-19 outcomes
due to existing research in SARS and emerging research in COVID-19. In addition to the known
role of cytokines in ARDS and lung infection more broadly, immunohistological analysis at
autopsy of patients deceased from SARS revealed that ACE2-expressing cells that were
infected by SARS-CoV-1 showed elevated expression of IL-6, IL-1β, and TNF-α [89]. Similarly,
the introduction of the S protein from SARS-CoV-1 to mouse macrophages was found to
increase production of IL-6 and TNF-α [90]. For SARS-CoV-2 infection leading to COVID-19,
early reports described a cytokine storm syndrome-like response in patients with particularly
severe infections [38,91,92]. Among patients hospitalized with COVID-19 in Wuhan, China, 112
out of 191 (59%) developed sepsis, including all 54 of the non-survivors [52]. However, the
argument has been made that while the cytokine levels observed in COVID-19 patients fall
outside of the normal range, they are not as high as typically found in patients with ARDS [93].
Regardless, inflammation has received significant interest both in regards to the pathology of
COVID-19 as well as potential avenues for treatment, as the relationship between the cytokine
storm and the pathophysiology of COVID-19 has led to the suggestion that a number of
immunomodulatory pharmaceutical interventions could hold therapeutic value for the treatment
of COVID-19 [94].

Pediatric Presentation
The presentation of COVID-19 infection can vary greatly among pediatric patients and, in some
cases, manifests in distinct ways from COVID-19 in adults. Evidence suggests that while
children and adolescents tend to have mostly asymptomatic infections, those that are
symptomatic typically exhibit a mild illness [95,96,97,98]. One review examined symptoms
reported in 17 studies of children infected with COVID-19 during the early months of the COVID19 epidemic in China and one study from Singapore [99]. In the more than a thousand cases
described, the most common reports were for mild symptoms such as fever, dry cough, fatigue,

nasal congestion and/or runny nose, while three children were reported to be asymptomatic.
Severe lower respiratory infection was described in only one of the pediatric cases reviewed.
Gastrointestinal symptoms such as vomiting or diarrhea were occasionally reported. Radiologic
findings were not always reported in the case studies reviewed, but when they were mentioned
they included bronchial thickening, ground-glass opacities, and/or inflammatory lesions [99].
Neurological symptoms have also been reported [100].
These analyses indicate that most pediatric cases of COVID-19 are not severe. Indeed, it is
estimated that less than 1% of pediatric cases result in critical illness [97,101]. However, serious
complications and, in rare cases, deaths have occurred [102]. Of particular interest, children
have occasionally experienced a serious inflammatory syndrome, multisystem inflammatory
syndrome in children (MIS-C), following COVID-19 infection. This syndrome is similar in some
respects to Kawasaki disease, including Kawasaki disease shock syndrome [103,104,105] and
is thought to be a distinct clinical manifestation of SARS-CoV-2 due to its distinct cytokine profile
and the presence of burr cells in peripheral blood smears [106,107]. MIS-C has been associated
with heart failure in some cases [108]. One case study [109] described an adult who appeared
to show symptoms similar to MIS-C after exposure to COVID-19, but cautioned against broad
conclusions; a second possible adult case has also been reported [110]. The presentation of
SARS-CoV-2 infection is therefore likely to be largely distinct between adult and pediatric
populations.

Systems-Level Effects
Systems biology provides a cross-disciplinary analytical paradigm through which the host
response to an infection can be analyzed. This field integrates the “omics” fields (genomics,
transcriptomics, proteomics, metabolomics, etc.) using bioinformatics and other computational
approaches. Over the last decade, systems biology approaches have been used widely to study
the pathogenesis of diverse types of life-threatening acute and chronic infectious diseases
[111]. Omics-based studies have also provided meaningful information regarding host immune
responses and surrogate protein markers in several viral, bacterial and protozoan infections
[112]. Though the complex pathogenesis and clinical manifestations of SARS-CoV-2 infection
are not yet fully understood, omics technologies offer the opportunity for discovery-driven
analysis of biological changes associated with SARS-CoV-2 infection. For example, previous
studies suggest that infection by coronaviruses, such as SARS-CoV-1 and MERS-CoV, as well
as other viruses, is associated with the upregulation of ACE2. In several preliminary assays and
an analysis of microarray data, ACE2 expression was reported to be significantly upregulated
following infection of human embryonic kidney cells and human airway epithelial cells [38]. This
study also reported that direct stimulation with inflammatory cytokines such as type I interferons
(e.g., IFNβ) resulted in the upregulation of ACE2 in human bronchial epithelial cells, with treated
groups showing four-fold higher ACE2 expression than control groups at 18 hours posttreatment [38]. While it is still unclear whether SARS-CoV-2 facilitates the positive regulation of
its own transmission between host cells, the host immune response itself likely plays a key role
in mediating infection-associated pathologies. For this reason, the application of omics
technologies to the process of characterizing the host response is expected to provide novel
insights into how hosts respond to SARS-CoV-2 infection and how these changes might
influence COVID-19 outcomes.

Transcriptomics
In addition to the study described above [38], two other studies have profiled expression
following SARS-CoV-2 infection using human cell lines. The first study [113] compared
transcriptional responses to SARS-CoV-2 and to other respiratory viruses, including MERSCoV, SARS-CoV, Human parainfluenza virus 3, Respiratory syncytial virus, and Influenza A
virus. The responses of three human cell lines were analyzed: A549 (adenocarcinomic human
alveolar basal epithelial cells), Calu-3 (human airway epithelial cells derived from human
bronchial submucosal glands), and MRC-5 (human fetal lung fibroblast cells). As the viral entry
portal ACE2 has low expression in A549 cells, these cells were supplemented with adenovirusbased vectors expressing either mCherry (a fluorescent protein used as a control) or ACE2
(A549-ACE2). The authors also measured host transcriptional responses to SARS-CoV-2 in
primary normal human bronchial epithelial cells (HBEC or NHBE cells), nasal washes from an
animal model (ferret), and lung samples from two COVID-19 patients. The transcriptional
response differed between the COVID-19 infected cells and the cells infected by other viruses,
with changes in differential expression specific to each infection type. In the hosts where SARSCoV-2 was able to replicate efficiently, differential expression analysis revealed that the
transcriptional response was significantly different from the response to all of the other viruses
tested. A unique pro-inflammatory cytokine signature associated with SARS-CoV-2 was present
in cells exposed to both high and low doses of the virus, with the cytokines IL-6 and IL1RA
uniquely elevated in response to SARS-CoV-2 relative to other viruses. However, the A549ACE2 cells showed significant IFN-I or IFN-III expression when exposed to high, but not low,
doses of SARS-CoV-2. This finding suggests that IFN induction is dependent on the extent of
exposure. Similarly, in cells from the NHBE line, ferrets, and COVID-19 patients, chemokine
signaling was significantly enriched, but there was no significant induction of IFN-I or IFN-III.
Together, these results suggest that SARS-CoV-2 induces a limited antiviral state with low IFN-I
or IFN-III expression and a moderate IFN-stimulated gene response, in contrast to other
viruses. Other respiratory viruses have been found to encode antagonists to the IFN response.
The analysis of SARS-CoV-2 suggested that this transcriptional state was specific to cells
expressing ACE2, as it was not observed in cells lacking expression of this protein except with
ACE2 supplementation and at very high (10-fold increase) level of SARS-CoV-2 exposure. This
hypothesis was further supported by a recent study [114] that showed that the SARS-CoV-2
ORF3b gene suppresses IFNB1 promoter activity (IFN-I induction) more efficiently than the
SARS-CoV-1 ORF3b gene. Taken together, these findings suggest that a unique cytokine
profile is associated with the response to the SARS-CoV-2 virus, and that this response differs
depending on the extent of exposure.
Another study [115] analyzed dynamic transcriptional responses to SARS-CoV-2 and SARSCoV-1. They characterized the response of three human cell lines, H1299 (human non-small
cell lung carcinoma cell line), Calu-3, and Caco-2 (human epithelial colorectal adenocarcinoma
cell line), at 4 to 36 hours post infection. Using poly(A) bulk RNA-seq, the authors found
negligible susceptibility of H1299 cells (< 0.08 viral read percentage of total reads) compared to
Caco-2 and Calu-3 cells (>10% of viral reads). This finding suggests that the risk of infection
varies among cell types, and that cell type could influence which hosts are more or less
susceptible. Based on visual inspection of microscopy images alongside transcriptional profiling,
the authors also showed distinct responses among the host cell lines evaluated. In contrast to

Caco-2, Calu-3 cells infected with SARS-CoV-2 showed signs of impaired growth and cell death
at 24 hours post infection, as well as moderate IFN induction with a strong up-regulation of IFNstimulated genes. Interestingly, the results were similar to those reported in Calu-3 cells
exposed to much higher levels of SARS-CoV-2 [113], as described above. This finding suggests
that IFN induction in Calu-3 cells is not dependent on the level of exposure, in contrast to A549ACE2 cells. The discrepancy could be explained by the observations that Calu-3 cells are highly
susceptible to SARS-CoV-2 and show rapid viral replication [27], whereas A549 cells are
incompatible with SARS-CoV-2 infection [116]. This discrepancy raises the concern that in vitro
models may vary in their similarity to the human response, underscoring the importance of
follow-up studies in additional models.

Proteomics
One early proteomics study investigated changes associated with in vitro SARS-CoV-2 infection
using Caco-2 cells [117]. This study reported that SARS-CoV-2 induced alterations in multiple
vital physiological pathways, including translation, splicing, carbon metabolism and nucleic acid
metabolism in the host cells. Another area of interest is whether SARS-CoV-2 is likely to induce
similar changes to other HCoV. For example, because of the high level of sequence homology
between SARS-CoV-2 and SARS-CoV-1, it has been hypothesized that sera from convalescent
SARS-CoV-1 patients might show some efficacy in cross-neutralizing SARS-CoV-2-S-driven
entry [26]. However, despite the high level of sequence homology, certain protein structures
might be immunologically distinct, which would be likely to prohibit effective cross-neutralization
across different SARS species [118]. Consequently, proteomic analyses of SARS-CoV-1 might
also provide some essential information regarding the new pathogen [119,120].
Considering the paucity of omics-level big data sets for SARS-CoV-2 currently available,
existing data hubs that contain information for other coronaviruses such as UniProt [121], NCBI
Genome Database [122], The Immune Epitope Database and Analysis Resource [123], and The
Virus Pathogen Resource [124] will serve as useful resources for comparative bioinformatics
research of SARS-CoV-2. Using such databases, the systems-level reconstruction of proteinprotein interaction networks will enable the generation of hypotheses about the mechanism of
action of SARS-CoV-2 and suggest potential drug targets. In an initial study [125], 26 of the 29
SARS-CoV-2 proteins were cloned and expressed in HEK293T kidney cells, allowing for the
identification of 332 high-confidence human proteins interacting with them. Notably, this study
suggested that SARS-CoV-2 interacts with innate immunity pathways. Ranking pathogens by
the similarity between their interactomes and that of SARS-CoV-2 suggested West Nile virus,
Mycobacterium tuberculosis, and human papillomavirus infections as the top three hits.
Therefore, given the lung symptoms associated with COVID-19, the Mycobacterium
tuberculosis host-pathogen interactome in particular might provide new insights to the
mechanism of SARS-CoV-2 infection. Additionally, it was suggested that the envelope protein,
E, could disrupt host bromodomain-containing proteins, i.e., BRD2 and BRD4, that bind to
histones, and the spike protein could likely intervene in viral fusion by modulating the GOLGA7ZDHHC5 acyl-transferase complex to increase palmitoylation, which is a post-translational
modification that affects how proteins interact with membranes [126].

Another study [127] used patient-derived peripheral blood mononuclear cells to identify 251 host
proteins targeted by SARS-CoV-2. This study also reported that more than 200 host proteins
were disrupted following infection. In particular, a network analysis showed that nsp9 and nsp10
interacted with NF-Kappa-B-Repressing Factor, which encodes a transcriptional repressor that
mediates repression of genes responsive to Nuclear Factor kappa-light-chain-enhancer of
activated B-cells. These genes are important to pro-, and potentially also anti-, inflammatory
signaling [128]. This finding could explain the exacerbation of the immune response that shapes
the pathology and the high cytokine levels characteristic of COVID-19, possibly due to the
chemotaxis of neutrophils mediated by IL-8 and IL-6. Finally, it was suggested [129] that the E
protein of both SARS-CoV-1 and SARS-CoV-2 has a conserved Bcl-2 Homology 3-like motif,
which could inhibit anti-apoptosis proteins, e.g., BCL2, and trigger the apoptosis of T cells.
Several compounds are known to disrupt the host-pathogen protein interactome, largely through
the inhibition of host proteins. Therefore, this research identifies candidate targets for
intervention and suggests that drugs modulating protein-level interactions between virus and
host could be relevant to treating COVID-19. By revealing which genes are perturbed during
SARS-CoV-2 infection, proteomics-based analyses can thus provide novel insights into hostvirus interaction and serve to generate new avenues of investigation for therapeutics.

Viral Virulence
Like that of SARS-CoV-1, the entry of SARS-CoV-2 into host cells is mediated by interactions
between the viral spike glycoprotein, S, and human ACE2 (hACE2)
[23,26,130,131,132,133,134,135]. Differences in how the S proteins of the two viruses interact
with hACE2 could partially account for the increased transmissibility of SARS-CoV-2. Recent
studies have reported conflicting binding constants for the S-hACE2 interaction, though they
have agreed that the SARS-CoV-2 S protein binds with equal, if not greater, affinity than the
SARS-CoV-1 S protein does [9,23,133]. The C-terminal domain of the SARS-CoV-2 S protein in
particular was identified as the key region of the virus that interacts with hACE2, and the crystal
structure of the C-terminal domain of the SARS-CoV-2 S protein in complex with hACE2 reveals
stronger interaction and a higher affinity for receptor binding than that of SARS-CoV-1 [134].
Among the 14 key binding residues identified in the SARS-CoV-1 S protein, eight are conserved
in SARS-CoV-2, and the remaining six are semi-conservatively substituted, potentially
explaining variation in binding affinity [23,133]. Recent crystal structures have shown that the
receptor binding domain (RBD) of the SARS-CoV-2 S protein, like that of other coronaviruses,
undergoes stochastic hinge-like movement that flips it from a “closed” conformation, in which
key binding residues are hidden at the interface between protomers, to an “open” one [9,23].
Because the RBD plays such a critical role in viral entry, blocking its interaction with ACE2 could
represent a promising therapeutic approach. Nevertheless, despite the high structural homology
between the SARS-CoV-2 RBD and that of SARS-CoV-1, monoclonal antibodies targeting
SARS-CoV-1 RBD failed to bind to SARS-CoV-2-RBD [9]. However, in early research, sera
from convalescent SARS patients were found to inhibit SARS-CoV-2 viral entry in vitro, albeit
with lower efficiency than it inhibited SARS-CoV-1 [26].
Comparative genomic analysis reveals that several regions of the coronavirus genome are likely
critical to virulence. The S1 domain of the spike protein, which contains the receptor binding
motif, evolves more rapidly than S’s S2 domain [16,17]. However, even within the S1 domain,

some regions are more conserved than others, with the receptors in S1’s N-terminal domain
(S1-NTD) evolving more rapidly than those in its C-terminal domain (S1-CTD) [17]. Both S1NTD and S1-CTD are involved in receptor binding and can function as RBDs to bind proteins
and sugars [16], but RBDs in the S1-NTD typically bind to sugars, while those in the S1-CTD
recognize protein receptors [5]. Viral receptors show higher affinity with protein receptors than
sugar receptors [5], which suggests that positive selection on or relaxed conservation of the S1NTD might reduce the risk of a deleterious mutation that would prevent binding. The SARSCoV-2 S protein also contains an RRAR furin recognition site at the S1/S2 junction [9,23],
setting it apart from both bat coronavirus RaTG13, with which it shares 96% genome sequence
identity, and SARS-CoV-1 [136]. Such furin cleavage sites are commonly found in highly virulent
influenza viruses, and as such may contribute to the heightened pathogenicity of SARS-CoV-2
[137,138]. The ongoing evolution of the spike protein can be seen from the genomic data. For
example, the mutation D614G became dominant by the end of May 2020, soon after its initial
appearance in mid-March [139,140], and a variant carrying two mutations (N501Y and 69–
70del) that was first observed in the UK in October 2020 [141] has quickly spread around the
world [142,143]. Effective cell entry is a critical component to pathogenesis and therefore an
important process to understand when examining possible therapeutics.

Mechanism of Transmission
Once a human host is infected with a virus, person-to-person viral transmission can occur
through several possible mechanisms. The primary mechanisms associated with respiratory
viruses are contact, droplet, and aerosol transmission [144]. Contact transmission can occur
through either contact with a contagious person or contact with active viral particles on a
contaminated surface [145]. This latter mode of transmission is also called fomite transmission
[146]. Viral particles can enter the body if they then come in contact with the oral, nasal, eye, or
other mucus membranes [145]. Droplet transmission occurs when a contagious individual
sneezes, coughs, or exhales and produces respiratory droplets that can contain a large number
of viral particles [145]. Contact with these droplets can occur through direct exposure to the
droplets, such as breathing in droplets produced by a sneeze [145]. The droplets can also
potentially settle on a surface and contribute to fomite transmission [145]. Aerosol transmission
refers to much smaller particles (less than 5 micrometers) that are also produced by sneezing,
coughing, or exhaling [144,145]. The small size of these particles allows them to remain
suspended over a longer period of time and potentially to be moved by air currents [145].
Additionally, viral particles deposited on surfaces via large respiratory droplets can also later be
aerosolized [145]. Droplet and/or contact transmission are both well-accepted modes of
transmission for many viruses associated with common human illnesses, including influenza
and rhinovirus [145]. The extent to which aerosol transmission contributes to the spread of
respiratory viruses is less clear. In influenza A, for example, viral particles can be detected in
aerosols produced by infected individuals, but the extent to which these particles drive the
spread of influenza A infection remains under debate [144,145,147,148,149]. Regardless of its
role in the spread of influenza A, however, aerosol transmission likely played a role in outbreaks
such as the 1918 Spanish Influenza (H1N1) and 2009 “swine flu” (pH1N1) [149]. Contact,
droplet, and aerosol transmission are therefore all worth evaluating when considering possible
modes of transmission for a respiratory virus like SARS-CoV-2.

All three of these mechanisms have been identified as possible contributors to the transmission
of HCoVs [145], including the highly pathogenic coronaviruses SARS-CoV-1 and MERS-CoV
[150,151]. Transmission of SARS-CoV-1 is thought to proceed primarily through droplet
transmission, but aerosol transmission is also considered possible [145], and fomite
transmission may have also played an important role in some outbreaks [152]. Similarly, the
primary mechanism of MERS transmission is thought to be droplets because inter-individual
transmission appears to be associated with close interpersonal contact (e.g., household or
healthcare settings), but aerosolized particles of the MERS virus have been reported to persist
much more robustly than influenza A under a range of environmental conditions [153,154].
While droplet-based and contact transmission were initially put forward as the greatest concern
for the spread of SARS-CoV-2 [155], as additional information has emerged, the possibility of
aerosol transmission has also been raised [156,157,158]. For example, the detection of SARSCoV-2 viral particles in air samples taken from hospitals treating COVID-19 patients led to the
concern that the virus could be spreading via aerosols [159]. The stability of the virus both in
aerosols and on a variety of surfaces appeared similar to that of SARS-CoV-1 [157]. However,
while the possibility of aerosol transmission seems plausible, the evidence suggests that droplet
transmission is the dominant mechanism driving the spread of the virus [160], and the risk of
fomite transmission under real-world conditions is likely to be substantially lower than the
conditions used for experimental analyses [161]. These mechanisms may differ in their
relevance to different types of transmission events, such as transmission within households,
nosocomial transmissions, and transmission in indoor versus outdoor spaces.

Symptoms and Viral Spread
Other aspects of pathogenesis are also important to understanding how the virus spreads,
especially the relationship between symptoms, viral shedding, and contagiousness. Symptoms
associated with reported cases of COVID-19 range from mild to severe [1], but some individuals
who contract COVID-19 remain asymptomatic throughout the duration of the illness [162]. The
incubation period, or the time period between exposure and the onset of symptoms, has been
estimated at five to eight days, with means of 4.91 (95% confidence interval (CI) 4.35-5.69) and
7.54 (95% CI 6.76-8.56) reported in two different Asian cities and a median of 5 (IQR 1 to 6)
reported in a small number of patients in a Beijing hospital [163,164]. However, the exact
relationship between contagiousness and viral shedding remains unclear. Estimates suggest
that viral shedding can, in some cases, begin as early as 12.3 days (95% CI 5.9-17.0) before
the onset of symptoms, although this was found to be very rare, with less than 0.1% of
transmission events occurring 7 or more days before symptom onset [165]. Transmissibility
appeared to peak around the onset of symptoms (95% CI -0.9 - 0.9 days), and only 44% (95%
CI 30–57%) of transmission events were estimated to occur from presymptomatic contacts
[165]. As these trends became apparent, concerns arose due to the potential for individuals who
did not yet show symptoms to transmit the virus [166]. Recovered individuals may also be able
to transmit the virus after their symptoms cease. Estimates of the communicable period based
on twenty-four individuals who tested positive for SARS-CoV-2 prior to or without developing
symptoms estimated that individuals may be contagious for one to twenty-one days, but they
note that this estimate may be low [162]. In an early study, viral nucleic acids were reported to
remain at observable levels in the respiratory specimens of recovering hospitalized COVID-19
patients for a median of 20 days and with a maximum observed duration through 37 days, when

data collection for the study ceased [52]. As more estimates of the duration of viral shedding are
released, they are beginning to converge around approximately three weeks from first positive
PCR test and/or onset of symptoms (which, if present, are usually identified within three days of
the initial PCR test). For example, in later studies, viral shedding was reported for up to 28 days
following symptom onset [167] and for one to 24 days from first positive PCR test, with a median
of 12 days [42]. On the other hand, almost 70% of patients were reported to still have symptoms
at the time that viral shedding ceased, although all symptoms reduced in prevalence between
onset and cessation of viral shedding [168]. The median time that elapsed between the onset of
symptoms and cessation of viral RNA shedding was 23 days and between first positive PCR
test and cessation of viral shedding was 17 days [168]. The fact that this study reported
symptom onset to predate the first positive PCR test by an average of three days, however,
suggests that there may be some methodological differences between it and related studies.
Furthermore, an analysis of residents of a nursing home with a known SARS-CoV-2 case
measured similar viral load in residents who were asymptomatic regardless of whether they
later developed symptoms, and the load in the asymptomatic residents was comparable to that
of residents who displayed either typical of atypical symptoms [169]. Taken together, these
results suggest that the presence or absence of symptoms are not reliable predictors of viral
shedding or of SARS-CoV-2 status (e.g, [170]). However, it should be noted that viral shedding
is not necessarily a robust indicator of contagiousness. The risk of spreading the infection was
low after ten days from the onset of symptoms, as viral load in sputum was found to be unlikely
to pose a significant risk based on efforts to culture samples in vitro [167]. The relationship
between symptoms, detectable levels of the virus, and risk of viral spread is therefore complex.
The extent to which asymptomatic or presymptomatic individuals are able to transmit SARSCoV-2 has been a question of high scientific and community interest. Early reports (February
and March 2020) described transmission from presymptomatic SARS-CoV-2-positive individuals
to close family contacts [171,172]. One of these reports [172] also included a description of an
individual who tested positive for SARS-CoV-2 but never developed symptoms. Later analyses
also sought to estimate the proportion of infections that could be traced back to a
presymptomatic or asymptomatic individual (e.g., [173]). Estimates of the proportion of
individuals with asymptomatic infections have varied widely. The proportion of asymptomatic
individuals on board the Diamond Princess cruise ship, which was the site of an early COVID-19
outbreak, was estimated at 17.9% [174]. In contrast, a model using the prevalence of antibodies
among residents of Wuhan, China estimated a much higher rate of asymptomatic cases, at
approximately 7 in 8, or 87.5% [175]. An analysis of the populations of care homes in London
found that, among the residents (median age 85), the rate of asymptomatic infection was
43.8%, and among the caretakers (median age 47), the rate was 49.1% [176]. The duration of
viral shedding may also be longer in individuals with asymptomatic cases of COVID-19
compared to those who do show symptoms [177]. As a result, the potential for individuals who
do not know they have COVID-19 to spread the virus raises significant concerns. In Singapore
and Tianjin, two cities studied to estimate incubation period, an estimated 40-50% and 60-80%
of cases, respectively, were considered to be caused by contact with asymptomatic individuals
[163]. An analysis of viral spread in the Italian town of Vo’, which was the site of an early
COVID-19 outbreak, revealed that 42.5% of cases were asymptomatic and that the rate was
similar across age groups [178]. The argument was thus made that the town’s lockdown was
imperative for controlling the spread of COVID-19 because it isolated asymptomatic individuals.

While more models are likely to emerge to better explore the effect of asymptomatic individuals
on SARS-CoV-2 transmission, these results suggest that strategies for identifying and
containing asymptomatic but contagious individuals are important for managing community
spread.

Estimating the Fatality Rate
Estimating the occurrence of asymptomatic and mild COVID-19 cases is important to identifying
the mortality rate associated with COVID-19. The mortality rate of greatest interest would be the
total number of fatalities as a fraction of the total number of people infected. One commonly
reported metric is the case fatality rate (CFR), which compares the number of COVID-19 related
deaths to the number of confirmed or suspected cases. However, in locations without universal
testing protocols, it is impossible to identify all infected individuals because so many
asymptomatic or mild cases go undetected. Therefore, a more informative metric is the infection
fatality rate (IFR), which compares the known deaths to the estimated number of cases. It thus
requires the same numerator as CFR, but divides by an approximation of the total number of
cases rather than only the observed/suspected cases. IFR varies regionally, with some
locations observed to have IFRs as low as 0.17% while others are as high as 1.7% [179].
Estimates of CFR at the national and continental level and IFR at the content level is maintained
by the Centre for Evidence-Based Medicine [180]. Several meta-analyses have also sought to
estimate IFR at the global scale. These estimates have varied; one peer-reviewed study
aggregated data from 24 other studies and estimated IFR at 0.68% (95% CI 0.53%–0.82%), but
a preprint that aggregated data from 139 countries calculated a global IFR of 1.04% (95% CI
0.77%-1.38%) when false negatives were considered in the model [179,181]. A similar
prevalence estimate was identified through a repeated cross-sectional serosurvey conducted in
New York City that estimated the IFR as 0.97% [182]. Examination of serosurvey-based
estimates of IFR identified convergence on a global IFR estimate of 0.60% (95% CI 0.42%–
0.77%) [179]. All of these studies note that IFR varies widely by location, and it is also expected
to vary with demographic and health-related variables such as age, sex, prevalence of
comorbidities, and access to healthcare and testing [183]. Estimates of infection rates are
becoming more feasible as more data becomes available for modeling and will be bolstered as
serological testing becomes more common and more widely available.

Dynamics of Transmission
Disease spread dynamics can be estimated using R0, the basic reproduction number, and Rt,
the effective reproduction number. Accurate estimates of both are crucial to understanding the
dynamics of infection and to predicting the effects of different interventions. R0 is the average
number of new (secondary) infections caused by one infected person, assuming a wholly
susceptible population [184] and is one of the most important epidemiological parameters [185].
A simple mechanistic model used to describe infectious disease dynamics is a susceptibleinfected-recovered compartmental model [186,187]. In this model, individuals move through
three states: susceptible, infected, and recovered; two parameters, 𝛾 and 𝛽, specify the rate at
which the infectious recover, and the infection transmission rate, respectively, and R0 is
estimated as the ratio of 𝛽 and 𝛾 [185,188]. A pathogen can invade a susceptible population
only if R0 > 1 [185,189]. The spread of an infectious disease at a particular time t can be

quantified by Rt, the effective reproduction number, which assumes that part of the population
has already recovered (and thus gained immunity to reinfection) or that mitigating interventions
have been put into place. For example, if only a fraction St of the population is still susceptible,
Rt = St x R0. When Rt is greater than 1, an epidemic grows (i.e., the proportion of the population
that is infectious increases); when Rt is less than 1, the proportion of the population that is
infectious decreases. R0 and Rt can be estimated directly from epidemiological data or inferred
using susceptible-infected-recovered-type models. To accurately capture the dynamics of
SARS-CoV-2, the addition of a fourth compartment, i.e. a susceptible-exposed-infectiousrecovered model may be appropriate.
Estimates of R0 for COVID-19 lie in the range R0=1.4-6.5 [190,191,192]. Variation in R0 is
expected between different populations, and the estimated values of R0 discussed below are for
specific populations in specific environments. The different estimates of R0 should not
necessarily be interpreted as a range of estimates of the same underlying parameter. In one
study of international cases, the predicted value was R0=1.7 [193]. In China (both Hubei
province and nationwide), the value was predicted to lie in the range R0=2.0-3.6 [190,194,195].
Another estimate based on a cruise ship where an outbreak occurred predicted R0=2.28 [196].
Susceptible-exposed-infectious-recovered model-derived estimates of R0 range from 2.0 - 6.5 in
China [197,198,199,200] to R0=4.8 in France [201]. Using the same model as for the French
population, a study estimated R0=2.6 in South Korea [201], which is consistent with other
studies [202]. From a meta-analysis of studies estimating R0, [191] the median R0 was
estimated to be 2.79 (IQR 1.16) based on twelve studies published between January 1 and
February 7, 2020.
Inference of the effective reproduction number can provide insight into how populations respond
to an infection and the effectiveness of interventions. In China, Rt was predicted to lie in the
range 1.6-2.6 in January 2020, before travel restrictions [203]. Rt decreased from 2.35 one week
before travel restrictions were imposed (January 23, 2020), to 1.05 one week after. Using their
model, the authors also estimated the probability of new outbreaks occurring. Assuming
individual-level variation in transmission comparable to that of MERS or SARS, the probability of
a single individual exporting the virus and causing a large outbreak is 17-25%, and assuming
variation like that of SARS and transmission patterns like those observed for COVID-19 in
Wuhan, the probability of a large outbreak occurring after ≥4 infections exist at a new location is
greater than 50%. An independent study came to similar conclusions, finding Rt=2.38 in the twoweek period before January 23 with a decrease to Rt = 1.34 (using data from January 24 to
February 3) or Rt=0.98 (using data from January 24 to February 8) [192]. In South Korea, Rt
was inferred for February through March 2020 in two cities, Daegu (the center of the outbreak)
and Seoul [202]. Metro data was also analyzed to estimate the effects of social distancing
measures. Rt decreased in Daegu from around 3 to <1 over the period that social distancing
measures were introduced. In Seoul, Rt decreased slightly, but remained close to 1 (and larger
than Rt in Daegu). These findings indicate that social distancing measures appeared to be
effective in containing the infection in Daegu, but in Seoul, Rt remained above 1, meaning
secondary outbreaks remained possible. The study also shows the importance of regionspecific analysis: the large decline in case load nationwide was mainly due to the Daegu region
and could mask persistence of the epidemic in other regions, such as Seoul and Gyeonggi-do.
In Iran, estimates of Rt declined from 4.86 in the first week to 2.1 by the fourth week after the

first cases were reported [204]. In Europe, analysis of 11 countries inferred the dynamics of Rt
over a time range from the beginning of the outbreak until March 28, 2020, by which point most
countries had implemented major interventions (such as stay-at-home orders, public gathering
bans, and school closures) [205]. Across all countries, the mean Rt before interventions began
was estimated as 3.87; Rt varied considerably, from below 3 in Norway to above 4.5 in Spain.
After interventions, Rt decreased by an average of 64% across all countries, with mean Rt=1.43.
The lowest predicted value was 0.97 for Norway and the highest was 2.64 for Sweden, which
could be related to the fact that Sweden did not implement social distancing measures on the
same scale as other countries. The study concludes that while large changes in Rt are
observed, it is too early to tell whether the interventions put into place are sufficient to decrease
Rt below 1.
More generally, population-level epidemic dynamics can be both observed and modeled [188].
Data and empirically determined biological mechanisms inform models, while models can be
used to try to understand data and systems of interest or to make predictions about possible
future dynamics, such as the estimation of capacity needs [206] or the comparison of predicted
outcomes among prevention and control strategies [207,208]. Many current efforts to model Rt
have also led to tools that assist the visualization of estimates in real time or over recent
intervals [209,210]. These are valuable resources, yet it is also important to note that the
estimates arise from models containing many assumptions and are dependent on the quality of
the data they use, which varies widely by region.

Molecular Signatures and Transmission
Genetic variation in SARS-CoV-2 has been used to elucidate patterns over time and space.
Mutations observed in individual SARS-CoV-2 genome sequences can be used to trace
transmission patterns and have provided insights during outbreak investigations [211,212,213].
Similar mutations observed in several patients may indicate that the patients belong to the same
transmission group. The tracking of SARS-CoV-2 mutations is recognized as an essential tool
for controlling future outbreaks and tracing the path of the spread of SARS-CoV-2. Efforts vary
widely by country: the UK has coordinated has coordinated a national database of viral
genomes [214]; no such coordination has been achieved in the USA. Several studies used
phylogenetic analysis to determine the source of local COVID-19 outbreaks in Connecticut
(USA), [215], the New York City area (USA) [216], and Iceland [217]. There is an ongoing effort
to collect SARS-CoV-2 genomes throughout the COVID-19 outbreak, and as of January 18,
2021 more than 381,000 genome sequences have been collected from patients. The
sequencing data can be found at GISAID [218], NCBI [219], and COVID-19 data portal [220].

Conclusions
The novel coronavirus SARS-CoV-2 is the third HCoV to emerge in the 21st century, and
research into previous HCoVs has provided a strong foundation for characterizing the
pathogenesis and transmission of SARS-CoV-2. Critical insights into how the virus interacts with
human cells have been gained from previous research into HCoVs and other viral infections. As
with other HCoVs, the immune response to SARS-CoV-2 is likely driven by detection of its spike
protein, which allows it to enter cells through ACE2. Epithelial cells have also emerged as the

major cellular target of the virus, contextualizing the respiratory and gastrointestinal symptoms
that are frequently observed in COVID-19. Many of the mechanisms that facilitate the
pathogenesis of SARS-CoV-2 are currently under consideration as possible targets for the
treatment or prevention of COVID-19. Research in other viruses also provides a foundation for
understanding the transmission of SARS-CoV-2 among people and can therefore inform efforts
to control the virus’s spread. The extent to which aerosol and fomite transmission contribute to
the spread of SARS-CoV-2 remains a question: in general, much like SARS-CoV-1 and MERSCoV, this virus seems to be spread primarily by droplet transmission. Asymptomatic
transmission was also a concern in the SARS outbreak of 2002-03 and, as in current pandemic,
presented challenges for estimating rates of infection [221]. However, in the current pandemic,
we have been fortunate to be able to build on top of 18 years of SARS-CoV-1 research in order
to rapidly ascertain the identity and behavior of the virus.
Even with the background obtained from research in SARS and MERS, COVID-19 has revealed
itself to be a complex and difficult-to-characterize disease that has many possible presentations
that vary with age. Variability in presentation, including cases with no respiratory symptoms or
with no symptoms altogether, were also reported during the SARS epidemic at the beginning of
the 21st century [221]. The variability of both which symptoms present and their severity have
presented challenges for public health agencies seeking to provide clear recommendations
regarding which symptoms indicate SARS-CoV-2 infection and should prompt isolation.
Asymptomatic cases add complexity both to efforts to estimate statistics such as R0 and Rt,
which are critical to understanding the transmission of the virus, and IFR, which is an important
component of understanding its impact on a given population. The development of diagnostic
technologies over the course of the pandemic has facilitated more accurate identification,
including of asymptomatic cases. As more cases have been diagnosed, the health conditions
and patient characteristics associated with more severe infection have also become more clear,
although there are likely to be significant sociocultural elements that also influence these
outcomes. While many efforts have focused on adults, and especially older adults because of
the susceptibility of this demographic, additional research is needed to understand the
presentation of COVID-19 and MIS-C in pediatric patients. As more information is uncovered
about the pathogenesis of HCoV and SARS-CoV-2 specifically, the diverse symptomatology of
COVID-19 has and likely will continue to conform with the ever-broadening understanding of
how SARS-CoV-2 functions within a human host.
While the SARS-CoV-2 virus is very similar to other HCoV in several ways, including in its
genomic structure and the structure of the virus itself, there are also some differences that may
account for differences in the COVID-19 pandemic compared to the SARS and MERS
epidemics of the past two decades. The R0 of SARS-CoV-2 has been estimated to be similar to
SARS-CoV-1 but much higher than that of MERS-CoV [222,222]. While the structures of the
viruses are very similar, evolution among these species may account for differences in their
transmissibility and virulence. For example, the acquisition of a furin cleavage site the S1/S2
boundary within the SARS-CoV-2 S protein may be associated with increased virulence.
Additionally, concerns have been raised about the accumulation of mutations within the SARSCoV-2 species itself, and whether these could influence virulence. The coming of age of
genomic technologies has made these types of analyses feasible, and genomics research
characterizing changes in SARS-CoV-2 along with temporal and spatial movement is likely to

provide additional insights into whether within-species evolution influences the effect of the virus
on the human host. Additionally, the rapid development of sequencing technologies over the
past decade has made it possible to rapidly characterize the host response to the virus. For
example, proteomics analysis of patient-derived cells revealed candidate genes whose
regulation is altered by SARS-CoV-2 infection, suggesting possible approaches for
pharmaceutical invention and providing insight into which systems are likely to be disrupted in
COVID-19 [127]. As more patient data becomes available, the biotechnological advances of the
2000s are expected to allow for more rapid identification of potential drug targets than was
feasible during the SARS, or even MERS, pandemic.
Thus, though the COVID-19 crisis is still evolving, the insights acquired over the past 20 years
of HCoV research have provided a solid foundation for understanding the SARS-CoV-2 virus
and the disease it causes. As the scientific community continues to respond to COVID-19 and to
elucidate more of the relationships between viral pathogenesis, transmission, and
symptomatology, and as more data about the regulatory shifts associated with COVID-19
become available, this understanding will no doubt continue to evolve and to reveal additional
connections among virology, pathogenesis, and health. As additional information becomes
available, this review will be updated to reflect the changing state of research in this area. At
present, understanding the SARS-CoV-2 virus and its pathogenesis is critical to a holistic
understanding of the COVID-19 pandemic.

Additional Items
Competing Interests
Author

Competing Interests

Last
Reviewed

Halie M. Rando

None

2021-01-20

Adam L. MacLean

None

2020-11-11

Alexandra J. Lee

None

2020-11-09

Sandipan Ray

None

2020-11-11

Vikas Bansal

None

2021-01-25

Ashwin N. Skelly

None

2020-11-11

Elizabeth Sell

None

2020-11-11

John J. Dziak

None

2020-11-11

Lamonica Shinholster

None

2020-11-11

Lucy D'Agostino
McGowan

Received consulting fees from Acelity and Sanofi in the past five
years

2020-11-10

Marouen Ben
Guebila

None

2020-11-11

Nils Wellhausen

None

2020-11-03

Sergey Knyazev

None

2020-11-11

Simina M. Boca

None

2020-11-07

Stephen Capone

None

2020-11-11

Yanjun Qi

None

2020-07-09

YoSon Park

Now employed by Pfizer (subsequent to contributions to this
project)

2020-01-22

Yuchen Sun

None

2020-11-11

David Mai

None

2021-01-08

Christian Brueffer

Employee and shareholder of SAGA Diagnostics AB.

2020-11-11

James Brian Byrd

Funded by FastGrants to conduct a COVID-19-related clinical
trial

2020-11-12

Jinhui Wang

None

2021-01-21

Ronan Lordan

None

2020-11-03

Ryan Velazquez

None

2020-11-10

Gregory L Szeto

None

2020-11-16

John P. Barton

None

2020-11-11

Rishi Raj Goel

None

2021-01-20

Serghei Mangul

None

2020-11-11

Tiago Lubiana

None

2020-11-11

COVID-19 Review
Consortium

None

2021-01-16

Anthony Gitter

Filed a patent application with the Wisconsin Alumni Research
Foundation related to classifying activated T cells

2020-11-10

Casey S. Greene

None

2021-01-20

Author Contributions
Author

Contributions

Halie M. Rando

Project Administration, Writing - Original Draft, Writing - Review &
Editing

Adam L. MacLean

Writing - Original Draft, Writing - Review & Editing

Alexandra J. Lee

Writing - Original Draft, Writing - Review & Editing

Sandipan Ray

Writing - Original Draft, Writing - Review & Editing

Vikas Bansal

Writing - Original Draft, Writing - Review & Editing

Ashwin N. Skelly

Writing - Original Draft, Writing - Review & Editing

Elizabeth Sell

Writing - Original Draft, Writing - Review & Editing

John J. Dziak

Writing - Original Draft, Writing - Review & Editing

Lamonica Shinholster

Writing - Original Draft

Lucy D'Agostino McGowan

Writing - Original Draft, Writing - Review & Editing

Marouen Ben Guebila

Writing - Original Draft, Writing - Review & Editing

Nils Wellhausen

Visualization, Writing - Original Draft, Writing - Review & Editing

Sergey Knyazev

Writing - Original Draft, Writing - Review & Editing

Simina M. Boca

Writing - Review & Editing

Stephen Capone

Writing - Original Draft, Writing - Review & Editing

Yanjun Qi

Visualization

YoSon Park

Writing - Original Draft, Writing - Review & Editing

Yuchen Sun

Visualization

David Mai

Writing - Original Draft, Writing - Review & Editing

Christian Brueffer

Writing - Original Draft, Writing - Review & Editing

James Brian Byrd

Writing - Original Draft, Writing - Review & Editing

Jinhui Wang

Writing - Review & Editing

Ronan Lordan

Writing - Review & Editing

Ryan Velazquez

Writing - Review & Editing

Gregory L Szeto

Writing - Review & Editing

John P. Barton

Writing - Original Draft, Writing - Review & Editing

Rishi Raj Goel

Writing - Original Draft, Writing - Review & Editing

Serghei Mangul

Writing - Review & Editing

Tiago Lubiana

Writing - Review & Editing

COVID-19 Review
Consortium

Project Administration

Anthony Gitter

Methodology, Project Administration, Software, Writing - Review &
Editing

Casey S. Greene

Conceptualization, Software, Writing - Review & Editing

Acknowledgements
We thank Nick DeVito for assistance with the Evidence-Based Medicine Data Lab COVID-19
TrialsTracker data and Vincent Rubinetti and Daniel Himmelstein for feedback on and support
with Manubot. We thank Yael Evelyn Marshall who contributed writing (original draft) as well as
reviewing and editing of pieces of the text but who did not formally approve the manuscript, as
well as Ronnie Russell, who contributed text to and helped develop the structure of the
manuscript early in the writing process and Matthias Fax who helped with writing and editing
text related to diagnostics. We are grateful to the following contributors for reviewing pieces of
the text: Nadia Danilova, James Eberwine and Ipsita Krishnan.

References
1. Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) – Symptoms
CDC
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2020-12-22)
https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/symptoms-testing/symptoms.html

2. WHO Declares COVID-19 a Pandemic
Domenico Cucinotta, Maurizio Vanelli
Acta Bio Medica Atenei Parmensis (2020-03-19) https://doi.org/ggq86h
DOI: 10.23750/abm.v91i1.9397 · PMID: 32191675 · PMCID: PMC7569573
3. Acute lung injury in patients with COVID-19 infection
Liyang Li, Qihong Huang, Diane C. Wang, David H. Ingbar, Xiangdong Wang
Clinical and Translational Medicine (2020-03-31) https://doi.org/ghqcrz
DOI: 10.1002/ctm2.16 · PMID: 32508022 · PMCID: PMC7240840
4. A Novel Coronavirus Genome Identified in a Cluster of Pneumonia Cases — Wuhan,
China 2019−2020
Wenjie Tan, Xiang Zhao, Xuejun Ma, Wenling Wang, Peihua Niu, Wenbo Xu, George F. Gao,
Guizhen Wu, MHC Key Laboratory of Biosafety, National Institute for Viral Disease Control and
Prevention, China CDC, Beijing, China, Center for Biosafety Mega-Science, Chinese Academy
of Sciences, Beijing, China
China CDC Weekly (2020) https://doi.org/gg8z47
DOI: 10.46234/ccdcw2020.017
5. Structure, Function, and Evolution of Coronavirus Spike Proteins
Fang Li
Annual Review of Virology (2016-09-29) https://doi.org/ggr7gv
DOI: 10.1146/annurev-virology-110615-042301 · PMID: 27578435 · PMCID: PMC5457962
6. A familial cluster of pneumonia associated with the 2019 novel coronavirus indicating
person-to-person transmission: a study of a family cluster
Jasper Fuk-Woo Chan, Shuofeng Yuan, Kin-Hang Kok, Kelvin Kai-Wang To, Hin Chu, Jin Yang,
Fanfan Xing, Jieling Liu, Cyril Chik-Yan Yip, Rosana Wing-Shan Poon, … Kwok-Yung Yuen
The Lancet (2020-02) https://doi.org/ggjs7j
DOI: 10.1016/s0140-6736(20)30154-9 · PMID: 31986261 · PMCID: PMC7159286
7. Fields virology
Bernard N. Fields, David M. Knipe, Peter M. Howley (editors)
Wolters Kluwer Health/Lippincott Williams & Wilkins (2007)
ISBN: 9780781760607
8. Important Role for the Transmembrane Domain of Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome
Coronavirus Spike Protein during Entry
Rene Broer, Bertrand Boson, Willy Spaan, François-Loïc Cosset, Jeroen Corver
Journal of Virology (2006-02-01) https://doi.org/dvvg2h
DOI: 10.1128/jvi.80.3.1302-1310.2006 · PMID: 16415007 · PMCID: PMC1346921
9. Cryo-EM structure of the 2019-nCoV spike in the prefusion conformation
Daniel Wrapp, Nianshuang Wang, Kizzmekia S. Corbett, Jory A. Goldsmith, Ching-Lin Hsieh,
Olubukola Abiona, Barney S. Graham, Jason S. McLellan
Science (2020-03-13) https://doi.org/ggmtk2
DOI: 10.1126/science.abb2507 · PMID: 32075877

10. Medical microbiology
Samuel Baron (editor)
University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston (1996)
ISBN: 9780963117212
11. Coronaviruses: An Overview of Their Replication and Pathogenesis
Anthony R. Fehr, Stanley Perlman
Methods in Molecular Biology (2015) https://doi.org/ggpc6n
DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4939-2438-7_1 · PMID: 25720466 · PMCID: PMC4369385
12. Genomic characterisation and epidemiology of 2019 novel coronavirus: implications
for virus origins and receptor binding
Roujian Lu, Xiang Zhao, Juan Li, Peihua Niu, Bo Yang, Honglong Wu, Wenling Wang, Hao
Song, Baoying Huang, Na Zhu, … Wenjie Tan
The Lancet (2020-02) https://doi.org/ggjr43
DOI: 10.1016/s0140-6736(20)30251-8
13. Emerging coronaviruses: Genome structure, replication, and pathogenesis
Yu Chen, Qianyun Liu, Deyin Guo
Journal of Medical Virology (2020-02-07) https://doi.org/ggjvwj
DOI: 10.1002/jmv.25681 · PMID: 31967327
14. SARS coronavirus entry into host cells through a novel clathrin- and caveolaeindependent endocytic pathway
Hongliang Wang, Peng Yang, Kangtai Liu, Feng Guo, Yanli Zhang, Gongyi Zhang, Chengyu
Jiang
Cell Research (2008-01-29) https://doi.org/bp9275
DOI: 10.1038/cr.2008.15 · PMID: 18227861 · PMCID: PMC7091891
15. Virus Entry by Endocytosis
Jason Mercer, Mario Schelhaas, Ari Helenius
Annual Review of Biochemistry (2010-06-07) https://doi.org/cw4dnb
DOI: 10.1146/annurev-biochem-060208-104626 · PMID: 20196649
16. Mechanisms of Coronavirus Cell Entry Mediated by the Viral Spike Protein
Sandrine Belouzard, Jean K. Millet, Beth N. Licitra, Gary R. Whittaker
Viruses (2012-06-20) https://doi.org/gbbktb
DOI: 10.3390/v4061011 · PMID: 22816037 · PMCID: PMC3397359
17. Phylogenetic Analysis and Structural Modeling of SARS-CoV-2 Spike Protein Reveals
an Evolutionary Distinct and Proteolytically Sensitive Activation Loop
Javier A. Jaimes, Nicole M. André, Joshua S. Chappie, Jean K. Millet, Gary R. Whittaker
Journal of Molecular Biology (2020-05) https://doi.org/ggtxhr
DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2020.04.009 · PMID: 32320687 · PMCID: PMC7166309
18. Angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) as a SARS-CoV-2 receptor: molecular
mechanisms and potential therapeutic target

Haibo Zhang, Josef M. Penninger, Yimin Li, Nanshan Zhong, Arthur S. Slutsky
Intensive Care Medicine (2020-03-03) https://doi.org/ggpx6p
DOI: 10.1007/s00134-020-05985-9 · PMID: 32125455 · PMCID: PMC7079879
19. Infection of Human Airway Epithelia by Sars Coronavirus is Associated with ACE2
Expression and Localization
Hong Peng Jia, Dwight C. Look, Melissa Hickey, Lei Shi, Lecia Pewe, Jason Netland, Michael
Farzan, Christine Wohlford-Lenane, Stanley Perlman, Paul B. McCray
Advances in Experimental Medicine and Biology (2006) https://doi.org/dhh5tp
DOI: 10.1007/978-0-387-33012-9_85 · PMID: 17037581 · PMCID: PMC7123641
20. The protein expression profile of ACE2 in human tissues
Feria Hikmet, Loren Méar, Åsa Edvinsson, Patrick Micke, Mathias Uhlén, Cecilia Lindskog
Molecular Systems Biology (2020-07-26) https://doi.org/gg6mxv
DOI: 10.15252/msb.20209610 · PMID: 32715618 · PMCID: PMC7383091
21. Receptor Recognition Mechanisms of Coronaviruses: a Decade of Structural Studies
Fang Li
Journal of Virology (2015-02-15) https://doi.org/f633jb
DOI: 10.1128/jvi.02615-14 · PMID: 25428871 · PMCID: PMC4338876
22. The spike protein of SARS-CoV — a target for vaccine and therapeutic development
Lanying Du, Yuxian He, Yusen Zhou, Shuwen Liu, Bo-Jian Zheng, Shibo Jiang
Nature Reviews Microbiology (2009-02-09) https://doi.org/d4tq4t
DOI: 10.1038/nrmicro2090 · PMID: 19198616 · PMCID: PMC2750777
23. Structure, Function, and Antigenicity of the SARS-CoV-2 Spike Glycoprotein
Alexandra C. Walls, Young-Jun Park, M. Alejandra Tortorici, Abigail Wall, Andrew T. McGuire,
David Veesler
Cell (2020-04) https://doi.org/dpvh
DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2020.02.058 · PMID: 32155444 · PMCID: PMC7102599
24. Molecular Interactions in the Assembly of Coronaviruses
Cornelis A. M. de Haan, Peter J. M. Rottier
Advances in Virus Research (2005) https://doi.org/cf8chz
DOI: 10.1016/s0065-3527(05)64006-7 · PMID: 16139595 · PMCID: PMC7112327
25. Coronavirus membrane fusion mechanism offers a potential target for antiviral
development
Tiffany Tang, Miya Bidon, Javier A. Jaimes, Gary R. Whittaker, Susan Daniel
Antiviral Research (2020-06) https://doi.org/ggr23b
DOI: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2020.104792 · PMID: 32272173 · PMCID: PMC7194977
26. SARS-CoV-2 Cell Entry Depends on ACE2 and TMPRSS2 and Is Blocked by a
Clinically Proven Protease Inhibitor
Markus Hoffmann, Hannah Kleine-Weber, Simon Schroeder, Nadine Krüger, Tanja Herrler,
Sandra Erichsen, Tobias S. Schiergens, Georg Herrler, Nai-Huei Wu, Andreas Nitsche, …

Stefan Pöhlmann
Cell (2020-04) https://doi.org/ggnq74
DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2020.02.052 · PMID: 32142651 · PMCID: PMC7102627
27. Characterization of spike glycoprotein of SARS-CoV-2 on virus entry and its immune
cross-reactivity with SARS-CoV
Xiuyuan Ou, Yan Liu, Xiaobo Lei, Pei Li, Dan Mi, Lili Ren, Li Guo, Ruixuan Guo, Ting Chen,
Jiaxin Hu, … Zhaohui Qian
Nature Communications (2020-03-27) https://doi.org/ggqsrf
DOI: 10.1038/s41467-020-15562-9 · PMID: 32221306 · PMCID: PMC7100515
28. Coronaviridae ~ ViralZone page https://viralzone.expasy.org/30?outline
29. Spatiotemporal interplay of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus and
respiratory mucosal cells drives viral dissemination in rhesus macaques
L Liu, Q Wei, K Nishiura, J Peng, H Wang, C Midkiff, X Alvarez, C Qin, A Lackner, Z Chen
Mucosal Immunology (2015-12-09) https://doi.org/f8r7dk
DOI: 10.1038/mi.2015.127 · PMID: 26647718 · PMCID: PMC4900951
30. Understanding Viral dsRNA-Mediated Innate Immune Responses at the Cellular Level
Using a Rainbow Trout Model
Sarah J. Poynter, Stephanie J. DeWitte-Orr
Frontiers in Immunology (2018-04-23) https://doi.org/gdhpbs
DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2018.00829 · PMID: 29740439 · PMCID: PMC5924774
31. Ultrastructure and Origin of Membrane Vesicles Associated with the Severe Acute
Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus Replication Complex
Eric J. Snijder, Yvonne van der Meer, Jessika Zevenhoven-Dobbe, Jos J. M. Onderwater,
Jannes van der Meulen, Henk K. Koerten, A. Mieke Mommaas
Journal of Virology (2006-06-15) https://doi.org/b2rh4r
DOI: 10.1128/jvi.02501-05 · PMID: 16731931 · PMCID: PMC1472606
32. Molecular immune pathogenesis and diagnosis of COVID-19
Xiaowei Li, Manman Geng, Yizhao Peng, Liesu Meng, Shemin Lu
Journal of Pharmaceutical Analysis (2020-04) https://doi.org/ggppqg
DOI: 10.1016/j.jpha.2020.03.001 · PMID: 32282863 · PMCID: PMC7104082
33. Structural basis for translational shutdown and immune evasion by the Nsp1 protein
of SARS-CoV-2
Matthias Thoms, Robert Buschauer, Michael Ameismeier, Lennart Koepke, Timo Denk,
Maximilian Hirschenberger, Hanna Kratzat, Manuel Hayn, Timur Mackens-Kiani, Jingdong
Cheng, … Roland Beckmann
Science (2020-09-04) https://doi.org/gg69nq
DOI: 10.1126/science.abc8665 · PMID: 32680882 · PMCID: PMC7402621
34. Immune responses in COVID-19 and potential vaccines: Lessons learned from SARS
and MERS epidemic

Asian Pacific Journal of Allergy and Immunology
(2020) https://doi.org/ggpvxw
DOI: 10.12932/ap-200220-0772 · PMID: 32105090
35. Angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 is a functional receptor for the SARS coronavirus
Wenhui Li, Michael J. Moore, Natalya Vasilieva, Jianhua Sui, Swee Kee Wong, Michael A.
Berne, Mohan Somasundaran, John L. Sullivan, Katherine Luzuriaga, Thomas C. Greenough,
… Michael Farzan
Nature (2003-11) https://doi.org/bqvpjh
DOI: 10.1038/nature02145 · PMID: 14647384 · PMCID: PMC7095016
36. Efficient Activation of the Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus Spike
Protein by the Transmembrane Protease TMPRSS2
Shutoku Matsuyama, Noriyo Nagata, Kazuya Shirato, Miyuki Kawase, Makoto Takeda, Fumihiro
Taguchi
Journal of Virology (2010-12-15) https://doi.org/d4hnfr
DOI: 10.1128/jvi.01542-10 · PMID: 20926566 · PMCID: PMC3004351
37. Evidence that TMPRSS2 Activates the Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome
Coronavirus Spike Protein for Membrane Fusion and Reduces Viral Control by the
Humoral Immune Response
I. Glowacka, S. Bertram, M. A. Muller, P. Allen, E. Soilleux, S. Pfefferle, I. Steffen, T. S.
Tsegaye, Y. He, K. Gnirss, … S. Pohlmann
Journal of Virology (2011-02-16) https://doi.org/bg97wb
DOI: 10.1128/jvi.02232-10 · PMID: 21325420 · PMCID: PMC3126222
38. Increasing Host Cellular Receptor—Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme 2 (ACE2)
Expression by Coronavirus may Facilitate 2019-nCoV Infection
Pei-Hui Wang, Yun Cheng
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory (2020-02-27) https://doi.org/ggscwd
DOI: 10.1101/2020.02.24.963348
39. Physiological and pathological regulation of ACE2, the SARS-CoV-2 receptor
Yanwei Li, Wei Zhou, Li Yang, Ran You
Pharmacological Research (2020-07) https://doi.org/ggtxhs
DOI: 10.1016/j.phrs.2020.104833 · PMID: 32302706 · PMCID: PMC7194807
40. Tissue distribution of ACE2 protein, the functional receptor for SARS coronavirus. A
first step in understanding SARS pathogenesis
I Hamming, W Timens, MLC Bulthuis, AT Lely, GJ Navis, H van Goor
The Journal of Pathology (2004-06) https://doi.org/bhpzc3
DOI: 10.1002/path.1570 · PMID: 15141377
41. Detection of SARS-CoV-2 in Different Types of Clinical Specimens
Wenling Wang, Yanli Xu, Ruqin Gao, Roujian Lu, Kai Han, Guizhen Wu, Wenjie Tan
JAMA (2020-03-11) https://doi.org/ggpp6h
DOI: 10.1001/jama.2020.3786 · PMID: 32159775 · PMCID: PMC7066521

42. Epidemiologic Features and Clinical Course of Patients Infected With SARS-CoV-2 in
Singapore
Barnaby Edward Young, Sean Wei Xiang Ong, Shirin Kalimuddin, Jenny G. Low, Seow Yen
Tan, Jiashen Loh, Oon-Tek Ng, Kalisvar Marimuthu, Li Wei Ang, Tze Minn Mak, … for the
Singapore 2019 Novel Coronavirus Outbreak Research Team
JAMA (2020-04-21) https://doi.org/ggnb37
DOI: 10.1001/jama.2020.3204 · PMID: 32125362 · PMCID: PMC7054855
43. Persistence and clearance of viral RNA in 2019 novel coronavirus disease
rehabilitation patients
Yun Ling, Shui-Bao Xu, Yi-Xiao Lin, Di Tian, Zhao-Qin Zhu, Fa-Hui Dai, Fan Wu, Zhi-Gang
Song, Wei Huang, Jun Chen, … Hong-Zhou Lu
Chinese Medical Journal (2020-05-05) https://doi.org/ggnnz8
DOI: 10.1097/cm9.0000000000000774 · PMID: 32118639 · PMCID: PMC7147278
44. Postmortem examination of COVID-19 patients reveals diffuse alveolar damage with
severe capillary congestion and variegated findings in lungs and other organs
suggesting vascular dysfunction
Thomas Menter, Jasmin D Haslbauer, Ronny Nienhold, Spasenija Savic, Helmut Hopfer,
Nikolaus Deigendesch, Stephan Frank, Daniel Turek, Niels Willi, Hans Pargger, … Alexandar
Tzankov
Histopathology (2020-07-05) https://doi.org/ggwr32
DOI: 10.1111/his.14134 · PMID: 32364264 · PMCID: PMC7496150
45. Association of Cardiac Injury With Mortality in Hospitalized Patients With COVID-19 in
Wuhan, China
Shaobo Shi, Mu Qin, Bo Shen, Yuli Cai, Tao Liu, Fan Yang, Wei Gong, Xu Liu, Jinjun Liang,
Qinyan Zhao, … Congxin Huang
JAMA Cardiology (2020-07-01) https://doi.org/ggq8qf
DOI: 10.1001/jamacardio.2020.0950 · PMID: 32211816 · PMCID: PMC7097841
46. The need for urogenital tract monitoring in COVID-19
Shangqian Wang, Xiang Zhou, Tongtong Zhang, Zengjun Wang
Nature Reviews Urology (2020-04-20) https://doi.org/ggv4xb
DOI: 10.1038/s41585-020-0319-7 · PMID: 32313110 · PMCID: PMC7186932
47. Acute kidney injury in SARS-CoV-2 infected patients
Vito Fanelli, Marco Fiorentino, Vincenzo Cantaluppi, Loreto Gesualdo, Giovanni Stallone,
Claudio Ronco, Giuseppe Castellano
Critical Care (2020-04-16) https://doi.org/ggv45f
DOI: 10.1186/s13054-020-02872-z · PMID: 32299479 · PMCID: PMC7161433
48. Liver injury in COVID-19: management and challenges
Chao Zhang, Lei Shi, Fu-Sheng Wang
The Lancet Gastroenterology & Hepatology (2020-05) https://doi.org/ggpx6s
DOI: 10.1016/s2468-1253(20)30057-1 · PMID: 32145190 · PMCID: PMC7129165

49. Evidence for Gastrointestinal Infection of SARS-CoV-2
Fei Xiao, Meiwen Tang, Xiaobin Zheng, Ye Liu, Xiaofeng Li, Hong Shan
Gastroenterology (2020-05) https://doi.org/ggpx27
DOI: 10.1053/j.gastro.2020.02.055 · PMID: 32142773 · PMCID: PMC7130181
50. 2019 Novel coronavirus infection and gastrointestinal tract
Qin Yan Gao, Ying Xuan Chen, Jing Yuan Fang
Journal of Digestive Diseases (2020-03) https://doi.org/ggqr86
DOI: 10.1111/1751-2980.12851 · PMID: 32096611 · PMCID: PMC7162053
51. Clinical Characteristics of Coronavirus Disease 2019 in China
Wei-jie Guan, Zheng-yi Ni, Yu Hu, Wen-hua Liang, Chun-quan Ou, Jian-xing He, Lei Liu, Hong
Shan, Chun-liang Lei, David S. C. Hui, … Nan-shan Zhong
New England Journal of Medicine (2020-04-30) https://doi.org/ggm6dh
DOI: 10.1056/nejmoa2002032 · PMID: 32109013 · PMCID: PMC7092819
52. Clinical course and risk factors for mortality of adult inpatients with COVID-19 in
Wuhan, China: a retrospective cohort study
Fei Zhou, Ting Yu, Ronghui Du, Guohui Fan, Ying Liu, Zhibo Liu, Jie Xiang, Yeming Wang, Bin
Song, Xiaoying Gu, … Bin Cao
The Lancet (2020-03) https://doi.org/ggnxb3
DOI: 10.1016/s0140-6736(20)30566-3
53. Presenting Characteristics, Comorbidities, and Outcomes Among 5700 Patients
Hospitalized With COVID-19 in the New York City Area
Safiya Richardson, Jamie S. Hirsch, Mangala Narasimhan, James M. Crawford, Thomas
McGinn, Karina W. Davidson, Douglas P. Barnaby, Lance B. Becker, John D. Chelico, Stuart L.
Cohen, … and the Northwell COVID-19 Research Consortium
JAMA (2020-05-26) https://doi.org/ggsrkd
DOI: 10.1001/jama.2020.6775 · PMID: 32320003 · PMCID: PMC7177629
54. Clinical Characteristics of Covid-19 in New York City
Parag Goyal, Justin J. Choi, Laura C. Pinheiro, Edward J. Schenck, Ruijun Chen, Assem Jabri,
Michael J. Satlin, Thomas R. Campion, Musarrat Nahid, Joanna B. Ringel, … Monika M. Safford
New England Journal of Medicine (2020-06-11) https://doi.org/ggtsjc
DOI: 10.1056/nejmc2010419 · PMID: 32302078 · PMCID: PMC7182018
55. Symptom Profiles of a Convenience Sample of Patients with COVID-19 — United
States, January–April 2020
Rachel M. Burke, Marie E. Killerby, Suzanne Newton, Candace E. Ashworth, Abby L. Berns,
Skyler Brennan, Jonathan M. Bressler, Erica Bye, Richard Crawford, Laurel Harduar Morano, …
Case Investigation Form Working Group
MMWR. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report (2020-07-17) https://doi.org/gg8r2m
DOI: 10.15585/mmwr.mm6928a2 · PMID: 32673296 · PMCID: PMC7366851
56. Population-scale Longitudinal Mapping of COVID-19 Symptoms, Behavior, and
Testing Identifies Contributors to Continued Disease Spread in the United States

William E. Allen, Han Altae-Tran, James Briggs, Xin Jin, Glen McGee, Andy Shi, Rumya
Raghavan, Mireille Kamariza, Nicole Nova, Albert Pereta, … Xihong Lin
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory (2020-06-11) https://doi.org/gg8skn
DOI: 10.1101/2020.06.09.20126813 · PMID: 32577674 · PMCID: PMC7302230
57. Extrapulmonary manifestations of COVID-19
Aakriti Gupta, Mahesh V. Madhavan, Kartik Sehgal, Nandini Nair, Shiwani Mahajan, Tejasav S.
Sehrawat, Behnood Bikdeli, Neha Ahluwalia, John C. Ausiello, Elaine Y. Wan, … Donald W.
Landry
Nature Medicine (2020-07-10) https://doi.org/gg4r37
DOI: 10.1038/s41591-020-0968-3 · PMID: 32651579
58. Acute kidney injury in patients hospitalized with COVID-19
Jamie S. Hirsch, Jia H. Ng, Daniel W. Ross, Purva Sharma, Hitesh H. Shah, Richard L. Barnett,
Azzour D. Hazzan, Steven Fishbane, Kenar D. Jhaveri, Mersema Abate, … Jia Hwei. Ng
Kidney International (2020-07) https://doi.org/ggx24k
DOI: 10.1016/j.kint.2020.05.006 · PMID: 32416116 · PMCID: PMC7229463
59. Nervous system involvement after infection with COVID-19 and other coronaviruses
Yeshun Wu, Xiaolin Xu, Zijun Chen, Jiahao Duan, Kenji Hashimoto, Ling Yang, Cunming Liu,
Chun Yang
Brain, Behavior, and Immunity (2020-07) https://doi.org/ggq7s2
DOI: 10.1016/j.bbi.2020.03.031 · PMID: 32240762 · PMCID: PMC7146689
60. Neurological associations of COVID-19
Mark A Ellul, Laura Benjamin, Bhagteshwar Singh, Suzannah Lant, Benedict Daniel Michael,
Ava Easton, Rachel Kneen, Sylviane Defres, Jim Sejvar, Tom Solomon
The Lancet Neurology (2020-09) https://doi.org/d259
DOI: 10.1016/s1474-4422(20)30221-0 · PMID: 32622375 · PMCID: PMC7332267
61. Update on the neurology of COVID-19
Josef Finsterer, Claudia Stollberger
Journal of Medical Virology (2020-06-02) https://doi.org/gg2qnn
DOI: 10.1002/jmv.26000 · PMID: 32401352 · PMCID: PMC7272942
62. -19: A Global Threat to the Nervous System
Igor J. Koralnik, Kenneth L. Tyler
Annals of Neurology (2020-06-23) https://doi.org/gg3hzh
DOI: 10.1002/ana.25807 · PMID: 32506549 · PMCID: PMC7300753
63. Olfactory transmucosal SARS-CoV-2 invasion as a port of central nervous system
entry in individuals with COVID-19
Jenny Meinhardt, Josefine Radke, Carsten Dittmayer, Jonas Franz, Carolina Thomas, Ronja
Mothes, Michael Laue, Julia Schneider, Sebastian Brünink, Selina Greuel, … Frank L. Heppner
Nature Neuroscience (2020-11-30) https://doi.org/fk46
DOI: 10.1038/s41593-020-00758-5 · PMID: 33257876

64. Large-Vessel Stroke as a Presenting Feature of Covid-19 in the Young
Thomas J. Oxley, J. Mocco, Shahram Majidi, Christopher P. Kellner, Hazem Shoirah, I. Paul
Singh, Reade A. De Leacy, Tomoyoshi Shigematsu, Travis R. Ladner, Kurt A. Yaeger, …
Johanna T. Fifi
New England Journal of Medicine (2020-05-14) https://doi.org/ggtsjg
DOI: 10.1056/nejmc2009787 · PMID: 32343504 · PMCID: PMC7207073
65. Incidence of thrombotic complications in critically ill ICU patients with COVID-19
F. A. Klok, M. J. H. A. Kruip, N. J. M. van der Meer, M. S. Arbous, D. A. M. P. J. Gommers, K.
M. Kant, F. H. J. Kaptein, J. van Paassen, M. A. M. Stals, M. V. Huisman, H. Endeman
Thrombosis Research (2020-07) https://doi.org/dt2q
DOI: 10.1016/j.thromres.2020.04.013 · PMID: 32291094 · PMCID: PMC7146714
66. Coagulopathy and Antiphospholipid Antibodies in Patients with Covid-19
Yan Zhang, Meng Xiao, Shulan Zhang, Peng Xia, Wei Cao, Wei Jiang, Huan Chen, Xin Ding,
Hua Zhao, Hongmin Zhang, … Shuyang Zhang
New England Journal of Medicine (2020-04-23) https://doi.org/ggrgz7
DOI: 10.1056/nejmc2007575 · PMID: 32268022 · PMCID: PMC7161262
67. Abnormal coagulation parameters are associated with poor prognosis in patients
with novel coronavirus pneumonia
Ning Tang, Dengju Li, Xiong Wang, Ziyong Sun
Journal of Thrombosis and Haemostasis (2020-04) https://doi.org/ggqxf6
DOI: 10.1111/jth.14768 · PMID: 32073213 · PMCID: PMC7166509
68. Review: Viral infections and mechanisms of thrombosis and bleeding
M. Goeijenbier, M. van Wissen, C. van de Weg, E. Jong, V. E. A. Gerdes, J. C. M. Meijers, D. P.
M. Brandjes, E. C. M. van Gorp
Journal of Medical Virology (2012-10) https://doi.org/f37tfr
DOI: 10.1002/jmv.23354 · PMID: 22930518 · PMCID: PMC7166625
69. Immune mechanisms of pulmonary intravascular coagulopathy in COVID-19
pneumonia
Dennis McGonagle, James S O’Donnell, Kassem Sharif, Paul Emery, Charles Bridgewood
The Lancet Rheumatology (2020-07) https://doi.org/ggvd74
DOI: 10.1016/s2665-9913(20)30121-1 · PMID: 32835247 · PMCID: PMC7252093
70. “War to the knife” against thromboinflammation to protect endothelial function of
COVID-19 patients
Gabriele Guglielmetti, Marco Quaglia, Pier Paolo Sainaghi, Luigi Mario Castello, Rosanna
Vaschetto, Mario Pirisi, Francesco Della Corte, Gian Carlo Avanzi, Piero Stratta, Vincenzo
Cantaluppi
Critical Care (2020-06-19) https://doi.org/gg35w7
DOI: 10.1186/s13054-020-03060-9 · PMID: 32560665 · PMCID: PMC7303575
71. COVID-19 update: Covid-19-associated coagulopathy
Richard C. Becker

Journal of Thrombosis and Thrombolysis (2020-05-15) https://doi.org/ggwpp5
DOI: 10.1007/s11239-020-02134-3 · PMID: 32415579 · PMCID: PMC7225095
72. The complement system in COVID-19: friend and foe?
Anuja Java, Anthony J. Apicelli, M. Kathryn Liszewski, Ariella Coler-Reilly, John P. Atkinson,
Alfred H. J. Kim, Hrishikesh S. Kulkarni
JCI Insight (2020-08-06) https://doi.org/gg4b5b
DOI: 10.1172/jci.insight.140711 · PMID: 32554923 · PMCID: PMC7455060
73. COVID-19, microangiopathy, hemostatic activation, and complement
Wen-Chao Song, Garret A. FitzGerald
Journal of Clinical Investigation (2020-06-22) https://doi.org/gg4b5c
DOI: 10.1172/jci140183 · PMID: 32459663 · PMCID: PMC7410042
74. Molecular biology of the cell
Bruce Alberts (editor)
Garland Science (2002)
ISBN: 9780815332183
75. Vander’s human physiology: the mechanisms of body function
Eric P Widmaier, Hershel Raff, Kevin T Strang
McGraw-Hill Higher Education (2008)
ISBN: 9780071283663
76. The Innate Immune System: Fighting on the Front Lines or Fanning the Flames of
COVID-19?
Julia L. McKechnie, Catherine A. Blish
Cell Host & Microbe (2020-06) https://doi.org/gg28pq
DOI: 10.1016/j.chom.2020.05.009 · PMID: 32464098 · PMCID: PMC7237895
77. Inflammatory responses and inflammation-associated diseases in organs
Linlin Chen, Huidan Deng, Hengmin Cui, Jing Fang, Zhicai Zuo, Junliang Deng, Yinglun Li, Xun
Wang, Ling Zhao
Oncotarget (2017-12-14) https://doi.org/ggps2p
DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.23208 · PMID: 29467962 · PMCID: PMC5805548
78. Into the Eye of the Cytokine Storm
J. R. Tisoncik, M. J. Korth, C. P. Simmons, J. Farrar, T. R. Martin, M. G. Katze
Microbiology and Molecular Biology Reviews (2012-03-05) https://doi.org/f4n9h2
DOI: 10.1128/mmbr.05015-11 · PMID: 22390970 · PMCID: PMC3294426
79. Cytokines, Inflammation, and Pain
Jun-Ming Zhang, Jianxiong An
International Anesthesiology Clinics (2007) https://doi.org/ft5b7h
DOI: 10.1097/aia.0b013e318034194e · PMID: 17426506 · PMCID: PMC2785020

80. Dynamic balance of pro- and anti-inflammatory signals controls disease and limits
pathology
Joseph M. Cicchese, Stephanie Evans, Caitlin Hult, Louis R. Joslyn, Timothy Wessler, Jess A.
Millar, Simeone Marino, Nicholas A. Cilfone, Joshua T. Mattila, Jennifer J. Linderman, Denise E.
Kirschner
Immunological Reviews (2018-09) https://doi.org/gd4g4p
DOI: 10.1111/imr.12671 · PMID: 30129209 · PMCID: PMC6292442
81. Cytokine Dysregulation, Inflammation and Well-Being
Ilia J. Elenkov, Domenic G. Iezzoni, Adrian Daly, Alan G. Harris, George P. Chrousos
Neuroimmunomodulation (2005) https://doi.org/bsn7kn
DOI: 10.1159/000087104 · PMID: 16166805
82. Chronic inflammation in the etiology of disease across the life span
David Furman, Judith Campisi, Eric Verdin, Pedro Carrera-Bastos, Sasha Targ, Claudio
Franceschi, Luigi Ferrucci, Derek W. Gilroy, Alessio Fasano, Gary W. Miller, … George M.
Slavich
Nature Medicine (2019-12-05) https://doi.org/gghdcf
DOI: 10.1038/s41591-019-0675-0 · PMID: 31806905 · PMCID: PMC7147972
83. Inpatient care for septicemia or sepsis: a challenge for patients and hospitals.
Margaret Jean Hall, Sonja N Williams, Carol J DeFrances, Aleksandr Golosinskiy
NCHS data brief (2011-06) https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22142805
PMID: 22142805
84. Cytokine Balance in the Lungs of Patients with Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome
WILLIAM Y. PARK, RICHARD B. GOODMAN, KENNETH P. STEINBERG, JOHN T.
RUZINSKI, FRANK RADELLA, DAVID R. PARK, JEROME PUGIN, SHAWN J. SKERRETT,
LEONARD D. HUDSON, THOMAS R. MARTIN
American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine (2001-11-15) https://doi.org/ggqfq7
DOI: 10.1164/ajrccm.164.10.2104013 · PMID: 11734443
85. Cytokine release syndrome
Alexander Shimabukuro-Vornhagen, Philipp Gödel, Marion Subklewe, Hans Joachim Stemmler,
Hans Anton Schlößer, Max Schlaak, Matthias Kochanek, Boris Böll, Michael S. von BergweltBaildon
Journal for ImmunoTherapy of Cancer (2018-06-15) https://doi.org/ghbncj
DOI: 10.1186/s40425-018-0343-9 · PMID: 29907163 · PMCID: PMC6003181
86. Understanding the Inflammatory Cytokine Response in Pneumonia and Sepsis
John A. Kellum
Archives of Internal Medicine (2007-08-13) https://doi.org/dbxb66
DOI: 10.1001/archinte.167.15.1655 · PMID: 17698689 · PMCID: PMC4495652
87. The pro- and anti-inflammatory properties of the cytokine interleukin-6
Jürgen Scheller, Athena Chalaris, Dirk Schmidt-Arras, Stefan Rose-John

Biochimica et Biophysica Acta (BBA) - Molecular Cell Research (2011-05) https://doi.org/cvn4nr
DOI: 10.1016/j.bbamcr.2011.01.034 · PMID: 21296109
88. The Role of Interleukin 6 During Viral Infections
Lauro Velazquez-Salinas, Antonio Verdugo-Rodriguez, Luis L. Rodriguez, Manuel V. Borca
Frontiers in Microbiology (2019-05-10) https://doi.org/ghbnck
DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2019.01057 · PMID: 31134045 · PMCID: PMC6524401
89. Expression of elevated levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines in SARS-CoV-infected
ACE2 + cells in SARS patients: relation to the acute lung injury and pathogenesis of
SARS
L He, Y Ding, Q Zhang, X Che, Y He, H Shen, H Wang, Z Li, L Zhao, J Geng, … S Jiang
The Journal of Pathology (2006-11) https://doi.org/bwb8ns
DOI: 10.1002/path.2067 · PMID: 17031779
90. Up-regulation of IL-6 and TNF-α induced by SARS-coronavirus spike protein in
murine macrophages via NF-κB pathway
Wei Wang, Linbai Ye, Li Ye, Baozong Li, Bo Gao, Yingchun Zeng, Lingbao Kong, Xiaonan
Fang, Hong Zheng, Zhenghui Wu, Yinglong She
Virus Research (2007-09) https://doi.org/bm7m55
DOI: 10.1016/j.virusres.2007.02.007 · PMID: 17532082 · PMCID: PMC7114322
91. COVID-19: consider cytokine storm syndromes and immunosuppression
Puja Mehta, Daniel F McAuley, Michael Brown, Emilie Sanchez, Rachel S Tattersall, Jessica J
Manson
The Lancet (2020-03) https://doi.org/ggnzmc
DOI: 10.1016/s0140-6736(20)30628-0
92. Cytokine Storms: Understanding COVID-19
Nilam Mangalmurti, Christopher A. Hunter
Immunity (2020-07) https://doi.org/gg4fd7
DOI: 10.1016/j.immuni.2020.06.017 · PMID: 32610079 · PMCID: PMC7321048
93. Is a “Cytokine Storm” Relevant to COVID-19?
Pratik Sinha, Michael A. Matthay, Carolyn S. Calfee
JAMA Internal Medicine (2020-09-01) https://doi.org/gg3k6r
DOI: 10.1001/jamainternmed.2020.3313 · PMID: 32602883
94. Can we use interleukin-6 (IL-6) blockade for coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19)induced cytokine release syndrome (CRS)?
Bingwen Liu, Min Li, Zhiguang Zhou, Xuan Guan, Yufei Xiang
Journal of Autoimmunity (2020-07) https://doi.org/ggr79c
DOI: 10.1016/j.jaut.2020.102452 · PMID: 32291137 · PMCID: PMC7151347
95. SARS-CoV-2 infection in primary schools in northern France: A retrospective cohort
study in an area of high transmission
Arnaud Fontanet, Rebecca Grant, Laura Tondeur, Yoann Madec, Ludivine Grzelak, Isabelle

Cailleau, Marie-Noëlle Ungeheuer, Charlotte Renaudat, Sandrine Fernandes Pellerin, Lucie
Kuhmel, … Bruno Hoen
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory (2020-06-29) https://doi.org/gg87nn
DOI: 10.1101/2020.06.25.20140178
96. SARS-CoV-2 Infection in Children
Xiaoxia Lu, Liqiong Zhang, Hui Du, Jingjing Zhang, Yuan Y. Li, Jingyu Qu, Wenxin Zhang,
Youjie Wang, Shuangshuang Bao, Ying Li, … Gary W. K. Wong
New England Journal of Medicine (2020-04-23) https://doi.org/ggpt2q
DOI: 10.1056/nejmc2005073 · PMID: 32187458 · PMCID: PMC7121177
97. Systematic review of COVID-19 in children shows milder cases and a better
prognosis than adults
Jonas F. Ludvigsson
Acta Paediatrica (2020-04-14) https://doi.org/ggq8wr
DOI: 10.1111/apa.15270 · PMID: 32202343 · PMCID: PMC7228328
98. Reopening schools during COVID-19
Ronan Lordan, Garret A. FitzGerald, Tilo Grosser
Science (2020-09-03) https://doi.org/ghsv9p
DOI: 10.1126/science.abe5765 · PMID: 32883837
99. Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) Infection in
Children and Adolescents
Riccardo Castagnoli, Martina Votto, Amelia Licari, Ilaria Brambilla, Raffaele Bruno, Stefano
Perlini, Francesca Rovida, Fausto Baldanti, Gian Luigi Marseglia
JAMA Pediatrics (2020-09-01) https://doi.org/dswz
DOI: 10.1001/jamapediatrics.2020.1467 · PMID: 32320004
100. Neurologic and Radiographic Findings Associated With COVID-19 Infection in
Children
Omar Abdel-Mannan, Michael Eyre, Ulrike Löbel, Alasdair Bamford, Christin Eltze, Biju
Hameed, Cheryl Hemingway, Yael Hacohen
JAMA Neurology (2020-11-01) https://doi.org/gg339f
DOI: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2020.2687 · PMID: 32609336 · PMCID: PMC7330822
101. Children with Covid-19 in Pediatric Emergency Departments in Italy
Niccolò Parri, Matteo Lenge, Danilo Buonsenso
New England Journal of Medicine (2020-07-09) https://doi.org/ggtp6z
DOI: 10.1056/nejmc2007617 · PMID: 32356945 · PMCID: PMC7206930
102. COVID-19 in 7780 pediatric patients: A systematic review
Ansel Hoang, Kevin Chorath, Axel Moreira, Mary Evans, Finn Burmeister-Morton, Fiona
Burmeister, Rija Naqvi, Matthew Petershack, Alvaro Moreira
EClinicalMedicine (2020-07) https://doi.org/gg4hn2
DOI: 10.1016/j.eclinm.2020.100433 · PMID: 32766542 · PMCID: PMC7318942

103. Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in Children During the Coronavirus 2019
Pandemic: A Case Series
Kathleen Chiotos, Hamid Bassiri, Edward M Behrens, Allison M Blatz, Joyce Chang, Caroline
Diorio, Julie C Fitzgerald, Alexis Topjian, Audrey R Odom John
Journal of the Pediatric Infectious Diseases Society (2020-07) https://doi.org/ggx4pd
DOI: 10.1093/jpids/piaa069 · PMID: 32463092 · PMCID: PMC7313950
104. Clinical Characteristics of 58 Children With a Pediatric Inflammatory Multisystem
Syndrome Temporally Associated With SARS-CoV-2
Elizabeth Whittaker, Alasdair Bamford, Julia Kenny, Myrsini Kaforou, Christine E. Jones, Priyen
Shah, Padmanabhan Ramnarayan, Alain Fraisse, Owen Miller, Patrick Davies, … for the PIMSTS Study Group and EUCLIDS and PERFORM Consortia
JAMA (2020-07-21) https://doi.org/gg2v75
DOI: 10.1001/jama.2020.10369 · PMID: 32511692 · PMCID: PMC7281356
105. Toxic shock-like syndrome and COVID-19: Multisystem inflammatory syndrome in
children (MIS-C)
Andrea G. Greene, Mona Saleh, Eric Roseman, Richard Sinert
The American Journal of Emergency Medicine (2020-11) https://doi.org/gg2586
DOI: 10.1016/j.ajem.2020.05.117 · PMID: 32532619 · PMCID: PMC7274960
106. Multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children and COVID-19 are distinct
presentations of SARS–CoV-2
Caroline Diorio, Sarah E. Henrickson, Laura A. Vella, Kevin O. McNerney, Julie Chase,
Chakkapong Burudpakdee, Jessica H. Lee, Cristina Jasen, Fran Balamuth, David M. Barrett, …
Hamid Bassiri
Journal of Clinical Investigation (2020-10-05) https://doi.org/gg7mz2
DOI: 10.1172/jci140970 · PMID: 32730233 · PMCID: PMC7598044
107. The Immunology of Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in Children with COVID-19
Camila Rosat Consiglio, Nicola Cotugno, Fabian Sardh, Christian Pou, Donato Amodio, Lucie
Rodriguez, Ziyang Tan, Sonia Zicari, Alessandra Ruggiero, Giuseppe Rubens Pascucci, …
Petter Brodin
Cell (2020-11) https://doi.org/d8fh
DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2020.09.016 · PMID: 32966765 · PMCID: PMC7474869
108. Acute Heart Failure in Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in Children in the
Context of Global SARS-CoV-2 Pandemic
Zahra Belhadjer, Mathilde Méot, Fanny Bajolle, Diala Khraiche, Antoine Legendre, Samya
Abakka, Johanne Auriau, Marion Grimaud, Mehdi Oualha, Maurice Beghetti, … Damien Bonnet
Circulation (2020-08-04) https://doi.org/ggwkv6
DOI: 10.1161/circulationaha.120.048360 · PMID: 32418446
109. An adult with Kawasaki-like multisystem inflammatory syndrome associated with
COVID-19
Sheila Shaigany, Marlis Gnirke, Allison Guttmann, Hong Chong, Shane Meehan, Vanessa
Raabe, Eddie Louie, Bruce Solitar, Alisa Femia

The Lancet (2020-07) https://doi.org/gg4sd6
DOI: 10.1016/s0140-6736(20)31526-9 · PMID: 32659211 · PMCID: PMC7351414
110. COVID-19 associated Kawasaki-like multisystem inflammatory disease in an adult
Sabrina Sokolovsky, Parita Soni, Taryn Hoffman, Philip Kahn, Joshua Scheers-Masters
The American Journal of Emergency Medicine (2021-01) https://doi.org/gg5tf4
DOI: 10.1016/j.ajem.2020.06.053 · PMID: 32631771 · PMCID: PMC7315983
111. A systems approach to infectious disease
Manon Eckhardt, Judd F. Hultquist, Robyn M. Kaake, Ruth Hüttenhain, Nevan J. Krogan
Nature Reviews Genetics (2020-02-14) https://doi.org/ggnv63
DOI: 10.1038/s41576-020-0212-5 · PMID: 32060427
112. Differential expression of serum/plasma proteins in various infectious diseases:
Specific or nonspecific signatures
Sandipan Ray, Sandip K. Patel, Vipin Kumar, Jagruti Damahe, Sanjeeva Srivastava
PROTEOMICS - Clinical Applications (2014-02) https://doi.org/f2px3h
DOI: 10.1002/prca.201300074 · PMID: 24293340
113. Imbalanced Host Response to SARS-CoV-2 Drives Development of COVID-19
Daniel Blanco-Melo, Benjamin E. Nilsson-Payant, Wen-Chun Liu, Skyler Uhl, Daisy Hoagland,
Rasmus Møller, Tristan X. Jordan, Kohei Oishi, Maryline Panis, David Sachs, … Benjamin R.
tenOever
Cell (2020-05) https://doi.org/ggw5tq
DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2020.04.026 · PMID: 32416070 · PMCID: PMC7227586
114. SARS-CoV-2 ORF3b Is a Potent Interferon Antagonist Whose Activity Is Increased by
a Naturally Occurring Elongation Variant
Yoriyuki Konno, Izumi Kimura, Keiya Uriu, Masaya Fukushi, Takashi Irie, Yoshio Koyanagi,
Daniel Sauter, Robert J. Gifford, So Nakagawa, Kei Sato
Cell Reports (2020-09) https://doi.org/ghvf8j
DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.2020.108185 · PMID: 32941788 · PMCID: PMC7473339
115. Bulk and single-cell gene expression profiling of SARS-CoV-2 infected human cell
lines identifies molecular targets for therapeutic intervention
Wyler Emanuel, Mösbauer Kirstin, Franke Vedran, Diag Asija, Gottula Lina Theresa, Arsie
Roberto, Klironomos Filippos, Koppstein David, Ayoub Salah, Buccitelli Christopher, …
Landthaler Markus
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory (2020-05-05) https://doi.org/ggxd2g
DOI: 10.1101/2020.05.05.079194
116. Isolation and characterization of SARS-CoV-2 from the first US COVID-19 patient
Jennifer Harcourt, Azaibi Tamin, Xiaoyan Lu, Shifaq Kamili, Senthil Kumar. Sakthivel, Janna
Murray, Krista Queen, Ying Tao, Clinton R. Paden, Jing Zhang, … Natalie J. Thornburg
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory (2020-03-07) https://doi.org/gg2fkm
DOI: 10.1101/2020.03.02.972935 · PMID: 32511316 · PMCID: PMC7239045

117. Proteomics of SARS-CoV-2-infected host cells reveals therapy targets
Denisa Bojkova, Kevin Klann, Benjamin Koch, Marek Widera, David Krause, Sandra Ciesek,
Jindrich Cinatl, Christian Münch
Nature (2020-05-14) https://doi.org/dw7s
DOI: 10.1038/s41586-020-2332-7 · PMID: 32408336
118. Potent human neutralizing antibodies elicited by SARS-CoV-2 infection
Bin Ju, Qi Zhang, Xiangyang Ge, Ruoke Wang, Jiazhen Yu, Sisi Shan, Bing Zhou, Shuo Song,
Xian Tang, Jinfang Yu, … Linqi Zhang
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory (2020-03-26) https://doi.org/ggp7t4
DOI: 10.1101/2020.03.21.990770
119. Plasma proteome of severe acute respiratory syndrome analyzed by twodimensional gel electrophoresis and mass spectrometry
J.-H. Chen, Y.-W. Chang, C.-W. Yao, T.-S. Chiueh, S.-C. Huang, K.-Y. Chien, A. Chen, F.-Y.
Chang, C.-H. Wong, Y.-J. Chen
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences (2004-11-30) https://doi.org/dtv8sx
DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0407992101 · PMID: 15572443 · PMCID: PMC535397
120. Analysis of multimerization of the SARS coronavirus nucleocapsid protein
Runtao He, Frederick Dobie, Melissa Ballantine, Andrew Leeson, Yan Li, Nathalie Bastien,
Todd Cutts, Anton Andonov, Jingxin Cao, Timothy F. Booth, … Xuguang Li
Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications (2004-04) https://doi.org/dbfwr9
DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2004.02.074 · PMID: 15020242 · PMCID: PMC7111152
121. UniProt: a worldwide hub of protein knowledge
The UniProt Consortium
Nucleic Acids Research (2019-01-08) https://doi.org/gfwqck
DOI: 10.1093/nar/gky1049 · PMID: 30395287 · PMCID: PMC6323992
122. Home - Genome - NCBI https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genome
123. The Immune Epitope Database (IEDB): 2018 update
Randi Vita, Swapnil Mahajan, James A Overton, Sandeep Kumar Dhanda, Sheridan Martini,
Jason R Cantrell, Daniel K Wheeler, Alessandro Sette, Bjoern Peters
Nucleic Acids Research (2019-01-08) https://doi.org/gfhz6n
DOI: 10.1093/nar/gky1006 · PMID: 30357391 · PMCID: PMC6324067
124. ViPR: an open bioinformatics database and analysis resource for virology research
Brett E. Pickett, Eva L. Sadat, Yun Zhang, Jyothi M. Noronha, R. Burke Squires, Victoria Hunt,
Mengya Liu, Sanjeev Kumar, Sam Zaremba, Zhiping Gu, … Richard H. Scheuermann
Nucleic Acids Research (2012-01) https://doi.org/c3tds5
DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkr859 · PMID: 22006842 · PMCID: PMC3245011
125. A SARS-CoV-2-Human Protein-Protein Interaction Map Reveals Drug Targets and
Potential Drug-Repurposing
David E. Gordon, Gwendolyn M. Jang, Mehdi Bouhaddou, Jiewei Xu, Kirsten Obernier, Matthew

J. O’Meara, Jeffrey Z. Guo, Danielle L. Swaney, Tia A. Tummino, Ruth Hüttenhain, … Nevan J.
Krogan
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory (2020-03-22) https://doi.org/ggpptg
DOI: 10.1101/2020.03.22.002386 · PMID: 32511329
126. Protein Palmitoylation and Its Role in Bacterial and Viral Infections
Justyna Sobocińska, Paula Roszczenko-Jasińska, Anna Ciesielska, Katarzyna Kwiatkowska
Frontiers in Immunology (2018-01-19) https://doi.org/gcxpp2
DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2017.02003 · PMID: 29403483 · PMCID: PMC5780409
127. Virus-host interactome and proteomic survey of PMBCs from COVID-19 patients
reveal potential virulence factors influencing SARS-CoV-2 pathogenesis
Jingjiao Li, Mingquan Guo, Xiaoxu Tian, Chengrong Liu, Xin Wang, Xing Yang, Ping Wu, Zixuan
Xiao, Yafei Qu, Yue Yin, … Qiming Liang
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory (2020-04-02) https://doi.org/ggrgbv
DOI: 10.1101/2020.03.31.019216
128. The Nuclear Factor NF- B Pathway in Inflammation
T. Lawrence
Cold Spring Harbor Perspectives in Biology (2009-10-07) https://doi.org/fptfvp
DOI: 10.1101/cshperspect.a001651 · PMID: 20457564 · PMCID: PMC2882124
129. The severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) envelope (E)
protein harbors a conserved BH3-like sequence
Vincent Navratil, Loïc Lionnard, Sonia Longhi, J. Marie Hardwick, Christophe Combet, Abdel
Aouacheria
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory (2020-06-09) https://doi.org/ggrp43
DOI: 10.1101/2020.04.09.033522
130. Structure of SARS Coronavirus Spike Receptor-Binding Domain Complexed with
Receptor
F. Li
Science (2005-09-16) https://doi.org/fww324
DOI: 10.1126/science.1116480 · PMID: 16166518
131. Structural basis for the recognition of SARS-CoV-2 by full-length human ACE2
Renhong Yan, Yuanyuan Zhang, Yaning Li, Lu Xia, Yingying Guo, Qiang Zhou
Science (2020-03-27) https://doi.org/ggpxc8
DOI: 10.1126/science.abb2762 · PMID: 32132184 · PMCID: PMC7164635
132. Structural basis of receptor recognition by SARS-CoV-2
Jian Shang, Gang Ye, Ke Shi, Yushun Wan, Chuming Luo, Hideki Aihara, Qibin Geng, Ashley
Auerbach, Fang Li
Nature (2020-03-30) https://doi.org/ggqspv
DOI: 10.1038/s41586-020-2179-y · PMID: 32225175

133. Crystal structure of the 2019-nCoV spike receptor-binding domain bound with the
ACE2 receptor
Jun Lan, Jiwan Ge, Jinfang Yu, Sisi Shan, Huan Zhou, Shilong Fan, Qi Zhang, Xuanling Shi,
Qisheng Wang, Linqi Zhang, Xinquan Wang
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory (2020-02-20) https://doi.org/ggqzp5
DOI: 10.1101/2020.02.19.956235
134. Structural and Functional Basis of SARS-CoV-2 Entry by Using Human ACE2
Qihui Wang, Yanfang Zhang, Lili Wu, Sheng Niu, Chunli Song, Zengyuan Zhang, Guangwen
Lu, Chengpeng Qiao, Yu Hu, Kwok-Yung Yuen, … Jianxun Qi
Cell (2020-05) https://doi.org/ggr2cz
DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2020.03.045 · PMID: 32275855 · PMCID: PMC7144619
135. Receptor Recognition by the Novel Coronavirus from Wuhan: an Analysis Based on
Decade-Long Structural Studies of SARS Coronavirus
Yushun Wan, Jian Shang, Rachel Graham, Ralph S. Baric, Fang Li
Journal of Virology (2020-03-17) https://doi.org/ggjvwn
DOI: 10.1128/jvi.00127-20 · PMID: 31996437 · PMCID: PMC7081895
136. A pneumonia outbreak associated with a new coronavirus of probable bat origin
Peng Zhou, Xing-Lou Yang, Xian-Guang Wang, Ben Hu, Lei Zhang, Wei Zhang, Hao-Rui Si,
Yan Zhu, Bei Li, Chao-Lin Huang, … Zheng-Li Shi
Nature (2020-02-03) https://doi.org/ggj5cg
DOI: 10.1038/s41586-020-2012-7 · PMID: 32015507 · PMCID: PMC7095418
137. Structure of the Hemagglutinin Precursor Cleavage Site, a Determinant of Influenza
Pathogenicity and the Origin of the Labile Conformation
Jue Chen, Kon Ho Lee, David A Steinhauer, David J Stevens, John J Skehel, Don C Wiley
Cell (1998-10) https://doi.org/bvgh5b
DOI: 10.1016/s0092-8674(00)81771-7
138. Role of Hemagglutinin Cleavage for the Pathogenicity of Influenza Virus
David A. Steinhauer
Virology (1999-05) https://doi.org/fw3jz4
DOI: 10.1006/viro.1999.9716 · PMID: 10329563
139. Tracking Changes in SARS-CoV-2 Spike: Evidence that D614G Increases Infectivity
of the COVID-19 Virus
Bette Korber, Will M. Fischer, Sandrasegaram Gnanakaran, Hyejin Yoon, James Theiler,
Werner Abfalterer, Nick Hengartner, Elena E. Giorgi, Tanmoy Bhattacharya, Brian Foley, …
Matthew D. Wyles
Cell (2020-08) https://doi.org/gg3wqn
DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2020.06.043 · PMID: 32697968 · PMCID: PMC7332439
140. Structural and Functional Analysis of the D614G SARS-CoV-2 Spike Protein Variant
Leonid Yurkovetskiy, Xue Wang, Kristen E. Pascal, Christopher Tomkins-Tinch, Thomas P.
Nyalile, Yetao Wang, Alina Baum, William E. Diehl, Ann Dauphin, Claudia Carbone, … Jeremy

Luban
Cell (2020-10) https://doi.org/ghkt47
DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2020.09.032 · PMID: 32991842 · PMCID: PMC7492024
141. Emergence of a new SARS-CoV-2 variant in the UK
Julian W Tang, Paul A Tambyah, David SC Hui
Journal of Infection (2020-12) https://doi.org/ghtg2k
DOI: 10.1016/j.jinf.2020.12.024 · PMID: 33383088 · PMCID: PMC7834693
142. WHO | SARS-CoV-2 Variant – United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
WHO
http://www.who.int/csr/don/21-december-2020-sars-cov2-variant-united-kingdom/en/
143. SARS-CoV-2 Variant Under Investigation 202012/01 has more than twofold
replicative advantage
Frederic Grabowski, Grzegorz Preibisch, Marek Kochańczyk, Tomasz Lipniacki
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory (2021-01-04) https://doi.org/ghtzw3
DOI: 10.1101/2020.12.28.20248906
144. Controversy around airborne versus droplet transmission of respiratory viruses
Eunice Y. C. Shiu, Nancy H. L. Leung, Benjamin J. Cowling
Current Opinion in Infectious Diseases (2019-08) https://doi.org/ggbwdb
DOI: 10.1097/qco.0000000000000563
145. Viral infections acquired indoors through airborne, droplet or contact transmission.
Giuseppina La Rosa, Marta Fratini, Simonetta Della Libera, Marcello Iaconelli, Michele Muscillo
Annali dell’Istituto superiore di sanita (2013) https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23771256
DOI: 10.4415/ann_13_02_03 · PMID: 23771256
146. Transmission of SARS-CoV-2: implications for infection prevention precautions
https://www.who.int/news-room/commentaries/detail/transmission-of-sars-cov-2-implications-forinfection-prevention-precautions
147. Questioning Aerosol Transmission of Influenza
Camille Lemieux, Gabrielle Brankston, Leah Gitterman, Zahir Hirji, Michael Gardam
Emerging Infectious Diseases (2007-01) https://doi.org/c2skj8
DOI: 10.3201/eid1301.061202 · PMID: 17370541 · PMCID: PMC2725811
148. Assessing the Dynamics and Control of Droplet- and Aerosol-Transmitted Influenza
Using an Indoor Positioning System
Timo Smieszek, Gianrocco Lazzari, Marcel Salathé
Scientific Reports (2019-02-18) https://doi.org/ggnqbc
DOI: 10.1038/s41598-019-38825-y · PMID: 30778136 · PMCID: PMC6379436
149. Influenza A virus transmission via respiratory aerosols or droplets as it relates to
pandemic potential
Mathilde Richard, Ron A. M. Fouchier

FEMS Microbiology Reviews (2016-01) https://doi.org/f8cp4h
DOI: 10.1093/femsre/fuv039 · PMID: 26385895 · PMCID: PMC5006288
150. Coronavirus Pathogenesis
Susan R. Weiss, Julian L. Leibowitz
Advances in Virus Research (2011) https://doi.org/ggvvd7
DOI: 10.1016/b978-0-12-385885-6.00009-2 · PMID: 22094080 · PMCID: PMC7149603
151. SARS and MERS: recent insights into emerging coronaviruses
Emmie de Wit, Neeltje van Doremalen, Darryl Falzarano, Vincent J. Munster
Nature Reviews Microbiology (2016-06-27) https://doi.org/f8v5cv
DOI: 10.1038/nrmicro.2016.81 · PMID: 27344959 · PMCID: PMC7097822
152. Role of fomites in SARS transmission during the largest hospital outbreak in Hong
Kong
Shenglan Xiao, Yuguo Li, Tze-wai Wong, David S. C. Hui
PLOS ONE (2017-07-20) https://doi.org/gbpgv7
DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0181558 · PMID: 28727803 · PMCID: PMC5519164
153. Stability of Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) under
different environmental conditions
N van Doremalen, T Bushmaker, VJ Munster
Eurosurveillance (2013-09-19) https://doi.org/ggnnjt
DOI: 10.2807/1560-7917.es2013.18.38.20590 · PMID: 24084338
154. MERS coronavirus: diagnostics, epidemiology and transmission
Ian M. Mackay, Katherine E. Arden
Virology Journal (2015-12-22) https://doi.org/f745px
DOI: 10.1186/s12985-015-0439-5 · PMID: 26695637 · PMCID: PMC4687373
155. Transmission routes of 2019-nCoV and controls in dental practice
Xian Peng, Xin Xu, Yuqing Li, Lei Cheng, Xuedong Zhou, Biao Ren
International Journal of Oral Science (2020-03-03) https://doi.org/ggnf47
DOI: 10.1038/s41368-020-0075-9 · PMID: 32127517 · PMCID: PMC7054527
156. Reducing transmission of SARS-CoV-2
Kimberly A. Prather, Chia C. Wang, Robert T. Schooley
Science (2020-06-26) https://doi.org/ggxp9w
DOI: 10.1126/science.abc6197 · PMID: 32461212
157. Aerosol and Surface Stability of SARS-CoV-2 as Compared with SARS-CoV-1
Neeltje van Doremalen, Trenton Bushmaker, Dylan H. Morris, Myndi G. Holbrook, Amandine
Gamble, Brandi N. Williamson, Azaibi Tamin, Jennifer L. Harcourt, Natalie J. Thornburg, Susan
I. Gerber, … Vincent J. Munster
New England Journal of Medicine (2020-04-16) https://doi.org/ggn88w
DOI: 10.1056/nejmc2004973 · PMID: 32182409 · PMCID: PMC7121658

158. It Is Time to Address Airborne Transmission of Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID19)
Lidia Morawska, Donald K Milton
Clinical Infectious Diseases (2020-07-06) https://doi.org/gg34zn
DOI: 10.1093/cid/ciaa939 · PMID: 32628269 · PMCID: PMC7454469
159. Aerodynamic analysis of SARS-CoV-2 in two Wuhan hospitals
Yuan Liu, Zhi Ning, Yu Chen, Ming Guo, Yingle Liu, Nirmal Kumar Gali, Li Sun, Yusen Duan,
Jing Cai, Dane Westerdahl, … Ke Lan
Nature (2020-04-27) https://doi.org/ggtgng
DOI: 10.1038/s41586-020-2271-3 · PMID: 32340022
160. Airborne Transmission of SARS-CoV-2
Michael Klompas, Meghan A. Baker, Chanu Rhee
JAMA (2020-08-04) https://doi.org/gg4ttq
DOI: 10.1001/jama.2020.12458
161. Exaggerated risk of transmission of COVID-19 by fomites
Emanuel Goldman
The Lancet Infectious Diseases (2020-08) https://doi.org/gg6br7
DOI: 10.1016/s1473-3099(20)30561-2 · PMID: 32628907 · PMCID: PMC7333993
162. Clinical characteristics of 24 asymptomatic infections with COVID-19 screened
among close contacts in Nanjing, China
Zhiliang Hu, Ci Song, Chuanjun Xu, Guangfu Jin, Yaling Chen, Xin Xu, Hongxia Ma, Wei Chen,
Yuan Lin, Yishan Zheng, … Hongbing Shen
Science China Life Sciences (2020-03-04) https://doi.org/dqbn
DOI: 10.1007/s11427-020-1661-4 · PMID: 32146694 · PMCID: PMC7088568
163. Evidence for transmission of COVID-19 prior to symptom onset
Lauren C Tindale, Jessica E Stockdale, Michelle Coombe, Emma S Garlock, Wing Yin Venus
Lau, Manu Saraswat, Louxin Zhang, Dongxuan Chen, Jacco Wallinga, Caroline Colijn
eLife (2020-06-22) https://doi.org/gg6dtw
DOI: 10.7554/elife.57149 · PMID: 32568070 · PMCID: PMC7386904
164. Time Kinetics of Viral Clearance and Resolution of Symptoms in Novel Coronavirus
Infection
De Chang, Guoxin Mo, Xin Yuan, Yi Tao, Xiaohua Peng, Fu-Sheng Wang, Lixin Xie, Lokesh
Sharma, Charles S. Dela Cruz, Enqiang Qin
American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine (2020-05-01) https://doi.org/ggq8xs
DOI: 10.1164/rccm.202003-0524le · PMID: 32200654 · PMCID: PMC7193851
165. Temporal dynamics in viral shedding and transmissibility of COVID-19
Xi He, Eric H. Y. Lau, Peng Wu, Xilong Deng, Jian Wang, Xinxin Hao, Yiu Chung Lau, Jessica
Y. Wong, Yujuan Guan, Xinghua Tan, … Gabriel M. Leung
Nature Medicine (2020-04-15) https://doi.org/ggr99q
DOI: 10.1038/s41591-020-0869-5 · PMID: 32296168

166. COVID-19 and Your Health
CDC
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2020-10-28)
https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/prevent-getting-sick/how-covid-spreads.html
167. Virological assessment of hospitalized patients with COVID-2019
Roman Wölfel, Victor M. Corman, Wolfgang Guggemos, Michael Seilmaier, Sabine Zange,
Marcel A. Müller, Daniela Niemeyer, Terry C. Jones, Patrick Vollmar, Camilla Rothe, …
Clemens Wendtner
Nature (2020-04-01) https://doi.org/ggqrv7
DOI: 10.1038/s41586-020-2196-x · PMID: 32235945
168. Clinical predictors and timing of cessation of viral RNA shedding in patients with
COVID-19
Cristina Corsini Campioli, Edison Cano Cevallos, Mariam Assi, Robin Patel, Matthew J.
Binnicker, John C. O’Horo
Journal of Clinical Virology (2020-09) https://doi.org/gg7m96
DOI: 10.1016/j.jcv.2020.104577 · PMID: 32777762 · PMCID: PMC7405830
169. Presymptomatic SARS-CoV-2 Infections and Transmission in a Skilled Nursing
Facility
Melissa M. Arons, Kelly M. Hatfield, Sujan C. Reddy, Anne Kimball, Allison James, Jesica R.
Jacobs, Joanne Taylor, Kevin Spicer, Ana C. Bardossy, Lisa P. Oakley, … John A. Jernigan
New England Journal of Medicine (2020-05-28) https://doi.org/ggszfg
DOI: 10.1056/nejmoa2008457 · PMID: 32329971 · PMCID: PMC7200056
170. Prevalence of SARS-CoV-2 Infection in Residents of a Large Homeless Shelter in
Boston
Travis P. Baggett, Harrison Keyes, Nora Sporn, Jessie M. Gaeta
JAMA (2020-06-02) https://doi.org/ggtsh3
DOI: 10.1001/jama.2020.6887 · PMID: 32338732 · PMCID: PMC7186911
171. Presumed Asymptomatic Carrier Transmission of COVID-19
Yan Bai, Lingsheng Yao, Tao Wei, Fei Tian, Dong-Yan Jin, Lijuan Chen, Meiyun Wang
JAMA (2020-04-14) https://doi.org/ggmbs8
DOI: 10.1001/jama.2020.2565 · PMID: 32083643 · PMCID: PMC7042844
172. Transmission of COVID-19 in the terminal stages of the incubation period: A familial
cluster
Peng Li, Ji-Bo Fu, Ke-Feng Li, Jie-Nan Liu, Hong-Ling Wang, Lei-Jie Liu, Yan Chen, Yong-Li
Zhang, She-Lan Liu, An Tang, … Jian-Bo Yan
International Journal of Infectious Diseases (2020-07) https://doi.org/ggq844
DOI: 10.1016/j.ijid.2020.03.027 · PMID: 32194239 · PMCID: PMC7264481
173. A Cohort of SARS-CoV-2 Infected Asymptomatic and Pre-Symptomatic Contacts
from COVID-19 Contact Tracing in Hubei Province, China: Short-Term Outcomes
Peng Zhang, Fei Tian, Yuan Wan, Jing Cai, Zhengmin Qian, Ran Wu, Yunquan Zhang, Shiyu

Zhang, Huan Li, Mingyan Li, … Hualiang Lin
SSRN Electronic Journal (2020) https://doi.org/ghf3n2
DOI: 10.2139/ssrn.3678556
174. Estimating the asymptomatic proportion of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19)
cases on board the Diamond Princess cruise ship, Yokohama, Japan, 2020
Kenji Mizumoto, Katsushi Kagaya, Alexander Zarebski, Gerardo Chowell
Eurosurveillance (2020-03-12) https://doi.org/ggn4bd
DOI: 10.2807/1560-7917.es.2020.25.10.2000180 · PMID: 32183930 · PMCID: PMC7078829
175. Estimated prevalence and viral transmissibility in subjects with asymptomatic
SARS-CoV-2 infections in Wuhan, China
Kang Zhang, Weiwei Tong, Xinghuan Wang, Johnson Yiu-Nam Lau
Precision Clinical Medicine (2020-12) https://doi.org/ghjmks
DOI: 10.1093/pcmedi/pbaa032 · PMCID: PMC7499683
176. Investigation of SARS-CoV-2 outbreaks in six care homes in London, April 2020
Shamez N Ladhani, J.Yimmy Chow, Roshni Janarthanan, Jonathan Fok, Emma CrawleyBoevey, Amoolya Vusirikala, Elena Fernandez, Marina Sanchez Perez, Suzanne Tang, Kate
Dun-Campbell, … Maria Zambon
EClinicalMedicine (2020-09) https://doi.org/ghbj9v
DOI: 10.1016/j.eclinm.2020.100533 · PMID: 32923993 · PMCID: PMC7480335
177. Clinical and immunological assessment of asymptomatic SARS-CoV-2 infections
Quan-Xin Long, Xiao-Jun Tang, Qiu-Lin Shi, Qin Li, Hai-Jun Deng, Jun Yuan, Jie-Li Hu, Wei Xu,
Yong Zhang, Fa-Jin Lv, … Ai-Long Huang
Nature Medicine (2020-06-18) https://doi.org/gg26dx
DOI: 10.1038/s41591-020-0965-6 · PMID: 32555424
178. Suppression of a SARS-CoV-2 outbreak in the Italian municipality of Vo’
Enrico Lavezzo, Elisa Franchin, Constanze Ciavarella, Gina Cuomo-Dannenburg, Luisa Barzon,
Claudia Del Vecchio, Lucia Rossi, Riccardo Manganelli, Arianna Loregian, Nicolò Navarin, …
Imperial College COVID-19 Response Team
Nature (2020-06-30) https://doi.org/gg3w87
DOI: 10.1038/s41586-020-2488-1 · PMID: 32604404
179. A systematic review and meta-analysis of published research data on COVID-19
infection fatality rates
Gideon Meyerowitz-Katz, Lea Merone
International Journal of Infectious Diseases (2020-12) https://doi.org/ghgjpw
DOI: 10.1016/j.ijid.2020.09.1464 · PMID: 33007452 · PMCID: PMC7524446
180. Global Covid-19 Case Fatality Rates
The Centre for Evidence-Based Medicine
https://www.cebm.net/covid-19/global-covid-19-case-fatality-rates/

181. Estimating the Global Infection Fatality Rate of COVID-19
Richard Grewelle, Giulio De Leo
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory (2020-05-18) https://doi.org/ghbvcj
DOI: 10.1101/2020.05.11.20098780
182. Repeated cross-sectional sero-monitoring of SARS-CoV-2 in New York City
Daniel Stadlbauer, Jessica Tan, Kaijun Jiang, Matthew M. Hernandez, Shelcie Fabre, Fatima
Amanat, Catherine Teo, Guha Asthagiri Arunkumar, Meagan McMahon, Christina Capuano, …
Florian Krammer
Nature (2020-11-03) https://doi.org/ghhtq9
DOI: 10.1038/s41586-020-2912-6 · PMID: 33142304
183. What do we know about the risk of dying from COVID-19?
Our World in Data
https://ourworldindata.org/covid-mortality-risk
184. The concept of R o in epidemic theory
J. A. P. Heesterbeek, K. Dietz
Statistica Neerlandica (1996-03) https://doi.org/d29ch4
DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-9574.1996.tb01482.x
185. Modeling infectious diseases in humans and animals
Matthew James Keeling, Pejman Rohani
Princeton University Press (2008)
ISBN: 9780691116174
186. A contribution to the mathematical theory of epidemics
Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series A, Containing Papers of a Mathematical
and Physical Character
(1997-01) https://doi.org/fwx2qw
DOI: 10.1098/rspa.1927.0118
187. Population biology of infectious diseases: Part I
Roy M. Anderson, Robert M. May
Nature (1979-08-01) https://doi.org/b6z9hc
DOI: 10.1038/280361a0 · PMID: 460412
188. Modeling infectious disease dynamics
Sarah Cobey
Science (2020-05-15) https://doi.org/ggsztw
DOI: 10.1126/science.abb5659 · PMID: 32332062
189. Theoretical ecology: principles and applications
Robert M. May, Angela R. McLean (editors)
Oxford University Press (2007)
ISBN: 9780199209989

190. Nowcasting and forecasting the potential domestic and international spread of the
2019-nCoV outbreak originating in Wuhan, China: a modelling study
Joseph T Wu, Kathy Leung, Gabriel M Leung
The Lancet (2020-02) https://doi.org/ggjvr7
DOI: 10.1016/s0140-6736(20)30260-9
191. The reproductive number of COVID-19 is higher compared to SARS coronavirus
Ying Liu, Albert A Gayle, Annelies Wilder-Smith, Joacim Rocklöv
Journal of Travel Medicine (2020-03) https://doi.org/ggnntv
DOI: 10.1093/jtm/taaa021 · PMID: 32052846 · PMCID: PMC7074654
192. Substantial undocumented infection facilitates the rapid dissemination of novel
coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2)
Ruiyun Li, Sen Pei, Bin Chen, Yimeng Song, Tao Zhang, Wan Yang, Jeffrey Shaman
Science (2020-05-01) https://doi.org/ggn6c2
DOI: 10.1126/science.abb3221 · PMID: 32179701
193. Epidemiological parameters of coronavirus disease 2019: a pooled analysis of
publicly reported individual data of 1155 cases from seven countries
Shujuan Ma, Jiayue Zhang, Minyan Zeng, Qingping Yun, Wei Guo, Yixiang Zheng, Shi Zhao,
Maggie H. Wang, Zuyao Yang
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory (2020-03-24) https://doi.org/ggqhzz
DOI: 10.1101/2020.03.21.20040329
194. Early Transmissibility Assessment of a Novel Coronavirus in Wuhan, China
Maimuna Majumder, Kenneth D. Mandl
SSRN Electronic Journal (2020) https://doi.org/ggqhz3
DOI: 10.2139/ssrn.3524675 · PMID: 32714102
195. Time-varying transmission dynamics of Novel Coronavirus Pneumonia in China
Tao Liu, Jianxiong Hu, Jianpeng Xiao, Guanhao He, Min Kang, Zuhua Rong, Lifeng Lin, Haojie
Zhong, Qiong Huang, Aiping Deng, … Wenjun Ma
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory (2020-02-13) https://doi.org/dkx9
DOI: 10.1101/2020.01.25.919787
196. Estimation of the reproductive number of novel coronavirus (COVID-19) and the
probable outbreak size on the Diamond Princess cruise ship: A data-driven analysis
Sheng Zhang, MengYuan Diao, Wenbo Yu, Lei Pei, Zhaofen Lin, Dechang Chen
International Journal of Infectious Diseases (2020-04) https://doi.org/ggpx56
DOI: 10.1016/j.ijid.2020.02.033 · PMID: 32097725 · PMCID: PMC7110591
197. Estimation of the Transmission Risk of the 2019-nCoV and Its Implication for Public
Health Interventions
Biao Tang, Xia Wang, Qian Li, Nicola Luigi Bragazzi, Sanyi Tang, Yanni Xiao, Jianhong Wu
Journal of Clinical Medicine (2020-02-07) https://doi.org/ggmkf4
DOI: 10.3390/jcm9020462 · PMID: 32046137 · PMCID: PMC7074281

198. Estimating the effective reproduction number of the 2019-nCoV in China
Zhidong Cao, Qingpeng Zhang, Xin Lu, Dirk Pfeiffer, Zhongwei Jia, Hongbing Song, Daniel
Dajun Zeng
medRxiv (2020-01) https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.01.27.20018952v1
DOI: 10.1101/2020.01.27.20018952
199. Modelling the epidemic trend of the 2019 novel coronavirus outbreak in China
Mingwang Shen, Zhihang Peng, Yanni Xiao, Lei Zhang
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory (2020-01-25) https://doi.org/ggqhzw
DOI: 10.1101/2020.01.23.916726
200. Novel coronavirus 2019-nCoV: early estimation of epidemiological parameters and
epidemic predictions
Jonathan M. Read, Jessica R. E. Bridgen, Derek A. T. Cummings, Antonia Ho, Chris P. Jewell
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory (2020-01-28) https://doi.org/dkzb
DOI: 10.1101/2020.01.23.20018549
201. Using early data to estimate the actual infection fatality ratio from COVID-19 in
France
Lionel Roques, Etienne Klein, Julien Papaïx, Antoine Sar, Samuel Soubeyrand
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory (2020-05-07) https://doi.org/ggqhz2
DOI: 10.1101/2020.03.22.20040915
202. Potential roles of social distancing in mitigating the spread of coronavirus disease
2019 (COVID-19) in South Korea
Sang Woo Park, Kaiyuan Sun, Cécile Viboud, Bryan T Grenfell, Jonathan Dushoff
GitHub (2020) https://github.com/parksw3/Korea-analysis/blob/master/v1/korea.pdf
203. Early dynamics of transmission and control of COVID-19: a mathematical modelling
study
Adam J Kucharski, Timothy W Russell, Charlie Diamond, Yang Liu, John Edmunds, Sebastian
Funk, Rosalind M Eggo, Fiona Sun, Mark Jit, James D Munday, … Stefan Flasche
The Lancet Infectious Diseases (2020-05) https://doi.org/ggptcf
DOI: 10.1016/s1473-3099(20)30144-4
204. Estimating the reproduction number of COVID-19 in Iran using epidemic modeling
Ebrahim Sahafizadeh, Samaneh Sartoli
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory (2020-04-23) https://doi.org/ggqhzx
DOI: 10.1101/2020.03.20.20038422
205. Report 13: Estimating the number of infections and the impact of nonpharmaceutical interventions on COVID-19 in 11 European countries
S Flaxman, S Mishra, A Gandy, H Unwin, H Coupland, T Mellan, H Zhu, T Berah, J Eaton, P
Perez Guzman, … S Bhatt
Imperial College London (2020-03-30) https://doi.org/ggrbmf
DOI: 10.25561/77731

206. Projecting hospital utilization during the COVID-19 outbreaks in the United States
Seyed M. Moghadas, Affan Shoukat, Meagan C. Fitzpatrick, Chad R. Wells, Pratha Sah,
Abhishek Pandey, Jeffrey D. Sachs, Zheng Wang, Lauren A. Meyers, Burton H. Singer, Alison
P. Galvani
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences (2020-04-21) https://doi.org/ggq7jc
DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2004064117 · PMID: 32245814 · PMCID: PMC7183199
207. The effect of control strategies to reduce social mixing on outcomes of the COVID19 epidemic in Wuhan, China: a modelling study
Kiesha Prem, Yang Liu, Timothy W Russell, Adam J Kucharski, Rosalind M Eggo, Nicholas
Davies, Mark Jit, Petra Klepac, Stefan Flasche, Samuel Clifford, … Joel Hellewell
The Lancet Public Health (2020-05) https://doi.org/ggp3xq
DOI: 10.1016/s2468-2667(20)30073-6 · PMID: 32220655 · PMCID: PMC7158905
208. Spread and dynamics of the COVID-19 epidemic in Italy: Effects of emergency
containment measures
Marino Gatto, Enrico Bertuzzo, Lorenzo Mari, Stefano Miccoli, Luca Carraro, Renato
Casagrandi, Andrea Rinaldo
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences (2020-05-12) https://doi.org/ggv4j6
DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2004978117 · PMID: 32327608 · PMCID: PMC7229754
209. Covid-19: Temporal variation in transmission during the COVID-19 outbreak
EpiForecasts and the CMMID Covid working group
https://epiforecasts.io/covid/
210. Rt COVID-19
Kevin Systrom, Thomas Vladeck, Mike Krieger
https://rt.live/
211. Emerging SARS-CoV-2 mutation hot spots include a novel RNA-dependent-RNA
polymerase variant
Maria Pachetti, Bruna Marini, Francesca Benedetti, Fabiola Giudici, Elisabetta Mauro, Paola
Storici, Claudio Masciovecchio, Silvia Angeletti, Massimo Ciccozzi, Robert C. Gallo, … Rudy
Ippodrino
Journal of Translational Medicine (2020-04-22) https://doi.org/ggtzrr
DOI: 10.1186/s12967-020-02344-6 · PMID: 32321524 · PMCID: PMC7174922
212. On the origin and continuing evolution of SARS-CoV-2
Xiaolu Tang, Changcheng Wu, Xiang Li, Yuhe Song, Xinmin Yao, Xinkai Wu, Yuange Duan,
Hong Zhang, Yirong Wang, Zhaohui Qian, … Jian Lu
National Science Review (2020-06) https://doi.org/ggndzn
DOI: 10.1093/nsr/nwaa036 · PMCID: PMC7107875
213. Emergence of genomic diversity and recurrent mutations in SARS-CoV-2
Lucy van Dorp, Mislav Acman, Damien Richard, Liam P. Shaw, Charlotte E. Ford, Louise
Ormond, Christopher J. Owen, Juanita Pang, Cedric C. S. Tan, Florencia A. T. Boshier, …
François Balloux

Infection, Genetics and Evolution (2020-09) https://doi.org/ggvz4h
DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2020.104351 · PMID: 32387564 · PMCID: PMC7199730
214. An integrated national scale SARS-CoV-2 genomic surveillance network
The Lancet Microbe
(2020-07) https://doi.org/d5mg
DOI: 10.1016/s2666-5247(20)30054-9 · PMID: 32835336 · PMCID: PMC7266609
215. Coast-to-Coast Spread of SARS-CoV-2 during the Early Epidemic in the United
States
Joseph R. Fauver, Mary E. Petrone, Emma B. Hodcroft, Kayoko Shioda, Hanna Y. Ehrlich,
Alexander G. Watts, Chantal B. F. Vogels, Anderson F. Brito, Tara Alpert, Anthony Muyombwe,
… Nathan D. Grubaugh
Cell (2020-05) https://doi.org/gg6r9x
DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2020.04.021 · PMID: 32386545 · PMCID: PMC7204677
216. Introductions and early spread of SARS-CoV-2 in the New York City area
Ana S. Gonzalez-Reiche, Matthew M. Hernandez, Mitchell J. Sullivan, Brianne Ciferri, Hala
Alshammary, Ajay Obla, Shelcie Fabre, Giulio Kleiner, Jose Polanco, Zenab Khan, … Harm van
Bakel
Science (2020-05-29) https://doi.org/gg5gv7
DOI: 10.1126/science.abc1917 · PMID: 32471856 · PMCID: PMC7259823
217. Spread of SARS-CoV-2 in the Icelandic Population
Daniel F. Gudbjartsson, Agnar Helgason, Hakon Jonsson, Olafur T. Magnusson, Pall Melsted,
Gudmundur L. Norddahl, Jona Saemundsdottir, Asgeir Sigurdsson, Patrick Sulem, Arna B.
Agustsdottir, … Kari Stefansson
New England Journal of Medicine (2020-06-11) https://doi.org/ggr6wx
DOI: 10.1056/nejmoa2006100 · PMID: 32289214 · PMCID: PMC7175425
218. GISAID - Initiative https://www.gisaid.org/
219. NCBI SARS-CoV-2 Resources https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sars-cov-2/
220. COVID-19 Data Portal - accelerating scientific research through data
https://www.covid19dataportal.org/
221. Epidemiology, transmission dynamics and control of SARS: the 2002–2003 epidemic
Roy M. Anderson, Christophe Fraser, Azra C. Ghani, Christl A. Donnelly, Steven Riley, Neil M.
Ferguson, Gabriel M. Leung, T. H. Lam, Anthony J. Hedley
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series B: Biological Sciences (200407-29) https://doi.org/c2n646
DOI: 10.1098/rstb.2004.1490 · PMID: 15306395 · PMCID: PMC1693389
222. Three Emerging Coronaviruses in Two Decades
Jeannette Guarner

American Journal of Clinical Pathology (2020-04) https://doi.org/ggppq3
DOI: 10.1093/ajcp/aqaa029 · PMID: 32053148 · PMCID: PMC7109697

