The tipping effect of delayed interventions on
the evolution of COVID-19 incidence
arXiv:2102.11750v1 [q-bio.QM] 23 Feb 2021

Kristoffer Rypdal Department of Mathematics and Statistics
UiT – The Arctic University of Norway

Abstract
We combine infectious disease transmission and the non-pharmaceutical intervention (NPI) response to disease incidence into one closed model consisting of two coupled
delay differential equations for the incidence rate and the time-dependent reproduction
number. The model contains three free parameters, the initial reproduction number,
the intervention strength, and the response delay relative to the time of infection. The
NPI response is modeled by assuming that the rate of change of the reproduction number is proportional to the negative deviation of the incidence rate from an intervention
threshold. This delay dynamical system exhibits damped oscillations in one part of
the parameter space, and growing oscillations in another, and these are separated by
a surface where the solution is a strictly periodic nonlinear oscillation. For parameters
relevant for the COVID-19 pandemic, the tipping transition from damped to growing
oscillations occurs for response delays of the order of one week, and suggests that effective control and mitigation of successive epidemic waves cannot be achieved unless
NPIs are implemented in a precautionary manner, rather than merely as a response to
the present incidence rate.

1

Introduction

A year after the COVID-19 pandemic began its rapid geographic expansion across the globe,
it is evident that the incidence rate in each country evolves in waves. In Europe, the typical
pattern so far has been two waves, the first in the spring of 2020, and a second longer and
stronger wave that started in the fall and is still ongoing at the time of writing, February
2021 [1]. The increased strength of the second wave is particularly prominent in the case
notification rate, but part of this increase is due to increasing testing rate. Nevertheless,
the tendency is clear also in the reported COVID-19 death rates, although many countries
have seen lower death rates in the start of the second wave, because this wave began with
infection spreading in the younger age groups.
Based on the experience from the first wave, countries should have been more prepared
for the second wave than for the first, and mitigation should have been be more feasible.
There is no apparent microbiological mechanisms that could have driven the strong second
1

wave, even though new and more contagious mutants have started to make an impact as we
enter the calendar year of 2021. Hence, the explanation seems to be associated to how our
societies respond to the threats of the pandemic.
Some evidence suggest that the wavy pattern during the first year of the pandemic has
been driven by an interaction between the pathogen’ natural tendency to reproduce and
the non-pharmaceutical interventions (NPIs) implemented by governments [2]. Even though
the emergence of new and more contagious mutants of the SARS-CoV-2 virus with higher
reproduction numbers R and the roll-out of vaccines will play an increasingly important role
in reducing R, NPIs are expected to play an important role in regulating and controlling the
incidence rate also in the upcoming year.
In this paper the term incidence rate X(t) will refer to the daily number of actual infections taking place in a country at the time t. It does not refer to the recorded incidence
(case notification rate), and the time t is the time of infection, not the time the infection
is detected. The instantaneous reproduction number R(t) refers to the average number of
new infections transmitted by an infected individual at the time t. This means that these
quantities are not directly observable at the time t.
There is clear and strong correlation between case notification rate and NPIs in most
countries, and the time lag between NPIs and changes in recorded incidence corresponds
roughly to the sum of incubation period and time for testing, analysis and registration.
Thus, it is reasonable to assume that the effect of NPI-induced changes of R(t) on the actual
transmission of the infection is more or less instantaneous. The same is not the case with the
effect of disease incidence on the NPIs. Here we would expect considerable delay between
cause and effect, a delay we shall refer to as the social response time.
NPIs represent a great burden on society, and so far in the COVID-19 pandemic there
are very few examples where interventions have been effectuated in a precautionary manner.
Political pressure has forced policy makers to respond to the recorded disease burden, which is
delayed by 1-2 weeks relative to the actual state, even though most governments have access
to model projections that can inform them about the true present state of the epidemic
and the likely development in the near future. The objective of this paper is to investigate
whether or not this delay may have an important influence on the trajectory of the epidemic
state.
It is intuitively evident that NPIs effectuated as responses to the true epidemic state
will lead to oscillations in the disease incidence. This is because NPIs act as a restoring
force counteracting the virus’ natural tendency to reproduce, while the disease activity level
below or above a socially acceptable threshold will enhance or reduce the NPIs. In a recent
paper [2], we constructed a simple model that reduces to a damped harmonic oscillator in
the small-amplitude (linearized) limit. In that paper we demonstrated that a weakening of
the intervention response over time could counteract the damping and lead to stronger and
longer secondary waves, but it was assumed that the intervention response is instantaneous.
In the present paper, we explore a similar model, where the intervention fatigue is replaced
by a delayed response.
In Section 2 we formulate and explain the mathematical model, which takes the form

2

of a system of first-order delay differential equations [3], and we discuss briefly the nature
of the equilibria and a possible limit cycle of the system and their relation to three model
parameters expressing the reproductive ability of the pathogen, the intervention strength,
and the response delay. Then we explore the solutions of the system numerically in Section
3, where we demonstrate the existence of a tipping transition that transforms the solution
from damped into growing oscillations, and we map the surface in the parameter space where
this transition takes place. In Section 4 we discuss the possible policy implications of these
results.

2
2.1

Methods
Evolution of epidemic state under given social evolution

Let J(t) be the cumulative fraction of infected individuals in a population, and I(t) the
instantaneous fraction of infectious individuals. The time evolution of these quantities can
be modelled by the simple system of ordinary differential equations,
dt J(t) = αR(t)I(t),
dIt (t) = α[R(t) − 1]I(t) .

(1)
(2)

Here the notation dt stands for the derivative with respect to time, R(t) is the effective
reproduction number at time t and α−1 is the mean duration of the infectious period. The
system is a reformulation of the standard Susceptible-Infectious-Recovered (SIR) model of
Kermack and McKendrick [4]. Here, the reproduction number can be written in the form,
R(t) =

β(t)
S(t),
α

(3)

where S(t) = 1 − J(t) is the fraction of susceptible individuals in the population and β(t)
is the contact rate, i.e., β(t)−1 is the characteristic time between contacts. The important
point is that α is time-independent and determined by the pathogen, β(t) is completely
determined by the contagiousness of the pathogen and the evolution of the social state, while
S(t) depends on the degree of immunity in the population. In the remainder of this paper we
shall assume that the degree of herd immunity does not change significantly during the time
span of the study, implying that we can consider S ≈ S0 as approximately constant, and
hence that R(t) ≈ (S0 /α)β(t) only varies in time due to variations in the social conditions
that determine the contact rate β(t). Note also that α[R(t) − 1] is the relative growth rate
for the infectious fraction, γI (t) ≡ dt ln I(t), which is positive when R(t) > 1 and negative
when R(t) < 1.

2.2

Evolution of social state under given epidemic evolution

Eqs. (1–3) describe the dynamics of the epidemic state J(t) and I(t) when the evolution
of the social state represented by R(t) is given. A closed model can only be obtained by
3

adding a description of the response of the social contact rate to the epidemic state. We
shall represent this response by assuming that the relative rate of change γR ≡ dt ln R(t)
is a linear function of the delayed incidence rate X(t − d) ≡ dt J(t − td ), where td is the
time delay. This function is positive when X(t − td ) is below a threshold X ∗ and negative
when it is above that threshold. Society reacts to the incidence rate only when it receives
the information about new infections, which is the reason for the delay. When the incidence
rate is low, society responds by relaxing restrictions, and the reproduction number increases.
When the incidence rate exceeds the threshold X ∗ , restrictions are introduced that make
dt ln R(t) to change sign from positive to negative. Thus, we end up with the equation,
dt ln R(t) = −k[X(t − td ) − X ∗ ],

(4)

where k is a coefficient which characterizes the strength of the social response to the epidemic
evolution, we shall refer to it as the intervention strength parameter.

2.3

A closed model for the socio-epidemic state

In the following, it is convenient to introduce a dimensionless time variable t → αt, which
allows us to formulate the differential equations as functions of time measured in units of the
infectious time α−1 , rather than days. We also express the incidence rate and the infectious
fraction in units of the intervention threshold, i.e., we introduce the dimensionless variables
X(t) → X(t)/X ∗ and I(t) → I(t)/X ∗ . Eqs. (1) can then be written as X(t) = R(t)I(t) and
inserted into Eq. (2), which leaves us with the following nonlinear system of delay differential
equations;
dt R(t) = −κ[R(t − δ)I(t − δ) − 1]R(t),
dt I(t) = [R(t) − 1]I(t),

(5)
(6)

where κ = kX ∗ /α and δ = td α. Since this is a system of delay differential equations we
have to specify the state variables in the time interval t ∈ (−δ, 0) rather than only at the
time t = 0 as in a conventional initial value problem. For this particular problem, we can
do this in a way that reflects the actual epidemiological situation. In the early stage of
the epidemic, the reproduction number is R0 which is determined by the infectivity of the
pathogen and the social structure in the actual country in absence of any non-pharmaceutical
interventions. Let us define the time origin t = 0 as the time when interventions start. In
Eq. (5) the threshold for intervention is X = 1, but because of the delay, the intervention
that starts to change R at t = 0 is a response to the reported incidence rate which took
place at t = −δ, which means that X(−δ) = 1. Since R(t) = R0 for t ∈ (−δ, 0) we have
that X(−δ) = R0 I(−δ) = 1, i.e., I(−δ) = 1/R0 . Eq. (6) is valid not only for t > 0,
but also in the time interval (−δ, 0) when R(t) = R0 , so the solution for I(t) satisfying
the condition I(−δ) = 1/R0 in this interval yields the following “initial conditions” for the
interval t ∈ (−δ, 0);
R(t) = R0 , I(t) = (1/R0 ) exp [(R0 − 1)(t + δ)].
4

(7)

Note also, that this choice does not only make epidemiological sense, but also ensures continuity in the derivatives of R(t) and I(t) across the intervention point t = 0.
The system has two equilibrium states: a fixed point in R = 1 and I = 1, where
the number of infected stays constant at the threshold value, and another fixed point in
R = 0 and I = 0, which is a state with no transmission and nobody infected. The latter is
obviously a repellor: if R(t) and I(t) both are becoming very small, then Eq. (6) implies
that I(t) decays exponentially towards zero as I(t) ≈ exp(−t), while Eq. (5) implies that
R(t) ≈ exp(κt) grows exponentially. The equilibrium (R, I) = (1, 1) a stable spiral node
for some regions of the parameter space (R0 , κ, δ), it is an unstable spiral node in another
region, and these regions are separated by a surface in parameter space where the solution
is a limit cycle.

2.4

Numerical exploration of the parameter space

Delay differential equations are integrated numerically by the same methods as ordinary differential equations, and these fast routines can be used to explore the nature of the solutions
in the regions of the parameter space which is of interest to the COVID-19 pandemic. In
particular, the region close to the transition surface is carefully mapped and we can easily
detect the transition points with three decimal accuracy in those three parameters. In practice, we run the routine for an array of values of the parameters R0 and κ and detect the
value of δ for which the solution shifts from a decaying oscillation to a growing one. It is
observed that this transition is sharper for larger values of R0 and smaller values of κ. This
is reasonable, since this is the region of the parameter space corresponding to stronger initial
epidemic spread and weaker interventions.

3

Results

The delay-differential equation system presented in Eqs. (5)-(7) is an interesting object
that warrants further mathematical study. The purpose of this paper, however, is not a
mathematical exploration, but to extract those properties of the system that are of particular
relevance to the delayed social response to changing reported incidence of the infection with
the SARS-CoV-2 virus.
The introduction of dimensionless, independent and dependent variables has revealed
that the epidemic evolution depends on the response time delay δ measured in units of the
effective infectious time α−1 . For COVID-19, a reasonable estimate of α−1 is 8 days [2],
which means that the physical delay in units of days is given by td = δ/α = 8 δ days. Hence,
it seems reasonable to explore delay times in a range around δ ∼ 1.
The interpretation of the dimensionless intervention strength κ can be seen from Eq. (5)
if we consider a state with very low incidence I(t)  1, such that the first term on the right
hand side can be neglected. In that case, we can write κ ≈ dt ln R, which is the relative rate
of change of R(t) measured in time units of 8 days. From experience with the first wave
of the COVID-19 epidemic, we have seen that a characteristic time scale of change of R
5

1.50

1.25

3

1.00

2

0.75

1

1.00
0.75

0

0.50
0

1.25

0

25 50 75 100 125

5

3.5

(b)

3.0

4

X(t)

X(t)

2

(d)

25

50

75 100 125

(f)

25
20

2.0

15
10
5

0.5

0

0
R(t)

0

30

1.0

0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6

0

t

1.5

1

10

0

2.5

3

20

1

t

X(t)

Out[ ]=

2

25 50 75 100 125

t

30

(e)

X(t)

4

3
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5

(c)

R(t)

1.75

X(t)

5

R(t)

R(t)

(a)
1.50

X(t)

1.75

0.8

1.0

1.2
R(t))

1.4

1.6

0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0
R(t))

Figure 1: Solutions of the delay differential system Eqs. (5- 7) for initial reproduction number R0 = 1.7 and
normalized intervention strength κ = 0.1. Blue curves show the evolution of the time-dependent reproduction
number R(t) and red curves the incidence rate X(t) in units of the intervention threshold. Panels (a), (c), and
(e) show the graphs for R(t) and X(t) for delay times for intervention δ = 0.90272, 0.3, and 1.0, respectively.
Times are given in units of infection duration α−1 . Panels (b), (d), and (f) present the corresponding phase
portraits, i.e, the trajectories for the vector (R(t), X(t)) as a parameterized curve for the same values of δ.

varies from a few weeks to a few months, which is included in the κ-range we explore below;
κ ∈ (0.2, 1.0).
The three characteristic modes of epidemic development are shown in Figure 1. On a
“transition surface” in the (R0 , κ, δ) parameter space, the solution to the system Eqs. (5)(7) is a nonlinear oscillation (limit cycle), as shown in Figure 1(a,b), but this oscillation is
parametrically unstable. This means that an infinitesimal perturbation of the parameters
could lead either to a damped oscillation, as in Figure 1(c,d), or to a growing oscillation, as
in Figure 1(e,f), depending on which side of the transition surface the perturbed parameter
point is located.
Figure 2 shows isolines (curves of constant R0 ) in the (κ, δ)-plane for R0 = 1.1, 1.7, 2.3, 3.0.
For any value of R0 in this range and κ in the range (0.2, 1.0), the solution is a growing
oscillation if the (κ, δ)-point is located above the isoline in the (κ, δ)-plane, and a damped
oscillation below this line.
The take-home message from this figure is that there is a transition from a series of
damped epidemic waves to a series of growing waves as the response delay δ exceeds a
critical transition threshold ∼ 1, or in dimensional units, ∼ 8 days. Thus, this simple model
suggests that a policy responding blindly to the actual incidence rate delayed by more than
approximately a week may lead to a succession of epidemic waves of increasing amplitude.

6

1.0

R0 = 1.1
R0 = 1.7

δ

0.9

unstable
above curves

R0 = 2.3

0.8

R0 = 3.0

Out[ ]=

0.7

stable
below curves

0.6
0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

κ

Figure 2: The figure depicts the transition between stable, decaying oscillations, like those shown in Figure
1 (c) and (d), and unstable, growing oscillations, as shown in Figure 1 (e) and (f). The curves represent the
parameters κ and δ at the transition points, for four values of R0 . At these transition points, the solution is
a limit cycle like the one shown in Figure 1 (a) and (b). For each R0 , the unstable region of the (κ, δ)-space
is the region above the corresponding curve.

4

Discussion

Our model system, Eqs. (5) and (6), is an extremely simplified representation of a complex
reality, although Eq. (6) is probably far easier to accept than Eq. (5), since it just describes
the balance between new infections produced in a population where the instantaneous reproduction number is R(t) and the reduction of the number of infections due to recovery
or death. Eq. (5), on the other hand, aspires to encapsulate the complex social dynamics
that determines the evolution of R(t) in one single delay differential equation. Such a simple
representation of a complex reality is certainly wrong, but may still be a valuable supplement
to purely qualitative reasoning over the socio-political process that determines the response
to a changing disease burden.
The potentially disastrous effect of delayed NPI response was recognized by Pei, Shandula, and Shaman (2020), employing a metapopulation transmission model and data on
infections, deaths and human mobility in the United States [5]. Their findings indicate that
if control measures and reductions of R(t) had been implemented just 1 to 2 weeks earlier,
substantial cases and deaths could have been avoided. It is concluded that rapid detection of
increasing case numbers and fast reimplementation of control measures are needed to control
repeated outbreaks. They run a considerably more complex transmission model than our
Eq. (6), but make no attempt to model the social NPI response. They rather project the
disease spread under factual and counterfactual NPI scenarios, and hence, the possibility
that NPI delays may lead to a succession of epidemic waves of increasing amplitude is not
explored.
The idea of NPIs trigged as incidence rates exceed a certain threshold is not new either.
In a paper on strategies for mitigation and suppression of COVID-19 in countries of different
7

income level, Walker et. al (2020) [6] modeled an oscillatory pattern of occupancy in intensive
care units (ICUs) by assuming NPIs resulting in instantaneous reduction of 75% in R from
a basic level 3.0 each time the threshold is exceeded, and a duration of the NPIs of 1 month.
Thus, in that model R(t) flips between 0.75 and a value that starts at 3.0 but is slightly
reduced in successive flips as herd immunity starts to emerge. By construction, this model
will not allow the oscillations of disease incidence rate to grow in amplitude; the incidence
threshold cannot be exceeded since the reproduction number drops instantaneously below 1
once the threshold is attained. The model presented here differs from [6] in two important
respects:
1. The effect on R(t) of crossing the incidence threshold is not an instantaneous shift,
but an effect on the rate of change dt ln R(t) which is proportional to the deviation
from the threshold. In this way one allows for an inertia in the response, which gives
rise to a damped oscillation around the threshold incidence. This can be seen from
˜ = I(t) − 1 around the equilibrium
introducing the perturbations R̃(t) = R(t) − 1, I(t)
(R, I) = (1, 1), and linearizing Eqs. (5) and (6) for δ = 0, which yields the damped
harmonic oscillator equation;
d2t I˜ + κdt I˜ + κI˜ = 0,

(8)

where the “friction coefficient” and the “spring constant” both are the same and given
by κ.
2. We allow for a delay δ in the NPI-response with respect to the time the incidence
threshold is crossed, and demonstrate that a sufficiently large delay may lead to a
transition from a damped oscillation to a growing oscillation.
The only damping taking place in [6] is a very slow reduction in effective reproduction
number arising from emerging herd immunity, i.e., reduction of the fraction of susceptible
individuals, S. This damping effect is not taken into account in our model, since it assumed
to be a negligible effect until vaccines effective against disease transmission have been rolled
out in all adult age groups.
The absence in [6] of delay in the social response and the absence of a reduction in the
response strength due to intervention fatigue (as explored in [2]), also preclude the possibility
of growing oscillations. Thus, the value of the scenarios depicted in [6] is primarily to
quantify the fraction of the time societies will have to spend in lockdown in order to keep
ICU occupancy below a given threshold, under the rather unrealistic assumption of full
societal control of the reproduction number.
Under the assumption of an infectious period of α−1 = 8 days, and reasonable values of
the parameters κ and R0 , our model predicts that the transition from damped to growing
oscillation occurs for a response delay td of the order of one week. This number should
of course be taken with a grain of salt, considering the simplicity of the response model.
Nevertheless, it is disturbing that this critical response time turns out to be so short that
it may be impossible, even under ideal circumstances, to avoid this regime of recurrent
8

waves of growing amplitudes, provided we assume that NPIs are implemented by only using
information about the most recent available case notification rate.
A valid objection to this assumption, and hence to Eq. (5), is that governments have
access to far more information when they lift on existing NPIs and decide on new ones. They
can consider existing trends in the incidence rates, not just the the most recent reported
recordings, and model projections are available. On the other hand, it is clear for anyone
who follow the public debate on the necessity of interventions, that it is extremely difficult
for policy makers to gain public acceptance for precautionary interventions, even in cases
when a pattern has been repeated several times in the past. The common belief that the
present wave is the last one seems to be a major hurdle to successful control of the epidemic.
The tendency of repeated and stronger epidemic waves has been ubiquitous across the
world’s countries as we move into the second year of the pandemic, and a major part of the
explanation may be the lack of ability of governments to take precautionary action. The
key message from the present work is that relatively small changes in governments’ ability
to respond in a more precautionary manner may have profound effects on controlling and
mitigating new outbreaks. The main challenge seems to be convey this insight to policy
makers, the media, and others who shape the public opinion.

References
[1] European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control. Available online:
https://covid19-country-overviews.ecdc.europa.eu (accessed on 19 February 2021 ).
[2] Rypdal, K., Bianchi, F. M., and Rypdal, M. Intervention Fatigue is the Primary Cause
of Strong Secondary Waves in the COVID-19 Pandemic, Int. J. Environ. Res. Public
Health 2020, 17(24), 9592.
[3] Smith, H., An Introduction to Delay Differential Equations with Application to Life
Sciences 2011, Springer, ISBN-13 : 978-1441976451.
[4] Kermack W. O., and McKendrick A. G. 1927 A contribution to the mathematical
theory of epidemics Proc. R. Soc. A 115, 700-721.
[5] Pei, S., Kandula, S., and Shaman, J. Differential effects of intervention timing on
COVID-19 spread in the United States. Science Advances 2020, 6(49), eabd6370,
DOI: 10.1126/sciadv.abd6370
[6] Walker, P. G. T. et al. 2020 The impact of COVID-19 and strategies for mitigation
and suppression in low- and middle-income countries, Science 369, 413-422.

9

