Blockchain for Decentralized Multi-Drone to Combat COVID-19
S. H. Alsamhi1,2, B. Lee1, M. Guizani3, N. Kumar4, Y. Qiao1, Xuan Liu5
Software Research Institute, Athlone Institute of Technology, Athlone, Ireland.
2
IBB University, Ibb, Yemen
3
Qater University, Qater
4
Thapa Thapar Institute of Engineering and Technology, Patiala (Punjab), India
5
College of Information Engineering (College of Artificial Intelligence), Yangzhou University, China
1

Abstract: -Currently, drones represent a promising technology for combating Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) due
to the transport of goods, medical supplies to a given target location in the quarantine areas experiencing an epidemic
outbreak. Drone missions will increasingly rely on drone collaboration, which requires the drones to reduce communication
complexity and be controlled in a decentralized fashion. Blockchain technology becomes a must in industrial applications
because it provides decentralized data, accessibility, immutability, and irreversibility. Therefore, Blockchain makes data
public for all drones and enables drones to log information concerning world states, time, location, resources, delivery data,
and drone relation to all neighbors drones. This paper introduces decentralized independent multi-drones to accomplish
the task collaboratively. Improving blockchain with a consensus algorithm can improve network partitioning and
scalability in order to combat COVID-19. The multi-drones task is to combat COVID-19 via monitoring and detecting,
social distancing, sanitization, data analysis, delivering goods and medical supplies, and announcement while avoiding
collisions with one another. We discuss End to End (E2E) delivery application of combination blockchain and multi-drone
in combating COVID-19 and beyond future pandemics. Furthermore, the challenges and opportunities of our proposed
framework are highlighted.
Keywords: - blockchain, swarm drones, quarantine, Smart healthcare, Pandemics, COVID-19, decentralized, Monitoring
COVID-19, E2E delivery system

I. Introduction
The COVID-19 outbreak is to fully quantify the value of advanced digital technologies to pandemics response in the
early stage. Digital technologies represented the critical technology to support smart healthcare response to COVID19 outbreak worldwide, such as identifying cases, monitoring the population, delivering goods and medical supply,
decentralized alert, zero touches remote monitoring, and detecting cases from faraway. Therefore, smart healthcare
for responding to COVID-19 and future pandemics is become more digital [1]. The advanced technologies are used
to mitigate the impact of the COVID-19 outbreak, such as Artificial Intelligence (AI), the Internet of Things (IoT),
drone, robotics, 5G, blockchain [2]. Furthermore, the authors addressed the numerous advantages that drones and
blockchain could provide to mitigate the impact of COVID-19. These advanced technologies accelerate faster than
before to create a safer environment world. Thus, the opportunities for research areas are discussed the combining
several technologies collaboratively towards combating the COVID-19 outbreak [3]. However, the combination of
advanced and emerging technologies can improve the ways to combat the COVID-19 outbreak and future pandemics
such as multi-robot collaboration and blockchain technology [4], AI and drone technology [5], AI for robots [6, 7],
blockchain, and AI [8]. In [9], the collaboration among multi-user concept is discussed and how they perform common
task efficiently with recognizing the activity.
Drones are flying in the low altitude platform [10-12]. Using multi-drone could deliver goods and serve people in the
quarantine zone to fulfill their needs and purposes. However, a drone network managing swarm needs efficient
techniques and protocols to perform the required tasks efficiently in the quarantine area. Furthermore, a swarm of
drones needs collaboration to share locations, trajectories, tasks, and purpose. With the support of the IoT, AI, and
Cloud/Edge computing, multi-drone is enabling complex interactions amongst themselves. Multi-drone interacts with
each other in order to exchange information, interdependent subtask, share goals, mutual trust, mutual learning, and
mutual adaption [4]. However, the existing challenges that impede large-scale multi-drone (e.g., swarm robotics [7])
include drone network architecture, drone supervision, network partitioning, scalability, time, safety, and energy
efficiency. The above issues can be solved by blockchain technology.
In drone network architecture, centralized suffers from a single drone failure, while decentralized suffers lack all
information about drones in the network. In the case of centralization, decision making will take a long time to control
a swarm of drones during their task performances, and therefore, the collision between drones occurs because of
response delay. Therefore, decentralized can improve drone network performance and enhance Quality of Service

(QoS) and reduce task performing time. Blockchain technology is also decentralized and adapted to quickly ensure
many actions during the networks drone interaction [13]. Moreover, blockchain can improve the speed and how swarm
drones change their behavior during task performance due to global information for addressing specific drone
requirements. Furthermore, a swarm drones system needs to accommodate many drones and simultaneously maintain
the required level of robustness. The multi-drone can be partitioned dynamically due to noise in the channel
communication between partitions. The system needs to complete the tasks within a given time or energy limits.
However, blockchain improves the swarm drones system's global data, resulting in high productivity and sustainable
maintenance.
To address challenges, blockchain has proposed in many works to facilitate drone collaboration efficiently. By using
blockchain, independent drones reach consensus in a decentralized fashion. A blockchain serves as a shared
knowledge to improve the performance of the system [14]. Smart contracts support great potential in order to enable
a high level of security [15], operations of robotic [16], flexible, autonomous, and profitable [17]. The current work
is still at an early stage. This conceptual framework paper discusses developing a decentralized ledger platform with
required protocols to enable multi-drone collaboration networks with malfunctioning drones and network partition
tolerance. The focus is to verify the feasibility of applying blockchain technology in a multi-drone to perform complex
tasks in the quarantine area. Most solutions require the drone to process and store the current status transactions equally
and collaboratively, just as blockchain technology does. We address the above challenges by designing a novel
consensus algorithm for multi-drone collaboration to combating the COVID-19 outbreak efficiently, focusing on
network partitioning, scalability, and byzantine drones.
A. Contribution
It is believed that blockchain can help in the decentralized multi-drone for combating COVID-19 and the impact on
pandemic management situations. To date, none of the literature address blockchain for multi-drone decentralized on
fighting COVID-19. The primary purpose of this conceptual framework paper is to provide the readers with a full
picture of how blockchain technology powered multi-drone decentralized for delivering services in the quarantined
area during the outbreak of pandemics. Therefore, in this conceptual framework paper, we present the challenges and
different proposed frameworks that motivate other researchers to work extensively on combating COVID-19
pandemics. To this end, our conceptual framework paper focuses on the following contributions:
1) We present a conceptual framework architecture that combines blockchain and multi-drone for combating
COVID-19, aiming to find efficient solutions in response to COVID-19 and future pandemics.
2) We highlight the blockchain potentials in decentralized multi-drone collaboration and discuss its applications
for combating COVID-19 and future pandemics.
3) We discuss two use cases for the multi-drone to combat COVID-19, i.e., monitoring and detecting COVID-19
and E2E delivery systems to people in the quarantined area.
4) Based on the conceptual framework paper, we provide the research challenges, opportunities, and different
proposed frameworks to motivate and encourage other researchers to work extensively on combating COVID19 pandemics.
B. Paper scope and organization
This conceptual framework paper focused mainly on controlling and managing multi-drone collaboration to combat
the COVID-19 outbreak and future pandemics with blockchain technology. The rest of the paper is organized as a
fellow. Related work is discussed in Section II, while the component and system architecture described in section III.
Section IV then describes the proposed framework solution and application and discussion described in Section V and
VI, respectively. Finally, the work conclusion concludes in section VII.
II. Related work
Drones are used for many purposes to combating COVID-19, such as vigilance, monitoring, food delivery, medicine
delivery, thermal scan, ensuring social distance, sanitization, and alert system [18, 19]. The authors of [20] discussed
how to gather data in real-time from wearable sensors, thermal scanners, cameras, and movement sensors. They
considered drone as an edge intelligent in order to process data gathered and to avoid collision.
The multi-drone has comprehensive application scenarios including unreached, unknown, and dangerous
environments (e.g., disaster Search and Rescue teams (SAR) [21, 22], humanitarian demining, underwater exploration,
or surveillance [15], quarantine area [23]. The consensus issue among multi-drones is essential to monitor, detect, and

deliver to improve real-time decision-making [24]. In many scenarios, centralized control is an issue because drones
or robots have to communicate with each other in a peer-to-peer manner. Drones may need to adapt to different
emergent situations. Some drones may be hacked, use faulty sensors or noisy communication channels, and lose
availability. An emerging trend in this community is to use blockchain technologies to tackle these challenges. In [25],
the authors presented the advantages of blockchain, and multi-robot combination, including security, management and
control, robot behavior differentiation and distributed decision making.
In [15], the authors proposed blockchain for decision making a collection in the swarm robotics. They compared the
blockchain approach with a probabilistic finite state machine (PFSM) [26]. The findings showed that PFSM breaks
down even if a small number of byzantine robots, while blockchain provides a robust solution. In [27], the authors
implemented a distributed ledger for multi-robots using BigchainDB to manage the feasibility. The distributed ledger
was including Parrot Jumping Night ground drones and Parrot AR Drone 2.0. In [28], the authors proposed a swarm
Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG) called swarmDAG for multi-robot partition tolerant of network. SwarmDAG enabled
multi-robot to achieve consensus.
The growth of blockchain technology is exponentially in the robotics domain because it allows robots to conduct a
transaction without third party authority. Hence, blockchain technology becomes a must in industrial applications due
to its advantages to support decentralized data, immutability, accessibility, non-repudiation features, and
irreversibility. Recently, the advantages make blockchains the probably and promising technology in smart industries
[29]. The authors of [30] presented blockchain for controlling and coordinating multi-agent consisting of drones. For
example, drones frequently interact with others nearby. This “community” feature [28] can be explored in designing
the consensus algorithm, e.g., the consensus in the neighborhood is probably valid in the global scope because their
transactions (interactions) are not relevant to the other communities. According to the network physics system's
environment, the authors of [20] introduced a dynamic distributed process control model for attack defense resources.
Blockchain technologies will be evaluated as the best way for decentralization and collaboration of participants in
many applications.
The computational resources represent the scalability challenges of PoW [31]. On the other hand, the scalability
challenges of PBFT is due to broadcasting messages and the cost of communication [32]. The authors of [33]
introduced the network partitioned in subnetworks with improving blockchain scalability. Elastico implemented the
sharding technique for the permissionless blockchain. Then, the authors of [34] proposed Merkle Patricia trees or
Merklix trees in which it was used a different shard to global state [35]. However, scalability is the main challenge of
blockchain technology. To solve the scalability issue, the sharding technique can play a vital role in enhancing
blockchain scalability. The sharding architecture matches with the features of the community. Sharding techniques
can enhance fault tolerance. Off-chain channels can be employed as complementary to sharding.
The work in joining blockchain and drones also covers other perspectives. Robotchain [36] introduces the record of
robot action using a private Tezos blockchain. Then, the events recorded are going to be deciding the robot required
for action performance in monitoring, conflicting situations, and tuning and behavior of the robot performance.
Furthermore, DezCom model [37], proposes decentralized smart industry 4.0 applications focusing on multi-robot
collaboration. The proposed DezCom implemented on Robot Operation System (ROS) with the Tendermint consensus
algorithms help.
For securing data acquisition, the authors of [38-40] used blockchain technology for securing data gathered from IoT
devices environment by drone technology. In [38], the findings showed that the proposed technologies' performance
improves security, connectivity, and energy consumption. While [39] used blockchain technology for securing
healthcare data gathered from IoT devices by drone. Blockchain technology, AI are applied for securing the drones
collaboration [41], while the optimal techniques are used to ensure multi-drone collaboration task allocation with low
energy consumption in a high level of security [42] and enable trustworthy communication among drones [43].
Furthermore, in [40] the authors introduced blockchain technology for processing data gathered by drones from IoT
environments. Simultaneously, [30] authors predicted the signal strength from drones over IoT framework to gather
data and improve energy efficiency. Also, the authors of [44] used blockchain for drone-enabled mobile edge
computing. The smart contract was used to access the public, while the sub blockchain was used to improve stability.
Recently, the authors of [45] introduced blockchain technology that envisioned softwarized for the communication of
multi-drone-based 6G to tackle COVID-19. The results showed better performance in QoS as compared to 4G and
5G. QoS parameters and techniques for improving communication via space technologies discussed
[46-51]. The authors of [52] introduced the collaboration of drones and Hetnet for enhancing QoS. The authors of [4,
8, 53] discussed the combination technologies for combating COVID-19, such as AI, blockchain, and robotics to

combat COVID-19 epidemics. In contrast, the authors [4] discussed the combination of blockchain and multi-robot
collaboration to combating COVID-19 via E2E delivery, detection, and identification and monitoring.
Table.1 comparative analysis of existing work and current work for combating COVID-19

√
√
√

√

√
√

√
√

√
√
√
√
√
√

√
√
√
√
√

Blockchain

Delivery

Face
detection

Technology
AI

Thermal
image

Data
gathered

Drone technology for support patients healthcare services
Drone support internet of public safety things
Drone technology for medical services
Multi-drone tackle COVID-19
Drone technology for vacant parking detection
Blockchain for securing drones delivery
Technologies to combat COVID-19
5G and drone technology for healthcare
Blockchain for securing data gathered from IoT by drone
Attack in healthcare device and drone technology
Collaboration of multi-robot to fight the COVID-19 outbreak
Role of advanced technologies and impact in COVID-19
Drone and techniques to combat COVID-19
Blockchain for decentralized multi-drone collaboration to fight
COVID-19 and future pandemics

Monitoring

[54](2020)
[11](2019)
[55](2020)
[45](2020)
[56](2018)
[57](2020)
[8](2020)
[58](2019)
[39](2020)
[59](2020)
[4](2020)
[2](2020)
[20](2020)
Work

Features

Disaster

Applications

Disease

Highlighted

COVID-19

Ref.

√
√
√
√
√

√
√

√
√
√
√

√
√

√

√
√
√
√
√
√

√
√
√
√

√

√
√
√
√
√

√
√
√
√

√
√
√
√
√

√
√
√

√

√
√
√

III. Component of system architecture
The drone can deliver goods and medical supplies in real-time. Therefore, it could improve the emergency response
to combat disease outbreak such as Corona, Lassa, Ebola, Malaria (detect, take and catch blood samples of mosquitos
for better mitigate the potential of infectious disease outbreaks) [60]; medicine transportation (transport patient
samples from affected people and a local disease center due to quarantine restrictions); and delivery goods (carrying
samples and dispatching them for the test in case the quarantined restricted at their homes). It is highly recommended
to ensure adequate disinfection and protection, usually gathering patients and staff to deliver goods to receive supplies
without risking the spread of infection. Therefore, drones help scientists to respond and understand the way diseases
become epidemics. For instance, China government mounted drones with loudspeakers to guide and deliver
information for Wuhan's people [61]. Moreover, drones with thermal cameras are used to monitor the body
temperature so that medical staff can quickly identify the affected new cases. Drones function for combating COVID19 is summarized, as shown in Fig.1.
Sample pick up
Transportation
Drones function
to combat
COVID-19

Food delivery
Medicine delivery

Spraying disinfection

Broadcasting voice
Detecting absence mask

Public space monitoring

Identifying infected case
Scan identity
Maintaining social distance

Fig.1 Drones function to combat COVID-19
Robotics systems are typically designed for running over long periods, which may accumulate a large size of
blockchain and the states, making it impractical for resource-constrained drones to store a copy of the full blockchain.
Drones can address, detect, recognize, and control disease infection outbreaks, which will lead to faster responses of
illness containment such as malaria, COVID-19, as s shown in Table.2. In China, several advanced emerging
technologies are viable technologies to mitigate the outbreak and spread of the COVID-19. For securing the internet
of drones, the authors [62] addressed the intelligent technique called convolution neural network and compared it with
the drone's autonomous internet. The findings showed better security performance of the proposed technique.

Furthermore, [63]introduced access control four-state models to avoid malicious nodes, provide high-security levels,
and improve IoT devices' energy efficiency.
Table.2 Drone technology for disease prevention and medical supplies
Ref.
[60]
(2017)
[64]
(2014)
[65]
(2014)
[66]
(2018)
[67]
(2017)
[68]
(2016)

Drone function
Sensing
capability
Sensing
capability
Sensing
capability
Sensing
capability
Transportation

[4]
(2020)

Highlighted
It provides flexible and low cost to map water bodies
in order to detect mosquito and disease elimination.
Tracking global burden of malaria by drone
technology to disseminate larvicide
exploring drone for mapping environmental risks of
zoonotic malaria
Drones for zoonosis controlling infectious diseases
among animal populations.
Drone is used for drug delivery in quarantine areas
undergoing epidemic outbreaks.
Drone technology is used for transporting laboratory
samples to the diagnosis of HIV in Malawi.
Blockchain for collaboration of multi-robot to fight
COVID-19

Current
work

Blockchain for multi-drone decentralization to
combat the COVID-19 outbreak

Transportation
Detection
Monitoring

Blockchain function

malaria
malaria
malaria
Drug delivery

Transportation
Transportation
Monitoring

Disease
malaria

HIV
Make Consensus
Decentralization
Managing and
control
Zero touches remote
Decentralization
Make consensus
Drone traffic control

COVID-19

COVID-19

Blockchain technology represents a critical role in managing and controlling multi-drone efficiently and secures and
ensuring accuracy. Moreover, blockchain helps to secure multi-drone via avoiding hackers and malicious, and
controlling the multi-drone to maintain track (no crash, no harm, no injuring) during the performance of their tasks.
Therefore, blockchain is working here as a “meta controller”. The importance of using blockchain is to update drones'
real-time location during delivering the medical supplies, monitoring the people who break the rules, and separating
people gathering by producing speaking in quarantine areas. To avoid collisions of drones, data on the blockchain will
be public, and therefore, each drone can access the locations of other drones, as shown in fig.2. Giving drones a unique
identity on the blockchain while delivering medical supplies, IoT devices at home, and hospitals give drones trusted
to access secure locations. The authors of [69] discussed how software and hardware setup of Ethereum to secure
exchange information among multi-drone during performing the tasks. Once permission is confirmed, the doors and
windows will open automatically, and the drone will deliver goods and complete door to door delivery task.

Fig.1 Drone and blockchain for traffic management
The network architecture of the blockchain-based multi-drone system is shown in fig.3. Fig.3 consists of a multidrone, blockchain decentralized network, and control system. Based on blockchain, multi-drone can form a drone
cluster to perform complex tasks, interact, real-time analysis, and process to facilitate decision making. Multi-drone
has carried IoT devices. Furthermore, multi-drone requires communicating with each other and sharing collected data,

flight status, speed, and location to combat COVID-19 collaboratively. Therefore, blockchain uses to collect data from
drones and responses based on controlling and data storing in order to ensure the stability of sharing data, improve
collaboration, and decentralize network to avoid malfunctioning and network partitioning.

Fig.3 DroneChain communication architecture
a) Blockchain
Blockchain is promising in many domains of real applications of industrial and academics. Blockchain technology is
essential to be used in the robotic domains because it can establish a reliable multi-robot network with a high-security
level and reach overall consensus robots in a decentralized fashion. It stores data and transfers between robots in the
network as transactions. Blockchain features ensure that adding a block to blockchain has more secure. The authors
of [70] discussed the consensus algorithms including Proof of Work (PoW), Proof of Stake (PoS), Delegated Proof of
Stake (DPoS), Practical Byzantine Fault Tolerance (PBFT), Proof of Capacity (PoC), Proof of Burn (PoB), etc.
Blockchain types and characteristics are shown in table.3.

Blockchain
types
Private
Public
Consortium

Efficiency
High
Low
High

Table. 3 Blockchain types and features
Characteristics
Transaction Read/ Write
Transparency
Short
Permissioned
High
High
permissionless Low
Short
Permissioned
High

Scalability
High
High
Low

Consensus
PBFT, RAFT
PoS, DPoS
BPFT

The combination of blockchain technology and multi-drone supports drones robustness, ease of scaling, operation
security, flexibility, autonomy, and even profitability. To prevent and avoid collisions of robots, secure robot
operations, and ensure robots stay on track. Blockchain and multi-drone combination enhances task automation,
decision making, task formulation, authentication, and action validation.
Blockchain is the critical solution for distributed decision making of multi-agent collaboration. Simultaneously, the
development of smart contract in blockchain technology for the collaboration of multi-drone can be built for

formulating the proposed actions in bytecode. Then, multi-drone is going to collaborate efficiently with each other
and vote for adaptive and effective action. For action validation, drones can monitor each other (i.e., locations, states,
energy, and actions, etc.). If the drone sends incorrect data, the sharding technique can be applied to solve the validator
issues [71]. Therefore, the consensus for the wrong action will be avoided. To make the task autonomously, blockchain
distributes consensus for dispatching, executing and assigning tasks during multi-drone collaboration. Therefore,
Blockchain can handle drone failures, attacks, and hijack efficiently. Moreover, blockchain can detect drone fails
before it occurs and produces an alert in this regard. In this case, drone fail does not impact other drone tasks due to
blockchain decentralized features.
b) DroneChain
DroneChain is a blockchain that is designed for drone operation to perform complex tasks. It is connected to drones
to allow events storing among them inside DroneChain. The main characteristics of Dronechain are easy verification,
self-amending & use of consensus algorithms. Furthermore, it supports accessibility, decentralization, auditability,
non-reputation, irreversibility, secure data, and trustworthy [72]. DroneChain architecture is shown in Fig.2. Fig.2 is
including drones, a decentralized blockchain network, and a control unit. For combating the COVID-19 outbreak,
many drones are required for different purposes and needs, such as monitoring, detecting, and E2E delivery. Each
drone carries different devices according to its activity in combating COVID-19. Decentralized blockchain network
uses for data validation (i.e., data collected from drones, control unit actions, and integrity protection). Therefore, the
blockchain decentralized network helps decentralize multi-drone collaboration in the quarantine area via data
gathering from drones, control unit responses, data storing and sharing, and decision-making in real-time. Control unit
requires decentralized multi-drone collaboration to send gathered data by drone, make commends, and update the
event's status to drones to change their behaviors. Furthermore, it can help in sending original and hashed data to the
blockchain network.

IV. Proposed framework solution
Regarding combat the COVID-19 outbreak, the integration of blockchain technology and multi-drone collaboration
makes robots ease of scaling, control, and robust against failure. To avoid the multi-drone collision, secure robot
operations, and ensure robots stay on track in the quarantine area, blockchain can efficiently manage the robot traffic,
support multi-drone collaboration. Blockchain makes data public for each drone, and therefore each robot can reach
other drones data in high authentication and accuracy. For combating COVID-19, we focus on discussing the efficient
solutions offered by using blockchain technology for identified decentralized multi-drone collaboration challenges.
We discuss how blockchain technology will control and manage decentralized multi-drone collaboration to combat
COVID-19. Then, we use cases in real-world applications of multi-drone collaboration to monitor and detect infected
people in the quarantine areas and E2E delivery system.
Blockchain helps multi-drone collaboration to fight COVID-19. The drones need to reach a common goal based on
their joint planning, and distributing their decision-making during planning is challenged. Therefore, flexible and
autonomous solutions for multi-drone distributed decision-making require to tackle the challenges. Blockchain
technology represents the critical solution for ensuring that all drones are connected in a decentralized fashion and
share an identical world view. For instance, in every sub-task performed, each drone requires the agreement of other
drones in order to act accordingly. However, with using blockchain, the information of action is in the block and
available for public drones in the group.
Fig.4 is shown the combination of consensus algorithm and sharding technique for improving blockchain scalability
and developing decentralized blockchain to decentralized multi-drone collaboration in combating COVID-19 in the
quarantine areas. The consensus algorithm supports decentralized multi-drone collaboration in blockchain network
for combating COVID-19. At the same time, the sharding technique improves blockchain scalability.

Fig.4 Decentralized and proposed technique for multi-drone collaboration to fight COVID-19
A. The consensus algorithm for supporting decentralized multi-drone collaboration
Consensus algorithms help multi-drone collaboration decentralized blockchain network to reach an agreement.
Table.4 illustrates several famous consensuses algorithms (i.e., PoW, PoS, and PBFT), benefits, and limitations that
are used for blockchain development. Therefore, each drone in a decentralized blockchain network trusts all robots.
The authors of [73] introduced the consensus algorithm for managing decentralized multi-drone collaboration. In [70],
the authors discussed and highlighted the consensus algorithms with details. However, applying the consensus
algorithms in blockchain can provide scalability, decentralized, and secure multi-drone agreement [74]. To allow a
multi-drone to reach the consensus, the fault-tolerant consensus is made a trade-off within a triangle formed and
required latency.

Consensus
PoW

Table.4 Consensus algorithms benefit and applications
Benefits
Limitation
Secure and decentralization
High latency and high resource

PoS
PBFT
DPoS

Secure and low resource
Low latency and high throughput
Secure, low latency, and high throughput

Low participation
Secure and Low scalability
Producer evil

A. Blockchain scalability for decentralized multi-drone collaboration
A significant effort is recently given to the development of decentralization, scalable, and secure blockchain, which
is designed in Ethereum 2.0 [75]. Therefore, computational resources are not needed for mining [76]. PoW is used for
shard scalability and a secure blockchain network. Shard synchronization and executing the contract from every single
shard must be deployed in the blockchain network's smart contract. Shard synchronization allows the flow of data
between shards. Therefore, the sharding technique improves the blockchain scalability and improves accommodates
fault tolerance. Moreover, the combination of the dynamic sharding technique and the consensus algorithms in
location, community (membership), task types, population, etc., support detecting malfunctioning drone and network
partitioning. Membership [28] and DAG [28, 77] techniques can be integrated with sharding techniques. The
integration will establish multi-drone collaboration based on dynamic sharding the consensus algorithm on blockchain
technology. It would result in realistic collaboration with avoiding collision, network partitioning, and failure
tolerance.
In the case of scalability, blockchain can support multi-drone operators and maintenance in distributed decisionmaking processes. Because of all planning actions, agreements are based on the transactions stored in the blockchain.
Therefore, it is not required to train new drones joining the team to perform common goals or if anyone has failed.
New drones can download the ledger that contains all of the agreement history contained the previous knowledge,
store it, and then start planning action accordingly. In the case of a drone malfunctioning, it can be replaced by another
drone. If any element/device equipped drone malfunctioning, then data of that element/device can be borrowed from
his neighbors. Blockchain becomes critical because of supporting decentralized applications for sharing data in realtime among multi-drone collaboration to combat the COVID-19 outbreak. With blockchain, multi-drone collaboration
can play a crucial role in monitoring, detecting, managing, and controlling public health emergencies during COVID19 and future pandemics.
B. Application of proposed framework (Some work required here)
Multi-drone plays a vital role in delivering medical supplies and goods to people quarantined at homes or hospitals
due to the COVID-19 outbreak. Therefore, the interaction between humans is minimized because of drones function
(i.e., autonomous spray disinfectant, delivering medical supplies and goods, controlling infection by sperate stuff from
patients, keep health workers out of the quarantine area, identify the infected case, detected person who breaks
quarantined restrictions rules). Hence, drones will satisfy the patients quality of experience in the quarantine due to
getting the staff's care and healthier people without risk. The collision risk increases gradually due to the number of
drones is growing increasingly in the quarantine area for delivering things, monitoring, detecting, and controlling.
Blockchain helps update each drone's locations on the distributed ledger, while each drone can reach all drone
locations updated in the smart contract to avoid collisions, as shown in fig.5. For instance, all drones deployed for a
different purpose in the quarantine area (i.e., detecting and identifying infected cases, broadcasting news, monitoring
people who break the quarantine rules, delivering the medical supplies, delivering goods to people in the quarantine
area, and automating spray disinfectant) update their location, speed, the status of the battery, delivery time and date,
and resources to blockchain network autonomously and in real-time. Each drone can access other drones locations
due to blockchain making data public for all drones, and therefore, drones can avoid collisions. Therefore, blockchain
represents the critical solution for drones traffic management efficiently with high accuracy. Moreover, blockchain
helps secure drones operation by ensuring that all drones in the network stay on track (no harm, no crash, no injuring).
1. Drones for door-to-door delivery
In this scenario, the door-to-door delivery system is required for combating COVID-19 via drop the delivered package
to the customer. Furthermore, pick up and delivering a medical sample requires a fast delivery system. Drones
represent the critical technology for transportation during COVID-19. Drones can combat the COVID-19 outbreak by
delivering goods to the patients in a smart hospital or to the people who are quarantined restricted in smart homes
without human interaction. However, opening and closing doors require smart devices (IoT devices), which may be
considered in smart cities. Therefore, a combination of multi-drone collaboration and IoT devices play a vital role in

delivering orders/goods in the quarantine area to combat COVID-19. IoT devices enable the window/door to interact
with drones to drop a package to the quarantined person either in a hospital or at home.
Here, blockchain is used to store drones updated data to ensure the door/window open for a certain drone. The drone
reached the near arrived house in the quarantine area, blockchain updated the location, and shared it with a specific
home's window/door. Therefore, IoT devices in the supposed house's window/door enable the window/door to identify
and verify the blockchain to open and let drones enter the house. As soon as a specific drone for delivering a particular
task reaches the receiver location, then the smart house's door/window will be open due to the automatic. Then, drones
deliver goods to the patient table or quarantine restricted people at a smart home. While the drones go out, the
door/window closed and then go to perform another task. Furthermore, if any documents are required from anyone
quarantine area, the drone can perform the task of scanning identity card or any documents and send them to the
required office, as shown in Fig.5-B.

Fig.5 Application of blockchain for decentralized multi-drone collaboration
2. Broadcasting Practicing social distance
In this scenario, two cases for using a drone are shown in fig.5-D. The first case is drone monitoring people gathering
and practicing social distance. In the second case, the drone is used to broadcast news about the COVID-19 danger
when people gather even if they wear masks. Drone can stop people from gathering and monitoring the social distance
between people during their door or outdoor activities. The importance of blockchain here is to produce alerts to police
if people do not follow the drone guiding.
3. Testing body temperature
In this scenario, the drone detected an infected person of COVID-19 with an absence mask. The process of identifying
infected cases can be done in the drone. Drone update the location, case level, and requirement to the smart contract
in the blockchain. Then, blockchain will produce alerts to the ambulance and other drones such as spray disinfection
drones, drones providing protection masks, etc. The notified drones and ambulance will access the smart contract and

read all of the detection cases' requirements, as shown in fig.5-C. Fig.5-C shows how few drones are collaborating to
combat COVID-19 in a decentralized fashion achieved by blockchain technology.
4. Absence mask detection
In this scenario, the drone is used to detect absence masks, while the absence mask process is done in a drone using
deep learning for face recognition, as shown in fig.5-A. Furthermore, another drone is used for mask delivery if
detecting a person is not responding to the drone and wear a mask or may not have a mask based on notification from
the blockchain. On the other hand, blockchain will alert police to take necessary action against people who break
quarantine rules.
V. Use cases of the proposed framework
A. Multi-drone collaboration for E2E delivery system
Drones are a promising technology in delivering goods to people in the quarantine area with support zero-touch
remote. Therefore, drones support combating COVID-19 by transporting medicine, goods. We focus on managing
and controlling multi-drone during the E2E delivery system using advanced technology to perform tasks effectively
and efficiently. Drone delivery time, reliability, and network connectivity are required for 5G to implement the use
cases. 5G connectivity is preferable due to high quality, connectivity, and communication security among multi-drone
collaboration networks to combating COVID-19. Multi-drone collaboration needs for security attack in order to
control spoof attack vectors. The attack vectors include data monitoring and data acquisition. For avoiding attack
vectors, blockchain technology requires multi-drone collaboration in the E2E delivery system. Furthermore, 5G offers
reliable data, access data quickly, high data availability for the combination of multi-drone and blockchain.
The proposed framework for the E2E delivery system of the multi-drone to combat COVID-19 is shown in Fig.6. It
consists of three layers, i.e., received Rx, blockchain, and donate Dx layers. In the Received layer, people in the
quarantine area request/order food and medicine to prepare in the smart contract (order, person location, denote
location, etc). This request is passed through the blockchain network the send to the donate layer to prepare the goods.
The request will be prepared with encrypted data in the donated layer, including drone ID, path, receiver location, and
delivery time. The smart contract executes and verifies the condition and status between the donated layer and receiver
layer. Then, the verified block will be sent to the blockchain. All data stored in the blockchain is secure and reliable.
The required drone will accept to perform and deliver the order from accessing smart contract and read the receiver's
location and denote. Then, the drone ID updates to the smart contract. Both receiver and donate layer update the drone
ID trajectory and time. Drone maintains to update its location simultaneously to blockchain in order to inform both
donate and receiver the status and condition. Finally, drone update to the blockchain the order has been successfully
delivering via updating returning and dispatching. Fig.7 shows the procedure and algorithm of the E2E delivery system
with blockchain technology in decentralized multi-drone collaboration during combating COVID-19 in the quarantine
area.

Fig.6 E2E delivery system using multi-drone collaboration and blockchain technology
During the flight, drones must be coordinated to keep their trajectory to reach the goal and avoid a collision. Therefore,
blockchain is working as a meta controller to control the drone's flight and avoid a collision. Blockchain is a
decentralized technology that can coordinate the drones flight allocation in a decentralized fashion. So, drones
allocation/ position always updates and is stored in the ledger and managed in peer-to-peer networks. Before drones
mission in space, each drone will add a block to the blockchain requesting fight trajectory while adding the initial and
destination position. Then, blockchain will ensure the flight trajectory and coordinate drone missions with others
already available in space.

Start
Drone IDs, Functions, Registration ID
in Blockchain
Order goods (food and medicine)
Rx order, Location, time, purpose into blockchain
Dx prepare order

Drone read the Rx and Dx location
from blockchain and update Drone
ID, Trajectory, time and etc.
Smart contract verify status

Another drone

No

Drone agree to
perform task

Yes
Smart contract update drone ID, time
and etc to Dx and Rx
Drone update its status
No

Drone reach to Rx

Yes
Drone update status order delivered
successfully to blockchain
End

Fig.7 Flowchart of outdoor E2E delivery system
B. Multi-drone collaboration for monitoring and detecting COVID-19
Drones are equipped with smart IoT devices, high-resolution cameras, computers, and thermal cameras for different
purposes and needs. For instance, the camera can detect people who do not wear masks and do not practice social
distance during COVID -19 outbreak and future pandemics. At the same time, a thermal camera can detect the infected
person of COVID-19 earlier from a long distance. Also, computers can be used to analyze captured date from drone
equipment locally as an edge intelligence within AI techniques. Furthermore, drones are used for spraying disinfection
and delivering goods, foods, and medicine during pandemics such as COVID-19.
Blockchain works as “Meta controller”. Blockchain is a crucial technology for deploying multi-drones for different
purposes to quarantine area with avoiding collision. The blockchain stores and shares information to all drones in the
blockchain network in a decentralized fashion. A smart contract is then used to control multi-drone to perform their
tasks efficiently and effectively without collision. In the case of combating the COVID-19 outbreak, the smart contract
also helps multi-drones to interact with each other to perform the shared task and make a decision in real-time. For
instance, if a drone detects one infected man, then the status will be updated to the blockchain, and each drone reads
the block and takes action according to its duty. Announce drone comes and guides people, disinfection drone joins
the action by spraying disinfection around the detected man, and drone with high-resolution camera monitoring area
as shown in Fig.8. An intelligent algorithm is implemented in the smart contract by detecting an infected person,
practicing social distance, or absence mask. Smart contracts can identify the needed action according to captured data
received from a drone, then send action to drones for changing behavior to perform required tasks accordingly.

Fig.8 Multi-drone collaboration for monitoring and detecting COVID-19
In the absence mask case, the drone can detect a person with an absent mask via a high-resolution camera equipped
in the drone body. Furthermore, the drone is considered an edge intelligent to analyze image locally with the help
of AI. Then drone produces an alert to the detected person immediately. The drone will update the information into
the blockchain and immediately register (drone ID, person movement, location, people around, etc.) as shown in
Fig.8. If the drone is still updating alert, the mask detection unit will update action to the drone chain, and another
drone will identify the person's location and deliver mask to him immediately as 0th responded for saving people life
and avoiding COVID-19 outbreak. Furthermore, if people gathering detected even if they wear a mask, a drone will
produce an alert for practicing social distance and avoiding interaction.
In case the infected person in a critical case, the doctor can access particular patient status in blockchain and
recommend suitable medicine to smart contracts. Pharmacist can access smart contracts and then prepare the required
medicine suggested by the doctor. Then, another medical delivery drone is used to deliver medicine from the Pharmacy
to the patient table in the smart hospital case, including explaining how to use the medicine. Therefore, the interaction
between humans is eliminated, and therefore, drone collaboration plays a critical role in fighting the COVID-19
outbreak efficiently in a high-security manner.
If a high body temperature is detected drone, the drone will update the information (block, hash, and drone ID) to
dronechain. It will then be registered in dronechain (drone ID, Location, environment status) as shown in fig.8. All
drones log information and read status from dronechain to respond immediately to perform their task
collaboratively. The disinfection drone will spray disinfection in the detect person environment. The medical delivery
drone can deliver the required medicine. Many drones are deployed to find if COVID-19 infects someone else.
Furthermore, a self-driver car joins the action to carry the infected person to the hospital. Based on the smart
contract in dronechain, all drones respond to action and change their behavior according to the need in a
decentralized fashion without collision. The procedures are summaries in the following algorithm, as shown in Fig.9.

Start
Deploy drone carried camera
for monitoring & drone carry thermal camera
Scanning quarantine area

Drone carry thermal camera

Monitoring

Drone carry thermal
camera

Detecting

Capture image of suspected face
People gathering

Registered drone ID to
blockchain
Location update to blockchain
Healthcare organization
notified by Smart contract

Wear mask

Person absent mask

Yes
Blockchain used to turn alert

Fellow drone alert

Yes

No
Smart contract updated
location to blockchain

Yes
Image captured
Registered in blockchain
Update location to blockchain

Alert still update
Mask delivery

Delivery medicine drone

Monitoring drone Disinfection drone

Self drive care

Smart contract alert to police

Quarantined in Hospital

Police take action

Detected environment

Yes
Mask delivery

No
Smart contract update to
blockchain and alert to police

Police take action

Combating COVID-19
End

Fig.9 Flowchart of monitoring multi-drone collaboration to combat COVID-19

VI. Discussion
Recently, drone technology is a promising solution in avoiding humans interaction, especially during the COVID-19
outbreak and future pandemics, by monitoring, detecting (mask absence, high body temperature), spray disinfection,
delivering goods, and broadcasting information, etc.

A. Challenges
This paper defines the proposed conceptual framework solutions for decentralized multi-drone collaboration using
blockchain technology in order to combat the COVID-19 outbreak and future pandemics. The limitations and
challenges of the proposed framework solutions include lifecycles of blockchain technology and guarantee the new
joined drone to decentralized blockchain network provides its real data quality, not a hacker. Gathered data from smart
IoT devices may also impact the resources of drones.
For thermal scanning in real-time and performing simulation-based experience, residents have to be considered for
scanning. Small drones can fly to perform the resident indoors (inside the building) if they cannot go to balconies for
scanning. However, the scanned image analysis will take time due to the small drone's capacity to gather data without
interruption is an open issue and should be taken for future consideration.

B. Opportunities
We observe opportunities related to combat COVID-19 outbreaks by monitoring, detecting, and E2E delivery systems
for quarantine areas. In the smart cities, combating the COVID-19 outbreak and future pandemics is more manageable
than others. For smart home and smart hospitals, IoT devices placed in windows or doors should be nodes in the
blockchain network. The multi-drone can then collaborate with smart home and smart hospital infrastructure (smart
IoT devices) based on the blockchain network. Therefore, the combination of multi-drone and smart IoT devices in a

smart environment (smart hospital, smart home) can allow drones to deliver goods to people inside the hospital or
room. Furthermore, blockchain provides data to multi-drone and then validates the data stamps send from multi-drone
in the same environment.
For the scanning and recording of residents in the quarantine area, multi- drones can be deployed for performing these
tasks during the COVID-19 pandemic. Thus, this task is essential to record all and update it to match scanned people
in a particular area. Furthermore, developing an integrated medical service, gathering data, fast monitoring, and
deploying are needed. Collecting data from large areas for a long time is an open issue due to drone battery life
limitations.
In the case of E2E delivery in the smart city, the window could have a sensor that can sense the drone when reaching
the drone. In this case, the window sensor should be one node of the blockchain network to update the drone location
on time. The drone can access the room via the window and deliver things to the room with zero touches (no one
touches the things deliver by drone).
VII. Conclusion
The integration of multi-drone collaboration and blockchain improves the way we care for sick people and infectious
disease outbreaks in the quarantine area. In blockchain, decentralization is promoted to improve multi-drone
performance and reduce time spent on performing a specific task. The multi-drone task is to combat the COVID-19
outbreak by delivering medical supplies, goods, and monitoring with reporting people those breaking rules of the
quarantine. Therefore, blockchain adapted to support many events very fast and deal with many interacting drones in
a decentralized fashion. For improving scalability and network patriation, a consensus algorithm is efficient for
improving the network patriation of drones, while, sharding scheme uses to increase blockchain scalability. Our
proposed conceptual framework solutions provide future potential experiments and domains that will develop
blockchain-based decentralized multi-drone collaboration to fight the COVID-19 outbreak and future pandemics.
Moreover, this conceptual framework will motivate industrial and academic researchers to pay more attention and
efforts to implement the used case experimentally. Furthermore, it encourages researchers to explore the new use
cases, in which the combination of emerged and advanced technologies can be used together (i.e., robots, drones, AI,
blockchain, digital twins, and smart IoT technologies) to help fight the future pandemics; like COVID-19.

Funding: This project has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation
programme under the Marie Skłodowska-Curie grant agreement No. 847577; and a research grant from Science
Foundation Ireland (SFI) under Grant Number 16/RC/3918 (Ireland’s European Structural and Investment Funds
Programmes and the European Regional Development Fund 2014-2020)
References

[1]
[2]

[3]

[4]
[5]
[6]

J. Budd et al., "Digital technologies in the public-health response to COVID-19," Nature medicine,
pp. 1-10, 2020.
V. Chamola, V. Hassija, V. Gupta, and M. Guizani, "A Comprehensive Review of the COVID-19
Pandemic and the Role of IoT, Drones, AI, Blockchain, and 5G in Managing its Impact," IEEE
Access, vol. 8, pp. 90225-90265, 2020.
S. Agarwal, N. S. Punn, S. K. Sonbhadra, P. Nagabhushan, K. K. Pandian, and P. Saxena,
"Unleashing the power of disruptive and emerging technologies amid COVID 2019: A detailed
review," arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.11507, 2020.
S. H. Alsamhi and B. Lee, "Blockchain for Multi-Robot Collaboration to Combat COVID-19 and
Future Pandemics," arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.02137, 2020.
P. Vaishnavi et al., "Artificial Intelligence and Drones to combat COVID-19," Preprints. org, no,
2020.
S. H. Alsamhi, O. Ma, and M. S. Ansari, "Convergence of Machine Learning and Robotics
Communication in Collaborative Assembly: Mobility, Connectivity and Future Perspectives,"
Journal of Intelligent & Robotic Systems, pp. 1-26, 2019.

[7]

[8]
[9]
[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]
[14]

[15]

[16]
[17]
[18]

[19]
[20]

[21]

[22]

[23]
[24]

S. H. Alsamhi, O. Ma, and M. S. Ansari, "Artificial intelligence-based techniques for emerging
robotics communication: A survey and future perspectives," arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.09671,
2018.
D. Nguyen, M. Ding, P. N. Pathirana, and A. Seneviratne, "Blockchain and AI-based Solutions to
Combat Coronavirus (COVID-19)-like Epidemics: A Survey," 2020.
Q. Li, R. Gravina, Y. Li, S. H. Alsamhi, F. Sun, and G. Fortino, "Multi-user activity recognition:
Challenges and opportunities," Information Fusion, vol. 63, pp. 121-135, 2020.
S. H. Alsamhi, M. S. Ansari, O. Ma, F. Almalki, and S. K. Gupta, "Tethered balloon technology in
design solutions for rescue and relief team emergency communication services," Disaster Med.
Public Health Prep, pp. 1-8, 2018.
S. H. Alsamhi, O. Ma, M. S. Ansari, and S. K. Gupta, "Collaboration of drone and internet of
public safety things in smart cities: An overview of qos and network performance optimization,"
Drones, vol. 3, no. 1, p. 13, 2019.
S. H. Alsamhi, O. Ma, M. S. Ansari, and F. A. Almalki, "Survey on collaborative smart drones and
internet of things for improving smartness of smart cities," Ieee Access, vol. 7, pp. 128125128152, 2019.
V. Lopes and L. A. Alexandre, "An overview of blockchain integration with robotics and artificial
intelligence," arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.00329, 2018.
M. Dorigo, "Blockchain Technology for Robot Swarms: A Shared Knowledge and Reputation
Management System for Collective Estimation," in Swarm Intelligence: 11th International
Conference, ANTS 2018, Rome, Italy, October 29–31, 2018, Proceedings, 2018, vol. 11172, p.
425: Springer.
V. Strobel, E. Castelló Ferrer, and M. Dorigo, "Managing byzantine robots via blockchain
technology in a swarm robotics collective decision making scenario," in Proceedings of the 17th
International Conference on Autonomous Agents and MultiAgent Systems, 2018, pp. 541-549:
International Foundation for Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems.
E. C. Ferrer, T. Hardjono, and A. Pentland, "Proceedings of the First Symposium on Blockchain
and Robotics, MIT Media Lab, 5 December 2018," Ledger, vol. 4, pp. 1-4, 2019.
A. Kapitonov et al., "Robotic Services for New Paradigm Smart Cities Based on Decentralized
Technologies," Ledger, vol. 4, pp. 56-66, 2019.
(2020). Draganfly Selected to Globally Integrate Breakthrough Health Diagnosis Technology
Immediately onto Autonomous Camera’s and Specialized Drones to Combat Coronavirus (COVID19) and Future Health Emergencies.
Z. DUKOWITZ. (2020). Drones and the Coronavirus: The Many Ways Drones Are Supporting
Containment Efforts in China.
A. Kumar, K. Sharma, H. Singh, S. G. Naugriya, S. S. Gill, and R. Buyya, "A drone-based networked
system and methods for combating coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic," Future
Generation Computer Systems, vol. 115, pp. 1-19, 2020.
S. H. Alsamhi, M. S. Ansari, and N. S. Rajput, "Disaster coverage predication for the emerging
tethered balloon technology: capability for preparedness, detection, mitigation, and response,"
Disaster medicine and public health preparedness, vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 222-231, 2018.
S. H. Alsamhi, F. A. Almalki, O. Ma, M. S. Ansari, and M. C. Angelides, "Performance optimization
of tethered balloon technology for public safety and emergency communications,"
Telecommunication Systems, pp. 1-10, 2019.
E. Otiede et al., "Delivering Medical Products to Quarantined Regions Using Unmanned Aerial
Vehicles," Journal of Applied Mechanics Engineering, vol. 6, no. 1, p. 244, 2017.
Y. Zheng, Y. Zhu, and L. Wang, "Consensus of heterogeneous multi-agent systems," IET Control
Theory & Applications, vol. 5, no. 16, pp. 1881-1888, 2011.

[25]
[26]

[27]
[28]

[29]

[30]

[31]
[32]
[33]

[34]
[35]
[36]
[37]
[38]
[39]

[40]
[41]

[42]
[43]

E. C. Ferrer, "The blockchain: a new framework for robotic swarm systems," in Proceedings of
the future technologies conference, 2018, pp. 1037-1058: Springer.
G. Valentini, D. Brambilla, H. Hamann, and M. Dorigo, "Collective perception of environmental
features in a robot swarm," in International Conference on Swarm Intelligence, 2016, pp. 65-76:
Springer.
A. Khawalid, D. Acristinii, H. van Toor, and E. C. Ferrer, "Grex: A decentralized hive mind,"
Ledger, vol. 4, pp. 42-55, 2019.
J. A. Tran, G. S. Ramachandran, P. M. Shah, C. B. Danilov, R. A. Santiago, and B. Krishnamachari,
"SwarmDAG: A Partition Tolerant Distributed Ledger Protocol for Swarm Robotics," Ledger, vol.
4, pp. 25-31, 2019.
D. Calvaresi, A. Dubovitskaya, J. P. Calbimonte, K. Taveter, and M. Schumacher, "Multi-agent
systems and blockchain: Results from a systematic literature review," in International
Conference on Practical Applications of Agents and Multi-Agent Systems, 2018, pp. 110-126:
Springer.
A. Kapitonov, S. Lonshakov, A. Krupenkin, and I. Berman, "Blockchain-based protocol of
autonomous business activity for multi-agent systems consisting of UAVs," in 2017 Workshop on
Research, Education and Development of Unmanned Aerial Systems (RED-UAS), 2017, pp. 84-89:
IEEE.
D. Vujičić, D. Jagodić, and S. Ranđić, "Blockchain technology, bitcoin, and Ethereum: A brief
overview," in 2018 17th international symposium infoteh-jahorina (infoteh), 2018, pp. 1-6: IEEE.
M. Vukolić, "The quest for scalable blockchain fabric: Proof-of-work vs. BFT replication," in
International workshop on open problems in network security, 2015, pp. 112-125: Springer.
L. Luu, V. Narayanan, C. Zheng, K. Baweja, S. Gilbert, and P. Saxena, "A secure sharding protocol
for open blockchains," in Proceedings of the 2016 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and
Communications Security, 2016, pp. 17-30.
D. s. den, "Using Merklix tree to shard block validation," in
"https://www.deadalnix.me/2016/11/06/using-merklix-tree-to-shard-block-validation/," 2016.
B. Qin, J. Huang, Q. Wang, X. Luo, B. Liang, and W. Shi, "Cecoin: A decentralized PKI mitigating
MitM attacks," Future Generation Computer Systems, vol. 107, pp. 805-815, 2020.
M. Fernandes and L. A. Alexandre, "Robotchain: Using tezos technology for robot event
management," Ledger, vol. 4, pp. 32-41, 2019.
A. K. R. Venkatapathy and M. ten Hompel, "A Decentralized Context Broker Using Byzantine
Fault Tolerant Consensus," Ledger, vol. 4, pp. 17-24, 2019.
A. Islam and S. Y. Shin, "Bus: a blockchain-enabled data acquisition scheme with the assistance
of UAV swarm in internet of things," IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 103231-103249, 2019.
A. Islam and S. Y. Shin, "A blockchain-based secure healthcare scheme with the assistance of
unmanned aerial vehicle in Internet of Things," Computers & Electrical Engineering, vol. 84, p.
106627, 2020.
A. Islam and S. Y. Shin, "Buav: A blockchain based secure uav-assisted data acquisition scheme in
internet of things," Journal of Communications and Networks, vol. 21, no. 5, pp. 491-502, 2019.
F. Syed, S. K. Gupta, S. Hamood Alsamhi, M. Rashid, and X. Liu, "A survey on recent optimal
techniques for securing unmanned aerial vehicles applications," Transactions on Emerging
Telecommunications Technologies, p. e4133, 2020.
Z. Fu, Y. Mao, D. He, J. Yu, and G. Xie, "Secure multi-uav collaborative task allocation," IEEE
Access, vol. 7, pp. 35579-35587, 2019.
K. Gai, Y. Wu, L. Zhu, K.-K. R. Choo, and B. Xiao, "Blockchain-Enabled Trustworthy Group
Communications in UAV Networks," IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems,
2020.

[44]
[45]
[46]

[47]

[48]

[49]

[50]

[51]

[52]

[53]

[54]

[55]
[56]

[57]

[58]

[59]
[60]

Z. Guan, H. Lyu, D. Li, Y. Hei, and T. Wang, "Blockchain: a distributed solution to UAV-enabled
mobile edge computing," IET Communications, 2020.
R. Gupta, A. Kumari, S. Tanwar, and N. Kumar, "Blockchain-Envisioned Softwarized MultiSwarming UAVs to Tackle COVID-I9 Situations," IEEE Network, 2020.
S. H. Alsamhi and N. S. Rajput, "An intelligent HAP for broadband wireless communications:
developments, QoS and applications," International Journal of Electronics and Electrical
Engineering, vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 134-143, 2015.
S. H. Alsamhi and N. S. Rajput, "Implementation of call admission control technique in HAP for
enhanced QoS in wireless network deployment," Telecommunication Systems, vol. 63, no. 2, pp.
141-151, 2016.
S. H. Alsamhi and N. S. Rajput, "An efficient channel reservation technique for improved QoS for
mobile communication deployment using high altitude platform," Wireless Personal
Communications, vol. 91, no. 3, pp. 1095-1108, 2016.
S. H. Alsamhi and N. S. Rajput, "Neural network in intelligent handoff for QoS in HAP and
terrestrial systems," International Journal of Materials science and Engineering, vol. 2, pp. 141146, 2014.
S. H. Alsamhi and N. S. Rajput, "Performance and analysis of propagation models for efficient
handoff in high altitude platform system to sustain QoS," in 2014 IEEE Students' Conference on
Electrical, Electronics and Computer Science, 2014, pp. 1-6: IEEE.
S. H. Alsamhi and N. S. Rajput, "An intelligent hand-off algorithm to enhance quality of service in
high altitude platforms using neural network," Wireless Personal Communications, vol. 82, no. 4,
pp. 2059-2073, 2015.
A. Gupta, S. Sundhan, S. K. Gupta, S. H. Alsamhi, and M. Rashid, "Collaboration of UAV and
HetNet for better QoS: a comparative study," International Journal of Vehicle Information and
Communication Systems, vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 309-333, 2020.
Z. H. Khan, A. Siddique, and C. W. Lee, "Robotics Utilization for Healthcare Digitization in Global
COVID-19 Management," International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health,
vol. 17, no. 11, p. 3819, 2020.
S. J. Kim, G. J. Lim, J. Cho, and M. J. Côté, "Drone-aided healthcare services for patients with
chronic diseases in rural areas," Journal of Intelligent & Robotic Systems, vol. 88, no. 1, pp. 163180, 2017.
R. F. Graboyes and B. Skorup, "Medical Drones in the United States and a Survey of Technical
and Policy Challenges," Mercatus Center Policy Brief, 2020.
C.-F. Peng, J.-W. Hsieh, S.-W. Leu, and C.-H. Chuang, "Drone-based vacant parking space
detection," in 2018 32nd International Conference on Advanced Information Networking and
Applications Workshops (WAINA), 2018, pp. 618-622: IEEE.
M. Singh, G. S. Aujla, R. S. Bali, S. Vashisht, A. Singh, and A. Jindal, "Blockchain-enabled secure
communication for drone delivery: a case study in COVID-like scenarios," in Proceedings of the
2nd ACM MobiCom Workshop on Drone Assisted Wireless Communications for 5G and Beyond,
2020, pp. 25-30.
H. Ullah, N. G. Nair, A. Moore, C. Nugent, P. Muschamp, and M. Cuevas, "5G communication: an
overview of vehicle-to-everything, drones, and healthcare use-cases," IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp.
37251-37268, 2019.
S. C. Sethuraman, V. Vijayakumar, and S. Walczak, "Cyber attacks on healthcare devices using
unmanned aerial vehicles," Journal of Medical Systems, vol. 44, no. 1, p. 29, 2020.
A. Hardy, M. Makame, D. Cross, S. Majambere, and M. Msellem, "Using low-cost drones to map
malaria vector habitats," Parasites & vectors, vol. 10, no. 1, p. 29, 2017.

[61]

[62]
[63]
[64]

[65]

[66]
[67]
[68]

[69]
[70]
[71]
[72]
[73]
[74]
[75]
[76]
[77]

Z. Doffman, "This New Coronavirus Spy Drone Will Make Sure You Stay Home," in
"https://www.forbes.com/sites/zakdoffman/2020/03/05/meet-the-coronavirus-spy-dronesthat-make-sure-you-stay-home/#43a7c9e51669," March, 2020.
Z. Lv, "The security of Internet of drones," Computer Communications, vol. 148, pp. 208-214,
2019.
Z. Lv and H. Song, "Mobile Internet of Things Under Data Physical Fusion Technology," IEEE
Internet of Things Journal, vol. 7, no. 5, pp. 4616-4624, 2019.
J.-T. Amenyo et al., "Ultra-low cost low-altitude affordable and sustainable UAV multicopter
drones for mosquito vector control in malaria disease management," in IEEE Global
Humanitarian Technology Conference (GHTC 2014), 2014, pp. 590-596.
K. M. Fornace, C. J. Drakeley, T. William, F. Espino, and J. Cox, "Mapping infectious disease
landscapes: unmanned aerial vehicles and epidemiology," Trends in parasitology, vol. 30, no. 11,
pp. 514-519, 2014.
Q. Yu, H. Liu, and N. Xiao, "Unmanned aerial vehicles: potential tools for use in zoonosis
control," Infectious diseases of poverty, vol. 7, no. 1, p. 49, 2018.
E. D. Otiede et al., "Delivering Medical Products to Quarantined Regions Using Unmanned Aerial
Vehicles," Journal of Applied Mechanics Engineering, vol. 6, no. 1, p. 244, 2017.
J. S. Daniel Singer, Emmanuel Saka, Emily Bancroft, "Cost Analysis and Feasibility of Using
Unmanned Aerial Vehicles to Transport Laboratory Samples for Early Infant Diagnosis of HIV in
Malawi," http://docplayer.net/17711108-Cost-analysis-and-feasibility-of-using-unmannedaerial-vehicles-to-transport-laboratory-samples-for-early-infant-diagnosis-of-hiv-inmalawi.htmlJune, 2016.
P. Abichandani, D. Lobo, S. Kabrawala, and W. McIntyre, "Secure Communication for MultiQuadrotor Networks using Ethereum Blockchain," IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 2020.
M. Andoni et al., "Blockchain technology in the energy sector: A systematic review of challenges
and opportunities," Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, vol. 100, pp. 143-174, 2019.
T. Ometoruwa, "Solving the blockchain trilemma: Decentralization, security & scalability,"
https://www.coinbureau.com/analysis/solving-blockchain-trilemma/2019.
L. M. Goodman, "Tezos: A self-amending crypto-ledger position paper," Aug, vol. 3, pp. 1-18,
2014.
J. Qin, Q. Ma, Y. Shi, and L. Wang, "Recent advances in consensus of multi-agent systems: A brief
survey," IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics, vol. 64, no. 6, pp. 4972-4983, 2016.
W. Wang et al., "A survey on consensus mechanisms and mining strategy management in
blockchain networks," IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 22328-22370, 2019.
V. Buterin, "A next-generation smart contract and decentralized application platform," white
paper, vol. 3, no. 37, 2014.
S. E. F. e. al., "Ethereum 2.0 Specifications," in "https://github.com/ethereum/eth2.0-specs,,"
2018.
L. Baird, "The swirlds hashgraph consensus algorithm: Fair, fast, byzantine fault tolerance,"
Swirlds, Inc. Technical Report SWIRLDS-TR-2016, vol. 1, 2016.

