How Information Diffuse in a Nomination Network?
Minghao Wang

Keyu Xu

Xiaohui Wang

Paolo Mengoni, IEEE Member

arXiv:2102.03052v1 [cs.SI] 5 Feb 2021

Department of Journalism
Department of Journalism
School of Communication
School of Communication
Hong Kong Baptist University Hong Kong Baptist University Hong Kong Baptist University Hong Kong Baptist University
Hong Kong SAR, China
Hong Kong SAR, China
Hong Kong SAR, China
Hong Kong SAR, China
pmengoni@hkbu.edu.hk
vincentwx@hkbu.edu.hk
wangminghao@hkbu.edu.hk 19456352@life.hkbu.edu.hk

Abstract—During the special period of the COVID-19 outbreak, this project investigated the driving factors in different
information diffusion modes (i.e. broadcasting mode, contagion
mode) based on the nomination relations in a charitable social
relay campaign on Sina Weibo. Specifically, we mapped a
nomination social network and tracked the core communicators
in both modes. Besides, we also observed the network from
perspectives such as relationships between core communicators
and modularity of the whole network. We extracted homophily
factors and tested them on representative communities within
the largest component of the network. We found that some core
communicators distributed in a co-dependent way. At last, we
presented several explanations to the phenomenon which can be
explored in further research.
Index Terms—information diffusion, social network analysis,
community detection, homophily analysis

I. I NTRODUCTION

from digital audiences as one of the most successful diseaserelated viral campaigns using social media [8], also focused
on the homophily of celebrities. Few studies have explored
the different information diffusion modes (broadcasting and
contagion) in the nomination network. Therefore, in this work
we aim to explore the driving factors in different information
diffusion modes by exploiting the social network based on the
relationship of the senders and nominees in the Nomination
Campaign.
Our research consists of two main parts: information diffusion mode of the Nomination Campaign and the related
content of Key Opinion Leaders (also can be regarded as
core communicators in this study). For Key Opinion Leaders
(KOLs), we pay attention to the distribution of different
attributes of this group and the structural mode of their
collaboration.

A. Background

C. Information Diffusion mode on Sina Weibo

Under the influence of the outbreak of COVID-19, Sina
Weibo (a Twitter-like social media platform in China)
launched a charitable campaign named #手写加油接力# (the
“Nomination Campaign”) on February 3, 2020, aiming to
encourage people to relay their blessing to Wuhan, China and
to cheer for the workers who were fighting on the front line.
The participants of this Nomination Campaign were asked
to post a picture of their handwritten blessing words along
with the hashtag, then nominate their friends using @. Those
people who were nominated by others needed to pass on this
relay. Half a month later, the Nomination Campaign had 4.17
billion views and more than 30 million engagements (data on
February 18, 2020), which can be regarded as a successful
viral campaign on Sina Weibo.

Previous studies have explored the diffusion characteristics
of cancer education information on Sina Weibo and found
that information diffusion is driven by a mix of the broadcast
and contagion mechanisms in the retweet network [3]. At the
same time, “Out-degrees” and “in-degrees” can be regarded as
the two key structural characteristics of advertisers on social
media [9]. Similarly, for the Nomination Campaign, we raise
the following research question:
RQ1: Whether the information diffusion mode of the Nomination Campaign is broadcasting or contagion?

B. Related Works
The advent of social media has facilitated the study of information diffusion, user interaction [1] and user influence over
social networks [2]. In many previous studies on social media
and information diffusion, scholars mainly focused on retweet
relations [3] [4] or follower relations [2] [5] to map and analyze the information diffusion network. Actually, nomination is
also a common method to generate social network data [6]. But
nomination networks are often used to study the homophily of
intimate and small social relationships [7]. The study on the
Ice Bucket Challenge, a campaign gained global recognition

D. Key Opinion Leaders and Their Relationships on Sina
Weibo
1) What is Key Opinion Leader: In literature, the definition
of Key Opinion Leader (KOLs) differs when referring to the
sociological and social media aspects. In this work, we mainly
focus on the social media definition of the KOL, referred
as someone that has acquired or developed his fame and
notability through the Internet 1 . In the context of social media,
KOLs with different audience amounts have different names
and features, such as Wang Hong and micro-celebrities. Wang
Hong, i.e. 网红, are celebrities grown up from the Internet
especially social media. They usually have a large number
of audiences and act as an important role of Chinese digital
1 Wikipedia contributors. Internet celebrity — Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia, 2020. [Online; accessed 26-August-2020].

economy. Micro-celebrities are usually ordinary persons who
share their mini shows or opinions via mobile phones around
a niche group. They don’t have many audiences compared to
Wang Hong, but their audiences are much loyal and frequently
interacted.
2) KOLs in this Nomination Campaign: During the outbreak of COVID-19 in 2020, online social activities not
only be significant in social coordination but also played an
important role in the establishment of motivation [10]. On the
one hand, the 14-day quarantine period allows people to have
more free time to participate in social media. Moreover, people
are more attracted to celebrities, which strengthens their online
social status [11]. Therefore, if celebrities are active during the
outbreak, it will inspire people to increase the possibility of
online socialization.
Meanwhile, the other groups, such as peer leaders, unverified, active, well-connected users and medical professionals
with ICT experience, they all can play an active role in
promoting Social Networking Sites (SNS) [12].
But in this Nomination Campaign, who are the promoters?
To explore this problem, we have the following research
question:
RQ2: Who strongly promoted the Nomination Campaign?
3) The Ways and Causes of KOLs Collaboration in the
Nomination Campaign: Homophily refers to “a contact between similar people occurs at a higher rate than among
dissimilar people” [13]. It will be easier to form ties based
on homophily with the same geographic location or common
hobbies between members [14]. A study on the online venue
for international expats in Denmark shows that the group
manifests itself as a community in terms of attachment to
geographical location, degree of mutual responsibility of its
members, recognition of communal history pieces, and normativity level [15]. In the previous related works on social
media homophily, factors like people’s political views [16] or
ethnicity, religion, age, country, and the reasons for joining
specific social media platforms [17] are tested.
It seems to be a common phenomenon that users on social
media spontaneously form a community for some reason.
Since our research is based on Sina Weibo and the nodes
in the network are basically entertainment stars, we decided
to choose age, school, occupation, employer, the number of
followers, and if they are verified as the factors to analyze the
homophily. Then we will discuss:
RQ3: What makes Sina Weibo KOLs form communities of
different sizes?
II. M ETHODOLOGY
A. Data Collection
We used the Python Web Crawler to extract the posts on
Sina Weibo that contain the hashtag #手写加油接力#. The
popularity of the Nomination Campaign has declined after half
a month. Therefore, we selected a time period from February
3 to 18, 2020. All information about the posts have been
collected into our dataset: number of retweets, number of
comments, number of likes, content and pictures of posts,

posting time and location. The senders’ personal profiles were
also included: account name and gender, number of followers
and followings. In consideration of the complexity of the
ordinary accounts, we decided to only extract the verified
account. Eventually, we obtained 13740 posts. In the process
of data cleaning, firstly, we deleted duplicated rows and then
we extracted all nominees from the text of posts that have
“@” in it. Because there were many participators without
nominating others in their posts and we deleted them. As a
result, a total of 4532 posts were retained in the final dataset.
Finally, we only retained two columns, the sender name and
corresponding nominees, as the source and target node for the
visualization stage. The final dataset was imported into Gephi
to generate the visualization of the network. It was a directed
graph with 2256 nodes and 4310 unweighted edges.
B. Information Diffusion Mode of the Nomination Campaign
About the broadcasting mode, since the nodes with large
out-degree are basically advertisement accounts, we decided
to utilize in-degree together with timeline to examine the
broadcasting mode. We first calculated the average in-degree
in the network to illustrate the normal scale of diffusion. Then
we selected the top 10 nodes with the highest in-degree, and
extracted their 1-degree egocentric network. Meanwhile, we
checked the time of their activities. So, if a node has a high indegree and its activity is earlier than its neighbors, we regard
this node is of the broadcasting mode.
About the contagion mode, the eccentricity (i.e. the distance
from a given starting node to the farthest node from it in
the network) of nodes are compared with the diameter of the
whole network. If the eccentricity is close to the diameter, we
regard this node is of the contagion mode.
C. Promoters of the Nomination Campaign
Since we have calculated the key indicators of both modes
(i.e. the in-degree and the eccentricity), we regard the top
10 nodes under each indicator are the promoters of the
Nomination Campaign.
D. KOLs’ Community Analysis
We first arranged the nodes into different components
using Gephi by their component ID, then we calculated the
modularity class applying the algorithm proposed by Blondel,
Guillaume, Lambiotte, and Lefebvre [18]. We selected the
communities within the largest component and conducted
portraits from 6 dimensions (i.e. age, school, occupation,
employer, the number of followers and if they are verified)
of those users and tried to extract some factors of their
homophily.
E. Results
Figure 1 shows the whole network of the Nomination
Campaign. It is a directed graph with 2256 nodes and 4310
edges. The network has 551 components and its density is
0.001. The average in-degree of the network is 1.584, and
Figure 2 shows the top 10 in-degree nodes and their 1-degree

egocentric network (the amount of neighbors are annotated
below each chart). These 10 focal nodes have 54.400 nodes
connected around them in average, with a standard deviation
of 22.916. The timeline rank (i.e. the appearance rank of the
focal nodes among the egocentric network in a decreasing time
order) is shown in Table I. As we can see, most focal nodes appeared earlier than their neighbors (Mtimeline rank = 0.175,
SDtimeline rank = 0.312). So, we can prove there exists
the broadcasting mode in the information diffusion of the
Nomination Campaign.
Figure 3 shows the longest path in the network. Both
the node size and color correspond to the eccentricity (i.e.
bigger and darker nodes have larger eccentricity). The top 10
eccentricity are quite similar (M = 21.800, SD = 0.632). The
diameter of the whole network is 23. So it can be proved that
contagion mode is also obvious in the information diffusion
of the Nomination Campaign.

Fig. 2. The top 10 in-degree nodes and their 1-degree egocentric network.
Node size represents the in-degree, and the amount of neighbors are annotated
below each plot.

Fig. 1. The whole network of the Nomination Campaign. The node size
corresponds to its in-degree, while different color illustrates different communities.

Table II illustrates the top promoters of neither mode. There
is no overlap between them, and the correlation between
them is negative (r = −0.518), showing that the relationship
between the two modes are fairly negative related. Actually,
among the top 10 promoters in the broadcasting mode, a half
of them are celebrity themselves, while among the top 10
promoters in the contagion mode, all of them are marketing
accounts and fan clubs.
Figure 4 shows the communities within the largest component (contains 683 nodes, 30.275% of all nodes) of the
whole network. There are mainly 7 communities within this
component. We selected two representative communities to
conduct portraits.
As shown in Figure 5, the first community we selected contains users namely “杨幂”, “Dear-迪丽热巴”, “张云龙mmc”

Fig. 3. The longest path within the network. Its start node “林一网宣站”
has a eccentricity of 23, equals to the network diameter.

TABLE I
T HE TIMELINE RANK OF TOP 10 IN - DEGREE NODES .
name
R1SE-姚琛
明星粉丝联盟
罗云熙Leo
微博明星
以啵之名助爱之城
微博书法
新浪娱乐
任嘉伦Allen
李一桐Q
谭松韵seven

timeline rank
0.941
0.535
0.037
0.084
0.018
0.015
0.044
0.017
0.022
0.042

TABLE II
T HE TOP 10 PROMOTERS OF NEITHER MODE .
promoter
R1SE-姚琛
明星粉丝联盟
罗云熙Leo
微博明星
以啵之名助爱之城
微博书法
新浪娱乐
任嘉伦Allen
李一桐Q
谭松韵seven
林一网宣站
路人甲 张云雷个站
汪苏泷官方后援会
林一超话小管家1号
兔子小姐是个哲学家
绮妞妞呀
林一反黑站
Boogie 王子异全球粉丝后援会
张嘉倪官方后援会
我是小刘同学

mode
broadcasting
broadcasting
broadcasting
broadcasting
broadcasting
broadcasting
broadcasting
broadcasting
broadcasting
broadcasting
contagion
contagion
contagion
contagion
contagion
contagion
contagion
contagion
contagion
contagion

etc. Table III lists all individual users among this community
(decreasingly sorted by the number of their followers). The
most obvious homophily factor is that they are all belong to
the same employer (i.e. 嘉行传媒). And they are all quite
young and from the same generation, with an average age
of 30.250 (SDage = 3.945). And they all graduated from
the most accomplished performing school in China. The are
all extremely popular on Sina Weibo, with 27933891.750
followers in average.
The second community we selected is shown in Figure 6 and
Table IV. Quite different from the first one, they all belong to
different employers (some of their employers are not available
from the internet, only broker’s contact). And their ages are
of quite large deviation (the youngest one, namely 赵今麦, is
underage). They are from quite different schools as well. The
average number of their followers is 26342852.500, almost the
same as the first community. No obvious homophily factors
were found in this community.

Fig. 4. Communities within the largest component of the network. The 7
main communities are highlighted in different colors.

Fig. 5. The community around “杨幂” and “Dear-迪丽热巴”.

III. D ISCUSSION
In this study, we aimed to discover the information diffusion
modes of the Nomination Campaign on Sina Weibo. By calculating in-degree, we discovered that information disseminates

Fig. 6. The community around “陈赫” and “贾乃亮”.

TABLE III
H OMOPHILY FACTORS AMONG THE COMMUNITY OF “杨幂” AND “D EAR -迪丽热巴”.
name
杨幂
Dear-迪丽热巴
张云龙mmc
张彬彬Vin
深情的高伟光
祝绪丹Bambi
刘芮麟Wayne
黄梦莹maggie

age
33
27
32
27
37
28
29
29

school
Beijing Film Academy
Shanghai Theatre Academy
Beijing Film Academy
Shanghai Theatre Academy
The Central Academy of Drama
The Central Academy of Drama
Beijing Film Academy
Beijing Film Academy

occupation
actress
actress
actor
actor
actor
actress
actor
actress

employer
嘉行传媒, 杨幂工作室
嘉行传媒
嘉行传媒
嘉行传媒
嘉行传媒
嘉行传媒
嘉行传媒
嘉行传媒

follower
107511790
68059693
12499549
11771026
8373698
5647558
5026767
4581045

if verified
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes

TABLE IV
H OMOPHILY FACTORS AMONG THE COMMUNITY OF “陈赫” AND “贾乃亮”.
name
陈赫
贾乃亮
刘涛tamia
罗云熙Leo
谭松韵seven
孙艺洲
秦海璐
金晨
张晓龙
赵今麦angel

age
34
36
41
31
29
36
41
29
44
17

school
Shanghai Theatre Academy
Beijing Film Academy
Art Troupe
Shanghai Theatre Academy
Beijing Film Academy
Shanghai Theatre Academy
The Central Academy of Drama
Beijing Dance Academy
Beijing Dance Academy

occupation
actor
actor
actress
actor, singer
actress
actor
actress
actress
actor
actress

in a broadcasting mode and we also verified that there was
a virus-like spreading mode in the network by calculating
eccentricity. Then we found that there are different KOLs
in two modes. For broadcasting mode, stars were the main
group to help to achieve a greater information coverage. For
contagion mode, marketing accounts and fan clubs were the
KOLs who followed the relay rules to a greater extent and
formed deeper connections. To find out how KOLs played a
role in the network, we selected several top KOLs to observe
their distribution and discovered that they gathered in different
communities which could be attributed to homophily.
Besides, we also observed the relationships between different KOLs based on the network structure. KOLs in the broadcasting mode received in-degree edges from both fan clubs
and marketing accounts. Fan club groups always distributed
around their idols to support them in the network. Compared
to fan clubs, marketing accounts didn’t have such significant
preference. However, our analysis shows that there are also
specific marketing account groups lying around specific star
groups in the network. In details, there are two kinds of
distributions.
The first is based on one group to one group. One group of
marketing accounts is corresponding to one star relay groups.
For example, the marketing accounts lying around “杨 幂oriented” corporation community only points to members in
the community. The suggested interpretation is that there might
be in cooperation or marketing accounts aiming to obtain more
attention from the public.
The second distribution is based on one group to many
groups. One group of marketing accounts is corresponding
to several star relay groups. For example, a fixed group of
marketing accounts interacts with both stars from the same

employer
上海话剧艺术中心
北京骏起菲阳文化传媒有限公司
中视同成
两小姐工作室，幸韵文化
孙艺洲工作室

The Central Academy of Drama

follower
68829670
64890095
43833989
21116743
19758087
12368094
10244842
8725137
7784305
5877563

if verified
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes

crew in a relay chain and stars from other exclusive relay
chains. One proposed interpretation is that the marketing
accounts might want to obtain more public attention. Another
possibility could be that this is a marketing strategy used
by stars. The phenomenon is interesting and offers further
research insights by analyzing more connections between fixed
star groups and marketing accounts in more scenarios.
What’s more, we also analysed the connection between
different communities by observing the modularity which
indicated the dense connection within communities and sparser
connections between communities. [19] In our network, modularity is 0.892 which indicates a very dense interactions during
the event. However, combining indicators of 1848 strongly
connected components and 568 communities, we found that a
great amount of small size of components were included in the
same group by the algorithm [18], which revealed that many
users in the event relayed and enjoyed in a limited circle.
IV. C ONCLUSION
Our research focused on a charitable social media relay
campaign during the most struggling period of COVID-19
pandemic. We studied the information diffusion mode in the
campaign, and conducted a series of analysis about KOLs. It
gives ideas for the development and communication of such
activities in the future. Find the corresponding KOL, attract
more attention and participation, and transfer love and positive
energy would be effective the communication effects that are
supposed to be achieved.
Future works will include the comparison with other relay
events also in different settings from the public welfare here
analysed. Moreover, we will analyse if the effects discovered
on Sina Weibo is applicable to other social media outlets.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work is supported in part by the Start-up Grant
Tier 2 (RC-SGT2/18-19/COMM/001) of Hong Kong Baptist
University.
R EFERENCES
[1] Paolo Mengoni, Alfredo Milani, Valentina Poggioni, and Yuanxi Li.
Community elicitation from co-occurrence of activities. Future Generation Computer Systems, 110:904–917, 2020.
[2] Io Taxidou and Peter M Fischer. Online analysis of information diffusion
in twitter. In Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on World
Wide Web, pages 1313–1318, 2014.
[3] Xiaohui Wang, Liang Chen, Jingyuan Shi, and Tai-Quan Peng. What
makes cancer information viral on social media? Computers in Human
Behavior, 93:149–156, 2019.
[4] Fei Xiong, Yun Liu, Zhen-jiang Zhang, Jiang Zhu, and Ying Zhang. An
information diffusion model based on retweeting mechanism for online
social media. Physics Letters A, 376(30-31):2103–2108, 2012.
[5] Ronggui Huang and Xiaoyi Sun. Weibo network, information diffusion
and implications for collective action in china. Information, Communication & Society, 17(1):86–104, 2014.
[6] Hsieh-Hua Yang, Chyi-In Wu, Man Kit Lei, Hung-Jen Yang, et al. How
many are good enough for the adolescent social network nomination.
WSEAS Transactions on Mathematics, 8(7):299–308, 2009.
[7] Cheryl Alexander, Marina Piazza, Debra Mekos, and Thomas Valente.
Peers, schools, and adolescent cigarette smoking. Journal of adolescent
health, 29(1):22–30, 2001.
[8] K Hazel Kwon. Public referral, viral campaign, and celebrity participation: a social network analysis of the ice bucket challenge on youtube.
Journal of interactive advertising, 19(2):87–99, 2019.
[9] Lun Zhang and Tai-Quan Peng. Breadth, depth, and speed: diffusion of
advertising messages on microblogging sites. Internet Research, 2015.
[10] Ammar Yasir, Xiaojian Hu, Munir Ahmad, Abdul Rauf, Jingwen Shi,
and Saba Ali Nasir. Modeling impact of word of mouth and egovernment on online social presence during covid-19 outbreak: A
multi-mediation approach. International Journal of Environmental
Research and Public Health, 17(8):2954, 2020.
[11] Jihyun Kim, Jinyoung Kim, and Hocheol Yang. Loneliness and the
use of social media to follow celebrities: A moderating role of social
presence. The Social Science Journal, 56(1):21–29, 2019.
[12] Jingyuan Shi and Charles T Salmon. Identifying opinion leaders to
promote organ donation on social media: network study. Journal of
medical Internet research, 20(1):e7, 2018.
[13] Miller McPherson, Lynn Smith-Lovin, and James M Cook. Birds of
a feather: Homophily in social networks. Annual review of sociology,
27(1):415–444, 2001.
[14] Jingyuan Shi, Xiaohui Wang, Tai-Quan Peng, and Liang Chen. Understanding interactions in virtual hiv communities: a social network
analysis approach. AIDS care, 29(2):239–243, 2017.
[15] Kostiantyn Yanchenko. Community, network or both? Communication
& Language at Work, 6(2):15–27, 2019.
[16] Itai Himelboim, Marc Smith, and Ben Shneiderman. Tweeting apart:
Applying network analysis to detect selective exposure clusters in twitter.
Communication methods and measures, 7(3-4):195–223, 2013.
[17] Sinan Aral, Lev Muchnik, and Arun Sundararajan. Distinguishing
influence-based contagion from homophily-driven diffusion in dynamic networks. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
106(51):21544–21549, 2009.
[18] Vincent D Blondel, Jean-Loup Guillaume, Renaud Lambiotte, and Etienne Lefebvre. Fast unfolding of communities in large networks. Journal
of statistical mechanics: theory and experiment, 2008(10):P10008, 2008.
[19] Mark EJ Newman. Modularity and community structure in networks.
Proceedings of the national academy of sciences, 103(23):8577–8582,
2006.

