FRM Financial Risk Meter for Emerging
Markets
Souhir Ben Amor∗

Michael Althof

†

Wolfgang Karl Härdle

‡§

arXiv:2102.05398v1 [q-fin.PM] 10 Feb 2021

February 11, 2021

The fast-growing Emerging Market (EM) economies and their improved transparency and liquidity has attracted international investors. However, the external
price shocks can result in a higher level of volatility as well as domestic policy instability. Therefore, an efficient risk measure and hedging strategies are needed to help
investors protect their investments against this risk. In this paper, a daily systemic
risk measure, called FRM (Financial Risk Meter) is proposed. The FRM@ EM is applied to capture systemic risk behavior embedded in the returns of the 25 largest EMs’
FIs, covering the BRIMST (Brazil, Russia, India, Mexico, South Africa, and Turkey),
and thereby reflects the financial linkages between these economies. Concerning the
Macro factors, in addition to the Adrian & Brunnermeier (2016) Macro, we include
the EM sovereign yield spread over respective US Treasuries and the above-mentioned
countries’ currencies. The results indicated that the FRM of EMs’ FIs reached its
maximum during the US financial crisis following by COVID 19 crisis and the Macro
factors explain the BRIMST’ FIs with various degree of sensibility. We then study
the relationship between those factors and the tail event network behavior to build
our policy recommendations to help the investors to choose the suitable market for investment and tail-event optimized portfolios. For that purpose, an overlapping region
between portfolio optimisation strategies and FRM network centrality is developed.
We propose a robust and well diversified tail-event and cluster risk sensitive portfolio
allocation model and compare it to more classical approaches.
JEL Classification: C30, C58, G11, G15, G21.
∗ Blockchain

Research Center, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Germany. International Research Training Group
1792, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Germany. Alexander von Humboldt Stiftung. benamors@hu-berlin.de.
† Blockchain Research Center, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Germany. International Research Training Group
1792, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Germany. michael.althof@hu-berlin.de
‡ Blockchain Research Center, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Germany. Wang Yanan Institute for Studies
in Economics, Xiamen University, China. Sim Kee Boon Institute for Financial Economics, Singapore Management University, Singapore. Faculty of Mathematics and Physics, Charles University, Czech Republic.
National Chiao Tung University, Taiwan. haerdle@wiwi.hu-berlin.de.
§ Financial support of the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation program “FIN- TECH: A
Financial supervision and Technology compliance training programme” under the grant agree- ment No 825215
(Topic: ICT-35-2018, Type of action: CSA), the European Cooperation in Science & Technology COST Action
grant CA19130 - Fintech and Artificial Intelligence in Finance - Towards a transparent financial industry, the
Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft’s IRTG 1792 grant, the Yushan Scholar Program of Taiwan, the Czech
Science Foundation’s grant no. 19-28231X / CAS: XDA 23020303

1

Keywords: FRM (Financial Risk Meter), Lasso Quantile Regression, Network
Dynamics, Emerging Markets, Hierarchical Risk Parity.
Highlights
• We select the 25 biggest FIs in the BRIMST by market capitalization,
• Select Macro variables to reflect the state and impact of the developed and
emerging economies,
• The FRM is based on Lasso quantile regression designed to capture tail event
co-movements, between the selected EM FIs and the Macro variables,
• We use different quantile risk levels to check the robustness of our results.
• We found a high positive spillover effects between FIs of the same country and
often negative spillover effects between FIs in between regions.
• We examplify EM FIs illustrating high-CoStress and high network centrality.
• We give examples of "risk receivers" during the 2020 COVID-19 crisis.
• The EMs are strongly influenced by the Macros the Emerging Market Yield
spread, followed the VIX, Moody’s Baa corporate yield spreads, and the shape
of the U.S. Treasury yield curve. However, Emerging market currencies have a
lesser impact.
• We use the FRM technology based results to construct robust tail-event sensitive portfolios based on an uplifted HRP approach and compare them to other
classical approaches.
• We analyze the relationship between the FRM network centralities and the portfolio weights and specifically risky concentrations,
• The classical portfolio approach leads to high weight concentration. However,
the uplifted HRP approach provides better diversification.
• The uplifted HRP portfolio overweight low-central FIs and underweight highcentral ones.
• The Invλ is less at risk of spill-over effects across EM regions, FIs, and financial
sub-sectors.

1 Introduction
Emerging markets have been commonly acclaimed for providing robust growth potential and
offering investors a higher expected return compared to developed markets. Indeed, due to
the possibility of higher profits and the low level of global equity markets integration, EMs have
been considered as an investment opportunity for investors, whose aim to build an internationally
diversified portfolio. EMs liquidity and transparency have continuously enhanced [McGuire &
Schrijvers (2006); Bunda et al. (2009)]. Moreover, the reputation of EMs, in the framework of
portfolio diversification, has received the attention of international investors, especially after the
financial crisis that affected mostly developed markets.
However, the investment’s benefits of EMs come with additional risks, which are usually not
as prominent in developed markets. In fact, EMs are exposed to additional economic, political,
and currency risks. Further, the EMs’ economies fast growth and, as consequence, the quick
evolution of their structure result in market information being rapidly outdated. Therefore,
the existing more traditional methods of risk evaluation may be misleading in EMs, especially

2

in short and medium investment horizons. Indeed, the existing risk measure methods are not
suited to provide the up to date point of view representing current market structures, if they not
supplemented with the latest market information. Hence, an efficient systemic risk measure is
needed for EM.
For that purpose, it is crucial to understand and measure the spillover risk across EMs financial
system network, which is important for financial risk measurement and portfolio diversification;
From the perspective of financial risk measurement, the interdependence among FIs becomes
more important, especially during periods of distress, when losses spread through institutions,
rendering the global financial system more vulnerable. In this regard, a systemic crisis that
disturbs the financial system stability can have serious effects and lead to high losses for the
entire economy and society.
From the perspectives of risk management and portfolio diversification, the contagion risk
across the FIs from the same market, and across the worldwide markets, leads to a decrease in
diversification potential. Hence, understanding the network structure of interdependence among
FIs is crucial to risk managers and portfolio investors, as this can help them design investment
strategies to reduce dependence risk and thereby increase diversification. Investors are also
interested in recognizing the FIs that contribute the most (least) risk to their portfolio so that
they are considered with caution in their portfolio design, especially during financial market
turmoil.
To understand the FIs co-movements in EMs, our study examines the effect of Macro factors
on the FIs in BRIMST (Brazil, Russia, India, Mexico, South Africa, Turkey) EMs, using daily
interval data for the period between 2000–2020, with particular focus on the last two years. It is
well known that the economics of the mentioned markets are strongly linked to the US economy
[Özatay et al. (2009)], so it is crucial to analyze the effects of US Macro factors on volatility in
EMs financial system. It is worth to note that our dataset covers several global crisis periods,
allowing us to examine how the EMs Financial systems respond to the different crisis. After
determining the interdependencies among FIs and macroeconomic factors, our research aims
also to build a robust strategy based on portfolio diversification in EMs.
In order to achieve the mentioned goals, our paper seeks to answer the following questions: Can
the US and EMs Macro factors explain BRIMST financial equity indices? Are some categories
of Macro factors more important than others? What FIs from EMs are the largest (smallest)
spillover transmitters (receivers)? What FIs contribute the most (least) risk to total portfolio
risk? What FIs offer greater diversification benefits? And lastly, how the tail spillover effect and
portfolio weights change over time, and how they react to the different tail risk levels?
Answering all these questions is crucial, as international investors interested in understanding the forces behind the interdependence among macroeconomic factors and FIs, to identify
potential risks and rewards and benefit from global diversification. Economic policymakers and
regulators in BRIMST are interested in forces behind the co-movement between these markets
to further establish market resilience in EMs.
We tackle these questions by employing the Financial Risk Meter (FRM) technology in EMs.
The FRM is based on Lasso quantile regression designed to examine tail event co-movements
financial securites. The objective is to understand the FIs interconnectedness and represent them
in a network topology. Moreover, the FRM indices summarize the systematic risk at a given area
and identify risk factors. Briefly, FRM represents tail event behavior in a financial risk factors
network, which allows us (i) to identify the “stress emitters” and “stress receivers” companies,
(ii) to measure the tail dependencies among the FIs and the Macro factors (iii) analyze the
risk level in EMs over time. Concerning risk management, (iv) the FRM network is adopted in
the portfolio selection process. More precisely, by interpreting the correlation coefficients of FIs
equity indices in the adjacency matrix of the FRM network, an overlapping region between the
portfolio optimisation strategies and FRM network is developed, (v) The FRM adjacency matrix

3

is also adopted to lift the Hierarchical Risk Parity (HRP) approach [propsed by De Prado (2016)]
to the quantile level.
The remainder of this research is organized as follows. Section 2 presents a brief review of risk
measurement and risk management methods. The econometric approach is discussed in Section
3, as well as a discussion on centrality measures. Section 4 illustrates the proposed portfolio
optimization strategies. The FRM results are analysed in section 5. Section 6 develops the
portfolio construction, while section 7 provides policy recommendations before concluding the
general scope.
The codes are published on www.quantlet.de indicated by with keyword FRM. The current
level of FRM for Emerging markets as well as other channels can be found at http://hu.berlin/
frm.

2 Literature Review
The large-scale breakdown of FIs after the global Lehman brother’s crisis in 2008 had caused
serious social and economic losses. Therefore, controlling and maintaining financial system stability is one of the principals and the mutual responsibilities of central banks and financial market
regulators around the world. Previous researches have been conducted in the framework of FIs
interconnectedness. In this context, empirical studies commonly focus on resolving this issue
in European countries; Betz et al. (2016), Abbassi et al. (2017), and Aldasoro & Alves (2018).
Some studies have studied the FIs networks of developed American countries. Among others,
Cai et al. (2018); Kreis & Leisen (2018), and Tonzer (2015). Relatively few researchers have
investigated bank networks of emerging American countries; Silva et al. (2016); and Berndsen et
al. (2018). All of the above studies focused on data from only one country and did not consider
networks between FIs from several countries across the globe.
In order to bridge this gap, our study investigates the FIs networks from six among the biggest
emerging countries worldwide, as globalization leads to closely linked economic activity among
these countries in terms of trade and finance. It is well known that FIs are interconnected within
networks of several types of financial connections and contracts. The complex links among these
institutions, which can be considered as risk factors, can cause systemic risk and results in
spillover-effects that deteriorate the network stability and its functioning. These observations on
the joint network dynamics motivated practitioners and researchers to insert tail events into risk
management.
The Value-at-Risk (VaR) approach Franke et al. (2019) is frequently used to measure market
risk, by computing the monetary loss of an institution for a given confidence level [Slim et al.
(2017)]. However, the VaR measures a tail event probability hosting only one single node, which
does not reflect its connection to overall systemic risk. Recently, Adrian & Brunnermeier (2011)
& (2016) developed CoVaR to measure the systemic risk [e.g.Fang et al. (2018), Ben Amor et
al. (2019)]. The CoVaR measures spillover effects across financial markets by providing the VaR
of one market under the condition that the other market is in financial distress as given by
its VaR. Consequently, the CoVaR approach can gauge the size of the financial risk spillover.
However, it can only capture the extent of risk spillovers for a simple bivariate system and cannot
simultaneously measure the risk spillover effects across multiple financial markets. Härdle et al.
(2016) developed the Tail Event NETwork (TENET) risk approach by generalizing the CoVaR to
be able to accommodate all system nodes as risk factors. TENET applies the quantile regression
method on a set of network nodes stock market information and macroeconomic variables in a
rolling window approach. The innovation of TENET model is to employ dimensional reduction
(in a semi-parametric setting) by using the Lasso in a quantile regression framework Tibshirani
(1996). Also, Chen et al. (2019) propose a Tail Event driven Network Quantile Regression

4

(TENQR) to adress the interdependence, dynamics and riskiness of financial institutions. The
TENQR captures risk dynamics within a panel quantile autoregression in a network topology,
quantified through a time-varying adjacency matrix. TENQR technique is evaluated using the
SIFIs (systemically important financial institutions). To extend the TENET further, Mihoci et
al. (2020) developed an improved systemic risk measure that summarizes the high-dimensional
tail stress into a single real value indicator, called the Financial Risk Meter (FRM). The FRM
is computed as an average of each node and at each time window selected penalization terms.
The FRM level contains fundamental information about the active set of influential neighboring
nodes and about the contributors to systemic risk.
Yu et al. (2019) compared the proposed FRM to other measures for systemic risk, such as Google
Trends, SRISK, and VIX. They found a Granger causality between the FRM and these measures,
which confirmed the validity of the FRM as an efficient systemic risk measure. Mihoci et al.
(2020) applied the FRM to measure the dependencies between FIs and Macro factors exploiting
tail event information. They built two FRM indices namely FRM@Americas and FRM@Europe,
but also on bond yield and credit default swap spread co-movements.
So far, the FRM applications took into consideration financial securities from one economic
region and its domestic Macro factors. In our study, we extend the application of FRM for EMs,
and we will consider the domestic Macro factors from the BRIMST as well as those from the US
(proposed by Adrian & Brunnermeier (2016) to represent both the domestic and foreign state of
the economy.
In many portfolio construction approaches, the correlation between financial assets represents
the basis for portfolio selection. To exemplify, Markowitz (1959) developed the modern portfolio
theory (MPT). He found that when correlation between assets is not perfect, a diversified portfolio
can be constructed. Therefore, to reach efficient diversification, investors should select anticorrelated assets and verify and ensure the satisfaction of this condition over time. But the
correlation structure among assets changes over time and evolves especially during crises periods.
For that reason, the Markowitz theory is usually oriented to select the most stable assets such as
the industrial assets, and hence, the Markowitz optimal portfolio is often composed of a limited
and invariant set of assets. The second weakness of Markowitz’s MPT [Markowitz (1959)] is
related to the large estimation errors of the expected returns vector [Merton (1980)], as well as
of the covariance matrices [Jobson & Korkie (1980)]. Hence, a robust method for the modelling
of the dynamic interconnectedness of assets is needed to support the MPT and guide investors
in building an efficient and well diversified portfolio. In this regard, recent researchers designed
financial markets in networks (FMN), where assets are represented by nodes and the correlation
of returns are represented by links that relate these nodes [Chi et al. (2010); Diebold & Yılmaz
(2014); Peralta & Zareei (2016)]. Despite the originality and interesting results provided by this
network approach, the majority of its applications are descriptive and lack concrete applications
in the portfolio optimization procedure. Recently, Pozzi et al. (2013) extracted the dependency
structure of financial equities from the network approach to build a diversified portfolio to reduce
investment risk. This procedure visualized portfolio selection directly over the FMN design.
Peralta & Zareei (2016) used the FMN as a powerful device to enhance the portfolio optimization
procedure by selecting a set of assets according to their network centrality.
However, the adopted spillover and financial network methods focused on estimating the risk
spillover based on the return distributions’ first two conditional moments, thereby ignoring higher
moments of the distribution (i.e. right and left tails). Indeed, the existing spillover measures
concentrate only on the mean and variance of the distributions, which may underestimate the real
spillover effects among FIs in tail-events, since they do not take into consideration the extreme
risk spillover across financial markets. More specifically, previous researchers investigated meanto-mean effect, assuming that investors are mean–variance optimizers. But ideally, a portfolio
selection decision should be based on the entire return distribution estimation, since investors are

5

more risk averse to the extreme downside risk related to the tails of the distribution. To overcome
this limitation, we adopt the FRM to measure the joint tail events. In fact, the FRM has the
advantage to represent instantaneously the co-movements and the dynamics of high-dimension
networks. Furthermore, the FRM can display the hidden interdependency structures between
the financial network’s nodes. Given that the functions of complex FMN are reflected in the
risk evaluation and portfolio optimization [Haluszczynski et al. (2017); Wang et al. (2018)], we
contribute to this line of research by investigating the extent to which the underlying structure
of this financial market tail event network can be used as an effective tool in enhancing the
portfolio selection process. For that purpose, we establish a bridge between the FRM network
and portfolio optimisation strategies. More precisely, we study the relationship between optimal
portfolio weights and the FIs’ centrality in the FRM network.
The HRP is a second approach that aims to overcome the shortcomings of MPT. The Hierarchical risk parity (HRP) is firstly proposed by López de Prado (2016) as a risk parity allocation
algorithm. The HRP applies machine learning and graph theory to extrapolate a hierarchical
implementation of an inverse-variance allocation with weights computed among the formed correlated asset return clusters. By substituting the covariance structure with a hierarchical structure
of clusters, HRP fully benefits from the covariance matrix information and improves the stability of the weights. López de Prado (2016) shows that the HRP achieves higher risk-adjusted
return and lower out-of-sample volatility than inverse-variance allocations. Despite its appealing
features, the application of HRP is still rare, with increased interest Lohre et al. (2020), Jain &
Jain (2019), and Raffinot (2017) test the performance of HRP in a multi-asset allocation. Furthermore, Raffinot (2017) and Alipour et al. (2016) evaluate the performance of variant HRP.
However, the HRP focusses on the covariance matrix in computing the weights, consequently, it
offers only a conditional mean view of the assets’ connectedness, which may underestimate the
real spillover effects among assets in tail events. Taking into consideration tail spillover effects
using quantile regression methods seeks to broaden this view, by providing a complete description
of the stochastic relationship between assets and offering more robust and more efficient estimation Ma & Pohlman (2008). In this context, our paper contributes to the growing literature
by employing an uplifted HRP based on FRM as a quantile regression method. More precisely,
our research introduces two modifications to the HRP algorithm of López de Prado (2016): (i)
Replace the covariance matrix with the FRM-adjacency matrix. Indeed, the HRP assign portfolio weights without the necessity to invert the covariance matrix. This propriety of HRP makes
the replacement of the symmetric covariance matrix with the non-symmetric adjacency matrix
possible. (ii) The HRP uses the inverse variance of each asset to calculate the optimal weights,
and we replace the variance with the FRM’s Lasso penalization parameter (λ). By introducing
these two modifications, we build the uplifted HRP based on the FRM technology. The HRP
portfolio is then benchmarked against the classical HRP, the Minimum variance (MinVar) and
inverse variance portfolio (IVP) optimization methods.
Our research investigates a comprehensive set of risk measurement and portfolio optimization
in EMs, contributing a new dimension to the existing literature as follows:
(1) The FRM based Lasso quantile regression yields novel insights into the co-movement among
FIs and US and EM domestic macroeconomic risk factors. The risk of spillover and its direction
are also quantified and visualized, as well as how spillover risk evolves during the financial crisis.
Therefore, our research paper is among a few investigating the risk spillover across BRIMST
EMs. To the best of our knowledge, there is a considerable gap in financial literature on the
subject of tail risk spillover among US Macro factors and FIs in EMs. This paper is an attempt
to bridge this gap by building our research on the above subject. For that purpose, we cover a
sample of the biggest six emerging countries from different areas around the world which offers a

6

reasonable basis for comparisons at country and regional market levels. Most of the earlier studies
focus on fewer countries, mostly in one region. In addition, we adopt a sample that contains
the largest FIs from each country as well as the domestic and US Macro factors to build our
FRM network. Hence, our study investigates a comprehensive set of emerging equity markets,
contributing a new dimension to the literature on international equity market co-movement that
has traditionally focused on developed markets.
(2) Examine the existence of portfolio diversification benefits for foreigners investing in EMs.
Several studies have been conducted to examine the existence of portfolio diversification benefits
in less correlated financial markets; Abid et al. (2014); and Saiti et al. (2014). However, few other
studies investigate this subject from the perspective of an EMs framework [Arreola Hernandez
et al. (2020)].
(3) This paper sheds light on the connection between the portfolio optimisation approaches and
the financial tail event networks. Our strategy aims to simplify the portfolio selection procedure
by targeting a set of assets within a certain range of network centrality. As far as we are aware,
Arreola Hernandez et al. (2020) is the only paper that attempts to take advantage of the topology
of the tail event financial market network for investment purposes. They applied a directional
spillover index, the tail-event driven network (TENET), and nonlinear portfolio optimization
methods on the bank returns from emerging and developed America.
(4) While most previous studies focus on portfolio optimization based on mean variance estimation, there is a lack of empirical literature on quantile estimation (both tails of distribution).
This study attempts to fill this gap by extending the classical HRP approach to build an optimal
portfolio based on tail information provided by the FRM quantile regression.
(5) Finally, it is worth mentioning that our results are robust to different estimation time
windows, market situations (pre-crisis, crisis, and post crisis), and tail risk levels. We argue
that our proposed FRM based portfolio optimisation approach benefits from the tail event comovement and asset clustering making more useful use of fundamental tail-event information,
resulting in an efficient risk portfolio selection strategy. This practice is unique to this research
and remains an important contribution to the literature on risk measurement and international
portfolio diversification.

3 Econometric Methodology
3.1 FRM Systemic Risk Measure Framework
This section describes the genesis and framework of FRM. For that purpose, we lay down the
fundamental structure and the background of our systemic risk analysis. More precisely, we will
state the systemic risk measure models that have been evaluated to lead to an augmented risk
measure, the FRM.
3.1.1 FRM Genesis
The Value at Risk (VaR) and the expected shortfall (ES) are traditional risk measures. They
compute the risk of a given financial institution based either on company characteristics or by
introducing macroeconomic variables as a proxy for the state of economy. To exemplify, the VaR
of a financial institution i at a quantile level τ is given by the following equation:
def

P (Xi,t ≤ V aRi,t,τ ) = τ,

τ ∈ (0, 1)

Where Xi,t represent the log return of financial institution i at time t.

7

(1)

Adrian & Brunnermeier (2011) proposed the Conditional Value at Risk (CoVaR), the CoVaR
considers the spillover effects and the macro economy state. The CoVaR of F Ij given Xi at
quantile level τ at time t is given as follow:
def

P (Xj,t ≤ CoV aRj|i,t,τ |Ri,t ) = τ,

(2)

Where Mt−1 denotes the vector of macro state variables, and Ri,t indicates the information set
that involves the event of Xi,t = V aRi,t,τ and Mt−1 . The CoVaR is estimated in two steps of
linear quantile regression assuming the following equations:
Xi,t = αi + γi> Mt−1 + εi,t ,

(3)

>
Mt−1 + εj,t ,
Xj,t = αj|i + βj|i Xi,t + γj|i

(4)

Fε−1
(τ |Mt−1 ) = 0 and Fε−1
(τ |Mt−1 , Xi,t ) = 0
i,t
j,t

(5)

Where βj|i in Equation(4) defines the sensitivity of log return of a company j to variation in tail
event log return of a company i.
Step 1: Estimate the V aR of an institution i (V aRi )
To estimate the V aRi , Adrian & Brunnermeier (2011) apply the quantile regression of log return
of company i on macro state variables. The estimated equation is defined as follow:
τ

bi + γ
bi> Mt−1 ,
Vd
aRi,t = α

(6)

Step 2: Estimate the CoV aR
τ
The CoVaR is computed by integrating the V aRi,t
in Equation (6) into the CoVaR equation as
follow:
τ
τ
>
daRj|i,t = α
aRi,t + γ
bj|i
Mt−1 .
(7)
CoV
bj|i + βbj|i Vd
Where the coefficient βj|i of Equation (7) indicates the degree of interconnectedness.
Therefore, the risk of a financial company j is computed through a V aR and macro state of
company i. By setting j equal to the return of a system, and i to be the return of a financial
company i, we obtain the contribution CoVaR that illustrates how a company i effects the rest
of the financial system. Or, by setting j to be a financial company and i to be a financial system,
we obtain exposure CoV aR, which characterizes how a single institution is exposed to the overall
risk of a system.
Recently, Härdle et al. (2016) developed the tail-event driven network (TENET). The TENET
is a risk approach generalizes CoVaR by joining systemic interconnectedness between FIs and
accommodates all system nodes as risk factors. It is estimated based on quantile regressions and
illustrated by three steps.
Step 1: Estimate the V aR of each FI
The V aR for the studied FIs is estimated using the linear quantile regression based on Equations (3 and 6).
Step 2: The network analysis
The TENET estimates the non-linear relationship among FIs, and takes more institutions into
consideration to compute the tail-driven risk interdependencies. Therefore, we have:
>
Xj,t = g(βj|R
Rj,t ) + εj,t ,
j
T EN ET def

daRj|R̃
CoV
j,t,τ

>
= b
g(βbj|
R̃ ),
R̃j j,t

8

(8)
(9)

def
b
D
j|R̃j =

>
Rj,t )
∂b
g(βbj|R
j

∂Rj,t

>
|Rj,t =R̃j,t = b
g0 (βbj|
R̃ )βb
R̃j j,t j|R̃j

def

(10)
def

where Rj,t = {X_j,t , Mt−1 , Bj,t−1 } denotes the set of information. Note that X_j,t =
{X1,t X2,t ..., X1,t } is a set of {k−1} independent explanatory variables, such as the log returns of
all the FIs expected the F Ij , and k here denotes the number of FIs. The term Bj,t−1 characterizes
def

the internal factors of the institution j.The parameters are defined through the term βj|Rj =
T EN ET
daR
{βj|_j , βj|M , βj|Bj }> . The CoV
stands for tail-event driven network risk by means of
a single-index model (SIM) model and is estimated by plugging in V aR of institution i at level
j|Rj, t, defined in Equation (6) into Equation (8).
τ
def
def
aRi,t , Mt−1 , Bj,t−1 }.b
g(•) characterize
Note that βj|Rj = {βj|_j , βj|M , βj|Bj }> and Rj,t = {Vd
the non-linear relationship among them. The parameter Dj|R˜j represents the gradient evaluating
the marginal effect of covariates measured at Rj,t = R̃j,t . The component wise expression is given
by:
b ˜ ≡ {D
b j|_j , D
b j|M , D
b j|B }> . Specifically, D
b j|_j permits to quantity spillover effects through
D
j
j|Rj
the FIs and to illustrate their evolution as a network system. The TENET network represents a
set of FIs links. The estimation results of this interconnectedness can be summarized in weighted
b s an element in D
bs
form of an adjacency matrix. Note D
j|i
j|_j at estimation window s for the F Ij
given another F Ii (where i is an element in the other F Ij ). Therefore, the adjacency matrix
b s (in upper triangular matrix) and D
b s (in lower triangular matrix),
includes absolute values of D
j|i
i|j
b s denotes the influence from a F Ii to a F Ij and D
b s is the influence from F Ij to F Ii .
where D
j|i

i|j

The adjacency matrix As = (k ∗ k) is represented in the following equation, where for each time
windows s only one adjacency matrix is estimated.
I1
I2
s
b
I1
0
|D1|2
|

bs |
I2 |D
0
2|1
As = .
..
..
..
 .
.
s
s
b
b
Ik |Dk|1 | |Dk|2
|


I3
s
b
|D1|3
|
bs |
|D
2|3
..
.
s
b
|Dk|3
|

···
···
···
..
.
···

Ik

s
b
|D1|k
|
b s |
|D
2|k 
.. 

. 
0

(11)

The matrix As summarizes the overall connectedness between variables at time window s, and
Ii denotes the name of F Ii .
Step 3: Systemic risk contributions
The objective here is to measure the systemic risk relevance of a specific FI by its total in- and
out-connections, weighted by market capitalization. Hence, we define the Systemic Risk Receiver
Index (SRR) for a F Ij at time windows s as follow:
(
)
X
def
s
b
SSRj,s = M Cj,s
(|D |.M Ci,s )
(12)
j|i

i∈ksIN

The Systemic Risk Emitter Index (SRE) for a F Ij at time windows s is given by the following
equation:
(
)
X
def
s
b
SSEj,s = M Cj,s
(|Di|j |.M Ci,s )
(13)
i∈ksOU T

9

Here ksIN and ksOU T denotes the set of FIs linked with the F Ij at time windows s by incoming
and outgoing links respectively. M Ci,s is the market capitalisation of FI i at the starting point
b s | and |D
b s | are absolute partial derivatives derived from Equation (10)
of time windows s. |D
j|i
i|j
which represents row (incoming) and column (outgoing) direction connection of F Ij . Thus both
SRRj , s and SREj,s take into consideration the F Ij and its linked FI’ market capitalization as
well as its connectedness within our network. For more details see Härdle et al. (2016).
3.1.2 FRM Financial Risk Meter
The FRM is a systemic risk measure based on the penalization parameter(λ) of a linear quantile
Lasso regression using moving-window approach. In this section we present the methodology
and algorithm that constitutes the FRM technology. Since the penalization parameters (λ) are
computed based on an L1 -norm (Lasso) quantile linear regression, this method is introduced
first.
Linear Quantile Lasso Regression Model
The FRM aims to simultaneously capture all interdependencies in one single number based
on the log return of FIs and a set of macroeconomic variables that illustrate the state of the
economy. Consider J the number of FI under consideration, where j ∈ {1, ..., J}. Therefore
p = J + M − 1 denotes the number of covariates. Let t = {1, ..., T } be the time point, where T
denotes the total number of daily observations. Suppose s is the index of time windows, where
s ∈ {1, ...(T − (n − 1))} and n is the length of windows size.
The Linear quantile Lasso regression for return series X is defined as follow:
s
s
s
s
Xj,t
= αj,t
+ As>
j,t βj + εj,t ,

(14)


s
s> def Mt−1
s
s
Where Aj,t =
, Mt−1
is the M dimensional vector of macro variables, X−j,t
is the
s
X−j,t
p − M dimensional vector of log returns of all other FIs except F Ij at time t and in moving
window s, βjs is a p × 1 vector defined for moving window s and αjs is a constant term.
The regression is performed using an L1 -norm penalisation given a parameter λj , defined
by Tibshirani (1996) as the least absolute shrinkage and selection operater (Lasso). According
to Bassett Jr & Koenker (1978), the current company’s λj are estimated by a modification of
Lasso in a quantile regression [see Belloni & Chernozhukov (2011) and Li & Zhu (2008) for more
details), where the optimization is solved as follow:


s+(n−1)
n
o
X
−1
s
s
s
s
min
n
ρτ (Xj,t
− αjs − As>
j,t βj ) + λj k βj k1
s
s

αj ,βj

(15)

t=s

with the following check function:
ρτ (u) = |u|c |τ − I{u<0} |

(16)

where c = 1 corresponds to quantile regression employed here and c = 2 corresponds to expectile
regression.
Penalization Parameter λ
The formula of Lasso’s penalization parameter λ can be estimated in a linear regression context,
following the work of Osborne et al. (2000) Treating λ as a fixed value in the objective function

10

of the penalized regression:
(
f (β, λ) =

p
n
X
1X
(yi − Xi> β)2 + λ
|βj |
2 i=1
i=1

)
(17)

Here f (β, λ) is convex in the parameter λ. In addition, with diverging β we note that f (β, λ) →
b
∞. Consequently, the function f (., λ) admits at least one minimum, which is attained in β(λ)
p
[Osborne (1985)] if and only if the null vector 0 ∈ R is an element of sub-differential:
∂f (β, λ)
= −X > (Y − Xβ) + λu(β)
∂β
Were:

(18)



uj (β) = 1 if βj > 0
u(β) = (u1 (β), ..., up (β))> is defined as uj (β) = −1 if βj < 0


uj (β) ∈ [−1, 1]; if βj = 0

b the following equation has to be
Therefore, considering that f (β, λ) admit a minimum in β,
satisfied:
b
b
0 = −X > {Y − X β(λ)}
+ λu(β(λ)
(19)
The estimator of the vector of parameters β here is a function of the penalization parameter λ.
This dependency follows from the formulation of the penalized regression method and its objective function Equation (17). Following this method we select first the penalization
Pp parameter λ
and then search for βλ that minimizes Equation (17). Given that u(β))> β = j=1 |βj | = kβk1 ,
where k.k1 represents here L1-norm of a p-dimensional vector, Equation (19) can be rewritten
in the following formula:
λ=

{Y − Xβ(λ)}> Xβ (λ)
kβk1

(20)

Looking to formula Equation (20), we can define the elements that influence the value of λ and
its dynamics when treated in a time- varying framework. The following three elements affect the
size of λ:
1. The size of residuals of the model;
2. The absolute size of the coefficients of the model, kβk1 ;
3. The singularity of a matrix X > X.
The formulae for the penalization parameter λ in a quantile regression problem Equations (15
and 16)can be derived following Li & Zhu (2008):
>

λ=

(θ) X βb (λ)
b
β(λ)
1

Where θ = (θ1 , ..., θn )> satisfies the following conditions:

b

>0
if Yi − Xi> β(λ)
τ
>
b
θi = −(1 − τ )
if Yi − Xi β(λ) < 0


b
∈ (−(1 − τ ) , τ ) if Yi − Xi> β(λ)
=0

11

(21)

Since Equation (15) has an L1 loss function and an L1 -norm penalty term, the optimization
problem is an L1 -norm quantile regression estimation problem. The selection of the penalization
parameter λsj is fundamental. There are different possibilities to choose λsj , for example with
the Generalized Approximate Cross- Validation criterion (GACV) or the Bayesian Information
Criterion (BIC). In this regards, Yuan (2006) conducted simulations and concluded that GACV
outperforms BIC in terms of statistical efficiency. Hence, we estimate λsj with the GACV criterion
in the FRM model and set λsj as the solution of the following minimization problem:
Ps+(n−1)
min GACV

(λsj )

= min

t=s

s
s
ρτ (Xj,t
− αjs − As,>
j,t βj )
n − df

(22)

where df stands for the estimated effective dimension of the fitted model. The advantage of
GACV is that it can be also adopted for p > n, which can be crucial for the FRM if the moving
window size is small. For further details see Mihoci et al. (2020).

Financial Risk Meter (FRM)
The FRM is estimated using a regression analysis as explained above and select the λj for each
FI j using GACV. The distribution of theλsj in a moving window gives important information
on the network dependencies among the financial nodes. The standard FRM is defined as the
average of λj over the set of J FIs for all windows. It is formally written as follows:
F RM = J −1

J
X

λj

(23)

j=1

Note that the distribution of λj provides details regarding the overall market movement and
gives information to macro-prudential decision makers about the network dynamics. Therefore,
the FRM is adopted to identify the high joint tail event risks resulting from each FI. More
precisely, the FI with high λj exhibits common high stress levels as the FI at the origin of the
crisis. Therefore, this FI is considered as having high ”co-stress”.

3.2 FRM Network and node centrality measures
The FRM network illustrates the tail event interaction between the selected FIs based on the adjacency matrix As (11). To describe the topology of the FRM networks, we focus on node centrality
measures, specifically, eigenvalue centrality, degree centrality, indegree, outdegree, betweenness
and closeness. The concept of centrality aims to measure the impact and the importance of a
given node in the network.

Eigenvector centrality
Bonacich (1972) proposed the so-called eigenvector centrality, which evolved to be a standard
measure in network analysis.
Consider a network G = {N, ω}, constituted by a set of links ω that connecting pairs of nodes
and a set of nodes N = 1, 2, ..., N . If there is a connection between two nodes i and j, we denote
it as (i, j) ∈ ω. The network connections are defined by a simplified version of (11): the (N × N )

12

s
adjacency matrix Asi,j = [βij
] whose element βij 6= 0 whenever (i, j) ∈ ω, s is the rolling window.



0

 β2,1

As =  .
 ..
βn,1

β1,2
0
..
.

···
···
..
.

βn,2

···


β1,n
β2,n 

.. 
. 

(24)

0

Based on the Bonacich (1987); (1972) definition, the eigenvector centrality of node i, vi , is
expressed as the proportional sum of its neighbors’ centralities. This concept has been extended
by Bonanno et al. (2004) suggesting that for the weighted networks, vi is relative to the weighted
sum of neighbors’ centralities of node i with the adjencency matrix Asi,j that illustrates the
corresponding weighting factors. Therefore, the eigenvector centrality of node vi is calculated as
follows:
X
s
vi = δ −1
βij
vj
(25)
j

where δ here denotes the eigenvalue. A large value of vi means that the node i is highly central,
implying that node i is linked either to several other nodes or is linked to a few highly central
nodes. The Equation (25) can be rewritten in matrix terms. We have δv = Av specifying that
the centrality vector v is defined by the eigenvector of As corresponding to the largest eigenvalue
δ.
In general, each eigenvector of As is a solution to Equation (25). Nevertheless, the centrality
vector matching to the largest network component is specified using the eigenvector corresponding
to the largest eigenvalue Bonacich (1972) and Peralta & Zareei (2016).
Closeness
Closeness is a centrality measure proposed by Freeman (1978). It highlights the distance of
a given vertex to the rest of vertices in the network. It can be considered as duration of the
information spread from one vertex to another. Closeness of a given vertex j is defined as follow:
Closenessj =

X

N
i=1

1
d(i,j)

(26)

Where d(i,j) measure the distance between a vertix i and another vertix j in the network.
Betweenness
Betweenness is a centrality measure, which computes the number of times a vertex lies on the
shortest path between other vertices in the network [Vỳrost et al. (2019)].
Suppose we need to compute this measure for a vertex j ∈ ω, for any two distinct vertices other
than j, named l and k ∈ ω, the number of shortest paths between l and k is nl,j,k ∈ N and
the total number of shortest paths between l and k is nl,k ∈ N , the betweenness for j is then
computed as follow:
X nl,j,k
(27)
Betweennessj =
nl,k
l6=j6=k
l,j,k∈ω

13

Degree centrality
Degree centrality captures total connectedness in the network, it is given by the following
equation:
N X
N
X
s
D=
1(βj,i
)
(28)
j=1 i=1

where

(
s
1(βj,i
)

=

s
1 if βj,i
6 0
=
s
0 if βj,i = 0

Indegree: Indegree computes the number of inflows, or in this paper the number of other FIs
influencing one node. Indegree of F Ij is defined as:
Indj =

N
X

s
1(βj,i
)

(29)

i=1

Here the F Ij can be considered as a risk receiver.
Outdegree: Outdegree computes the number of out-going links, or in this paper the number of
other FIs influenced by the node. Outdgree of F Ii is defined as:
Outdi =

N
X

s
1(βj,i
)

(30)

j=1

Here the F Ii can be considered as a "risk emitter".

4 Portfolio optimisation
4.1 The minimum-variance
Consider N risky assets with a vector of expected returns µ, and covariance matrix, Σ = [σii ].
The problem is to define the optimal portfolio weights vector w, which minimizes the portfolio
variance subject to w> 1 = 1 where 1 represents a column vector whose components are equivalent
to one Markowitz (1959). This approach is usually defined as minimum-variance or shortly
M inV ar. Formally the problem is stated as follow:
minw σp2 = w> Σw;

subject to

w> 1 = 1

(31)

The solution of Equation (31) is:
∗
w
bminv
=

1
Σ−1 1
1 Σ−1 1
>

(32)

4.2 A machine learning-based Hierarchical Risk Parity HRP
4.2.1 Classical HRP approach
The HRP is a risk-based portfolio optimization approach that diversifies portfolios without imposing a positive-definite return covariance matrix [López de Prado (2016)]. The algorithm employs

14

machine learning methods and graph theory to classify the underlying hierarchical correlation
structure of the assets, which allow clusters of similar assets to compete for capital allocation.
The algorithm of the HRP approach can be broken down into three main steps: tree clustering,
quasi-diagonalization, and recursive bisection. In the following, we explain each step in detail.

Step 1- Hierarchical Tree Clustering This step involves breaking down the assets of the
considering portfolio into different hierarchical clusters exploiting a Hierarchical Tree Clustering
algorithm. The clusters are formed as follows:
1. For N stock returns compute the correlation matrix [see Härdle & Simar (2019)(p 431-442)],
which gives an N × N matrix Ω of these correlations ρ,
ρ = {ρi,j }i,j=1,...,N
Where ρi,j is the correlation coefficient between a pair of assets {i, j} ρ[Xi , Xj ]
2. Transform the correlation matrix to a correlation-distance matrix D, where for
d : (Xi , Xj ) ⊂ B → R ∈ [0, 1];
r
1
(1 − ρi,j )
(33)
di,j = d[Xi , Xj ] =
2
3. Compute a new distance matrix d˜ where, by taking the Euclidean distance among columns in
a pair-wise manner, the augmented distance matrix is given as follow:
v
uN
uX
˜ i , dj ] = t
(dn,i − dn,j )2
(34)
d˜ = d[d
n=1

√
where d˜i,j : (di , dj ) ⊂ B → R ∈ [0, N ].
Note that for two assets i and j, Di,j represents the distance between them, however d˜i,j represents the closeness in similarity of {i, j} with the rest of the portfolio. More precisely, a lower
d˜i,j indicates that the assets i and j are similarly correlated to the rest of stocks in the portfolio.
4. Form the assets clusters in a recursive manner based in Equation(34). The set of clusters is
donated by U and the first formed cluster(i∗ , j ∗ ) is define as:
U [1] = (i∗ , j ∗ ) = argmin(i, j)i6=j {d˜i,j }

(35)

5. Update the distance matrix d by computing the distances of other assets from the newly
formed cluster U (1) using single linkage clustering. Therefore, for any asset i outside of U (1),
the distance from U (1) is updated as follows:


(36)
di,U [1] = min {d˜i,j }j∈U [1]
Thereby, the algorithm recursively forms assets clusters and updates the distance matrix until
we are left with one giant cluster of all stocks. Finally, the clusters are visualised in a dendrogram.
See Härdle & Simar (2019) (p. 363-393) for more details.

Step 2- Quasi Diagonalisation or Matrix Seriation
The Quasi-Diagonalisation of the covariance matrix or Matrix seriation is adopted to rearrange
the data to clearly represent the inherent clusters. Using the hierarchical clusters from the
previous step, the columns and rows of the covariance matrix are reorganized so that similar
assets are placed together and dissimilar assets are placed far apart. More precisely, the larger

15

covariances are positioned along the diagonal and smaller ones around this diagonal and since
the off-diagonal elements are not completely zero. This is named a quasi-diagonal covariance
matrix.

Step 3- Recursive Bisection
The final recursive bisection step implicates assigning actual portfolio weights to the assets in
the portfolio.
1. Assign a unit weight to all assets,
Wi = 1, ∀ i = 1, ...N
2. Bisect each cluster into two sub-clusters in a top-down manner, it means by starting with the
topmost cluster, so, for each cluster, we obtain a left and right sub-cluster.
3. Calculate the variance for each of these sub-cluster
V1,2 = w> Σw

; Σ is the covariance matrix

(37)

where,
w=

diag[Σ]−1
tr[diag[Σ]−1 ]

(38)

Since we are dealing with a quasi-diagonal matrix, the algorithm uses the property of the portfolio
that the inverse-variance allocation is optimal for a diagonal covariance matrix. Hence, we adopt
the inverse-variance allocation weights when computing the variance for sub-clusters.
4. Calculate the weighting factor based on the quasi-diagonalised covariance matrix
α1 = 1 −

V1
, so that 0 ≤ αi ≤ 1 ; α2 = 1 − α1
V1 + V2

(39)

5- Update the weights w1 and w2 for both sub-clusters:
w10 = α1 · w1 ;

w20 = α2 · w2

(40)

6- Execute recursively steps 2-5. The algorithm stops when we have a single asset for each
cluster and then the weights are assigned to all assets in the portfolio.
Since the weights are assigned in a top-down manner, only assets within each cluster compete
for allocation for the final portfolio, rather than competing with all the assets in the portfolio,
see Vỳrost et al. (2019).

4.2.2 An uplifted HRP approach based on FRM
The classical HRP approach focused on calculating the optimal portfolio weights based on the
variance and the covariance matrix, in other words it is focused on estimating the spillover
risk on the mean-variance levels, ignoring analysis of other quantile levels. To overcome this
limitation, we extend the classical HRP based on FRM in order to take into consideration the
hidden interdependency structures among the FIs tail quantile level when optimizing the EMs
portfolio. The basic idea is to use the FRM output in order to compute the portfolio weights
based on quantile level analysis. In the classical approach, these weights are computed using
the variance (which is a measure of individual risk) and the covariance matrix that measures
the relationship between a pair of assets in the mean-variance level. To improve on this, the

16

FRM provides the penalty parameters (λj ) as a measure of individual risk of each company or
FI at the quantile level. In addition, the FRM provides also the adjacency matrix to estimate
the interconnectedness between each pair of the studied FIs (βi,j ). By analogy, for the uplifted
HRP approach based FRM, we replace the covariance matrix with the adjacency matrix. Recall
that the diagonal elements of the adjacency matrix are zero (Equation (24)), which allow us
to introduce the vector of penalty parameters (λj ) in the diagonal of the adjacency matrix to
replace the variance in the classical approach. Following this reasoning, the uplifted HRP steps
will be as follows:

Step 1- Hierarchical Tree Clustering :
1. Calculate the the FRM adjacency matrix As (Equation (24)) Where βi,j is the degree of
connectedness between a pair of assets {i, j}
2. Introduce the vector of (λj ) as diagonal elements in the adjacency matrix As , so we obtain
the new adjacency matrix Ã


λ1 β1,2 · · · β1,n
 β2,1 λ2 · · · β2,n 


(41)
Ãs =  .
..
.. 
..
 ..
.
.
. 
βn,1

βn,2

···

λn

3. Replace the covariance matrix in the HRP algorithm with the adjacency matrix Ãs .
4. Transform Ãs to an adjacency-distance matrix D,
q

 12 (1 − βi,j ) if |βi,j | < 1

Di,j = D[Xi , Xj ] =


maxD[X , X ]
otherwise.
i
j

(42)

5. Compute a new distance matrix D̃
v
uN
uX
D̃ = D̃[Di , Dj ] = t
(Dn,i − Dn,j )2

(43)

n=1

6. Form the assets clusters in a recursive manner based in Equation(43). The set of clusters is
donated by Ũ and the first formed cluster(i∗ , j ∗ ) is define as:
Ũ [1] = (i∗ , j ∗ ) = argmin(i, j)i6=j {D̃i,j }

(44)

7. Update the distance matrix D by computing the distances of other assets from the newly
formed cluster Ũ (1) as follows:


Di,Ũ [1] = min {D̃i,j }j∈U [1]
(45)
Step 2- Quasi Diagonalisation or Matrix Seriation :
The Quasi-Diagonalisation of the adjacency matrix or Matrix seriation is adopted to rearrange
the data to represent clearly the inherent clusters (as explained in the classical approach).

17

Step 3- Recursive Bisection :
1. Assign a unit weight to all assets,
Wi = 1, ∀ i = 1, ...N
2. Bisect each cluster into two sub-clusters.
3. Calculate the variance for each sub-cluster
Ṽ1,2 = w̃> Ãw̃

; Ã is the adjacency matrix

(46)

where,
w̃ =

diag[Ã]−1
tr[diag[Ã]−1 ]

(47)

4. Calculate the weighting factor based on the quasi-diagonalised adjacency matrix.
α̃1 = 1 −

Ṽ1
, so that 0 ≤ α̃i ≤ 1 ; α̃2 = 1 − α̃1
Ṽ1 + Ṽ2

(48)

5- Update the weights w̃1 and w̃2 for both sub-clusters:
w̃10 = α̃1 · w1 ;

w̃20 = w̃α2 · w2

(49)

6- Execute recursively steps 2-5, the algorithm stops when we have a single asset for each
cluster and then the weights are assigned to all assets in the portfolio.

5 Financial Risk Meter in Emerging Markets
5.1 FRM@EM data-set description
In this paper we study the largest 25 Emerging Market financial institutions (FIs) by market
capitalisation at any given point in time, with focus on the BRIMST FIs. We compile a database
of daily price levels in as well as market capitalisations in U.S. Dollars from Bloomberg, and select
the biggest financial institutions on a daily basis from the most liquid local EM equity market
indices. On any given trading day in consideration, we take the price returns of those biggest
j = 25 FIs over an estimation window s = 63 business days.
As for the macroeconomic data, we follow Adrian & Brunnermeier (2016) concerning the
developed market specific risk factors, to repeat, returns in US REITs, S&P 500 index, U.S. three
months treasury bill rates, the spread between 3 months and 10 year U.S. treasury rates, the
spread between BAA rates corporate bonds by the rating agency Moody’s to U.S. treasury bonds,
and the implied volatility index VIX based on outstanding options on the S&P 500 equity index.
We add the following EM specific macroeconomic risk variables: The J.P. Morgan Emerging
Bond Index Global Sovereign Spread index tracking the Emerging Bond Index yields over the
benchmark U.S. Treasury bonds and thereby representing the risk compensation demanded from
investors when investing in EM sovereign bonds, as well as the respective countries currency
versus the U.S. dollar cross.

5.2 FRM@EM Interpretation and Network Analysis
Figure 1 depicts the FRM@EM from April 2000 to June 2020. Clearly observable are the periods
of distress in the global financial system around 2008, 2012, more recently in 2020 but also during

18

the EM specific market distress periods such as 2002 (Argentina) and 2013 (following the Federal
Reserve Board’s Open Market Committee forward guidance).
Figure 2 introduces one of the FRM’s tool: FRM is not just the mean but actually a distribution
of λsj as well as the adjacency matrix containing all (Lasso penalised) βjs between FIs, and also
between FIs and macroeconomic risk variables. As an example of the information contained, we
mark some of the more extreme maxima in Figure 2. For example, into the crisis, Standard Bank
Group (SBK SJ) had a very high λsj reading, indicating the bank was a "risk receiver", thus at
risk to be impacted by spill over effects.
But we can also have a more detailed look at the adjacency matrix containing the βjs between
FIs and macroeconomic risk variables, with two examples shown for 20200429 in Figure 4 as
well as post crisis 20200630 in Figure 5, both estimated at τ = 0.05, and colour scaled in blue
(low/negative) to high (red/positive). Observable are the high dependencies between countries of
the same region (BS for Brazil, RM for Russia, IS for India, MF for Mexico, SJ for South Africa
and TI for Turkey), and often negative relationships (adjusted for co-movements with macroeconomic risk variables) in between regions. However, there are also detectable co-dependencies,
which necessitate closer inspection from both investors as well as regulators. For example in
Figure 4 South Africa’s Sanlam Ltd. (SLM SJ)’s returns are explained to a significant extend by
Bajaj Finance Ltd. of India (BAF IS), as both financial services companies, providing an assortment of financial services. Similarly, Banco BTG Pactual (BPAC11 BS)’s returns are explained
not only by other Brazilian FIs, but also significantly by Russia’s VTB Bank (VTBR RM), both
operating in more banking and investment banking related markets. Clearly, sub-sector dependencies across EM FIs are to be considered to prevent risk clusters.
Another component to consider is the impact from macroeconomic risk variables’ changes on FIs
returns. As can be seen on both adjacency matrices, the "classic" macroeconomic risk variables
do have an impact, however, to a large extend, the Emerging Market Sovereign Yield Spread to
U.S. Treasuries (JPEGSOSD) is the main influence. In fact, this is true across from τ = 0.05
to τ = 0.50. In Figure 3 we show the smoothed (rolling seven day mean) of the share of FIs
impacted by the respective macroeconomic risk variable. The Emerging Market Yield spread is
the dominant driver, followed by more general market risk measures such as the VIX, Moody’s
Baa corporate yield spreads, and the shape of the U.S. Treasury yield curve. Emerging market
currencies as a cross versus the U.S. Dollar have a lesser impact. It is mostly one or two EM
currencies having an overall impact, and not only on domestic banks. In Figure 5 for example,
the Brazilian Real (USDBRL) has marginal negative return contribution to Bajaj Finance Ltd
in India (BAF IS), and positive return contribution to Brazilian Itausa SA (ITSA4 BS) and
Mexican Grupo Elektra SAB (ELEKTRA MF).
In Figure 7, we show the time series of FRM against various centrality measures. We observe
that Betweenness, Eigenvector have similar trends as the FRM EM series, especially during the
crisis period of March to May 2020. On the other hand, Closeness centrality drops sharply into
s
the crisis period. When the FRM rises, the number of βij
equal to zero increase, increasing with
it the distance between the vertices. The average length of one node (one FI in our case) and
all other FIs increases, thereby sharply reducing Closeness centrality. Betweeness as a centrality
measure of a vertex within a network rises when the FRM rises, as information flow has a very
high probability to pass between some central FIs, indicating a concentration of risk around
certain FIs which we call "risk emitters". Similarly, Eigenvector centrality is a measure of an
FIs influence in an observed financial system network. Central FIs Eigencentrality rises sharply
around a crisis period, as the FRM increases in value. In- and Out-degree centrality drop when
FRM rises, since the edges or connections between FIs have reduced sharply, to mostly the
network’s risk emitters. We can conclude therefore, that a close inspection if the distribution
of λsj as well as the detailed information within the adjacency matrix across a range of τ are
particularly important. In Section 6 we aim to make use of this richness of information for the

19

construction of more robust, tail-event network behaviour attentive portfolios. As an indication,
Figure 6 shows a network graph with edges between the 25 largest FIs, estimated at τ = 0.05 on
20200429. We highlight one exemplary bank, and its edges stemming from the adjacency matrix.
Condensing such information into clusters of risk as outlined above is the focus of the following
portfolio construction discussion. In Figure 3 we depict the macroeconomic risk variables influence over time. Clearly, the EM Sovereign Yield Spread to U.S. Treasury Bonds is the prominent
macroeconomic risk variable not only during tail events but also at "normal" times estimated
at τ = 0.50. We can conclude that most EM risk is rapidly priced into yield spreads, and then
consequently impacts financial institutions. This link between the sovereign and banks needs to
be considered for investors and policy makers as well. Other strongly influencing risk variables
are more expected such as the VIX, the US yield curve shape, and Corporate Bond yield spreads.
However, EM currency fluctuations only have a marginal effect in tail events, on some of the FIs.
With the increase of debt issuance in local currency denominated debt, the risk of mismatches
versus developed market currencies has diminished overall, and has lower influence on EM FIs.

Figure 1: FRM@EMs Time series

20

Figure 2: FRM@EM Boxplot, with mean and maximum at τ = 0.05

21

(a) τ = 0.05

(b) τ = 0.1

(c) τ = 0.25

(d) τ = 0.5

Figure 3: Macro variables’ most frequent marginal return contribution across time with 7-day
moving average: EM Sovereign Spread, VIX, U.S. 3mth to 10yr yield spread, Moody’s
BAA Corporate Yield Spread, S&P 500 Index

22

23

IS
RM
IS
BS
IS
BS
BS
IS
TI
IS
BS
IS
IS
BS
BS
BS
MF
SJ
IS
BS
SJ
MF
SJ
BS
RM
0.17
0.00
0.28
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.02
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.06
0.00
0.00
0.33
0.50
0.24
-0.04 0.00
0.0
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
-0.03 0.05

ITUB4 BS

KMB IS

BBDC3 BS

BBDC4 BS

ICICIBC IS

QNBFB TI

SBIN IS

SANB11 BS

BAF IS

AXSB IS

BBAS3 BS

ITSA4 BS

B3SA3 BS

ELEKTRA MF

FSR SJ

BJFIN IS

BBSE3 BS

SBK SJ

GFNORTEO MF

SLM SJ

BPAC11 BS

VTBR RM

REIT

SPX

USGG3M

VIX

USGG3M10YR

MOOD BAA SPD

JPEGSOSD

USDBRL

USDRUB

USDINR

USDMXN

USDTRY

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.0

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.59

0.00

0.00

0.44

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.03

0.00

0.00

0.67

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

HDFC IS

HDFCB IS

SBER RM

tau=0.05
20200429

HDFC IS

BS

0.36

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.18

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.0

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

-0.15 0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.0

0.00

0.23

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.12

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.01

0.00

0.00

0.18

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

-0.06 0.00
0.00

-0.13 0.00

0.0

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.30

KMB IS

-0.06 0.28

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

ITUB4 BS

-0.06 0.00

0.00

0.00

0.22

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.23

0.00

0.13

0.00

0.17

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.31

IS

IS
BBDC3 BS
0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.0

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.10

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.34

0.28

0.50

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.53

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

BBDC4 BS
0.00

0.00

0.00

0.02

0.00

0.0

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.36

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.11

0.25

0.00

0.00

0.24

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.46

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

BS
ICICIBC IS
0.02

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.0

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.10

0.00

0.00

0.68

0.30

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.32

0.00

0.00

IS
QNBFB TI
0.00

0.00

0.00

0.06

SBIN IS
0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.18

0.03

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.0

0.00

-0.04 0.00

0.03

0.01

0.00

0.07

0.0

0.00

-0.07 0.00

0.00

-0.16 0.10

0.00

0.00

0.05

0.02

0.02

0.26

0.00

0.13

0.00

-0.03 0.00

0.00

0.02

0.00

0.00

0.00

-0.06 0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

-0.03 0.00

0.00

0.01

0.00

0.00

TI

IS
SANB11 BS
BAF IS
0.00

0.00

0.00

0.12

0.00

0.03

0.00

0.00

0.36

0.11

0.00

0.00

0.18

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.0

0.50

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.01

0.53

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

IS

0.00

0.06

0.00

0.00

IS

BS

0.32

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.16

0.33

0.00

0.04

0.00

0.00

0.00

BBAS3 BS

BS

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.21

0.00

0.00

0.00

ITSA4 BS

1.5

0.00

0.24

0.11

0.01

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.35

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.05

0.00

0.00

0.05

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.0

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.0

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

-0.03 0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.10

0.10

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.04

0.00

0.00

-0.17 -0.03 0.00

0.00

0.33

0.00

0.41

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

AXSB IS

-0.04 0.00

0.0

0.00

0.27

0.00

0.46

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.15

0.00

0.00

0.21

0.40

0.01

-0.04 0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

-0.07 0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.30

0.00

0.00

-0.04 0.00

BS
B3SA3 BS
0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.1

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.0

0.00

-0.11 0.00

FSR SJ
0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.24

0.87

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

BJFIN IS
0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.08

0.00

0.03

0.01

0.00

0.0

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.16

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.0

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.01

MF

0.04

0.00

0.06

0.05

0.00

0.02

0.06

0.08

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.12

0.03

0.00

0.04

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.33

0.43

0.00

0.00

0.02

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.11

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.3

0.10

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.0

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

-0.09 0.00

0.16

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.22

SJ

0.00

SLM SJ

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

BS

RM

0.49

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.10

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.02

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.0

0.00

0.00

-0.48

-0.04

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.49

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

-0.01 0.00

0.04

0.02

-0.2

0.04

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.05

0.00

0.00

0.04

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

SPX
0.00

0.00

0.00

0.04

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.02

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.08

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.08

0.03

0.03

MOOD BAA SPD

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.20

0.00

0.00

0.03

0.00

0.03

0.01

-0.02 0.00

-0.04 0.00

-0.01 0.00

-0.02 0.00

0.00

0.00

0.05

0.00

0.00

0.01

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00
-0.03 0.00

0.06

-0.06 0.00

-0.02 0.00

-0.09 -0.20 -0.02 -0.02 0.00

0.02

0.00

0.00

0.00

-0.09 -0.01 -0.02 0.00

0.02

-0.05 0.00
0.01

0.00

0.00

-0.01 0.00

-0.11 0.00

0.01

0.00

0.00

-0.03 0.00

0.00

0.00

-0.10 -0.01 0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

-0.10 0.00

0.11

0.00

0.00

-0.08 0.02

0.00

0.02

-0.06 0.01

0.00

0.00

0.00

-0.01 0.00

-0.07 0.00

-0.03 0.02
0.00

0.00

-0.05 0.00

-0.07 0.02
0.00

-0.03 -0.04 -0.03 0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

USDBRL

-0.05 -0.04 -0.01 0.00

0.00

0.02

0.00

0.00

-0.06 0.00

0.00

0.00

0.02

0.01

-0.08 0.00

JPEGSOSD

-0.03 -0.08 -0.04 0.00

USGG3M10YR

-0.02 0.00

0.04

VIX

-0.02 0.05

0.00

-0.03 -0.11 0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

REIT

-0.03 -0.07 0.00

0.00

0.00

0.13

0.04

0.00

0.03

0.00

0.00

0.10

0.04

0.00

0.07

0.00

0.15

0.08

0.00

0.04

0.00

BPAC11 BS

-0.02 0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

-0.02 -0.09 0.00

-0.9

0.00

0.18

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.56

0.00

0.00

0.07

0.00

-0.01 0.00

0.00

0.00

-0.05 0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

-0.13 0.00

0.00

0.00

0.43

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

-0.04 0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

-0.03 0.00

0.00

0.05

SJ

0.09

SBK SJ

-0.16 0.00

0.00

BS

-0.03 -0.02 0.00

0.08

-0.1

IS
BBSE3 BS

-0.04 0.00

0.00

0.00

-0.52 0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.62

0.00

-0.13 0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.18

0.01

0.00

0.00

0.09

0.00

0.04

0.24

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

SJ
GFNORTEO MF

MF
ELEKTRA MF

-0.21 0.00

0.08

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.89

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.25

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.17

0.00

0.00

0.13

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

BS
USGG3M

Figure 4: Adjacency matrix estimated at τ = 0.05 on 20200429

BS
VTBR RM

RM
SBER RM

HDFCB IS

IS
USDRUB
0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

USDINR
0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

USDMXN
0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

USDTRY

24

IS
RM
BS
IS
IS
BS
BS
IS
IS
TI
IS
BS
BS
BS
BS
IS
MF
IS
SJ
BS
MF
BS
SJ
SJ
RM
0.00
0.20
0.53
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.32
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
-0.12 0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.15
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.31
0.00
0.00
0.4
0.00
0.00
-0.01 0.00
0.00
0.00

HDFC IS

KMB IS

BBDC3 BS

BBDC4 BS

ICICIBC IS

BAF IS

QNBFB TI

SBIN IS

B3SA3 BS

SANB11 BS

BBAS3 BS

ITSA4 BS

AXSB IS

ELEKTRA MF

BJFIN IS

FSR SJ

BPAC11 BS

GFNORTEO MF

BBSE3 BS

SBK SJ

SLM SJ

VTBR RM

REIT

SPX

USGG3M

VIX

USGG3M10YR

MOOD BAA SPD

JPEGSOSD

USDBRL

USDRUB

USDINR

USDMXN

USDTRY

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.0

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.36

0.04

0.00

0.00

0.46

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

ITUB4 BS

ITUB4 BS
0.00

0.26

0.04

0.00

0.05

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.04

0.0

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.02

0.05

0.25

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.08

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.13

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.6

0.00

0.00

IS

BS

0.00

0.00

BS

0.03

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.05

0.00

0.14

0.00

0.42

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.59

0.00

0.00

0.20

0.00

0.00

BBDC4 BS

0.00

0.0

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.03

0.00

ICICIBC IS
0.13

0.01

0.00

0.01

0.00

0.03

0.3

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.04

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.20

0.09

0.00

0.00

0.19

0.07

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.49
0.00

0.00

0.00

0.25

0.00

0.00

0.18

0.00

0.20

0.00

0.00

0.04

0.00

0.02

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.10

0.00

0.00

0.00

-0.08 0.06

0.00

-0.36 0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.14

0.03

0.00

0.00

0.12

1.1

-0.03 0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

-0.4

IS

BS

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.12

0.00

0.0

SANB11 BS

BS

0.24

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.10

0.00

0.00

0.01

0.00

0.00

0.02

0.00

0.00

0.0

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.03

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.21

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.35

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.40

0.19

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.11

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.0

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.01
0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.0

0.00

0.00

-0.16 0.00

-0.12 0.07

0.00

0.0

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.31

0.00

-0.09 0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

-0.36 0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

BS

0.00

ITSA4 BS

-0.08 0.00

0.00

0.00

0.38

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.08

-0.08 0.00

0.10

0.00

0.03

0.00

0.00

-0.16 0.00

0.00

0.15

BS

0.00

BBAS3 BS

-0.15 0.00

0.00

0.03

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.30

0.00

-0.11 0.00

B3SA3 BS

-0.01 0.00

0.00

0.00

-0.05 0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

-0.15 -0.39 0.00

0.00

0.00

0.03

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.01

0.00

0.00

0.00

-0.04 0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

-0.19 0.00

0.00

0.00

TI
SBIN IS

-0.15 0.00

0.07

-0.07 0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.14

0.08

-0.15 0.31

0.00

IS
QNBFB TI

-0.03 0.00

0.09

0.14

BAF IS

-0.01 0.00

0.75

0.00

0.03

0.00

0.00

0.16

0.11

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.31

0.00

0.00

0.19

IS
AXSB IS
0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.01

0.00

0.00

0.01

0.0

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.0

-0.04 0.00

0.43

0.00

0.00

0.02

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.02

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.15

0.00

BJFIN IS

SJ

0.10

0.08

0.95

0.17

0.29

0.47

0.00

0.07

0.00

0.29

0.15

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.02

0.00

0.09

0.02

0.03

0.16

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.05

0.00

0.00

MF

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00
0.00
0.03

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.35

0.00
0.0

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.09

0.03
-0.6

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.50

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.18

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.22

0.00

0.00

0.03

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.0

0.00

-0.04 -0.05 0.00

0.01

0.00

-0.02 0.00
0.00

0.00
0.12

-0.27 0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

-0.04 0.00

0.4

0.47

0.18

0.05

0.00

0.00

0.02

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.21

-0.07 0.00
0.24

RM

-0.09 0.00

0.00

0.00

0.11

-0.01 0.00

-0.02 0.00

0.00

0.00

-0.09 0.00

0.0

0.08

0.00

SJ

0.00

SLM SJ

-0.14 0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.01

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.24

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

-0.03 0.00

-0.17 0.00
0.69

SJ

0.00

SBK SJ

-0.06 0.19

-0.04 0.00

0.06

0.00

0.20

-0.16 0.00

-0.08 0.00

0.00

0.00

0.36

0.00

0.00

-0.17 0.00

0.00

-0.04 0.02

0.00

-0.01 0.43

0.04

-0.03 0.00

0.06

0.00

0.00

0.00

-0.12 0.00

0.05

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

-0.01 0.06

0.00

0.0

BS

0.00

BBSE3 BS

-0.18 0.00

0.00

0.01

-0.15 0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.05

0.18

0.00

0.00

0.00

-0.57 0.00
0.00

0.0

-0.03 0.00

0.00

0.0

0.00

-0.13 0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

-0.05 0.00

-0.05 0.20

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.10

0.00

0.00

0.15

0.00

-0.02 0.02

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

-0.20 0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

-0.07 0.00
0.00

0.00

-0.07 0.00

-0.05 0.00
0.13

BS

0.00

BPAC11 BS

-0.01 0.00

0.16

0.04

FSR SJ

-0.04 0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

IS
GFNORTEO MF

MF
ELEKTRA MF

-0.07 0.00

0.49

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.05

0.00

0.00

0.00

IS

0.00

REIT
0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

SPX

0.00

0.00

0.05

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

-0.02 0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

VIX
0.00

0.00

0.03

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.27
0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.05

0.00

0.00
0.00
0.02

0.00

0.00
0.00

0.00

-0.12 0.00

0.01

-0.09 0.00

-0.01 0.00

-0.16 0.06

0.00

0.00

0.11

-0.08 0.00

-0.07 0.05

0.00

0.00

0.00

-0.02 -0.01 0.05

-0.04 0.00

0.06

0.00

0.00

-0.09 0.00

-0.04 -0.01 0.00
0.02

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

USDRUB
0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

-0.03 0.00

-0.05 0.00

0.00

-0.01 0.00

-0.03 0.00

-0.11 -0.04 0.00

-0.06 0.00
0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

USDBRL

-0.01 0.00

0.01

-0.17 0.16

-0.13 0.00
0.00

-0.16 -0.04 0.00

0.00

0.08

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.07

0.02

JPEGSOSD

-0.12 -0.14 0.06

0.00

0.00

0.00

-0.06 0.00

0.05

0.10

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

MOOD BAA SPD

-0.14 0.00

0.00

-0.01 0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.01

-0.01 0.00

0.00

USGG3M10YR

-0.37 -0.01 0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.08

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

USGG3M

Figure 5: Adjacency matrix estimated at τ = 0.05 on 20200630

0.00

-0.04 0.00

0.00

0.00

0.0

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

-0.03 0.00

0.00

0.06

0.00

0.00

0.20

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.18

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.76

0.00

0.30

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.72

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.02

0.00

BBDC3 BS

-0.07 0.00

-0.01 0.00

0.00

-0.03 0.00

0.0

-0.16 0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.15

0.00

0.09

0.00

0.00

-0.15 0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

-0.01 0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.57

0.00

0.00

0.00

IS
KMB IS

-0.01 0.00

0.00

0.11

HDFC IS

-0.02 0.08

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.31

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

BS
VTBR RM

RM
SBER RM

SBER RM

tau=0.05
20200630

HDFCB IS

HDFCB IS

IS

0.00

USDINR
0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.16

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

USDMXN
0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

USDTRY

Figure 6: FRM@EM Network with one example node and its in-degree and out-degree edges

25

(a) FRM and Betweenness

(b) FRM and Closeness

(c) FRM and Eigenvector

(d) FRM and In-degree

(e) FRM and Out-degree

Figure 7: FRM at τ = 0.05 and Centrality measures

6 Portfolio Construction
The portfolio is constructed using daily FIs prices for the period between 20200101 and 20200630
(which yields 130 observations of the 25 biggest EM FIs).
The performance of the uplifted portfolio approaches (Invλ and upHRP) are benchmarked against
the minimum-variance portfolio (MinVar), the inverse variance (IVP), and the classical HRP
approaches. The MinVar weights are simply computed based on Equation (32), and often lead to
concentration in low-volatility assets. The IVP strategy can be considered as a naive risk parity
strategy (Equation (38)), since it is agnostic with respect to asset correlations. Thereafter,

26

an overlapping region between portfolio optimisation startegies and FRM network centrality is
developed.
As shown in the FRM network (Figure 6), all FIs are treated as potential substitutes without
specifying any hierarchical structure among them. Therefore, tree structures that integrate
hierarchical relationships are needed. For that purpose, the upHRP algorithm aims to build and
make use of a clustered adjacency matrix.
Matrix seriation
For the classical approach, the steps of the HRP are applied using the price time series of the
25 biggest FIs selected during the studied period. Figure 8 presents the estimation results:

(a) Unclustered Correlations

(b) clustered Correlations

Figure 8: Classical HRP: Matrix Seriation

Figure 8a shows the original or the unclustered correlation matrix. Figure 8b illustrates the
correlation matrix after reordering in clusters using the hierarchical tree clustering, also called
clustered correlation matrix. This matrix then serves as the input for the asset allocation procedure. As shown in Figure 8b the reorganizing results group similar FIs together and the dissimilar
further away in a new correlation matrix, which helps to construct more meaningful asset allocation decisions and building more risk diversified portfolios. More precisely, from Figure 8b the
lighter-colored squares (indicating a higher correlation coefficient) are all concentrated around
the diagonal matrix.

27

(a) Unclustered Adjacency matrix

(b) clustered Adjacency matrix

Figure 9: Uplifted HRP: Matrix Seriation

For the uplifted approach, the quasi-diagonalization step is applied to the adjacency matrix
dated on 20200630 with τ = 0.05. In this stage, the algorithm aims at reordering the adjacency
matrix by placing similar assets together. As we can notice from Figure 9b the closer assets
(similar given (β)) are placed together forming assets clusters.
Tree clustering or Dendrogram

Figure 10: Classical HRP: EM@Dendrogram

The clusters are visualised in the form of a cluster diagram called a dendrogram. Figure 10

28

illustrates the hierarchical clusters for our FIs data, where the x-axis indicates the name of the
FIs in the studied portfolio and the y-axis measures the distance between the two merging FIs.
The key to interpreting a dendrogram is to focus on the height at which any two FIs are joined
together. In Figure 10, we can see that Bajaj Finance (BAF IS) and Bajaj Finserv Ltd (BJFIN
IS) (plotted with green) are expectedly most similar, as the height of the link that joins them
together is the lowest. Note that both of them are same ultimate parent Indian financial services
companies focused on insurance. The dendrogram also detects that the most similar FIs most
often belong to the same market (FirstRand Ltd (FSR SJ) and Standard Bank Group Ltd (SBK
SJ) plotted with red), or a similar financial sector. Finally, the highest cluster represents the
giant cluster that joins all the FIs formed clusters together.

Figure 11: Uplifted HRP: EM@Dendrogram

Based on the FRM clustered adjacency matrix, Figure 11 indicates that the tree clustering
architecture differs from the previous one (Figure 10). Indeed, here State Bank of India (SBIN
IS) is a perturbation of BJFIN IS, and consequently the two assets present the first formed cluster
since they are the most similar FIs. Also, Grupo Financiero Banorte (GFNORTEO MF) and
VTR Bank (VTRB RM) are perturbations of Sberbank of Russia (SBER RM), hence these three
FIs are clustered together, forming a cluster of two different markets, contrary to the previous
dendrogram, Figure 10, where the most similar FIs belong the same market.

Calculate allocation through recursive bisection
Table 1 and Figure 12 specify further explanation regarding the weight’s allocation of the
studied FIs according to the adopted strategies.

29

Table 1: Weight allocations of FIs: Classical approach vs uplifted approach
EM@ FIs
HDFCB.IS.EQUITY
SBER.RM.EQUITY
ITUB4.BS.EQUITY
HDFC.IS.EQUITY
KMB.IS.EQUITY
BBDC3.BS.EQUITY
BBDC4.BS.EQUITY
ICICIBC.IS.EQUITY
QNBFB.TI.EQUITY
SBIN.IS.EQUITY
B3SA3.BS.EQUITY
SANB11.BS.EQUITY
BBAS3.BS.EQUITY
BAF.IS.EQUITY
ITSA4.BS.EQUITY
AXSB.IS.EQUITY
ELEKTRA.MF.Equity
FSR.SJ.EQUITY
SBK.SJ.EQUITY
BBSE3.BS.EQUITY
BJFIN.IS.EQUITY
GFNORTEO.MF.Equity
BPAC11.BS.EQUITY
SLM.SJ.EQUITY
VTBR.RM.EQUITY

MinVar
0.002
0
0
0
0.062
0
0.002
0.002
0.008
0
0
0
0
0
0.001
0
0.866
0.001
0
0
0.004
0.044
0
0.007
0

30

IVP
0.045
0.054
0
0.032
0.038
0
0.005
0.027
0.009
0.035
0
0.024
0.016
0.021
0
0.018
0.503
0.033
0.029
0
0.026
0.035
0.010
0.039
0

HRP
0.017
0.020
0
0.007
0.011
0
0.002
0.005
0.006
0.010
0
0.007
0.025
0.014
0
0.009
0.787
0.018
0.011
0
0.012
0.017
0.003
0.018
0

Invλ
0.039
0.021
0.019
0.065
0.036
0.055
0.017
0.022
0.084
0.030
0.040
0.029
0.032
0.056
0.018
0.041
0.032
0.062
0.074
0.052
0.025
0.037
0.032
0.045
0.037

upHRP
0.051
0.018
0.074
0.023
0.003
0.074
0.030
0.072
0.001
0.044
0.053
0.107
0.012
0.012
0.024
0.056
0.073
0.016
0.034
0.041
0.035
0.004
0.016
0.084
0.043

HD
FC
SB B IS
ER E Q
IT RM UIT
UB E Y
4 QU
H D BS IT Y
FC EQU
KM IS E IT Y
BB B I QUI
DC S E TY
BB 3 B QUI
DC S E T Y
Q
IC 4 B UI
IC S E T Y
IB
Q
QN C IS UI
BF EQ T Y
B
U
SB TI E ITY
Q
I
B3 N IS UI
TY
S
SA A3 EQU
B
NB S IT
1 EQ Y
BB 1 BS U I
AS E TY
3 QU
B
I
BA S EQ TY
F
U
IT I S IT
SA E
Y
4 QU
BS IT
A
EL X
Y
E K SB EQU
T R IS IT
E
A* Q Y
M U
I
FS F EQ TY
R
SJ UI T
SB E Q Y
BB K S UI
SE J EQ TY
3
GF B BS UIT
NO JFI EQ Y
RT N IS UIT
E
E Y
BP O M QU
AC F ITY
11 E Q
B U
SL S E I TY
M QU
VT S
BR J E IT Y
RM QU
I
EQ T Y
UI
TY

HD
FC
SB B IS
ER E
IT RM QUI
UB E TY
4 Q
H D BS UIT
FC EQ Y
U
KM IS E IT Y
BB B I QU
DC S E ITY
BB 3 B QU
DC S E IT Y
IC 4 B QU
IC S IT
IB E Y
QN C I QU
BF S EQ IT Y
B
U
SB TI E ITY
I
Q
N
B3
U
S IS IT
SA A3 EQ Y
NB BS UIT
Y
1 E
BB 1 B QU
AS S E ITY
3 QU
B
BA S EQ I TY
F
U
IT
SA I S E IT Y
4 QU
EL AX BS E IT Y
E K SB Q
T R IS UIT
A* E Q Y
M U
FS F EQ ITY
R
S U
SB J E I TY
K
BB S QUI
SE J E TY
3 Q
G F B BS U I
NO JFI EQ T Y
RT N IS UI
T
E
BP O M E Q Y
AC F UIT
11 E Q Y
B U
SL S E I TY
M
VT S QU
BR J E IT Y
RM QU
I
EQ T Y
UI
TY

1

0,9

0,8

0,7

0,6

0,5

0,4

0,3

0,2

0,1

0

HPR
Weights weights
MinVarMinVar,
Weights IVP,
IVPHRP
Weights
(a) Optimal

0,12

0,1

0,08

0,06

0,04

0,02

0

(b) Optimal weights Invλ, upHRP

mHPR Weights

InvLambda Weights

Figure 12: Weights allocations of FIs: classical approach vs uplifted approach

31

Table 1 and Figure 12 specify further explanation regarding the weight’s allocation of the
studied FIs according to the adopted strategies. Several points are worth noting. First, for
both classical and uplifted approaches, IVP, HRP, Invλ and upHRP and similarly allocate their
assets. This result can be explained by the fact that they are based on the inverse variance
method to compute their weights. However, while IVP and Invλ show more stable weight
distributions, HRP and upHRP adjust their weight allocation more frequently, since it also takes
into consideration the correlation (for HRP)/ tail connectedness (for upHRP) and the asset
clusters when assigning weights. Second, results also show that the MinVar allocations have the
most concentrated weight allocation. While it accorded zero allocation to certain FIs (i.e SBIN
IS, B3SA3 BS, etc.), it significantly overweights others (ELEKTRA MF). Third, the MinVar,
IVP and HRP classical approaches over-weighted the Mexican ELEKTRA MF (0.866, 0.503,
0.787, respectively). In this case, any distress situation affecting this FI will have a great impact
on those concentrated portfolios. Contrary, these extreme weight concentrations disappear with
the Invλ and upHRP uplifted approaches, where the weights are wider distributed among FIs,
providing a well-diversified portfolio.
Table 2: Weight’s allocation of EMs: Classical approach vs
EM@ FIs
Nbr of FIs MinVar IVP
HRP
India (IS)
8
7 % 24.2%
8.5%
Brasil (BS)
9
0.3%
5.5%
3.7%
Mexico (MF)
2
91 % 53.8% 80.4%
Russia (RM)
2
0%
5.4%
2%
Turkey (TI)
1
0.8%
0.1%
0.6%
S.Africa (SJ)
3
0.8% 10.1%
4.7%

Uplifted approach
Invλ
upHRP
29.2%
22.4%
29.4%
43.1%
6.9%
7.7%
5.8%
6.1%
8.6%
0.1%
18.1%
13.7%

Table 2 reports the percentage of weight allocation for the different approaches, giving further
intuition on how the portfolio optimization approaches allocate their weights through EMs. From
these allocation results, we can understand a few stylized features: First, the MinVar concentrates
91% of the allocation on the two existing Mexican FIs and it assigns zero weights for the Russian
FIs and only 0.3% for the 9 Brazilian FIs. Similarly, the IVP and the HRP concentrate allocation
on the same market with 53.8% and 80.4% weights respectively. However, they provide some
diversification across the other markets compared to MinVar strategy. The classical approaches
concentrate their weights on the Mexican market that contributed only by two FIs to the basket
of the 25 biggest FIs in the EMs, which poses significant idiosyncratic risk. Nevertheless, for the
uplifted portfolio approaches, the weights are well distributed across the EMs. For example, the
Invλ allocates 29% of weights to the Brazilian and Indian FIs, while, the upHRP allocates 29.4%
to Indian FIs and 43.1% to the Brazilian FIs since this last market has the highest number of
FIs in the selection of the 25 biggest EM@FIs. Moreover, the upHRP allocates only 0.1% for the
Turkish FIs, since this market contributes only by one FI. To recapitulate, the upHRP appears
to find a compromise between classical concentrated weight approaches and the Invλ strategy.
The classical strategies can concentrate weights on a few FIs, leading to vulnerabilities. The Invλ
evenly assigns weights across all FIs, ignoring the correlation structure. This makes it exposed
to systemic shocks. However, the upHRP finds a compromise between diversifying across all FIs
and diversifying across clusters, which makes it more resistant against both types of shocks.

32

Table 3: Backtesting on EM FIs data: Classical approach vs uplifted approach
Mean
Std
Sharpe ratio Effective n
MinVar 0.0043 0.0818
0.0528
1.3225
IVP
0.0039 0.0712
0.0560
3.7121
HRP
0.0035 0.0490
0.0721
1.6063
τ = 5%
Invλ
0.0767 0.1859
0.4128
20.986
upHRP 0.0522 0.1886
0.2768
16.801
τ = 10%
Invλ
0.0894 0.1868
0.4788
21.643
upHRP 0.0807 0.1967
0.4104
16.296
τ = 25%
Invλ
0.0894 0.2195
0.4073
23.429
upHRP 0.0792 0.2280
0.3476
20.199
τ = 50%
Invλ
0.0883 0.2093
0.4219
21.117
upHRP 0.0766 0.2145
0.3571
21.508

Figure 13: Backtesting on EM FIs data: classical approaches (MinVar,IVP, HRP) vs uplifted
approaches (Invλ, upHRP)

33

(a) Backtesting on EM asset data: uplifted approach (Invλ 5%, upHRP 5%, Invλ 10%,
upHRP 10%, Invλ 25%, upHRP 25%, Invλ
50%, upHRP 50%)

(b) Financial Risk Meter (FRM)

(c) Penalisation parameter (λ) vs Optimal weights (Penalisation parameter (λ, Invλ
5% weights, upHRP 5% weights)

Figure 14: Impact of Penalisation parameter (λ) and FRM on optimal weights and portfolio
returns

Backtesting results For the backtesting, we adopt a 30 days rebalancing period. Table 3 recapitulates the out-of-sample performance of the studied approaches.
For the classical approaches, the mean and the volatility of the HRP are 0.003 and 0.049, respectively. While the MinVar delivers the highest return value (0.004) and the highest volatility
(0.081), the IVP provides approximately the same portfolio return (0.003) with higher volatility
(0.0712). Therefore, the HRP balances out both return and volatility most efficiently providing
the best approach in terms of Sharpe ratio (0.072 compared to 0.052 and 0.056 of the MinVar
and IVP portfolios, respectively).
For the uplifted approach (with τ = 5%), the return and volatility of the upHRP approach are
0.052 and 0.188, respectively. While the Invλ offers a higher return (0.076), and approximately
the same volatility, the Invλ provides a risk-return balance registering the best Sharpe ratio value
(0.412 compared to 0.276 of the upHRP portfolio).
Besides the sharp ratio, we measured the portfolio diversification effects using the Effective N
Ef f ect(N ) measurement, proposed by Strongin et al. (2000) as one of allocation concentration
and defined as follow:
1
Ef f ect(N ) = PN
(50)
2
bj,t
j=1 ω

34

The portfolio has high concentration risk if Ef f ect(N ) is close to one.
Comparing the classical and the uplifted approaches(with τ = 5%), it seems that the upHRP
improves the Sharpe ratio of the HRP approach (0.072 and 0.276, respectively). Moreover,
the HRP has discarded five EMs in favor of one single market, with (Ef f ect(N ) = 1.6), see
Table 2). Therefore, the HRP’s portfolio is deceitfully diversified, since any distress situation
affecting this market will have a greater negative impact on HRP’s portfolio than the upHRP,
which allocates only 6.9% to the Mexican market and providing more diversification across EMs
(Ef f ect(N ) = 16.8, see Table 3).
In fact, the main innovation of upHRP strategy is to apply the HRP algorithm based on tail
dependence clustering instead of the standard correlation-based clustering. First, this strategy
is motivated by the fact that the correlation coefficients can change drastically during financial
crises due to contagion effects, and such a crisis can spill over quickly. Consequently, diversifying
a portfolio based on correlation clusters may be a failing strategy without attention to tail events.
Second, while the correlation matrix illustrates the relationship based on the mean-variance of
the distribution, the FRM measures the co-movements in extreme events based on both tail of
the distribution. To exemplify, lower tail dependence is associated with the capacity to diversify
during crises, which can improve the tail risk management of a given strategy. More precisely,
the main idea is to cluster the studied FIs illustrating a high probability to experience extremely
negative events contemporaneously. Finally, empirical results show that the proposed uplifted
approach has the potential to compete with the classical portfolio optimization approach by
providing desirable diversification properties, especially if this hierarchical risk parity strategy
is based on the tail dependence coefficient (provided by the FRM adjacency matrix), which is a
benefit to tail risk management.
Besides, for the uplifted approach, we take into consideration four tail risk levels (5%, 10%,
25%, 50%). The results in Table 3 indicate that: The Ef f ectN is an increasing function of the
tail risk level, therefore for a higher tail risk level, more diversification is needed to guarantee
stable portfolio returns. Comparing the Invλ strategy with the upHRP, we noticed that the Invλ
strategy needs to include a higher number of assets compared to the upHRP (i.e for τ = 10%,
Ef f ect(N ) = 21.64 and 16.24, respectively) to provide the same portfolio performance level (
approximately the same sharp ratio=0.4). On the one hand, this result can be explained by
the fact that for the upHRP, only FIs within the same cluster compete for portfolio allocation
rather than competing with all the FIs in the portfolio, which avoids the redundancy in the
FIs included in the optimal portfolio. On the other hand, the larger number of FIs increases
estimated parameters, which also can increase the risk of estimation error and thus biased results.
For that purpose, for relatively similar values of sharp ratio (portfolio efficiency), the upHRP is
preferred over the Invλ.
Figure 13 illustrates the backtesting on EM’s FIs with 30 days rebalancing period. It plots
the portfolio turnover for the first half of 2020 according to the classical strategies (MinVar, IVP,
and HRP) and the uplifted strategies (Invλ and upHRP), where the classical approaches show a
relative stability in returns compared to the uplifted approaches since, the classical approaches
concentrate their weights on one Mexican FI (see Table 2), which limited their profit (increase in
portfolio returns in mid-February and in June) and also limit their loss (end of March ) during
the COVID 19 crisis. However, this is a trade-off between historical stability and very high
concentration risk. Any idiosyncratic risk impact would lead to substantial portfolio losses.
Figure 14a plots the backtesting on EM’s FIs with 30 day rebalancing period for the uplifted
strategies, taking into consideration the adjacency matrices with different tail risk levels (5%,

35

10%, 25%, and 50%). The Figure indicates that all portfolio returns follow the same trend, despite
the difference in portfolio composition, since the biggest 25 FIs that compose the adjacency
matrices vary over time and the risk levels.
Indeed, by comparing this portfolio return’s trend with the FRM plot (Figure 14b) during the
same period, we noticed a negative relationship, where the high-risk period plotted by the FRM
is translated by a decrease in the portfolio returns (March). Moreover, Figure 14c indicates that
the uplifted approach underweights the high risky FIs (with high penalization parameter λ) and
overweight the less risky FIs, specially for the Invλ, since the upHRP takes into consideration
the tail co-movement between the FIs.

36

6.1 Bridging optimal portfolio weights and network centrality

(a) τ = 0.05

(b) τ = 0.1

(c) τ = 0.25

(d) τ = 0.5

Figure 15: Network graphs with the size of nodes representing total degree centrality on 20200630

Figure 15 plots the FRM Network with the size of nodes representing total degree centrality
(indegree and outdegree). The network information is provided by the adjacency matrices estimated at τ equal to 0.05, 0.10, 0.25, and 0.50, with dates 20200630. The Figure shows that the
total degree centrality (both in and out) increase and become more visible with the increasing
of tail risk level τ . By interpreting the adjacency matrix of the network, an overlapping region
between the portfolio theory and network theory can be established.
Indeed, according to Figure 15a, Itau Unibanco (ITUB4 BS) is a highly central FI followed by
Banco Santander Brasil (SANB11 BS) and Banco Bradesco SA (BBDC4 BS). Therefore, the

37

Brazilian market illustrates high-CoStress compared to the other markets (see also the boxplot,
Figure 2. Contrary to that, QNB Finansbank (QNBF TI) and Housing Development Finance
Corp (HDFC IS) are low-central FIs.
Regarding ELEKTRA MF, the networks (Figure 15) indicate that this FI is only a risk emitter
(high out-degrees with zero in-degree), which makes this FI insensitive to the other FIs shocks.
Moreover, the classical portfolio approaches overweight ELEKTRA MF (see Table 1). Therefore,
at least historically, ELEKTRA MF had more stable return patterns, but as a risk emitter, any
change in risk perception concerning this FI would rapidly spill over into the entire market.
Moreover, referring to Table 4, the results of the optimal weight indicate that the Invλ portfolio
is insensitive to the centrality degree. It often allocates similar weights for the high and low
central FIs (i.e. BBDC4 BS and GFNORTEO MF, see Figure (15d). This result is due to the
fact that this portfolio approach allocates weights based only on the individual tail risk level Λ,
varying by tail risk levels τ but is insensitive to the network centrality degree.
Referring to Table 4 and Figure 15, results from different τ levels indicate that the upHRP approach underweights the high central FIs (i.e. BBDC4 BS (for τ =5% and τ =50%), ICICIBC
IS (for τ =10%), ITUB BS and HDFC IS (for τ =25%)). Contrary to that, the upHRP strategy
overweights the low central FIs (i.e. ELEKTRA MF and SLM SJ (for τ =5%), ELEKTRA MF
(for τ =10%), GFNORTEO MF and B3SA3 BS (for τ =25% and τ =50%). These findings are in
line with previous research, studying the relationship between the optimal portfolio weights and
network centrality in the mean-variance level. In fact, our findings are consistent with Peralta
& Zareei (2016) and Pozzi et al. (2013) in establishing that "optimal portfolio strategies should
overweigh low-central assets and underweight high-central ones". Nonetheless, they contradict
the findings of Vỳrost et al. (2019), who argue that “asset weights must be ordered in the same
way as the reciprocal of asset centrality in a given network”.
Indeed, the sensibility of the Adjacency matrix to different tail risk levels τ results in centrality
degree variation as well as FIs clustering (see Figures 11 and 16), which leads to upHRP optimal
weights variation through different τ for all FIs.
In fact, the low concentration of weights for the uplifted strategies (InvΛ and upHRP) as well as
the sensitivity of weights to different tail risk levels, don’t allow us to conclude about the best FI
that offers greater diversification benefits in EMs (contrary to the classical approach that concentrates weights on ELEKTRA MF). However, uplifted strategies overweight the Brasilian FIs
(for different τ ). Moreover, by contributing with the highest number of FIs to the basket of the
25 biggest FIs in EMs (see Table 2), the Brazilian market seems more interesting to international
investors, besides the need of diversification advantages provided by the other EMs.

7 Policy recommendation
Besides the outlined portfolio construction in Section 6, we want to derive some recommendations for both policy makers as well as investors.
In Section 5 we have shown that particular EM FIs are not only influenced by FIs and macroeconomic risk variables from the same region, but also have tail-event co-movement dependencies to
other EM geographic regions and currencies, the latter all the more important at lower levels of
τ = 0.10 or τ = 0.05. Secondly, a dominant driver of EM FIs returns is the fiscal and economical
stance of EM Sovereign bond issuers. If the risk perception for sovereign issuers increases, the
return of EM FIs is impacted across the board and across the multivariate distribution. Lastly,
co-movements can be detected within similar economic sub-sectors across geographical regions,
which is also apparent in the portfolio construction exercises in Section 6. We recommend investors to analyse concentrations across economic sub-sectors across regions, as well as to analyse
dependencies between equity investments and bond investments in EM, given the clear linkages

38

between the sovereign and the domestic EM FIs. Lastly, currency fluctuations have marginal
return contributions in tail-events especially. In so far as EM FI investments are unhedged into
developed market currencies, there is risk of a compound effect on returns.
As for the portfolio construction, the "classical" approaches show a relative stability in portfolio returns compared to the uplifted approaches, which limited their profit and also limit their
loss during the COVID 19 crisis. But, this often comes at the cost of high concentration risks,
exposing the portfolio to idiosyncratic tail events. The uplifted portfolio approaches show more
volatile turnover with higher loss and profit, but are much better diversified, preventing sizeable
risk clusters. Even though a risk averse investor might opt for the classical approach at first,
closer inspection of tail risk behaviour and concentration risk should let the investor prefer the
uplifted portfolio.
EM policy makers can derive important recommendations from our analysis. Firstly, coordination between EM regulatory bodies is of importance in order to mute EM FI fluctuations. Here,
particular attention should be put on linkages in same sub-sector operating FIs across regions,
which will be increasingly more important as globalisation continues. Secondly, fluctuations in
risk perception of the sovereign issuer has an immediate impact on EM FI returns. Regulatory
bodies are therefore advised to preemptively verify sound capitalisation of their domestic banks,
even if the sovereign issuers distress is stemming from another geographic region. This is further
amplified by a tail-event leading to a weakening of an EM’s currency versus for example the U.S.
Dollar. Global financial linkages, we show, between EM FIs lead to spill-over effects. Overall, in
order to protect the domestic as well as global EM economies and their FIs, EM regulatory bodies should continuously work towards closer coordination between Emerging Market economies.
This will help increase robustness versus developed market economies distress, of which more is
likely to come, as developed markets fight with difficult fiscal situations and low growth patterns.
But also, closer coordination between countries will prevent spill-over effects from one geographical region’s FIs onto others, thereby increasing the attractiveness of the asset class further. Our
approach via dendograms rapidly indicates any such risk clusters, and can be updated at ease
and frequently during financial crises.

8 Conclusion
In this study, we examine the co-movements of EM FIs across six geographical regions, with
aim to analyse within EM country co-dependencies in tail events but importantly also between
regions as well as FIs of the same sub-sector across regions. We also analyse the important
macro-economical risk variables impacting EM FIs and conclude that in addition to the developed market variables suggested by Adrian & Brunnermeier (2016), EM specific macroeconomic
risk variables have significant explanatory power. This can be used to construct more robust
total asset class portfolio allocation and supplies EM regulatory bodies with detailed information
on co-dependencies for better and faster stabilisation measures during periods of distress.
We also propose a novel asset allocation method – Hierarchical Risk Parity based the tail event
information from the FRM technology, allowing us to extend this approach to the quantile level
and replace the covariance matrix with the rich information contained in the FRM adjacency
matrix. We applied this proposed approach to a portfolio of the biggest 25 FIs in EM, and our results show that uplifted strategies provide appropriate diversification properties. In comparison,
the Invλ portfolios tend to be too static and the classical approaches result in too concentrated
portfolios. Bridging optimal portfolio weights and network centrality, we conclude that the Invλ
insensitive to the network centrality degree. However the upHRP portfolio underweight highcentral FIs and overweight low-central ones, therefore the Invλ is less at risk of spill-over effects
across EM regions, FIs, and financial sub-sectors.

39

References
Abbassi, P., Brownlees, C., Hans, C., & Podlich, N. (2017). Credit risk interconnectedness: What does the market really know? Journal of Financial Stability, 29 , 1–12. doi:
10.1016/j.jfs.2017.01.002
Abid, F., Leung, P. L., Mroua, M., & Wong, W. K. (2014). International Diversification Versus Domestic Diversification: Mean-Variance Portfolio Optimization and Stochastic Dominance Approaches. Journal of Risk and Financial Management, 7 (2), 45–66. doi:
10.3390/jrfm7020045
Adrian, T., & Brunnermeier, M. K. (2011). CoVaR. National Bureau of Economic Research.
doi: 10.3386/w17454
Adrian, T., & Brunnermeier, M. K. (2016). CoVaR. The American Economic Review , 106 (7),
1705. doi: 10.1257/aer.20120555
Aldasoro, I., & Alves, I. (2018). Multiplex interbank networks and systemic importance: An application to European data. Journal of Financial Stability, 35 , 17–37. doi:
10.1016/j.jfs.2016.12.008
Alipour, E., Adolphs, C., Zaribafiyan, A., & Rounds, M. (2016). Quantum-Inspired Hierarchical
Risk Parity. 1QBit.
Arreola Hernandez, J., Kang, S. H., Shahzad, S. J. H., & Yoon, S.-M. (2020). Spillovers and diversification potential of bank equity returns from developed and emerging America. The North
American Journal of Economics and Finance, 54 , 101219. doi: 10.1016/j.najef.2020.101219
Bassett Jr, G., & Koenker, R. (1978). Asymptotic Theory of Least Absolute Error
Regression. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 73 (363), 618–622. doi:
10.1080/01621459.1978.10480065
Belloni, A., & Chernozhukov, V. (2011, 02). l1 -penalized quantile regression in high-dimensional
sparse models. Annals of Statistics, 39 (1), 82–130. doi: 10.1214/10-AOS827
Ben Amor, S., Boubaker, H., & Belkacem, L. (2019). Price risk and hedging strategies in Nord
Pool electricity market evidence with sector indexes. Energy Economics, 80 , 635–655. doi:
10.1016/j.eneco.2019.02.001
Berndsen, R. J., Leon, C., & Renneboog, L. (2018). Financial stability in networks of financial
institutions and market infrastructures. Journal of Financial Stability, 35 , 120–135. doi:
10.1016/j.jfs.2016.12.007

40

Betz, F., Hautsch, N., Peltonen, T. A., & Schienle, M. (2016). Systemic risk spillovers in the
European banking and sovereign network. Journal of Financial Stability, 25 , 206–224. doi:
10.1016/j.jfs.2015.10.006
Bonacich, P.
(1972).
Factoring and weighting approaches to status scores and
clique identification.
The Journal of Mathematical Sociology, 2 (1), 113–120.
doi:
10.1080/0022250X.1972.9989806
Bonacich, P. (1987). Power and Centrality: A Family of Measures. American Journal of
Sociology, 92 (5), 1170–1182. doi: 10.1086/228631
Bonanno, G., Caldarelli, G., Lillo, F., Micciche, S., Vandewalle, N., & Mantegna, R. N. (2004).
Networks of equities in financial markets. The European Physical Journal B , 38 (2), 363–371.
doi: 10.1140/epjb/e2004-00129-6
Bunda, I., Hamann, A. J., & Lall, S. (2009). Correlations in emerging market bonds:
The role of local and global factors. Emerging Markets Review , 10 (2), 67–96. doi:
10.1016/j.ememar.2009.02.003
Cai, J., Eidam, F., Saunders, A., & Steffen, S. (2018). Syndication, interconnectedness, and
systemic risk. Journal of Financial Stability, 34 , 105–120. doi: 10.1016/j.jfs.2017.12.005
Chen, C. Y.-H., Härdle, W. K., & Okhrin, Y. (2019). Tail event driven networks of SIFIs.
Journal of Econometrics, 208 (1), 282–298. doi: 10.1016/j.jeconom.2018.09.016
Chi, K. T., Liu, J., & Lau, F. C. (2010). A network perspective of the stock market. Journal of
Empirical Finance, 17 (4), 659–667. doi: 10.1016/j.jempfin.2010.04.008
De Prado, M. L. (2016). Building diversified portfolios that outperform out of sample. The
Journal of Portfolio Management, 42 (4), 59–69. doi: 10.3905/jpm.2016.42.4.059
Diebold, F. X., & Yılmaz, K. (2014). On the network topology of variance decompositions:
Measuring the connectedness of financial firms. Journal of Econometrics, 182 (1), 119–134.
doi: 10.1016/j.jeconom.2014.04.012
Fang, L., Chen, B., Yu, H., & Qian, Y. (2018). Identifying systemic important markets from a
global perspective: Using the ADCC ∆CoVaR approach with skewed-t distribution. Finance
Research Letters, 24 , 137–144. doi: 10.1016/j.frl.2017.08.002
Franke, J., Härdle, W. K., & Hafner, C. M. (2019). Statistics of Financial Markets: An Introduction. In (5th ed.). Springer. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-13751-9

41

Freeman, L. C. (1978). Centrality in social networks conceptual clarification. Social Networks,
1 (3), 215–239. doi: 10.1016/0378-8733(78)90021-7
Haluszczynski, A., Laut, I., Modest, H., & Räth, C. (2017). Linear and nonlinear market
correlations: Characterizing financial crises and portfolio optimization. Physical Review E ,
96 (6), 062315. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevE.96.062315
Härdle, W. K., & Simar, L. (2019). Applied Multivariate Statistical Analysis. In (5th ed., pp.
363–393 & 431–442). Springer. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-26006-4
Härdle, W. K., Wang, W., & Yu, L. (2016). TENET: Tail-Event driven NETwork risk. Journal
of Econometrics, 192 (2), 499–513. doi: 10.1016/j.jeconom.2016.02.013
Jain, P., & Jain, S. (2019). Can Machine Learning-Based Portfolios Outperform Traditional
Risk-Based Portfolios? The Need to Account for Covariance Misspecification. Risks, 7 (3).
doi: 10.3390/risks7030074
Jobson, J. D., & Korkie, B. (1980). Estimation for Markowitz Efficient Portfolios. Journal of
the American Statistical Association, 75 (371), 544–554. doi: 10.2307/2287643
Kreis, Y., & Leisen, D. P. (2018). Systemic risk in a structural model of bank default linkages.
Journal of Financial Stability, 39 , 221–236. doi: 10.1016/j.jfs.2017.05.010
Li, Y., & Zhu, J. (2008). L1 -Norm Quantile Regression. Journal of Computational and Graphical
Statistics, 17 (1), 163–185. doi: 10.1198/106186008X289155
Lohre, H., Rother, C., & Schäfer, K. A. (2020). Hierarchical Risk Parity: Accounting for Tail Dependencies in Multi-asset Multi-factor Allocations. Machine Learning for Asset Management:
New Developments and Financial Applications, 329–368. doi: 10.1002/9781119751182.ch9
López de Prado, M. (2016). Building Diversified Portfolios that Outperform Out of Sample. The
Journal of Portfolio Management, 42 (4), 59–69. doi: 10.3905/jpm.2016.42.4.059
Ma, L., & Pohlman, L. (2008). Return forecasts and optimal portfolio construction: a
quantile regression approach. The European Journal of Finance, 14 (5), 409-425. doi:
10.1080/13518470802042369
Markowitz, H. (1959). Portfolio Selection. Yale University Press New Haven. doi: 10.1111/j.15406261.1952.tb01525.x

42

McGuire, P., & Schrijvers, M. (2006). Common Factors in Euro-denominated Emerging Market
Bond Spreads. International Finance Review , 6 , 261–280. doi: 10.1016/S1569-3767(05)060115
Merton, R. C. (1980). On estimating the expected return on the market: An exploratory investigation. Journal of Financial Economics, 8 (4), 323–361. doi: 10.1016/0304-405X(80)90007-0
Mihoci, A., Althof, M., Chen, C. Y.-H., & Härdle, W. K. (2020). FRM Financial Risk Meter. In The Econometrics of Networks. Emerald Publishing Limited. doi: 10.1108/S0731905320200000042016
Osborne, M. R. (1985). Finite algorithms in optimization and data analysis. Wiley Series in
Probability and Statistics - Applied Probability and Statistics Section. John Wiley & Sons,
Inc.
Osborne, M. R., Presnell, B., & Turlach, B. A. (2000). On the LASSO and Its Dual. Journal of
Computational and Graphical Statistics, 9 (2), 319–337. doi: 10.2307/1390657
Özatay, F., Özmen, E., & Şahinbeyoğlu, G. (2009). Emerging market sovereign spreads, global
financial conditions and U.S. macroeconomic news. Economic Modelling, 26 (2), 526–531. doi:
10.1016/j.econmod.2008.10.008
Peralta, G., & Zareei, A. (2016). A network approach to portfolio selection. Journal of Empirical
Finance, 38 , 157–180. doi: 10.1016/j.jempfin.2016.06.003
Pozzi, F., Di Matteo, T., & Aste, T. (2013). Spread of risk across financial markets: better to
invest in the peripheries. Scientific reports, 3 (1), 1–7. doi: 10.1038/srep01665
Raffinot, T. (2017). Hierarchical Clustering-Based Asset Allocation. The Journal of Portfolio
Management, 44 (2), 89–99. doi: 10.3905/jpm.2018.44.2.089
Saiti, B., Bacha, O. I., & Masih, M. (2014). The diversification benefits from Islamic investment
during the financial turmoil: The case for the US-based equity investors. Borsa Istanbul
Review , 14 (4), 196-211. doi: 10.1016/j.bir.2014.08.002
Silva, T. C., de Souza, S. R. S., & Tabak, B. M. (2016). Network structure analysis of the Brazilian interbank market. Emerging Markets Review , 26 , 130–152. doi:
10.1016/j.ememar.2015.12.004
Slim, S., Koubaa, Y., & BenSaida, A. (2017). Value-at-Risk under Lévy GARCH models:
Evidence from global stock markets. Journal of International Financial Markets, Institutions
and Money, 46 , 30–53. doi: 10.1016/j.intfin.2016.08.008

43

Strongin, S., Petsch, M., & Sharenow, G. (2000). Beating Benchmarks. The Journal of Portfolio
Management, 26 (4), 11–27. doi: 10.3905/jpm.2000.319761
Tibshirani, R. (1996). Regression Shrinkage and Selection Via the Lasso. Journal of the
Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Methodological), 58 (1), 267–288. doi: 10.1111/j.25176161.1996.tb02080.x
Tonzer, L. (2015). Cross-Border Interbank Networks, Banking Risk and Contagion. Journal of
Financial Stability, 18 , 19–32. doi: 10419/121130
Vỳrost, T., Lyócsa, Š., & Baumöhl, E. (2019). Network-based asset allocation strategies.
The North American Journal of Economics and Finance, 47 , 516–536.
doi:
10.1016/j.najef.2018.06.008
Wang, G.-J., Jiang, Z.-Q., Lin, M., Xie, C., & Stanley, H. E. (2018). Interconnectedness and
systemic risk of China’s financial institutions. Emerging Markets Review , 35 , 1-18. doi:
10.1016/j.ememar.2017.12.001
Yu, L., Härdle, W. K., Borke, L., & Benschop, T. (2019). An AI approach to measuring financial
risk. The Singapore Economic Review , 1–21. doi: 10.1142/S0217590819500668
Yuan, M. (2006). GACV for quantile smoothing splines. Computational Statistics & Data
Analysis, 50 (3), 813–829. doi: 10.1016/j.csda.2004.10.008

44

9 Appendix
Table 4: Sensitivity of the optimal weights of the uplifted strategies to different tail risk levels τ
FIs
HDFCB.IS.EQUITY
SBER.RM.EQUITY
ITUB4.BS.EQUITY
HDFC.IS.EQUITY
KMB.IS.EQUITY
BBDC3.BS.EQUITY
BBDC4.BS.EQUITY
ICICIBC.IS.EQUITY
BAF.IS.EQUITY
QNBFB.TI.EQUITY
SBIN.IS.EQUITY
B3SA3.BS.EQUITY
SANB11.BS.EQUITY
BBAS3.BS.EQUITY
AXSB.IS.EQUITY
ITSA4.BS.EQUITY
ELEKTRA..MF.Equity
BJFIN.IS.EQUITY
FSR.SJ.EQUITY
BPAC11.BS.EQUITY
BBSE3.BS.EQUITY
GFNORTEO.MF.Equity
SBK.SJ.EQUITY
SLM.SJ.EQUITY
VTBR.RM.EQUITY

Inv(λ)
0.039
0.021
0.019
0.065
0.036
0.055
0.017
0.022
0.056
0.086
0.030
0.040
0.029
0.032
0.018
0.041
0.032
0.025
0.062
0.032
0.037
0.052
0.074
0.045
0.037

5%
upHRP
0.051
0.018
0.074
0.023
0.003
0.074
0.030
0.072
0.012
0.001
0.044
0.053
0.107
0.012
0.024
0.056
0.073
0.035
0.016
0.016
0.004
0.041
0.034
0.087
0.043

10%
Inv(λ) upHRP
0.030
0.017
0.021
0.086
0.023
0.069
0.038
0.034
0.026
0
0.041
0.050
0.027
0.043
0.022
0.026
0.032
0.049
0.023
0.001
0.036
0.049
0.060
0.030
0.033
0.059
0.026
0.039
0.029
0.083
0.128
0.033
0.031
0.043
0.043
0.052
0.062
0.051
0.051
0.030
0.032
0.007
0.044
0.024
0.052
0.050
0.049
0.029
0.042
0.044

45

25%
Inv(λ) upHRP
0.021
0.320
0.053
0.052
0.020
0.026
0.022
0.047
0.027
0.052
0.032
0.022
0.020
0.039
0.024
0.023
0.044
0.014
0.029
0.026
0.025
0.024
0.030
0.114
0.025
0.050
0.019
0.018
0.044
0.024
0.091
0.042
0.058
0.016
0.039
0.056
0.021
0.057
0.060
0.018
0.041
0.010
0.090
0.076
0.046
0.073
0.050
0.078
0.058
0.021

50%
Inv(λ) upHRP
0.038
0.027
0.037
0.031
0.026
0.066
0.026
0.027
0.022
0.031
0.045
0.069
0.030
0.027
0.034
0.052
0.057
0.033
0.028
0.046
0.022
0.066
0.030
0.054
0.028
0.053
0.026
0.039
0.042
0.019
0.068
0.045
0.046
0.044
0.035
0.024
0.052
0.023
0.058
0.033
0.042
0.029
0.030
0.070
0.070
0.039
0.048
0.018
0.058
0.038

(a) τ = 0.1

(b) τ = 0.25

(c) τ = 0.5

Figure 16: Sensitivity of the upHRP’ dendrogram of to different tail risk levels τ
46

Table 5: List of Abbreviations
Financial Institutions
Emerging Market
ITUB4 BS
Itau Unibanco Holding SA
BRAZIL
BBDC3 BS
Banco Bradesco SA
BRAZIL
BBDC4 BS
Banco Bradesco SA
BRAZIL
B3SA3 BS
B3 SA - Brasil Bolsa Balcao
BRAZIL
SANB11 BS
Banco Santander Brasil SA
BRAZIL
BBAS3 BS
Banco do Brasil SA
BRAZIL
ITSA4 BS
Itausa SA
BRAZIL
BBSE3 BS
BB Seguridade Participacoes SA
BRAZIL
BPAC11 BS
Banco BTG Pactual SA
BRAZIL
HDFCB IS
HDFC Bank Ltd
INDIA
HDFC IS
Housing Development Finance Co INDIA
KMB IS
Kotak Mahindra Bank Ltd
INDIA
ICICIBC IS
ICICI Bank Ltd
INDIA
SBIN IS
State Bank of India
INDIA
BAF IS
Bajaj Finance Ltd
INDIA
AXSB IS
Axis Bank Ltd
INDIA
BJFIN IS
Bajaj Finserv Ltd
INDIA
ELEKTRA MF
Grupo Elektra SAB DE CV
MEXICO
GFNORTEO MF
Grupo Financiero Banorte SAB d MEXICO
SBER RM
Sberbank of Russia PJSC
RUSSIA
VTBR RM
VTB Bank PJSC
RUSSIA
FSR SJ
FirstRand Ltd
SOUTH AFRICA
SBK SJ
Standard Bank Group Ltd
SOUTH AFRICA
SLM SJ
Sanlam Ltd
SOUTH AFRICA
QNBFB TI
QNB Finansbank AS
TURKEY

REIT
SPX
USGG3M
VIX
USGG3M10YR
MOOD BAA SPD
JPEGSOSD
USDBRL
USDRUB
USDINR
USDMXN
USDTRY
USDZAR

Macroeconomic Risk Factors
Dow Jones Equity REIT Total Re
S&P 500 INDEX
US Generic Govt 3 Mth
Cboe Volatility Index
US Generic Govt 3 Mth to 10yr yield spread
Moody’s Bond Indices Corporate BAA Yield Spread to US Treasury Bonds
JPMorgan EMBIG Sovereign Bond Yield Spread to U.S. Treasury
Brazilian Real Spot vs USD
Russian Ruble Spot vs USD
Indian Rupee Spot vs USD
Mexican Peso Spot vs USD
Turkish Lira Spot vs USD
South African Rand Spot vs USD

47

