A survey on modelling of infectious disease spread and
control on social contact networks
arXiv:2102.02768v1 [physics.soc-ph] 3 Feb 2021

Md Shahzamal
Macquarie University, Sydney, Australia
md.shahzamal@mq.edu.au
Saeed Khan
University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia
s.khan@uq.edu.au

Abstract
Infectious diseases are a significant threat to human society which was over sighted
before the incidence of COVID-19, although according to the report of the World
Health Organisation (WHO) about 4.2 million people die annually due to infectious
disease. Due to recent COVID-19 pandemic, more than 2 million people died during 2020 and 96.2 million people got affected by this devastating disease. Recent
research shows that applying individual interactions and movements data could
help managing the pandemic though modelling the spread of infectious diseases
on social contact networks. Infectious disease spreading can be explained with the
theories and methods of diffusion processes where a dynamic phenomena evolves on
networked systems. In the modelling of diffusion process, it is assumed that contagious items spread out in the networked system through the inter-node interactions.
This resembles spreading of infectious virus, e.g. spread of COVID-19, within a
population through individual social interactions. The evolution behaviours of the
diffusion process are strongly influenced by the characteristics of the underlying
system and the mechanism of the diffusion process itself. Thus, spreading of infectious disease can be explained how people interact with each other and by the
characteristics of the disease itself. This paper presenters the relevant theories and
methodologies of diffusion process that can be used to model the spread of infectious
diseases.
Keywords: diffusion; disease spread; contact networks, human movements, and covid-19

1

1

Introduction

Infectious diseases are a significant threat to human society which was over sighted before
the incidence of COVID-19, although according to the report of the World Health Organisation (WHO) about 4.2 million people die annually due to infectious disease. Due to
COVID-19, more than 2 million people died during 2020 and 96.2 million people affected
by this disease. The infectious diseases can also spread through animal contact networks,
insect contact networks and even with plant contact networks [1, 2, 3]. Therefore, it is
very important to understand the theories and methods for modelling spread of infectious
disease and its control. The popular approach to model infectious disease spread is using
theories and techniques of diffusion process on contact networks. The availability of high
computational power allows researchers to simulate and analyse dynamics of infectious
disease spread using the models of diffusion. Therefore, building simulation tools based
on the diffusion modelling theories can help authorities to make policies and strategies
to manage spreading of infectious diseases within a population.
A diffusion processes is defined as a dynamic phenomena on a networked system,
connecting a set of nodes, that starts from a node or a set of nodes and spread over the
networked system through inter-node interactions. In the diffusion process, contagious
items (infectious particles, a piece of information, innovation and a specific behaviour
etc.) initially grow on one or more nodes of the networks and then spread through
neighbouring nodes over the network. The interactions among nodes are responsible
for transmitting contagious items from one node to the other nodes. The interactions
can happen through physical contact such as being in a common location, touch the
same object within a time frame and transferring of objects from one node to other
nodes through medium such as air. In infectious diseases scenarios, infected individuals
interact with susceptible individuals and disease is transmitted to susceptible individuals.
Thus, the nodes of a networked system underlying of a diffusion process are represented
by individuals and the inter-node interactions causing transmission of infectious particles
are called contacts, edges, or links in the study of disease spreading on social contact
networks [4, 5, 6].
Modelling of diffusion dynamics on networked system or social contact networks is
required to understand what factors shape the diffusion behaviours. In reality, the factors
governing the behaviours of diffusion process vary depending where it happens. However,
the spreading of contagious items, e.g. infectious particles, over a contact network is
often treated as the coupling of results of three factors, namely individual interactions,
characteristics of contagious items, and environments. These three factors make strong
contributions to diffusion phenomena on a contact network. The roles and influence of
these factors depend on the context of diffusion processes.
Researches on diffusion modelling identified interactions between individuals are the
2

main drivers for spreading contagious items on contact networks. The individual interaction patterns provide pathways to spread contagious items on contact networks. For
example, how many susceptible individuals an infected individual meets during their infectious period determine the spreading speed of the infectious disease. If an infected
individual is connected to many other individuals, there is a high probability to transmit
disease to others by him. On the other hand, if an infected individual has no contact with
other individuals, the disease is not transmitted. Thus, the final size of the epidemic,
total number of infection caused during an outbreak of an infectious disease, depends on
the contact patterns distribution in the population. There are several interaction properties such as how contact happens, contact frequency and contact duration etc. at the
individual levels and contact degree distribution, clustering coefficient etc. at the network level that are studied to understand and model diffusion processes on social contact
networks.
The contagious items can be infectious particles for spreading infectious diseases. The
contagious items themselves play strong roles in their spread in a population and is identified as the critical factors to spread disease in the literature. The internal spreading
potentiality of contagious items varies based on its characteristics. For example, the infectiousness of contagious particles is defined by the disease types and highly infectious
diseases usually spread faster in a population. The spreading potential is also affected by
the process of infectious particles generation. The impacts of contagious items also vary
depending on the recipient individual behaviours. For example, the impacts of infectious
particles varies according to the susceptibility of the individuals. Therefore, the characteristics of contagious items are often considered in the modelling of diffusion processes.
In case of modelling infectious disease spreading, the characteristics of infectious items
varies widely due to the various nature of disease.
The spreading of contagious items is often influenced by the environment. The environments represent the characteristics of the space where diffusion processes occur. For
example, the impacts of infectious particles are determined by weather conditions such as
temperature and humidity etc. The infectious particles generally lose their infectiousness
over time and may also depend on the weather conditions. The underlying medium where
contagious items spread can also be heterogeneous. For example, a disease can spread
through multiple platforms such as proximity contact networks, transportation contact
networks, and air-travel contact networks. Thus, diffusion modelling is also required to
consider the heterogeneity of diffusion medium.
To model the diffusion on contact networks, these factors should be included to capture realistic diffusion behaviours. The impacts of contagious properties and environment
have been studied for a long time in the literature [7]. However, analysing contact structure to understand the spreading of contagious items is comparatively new. The recent
exploration of data on individual interactions have fuelled research on unravelling contact
3

patterns affecting contagious spreading [8, 9, 10, 11].
A spark has been seen on modelling of COVID-19 spread and control using social
contact networks properties [12, 13, 14, 15]. The authors of [12] shows that there is significant variation in the number of connections and social contacts each individual make
in a social interaction networks. Individuals with more social contacts are more likely
to attract and spread infection. These individuals are likely the drivers of the epidemic,
so-called superspreaders. When many superspreaders are immune, it becomes more difficult for the disease to spread, as the connectedness of the social network dramatically
decreases. Authors of [16] also show that properly taking some relevant network features
into account, linear growth can be naturally explained. Further, the effect of nonpharmaceutical interventions (NPIs), like national lockdowns, can be modeled with a remarkable
degree of precision without fitting or fine-tuning of parameters.
This paper analyse the approaches to integrate individual contact patterns with diffusion modelling and discuss how these approaches are used in modelling of infectious
diseases.

2

Diffusion modelling

Diffusion modelling is an intensively researched area due to its wide applications. As the
area of diffusion is diverse, the models developed are extremely varied in their approaches.
Broadly speaking, the models developed can be divided into two groups based on their
purposes: i) explanatory models, and ii) predictive models [17, 18, 19, 20]. The explanatory models are usually developed to understand the factors affecting diffusion dynamics
on a contact network. This often allows one to answer the questions such as which nodes
are influential, what is the underlying reason for the way diffusion occurs, and what is
appropriate diffusion controlling strategy? On the other hand, predictive models usually
predict the spreading intensity and the final number of individuals received contagious
items based on certain factors. It is often the case that the explanatory models find the
key influential factors and apply them for developing predictive models. This paper focuses on understanding the diffusing approaches for explanatory models. There has been
a range of approaches for explanatory models of diffusion. This section discusses some
of them that are widely used in different fields of diffusion ranging from disease spreading on individual contact networks to information spreading on online social networks
(OSN) [19, 20].

2.1

Compartmental models

Compartment epidemic models are frequently applied to study diffusion in many applications such as information diffusion, innovation diffusion and computer virus spread4

ing [21, 22, 23]. The fundamental concept of these approaches is to divide the system
into several compartments or partitions. Each compartment represents a set of individuals having a specific status. Then, the dynamics of the diffusion are determined by the
flows between these compartments. Widely used compartments are Susceptible having
individuals who are exposed to the contagious items, Infected having individuals who
have adopted the contagious items and started forwarding items (infecting) others, and
Recovered having individuals who were infected but now recovered. This compartment
model is called SIR propagation model and the dynamics of the compartments are given
by

dS
dI
dR
= −βIS,
= βIS − τ I,
= −τ I
(1)
dt
dt
dt
where S, I and R are the fractions of the population in the Susceptible, Infected and Recovered compartments respectively, β is the transmission rate from Susceptible to Infected
compartment and τ is the transmission rate from Infected to Recovered compartment.
Thus, the dynamics of the system is given by S(t) + I(t) + R(t) = 1. In the diffusion
modelling, β is given as β = γβ0 , where γ is the number of potential contacts on average
individuals has with others through which contagious items transmit with a rate β0 . By
changing the value of γ, τ and β0 one, therefore, can study the diffusion dynamics of
diffusion processes.
The compartment model can be analysed easily mathematically in the simple case. It
requires no more details than needed to reproduce and explain observed behaviours. It
reduces data collection cost and computational cost. Clearly, it can be applied in many
situations where high precision is not necessary. However, the assumption of having
homogeneous interaction γ between individuals is not realistic. Many researchers have
pointed out that the interaction between individuals is clearly heterogeneous as individuals do not have the same level of contact with all its neighbours [24, 25, 26, 25]. Moreover,
the constant rate of transmission probability β0 and constant recovery rate τ are not realistic in many diffusion processes. This is because individuals have different contact
intensity with infected individuals and heterogeneous susceptibilities to the contagious
items [27, 28, 29].
Heterogeneity is often integrated into the compartment model by dividing the main
compartments (such as S, I, R) into sub-compartments. These sub-divisions can be constructed based on the age, risk behaviours, or spatial diversities of individuals. Then, the
transmission probability can be divided into k sub-classes and the model can be parameterised by means of a k × k transmission rate matrix instead of a constant transmission
rate β [30, 31]. For example, some disease spread models split individuals spatially (divide
population with different regions) and assign heterogeneity for infection risks [32, 33, 34].
These approaches are called meta-population models. Similarly, different infectious periods can be implemented in the model by dividing population into k sub-classes which

5

resolve the limitations of the constant rate of recovery [27].
The integration of heterogeneity with sub-compartmentalisation relax some of the
most unrealistic assumptions of basic compartmental models. However, many limitations
of the compartment model still prevail and new issues arise by doing sub-compartmentalisation.
The analysis in [35] shows that individual’s interaction is still random and transient in
these models. Hence, individuals in the divided sub-populations behave homogeneously.
In case of meta-population models, dividing a population into the various spatial groups
can create asynchronous between these groups, but for time t → ∞ they become homogeneous [36]. Therefore, the real steady state heterogeneity cannot be captured by
meta-population models. Thus, high partitioning in compartmental models lose the simplicity. It also requires more data to fit the model and increases the data collection
cost.

2.2

Network models

To overcome the limitations of the compartment models and capture realistic contact
patterns, network science is adopted for modelling diffusion processes on the networked
systems [37, 38]. The network based diffusion modelling is also empowered by the graph
theory where contact networks are often generated by graph models. In addition, graph
theory is applied to study the characteristics of contact networks. The core entities in
the network-based modelling are nodes, representing individuals, and links connecting
one node to other nodes in the network, which represent interactions between individuals. A contact network can be represented by a graph where vertices correspond to
nodes and edges to links. The network models provide a range of flexibility for assigning
nodes various attributes and defining links with a range of properties. A wide range of
efficient network based models has been developed in the literature for studying diffusion
processes [37, 38, 39]. For generating contact networks, a fundamental aspect is to build
network structure called the network topology based upon which nodes interact with
each other. There are four types of network structure namely regular lattice networks,
random networks, small-world networks and scale-free networks that are frequently used
to study diffusion processes [40, 41, 42, 43]. In addition, data-driven network models are
also derived from real-world data and they may assume some properties of the theoretical
models.
Regular lattices are the simplest representation of contact network structures where
nodes are only connected to their nearest neighbour nodes in a lattice with a regular
fashion [42, 43]. The regular lattice networks assume large path lengths, i.e. the average
distance between two nodes is very high and the clustering coefficient is very high as well.
Therefore, these are not realistic [44, 45]. The random network models improve regular
lattice model where nodes contact with each other in a random fashion and each pair of
6

nodes has an equal probability to be connected. Furthermore, the average path lengths
in the random networks match with many real-world networks with appropriate contact probabilities [46]. However, the clustering coefficient is too low for these networks.
Recently an approach is introduced called the small-world network model based on six
degrees of separation phenomena which states that if you choose any two individuals anywhere on Earth, you will find a path of only six acquaintances on average between them.
In a small-world network, most of the nodes are not neighbours of each other, but the
neighbours of a given node are likely to be neighbours of each other. The Watts-Strogatz
model [47] generates such networks where the existing links of a regular lattice are rewired with a defined probability. The generated networks assume high local clustering
co-efficient and short path length [48]. The latest approach to generate contact structure
is scale-free networks developed by the Barabasi-Albert model [49] where node’s degree
follows a power-law distribution. In the Barabasi-Albert model, the scale-free networks
are self-organised with growing and preferential attachment processes. The research found
that many real-world systems have a power-law degree distribution [50, 51].
The above structured contact networks can be analysed mathematically and numerically. The authors of [52] has presented surveys on the methods of designing contact
networks applying real contact data. These networks are, however, static in nature where
node attributes and link properties are not changed during the observation period. These
contact networks are often represented with adjacency matrices of binary values. This
allows the use of algebra to calculate various network properties and corelate it with diffusion dynamics unfolded on it. While having some strong benefits over compartmental
models, these network models still have several shortcomings, namely that in these models, the quality of contacts is overlooked. For example, the duration of contacts affects
the transmission probability, and frequency of contact etc. There have, however, been
some models to overcome these limitations with weighted contacts [53, 54, 55]. However,
the weighted contact networks do not capture burstiness of the contact which is found
to have an impact on spreading dynamics [56]. The other crucial temporal factor is that
the contact sequences among individual are completely missing in these network models.
For studying diffusion processes with realistic contacts, there have been several approaches to make the contact network dynamic as well [39, 57, 58]. The dynamic networks
assume the links are transient in status, i.e., links appear and disappear. However, the
relationship between two linked nodes is often permanent. In the dynamic contact network models, the above static network models can be implemented as the underlying
structure (capturing permanent social relationship among individuals) and an additional
mechanism is added on top of that to maintain the link dynamic. The dynamic contact
network models are often difficult to analyse with exact mathematical solutions. Thus,
an approximation is often used to characterise the system dynamics [59]. There are no
analytical solutions for many dynamic contact network models and such models are only
7

used for simulations to explore diffusion dynamics for wide scenarios of developed models. These classes of contact networks are often efficient tools to validate the simulations
results of data-driven individual-level diffusion models.

2.3

Individual-based models

The other trend of diffusion modelling on contact networks is to apply individual-based
models [60, 61, 62, 63]. In these models, all operations are executed at the individual-level
and thus the integration of many realistic contact properties becomes easier. The other
fundamental concept is that individual-based models are implemented upon a community
of targeted individuals and that are situated in an environment. In these models, every
individual plays its role and interacts with its respective environment. Thus, infectious
items are received by an individual according to its behaviour and surrounding conditions,
and it transmits contagious items to other individuals by regenerating it. However, it is
not so easy to define the boundaries of the model class based on individual compared
to compartmental models or network models as the assumptions in the individual based
models varies largely.
The system dynamics in the individual-based model are generated with all individual
actions happened simultaneously within the respective simulation environment of the
individual [64]. The respective environment depends on the modelling approaches and
it may include parts or sometimes all of the other individuals. Thus, all individuals are
affected by the state of neighbours in their simulation environment at the same time.
Individual response to a specific environment can be deterministic or can be stochastic
events. The reactions process to a simulation environment is often implemented with
a set of rules (e.g. IF-THEN operations). For disease simulation, such a rule can be
IF the individual is susceptible and if there was a contact with an infected individual,
THEN switch the status from susceptible to infectious with a certain probability P .
Some individual-based models implement the process of adaptation, learning or evolution.
These models are called agent-based models, which is a subset of individual-based models,
and have simulated intelligence [65, 66, 67, 68].
The most significant advantage of individual-based models is that they allow for the
inclusion of natural mechanisms for every desired aspect of the model to be as realistic
as possible. They can offer characterisation even at the link level and environmental
conditioning including complex biological mechanisms [1, 69]. The current exploration of
data on social interactions leverages the benefit of this class of model as they easily allow
modelling of individual interactions over time. The complexity of implementing higherlevel architecture such as clustering and community structure are reduced as the network
formation mechanism is implemented at a lower level. The contact networks created
by dynamic contact network models can also be simulated with individual-level models.
8

However, the individual based models become difficult with detailed information and
require more effort to analyse sensitivity. To achieve stable insights, repeated simulations
are conducted with a high number of parameter combinations. Therefore, the individual
based model requires more computing resources and computation time. These models
often cannot be analysed mathematically due to their stochastic nature and large number
of parameters.

3

Contact graphs for diffusion study

Contact networks are widely used tools to study diffusion on social contact networks.
This allows to characterise the diffusion behaviours and simulate the spreading dynamics. These contact networks can mimic the social interaction and reveal the influence of
individual interactions. Contact networks are often generated by graph models. It is discussed in the previous section, dynamic contact networks are realistic to model diffusion
processes. However, the development of dynamic graph models for generating dynamic
contact networks is still at an early stage compared to the static models. There have been
limited number of approaches to develop dynamic graph model. This section presents a
brief details of current dynamic graph modelling approaches which consist of representing
contact networks and links generation. Here, dynamic contact graphs/networks represent temporal or time-varying graphs/networks where edges between a pair of nodes are
dynamic as their availability for transmission are not permanent.

3.1

Dynamic graphs representation

The evolution of a dynamic contact graph can be captured in many ways. The evolution
in the graph can occur due to changes in the status of nodes and status of links. The
links in the static graphs represent a relationship between a pair of nodes and is created
there is at least one interaction during observation period [70, 71]. In dynamic graphs,
however, the links are often differentiated from contacts (links and contacts have different
meaning) [39, 72, 58]. The contacts indicate interactions between a linked pair of nodes
occurring at certain times during an observation period. Dynamic graph modelling is
required to incorporate timing information of these contacts with link dynamics. The
development of a dynamic graph model often depends on how the graph is represented.
The dynamic contact graphs can be represented in the following ways.
Contact sequences: Many real world interaction data sets comes with the entries
containing identities of interacted nodes and the time when the interaction happened,
even with other some meta information such as gender and locations. The interaction
time can be a time stamp or a time interval sequence. For examples, works of [73, 62]
have collected interactions between two individuals using RFID and wearable sensors.
9

This representation is a straightforward and practical format computationally. However,
analysing diffusion processes on the graphs with this format would be difficult as they
do not count some properties such as contact duration. It is also difficult to visualise the
contact graphs and hence representing it to audience.
Multi-layer graphs: The dynamic graph can be visualised well if it is represented
with as a sequence of static graphs. In this method, the observation time is divided
into discrete time steps and a static graph is constructed for each time step [74, 75].
Thus, the dynamic graph becomes a multi-layer graph with each sequence of the static
graph as a single layer. This allows one to understand and analyse the dynamic graph
using static graph theories and then combine the results for the sequence of times to
obtain overall results. This method is applicable where the time resolution is high (or
continuous) compared to dynamic process on the studied graph. For studying infectious
disease, this method has a limitation as the disease cannot be transmitted over a path
during a sequence of the graph and thus analysing multi-layer graphs cannot capture real
dynamics. The time-lines representation of contacts is one of the extended approaches
where nodes are placed in one axis and times in another axis. The advantage with this
representation is that the time-respecting paths (sequences of contacts of increasing times)
between nodes are easy to identify as these are all paths that do not turn backwards in the
time dimension. The structure of time-respecting paths can be represented as a binary
matrix as it is in a static graph with an adjacency matrix. Thus, the dynamic graph can be
expressed as a binary tensor. The limitation is that the corresponding adjacency tensor,
as a data structure, takes a lot of memory and requires high computational overhead to
process such graph [59, 76].
Dynamic links graph: In this representation, temporal variations are captured
with only one dynamic graph where nodes and links change their status over time. The
underlying graph is a static graph with the fixed links among nodes. In fact, the underlying graph captures the fixed topology of the dynamic graph and can be treated as
the foot-print of nodes [77, 78]. Then, the static graph structure evolves over time where
contacts can appear and disappear. This means a time dimension is added with the
static network. This approach is considered for the class of graphs where the targeted
research question is to understand how the structure has evolved and how it affects the
diffusion process unfolded on the graph. The dynamic graphs are typically data-oriented
where the focus of study is on a data set, its structure, and how something behaves on
it e.g. how disease spreading would behave on the graph. In addition, these observations
may vary with used data sets and generalisation of results are often difficult. However,
it is used widely due to its flexibility to implement and capture properties of real contact
networks.
Time-node graphs: The recent trend of dynamic graph modelling is to extend the
concept of node into temporal node i.e at each time step the same node is considered as
10

a different node. Then, the graph is built among the temporal nodes. This approach is
called the static expansion of a temporal graph [79]. This type of graph can be practical
since it is straightforward to apply static graph methods also over the time dimension.
Eventually one usually needs to map the time nodes back to the original nodes. This
requires high computational power which is available in the current technology. However,
the applicability is limited by the size of the networks.

3.2

Dynamic graph modelling

A general representation of the dynamic contact graph can be described as follows. Consider a dynamic contact graph GT that is built with a set of nodes Z, a set of relationships
L between these nodes (links, contacts), and a labelling sets Y which represents any property such as links weights, set of node attributes; that is, L ⊆ Z × Z × Y . The relations
between nodes are assumed to take place over a time span Γ ⊆ T denoting the lifetime
of the system. The temporal domain T is generally assumed to be N+ for discrete-time
systems or R+ for continuous-time systems. The dynamics of the system can be subsequently described by a dynamic contact graph, GT = (Z, L, Γ, φ, ψ), where
φ : L × Γ → {0, 1}
φ is called presence function, indicates whether a given link is available at a given time.
The status of node can also be varied over time where they can be active or inactive to
create links at a certain time. Thus, the model can be extended by adding a node status
function
ψ : Z × Γ → {0, 1}
where the activation function ψ of nodes depend on a given time. Given a GT =
(Z, L, Γ, φ, ψ), the graph G = (Z, L) is called underlying graph of GT . This static graph
G should be seen as a sort of footprint of GT , which flattens the time dimension and
indicates only the pairs of nodes that have relations at some time in Γ. The connectivity
of G = (Z, L) does not imply that GT is connected at a given time instant with the
connectivity of G. Within this general graph definition, various contact networks can
be generated by varying details in links and nodes definition. Thus, graph models are
often accompanied with a network generation method. This network generation method
handles incorporating details to links and nodes while graph defines the relationships at
the abstract level. Some network generation methods that have been designed under the
frameworks of various graph models are presented here.
Static graphs with link dynamics: The simplest method of generating a dynamic
graph is first to generate a static graph with links using a static graph model and then
define a sequence of contacts for each link generated. To avoid complexity, contact

11

generation process is often kept independent of the network position of the links in this
approach. The authors of [77] have applied the following procedures to generate a
dynamic graph.
i) a static graph is constructed from a multigraph that is generated using the
configuration model [80] and deleting the duplicate links and self-links
ii) an active interval is generated for each link when contacts can occur i.e.
nodes are present in the graph. The duration of active intervals is generated using a truncated power-law. For a link, the active interval starts at a
uniformly random starting time within a sampling time frame (observation
period)
iii) a sequence of contact times is generated following an inter-event time
distribution over the observation period. This also generates burstiness in the
contact patterns.
iv) finally the contact time sequence is wrapped with the corresponding active
interval of each link. The contact sequence times (step 2) which are within the
active time interval are taken and other are deleted for a link. The wrapping
is done for all links in the graph and a dynamic contact graph is obtained
The authors of [78] used a similar method to generate contact graph. These methods easily integrate contact dynamics and burstiness to the topology of a static graph. However,
the inter-event times are not influenced by the topology structure and node properties.
Temporal exponential random graphs: The exponential random graph model
(ERGM) [81] is widely used to generate static graphs in the study of social dynamics.
The ERGM model parameters reflect the importance and weight of selected topological
elements and sub-graphs such as triangles and stars. The ERGM model generates a
class of graphs and the model parameter inferred from an empirical data capture the
corresponding graphs. A similar modelling framework is used by the authors [82, 83] to
generate temporal exponential random graphs (TERGM). Thus, the temporal dynamics
of links are influenced by the network topology in TERGM. In TERGM, a set of states
of the nodes observed over a time window for an ongoing dynamical process is applied to
estimate the model parameters. Thus, the probability of making a contact between a pair
of nodes is bounded with the time window of applied data set for modelling. The temporal
exponential random graph models are not node-oriented model (nodes connectivity is not
build at the node level, but connectivity is defined based on the network topology) that
makes possible to change the network with its basic building block such as links. Thus, it
is difficult to achieve a good fit unless the successive networks are close to each other [84].
Coordinated temporal graph models: The above models cannot implement node
and link level operations such as which neighbour nodes a host node contacts frequently,
12

how recent changes in contact sequences affect the future contacts, whether the contact
creation and deletion follow any specific social mechanism. There have been several works
to incorporate these characteristics of dynamic contact graphs [85, 86, 87, 71]. The work
of [71] has developed a dynamic graph model for face-to-face interactions. This is a
spatio-temporal graph implemented with a two-dimensional random walk. In this model,
the propensity of walking closer to a node is proportional to the attractiveness assigned
to it. Therefore, the more attracted a walker is to its neighbour nodes, the slower its
walk becomes. A similar approach is implemented in the dynamic graph model developed
by [88]. This model for online setting and their assumption is that some individuals are
much more central in a temporal graph than they are in an aggregated static graph.
Thus, random communication partners are assigned to a node by a basal rate and a
positive feedback mechanism. The authors have applied stochastic point processes to
model dynamic contact graphs. In this model, a node creates and breaks links according
to a Bernoulli process with memory. The probability of an event between two nodes
increases with the number of events recently occured between them.
Activity-driven graph modelling: A comparatively simple dynamic graph modelling approaches is proposed by [57]. This model is called activity driven network modelling (ADN). They adapt the graph sequence framework of dynamic graph modelling
and generate a simple graph GT at (it is a discrete time system) time t. The graph
generation procedures are as follows:
i) node i is assigned an activity potential ai . This is usually done with a
power-law distribution. The activity potential is assigned to all nodes in the
graph
ii) the graph generation process goes through increasing a time counter to
t and assume that GT is empty, i.e. all N nodes have no link and contact
memory from previous time step
iii) activate node i with a probability ai ∆t. If node i is activated, it is connected with other m randomly chosen distinct nodes. Repeat the step 2 and
step 3
The distinguishing characteristics of this model are that the activity of the nodes
governs the link creation. In contrast, the previous models are connectivity driven where
the network’s topology is at the core of the model formation. The ADN overcomes the
timescale separation assumption and explicitly accounting for the concurrent evolution
of the interactions in a graph and the dynamic process evolving on it [89]. The studies of
[90, 91] show that many important aspects of the system dynamics can be characterised
using a heterogeneous mean-field approach. Interestingly, it is found that some system
properties are directly related to the activity potential of nodes. The diffusion dynamics
13

are quite different from that of aggregated static networks [91]. However, the basic ADN
model has several limitations such as nodes contact with a fixed number of links during
each activation, the contacts are not repetitive, and social structure among individual is
not maintained.

3.3

Realistic activity driven graph models

When nodes are active in the basic activity driven network, they randomly create connections with other nodes. In other words, at any time, a node may connect with any
other nodes in the graphs. That means this method does not apply any prior knowledge
of social or geographic relationships that could alter the selection of one link over another. However, this assumption severely challenges the feasibility of the ADN modelling
when it is implemented for real graphs. There have been great efforts to incorporate
realistic features with the basic ADN. An individual can interact with other individuals
arbitrarily or by choice. Thus, some links tend to be persistent in time and such links
are generated in the household, at the office and with close friends. This property is
integrated introducing memory effects in the link formation. Therefore, social graphs can
have two types of links. The first class describes strong ties that identify time repeated
and frequent interactions among specific couples of nodes. The second class characterises
weak ties among agents that are activated only occasionally. It is natural to assume that
strong ties are the first to appear in the system, while weak ties are incrementally added
to the contact set of each node. This approach is studied in the work of [92] where it
η
,
is assumed that a node will connect to a new node with a probability P (n + 1) = η+n
where n is the current contact set sizes of the node and η is the tendency to broaden their
contact set sizes. Therefore, the probability of contacting with a node from previously
contacted nodes is 1 − P (n). This method of repeating with the old contacted nodes and
extending contact set size is called the reinforcement process. In the above process, every
node has the same tendency to extend the contact graph. In reality, however, individual
have heterogeneous tendency to extend the contact set size. This issue is addressed by
the work of [93] where they proposed to assign a heterogeneous value of η. For a node
i, the probability of contacting a new node is given by
p(ni ) =



ni
1+
ηi

−αi

where αi is the reinforcement of node i and ηi is the characteristic number indicating the
size of contact set size before reinforcement start. The value of ηi is often assigned with
power-law and the distribution of resultant contact set size will be a power-law.
In the social graphs, individuals have a tendency to make a close social circle and
make a community. Therefore, the underlying social structure of a dynamic contact
14

graph also should maintain community structure. The community structure emerges in
a graph by creating triadic closure when making a new connections [94]. One typical
mechanism to make triadic closure is to use common neighbours (CN) indices, where two
nodes i and j are going to interact if their neighbour nodes set has substantially overlap.
This means that the probability of these two nodes interacting is proportional to the
number of common neighbours. In other words, triadic closure can be created if the
host node chose a new neighbour from its neighbour’s neighbour [94, 95]. The random
new neighbour selection mechanism of basic activity driven graph can not emerge the
community saturate. The work of [72] has upgraded the basic ADN integrating a triadic
closure creation mechanism. If a host node i has not contacted any node yet, it randomly
picks another node from the entire graph j and creates a link. Otherwise, the host node
tries to make a new link with the triadic closure mechanism. As the first step, it selects
randomly one neighbour node j from his contact set with a probability. If node j is not
selected or has no other neighbours node except node i, node i looks for another random
new node and creates a link. If node j is elected and has neighbour nodes, then it selects
a random neighbour node k from the neighbour set of j. Then node i from a link with k
and create triadic closure.
The basic activity-driven graph model assigns heterogeneous potentiality to nodes.
This generates a heterogeneous distribution of interactions. However, the research on
social interaction shows that individual’s interactions have bursty nature, i.e the interevent time of activation of nodes in ADN is required to be heterogeneous [96, 56]. This
bursty activity has a strong influence on graph evolution and diffusion unfolded on it.
The inter-event time ti is directly connected with the activity of node i and can defined
as ai = <t1i > . The inter-event time usually spans over several orders of magnitude. The
authors of [97] shows a mechanism to capture this bursty nature of human dynamics
using a power-law distribution. The basic ADN can generate heterogeneous contact
degree distribution based on the value of ai . However, the growing of contact set size
is completely dependent on η. In addition, the model can capture link heterogeneity of
directed graphs where the in-link propensity can be different to out-link density. This
issue is addressed by the work of [98] where each node is assigned an attractiveness. When
a node selects a new neighbour node, a node will be chosen based on its attractiveness.
However, any current modification of ADN can generate contact networks with links for
indirect interactions. The study of [58] shows how to add repetitive contacts and indirect
contacts in generating contact networks.

4

Infectious disease diffusion

The theories of diffusion process can be applied to model infectious disease spreading. It
is required to understand how the infectious disease spreading is modelled. This allows
15

to integrate the above diffusion model with the disease spread. In the infectious disease,
two key aspects are disease transmission and calculation of transmission force.

4.1

Disease transmission

An infectious disease is transmitted from an infected individual to susceptible individuals via transferring organisms/microbes capable of causing infection [99, 100]. These
organisms/microbes are called pathogens. In this paper, contagious items or infectious
particles refer to these pathogens. The infectious items enter the body of susceptible
individuals and deposit on mucus membranes of body parts such as mouth, nose, throat,
and lungs where they can cause an infection. Therefore, for an infectious disease to
persist within a population, relevant contagious items are required to be transmitted
continuously to new bodies. The contagious items are transmitted through two mechanisms: 1) direct transmission and 2) indirect transmission [8, 101, 6, 58, 102]. Direct
transmission occurs through individual-to-individual interactions transferring contagious
items without any intermediate transmission medium between these two individuals. The
example includes physical touches (such as shaking hands, kissing etc.) and contact of
blood and body fluids. Direct transmission is found in infectious disease such as common
colds, sexually transmitted diseases etc. For many infectious diseases [103, 104, 99, 100],
infected individuals generate particles containing infectious microbes by their respiratory
activities like talking, laughing, coughing or sneezing. These particles are scattered into
the environment of the proximity of the infected individuals. The infectious particles
then deposit onto objects or surfaces and survive long enough time to transfer to other
susceptible individuals who subsequently touch the objects. This creates the indirect
transmission of diseases where intermediate medium or objects are required to transmit
infectious particles. Examples of diseases with the indirect transmission are Coronavirus,
Rhinovirus, and Influenza etc.
The ways indirect transmission occur are not the same in all cases and can be classified
into different modes which are based on the roles of the intermediate medium and the
properties of the infectious particles when transmitting through the intermediate medium.
The respiratory activities of infected individuals generate droplets containing infectious
particles and the sizes of the droplets often define the mode of transmission. Droplet
whose size is comparatively large, often assumes to be greater than 5µm, are transmitted
through the air to nearby susceptible individuals. This mode of indirect transmission is
called droplet transmission. However, the droplet whose size is small, often assumes to
be less than 5µm, evaporates quickly and becomes droplet nuclei. These droplet nuclei
are suspended in the air for a long time and can travel large distances. Thus, they can
transmit to susceptible individuals with a long time delay after their generation, even to
susceptible individuals who are far away up to 100m from the source infected individual.
16

This mode of indirect transmission is called airborne transmission. Indirect transmission
of infectious particles can also happen through vectors (mosquitoes, flies and mites etc.)
that carry infectious particle from an infected individual to susceptible individuals with
delay and at substantial distances. In this situation, the contagious items present in the
blood or skin of an infected individual are ingested by vectors. Then, it is developed
in the vectors itself. Susceptible individuals are usually infected through the bite of an
infectious vector, though other ways of entry are possible. Examples of vector-borne
disease transmissions are yellow fever, malaria, plague and dengue etc. [103, 104, 99,
105]. Another indirect mode of transmission is to spread disease through contaminated
objects spatially. Examples of such diseases includes water-borne diseases, food-borne
diseases [106, 107].
It has been observed that the spreading of some infectious diseases is dominated by
only direct transmission and can be modelled by creating direct transmission links for
co-presence interaction between infected and susceptible individuals. However, the infectious diseases that spread based on indirect transmission or have additional indirect
transmission along with direct transmission cannot be modelled by creating only direct
transmission links for co-presence interactions. This thesis considers airborne infectious
disease spreading as a case study for understanding and modelling the impacts of indirect
transmission links. For airborne diseases, infected individuals generate droplets containing infectious particles through various respiratory activities. The authors of [108] have
found that an infected individual generates on average 75,000 particles/cough but it can
be up to 500,000 particles/cough. They have also found that 60% of these particles can
reach the alveolar region of lungs if the particles are inhaled by another individual. It is
found that the cough frequency of an infected individual is on average 18/hr [109]. Thus,
an infected individual deposits about 1.36 × 106 particles during a one hour stay at a
location. Up to 50% of these particles evaporate and become droplet nuclei (airborne
particles) which are suspended in the air for a longer time [110]. Airborne particles are
also added to the environment by breathing, talking and laughing. There have been a
wide range of studies to understand the viral load of airborne particles. The studies show
that most of the influenza virus is contained in the droplets whose sizes are < 5µm. The
works of [111, 112, 111] have found that up to 75% virus is contained within droplets
with sizes < 5µm. The exhaled breath of an influenza patient can generate on average
0.5 plaque-forming units (PFU) for influenza viruses [113]. The study of [112] found
that a cough can generate up to 77 PFU virus. Inhalation of 0.7 - 3.5 PFU of influenza
is sufficient to cause infection in 50% of susceptible individuals [114]. Therefore, it can
be concluded that the generated airborne particles have sufficient viral load to cause
infection if they are inhaled.
The impact of airborne transmission is different to the other model of indirect transmission as airborne particles can travel spatially while large droplets settle nearby. The
17

literature indicates the various range of travel distances for airborne particles. The travel
distances depend on the weather conditions and air-flows. The authors of [115] show
that airborne particles can travel up to 100m in the direction of air-flow. The travel
distance can also be interpreted from the analysis of SARS outbreak occurred in the
Amoy Gardens Hong Kong in the year 2003. The study of [116] has revealed that the
infection had reached the Block-E which was at 60m distance from the Block-B where
infection had started, although there was no indication of physical interaction among the
residences of these buildings. Thus, it was concluded that the infection particles travelled
to the Block-E through airborne transmission. A number of studies have also shown that
it is also possible to disperse airborne particles between flats in a building [117, 118] and
between wards in a hospital [119]. The experiment of [118] shows that airborne particles
can also travel from one building to the nearby buildings. The travel distance of airborne
particles is extended in the open area. The authors of [120] have studied the presence
of influenza A virus around pigs farms by collecting air samples at different distances
from the farms. They have noticed a significant amount of RNA copies of the virus at
the distance of 1.5Km from the pig farms that had influenza A infected pigs. Therefore, the airborne indirect transmission mode of infectious disease has strong potential to
spread diseases. The airborne infectious diseases spreading is an important application
of diffusion process with indirect transmissions.

4.2

Infection risk

An interaction (e.g. being in the same location) between infected and susceptible individuals poses an infection risk for the susceptible individual. Infection risk assessment
can be divided into two steps: determining the intake dose of infectious particles and
finding the corresponding infection probability [121]. The infectious particles that reach
the target infection site are called the intake dose. The intake dose is estimated based
on the exposure level to the infectious particles, the pulmonary ventilation rate of susceptible individuals, the exposure time interval, and the respiratory deposition of the
infectious particles. Then, the infection probability is calculated by a mathematical formula. Two approaches are applied to determine if an infection occurs: deterministic and
stochastic. The first approach assumes that each individual has an inherent resistance
up to a dose of infectious particles. Thus, a susceptible individual contracts the disease
when a target infection site is exposed to a dose equivalent to or exceeding the threshold
dose. In the stochastic approach, any amount of intake dose causes disease with a certain
probability. The infectious particles are usually randomly distributed in the suspension
medium. Thus, the estimated exposure level and intake dose of airborne particles are
always expected values rather than exact values. Therefore, the stochastic models are
appropriate for studying airborne disease spread. Models that are frequently used for
18

assessing infection risk for airborne diseases are now discussed.
A wide range of models has been developed for the spread of airborne disease. These
range from simple models that are easy to apply to complex models that require greater
detail of the disease spreading process. Unfortunately, these details is not always available
for many diseases. In the literature, the Wells-Riley model or its modification are widely
used to estimate infection risks [121, 122]. The Wells-Riley equation is given as


Igpt
PI = 1 − exp −
Q

(2)

where PI is the probability of causing infection to a susceptible individual for the intake
dose E = Igpt/Q, I is the number of infected individuals at the interaction room, p is the
breathing rate of the susceptible individual (L/s), g is the average quanta generation rate
(quanta/s), t is the exposure time interval, and Q is the room ventilation rate (L/s). The
PI is, in fact, the ratio between the number of infections caused for E and the susceptible
individuals. This model is based on the concept of quanta which is the number of droplet
nuclei required to cause infection for 63% of all exposed susceptible individuals. The ratio
PI provides the reproduction number of the studied diseases which is frequently used to
determine disease spreading dynamics for the large population. The model parameter
quanta generation rate ϑ is required to be estimated from the real outbreak cases. This
is very difficult for many diseases as it requires data from real outbreak scenarios. The
model is also limited due to its assumption that particles are homogeneously distributed
in the air, and that every particle reaches to the target infection site. It does not consider
the duration of particle generation.
There have been several modifications to overcome these limitations. The authors of
[122] incorporated the effect of respiratory protection system that may filter the inhaled
infectious particles by multiplying a fraction term with the intake dose as E = Igptθ
,
Q
where θ is the fraction of infectious particles reached to a target infection site. Air
disinfection and particle filtration are used in the many buildings that reduce the effective
infectious particles to cause infection. These factors are included for the Wells-Riley
equation in the work of [123]. However, collecting such data is difficult and expensive for
large scale simulation. The assumption about the homogeneity of particle distribution in
the interaction area is addressed by [124]. They considered the time-weighted average
pathogen concentration in the room air to incorporate the non-steady-state conditions in
the Wells-Reily equation. This model is given by


pIg(Qt + e−ϕt − 1)
PI = 1 − exp −
V Q2



(3)

where Q is the air change rate or disinfection rate, ϕ is the particle accumulation rate
and V is the volume of interaction area. In spite of these improvements, the Wells-Reily
19

model still requires the total exposure during an outbreak to find the quanta generation
rate and that is not possible for many diseases.
Rudnick and Milton [125] developed a model where the exhaled air volume fraction is
used to estimate the number of quanta that the susceptible individuals are exposed to:


g ω̄It
PI = 1 − exp −
N



(4)

where ω̄ is the average volume fraction of room air that is exhaled breath and N is the
total number of people in the premises. To find the quanta generation rate based on the ω̄,
one requires a knowledge of carbon dioxide concentration in the room. These models still
follow the well-mixed assumption of particle concentration. Some works [118, 126] address
this problem by experimenting the dispersion of tracer gas and integrating impacts with
model.
In the models discussed above, the quanta generation rates are not well understood
for many diseases. However, the infectious particles generation rates, their formation,
pathogen loads and their survivable time etc. are now becoming available. The authors
of [127] first introduce a dose response model based on the infectious particles concentration instead of quanta. The model is


Igθpt
PI = 1 − exp −
Q

(5)

where g is the number of infectious particles released per infected per unit time and θ is
the fraction of infectious particles reaches the target site. In this equation, the quanta
generation rate g is replaced by θg. The authors defined the source strength g with cough
frequency, pathogen concentration in the respiratory fluids and the volume of expiatory
droplets introduced into the air in a cough. This model also based on the homogeneity.
Recently, the authors of [128] have also introduced a model based on the infectious
particle concentration considering non-steady-state conditions as



V 
I(g − r)θpt
− Qτ
1−
1−e V
PI = 1 − exp −
Q
QT

(6)

where g is the particles generation rate, r is the mortality rate of the generated particles, θ
is the deposition fraction of the inhaled particles, τ is the duration of particle generation,
and t is the duration susceptible individuals breath in infectious particles.
In the above equations, the temporal variation in the particle concentration is captured using a non-steady-state model. However, this model assumes that all infected
individuals arrive at the same time and this may not happen in reality. The variations
in the arrival time of infected individuals also introduce the fluctuations in the particles
concentration. The current models also do not capture the exposure that susceptible in20

dividuals receive after infected individuals leave the interaction locations. Thus, it would
be more appropriate to find exposure level due to contact with each infected individual
and sum them up to find total exposure. Therefore, the arrival and departure of each
infected individual can be tracked independently and hence the exposure during indirect
interactions. This also allows one to assign a random value of Q to each contact to
capture heterogeneous particle concentrations at different locations.
The disease transmission probability can also be calculated for both the direct and
indirect contacts as follows [8]. This model resolves the problems mentioned in the
previous section. This model define a contact called same place different time (SPDT)
that has both direct and indirect infection transmission probability. This accounts when
an infected individual and susceptible individuals have been to a place. If a node in the
susceptible compartment receives a SPDT link from a node in the infectious compartment,
the former is subject to exposure El of infectious pathogens for both direct and indirect
transmission links according to the following equation
El =

i


gp  −rt′
gp h
′
−rti
−rt′l
′
rtl
l − e−rts
+
e
−
e
r
(t
−
t
)
+
e
e
erts
i
s
V r2
V r2

(7)

where g is the particle generation rate of infected individual, p is the pulmonary rate of
susceptible individual, V is the volume of the interaction area, r is the particles removal
rates from the interaction area, ts is the arrival time of the infected individual, tl is the
leaving time of the infected individual, t′s is the arrival time of susceptible individuals
and t′l is the leaving time of susceptible individuals from the interaction location and ti is
given as follows: ti = t′l when the SPDT link has only a direct component, ti = tl if the
SPDT link has both direct and indirect components, and ti = t′s otherwise. If ts < t′s , ts
is set to t′s for calculating an appropriate exposure [8]. If a susceptible individual receives
m SPDT links from infected individuals during an observation period, the total exposure
E is
m
X
Elk
(8)
E=
k=0

where Elk is the received exposure for kth link. The probability of infection for causing
disease can be determined by the dose-response relationship defined as
PI = 1 − e−σE
where σ is the infectiousness of the virus that causes infection [99].

21

(9)

5
5.1

Diffusion control
Diffusion control strategies

Controlling diffusion dynamics on individual contact networks has a wide range of applications ranging from mitigating the spread of infectious diseases to marketing products.
The methods developed for controlling diffusion depends on the context and applications.
For example, controlling diffusion for marketing a products focuses on maximising the
spreading of items to the largest proportion of populations [129, 130] while diffusion controlling for infectious disease focuses on minimising the number of infections reducing
the number of individuals received spreading items [131]. However, the key task in all
controlling methods is to find a set of individuals and change their behaviours to alter
spreading rates. These individuals often have high spreading potential and are called
super-spreaders. The size of the set should be minimal to reduce vaccination cost as well
as achieve the control goals.
Most of the efforts of developing a control strategy are put on finding the optimal
set of individuals. Accordingly, researchers search for the contact properties of individuals and their behaviours relevant to the spreading of contagious items [132, 133, 134].
Individual’s preference and exposure intensity to contagious items, personal status and
their surrounding environment often define the spreading potential. Thus, the influential individuals are often searched based on the individual’s behaviours [135, 136]. The
network properties such as the number of connection of individuals to others are also
key factors to determine one’s spreading potential. Understanding personal behaviours
and modelling is a complex process. In addition, research focuses on understanding the
impacts of contact properties on diffusion dynamics.
Various measures of network properties are applied to find influential individuals for
controlling diffusion of contagious items. The widely used measures to find the important
individuals are degree centrality, betweenness centrality, k-core score and PageRank centrality etc [132]. Individuals contact degrees defined the number of connections to other
individuals is frequently used as topological measures of influence. In the social contact
networks with broad degree distribution, it is observed that individuals with high degree
determine the diffusion dynamics [137]. However, degree based methods sometimes underestimate the low degree individuals that can be influential through connecting high
degree individuals. The page ranking algorithm developed to rank the content in the
World Wide Web is also adapted to find the pivotal individuals in social contact networks. The ranking mechanism of PageRank is simple and straight forward [138] where
the importance of page is measured by counting the number and quality of links to that
page. The PageRank algorithm is only applicable to directed networks. Betweenness
centrality is also a good candidate in many applications as it is a measure of the num-

22

ber of shortest paths passing through one individual [139]. Thus, it is most likely that
individuals having high betweenness centrality will play key roles in shaping the diffusion dynamics on the networks. It is efficient but requires high computational resources.
Moreover, it is applicable for undirected networks. The K-core score present the positions
of individuals in the social networks with the k-index obtained by iteratively removing
k-degree nodes [140]. These networks measures are based on static networks and may
not provide optimal performance in dynamic contact networks.
The one way of finding influential nodes in dynamic contact networks is to use temporal versions of traditional centrality metrics [133, 134]. In this work, time respecting
paths, paths are created based on the time order of links availability, are used to calculate
the betweenness centrality and closeness centrality. Eigenvector centrality is also modified for dynamic networks [141]. These methods require complete information regarding
contact networks. The random walk is applied in [142] for measuring temporal centrality. This does not require global information. However, all these algorithms require huge
computational resources. The temporal centrality measurement is in the early stage and
is not still feasible for applying in large social contact networks.
Applicability of these methods depends on the application scenarios. For example,
betweenness centrality can be applied to find the influential individuals in online social
contact networks as the contact information often is available [132, 143].

5.2

Disease spread control

It is difficult to apply the above approaches for controlling disease spreading as it is quite
difficult to collect contact information of a population. The vaccination strategies are
required to be developed based on the contact information that can be obtained locally.
The key task of a vaccination strategy is to choose a set of individuals based on the
local contact information. The simplest way of selecting a set of individuals is to choose
randomly from the population and is called random vaccination [144, 145, 146]. This
approach does not consider the disease spreading behaviours of the chosen individuals.
Therefore, the information collection cost is minimal. However, it requires a large set of
individuals to be vaccinated for achieving hard immunity to disease. Thus, the research
is directed to select the individuals who have strong disease spreading potentials [147].
These methods are called targeted vaccination. In the targeted vaccination, the number
of individuals to be vaccinated is often small and the effectiveness of strategies is substantially high if an appropriate set of individuals are chosen. Therefore, the infection cost
can be substantially lower in a targeted vaccination strategy with the reasonable cost of
information collection and vaccination cost.
There has been a wide range of vaccination strategies using obtainable contact information [148, 149, 150, 151]. All these methods do not develop vaccination strategies based
23

on local contact information. Sometimes global information is also used and methods are
developed to find the global metrics with locally obtainable contact data. There have been
several other methods that depend on the movement behaviours of individuals instead
of collecting information on interactions between individuals. Vaccination strategies are
also varied based on the implementation scenarios. There are two specific vaccination scenarios: preventive vaccination (pre-outbreak) and reactive vaccination (post-outbreak).
The vaccination strategies that apply local contact information is now first discussed.
Then, the implementation of vaccination strategies is discussed. As examining vaccination strategies in the real-world scenarios are expensive and difficult, empirical contact
networks or synthetic contact networks are frequently applied to test and validate developed vaccination strategies. The discussion includes the network model based vaccination
strategies.
The authors of [145, 149] present an elegant way of implementing vaccination using local contact information called acquaintance vaccination (AV). According to this
strategy, a randomly picked node is asked to name a neighbour node to be vaccinated.
Therefore, no knowledge of the node degrees and any other global information of network are required. In fact, it selects the node that has a large number of connection to
other nodes. Its efficiency greatly exceeds that of random vaccination. The acquaintance
method is also improved in few other ways. Instead of vaccinating random acquaintance,
it is more effective to vaccinate the acquaintance who has more frequent contact [148].
That means the selected individual should be asked to name friends who contact frequently. This method substantially improves the efficiency of AV strategy. The works of
[152, 153, 154] have shown that if neighbour nodes with many connections are vaccinated
then the performances are improved significantly.
The acquaintance based strategies still require a large number of individuals to be
vaccinated to achieve control goal. Thus, there have been a fair amount of works to
search for other contact properties that can be obtained locally. The analysis of social
contact networks shows that individuals are connected to various communities [155, 156].
These properties of the contact network are exploited by several works where the concept
of the bridge nodes is introduced as these nodes provide the pathways for a disease
to propagate from one community to another community. Therefore, vaccinating such
nodes will be a more effective strategy than of selecting random acquaintance. However, it
requires the searching methods that use only the local contact information. The searching
algorithm developed by the work of [157] can find the bridge nodes using stochastic
searching methods that need only local structural information. They found that the
developed strategy based on these bridge nodes is more efficient than random strategies.
A similar approach is applied in [158] where bridge hub nodes, nodes bridging between
two communities, are chosen for vaccination.
The above vaccination strategies have been developed based on static network prop24

erties. However, the real-world social contact networks are dynamic which has a strong
impact on disease spreading and hence designing a vaccination strategy. The study [73]
shows that the contact rates between a pair of nodes are broadly distributed. Therefore,
the selection of an acquaintance in AV strategy is not sufficient to find the appropriate nodes to be vaccinated. For example, the infection risk for being in a contact with
an infected individual is relevant to the contact duration. Moreover, there is a higher
risk if one susceptible interacts frequently with the infected individual. The works of
[159, 160, 161] consider this information in neighbour selecting instead of selecting random neighbours. The authors of [159] use the most recent contact for vaccination and
they also apply weight to capture the contact rates with the neighbouring nodes. Theses
vaccination strategies outperform acquaintance vaccination.
The collection of contact information is often difficult. Thus, vaccination with detailed
local contact information may be infeasible in real-world scenarios and lose the benefit
of using the local contact information. There have been several other vaccination models
based on individual movement behaviours where individuals contact properties are not
consider explicitly [150]. Beyond the contact properties, the work of [162] consider the
individuals who travel long distance for vaccination. The similar approach is taken by
[163] where individuals who visit many locations are vaccinated.
The above vaccination strategies shows that node ranking is conducted based on the
contact information about neighbouring nodes. However, in the diffusion processes with
indirect interactions, it is difficult to identify the neighbours contacted through indirect
interactions. Thus, there is a need to understand the efficiency of strategies with indirect
interaction and find the best strategy. The authors of [102] addressed this issues to build
vaccination strategies with the indirect links.

6

Conclusion

For modelling disease spread within a society, a proper infection risk assessment model
and a proper contact network are required. This paper analysed a wide range of networks
models and infection risk models. There are simple infection risk assessment models that
capture practical situation through simple model parameters. The complex model can
capture the temporal dynamics of individual interactions and estimate more accurate
infection risk. But, it require granular level contact information which may not available
all time. In addition, it is observed that many factors affect the spreading dynamics of
contagious items on contact networks. However, it is clear that interaction pattern of
individuals is one of the key factors in driving diffusion processes on contact networks.
There have, therefore, been a wide range of efforts to understand and integrate the
impacts of interaction patterns with diffusion modelling [25, 24, 26, 164]. There are,
however, still some critical factors to be addressed in constructing proper diffusion models
25

that capture realistic contact patterns. In addition, current opportunities for gathering
individual-level contact data have attracted the researchers to deep dive further in this
field by looking at contact patterns at the granular level [165, 62, 5, 166, 101]. The
models presented in this paper would provide a guideline to model infectious disease like
COVID-19.

7

Introduction

References
[1] Matt J Keeling and Pejman Rohani. Modeling infectious diseases in humans and
animals. Princeton University Press, 2008.
[2] Thomas O Richardson and Thomas E Gorochowski. Beyond contact-based transmission networks: the role of spatial coincidence. Journal of The Royal Society
Interface, 12(111), 2015.
[3] Mike J Jeger, Marco Pautasso, Ottmar Holdenrieder, and Mike W Shaw. Modelling disease spread and control in networks: implications for plant sciences. New
Phytologist, 174(2):279–297, 2007.
[4] Robert Moss, Roslyn I Hickson, Jodie McVernon, James M McCaw, Krishna Hort,
Jim Black, John R Madden, Nhi H Tran, Emma S McBryde, and Nicholas Geard.
Model-informed risk assessment and decision making for an emerging infectious
disease in the asia-pacific region. PLoS neglected tropical diseases, 10(9), 2016.
[5] Chunlin Huang, Xingwu Liu, Shiwei Sun, Shuai Cheng Li, Minghua Deng,
Guangxue He, Haicang Zhang, Chao Wang, Yang Zhou, Yanlin Zhao, et al. Insights into the transmission of respiratory infectious diseases through empirical
human contact networks. Scientific Reports, 6, 2016.
[6] Md Shahzamal, Raja Jurdak, Reza Arablouei, Minkyoung Kim, Kanchana Thilakarathna, and Bernard Mans. Airborne disease propagation on large scale social
contact networks. In Proceedings of the 2nd Int. Workshop on Social Sensing, pages
35–40. ACM, 2017.
[7] Minkyoung Kim, Dean Paini, and Raja Jurdak. Real-world diffusion dynamics
based on point process approaches: A review. Artificial Intelligence Review, pages
1–30, 2018.

26

[8] Md Shahzamal, Raja Jurdak, Bernard Mans, and Frank de Hoog. Indirect interactions influence contact network structure and diffusion dynamics. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1906.02405, 2019.
[9] Marta C González and Albert-László Barabási. Complex networks: From data to
models. Nature Physics, 3(4):224, 2007.
[10] Marta C Gonzalez, Cesar A Hidalgo, and Albert-Laszlo Barabasi. Understanding
individual human mobility patterns. nature, 453(7196):779, 2008.
[11] Marc Barthélemy, Alain Barrat, Romualdo Pastor-Satorras, and Alessandro Vespignani. Dynamical patterns of epidemic outbreaks in complex heterogeneous networks. Journal of theoretical biology, 235(2):275–288, 2005.
[12] Patrick Bryant and Arne Elofsson. Modelling the dispersion of sars-cov-2 on a
dynamic network graph. medRxiv, 2020.
[13] Marino Gatto, Enrico Bertuzzo, Lorenzo Mari, Stefano Miccoli, Luca Carraro, Renato Casagrandi, and Andrea Rinaldo. Spread and dynamics of the covid-19 epidemic in italy: Effects of emergency containment measures. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 117(19):10484–10491, 2020.
[14] Sheryl L Chang, Nathan Harding, Cameron Zachreson, Oliver M Cliff, and Mikhail
Prokopenko. Modelling transmission and control of the covid-19 pandemic in australia. Nature communications, 11(1):1–13, 2020.
[15] Theresa Kuchler, Dominic Russel, and Johannes Stroebel. The geographic spread of
covid-19 correlates with the structure of social networks as measured by facebook.
Journal of Urban Economics, page 103314, 2020.
[16] Stefan Thurner, Peter Klimek, and Rudolf Hanel. A network-based explanation of
why most covid-19 infection curves are linear. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences, 117(37):22684–22689, 2020.
[17] Nigel Meade and Towhidul Islam. Modelling and forecasting the diffusion of
innovation–a 25-year review. International Journal of forecasting, 22(3):519–545,
2006.
[18] Adrien Guille, Hakim Hacid, Cecile Favre, and Djamel A Zighed. Information
diffusion in online social networks: A survey. ACM Sigmod Record, 42(2):17–28,
2013.
[19] Romualdo Pastor-Satorras, Claudio Castellano, Piet Van Mieghem, and Alessandro
Vespignani. Epidemic processes in complex networks. Reviews of modern physics,
87(3):925, 2015.
27

[20] A. Barrat, Marc B., and A. V. Dynamical processes on complex networks. Cambridge university press, 2008.
[21] Roy M Anderson and Robert M May. Infectious diseases of humans: dynamics and
control. Oxford university press, 1992.
[22] Kenneth J Himmelstein. Compartmental models and their application. by keith
godfrey. academic press inc., 24–28 oval road, london nwi 7dx, england. 1983. 293
pp. 15.5× 23.5 price 50.00(32.00). Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 73(7):1018,
1984.
[23] Daniel Gruhl, Ramanathan Guha, David Liben-Nowell, and Andrew Tomkins. Information diffusion through blogspace. In Proceedings of the 13th international
conference on World Wide Web, pages 491–501. ACM, 2004.
[24] RT Mikolajczyk, MK Akmatov, S Rastin, and Mirjam Kretzschmar. Social contacts
of school children and the transmission of respiratory-spread pathogens. Epidemiology & Infection, 136(6):813–822, 2008.
[25] Joël Mossong, Niel Hens, Mark Jit, Philippe Beutels, Kari Auranen, Rafael Mikolajczyk, Marco Massari, Stefania Salmaso, Gianpaolo Scalia Tomba, Jacco Wallinga,
et al. Social contacts and mixing patterns relevant to the spread of infectious
diseases. PLoS medicine, 5(3):e74, 2008.
[26] Niel Hens, Nele Goeyvaerts, Marc Aerts, Ziv Shkedy, Pierre Van Damme, and
Philippe Beutels. Mining social mixing patterns for infectious disease models based
on a two-day population survey in belgium. BMC infectious diseases, 9(1):5, 2009.
[27] Helen J Wearing, Pejman Rohani, and Matt J Keeling. Appropriate models for the
management of infectious diseases. PLoS medicine, 2(7), 2005.
[28] Timo Smieszek. A mechanistic model of infection: why duration and intensity of
contacts should be included in models of disease spread. Theoretical Biology and
Medical Modelling, 6(1):25, 2009.
[29] Timo Smieszek, Lena Fiebig, and Roland W Scholz. Models of epidemics: when
contact repetition and clustering should be included. Theoretical biology and medical
modelling, 6(1):11, 2009.
[30] Patrick Rhomberg. On the parallelization of network diffusion models. 2017.
[31] James A Yorke, Herbert W Hethcote, and Annett Nold. Dynamics and control of
the transmission of gonorrhea. Sexually transmitted diseases, 5(2):51–56, 1978.

28

[32] Alun L Lloyd and Robert M May. Spatial heterogeneity in epidemic models. Journal
of theoretical biology, 179(1):1–11, 1996.
[33] Michael Pitcher, Ruth Bowness, Simon Dobson, and Stephen Gillespie. A networkbased metapopulation model to simulate a pulmonary tuberculosis infection. In
BOOK OF ABSTRACTS, page 61, 2017.
[34] Sophie Meakin, Mike Tildesley, Emma Davis, and Matt Keeling. A metapopulation
model for the 2018 ebola outbreak in equateur province in the democratic republic
of the congo. bioRxiv, 2018.
[35] James S Koopman. Mass-action and system analysis of infection transmission.
Ecological paradigms lost: routes of theory change, pages 143–155, 2005.
[36] Matt J Keeling. Extensions to mass-action mixing. Ecological paradigms lost: routes
of theory change. Elsevier, Burlington, MA, pages 107–142, 2005.
[37] Mark EJ Newman. Spread of epidemic disease on networks. Physical review E,
66(1), 2002.
[38] Matt J Keeling and Ken TD Eames. Networks and epidemic models. Journal of
the Royal Society Interface, 2(4):295–307, 2005.
[39] P. Holme. Modern temporal network theory: a colloquium. The European Physical
Journal B, 88(9):234, 2015.
[40] Hamed Seyed-Allaei, Ginestra Bianconi, and Matteo Marsili. Scale-free networks
with an exponent less than two. Physical Review E, 73(4):046113, 2006.
[41] Xiao Fan Wang and Guanrong Chen. Complex networks: small-world, scale-free
and beyond. IEEE circuits and systems magazine, 3(1):6–20, 2003.
[42] Rainer Hegselmann. Modeling social dynamics by cellular automata. Computer
modeling of social processes, pages 37–64, 1998.
[43] Rainer Hegselmann and Andreas Flache. Understanding complex social dynamics:
A plea for cellular automata based modelling. Journal of Artificial Societies and
Social Simulation, 1(3):1, 1998.
[44] Parongama Sen, Subinay Dasgupta, Arnab Chatterjee, PA Sreeram, G Mukherjee,
and SS Manna. Small-world properties of the indian railway network. Physical
Review E, 67(3), 2003.
[45] Tao Zhou, Gang Yan, and Bing-Hong Wang. Maximal planar networks with large
clustering coefficient and power-law degree distribution. Physical Review E, 71(4),
2005.
29

[46] Andrew Barbour and Denis Mollison. Epidemics and random graphs. In Stochastic
processes in epidemic theory, pages 86–89. Springer, 1990.
[47] Duncan J Watts and Steven H Strogatz.

Collective dynamics of ‘small-

world’networks. nature, 393(6684):440, 1998.
[48] Mark EJ Newman and Duncan J Watts. Renormalization group analysis of the
small-world network model. Physics Letters A, 263(4-6):341–346, 1999.
[49] Réka Albert and Albert-László Barabási. Statistical mechanics of complex networks. Reviews of modern physics, 74(1):47, 2002.
[50] Lada A Adamic, Rajan M Lukose, Amit R Puniyani, and Bernardo A Huberman.
Search in power-law networks. Physical review E, 64(4), 2001.
[51] Aaron Clauset, Cosma Rohilla Shalizi, and Mark EJ Newman. Power-law distributions in empirical data. SIAM review, 51(4):661–703, 2009.
[52] Martina Morris. Network epidemiology: A handbook for survey design and data
collection. Oxford University Press on Demand, 2004.
[53] Jukka-Pekka Onnela, Jari Saramäki, Jörkki Hyvönen, Gábor Szabó, M Argollo
De Menezes, Kimmo Kaski, Albert-László Barabási, and János Kertész. Analysis
of a large-scale weighted network of one-to-one human communication. New journal
of physics, 9(6):179, 2007.
[54] Christel Kamp, Mathieu Moslonka-Lefebvre, and Samuel Alizon. Epidemic spread
on weighted networks. PLoS computational biology, 9(12), 2013.
[55] Xiangwei Chu, Jihong Guan, Zhongzhi Zhang, and Shuigeng Zhou. Epidemic
spreading in weighted scale-free networks with community structure. Journal of
Statistical Mechanics: Theory and Experiment, 2009(07):P07043, 2009.
[56] Renaud Lambiotte, Lionel Tabourier, and Jean-Charles Delvenne. Burstiness and
spreading on temporal networks. The European Physical Journal B, 86(7):320,
2013.
[57] N. Perra, B. Gonçalves, R. Pastor-Satorras, and A. Vespignani. Activity driven
modeling of time varying networks. Scientific reports, 2, 2012.
[58] Md Shahzamal, Raja Jurdak, Bernard Mans, and Frank de Hoog. A graph model
with indirect co-location links. arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.03386, 2018.
[59] Eugenio Valdano, Luca Ferreri, Chiara Poletto, and Vittoria Colizza. Analytical
computation of the epidemic threshold on temporal networks. Physical Review X,
5(2), 2015.
30

[60] S. Bansal, Bryan T G., and Lauren A. M. When individual behaviour matters:
homogeneous and network models in epidemiology. Journal of the Royal Society
Interface, 4(16):879–891, 2007.
[61] Simon Cauchemez, Alain-Jacques Valleron, Pierre-Yves Boelle, Antoine Flahault,
and Neil M Ferguson. Estimating the impact of school closure on influenza transmission from sentinel data. Nature, 452(7188):750, 2008.
[62] Juliette Stehlé, Nicolas Voirin, Alain Barrat, Ciro Cattuto, Vittoria Colizza,
Lorenzo Isella, Corinne Régis, Jean-François Pinton, Nagham Khanafer, Wouter
Van den Broeck, et al. Simulation of an seir infectious disease model on the dynamic contact network of conference attendees. BMC medicine, 9(1):87, 2011.
[63] Damon JA Toth, Molly Leecaster, Warren BP Pettey, Adi V Gundlapalli,
Hongjiang Gao, Jeanette J Rainey, Amra Uzicanin, and Matthew H Samore. The
role of heterogeneity in contact timing and duration in network models of influenza
spread in schools. Journal of The Royal Society Interface, 12(108):20150279, 2015.
[64] John H Holland. Studying complex adaptive systems. Journal of systems science
and complexity, 19(1):1–8, 2006.
[65] Elmar Kiesling, Markus Günther, Christian Stummer, and Lea M Wakolbinger.
Agent-based simulation of innovation diffusion: a review. Central European Journal
of Operations Research, 20(2):183–230, 2012.
[66] Kirsten A Copren and NL Geard. An individual based model examining the emergence of cooperative recognition in a social insect. Sociobiology, 46(2):349–361,
2005.
[67] Zhijing Xu, Kathryn Glass, Colleen L Lau, Nicholas Geard, Patricia Graves, and
Archie Clements. A synthetic population for modelling the dynamics of infectious
disease transmission in american samoa. Scientific reports, 7(1), 2017.
[68] Christian Stummer, Elmar Kiesling, Markus Günther, and Rudolf Vetschera. Innovation diffusion of repeat purchase products in a competitive market: an agentbased simulation approach. European Journal of Operational Research, 245(1):157–
167, 2015.
[69] Anna Machens, Francesco Gesualdo, Caterina Rizzo, Alberto E Tozzi, Alain Barrat,
and Ciro Cattuto. An infectious disease model on empirical networks of human
contact: bridging the gap between dynamic network data and contact matrices.
BMC infectious diseases, 13(1):185, 2013.

31

[70] Y. Zhang, Jing C., Shu-Min Z., Qi Z., and X. L. Modelling temporal networks of
human face-to-face contacts with public activity and individual reachability. The
European Physical Journal B, 89(2):26, 2016.
[71] Michele Starnini, Andrea Baronchelli, and Romualdo Pastor-Satorras.

Model-

ing human dynamics of face-to-face interaction networks. Physical review letters,
110(16):168701, 2013.
[72] G. Laurent, Jari S.äki, and Márton Karsai. From calls to communities: a model
for time-varying social networks. The European Physical Journal B, 88, 2015.
[73] Rossana Mastrandrea, Julie Fournet, and Alain Barrat. Contact patterns in a high
school: a comparison between data collected using wearable sensors, contact diaries
and friendship surveys. PloS one, 10(9):e0136497, 2015.
[74] Kyu-Min Lee, Byungjoon Min, and Kwang-Il Goh. Towards real-world complexity:
an introduction to multiplex networks. The European Physical Journal B, 88(2):48,
2015.
[75] Mikko Kivelä, Alex Arenas, Marc Barthelemy, James P Gleeson, Yamir Moreno,
and Mason A Porter. Multilayer networks. Journal of complex networks, 2(3):203–
271, 2014.
[76] Benjamin Bach, Emmanuel Pietriga, and Jean-Daniel Fekete. Visualizing dense
dynamic networks with matrix cubes. In IEEE Conference on Information Visualization [Poster], 2013.
[77] Petter Holme. Epidemiologically optimal static networks from temporal network
data. PLoS computational biology, 9(7):e1003142, 2013.
[78] Marta Sarzynska, Elizabeth A Leicht, Gerardo Chowell, and Mason A Porter. Null
models for community detection in spatially embedded, temporal networks. Journal
of Complex Networks, 4(3):363–406, 2015.
[79] Othon Michail. An introduction to temporal graphs: An algorithmic perspective.
Internet Mathematics, 12(4):239–280, 2016.
[80] Alice Albano, Jean-Loup Guillaume, Sébastien Heymann, and Bénédicte Le Grand.
A matter of time-intrinsic or extrinsic-for diffusion in evolving complex networks.
In Proceedings of the 2013 IEEE/ACM International Conference on Advances in
Social Networks Analysis and Mining, pages 202–206. ACM, 2013.
[81] Peng Wang, Ken Sharpe, Garry L Robins, and Philippa E Pattison. Exponential
random graph (p∗) models for affiliation networks. Social Networks, 31(1):12–25,
2009.
32

[82] Steve Hanneke, Wenjie Fu, Eric P Xing, et al. Discrete temporal models of social
networks. Electronic Journal of Statistics, 4:585–605, 2010.
[83] Pavel N Krivitsky. Modeling of dynamic networks based on egocentric data with
durational information.
[84] Tom AB Snijders. Statistical models for social networks. Annual review of sociology,
37:131–153, 2011.
[85] Yoon-Sik Cho, Aram Galstyan, P Jeffrey Brantingham, and George Tita. Latent
self-exciting point process model for spatial-temporal networks. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1302.2671, 2013.
[86] Naoki Masuda, Taro Takaguchi, Nobuo Sato, and Kazuo Yano. Self-exciting point
process modeling of conversation event sequences. In Temporal Networks, pages
245–264. Springer, 2013.
[87] Christoph Stadtfeld, James Hollway, and Per Block. Dynamic network actor models: Investigating coordination ties through time. Sociological Methodology, 47(1):1–
40, 2017.
[88] Alexander V Mantzaris and Desmond J Higham. A model for dynamic communicators. European Journal of Applied Mathematics, 23(6):659–668, 2012.
[89] Alessandro Rizzo and Maurizio Porfiri. Innovation diffusion on time-varying activity
driven networks. The European Physical Journal B, 89(1):20, 2016.
[90] Sergio Gómez, Jesús Gómez-Gardenes, Yamir Moreno, and Alex Arenas. Nonperturbative heterogeneous mean-field approach to epidemic spreading in complex
networks. Physical Review E, 84(3), 2011.
[91] Kaiyuan Sun, Andrea Baronchelli, and Nicola Perra. Contrasting effects of strong
ties on sir and sis processes in temporal networks. The European Physical Journal
B, 88(12):326, 2015.
[92] Márton Karsai, Nicola Perra, and Alessandro Vespignani. Time varying networks
and the weakness of strong ties. Scientific reports, 4, 2014.
[93] Enrico Ubaldi, Alessandro Vezzani, Márton Karsai, Nicola Perra, and Raffaella
Burioni. Burstiness and tie activation strategies in time-varying social networks.
Scientific Reports, 7, 2017.
[94] Ginestra Bianconi, Richard K Darst, Jacopo Iacovacci, and Santo Fortunato. Triadic closure as a basic generating mechanism of communities in complex networks.
Physical Review E, 90(4), 2014.
33

[95] Simone Daminelli, Josephine Maria Thomas, Claudio Durán, and Carlo Vittorio
Cannistraci. Common neighbours and the local-community-paradigm for topological link prediction in bipartite networks. New Journal of Physics, 17(11), 2015.
[96] Juliette Stehlé, Alain Barrat, and Ginestra Bianconi. Dynamical and bursty interactions in social networks. Physical review E, 81(3), 2010.
[97] Enrico Ubaldi, Alessandro Vezzani, Márton Karsai, Nicola Perra, and Raffaella
Burioni. Burstiness and tie reinforcement in time varying social networks. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1607.08910, 2016.
[98] I. Pozzana, Kaiyuan S., and N. P. Epidemic spreading on activity-driven networks
with attractiveness. Physical Review E, 96(4), 2017.
[99] Aaron Fernstrom and Michael Goldblatt. Aerobiology and its role in the transmission of infectious diseases. Journal of pathogens, 2013, 2013.
[100] Stephanie A Boone and Charles P Gerba. Significance of fomites in the spread
of respiratory and enteric viral disease. Applied and Environmental Microbiology,
73(6):1687–1696, 2007.
[101] Md Shahzamal, Raja Jurdak, Bernard Mans, Ahmad El Shoghri, and Frank
De Hoog. Impact of indirect contacts in emerging infectious disease on social networks. In Pacific-Asia Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, pages
53–65. Springer, 2018.
[102] Md Shahzamal, Bernard Mans, Frank de Hoog, Dean Paini, and Raja Jurdak.
Vaccination strategies on dynamic networks with indirect transmission links and
limited contact information. Plos one, 15(11):e0241612, 2020.
[103] Erik Rottier and Margaret Ince. Controlling and preventing disease: the role of water and environmental sanitation interventions. WEDC, Loughborough University,
2003.
[104] Gabrielle Brankston, Leah Gitterman, Zahir Hirji, Camille Lemieux, and Michael
Gardam. Transmission of influenza a in human beings. The Lancet infectious
diseases, 7(4):257–265, 2007.
[105] S. T Stoddard, Amy C M., Gonzalo M V., Valerie P. S., Tadeusz J K., Uriel K.,
John P E., and Thomas W S. The role of human movement in the transmission of
vector-borne pathogens. PLoS neglected tropical diseases, 3(7), 2009.
[106] Marnie L Brennan, R Kemp, and Robert M Christley. Direct and indirect contacts
between cattle farms in north-west england. Preventive veterinary medicine, 84(34):242–260, 2008.
34

[107] Martin Lange, Stephanie Kramer-Schadt, and Hans-Hermann Thulke. Relevance
of indirect transmission for wildlife disease surveillance. Frontiers in veterinary
science, 3:110, 2016.
[108] William G Lindsley, Terri A Pearce, Judith B Hudnall, Kristina A Davis, Stephen M
Davis, Melanie A Fisher, Rashida Khakoo, Jan E Palmer, Karen E Clark, Ismail
Celik, et al. Quantity and size distribution of cough-generated aerosol particles
produced by influenza patients during and after illness. Journal of occupational
and environmental hygiene, 9(7):443–449, 2012.
[109] Robert G Loudon and Linda C Brown. Cough frequency in patients with respiratory
disease 1, 2. American Review of Respiratory Disease, 96(6):1137–1143, 1967.
[110] Richard James Thomas. Particle size and pathogenicity in the respiratory tract.
Virulence, 4(8):847–858, 2013.
[111] WG Lindsley, FM Blachere, RE Thewlis, A Vishnu, KA Davis, et al. Measurements
of airborne influenza virus in aerosol particles from human. 2010.
[112] William G Lindsley, John D Noti, Francoise M Blachere, Robert E Thewlis,
Stephen B Martin, Sreekumar Othumpangat, Bahar Noorbakhsh, William T Goldsmith, Abhishek Vishnu, Jan E Palmer, et al. Viable influenza a virus in airborne
particles from human coughs. Journal of occupational and environmental hygiene,
12(2):107–113, 2015.
[113] Nikolai Nikitin, Ekaterina Petrova, Ekaterina Trifonova, and Olga Karpova. Influenza virus aerosols in the air and their infectiousness. Advances in virology,
2014, 2014.
[114] Gerone PJ Alford RH, Kasel JA and Knight V.

Human influenza resulting

from aerosol inhalation. Proceedings of the Society for Experimental Biology and
Medicine, 122(3):800–804, 1966.
[115] Zhuyang Han, Wenguo Weng, Quanyi Huang, and Shaobo Zhong. A risk estimation
method for airborne infectious diseases based on aerosol transmission in indoor
environment. In Proceedings of the World Congress on Engineering, volume 2,
2014.
[116] Ignatius TS Yu, Yuguo Li, Tze Wai Wong, Wilson Tam, Andy T Chan, Joseph HW
Lee, Dennis YC Leung, and Tommy Ho. Evidence of airborne transmission of
the severe acute respiratory syndrome virus. New England Journal of Medicine,
350(17):1731–1739, 2004.

35

[117] Jiachen Mao and Naiping Gao. The airborne transmission of infection between flats
in high-rise residential buildings: A review. Building and Environment, 94:516–531,
2015.
[118] NP Gao, JL Niu, Marco Perino, and Per Heiselberg. The airborne transmission
of infection between flats in high-rise residential buildings: tracer gas simulation.
Building and Environment, 43(11):1805–1817, 2008.
[119] CB Beggs. The airborne transmission of infection in hospital buildings: fact or
fiction? Indoor and Built Environment, 12(1-2):9–18, 2003.
[120] Cesar A Corzo, Marie Culhane, Scott Dee, Robert B Morrison, and Montserrat
Torremorell. Airborne detection and quantification of swine influenza a virus in air
samples collected inside, outside and downwind from swine barns. PLoS One, 8(8),
2013.
[121] GN Sze To and CYH Chao. Review and comparison between the wells–riley and
dose-response approaches to risk assessment of infectious respiratory diseases. Indoor Air, 20(1):2–16, 2010.
[122] Kevin P Fennelly and Edward A Nardell. The relative efficacy of respirators and
room ventilation in preventing occupational tuberculosis. Infection Control & Hospital Epidemiology, 19(10):754–759, 1998.
[123] William W Nazaroff, Mark Nicas, and Shelly L Miller. Framework for evaluating
measures to control nosocomial tuberculosis transmission. Indoor Air, 8(4):205–218,
1998.
[124] Laura Gammaitoni and Maria Clara Nucci. Using a mathematical model to evaluate
the efficacy of tb control measures. Emerging infectious diseases, 3(3):335, 1997.
[125] SN Rudnick and DK Milton. Risk of indoor airborne infection transmission estimated from carbon dioxide concentration. Indoor air, 13(3):237–245, 2003.
[126] Yun-Chun Tung and Shih-Cheng Hu. Infection risk of indoor airborne transmission
of diseases in multiple spaces. Architectural Science Review, 51(1):14–20, 2008.
[127] Mark Nicas. An analytical framework for relating dose, risk, and incidence: an
application to occupational tuberculosis infection. Risk Analysis, 16(4):527–538,
1996.
[128] Chacha M Issarow, Nicola Mulder, and Robin Wood. Modelling the risk of airborne
infectious disease using exhaled air. Journal of theoretical biology, 372:100–106,
2015.
36

[129] Christophe Van den Bulte and Yogesh V Joshi. New product diffusion with influentials and imitators. Marketing science, 26(3):400–421, 2007.
[130] Renana Peres, Eitan Muller, and Vijay Mahajan. Innovation diffusion and new
product growth models: A critical review and research directions. International
journal of research in marketing, 27(2):91–106, 2010.
[131] Lu-Xing Yang, Moez Draief, and Xiaofan Yang. The optimal dynamic immunization
under a controlled heterogeneous node-based sirs model. Physica A: Statistical
Mechanics and its Applications, 450:403–415, 2016.
[132] Mohammed Ali Al-Garadi, Kasturi Dewi Varathan, Sri Devi Ravana, Ejaz Ahmed,
Ghulam Mujtaba, Muhammad Usman Shahid Khan, and Samee U Khan. Analysis
of online social network connections for identification of influential users: Survey
and open research issues. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), 51(1):16, 2018.
[133] I. Scholtes, Nicolas W., and A. G. Higher-order aggregate networks in the analysis
of temporal networks: path structures and centralities. The European Physical
Journal B, 89(3):61, 2016.
[134] Miray Kas, Matthew Wachs, Kathleen M Carley, and L Richard Carley. Incremental
algorithm for updating betweenness centrality in dynamically growing networks. In
Proceedings of the 2013 IEEE/ACM international conference on advances in social
networks analysis and mining, pages 33–40. ACM, 2013.
[135] Jing Ma, Dandan Li, and Zihao Tian. Rumor spreading in online social networks
by considering the bipolar social reinforcement. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics
and its Applications, 447:108–115, 2016.
[136] Jing Ma and He Zhu. Rumor diffusion in heterogeneous networks by considering the
individuals’ subjective judgment and diverse characteristics. Physica A: Statistical
Mechanics and its Applications, 499:276–287, 2018.
[137] Réka Albert, Hawoong Jeong, and Albert-László Barabási. Error and attack tolerance of complex networks. nature, 406(6794):378, 2000.
[138] Sergey Brin and Lawrence Page. The anatomy of a large-scale hypertextual web
search engine. Computer networks and ISDN systems, 30(1-7):107–117, 1998.
[139] Linton C Freeman. Centrality in social networks conceptual clarification. Social
networks, 1(3):215–239, 1978.
[140] Stefan Wuchty and Eivind Almaas. Evolutionary cores of domain co-occurrence
networks. BMC evolutionary biology, 5(1):24, 2005.
37

[141] Dane Taylor, Sean A Myers, Aaron Clauset, Mason A Porter, and Peter J Mucha.
Eigenvector-based centrality measures for temporal networks. Multiscale Modeling
& Simulation, 15(1):537–574, 2017.
[142] Luis EC Rocha and Naoki Masuda. Random walk centrality for temporal networks.
New Journal of Physics, 16(6), 2014.
[143] Mark EJ Newman. A measure of betweenness centrality based on random walks.
Social networks, 27(1):39–54, 2005.
[144] Nilly Madar, Tomer Kalisky, Reuven Cohen, Daniel Ben-avraham, and Shlomo
Havlin. Immunization and epidemic dynamics in complex networks. The European
Physical Journal B, 38(2):269–276, 2004.
[145] Reuven Cohen, Shlomo Havlin, and Daniel Ben-Avraham. Efficient immunization strategies for computer networks and populations. Physical review letters,
91(24):247901, 2003.
[146] Marc Lelarge. Efficient control of epidemics over random networks. ACM SIGMETRICS Performance Evaluation Review, 37(1):1–12, 2009.
[147] Romualdo Pastor-Satorras and Alessandro Vespignani. Immunization of complex
networks. Physical review E, 65(3):036104, 2002.
[148] Maria Deijfen. Epidemics and vaccination on weighted graphs. Mathematical biosciences, 232(1):57–65, 2011.
[149] Tom Britton, Svante Janson, and Anders Martin-Löf. Graphs with specified degree distributions, simple epidemics, and local vaccination strategies. Advances in
Applied Probability, 39(4):922–948, 2007.
[150] Liang Mao and Ling Bian. Efficient vaccination strategies in a social network with
individual mobility. UCGIS 2009 Summer Assembly, 2009.
[151] Adam J Kucharski, Timothy W Russell, Charlie Diamond, Yang Liu, John Edmunds, Sebastian Funk, Rosalind M Eggo, Fiona Sun, Mark Jit, James D Munday,
et al. Early dynamics of transmission and control of covid-19: a mathematical
modelling study. The lancet infectious diseases, 20(5):553–558, 2020.
[152] Petter Holme. Efficient local strategies for vaccination and network attack. EPL
(Europhysics Letters), 68(6):908, 2004.
[153] Li Chen and Dongyi Wang. An improved acquaintance immunization strategy for
complex network. Journal of theoretical biology, 385:58–65, 2015.
38

[154] Lazaros K Gallos, Fredrik Liljeros, Panos Argyrakis, Armin Bunde, and Shlomo
Havlin. Improving immunization strategies. Physical Review E, 75(4):045104, 2007.
[155] Michelle Girvan and Mark EJ Newman. Community structure in social and biological networks. Proceedings of the national academy of sciences, 99(12):7821–7826,
2002.
[156] Roger Guimera, Leon Danon, Albert Diaz-Guilera, Francesc Giralt, and Alex Arenas. Self-similar community structure in a network of human interactions. Physical
review E, 68(6):065103, 2003.
[157] Kai Gong, Ming Tang, Pak Ming Hui, Hai Feng Zhang, Do Younghae, and YingCheng Lai. An efficient immunization strategy for community networks. PloS one,
8(12):e83489, 2013.
[158] Marcel Salathé and James H Jones. Dynamics and control of diseases in networks
with community structure. PLoS computational biology, 6(4):e1000736, 2010.
[159] Sungmin Lee, Luis EC Rocha, Fredrik Liljeros, and Petter Holme. Exploiting temporal network structures of human interaction to effectively immunize populations.
PloS one, 7(5):e36439, 2012.
[160] Michele Starnini, Anna Machens, Ciro Cattuto, Alain Barrat, and Romualdo
Pastor-Satorras. Immunization strategies for epidemic processes in time-varying
contact networks. Journal of theoretical biology, 337:89–100, 2013.
[161] Naoki Masuda and Petter Holme. Predicting and controlling infectious disease
epidemics using temporal networks. F1000prime reports, 5, 2013.
[162] Liang Mao and Ling Bian. A dynamic network with individual mobility for designing vaccination strategies. Transactions in GIS, 14(4):533–545, 2010.
[163] Joel C Miller and James M Hyman. Effective vaccination strategies for realistic
social networks. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications, 386(2):780–
785, 2007.
[164] José Luis Iribarren and Esteban Moro. Impact of human activity patterns on the
dynamics of information diffusion. Physical review letters, 103(3):038702, 2009.
[165] Michele Starnini. Time-varying networks approach to social dynamics: from individual to collective behavior. PhD thesis, Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya,
2014.

39

[166] Andrew J Tatem, Zhuojie Huang, Clothilde Narib, Udayan Kumar, Deepika Kandula, Deepa K Pindolia, David L Smith, Justin M Cohen, Bonita Graupe, Petrina
Uusiku, et al. Integrating rapid risk mapping and mobile phone call record data
for strategic malaria elimination planning. Malaria journal, 13(1):52, 2014.

40

