A transition of shared mobility in metro cities– a
challenge post Covid-19 lockdown

arXiv:2102.00962v1 [physics.soc-ph] 13 Dec 2020

Mohd Aman and Bushra Miftah

Abstract This chapter is written for the welfare of the society, questioning and
enlightening the effects of the increment or decrement in the percentage of quality
of air causing pollution due to the rise in the traffic post-lockdown due to COVID19 in metro cities, specifically in Delhi. In this chapter, we address the question
about people’s preference in moving in the shared taxis to their workplaces or their
reluctance and denial of the idea of moving in the shared vehicle because of the
fear of getting infected. The sensitivity of the situation will compel the people to
move in a single occupied vehicle (SOV). The rise in the number of vehicles on
the roads will result in traffic jams and different kinds of pollution where people
battling with the pandemic will inevitably get exposed to other health-related issues.
We use a BPR (Bureau of Public Roads) model to combat this issue endangering the
environment and public health. We exploit the BPR function to relate average travel
time to the estimated number of commuters travelling by car. We collect mode share
data from the NITI Ayog, the State Resource Centre and other authentic sources,
which gives unique figures of the impact of shared mobility in India and how, in
its absence, various sectors will get affected. Using the given data and the BPR, we
evaluate increased vehicle volumes on the road if different portions of transit and
carpool users switch to single-occupancy vehicles and its effect on multiple other
factors. Based on the study of densely populated city, Delhi, we predict that cities
with significant transit ridership are at risk for extreme traffic and pollution unless
transit systems can resume safe with effective protocols.

Mohd Aman
Department of Applied Mathematics, Faculty of Engineering and Technology, Aligarh Muslim
University, Aligarh 202002, India, e-mail: mohdaman.maths@gmail.com
Bushra Miftah
Department of English, Faculty of Arts, Aligarh Muslim University, Aligarh 202002, India, e-mail:
bushramiftah.in@gmail.com

1

2

Mohd Aman and Bushra Miftah

1 Introduction
The 21st century saw the emergence of a newly found coronavirus, also known as
the SARS (Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome) COV–2 in the Wuhan city of China.
Unaware of the cause of transmission to the human body, the deadly virus which had
been declared Public Health Emergency of International Concern by WHO earlier
this year has been contracted by more than one crore population across the globe
causing more than 1 lakh fatalities bringing the entire world to a standstill.
India, which holds a population of more than 130 crores has been severely affected
by the newly found virus. However, to curb the same India went under what is known
as the strictest lockdown on March 22, 2020. The stay-at-home orders had a drastic
effect on the life of every common man. It caused a direct impact on the usage of the
transport system. As the stay-at-home order took effect, ridership data show steep
decline in both transit ridership and vehicular traffic.
According to the data collected in from NITI Ayog [1, 2], a State-Resource-Centre
of Government of India established with the aim to achieve sustainable development
goals in the economic policy-making process; there was an usurp growth in the
vehicle ownership and transportation in the last few years which led to overcrowding
and unsorted situation that resulted in the loss of 1.42 lakh crore INR annually
alone in the cities of Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata and Bangalore. It has had severe and
adverse implications on the health and environment. The increment in the number
of vehicles had severely affected India’s energy consumption, energy security and
economy, pollution, congestion, health and safety. The graphs in Fig. 1 and 2 depicts
a more detailed picture of the congestion and its cost across metro cities.

Fig. 1 Cost of congestion across cities (2017) in USD Billion

A transition of shared mobility in metro cities– a challenge post Covid-19 lockdown

3

Fig. 2 Road congestion during peak hours before vs. after rideshare (2017)

The transportation sector in India accounts for 18% of commercial energy consumption and is highly dependent on oil imports. India imported 80% of its oil
at the cost of Rs. 4.2 lakh crore in recent years. Additionally, private vehicle use
has significant implications on land requirement for parking: in Delhi, for example,
parking accounts for 8–10% of the available land pool.
There is a direct effect of ridesharing practice on space. The figure 3 gives the
idea of estimated space that could be saved by switching to rideshare from private
vehicles in big cities in 2017.

Fig. 3 Estimated space that can be saved by adopting rideshare assuming rideshare substitutes for
private cars (2017)

4

Mohd Aman and Bushra Miftah

Weighing the seriousness of the situation, it is deducted that with the complete
unlocking of the lockdown, there will be a drastic mode shift of transportation to
SOV (Single Occupied Vehicles).
Definitely, there will be a massive change in the traffic volume caused due to a
sudden drop in transit usage and its impact on the commute time on the road. With
the collected data from verified sources, we estimate the number of cars on the road
if certain proportions of commuters switch from transit and carpool modes to Single
Occupancy Vehicle (SOV), thus increasing the total number of vehicles on the road
and the average travel time. The total traffic volume is therefore taken as the number
of vehicles commuting from this mode. This data when applied on the BPR model
[3, 4, 5, 6] to calculate the traffic volume and average traffic time give us an idea of
the travel time in a condition when there is a decrease or the increase in the number
of vehicles on the road.
Several researchers have carried out studies trying to model the congested traffic
in the urban network for different countries across the globe. For e.g., Saberi et
al. [7] use a susceptible-Infected-recovered (SIR) model to describe the spreading
of traffic jam. Colak et al. [8] use the ratio of road supply to travel demand as
a dimensionless factor to explain the percentage of time lost in congestion. The
macroscopic BPR model is studied by Wong et al. [9] and Kucharski and Drabicki
[10] to relate traffic demand and travel time. One or several cities or regions are
studied in the above works. Our research is specific to a densely populated Indian
metro city, Delhi with an exorbitant increase in the traffic. There is no work done
using the BPR analytical model on Indian metro cities which makes an inquiry with
regards to road management in Indian cities and make predictions for their travel
time under various scenarios of possible traffic volume. India accounts for top 15
most polluted cities in the world. The figure 4 gives the average travel time of four
highly congested metro cities in India in 2018.

Fig. 4 Travel Time of congested metro cities of India (2018)

A transition of shared mobility in metro cities– a challenge post Covid-19 lockdown

5

The major finding on the collected data throws light on the greater risk of high
transit cities of increased traffic so that system can resume safely without any complications.
The high transit metro cities are at a higher risk with potentially 4–30 minutes
additional commute travel time in a one-way trip. This unusual rise in road transport
which will result in a sudden increment in the number of vehicles will cause serious
health and environmental issues. This can be curbed, and the transit ridership can be
brought to normalcy with returns in trips by car, thereby bringing down the traffic.
The rest of the chapter deals with the introduction of the formulation of BPR
model, the introduction of data on traffic in metro cities of India, and show the
forecast result of traffic in different reopening scenarios.
Our main finding is that the high–transit cities are at greater risk for increased traffic volume unless their transit systems can resume safe, high throughput operations
quickly.

2 BPR model
A widely used impedance calculation model, the BPR (Bureau of Public Roads)
model [3, 4, 5, 6] states that traffic flow affects the traffic speed. The Bureau of
Public Roads is a federal agency created in 1918. Lodged in the US Department,
it has taken up much responsibility of building roads in national parks and forests,
assisted states with road construction, helped beautify highways, and conducted
various transportation studies.
The (Bureau of Public Roads) BPR function [3, 4] is a model that relates the
volume of traffic on the road to the travel time to traverse it. It has a great deal of
usage in transportation management [11, 12] and network traffic stimulation [13].
According to recent studies, apart from being applied on single–road traffic [9, 10],
it also has applicability on urban scale transportation analysis. A BPR function thus
provides us with a theoretical foundation of predicting metro area travel congestion
based on traffic volume.
The relationship between travel time and the volume (total no. of vehicles) can
be expressed by the classical BPR function in the following way:
"
 𝑏#
𝑁
,
(1)
T = T0 1 + 𝑎
𝐶
where, T is the travel time as a function of 𝑁 the volume on the roadway. The parameters T0 , 𝐶 are the free flow travel time and the practical road capacity respectively.
The shape parameters a and b can be fit or assumed to follow a common choice of
𝑎 = 0.15 and 𝑏 = 4.
In order to apply the function at the scale of a city, we interpret the BPR model as
a function that takes the total number of road users in a city 𝑁 as a proxy for volume

6

Mohd Aman and Bushra Miftah

and returns the average commute travel time T in the city. In this interpretation,
the capacity 𝐶 should be viewed as the total number of road users that can be
accommodated in the city before average travel time begins to increase. The average
travel time is overall users at all time of the day.
Rewriting (1), we have
"
 𝑏#
𝑁
,
(2)
T = T0 1 + 0.15
𝐶
or
T = T0 𝜇 + 𝑁.

(3)

The above equation clearly shows that the travel time T and the traffic volume 𝑁
have a linear relationship. The model parameters in (1) can be estimated using linear
regression. With the historic data from NITI Ayog and other sources [1, 2, 14, 15, 16],
we conduct a linear regresson on the data from 2012–2018 to find the coefficients T0
and 𝜇. This allows us to estimate the free-flow travel time T0 and the practical road
capacity


0.15 T
,
(4)
𝑐=
𝜇
for the metro city Delhi deriving from (2).

3 Data Analysis & Implementation
3.1 Data Description
The data used in the given equation has been derived mainly from NITI Ayog which
is a State-of-Art Resource Centre with in-demand knowledge and some other sources
as well [1, 2, 14, 15, 16]. Using the data, we can answer the following questions:
How many cars are on the road in each city?
What is the average travel time experienced by commuters in each city?
The data records means of transportation to work by selected characteristics. For
Delhi, annual statistics of a given time (2012–2018) is recorded including the total
number of road users for each commute mode (shared vehicles including public
transit, single-occupancy vehicles (SOV)), as well as the average commute time.

A transition of shared mobility in metro cities– a challenge post Covid-19 lockdown

2018

70
average travel times (minutes)

7

2017
2016

65

2015
60

2014

2013

55

2012
50

3.0 × 10 6

3.5 × 10 6

4.0 × 10 6

Number of vehicles

Fig. 5 Observed data of number of vehicles and average one way tavel time (Delhi) from 2012–2018

The road commute metrics are calculated with the help of raw data. The average
travel time of the four-wheelers is taken. The total number of vehicles is computed
by converting cars, jeeps, shared vehicles and buses into equivalent vehicles on the
road.
We have estimated the resulting vehicles on the road when 25%, 50%, 75% and
100% of commuters using shared vehicles switch to SOV.
We use the latest statistics from the 2018 data to estimate the number of vehicles
on the road. The data from 2018 to present can be considered in an extension and
is not taken into account in this analysis. We also note that the mode share data for
taxis and ride-hailing is mixed in with motorcycles, bike and others and we omit
the influence of taxis (not OLA, UBER, etc.) in this study, and do not count taxis in
the total number of vehicles. The table 1 gives the historical commute data of Delhi
from 2012 to 2018.
Table 1 Exploitation of Historical Data𝑎 & Data computed using BPR function (Delhi)
Year

No. of Vehicles

Avg. Travel
Time

Trave Time Ratio

2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018

2644520
2831460
3102442
3470526
3711060
3937104
4245760

51
54
59
61
65
67
70

1.007
1.067
1.165
1.205
1.284
1.324
1.383

𝑎

Capacity Ratio
0.807
0.864
0.946
1.059
1.132
1.201
1.295

Historical data collected from NITI Ayog & other reliable sources

8

Mohd Aman and Bushra Miftah

3.2 Model Application & Results
BPR Model
The linear regression applied to the historical data of Delhi gives us an estimate of
free-flow travel time and capacity. The figure 6 gives the regression line for better
understanding of the trend.

60
55

y

65

70

Scatterplot, lowess, and regression line

5.0e+25

1.0e+26

1.5e+26

2.0e+26

2.5e+26

3.0e+26

x

Fig. 6 Regression line and Scatter Plot for the Data of Delhi from 2012–2018

To understand the travel time, we study the traffic scenarios in different metro
cities. We show for the metro city Delhi, the increment in travel time follow the BPR
model as described in (2).
We deduce that the highly congested metro cities have a strong relationship
between traffic volume and travel time over the years.
For better insight, we see the drift in travel time by analysing the data of Delhi.
We show that for Delhi, travel time follow the BPR trend as mentioned in (2). The
cities that do not have a strong relationship between the volume of traffic and travel
time are excluded. The reasons for excluding can be an error in data collection or the
traffic volume not being the main factor for increase in travel time. We exclude these
cities in analysis as the traffic volume does not facilitate in predicting the commute
time. The exclusion is done based on some statistical analysis. We measure the
linear correlation between travel time T and the fourth-order of traffic volume 𝑁 4 ,
and calculate their Pearson’s correlation coefficient and two-tailed p-value. We filter

A transition of shared mobility in metro cities– a challenge post Covid-19 lockdown

9

out the metro areas where Pearson’s correlation coefficient is larger than 0.5, and
p-value is smaller than 0.1. On the basis of threshold, we predict that the analysis is
applicable to the cities including Delhi, Bangalore, Mumbai and Kolkata and some
other that are not included in the further analysis. The BPR model is then applied
to Delhi and other metro cities. We see that in Delhi, travel time increases with the
increase in the number of vehicles, nicely following the BPR function.
We can observe a similar trend in the other mentioned metro cities using the BPR
model, which gives us the estimated free-flow time and practical road capacity. Using
the estimated free-flow travel time and road capacity, we calculate two important
metrics for mentioned metro area:
• Travel time ratio: the ratio of actual travel time versus free flow travel time. A
travel time ratio of 1.1 means the current travel time is 1.1 time (or 10% higher)
than the empty road travel time.
• Capacity ratio: the ratio of traffic volume versus road capacity. A capacity ratio
of 1.1 means there are 10% more cars than the road capacity.
Travel time ratio and capacity ratio allows us to standardize each city, accounting for
the fact that larger cities tend to have larger capacities and longer commutes, even
when the roads are empty.

Travel Time Ratio

2.0

■

1.8
1.6

■
■
■

1.4

●
●

1.2
1.0 ●
0.8

●

●

●
●

1.0

1.2

1.4

1.6

Capacity Ratio
Fig. 7 Travel time Ratio vs. Capacity Ratio for Delhi under different scenarios.

Figure 7 shows the standardized relationship of travel time ratio and capacity ratio
of Delhi (Blue dots are historical data and yellow dots are prediction for 25%, 50%,
75% and 100% switch to SOV). We see that the city follows the same growing curve
when there is a decrease in the number of shared vehicles on the road. Essentially,
what we are doing in the standardization, is looking at the rate travel time ratio
increases with capacity ratio, then estimate where the city sits on the BPR curve.
For Delhi, there is an increase in travel time ratio with an increase in capacity ratio.

10

Mohd Aman and Bushra Miftah

This indicates that the traffic volume of Delhi is way above road capacity. The same
can be observed in Figure 7.

3.3 Prediction of Traffic Scenarios Post-Lockdown
For decades now, there has been a massive amount of pollutants in the atmosphere,
which is a cause of major concern. The air quality has however enormously improved
from hazardous to moderate during the lockdown imposed due to COVID-19.
A massive rise of pollutants is expected post-lockdown with increasing number
of vehicles on roads with commuters switching to SOV. A sudden drift in the number
of vehicles will cause an adverse effect on the traffic system. Although, a massive
decrement in the amount of pollutants in the atmosphere has been observed, which
was a cause of major concern pre-lockdown. It has been successfully reduced,
improving the air quality from hazardous to moderate.
According to the Air Quality Index, the unprecedented growth in the pollutants
in the atmosphere has caused not only environmental and health issues but a heavy
impact on the economy.
If we focus on the situation on the road traffic before lockdown, we see a high
level of congestion in four megacities in India, namely Delhi, Mumbai, Bangalore
and Kolkata where total congestion cost was estimated to be more than USD 22
billion per year. We can thus estimate the potential positive impact on ridesharing in
each city.
Delhi and Mumbai have been two mega urban centres with relatively more developed modern public transport system. The congestion levels remained high during
the pre-lockdown era due to high level of private vehicles in the city. With the burgeoning population and the growing prosperity of Delhi and Mumbai, the reliance
on cars has increased, adding more pressure to the road network.
Bangalore and Kolkata have a relatively smaller population; these two cities have
been more dependent on motorbikes and cars adding to huge ownership of private
vehicles causing intense congestion.
Government has urged the cities to maintain control over vehicle growth and
encourages the use of public transport as key objectives for going forward. A combination of infrastructure improvement, addition of more mass transit, as well as
efficient alternatives to vehicle ownership, will facilitate in curbing congestion.
It can be easily predicted that if commuters quickly return to road, the transit
users are more likely to switch to SOV. We have considered three scenarios namely
when 25%, 50%, 75% and 100% of the carpool and transit users switch to SOV.

A transition of shared mobility in metro cities– a challenge post Covid-19 lockdown

11

The assumed scenarios are created to show a range of possibilities of the mode shift
to SOV, which is highly likely post-lockdown in the country. It does not necessarily
predict the actual mode shift.
The predictions for Delhi under each of the four scenarios is shown in Figure 8.

Average travel time (minutes)

100

■

90

80

■
■
■

70

●
●
●
●

60

●
●

50

●

3.0 × 10 6

3.5 × 10 6

4.0 × 10 6

4.5 × 10 6

5.0 × 10 6

Number of vehicles

Fig. 8 Example of BPR travel time prediction for Delhi. The blue points are the observed data, and
the yellow points are the predictions when 25%, 50%, 75% and 100% of the carpool and transit
commuters switch to SOV.

The data plotted using the BPR model can be seen to be easily fitted along the
curve. We can determine from figure 8 that cities having more cars than the network
can handle (for e.g. Delhi here) are sensitive to the changes in the number of vehicles
on the road. A few minutes of increment in average travel time can make a huge
impact on the traffic network, if multiplied by the number of road users in the city
and this can result in thousands of additional hours time spent in traffic each day.
However, the rate of actual mode shift of transit and carpool users that will shift to
personal vehicles or SOV depends on a multitude of factors. They may be specific
of each traveller and each city, such as unemployment, cost of maintaining SOV,
remote work etc.
We are, however, not claiming that a specific percentage of users will switch to
Single Occupied Vehicles. The purpose of creation of the predicted scenarios is to
identify the cities which are more sensitive to changes in the number of cars on the
road post-lockdown in the country.

12

Mohd Aman and Bushra Miftah

4 India’s Transport Growth Journey and its Effect on Energy
and Environment
If we look at the present situation in India, there is an urgent need to conserve energy
and land, control pollution and “greenhouse gas emissions”, and to alleviate poverty.
Urban transport has been a major cause and a solution to combat these issues.
The need of the hour is planned urban mobility solutions where all categories of
road users are facing problems in commuting.
If we look at the scenario before the pandemic brought the world to a standstill the
increment in the number of vehicles on the road has caused problems to everybody,
the pedestrians do not get a safe, conflict-free and obstruction-free path to walk. The
cyclists have to fight for the space to cycle with fast moving motorized modes of
transport, many a time risking their lives. This is due to over-crowding of vehicles
reducing the area of parking, compelling people to park their vehicles out of the
allotted area.
The users of Shared Vehicles face long waiting periods, uncertainty in travel time
and difficult conditions of travel. The movement of personal motorized modes of
transport is slowed down by the slow-moving passenger and goods traffic and face
significant delays at traffic signals and road junctions. Road users get restless leading
to road rage, rash driving and accidents.
The use of desirable modes; walk, bicycle and PT is declining and the use of
undesirable modes, i.e. car and 2-wheelers are growing. As a result, congestion is
increasing, urban mobility as well as road safety are declining and, pollution, use of
fossil fuel and accidents are rising everyday.

4.1 Transport and Environment
The second largest consumer of energy in India is the Transport Sector. The unprecedented and haphazard growth of the transport has been a major cause of concern,
for it has not only increased pressure on the limited non-renewable energy resources
but has considerably increased environmental pollution.
Increasing car dependency in India, especially in the urban areas, is most visible
in vehicular emissions which cause air pollution, noise pollution, and corresponding
health effects. Increasing energy consumption, pollution, land intrusion and congestion are some of the areas that need urgent attention.
Transport planning is intrinsically linked to land use planning and both need to be
developed together in a manner that serves the entire population and yet minimizes
travel needs. An integrated master plan needs to internalize the features of sustainable
urban transport.
Rapid motorization of Indian cities has led to a public health crisis in the form
of increased traffic injuries and fatalities, exposure to air and noise pollution, and
decreased physical activity among many other adverse health and environmental
impacts.

A transition of shared mobility in metro cities– a challenge post Covid-19 lockdown

13

4.2 Health and Social Issues

Fig. 9 Effects of Road Transport on Growth. Source: ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4746948/

Adverse effects of increasingly car-based urban transport systems in India and other
emerging economies are most visible on the local level. Vehicle emissions such
as particulate matter, 𝑁𝑂 𝑥 or 𝑆𝑂 𝑥 pollute the atmosphere. Traffic noise act as a
hindrance in conversation and disturbs the sleep. Road accidents pose further risk
to the citizens’ health, affecting especially vulnerable groups such as pedestrians,
cyclists or children.
The transport sector has contributed significantly to the emissions of toxic substances into the atmosphere. High demand for used automobiles might have sufficed
and catered the need of the people, but it has made the situation worse for their
health. Every vehicle on the road adds to the harmful substance in the atmosphere.
Many surveys reveal that 45% of the respondents claimed that they have transportrelated diseases in the city. It is pertinent to note that 50% of the respondents
who claim that they have transport-related health challenges have eye problems,
approximately 16% has asthma and the same percentage has skin-burn diseases. In
addition, 8% and 5% of the patients claim that they have upper respiratory tract
infections and hypertension, respectively. Only 2% of respondents indicated that
they have hearing impairment resulting from unpleasant sounds emanating from
indiscriminate use of horns by motorists and record players.
The increase in air pollution has very serious health implications. Poor air quality
increases respiratory ailments like asthma and bronchitis, heightens the risk of
life-threatening conditions like cancer, and burdens our health care system with
substantial medical costs. Particulate matter is singlehandedly responsible for up to
30, 000 premature deaths each year.
It is impossible to reduce all environmental exposures to a level at which the risk
to human health is zero.

14

Mohd Aman and Bushra Miftah

4.3 Personal Vehicles and their Impact
Use of personal motorized vehicles and its significant contribution to air pollution,
greenhouse gas emissions, and fossil fuel consumption are well accepted. The main
reason for the increasing use of personal vehicles is the reluctance of the people to
travel in Public Transports (PTs) for the inefficiency in maintaining the quality of
the transport. Not until this situation was tackled that COVID-19 hit the country,
making the situation even worse where even a greater population will now switch to
a personal mode of commute, turning the whole situation gross.
Simultaneously, there is an urgent need to put a restraint on the use of personal
vehicles. Government of India is already supporting measures such as traffic-calmed
areas, pedestrianized areas, car limited zones, congestion pricing zones, no-emission
zones, high parking charges, park & ride facility and other economic instruments
to control the indiscriminate use of personal motorized modes. However, these may
not suffice in the current panic-like situation.
Increase in the number of PT wouldn’t suffice in such a situation of crisis. The
pandemic is more likely to force people to choose Private Vehicle Ownership for the
fear of infection, reducing their dependency on PTs.
AQI calculates the air pollutants and particulate matter, nitrogen oxide, Sulphur
dioxide, ozone, carbon monoxide etc. The ones that are of most concern is particulate
matter with a diameter of 2.5 and 10 microns. The PT of these sizes cannot be
removed and filtered from the body.
It is obvious that low-levels of air pollution reached during the lockdown have
considerably reduced the particulate matter in the atmosphere, thus reducing the
deaths to approximately six lakhs. Due to the restricted activities during the period
of lockdown, the particulate matter was reduced by 52% nationwide.
According to the Central government’s System of Air Quality and Weather Forecasting and Research, all the sources of pollution have decreased during the lockdown
period to a considerably lower level which has not been seen in the past four decades.
These changes are however temporary and once the lockdown is brought to
closure, the vehicles will increase at an alarming rate due to a sudden switch to
SOV or personal vehicles. A measure to save oneself from one deadly disease, i.e.
COVID-19 would push them to the risk of another.
This situation needs dire and urgent attention to the public transport in India is
not very developed and walkable and cycling environment needs to be promoted at
a larger scale. With lakhs of travel trips a day, cities without adequate measures to
tackle the situation will lock in an enormous amount of pollution and carbon.
There is a rise of 7-14 time more pollutants contributed by car or two-wheelers
than by buses in Delhi in every trip. There is a constant decline in the usage of the
buses in Delhi which is expected to witness even a steeper decline post lockdown.

A transition of shared mobility in metro cities– a challenge post Covid-19 lockdown

15

4.4 Measures to Curb the Traffic Upsurge
With the unlocking of the cities, there will be steep inclination in the people switching
to private mode of transport. The spread of the infectious disease can be easily
contracted in close proximity of the infected person therefore, people will keep off
from enclosed spaces especially the shared mode of transport.
Confined and crowded environment result in easy contraction of the disease which
might result in an outbreak. The restarting of the public transport with reduced
crowding is an issue of paramount importance.
The safety measures should be incorporated in such a manner to protect commuters and on-board staff. Proper and regular sanitization of public transport with
proper distancing might serve as a boon.
Several other ways are being discussed by the government keeping in view the
welfare of the society.

Conclusion
After performing the experiment with the help of the given data, it is observed that
the increase in the average travel time is only by few minutes. This may appear as
a minimal change but the delay takes place in each trip. To understand the actual
time-lapse if it is multiplied by the total number of travellers in the city, even a
minute of change will result in thousands of additional hours in the traffic.
The data on road commute mode and travel time in different cities has been
accumulated from the verified sources such as State-Resource-Centre, NITI Aayog
and Transport Sector of India.
A BPR model is further used to establish a relation between the average travel
time to the estimated number of commuters travelling by car. The resulting travel
time is thus deduced using the BPR model by estimating the number of cars on the
road wherein the transit and carpool users switch to single-occupancy vehicles.
Therefore, it can be concluded that
• When the number of vehicles is more than the capacity of the road. The increasing
cars are inimical to everyone’s commute. This is calculated and analyzed using
the BPR model.
• COVID-19 brought serious implication in the mode shift of traffic. The imposition
of lockdown throughout the country resulted in deserted roads thereby decreasing
the pollution. With the reopening traffic will eventually spring back. If transit
ridership does not return, travel time will increase, sometimes dramatically.
• A possible increase in travel time per trip is of 5-20 minutes in high-transit cities,
which add up to several hundreds of thousands of hours of travel time each day.

16

Mohd Aman and Bushra Miftah

• These discordant and erratic increases are avoidable, if transit ridership resumes
in accordance with car traffic.

A transition of shared mobility in metro cities– a challenge post Covid-19 lockdown

17

Acknowledgements The authors are thankful to Government of India and their respective bodies
for putting up important data related to urban transport which was the main source of data for the
analysis.

References
1. Transforming India’s Mobility–a Perspective. NITI Aayog and Boston Consulting Group
(BCG). 2018
2. Bhandari, A., Juyal, S., Maini, H., Saxena, A., Srivastava, A.:Moving forward together–
enabling shared mobility in India. NITI Aayog, Global Mobility Submit. 2018
3. Bureau of Public Roads. Traffic assignment manual. U.S. Department of Commerce, Urban
Planning Division. Washington DC. 1964
4. Bureau of Public Roads. Traffic Assignment Manual for Application With a Large, High Speed
Computer. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Public Roads, Office
of Planning, Urban Planning Division. 1964
5. Daskin, M.S.: Urban transportation networks: Equilibrium analysis with mathematical programming methods. JSTOR. 1985
6. Hu, Y., Barbour, W., Samaranayake, S., Work, D.: Impacts of Covid–19 mode shift on road
traffic. arXiv:2005.01610v1 [physics.soc-ph]. 4 May, 2020
7. Saberi, M. Hamedmoghadam, H., Ashfaq, M., Hosseini, S.A., Gu, Z., Shafiei, S., Nair, D.J.,
Dixit, V., Gardner, L., Waller, S.T., et al.: A simple contagion process describes spreading of
traffic jams in urban networks. Nature communications. 11(1), 1–9, 2020
8. Çolak, S., Lima, A., Gonzáalez, M.C.: Understanding congested travel in urban areas. Nature
communications. 7(1), 1–8, 2016
9. Wong, W., Wong, S.C.: Network topological effects on the macroscopic bureau of public roads
function. Transportmetrica A: Transport Science. 12(3), 272–296, 2016
10. Kucharski, R., Drabicki, A.: Estimating macroscopic volume delay functions with the traffic
density derived from measured speeds and flows. Journal of Advanced Transportation. 2017
11. Highway Capacity Manual. Highway capacity manual. Washington DC. 2, 2000
12. Dowling, R.G. Singh, R., Cheng, W.W.: Accuracy and performance of improved speed–flow
curves. Transportation research record. 1646(1), 9–17, 1998
13. Florian, M., Nguyen, S.: Recent experience with equilibrium methods for the study of a
congested urban area. In Traffic Equilibrium Methods. 382–395, Springer, 1976
14. Bandyopadhyay, K.: Life in transit is easy in Kolkata, shows study. The Times Of India.
November 2, 2018
15. Shaikh, Z.: Census data: Most Mumbai commuters travel less than 10 km, says report. The
Indian Express. Novermber 16, 2015
16. Chin, V., Jaafar, M., Subudhi, S., Shelomentsev., N., Do, D., Prawiradinata, I.: Unlocking
cities: The impact of ridesharing across India. Boston Consulting Group. 2018

