arXiv:2102.06440v3 [econ.TH] 10 May 2021

Interview Hoarding*
Vikram Manjunath

Thayer Morrill

University of Ottawa

North Carolina State University

vikramma@gmail.com

thayer_morrill@ncsu.edu

May 11, 2021

Abstract
Many centralized matching markets are preceded by interviews between
the participants. We study the impact on the final match of an increase in
the number of interviews for one side of the market. Our motivation is the
match between residents and hospitals where, due to the COVID-19 pandemic, interviews for the 2020-21 season of the National Residency Matching
Program were switched to a virtual format. This drastically reduced the cost
to applicants of accepting interview invitations. However, the reduction in cost
was not symmetric since applicants, not programs, previously bore most of
the costs of in-person interviews. We show that, starting from a situation
where the final matching is stable, if doctors can accept more interviews, but
the hospitals do not increase the number of interviews they offer, then no
doctor is better off and many doctors are potentially harmed. This adverse
consequence is the result of what we call interview hoarding. We prove this
* We

thank Anna Sorensen and Alkas Baybas for raising the question that sparked this pa-

per. We also thank Alex Chan, Adrienne Quirouet, Assaf Romm, Al Roth, Erling Skancke, Colin
Sullivan, William Thomson, and seminar audiences at North Carolina State University, Stanford,
University of Arizona, and University of Lausanne for helpful comments and discussions.

1

analytically and characterize optimal mitigation strategies for special cases.
We use simulations to extend these insights to more general settings.
Keywords: NRMP, Deferred acceptance, Interviews, Hoarding

1

Introduction

Perhaps the most well-known application of matching theory is the entry-level labor market for physicians. In 2021, 37,470 positions were matched through the
National Resident Matching Program (NRMP). The matching process consists of
two steps. First, each physician interviews with a set of residency programs. Second, programs and physicians submit rank-order lists of those they interview to a
centralized clearinghouse. This clearinghouse, run by the NRMP, matches physicians to residency programs using a version of Gale and Shapley’s (1962) Deferred Acceptance (DA) Algorithm (Roth and Peranson, 1999).
In practice, both programs and applicants are constrained in the number of
interviews they can take part in. Prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, interviews
were done in person. These interviews were particularly costly for physicians
since they not only had to bear travel expenses but also had to take days off from
clinical rotations. The cost to programs was mainly in terms of time. For the 202021 matching season, interviews were conducted virtually. While this dramatically
decreased the cost of interviews for physicians, it did not change the costs for the
programs. We are interested in the implications of this asymmetric change on the
eventual match.
We follow the approach of Echenique et al. (2020) and assume complete information about preferences and non-strategic offers and acceptance of interviews.
In reality, interviews serve the obvious purpose of preference formation. However,
in the context of the NRMP match, they are also important in coordinating mutual
rankings across the two sides. Most specialties have hundreds of programs and
thousands of candidates, so the rank-order lists submitted to the NRMP are necessarily partial. Moreover, a program and a candidate can only match if they rank
2

one another. This coordination across the two sides is important independent of
preference formation. The complete information set up of Echenique et al. (2020)
keeps the analysis focused on bottlenecks that arise in the interview phase.1 The
assumption of non-strategic behavior makes the analysis tractable. These modeling choices allow us to identify a subtle bottleneck caused by interviews that would
likely be lost in the analysis of a more complex model.
The focus of our study is the effects of doctors accepting more interview invitations without a corresponding increase to the number of invitations extended
by programs. If some doctors accept more interviews, and if the total number of
invitations extended does not change, then some of the doctors necessarily receive fewer invitations. It seems natural to intuit that at least doctors with more
interviews benefit from the lower costs, even if those with fewer interviews are
harmed. However, for any market where the eventual matching is stable—which
we would expect at the steady state of a well-functioning market—we show a surprising result: No physician is better off when more interviews can be accepted.
The intuition for this result is as follows. Consider a highly sought after physician: one who is offered interviews at the leading programs and ends up matched
with her favorite program. When interviews become cheaper, she will accept more
interviews.2 However, as she would already have matched with her favorite program, the interviews she accepts are from inferior programs. These interviews
do not help her: she ultimately matches with the same program as before. The
interviews are, in effect, wasted. We refer to this as interview hoarding. Interview
hoarding has a cascading affect. The physicians who otherwise would have filled
these wasted interview slots now interview with programs they consider inferior.
These physicians may have more interviews, but they do not have better inter1 We

weaken these assumptions, to an extent, in the appendices. Analogs of some of our

results hold for a version of our model that includes preference formation. Simulation results with
more sophisticated heuristic based interview offers are consistent with our results as well.
2 While we have assumed that agents have complete information, if there were an arbitrarily
small amount of uncertainty about others’ preferences, she would accept additional costless interviews.

3

views in a precise sense: the doctor rates every new interview as worse than the
program she matched with before. Physicians are ultimately divided into three categories: physicians who hoard interviews worse than their eventual match; physicians who receive more but worse interviews; and physicians who receive fewer
and worse interviews. The first category is indifferent between the new costs and
the old. The latter two categories are harmed under the new cost. Thus, when
physicians accept more interviews but programs do not react, the ultimate match
is Pareto inferior from the physicians’ perspective.3
Having shown that increases to doctors’ abilities to accept interviews has adverse welfare consequences, we turn to mitigation policies. We consider policies
that limit the numbers of interviews that programs can offer and candidates can
accept. Though there are essentially no such policies that always (for every preference profile) yield a stable final matching (Proposition 1), we characterize such
policies for “common preferences” (Proposition 2). These are salient preference
profiles where every doctor ranks the programs the same way and every program
ranks the doctors the same way. The policies we characterize are such that there
is a common cap on the number of interviews any program can offer or any candidate can accept. We also show that if the programs’ interview capacities are
fixed, say at l , then the number of blocking pairs increases and the match rate decreases as the doctors’ interview cap moves further away from l in either direction
(Proposition 3).
Our analytical results can advise policies for more general settings where preferences are not quite common, but have a common component. We use simulations to show that the lessons from our analytical results hold up under weaker
assumptions. Though the optimal cap on doctors’ interview capacities depends
on the parameters of the model—and in practice would have to be determined
empirically—our simulations indicate that it is no higher than the number of interviews that the programs offer.4
3 The

example in Section 1.2 demonstrates that there need not exist a Pareto ranking from the

programs’ perspective.
4 This is true whether we define the optimality of a policy as maximizing the expected proportion

4

1.1

Related Literature

While there is a large literature on the post-interview NRMP match,5 there are
relatively few papers that incorporate the pre-match interview process. One of
the first to explicitly model interviews in the classic one-to-one matching model
is Lee and Schwarz (2017). In this model, before participating in a centralized,
two-sided match, firms learn their preferences over workers by engaging in costly
interviews. They show that even if firms and workers interview with exactly the
same numbers of agents, the extent of unemployment in the final match depends
critically on the overlap between the sets of workers that firms interview. Three
other recent papers that incorporate pre-match interviews include Kadam (2021),
Beyhaghi (2019), and Echenique et al. (2020).
Like our paper, Kadam (2021) considers the implications of loosened interview
constraints for doctors. However, the focus is on the strategic allocation of scarce
interview slots. For the sake of tractability, the analysis is for a stylized model of
large markets. Under the assumption of common preferences over programs, he
shows that increasing doctors’ capacities may increase total surplus, but not in
a Pareto-improving way. Moreover, the match rate decreases. He also highlights
that when preferences are not necessarily common, the effect is ambiguous, since
increased interview capacities dilute doctors’ signaling ability.
Beyhaghi (2019) also performs a strategic analysis of a stylized large market
model. However, she considers a slightly different set up with application caps
for doctors and interview caps for programs. While similar, application caps are
not exactly the same as interview caps: they constrain the number of programs a
doctor can express interest in at the outset of the interview matching phase, but
not the number of interviews she can accept at the end. In her model, inequity
in the application caps decreases the expected total surplus. Moreover, when
interview capacity is low, low application caps are socially desirable.
In our model, the agents do not choose interviews strategically. Determining
of positions that are filled or minimizing the expected number of blocking pairs.
5 See the multitude of papers following Roth and Peranson (1999).

5

the optimal set of interviews is closely related to the portfolio choice problem of
Chade and Smith (2006). They solve for the optimal portfolio when an agent
chooses a portfolio of costly, stochastic options, but only consumes one of their
realizations. In order to apply the optimal solution to the interview scheduling
problem, one would have to pin down precisely the probability of any given pair
matching. This is what makes strategic analysis of the problem intractable without
severe simplifying assumptions (such as those in the papers we have mentioned
above).
As in Echenique et al. (2020), which is methodologically closest to ours, we
sidestep this issue. They explain a puzzling empirical pattern resulting from the
NRMP match: 46.3% of the physicians were matched to their top ranked residency programs and 71.1% where matched to a program they ranked in their top
three. These statistics seem to contradict surveys indicating that many doctors
have similar preferences over residency programs. They provide an explanation
for this phenomenon by pointing out the importance of the interviewing process
that precedes the match. Roughly speaking, the pre-match interviewing process
restricts the preferences that the physicians actually submit to the NRMP. Therefore, a proper interpretation is not that the physicians matched with their most preferred programs but rather that they matched with their most preferred programs
among those they interviewed with.
Our work is complementary with these papers in the sense that they highlight
the importance of understanding the prematch interviews for properly evaluating
the NRMP match itself.

1.2

Motivating Example

We present the intuition behind the welfare loss from increased interview capacity
for doctors with a simple example. Consider a market with four doctors {d1 , ... , d4 }
and four hospitals {h1 , ... , h4 }. The agents’ preferences are as follows:

6

d1

d2

d3

d4

h1

h2

h3

h4

h4

h2

h2

h2

d4

d1

d2

d4

h1

h3

h1

h3

d1

d2

d1

d3

h2

h1

h3

h4

d2

d4

d3

d2

h3

h4

h4

h1

d3

d3

d4

d1

Suppose that the interview capacities of the doctors and hospitals are:
d1

d2

d3

d4

h1

h2

h3

h4

1

2

1

1

1

1

2

1

Interviews are initially offered by hospitals: h1 invites d4 , h2 invites d1 , h3 invites
d1 and d2 , and h4 invites d4 . As d1 can accept only one invitation, she turns h3
down. Since d4 can only accept one invitation, she declines h1 ’s invitation. Doctor
d2 holds on to her invitation from h3 . Hospitals h1 and h3 then offer interviews to
d1 and d3 , respectively. Doctor d1 rejects her invitation from h2 . After h2 invites
d2 , the final interviews are:
d1

d2

h1

d3

d4

{h2 , h3 } h3

h4

The final matching is computed by applying the doctor-proposing Deferred Acceptance algorithm to the agent preferences (restricted to agents they interview
with). The outcome is therefore:
d1

d2

d3

d4

h1

h2

h3

h4

The market functions well in the sense that the final outcome is stable with regard
to the actual (as opposed to restricted) preferences.
Now suppose d1 is able to accept an additional interview (and all other interview capacities remain the same). In this case she does not reject h2 ’s invitation.
The interview schedule is:
d1

d2

d3

d4

{h1 , h2 } h3

h3

h4

7

This leads to the final matching:
d1

d2

h1

h3

d3

d4
h4

Doctor d1 does not benefit from the additional interview. The interview she adds
is with a hospital that she finds worse than her original match. However, her
acceptance of h2 ’s invitation comes at the expense of both d2 and d3 : both now
receive worse assignments. In fact, the final matching is no longer stable. That
none of the doctors are better off is not unique to this example—we show that this
is generally true (Theorem 1). The programs, however, are not unanimously better
or worse off: h3 is better off while h2 is worse off.

2

The Model

A market consists of a triple (D, H, P), where D is a finite set of doctors, H is
a finite set of hospitals, and P is a profile of strict preferences for the doctors
and hospitals. We assume that there are at least two doctors and two hospitals:
|D | ≥ 2 and |H | ≥ 2. For each h ∈ H , Ph is the set of strict preferences over D ∪ {h },
and for each d ∈ D , Pd is the set of strict preferences over H ∪ {d }. The set of
preference profiles is P ≡ ×i ∈H ∪D Pi .
There are two phases to the matching process. The first is a decentralized
interview phase and the second is the centralized matching phase. The former involves many-to-many matching while the latter is a standard one-to-one matching
problem (Roth and Sotomayor, 1990).
A many-to-many matching is a function ν : H ∪ D → 2H ∪D such that, for each
d ∈ D and h ∈ H , ν(d ) ⊆ H , ν(h ) ⊆ D , and h ∈ ν(d ) if and only if d ∈ ν(h ).
For each h ∈ H , let ιh ∈ N be h’s interview capacity. Similarly, for each d ∈ D ,
let κd ∈ N be d’s interview capacity. We call the profile (ι, κ) = ((ιh )h ∈H (κd )d ∈D )
the interview arrangement. An interview matching is a many-to-many matching
ν such that for every doctor d , |ν(d )| ≤ κd and for every hospital h , |ν(h )| ≤ ιh .
8

An interview matching ν is pairwise stable if there is no doctor-hospital pair
(d , h ) such that h < ν(d ) but:
• either |ν(h )| < ιh and d Ph h or there exists a d 0 ∈ ν(h ) such that d Ph d 0 , and
• either |ν(d )| < κd and h Pd d or there exists a h 0 ∈ ν(d ) such that h Pd h 0 .
A matching is a function µ : H ∪D → H ∪D such that µ(h ) ∈ D ∪{h }, µ(d ) ∈ H ∪{d },
and µ(d ) = h if and only if µ(h ) = d . We say that (d , h ) is a blocking pair of
matching µ if h Pd µ(d ) and d Ph µ(h ). A matching is stable if it does not have a
blocking pair.
To describe how the market works, we follow the approach of Echenique et al.
(2020) by assuming complete information and non-strategic behavior.6 This means
that hospitals naïvely make offers to their most preferred doctors and these offers,
if rejected, trickle down to less preferred doctors. Thus, given (ι, κ) and P ∈ P , the
final matching, which we call the (ι, κ)-matching, is the outcome of the following
two phase process:7
Phase 1: The interview matching ν is the hospital-optimal pairwise stable many-tomany matching where the capacities of the hospitals and doctors are given
by ι and κ, respectively. This can be computed by applying the hospitalproposing deferred acceptance (DA) algorithm: each h ∈ H is matched with
up to ιh doctors and each d ∈ D is matched with up to κd hospitals. Since we
ignore the informational aspect of the problem, the input to DA is a choice
function for each agent that is responsive to her preference relation and constrained by her interview capacity.8 The hospital-proposing DA algorithm is
6 In

Appendix A, we discuss a version of our model and some of our results when preferences

are formed during the interviews.
7 We only differ from Echenique et al. (2020) in that we set the interview matching to be the
hospital-optimal many-to-many stable matching, while they set it to be the doctor-optimal one.
Their choice is appropriate for the question they ask. However, we have chosen to approximate
the interview phase through the hospital-proposing DA. This difference does not drive our results,
as we explain in Appendix B.
8 For the sake of completeness, we define in Appendix C the acceptant and responsive choice

9

an approximation of the decentralized process by which hospitals invite doctors, extending invitations to further doctors when invitations are declined.
Phase 2: The (ι, κ)-matching is chosen by doctor-proposing DA. The input to DA is the
true preference profile restricted to the interview match, (Pi |ν(i ) )i ∈D ∪H .
Given P ∈ P , we say that (ι, κ) is adequate if the (ι, κ)-matching at P is stable. We interpret (ι, κ) being adequate at a profile P as a sign that the market is
functioning well. Otherwise, a blocking pair could alter their behavior to improve
their lot. In other words, using stability as our notion of equilibrium, (ι, κ) being
adequate is equivalent to the market being in equilibrium. If (ι, κ) is adequate at
each P ∈ P , then we say that (ι, κ) is globally adequate.
Finally, we define a welfare comparison between matchings. Given a pair of
matchings µ and µ0 , we say that no doctor prefers µ0 to µ if, for each d ∈ D ,
µ(d ) Rd µ0 (d ).

3

Welfare Impact of Increased Interviews

Our aim is to study how a change in the interview costs impacts a market. We consider a market that is initially at equilibrium. Starting from such an equilibrium, the
goal is to understand the welfare consequences of a shock that permits doctors to
accept more interviews. That is, starting with P ∈ P and (ι, κ) that is adequate at
P , we consider an increase in the doctors’ interview capacities to κ0 and compare
the (ι, κ)-matching to the (ι, κ0 )-matching.
The doctor who accepted more interviews in our example in Section 1.2 did
not benefit from it. Our main result shows that this is true in general.
functions that we appeal to while running DA to compute the interview matching. According to
these choice functions, hospitals naïvely select their most preferred doctors from each set. In
Appendix D, we consider alternative choice functions that reflect common heuristics. Simulations
involving such a heuristic based choice are closer to the results of the 2021 match, but the qualitative effects are similar. The simpler assumption of naïve behavior renders the results more
transparent.

10

Theorem 1. Starting at an adequate arrangement, doctors do not benefit from
increases to their interview capacities. That is, if (ι, κ) is adequate at P and κ0 is
such that, for each d ∈ D , κd0 ≥ κd , then the no doctor prefers the (ι, κ0 )-matching
to the (ι, κ)-matching.
Proof. Let ν and µ be the interview and final matchings, respectively, under (ι, κ).
Similarly, let ν 0 and µ0 be the interview and final matchings under (ι, κ0 ). We frame
the temporal language below in reference to a hypothetical change in doctors’
interview capacities from κ (“before”) to κ0 (“after”).
We first establish a number of properties of the interview matchings. The intuition for these results comes from one of the classical results in two-sided matching
theory: When the set of men increases, no man benefits from this increased competition while no woman is harmed.9 In our setting, an increase in the number of
interviews a doctor can participate in plays the role of additional men participating
in the market. This means that the hospitals are able to interview better doctors.
However, there is a tension between interviewing better doctors and interviewing
the “right” doctors. Thus improving the set of candidates a hospital interviews
does not necessarily translate to an improvement in its eventual match. Those
doctors whose capacities do not change do not see an improvement in the hospitals that interview them. For those whose capacities do increase, the stability of
the original matching means that none of the new prospects come to fruition.
Lemma 1. No doctor rejects a hospital she previously interviewed with.
Proof. Suppose not. In the interview matching phase (under capacities κ0 ), let d
be the first doctor to reject a hospital h that she interviewed with under capacities
κ. As d has at least as much interview capacity, she must have received a new
proposal from some hospital h 0 . As h 0 did not propose to d before, it must have
been rejected by some doctor d 0 ∈ ν(h ), a doctor it previously interviewed. But this
contradicts d being the first doctor to reject a hospital she previously interviewed
with.
9 See

Theorem 2.25 of Roth and Sotomayor (1990).

11

We cannot say whether a doctor prefers her interviews under κ versus κ0 as
we only have a doctor’s preferences over individual hospitals and not sets of hospitals. However, we show—in a specific sense—that while a doctor may get new
interviews, she does not get better interviews.
Lemma 2. No doctor has a new interview better than her previous matching: if
h ∈ ν 0 (d ) \ ν(d ), then µ(d ) Pd h .
Proof. Suppose not. Let d be the first doctor when DA is run during the interview
phase under capacities κ0 to receive a proposal from a hospital h < ν(d ) such that
h Pd µ(d ). As h did not previously propose to d , h must have been rejected by a
doctor that it previously interviewed. This contradicts Lemma 1.
In the classical result, no man benefits from the increased competition due to
additional men and also no woman is harmed. An analogous result holds in our
framework. A hospital either has the same set of interviews, additional interviews,
or it interviews new doctors it prefers to her previous interviews. In any scenario,
the hospital’s set of interviews (weakly) improves.
Lemma 3. Suppose a hospital h interviews a doctor d under κ0 . If h previously
interviewed d 0 and prefers d 0 to d , then h continues to interview d 0 : if d ∈ ν 0 (h ),
d 0 ∈ ν(h ), and d 0 Ph d , then d 0 ∈ ν 0 (h ).
Proof. As d 0 Ph d , h proposes to d 0 before it proposes to d when DA is run in the
interview phase under κ0 . By Lemma 1, h is not rejected by any doctor it previously
interviewed. As h proposes to d under κ0 , it must have already proposed to but
not have been rejected by d 0 . Therefore, h continues to interview d 0 .
To complete the proof of Theorem 1, we show that if a doctor is rejected by
a hospital during the matching phase under κ, then she is not matched to that
hospital under κ0 . We proceed by induction on the round (of DA in the matching
phase under κ) in which the doctor was rejected, and our inductive hypothesis is
that if doctor d was rejected by hospital h in round k under κ, then under κ0 , either
she no longer interviews with h or she is rejected in round k or earlier.
12

For the base step, consider a doctor d who was rejected by hospital h in the
first round under κ, and let d 0 be the doctor that h tentatively accepts. If d does
not interview with h under κ0 (d < ν 0 (h )), then we are done. Therefore, suppose
d ∈ ν 0 (h ). By Lemma 3, since h prefers d 0 to d and it interviews d , it also interviews
d 0 (d 0 ∈ ν 0 (h )). Doctor d 0 does not have any new interviews with a hospital she
prefers to h since h Rd 0 µ(d 0 ) and by Lemma 2 she does not get a new interview
with a hospital she prefers to µ(d 0 ). Therefore, d 0 continues to propose to h in the
first round even under the new capacities and d continues to be rejected by h in
favor of d 0 or possibly a doctor h prefers even more.
To complete the inductive argument, suppose that doctor d was rejected by
hospital h in favor of doctor d 0 in round k under κ. If h < ν 0 (d ), then we are done.
Otherwise, again by Lemma 3, d 0 ∈ ν 0 (h ). Under κ, d 0 proposes to h in round
k or earlier. Therefore, d 0 was rejected by all hospitals she interviewed with and
prefers to h in an earlier round. By the inductive hypothesis, for any hospital h 0
that rejected d 0 under κ, either d 0 no longer interviews with h 0 or h 0 has already
rejected d 0 by round k under κ0 . Therefore, under κ0 , d 0 proposes to h in either
round k or a previous round. In either case, by round k , under κ0 , h has already
received a proposal it prefers to d . Therefore, doctor d is rejected by hospital h
under κ0 in round k or earlier.
This shows that if d was rejected by hospital h under the old capacities, then d
is not matched to h under the new capacities. Note that d has no new interviews
with a hospital she prefers to µ(d ). Therefore, if h Pd µ(d ) and h ∈ ν 0 (d ), then
h ∈ ν(d ) and h rejected d in some round under the old capacities. Therefore, h
also rejects d under the new capacities. In particular, under the new capacities, d
is not matched to a hospital she prefers to µ(d ).
Theorem 1 tells us that doctors increasing the number of interviews they accept
will either have no impact on the resulting matching or will make the new matching
Pareto worse from the doctors’ perspective. The example in Section 1.2 illustrates
that there are instances where increasing the interview capacity does result in
a Pareto inferior outcome. This example is not pathological. Lemmas 1 and 2
13

highlight the root cause of the inferior match, which is interview hoarding.
Under our simplifying assumptions that agents are non-strategic and have
complete information, Theorem 1 implies that the shift to virtual interviews for
the 2020-21 season of the NRMP ought to have led to an inferior matching. In Appendix D, we contrast simulation results for this naïve behavior with the common
heuristic of including a “safety” candidate when choosing a set. While the NRMP
has touted the high match rate for 2021, this may be driven by hospitals being
matched to safety candidates (under such heuristic behavior) rather than being
unmatched (under naïve behavior). Other than the match rate, heuristic choice
does not qualitatively affect the results.

4

Adequate Arrangements

Theorem 1 assumes that the initial profile of interviews was adequate in the sense
that the outcome of the two-phase process is a stable matching. We interpret
this assumption as a characteristic of a well-functioning market in steady state
equilibrium. A natural question is how many interviews need to take place and
what does the distribution of interviews need to be in order for an interview profile
to be adequate. Of course, in general, the answer will depend on specifics of
the market, such as the ratio of doctors to hospitals and how correlated or aligned
preferences are. However, we are able to provide tight characterizations for certain
“end-point” cases that provide intuition for more general markets.

4.1

Globally Adequate Arrangements

In studying adequate arrangements, we first discuss worst case performance:
what arrangements are adequate for every preference profile? It turns out that
only very extreme arrangements satisfy this property. We characterize these arrangements in our next result.
Proposition 1. Arrangement (ι, κ) is globally adequate, if and only if either
14

1. every doctor and every hospital has only unit interview capacity—that is, for
each d ∈ D , κd = 1 and for each h ∈ H , ιh = 1—or
2. every doctor and every hospital has high interview capacity—that is, for each
d ∈ D , κd ≥ min{|D |, |H |} and for each h ∈ H , ιh ≥ min{|D |, |H |}.
Proof. We first prove necessity. Suppose that (ι, κ) is globally adequate.
We start by establishing that if one doctor or hospital has greater than unit
interview capacity, then every doctor and hospital has interview capacity of at
least two. Stated differently, if any doctor or hospital has unit capacity, then all
doctors and hospitals have unit capacity. We denote by ν the interview matching
and by µ the (ι, κ)-matching.
Claim 1.

1. If there is d ∈ D such that κd > 1, then for each d 0 ∈ D , κd ≥ 2 and

for each h ∈ H , ιh ≥ 2, and
2. If there is h ∈ H such that ιh > 1, then for each h 0 ∈ H , ιh ≥ 2 and for each
d ∈ D , κd ≥ 2.
Proof. We prove only the first statement as the proof of the second statement is
analogous—it requires only a reversal of the roles of doctors and hospitals.
Suppose, for the sake of contradiction, there is a globally adequate (ι, κ) where
there exists a d1 ∈ D such that κd1 > 1 and a h2 ∈ H such that ιh2 = 1. Let
h1 ∈ H \ {h2 } and d2 ∈ D \ {d1 }. Consider P ∈ P where each doctor ranks h1 first
and h2 second, and each hospital ranks d1 first and d2 second. All hospitals offer
an interview to d1 and as κd1 > 1, d1 accepts interviews from at least h1 and h2 .
Since ιh2 = 1, h2 only interviews d1 . Let µ be the (ι, κ)-matching. Since (ι, κ) is
adequate, µ is stable, so µ(d1 ) = h1 , as h1 and d1 are mutual favorites. Therefore,
µ(h2 ) = h2 as h2 only interviews d1 . Note that (d2 , h2 ) forms a blocking pair of µ
as h2 Pd2 µ(d2 ), since µ(d2 ) < {h1 , h2 }, and d2 Ph2 h2 . This contradicts the stability
of µ and thus the assumption that (ι, κ) is globally adequate. We have therefore
established that if there is d ∈ D such that κd > 1, then for each h ∈ H , ιh ≥ 2.
We now prove that if there is a d1 ∈ D such that κd1 > 1, then for each d ∈
D , κd ≥ 2. Suppose for the sake of contradiction that there is d2 ∈ D such that
15

κd2 = 1. Let h1 , h2 ∈ H . Consider P ∈ P such that each doctor ranks h1 first and
h2 second, and each hospital ranks d1 first and d2 second. As we have shown
above, ιh1 , ιh2 ≥ 2, so both h1 and h2 offer interviews to both d1 and d2 . Since h1 is
her favorite hospital, d2 accepts its offer. Thus, ν(d2 ) = {h1 }. However, µ(d1 ) = h1
since d1 and h1 are mutual favorites, so µ(d2 ) = d2 . This means that (d2 , h2 ) form
a blocking pair of µ as the only hospital d2 prefers to h2 is h1 . This contradicts the
stability of µ and thus the assumption that (ι, κ) is globally adequate.
We complete the proof of necessity by showing that neither a doctor nor a
hospital can have an intermediate capacity.
Claim 2. There is no d ∈ D such that 1 < κd < min{|D |, |H |}, and there is no hospital
h such that 1 < ιh < min{|D |, |H |}.
Proof. We prove this statement for the case where |D | ≤ |H |. The proof when
|H | < |D | is symmetric.
Suppose for the sake of contradiction that d1 ∈ D is such that κd1 = k where
1 < k < |D |. Let P ∈ P be such that for i from 1 through k + 1:
Pd1 : h2 , h3 , ... , hk +1 , h1 , ...
Phi : hi , h1 , ... , hi −1 , hi +1 , ...
Ph1 : d1 , d2 , ...
Phi : di , d1 , ... , di −1 , di +1 , ...
We have constructed the preference profile P such that:
• For each i from 1 through k +1, di and hi are matched in every stable matching.
• Each of the k + 1 hospitals h1 , ... , hk +1 offers d1 an interview.
• Doctor d1 accepts interview offers from hospitals h2 , ... , hk +1 , but not from h1 .
The first and third points are immediate consequences of the preferences. The
second is a consequence of the first part of Claim 1: since κd1 > 1, every hospital
16

has an interview capacity of at least two and ranks d1 in its top two. However,
this contradicts the definition of µ as the (ι, κ)-matching, since h1 < ν(d1 ) yet by
stability, h1 = µ(d1 ).
A similar construction shows that there is no h ∈ H such that 1 < ιh < |D |.
Suppose for the sake of contradiction that h1 ∈ H is such that ιh1 = l where 1 < l <
|D |. Let P ∈ P be such that for i from 1 through l + 1:
Pd1 : h1 , h2 , ...
Pdi : hi , h1 , ... , hi −1 , hi +1 , ...
Ph1 : d2 , d3 , ... , dl +1 , d1
Phi : di , d1 , ... , di −1 , di +1 , ...
By the second part of Claim 1, since ιh1 > 1, every doctor has a capacity of at least
two. Therefore:
• For each i from 1 through l + 1, di and hi are matched in every stable matching.
• Each of the l doctors d2 , ... , dk +1 accepts an interview from h1 .
• Hospital h1 does not offer d1 an interview.
Thus, h1 < ν(d1 ), so h1 , µ(d1 ). This contradicts the stability of µ, the (ι, κ)matching, and in turn the assumption that (ι, κ) is globally adequate.
We now turn to sufficiency. If every agent has an interview capacity of one, then
the interview matching is actually a matching. Moreover, it is a stable matching.
So, suppose that each agent has an interview capacity of at least min{|D |, |H |}. If
|D | = |H |, then the interview matching involves an interview between every mutually
acceptable doctor-hospital pair. This means that the (ι, κ)-matching is the doctor
optimal stable matching under unrestricted preferences, which is stable. We now
show, that even if |D | < |H | or |D | > |H |, the (ι, κ)-matching, µ, is stable. Suppose
the doctor-hospital pair (d , h ) blocks µ. By defintion of µ as the (ι, κ)-matching, if
h Pd µ(d ) and d Ph µ(h ), then h < ν(d ).
17

Suppose |D | < |H |. Since ιh ≥ |D |, h would have offered an interview to d and
would have been rejected during the interview matching phase, so ν(d ) contains
κd hospitals that d prefers to h . Since h Pd µ(d ), and µ(d ) ∈ ν(d ) ∪ {d }, this means
µ(d ) = d . Then, d is rejected by every hospital in ν(d ) during the application of
DA in the matching phase. However, |ν(d )| = κd ≥ |D | and since d is acceptable to
every hospital in ν(d ), she is only rejected when another doctor applies. However,
this implies that when DA terminates in the matching phase, every hospital in ν(d )
has tentatively accepted some doctor other than d , which is a contradiction—there
are not enough such doctors.
Suppose |H | < |D |. Since κd ≥ |H |, d does not reject any interviews she is
offered. Since h < ν(d ), h offers interviews to and has them accepted by ιh ≥ |H |
doctors whom it prefers to d . Since d Ph µ(h ), h does not receive a proposal from
any d 0 ∈ ν(h ) during the application of DA in the matching phase since it finds all
such d 0 better than d . This implies that each d 0 ∈ ν(h ) is tentatively accepted by
some hospital other than h when DA terminates, which is a contradiction—there
are not enough such hospitals.
Proposition 1 highlights a previously overlooked role that the interview phase
plays in determining whether or not the ultimate NRMP match is stable. While interviews are necessary for agents to gain information, we learn from Proposition 1
that interviews can also act as a bottleneck. Even with complete information, once
any agent is capable of participating in more than one interview, all agents must
interview with essentially the entire market to be certain that the ultimate match is
stable.

4.2

Homogeneous Arrangements

The distribution of interviews is an essential factor in the stability of the NRMP
match. So, it is natural to consider market interventions when the interview phase
is out of balance. Our motivating question concerns what happens when there is
an increase to the number of interviews doctors can accept. The most straight-

18

forward intervention is to cap the number of interviews an agent can participate
in. Here we consider a homogeneous arrangement: all doctors face the same
cap and all hospitals face the same cap, but we allow the doctor and hospital caps
to potentially differ. In other words, the arrangement would be described by two
numbers: an interview capacity l ∈ N for hospitals and an interview capacity k ∈ N
for doctors. The pair (l , k ) corresponds to the arrangement (ι, κ) where for each
h ∈ H , ιh = l and for each d ∈ D , κd = k .
By Proposition 1 a homogenous arrangement (l , k ) can only be globally adequate if l = k = 1 or l , k ≥ min{|D |, |H |}. Nonetheless, (l , k ) may be adequate for a
specific profile of preferences. One might ask whether, starting at a profile P ∈ P
and arrangement (l , k ) that is adequate at P , the comparative statics with respect
to l and k are consistent. The following examples demonstrate that this is not so.
It may be that, depending on P , increasing k renders a previously adequate arrangement inadequate, or the opposite. In other words, the effect of the increase
to k is specific to P and l .
Example 1. Either incrementing or decrementing l or k can render an adequate
arrangement inadequate.
Suppose |D | = |H | = 3 and consider P ∈ P such that for each i = 1, 2, 3,10
Phi

Pdi

d1

h1

d2

h2

d3

h3

hi

di

For P , (2, 2) is adequate: the interview matching is ν such that ν(h1 ) = ν(h2 ) =
{d1 , d2 } and ν(h3 ) = {d3 }. So, the (l , k )-matching is µ such that for each i = 1, 2, 3,
µ(hi ) = di , which is the unique stable matching.
We now observe that if we increment or decrement either l or k by one, the
arrangement is no longer adequate for P . In other words, none of (1, 2), (3, 2),
10 This

can be embedded into a larger problem instance.

19

(2, 1), or (2, 3) are adequate for P . We summarize the interview matching and the
(l , k )-matching for each of these below.
(l , k )

interview matching

(l , k )-matching

(1, 2)

ν(h1 ) = ν(h2 ) = {d1 }, ν(h3 ) = {d2 }

µ(h1 ) = d1 , µ(h3 ) = d2 , µ(h2 ) = h2 , µ(d3 ) = d3

(3, 2)

ν(h1 ) = ν(h2 ) = D , ν(h3 ) = {}

µ(h1 ) = d! , µ(h2 ) = d2 , µ(h3 ) = h3 , µ(d3 ) = d3

(2, 1) ν(h1 ) = {d1 , d2 }, ν(h2 ) = {d3 }, ν(h3 ) = {} µ(h1 ) = d1 , µ(h2 ) = d3 , µ(h3 ) = h3 , µ(d2 ) = d2
ν(h1 ) = ν(h2 ) = ν(h3 ) = {d1 , d2 }

(2, 3)

µ(h1 ) = d1 , µ(h2 ) = d2 , µ(h3 ) = h3 , µ(d3 ) = d3

All four of the (l , k )-matchings are unstable.

◦

The mechanics of Example 1 are robust and it is not by accident that (2, 2) is
adequate to start with. The preferences in the example have a particularly salient
configuration, which we focus on here. A profile P ∈ P has common preferences
if all doctors rank the hospitals in the same way, and all hospitals rank the doctors
in the same way. To further restrict the definition, we also require that each doctor
finds each hospital acceptable and each hospital finds each doctor acceptable.
That is, for each pair d , d 0 ∈ D and each pair h , h 0 ∈ H , Pd |H = Pd 0 |H , Ph |D = Ph 0 |D ,
d Ph h , and h Pd d .11
As we see from Example 1, a result like Proposition 1 does not hold if we
restrict ourselves to common preferences. Our next result is a characterization of
homogeneous arrangements that are adequate for common preferences.12
Proposition 2. Let P ∈ P be such that there are common preferences. A homogeneous arrangement (l , k ) is adequate at P if and only if l = k or l , k ≥ min{|D |, |H |}.
|D |

|H |

Proof. Let {dt }t=1 and {ht }t=1 be enumerations of D and H , respectively, such that
every hospital prefers dt to dt+1 and every doctor prefers ht to ht+1 . Let m =
11 Under
12 The

common preferences there is obviously a unique stable matching.
characterization of Proposition 2 does not hold for arrangements that are not homoge-

neous. For a counterexample, suppose |D | = 4, |H | = 3, there is d ∈ D such that κd = 3, for each
d 0 ∈ D \ {d }, κd 0 = 2, there is h ∈ H such that ιh = 4, and for each h 0 ∈ H \ {h }, ιh 0 = 2. For any
common preferences, (ι, κ) is adequate.

20

min{|D |, |H |}. There is a unique stable matching µ∗ , such that for each t = 1, ... , m,
µ∗ (ht ) = dt .
Let ν be the interview matching under (l , k ) and µ be the (l , k )-matching.
First, we show that (l , k ) is adequate for P only if l = k or l , k ≥ min{|D |, |H |}.
Suppose l , k . If l < k and l < min{|D |, |H |}, then for each t = 1, ... , k , ν(ht ) =
{d1 , ... , dl }. In particular, dk < ν(hk ) so µ(hk ) , dk . On the other hand, if l > k
and k < min{|D |, |H |}, then for each t = 1, ... , l , ν(dt ) = {h1 , ... , hk }. In particular,
hl < ν(dl ) so µ(dl ) , hl . In either case, the (l , k )-matching is not stable so (l , k ) is
not adequate.
Now, we show that if l = k ≤ m, then (l , k ) is adequate. For each t = 1, ... , m, let
t = b t−1
l c. Then, for each t = 1, ... , i , ν(ht ) = {dt+1 , ... , dt+l } and ν(dt ) = {dt+1 , ... , dt+l }.
Thus, for each t = 1, ... , m, µ(ht ) = dt . So (l , k ) is adequate at P .
Finally, if l , k ≥ m, then for each t = 1, ... , m, ν(dt ) ⊇ {h1 , ... , hm }. Since ht ∈ ν(dt ),
ht = µ(dt ). So (l , k ) is adequate at P .
If the hospitals’ interview capacity is fixed at some specific l , an important
policy decision involves where to set the doctors’ interview cap, k . Proposition 2
says that the optimal value for k is exactly at l whether the objective is to minimize
the number of blocking pairs or to maximize the match rate (the proportion of
positions that are filled). Our next result sheds light on this objective.
Proposition 3. Fix the hospitals’ interview capacity at l and consider k and k 0
such that either k 0 < k ≤ l or l ≤ k < k 0 . Suppose P ∈ P has common preferences.
The (l , k 0 )-matching has more blocking pairs and a weakly lower match rate than
the (l , k )-matching.
|D |

Proof. Let P ∈ P be such that there are common preferences. Let {dt }t=1 and
|H |

{ht }t=1 be enumerations of D and H , respectively, such that every hospital prefers
dt to dt+1 and every doctor prefers ht to ht+1 .
nj k j ko
Let m = min |Hk | , |Dl | . The interview matching is such that for each dt , if
t ≤ ml ,
ν(dt ) = {h(n−1)k +1 , ... , hnk } where n is such that (1 − n)l < t ≤ nl
21

if ml < t ≤ (m + 1)l ,



 {hmk +1 , ... , hn } if |H | ≥ mk + 1
where n = min{|H |, (m + 1)k }
ν(dt ) = 

 ∅
otherwise
and if (m + 1)n < t, ν(dt ) = ∅.
We first consider the case where when k > l and show that the number of
matched hospitals is decreasing in k and that the number of blocking pairs is
increasing in k .
Given P and its restriction to ν, the (l , k )-matching, µ, at P is such that for each
dt , if t ≤ ml ,
µ(dt ) = h(n−1)k +(t mod l ) , where n is such that (n − 1)l < t ≤ nl ,
if ml < t ≤ (m + 1)l ,



 hmk +(t mod l ) if |H | ≥ mk + (t mod l )
µ(dt ) = 

 dt
otherwise,
and if (m + 1)l < t, µ(dt ) = dt .
Let n = min{|H | − mk , |D | − ml }. Given the (l , k )-matching above, the set of
matched hospitals is
{hik +s : i = 0, ... , m − 1, s = 1 ... , l } ∪ {ht : t = mk + 1, ... , mk + n}.
Therefore, the number of matched hospitals is ml + n. Holding l fixed, this is
decreasing in k .
The (l , k )-matching is blocked by all pairs consisting of an unmatched hospital
and any doctor with a higher index. That is, (ht , dt 0 ) such that t ≤ mk , t −1 mod k ≥
l and t 0 > t. These are the only pairs that block it. Thus, the number of blocking
pairs is
m−1
X

k
X

|D | − (nk + i ).

n=0 i =l +1

Holding l fixed, this is increasing in k .
22

Now, we consider the case where k < l and show that the number of matched
hospitals is increasing in k and the number of blocking pairs is decreasing in k .
Given P and its restriction to ν, the (l , k )-matching at P is such that for each ht ,
if t ≤ mk ,
µ(ht ) = d(n−1)l +(t mod k ) , where n is such that (n − 1)l < t ≤ nl ,
if mk < t ≤ (m + 1)k ,



 hml +(t mod k ) if |D | ≥ ml + (t mod k )
µ(ht ) = 

 ht
otherwise
and if (m + 1)k < t, µ(ht ) = ht .
Let n = min{|H | − mk , |D | − ml }. Given (l , k )-matching above, the set of matched
hospitals is {ht : t ≤ mk +n. Therefore, the number of matched hospitals is mk +n.
Since k < l , this is weakly increasing in k .
The (l , k )-matching is blocked by all pairs consisting of an unmatched doctor
and any hospital with a higher index. That is, (dt , ht 0 ) such that t ≤ ml , t −1 mod l ≥
k and t 0 > t. These are the only pairs the block it. Thus, the number of blocking
pairs is
m−1
X

l
X

|D | − (nl + i ).

n=0 i =k +1

Holding l fixed, this is decreasing in k .

5

Simulations

Our analytical results are of two sorts. On one hand, Theorem 1 applies without
restrictions on preferences. However, it only has something to say about doctors’
welfare and only in regards to perturbations to an equilibrium arrangement. On the
other hand, when we focus on common preferences, Propositions 2 and 3 deliver
a clearcut policy prescription. In this section, we use simulations to bridge the gap.

23

This allows us to consider how changes in the doctors’ interview capacities affect
hospitals’ welfare, match rates, stability, and so on, in a more general setting.
While there is evidence that preferences do indeed have a common component
(Agarwal, 2015; Rees-Jones, 2018), agents care about “fit” as well. Moreover, an
idiosyncratic component is to be expected. We adopt the random utility model
of Ashlagi et al. (2017).13 Each hospital h ∈ H has a common component to its
quality, xhC , and a “fit” component, xhF . Similarly, each doctor d ∈ D has a common
component to her quality, xdC and a fit component, xdF . The utilities that h and d
enjoy from being matched to one another are

2
uh (d ) = βxdC − γ xhF − xdF + εhd
and

2
ud (h ) = βxhC − γ xhF − xdF + εdh ,
respectively, where εhd and εdh are drawn independently from the standard logistic distribution. Each xhC , xhF , xdC , and xdF is drawn independently from the uniform
distribution over [0, 1]. The coefficients β and γ weight the common and fit components, respectively. When β and γ are both zero, preferences are drawn uniformly
at random. As β → ∞, these approach common preferences. As γ increases,
preferences become more “aligned”: the fit, which is orthogonal to the common
component, becomes more important.
Our simulated market has 400 hospitals.14 We have set the number of doctors
at 470.15 The parameters for the random utility model are β = 40 and γ = 20.
Since our interest is in the effects of changes to doctors’ interview capacities,
13 This,
14 The

in turn, is adapted from Hitsch et al. (2010).
NRMP match is broken down into smaller matches by specialty. In 2020, among 50

specialties for PGY-1 programs, the largest had 8,697 positions, the 10th largest had 849 positions,
the 25th largest had 38 positions, the 49th largest had one position, and the smallest had no
positions. This data is available from the NRMP. Our chosen number of hospitals is comparable to
the 70th percentile among specialties (that is, 70% of specialities are smaller than this).
15 There were, on average, 0.85 PGY-1 positions per applicant in the 2020. Our chosen number
of doctors reflects this ratio.

24

(a) The average match rate is highest at (b) The average number of blocking pairs is
k = 5 (90.655 pairs).

lowest at k = 7 (22, 080 pairs).

Figure 1: We vary k from 1 to 100 with l fixed at 25.
we fix hospital interview capacities at l = 25. We discuss the robustness of our
findings with regards to our choices of model and parameter values in Appendix E.
Our first simulation results involve varying k from 1 to 100.16 Figure 1a shows
that the match rate increases and then decreases. On the other hand, Figure 1b
shows that the number of blocking pairs decreases and then increases. These
results are consistent with Proposition 3. However, since preferences are not
common, the match rate does not reach 100% and the number of blocking pairs
remains positive even at the optimal k —that is, the arrangement is not adequate.
Moreover, the optimal k does not equal l .
Our next set of results evaluate a hypothetical policy of restricting doctors to
a maximum of 7 interviews. We choose this as a candidate policy since it is
optimal in terms of minimizing the average number of blocking pairs (Figure 1b).
We compare this policy with the benchmark of no intervention where doctors are
completely unconstrained.
16 We

have chosen this upper bound to be high enough that further increases have little effect.

Thus, we interpret this as doctors being essentially unconstrained in how many interviews they
can accept.

25

Figure 2a shows the distribution of the number of doctors who prefer their
match under the optimal k over the benchmark as well as the distribution of those
with the opposite preference. We see that the former is considerably higher than
the latter. Though Theorem 1 applies only when the starting arrangement is adequate, Figure 2a shows that the lesson from that result does extend beyond.
Figure 2b shows the same distributions, except for hospitals. Despite the fact that
Theorem 1 does not address hospitals’ welfare, our simulations show that more
hospitals prefer the k = 7 than leaving the doctors unconstrained. The policy also
has the benefit of drastically decreasing the number of blocking pairs. Figure 2c
shows the distribution of excess blocking pairs when we compare the benchmark
matching where doctors are unconstrained to the matching under k = 7. Finally,
we compare the distribution of interviews among the doctors between the two arrangements in Figure 2d. The constraint limiting doctors to k = 7 interviews binds
for many doctors. One implication is that significantly more doctors receive zero
interviews when they are unconstrained. This is consistent with the intuition that if
interviews were costless for doctors, then highly sought after doctors would hoard
interviews and others would be left with nothing.
Finally, we consider the possibility that the NRMP could set not only a cap on
interviews that doctors can accept, but can also control the number of interviews
that hospitals offer. From Proposition 2, we know that if preferences are common,
the match rate would be maximized where l = k . Figure 3 shows that, even when
preferences are not exactly common, there are still optimal combinations of l and
k , but they typically involve l > k .
In Appendix D, we modify our model to consist of two tiers of doctors and
contrast simulations under naïve choices by hospitals (as above) to those under
a heuristic for hospitals where every choice involves a “safety” doctor from the
lower tier. The only qualitative difference is in the match rate: rather than being
unmatched, hospitals match with safety candidates. The welfare based comparisons are very similar.

26

(a) Distribution of the number of doctors (b) Distribution of the number of hospitals
who prefer their match at k = 7 over being that prefer their match at k = 7 over the docunconstrained and vice versa.

tors being unconstrained and vice versa.

(c) Distribution of the number of excess (d) Distributions of interviews at k = 7 and
blocking pairs when doctors are uncon- without a cap.

The uncapped distribu-

strained over the number of such pairs at tion vanishes with the number of interviews
k = 7.

reaching the hundreds.

Figure 2: Comparisons of the intervention of capping doctors’ interview capacities
at k = 7 to leaving doctors unconstrained.

27

Figure 3: Match rate as a function of l and k

28

6

Conclusion

The 2020-21 global pandemic has had a significant impact on the way interviews
are conducted. It has also impacted the distribution of interviews among doctors.
Through our theoretical results and simulations, we argue that the 2021 NRMP
Match was likely inferior to previous years.
In future years, the NRMP should consider policies to mitigate these effects.
Our analysis supports the idea of interview caps and our simulations provide evidence that such a policy would reduce the bottleneck created by the interview
phase. Such caps can be implemented with very limited centralization, for instance, using a ticket system.
Even if such interventions are not possible in the very short run, our policy
prescription is that residency programs should be advised to increase the number
of candidates they interview relative to previous years.
Design of a fully centralized clearinghouse is an area that remains open. As
earlier work on the interview pre-markets have shown, strategic analysis has only
been tractable under very stringent assumptions (Kadam, 2021; Lee and Schwarz,
2017; Beyhaghi, 2019). Nonetheless, the current paper adds to the evidence
(along with Echenique et al. (2020)) that a more holistic approach that includes
the interview stage is critical.
This interview-driven bottleneck is likely a factor in other matching contexts
as well, including fully decentralized labor markets. For example, we expect it
will affect the junior market for economists. This labor market typically consists
of short interviews followed by on-campus visits. Physical constraints typically
limit both the number of short interviews and on-campus visits a candidate is able
to accept. With virtual interviews and virtual “fly-outs,” we expect candidates to
accept more of both than they would otherwise. As a result, we could expect the
same bottleneck in the economics job market as in the NRMP match.

29

References
Agarwal, Nikhil (2015) “An Empirical Model of the Medical Match,” American Economic Review, Vol. 105, No. 7, pp. 1939–78, July. 24
Ashlagi, Itai, Yash Kanoria, and Jacob D. Leshno (2017) “Unbalanced Random
Matching Markets: The Stark Effect of Competition,” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 125, No. 1, pp. 69–98. 24, 42, 44, 45
Beyhaghi, Hedyeh (2019) “Approximately-optimal Mechanisms in Auction Design,
Search Theory, and Matching Markets,” Ph.D. dissertation, Cornell University.
Chapter 5: Two-Sided Matching with Limited Number of Interviews. 5, 29
Chade, Hector and Lones Smith (2006) “Simultaneous Search,” Econometrica,
Vol. 74, No. 5, pp. 1293–1307. 6, 38
Echenique, Federico, Ruy Gonzalez, Alistair Wilson, and Leeat Yariv (2020) “Top
of the Batch: Interviews and the Match.” 2, 3, 5, 6, 9, 29, 34, 42
Gale, David and Lloyd Shapley (1962) “College Admissions and the Stability of
Marriage,” American Mathematical Monthly, Vol. 69, pp. 9–15. 2
Hitsch, Gunter J., Ali Hortaçsu, and Dan Ariely (2010) “Matching and Sorting in
Online Dating,” American Economic Review, Vol. 100, No. 1, pp. 130–63, March.
24
Kadam, Sangram V (2021) “Interviewing in Matching Markets with Virtual Interviews.” 5, 29
Lee, SangMok (2016) “Incentive Compatibility of Large Centralized Matching Markets,” The Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 84, No. 1, pp. 444–463, 09. 42, 44,
45, 46
Lee, Robin S. and Michael Schwarz (2017) “Interviewing in two-sided matching
markets,” The RAND Journal of Economics, Vol. 48, No. 3, pp. 835–855. 5, 29
30

Rees-Jones, Alex (2018) “Suboptimal behavior in strategy-proof mechanisms: Evidence from the residency match,” Games and Economic Behavior, Vol. 108, pp.
317–330. 24
Roth, Alvin E. and Elliott Peranson (1999) “The Redesign of the Matching Market for American Physicians: Some Engineering Aspects of Economic Design,”
American Economic Review, Vol. 89, No. 4, pp. 748–780, September. 2, 5
Roth, Alvin E. and Marilda A. Oliveira Sotomayor (1990) Two-Sided Matching: A
Study in Game-Theoretic Modeling and Analysis, Econometric Society Monographs: Cambridge University Press. 8, 11

Appendices
A

Role of Interviews: Preference Formation and Coordination

The interviews that precede the NRMP match serve at least two important purposes. The more obvious one is preference formation: while agents have a prior
sense of their preferences, they update their preferences based on information
revealed by the interviews. Less obvious is the coordination of whom to rank. A
pair of agents can only be matched if they rank one another. In a market with
hundreds, if not thousands, of potential partners, even formulating—much less
submitting—a ranking of all possible partners is impractical. Thus agents submit
only a portion of their preferences. Interviews function as a device to coordinate
which portions they submit.
The second role of interviews that we have mentioned above is important even
in a world where interviews are completely uninformative.

31

A natural question is to ask how the analysis of this paper is affected when
we take preference formation into account. We first observe that we have drawn
conclusions about doctors’ welfare (Theorem 1) and stability (Proposition 2 and
Proposition 3). These comparisons are based on exogenous preferences. If preference formation is part of the model, then preferences are endogenous and there
is no basis for such comparisons. However, we explain below how even here the
match rate, which is an objective measure, is maximized when there is balance
between the two sides’ interview capacities.
Represent the preferences of the agents prior to the interviews by the preinterview preferences, P∈ P . As with Propositions 2 and 3, we assume that P
has common preferences.
Given an interview matching ν, for each agent i ∈ D ∪ H , let Pνi be i ’s postinterview preferences. These are the preferences that i forms through the interview process. The only requirement for Piν is that ν(i ) is the set of partners that
i ranks as acceptable. Note that we do not make any other assumptions about
how P ν relates to P . In fact, we leave the exact orderings unspecified as this is
unnecessary to draw conclusions about the match rate.
Since the pre-interview preferences are common, there is a unique interview
matching, ν, that is stable with respect to these preferences. Given ν, unlike
the two-phase process in Section 2, the next step is to use the post-interview
preferences, P ν (as opposed to (P i |ν(i ) )i ∈D ∪H ) as the input to the doctor-proposing
DA algorithm. The output is what we call the (l, k)-matching with updating.
Note that if the interviews either lead to a matching (l = k = 1) or do not impose any constraints (l , k ≥ min{|D |, |H |}), then a total of min{|D |, |H |} pairs form.
In the proof of below, we demonstrate that when l = k , the (l , k )-matching with
updating matches as many pairs as this “first best” benchmark. Increasing the
gap between l and k causes the (l , k )-matching with updating to fall short of this
benchmark regardless of what the updated preferences are. This is a straightforward consequence of the pigeon hole principle.
Proposition 4. Fix the hospitals’ interview capacity at l and consider k and k 0
32

such that either k 0 < k ≤ l or l ≤ k < k 0 . The (l , k 0 )-matching with updating has a
weakly lower match rate than the (l , k )-matching with updating.
|D |

|H |

Proof. Let {dt }t=1 and {ht }t=1 be enumerations of D and H , respectively, such that
every hospital prefers dt to dt+1 and every doctor prefers ht to ht+1 under P .
nj k j ko
Let m = min |Hk | , |Dl | . For each n = 1, ... , m, let
Dn = {dt : (n − 1)l < t ≤ nl }
and
Hn = {ht : (n − 1)k < t ≤ nk }.
By definition of m, either |D | < (m + 1)l or |H | < (m + 1)k . Let tD = min{|D |, (m + 1)l },
tH = min{|H |, (m + 1)k },
Dm+1 = {dt : ml < t ≤ tD } ,
and
Hm+1 = {ht : mk < t ≤ tH }
The unique pairwise stable interview matching, ν, is such that for each n = 1, ... , m+
1, every doctor in Dn is interviewed by every hospital in Hn —that is, for each
d ∈ Dn , ν(d ) = Hn and for each h ∈ Hn , ν(h ) = Dn . Moreover, every doctor or hospital not in one of these sets has no interviews—that is, if there is dt such that
t > tD , then ν(dt ) = ∅ and if there is ht such that t > tH , then ν(ht ) = ∅.
Now we consider the (l , k )-matching with updating, µ. Having received no interviews, any doctor or hospital with index higher than tD or tH , respectively, is necessarily unmatched regardless of the post-interview preferences. Since each agent’s
post-interview preferences only rank those agents in one’s interview matching as
acceptable, for each n = 1, ... , m + 1, we have that
1. for each d ∈ Dn , µ(d ) ∈ Hn ∪ {d } and
2. for each h ∈ Hn , µ(h ) ∈ Dn ∪ {h }.

33

If l < k , then for each n = 1, ... , m, |Dn | = l < k = |Hn |. So exactly k − l hospitals
in Hn are unmatched. There are m(k − l ) such hospitals. If there are fewer hospitals in Hm+1 than doctors in Dm+1 , then |Hm+1 | − |Dm+1 | additional hospitals are
unmatched. That is, the number of unmatched hospitals among those in Hm+1 is
max{0, |Hm+1 | − |Dm+1 |} = max{0, (tH − mk ) − (tD − ml )} = max{0, (tH − tD ) − m(k − l )}.
So the total number of unmatched hospitals is
m(k − l ) + max{0, (tH − tD ) − m(k − l )},
which is weakly increasing in k .
If k < l , then every hospital ht such that t ≤ mk is matched by µ. As when
l < k , max{0, (tH − tD ) − m(k − l )} hospitals among those in Hm+1 are unmatched
by µ. Every hospital ht such that t > tH is also unmatched. Thus, the number of
hospitals that µ leaves unmatched is max{0, |H |−(mk +|D |−ml )} = max{0, |H |−|D |+
m(l − k )}, which is weakly decreasing in k .
Proposition 4 shows that the bottleneck of imbalanced interview capacities occurs at the interview stage. In this sense, the preference formation role of interviews is orthogonal to our main point regarding the harm such imbalance causes.

B

Doctor-optimal Interview Matching

The only difference between our model and that of Echenique et al. (2020) is that
we suppose that the interview matching is hospital-optimal rather than doctoroptimal. Their modeling choice is natural for the question they ask as it gives each
doctor her best stable set of interviews. Thus, their result that most doctors match
with hospitals they rank highly can only be stronger for other interview matchings.
For our analysis, the doctor-optimal interview matching does not have this natural
appeal. To the contrary, hospital-proposing DA is a reasonable approximation
of the interview assignment process. Nonetheless, our results are not driven by
this choice. The only proof that relies on this choice is that of Theorem 1. In
this section, we show that the result holds even for the doctor-optimal interview
34

matching followed by the doctor-optimal final matching. In what follows, we use
the same terminology and notation as before, with the understanding that the
interview matching is doctor-optimal.
As in the statement of the theorem, suppose that for each d ∈ D , κd ≤ κd0 . We
show below that the Lemmas 2 and 3 hold even with the change from the hospitaloptimal interview matching to the doctor-optimal interview matching. The key is
to establish that, in the interview phase, if a doctor d is rejected by a hospital h
under capacities κ, then h rejects her under κ0 as well. Given capacities κ̄, let
Ad (m; κ̄) be the hospitals that d proposes to and Rd (m; κ̄) be the hospitals that
reject doctor d by the end of round m of the interview phase. We show that these
sets are monotonic in κ.
Claim 3. For any positive integer m,
Rd (m; κ) ⊆ Rd (m; κ0 )
Ad (m; κ) ⊆ Ad (m; κ0 )
Proof. We proceed by induction on m, the base case being m = 1. In the first
round of the interview phase, each d ∈ D proposes to her favorite hospitals up to
her interview capacity. Since every doctor proposes to at least as many hospitals
under κ0 as under κ, every hospital receives at least as many proposals under κ0
as under κ. Therefore, if a doctor d is rejected by a hospital h in the first round of
the interview phase under κ, she is also rejected by h in the first round under κ0 .
Now consider a round m > 1 of the interview phase and suppose for each doctor
d that Rd (m − 1; κ) ⊆ Rd (m − 1; κ0 ) and Ad (m − 1; κ) ⊆ Ad (m − 1; κ0 ). In round m,
each d ∈ D proposes to her favorite hospitals that have not yet rejected her up
to her interviewing capacity. Under κ, d proposes to her κd favorite hospitals in
H \ Rd (m − 1; κ). Under κ0 , she proposes to her κd0 favorite hospitals in H \ Rd (m −
1; κ0 ). By the inductive hypothesis, H \Rd (m −1; κ0 ) ⊆ H \Rd (m −1; κ). Therefore, if d
proposes to h under κ, either she proposes to h under κ0 as well (she is choosing
more hospitals from a smaller set of options) or she has already proposed to and
has been rejected by h under κ0 . In either case, if h ∈ Ad (m; κ), then h ∈ Ad (m; κ0 ).
35

Since each hospital h receives more proposals but its capacity does not change, if
h rejects doctor d under κ, she also rejects doctor d when choosing from a larger
set of doctors who have proposed to it under κ0 . Therefore, if h ∈ Rd (m; κ), then
h ∈ Rd (m; κ0 ).
We now explain how Claim 3 implies that Lemmas 2 and 3 hold even when we
switch to the doctor-optimal interview matching. Let ν and µ be the interview and
final matchings respectively, under (ι, κ). Similarly, let ν 0 and µ0 be the interview
and final matchings under (ι, κ0 ).
Lemma 2 says that for each d ∈ D , if h ∈ ν 0 (d ) \ ν(d ), then µ(d ) Pd h . Given
κ̄, let Rd (κ̄) denote the set of hospitals that reject d in any round of the interview
phase under capacities κ̄. By Claim 3, Rd (κ) ⊆ Rd (κ0 ). Under κ, ν(d ) consists
of d ’s κd most preferred hospitals in H \ Rd (κ). That is, the κd highest-ranked
hospitals that did not reject her. Under κ0 , ν 0 (d ) comprises d ’s κd0 most preferred
hospitals in H \ Rd (κ0 ). As H \ Rd (κ0 ) ⊆ H \ Rd (κ), if h 0 ∈ ν 0 (d ) \ ν(d ), then for every
h ∈ ν(d ), h Pd h 0 . In words, since d is interviewed by h under κ, she was not
rejected by h under κ. As more hospitals rejected d under κ0 than under κ, h
does not reject d under κ. Therefore, d could have proposed to h under κ, but
she chose not to. Therefore, by revealed preference, she prefers all hospitals in
ν(d ) to any of her “new” interviews under κ0 (those in ν 0 (h ) \ ν(h )).
Lemma 3 said that if d ∈ v 0 (h ), d 0 ∈ v(h ), and d 0 Ph d , then d 0 ∈ v 0 (h ). By
Claim 3, d 0 proposes to at least as many hospitals in the interview phase under
κ0 as under κ. Since d 0 proposes to h under κ, she also proposes to h under κ0 .
Each hospital h accepts its ιh favorite applicants, so if it accepts d , it must also
accept d 0 .
Since Lemmas 2 and 3 hold, the remainder of the proof follows exactly as in
Section 3.

36

C

Choice Functions for Interview Phase

In the interview phase, we compute a many-to-many matching. However, each
doctor and each hospital only ultimately matches to at most one other partner,
and each has strict preferences over partners. This necessitates the definition
of a choice function over sets of partners. Consistent with the assumption of
non-strategic behavior with complete information, we focus on acceptant choice
functions that are responsive to preferences over partners and constrained by
interview capacity. That is, given P ∈ P ,
• From the set H 0 ⊆ H , each d ∈ D chooses the κd best elements of H 0 according to Pd :


{h ∈ H 0 : h Pd d }
if |{h ∈ H 0 : h Pd d }| ≤ κd and







0
Cd (H ) = 


 B ⊆ {h ∈ H 0 : h Pd d } such that |B | = κd and for each h ∈ B




and each h 0 ∈ H 0 \ B , h Pd h 0 otherwise.
• From the set D 0 ⊆ D , each h ∈ H chooses the κh best elements of D 0 according to Ph :


{d ∈ D 0 : d Ph h }
if |{d ∈ D 0 : d Ph h }| ≤ ιh and







0
Ch (D ) = 


B ⊆ {d ∈ D 0 : d Ph h } such that |B | = ιh and for each d ∈ B





and each d 0 ∈ D 0 \ B , d Ph d 0 otherwise.

D

Epilogue: What Actually Happened

The 2021 “Match Day”—the day the NRMP announces the results of the match—
was on March 19. In the words of the NRMP President and CEO, Donna L. Lamb,
The application and recruitment cycle was upended as a result of the
pandemic, yet the results of the Match continue to demonstrate strong
37

and consistent outcomes for participants.17
Indeed, contrary to our results, there was a 2.6 percent increase in PGY-1 positions filled.
In this section, we argue that there is reason to be skeptical about the claim that
the 2021 match is “strong and consistent.” In particular, we contend that focusing
on match rates leads one to miss an effect that is analogous to our results.
We have assumed that hospitals naïvely extend interview invitations to their
most preferred doctors first and that these trickle down to less preferred doctors.
However, hospitals are not naïve in practice and use heuristics.18 Most heuristics
include an option that has a high match probability even if it is ranked relatively
low.19 We call these candidates “safety” candidates. When hospitals offer interviews in this way, an increase to k increases the proportion of hospitals that match
with their safety candidates rather than the number of unfilled positions. In other
words, hospitals tend to match with lower ranked doctors, the likelihood of matching for higher tier candidates decreases, and the likelihood of matching for lower
tier candidates increases.
The very limited information that the NRMP has published so far supports
this conjecture. We do not have access to the actual preferences of residency
programs, nor their submitted rankings. Yet, the reported interview and ranking
patterns in the 2020 NRMP Program Director Survey reveal a systematic preference for MD Seniors (graduating students from US MD medical schools) over
DO Seniors (graduating from US DO medical schools) as well as MD and DO
Grads (those who have previously graduated from US medical schools but had
17 NRMP

Press Release dated March 19, 2021.
strategies depend critically on the probability of matching with a doctor conditional

18 Optimal

on interviewing her (Chade and Smith, 2006). In our context, these probabilities are dependent
not only on other hospitals’ preferences and strategies but also on the rest of the hospital’s own
interview choices. It is implausible that hospitals have this information and that they then compute
the optimal portfolio of doctors to interview.
19 Even the optimal solution has this property when being unmatched is very unattractive relative
to matching with lower ranked candidates (Chade and Smith, 2006).

38

not matched). Nonetheless, the proportion of positions filled by MD Seniors declined slightly while the proportions of positions filled by the latter three increased
slightly.20 This lends support to our hypothesis that more positions were filled by
safety candidates.
In what follows, we consider a variation of our model and contrast the matching
patterns generated by the naïve behavior and a particular heuristic. The goal is
to demonstrate the above explanation of how increased matches to safety candidates may mask the effects of increased interview capacities.
The change to the model is that we separate the doctors into two tiers—D1
and D2 (so D1 ∩ D2 = ∅ and D1 ∪ D2 = D )—such that every hospital prefers every
doctor in D1 to every doctor in D2 . We achieve this change by adding β + γ + 10
to uh (d ), as specified in Section 5, for each d ∈ D1 . We have chosen D1 such that
|D1 | = 200.
To model behavior under the heuristic, we use the following choice functions
for hospitals, as opposed to those defined in Appendix C. From a set D 0 ⊆ D , hospital h ∈ H chooses a safety candidate from the second tier, if one is available, and
fills the remaining slots by choosing the best options in D 0 . Note that in order to
ensure that the interview matching (the hospital-proposing Deferred Acceptance)
algorithm terminates, hospitals do not reconsider tentatively accepted interview
offers. Thus, the choice function is parameterized by the number of interview offers to be made—in each round of the algorithm, the number of doctors a hospital
chooses is its interview capacity minus the number of tentatively accepted offers
in the previous round. Thus, when the hospital’s preferences over the doctors are
represented by Ph it chooses n doctors from D 0 ⊂ D as follows: If D ⊆ D1 ,


{d ∈ D 0 : d Ph h }
if |{d ∈ D 0 : d Ph h }| ≤ n and







0
Ch (n, D ) = 


B ⊆ {d ∈ D 0 : d Ph h } such that |B | = n and for each d ∈ B





and each d 0 ∈ D 0 \ B , d P d 0 otherwise.
h

20 See

the NRMP Reports for 2020 and 2021.

39

(a) Naïve choices

(b) Heuristic choices

Figure 4: We vary k from 1 to 100 with l fixed at 25 and display the corresponding
match rate for naïve behavior by the hospitals, as well as the heuristic where each
choice includes a safety candidate.
Otherwise, let d s be chosen uniformly at random from D 0 ∩ D2 .21 Then,



{d s } ∪ {d ∈ D 0 : d Ph h } if |{d ∈ D 0 \ {d s } : d Ph h }| ≤ n − 1 and










S

where B ⊆ {d ∈ D 0 \ {d s } : d Ph h }
 {d } ∪ B
0
Ch (n, D ) = 


is such that |B | = n − 1 and for each d ∈ B






and each d 0 ∈ D 0 \ (B ∪ {d s }), d Ph d 0





otherwise.
We first observe that under the heuristic, the effect that increasing k has on the
match rate all but disappears. In Figures 4a and 4b we show the effects for the
naïve behavior and the heuristic respectively.22 The dramatic difference in the
match rates is entirely accounted for by the number of positions that are filled by
second tier candidates. In other words, matching with lower ranked candidates is
the alternative to being unmatched. This is easily seen in the comparison between
Figures 5a and 5b.
21 Hospitals
22 All

randomize their safety choice d s to avoid overlap.
parameter values are the same as in Section 5.

40

(a) Naïve choices

(b) Heuristic choices

Figure 5: For a range of values of k , with l fixed at 25, we see that under naïve
choices more positions are unfilled as k increases. Under the heuristic, the match
rate does not drop substantially, but positions are filled by lower ranked candidates. In either case, the number of positions filled by top tier candidates decreases with k , which is consistent with our theory.

41

Other than the match rate, the remaining patterns that we presented in Section 5 persist with our modified model under the heuristic for hospitals’ choices.
Under the heuristic, lower ranked doctors who would be unmatched at lower k
gain from the misallocation of interviews among higher ranked doctors. Nonetheless, more doctors prefer the outcome under a cap of 13 than prefer the benchmark with no cap as shown in Figure 6a.23 As noted above, hospitals tend to
match with lower ranked doctors and therefore tend to be worse off, as shown in
Figure 6b. The result, as before, is driven by interview hoarding, which can be
seen from the comparison of interview distributions with a cap of 13 and with no
cap in Figure 6c.

E

Robustness of Simulations: Choice of Random
Utility Model and Parameters

In Section 5, we have adopted the random utility model of Ashlagi et al. (2017).
Moreover, we have presented our results for fixed values of several parameters:
β = 40, γ = 20, l = 25, |D | = 470, and |H | = 400. In this appendix, we discuss the
robustness of our findings with regards to these choices.
We start with the random utility model. A very natural alternative is that of
Lee (2016), which is the model that Echenique et al. (2020) have adopted. This
model does not include a fit component, so a doctor’s utility from being matched
to a hospital is a convex combination of a common (across all doctors) value
and an idiosyncratic (to that doctor) value. A hospital’s utility from being matched
to a doctor is similarly comprised. Thus, each hospital h ∈ H has a common
component to its quality, xhC , and each doctor has a common component to her
quality, xdC . Aside from this, for each doctor-hospital pair, d and h , εdh is the
idiosyncratic value that d assigns to h and εhd is the idiosyncratic value that h
assigns to d . Then, the utilities that h and d enjoy from being matched to one
23 We

chose 13 as this maximizes the match rate for the tiered model under the heuristic.

42

(a) Distribution of the number of doctors (b) Distribution of the number of hospitals
who prefer their match at k = 13 over being that prefer their match at k = 13 over the
unconstrained and vice versa.

doctors being unconstrained and vice versa.

(c) Distributions of interviews at k = 13 and
without a cap. The uncapped distribution
vanishes when the number of interviews
reach the hundreds.

Figure 6: Results for the tiered model with heuristic choices for the hospitals that
parallel our results from Section 5.

43

another are
uh (d ) = αxdC + (1 − α)εhd
and
ud (h ) = αxhC + (1 − α)εdh ,
respectively.
The random variables xhC , xdC , εdh , and εhd are all independently drawn from the
uniform distribution over [0, 1]. The coefficients α and (1 − α) weight the common
and idiosyncratic components, respectively.
To make an apples-to-apples comparison between the two models, we set
γ = 0 since the Lee (2016) model does not have a fit component. The remaining
difference is the distribution of the idiosyncratic components: the standard logistic distribution in the former and the uniform distribution over [0, 1] in the latter.
Though these distributions have different supports, we can relate the two models
by considering, for each pair d , d 0 ∈ D and each h ∈ H , the degree of correlation
between ud (h ) and ud 0 (h ) as given by the Pearson correlation coefficient.24 For
the Lee (2016) model with parameter α, it is

α 2/α 2 +(1−α)2 .

For the Ashlagi et al.

(2017) model with parameter β (and γ = 0), it is β 2/β 2 +(2π)2 . Thus, utilities have the
same linear correlation in the two models when
α=

β
.
β + 2π

We display this relationship in Figure 7. The value of 40 that we have chosen for
β in Section 5 corresponds to an α of 0.864.
Now consider γ. The higher γ is, the more aligned preferences are across
the two sides of the market. However, when we compare two doctors, when γ >
0, the further apart they are in terms of their fit component, the less correlated
their utilities are. Thus, since

β 2/β 2 +(2π)2

is the correlation between the utilities of

two doctors with the same fit component, it is an upper bound on the correlation
between the preferences of any two doctors. Our chosen value of γ is on the
same order of magnitude as β.
24 Given the symmetry of both models,

uh (d ) and uh 0 (d ) for for each pair

h,h0

we could equivalently state this as the correlation between

∈ H and each d ∈ D .

44

Figure 7: Locus of α and β pairs that result in the same linear correlation between
two doctors’ (hospitals’) utilities from the same hospital (doctor) in the models of
Lee (2016) and Ashlagi et al. (2017), respectively
.
We intend for our simulation results to be suggestive of how the insights from
our analytical results may extend beyond the assumptions that we make for the
sake of tractability. To this end, none of the choices that we have made are critical
in driving the effects we describe in Section 5. We consider each of these choices
in turn and make our point by focusing on how the match rate responds to different
values of k as shown in Figure 1a. In other words, we show how this relationship
changes as we vary our model and parameter choices. In what follows, we vary
only one choice at a time, leaving fixed the other parameters as in Section 5.
In Figure 8, we consider various values of α and use the Lee (2016) model.
As long as there is at least moderate correlation in preferences, we observe the
effect, albeit with varying magnitude. Indeed, as the correlation between utilities
grows, the effect becomes stronger, eventually converging to the one described
by Proposition 3 when α = 1.
In Figure 9, we consider various combinations of β and γ. Again, as β grows,
the correlation in preferences increases and the effect becomes stronger. However, as discussed above, γ > 0 has the effect of decreasing the correlation between utilities of agents on the same side on average. Consistent with this under-

45

Figure 8: The average match rates for each k under the random utility model of
Lee (2016) at various values of α.
standing, we see that for a fixed value of β, the lower γ is, the stronger the effect.
The next parameter we vary is the number of doctors. Recall that we fixed the
number of hospitals at 400 for the simulations reported in Section 5. We leave this
number fixed in Figure 10 but vary the number of doctors. For the cases where
there are fewer than 400 doctors, the match rate is necessarily lower than 100%.
Keeping the ratio of hospitals to doctors the same, we next proportionally vary
the size of the market in Figure 11. The value of k that maximizes the match rate
decreases as the market becomes larger.
Finally, we consider the value of l that we have fixed at 25 for the simulations
in Section 5. Though the effect persists no matter the value of l , the magnitude
decreases as l increases as we show in Figure 12. This suggests that a policy
that induces hospitals to interview more candidates would alleviate the problem to
some extent.

46

Figure 9: The average match rates for each k at various values of β and γ.

Figure 10: The average match rates for each k for different numbers of doctors
when there are 400 hospitals.
47

Figure 11: The average match rates for each k for different market sizes with the
ratio of hospitals to doctors fixed at

400
470 .

48

Figure 12: The average match rates for each k for different values of l , the hospitals’ interview capacity.

49

