arXiv:2102.04519v1 [cs.IT] 8 Feb 2021

Semiquantitative Group Testing
in at Most Two Rounds
Mahdi Cheraghchi

Ryan Gabrys

Olgica Milenkovic

Department of EECS
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI
Email: mahdich@umich.edu

Naval Information Warfare Center,
San Diego, and UIUC, Urbana, IL
Email: ryan.gabrys@gmail.com

Department of ECE
University of Illinois, Urbana, IL
Email: milenkov@illinois.edu

Abstract—Semiquantitative group testing (SQGT) is a pooling
method in which the test outcomes represent bounded intervals
for the number of defectives. Alternatively, it may be viewed
as an adder channel with quantized outputs. SQGT represents
a natural choice for Covid-19 group testing as it allows for
a straightforward interpretation of the cycle threshold values
produced by polymerase chain reactions (PCR). Prior work on
SQGT did not address the need for adaptive testing with a
small number of rounds as required in practice. We propose
conceptually simple methods for 2-round and nonadaptive SQGT
that significantly improve upon existing schemes by using ideas
on nonbinary measurement matrices based on expander graphs
and list-disjunct matrices.

I. I NTRODUCTION
Group testing (GT) is a scheme designed to efficiently
identify a small set of subjects with a particular property
(standardly referred to as defectives) within a large population,
first introduced by Dorfman [1] and further studied in many
other works, including [2]–[4]. Group testing entails testing a
collection of carefully selected subpopulations and reporting
for each subgroup a binary answer: A positive answer is
indicative of the existence of at least one defective in the
subgroup while a negative answer implies the absence of
defectives. Given that screening protocols are extensively used
in engineering and science, group testing has found widespread applications in communication theory, signal processing, computer science, and computational biology [3], [5].
Many different variants of group testing have been proposed
in the literature [1], [3], [6]. These include threshold group
testing proposed by Damaschke [7] and quantitative (additive)
group testing studied by Lindstróm and Du and Hwang [6], [8],
[9]. In the latter case, the test results report the exact number of
defectives in the test subpool. In the former case, if the number
of defectives in a test is smaller than a lower threshold, the test
outcome is negative; if the number of defectives is larger than
an upper threshold, the test outcome is positive; otherwise,
the result is arbitrary (positive or negative). To bridge the
two above described paradigms, Emad and Milenkovic [10]–
[12] introduced the notion of semiquantitative group testing
(SQGT). SQGT represents a unifying framework of a number
of testing protocols, including conventional, quantitative and
gapless threshold group testing and the schemes by D’yachkov
M. Cheraghchi’s research was partially supported by the National Science
Foundation under Grant No. CCF-2006455.

and Rykov [13], [14]. In SQGT, the result of a test is a
nonbinary value that depends on the number of defectives
through a fixed set of thresholds. The SQGT model may also
be viewed as a quantitative group testing method followed
by a quantizer. The original motivation for introducing SQGT
models is genotyping; more recently, the model has been used
by Gabrys et al. [15] to describe the test outcomes of a Covid19 testing process known as real-time reverse-transcriptase
polymerase chain reaction (PCR).
In nonadaptive SQGT, each subject is assigned a unique
binary or nonbinary indicator word of length equal to the total
number of tests. These indicators are arranged column-wise
in a test matrix. Each coordinate in the codeword assigned
to a subject corresponds to a test, and its value reflects the
“concentration” of the sample corresponding to the given
subject in the test. Note that the concentrations are nonnegative
integers that usually correspond to the number of units of
the genetic material of an individual subject. Two families
of nonadaptive SQGT codes, SQ-disjunct and SQ-separable,
were analyzed in [11], [12]. In the same work, a number of
constructions for nonadaptive uniform and nonuniform (quantized) SQGT codes were presented but no results were reported
for adaptive tests. The more recent work [15] introduced the
first combinatorial and probabilistic adaptive SQGT (ASQGT)
schemes, the former extending the work of Hwang [16] on
generalized binary group testing. The proposed combinatorial
ASQGT schemes involve what is referred to as parallel and
deep search methods that lead to a relatively large number
of testing rounds. This is an undesirable feature for practical
implementations of SQGT in Covid-19 testing.
Here, we describe the first known combinatorial tworound adaptive SQGT (ASQGT) for a special selection of
(quantization)
thresholds
studied in [15]. The scheme uses
´
¯
d log log τ
n
O
log
tests
for
n subjects, d defectives and τ
log τ
d
SQGT thresholds. It builds upon the ideas of list-disjunct
group testing [17] and like the approach [15] uses nonbinary
test matrices obtained by careful linear combining of the rows
of a binary disjunct matrix. The described two-round ASQGT
protocol differs from the information-theoretic bound only by
about a factor log τ. We then proceed to improve existing
nonadaptive protocols by extending the construction of Porat
and Rothschild [18].

The paper is organized as follows. Sections III describes our
main result, the first known two-round ASQGT. Section IV
presents new nonadaptive SQGT schemes that significantly
improve upon previous constructions [11], [12] and imply new
upper bounds for nonadaptive SQGT.
II. T ERMINOLOGY, GT BACKGROUND ,

AND

B OUNDS

We start with some relevant terminology. All parameters are
denoted by small-case letters, while vectors and matrices are
denoted by bold-face small-case and capitalized Latin letters,
respectively. Entries of the vectors are indexed by subscripts
while matrix entries are indexed by pairs of integers within
parentheses. Unless stated otherwise, all logs are to base 2.
Assume that there are n ą 1 test subjects labeled by
elements in rns :“ t1, . . . , nu among which d ă n are
defective (i.e, infected). In conventional group testing, we
summarize the set of tests through a binary matrix B mˆn in
which every column of the matrix uniquely characterizes an
individual and each row represents a test. The pi, jqth entry
of B, Bpi, jq, equals 1 if and only if the individual labeled j
is included in the ith test. Let t I P t0, 1um denote the binary
vector that results from m tests using B, assuming that the
set of infected individuals equals I Ă rns, with |I| ď d.
Whenever clear from the context, we omit the subscript I.
In conventional group testing t I plq “ 1 if and only if the l th
test includes at least one element from I. Let t L P t0, 1um be
defined analogously for another set L Ă rns. We say that a set
L is consistent with I if t L ď t I entrywise.
The matrix Bmˆn is termed d-disjunct if no vector t I for
|I| ď d contains in its support a column of B not indexed by I.
The disjunctness property ensures that the test results obtained
from B uniquely identify the set of defectives. A matrix B
is termed pd, ℓq-list-disjunct if the tests output a superset of
the defectives of size at most ℓ ` d; for such a matrix, the
size of any list L consistent with I is at most ℓ ` d. Clearly,
a matrix B which is d-disjunct is equivalent to one which
is pd, 0q-list-disjunct. The notion of list-disjunct matrices was
explicitly formulated (in an equivalent form) in [19] and is
also essentially equivalent to what was defined earlier in [20].
We review the following known results pertaining to the
existence of pd, ℓq-list-disjunct test matrices B P t0, 1umˆn
with ℓ “ O pdq and m “ O pd log nd q. First, note that it is
straightforward to see that for a maximal L one has I Ď L.
Therefore, as noted in [21], the existence of a pd, ℓq-listdisjunct test matrix B P t0, 1umˆn with ℓ “ O pdq naturally
implies a two-round testing scheme: The first round of tests is
governed by the rows of B while the second round involves
individually testing subjects in L. Randomized and explicit
constructions of list-disjunct matrices exist, particularly via
expander graphs [14], [17], [19]–[21]. The best known construction which achieves an optimal number of rows and nearly
linear time recovery (in the number of rows) is given by [22].
The best lower bound on the number of tests necessary for
an adaptive ASQGT scheme was established in [15] via a
simple counting argument and the bound equals logd τ log nd .
In the next section, we establish the existence of a two-round

scheme that differs from this lower bound by a factor of
log log τ only. For the single-round setting, using a variation
of the argument employed by Füredi [23] in the context of
cover-free codes, one can show that the corresponding number
2
of tests scales as plogd τ q3 logd n whereas the construction from
Section IV implies the existence of a scheme that requires
d2
at most log
τ log n tests. This lower bound applies to not only
general nonadaptive SQGT, but in fact the particular saturation
model as well, which is the focus of this work. The derivation
of the bound is relegated to the full version of the paper.
III. T WO -ROUND ASQGT
Let G be a bipartite graph with a vertex partition P (people)
and T (tests) such that every vertex in P has degree k (i.e.,
k neighbors) and |P | “ n, |T | “ m. We say that G is an
pα, βq-expander if every P Ď P of size at most α|P | has at
least β|P| neighbors in T . The values of the parameters n, m
are dictated by the expansion factors α, β. It is also worth
pointing out that explicit constructions of expander graphs with
parameters of interest in our derivations may not be known,
but their existence is guaranteed via probabilistic arguments.
We say that a set of vertices T P T is covered by a set P Ď P
if for every vertex t P T, there exists a vertex p P P which is
connected to t. We say that a vertex t P T is uniquely covered
(or a unique neighbor) of P if it is the neighbor of exactly one
vertex p P P. Henceforth, for a set of vertices P, let NpPq Ď T
denote the neighbors of P and let Nu pPq Ď T denote the set
of unique neighbors of P. Furthermore, we say that a vertex
t P T is covered h times by P if it is connected to exactly
h different vertices in P. The next results may be obtained
through a straightforward modification of existing results.
Lemma 1. [19] Suppose that G is an pα, βq-expander where
every vertex in P has k neighbors and β ą 3k
4 . Let I Ď P
be a subset of size at most |I| ď d. Then for any P Ď P such
that P X I “ H, |P| ě |I| ` 2 and |P Y I| ď α|P |, we have:
ˇ
ˇ
ˇ
ˇ
ˇ Nu pP Y IqzNpIqˇ ě k.

Thus, given the previous lemma, it follows that there exists
at least one test in NpP Y Iq that is not covered by an
element of I. Using this observation, we construct the m ˆ n
binary matrix B as follows. Suppose that G is an expander as
previously described. We assume that the vertices in P and
T are lexicographically ordered so that we can refer to the ith
vertex in T as i and the jth vertex in P as j. Then, for i P T
and j P P ,
#
1, if an edge exists between i and j in G ,
(1)
Bpi, jq “
0, otherwise.

Thus, as a result of the construction for B, we see that we can
uniquely associate each column of B with a vertex in P and
each row of B with a vertex in T .
The next two results follow immediately from the previous
discussion.

Corollary 2. Suppose we are given two sets I, L Ď P such that
I Ď L. If L is consistent with I under B and |L| ď α|P |, then
|L| ă 2|I| ` 2.
Lemma 3. Suppose B is as defined in ( 1) and the set of infected
individuals satisfies |I| ď d. Then, testing with B recovers a set
L Ď P such that |L| “ O pdq and I Ď L.
The following lemma is known [3] and follows from a
standard randomized construction:
Lemma 4. Suppose that α “ 2dn`2 and let m “ 8e2 kαn, where
e is the base of the natural logarithm. Then, for k “ O plog α1 q
there exists an pα, βq-expander graph G with bipartition P , T
such that |P | “ n and |T | “ m, and β “ 3k
4 .
The previous result implies the following theorem.


S p1 q
. Let B be as defined in (1) and for simplicity,
S p2 q
assume that γ | m. Then, for i P r1, m
γ s and j P r1, ns, we set
S “

„

Sp1q pi, jq “ Bppi ´ 1qγ ` 1, jq ` p4γqBppi ´ 1qγ ` 2, jq
2

` p4γq Bppi ´ 1qγ ` 3, jq ` ¨ ¨ ¨ ` p4γq
S

p2q

γ ´1

pi, jq “ Bppi ´ 1qγ ` 1, jq ` Bppi ´ 1qγ ` 2, jq

(2)

Bpiγ, jq;
(3)

` Bppi ´ 1qγ ` 3, jq ` ¨ ¨ ¨ ` Bpiγ, jq.
Note that both Sp1q and Sp2q are obtained linear combination
of rows of B, but the scaling factors are different. The SQGT
test matrix S has 2 m
γ rows and consequently the same number
of tests. The tests involve taking an integer number of sample
units dictated by the nonbinary entries in S. The nonbinary
(semi-quantitative) test outcome vector will be denoted by s.
Let Epaq denote the p4γq-ary expansion of the natural number a in vector form. More precisely, if a “
2
a0 ` a1 4γ ` a2 p4γq
` ¨ ¨ ¨ ` aγ´1 p4γqγ´1, then Epaq “
´
¯
a0 , a1 , . . . , aγ´1 , where ai , i P r0, 4γ ´ 1s. Our decod-

Theorem 5. There exists a conventional two-stage GT scheme
that requires at most

ing procedure operates as follows. Suppose that sp1q “
p1q
p1q
ps1 , . . . , s m q represents the results of the (quantized) testing

´
n¯
O 8e2 d log
d

using the matrix (2). We apply the map E to sp1q entrywise.
We then use an expander-based decoding procedure on this
vector to recover a “noisy” set of test values - the “noise” is
due to the that the matrix Sp2q pi, jq can handle only up to 4γ
defectives.
¯
´
p1q
p1q
p1q
To this end, let s1 “ Eps1 q, Eps2 q, . . . , Eps m q “
γ¯
´ 1
1
s
“
ps11 , s12 , . . . , s1m q and let t̂pbq “
r τ1 s, . . . , r sτm s
¯
´
pb q pb q
pb q
pb q
t̂1 , t̂2 , . . . , t̂m P t0, 1um . Note that t̂i “ 0 if s1i ą 0 and
´
¯
zero otherwise. For shorthand, we write f τ Ñb sp1q “ t̂pbq .
We have the following claim.

γ

tests and can identify a set of infected individuals of size at most
d from a population of size n.
We remark that the best known explicit constructions of
bipartite expanders are still inferior to the optimal bounds
achieved by random expanders in Lemma 4. For example,
using [24] one can get Opd1`α plog nqOp1{αq q tests for any
fixed α ą 0, and [25] would achieve Opd exppplog log nq3 qq
tests, similar to the derivation in [20].
We now discuss how to use the matrix B to design a
specialized two-round SQGT testing scheme for τ ą 2.
We focus on a special case of uniform SQGT with saturation [15] for which we are given τ thresholds. The test
outcome vector for a set I of defectives is such that s I plq “ 0
if the l th test includes no defectives, s I plq “ 1 if the l th test
includes 1 defective, . . . , s I plq “ τ ´ 2 if the l th test includes
τ ´ 2 defectives and s I plq “ τ ´ 1 if the number of defectives
in the l th test exceeds τ ´ 2. To simplify the notation, we
assume that τ “ p4γqγ , for some positive integer γ.
We show the existence of a two-round testing scheme that
differs from the information theoretic lower bound from [15]
by only a factor of roughly log τ. As discussed earlier,
we only focus on the first round, since the second one is
straightforward. The key idea used to construct the test matrix
for the first round is to start with list-disjunct expander-based
binary test matrix and then merge the rows via specialized
linear combinations to reduce the number of tests and increase
the size of the alphabet used for the codebook.
We start by introducing two matrices Sp1q and Sp2q that will
be subsequently concatenated into the “global” SQGT matrix

Claim 6. Let t P t0, 1um denote the test output based on the
binary matrix B, let sp1q be the test output generated via Sp1q
and let t̂pbq be as defined above.Then,
´
¯ dk
.
d H t̂pbq , t ď
4
p1q

Proof: Let f τ Ñb psi q “ ptγpi´1q`1, . . . , tγi q be the
p1q

mapping that corresponds to si . For some j P r0, γ ´ 1s,
let vertex pi ´ 1qγ ` j P T be covered ě 4γ times. Such a
vertex may be in error (due to the use of the 4γ-ary expansion).
Since the set I Ď P has at most |I|k neighbors in T Ď G , it
follows from an averaging argument that
ˇ!
)ˇ
ˇ
ˇ
ˇ pi, jq : vertex pi ´ 1qγ ` j P T is covered ě 4γ times ˇ
ď

|I|k
.
4γ

Let pi ´ 1qγ ` ℓ P T be a vertex in T which is covered at
least 4γ times (if no such vertex exists, we are error-free and
do not have
may
´ to prove ¯anything
´ further). In this case we ¯
pb q
pb q
pb q
p1q
have f τ Ñb spi´1qγ`ℓ “ t̂pi´1qγ`1, t̂pi´1qγ`2, . . . , t̂γ
‰

´

¯
pb q
tpi´1qγ`1, tpi´1qγ`2, . . . , tγ ; in the worst case t̂pi´1qγ`1 ‰

t p i ´1 q γ `1 , . . . ,

pb q
t̂iγ

‰ tiγ . This implies that for every pi, ℓq
pb q

there are at most γ instances where t̂v ‰ tv , which gives the
desired result.
As a result of the previous lemma, it follows that we can
recover a binary vector t̂pbq that is within Hamming distance
dk
4 of the binary test result t based on B. Thus, we have to
recover the set of infected individuals given a noisy set of test
outcomes. To correct errors, we make use of the test outcome
generated by the matrix Sp2q ; this matrix renders the errors in
t “asymmetric,” which simplifies the problem. Here, the term
“asymmetric” refers to the fact to be addressed in Claim 7 that
t̂ ě t so that in t a 0 can change to a 1 but not otherwise. More
precisely, we use Sp2q to identify tests in Sp1q that contain
ą 4γ defectives. Note that if at least 4γ infected individuals
are present in some test pool i, then the entries indexed by
pi ´ 1qγ ` 1, pi ´ 1qγ ` 2, . . . , iγ of t̂pbq may be in error.
m
p2q
p2q
Let sp2q “ ps1 , . . . , sm{γ q P r0, τ ´ 1s γ be the test
outcomes of

Sp2q .

Define a vector
$
p2q
&1,
if s j ě 4γ,
pb q
rms
tj “
%t̂pbq , otherwise.
j

(4)

Similarly as before, for s “ psp1q , sp2q q we write
f τ Ñb psq “ t

pb q

.

The following straightforward claim follows from the previous discussion and the observations in Claim 6.
Claim 7. Let t

pb q

“ f τ Ñb psq. Then, t

pb q

pb q

, tq ď

2m

Lemma 8. Suppose that s P r0, τ ´ 1s γ is the result of the
pb q
tests in ( 2) and ( 3) and t “ f τ Ñb psq. Then the size of any
pb q
list of defectives from P consistent with t “ f τ Ñb psq is at
most O pdq.
Proof: Recall that in our setup the graph G , which is used
to construct B and also Sp1q , is an pα, βq-expander. Hence,
every vertex in P has k neighbors and β ą 3k
4 . As before,
let I Ď P denote the set of infected individuals such that
|I| ď d. Let t I P t0, 1um be the output of the tests dictated
by B. We show that given a S Ď P such that S X I “ H and
pb q
|S| ě O pdq, S Y I cannot be consistent with t under B.
Let S1 “ S Y I Ď P . Using the same arguments as in the
proof of Lemma 1, we can show that the number of unique
neighbors of S1 satisfies
Nu pS1 q ě

k|S|
.
2

dk
4

from

which implies that if |S| ą 10d
8 , then there exists a unique
neighbor of S1 which is not in error and is also not already
covered by an element in I. This implies that NpS1 q is not
pb q
consistent with t .
The following theorem follows from the previous discussion
and from Claim 6 and Lemma 8.
Theorem 9. There exists a nonbinary two-stage GT scheme
that given τ “ p4γqγ thresholds and

O

´ 8e2 d
γ

log

n¯
d

tests that can identify a set of infected individuals of size at most
d in a population of size n.
Proof: We prove the result by describing a simple method
for recovering a set L of size O pdq which contains the set of
pb q
defectives I. First, we generate the vector t “ f τ Ñb psq from
our non-binary test outcomes. We initialize L “ H. Then, for
pb q
every p P P , if L Y P is consistent with t , we update L “
L Y tpu. Otherwise, we do not change L. At the end of this
process we have I Ď L. Furthermore, according to Lemma 8,
|L| ď O pdq. The result now follows from Theorem 5.
IV. N ONADAPTIVE SQGT

ě t, and

dk
.
4
We next generate a list L of potentially infected individuals
pb q
consistent with the outcome of the tests t . The next lemma,
which uses the same ideas as Lemma 1, describes an upper
bound on the size of L.
d H pt

pb q

Let E “ tj : t j ą t j u. Since NpIq ď dk and |E| ď
Claim 7, it follows that
ˇ
ˇ k|S|
dk
ˇ
ˇ
´ pdk ` q,
ˇNu pS1 qzpI Y Eqˇ ě
2
4

We describe next constructive nonadaptive testing schemes,
2
which in the asymptotic regime require at most O p dγ log nq
tests, with τ “ p4γqγ . Our approach builds upon the construction by Porat and Rothschild (PR construction) [18], which
makes use of non-binary error-correcting codes. Our key result
is described in Lemma 13.
m{ q
Let C P F q be a q-ary linear error-correcting code, where
q is an odd prime, of minimum distance δ mq , q “ O pdq, and
dimension logq pnq. The PR construction works by uniquely
associating each individual in the population of size n with
a codeword in C . Under this setup, the test matrix BpPRq “
pbpc,xq,j qcPr1, m s,xPr0,q´1s,jPr1,ns is defined as
q

bpc,xq,j “

#

p jq

1, if xc “ x,
0, otherwise,

where xp jq is the j-th codeword of C . In words, the test indexed
by pc, vq contains the codewords (individuals) from C whose
c-th coordinate equals x.
Our approach for designing a nonadaptive testing scheme
is similar to that for the adaptive setting. Each test can be
generated by taking a linear combination of γ rows of BpPRq .
q
The total number of tests equals 2 mq r γ s “ O p m
γ q, and once

„ p1q 
S
again the tests are represented by S “ p2q , where Sp2q “
S
´
¯
p2q
, is defined as follows:
spc,rq,j
q
m
cP q ,r Pr0,r γ s´1s,jPr1,ns

p2q

spc,rq,j “

#

p jq
xc

1, if
“ rpr ´ 1qγ, mintrγ ´ 1, q ´ 1us,
0, otherwise.

In words, the test in Sp2q indexed by pc, rq contains the
codewords (individuals) from C whose c-th coordinate has a
value between pr ´ 1qγ and the minimum of rγ ´ 1, q ´ 1.
Note that the reason for using the minimum in the previous
range of values is a consequence of the fact that we assumed
q to be an odd prime. The tests in Sp1q are defined similarly:
p jq
Suppose that xc “ pr ´ 1qγ ` v1 where v1 P r0, γ ´ 1s. Then,
p1q
spc,rq,j

v1

“ p4γq .

For shorthand, we refer to the codewords in the pc, rq-th test
in Sp1q as Tpc,rq Ď C .
Claim 10. Suppose that the number of infected individuals in
the test indexed by pc, rq is at most 4γ ´ 1 so that
ˇ
ˇ
ˇ
ˇ
ˇTpc,rq X I ˇ ď 4γ ´ 1.

Then, given the output of the test Tpc,rq we can uniquely
determine
ˇ
(ˇˇ
ˇ
ˇ x P I : x c “ x ˇ,
for x P rpr ´ 1qγ, rγ ´ 1s.

Let 1n denote the all-ones vector of length n. We assume
that our code C is such that 1n P C . Henceforth, let
!
)
I “ y ` i ¨ 1n : y P I
(5)
for all i P t´γ ` 1, . . . , ´1, 0, 1, . . . , γ ´ 1u.

Claim 11. Let x P C zI be such that x P Tpc,rq. Suppose that for
an integer ℓ we have
ˇ
(ˇˇ
ˇ
ˇ z P I : x c “ z c ˇ ď ℓ.

Then,

ˇ
ˇ
ˇ
ˇ
ˇTpc,rq X I ˇ ď ℓ.

Proof: This follows since if x P Tpc,rq, then x c “ rpγ ´
1q ` v1 for some v1 P r0, γ ´ 1s. If z P Tpc,rq X I, then zc “
rpγ ´ 1q ` v2 for some v2 P r0, γ ´ 1s. Since v1 , v2 P r0, γ ´
1s, it follows that zc ` pv1 ´ v2 q “ rpγ ´ 1q ` v1 “ xc where
pv1 ´ v2 q P t´γ ` 1, . . . , ´1, 0, 1, . . . , γ ´ 1u. This in turn
implies that zc ` pv1 ´ v2 q is the value of component c of a
vector from the set I.
We also need the following result.
Claim 12. Suppose that x P C zI is such that x P Tpc,rq . If there
exists an index c P rns satisfying
ˇ
(ˇˇ
ˇ
(6)
ˇ z P I : x c “ zc ˇ ď 4γ ´ 1,

and
ˇ
(ˇˇ
ˇ
ˇ z P I : x c “ zc ˇ “ 0,

(7)

then given the output of the tests dictated by Sp1q ,Sp2q we can
determine that x R I .
Proof: ˇFrom Claim 11 and if (6) holds, we have that
ˇ
(ˇ
ˇ
ˇ I X Tpc,rq ˇ ď 4γ ´ 1. Then from Claim 10, since the number
in Tpc,rq is at most 4γ ´ 1, we have
ˇof infected individuals
(ˇˇ
ˇ
ˇ z P I : zc “ xc ˇ “ 0 using the test outputs of Tpc,rq.
Lemma 13. If C has minimum distance δ ą 1 ´
uniquely determine the set I of defectives.

1
2d ,

the tests S

Proof: According to Claim 12, we need to show that (6)
and (7) hold for any x P C zI. We start by showing that (7)
holds. In particular, we show a stronger claim that there exists
m
` 1 where for any c P Cp1q ,
a set Cp1q Ď mq of size at least 2q
we have
xc ‰ yc ,

(8)

where y “ py1 , . . . , y m q P I. Note that this implies that the
q
number of coordinates of x which agree in value with an
m{ q
element of I is at most 2 ´ 1. Since any two elements in C
1
, it
can agree in at most p1 ´ δq mq coordinates and δ ą 1 ´ 2d
follows that
ˇ
(ˇˇ
m
m
ˇ
ˇ c : xc “ yc , y P I ˇ ď dp1 ´ δq ă .
q
2q
Next, we show that for at least one coordinate in Cp1q , (6)
holds as well. First, note that
ˇ!` ˘
)ˇ
m
m
m
ˇ
ˇ
: xc “ yc ˇ ď 2γdp1 ´ δq ă γ ,
ˇ y, c P I ˆ
q
q
q

so that for a randomly chosen coordinate c P
ˇı
”ˇ
ˇ
ˇ
E ˇ y P I : x c “ yc uˇ ă γ.

m
q,

Invoking Markov’s inequality we get
´ˇ
¯ 1
ˇ
Pr ˇ y P I : x c “ yc uˇ ě 4γ ă .
4
Therefore, it follows that there exists a set of coordinates
m
such that for any c P Cp2q
Cp2q Ď mq of size at least 2q
ˇ!
)ˇ
ˇ
ˇ
ˇ y P I : x c “ yc ˇ ă 4γ.
Since |Cp2q | ě

` 1, it follows that |Cp1q X
ˇ
ˇ
Cp2q | ě 1. Letting c˚ P Cp1q X Cp2q we have ˇ y P I : xc˚ “
ˇ
ˇ
ˇ
(ˇ
(ˇ
ˇ
yc˚ ˇ ď 4γ ´ 1 and ˇ y P I : x c˚ “ yc˚ ˇ “ 0. By Claim 12,
we conclude that x R I.
Open Problems. Despite only a small gap remaining
between the lower bound and the actual constructions for
the saturation model, many other problems remain open and
include:
m
2q

and Cp1q ě

m
2q

‚

‚

‚

Extending the nonadaptive and two-round constructions
for general quantization thresholds under the SQGT
model;
Deriving bounds and test strategies for consecutive defective models [26], [27], as these capture the order of
arrivals into testing queues;
Addressing generalized binomial SQGT algorithms [28].
R EFERENCES

[1] R. Dorfman, “The detection of defective members of large populations,”
Annals of Mathematical Statistics, vol. 14, pp. 436–440, 1943.
[2] W. Kautz and R. Singleton, “Nonrandom binary superimposed codes,”
IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 10, pp. 363–377, 1964.
[3] D.-Z. Du and F.-K. Hwang, Pooling Designs and Nonadaptive Group
Testing. World Scientific, 2006.
[4] H. A. Inan, P. Kairouz, M. Wootters, and A. Özgür, “On the optimality of
the Kautz-Singleton construction in probabilistic group testing,” IEEE
Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 65, no. 9, pp. 5592–5603,
2019.
[5] J. Wolf, “Born again group testing: Multiaccess communications,” IEEE
Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 31, no. 2, pp. 185–191, 1985.
[6] A. Dyachkov, “Lectures on designing screening experiments,” 2004,
lecture Note Series 10.
[7] P. Damaschke, “Threshold group testing,” in General Theory of Information Transfer and Combinatorics, ser. Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, vol. 4123, 2006, pp. 707–718.
[8] B. Lindstrom, “Determining subsets by unramified experiments,” A
Survey of Statistical Design and Linear Models, 1975.
[9] D.-Z. Du and F. Hwang, Combinatorial Group Testing and its Applications, 2nd ed. World Scientific, 2000.
[10] A. Emad, J. Shen, and O. Milenkovic, “Symmetric group testing and
superimposed codes,” in 2011 IEEE Information Theory Workshop,
2011, pp. 20–24.
[11] A. Emad and O. Milenkovic, “Semiquantitative group testing,” IEEE
Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 60, no. 8, pp. 4614–4636,
2014.
[12] ——, “Code construction and decoding algorithms for semi-quantitative
group testing with nonuniform thresholds,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 62, no. 4, pp. 1674–1687, 2016.
[13] A. G. D’yachkov and V. V. Rykov, “A coding model for a multipleaccess adder channel,” Probl. Perdachi Inform. , pp. 26–32, 1981, in
Russian.

[14] A. Dyachkov and V. Rykov, “A survey of superimposed code theory,”
Problems of Control and Information Theory, vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 229–
242, 1983.
[15] R. Gabrys, S. Pattabiraman, V. Rana, J. ao Ribeiro, M. Cheraghchi,
V. Guruswami, and O. Milenkovic, “AC-DC: Amplification curve diagnostics for Covid-19 group testing,” 2020, arXiv:2011.05223.
[16] F. Hwang, “A generalized binomial group testing problem,” Journal of
the American Statistical Association, vol. 70, no. 352, pp. 923–926,
1975.
[17] H. Q. Ngo, E. Porat, and A. Rudra, “Efficiently decodable errorcorrecting list disjunct matrices and applications,” in International
Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and Programming. Springer,
2011, pp. 557–568.
[18] E. Porat and A. Rothschild, “Explicit nonadaptive combinatorial group
testing schemes,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 57,
no. 12, pp. 7982–7989, 2011.
[19] P. Indyk, H. Q. Ngo, and A. Rudra, “Efficiently decodable non-adaptive
group testing,” in Proceedings of the twenty-first annual ACM-SIAM
symposium on Discrete Algorithms. SIAM, 2010, pp. 1126–1142.
[20] M. Cheraghchi, “Noise-resilient group testing: Limitations and constructions,” Discrete Applied Mathematics, vol. 161, no. 1, pp. 81–95, 2013,
preliminary version in Proceedings of the FCT 2009. arXiv manuscript
published in 2008.
[21] A. De Bonis, L. Gasieniec, and U. Vaccaro, “Optimal two-stage algorithms for group testing problems,” SIAM Journal on Computing, vol. 34,
no. 5, pp. 1253–1270, 2005.
[22] M. Cheraghchi and V. Nakos, “Combinatorial group testing schemes
with near-optimal decoding time,” in Proceedings of the 61st Annual
IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), 2020.
[23] Z. Füredi, “On r-cover-free families,” Journal of Combinatorial Theory,
Series A, vol. 73, no. 1, pp. 172–173, 1996.
[24] V. Guruswami, C. Umans, and S. Vadhan, “Unbalanced expanders and
randomness extractors from Parvaresh-Vardy codes,” Journal of the
ACM, vol. 56, no. 4, 2009.
[25] M. Capalbo, O. Reingold, S. Vadhan, and A. Wigderson, “Randomness
conductors and constant-degree expansion beyond the degree/2 barrier,”
in Proceedings of the 34th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of
Computing (STOC), 2002, pp. 659–668.
[26] T. V. Bui, M. Cheraghchi, and T. D. Nguyen, “Improved algorithms for
non-adaptive group testing with consecutive positives,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2101.11294, 2021.
[27] C. J. Colbourn, “Group testing for consecutive positives,” Annals of
Combinatorics, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 37–41, 1999.
[28] F. Hwang, “A generalized binomial group testing problem,” Journal of
the American Statistical Association, vol. 70, no. 352, pp. 923–926,
1975.

