Priming prosocial behavior and expectations in response to the Covid19 pandemic - Evidence from an online experiment
Valeria Fanghella, Thi-Thanh-Tam Vu, Luigi Mittone1

Abstract
This paper studies whether and how differently projected information about the impact of the Covid19 pandemic affects individuals’ prosocial behavior and expectations on future outcomes. We
conducted an online experiment with British participants (N=961) when the UK introduced its first
lockdown and the outbreak was on its growing stage. Participants were primed with either the
environmental or economic consequences (i.e., negative primes), or the environmental or economic
benefits (i.e., positive primes) of the pandemic, or with neutral information. We measured priming
effects on an incentivized take-and-give dictator game and on participants’ expectations about future
environmental quality and economic growth. Our results show that primes affect participants’
expectations, but not their prosociality. In particular, participants primed with environmental
consequences hold a more pessimistic view on future environmental quality, while those primed with
economic benefits are more optimistic about future economic growth. Instead, the positive
environmental prime and the negative economic prime do not influence expectations. Our results offer
insights into how information affects behavior and expectations during the Covid-19 pandemic.

Keywords: Covid-19 pandemic, Prosocial behavior, Expectations, Media priming, Economic growth,
Environmental quality, Online experiment

1

Valeria Fanghella: University of Trento, Italy; Grenoble Ecole de Management, France. Thi-Thanh-Tam Vu: University
of Trento, Italy; LUT University, Finland; Vietnam National University, Vietnam. Luigi Mittone: University of Trento,
Italy; LUT University, Finland. Correspondence to: thithanhtam.vu@unitn.it

1

Introduction

The Covid-19 pandemic has far-reaching consequences beyond a health crisis. As an effort to contain
the virus, governments have imposed restrictive measures including travel restrictions, social distance,
stay-at-home order, and for the very first time, put the entire country under lockdown. On the one hand,
the global restrictive measures may cause one of the worst economic recessions since the Great
Recession.2 The pandemic could cause nearly 200 million job losses,3 and global economic growth
may drop to half of the projected rate before the virus outbreak. 4 On the other hand, the environment
has, at least in the short run, benefitted from the lockdown: air pollution and greenhouse gas emissions
have temporarily dropped, and wildlife has taken over anthropized areas (Helm, 2020).
These unprecedented events have dramatically changed people’s life and perception of the world, as
well as the world itself. First, the dramatic changes caused by the disaster influence individuals’
assessment of the future (Västfjäll, Peters and Slovic, 2008). Changes in one’s expectation about the
economy or the environment lead to ramifications in voting behavior (Lewis-Beck and Stegmaier,
2000), consumer confidence (Curtin, Presser and Singer, 2000), investment decision (Starr and Yilmaz,
2007), and willingness to mitigate climate change and other environmental issues (Chapman, Lickel
and Markowitz, 2017; Hornsey and Fielding, 2016). Second, in the midst of tremendous amounts of
uncertainty, confusion, and fear, individuals change how they think about and react to other people.
They may act selfishly and even harm others as they perceive more threats and risks (van Bavel et al.,
2020) or may behave altruistically as cooperation and norm-governed behaviors are common during
the crisis time (Drury, 2018). Both of these opposite acts have been displayed in individuals’
psychological and behavioral responses to the Covid-19 pandemic.5
Given the explosion of media coverage on the Covid-19 pandemic, individuals’ prosocial behaviors
and expectations can depend on the information to which they are exposed. Information can promote
preventive behaviors and avoid pandemic-related panic (Lep, Babnik and Beyazoglu, 2020; van Bavel
et al., 2020; West et al., 2020), thereby fostering altruistic rather than selfish behaviors and easing the
management of the crisis. Moreover, how media covers environmental- and economic-related topics
2

https://blogs.imf.org/2020/04/14/the-great-lockdown-worst-economic-downturn-since-the-great-depression/
https://news.un.org/en/story/2020/04/1061322
4
https://www.oecd.org/economic-outlook/
5
See for example, https://www.theguardian.com/world/2020/mar/21/coronavirus-uk-panic-buyers-urged-to-think-offrontline-workers;
https://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/americas/coronavirus-supermarket-cough-prank-foodpennsylvania-hygiene-a9426781.html;
https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2020/mar/21/like-an-emotionalmexican-wave-how-coronavirus-kindness-makes-the-world-seem-smaller.
3

2

plays a vital role in the post-crisis responses. Whether environmental conservation will still be
considered a priority depends on how the situation is addressed to the public (Henrique and Tschakert,
2019; Miles and Morse, 2007). If news raises excessive optimism about the environmental benefits of
the pandemic, it will have a detrimental effect on conservation policies (Helm, 2020). On the other
hand, news can speed up the economic recovery by raising public optimism and faith in it (Hollanders
and Vliegenthart, 2011; van Giesen and Pieters, 2019). For these reasons, assessing the impact of news
on individuals’ prosociality and expectations is of high importance to manage a crisis like the Covid19 pandemic and the post-crisis recovery.
To unearth how individuals’ prosociality and expectations are affected by the valenced information
about the Covid-19 pandemic, we run an online experiment with British participants when the UK is
under lockdown and the outbreak still in its growing phase. Participants are primed with different
information about the impact of the pandemic that either emphasizes its benefits or consequences for
the environment or the economy. We measure how the primes influence participants’ prosociality
through an incentivized take-and-give dictator game and their effect on expectations of environmental
quality and economic growth.
Our results show that primes do not influence prosocial behavior. However, regardless of treatment
assignment, participants behave very generously in the take-and-give dictator game, suggesting that
the extraordinary time of the pandemic triggers altruism. Second, primes affect participants’
expectations, and this effect varies across priming contents. Specifically, we find two main significant
results: (1) negative environmental information induces pessimism about future environmental quality;
(2) positive economic information triggers optimism about future economic growth. By contrast, the
negative environmental information and the positive economic information do not influence
expectations. We reason these different priming effects on the biased concentration of news coverage:
the media has mostly provided one-dimensional information flow on the Covid-19 pandemic’s
environmental benefits and economic losses.6 As such, only those primes that contain information not
frequently covered by media (i.e., the pandemic’s environmental consequences and economic
benefits), significantly affect participants’ expectations.

6

https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/ip_20_799
and
https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/WEO/Issues/2020/04/14/weo-april-2020 for the economy;
https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2020/04/coronavirus-covid19-air-pollution-enviroment-naturelockdown and https://www.eea.europa.eu/highlights/air-pollution-goes-down-as for the environment.
See

for

example,

3

The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 reviews relevant literature and draws the
hypotheses of the study (pre-registered).7 In Section 3, we present the experimental design and
procedure followed by the experimental results in Section 4. Section 5 discusses the main results and
offers some concluding remarks.
2

Hypothesis development

People’s preferences depend on how information is presented (Tversky and Kahneman, 1985). In this
study, we focus on a specific way to influence participants’ behaviors and expectations: priming.
Priming is a technique initially introduced by experimental psychologists and refers to the mental
activation of a specific concept (Bargh and Chartrand, 2000). It has been widely adopted both in
psychology and economics to influence participants’ decisions (Cohn and Maréchal, 2016; Janiszewski
and Wyer, 2014).
Our study belongs to the emergent literature of media priming. Media priming refers to how contents
covered by the media influence people’s behavior and decisions (Roskos-Ewoldsen, Roskos-Ewoldsen
and Carpentier, 2009). Prior research has mainly studied priming intensity, recency, and valence of the
media in various contexts including violence, politics, and stereotype (see Roskos-Ewoldsen et al.,
2009 for a review). This body of studies does concur that by emphasizing certain aspects (e.g.,
definitions, solutions, consequences) of an issue and not others, media can influence people’s attitudes
and evaluations about that issue (Kalogeropoulos et al., 2017). According to Althaus and Kim (2006),
media priming effects are the result of two mechanisms, namely accessibility and applicability of
information. Accessibility is defined by the extent to which a specific knowledge can be activated while
applicability refers to how “a stimulus and a stored knowledge construct are perceived as applicable to
one another” (Althaus and Kim, 2006, p.962). Information emphasized by the media offers a shortcut
in decision-making, because the primed content becomes particularly accessible and applicable when
individuals have to make a decision related to the emphasis.
2.1

Priming and prosocial behavior

Priming has been erratically used in economics to promote prosocial behavior (Kamenica, 2012),
especially in the context of natural disasters. More recently, a number of studies investigate how to

7

Hypothesis
and
study
pre-registration
can
be
https://osf.io/td4r9/?view_only=18afc22e064647c0b45ceb84395b0ed6.

4

found

at

the

following

link:

foster compliance with measures to prevent the Covid-19 leveraging on social norms (Bilancini et al.,
2020) or on moral frames (Everett et al., 2020). Yet, to the best of our knowledge, there has been no
study that explicitly examined the priming effect of media on prosociality.
We employ the literature on how emotions affect prosociality to establish our first hypothesis. Positive
or negative information can affect people’s moods, and thus, prosocial behavior. Despite a large
amount of research on the topic, the effect of negative mood on prosocial behavior is not conclusive.
Some studies observed that people in a bad mood behave less prosocially than those in a good mood
(e.g., Carlson and Miller, 1987; George, 1991), especially when the bad mood is caused by anger
(Pillutla and Murnighan, 1996). Others found evidence that sad people compensate for their negative
mood with good behavior (e.g., Cialdini, Baumann and Kenrick, 1981; Manucia, Baumann and
Cialdini, 1984). Particularly, Hanley et al. (2017) failed to detect any effect of emotions on prosocial
behavior. Given these inconsistent results, we explore the effect of positive and negative primes on
prosociality, by studying which of the two alternative hypotheses holds in our setting:
Hypothesis 1a: Participants exhibit higher (lower) prosociality after reading a paragraph that
highlights the positive (negative) impact of the pandemic.
Hypothesis 1b: Participants exhibit lower (higher) prosociality after reading a paragraph that
highlights the positive (negative) impact of the pandemic.
Behavioral scientists and psychologists have shown that individuals are prone to loss aversion (also
known as negativity bias) as losses result in more negative responses than gains of a similar magnitude
result in positive responses (Tversky and Kahneman, 1974, 1991). In other words, people are more
sensitive to losses (or negativity) than gains (or positivity). This phenomenon is also manifested with
media priming. Previous studies on the negative and positive valence’s priming effects (e.g., Bizer and
Petty, 2005; Dillman Carpentier, Roskos-Ewoldsen and Roskos-Ewoldsen, 2008; Northup and
Carpentier, 2013) found that people’s judgment and behavior are more heavily influenced by negative
than positive information (see Dijksterhuis, 2010 for a review). According to Sheafer (2007, p.23),
negatively valenced stimulus induces a stronger effect than positively valenced one because it
‘‘captures our attention far more than information about positive developments’’. We also conjecture
such an asymmetric effect in our setting, as stated in the following hypothesis:

5

Hypothesis 2: The effect of priming on participants’ prosociality is more pronounced when the prime
is negative than when it is positive.
In terms of priming environmental and economic concepts, we draw on a number of studies that
investigate the effect of each of these concepts individually. The activation of environmental concepts
is closely associated with the activation of prosocial concepts. Laboratory experiments show that
priming with prosocial values increase contribution in a team contest (Andersson et al., 2017a) and
charitable donation (Andersson et al., 2017b), but only among prosocial individuals. Drouvelis et al.
(2015) show that activating the concept of cooperation increases voluntary public good provision.
Similarly, Van der Werff et al. (2014) find evidence that recalling previous pro-environmental
behaviors improves subsequent environmental judgments and intentions. This effect is maintained only
when the information relates to positive environmental or sustainable concepts and not to negative
ones. Notably, a degraded environment is more likely to trigger negative than positive behavior
(Keizer, Lindenberg and Steg, 2008).
Economic concepts generally have a detrimental effect on prosocial behavior (Vohs, 2015). Adding a
market institution increases self-interested and profit maximization behavior in public good games
(Reeson and Tisdell, 2010). Similar findings have been observed in the context of environmental
conservation: priming about ecosystem service valuation reduces donation to an environmental fund,
compared to the condition when this information is not provided (Goff, Waring and Noblet, 2017).
Activating economic concepts triggers a self-sufficient orientation and reduces requests for help and
helpfulness toward others (Vohs, Mead and Goode, 2006).
Bridging together the two streams of literature, we expect that priming environmental concepts will
lead to more prosocial behavior than economic ones, especially for positive priming. This leads to the
following hypothesis:
Hypothesis 3: Participants exhibit higher prosociality after reading a paragraph that highlights the
positive environmental impact of the pandemic than the positive economic impact.
To the best of our knowledge, there has been no previous study on the negative priming effect of
environmental vs. economic concepts. Therefore, we explore which of the two following alternative
hypotheses holds:

6

Hypothesis 4a: Participants exhibit higher prosociality after reading a paragraph that highlights the
negative environmental impact of the pandemic than the negative economic impact.
Hypothesis 4b: Participants exhibit lower prosociality after reading a paragraph that highlights the
negative environmental impact of the pandemic than the negative economic impact.
2.2

Priming and expectations

Natural and anthropogenic disasters like the Covid-19 pandemic affect people’s perceptions and
attitudes on future outcomes (Västfjäll et al., 2008). With regard to environmental issues, being
exposed to natural disasters affects people’s evaluation of risks and of mitigation and adaptation
measures. The Fukushima nuclear accident increased the Chinese public’s risk perception of nuclear
disasters and significantly reduced nuclear plants acceptability (Lei et al., 2013). Media plays a role
inasmuch as it shapes which consequences of the disaster are brought to public attention (Miles and
Morse, 2007). Moreover, whether media raises more or less support for policies for environmental risk
prevention depends on how it frames the information (Sunstein, 2007). Indeed, availability bias and
information framing affect attitude towards natural disasters (Rheinberger and Treich, 2017).
There is a growing body of work suggesting that positive and negative information influences
individuals’ economic evaluation (e.g., Garz, 2013; Petalas, Van Schie and Vettehen, 2017; Soroka,
2006). Using a laboratory experiment, Bosman, Kräussl and Mirgorodskaya (2017) examined if
investors’ expectations are influenced by the valence of financial news they read. Their findings
suggest that people predict higher stock price turn, perceive less risk, are more likely to buy and
especially, hold a more optimistic view on the economy after reading positive than negative news.
Consistently, Hollanders and Vliegenthart (2011) found that negative news coverage on economic
development during the period 1990-2009 was correlated with lower consumer confidence and this
effect was more pronounced at the beginning of the credit crisis. Kalogeropoulos et al. (2017) expanded
these findings, by showing that positive and negative news about the economy not only affects
expectations about economic development but also on overall Government evaluation. In line with the
priming effect on prosocial behavior, the asymmetric responsiveness of people to positive and negative
information is also explored in these studies: participants are more sensitive to negative than positive
information (Bosman, Kräussl and Mirgorodskaya, 2017; Petalas et al., 2017).

7

Based on the above findings, we hypothesize that positive and negative priming respectively increases
optimism and pessimism in individuals’ expectations about economic and environmental outcomes,
and that the negative one has a greater impact than the positive one.
Hypothesis 5: Participants expect a higher (lower) future economic growth and environmental quality
after reading a paragraph that highlights the positive (negative) impact of the pandemic.
Hypothesis 6: The effect of priming on participants’ expectations on future outcomes is more
pronounced when the prime is negative than when it is positive.
The accessibility mechanism of priming suggests that participants rely on information about a specific
issue to make their judgment related to that issue. Janiszewski and Wyer (2014) provided a thorough
review on content priming and summarized that "an increase in the accessibility of content increases
the likelihood the content will be integrated into ongoing perceptions, judgements, and choices” (p.97).
As an example, Kalogeropoulos et al. (2017) found that individuals rely on economic news to form
their economic evaluations. This leads us to the last hypothesis:
Hypothesis 7: Economic (environmental) priming influences future economic (environmental) outcome
predictions.8
3

Experimental design

3.1

Stages

3.1.1 Stage 1: Take-and-give dictator game
In the first stage, participants played a simplified version of the take-and-give dictator game (Cappelen
et al., 2013; List, 2007). In this version of the dictator game, also negative transfers are allowed. Each
participant was randomly matched with another participant and was assigned the role of dictator or
recipient. In a pair, the dictator and the recipient were given 5 pounds each. The dictator selected, from
a list in steps of 1 pound, how much to transfer to the recipient between -5 and +5 pounds. A positive
amount meant that the dictator gives the recipient part of her money. A negative amount that the

8

In the pre-registration, we initially had two hypotheses for Hypothesis 7. H1: Participants tend to expect a higher effect
on economic than environmental outcomes after reading a paragraph that highlights the economic impact of the pandemic.
H2: Participants tend to expect a higher effect on environmental than economic outcomes after reading a paragraph that
highlights the environmental impact of the pandemic. We collapsed them in one for clarity’s and conciseness’ sake, but the
meaning remains unchanged.

8

dictator took from the budget of the recipient. The order of presentation of choices (descending vs.
ascending) was randomized.
All participants made the decision in the role of dictators. At the end of the experiment, we randomly
selected 5% of participants as dictators, 5% as recipients, and we matched them. They were paid
according to the dictator’s allocation.
The take-and-give dictator game was employed to measure participants’ pro and antisocial behavior in
response to the primes. We introduced the take-and-give version of the dictator game because it
captured competitive behaviors towards others in a context of resource scarcity (e.g., stockpiling
protective masks and durable food without leaving enough for other people).
3.1.2 Stage 2: Outcome predictions
In the second stage, participants were asked to make predictions on how the pandemic may affect
economic growth and environmental quality for the current year. We used two indicators of economic
growth and environmental quality, which were the gross domestic product (GDP) growth rate and the
density of particulate matter (PM), respectively. We presented four scenarios about GDP growth rate
and PM density for Europe and worldwide. Two scenarios were optimistic and the other two were
pessimistic. The degree of optimism/pessimism varied across scenarios. We constructed the four
scenarios in a way that increased their realism. Notably, we based them on previous years’ data and
experts’ predictions on possible post-pandemic developments.
For the pessimistic economic scenarios, we used the predictions on how the pandemic affected the
European and global economy presented by experts of McKinsey & Company in their Covid-19
briefing notes of the 4th of April.9 These were two negative scenarios that varied the degree of severity
on Europe and worldwide (henceforth, pessimistic and highly pessimistic). We constructed the
optimistic scenario using predictions on the real GDP growth rate in 2020 made before the outbreak.
For the highly optimistic scenario, we employed the highest GDP growth rate for Europe and
worldwide since the 2008 crisis.10 Table 1 reports the economic scenarios.

9

https://www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/risk/our-insights/covid-19-implications-for-business
https://www.imf.org/external/datamapper/NGDP_RPCH@WEO/OEMDC/ADVEC/WEOWORLD

10

9

Table 1. Economic scenarios, from the most pessimistic to the most optimistic






Highly pessimistic

Europe (%)
World (%) 

-10.6
-5.7

Pessimistic




-4.7
-1.8

Optimistic




+1.7
+3.4

Highly optimistic




+4.6
+5.6

For the environmental outcomes, we could not find the same predictions as for the economy about the
effect of the pandemic. As a reference point, we used the temporary effect that the lockdown had on
PM2.5 density in China, equal to a reduction of 20-30%.11 The optimistic scenario envisaged a
reduction of 10% in PM density and the highly optimistic one of 30%. We also used these percentages
to create the pessimistic (+10%) and highly pessimistic scenarios (+30%). We provided participants
with scenarios about absolute values of PM density, not as percentages of change. Notably, we applied
the percentages to the latest available data of PM2.5 density before the crisis: 19 µg/m3 and 46 µg/m3,
for Europe and worldwide, respectively.12 Table 2 reports the environmental scenarios.
Table 2. Environmental scenarios, from the most pessimistic to the most optimistic





Europe (µg/m3)
World (µg/m3) 

Highly pessimistic
24.7
59.8




Pessimistic
20.9
50.6




Optimistic
17.1
41.4




Highly optimistic
13.3
32.3

Participants were presented with Table 1 and 2. Their order, as well as that of scenarios, were
randomized. Besides, we also provided the participants with the latest available values for the European
and Global indicators (summarized in Table 3).13
Table 3. Latest available information on economic and environmental indicators


GDP growth rate (2019) PM density (2017)
Europe +1.5%
19 µg/m3
World +3%
46 µg/m3

Before participants made their predictions, they were provided with some background information. We
explained the meaning and the interpretation of the indicators included in this stage. We also
highlighted whether a positive or negative change in these indexes could be considered as an
improvement for the economy and the environment. Participants could proceed to the predictions only

11

https://atmosphere.copernicus.eu/amid-coronavirus-outbreak-copernicus-monitors-reduction-particulate-matter-pm25over-china
12
https://www.stateofglobalair.org/data/#/air/plot
13
PM density was taken from https://www.stateofglobalair.org/data/#/air/plot while the real GDP growth rate was taken
from https://www.imf.org/external/datamapper/NGDP_RPCH@WEO/OEMDC/ADVEC/WEOWORLD.

10

if they answered correctly the two following instructional checks: “Is the growth of the gross domestic
product (GDP) good or bad for the economy of a country?” and “Is the increase in density of particulate
matter (PM) good or bad for the environment?”.
This stage aimed to examine whether our manipulations affect participants’ degree of optimism and
pessimism. Even if these predictions were central to our research question, we could not incentivize
this stage. It should be noted that we conducted our study in the time of change so we could only adopt
the most likely scenarios of future outcomes as projected by experts by the time of the experiment.
3.1.3 Stage 3: Questionnaires
The third stage contained a questionnaire about participants’ social and risk preferences and other
Covid-19 related questions, such as the degree of concern and of acceptance of governmental policies.
We elicited social preferences with the version of the Social Value Orientation (SVO)14 developed by
Murphy et al. (2011). Participants were asked to make six choices on how to allocate money between
themselves and a hypothetical partner. Based on their preferred allocations, participants were classified
into one of four types: (1) altruistic (i.e., individuals who aim at maximizing others’ payoffs); (2)
prosocial (i.e., individuals who aim at maximizing the joint payoffs); (3) individualistic (i.e.,
individuals who aim at maximizing their own payoffs); (4) competitive (i.e., individuals who aim at
maximizing the positive difference between their own and others’ payoffs).
We elicited risk preferences using the Bomb Risk Elicitation Task (BRET) (Crosetto and Filippin,
2013). Participants were asked to choose the number of boxes out of 64 that they want to open given
that one box contains the bomb. The hypothetical payment increased linearly with the number of boxes
collected but becomes zero if the bomb is also collected. Both SVO task and BRET were not monetarily
incentivized.
This stage also includes an attention check to screen participants who did not pay attention while
completing the experiment. For this check, participants were asked to choose exactly “Strongly
disagree” to a question.

14

SVO is defined as a construct that theoretically extends the rational self-interest assumption in traditional economics
theories by assuming that economic agents have broader motivation such as maximizing joint outcomes, enhancing equality
in outcomes or minimizing others’ outcomes (Van Lange, 1999).

11

3.2

Treatments

At the beginning of the experiment, participants were randomly assigned to one of the five different
experimental treatments. Two treatments highlighted the positive effects of the pandemic on the
environment, Env+, and on the economy, Econ+. The other two treatments, Env- and Econ-, stressed
the environmental and economic consequences of the outbreak, respectively. We also introduced a
baseline condition named Neutral, where we provided information about the effect of reading books.
The baseline condition allows us to test our hypotheses that negative priming induces greater effect
than positive priming. Namely, simply contrasting positive vs. negative primes does not distinguish
the contribution of each priming to any difference in the outcome variables. The baseline condition
provides a benchmark against which to contrast the effect of each priming and determine the one with
largest effect.
In each treatment, there was a short paragraph displayed at the beginning of the experiment and at the
beginning of each stage. The first priming was given after the participants consented to join the
experiment, followed by three control questions to ensure that participants read this priming. The other
two primes (i.e., two other paragraphs) were displayed before participants made decisions in Stage 1
and Stage 2. Each paragraph reported some plausible impact of the pandemic on the environment or
the economy. Table 4 summarizes the description of each treatment and an example of a priming
paragraph.
3.3

Experimental procedures

We conducted the experiment on the online platform Prolific using oTree (Chen, Schonger and
Wickens, 2016). Online platforms offer reliable results for experimental research, as shown by
replications of well-known experiments (Horton, Rand and Zeckhauser, 2011; Palan and Schitter,
2018; Paolacci, Chandler and Ipeirotis, 2010). Moreover, they also allow for better external validity
when compared to research conducted using student samples (Henrich, Heine and Norenzayan, 2010).
We ran four experimental sessions between the 15 and the 23 of April 2020. To be eligible, participants
had to be UK citizens and live in the UK at the time of the experiment. It should be noted that at the
time we ran the experiment, the entire UK was under its first lockdown and the Covid-19 outbreak was
on its growing stage.15

15

https://www.worldometers.info/coronavirus/country/uk/

12

Table 4. Summary of the treatments
Priming features
Treatment

Example of priming paragraph
Valence

Concept

Env+

Positive

Environmental

Econ+

Positive

Economic

Env-

Negative

Environmental

Econ-

Negative

Economic

Neutral

Neutral

Neutral

Covid-19 pandemic has some positive effects on the
environment. Amongst the others, it may increase
the usage of sustainable working practices such as
online conferences and digital libraries.
Covid-19 pandemic has some positive effects on the
economy. Amongst the others, it may increase the
development of cost-effective innovations such as
digitally-enabled forms and smart-working tools.
Covid-19 pandemic has some negative effects on
the environment. Amongst the others, it may
decrease the allocation of resources on proenvironmental policies such as subsidies for green
energy.
Covid-19 pandemic has some negative effects on
the economy. Amongst the others, it may decrease
the number of small and medium businesses in
some sectors such as tourism and transportation.
Reading books has some effects on the mind.
Amongst the others, it may affect writing
capabilities, such as the usage of punctuation marks
and of rare words.

The experiment started with a paragraph about the Covid-19 outbreak for all participants, regardless
of treatment assignment, to make them aware that the experiment was related to the pandemic and to
provide them with the same basic knowledge about it and its health consequences. Participants
proceeded to the first priming paragraph, whose content depended on their treatment. They were then
instructed on the take-and-give dictator game of Stage 1. Before choosing how much to transfer,
participants were exposed to the second priming paragraph. After the instructions of Stage 2, we primed
participants with the last paragraph and we asked their predictions about environmental and economic
outcomes. Finally, participants completed the questionnaire in Stage 3.
Overall, 988 participants completed the study. We excluded 22 participants who failed the attention
check and 2 participants who completed the study too quickly (less than 4 minutes), and 3 participants
who had missing socio-demographic variables. The final sample includes 961 participants. On average,
participants completed the experiment in 11 minutes. Each participant was given 1.8 pounds for
13

participation. In addition, we randomly selected 10% of participants for payment in the take-and-give
dictator game, 5% as dictators and 5% as recipients.
While running the first two experimental sessions, we made a typo in the table with environmental
outcomes. We corrected it on the two final sessions. Therefore, we analyzed the hypotheses on
environmental predictions using a subsample of 437 participants. We excluded that the problem also
affected the other outcomes of the study. First, the take-and-give dictator game took place before the
outcome predictions and is thus unaffected. Second, economic predictions were presented on a
different table.
4

Results

We first summarize demographic characteristics of participants across treatments and then focus on
the most substantial research issues of our study, which are the priming effect on individuals’
prosociality, environmental quality and economic growth expectations.
Table 5. Participants’ characteristics
N
Male (%)
Age (mean)
University degree (%)
BRET (mean)
SVO
Competitive (%)
Individualistic (%)
Prosocial (%)
Altruistic (%)

Env+
180
26.11
33.48
(11.82)
0.49
22.67
(15.15)

Econ+
190
27.37
34.11
(12.57)
0.51
22.39
(15.04)

Env202
23.27
34.03
(11.24)
0.53
22.00
(13.67)

Econ192
28.65
34.10
(12.05)
0.46
22.14
(13.52)

Neutral
197
24.87
33.32
(10.94)
0.53
21.54
(13.90)

1.67
17.22
79.44
1.67

1.50
13.68
85.26
0.00

0.50
14.36
84.16
0.99

0.52
17.19
80.21
2.08

2.54
21.83
74.62
1.02

Note: Standard deviations in parentheses

Table 5 reports participants’ characteristics across treatments. All socio-demographic variables are
balanced across experimental conditions. Overall, 26% of participants are male, and 50.6% have at
least an undergraduate degree. Age ranges between 18 and 78 years. Risk attitudes measured by the
BRET and social value orientation measured by the SVO task are uniformly distributed across
treatments. On average, participants open 20 out of 64 boxes. The percentage of prosocial and
14

individualistic types are 81% and 17% respectively. Each of the other two types (competitive and
altruistic) accounts for less than 2% of the sample.
4.1

Priming and prosociality

On average, participants transferred 1.18 pounds to another anonymous participant. Figure 1 illustrates
the distribution of participants’ decisions in the take-and-give dictator game across treatments. In all
treatments, more than 20% of participants did not transfer anything; the median of the transfer is 2
pounds. About 5% chose to take all 5 pounds from the endowment of the other partner while more than
60% transferred a positive amount. These results show more altruistic behaviors than previous studies
using the same game (e.g., Cappelen et al., 2013; List, 2007). As an example, List (2007), in his
treatment named “Take ($5)” which is the most similar to our experimental setting, found that only
10% of participants transfer a positive amount.

Figure 1. Distribution of transfers in the take-and-give dictator game across treatments

Note: Red dashed line represents mean transfer per experimental condition

We first examine Hypothesis 1 and 2 on the effect of positive vs. negative prime. For positive primes,
we pool the observations of the Env+ and Econ+ treatment, while for the negative primes, those of the
15

Env- and Econ-. Table 6 reports the results from the OLS regressions, where the dependent variable is
participants’ transfer, and the regressors are treatments (M1). In model M2, we also include measures
of risk preferences (denoted as BRET), SVO, and other demographic characteristics such as gender,
age, and whether they have a university degree as independent variables.
Table 6. Effect of positive and negative prime on transfers in the take-and-give dictator game
M1
β
0.14
-0.16

M2
SE
β
Negative
(0.16) 0.10
Neutral
(0.19) -0.05
BRET
-0.00
Competitive
-2.66***
Individualistic
-1.25***
Altruistic
1.51**
Female
0.52***
Age
0.02***
University degree
-0.17
Constant
1.16*** (0.11) 0.65**
Observations
961
961
R-squared
0.00
0.09

SE
(0.15)
(0.19)
(0.00)
(0.61)
(0.18)
(0.64)
(0.15)
(0.01)
(0.14)
(0.29)

Note: OLS regression, standard errors in parentheses. ***p < 0.01, **p < 0.05, *p < 0.1. Negative denotes the negative
prime (Env- and Econ- together), Neutral denotes the neutral prime. Positive (Env+ and Econ+ together) is the reference
group. BRET represents risk aversion. Competitive, Individualistic and Altruistic are SVO types. Prosocial is the SVO
reference group.

Regression results suggest that there is no priming effect on participants’ prosocial behavior. The
coefficient of the negative primes does not significantly differ from 0 in both specifications, showing
that the average transfers between the two primings are not statistically different. The lack of significant
effect is not unexpected: we formulated Hypothesis 1 as exploratory, as previous findings on the topic
are inconclusive.
Next, we investigate Hypothesis 2 on the asymmetric effect between positive and negative primes.
Using F-tests, we test whether transfers with positive and negative primes significantly differ from the
one in the Neutral condition. If Hypothesis 2 holds, the difference between the negative and the neutral
prime should be higher than that between the positive and the neutral primes. However, F-tests show
that there is no difference between any of these primes. Hence, we find no empirical support for
Hypothesis 2.

16

We then test Hypothesis 3 and 4 by assessing whether there is any between-treatment difference. As
before, we run OLS regressions on participants’ transfers without (M3) and with (M4) demographic
characteristics. Table 7 shows no significant difference between any priming treatment and the baseline
condition. As a direct test of our hypotheses, we first investigate whether participants behave more
prosocially after being exposed to positive environmental priming than positive economic priming
(Hypothesis 3). F-tests show that participants in the Env+ and Econ+ treatment transfer the same
amount of money. Hypothesis 3 is thus not supported. Next, we perform the same analysis on the Envand Econ- treatment. No significant difference is observed, providing no support to any of the two
alternative formulations of Hypothesis 4.16
Table 7. Effect of treatments on transfers in the take-and-give dictator game
M3
β
0.02
0.29
0.30
0.31

SE
(0.23)
(0.22)
(0.22)
(0.22)

Env+
Econ+
EnvEconBRET
Competitive
Individualistic
Altruistic
Female
Age
University graduate
Constant
1.00*** (0.16)
Observations
961
R-squared
0.00

M4
β
-0.07
0.17
0.13
0.18
-0.00
-2.64***
-1.24***
1.54**
0.53***
0.02***
-0.17
0.60**
961
0.09

SE
(0.22)
(0.21)
(0.21)
(0.21)
(0.00)
(0.61)
(0.18)
(0.64)
(0.15)
(0.01)
(0.14)
(0.30)

Note: OLS regression, standard errors in parentheses. ***p < 0.01, **p < 0.05, *p < 0.1. Env+ and Econ+ respectively
denote the priming with positive environmental information and with positive economic information. Env- and Econrespectively denote the priming with negative environmental and with negative economic information. Neutral is the
reference group. BRET represents risk aversion. Competitive, Individualistic and Altruistic are SVO types. Prosocial is the
SVO reference group.

To sum up, we do not find any significant priming effect on prosociality. However, as highlighted at
the beginning of this section, participants are very generous in our experiment. The very high

16

As a further check, we examine the determinants of transferring a positive amount by running logit regressions, where
the dependent variable is equal to 1 if the transfer is strictly positive, and 0 otherwise. Results of the logistic regression are
available upon request and replicate the lack of treatment effect on prosociality.

17

propensity of the dictators to donate to their recipients is one of the most important results that emerge
from this study. Unfortunately, the considerations that can be drawn from this finding are mainly
speculative because we did not formulate an ex-ante hypothesis about it. We explain dictators’ high
propensity to “donate” to their recipients with the psychological impact generated by Covid-19. In fact,
it is commonly acknowledged in the dictator game literature that many factors explain the decision to
transfer money to the recipients, and, among them, psychological mechanisms play an important role
(Bardsley 2008).
Participants’ generosity during the Covid-19 outbreak is consistent with the social pressure model
(Akerlof and Kranton, 2000). This model posits that the decision to behave altruistically is triggered
by a demand external to the donor’s will, in some way expressed by the society. Accordingly, this
theoretical view states that what matters in triggering altruistic behavior is the perception of what the
society expects from one as a society member. The social values prevailing in a society can be strongly
modified when extraordinary historical events occur. As a consequence of these changes also
individual behaviors can change (Cassar, Healy and von Kessler, 2017; Whitt and Wilson, 2007). This
is certainly the case of the crisis generated by the Covid-19 pandemic, which triggered a demand for
collaborative behavior and support for the needs of the most fragile members of the society. Our
experimental results would seem to support the existence of this mechanism of indirect conditioning
of individual behaviors, triggered by a social demand for help that, in some way, influences the
decisions of the participants in the dictator game, pushing them towards more altruistic choices.
4.2

Priming and environmental quality predictions

The distributions of participants’ predictions about 2020 particulate matter (PM) density of Europe and
of the world are respectively depicted in Figure 2. For both regions, participants hold optimistic
expectations on future environmental quality: except in the Env- treatment, the most frequently chosen
scenario is the highly optimistic one, which entails a reduction of 30% in the PM density. Less than
25% of participants selected one of the two pessimistic scenarios for both European and global PM
density.

18

Figure 2. Participants’ predictions on European (Panel A) and global (Panel B) environmental
quality

We first compare the impact of priming on predictions between positive and negative primes and then,
across treatments. Before we present the results, it should be recalled that Hypothesis 5 states that
positive and negative primings prompt optimism and pessimism, respectively. The effect of the
negative priming is expected to be higher than that of the positive (Hypothesis 6). Finally, we expect
that the effect of the priming is stronger on the indicator that shares the same concept with the priming
(Hypothesis 7).
We assess treatment effect using the two-sided Fisher’s exact tests. As we compare more than two
treatments for each outcome (List, Shaikh and Xu, 2019), we correct the p-values for multiple
hypothesis testing using Holm’s correction.17
Table 8 tabulates the p-values from the Fisher’s exact tests on the difference between positive and
negative primes, and neutral information. For the European scenarios, participants’ expectations
significantly differ between the positive and negative primes. In line with Hypothesis 5, Table 8 shows
that participants in the positive prime are more optimistic than those in the negative one. This difference

17

Results without Holm’s correction are available upon request. Obviously, report more significant differences between
pairs than the corrected tests. The comparisons that are not robust to the multiple hypothesis correction are those significant
at 0.10, while those at 0.05 are generally robust.

19

is mostly driven by the negative priming: Participants in the positive priming have the same
expectations than those in the neutral condition, whereas those in the negative priming significantly
differ from it. Hence, Hypothesis 6 is also supported. The pattern of results is qualitatively, but not
quantitatively, replicated for global outcomes.
Table 8. Comparison of positive and negative priming effect on environmental quality
predictions
Comparison
Positive vs. Negative priming
Positive vs. Neutral priming
Negative vs. Neutral priming

European
0.06
0.85
0.06

Global
0.27
0.82
0.19

Note: p-values from two-sided Fisher’s exact test. For each outcome, p-values are corrected for multiple hypothesis testing
using Holm’s correction. Negative denotes the negative prime (Env- and Econ- together), Positive the positive prime (Env+
and Econ+ together), Neutral denotes the neutral prime.

We further unpack these findings by assessing between-treatment differences. Table 9 reports the
comparisons that are relevant to our hypothesis testing. Compared to participants exposed to the neutral
information (Neutral) or to the economic consequences of the pandemic (Econ-), those primed with
environmental consequences (Env-) are significantly more likely to choose the pessimistic scenarios.
Surprisingly, Env+ does not yield the same results, leading to the same expectations as the economic
and neutral primes. Finally, as expected, priming with economic concept does not affect expectations
about environmental outcomes. Overall, these results show that environmental priming influences
environmental predictions more than what economic priming does (but only for negative information).
Hence, for the environment, we partially confirm the effect of priming concept as conjectured in
Hypothesis 7.
Table 9. Comparison of treatment effect on environmental quality predictions
Comparison
Env+ vs. Econ+
Env+ vs. Neutral
Env- vs. EconEnv- vs. Neutral
Econ+ vs. Neutral
Econ- vs. Neutral

European
1.00
1.00
0.03
0.01
1.00
1.00

20

Global
0.54
1.00
0.01
0.01
0.94
1.00

4.3

Priming and economic growth predictions

The distributions of participants’ predictions about 2020 GDP growth of Europe and of the world are
depicted in Figure 3. In all treatments but the Econ+, more than 70% of participants expect a negative
GDP growth rate in Europe and worldwide. The distribution between the two pessimistic scenarios
differs slightly between the two regions. In particular, the most frequently chosen scenario is the
pessimistic one for Europe (growth rate of -4.7%) and the highly pessimistic one for the world (growth
rate of -5.7%). The proportion of participants selecting a negative GDP growth rate is the lowest in the
positive economic priming (Econ+) with 57%. Overall, the pessimistic expectations about economic
growth sharply contrast the optimism observed in the environmental predictions.
Figure 3. Participants’ predictions on European (Panel A) and global (Panel B) economic
growth

We repeat our hypothesis testing on economic predictions as for the environmental outcomes. In Table
10, we report the effect of priming positive vs. negative vs. neutral information. Results show that
participants primed with positive information about the pandemic are significantly more optimistic
about both European and global economic growth than their counterparts primed with negative or
neutral information. These findings provide further support for Hypothesis 5.
Next, we find no significant difference in the distribution of GDP growth prediction between negative
and neutral priming. Instead, positive priming triggers significantly more optimism than the neutral
21

one. This is in sharp contrast with Hypothesis 6 and with the results of the environmental primes, in
which we predicted and found that that negative prime has the largest effect.
Table 10. Comparison of positive and negative priming effect on economic growth predictions
Comparison
Positive vs. Negative priming
Positive vs. Neutral priming
Negative vs. Neutral priming

European
0.02
0.00
0.40

Global
0.02
0.00
0.16

Note: p-values from two-sided Fisher’s exact test. For each outcome, p-values are corrected for multiple hypothesis testing
using Holm’s correction. Negative denotes the negative prime (Env- and Econ- together), Positive the positive prime (Env+
and Econ+ together), Neutral denotes the neutral prime.

Table 11 reports between-treatment differences. Results are in line with the differences across positive,
negative, and neutral priming. Positive economic information (Econ+) leads to more optimistic
predictions on the European economy than the positive environmental (Env+) and neutral priming. In
addition, in the Econ+ treatment, participants are significantly more optimistic about the global
economy than in the Neutral treatment. Instead, participants in Econ- make the same predictions as
those in the other treatments. This asymmetric result is again in contrast with our predictions since we
hypothesized that economic primes, regardless of their valence, have higher effect on economic
expectations than environmental primes (Hypothesis 7). However, it is consistent with the findings
from the environmental outcomes, but for the opposite valence. Notably, the effect of the economic
information is significant only when it is positive, whereas the effect of the environmental information
is significant only when it is negative. In Section 5, we discuss how these seemingly contrasting
outcomes may be derived from the same mechanism.
Table 11. Comparison of treatment effect on economic growth predictions
Comparison

European

Global

Env+ vs. Econ+

0.02

0.12

Env+ vs. Neutral

0.72

0.20

Env- vs. Econ-

0.73

0.22

Env- vs. Neutral

0.72

0.22

Econ+ vs. Neutral

0.00

0.00

Econ- vs. Neutral

0.74

0.22

Note: p-values from two-sided Fisher’s exact test. For each outcome, p-values are corrected for multiple hypothesis
testing using Holm’s correction. Env+ and Econ+ respectively denote the priming with positive environmental
information and with positive economic information. Env- and Econ- respectively denote the priming with negative
environmental and with negative economic information. Neutral denotes the neutral prime.

22

5

Discussion and conclusion

The goal of this study is to investigate how information, through priming, affects people’s prosocial
behavior and expectations amidst a global disaster, more specifically, the Covid-19 pandemic. To do
so, we conduct an online experiment with British participants during the first UK lockdown. To
reproduce the effect that news has on one’s behavior and judgment, we expose participants to different
kinds of information, which is either neutral or addresses the positive or the negative impact of the
pandemic on the environment or the economy. We assess the effect of this information on participants’
prosocial behavior through an incentivized take-and-give dictator game. We also investigate the effect
on participants’ expectations about future outcomes by asking their predictions on how the
environment and the economy will be affected by the pandemic.
Our results are partially consistent with the existing literature. We observe that none of the primes
influences prosocial behavior. Prior research found that negative or positive stimuli, as well as
prosocial appeals, do not affect prosociality (Andersson et al., 2017a; Andersson et al., 2017b; Hanley
et al., 2017). We show that this result holds also in the extraordinary context of the Covid-19 pandemic.
Nevertheless, we fail to replicate a common result as discussed in Vohs (2015): in our setting, economic
information does not prompt selfish behavior. An interesting outcome of our study is the high degree
of altruism displayed by the participants regardless of the type of priming. This result is likely to be
driven by the specific context of our experiment. Prior evidence has shown that sharing a traumatic
event increases prosocial behavior, such as in-group cooperation (Whitt and Wilson, 2007) and trust
(Cassar et al., 2017). Furthermore, the onset of demand from society in favor of the vulnerable citizens
seemed to fuel the individual attitude towards altruistic behavior in general. This finding is of practical
relevance for policy makers who target individuals’ behavior to contrast the diffusion of the pandemic.
Second, we find that highlighting specific consequences of the pandemic influences how people expect
the situation to develop. In terms of environmental expectations, the negative prime triggers more
pessimism than the positive one. This is stronger when the negative prime contains information about
the environment. Instead, the positive environmental priming has no effect on participants’
environmental expectations. For the economic expectations, we observe the opposite pattern: the
positive prime increases optimism in the economy compared to the other primes. On the contrary, the
negative priming, even when it conveys negative economic information, does not affect participants’
economic expectations. The fact that the positive prime has greater effect than the negative one

23

contradicts decades of literature showing that people are more responsive to negative than positive
information.
A search on Google News shows that since the virus first struck in China, media have productively
covered the two inevitable impacts of the global shutdown: economic damage and environmental
benefit. Such external priming may have generated a sort of ceiling effect on participants’ expectations.
More specifically, questioned about environmental quality predictions, people are, by default,
optimistic. Only negative priming – information about environmental consequences of the pandemic –
differs from what people already know and thus, changes their expectations about future environmental
quality. Similarly, given the intensity of news on on-going economic consequences, participants
already hold a pessimistic view on how the pandemic will affect economic development. Hence, their
economic expectations only deviate when they are primed with information about the economic
benefits of the pandemic.
Even though the literature on priming in general and media priming in particular have been wellestablished, it is particularly interesting to study media priming during the Covid-19 pandemic. It is
undoubtedly a “1 in 100 years” event in which media exposure is more intense than usual. Studying
media priming within the specific situation of a pandemic brings about a number of valuable
implications for policy making not only for the Covid-19 crisis but also for future extreme events. The
fact that people hold a relatively high optimistic view on environmental quality amidst the Covid-19
pandemic is alarming. Governments and media should pay attention to avoid raising further optimism
on how the disaster will affect the environment. Citizens may be otherwise less likely to support
policies that prioritize environmental issues and to engage in mitigation behavior once the peak of the
crisis will end. This scenario would constitute a serious threat to the achievement of the ambitious
goals set by the COP21 and recently renovated by the European Green Deal. At the same time, the
news could stress the positive possible economic benefits of the pandemic. Even such a short-lived
priming like the one implemented here triggers optimism and probably releases some of the stress
caused by the negative economic news. In turn, this can speed up countries’ economic recovery.
Like all studies, our study has some limitations. We did not measure some key concepts that might
bring more insights into the process of the media priming such as the use of media and how it has been
changed during a critical period of time like the Covid-19 pandemic; prior expectations of individuals
about the economic and environmental impact of the pandemic. An important venues to increase the

24

generalizability of our results is to conduct the experiment on different target populations and to
employ other priming techniques such as image or scenario priming.
References
Akerlof, G. A., and Kranton, R. E. (2000). Economics and Identity. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 115(3),
715–753. https://doi.org/10.1162/003355300554881
Althaus, S. L., and Kim, Y. M. (2006). Priming effects in complex information environments: Reassessing the
impact of news discourse on presidential approval. The Journal of Politics, 68(4), 960-976.Andersson, O.,
Huysentruyt, M., Miettinen, T., and Stephan, U. (2017)a. Person-organization fit and incentives: A causal
test. Management Science, 63(1), 73–96. https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2015.2331
Andersson, O., Miettinen, T., Hytönen, K., Johannesson, M., and Stephan, U. (2017)b. Subliminal influence on
generosity. Experimental Economics, 20(3), 531–555. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10683-016-9498-8
Andreoni, J. (1989). Giving with Impure Altruism: Applications to Charity and Ricardian Equivalence. Journal
of Political Economy, 97(6), 1447–1458. https://doi.org/10.1086/261662
Andreoni, J. (1990). Impure Altruism and Donations to Public Goods: A Theory of Warm-Glow Giving. The
Economic Journal, 100(401), 464. https://doi.org/10.2307/2234133
Bardsley, N. (2008). Dictator game giving: Altruism or artefact? Experimental Economics, 11(2), 122–133.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10683-007-9172-2
Bargh, J. A. (2006). What have we been priming all these years? On the development, mechanisms, and ecology
of nonconscious social behavior. European journal of social psychology, 36(2), 147-168.
Bargh, J. A., and Chartrand, T. L. (2000). The mind in the middle: A practical guide to priming and automaticity
research. In H. T. Reis and C. M. Judd (Eds.), Handbook of research methods in social and personality
psychology (pp. 253–285). Cambridge University Press.
Baumeister, R. F., Bratslavsky, E., Finkenauer, C., and Vohs, K. D. (2001). Bad Is Stronger Than Good. Review
of General Psychology, 5(4), 323–370. https://doi.org/10.1037/1089-2680.5.4.323
Bilancini, E., Boncinelli, L., Capraro, V., Celadin, T., and Paolo, R. Di. (2020). The effect of norm-based
messages on reading and understanding COVID-19 pandemic response governmental rules
(Unpublished).
Bizer, G. Y., and Petty, R. E. (2005). How we conceptualize our attitudes matters: The effects of valence framing
on the resistance of political attitudes. Political Psychology, 26(4), 553-568.
Bosman, R., Kräussl, R., and Mirgorodskaya, E. (2017). Modifier words in the financial press and investor
expectations.
Journal
of
Economic
Behavior
and
Organization,
138,
85–98.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jebo.2017.04.002
Cappelen, A. W., Nielsen, U. H., Sørensen, E., Tungodden, B., and Tyran, J. R. (2013). Give and take in dictator
games. Economics Letters, 118(2), 280–283. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.econlet.2012.10.030

25

Carlson, M., and Miller, N. (1987). Explanation of the Relation Between Negative Mood and Helping.
Psychological Bulletin. https://doi.org/10.1037/0033-2909.102.1.91
Cassar, A., Healy, A., and von Kessler, C. (2017). Trust, Risk, and Time Preferences After a Natural Disaster:
Experimental
Evidence
from
Thailand.
World
Development,
94,
90–105.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.worlddev.2016.12.042
Chen, D. L., Schonger, M., and Wickens, C. (2016). oTree-An open-source platform for laboratory, online, and
field experiments. Journal of Behavioral and Experimental Finance, 9, 88–97.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbef.2015.12.001
Cialdini, R. B., Baumann, D. J., and Kenrick, D. T. (1981). Insights from sadness: A three-step model of the
development
of
altruism
as
hedonism.
Developmental
Review,
1(3),
207–223.
https://doi.org/10.1016/0273-2297(81)90018-6
Cohn, A., Engelmann, J., Fehr, E., and Maréchal, M. A. (2015). Evidence for countercyclical risk aversion: An
experiment with financial professionals. American Economic Review, 105(2), 860–885.
https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.20131314
Cohn, A., and Maréchal, M. A. (2016). Priming in economics. Current Opinion in Psychology, 12, 17–21.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.copsyc.2016.04.019
Crosetto, P., and Filippin, A. (2013). The “bomb” risk elicitation task. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 47(1),
31–65. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11166-013-9170-z
Curtin, R., Presser, S., and Singer, E. (2000). The Effects of Response Rate Changes on the Index of Consumer
Sentiment. Public Opinion Quarterly. https://doi.org/10.1086/318638
DellaVigna, S., List, J. A., and Malmendier, U. (2012). Testing for Altruism and Social Pressure in Charitable
Giving. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(1), 1–56. https://doi.org/10.1093/qje/qjr050
Dillman Carpentier, F. R., Roskos-Ewoldsen, D. R., and Roskos-Ewoldsen, B. B. (2008). A test of the network
models of political priming. Media Psychology, 11(2), 186-206.
Dillman Carpentier, F. R., Northup, C. T., and Parrott, M. S. (2014). Revisiting media priming effects of sexual
depictions: Replication, extension, and consideration of sexual depiction strength. Media
Psychology, 17(1), 34-54.
Drouvelis, M., Metcalfe, R., and Powdthavee, N. (2015). Can priming cooperation increase public good
contributions? Theory and Decision, 79(3), 479–492. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11238-015-9481-4
Drury, J. (2018). The role of social identity processes in mass emergency behaviour: An integrative review.
European Review of Social Psychology. https://doi.org/10.1080/10463283.2018.1471948
Everett, J. A., Colombatto, C., Chituc, V., Brady, W. J., and Crockett, M. J. (2020). The effectiveness of moral
messages on public health behavioral intentions during the COVID-19 pandemic (Upublished).
https://doi.org/10.31234/osf.io/9yqs8
Garz, M. (2013). Unemployment expectations, excessive pessimism, and news coverage. Journal of Economic

26

Psychology, 34, 156–168. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joep.2012.09.007
George, J. M. (1991). State or trait: Effects of positive mood on prosocial behaviors at work. Journal
applied Psychology, 76(2), 299.

of

Goff, S. H., Waring, T. M., and Noblet, C. L. (2017). Does Pricing Nature Reduce Monetary Support for
Conservation?: Evidence From Donation Behavior in an Online Experiment. Ecological Economics, 141,
119–126. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolecon.2017.05.027
Hanley, N., Boyce, C., Czajkowski, M., Tucker, S., Noussair, C., and Townsend, M. (2017). Sad or Happy? The
Effects of Emotions on Stated Preferences for Environmental Goods. Environmental and Resource
Economics, 68(4), 821–846. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10640-016-0048-9
Helm, D. (2020). The environmental impacts of the Coronavirus. Environmental and Resource Economics, (26),
1–20. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10640-020-00426-z
Henrich, J., Heine, S. J., and Norenzayan, A. (2010). The weirdest people in the world? Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 33(2–3), 61–83. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X0999152X
Henrique, K. P., and Tschakert, P. (2019). Taming São Paulo’s floods: Dominant discourses, exclusionary
practices, and the complicity of the media. Global Environmental Change, 58, 101940.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2019.101940
Hollanders, D., and Vliegenthart, R. (2011). The influence of negative newspaper coverage on consumer
confidence: The Dutch case. Journal of Economic Psychology, 32(3), 367–373.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joep.2011.01.003
Horton, J. J., Rand, D. G., and Zeckhauser, R. J. (2011). The online laboratory: Conducting experiments in a
real labor market. Experimental Economics, 14(3), 399–425. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10683-011-9273-9
Janiszewski, C., and Wyer, R. S. (2014). Content and process priming: A review. Journal of Consumer
Psychology. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcps.2013.05.006
Kalogeropoulos, A., Albæk, E., De Vreese, C. H., and Van Dalen, A. (2017). News priming and the changing
economy: How economic news influences government evaluations. International Journal of Public
Opinion Research. https://doi.org/10.1093/ijpor/edv048
Kamenica, E. (2012). Behavioral Economics and Psychology of Incentives. Annual Review of Economics, 4(1),
427–452. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-economics-080511-110909
Keizer, K., Lindenberg, S., and Steg, L. (2008). The Spreading of Disorder. Science, 322(5908), 1681–1685.
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1161405
Larney, A., Rotella, A., and Barclay, P. (2019). Stake size effects in ultimatum game and dictator game offers:
A
meta-analysis.
Organizational
Behavior
and
Human
Decision
Processes.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.obhdp.2019.01.002
Lei, H., Yuting, H., Jun, B., Ying, Z., Yang, L., and Hammitt, J. K. (2013). Effect of the Fukushima nuclear
accident on the risk perception of residents near a nuclear power plant in China. Proceedings of the

27

National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 110(49), 19742–19747.
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1313825110
Lep, Z., Babnik, K., and Beyazoglu, K. H. (2020). Emotional responses and self-protective behavior within days
of the COVID-19 outbreak: The promoting role of information credibility. Frontiers in Psychology.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2020.01846
Lewis-Beck, M. S., and Stegmaier, M. (2000). Economic Determinants of Electoral Outcomes. Annual Review
of Political Science, 3(1), 183–219. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.polisci.3.1.183
List, J. A. (2007). On the interpretation of giving in dictator games. Journal of Political Economy, 115(3), 482–
493. https://doi.org/10.1086/519249
List, J. A., Shaikh, A. M., and Xu, Y. (2019). Multiple hypothesis testing in experimental economics.
Experimental Economics, 22(4), 773–793. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10683-018-09597-5
Manucia, G. K., Baumann, D. J., and Cialdini, R. B. (1984). Mood influences on helping: Direct effects or side
effects? Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 46(2), 357–364. https://doi.org/10.1037/00223514.46.2.357
Miles, B., and Morse, S. (2007). The role of news media in natural disaster risk and recovery. Ecological
Economics, 63(2–3), 365–373. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolecon.2006.08.007
Murphy, R. O., Ackermann, K. A., and Handgraaf, M. J. J. (2011). Measuring Social Value Orientation.
Judgment and Decision Making, 6(8), 771–781. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.1804189
Northup, T., and Carpentier, F. D. (2013). Exploring priming effectiveness within news stories according to
media modality and valence. Electronic Journal of Communication, 23(3).
Palan, S., and Schitter, C. (2018). Prolific.ac—A subject pool for online experiments. Journal of Behavioral and
Experimental Finance, 17, 22–27. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbef.2017.12.004
Paolacci, G., Chandler, J., and Ipeirotis, P. G. (2010). Running experiments on Amazon mechanical turk.
Judgment and Decision Making, 5(5), 411–419. https://doi.org/10.1037/t69659-000
Petalas, D. P., Van Schie, H., and Vettehen, P. H. (2017). Forecasted economic change and the selffulfilling
prophecy
in
economic
decisionmaking.
PLoS
ONE,
12(3),
1–18.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0174353
Pillutla, M. M., and Murnighan, J. K. (1996). Unfairness, anger, and spite: Emotional rejections of ultimatum
offers. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes. https://doi.org/10.1006/obhd.1996.0100
Reeson, A. F., and Tisdell, J. G. (2010). The Market Instinct: The Demise of Social Preferences for Self-Interest.
Environmental and Resource Economics, 47(3), 439–453. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10640-010-9387-0
Rheinberger, C. M., and Treich, N. (2017). Attitudes Toward Catastrophe. Environmental and Resource
Economics, 67(3), 609–636. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10640-016-0033-3

28

Roskos-Ewoldsen, D. R., Roskos-Ewoldsen, B., and Dillman Carpentier, F. (2009). Media priming: An updated
synthesis. In J. Bryant and M. B. Oliver (Eds.), Media effects: Advances in theory and research (pp. 7493). New York: Routledge/Taylor & Francis.
Sheafer, T. (2007). How to evaluate it: The role of story-evaluative tone in agenda setting and priming. Journal
of Communication, 57(1), 21-39.
Soroka, S. N. (2006). Good News and Bad News: Asymmetric Responses to Economic Information. The Journal
of Politics, 68(2), 372–385. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-2508.2006.00413.x
Starr, M. A., and Yilmaz, R. (2007). Bank runs in emerging-market economies: Evidence from Turkey’s special
finance houses. Southern Economic Journal, 73(4), 1112–1132.
Sunstein, C. R. (2007). Worst-case scenarios. Harvard University Press.
Tversky, A., and Kahneman, D. (1974). Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases. Science, 185(4157),
1124–1131. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.185.4157.1124
Tversky, A., and Kahneman, D. (1985). The Framing of Decisions and the Psychology of Choice. In
Environmental Impact Assessment, Technology Assessment, and Risk Analysis (pp. 107–129). Berlin,
Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-70634-9_6
Tversky, A., and Kahneman, D. (1991). Loss Aversion in Riskless Choice: A Reference-Dependent Model. The
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 106(4), 1039–1061. https://doi.org/10.2307/2937956
Valenzuela, S. (2009). Variations in media priming: The moderating role of knowledge, interest, news attention,
and discussion. Journalism & Mass Communication Quarterly, 86(4), 756-774.
van Bavel, J. J., Baicker, K., Boggio, P. S., Capraro, V., Cichocka, A., Cikara, M., … Weeden, K. A. (2020).
Using social and behavioural science to support COVID-19 pandemic response. Nature Human Behaviour,
1–12. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-020-0884-z
Van der Werff, E., Steg, L., and Keizer, K. (2014). I Am What I Am, by Looking Past the Present. Environment
and Behavior (Vol. 46). https://doi.org/10.1177/0013916512475209
van Giesen, R. I., and Pieters, R. (2019). Climbing out of an economic crisis: A cycle of consumer sentiment
and
personal
stress.
Journal
of
Economic
Psychology,
70,
109–124.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joep.2018.12.004
Van Lange, P. A. M. (1999). The pursuit of joint outcomes and equality in outcomes: An integrative model of
social value orientation. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology. https://doi.org/10.1037/00223514.77.2.337
Västfjäll, D., Peters, E., and Slovic, P. (2008). Affect, risk perception and future optimism after the tsunami
disaster. Judgment and Decision Making, 3(1), 64–72. https://doi.org/10.4324/9781849776677-15
Vohs, K. D. (2015). Money priming can change people’s thoughts, feelings, motivations, and behaviors: An
update on 10 years of experiments. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 144(4), e86-93.
https://doi.org/10.1037/xge0000091

29

Vohs, K. D., Mead, N. L., and Goode, M. R. (2006). The psychological consequences of money. Science,
314(5802), 1154–1156. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1132491
West, R., Michie, S., Rubin, G. J., and Amlôt, R. (2020). Applying principles of behaviour change to reduce
SARS-CoV-2 transmission. Nature Human Behaviour, 4(5), 451–459. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562020-0887-9
Whitt, S., and Wilson, R. K. (2007). Public goods in the field: Katrina evacuees in Houston. Southern Economic
Journal, 74(2), 377–387. https://doi.org/10.2307/20111973

30

