Was India saved by staying below the critical travel threshold and was lockdown and
travel restriction the most important public health intervention?
Sunil Kumar Raina MD FIAPSM1 , Yaneer Bar-Yam2
1

arXiv:2102.12405v1 [physics.soc-ph] 24 Feb 2021

2

Dr RP Government Medical College, Tanda (HP) and
New England Complex Systems Institute, Cambridge, MA USA
(Dated: February 25, 2021)

Indian response to the pandemic has been described from “India is in denial about the covid-19
crisis” or “India staring at corona virus disaster”, to “The mystery of India’s plummeting covid-19
cases”. These responses have been far from being backed scientifically and appear ignorant of India’s
capabilities of leveraging its strengths to mitigate the impact of the pandemic. Backed by a swift
Government action of restricting/regulating movement to increasing public health capacity to meet
the increasing demands of the pandemic, India seems to have done enough to emerge successful.
India is doing well, if not guaranteed for the future, but at least for now. Here we review these
measures and point to their consistency with analysis of the role of intercommunity transmission
and within community action to stop localized outbreaks. In particular, severe restrictions on travel,
stopping gatherings, targeted localized lockdowns, school closures, effective public communication,
improvements in case identification, rapid ramping of industrial production of masks and other
personal protective equipment (PPE) and testing capacity, as well as intensive measures in high
density areas of urban deprivation have placed India in a regime of declining cases and outbreak
control. It is time to recognize the scientific basis of India’s success and give it its due. With the
number of new cases in India leveling recently, the urgency is great to complete the eliminiation
process so that a new surge does not occur.

I.

BACKGROUND

Over one year into the COVID-19 pandemic there continue to be widely speculative ill-informed discussions
of causal factors in pandemic dynamics despite scientific
clarity about the essential role of public health measures.
Some of the most common questions doing the rounds
have been; was use of stringent lock down measures necessary? Why did it strike different countries differently
or different states/cities in the same country with varying severity? In between such questions there have been
headlines that read that “India is in denial about the
COVID-19 crisis” or “India staring at corona virus disaster”. [1] Surprisingly however, the last few months have
seen a new narrative on India. The headlines now read
“The mystery of India’s plummeting covid-19 cases” although the word “mystery” is far from flattering.[2] From
India’s efforts in mitigating the impact of Covid-19 pandemic being viewed with suspicion to India’s success now
being equated with magic, the cycle of mis-information
on India seems complete. Epidemiological experts and
the mathematical modelers alike were predicting millions
of deaths by August 2020, the falling numbers have left
them perplexed and seeking non-scientific or still speculative explanations such as a hygiene/microbiome theory
that has been widely talked about as the factor working
in India’s favor [5] and the country’s age profile having
played a positive role—which perhaps contributed to a
lower death rate but does not explain why cases have declined. The achievement has been spectacular. As on 8th
of February, India, with a population of 1.4 billion, has
cumulative 155, 080 COVID-19 deaths with 84 deaths in
the preceding 24 hours and total number of active cases
is at 148, 609 is doing much better than in comparison

to, the United States, which has seen 439, 830 deaths or
the United Kingdom for example, countries boasting of a
superior healthcare delivery system. [3] We note that no
positive correlation between superior healthcare delivery
systems with pandemic excellence has been shown, and
indeed, there is no reason to attribute effectiveness of
prevention through stopping transmission to the medical
quality or capacity of hospitals for treatment of infected
individuals. Public health prevention and medical treatment are entirely different capabilities.

II.

THE EVIDENCE SO FAR

India recorded 97,859 on 16th September 2020, the
highest single-day number of Covid-19 infections since
the start of the pandemic. However, ever since then the
cases have seen a significant decline despite the number of
tests being carried out continuing to be substantial. The
Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) backed testing strategy had yielded 8 crore (tens of millions of) tests
till 30th September out of which 3.1 crore were done in
September only with a daily average of 10, 42, 750 tests.
As recent as 13th of February, the total number of tests
conducted was 6, 97, 114 to add to a cumulative total of
20, 62, 30, 512. The number of tests returning positive for
Covid-19 was 11,106. The average number of new cases
for last one week has been about 11, 000/day. [4]
The number of active cases has also seen a continues
decline since 17th September 2020. India recorded highest number of daily deaths on 15th September at 1283
(except 2006 on 16th June; which was due to adjustment
of old unrecorded deaths) and since then has seen a significant decline. [4]

2
III.

per a report, 86% of Indian households never take
to a trip.[11] The limited modes of travel both limit
transmission between communities and allow for its
regulation when proactive measures are taken.

WHAT HAS WORKED IN INDIA’S FAVOR

In an attempt to look into what may have worked for
India, we list a few important underlying factors probably favorable to mitigating the impact of the pandemic.
1. Experience and successful response efforts in prior
pandemics has been in India’s favor. India saw
lesser number of cases of 2009 H1N1 pandemic
due to H1N1pdm09 virus when compared to the
United States or the Europe or even Africa for that
matter. [6] It even saw lesser cases than China,
Japan or South Korea.[6] The evidence of history
also reveals India’s ability to largely restrict pandemics/epidemics to one or few geographical areas only. Even the Spanish flu of 1918 which is
supposed to have hit India badly killing an estimated 10 million to 20 million—roughly 6% of the
Indian population at that time—did not present a
different picture, with the then state of Bombay
affected badly in comparison to Bihar for example. [7] Similar observations appear to be the story
for seasonal Influenza A (H1N1) where the cases
are differentially distributed across the country.[8]
We note that Covid-19, did affect India widely and
registered a large number of cases. However, here
again the highest contribution to cases in this pandemic has also been restricted to some regions only.
The reasons for the observed geographical restriction can be attributed to both underlying social
conditions as well as proactive implementation of
public health measures as enumerated below.
2. The less urbanized India may have worked to its advantage. Of all the continents in the world, Asia is
the least urbanized, with 51% of its population living in the urban areas. [9] When it comes to India,
the percentage falls further with only around 30%
of Indians living in Urban areas. [10] When compared to Europe or America, the difference is significant. A large portion of Indian population survives
on agriculture as main source of income generation.
This results in limited travel and thus limited rates
of community-to-community transmission and the
opportunity to implement localized actions to stop
outbreaks from spreading further.
3. Another important factor that probably worked
in India’s favor is the way Indians travel. India continues to use buses as the major public transport mode of travel.
Rapid transit
(metro/subways/undergrounds etc) travel mode is
restricted to a few major cities of the country only.
So is travel by the airways. Added to it is the fact
that large India states like the Uttar Pradesh or Bihar which account for almost 1/4th of India’s population travel less in comparison to states like Kerala
or Himachal Pradesh leading to less overall mean
travel time by Indian population in general. As

4. The fact that India does not feature among the top
tourist destinations of the world may again have
helped. [12] India’s international tourist footprint
is very small in comparison to France for example. The fact, however, remains that India features at rank 8 among the top 10 tourist destinations in Asia-Pacific.[12] The tourism is, however, localized—large parts of north and northeastern India (wherein impact of Covid-19 pandemic
was lower) boast of very few international airports
and fewer direct international flights. Significantly,
Kerala, a state which continues to have a high number of cases has four international airports, while
by comparison there is one in the state of Bihar and
two in the state of Uttar Pradesh.[13]
IV.

HOW INDIA LEVERAGED ITS STRENGTH

Credit must go to the country’s policy makers on their
ability to identify its strengths and leverage these to their
advantage.
1. Lockdown and Zoning: Use of non pharmaceutical interventions by imposing large-scale restrictions on gatherings where person-to-person transmission could occur was probably the most effective
step taken by the Government. Some of these restrictions continue to be in place across large part
of the country restricting social gatherings. As India’s Prime minister said in one of his meetings with
the Chief Ministers of different states at the end of
April 2020, the government may move towards a
“smart lockdown”—with severe restrictions in affected districts, and partial lifting of restrictions
in unaffected districts, along with the opening up
of some sectors to meet the economic challenge.
[14] This was done by demarcating the country
into three types of zones—red, orange and green—
depending on the scale of the Covid-19 outbreak.
While no activity was allowed in the red zone,
minimum activities like opening of limited public
transport, harvesting of farm products were allowed
in orange zones (where only few cases had been
found in the recent past), and further relaxation
like opening of MSME industries falling with inhouse lodging facilities for employees with proper
maintenance of social distance was allowed in green
zones. [14] India is continuing to rely on this model
of both restriction and regulation on the one hand
and of relaxation on the other. The state of Maharashtra which has seen a rise in cases again is contemplating imposition of a new lockdown. [15] In a
statement on 17th of February 2021, the chief minister of the state of Maharashtra minced no words

3
while addressing a meeting with the Revenue Commissioners and Collectors through video conferencing, when he said that “It is up to the people to decide whether they want the lockdown back or roam
freely with some restrictions and if people do not
wear masks or follow health rules, then the district
and police administration has a responsibility to
strictly enforce these rules. They must take strict
punitive and necessary action without showing any
leniency,” Thus, imposing restriction and localizing
cases to specific geographical locations is continuing to be seen as an effective tool to counter the
impact of the pandemic.
2. Restriction on travel: For the large part of
2020, the country saw restrictions on travel. Travel
was regulated through issue of e-pass with border
checks in place on state borders across the country. The regulation of travel continues into 2021
as travel has not been fully de-regulated. In a few
states/union territories like Jammu & Kashmir or
Uttarakhand for example, every traveler is registered before entry or either needs to show Covid-19
negative test report or undergo a test for the infection. As late as 31st of January 2021, all 20 districts
of the Union territory of J&K were listed in orange
zone with only regulated activities allowed.[16] The
guidelines on international travel continue (as of
17th February 2021) to be in place with travelers
requiring to undergo quarantine after entering India in addition to production of RT-PCR negative
test report.
3. Immediate isolation and contact tracing on
testing positive: The country continues to use
its strategy of restricting mobility and isolating all
individuals who test positive to Covd-19. Restrictions are imposed on their movement and contact
tracing is conducted. All primary contacts identified as high-risk contacts (as per the defined protocol) are also quarantined and tested. The movements of contacts are restricted till they are confirmed to be negative. Quarantines of locations
(not just of individuals) are also applied: The
area/building or site is sealed off if the cases come
in a cluster. In one such case when 14 inmates of
an old age home in the state of Himachal Pradesh
tested positive on 31st of January 2021, a 50 meter
area around the old age home was completed sealed
off and contained. [17]
4. School Closure: For an extended period of time,
all Indians up to age 25 were at home, there were
no schools and no colleges open. Recent reopening is partial and occurs in a context of very low
number of cases. The current reopening strategy,
due to its recent nature, remains untested in its
epidemiological consequences [21]
5. Industry response: Another area wherein In-

dia showed tremendous progress within a short period of time was manufacturing. The industry responded to the needs of the pandemic like never before. From a country producing no high-end masks
and personal protective equipment to its capability
of being able to supply to the world, the shift was
swift and decisive. [18] In fact, the production of
personal protective equipment (PPEs) went from
zero to the second-highest in the world within two
months. The incentives by the Government worked
as a boost as it itself went into procuring and distributing ventilators.
6. Laboratory Testing Capacity: From a single
lab capable of doing RT-PCR for Covid-19 to more
than 2300 (in both Government and Private sector)
has been a significant public health initiative.[4]
The addition of a greater number of labs has reduced the test result return time, strengthening the
isolation/quarantine strategy.
7. Awareness: The public awareness drives with
cautionary messages replacing ring tunes on phones
to imposing fines for not wearing mask in public,
public communication and response efforts moved
in sync. More awareness meant that the general
population willingly submitted to the restriction
guidelines. Typical Indians travelled significantly
less in 2020 than the past few years.
8. High density urban areas: The greatest challenge to pandemic response is the areas of urban
deprivation. India’s response therein involved local intensification and refinement of the lockdowns,
travel restrictions, rapid case identification, and
public communication found in other locations.
For, e.g. Dharavi, one of the largest slums in Asia
(2.1 km2 , about 1 mile on a side) and 1M people, the area is treated as a separate administrative zone with an Assistant municipal commissioner
in charge. 3, 60, 600 were screened, 9 municipal
dispensaries and 350 private clinics were pressed
into service, 225 community toilets, 100 public toilets, 125 MHADA toilets were disinfected daily.
Anybody in these blocks that has any problems
is reported to the 350 local health workers, they
respond and provide isolation away from home.
Quarantine facilities were established in schools,
hostels etc. Communication is strong across the
community that if there are problems to get tested
and isolated as soon as symptoms are found. There
is restricted entry and exit from these areas. Similarly, for multiple zones of slums in Delhi.[20]
9. Vaccines: Through what is being recognized as
the largest vaccination drive across the world, the
government of India on 16th of January started vaccinating its healthcare professionals, riding largely
on two vaccines developed by Indian vaccine manufactures.[9] This action, reflecting an all measures

4
approach, is expected to have a increasingly significant impact on the outbreak.

V.

WHAT INDIA NEEDS TO CONTINUE
DOING

In order to further reduce the number of daily cases
of Covid-19 being reported, India needs to strengthen
what it has been doing so far. It needs to continue with
regulation/restriction in areas reporting cases while allowing return to normalcy in areas reporting no cases.
It also needs to respond quickly to every single case of
Covid-19 reported from any part of the country by isolating the case, carrying out contact tracing and placing
restriction of movement on those suspected to carrying
the disease. Also, it needs to strengthen its Covid-19
vaccination strategy as it does not have a general adult
vaccination program in place. As the country intends
to vaccinate 300 million individuals by July 2021, a vaccination strategy integrated into the pandemic response
program may be helpful.
Still, the difference between success and failure in pandemic response rests on decisiveness of action when numbers of cases are small. Recent numbers of new cases in
India have leveled at around 11,000 cases per day with
approximately half in Kerala. The outbreak there should
be finally controlled. Elsewhere, and there, the urgency
is great to complete the elimination process so that a
new surge does not occur across India. Should India join
countries in Asia and Oceania in elimination, 50% of the
world would become COVID free and an example for
emulation can be achieved that is surely unexpected by
western observers.

[1] India Is in Denial about the COVID-19 Crisis. Available
online at: www.scientificamerican.com Last accessed:
18-02-2021.
[2] The Mystery of India’s Plummeting COVID-19 Cases.
Available online at: flutrackers.com. Last accessed: 1802-2021.
[3] WHO Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19) Dashboard.
Covid19.who.int. Last accessed: 18-02-2021.
[4] www.icmr.gov.in. Last accessed: 18-02-2021.
[5] Kumar P, Chander B. COVID 19 mortality: Probable
role of microbiome to explain disparity. Med Hypotheses.
2020; 144: 110209.
[6] 2009 swine flu pandemic by country—Wikipedia. Available online at: en.wikipedia.org. Last accessed: 18-022021.
[7] A study maps the spread (and decline) of the 1918 Spanish flu in India. Available online at scroll.in. Last accessed: 18-02-2021.
[8] Seasonal Influenza H1N1. Available online at
ncdc.gov.in. Last accessed: 18-02-2021.

VI.

LESSONS FOR THE WORLD

At the end of Spanish flu of 1918, the Sanitary
Commissioner of India reported “Transportation systems
aided the spread of the disease as the railway played a
prominent part as was inevitable”. [7] The Covid-19 pandemic has not behaved differently. Travel and time of
local response are the key components of this pandemic’s
outcomes. The message to go out from India therefore is
“restrict travel in areas wherein cases are there, isolate
cases and don’t allow them to transmit infection”. The
states that continue (to date) to have some restrictions
on travel did better than others in India. Kerala, was the
one state that opened up early, as early as April 2020,
and distinct from other states continues to have significantly more cases. Probably also the fact that Kerala
saw the largest number of expatriates coming back from
outside the country could be a contributing factor. Of almost 8 lakh expatriates coming to India more than 25%
belonged to Kerala.
VII.

CONCLUSIONS

Travel and time could be the key for controlling pandemics. India, with less travel externally and internally
than its western counterparts due to both intrinsic conditions and public health measures gave itself more time to
get the infection under control than much of the western
world. Under these conditions, where localized restrictions are not needed, relaxing restrictions can be done
without preventing effective control measures in other
locations, resulting in overall ongoing reduction in cases.
That those who are not aware of the geographic dynamic
of response efforts do not recognize it is not surprising,
but the scientific and public health understanding should
be clear.

[9] Population of Asia (2021)—Worldometer. Available online at: www.worldometers.info. Last accessed: 18-022021.
[10] Census of India 2011 Urban Agglomerations and Cities.
Available online at Censusindia.gov.in. Last accessed:
18-02-2021.
[11] How many Indians travel?—Mint. Available online at
www.livemint.com
[12] World Tourism rankings—Wikipedia. Available online
at: en.wikipedia.org. Last accessed: 18-02-2021.
[13] List of all International Airports of India. Available online at: www.jagrangosh.com. Last accessed: 18-02-2021.
[14] A smart lockdown, HT Editorial. Available online at:
www.hindustantimes.com. Last accessed: 18-02-2021.
[15] Want freedom or lockdown? Maharashtra CM Uddhav
Thackeray warns over rising Covid-19 cases. Available
online at : www.indiatoday.in. Last accessed: 18-022021
[16] Jammu and Kashmir extends Covid-19 Lockdown
restrictions till January 31. Available online at:
www.businesinsider.in. Last accessed: 18-02-2021

5
[17] Coronavirus: Twelve tested positive at old-age home in
McLeod Ganj. Available online at: www.tibetsun.com
Last accessed: 24-02-2021 (and order by Office of Subdivisional Magistrate Dharamshala District Kangra Himachal Pradesh 601 /COVID19/SDK/031.01.2021)
[18] From struggling to meet domestic demand, to exporting,
India’s PPE manufacturing tale is one of self-reliance.
Available online at: www.moneycontrol.com. Last ac-

cessed: 18-02-2021
[19] Raina SK, Kumar R. “Covishield and Covaxin”—India’s
Contribution to Global Covid-19 pandemic. Jour of Famil
Med Prim Care. (in production)
[20] Golecha M. COVID-19 Containment in Asia’s Largest
Urban Slum Dharavi-Mumbai, India: Lessons for Policymakers Globally. J Urban Health (2020) 97:796-801).
[21] COVID-19: Over 1.3 billion students hit by closure of
schools, colleges, says VC. www.thehindu.com

