FEW-SHOT LEARNING FOR CT SCAN BASED COVID-19 DIAGNOSIS
Yifan Jiang

Han Chen

Hanseok Ko∗

arXiv:2102.00596v1 [eess.IV] 1 Feb 2021

School of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Korea University
Seoul, Korea

ABSTRACT
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is a Public Health
Emergency of International Concern infecting more than 40
million people across 188 countries and territories. Chest
computed tomography (CT) imaging technique benefits from
its high diagnostic accuracy and robustness, it has become an
indispensable way for COVID-19 mass testing. Recently,
deep learning approaches have become an effective tool
for automatic screening of medical images, and it is also
being considered for COVID-19 diagnosis. However, the
high infection risk involved with COVID-19 leads to relative
sparseness of collected labeled data limiting the performance
of such methodologies. Moreover, accurately labeling CT
images require expertise of radiologists making the process expensive and time-consuming. In order to tackle the
above issues, we propose a supervised domain adaption based
COVID-19 CT diagnostic method which can perform effectively when only a small samples of labeled CT scans are
available. To compensate for the sparseness of labeled data,
the proposed method utilizes a large amount of synthetic
COVID-19 CT images and adjusts the networks from the
source domain (synthetic data) to the target domain (real
data) with a cross-domain training mechanism. Experimental
results show that the proposed method achieves state-of-theart performance on few-shot COVID-19 CT imaging based
diagnostic tasks.

David K. Han
Department of Electrical and
Computer Engineering
Drexel University
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA
and it spreads more readily compared to similar infectious
diseases such as Middle East Respiratory Syndrome (MERS)
or Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS) [3]. To slow
down the rapid transmission of this disease, it is necessary to
detect the COVID-19 in an early stage of infection.
With the emergence of deep learning, medical imaging
area also benefited from effective feature representation capability of deep learning techniques [4, 5, 6, 7, 8]. However,
applying deep learning on COVID-19 diagnosis is challenging due to lack of sufficiently large labeled data, particularly
of COVID-19 CT data, as it involves high infection risk and
the labeling process requiring experienced radiologists [9]. To
enable effective deep learning based COVID-19 diagnosis, it
is necessary to develop a novel approach capable of learning
in few-shot conditions (only limited data is available).

Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) [1] is an ongoing
global pandemic that was declared by the World Health Organization (WHO) on 11 March 2020. It has already infected
more than 40 million individuals and caused 1,119,369 death,
as of 20 October 2020 [2]. COVID-19 is highly contagious

One promising approach that can tackle the above issue is
to use synthetic data for model training. However, a model
trained with synthetic data may not perform satisfactorily on
real data when applied directly. This is because of the domain
shift problem: synthetic data (source domain) may not necessarily have similar distribution compared to the distribution
of real data (target domain). To handle the domain shift problem, some supervised domain adaptation (SDA) methods are
proposed recently. FADA [10] applied adversarial learning to
learn embedding features that maximize the distance between
two domains while aligning on a semantic level. CCSA [11]
proposed a series of loss functions in order to manage the
domain gap for a few-shot domain adaptation tasks. d-SNE
[12] introduced a new approach that exploits the stochastic
neighborhood embedding theory and modified-Hausdorff distance to improve the few-shot classification performance. Although, many efforts have been done on SDA or few-shot
COVID-19 diagnosis areas [13, 14], applying domain adaptation on CT images for the COVID-19 diagnostic task is relatively a new area, and our proposed method is one of the
first attempts in utilizing synthetic chest CT scans for fewshot COVID-19 diagnostic task.

∗ This material is based upon work supported by the Air Force Office of
Scientific Research under award number FA2386-19-1-4001. (Corresponding author: Hanseok Ko. E-mail: hsko@korea.ac.kr)

In this paper, we propose a novel supervised domain adaptation based few-shot COVID-19 diagnostic method applied
to CT scans. The proposed method consists of a Siamese

Index Terms— COVID-19 diagnosis, computed topography, few-shot learning, supervised domain adaptation
1. INTRODUCTION

structure, and the domain shift problem is solved with a
cross-domain training mechanism. The main idea is to learn
a model that can quantify three distances at domain-level: (a)
Classification loss Lc to maximize the distribution distance
between samples from different categories; (b) Cross-domain
pairing loss Lcp to minimize the distribution distance between
samples from a different domain but of the same category;
(c) Cross-domain detaching loss Lcd to maximize the distribution distance between samples from different domains and
categories.

which only a small quantity of COVID-19 CT data is
available. To the best of our knowledge, the proposed
method stands the first domain adaptation method that
utilizes synthetic COVID-19 CT data for a few-shot
COVID-19 diagnostic task.
(2) We propose a Siamese network structure that is trained
by a novel cross-domain training mechanism. This
cross-domain training mechanism enables an effective
domain transfer via three different losses (Lc , Lcp and
Lcd ) in few-shot condition.

Diagnosis
accuracy

(A)

2. PROPOSED METHOD
Synthetic data

Model pre-trained on
synthetic data (Csyn)

Test on real data

Csyn
Evaluation
performance

Source branch 𝑓($)

Diagnosis
accuracy

𝑓(𝑋!/" )

Cause by
domain shift
problem

(B)

Real data

Model pretrained on real
data (Creal)

Test on real
data

Csyn
Creal
Evaluation
performance

Prediction branch 𝑔($)

𝑔(𝑓(𝑋!/" ))

ℒ!

Abundant synthetic data 𝑋!
Weight sharing

ℒ !" , ℒ !#

Abundant
synthetic data
Diagnosis
accuracy
Reducing
Domain gap

(C)

𝑓(𝑋" )
Few-shot real data 𝑋"
Target branch 𝑓($)

Proposed method pretrained on few-shot
Few-shot real data
condition (Cproposed)

Test on real
data

Csyn Cproposed Creal
Evaluation
performance

Fig. 1. Demonstration of domain shift problem and proposed
solution. (A) Model trained on a large synthetic dataset then
tested on real data; (B) Model trained on a large real dataset
then tested on real data; (C) The proposed model trained on
a large synthetic dataset and few real data, then evaluated on
real data.
An illustration of the domain shift problem and the proposed solution is shown in Figure 1. Figure 1 (A) depicts the
situation in which a COVID-19 CT based diagnostic model is
pre-trained by a large amount of synthetic data and tested on
real data. The model in Figure 1 (B), on the other hand, was
given a large quantity of real data for training and was tested
the same way as in the model in Figure 1 (A). As would be expected, Figure 1 (A) model performs poorly due to the domain
shift problem compared to Figure 1 (B) model. Figure 1 (C)
shows the proposed method which utilizes the same synthetic
data as in model (A) plus few real data to reduce the domain
gap between synthetic data and real data so that it can achieve
a similar performance level as in (B), as synthetic data can
easily be generated from our previous work [15]. The main
contributions of our work are as follows:
(1) We propose a novel chest CT data based COVID-19
diagnostic method designed for few-shot conditions in

Fig. 2. Overview of the proposed method. The proposed
model mainly consists of three parts: the source branch f (·)
depicted in blue color, the target branch f (·) in orange color,
and the prediction branch g(·) in gray color. The crossdomain losses (Lcc and Lci ) and the classification loss Lc are
derived through the green arrow and the blue arrow, respectively.
In this work, we propose a novel Siamese network based
model for a few-shot COVID-19 CT diagnostic task as illustrated in Figure 2. The Siamese network structure is basically formed in three components: source branch f (·), target branch f (·) and prediction branch g(·). Source and target
branches have the same network structure which consists of a
feature extractor and two fully-connected (FC) layers. The
prediction branch is a network that contains three FC layers. During the training stage, weight sharing occurs between
source and target branches as they take staggered input of
synthetic and real as (Xs1 , Xt1 , Xs2 , Xt2 , ......, XsN , XtN , ).
Since the synthetic data outnumber the real data in a large
proportion, the real data were reused. Two embedded feature vectors (fs (Xs ) and ft (Xt )) are extracted through the
two branches. Only fs (Xs ) is passed to the prediction branch
for calculating classification loss Lc while both fs (Xs ) and
ft (Xt ) are used to compute the cross-domain losses (Lcp and
Lcd ). The classification loss and the cross-domain loss are

used together to construct the overall loss for updating the
network. During the test stage, a real CT image is passed
through the network, and the network makes a binary diagnostic decision.
2.1. Classification loss
In order to train the proposed classifier to classify an input
CT scan to be positive or negative, we propose a classification
loss Lc as follows:
Lc = −[y · log g(f (x)) + (1 − y) log(1 − g(f (x)))]

Similar to Lcp , the cross-domain detaching Lcd uses Euclidean distance to manage the difference between the two
feature distributions. The learning object is to maximize
Lcd so that the diagnostic model is able to effectively separate the distributions well at the feature-level for enhanced
performance.
2.4. Overall learning objective
The overall learning object is defined as

(1)

where x denotes the input CT scan, y denotes the binary label
(0, 1) of the corresponding input. The binary category cross
entropy loss learns the difference between positive case and
negative case and teaches the network to recognize the characteristics of the lesion representation associated with COVID19. Since the data distributions of source and target domains
are different, this domain gap can influence the diagnostic
performance of the model when the network is pre-trained in
the source domain but is tested in the target domain. Therefore, the classification loss alone is not sufficient to handle the
domain shift problem, and further cross-domain measures are
required to deal with the domain shift problem.
2.2. Cross-domain pairing loss
We define here a novel Cross-domain pairing loss for managing the distance between features from different domains but
have the same label. The cross-domain pairing loss is defined
as
Lcp = D(p(f (Xsp ), p(f (Xtp )))) + D(p(f (Xsn ), p(f (Xtn ))))
(2)
where Xsp represents a sample from the source domain with
a positive label, while Xtn denotes a sample from the target
domain with a negative label. D is the distance between two
probability distributions, p(·), and it is computed by average
pairwise Euclidean distances between points of the same label
from the two domains. By applying the cross-domain pairing
loss Lcp , the model can learn the pair-wise (same category)
relationship between two domains by minimizing the distance
between the two feature distributions.
2.3. Cross-domain detaching loss
In order to further enhance the cross-domain diagnostic performance, we propose a cross-domain detaching loss, aimed
at maximizing the distance between two feature distributions
of different classes. The definition of cross-domain detaching
loss is defined as follows:
Lcd = D(p(f (Xsp ), p(f (Xtn )))) + D(p(f (Xsn ), p(f (Xtp ))))
(3)

Loverall = Lc + α(Lcp − Lcd )

(4)

where hypo-parameter α denotes a weight factor of the crossdomain losses. By applying both the classification loss Lc
and the cross-domain losses Lcp , Lcd , our proposed COVID19 diagnostic model can not only effectively classify the positive/negative cases within the domain, but also can transfer
the knowledge from the source domain to the target domain.
Thus, the proposed combination of the loss functions fully
exploits the large number of synthetic data for COVID-19 CT
diagnostic task when only a small number of real data are
given.
3. EXPERIMENTS
3.1. Experimental settings
Dataset. We constructed our dataset by using the data from
both the source and the target domains. The source domain
data is generated by our previous work [15], and the target domain data comes from a public COVID-19 CT dataset which
contains 29 individual cases [16]. Here, all the CT slices are
divided into training set (20) and test set (9) by patient level.
Specifically, we apply a combination of 6,000 source domain
slices (synthetic data) and 60 target domain slices (real data)
to form the training set, and we use 600 real CT scans as our
test set. The COVID-19 diagnostic task is formulated as a
binary classification task here, therefore, there are only two
possible categories: positive and negative. In order to evaluate the proposed model, we randomly select n positive cases
and n negative cases from the target domain slices and pair
them with a randomly selected source domain group which
contains 600 samples, so we can obtain 2n · 600 source-target
pairs for the n-shot learning task.
Evaluation metrics. We report the diagnostic performance
by two metrics: accuracy and F1 score. We randomly resample 10 times for building 10 individual training sets, and
report the results with the format as MEAN±95% CONFIDENCE INTERVAL among the 10 folds.
Experimental details. All CT scans are transformed to gray
images on a Hounsfield unit (HU) scale [-600,1500] and resized to 512 × 512. The learning rate is set as 0.001 with a
decay rate 0.95. The weight factor α is 0.25.

Table 1. Diagnostic performance comparison of few-shot
COVID-19 CT diagnostic task (n-shot: 5-shot, feature extractor: Xception [17], the best evaluation score is marked
in bold. Higher number of the metrics is better.)
Methods
Metrics
Performance
Accuracy 0.8040±0.0356
OURS
F1 score 0.7998±0.0384
Accuracy 0.5353±0.0268
Source only
F1 score 0.5133±0.0272
Accuracy 0.7068±0.0443
CCSA [11]
F1 score 0.6841±0.0573
Accuracy 0.7300±0.0688
FADA [10]
F1 score 0.7167±0.0796
Accuracy 0.7693±0.0415
d-SNE [12]
F1 score 0.7651±0.0426

Table 2. Ablation study for cross-domain losses (n-shot: 5shot, feature extractor: Xception [17], the best evaluation
score is marked in bold. Higher number of the metrics is better.)
Loss terms
Metrics
Performance
Accuracy 0.8040±0.0356
Lc + Lcp + Lcd (OURS)
F1 score 0.7998±0.0384
Accuracy 0.6553±0.0313
Lc + Lcp
F1 score 0.6487±0.0622
Accuracy 0.7142±0.0650
Lc + Lcd
F1 score 0.6998±0.0514

3.2. Experimental results
In this sub-section, we focus on comparing the performance
between the proposed method and other state-of-the-art supervised domain adaptation methods, including CCSA [11],
FADA [10], d-SNE [12]. In order to show how does our domain adaptation help to improve the cross-domain diagnostic
performance, we also involve a source only competitor which
is trained on a deep network with only source domain data
and tested on a target domain test set. This experiment is a
5-shot learning task and we used the Xception [17] network
as the feature extractor. As shown in Table 1, the proposed
method outperforms the other state-of-the-art supervised domain adaptation approaches on both accuracy and F1 score
metrics.
3.3. Ablation Study of the Proposed Cross-domain Losses
We discuss the ablation study focused on examining the effectiveness of the components of our proposed loss functions
in this sub-section.
Our overall loss consists of three terms: classification loss
Lc , cross-domain pairing loss Lcp and cross-domain Lcd . In
order to explore the performance contribution of each loss

term, we evaluated the proposed model under four conditions:
Lc + Lcp , Lc + Lcd and Lc + Lcp + Lcd (ours). Experiment
results are summarized in Table 2. By comparing the contribution of each cross-domain loss term, it is clear that both the
cross-domain paring and cross-domain detaching losses can
help to overcome the domain gap and improve cross-domain
diagnostic performance.
3.4. Ablation Study of n-shot learning task

0.8

Accuracy
F1 score

0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0

n=1

n=3

n=5

n=7

n=9

Fig. 3. Ablation study for n-shot learning task.
We evaluate the proposed method in terms of its capability
in a few-shot learning problem. We consider a total of five
cases with n=1, 3, 5, 7 and 9, where n represents the shot
number. Experiment results are shown in Figure 3. From
Figure 3, it is clear that the proposed method can effectively
handle few-shot diagnoses under diverse n-shot conditions.
As expected, the diagnostic performance improves as the shot
number n increases. It should be noted, however, that even in
the extreme case of n = 1, the performance was maintained at
above 0.6.
4. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE STUDY
In this paper, we proposed a supervised domain adaptation
based few-shot COVID-19 diagnostic method for CT scans.
The novelty of the proposed method consists of constructing
a cross-domain training architecture by integrating a Siamese
network and introducing two cross-domain training losses
in addition to a classification loss. Siamese network based
architecture and the proposed cross-domain losses have been
demonstrated to be effective in handling the domain shift
problem between the source and the target domains. Experimental results on the public COVID-19 CT dataset show
that the proposed method outperforms the other state-ofthe-art supervised domain adaptation methods on a few-shot
COVID-19 CT diagnostic task. For the future plan, we would
like to pay attention to channel attention mechanism based
COVID-19 diagnostic method using 3D CT volume.

5. REFERENCES
[1] “Coronavirus
disease
(covid-19)
pandemic,”
https://www.who.int/emergencies/
diseases/novel-coronavirus-2019.
[2] “Johns hopkins coronavirus resource center,” https:
//coronavirus.jhu.edu/map.html.
[3] Elisabeth Mahase, “Coronavirus: covid-19 has killed
more people than sars and mers combined, despite lower
case fatality rate,” 2020.
[4] Konstantinos Kamnitsas, Christian Ledig, Virginia FJ
Newcombe, Joanna P Simpson, Andrew D Kane,
David K Menon, Daniel Rueckert, and Ben Glocker,
“Efficient multi-scale 3d cnn with fully connected crf
for accurate brain lesion segmentation,” Medical image
analysis, vol. 36, pp. 61–78, 2017.
[5] Su Yang, Jihoon Kweon, Jae-Hyung Roh, Jae-Hwan
Lee, Heejun Kang, Lae-Jeong Park, Dong Jun Kim,
Hyeonkyeong Yang, Jaehee Hur, Do-Yoon Kang, et al.,
“Deep learning segmentation of major vessels in x-ray
coronary angiography,” Scientific reports, vol. 9, no. 1,
pp. 1–11, 2019.
[6] Deng-Ping Fan, Tao Zhou, Ge-Peng Ji, Yi Zhou, Geng
Chen, Huazhu Fu, Jianbing Shen, and Ling Shao, “Infnet: Automatic covid-19 lung infection segmentation
from ct images,” IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging, 2020.
[7] Lin Li, Lixin Qin, Zeguo Xu, Youbing Yin, Xin Wang,
Bin Kong, Junjie Bai, Yi Lu, Zhenghan Fang, Qi Song,
et al., “Artificial intelligence distinguishes covid-19
from community acquired pneumonia on chest ct,” Radiology, p. 200905, 2020.
[8] Hengyuan Kang, Liming Xia, Fuhua Yan, Zhibin Wan,
Feng Shi, Huan Yuan, Huiting Jiang, Dijia Wu, He Sui,
Changqing Zhang, et al., “Diagnosis of coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) with structured latent multi-view
representation learning,” IEEE transactions on medical
imaging, 2020.
[9] Tao Ai, Zhenlu Yang, Hongyan Hou, Chenao Zhan,
Chong Chen, Wenzhi Lv, Qian Tao, Ziyong Sun, and
Liming Xia, “Correlation of chest ct and rt-pcr testing
in coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) in china: a report
of 1014 cases,” Radiology, p. 200642, 2020.
[10] Saeid Motiian, Quinn Jones, Seyed Iranmanesh, and Gianfranco Doretto, “Few-shot adversarial domain adaptation,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, 2017, pp. 6670–6680.

[11] Saeid Motiian, Marco Piccirilli, Donald A Adjeroh,
and Gianfranco Doretto, “Unified deep supervised domain adaptation and generalization,” in Proceedings of
the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision,
2017, pp. 5715–5725.
[12] Xiang Xu, Xiong Zhou, Ragav Venkatesan, Gurumurthy
Swaminathan, and Orchid Majumder, “d-sne: Domain
adaptation using stochastic neighborhood embedding,”
in Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, 2019, pp. 2497–2506.
[13] Xiaocong Chen, Lina Yao, Tao Zhou, Jinming Dong,
and Yu Zhang, “Momentum contrastive learning for
few-shot covid-19 diagnosis from chest ct images,” Pattern Recognition, p. 107826, 2020.
[14] Aram Ter-Sarkisov, “Single-shot lightweight model for
the detection of lesions and the prediction of covid-19
from chest ct scans,” medRxiv, 2020.
[15] Yifan Jiang, Han Chen, Murray Loew, and Hanseok
Ko,
“Covid-19 ct image synthesis with a conditional generative adversarial network,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2007.14638, 2020.
[16] “Covid-19 ct segmentation dataset,” https:
//medicalsegmentation.com/covid19/.
[17] François Chollet, “Xception: Deep learning with depthwise separable convolutions,” in Proceedings of the
IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, 2017, pp. 1251–1258.

