BANANA FOR BIBLIOMETRIC SCALE
1

Banana for scale: Gauging trends in academic interest by normalising
publication rates to common and innocuous keywords
Edwin S. Dalmaijer 1, Joram Van Rheede 2, Edwin V. Sperr 3, & Juliane Tkotz 4

1. MRC Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit, University of Cambridge
2. MRC Brain Network Dynamics Unit, University of Oxford
3. Augusta University / University of Georgia Medical Partnership
4. Department of Clinical Psychology, Central Institute for Mental Health (Mannheim)

Corresponding author
Dr Edwin S Dalmaijer, MRC Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit, 15 Chaucer Road, Cambridge,
CB2 7EF, United Kingdom. edwin.dalmaijer@mrc-cbu.cam.ac.uk

CRediT author contributions
ESD, JvR, and JT conceptualised the metric. ESD wrote the software with input from EVS;
collected and visualised the data; and drafted the article, which all authors reviewed and edited.

Conflict of interest statement
All authors declare to have no financial or non-financial relationships with any organisations (not
even the Temperate Fruit Lobby) that influenced this work.

Acknowledgements
The keyword “banana” was chosen to mimic the popular internet meme “banana for scale”, not
because the authors think it is an inherently uninteresting scientific topic. (Please don’t come after
us on Twitter, banana research community!) This manuscript was submitted to the BMJ for its
Christmas Edition, where it was deemed “amusing and quirky”, but ultimately of too low priority.
The current version incorporates helpful comments from BMJ’s reviewers.

Open data and software
All data and code used for this manuscript can be found on github.com/esdalmaijer/bibliobanana

BANANA FOR BIBLIOMETRIC SCALE
2

Abstract
Many academics use yearly publication numbers to quantify academic interest for their research
topic. While such visualisations are ubiquitous in grant applications, manuscript introductions, and
review articles, they fail to account for the rapid growth in scientific publications. As a result, any
search term will likely show an increase in supposed “academic interest”. One proposed solution is
to normalise yearly publication rates by field size, but this is arduous and difficult. Here, we
propose an simpler index that normalises keywords of interest by a ubiquitous and innocuous
keyword, such as “banana”. Alternatively, one could opt for field-specific keywords or hierarchical
structures (e.g. PubMed’s Medical Subject Headings, MeSH) to compute “interest market share”.
Using this approach, we uncovered plausible trends in academic interest in examples from the
medical literature. In neuroimaging, we found that not the supplementary motor area (as was
previously claimed), but the prefrontal cortex is the most interesting part of the brain. In cancer
research, we found a contemporary preference for cancers with high prevalence and clinical
severity, and notable declines in interest for more treatable or likely benign neoplasms. Finally, we
found that interest in respiratory viral infections spiked when strains showed potential for pandemic
involvement, with SARS-CoV-2 and the COVID-19 pandemic being the most extreme example. In
sum, the time is ripe for a quick and easy method to quantify trends in academic interest for
anecdotal purposes. We provide such a method, along with software for researchers looking to
implement it in their own writing.

Keywords: bibliometrics, academic publishing, publication rates, PubMed, Google Scholar, Web of
Science, Scopus, MeSH

BANANA FOR BIBLIOMETRIC SCALE
3

Introduction
There is an increased interest in “increased interest” in academic publishing (Figure 1), possibly
reflecting an increasing need for academics to justify their research topic as growing in prominence.
However, many academics do not take into account baseline publication rates in their field when
presenting such visualisations (see e.g. (1), nostra culpa). Because academic outputs are growing
across the board, one should expect an increase in publications for the majority of research topics. It
is thus likely that uncorrected visualisations like Figure 1 are not as noteworthy as they are
frequently presented to be.

Figure 1 – The yearly number of papers indexed in PubMed that reference “increased interest”
(blue line) or “banana” (for scale). This trend was pointed our by Alex Bond on Twitter
(https://twitter.com/TheLabAndField/status/1273598114708979713?s=20).

A similar problem exists in the field of academic impact measurement, particularly between
fields with different publication and citation rates. Various methods have been proposed to account
for this by normalising to field-specific rates (2–4). Unfortunately, not all bibliometric databases are
as complete as they perhaps ought to be: Web of Science and Scopus do not cover all fields equally,
are slow to incorporate new publications, and omit preprints. These are crucial roadblocks in the
context of quantifying recent interest in a research topic. While databases like Google Scholar
provide a more complete alternative, collecting and validating normalisation data through such
databases requires extensive manual work (5).
We have thus landed on a trade-off between accuracy and effort. To academics looking for a
simple illustration that justifies their specific topic, proper normalisation techniques that accurately
gauge changes in academic interest require more work than they are worth. The low-hanging fruit in
armchair bibliography is thus a more user-friendly method for publication rate normalisation. Here,
we present a novel metric of academic interest that is both easy to implement and “good enough”

BANANA FOR BIBLIOMETRIC SCALE
4
for casual use. Specifically, we propose a normalisation of publications that mention a keyword
of interest by those that mention a keyword of non-interest, such as “banana”. We illustrate this
approach in the fields of neuroimaging, cancer, and respiratory virology. Each of these show
fluctuations in interest, sometimes particularly rapidly in the case of respiratory illnesses with
pandemic potential (e.g. influenza A H1N1 and SARS-CoV-2).

Methods
Keyword normalisation
We quantified academic interest as the yearly number of publications that included a given
keyword, divided by the yearly number of publications that included one (Equation 1) or several
(Equation 2) comparison keywords. In Equation 1, this idea is demonstrated using “banana” as a
reference keyword. In Equation 2, we expanded upon this idea by using the average of a set of
reference keywords.

(1) e normalised =
(2) e normalised =

p keyword
pbanana
p keyword
n

1
∑p
n i=1 comparison ,i

Where enormalised is the yearly academic interest (named e for enthusiasm, and also for the first name
of two of the authors), pkeyword is the annual number of publications that reference a keyword of
interest, pcomparison,i is the annual number of publications that reference a comparison keyword i, and
n is the number of keywords in the comparison set.

Keyword selection
We used “banana” as a comparison keyword because, in addition to being nutritious and versatile
(6), it is both common and innocuous (although see (7)). These are ideal characteristics, as rare
keywords could show unstable fluctuations, and more exciting keywords could show upward trends
that exceed the general publication growth due to their inherent interestingness.
Bananas have received stable interest as a function of research that mentions “fruit” (Figure
2). More popular fruits were apples and oranges, which are inherently difficult to compare, and
particularly so because “orange” could also appear as colour reference. This could explain why
more published papers referenced “orange” than “fruit” in the late 1980s (8). Out of all fruits
included here, “banana” showed the most stable publication ratio, driven by an increase in
publications (12 in 1980, 26 in 1990, 83 in 2000, 170 in 2010, and 420 in 2019) that mirrored the
general increase in scientific publications on fruit.

BANANA FOR BIBLIOMETRIC SCALE
5
One fundamental limitation on keyword selection, is that no “neutral” term is without its
caveats. For example, the publication of the banana genome in 2012 (9) could have inspired
increased interest in banana research (perhaps because of its excellent use of Venn diagrams),
although this has not yet become apparent in publication numbers (Figure 2).

Figure 2 – The yearly publication ratio (compared to keyword “fruit”) of keywords “blueberry”
(blue), “apple” (green), “blackberry” (purple), “strawberry” (red), “orange” (orange), and
“banana” (yellow). This illustrates that apples and oranges cannot be compared: publications that
reference “orange” far outnumber those that reference “apple”. More importantly, “banana”
shows numerous yet stable publication numbers, thus providing an excellent comparison keyword.

As an alternative to “banana”, field-specific comparison keywords could be chosen to
account for differential publication growths between fields. We believe that semi-informal
environments like Twitter or the doctors’ mess (10) could play an important role in the process of
establishing consensus between experts on their own fields’ “banana” equivalents.
A more systematic way of choosing keywords, would be to tap into PubMed’s Medical
Subject Headings (MeSH), which have been used to track research trends (11). MeSH provides a
hierarchical ordering for pathologies, and can thus be used to select reference keywords higher in
the hierarchy for keywords of interest on lower rungs.

Example keywords
To provide an example of a field-specific keyword, we examined trends in the neuroimaging
literature by comparing several brain areas to the keyword “brain”. This keyword was chosen
because it is both ubiquitous in neuroscience, and relatively unbiased between brain areas. The
increase in publications that mention “brain” is thus expected to reflect the general increase in
human neuroimaging research output.

BANANA FOR BIBLIOMETRIC SCALE
6
Another example could be the reference keyword “cancer” to normalise research on specific
sub-types. This comparison computed the proportion of work within the wider field of cancer
research, and thus reveals the relative popularity of specific cancers. When used in this way, our
suggested keyword-normalisation approach can be used to reflect the “market share” for each
search term in a subset that contains the reference keyword.
The third example included here is that of influenza and COVID-19, which are expected to
show periodic trends in interest that align with outbreaks of specific strains in humans. We
employed reference keyword “virus”, expecting it to reflect trends in the wider field.
Finally, to demonstrate keyword selection from the MeSH tree, we investigated relative
publication trends under the MeSH term “Endocrine Gland Neoplasms” (C04.588.322), which
includes nodes “Adrenal Gland Neoplasms” (C04.588.322.078), “Ovarian Neoplasms”
(C04.588.322.455), “Pancreatic Neoplasms” (C04.588.322.475), “Pituitary Neoplasms”
(C04.588.322.609), “Testicular Neoplasms” (C04.588.322.762), and “Thyroid Neoplasms”
(C04.588.322.894). These keywords capture articles relating to specific subtypes of endocrine gland
tumours, and will act as an example for comparing publication ratios between terms within the
MeSH hierarchy.

Search queries
Searches were performed using the NCBI E-utilities API (12) (see below for details). Queries were
performed per year, in the PubMed database, using the “TEXT” field for keywords in examples 1-3
or the “MESH” field in example 4, with double-quoted terms. For example, a search for a specific
influenza strain in the year 2018 could be “"H1N1"[text]+AND+2018[pdat]”, with “db=pubmed”
and “rettype=count”. Data for the current manuscript were collected on 8 February 2021.

Open software and data
We developed a Python library to count and normalise the number of publications that reference any
keyword. It interfaces with the NCBI E-utilities API (12) to count publication numbers on PubMed.
Similar interfaces exist as online tool PubMed By Year (https://esperr.github.io/pubmed-by-year/),
and as R package (13) to interface with Europe PMC (14).
The source code can be freely accessed on GitHub, and the package can also be downloaded
from the Python Package Index (PyPI). Example scripts are included, as are the data analysed here.
See: https://github.com/esdalmaijer/bibliobanana

Statistical tests
Due to the anecdotal purpose of the proposed index, and to avoid encouraging the misappropriation
of null-hypothesis significance testing, no statistical tests were performed.

BANANA FOR BIBLIOMETRIC SCALE
7

Results
Example 1: Publication trends in neuroimaging reveal the most interesting brain area
We examined the period from 1990 until 2020. We compared a selection of brain areas: prefrontal
cortex, visual cortex, cingulate cortex, amygdala, supplementary motor area, and frontal eye fields.
Since 1990, the number of publications referencing brain areas has sharply increased (Figure
3A). While the raw number of publications indicated an upwards trend for all included brain areas,
the banana ratio (Figure 3B) revealed that academic interest was in fact stable or declining for all
but the prefrontal and cingulate cortices. (An alternative conclusion could be that interest in banana
research has grown faster than interest in the brain.) Importantly, normalising against field-specific
keyword “brain” (Figure 3C) confirmed that academic interest steadily decreased for the visual
cortex and amygdala; remained constant for supplementary motor area and frontal eye fields; while
interest for the prefrontal cortex and cingulate cortex increased.

Figure 3 – A) The number of publications that mention “prefrontal cortex” (blue), “visual cortex”
(green), “cingulate cortex” (purple), “amygdala” (red), “supplementary motor area” (orange),
“frontal eye fields” (brown), or the word “banana” (yellow) increased every year. B) Relative
trends are more apparent in the banana ratio. C) Field-specific trends are further clarified after
scaling the number of publications for each brain area by common and innocuous keyword
“brain”, revealing that prefrontal cortex and cingulate cortex are increasing in relative popularity,
while visual cortex and amygdala are decreasing.

It has previously been argued that the supplementary motor area is the most interesting part
of the brain (15), but these results indicate that this view is not supported by the wider
neuroimaging literature. Yearly publication numbers suggest that the supplementary motor area is
almost exactly as interesting as a banana. Instead, continuous growth in relative interest for the
prefrontal cortex indicates that it is not only in the front of researchers’ brains, but also in the front
of their minds.

BANANA FOR BIBLIOMETRIC SCALE
8
Example 2: Publication trends in cancer research “market shares”
As a second example from the medical literature, yearly numbers of publications about different
types of cancer were normalised against the broad keyword “cancer”.
This analysis (Figure 4A) revealed that interest in skin cancer has remained relatively stable
since 1970; whereas interest has increased gradually for breast, lung, and colorectal cancer, and
more rapidly for prostate cancer from the 1990s. Notably, relative interest in testicular cancer has
decreased since 1985. This coincides with the introduction (16) and proven superiority over existing
treatments (17) of bleomycin, etoposide, and cisplatin; the current gold-standard treatment that has
greatly reduced mortality since its introduction (18). One could speculate that this reflects a lack of
interest in “solved” diseases among the medical research community.

Figure 4 – A) The yearly number of publications that mention specific types of cancer (lung in blue,
breast in green, colorectal in purple, prostate in red, skin in orange, testicular in brown),
normalised by the number of publications that mention “cancer” to reveal relative interest. B) The
number of publications that mention specific influenza strains (H1N1 in blue, H5N1 in green, H7N9
in purple, H3N2 in red) or SARS-CoV-2 (orange), normalised by the number of publications that
contain keyword “virus”. Note that the y-axis is discontinuous, and jumps from 0.12 to 1.12.

Example 3: Publication trends in respiratory disease mirror potential outbreaks
One field with clear and acute trends, and thus an excellent test-case for our bibliographic interest
method, is that of viruses that cause respiratory illness. We compared several strains of influenza
and SARS-CoV-2 with the common keyword “virus”. This keyword was chosen to account for the
technological advances that support the viral increase in publication output.
This analysis (Figure 4B) confirmed our metric’s ability to identify periodic trends amid
generally increasing publication numbers. Notably, relative interest for each influenza strain peaked
after potential pandemic involvement: H3N2 in 1968 (19), H5N1 after a public warning in 2003
(20), H1N1 in 2009 (21), and H7N9 after the first human infections were reported in 2013 (22).

BANANA FOR BIBLIOMETRIC SCALE
9
Interest in the virus SARS-CoV-2 has quickly grown to dwarf that for influenza since its
emergence in 2019. At the time of data collection (8 February 2021), more papers were published
that mentioned SARS-CoV-2 than there were papers that mentioned reference keyword “virus”.
This highlights the importance of choosing keywords that encompass the field of interest.

Example 4: Publication trends under MeSH term “Endocrine Gland Neoplasms”
This final example served to illustrate relative differences between terms in the MeSH hierarchy.
Here, six terms captured under “Endocrine Gland Neoplasms” were compared.
This analysis showed that the number of publications relating to endocrine gland tumours
increased rapidly in the last decades (Figure 5A), and highlighted trends in interest (Figure 5B).
Specifically, academic interest has been consistently high for ovarian neoplasms; with pancreatic
neoplasms overtaking the top position in 2012, after a steady climb in publication rate. A more
modest increase was apparent for thyroid tumours, whereas it dropped for other neoplasms.
The decrease in publication rates for testicular neoplasms from 1985 was also apparent
under Example 2, where it was attributed to the introduction of a new gold-standard treatment that
rendered testicular cancer much more treatable. In this example, highly similar reductions in interest
are apparent for tumours of the pituitary and adrenal glands. Both of these neoplasms are
characterised by their rarity and high likelihood of being benign. Hence, the decrease in relative
popularity for testicular, pituitary, and adrenal neoplasms could indeed reflect a trend away from
conditions with lower clinical impact.
A large dip in publication numbers is apparent in 2020. This is artificial, and due to a delay
in MeSH indexing after articles are entered into PubMed (23).

Figure 5 – A) The yearly number of publications in PubMed MeSH terms “Adrenal Gland
Neoplasms” (blue), “Ovarian Neoplasms” (green), “Pancreatic Neoplasms” (purple), “Pituitary
Neoplasms” (red), “Testicular Neoplasms” (orange), and “Thyroid Neoplasms” (brown); which
are members of the MeSH term “Endocrine Gland Neoplasms” (yellow). B) The relative ratios for
sub-terms of the “Endocrine Gland Neoplasms” MeSH term.

BANANA FOR BIBLIOMETRIC SCALE
10

Discussion
While there is an abundance of complex normalisation tools to put publication and citation rates
into perspective, there are few simple-yet-accurate alternatives for researchers who wish to quantify
academic interest for their grant proposals or manuscripts’ introduction sections. We proposed a
metric that compares the ratio of a keyword of interest to one or several ‘steady interest’ keywords,
allowing for quick normalisation of bibliometric trends against general increases in publications
within a field of research. We validated this metric in the fields of neuroimaging, cancer, and
respiratory illnesses, using both general (“banana”) and field-specific keywords. This revealed that
while general publication rates increased dramatically over the last decades, the “banana ratio” only
increased for a subset of truly interesting topics, and normalising against field-specific keywords
further clarified these trends.
In conclusion, academics can use our metric (and freely available software) to easily
compute and visualise bibliometric trends. These visualisations can be used as informal but accurate
illustrations of how popular or overlooked the topic of their next paper or grant is.

References
1.

Anwyl-Irvine AL, Dalmaijer ES, Hodges N, Evershed J. Online Timing Accuracy and
Precision: A comparison of platforms, browsers, and participant’s devices [Internet].
PsyArXiv; 2020 Jan [cited 2020 Jun 18]. Available from: https://osf.io/jfeca

2.

Bornmann L, Thor A, Marx W, Schier H. The application of bibliometrics to research
evaluation in the humanities and social sciences: An exploratory study using normalized
Google Scholar data for the publications of a research institute. J Assoc Inf Sci Technol. 2016
Nov;67(11):2778–89.

3.

Bornmann L, Marx W. Methods for the generation of normalized citation impact scores in
bibliometrics: Which method best reflects the judgements of experts? J Informetr. 2015
Apr;9(2):408–18.

4.

Waltman L, van Eck NJ. Source normalized indicators of citation impact: an overview of
different approaches and an empirical comparison. Scientometrics. 2013;96(3):699–716.

5.

Mingers J, Meyer M. Normalizing Google Scholar data for use in research evaluation.
Scientometrics. 2017 Aug;112(2):1111–21.

6.

Mohapatra D, Mishra S, Sutar N. Banana and its by-product utilisation: an overview. J Sci Ind
Res. 2010;69:323–9.

7.

Wiley J. The banana: empires, trade wars, and globalization. Lincoln: University of Nebraska
Press; 2008. 278 p. (At table).

8.

Winner D. Brilliant orange: the neurotic genius of Dutch soccer. Paperback edition.
Woodstock, NY: Overlook Press; 2008. 288 p.

BANANA FOR BIBLIOMETRIC SCALE
11
9.

D’Hont A, Denoeud F, Aury J-M, Baurens F-C, Carreel F, Garsmeur O, et al. The banana
(Musa acuminata) genome and the evolution of monocotyledonous plants. Nature. 2012
Aug;488(7410):213–7.

10. Raw J. The doctors’ mess: the unsung resource. BMJ. 2003;327(7416):689.
11. Yang H, Lee H. Research Trend Visualization by MeSH Terms from PubMed. Int J Environ
Res Public Health. 2018 May 30;15(6):1113.
12. Sayers E. A General Introduction to the E-utilities [Internet]. National Center for
Biotechnology Information, MD (USA); 2020 [cited 2020 Jun 19]. Available from:
https://www-ncbi-nlm-nih-gov/books/NBK25497/
13. Jahn N. europepmc: R Interface to the Europe PubMed Central RESTful Web Service
[Internet]. 2020 [cited 2020 Jul 22]. Available from: https://github.com/ropensci/europepmc/
14. Levchenko M, Gou Y, Graef F, Hamelers A, Huang Z, Ide-Smith M, et al. Europe PMC in
2017. Nucleic Acids Res. 2018 Jan 4;46(D1):D1254–60.
15. Behrens TEJ, Fox P, Laird A, Smith SM. What is the most interesting part of the brain? Trends
Cogn Sci. 2013;17(1):2–4.
16. Peckham MJ, Barrett A, Liew KH, Horwich A, Robinson B, Dobbs HJ, et al. The treatment of
metastatic germ-cell testicular tumours with bleomycin, etoposide and cis-platin (BEP). Br J
Cancer. 1983 May;47(5):613–9.
17. Williams SD, Birch R, Einhorn LH, Irwin L, Greco FA, Loehrer PJ. Treatment of
Disseminated Germ-Cell Tumors with Cisplatin, Bleomycin, and either Vinblastine or
Etoposide. N Engl J Med. 1987 Jun 4;316(23):1435–40.
18. Einhorn EH. Testicular cancer: an oncological success story. Clin Cancer Res. 1997;3:2630–2.
19. Jester BJ, Uyeki TM, Jernigan DB. Fifty Years of Influenza A(H3N2) Following the Pandemic
of 1968. Am J Public Health. 2020 May;110(5):669–76.
20. Webster RG, Walker EJ. Influenza: The world is teetering on the edge of a pandemic that
could kill a large fraction of the human population. Am Sci. 2003;91(2):122.
21. Novel Swine-Origin Influenza A Virus Investigation Team, Dawood FS, Jain S, Finelli L,
Shaw MW, Lindstrom S, et al. Emergence of a Novel Swine-Origin Influenza A (H1N1) Virus
in Humans. N Engl J Med. 2009 Jun 18;360(25):2605–15.
22. Gao R, Cao B, Hu Y, Feng Z, Wang D, Hu W, et al. Human Infection with a Novel AvianOrigin Influenza A (H7N9) Virus. N Engl J Med. 2013 May 16;368(20):1888–97.
23. Irwin AN, Rackham D. Comparison of the time-to-indexing in PubMed between biomedical
journals according to impact factor, discipline, and focus. Res Soc Adm Pharm. 2017
Mar;13(2):389–93.

