DCcov: Repositioning of Drugs and Drug Combinations for SARSCoV-2 Infected Lung through Constraint-Based Modelling
Ali Kishk, Maria Pires Pacheco, Thomas Sauter*
University of Luxembourg
Faculty of Science, Technology and Medicine
6, avenue du Swing
L-4367 Belvaux
*Thomas.Sauter@uni.lu

Abstract
The 2019 coronavirus disease (COVID-19) became a worldwide pandemic with currently no
effective antiviral drug except treatments for symptomatic therapy. Flux balance analysis is an
efficient method to analyze metabolic networks. It allows optimizing for a metabolic function
and thus e.g., predicting the growth rate of a specific cell or the production rate of a metabolite
of interest. Here flux balance analysis was applied on human lung cells infected with severe
acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) to reposition metabolic drugs and
drug combinations against the replication of the SARS-CoV-2 virus within the host tissue.
Making use of expression data sets of infected lung tissue, genome-scale COVID-19-specific
metabolic models were reconstructed. Then host-specific essential genes and gene-pairs
were determined through in-silico knockouts that permit reducing the viral biomass production
without affecting the host biomass. Key pathways that are associated with COVID-19 severity
in lung tissue are related to oxidative stress, as well as ferroptosis, sphingolipid metabolism,
cysteine metabolism, and fat digestion. By in-silico screening of FDA approved drugs on the
putative disease-specific essential genes and gene-pairs, 45 drugs and 99 drug combinations
were predicted as promising candidates for COVID-19 focused drug repositioning
(https://github.com/sysbiolux/DCcov). Among the 45 drug candidates, six antiviral drugs were
found and seven drugs that are being tested in clinical trials against COVID-19. Other drugs
like gemcitabine, rosuvastatin and acetylcysteine, and drug combinations like azathioprinepemetrexed might offer new chances for treating COVID-19.
Keywords: Flux balance analysis; COVID-19; Metabolism; Essential genes; Drug
repositioning
Introduction
Constraint-based modelling (CBM) approaches have successfully been applied in
fundamental research [1], [2], [3] especially in cancer research [4], [5], [6], [7], as well as in
microbial engineering [8], [9] among other research fields. CBM uses data- and prior
knowledge-driven constraints to identify feasible metabolic flux distributions for a given
condition [10]. Many communities and collaborative works contributed to reconstructing
organism-specific generic metabolic networks which serve as starting points for CBM.
Examples of such generic models are Recon 2 [11], Recon 2.2 [12], Recon3D [13], Human1
[14], and HMR [5]. Other types of metabolic models are context-specific models, that are built
from tissue or disease-specific data. Usually, the context-specific models are draft
reconstructions built from expression data of this condition by building algorithms like
FASTCORE [15], rFASTCORMICS [7], INIT [5], and RegrEX [16] / or manually curated such
as for E. coli [8], hepatocyte [17], and Zea mays [18]. These models are often used as
scaffolds for the integration of omics data or more interesting to simulate the metabolic
phenotypes of organisms, tissues, or cell lines.

1

Within the CBM methods, flux balance analysis (FBA) is a linear programming-based
approach that maximizes or minimizes an objective function, often growth rate, to identify the
optimal flux distribution(s) [19] [20]. In-silico knockout studies are common in FBA through
gene or reaction deletion. This deletion may be single, double, or multiple [21]. The goal of
single reaction deletion is finding the most critical reactions in respect to the objective function
through brute force removal of each reaction individually and calculating the ratio of the
objective rates between mutated and wild type models. Gene deletion studies are taking
advantage of Boolean representations of the gene-reaction links known as Gene-ProteinReaction (GPR) rules [22]. Gene deletion helps in defining essential genes whose deletion
impacts the flux through the objective function [20]. Essential genes are often used as targets
for drug repositioning.
The 2019 coronavirus disease (COVID-19) is caused by a strain of coronavirus called severe
acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2). COVID-19 was declared as a global
pandemic on 11 March 2020 by WHO [23]. Human-to-human transmission is caused by
droplets [24] and possibly aerosols [25]. Also, asymptomatic patients can transmit SARS-CoV2 [26]. The virus might have originated from beta-coronaviruses from bats and pangolins [27].
SARS-CoV-2 can cause upper and lower respiratory infections, increasing its transmissibility
and severity. SARS-CoV-2 utilizes the human protein angiotensin I converting enzyme 2
(ACE2) for cell entry with its spike protein. ACE2 is expressed on lung epithelial cells and
other organs. ACE2 converts Angiotensin II (AT-II) to Angiotensin-(1-7) (AT-1,7) negating the
inflammatory effect of AT-II [28]. Thus, SARS-CoV-2 infection decreases the concentration of
cellular unbound ACE2 molecules to facilitate the cell entry, causing an increase of AT-II which
eventually increases the oxidative stress ion superoxide [29]. SARS-CoV-2 have shown a
relatively low mutation rate, lower than SAR-CoV-1, despite worldwide transmission [30]. Also,
the spike protein is more conserved than other proteins [30]. People with increased COVID19 risk are patients with cancer [31], chronic kidney disease [32], obesity [33], type 2 diabetes
mellitus [34], immunocompromised [35], cardiac diseases [36], COPD [36], and sickle cell
disease [37].
Acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) is one of the severe symptoms of COVID-19,
which may be attributed to alveolar epithelial cell injury [38]. COVID-19 induced ARDS lasts
8-12 days, which exceeds the known ARDS onset of one week [38]. This ARDS may become
unresponsive to invasive mechanical ventilation and increase lung injury [39]. Severe COVID19 courses are also associated with acute injury to heart, kidney, and cerebrovascular
diseases [40]. A systematic meta-analysis of 27 histological studies found that COVID-19
affects in addition to the previous organs, vasculature, central nervous system, and
hemolymphatic system [41]. Despite the COVID-19 pandemic is still in its few first months,
long term effects for COVID-19 survivors (or long-haulers) have become to emerge such as
new-onset diabetes, increasing severe complications in pre-existing diabetes [42], fatigue,
dyspnea, psychological distress [43] and myocardial inflammation [44]. The cause of these
long-term effects is still unclear whether the result of COVID-19 or the treatment, also these
symptoms were reported from relatively small populations.
Metabolic modeling and in particular FBA were often used to understand the effects of
microbes on human cells. Notably, a human alveolar model was used to assess the metabolic
interaction between the host and M. tuberculosis [45]. Lately, a similar approach was applied
in the viral genomes to model the impact of the Chikungunya, Dengue, and Zika viruses on
macrophage [46].
Only a few studies employed FBA on COVID-19 so far. Renz et al. used the viral genome
information available at that time, to generate a SARS-CoV-2 specific viral biomass objective
function (VBOF) [47]. This VBOF generation from the genome information consisted of six
steps on nucleotide investment, amino acid investment, ATP requirements, pyrophosphate
liberation, total viral molar mass, and final construction of the VBOF [46]. Then the VBOF was

2

added to a human alveolar macrophage model (iAB-AMØ1410) [45] to build an infected
model. They identified guanylate kinase (GUK1) as an essential gene through in silico
knockout, that allows decreasing the viral biomass without affecting the human biomass
maintenance. Several worldwide collaborative works in computational modeling of COVID-19
was established. Ostaszewski et al. built the COVID-19 Disease Map to understand the
mechanistic interactions between SARS-CoV-2 and human tissues [48]. In another
collaborative study, Gysi et al. applied network analysis for drug repositioning using three
different ranking approaches: network proximity, diffusion, and deep learning-based [49]. To
further support the search for an effective treatment for COVID-19, we employ here FBA to
find candidate drugs and drug combinations that target viral-specific essential genes in
COVID-19 infected lung cells through context-specific models built from expression data by
the rFASTCORMICS workflow [7] (see Fig. 1). We also highlight key pathways of these
essential genes that might contribute to COVID-19 severity.

Methods
A. SARS-CoV-2 Essentiality Analysis in Lung
A.1 Differentially Expressed Genes Analysis
A.1.1 Data Preprocessing
At the onset of the pandemic, two datasets were available focusing mainly on the effects of
the virus on lung tissues. These two bulk RNA seq datasets GSE147507 [50] and GSE148729
[51] of human cell lines hosting SARS-CoV-2, as well as of mock samples were downloaded
from the NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) [52] data repository on April 23, and May
15, 2020, respectively. The GSE147507 dataset, which focuses on the expression changes
at various severity levels of Infection (severity study), contains 36 samples originating from
healthy epithelial, A549, and Calu-3 cells infected by SARS-CoV-2 at three different viral
loads, as well as control samples with a mock infection. Also, the samples of two conditions
were transfected with a vector expressing ACE2 (Table 1), a protein that governs SARS-CoV2 cell entry in the host cells. Conditions with two replicates only or subjected to drug
perturbations were not considered for the analysis. Raw counts were converted to the Reads
Per Kilobase of transcript (RPKM) using an in-house Python script.
For the GSE148729 dataset, which monitors how expression changes at different points after
the infection (time-series study), the normalized Fragments Per Kilobase of transcript per
Million (FPKM) values of Calu-3 and H1299 cell lines infected by SARS-CoV-2, as well as
controls were retrieved from GEO.
Table 1: Severity Study Metadata (GSE147507). Expression data from three lung cell lines infected
with SARS-CoV-2 at three different viral loads, and for some samples transfected with a vector
expressing ACE2 with their controls.
Condition
Cell Line

Multiplicity of ACE2 Vector
infection

Abbreviation

Number of Samples
Infected/ Mock

Series 1

NHBE

2

No

NBHE_2

3/3

Series 2

A549

0.02

No

A549_0.02

3/3

Series 5

A549

2

No

A549_2

3/3

3

Series 6

A549

0.2

Yes

A549_0.2_ACE2

3/3

Series 7

Calu-3

2

No

Calu3_2

3/3

Series 16

A549

2

Yes

A549_2_ACE2

3/3

Table 2: Time-series Study Metadata (GSE148729). Time series expression data with five time-points
(4, 8, 12, 24, and 36 hours) with infected and mock samples for two lung cell lines.

Condition

Cell Line

Time Point in hrs

Number of Samples
Infected/Mock

Calu3_4h

Calu-3

4

4/4

Calu3_8h

Calu-3

8

2/0

Calu3_12h

Calu-3

12

4/2

Calu3_24h

Calu-3

24

2/2

H1299_4h

H1299

4

2/2

H1299_12h

H1299

12

2/0

1299_24h

H1299

24

2/0

H1299_36h

H1299

36

2/2

A.1.2 Differentially Expressed Genes Analysis:
For the severity study, a principal component analysis was first performed using FactoMineR
[53] to identify and if necessary, remove outliers by visual inspection. Then genes with low
expression values were filtered out using edgeR (Version 3.30.3) ’s filterByExpr function. This
function keeps genes based on a minimum count-per-million in at least k samples, determined
by the lowest sample size between all conditions [54]. Finally, DESeq2 (Version 1.28.1) [55]
was run on the preprocessed data to identify differentially expressed genes (DEG) between
the infected and the mock samples applying an adjusted P-value threshold of 0.05, and an
absolute log fold change threshold of 1. edgeR and DESeq2 were used via R (Version 4.0.1),
A.1.3 Metabolic Pathway Analysis of the DEGs
To identify metabolic alterations in the metabolism of infected lung cells, for each condition,
DEGs were mapped to the genes of the generic model Recon3D_01 [13] via the GPR rules
to retrieve differentially expressed reactions (DERs) as well as their associated pathways.
As condition NHBE_2 and A549_0.02 of the Severity Study only displayed a few DEGs, these
conditions were not included in the downstream analysis. For each pathway with at least three
reactions, the number of up- and down-regulated reactions were summed up, and the
reactions per pathways for each condition and pathway was computed as follows: The
enrichment overlap is the number of shared reactions between a condition and a pathway,
divided by the total number of reactions in this pathway. To improve the readability of the plot,
only pathways with more than five percent of DERs were depicted.
A.2 Essentiality Analysis

4

Fig. 1: Overview of the pipeline of essential gene prediction for COVID-19 infected lung cells.
The viral biomass function (VBOF) was added to the generic models as detailed in (A.2.1) to build the
infected generic model. Mock and infected lung expression data were used to build the context-specific
models using rFASTCORMICS and a consistent version of Recon2.04 as input for control models and
the consistent version of Recon2.04 with the added viral biomass for infected models, respectively. The
objective functions were adjusted as explained in (A.2.2). Finally, essential genes were identified by insilico gene knockout.

A.2.1 Condition-specific Model Building
To further elucidate, the metabolic alteration provoked by the virus, metabolic models for the
infected samples and mock samples were built. Therefore, the VBOF from the infected
alveolar macrophage model iAB_AMO1410_SARS-CoV-2 (MODEL2003020001) [47] was
added to the generic reconstructions Recon2.04 [11] and Recon3D_01 [13] using the
addReaction function of the COBRA Toolbox [20]. The identifiers of metabolites included in
the biomass had first to be modified to match the ones of the generic reconstruction. Then,
FASTCC [15] was run to remove blocked reactions. For each condition, the RPKM values and
the modified consistent generic reconstruction were used as input for the rFASTCORMICS [7]
to get condition-specific models. COBRA Toolbox and FASTCC were used via MATLAB
(R2019a).
A.2.2: Single Gene Knockout
The metabolic models were then used to identify viral-specific vulnerabilities, using a single
gene deletion approach on the mock and infected models. For the infected model, to ensure
that both host and viral biomasses objective functions can carry simultaneously a flux in the
infected models, the objective coefficients were set to 100 and 1, respectively, and the upper
bound of the host biomass was fixed to 10% of its maximal flux. This setting constrains the
model to guarantee cell homeostasis and protein turnover in the host model while diverting all
non-essential resources for viral reproduction.
model.c(viral biomass) =1
model.c(host biomass) =100
model.ub(host biomass) = 10 % of max flux determined by FBA

5

In-silico single-gene knockouts (SKO) were performed on the infected models using a
corrected version of the singleGeneDeletion function of the COBRA ToolBox [20] to assess
the impact of the knockout of each gene on the viral biomasses. The 0.2 threshold was used
as a cutoff for gene growth rate Ratio (grRatio) to identify essential genes.
A.2.3 Double Gene Knockout
To identify potential targets for drug combinations, double gene knockouts (DKO) for all gene
pair combinations were simulated using the doubleGeneDeletion function on the infected
models. From the analysis, we obtained two lists of synergistic gene pairs: non-essential gene
pairs that allow reducing the growth rate below the specified thresholds when simultaneously
knocked-out and pairs of essential and non-essential genes that induced a stronger reduction
of the growth than the knockout of the essential gene alone. Both non-essential and essential
and non-essential gene pairs were concatenated as DKO outputs for further drug
repositioning.
A.2.4 Essentiality and Safety Scoring
To test the knockout impact of SARS-CoV-2- infected host-specific predicted essential genes
and gene pairs on the healthy counterpart tissue, SKO, and DKO of these genes were
performed on the healthy models. Genes or gene pairs that cause a reduction of biomass only
in the infected models are considered safe, whereas those that cause also a reduction of
biomass in the healthy models are regarded as potentially toxic. The essentiality score of an
essential gene is the sum of infected models that show this gene as essential. The safety
score of an essential gene is the sum of healthy models that show this gene as safe. A healthy
model SKO and DKO of a gene was applied only if the gene is determined as essential in its
respective infected model. A scatterplot of essentiality scores against safety scores was
plotted (see Fig. 3).
B. Gene Enrichment of the potential targets
The identifiers of the essential genes and synergetic genes were translated into HGNC gene
symbols using GSEApy (Version 0.9.17, https://github.com/zqfang/GSEApy/) Python package
(3.7.4) and then uploaded to Enrichr API [56] to identify enrichment of these genes in KEGG
pathways (KEGG2019 human [57] database with 0.05 P-value cutoff). All enrichment results
based on only one gene were discarded. Then enrichment percentage was calculated as in
(A.1.3). Metabolic pathway analysis was also applied using the Recon3D_01 subSystem as
background instead of KEGG pathways on the essential genes such as in (A.1.3) without
further filtering of the pathways. Comparison of pathways of Calu-3 and NHBE cell lines were
excluded from the analysis of the effect of viral load and ACE2 vector in the severity study,
since these cell lines didn't have ACE2 vector condition.
C. Drug repositioning of the Essential Genes
To identify drugs targeting the predicted viral-specific essential genes, drug-target interactions
were downloaded from DrugBank [58] on April 23, 2020. Drugs that were withdrawn,
nutraceutical or experimental were discarded from the analysis. Drugs that are described as
having any effect on the potential targets were selected as candidate drugs (Table S3) and
drug combinations (Table S4, S5). To determine which drugs, have multi-target effect,
tripartite networks of the drug-gene-pathway interactions were constructed for the single and
double knockout drugs using Recon3D_01 subSystems as pathways (Fig. 3. b., Fig. 5). The
tripartite networks were constructed using the sankeyNetwork function in networkD3 [59, p. 3]
(version 0.4) package in R.
D. Relationship with Ferroptosis

6

As SKO targets were enriched for many pathways related to ferroptosis, the potential targets
and SKO drugs were searched in a curated database (FerrDb) [60] for ferroptosis genes, and
related drugs. FerrDb classifies genes into driver, suppressor, and marker, while it classifies
drugs into inducer and inhibitor. These classes were also used to identify the role of the
potential targets and SKO drugs in the ferroptosis pathway.

Results
The main goal of the present study is to understand metabolic changes induced by COVID19 in several lung cell lines, at various severity of infection, and at different time points after
the infection. We then used single and double knockouts to identify vulnerabilities that are
specific to infected cells that are predicted by our network models to reduce the viral
proliferation while only affecting moderately the growth of host and control cells. To further
prioritize essential genes, we considered their essentiality scores across cell lines and in time
and the effect of a knockout of these genes in the healthy tissues. The final aim is to identify
conserved essential genes across infected models that do not provoke severe side effects
when the gene is knocked-out in the healthy counterpart model. To further identify
vulnerabilities in the networks that could be exploited as drug targets, in silico inactivation of
reactions were simulated. We further investigated the pathways harboring the predicted
essential genes and reactions, to gain insight into how the virus adapts to the metabolism of
lung cells. Finally, we proposed drug and drug combinations that target the predicted essential
genes and synergistic essential gene pairs.
Metabolic Pathway Analysis of Differentially Expressed Genes indicates COVID-19
based rewiring of core metabolism
Infection by the SARS-CoV-2 virus provokes alterations of the metabolism of the host cells.
To elucidate these induced metabolic changes, we took advantage of two available expression
data sets (Severity Study; Time-series Study; see Methods for details). PCA of the severity
study samples, shows a clear cluster separation according to the cell type (see Fig. S1).
Besides determining the differentially expressed genes (DEG), we built genome-scale
metabolic models applying rFASTCORMICS (see Methods, A.2.1). This resulted in 50 models
(28 infected and 22 mock) with a median of 3646 metabolites (2465-5088) and 2456,5
reactions (1790-3474). To determine the key dysregulated pathways, we mapped the DEGs
on the RECON3D_01 model and displayed the pathway alterations in the mostly dysregulated
conditions (Fig. 2, and Fig. S2 that shows a representation of all pathways without filtering on
the number of reactions, nor the reactions per pathway). A549_0.02 condition didn't show any
differentially expressed metabolic genes, thus it was discarded from the DEGs metabolic
pathways. Meanwhile NHBE_2 condition pathways were filtered (see Methods, A.1.3).
Among the most down-regulated pathways in the A549 cell lines with transfection
(A549_2_ACE2 and A549_0.2_ACE2) in comparison to no ACE2 vector (A549_2) were
chondroitin sulfate degradation, phosphatidylinositol phosphate metabolism, and
phenylalanine metabolism, whereas glutathione metabolism was upregulated. For the A549
cell line with high viral load (A549_2_ACE2 and A549_2) in comparison to low viral load
(A549_0.2_ACE2), a downregulation of fatty acid synthesis, androgen and estrogen synthesis
and metabolism, chondroitin synthesis, and pyruvate metabolism were also detected. Across
all conditions including Calu3_2, we found a moderate downregulation of several pathways
(glycerophospholipid metabolism, glycosphingolipid metabolism, sphingolipid metabolism).
Other regulated pathways in Calu3_2 are the downregulated chondroitin sulfate degradation,
nucleotide interconversion, and the upregulated cholesterol metabolism.

7

Fig. 2: Reactions per Pathway Heatmap for Pathway Analysis of Differentially expressed genes
in the Severity Study.
Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were computed with DESeq2. The Down- and up-regulated
were mapped to the pathways (subSystems) of Recon3D_01. The number of up and down-regulated
reactions was then summed up to identify the top altered pathways in the infected lung cell lines in the
severity study (A.1.3). The color code "Reactions per Pathway [%]" represents the number of
enriched metabolic reactions in a pathway divided by the overall number of reactions in this pathway.
The transfection of ACE2 at an MOI of two in the A549 cell lines, caused the downregulation of many
pathways which was not seen when the MOI was decreased by a factor ten.

In silico single gene deletion predicts common potential drug targets across infected
cell lines with reduced side effects on control cells
The DEGs and the performed pathway analysis indicate a rewiring of the metabolism induced
by SARS-CoV-2. The next step was then to verify if these alterations caused the appearance
of infected cell-specific essential genes that could specifically be targeted by repositioned
drugs. Therefore, for every condition of both lung studies, in silico single gene deletion was
performed on the respective reconstructed metabolic models. 23 unique genes were predicted
to be essential in the infected models (Table S1,4). To assess if a drug targeting the candidate
essential gene will kill the infected cell or reduce the viral proliferation, we computed an
essentiality score for each essential gene, which sums up the number of models in which this

8

gene is predicted to be essential. Essential genes that are only found in one or a few conditions
might be cell line or experiment (e.g., medium) specific and hence might not have general
biological relevance. Single gene deletion of each predicted essential gene was then
performed on the counterpart control model (see Methods, A.2.2), to predict the effect of the
gene knockout on the healthy tissue. This allowed obtaining a safety score and hence
estimating the potential toxicity of each of the considered drug targets.
The obtained essentiality and safety scores are plotted for visual inspection (see Fig. 3).
CRLS1 and SGMS1 scored highest for essentiality, but were among the lowest for safety,
thus indicating that targeting any of these genes might be effective against the virus but also
reduces the growth of healthy cells suggesting high toxicity of respective drugs. On the other
hand, GUK1 gene showed a moderate essentiality score, but a higher safety score
expecting fewer side effects. No gene could be identified that has high efficiency and safety.
Also, nine of the 23 essential genes belong to the SLC transporter gene family. Transporters
are known key regulators of metabolic flux [7], [61], hence modulating their expression might
contribute to diverting metabolic fluxes to pathways for viral survival and proliferation. Of the
23 essential genes, 10 genes were shared between the two investigated lung studies, and
many essential gene sets are shared between the investigated conditions (CRLS1, GUK1,
SGMS1 in the severity study and CRLS1, ISYNA1, SGMS1, SLC27A4 in the time-series
study), suggesting the existence of a consistent metabolic rewiring of the host metabolism
rather than random alterations.

Fig. 3: Scatterplot and Tripartite Network of Essential Genes, and their Predicted Drugs and
Pathways, Determined by in silico Single-gene Deletions on the Infected Lung Models.
a. Scatterplot of essentiality and safety scores of the essential genes.
Essentiality and safety scores correspond to the number of infected and healthy models respectively,

9

in which each gene is predicted to be essential. The y-axis indicates the number of infected cell lines
for which the gene is predicted to be essential, whereas the x-axis indicates the number of control cell
lines that are predicted to remain unharmed by the silencing of the target genes.
b. Tripartite network of the drug-gene-pathway interactions of the essential genes:
A network of the single repositioned drugs and their essential genes, predicted by in silico gene deletion,
was built. The relationships between the essential genes and their pathways were mapped using
Recon3D_01 subSystem. Genes, and their connected drugs, that don’t have pathways in Recon3D_01
subSystems were discarded.

In silico single gene deletion predicts potential drug targets for different stages and
disease severity levels
Variability in the metabolism of cell lines, viral load, and time of infection gives rise to the
appearance of context-specific essential genes. Core essential genes in infected cells are
optimal drug targets as likely to be efficient for a majority of patients. Essential genes that are
specific to the time of the disease or severity level are also of interest, as it allows modulating
the specific treatment. It might be reasonable to provide drugs with strong adverse effects to
more severe cases and to opt for lighter treatments for mild affections. To identify core and
context-specific essential genes, we performed in silico gene knockouts on all reconstructed
models and compared the sets of essential genes across all the conditions and between the
severity and time-series studies. And more specifically we focused on the effect of the
transfection of the ACE2 vector, of the viral load in the severity study, and the time after
infection in the time-series study. ACE2 is crucial for SARS-CoV-2 cell entry by binding with
its spike protein, but ACE2 also has many cellular functions crucial to the host cells such as
in the angiotensin-renin system. By comparing the essential genes in the absence (A549_2
&) and presence of the ACE2 vector (A549_2_ACE2 & A549_0.2_ACE2), we could identify
one set of genes (ISYNA1, SLC3A2, SLC7A11) that are essential for the virus in the absence
of the ACE2 vector. By comparing the essential genes in the A549 cell line in the severity
study with a high multiplicity of infection (MOI) (A549_2 & A549_2_ACE2) against low MOI
(A549_0.02 & A549_0.2_ACE2), we identified essential genes for high viral load (CMPK1,
CTH, PTDSS1, SLC2A13, SLC3A1, SLC5A3, SLC7A9) in A549_2_ACE2 and one essential
gene, DTYMK, in A549_2, where the gene set (AGXT, DHFR, SLC27A4, TYMS) were unique
for low viral load in A549_0.2_ACE2.
For the time-series study, a list of core essential genes (7-10 genes) was common to every
time point and for each cell line (see Table S2). Besides the core essential genes, there were
time-point specific essential genes that were essential only at very specific time-points due to
the inactivation of alternative pathways (Table S2). The Calu-3 cell line has eight core
essential genes (CRLS1, GUK1, ISYNA1, PEPD, SGMS1, SLC27A4, SLC3A2, SLC7A11)
and three time-point specific genes (see Table S2). Out of the eight core essential genes, five
(SLC27A4, CRLS1, GUK1, PEPD, SGMS1) were also in the six essential genes of the
Calu3_2 condition in the severity study. six core essential genes (CRLS1, ISYNA1, PLD2,
SGMS1, SLC27A4, SLC7A6) and two time-specific genes were predicted for the H1299 cell
line. Jaccard similarity of the essential genes between different conditions, shows cell type
specific essential genes in the time-series study in (see Fig. S4). Clustering of the
reconstructed models by core reactions using Jaccard similarity (see Fig. S3), shows four
clusters by cell type (A549, H1299, NHBE, Calu-3), even for cell lines between the two studies
(Calu-3). This cell line-specific clustering is more apparent in Recon 3D than in Recon2.
Moreover, the infection state (Mock, Infected) forms subclusters within each of the four main
clusters.

10

Fig. 4: Pathway Analysis of the Essential Genes in the two Lung Studies.
Identification of the pathways harboring the identified essential genes using Enrichr and Recon3D_01
subSystem, and hence the most critical pathways for the viral survival and proliferation across cell type,
severity
level,
and
time
after
infection.
a) Enrichr enrichment of the severity and time-series lung studies respectively as mentioned in (B).
Conditions in the severity study were named as: cell line + ACE2 vector (if exists) + MOI. Conditions in
the 2nd lung cell line were names as: cell line + time point. The color code in a) "Enrichment [%]"
represents the number of enriched genes in this pathway divided by the overall number of genes in this
pathway.
b) Metabolic pathway analysis of severity study and time-series lung studies respectively as mentioned
in (B). The color code in b) "Reactions per Pathway [%]" represents the number of enriched metabolic
reactions in a pathway divided by the overall number of reactions in this pathway.

Essential genes and reactions are predicted to be harbored in 10 unique pathways
among which is methionine and cysteine metabolism
To obtain a comprehensive picture of viral essentiality, we apply pathway analysis for core
and context-specific essential genes to identify pathways that are major players in the
determination of the severity as well as the stage of the infections. For both studies, the
predicted essential genes were enriched in 13 unique pathways, of which eight were shared
between both studies (Fig. 4 b). Glycerophospholipid metabolism was enriched in all
conditions across both studies. Nucleotide interconversion and extracellular transport were
highly enriched in the severity and in the time-series study, respectively. Also, two pathways
were shared with the DEGs pathways (glycerophospholipid metabolism, sphingolipid

11

metabolism). The essential gene ISYNA1, encoding a synthase in the inositol phosphate
metabolism pathway, was specific to cell lines without ACE2 vectors. No unique change in the
set of essential genes’ pathways was found in the function of the viral load in both conditions
(A549_2 & A549_2_ACE2).
To also explore pathways harbouring essential genes that are not directly linked to metabolism
or that are not captured by the metabolic genes and pathways in Recon3D_01, an Enrichr
pathway analysis was performed [56]. Among others, ferroptosis, selenocompound
metabolism, cysteine, and methionine metabolism, mTOR signaling pathway, and ether lipid
metabolism were enriched for the essential genes (Fig. 4 a). Ferroptosis was the only Enrichr
derived pathway that was associated with non ACE2 vector samples due to context-specific
essential genes (SLC3A2, SLC7A11). Protein digestion and absorption were also enriched in
some conditions with high viral load. Whereas, glycerophospholipid metabolism was highly
enriched in both lung study. Finally, Pyrimidine metabolism was enriched in most severity
study conditions, meanwhile, sphingolipid metabolism was enriched in all time-series study
conditions.

Fig. 5: Tripartite Network of the Drug-Gene-Pathway Interactions of the Synergetic Gene-pairs
Determined by Double Gene Deletion.
Determination for the individual repositioned drugs for the synergistic gene-pairs, and also mapping the
relationships of the genes to pathways determined by Recon3D_01 subSystem.
a) Tripartite network of the reduced list of Double Gene Deletion Drug Pairs: Candidate gene pairs with
possible essentiality to the viral biomass were determined by double gene knockout (DKO) as
mentioned in (A.2.3). Gene pairs that have one drug for both genes were excluded. Genes, and their
connected drugs, that don’t have pathways in Recon3D_01 subSystems were discarded.
b) Tripartite network of Single Drugs with Two Paired Targets of Double Gene Deletion: Candidate
genes with possible essentiality to the viral biomass were determined by double gene knockout as
mentioned in (A.2.3). Gene pairs that have one drug for both gene targets were selected. Genes, and
their connected drugs, that don’t have pathways in Recon3D_01 subSystems were discarded.

Prediction of candidates for repositioning of drugs and drug combinations targeting
essential genes and synergetic gene-pairs

12

Out of the 23 predicted essential genes, eight genes are druggable by 45 unique drugs (Table
S3) from DrugBank [58]. Six antiviral drugs (acyclovir, valaciclovir, lamivudine, sofosbuvir,
methotrexate, trifluridine) were identified in these 45 drugs. These drugs cover many
pharmacological actions such as immunosuppressive, antiviral, folic acid antagonists,
antirheumatic, and hypolipidemic actions besides some known nutraceutical cofactors such
as lactose and folic acid. The tripartite network of individual repositioned drugs (Fig. 5 b) shows
a multi-target effect of four drugs (pralatrexate, pemetrexed, methotrexate, Gemcitabine).
Gemcitabine affects the nucleotide interconversion pathway through both CPMK1 and TYMS
essential genes. Meanwhile, pralatrexate, pemetrexed and methotrexate, affect both
nucleotide interconversion and folate metabolism pathways through TYMS and DHFR
essential genes respectively.
Double gene deletion produced 598 unique gene pairs across the two lung studies. Out of
these 598 gene-pairs, 56 gene-pairs are druggable by 3411 unique drugs or drug pairs. We
found 47 single drugs with two paired targets, (Table S4) due to multiple identified targets per
drug. Since these 3411 drug pairs could target more than one gene pair, safety scores and
essentiality scores were calculated using the average of these scores. To prioritize among the
3411 drug pairs, we filtered by keeping drug pairs with more than two in essentiality scores,
and more than one in either the number of gene-pairs or safety scores. This reduced drug pair
list has 52 drug pairs that consist of 37 individual drugs (Table S5). The top-ranked drug pairs
in the number of gene pairs are (azathioprine-pemetrexed and mercaptopurine-pemetrexed)
affecting five essential gene pairs, while (imexon-valaciclovir and imexon-acyclovir) are topranked in the essentiality score of 10. The pathway analysis of the druggable essential genepairs (see Fig. 5), shows that most of the single drugs with two paired targets, targets the
extracellular transport pathway. Meanwhile the reduced drug pairs cover more diverse
pathways. These pathways include new pathways in addition to the single druggable
pathways such as: purine catabolism, purine synthesis, nucleotide salvage pathway, and NAD
metabolism. The aforementioned azathioprine-pemetrexed drug pair targets seven metabolic
pathways such as transporter pathway and purine synthesis and catabolism.

Discussion
In the present study, we analyzed changes in transcriptomic data of lung cell lines infected
with COVID-19 at various viral loads and at different time points after infection. The main focus
was on the alteration of expression of metabolic genes that could be evidence of a metabolic
rewiring induced by the virus. Then in silico single and gene double knockouts were performed
to identify potential infected cell-specific essential genes that arise from this metabolic rewiring
and that could be used as potential drug targets. To extend the list of targets and identify
critical pathways for the growth or survival of the virus, reactions were inactivated in silico and
the resulting impact on the viral biomass production was estimated. In addition, we explored
pathways enriched for predicted essential genes and reactions to obtain a better picture of the
occurring metabolic rewiring. Furthermore, we predicted a set of 45 repositionable drugs and
99 drug combinations that could be explored as treatment against COVID-19. Finally, we
compared our results against two recent studies that cover the candidate metabolic pathways
alternation in COVID-19 infection [62] [63].
To unravel the metabolic rewiring induced by COVID-19 on the host lung cell after ACE2 or a
mock transfection at different viral loads, we computed the metabolic differentially expressed
genes (DEGs) in the severity study for these different conditions. The DEGs were classified
into three sets: downregulated with ACE2 vector, downregulated with high viral load, and
moderately downregulated across all conditions.

13

Among the metabolic pathways with a different activation pattern after the transfection with
the ACE2 vector, are chondroitin sulfate degradation and synthesis that have a link to oxidative
stress. Chondroitin is a glycosaminoglycan (GAG) that plays a role as a structural component
in the cartilage. It also has antioxidant and neuroprotective effects against oxidative stress
through the upregulation of phosphoinositide 3-kinases (PI3K) /Akt signaling and heme
oxygenase-1 (HMOX1) [64]. Chondroitin sulfate degradation was downregulated after the
transfection with ACE2 vector and chondroitin synthesis was downregulated with a high viral
load which is consistent with the hypothesis of accumulation chondroitin in the infected cells
to balance the oxidative stress induced by the virus. The phosphoinositol phosphate pathway,
which includes PI3K was also downregulated after transfection with the ACE2 vector, further
supporting the protective role of chondroitin in COVID-19 infection. Although this hypothesis
was not tested in vitro, in an in vivo study on the Vero cell line, chondroitin sulfate showed a
weak inhibition of SARS-CoV-2 cell entry in comparison to other types of GAGs such as
heparin and enoxaparin [65]. Finally, HMOX1 has been found to bind to SARS-CoV-2 open
reading frame 3 a (ORF3a) [66]. The ineffectiveness of chondroitin sulfate as an antiviral agent
SARS-CoV2 was expected due to its unspecific mode of action. Reducing oxidative stress
may alleviate the symptoms but does not kill the virus nor does it reduce its ability to replicate
itself.
To be more effective, drug candidates have to target genes, reactions, or pathways that are
key and specific to viral metabolism. Hence in silico single and double gene knockouts were
performed to identify genes essential to the viral biomass production but whose knockout has
little or no effect on the host biomass production. Among the 23 predicted essential genes for
viral biomass, two genes of the phospholipid metabolism (CRLS1 and SGMS1) showed the
highest essentiality score. GUK1, which was the main essential gene identified in [47], is also
among the top predicted targets and displays moderate essentiality and safety score.
Furthermore, three essential genes (DTYMK, CMPK1 & TYMS) are part of pyrimidine
metabolism (through pyrimidine deoxyribonucleotides de novo biosynthesis) that was
enriched in all conditions in the severity study, but for the last time point of the time-series
study in the Calu-3 cell line. In two separate in vivo studies on the Vero cell line, inhibition of
de novo pyrimidine biosynthesis pathway through dihydroorotate dehydrogenase (DHODH)
inhibitors, showed broad-spectrum antiviral activity, stopped or halted SARS-CoV-2
replication respectively [67], [68]. Although DHODH inhibitor PTC299 showed a little cytotoxic
effect on SARS-CoV2, they were proven to have an immunomodulating effect on IL-6, IL-7A,
IL-17F, and VEGF [68]. Alterations in the expression of genes of the pyrimidine metabolism
were significantly higher in the A549, suggesting a response that could be specific to this cell
line.
To further understand why a gene is essential for the viral biomass production, we examined
the pathways harbouring the essential genes. A percentage of shared essential metabolic
pathways were found between the two lung studies (8 out of 13 pathways), highlighting the
robustness of the predictions (fatty acid oxidation, glycerophospholipid metabolism, inositol
phosphate metabolism, methionine and cysteine metabolism, nucleotide interconversion,
sphingolipid metabolism, starch and sucrose metabolism, extracellular transport). Pathways
harbouring essential genes were also enriched for DEGs. Exploring the ferroptosis specific
database FerrDb shows that three out of the 23 essential genes are related to ferroptosis.
SLC7A11 and SLC3A2 are classified as suppressors, meanwhile, SLC7A5 is a marker. Also,
FerrDb, classified only one of our predicted drugs, sulfasalazine, as an inducer of ferroptosis.
Ferroptosis is an iron-dependent programmed cell death that can be inhibited by Selenium. In
a cross-sectional study, Selenium level was found higher in tissue samples from COVID-19
survivors in comparison to non-survivors [69]. Also in a population retrospective analysis, the
selenium concentration in the hair in the population of Chinese cities outside Hubei province
was correlated with the COVID-19 cure rate in Chinese cities [70]. Even though the last

14

retrospective study using city population-level data instead of patient-level data might be less
reliable, both suggest a role of ferroptosis in the survival of COVID patients.
To prioritize drug and drug combinations and since many conditions in the time-series study
were lacking mock samples, we relied for the present work rather on the essentiality score of
each gene identified in terms of reducing the viral proliferation rather than the predicted toxicity
on control tissue models (safety score). In total 23 SARS-COV-2-specific essential genes were
predicted by rFASTCORMICS based lung models, that can be targeted by 45 repositionable
drugs and 99 drug combinations. The safety of the drugs was assessed by simulation
knockouts on the biomass of the counterpart mock sample. This strategy allows estimating
which drugs might be potential candidates as not having too drastic side-effects. Although the
drug candidates are all FDA-approved drugs, some treatments are associated with severe
side effects, and combining two drugs can have additional unexpected side effects. Hence,
further tests would be required on other tissues and using other optimization functions as well
as in vitro and in vivo validations before considering any predictions as potential drug
candidates.
Among the predicted drugs, six are antiviral drugs and three drugs (valaciclovir, methotrexate,
sofosbuvir) are broad-spectrum antivirals [71]. In a small clinical trial (n= 62), the combination
of sofosbuvir-daclatasvir decreased the COVID-19 mortality rate (6%) in comparison to
ribavirin (33%) [72]. Of the predicted drugs, two drugs (acyclovir, valaciclovir) target the GUK1
gene, which shows relative essentiality and safety. SGMS1, one of our top drug target
candidates, has currently no associated drug in DrugBank. Acetylcysteine, another predicted
drug by our workflow, is mucolytic and antioxidant in high doses through regenerating
glutathione. Acetylcysteine has been proposed as a treatment for COVID-19 [73] for its role in
inflammation regulation. Acetylcysteine alone or with bromelain were able in vitro to fragment
the recombinant spike and envelope SARS-CoV-2 proteins [74]. Also, acetylcysteine was
among four metabolic cofactors that reduced the recovery time in combination with
hydroxychloroquine in comparison to hydroxychloroquine alone in a randomized clinical study
(n=93) [75].
Further, statins, lipid-lowering drugs that were enriched among the predicted drugs were
debated for their efficacy in reducing COVID-19 severity at the onset of the pandemic and
their usefulness for COVID-19 is still unclear [76]. For example, statins were described to
increase ACE2 expression through angiotensin 2 [77], which might enhance viral cell entry.
On the other hand, it can decrease oxidative stress from ACE-2 viral binding [76]. Also, a
retrospective study (n=13,981) has shown an association between statins and reduced
COVID-19 mortality from 9.4% in patients not taking statins to 5.2% with statins [78]. Due to
the relative number of the different statin recipients, this study couldn’t rank the different statin
types. But, a recent in-vitro study of different statins showed an antiviral effect on SARS-CoV2 [79]. Fluvastatin was the only statistically significant in its antiviral effect, meanwhile,
rosuvastatin was ranked second in the antiviral activity [79]. Moreover, gemcitabine has been
shown to have antiviral activity against SARS-CoV-2 in the Vero-E6 cell line [80]. Till 17 Sep
2020, out of the 45 essential genes' drugs, seven drugs are being tested currently in clinical
trials (rosuvastatin, acetylcysteine, sofosbuvir, liothyronine, melphalan, oleic acid,
methotrexate) according to DrugBank COVID-19 Clinical Trial Summary [58] [81].
Also, among the 47 predicted single drugs with two paired targets, four drugs are affecting
more than one gene pair (gemcitabine, trifluridine, mercaptopurine, tegafur-uracil). In the
reduced list of predicted drug combinations, the highest ranked drug pair in the number of
target gene pairs are azathioprine-pemetrexed and mercaptopurine-pemetrexed, both
affecting five gene pairs. Furthermore, nine predicted drugs belonging to angiotensinconverting enzyme inhibitors (ACEIs) such as lisinopril, are affecting the gene pair SLC15A1SLC15A2, targeting the extracellular transport pathway. Interestingly, in a prospective study
of COVID-19 (n=19,486), patients taking ACEIs have a reduced risk of COVID-19, with

15

differences according to ethnicity [82]. Meanwhile, ACEIs did not reduce the risk of receiving
ICU care [82].
In both drug pair datasets (single drugs with two paired targets, see reduced list),
immunomodulators appear such as mercaptopurine, azathioprine, pemetrexed, and
methotrexate. Methotrexate shows antiviral activity against SARS-CoV-2 in Vero-E and Calu3 cell lines [83]. This antiviral activity was better than the only authorized antiviral for
emergency use for COVID-19 remedisvir. Also, five unique antivirals appear in the two drug
pairs datasets (didanosine, trifluridine, valganciclovir, valaciclovir, zalcitabine).
The use of 5-aminosalicylate or sulfasalazine, a 5-aminosalicylate prodrug, has recently been
shown to increase COVID-19 severity in patients with inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) in a
retrospective study (n = 525) [84]. As sulfasalazine was found as a ferroptosis inducer in
FerrDb [85], this could strengthen the evidence of a role of ferroptosis in COVID-19 severity.
It illustrates also the need for a careful assessment of the toxicity of the predicted drugs in
follow-up in vitro and in vivo studies as well as a patient or group of patient-tailored approach
as some of the most efficient treatments for a given group of patients is likely to have severe
adverse side-effects for others.
We further compared our enriched pathways from the DEGs and essential genes with a recent
metabolomics study [62]. In this study serum metabolites were compared among SARS-CoV2 positive and negative patients, also altered IL-6 levels measures as an indication of COVID19 severity. The study found several altered pathways and dysregulation notably of nitrogen
and tryptophan metabolism associated with increased severity. Also, some metabolite levels
were increased in COVID-19 patients such as kynurenines, methionine sulfoxide, cystine, and
free polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs).
Pathways that harbored essential genes (essential gene pathways) and DEGs (Fig. 2)
between COVID-19 and mock samples were also identified as relevant pathways in the
metabolomics study [62]. Up-regulated fatty acid oxidation in DEGs and glycerophospholipid
metabolism in essential genes pathways is consistent with the increased levels of PUFAs [62].
The increased PUFAs are biomarkers for ferroptosis which was predicted in the condition
without ACE2 vector. The recent evidence for the role of selenium in COVID-19 and the
significant presence of PUFAs as a biomarker in severe COVID-19 cases might be a further
indication of the role of ferroptosis in regards to COVID-19 severity. Moreover, the SARSCoV-2 spike protein was discovered to have a binding pocket for free fatty acids [86]. This
seems to allow the PUFA linoleic acid to have a synergistic effect with the antiviral remdesivir
against SARS-CoV-2 in vitro [86].
Furthermore, tryptophan metabolism that was up-regulated in the DEGs in conditions with
high viral load (A549_2, A549_2_ACE2), has been found to be dysregulated in the
metabolomics study. Also, the enriched methionine and cysteine metabolism identified in (Fig.
4) might explain the increased oxidative stress biomarker levels of methionine sulfoxide and
cystine and the enriched nitrogen metabolism in the metabolomics study [62].
To discover which lung essential pathways might be shared with other infected organs, we
also compared our identified pathways with a multi-omics study on three cell types:
megakaryocytes, erythroid cells, and plasmablasts [63]. In this longitudinal study of COVID19 severity, cell-/tissue- specific metabolic models were reconstructed from single-cell/ bulk
RNA-seq respectively [63]. The goal of the metabolic reconstruction in this study was to find
cell-specific metabolic pathways associated with different disease progression and recovery
time points [63]. The essentiality of genes and reactions in these pathways across the three
cell types are unknown since single gene or reaction deletions were not applied. Many
identified metabolic pathways in this multi-omics study across megakaryocytes, erythroid
cells, and plasmablasts were also shared with our essential pathways on the lung such as

16

pyrimidine metabolism and cysteine and methionine metabolism. Also, our lung essential
metabolic pathways such as inositol phosphate metabolism, sphingolipid metabolism, glycine,
serine, and threonine metabolism have been identified as both erythroid cells- and
plasmablasts- specific. Meanwhile, the lung- essential fatty acid oxidation and the nonessential pyruvate metabolism have been identified as megakaryocytes- specific.
Interestingly, a high upregulation of pyruvate kinase M in (PI3K) /Akt signaling was found in
critical patients in megakaryocytes [63]. (PI3K) /Akt signaling participates in chondroitin sulfate
metabolism [64], which was enriched in the DEGs but not in the essential pathways.
Furthermore, serum sphingosine-1-phosphate, a metabolite in the lung- essential sphingolipid
metabolism, was found significantly decreased with COVID-19 severity in a small study
(n=111) [87]. Taken together, the shared metabolic pathways between the different studies
such as pyrimidine metabolism and methionine and cysteine metabolism across different
tissues might represent core viral-specific pathways that could harbor efficient drug targets
that would eliminate or slow down the virus regardless of the infected tissue.
Although this study predicts some interesting drug candidates and drug combinations, the
work is limited by the modelled lung cell lines (A549, Calu-3, H1299, NHBE). Since more
evidence shows the multi-organ effect of COVID-19 [40], especially the possible long-term
effects [44], further computational studies are needed e.g., to obtain multicellular constraintbased models [88]. With the rising SARS-CoV-2 variants globally, variant-specific metabolic
models would be needed to answer questions related to vaccines’ immunity-escaping.
Another limitation to this work is that the identified drug and drug pairs are based on targets
identified by network effects on the host metabolome (as the virus is only modelled through
its biomass function) rather than direct docking on the viral proteome. Thus, further in vitro
studies are needed to determine the essentiality of the identified essential genes.

Conclusion
Unlike drug repositioning using expression reversal or drug docking that lack targets’
identification or genome-scale multi-targeting respectively, constraint-based metabolic
modeling is a powerful in silico tool for drug repositioning with genome-scale information and
producing known targets. These powerful advantages come from gene essentiality prediction.
In this work, context- specific models from expression data from infected lung cell lines were
built then constrained by both viral and host biomass. In silico gene deletion identified 23
single essential genes and 598 essential gene pairs. Drug repositioning using approved drugs
in DrugBank identified 45 single drugs, and 99 drug combinations of which 47 single drugs
are targeting both genes in the gene pair. Pathway analysis of the essential genes identify
ferroptosis as a candidate biomarker pathway of COVID-19 severity. Gemcitabine was
predicted to target two single essential genes in the nucleotide interconversion pathway and
three gene pairs in drugs identified by both single and double gene deletion respectively.
Finally, we predicted the GUK1 gene as both relatively safe and essential against SARS-CoV2
as reported by a previous in silico modeling.
Data Availability Statement
Models and code are available in:

https://github.com/sysbiolux/DCcov
FPKM for the time-series study GSE148729:
https://filetransfer.mdc-berlin.de/?u=CVXckugR&p=MACT6Xw9
GHDDI Broad-spectrum antiviral agents:
https://ghddiai.oss-cn-zhangjiakou.aliyuncs.com/file/Antivirus_Drug_Profile_k2.csv

17

Acknowledgments:
The experiments presented in this paper were carried out using the HPC facilities of the
University of Luxembourg [89].
References:

[1] G. Marinos, C. Kaleta, and S. Waschina, ‘Defining the nutritional input for genome-scale
metabolic models: A roadmap’, PLoS ONE, vol. 15, no. 8, 2020, doi:
10.1371/journal.pone.0236890.
[2] P. F. Suthers and C. D. Maranas, ‘Challenges of cultivated meat production and
applications of genome-scale metabolic modeling’, AIChE J., vol. 66, no. 6, p. e16235,
2020.
[3] M.-A. Blätke and A. Bräutigam, ‘Evolution of C4 photosynthesis predicted by constraintbased modelling’, eLife, vol. 8, 2019, doi: 10.7554/eLife.49305.
[4] K. Yizhak, B. Chaneton, E. Gottlieb, and E. Ruppin, ‘Modeling cancer metabolism on a
genome scale’, Mol. Syst. Biol., vol. 11, no. 6, Jun. 2015, doi: 10.15252/msb.20145307.
[5] R. Agren, S. Bordel, A. Mardinoglu, N. Pornputtapong, I. Nookaew, and J. Nielsen,
‘Reconstruction of Genome-Scale Active Metabolic Networks for 69 Human Cell Types
and 16 Cancer Types Using INIT’, PLoS Comput. Biol., vol. 8, no. 5, May 2012, doi:
10.1371/journal.pcbi.1002518.
[6] I. Larsson, M. Uhlén, C. Zhang, and A. Mardinoglu, ‘Genome-Scale Metabolic Modeling
of Glioblastoma Reveals Promising Targets for Drug Development’, Front. Genet., vol.
11, 2020, doi: 10.3389/fgene.2020.00381.
[7] M. P. Pacheco et al., ‘Identifying and targeting cancer-specific metabolism with
network-based drug target prediction’, EBioMedicine, vol. 43, pp. 98–106, May 2019,
doi: 10.1016/j.ebiom.2019.04.046.
[8] J. L. Reed and B. Ø. Palsson, ‘Thirteen Years of Building Constraint-Based In Silico Models
of Escherichia coli’, J. Bacteriol., vol. 185, no. 9, pp. 2692–2699, May 2003, doi:
10.1128/JB.185.9.2692-2699.2003.
[9] Y. W. Choon et al., ‘Differential Bees Flux Balance Analysis with OptKnock for In Silico
Microbial Strains Optimization’, PLOS ONE, vol. 9, no. 7, p. e102744, Jul. 2014, doi:
10.1371/journal.pone.0102744.
[10] J. Schellenberger et al., ‘Quantitative prediction of cellular metabolism with
constraint-based models: the COBRA Toolbox v2.0’, Nat. Protoc., vol. 6, no. 9, pp. 1290–
1307, Aug. 2011, doi: 10.1038/nprot.2011.308.
[11] I. Thiele et al., ‘A community-driven global reconstruction of human metabolism’,
Nat. Biotechnol., vol. 31, no. 5, Art. no. 5, May 2013, doi: 10.1038/nbt.2488.
[12] N. Swainston et al., ‘Recon 2.2: from reconstruction to model of human metabolism’,
Metabolomics, vol. 12, 2016, doi: 10.1007/s11306-016-1051-4.
[13] ‘Recon3D enables a three-dimensional view of gene variation in human metabolism
| Nature Biotechnology’. https://www.nature.com/articles/nbt.4072 (accessed May 11,
2020).
[14] J. L. Robinson et al., ‘An atlas of human metabolism’, Sci. Signal., vol. 13, no. 624,
Mar. 2020, doi: 10.1126/scisignal.aaz1482.
[15] N. Vlassis, M. P. Pacheco, and T. Sauter, ‘Fast Reconstruction of Compact ContextSpecific Metabolic Network Models’, PLoS Comput. Biol., vol. 10, no. 1, p. e1003424, Jan.

18

2014, doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003424.
[16] S. Robaina Estévez and Z. Nikoloski, ‘Context-Specific Metabolic Model Extraction
Based on Regularized Least Squares Optimization’, PLoS ONE, vol. 10, no. 7, Jul. 2015,
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0131875.
[17] C. Gille et al., ‘HepatoNet1: a comprehensive metabolic reconstruction of the human
hepatocyte for the analysis of liver physiology’, Mol. Syst. Biol., vol. 6, no. 1, p. 411, Jan.
2010, doi: 10.1038/msb.2010.62.
[18] R. Saha, P. F. Suthers, and C. D. Maranas, ‘Zea mays iRS1563: A Comprehensive
Genome-Scale Metabolic Reconstruction of Maize Metabolism’, PLoS ONE, vol. 6, no. 7,
p. e21784, Jul. 2011, doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0021784.
[19] J. D. Orth, I. Thiele, and B. Ø. Palsson, ‘What is flux balance analysis?’, Nat.
Biotechnol., vol. 28, no. 3, Art. no. 3, Mar. 2010, doi: 10.1038/nbt.1614.
[20] L. Heirendt et al., ‘Creation and analysis of biochemical constraint-based models
using the COBRA Toolbox v.3.0’, Nat. Protoc., vol. 14, no. 3, Art. no. 3, Mar. 2019, doi:
10.1038/s41596-018-0098-2.
[21] D. Perumal, A. Samal, K. R. Sakharkar, and M. K. Sakharkar, ‘Targeting multiple
targets in Pseudomonas aeruginosa PAO1 using flux balance analysis of a reconstructed
genome-scale metabolic network’, J. Drug Target., vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 1–13, Jan. 2011,
doi: 10.3109/10611861003649753.
[22] D. Machado, M. J. Herrgård, and I. Rocha, ‘Stoichiometric Representation of Gene–
Protein–Reaction Associations Leverages Constraint-Based Analysis from Reaction to
Gene-Level Phenotype Prediction’, PLoS Comput. Biol., vol. 12, no. 10, Oct. 2016, doi:
10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005140.
[23] ‘WHO Director-General’s opening remarks at the media briefing on COVID-19 - 11
March 2020’. https://www.who.int/dg/speeches/detail/who-director-general-sopening-remarks-at-the-media-briefing-on-covid-19---11-march-2020 (accessed Sep. 23,
2020).
[24] C. Huang et al., ‘Clinical features of patients infected with 2019 novel coronavirus in
Wuhan, China’, Lancet Lond. Engl., vol. 395, no. 10223, pp. 497–506, 15 2020, doi:
10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30183-5.
[25] L. Morawska and J. Cao, ‘Airborne transmission of SARS-CoV-2: The world should
face the reality’, Environ. Int., vol. 139, p. 105730, Jun. 2020, doi:
10.1016/j.envint.2020.105730.
[26] A. Kronbichler, D. Kresse, S. Yoon, K. H. Lee, M. Effenberger, and J. I. Shin,
‘Asymptomatic patients as a source of COVID-19 infections: A systematic review and
meta-analysis’, Int. J. Infect. Dis., vol. 98, pp. 180–186, Sep. 2020, doi:
10.1016/j.ijid.2020.06.052.
[27] K. G. Andersen, A. Rambaut, W. I. Lipkin, E. C. Holmes, and R. F. Garry, ‘The proximal
origin of SARS-CoV-2’, Nat. Med., vol. 26, no. 4, Art. no. 4, Apr. 2020, doi:
10.1038/s41591-020-0820-9.
[28] M. A. Sparks, S. D. Crowley, S. B. Gurley, M. Mirotsou, and T. M. Coffman, ‘Classical
Renin-Angiotensin System in Kidney Physiology’, Compr. Physiol., vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 1201–
1228, Jul. 2014, doi: 10.1002/cphy.c130040.
[29] M. C. Zimmerman, E. Lazartigues, R. V. Sharma, and R. L. Davisson, ‘Hypertension
caused by angiotensin II infusion involves increased superoxide production in the central
nervous system’, Circ. Res., vol. 95, no. 2, pp. 210–216, Jul. 2004, doi:
10.1161/01.RES.0000135483.12297.e4.

19

[30] Y. Jia et al., ‘Analysis of the mutation dynamics of SARS-CoV-2 reveals the spread
history and emergence of RBD mutant with lower ACE2 binding affinity’, bioRxiv, p.
2020.04.09.034942, Apr. 2020, doi: 10.1101/2020.04.09.034942.
[31] M. Fung and J. M. Babik, ‘COVID-19 in Immunocompromised Hosts: What We Know
So Far’, Clin. Infect. Dis. Off. Publ. Infect. Dis. Soc. Am., Jun. 2020, doi:
10.1093/cid/ciaa863.
[32] J. S. Hirsch et al., ‘Acute kidney injury in patients hospitalized with COVID-19’, Kidney
Int., vol. 98, no. 1, pp. 209–218, Jul. 2020, doi: 10.1016/j.kint.2020.05.006.
[33] C. M. Petrilli et al., ‘Factors associated with hospitalization and critical illness among
4,103 patients with COVID-19 disease in New York City’, medRxiv, p.
2020.04.08.20057794, Apr. 2020, doi: 10.1101/2020.04.08.20057794.
[34] G. P. Fadini, M. L. Morieri, E. Longato, and A. Avogaro, ‘Prevalence and impact of
diabetes among people infected with SARS-CoV-2’, J. Endocrinol. Invest., pp. 1–3, Mar.
2020, doi: 10.1007/s40618-020-01236-2.
[35] J. Tschopp et al., ‘First experience of SARS-CoV-2 infections in solid organ transplant
recipients in the Swiss Transplant Cohort Study’, Am. J. Transplant., vol. n/a, no. n/a,
doi: 10.1111/ajt.16062.
[36] J. Yang et al., ‘Prevalence of comorbidities and its effects in patients infected with
SARS-CoV-2: a systematic review and meta-analysis’, Int. J. Infect. Dis., vol. 94, pp. 91–
95, May 2020, doi: 10.1016/j.ijid.2020.03.017.
[37] J. A. Panepinto et al., ‘Coronavirus Disease among Persons with Sickle Cell Disease,
United States, March 20–May 21, 2020 - Volume 26, Number 10—October 2020 Emerging Infectious Diseases journal - CDC’, doi: 10.3201/eid2610.202792.
[38] X. Li and X. Ma, ‘Acute respiratory failure in COVID-19: is it “typical” ARDS?’, Crit.
Care, vol. 24, May 2020, doi: 10.1186/s13054-020-02911-9.
[39] G. McGuinness et al., ‘High Incidence of Barotrauma in Patients with COVID-19
Infection on
Invasive Mechanical Ventilation’, Radiology, p. 202352, Jul.
2020, doi: 10.1148/radiol.2020202352.
[40] T. Wu et al., ‘Multi-organ Dysfunction in Patients with COVID-19: A Systematic
Review and Meta-analysis’, Aging Dis., vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 874–894, May 2020, doi:
10.14336/AD.2020.0520.
[41] W. O. Vasquez-Bonilla et al., ‘A review of the main histopathological findings in
coronavirus disease 2019’, Hum. Pathol., Aug. 2020, doi:
10.1016/j.humpath.2020.07.023.
[42] ‘New-Onset Diabetes in Covid-19 | NEJM’.
https://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMc2018688 (accessed Sep. 24, 2020).
[43] S. J. Halpin et al., ‘Postdischarge symptoms and rehabilitation needs in survivors of
COVID-19 infection: A cross-sectional evaluation’, J. Med. Virol., vol. n/a, no. n/a, doi:
10.1002/jmv.26368.
[44] V. O. Puntmann et al., ‘Outcomes of Cardiovascular Magnetic Resonance Imaging in
Patients Recently Recovered From Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19)’, JAMA
Cardiol., Jul. 2020, doi: 10.1001/jamacardio.2020.3557.
[45] A. Bordbar, N. E. Lewis, J. Schellenberger, B. Ø. Palsson, and N. Jamshidi, ‘Insight into
human alveolar macrophage and M. tuberculosis interactions via metabolic
reconstructions’, Mol. Syst. Biol., vol. 6, no. 1, p. 422, Jan. 2010, doi:
10.1038/msb.2010.68.
[46] S. Aller, A. Scott, M. Sarkar-Tyson, and O. S. Soyer, ‘Integrated human-virus

20

metabolic stoichiometric modelling predicts host-based antiviral targets against
Chikungunya, Dengue and Zika viruses’, J. R. Soc. Interface, vol. 15, no. 146, p.
20180125, doi: 10.1098/rsif.2018.0125.
[47] A. Renz, L. Widerspick, and A. Dräger, ‘FBA reveals guanylate kinase as a potential
target for antiviral therapies against SARS-CoV-2’, Zenodo, Feb. 2020. doi:
10.5281/zenodo.3752641.
[48] M. Ostaszewski et al., ‘COVID-19 Disease Map, building a computational repository
of SARS-CoV-2 virus-host interaction mechanisms’, Sci. Data, vol. 7, no. 1, Art. no. 1,
May 2020, doi: 10.1038/s41597-020-0477-8.
[49] D. M. Gysi et al., ‘Network Medicine Framework for Identifying Drug Repurposing
Opportunities for COVID-19’, ArXiv, Apr. 2020, Accessed: Sep. 24, 2020. [Online].
Available: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7280907/.
[50] D. Blanco-Melo et al., ‘SARS-CoV-2 launches a unique transcriptional signature from
in vitro, ex vivo, and in vivo systems’, bioRxiv, p. 2020.03.24.004655, Mar. 2020, doi:
10.1101/2020.03.24.004655.
[51] W. Emanuel et al., ‘Bulk and single-cell gene expression profiling of SARS-CoV-2
infected human cell lines identifies molecular targets for therapeutic intervention’,
bioRxiv, p. 2020.05.05.079194, May 2020, doi: 10.1101/2020.05.05.079194.
[52] E. Clough and T. Barrett, ‘The Gene Expression Omnibus database’, Methods Mol.
Biol. Clifton NJ, vol. 1418, pp. 93–110, 2016, doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-3578-9_5.
[53] S. Lê, J. Josse, and F. Husson, ‘FactoMineR: An R Package for Multivariate Analysis’, J.
Stat. Softw., vol. 25, no. 1, Art. no. 1, Mar. 2008, doi: 10.18637/jss.v025.i01.
[54] ‘edgeR: a Bioconductor package for differential expression analysis of digital gene
expression data | Bioinformatics | Oxford Academic’.
https://academic.oup.com/bioinformatics/article/26/1/139/182458 (accessed Sep. 24,
2020).
[55] M. I. Love, W. Huber, and S. Anders, ‘Moderated estimation of fold change and
dispersion for RNA-seq data with DESeq2’, Genome Biol., vol. 15, no. 12, p. 550, Dec.
2014, doi: 10.1186/s13059-014-0550-8.
[56] M. V. Kuleshov et al., ‘Enrichr: a comprehensive gene set enrichment analysis web
server 2016 update’, Nucleic Acids Res., vol. 44, no. W1, pp. W90–W97, Jul. 2016, doi:
10.1093/nar/gkw377.
[57] M. Kanehisa and S. Goto, ‘KEGG: Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes’,
Nucleic Acids Res., vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 27–30, Jan. 2000, doi: 10.1093/nar/28.1.27.
[58] D. S. Wishart et al., ‘DrugBank: a knowledgebase for drugs, drug actions and drug
targets’, Nucleic Acids Res., vol. 36, no. suppl_1, pp. D901–D906, Jan. 2008, doi:
10.1093/nar/gkm958.
[59] J. J. Allaire et al., networkD3: D3 JavaScript Network Graphs from R. 2017.
[60] N. Zhou and J. Bao, ‘FerrDb: a manually curated resource for regulators and markers
of ferroptosis and ferroptosis-disease associations’, Database, vol. 2020, Jan. 2020, doi:
10.1093/database/baaa021.
[61] P. Mp et al., ‘Integrated metabolic modelling reveals cell-type specific epigenetic
control points of the macrophage metabolic network’, BMC genomics, Oct. 19, 2015.
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26480823/ (accessed Oct. 14, 2020).
[62] T. Thomas et al., ‘COVID-19 infection alters kynurenine and fatty acid metabolism,
correlating with IL-6 levels and renal status’, JCI Insight, vol. 5, no. 14, doi:
10.1172/jci.insight.140327.

21

[63] J. P. Bernardes et al., ‘Longitudinal multi-omics analysis identifies responses of
megakaryocytes, erythroid cells and plasmablasts as hallmarks of severe COVID-19
trajectories’, medRxiv, p. 2020.09.11.20187369, Sep. 2020, doi:
10.1101/2020.09.11.20187369.
[64] N. Cañas et al., ‘Chondroitin sulfate protects SH-SY5Y cells from oxidative stress by
inducing heme oxygenase-1 via phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/Akt’, J. Pharmacol. Exp.
Ther., vol. 323, no. 3, pp. 946–953, Dec. 2007, doi: 10.1124/jpet.107.123505.
[65] R. Tandon et al., ‘Effective Inhibition of SARS-CoV-2 Entry by Heparin and Enoxaparin
Derivatives’, bioRxiv, Jul. 2020, doi: 10.1101/2020.06.08.140236.
[66] D. E. Gordon et al., ‘A SARS-CoV-2 protein interaction map reveals targets for drug
repurposing’, Nature, vol. 583, no. 7816, Art. no. 7816, Jul. 2020, doi: 10.1038/s41586020-2286-9.
[67] R. Xiong et al., ‘Novel and potent inhibitors targeting DHODH are broad-spectrum
antivirals against RNA viruses including newly-emerged coronavirus SARS-CoV-2’,
Protein Cell, vol. 11, no. 10, pp. 723–739, Oct. 2020, doi: 10.1007/s13238-020-00768-w.
[68] J. Luban et al., ‘The DHODH Inhibitor PTC299 Arrests SARS-CoV-2 Replication and
Suppresses Induction of Inflammatory Cytokines’, bioRxiv, p. 2020.08.05.238394, Aug.
2020, doi: 10.1101/2020.08.05.238394.
[69] A. Moghaddam et al., ‘Selenium Deficiency Is Associated with Mortality Risk from
COVID-19’, Nutrients, vol. 12, no. 7, Art. no. 7, Jul. 2020, doi: 10.3390/nu12072098.
[70] J. Zhang, E. W. Taylor, K. Bennett, R. Saad, and M. P. Rayman, ‘Association between
regional selenium status and reported outcome of COVID-19 cases in China’, Am. J. Clin.
Nutr., Apr. 2020, doi: 10.1093/ajcn/nqaa095.
[71] ‘Coronavirus Data Download - Targeting COVID-19 Portal’. https://ghddiailab.github.io/Targeting2019-nCoV/CoV_Experiment_Data/#broad-spectrum-antiviralagents (accessed Sep. 17, 2020).
[72] G. Eslami et al., ‘The impact of sofosbuvir/daclatasvir or ribavirin in patients with
severe COVID-19’, J. Antimicrob. Chemother., doi: 10.1093/jac/dkaa331.
[73] H. Ibrahim et al., ‘Therapeutic blockade of inflammation in severe COVID-19
infection with intravenous N-acetylcysteine’, Clin. Immunol. Orlando Fla, vol. 219, p.
108544, 2020, doi: 10.1016/j.clim.2020.108544.
[74] J. Akhter, K. Pillai, S. Badar, A. Mekkawy, S. J. Valle, and D. L. Morris, ‘In vitro study of
BromAc on SARS-CoV-2 spike and envelope protein shows synergy and disintegration at
modest concentrations’, bioRxiv, p. 2020.09.07.286906, Sep. 2020, doi:
10.1101/2020.09.07.286906.
[75] O. Altay et al., ‘Combined metabolic cofactor supplementation accelerates recovery
in mild-to-moderate COVID-19’, medRxiv, p. 2020.10.02.20202614, Oct. 2020, doi:
10.1101/2020.10.02.20202614.
[76] R. Subir, M. Jagat J, and G. Kalyan K, ‘Pros and cons for use of statins in people with
coronavirus disease-19 (COVID-19)’, Diabetes Metab. Syndr., vol. 14, no. 5, pp. 1225–
1229, 2020, doi: 10.1016/j.dsx.2020.07.011.
[77] Y.-H. Li et al., ‘Effects of rosuvastatin on expression of angiotensin-converting
enzyme 2 after vascular balloon injury in rats’, J. Geriatr. Cardiol. JGC, vol. 10, no. 2, pp.
151–158, Jun. 2013, doi: 10.3969/j.issn.1671-5411.2013.02.009.
[78] X.-J. Zhang et al., ‘In-Hospital Use of Statins Is Associated with a Reduced Risk of
Mortality among Individuals with COVID-19’, Cell Metab., vol. 32, no. 2, pp. 176-187.e4,
Aug. 2020, doi: 10.1016/j.cmet.2020.06.015.

22

[79] R. Moeller et al., ‘Effect of statins on SARS-CoV-2 infection’, Infectious Diseases
(except HIV/AIDS), preprint, Jul. 2020. doi: 10.1101/2020.07.13.20152272.
[80] Y.-N. Zhang et al., ‘Gemcitabine, lycorine and oxysophoridine inhibit novel
coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2) in cell culture’, Emerg. Microbes Infect., vol. 9, no. 1, pp.
1170–1173, Jan. 2020, doi: 10.1080/22221751.2020.1772676.
[81] ‘DrugBank’. https://www.drugbank.ca/covid-19 (accessed Sep. 17, 2020).
[82] J. Hippisley-Cox et al., ‘Risk of severe COVID-19 disease with ACE inhibitors and
angiotensin receptor blockers: cohort study including 8.3 million people’, Heart, vol.
106, no. 19, pp. 1503–1511, Oct. 2020, doi: 10.1136/heartjnl-2020-317393.
[83] K. M. Stegmann et al., ‘The folate antagonist methotrexate diminishes replication of
the coronavirus SARS-CoV-2 and enhances the antiviral efficacy of remdesivir in cell
culture models’, bioRxiv, p. 2020.07.18.210013, Jul. 2020, doi:
10.1101/2020.07.18.210013.
[84] E. J. Brenner et al., ‘Corticosteroids, But Not TNF Antagonists, Are Associated With
Adverse COVID-19 Outcomes in Patients With Inflammatory Bowel Diseases: Results
From an International Registry’, Gastroenterology, vol. 159, no. 2, pp. 481-491.e3, Aug.
2020, doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2020.05.032.
[85] T. Sehm et al., ‘Sulfasalazine impacts on ferroptotic cell death and alleviates the
tumor microenvironment and glioma-induced brain edema’, Oncotarget, vol. 7, no. 24,
pp. 36021–36033, Apr. 2016, doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.8651.
[86] C. Toelzer et al., ‘Free fatty acid binding pocket in the locked structure of SARS-CoV-2
spike protein’, Science, Sep. 2020, doi: 10.1126/science.abd3255.
[87] G. Marfia et al., ‘Serum Sphingosine-1-Phosphate as Novel Prognostic and Predictive
Biomarker for COVID-19 Severity and Morbidity and Its Implications in Clinical
Management’, Social Science Research Network, Rochester, NY, SSRN Scholarly Paper ID
3668364, Aug. 2020. doi: 10.2139/ssrn.3668364.
[88] P. do R. Martins Conde, T. Sauter, and T. Pfau, ‘Constraint Based Modeling Going
Multicellular’, Front. Mol. Biosci., vol. 3, 2016, doi: 10.3389/fmolb.2016.00003.
[89] S. Varrette, P. Bouvry, H. Cartiaux, and F. Georgatos, ‘Management of an academic
HPC cluster: The UL experience’, in 2014 International Conference on High Performance
Computing Simulation (HPCS), Jul. 2014, pp. 959–967, doi:
10.1109/HPCSim.2014.6903792.

23

Supplementary Information:
re

Fig. S1: Principal Component Analysis (PCA) of the Severity Study given in Log Normalized
Read Counts for different principal components (PC).
a) PC1 vs PC2 colored by cell line and condition.
b) PC1 vs PC3 colored by cell line and condition.
c) PC1 vs PC2 colored by infection status (infected vs. mock samples).
d) PC1 vs PC3 colored by infection status (infected vs mock samples).

24

25

Fig. S2: Reactions per Pathway Heatmap for Pathway Analysis of All Conditions of Differentially
expressed
genes
in
the
Severity
Study.
Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were computed with DESeq2. The Down- and up-regulated were
mapped to the pathways (subSystems) of Recon3D_01. The number of up and down-regulated
reactions was then summed up to identify the top altered pathways in the infected lung cell lines in the
severity study (A.1.3) but without filters on the number of reactions nor the Reactions per Pathway. The
color code "Reactions per Pathway [%]" represents the number of enriched metabolic reactions in a
pathway divided by the overall number of reactions in this pathway. Removing filters allowed increased
the number of differentially expressed pathways and allowed including the NBHE_2 condition.

Fig. S3: Clustergrams of the Reconstructed Models’ Similarity using Reactions Presence with
Jaccard Similarity Metrics of Both Recon3D Models (a) and Recon2 Models (b).

Fig. S4: Jaccard Similarity of the Essential Genes derived from the different conditions of the 2
lung studies (Severity Study & Time-series Study)
Table
S1:
Essential
metabolic
genes
of
the
severity
study.
The essential genes of each condition of the infected model are aggregated from the Recon2.04 and
Recon3D_01 based reconstructions. Genes are classified according to the predicted toxicity into toxic

26

or safe, based on the presence or the absence from the essential genes of the mock model. A gene is
considered with unknown toxicity, if there is no mock model corresponding to the infected model, or the
essential gene was filtered from the context mock model.
Condition

Safe Essential

Toxic Essential

Unknown Safety
Essential

A549_0.02

SLC3A2; SLC7A11

CRLS1; ISYNA1; SGMS1

A549_0.2_ACE2

AGXT; DHFR; SLC27A4; TYMS

CRLS1; GUK1; PEPD; SGMS1

NHBE_2

SLC3A1; SLC7A9

CMPK1; CRLS1; CTH; GUK1; PTDSS1;

SLC5A3

SGMS1; SLC27A4; SLC5A3
A549_2

DTYMK; GUK1; PEPD

CRLS1; GUK1; ISYNA1; SGMS1; SLC3A2;
SLC7A11

A549_2_ACE2

CMPK1; CTH; GUK1; PTDSS1;

CRLS1; PEPD; SGMS1; SLC2A13

SLC5A3

SLC3A1; SLC7A9
Calu3_2

CMPK1; SLC27A4

CRLS1; GUK1; PEPD; SGMS1

Table
S2:
Essential
metabolic
genes
of
the
time-series
study
The essential genes of each condition of the infected model are aggregated from the Recon2.04 and
Recon3 based reconstructions. Gene gain and gene loss are genes gained or lost from the previous
time point in the same cell line. Time points are in hours. Genes are classified according to the predicted
toxicity into toxic or safe, based on the presence or the absence from the essential genes of the mock
model. A gene is considered with unknown toxicity, if there is no mock model corresponding to the
infected model, or the essential gene was filtered from the context mock model.
Condition

Safe Essential

Toxic Essential

Calu3_4H

GLTP

CRLS1; GUK1; ISYNA1; PEPD;
SGMS1; SLC27A4; SLC3A2;
SLC7A11

Calu3_8H

ISYNA1;
SLC27A4;
SLC7A5

CRLS1; GUK1; ISYNA1; PEPD;
SGMS1; SLC3A2; SLC7A11;
SLC7A5

Calu3_24H

PTDSS1

CRLS1; GLTP; GUK1; ISYNA1;
SGMS1; SLC27A4; SLC3A2;
SLC7A11; SLC7A5

H1299_4H

CTH

CRLS1; ISYNA1; PLD2;
SGMS1; SLC27A4; SLC7A6

H1299_24H

Gene Gain Gene Loss

CRLS1; GLTP; GUK1; ISYNA1;
SLC7A5
PEPD; SGMS1; SLC27A4; SLC3A2;
SLC7A11; SLC7A5

Calu3_12H

H1299_12H

Unknown Safety Essential

GLTP

GLTP;
PTDSS1

CRLS1; CTH; ISYNA1; PEPD;
PEPD
PLD2; SGMS1; SLC27A4; SLC7A6
CRLS1; ISYNA1; PEPD; PLD2;
SGMS1; SLC27A4; SLC7A6

CTH

27

H1299_36H

PEPD; SLC7A6

CRLS1; CTH; ISYNA1; PLD2;
SGMS1; SLC27A4

CTH

Table S3: Candidate drugs for the essential genes given by their gene targets.
Drug-target interactions were downloaded from DrugBank and filtered as mentioned in (C). Essential
genes were determined using single-gene knockouts. eight essential genes are targeted by 45 drugs.
Gene Symbol

Drugs

Essentiality Score Safety Score

GUK1

Valaciclovir, Acyclovir

3

16

ISYNA1

Glycerin

1

9

SLC7A11

Riluzole, Taurocholic acid, Alanosine, Thimerosal,
Tauroursodeoxycholic acid, Rosuvastatin, Acetylcysteine,
Sulfasalazine

1

5

CMPK1

Lamivudine, Gemcitabine, Sofosbuvir

3

4

SLC7A5

Dextrothyroxine, Pregabalin, Levothyroxine, Liothyronine, Melphalan,
Gabapentin, Levodopa, Thyroid, porcine

1

3

GLTP

Oleic Acid, Lactose, Lauric acid

1

2

DHFR

Methotrexate, Pyrimethamine, Pemetrexed, Lamotrigine, Piritrexim,
Pralatrexate, Trimetrexate, Proguanil, Iclaprim, Gentamicin

1

1

TYMS

ANX-510, Fluorouracil, Capecitabine, Methotrexate, Floxuridine,
Thymectacin, Trifluridine, Gemcitabine, Pemetrexed, Pralatrexate,
OSI-7904L, Tegafur, Tegafur-uracil, Raltitrexed

1

1

Table S4: Single Drugs with Two Paired Targets of Double Gene Deletion:
Candidate gene pairs with possible essentiality to the viral biomass were determined by double gene
knockout as mentioned in (A.2.3). Gene pairs that have one drug for both gene targets were selected.
Essentiality and safety scores were calculated as mentioned in A.2.4. As many gene-pairs share the
same drug, gene pairs were clustered by their drugs. Essentiality and safety scores were averaged
between the different gene-pairs. Drugs were sorted by the number of gene pairs they are targeting.
Average
Average
Number of
Essentiality Score Safety Score Gene Pairs

Drug

Gene Pairs

Gemcitabine

CMPK1;SLC29A2, TYMS;SLC29A2, SLC29A2;SLC29A1

1.66

1.0

3

Trifluridine

TYMS;TYMP, TYMS;SLC29A2, SLC29A2;SLC29A1

1.33

1.0

3

Mercaptopurine

PPAT;HPRT1, SLC29A2;SLC29A1

3.5

1.0

2

Tegafur-uracil

TYMS;SLC29A2, SLC29A2;SLC29A1

1.5

1.0

2

Valaciclovir

SLC15A2;SLC15A1

13.0

0.0

1

Moexipril

SLC15A2;SLC15A1

13.0

0.0

1

Nateglinide

SLC15A2;SLC15A1

13.0

0.0

1

Oxacillin

SLC15A2;SLC15A1

13.0

0.0

1

Perindopril

SLC15A2;SLC15A1

13.0

0.0

1

Lisinopril

SLC15A2;SLC15A1

13.0

0.0

1

Valganciclovir

SLC15A2;SLC15A1

13.0

0.0

1

28

Spirapril

SLC15A2;SLC15A1

13.0

0.0

1

Tolbutamide

SLC15A2;SLC15A1

13.0

0.0

1

Trandolapril

SLC15A2;SLC15A1

13.0

0.0

1

Ubenimex

SLC15A2;SLC15A1

13.0

0.0

1

Ramipril

SLC15A2;SLC15A1

13.0

0.0

1

Quinapril

SLC15A2;SLC15A1

13.0

0.0

1

Cefepime

SLC15A2;SLC15A1

13.0

0.0

1

Cefixime

SLC15A2;SLC15A1

13.0

0.0

1

Cefalotin

SLC15A2;SLC15A1

13.0

0.0

1

Cefdinir

SLC15A2;SLC15A1

13.0

0.0

1

Ceftazidime

SLC15A2;SLC15A1

13.0

0.0

1

Ceftriaxone

SLC15A2;SLC15A1

13.0

0.0

1

Ceftibuten

SLC15A2;SLC15A1

13.0

0.0

1

Cefmetazole

SLC15A2;SLC15A1

13.0

0.0

1

Cefradine

SLC15A2;SLC15A1

13.0

0.0

1

Cefotaxime

SLC15A2;SLC15A1

13.0

0.0

1

Amoxicillin

SLC15A2;SLC15A1

13.0

0.0

1

Aminolevulinic acid

SLC15A2;SLC15A1

13.0

0.0

1

Cefaclor

SLC15A2;SLC15A1

13.0

0.0

1

Benzylpenicillin

SLC15A2;SLC15A1

13.0

0.0

1

Ampicillin

SLC15A2;SLC15A1

13.0

0.0

1

Benazepril

SLC15A2;SLC15A1

13.0

0.0

1

Fosinopril

SLC15A2;SLC15A1

13.0

0.0

1

Glyburide

SLC15A2;SLC15A1

13.0

0.0

1

Chlorpropamide

SLC15A2;SLC15A1

13.0

0.0

1

Cilazapril

SLC15A2;SLC15A1

13.0

0.0

1

Cephalexin

SLC15A2;SLC15A1

13.0

0.0

1

Cefuroxime

SLC15A2;SLC15A1

13.0

0.0

1

Dicloxacillin

SLC15A2;SLC15A1

13.0

0.0

1

Cloxacillin

SLC15A2;SLC15A1

13.0

0.0

1

Cyclacillin

SLC15A2;SLC15A1

13.0

0.0

1

Zalcitabine

SLC29A2;SLC29A1

2.0

2.0

1

Didanosine

SLC29A2;SLC29A1

2.0

2.0

1

Capecitabine

TYMS;TYMP

1.0

1.0

1

Fluorouracil

TYMS;TYMP

1.0

1.0

1

Floxuridine

TYMS;TYMP

1.0

1.0

1

29

Table
S5:
Reduced
list
of
Double
Gene
Deletion
Drug
Pairs
Candidate gene pairs with possible essentiality to the viral biomass were determined by double gene
knockout (DKO) as mentioned in (A.2.3). Gene-pairs that have one drug for both genes were excluded.
Essentiality and safety scores and the number of gene-pairs were calculated such as in (Table S4).
The reduced DKO drug dataset was filtered by selecting drug pairs with more than two in essentiality
scores, and more than one in either the number of gene-pairs or safety scores.

30

Drugs1

Drugs2

Gene Pair

Average
Essentiality
Score

Average
Safety
Score

Number
of Gene
Pairs

Azathioprine

Pemetrexed

HPRT1;GART, SLC29A2;SLC29A1,
TYMS;SLC29A2, DHFR;SLC29A2,
ATIC;HPRT1

2.8

0.4

5

Mercaptopurine

Pemetrexed

HPRT1;GART, SLC29A2;SLC29A1,
TYMS;SLC29A2, DHFR;SLC29A2,
ATIC;HPRT1

2.8

0.4

5

Cladribine

Valaciclovir

GUK1;PNP, RRM2;GUK1, RRM1;GUK1

9.33

0.0

3

Cladribine

Acyclovir

GUK1;PNP, RRM2;GUK1, RRM1;GUK1

9.33

0.0

3

Cefradine

Methotrexate

SLC22A5;DHFR, SLC22A5;TYMS,
SLC15A2;SLC15A1

5.0

0.66

3

Benzylpenicillin

Methotrexate

SLC22A5;DHFR, SLC22A5;TYMS,
SLC15A2;SLC15A1

5.0

0.66

3

Cefalotin

Methotrexate

SLC22A5;DHFR, SLC22A5;TYMS,
SLC15A2;SLC15A1

5.0

0.66

3

Ampicillin

Methotrexate

SLC22A5;DHFR, SLC22A5;TYMS,
SLC15A2;SLC15A1

5.0

0.66

3

Ceftazidime

Methotrexate

SLC22A5;DHFR, SLC22A5;TYMS,
SLC15A2;SLC15A1

5.0

0.66

3

Cefdinir

Methotrexate

SLC22A5;DHFR, SLC22A5;TYMS,
SLC15A2;SLC15A1

5.0

0.66

3

Cefepime

Methotrexate

SLC22A5;DHFR, SLC22A5;TYMS,
SLC15A2;SLC15A1

5.0

0.66

3

Cefixime

Methotrexate

SLC22A5;DHFR, SLC22A5;TYMS,
SLC15A2;SLC15A1

5.0

0.66

3

Cyclacillin

Methotrexate

SLC22A5;DHFR, SLC22A5;TYMS,
SLC15A2;SLC15A1

5.0

0.66

3

Cephalexin

Methotrexate

SLC22A5;DHFR, SLC22A5;TYMS,
SLC15A2;SLC15A1

5.0

0.66

3

Azathioprine

Fluorouracil

TYMS;SLC29A2, PPAT;HPRT1,
SLC29A2;SLC29A1

2.66

0.66

3

Mercaptopurine

Fluorouracil

TYMS;SLC29A2, PPAT;HPRT1,
SLC29A2;SLC29A1

2.66

0.66

3

Methotrexate

Azathioprine

TYMS;SLC29A2, DHFR;SLC29A2,
ATIC;HPRT1

2.33

0.0

3

Methotrexate

Mercaptopurine

TYMS;SLC29A2, DHFR;SLC29A2,
ATIC;HPRT1

2.33

0.0

3

Imexon

Valaciclovir

RRM2;GUK1, RRM1;GUK1

10.0

0.0

2

Imexon

Acyclovir

RRM2;GUK1, RRM1;GUK1

10.0

0.0

2

Tioguanine

Pemetrexed

HPRT1;GART, ATIC;HPRT1

5.0

0.0

2

31

DB01632

Pemetrexed

HPRT1;GART, ATIC;HPRT1

5.0

0.0

2

Azathioprine

Mercaptopurine

PPAT;HPRT1, SLC29A2;SLC29A1

3.5

1.0

2

Mercaptopurine

Mercaptopurine

PPAT;HPRT1, SLC29A2;SLC29A1

3.5

1.0

2

Human calcitonin

Cystine

ANPEP;SLC3A1, ANPEP;SLC7A9

3.0

1.0

2

Lamivudine

Choline salicylate

CMPK1;SLC22A5, CMPK1;PLD2

3.0

1.0

2

Lamivudine

Choline

CMPK1;SLC22A5, CMPK1;PLD2

3.0

1.0

2

Icatibant

Cystine

ANPEP;SLC3A1, ANPEP;SLC7A9

3.0

1.0

2

Gemcitabine

Choline salicylate

CMPK1;SLC22A5, CMPK1;PLD2

3.0

1.0

2

Gemcitabine

Choline

CMPK1;SLC22A5, CMPK1;PLD2

3.0

1.0

2

Ezetimibe

Cystine

ANPEP;SLC3A1, ANPEP;SLC7A9

3.0

1.0

2

Sofosbuvir

Choline

CMPK1;SLC22A5, CMPK1;PLD2

3.0

1.0

2

Sofosbuvir

Choline salicylate

CMPK1;SLC22A5, CMPK1;PLD2

3.0

1.0

2

Gemcitabine

Phosphatidyl serine

SLC29A2;PTDSS1, CMPK1;PTDSS1

2.5

2.0

2

Taurocholic acid

Phosphatidyl serine

SLC16A1;PTDSS1

3.0

3.0

1

Nateglinide

Phosphatidyl serine

SLC16A1;PTDSS1

3.0

3.0

1

Lamivudine

Phosphatidyl serine

CMPK1;PTDSS1

3.0

2.0

1

Quercetin

Phosphatidyl serine

SLC16A1;PTDSS1

3.0

3.0

1

Probenecid

Phosphatidyl serine

SLC16A1;PTDSS1

3.0

3.0

1

Aminohippuric acid

Phosphatidyl serine

SLC16A1;PTDSS1

3.0

3.0

1

Acetic acid

Phosphatidyl serine

SLC16A1;PTDSS1

3.0

3.0

1

Lactic acid

Phosphatidyl serine

SLC16A1;PTDSS1

3.0

3.0

1

Benzoic acid

Phosphatidyl serine

SLC16A1;PTDSS1

3.0

3.0

1

Ampicillin

Phosphatidyl serine

SLC16A1;PTDSS1

3.0

3.0

1

Salicylic acid

Phosphatidyl serine

SLC16A1;PTDSS1

3.0

3.0

1

Arbaclofen Placarbil

Phosphatidyl serine

SLC16A1;PTDSS1

3.0

3.0

1

32

Methotrexate

Phosphatidyl serine

SLC16A1;PTDSS1

3.0

3.0

1

Valproic acid

Phosphatidyl serine

SLC16A1;PTDSS1

3.0

3.0

1

Foscarnet

Phosphatidyl serine

SLC16A1;PTDSS1

3.0

3.0

1

Sofosbuvir

Phosphatidyl serine

CMPK1;PTDSS1

3.0

2.0

1

Pravastatin

Phosphatidyl serine

SLC16A1;PTDSS1

3.0

3.0

1

gammaHydroxybutyric acid

Phosphatidyl serine

SLC16A1;PTDSS1

3.0

3.0

1

33

