OpenTera: A Microservice Architecture
Solution for Rapid Prototyping of Robotic
Solutions to COVID-19 Challenges in Care
Facilities
Adina M. Panchea 1,?,a , Dominic Létourneau 1,a , Simon Brière 2,a , Mathieu
Hamel 2,b , Marc-Antoine Maheux 1,a , Cédric Godin 1,a , Michel Tousignant 2,a ,
Mathieu Labbé 1,c , François Ferland 1,a , François Grondin 1,b , François
Michaud 1,a

arXiv:2103.06171v1 [cs.HC] 10 Mar 2021

1 IntRoLab

- Intelligent, Interactive, Integrated and Interdisciplinary Robotics Lab,
Interdisciplinary Institute for Technological Innovation (3IT), Department of Electrical
Engineering and Computer Engineering,
2 Research Center on Aging, School of Rehabilitation,
Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Quebec, Canada
a {firstname.lastname}@usherbrooke.ca
b {firstname.lastname2}@usherbrooke.ca
c {mathieu.m.labbe}@usherbrooke.ca
Correspondence*:
Corresponding Author
adina.panchea@usherbrooke.ca

ABSTRACT
As telecommunications technology progresses, telehealth frameworks are becoming more
widely adopted in the context of long-term care (LTC) for older adults, both in care facilities and in
homes. Today, robots could assist healthcare workers when they provide care to elderly patients,
who constitute a particularly vulnerable population during the COVID-19 pandemic. Previous work
on user-centered design of assistive technologies in LTC facilities for seniors has identified positive
impacts. The need to deal with the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic emphasizes the benefits
of this approach, but also highlights some new challenges for which robots could be interesting
solutions to be deployed in LTC facilities. This requires customization of telecommunication and
audio/video/data processing to address specific clinical requirements and needs. This paper
presents OpenTera, an open source telehealth framework, aiming to facilitate prototyping of
such solutions by software and robotic designers. Designed as a microservice-oriented platform,
OpenTera is an end-to-end solution that employs a series of independent modules for tasks such
as data and session management, telehealth, daily assistive tasks/actions, together with smart
devices and environments, all connected through the framework. After explaining the framework,
we illustrate how OpenTera can be used to implement robotic solutions for different applications
identified in LTC facilities and homes, and we describe how we plan to validate them through field
trials.
Keywords: telehealth, telecommunications framework, microservice architecture, long-term care facilities, COVID-19 challenges,
mobile robot, teleoperation

1

Panchea et al.

1

OpenTera and Solutions to COVID-19 Challenges in Care Facilities

INTRODUCTION

Telehealth is defined as the use of information and communication technologies (ICT) to extend healthcare
service delivery over long distances (Praxia and Gartner, 2011). Its success relies on the ability to maximize
the quality of care provided remotely, i.e., to provide diagnosis and treatment of equivalent quality to what
can be achieved by face-to-face or conventional means, and to maximize benefits for patients, clinicians,
and the healthcare system. It is thus able to improve patient outcomes and satisfaction, reduce the healthcare
resources required for improved care, provide cost savings and more efficient use of healthcare resources,
and reduce hospitalizations (Elder, 2013). There are, however, significant barriers to the adoption and
implementation of telehealth, such as cost, technological incompatibility, privacy and security issues,
usability, acceptability, and education of healthcare personnel in the use of the associated technology
(Elder, 2013; Reginatto, 2012; Kubitschke and Cullen, 2010; Goodwin, 2010; Alwan and Nobel, 2008;
Broens et al., 2007). These barriers are intertwined, making adaptability of the technology a key element
for success.
As of September 2020, more than 32 million people have been confirmed to have been infected with
COVID-19.1 The most common symptoms of COVID-19 are fever, cough, and tiredness. Moreover, in
the absence of a vaccine or antiviral treatment, strict measures must be followed to prevent, contain, and
attenuate the spread of the virus among older adults, considered to be a high-risk population. These strict
measures consist of good hygiene, social distancing, restrictions on social activity and travel, isolation and
quarantine measures, and hospitalization among the exposed, suspicious, and positively tested population.
In the context of long-term care (LTC) facilities for seniors, these measures are very challenging, and some
of them are almost impossible to implement, since care workers play a critical role and have to work in
challenging conditions to provide daily assistance to elderly people.
As a result, the COVID-19 pandemic has drastically changed the landscape of telehealth barriers: people
are now willing to try telehealth technologies, disregarding previous concerns. Videoconferencing solutions
such as Zoom and Microsoft Teams have seen large increases in their users, and their integration into our
work strategies is now becoming a reality. Tavakoli et al. (2020) also describe how robotic, autonomous,
and smart devices can be used to help front line workers in the healthcare system during the COVID-19
crisis and discuss examples of how techniques from various areas of medicine, engineering, and science can
help healthcare workers as well as society as a whole. However, some barriers remain with conventional
videoconferencing solutions, which basically only establish an audio and video link between two or more
participants. For instance, telehealth systems may also require easy installation and use, remote biometrics
and remote control of devices (e.g., vital sign monitoring devices, pan–tilt–zoom (PTZ) cameras, and
telepresence robots), streaming of multiple video feeds, and specialized graphical interfaces to improve
situation awareness and reduce cognitive load.
In spite of the proliferation of videoconferencing solutions, adaptation of commercial videoconferencing
platforms to address specific telehealth needs may be difficult or impossible to accomplish, depending on
the priorities set by the providers of these solutions. To cope with these limitations, we chose to develop a
customizable telecommunication platform to address the broad range of specifications and requirements of
clinical and telehealth applications (Lepage et al., 2014, 2016). To do so, we follow a holistic, bottom-up,
iterative, and incremental approach starting from small and simple systems addressing specific needs and
current practices, in situ, and designed to minimize changes to clinical practice, rather than expecting
1

https://coronavirus.jhu.edu/map.html

2

Panchea et al.

OpenTera and Solutions to COVID-19 Challenges in Care Facilities

clinicians and patients to simply adapt to the technology. Simplicity of use is a central requirement in these
development efforts. More specifically, we did the following:
• In 2004, we started by developing a telerehabilitation platform integrating a commercially available

videoconferencing system (Tandberg 550 MXP, using H.323 and H.263 codecs) providing two video
feeds using the system’s integrated PTZ camera, a touchscreen computer, and external biosensors,
along with a homemade companion application providing an overview of all the available patients
and easing the connection process for the clinician and the patient (Tousignant et al., 2011b,a, 2012;
Dechene et al., 2011). The data collected during a session included session information (which clinician
with what patient for how long and what session type—physiotherapy, speech therapy, etc.), data from
external sensors (oxygen saturation and heart rate), network performance (bandwidth, jitter, packet
loss, and reported technical problems), and results from a satisfaction survey (for the clinician only),
all recorded in a local database.
• In 2013, with the availability of inexpensive and general purpose embedded computers able to process

audio, video, and data in real time, a new version of the platform, named Vigil2, integrated a software
videoconferencing codec (H.264 codec for video, Speex for audio) to reduce cost and complexity
and facilitate in-home deployment, making it an all-in-one solution not relying on external hardware
codecs. That platform was also built to allow integration of new sensors (ECG) and network PTZ
cameras.
• In 2017, to address needs such as the ability to see the patient in different areas (kitchen, bathroom,
bedroom, and staircases) and to further reduce the cost of the hardware platform by instead using patient
devices, we integrated mobile handheld audio–video devices (such as smartphones and tablets, using
the integrated Internet browser supporting WebRTC technology), wearable sensors, and a telepresence
robot with the revised platform, named TeraPlus.
Going through these development phases in close association with clinical trials, it became clear to us
that a more generic Healthcare Internet-of-Things (H-IoT) platform, which could cover remote patient
monitoring, videoconferencing (including for telerehabilitation, teleconsultation, and general telehealth
applications), telepresence robotics, smart environments, and features required by the various projects
and clinician needs, would provide key benefits for prototyping solutions adapted to telehealth needs.
Still, keeping up with software maintenance and upgrades of videoconferencing codecs, along with
compatibility with a wide range of computing devices (computers, tablets, and smartphones, using different
operating systems), requires a framework based on generic and widely adopted standards, rather than one
using privately designed packages as in the previous iteration of the platform. The lack of multiservice
architecture solutions detached from a specific application (Napoli and Rossi, 2019) or robotic platform
(Cosar et al., 2020; Ferland et al., 2019) motivated our team to conduct research in this direction. Therefore,
we decided to develop OpenTera, an open source microservice telecommunication framework for telehealth
applications based on what we have learned with previous experiments and platforms. OpenTera is designed
to provide useful, secure, and reliable telecommunication services independent of tier actors and online
services. Making it open source allows it to exploit standardized tools, avoids reinventing what is already
available, and focuses on the addition of new capabilities and their integration. This is similar to what the
open source Robot Operating System (ROS) framework (Quigley et al., 2009) accomplishes for the robotic
community, and provides the opportunity to encourage other researchers to eventually contribute to the
effort.
3

Panchea et al.

OpenTera and Solutions to COVID-19 Challenges in Care Facilities

The goal of this paper is to present OpenTera and its microservice architecture, and to describe how
it can be beneficial in handling the COVID-19 pandemic, with an emphasis on its use in LTC facilities
for older adults. OpenTera is a framework intended for software engineers and roboticists to prototype
and to deploy H-IoT applications without having to start from the beginning everytime. The organization
of the paper is as follows. Section 2 presents OpenTera along with details of its microservice modules.
Section 3 reports the needs and challenges identified with LTC facilities and homes during the COVID-19
pandemic, outlining requirements that commercial videoconferencing systems do not address. Section 4
describes how OpenTera can be exploited in such contexts, along with some considerations in deploying
such solutions. Section 5 concludes the paper.

2

OpenTera: A MICROSERVICE TELEHEALTH/H-IoT PLATFORM

In modern computing, microservices are a software development technique in which an application is
structured as a set of loosely coupled services. In contrast to a monolithic system, which is formed as a
single process by integrating all the interfaces and functionalities, the independent microservices offer
the same functionalities and interfaces to the external user. However, the microservices are separated
into multiple components that communicate with each other using standardized application programming
interfaces (APIs) that are independent of the programming language. The most important microservice
features are as follows (Dragoni et al., 2017):
(a) They can be independently and directly testable, in isolation and without affecting the whole system.
(b) They can foster continuous integration to ease maintenance: for example, performing changes on a
module does not require a reboot of the whole system.
(c) They have their own containers with their own configuration of the deployment environment.
(d) They simplify scaling without duplication of all components.
To facilitate interoperability of all components and adequate decoupling, one commonly used
communication mechanism for microservices is REST (for “representational state transfer”) (Fielding,
2000), which uses standard HTTP/HTTPS requests to implement stateless operations to access and
manipulate web resources. The resources, designated with an Uniform Resource Identifier (URI), respond
to requests with a payload formatted in HTML, JSON, XML, or any other designated format. Serviceoriented approaches have recently been used to implement robotic solutions for assistive tasks. For instance,
Napoli and Rossi (2019) presented a robot-as-a-service approach with the intention of customizing the
robotic system with respect to specific assistive tasks, and Ercolano et al. (2019) introduced a set of socially
assistive robot behaviors for monitoring and interaction with elderly people affected by Alzheimer disease,
which rely on a microservice architecture currently operating in a private home. Similarly, OpenTera
follows microservices architecture guidelines and extends its usage to broader applications rather than
being specific to robotics. OpenTera’s architecture and data representation are designed to address clinical
researchers needs by organizing the data collection process in a sites, projects and participants hierarchy.
From the caregiver point of view, this architecture allows a patient-centered approach in their daily activities
by putting the patient at the center of the software solution by linking directly to it the clinical sessions and
related data. Figure 1 illustrates OpenTera’s overall architecture, designed to support the development of
independent and modular services to facilitate deployment and maintenance. Using open source packages,
the OpenTera architecture integrates its microservices using shared RESTful APIs and Redis2 network
messaging technology for internal communication and data storage. OpenTera’s architecture has two layers:
2

https://redis.io

4

Panchea et al.

OpenTera and Solutions to COVID-19 Challenges in Care Facilities

Figure 1. OpenTera microservice architecture.
the backends (top) and the frontends (bottom). The backends manage the low level of the application
(databases, logic, and communications) and work behind the scenes to deliver information to the user.
The frontends offer a user-friendly interface, in the form of a web or dedicated application. Between
the backends and frontends, there is a bridge composed of the NGINX 3 server and secure transport
through HTTPS routes and TLS certificates to protect the information exchanged via the Internet. The
NGINX server acts as a reverse proxy that controls and protects access to services on the private network
where the backends reside. Resources appear as if they originated from the proxy server itself, making
it visible as a single entry point to the frontend applications. NGINX also handles data encryption and
TLS certificates and routes HTTPS requests to the right service. Each service offered by the OpenTera
architecture is organized to fit its purpose with no dependence on the chosen technology, as long as its
interface with other services is satisfied. Internally, each service can then implement its own business logic,
processing capabilities, and storage to fit the application needs and select the appropriate technologies and
programming languages to fit its purpose. Its main microservices are as follows:

3

https://www.nginx.com

5

Panchea et al.

OpenTera and Solutions to COVID-19 Challenges in Care Facilities

• OpenTera Server: this is a mandatory service that structures users, participants, and device information,

and manages access to resources. The role of the OpenTera Server is twofold:
– Organize and store information in the PostgreSQL database. The server is designed to manage
multiple sites, projects, users, user groups, devices, participants, sessions, session types, assets (files,
events, session information, observations, forms, etc.), services, and the relations between those
data structures to provide data integrity. Data creation, retrieval, update, and delete (CRUD) is easily
accomplished via its REST API using HTTP requests. This is commonly used in microservice-based
systems, since it offers a low-maintenance interface that can easily be implemented in any modern
programming language or framework, and it provides decoupling of server components. In the
current implementation, the REST API is implemented with a Python framework called Flask, and
the PostgreSQL database is interfaced with SQLAlchemy. The concept of session is used to link all
these data structures together. The session concept stems from a clinical intervention, where it is
relevant to keep track of when the consultation occurred, what happened during the intervention,
and its duration. Session information can then be consulted again at a later time if necessary. In
OpenTera, a session combines information about which service was used with any user, connected
device, and participants, along with timestamped events and data. In all cases, the data are only
stored in the session if they are pre-authorized by the participants and are subject to prior approval
by an ethics committee.
– Manage authentication (login) and authorization (permissions) to different parts of the system
through its users, participants, devices, and service APIs. Authentication can be accomplished by
using JSON Web Tokens, SSL/TLS X.509 certificates, or username and password (Http Auth).
Authorization is normally managed by sites and projects, allowing users, participants, devices, and
services to interact with resources that are granted by the site or system administrators.
• Videoconference Service: this provides videoconferencing services for one or multiple audio and

video streams. WebRTC4 is the framework used: it provides real-time communications and uses open
standards to send and receive audio, video, and data between peers. WebRTC is an open source
framework supported by every major web browser through its Javascript interface. It allows developers
to build web applications that are easy to distribute without any installation of local applications, simply
through a web link (facilitating usage by nontechnical users), and works on portable devices (i.e.,
tablets and smartphones) as well as desktop computers and all operating systems. The Videoconference
Service is designed to offer virtual medical consultations for daily and urgent care and/or doctor
visits, virtual communications, and interactions with the family and the community. If the virtual call
is initiated by the healthcare worker, there is an option of taking notes about the appointment and
attaching these to the patient’s session. The service uses a combination of Python and Flask for its
API and Node.js for its WebRTC signaling server, allowing clients to exchange metadata to coordinate
communication.
• Robot Service: telepresence robots (Kristoffersson et al., 2013) are mobile robotic systems, controlled

by a human operator via a user interface, which can be used for remote medical check-ups and/or
appointments with patients, visits from families, and/or social interaction. A recent study (Niemela
et al., 2019) suggests that through telepresence robots, family members are more present for older
adults aging in residential care. It is therefore important to include such services in OpenTera, whether
these robots are fully teleoperated or having some level of autonomy. Similarly to the Videoconference
Service, the Robot Service provides videoconferencing and bidirectional data exchange through
4

https://webrtc.org

6

Panchea et al.

OpenTera and Solutions to COVID-19 Challenges in Care Facilities

WebRTC, adding the possibility to bridge control and sensor data from ROS, on the robot side, to
the teleoperation interface in the robot application at the frontend level. In the context of multiple
robots in residences, stakeholders need to be able to know the state of all robots in real time, their
physical position, their in-use status, their battery state, etc., to make sure that adequate and safe
interventions with the robots are performed. OpenTera offers secure access to robots, by managing
users’ permissions for each robot available in the fleet. Also, it addresses protection of privacy concerns
for family members and healthcare workers by connecting the robots without storing or sharing
video/audio or any kind of information with a third-party, thus providing data security.
• Actimetry Service: this provides wearable devices to monitor human activity. Actimetry is the

measurement of people’s activity, usually performed using wearable devices such as smart watches
or custom hardware with embedded sensors (accelerometers, gyrometers, heartrate sensors, GPS,
altimeters, force sensors, etc.). Activity processing algorithms (number of steps, active minutes, sleep
patterns, etc.), which are often tuned for people with particular physical conditions, gender, and
age, give an overview of the minutes spent in several energy expenditure categories, asserted with a
combination of sensors, ranging from inactive (sedentary) to very vigorous. The OpenTera Server and
the Actimetry Service can be used to store and organize data collected periodically and automatically to
the service. Each device is associated with a site, project, and participant in OpenTera, configured with
a unique token or certificate. Every upload generates a new session with associated data that can be
retrieved for offline short- or long-time analysis. Uploads can be performed via WiFi devices connected
to the Internet or through a gateway device. Automated measurements can also be generated by activity
processing algorithms and stored in the session. The use of such a nonintrusive service can be very
important in detecting changes in usual behavior, which can be used as warnings. This information
can be displayed in various forms, such as custom dashboards or direct notifications, and can be
helpful when planning in-person, videoconference, or teleoperation interventions. Some of the work
for this service has been initiated and should be completed in the near future with the integration of a
custom application called OpenIMU.5 OpenIMU is an open source and generic data importer, viewer,
manager, processor, and exporter for inertial measurement units (IMUs) and actimetry data. By using a
common sensor data format and structure, data from different sources can be imported and managed
in the software using a local database. Wearable actimetry devices, once connected to OpenTera and
associated with a participant, can automatically and periodically transfer data to sessions. We are
currently working on an importer that can retrieve raw actimetry data from an OpenTera participant’s
session. Once imported, OpenIMU can analyze and produce activity reports that could be added to the
participant’s session for further consultation.
• Connected Devices Service: this provides real-time bidirectional data exchange with smart home

devices. Connected devices, often referred as IoTs, comprise a network of heterogeneous computing
devices communicating over the Internet to send and receive data without requiring human intervention.
Internet communication can be provided by various methods—wired networks or wireless technologies,
such as cellular networks (2G to 5G), WiFi, Lora, Bluetooth, or ZigBee—and sometimes require a
communication gateway that bridges different protocols and provides interaction of various devices.
As shown in Figure 1, a message broker, such as RabbitMQ (Arasa and Meharunnisa, 2019), which
implements standard protocols such as AMPQ (ISO/IEC 19464) and MQTT (ISO/IEC 202922), is
used for communication between the devices and with services hosted on the cloud. International
standards are being developed to ensure privacy and security of such systems. Encryption and adequate
5

https://github.com/introlab/OpenIMU

7

Panchea et al.

OpenTera and Solutions to COVID-19 Challenges in Care Facilities

authentication to the broker is then required, each device having its own and unique identifier and
credentials. Ongoing development of the service includes two complementary applications with
connected devices. The first application is related to healthcare applications (Ahmadi et al., 2019),
with wireless medical devices that are producing data for specific patients or participants. Most of the
time, the data acquisition are going to be performed by wireless devices that are sometimes shared in
LTC facilities. For instance, the same thermometers, weight scales, blood pressure, or SpO2 sensors
are reused with multiple persons, and data are collected through a single data hub (a robot, computer,
tablet, phone, etc.). In this case, it is mandatory that the service dynamically assign the data producing
device to the right participant to ensure data confidentiality. This can be configured by residence staff,
by automatically detecting the user, or by the elderly, and will require training and adequate user
interfaces. The second application we envision is related to smart environments, which can include
smart homes, smart cities, and smart manufacturing, which are augmented with various kind of sensors.
In the context of LTC for seniors, we define smart homes as residences in which devices (examples of
such devices can be found in Rashidi and Mihailidis (2013)) can be used for a variety of purposes:
– In shared spaces, they can be used to change TV channels, adjust chair positioning and lighting, and
control music preferences.
– They can allow monitoring of residents. Monitoring residents’ health can help health workers
perform virtual visits. Collecting environmental data through connected devices is easy, but
associating data with a given individual is more challenging in a context where multiple persons use
the same environment. On the other hand, collecting anonymous data can be very useful to optimize
use of robots.
– They can encourage independence and maintenance of good health, and provide pleasurable
experiences within residences (Lee and Kim, 2020).
– They can help in case of emergencies (e.g., through detecting falls by residents or high CO2
levels and by providing emergency contact) and can feed robots with information to display or
communicate to residents.
– They can facilitate robots’ navigation throughout the residence, for example, by automatically
opening doors to allow easier movement in the halls.

3

NEEDS AND CHALLENGES IDENTIFIED DURING THE COVID-19 PANDEMIC

When the COVID-19 lockdown started, our research team, in collaboration with clinicians and partners
from the health sector, started to think about useful short-term applications to help address the difficulties
observed in healthcare. The following are examples of applications that we identified:
• Design a virtual patient triage station that would allow a nurse to remotely assess the condition of a

potential patient. This would allow older nurses, who can be at risk, to intervene remotely and limit
unnecessary movement of infected people.
• Use mobile robots for disinfecting or monitoring areas.
• Control a pan-tilt thermal camera to remotely measure people’s temperature.

We then reached out to two LTC facilities in Québec Canada, to gather their ideas about how technology
could help them in this time of crisis. Hereinafter, the care facilities are referred to as CF1 and CF2. First,
virtual meetings through online applications (A-meets) were conducted, separately with CF1 and CF2,
to determine the needs and challenges encountered by each of these facilities. Then, additional virtual
brainstorm meetings (B-meets) followed, again separately with CF1 and CF2, to explore further challenges
8

Panchea et al.

OpenTera and Solutions to COVID-19 Challenges in Care Facilities

and needs, as they are ready to conduct trials in early and late Fall 2020. The virtual A-meets and B-meets
were conducted after the lockdown period of the pandemic, between mid-May and end-August 2020.
Table 1 presents a summary of these meetings. Five out of ten needs identified were COVID-related. Both
care facilities raised the following common needs:
(a) constant repetition of the COVID restrictions, namely, Wash your hands for at least 20 seconds, Keep
a distance of 2 m, and Avoid interaction in groups;
(b) personalized assistance that can engage patients in social interaction and can help healthcare workers
to provide care in accordance with each patient’s profile;
(c) security tasks, to detect if a person is lost in the facility.
CF1 also identified two other COVID-related needs:
(d) managing who enters and exists the care facility;
(e) patrolling to check that the older adults do not leave their rooms during sleeping hours.
Ideas about other needs also emerged during the meetings, such as having access to residents’ ambient
temperature or providing pill and water reminders, to help give healthcare personnel time to dedicate
themselves to more urgent tasks. Having faced the difficulties associated with the pandemic, both care
facilities expressed their interest in getting extra help through the use of robotic solutions. Sterilizing the
robots was their first concern, each facility having different strategies regarding how to proceed: CF1 would
only use sprays to avoid spending time using chiffon to clean up, whereas CF2 would use sterilized wipes
or chiffon and sanitizing solutions.
A number of possible solutions were discussed during the B-meets, and a number of observations were
made:
• The use of IoT devices, such as connected thermometers or connected loudspeakers, can be considered

as a solution to N1 –Wellness and health and N3 –Constant reminders. However, another option could
be the use of companion robots (Broekens et al., 2009), such as MiRo (Prescott et al., 2017), Aibo,6
Paro (Wada and Shibata, 2007), iCat (van Breemen et al., 2005), and Huggable (Stiehl et al., 2006),
which can provide constant reminders or alerts when the environment is not appropriate for older
adults. Such robots can also be considered for N9 –Personalized assistance. Moreover, mobile robot
manipulators, such as the Tiago robot, can also be considered for N9 , since a recent study (Cosar et al.,
2020) has already used it to provide personalized assistance to older adults aging in place.
• Telepresence robots, either commercialized ones such as Beam, OhmniLabs, or Giraff (Kristoffersson

et al., 2013) or modified versions with assistive capabilities (Laniel et al., 2017; Laniel et al., 2017),
can address N5 –Social interaction and allow older adults to be in touch with their families and the
community. Telepresence robots can also be considered for N2 –Tele-assistance to provide virtual
check-ins with doctors and/or nurses. Such robots can be designed to have attached supports, such as
plates or baskets, which can be used to carry the tools necessary for taking vital signs and the usual
medical supplies used by nurses during check-ins, as required by N4 .
• An important identified need is N6 –Activities, since such activities are thought to stimulate older adults’

cognitive functions. Before the imposition of social distancing restrictions, older adults gathered in
large groups to interact through social activities. Now, such kinds of physical gatherings are limited.
Still, telepresence robots could be used by local organizers to allow them to be present remotely on
6

https://us.aibo.com

9

Panchea et al.

OpenTera and Solutions to COVID-19 Challenges in Care Facilities

Table 1. Potential solutions to needs identified while meeting healthcare workers from care facilities
Needs
N1

Wellness and health
Room temperature
Tele-assistance
Doctor’s visits
Assist nurses
Constant reminders
To drink water
To take medication
Logistics
Move medical supplies
Social interaction
Connect with family

N2
N3
N4
N5

N6
N7

N8
N9
N10

Care facility Meet COVID-related Potential solution
(CF1, CF2)
(Yes/No)
CF2

B

No

IoT

CF2
CF2

A
A

Yes
Yes

Telerobots
Telerobots

CF2
CF2

B
B

Yes & No
Yes & No

IoT, SAR
IoT, SAR

CF2

B

Yes & No

Mobile robots

B
A, B
A, B

Yes
Yes
Yes

Telerobots, SAR
Telerobots, SAR
Telerobots, SAR

B
A, B

Yes
Yes

SARs, Mobile robots
Telerobots, SAR

A, B
A, B
A
A, B

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

SAR, loudspeakers, telerobots
SAR, loudspeakers, telerobots
SAR, loudspeakers, telerobots
Thermal camera, IoT

A, B
A, B

Yes
Yes & No

Any robot with a camera
SAR

A
A, B

Yes & No
Yes & No

Mobile robots
Mobile robots

CF1
CF2
Connect with the community CF2
Activities
Accompanied walks CF2
Engage in social activities CF2
Covid-related
Questioning CF1, CF2
Repeat COVID-19 restrictions CF1
CF2
Take temperature CF1, CF2
Person and action recognition
Manage entries/outputs CF1
Personalized assistance
CF1, CF2
Patrolling
Find persons CF1
Security CF1, CF2

the robot while coordinating games or other social activities for small groups of older adults. Another
option is the use of socially assistive robots (SARs), such as the Sprite robot, which has played the
role of a moderator in a group interaction centered around a tablet-based assembly game (Short and
Mataric, 2017). Studies involving teleoperated robots or SARs stepping up in crisis situations are not
new: tests were performed with participants in a simulated Ebola treatment unit (ETU) while a SAR,
the PR2 robot, performed various tasks via teleoperation (Kraft and Smart, 2016). The results suggest
that participants trust the robot more when they can see the teleoperator. The solutions presented in
this study give older adults the opportunity to see the operator on the tablet attached on the robot.
• The N7 –COVID-related need can be addressed by using wireless thermometers or thermal cameras

(Cosar et al., 2020) to take people’s temperature, and loudspeakers, mobile robots, or SARs to repeat
the social distancing guidelines and to ask the standard COVID-19 related questions.
• The N8 –Person recognition need to manage who is entering and exiting the care facility can be

addressed by using any robot with a camera attached and a proper recognition algorithm.
• N10 –Patrolling through the care facility, for example at night during sleeping hours, can be performed

by autonomous mobile robots with cameras to detect unusual behavior such adults being where they
are not supposed to be. Another solution could be a telepresence robot controlled remotely.

10

Panchea et al.

4

OpenTera and Solutions to COVID-19 Challenges in Care Facilities

HOW OpenTera CAN HELP

One outcome of the needs and challenges outlined in Section 3 is that rapid prototyping is essential to
address a variety of specific applications and requirements. This section outlines how OpenTera can be used
to implement identified applications, along with specific functionalities integrated into its microservice
architecture.
4.1 Patient Triage Application

Figure 2. Virtual patient triage application using OpenTera: (A) questionnaire; (B) notification of need for
appointment; (C) appointment schedule; (D) Tele-consultation.
At the start of the pandemic, a simple patient triage application was prototyped using OpenTera in
three weeks by two developers. The application consists of accessing a virtual meeting room using a web
link, designed using OpenTera’s videoconferencing service module. The user is first asked to fill out a
questionnaire to identify if important symptoms related to the virus makes it a priority. The user then waits
to have a videoconference session with a nurse, who is going to provide recommendations for what to do
next. Figure 2 illustrates the typical interaction scenario with this application:
• Figure 2A: the user starts to fill out personal (age group, gender information), health (fever, cough,

tiredness), and other information (Is the user a healthcare worker?, Has the user been in contact with
someone with a confirmed COVID diagnosis?) on the provided questionnaire. Based on their responses,
the user is assigned a teleconsultation with a nurse.
• Figure 2B: to fix an appointment, the user’s name and email address are required so that they can

receive the appointment information.
11

Panchea et al.

OpenTera and Solutions to COVID-19 Challenges in Care Facilities

• Figure 2C: when the appointment is confirmed, an email is sent to the user indicating the date of the

appointment and the link to be used to attend the teleconsultation.
• Figure 2D: at the time set for the appointment, the user clicks on the provided link (also sent via email)
and starts the videoconference with a nurse.
4.2 In-Home Telerehabilitation Application
In-home telerehabilitation is defined as the provision of remote rehabilitation services in their home
(Tousignant et al., 2011b). A telerehabilitation session involves a healthcare professional connecting to
one or multiple patients in their home using audio, video and sensor data. A typical session consists of
physical rehabilitation including supervised exercises, coaching, training and discussions, but may also
involve speech rehabilitation, social and psychological consultations.
Figure 3 presents the user-friendly interface for the telerehabiliation session designed using OpenTera,
where Figure 3A illustrates the web browser available to the participants, while Figure 3B reports the part
of the application only seen by the session host. It uses the videoconference service module validated while
prototyping the patient triage application, allowing us to reuse previous software components for both the
web frontend and the service backend. A telerehabilitation session is scheduled by having the session host
send an invitation to one of multiple participants via email with a web link to connect to the OpenTera
telerehabilitation service. After having clicked on the link, the participants arrive in a waiting room. When
ready, the host starts the session and each participant joins it automatically. The functionalities offered by
OpenTera’s telerehabilitation application are as follows:
• Standard videoconference features are provided. The session host has full control of cameras and

microphones for all patients and can turn them on/off at any moment, while the participants have full
control over their own devices. Desktop sharing makes it possible to display any other information
by both the host and the participants, such as a PowerPoint presentation for instance (as illustrated in
Figure 3). The host can add or remove participants from the session at all time using features on the
left panel. Giving the opportunity for on-demand group sessions and assistance, a host can invite both
patients and healthcare workers as participants to the session. The current group limit is five.
• Tools can be used during the sessions, such as a timer to be displayed for each participant during a
rehabilitation exercise. We are currently developing a virtual goniometer to measure range of motion
of limbs and joints from the video streams. These tools are useful additional features not available
on commercial videoconference applications and can greatly influence usability and acceptability of
telerehabilitation, as it simplifies and addresses specifically the needs for such application.
• The telerehabilitation application makes it possible to manage several sites, users, projects, patients,

groups of patients, connected devices, sessions, data sources, and to extract key usage statistics like
sessions duration or revisit session events by having access to the session history, for each host and
participants.
The first version of the telerehabilitation application is available as open source code7 , and is now
deployed and used in Paris (France) and Quebec (Canada) for trials and experimentation.
4.3 Telepresence, Mobile Robots, and SARs
As explained in Section 3, both CF1 and CF2 indicated telepresence and/or mobile robots as solutions
with potentially great benefits during a pandemic. As shown in Figure 4, commercial platforms such as
Beam and OhmniLabs are available in our laboratory for trials. OpenTera can be quite useful in these trials,
7

https://github.com/introlab/opentera

12

Panchea et al.

OpenTera and Solutions to COVID-19 Challenges in Care Facilities

Figure 3. Telerehabilitation session interfaces designed with OpenTera: (top) Participant’s web-browser;
(buttom) Host’s desktop application. In this scenario the host shares a PowerPoint presentation.

allowing users to control both platforms using the same telepresence interface and allowing developers to
add new features and study their impacts. OpenTera can be used on commercial platforms as long as we
can have access to a software development kit (SDK) (Benso et al., 2000). Otherwise the platforms must
13

Panchea et al.

OpenTera and Solutions to COVID-19 Challenges in Care Facilities

Figure 4. Telepresence robots: (A) Beam; (B) SAM, an augmented version of Beam; (C) OhmniLabs.
be reverse-engineered and modified to allow custom applications. We have already augmented a Beam
platform that we have named SAM (Laniel et al., 2017; Laniel et al., 2017), with an RGB-D camera and an
additional onboard computer to use Real-Time Appearance-Based Mapping (RTAB-Map)8 (Labbé and
Michaud, 2019), an open source library for simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM). We have also
added a microphone array for sound source localization, tracking and separation using ODAS (Grondin
and Michaud, 2019), which is also an open source library. Such capabilities are designed to facilitate the
teleoperation of the platform by allowing it to navigate autonomously to rooms or back to its charging
station (when a session ends, voluntarily or not), to orient itself in the direction of the loudest sound source
to face the person who speaks, and to avoid colliding with people or obstacles. Ultimately, we want the
teleoperator to concentrate on their task (caregiving/rehabilitation/family discussion/medical assessment,
etc.) and not on driving the robot around. These open source libraries can be used through the frontends
applications provided by OpenTera.
Figure 5 shows a prototype interface available on OpenTera’s frontend layer for the SAM robot, which
contains the following:
• Figure 5A and 5B: video images provided by the top and bottom cameras installed on the robot;
• Figure 5B: a virtual joystick for robot teleoperation as an overlay to the bottom-facing camera image;
• Figure 5C: an interactive map generated by the RTAB-Map algorithm allowing visualization of the

laser range sensors (red dots) and waypoint specification (blue arrow) by clicking on the map;
• Figure 5D: a window that can provide information about the robot’s settings (battery level, CPU usage),
vital signs information provided by the IoTs attached to the SAM, and navigation labels (which allow
selection of a target destination).
We are currently using OpenTera as a common base to compare a standard Beam platform, SAM and an
OhmniLabs robot, observing usability and acceptability issues that arise during installation and use of the
telepresence robot at a residence. Targeted applications consist of using the robot to:
8

http://wiki.ros.org/rtabmap_ros

14

Panchea et al.

OpenTera and Solutions to COVID-19 Challenges in Care Facilities

Figure 5. Prototype interface of a robot teleoperation service web interface, used by the SAM robot.
• assist a doctor in carrying out checkups together with a nurse;
• allow family members to visit residents and allow residents to engage in social activities;
• carry out patrols;
• help nurses to remind residents to take pills or drink water and to remind them about the COVID-19

instructions;
• help nurses to quickly check on residences during the day.

Figure 6 shows two other custom-designed robots interfaced with OpenTera:
• SecurBot9 is an open source platform with autonomous navigation, person recognition (in case an older

adult gets lost in the facility), and other assistive capabilities. SecurBot will be used for communicating
COVID-19 instructions in a friendly manner and for patrolling;
• T-Top, a small SAR consisting of a touchscreen mounted on a Stewart platform (Siciliano and Khatib,
2008). Such a robot could act as a COVID-19 assistant, with the duty of managing the residence’s
entrances and exits. T-Top will be enhanced to manage the residence’s entrances by having people
answer specific questions about COVID-19 (based on the triage application presented in Section 4.1)
and by confirming that the person used the hand sanitizer before entering the building. This could
be done by interfacing an electronic dispenser and monitoring the sound it makes when used. If
the hand sanitizer is not used, T-Top will immediately contact the reception desk, activating the
videoconferencing capability through OpenTera.
Both have access to RTAB-Map and ODAS through OpenTera, facilitating reuse of such capabilities
over multiple platforms. Such sharing is quite beneficial when telepresence robotic solutions are being
9

https://github.com/introlab/securbot

15

Panchea et al.

OpenTera and Solutions to COVID-19 Challenges in Care Facilities

Figure 6. Custom-designed mobile robots and SAR interfaced with OpenTera: (A) SecurBot; (B) T-Top.

deployed in the real world. For instance, one of the most common problems encountered when using
wireless telecommunication networks is loss of the WiFi signal while navigating a robot. Sometimes,
communication can be restored, but in some cases the robot remains jammed in a WiFi dead zone. This
unfortunate situation can be remedied by having the robot navigate autonomously, using RTAB-Map for
instance, to a place with better signal and wait for the operator to reconnect. But still, evaluating this
before deployment in real environments becomes an important step, since it can influence performance and
incidentally user adoption. As a solution, by using OpenTera as an interface to RTAB-Map, we are currently
adding WiFi signal strength data to the locations memorized in RTAB-Map,10 thus allowing the user to
identify Internet dead zones or areas with weak WiFi signals and have the robot navigate autonomously to
locations with better WiFi reception. Moreover, such information can be used to evaluate Internet coverage
in care facilities or business offices. Figure 7 shows how RTAB-Map with WiFi signal strength data works
when mapping three environments using different devices. The laboratory floor has very good Internet
coverage, as indicated by the green dots. In the private apartments, areas near the routers have good Internet
coverage, but this deteriorates farther away from the routers, as indicated by the orange to red dots. Having
access to such capabilities through OpenTera would facilitate adaption to specific conditions that may
occur. For instance, in a study using the commercially available Double robot (Niemela et al., 2019),
confidentiality issues were raised by healthcare workers: calls from families could be performed only in
the older adults’ room to avoid having family members hear private conversations between other residents
or between nurses. Using RTAB-Map through OpenTera for implementing such a capability would be
beneficial, allowing a community of developers using OpenTera to benefit from this capability in their own
designs without having to reimplement everything on their own.

10

http://wiki.ros.org/rtabmap_ros/Tutorials/WifiSignalStrengthMappingUserDataUsage

16

Panchea et al.

OpenTera and Solutions to COVID-19 Challenges in Care Facilities

Figure 7. Example of three different environments mapped using the RTAB-Map with WiFi signal strength
data: (A) laboratory floor mapped using an Intel Realsense T265 camera; (B) private apartment mapped
using a Google Tango ASUS Zenfone AR; (C) private apartment mapped using an Intel Realsense D435
camera.

5

CONCLUSION

In the context of LTC for seniors in care facilities, this paper explains why a rapid prototyping
framework such as OpenTera is important in addressing COVID-19 challenges, and outlines how OpenTera
microservices can be used to do a variety of tasks, such as
• remote evaluation, diagnosis, monitoring, and treatment;
• provision of tele-assistance services to protect healthcare workers and older adults during crisis

situations;
• provision of wearable/H-IoT technologies for monitoring health or specific symptoms;
• design of assistive devices to allow older adults to communicate with relatives and healthcare workers

using videoconferencing;
17

Panchea et al.

OpenTera and Solutions to COVID-19 Challenges in Care Facilities

• mental health support through provision of providing social robotics and cognitive support through

reminders and notifications.
Our objective is to make OpenTera an adaptable solution intended to be used in different robotics/H-IoT
applications. The examples provided in this paper outline OpenTera’s design process and the envisioned
testbeds that are to be made available, with the aim of getting others in the software design and robotics
community involved in the effort of developing OpenTera, so that we can all focus and mutually benefit
from designing innovative solutions to address COVID-19 challenges healthcare.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST STATEMENT
The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial
relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
All authors took part in OpenTera’s design and evaluation process. All authors contributed to manuscript
revision, and all read and approved the submitted version.

FUNDING
This work is supported by AGE-WELL, the Network of Centres of Excellence of Canada on Aging
Gracefully across Environments using Technology to Support Wellness, Engagement, and Long Life, and
INTER, FRQNT Québec Strategic Network on Engineering Interactive Technologies for Rehabilitation.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank the healthcare personnel and administration staff of the two LTC facilities
and homes for the time they put aside to have meetings with us during this busy and challenging period.

REFERENCES
Ahmadi, H., Arji, G., Shahmoradi, L., Safdari, R., Nilashi, M., and Alizadeh, M. (2019). The application
of Internet of Things in healthcare: A systematic literature review and classification. Universal Access
in the Information Society 18, 837–869
Alwan, M. and Nobel, J. (2008). State of Technology in Aging Services According to Field Experts and
Thought Leaders. Tech. rep., Washington: American Association of Homes and Services for the Aging
(AAHSA)
Arasa, D. and Meharunnisa, S. (2019). Development of android application for Device to Device
Communication in IoT using Rabbit MQ broker. International Journal of Advance Research and
Innovation 7, 251–252
Benso, A., Chiusano, S., and Prinetto, P. (2000). A software development kit for dependable applications
in embedded systems. In Proceedings IEEE International Test Conference. 170–178
Broekens, J., Heerink, M., and Rosendal, H. (2009). Assistive social robots in elderly care: A review.
Gerontechnology 8, 94–103
Broens, T., Vollenbroek-Huttenw, R. V. M., Hermenswz, A., Halteren, H., and Nieuwenhuis, L. (2007).
Determinants of successful telemedicine implementations: A literature study. Journal of Telemedicine
and Telecare 13, 303
Cosar, S., Fernandez-Carmona, M., Agrigoroaie, R., Pages, J., Ferland, F., Zhao, F., et al. (2020).
ENRICHME: Perception and interaction of an assistive robot for the elderly at home. International
Journal of Social Robotics
18

Panchea et al.

OpenTera and Solutions to COVID-19 Challenges in Care Facilities

Dechene, L., Tousignant, M., Boissy, P., Macoir, J., Héroux, S., Hamel, M., et al. (2011). Simulated
in-home teletreatment for anomia. International Journal of Telerehabilitation 3
Dragoni, N., Giallorenzo, S., Lluch-Lafuente, A., Mazzara, M., Montesi, F., Mustafin, R., et al. (2017).
Microservices: Yesterday, today, and tomorrow. In Present and Ulterior Software Engineering. 1–17
Elder, M. (2013). Advance Remote Patient Monitoring Systems. Tech. rep., Kalorama Information Market
Intelligence Report
Ercolano, G., Lambiase, P. D., Leone, E., Raggioli, L., Trepiccione, D., and Rossil, S. (2019). Socially
assistive robots behaviors using microservices. In 28th IEEE International Conference on Robot and
Human Interactive Communication (New Delhi, India: IEEE), 1–6
Ferland, F., Agrigoroaie, R., and Tapus, A. (2019). Assistive humanoid robots for the elderly with
mild cognitive impairment. In Humanoid Robotics: A Reference, eds. A. Goswami and P. Vadakkepat
(Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands). 2377–2396
Fielding, R. T. (2000). Architectural Styles and the Design of Network-based Software Architectures.
Ph.D. thesis, University of California, Irvine
Goodwin, N. (2010). The state of telehealth and telecare in the UK: Prospects for integrated care. Journal
of Integrated Care 18, 3–10
Grondin, F. and Michaud, F. (2019). Lightweight and optimized sound source localization and tracking
methods for open and closed microphone array configurations. Robotics and Autonomous Systems 113,
63 – 80
Kraft, K. and Smart, W. D. (2016). Seeing is comforting: Effects of teleoperator visibility in robot-mediated
health care. In ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot Interaction. 11–18
Kristoffersson, A., Coradeschi, S., and Loutfi, A. (2013). A review of mobile robotic telepresence.
Advances in Human-Computer Interaction 2013
Kubitschke, L. and Cullen, K. (2010). ICT and Ageing–European Study on Users, Market and
Technologies. Tech. rep., Brussels: Commission of the European Communities
Labbé, M. and Michaud, F. (2019). RTAB-Map as an open-source lidar and visual simultaneous localization
and mapping library for large-scale and long-term online operation. Journal of Field Robotics 36,
416–446
Laniel, S., Letourneau, D., Labbé, M., Grondin, F., Polgar, J., and Michaud, F. (2017). Adding navigation,
artificial audition and vital sign monitoring capabilities to a telepresence mobile robot for remote home
care applications. In IEEE International Conference on Rehabilitation Robotics. 809–811
Laniel, S., Létourneau, D., Labbé, M., Grondin, F., and Michaud, F. (2017). Enhancing a Beam+
telepresence robot for remote home care applications. In International Conference on Virtual
Rehabilitation. 1–2
Lee, L. N. and Kim, M. J. (2020). A critical review of smart residential environments for older adults with
a focus on pleasurable experience. Frontiers in Psychology 10, 3080
Lepage, P., Létourneau, D., Hamel, M., Brière, S., Corriveau, H., Tousignant, M., et al. (2016).
Telehomecare telecommunication framework — From remote patient monitoring to video visits and
robot telepresence. In 38th Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and
Biology Society. 3269–3272
Lepage, P., Létourneau, D., Hamel, M., Brière, S., Tousignant, M., and Michaud, F. (2014). From
teletraining to telehomecare — Design of mobile and multi-stream telehealth systems. In Global
Information Infrastructure and Networking Symposium. 1–4
Napoli, C. D. and Rossi, S. (2019). A layered architecture for socially assistive robotics as a service. In
IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man and Cybernetics (Bari, Italy: IEEE), 352–357

19

Panchea et al.

OpenTera and Solutions to COVID-19 Challenges in Care Facilities

Niemela, M., van Aerschot, L., Tammela, A., Aaltonen, I., and Lammi, H. (2019). Towards ethical
guidelines of using telepresence robots in residential care. International Journal of Social Robotics
[Dataset] Praxia and Gartner (2011). Telehealth Benefits and Adoption – Connecting People and Providers
Across Canada
Prescott, T. J., Mitchinson, B., and Conran, S. (2017). Miro: An animal-like companion robot with a
biomimetic brain-based control system. In Proceedings of the ACM/IEEE International Conference on
Human-Robot Interaction. (New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery), 50–51
Quigley, M., Conley, K., Gerkey, B. P., Faust, J., Foote, T., Leibs, J., et al. (2009). ROS: An open-source
Robot Operating System. In ICRA Workshop on Open Source Software. 1–6
Rashidi, P. and Mihailidis, A. (2013). A survey on ambient-assisted living tools for older adults. IEEE
Journal of Biomedical and Health Informatics 17, 579–590
Reginatto, B. (2012). Understanding barriers to wider telehealth adoption in the home environment of older
people : An exploratory study in the Irish context. International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences
4, 63–76
Short, E. and Mataric, M. J. (2017). Robot moderation of a collaborative game: Towards socially assistive
robotics in group interactions. In 26th IEEE Int Symp Robot and Human Interactive Communication
(Lisbon: IEEE), 385–390
Siciliano, B. and Khatib, O. (eds.) (2008). Springer Handbook of Robotics (Springer)
Stiehl, W. D., Lieberman, J., Breazeal, C., Basel, L., Cooper, R., Knight, H., et al. (2006). The Huggable:
A therapeutic robotic companion for relational, affective touch. In Proceeedings 3rd IEEE Consumer
Communications and Networking Conference. vol. 2, 1290–1291
Tavakoli, M., Carriere, J., and Torabi, A. (2020). Robotics, smart wearable technologies, and autonomous
intelligent systems for healthcare during the COVID19 pandemic: An analysis of the state of the art and
future vision. Advanced Intelligent Systems , 2000071
Tousignant, M., Boissy, P., Moffet, H., Corriveau, H., Cabana, F., Marquis, F., et al. (2011a). Patients’
satisfaction of healthcare services and perception with in-home telerehabilitation and physiotherapists’
satisfaction toward technology for post-knee arthroplasty: An embedded study in a randomized trial.
Telemedicine and e-Health 17, 376–382
Tousignant, M., Marquis, N., Pagé, C., Imukuze, N., Métivier, A., St-Onge, V., et al. (2012). Inhome telerehabilitation for older persons with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: A pilot study.
International Journal of Telerehabilitation 4
Tousignant, M., Moffet, H., Boissy, P., Corriveau, H., Cabana, F., and Marquis, F. (2011b). A randomized
controlled trial of home telerehabilitation for post-knee arthroplasty. Journal of Telemedicine and
Telecare 17, 195–8
van Breemen, A., Yan, X., and Meerbeek, B. (2005). Icat: An animated user-interface robot with
personality. In International Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems (New York,
NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery), 143–144
Wada, K. and Shibata, T. (2007). Social effects of robot therapy in a care house - change of social network
of the residents for two months. In Proceedings 2007 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Automation. 1250–1255

20

