COVID-19 Digital Contact Tracing Applications and
Techniques: A Review Post Initial Deployments

arXiv:2103.01766v1 [cs.CY] 25 Feb 2021

Muhammad Shahroza , Farooq Ahmada , Muhammad Shahzad Younisa ,
Nadeem Ahmadb , Maged N. Kamel Boulosc , Ricardo Vinuesad , Junaid Qadire
a School

of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, National University of Sciences
and Technology, Islamabad, 44000, Pakistan.
b Cyber Security Cooperative Research Centre, (CSCRC), University of New South Wales
Sydney, New South Wales, Australia.
c School of Information Management, Sun Yat-sen University, East Campus, Guangzhou,
510006, Guangdong, China.
d Department of Mechanical Engineering, KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm,
Sweden.
e Department of Electrical Engineering, Information Technology University, Lahore,
Pakistan.

Abstract
The coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is a severe global pandemic that has
claimed millions of lives and continues to overwhelm public health systems in
many countries. The spread of COVID-19 pandemic has negatively impacted
the human mobility patterns such as daily transportation-related behavior of
the public. There is a requirement to understand the disease spread patterns
and its routes among neighboring individuals for the timely implementation of
corrective measures at the required placement. To increase the effectiveness
of contact tracing, countries across the globe are leveraging advancements in
mobile technology and Internet of Things (IoT) to aid traditional manual contact tracing to track individuals who have come in close contact with identified
COVID-19 patients. Even as the first administration of vaccines begins in 2021,
the COVID-19 management strategy will continue to be multi-pronged for the
foreseeable future with digital contact tracing being a vital component of the

Email addresses: mshahroz.msee18seecs@seecs.edu.pk (Muhammad Shahroz),
fahmad.msee17seecs@seecs.edu.pk (Farooq Ahmad), muhammad.shahzad@seecs.edu.pk
(Muhammad Shahzad Younis), nadeem.ahmed@cybersecuritycrc.org.au (Nadeem Ahmad),
mnkboulos@ieee.org / mnkboulos@mail.sysu.edu.cn (Maged N. Kamel Boulos),
rvinuesa@mech.kth.se (Ricardo Vinuesa), junaid.qadir@itu.edu.pk (Junaid Qadir)

Preprint submitted to Journal of LATEX Templates

March 3, 2021

response along with the use of preventive measures such as social distancing
and the use of face masks. After some months of deployment of digital contact
tracing technology, deeper insights into the merits of various approaches and the
usability, privacy, and ethical trade-offs involved are emerging. In this paper,
we provide a comprehensive analysis of digital contact tracing solutions in terms
of their methodologies and technologies in the light of the new data emerging
about international experiences of deployments of digital contact tracing technology. We also provide a discussion on open challenges such as scalability,
privacy, adaptability and highlight promising directions for future work.
Keywords: App; contact tracing; COVID-19; data protection; Internet of
Things; privacy.

1. Introduction
The Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) virus
and the associated disease designated as coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19),
first reported in China in late 2019, represents the most significant public health
threat in the last 100 years. This disease has spread like wildfire across the globe.
The pandemic response has been mixed. Some countries responded proactively
and effectively, while others botching their responses. One way to limit the
spread of the virus is to ensure strict lockdowns—however, this comes at a
significant economic cost due to industries being shut down and workers losing
jobs, and there is a risk that the spread will start anew once the lockdowns are
lifted [1].
During the early days of the pandemic, human mobility was greatly affected.
People started taking self-isolation measures in their homes. However, it resulted
in the shutting of the transportation industry. Most countries have focused on
developing smart lockdown strategies using various technological solutions to
combat COVID-19 [2, 3]. Overall timely preventive measures and a mix of high
and low technological solutions made it possible for some countries (such as
China, South Korea) to minimize the disease’s spread. These countries relied

2

on putting international travelers under surveillance and quarantine. Even lowrisk individuals were asked to observe quarantine, and their physical location
was either observed by the government operators or cell tower location data
was used to monitor the quarantine conditions. Identified cases were kept in
special COVID wards for about a fortnight, depending on health infrastructure
availability.
The use of face masks among the masses can drastically reduce the virus’s
spread among healthy individuals [4]. However, the chances of the spread can
still be high. Contact tracing is a technique to identify individuals who have
possibly come in close contact with an infected person while that person was
the carrier of the viral pathogens. Contact tracing is a time-tested technique
employed successfully to control and monitor historical outbreaks of diseases
like HIV, Ebola, and measles. The traditional way of contact tracing is the
manual contact tracing technique, used to identify the close meetups of the
infected person [5]. However, the manual contact tracing technique has two
significant limitations: (1) it requires a sizeable trained workforce to conduct
these manual interviews; and (2) it cannot identify individuals that are not
known to the infected person but have come in close contact (e.g., while using
public transport or dining in restaurants). Furthermore, manual contact tracing
is a hectic process that requires a centralized, coordinated effort to identify atrisk close contacts of a COVID positive individual.
Due to the various limitations of manual contact tracing, technologists, in
consultations with the epidemiologists, are now overwhelmingly supplementing
classical contact tracing techniques with digital contact tracing techniques [6].
Digital contact tracing techniques typically depend on apps installed on smart
mobile phones [7]. These contact tracing apps trace individuals’ meetups by
either using a local Bluetooth connection or the global network of the Global
Positioning System (GPS) for location tracking. In the current crisis, many IoTbased contact-tracing apps have been deployed [5, 8] or are in the development
phase under the collaborations of government and tech industries [9, 10, 11].
Countries like Singapore, South Korea, Israel, Italy, Germany, and China have
3

fully implemented digital contact tracing. Other countries do not have substantial adoption due to policy issues and concerns about consumer privacy and
legal rights. Big tech companies like Apple and Google [11] have also joined
hands to accelerate the effort on expanding the capabilities of existing tracing
frameworks. Digital contact tracing platforms are thus emerging as an essential
component of global response against the COVID-19.
However, such an approach is not a panacea or a silver bullet. The current
generation of digital contact tracing apps is facing several issues that limit their
effectiveness. This includes low app adoption rates, low mobile phone penetration, privacy and trust issues, potentially high false-negative rates (i.e., the
app fails to register a close contact with an infected individual [12]), and the
reliance on the tracing apps on Bluetooth for proximity calculations. In this
paper, we present a comprehensive analysis of digital contact tracing and its
supporting IoT framework. Furthermore, we elaborate on the challenges associated with the digital contact tracing solutions in terms of their methodologies
and technologies in the light of the new data emerging about international experiences of deployments of digital contact tracing technology. We also discuss
open challenges such as scalability, privacy, adaptability and highlight promising
directions for future work.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. The background of digital
contact tracing, which includes discussion on multiple types of contact-tracing
architecture, review of different existing communication technologies in contact
tracing, and the IoT framework of contact tracing, is presented in Section 2. The
challenges associated with the digital contact tracing application are discussed
in Section 3. The international efforts in digital contact tracing are discussed in
Section 4. The current research gaps in the literature are identified in Section 5.
The emerging communication technologies that can be used in digital contact
tracing are discussed in Section 6, followed by concluding remarks in Section 7.

4

2. Background
Digital contact tracing is a framework in which smartphones register close
contacts with other smartphones, running the same contact tracing app. In this
section, the architecture of the digital contact tracing framework is discussed.
Furthermore, the communication technologies which are currently used for digital contact tracing are discussed. Moreover, digital contact tracing solutions
using IoT are also discussed in this section.
2.1. Centralized vs. Decentralized Digital Contact Tracing Architecture
Broadly speaking, contact-tracing applications are of two types. In centralized contact-tracing, mobile phones share their anonymous IDs to a central
server maintaining a centralized database, and the server uses this database to
perform contact-tracing, risk-analysis and alerts notifications to the users. In
decentralized contact-tracing, on the other hand, mobile phones, instead of a
centralized server, perform contact matching and notification by downloading
the contact database from the server. A graphical illustration of these contacttracing architectures is presented in Figure 1. In centralized contact-tracing,
the detection is performed in a centralized server. In contrast, in decentralized
contact-tracing, each user smartphone acts as a local server that shares only the
infected individuals’ data to the centralized server, and then the smartphones
will fetch this data periodically from the server and do contact matching locally.
An example of this decentralized contact-tracing architecture is Apple-Google
platform [13]. Note that in decentralized contact tracing, only the data of an
infected person are shared with the centralized server, and contact matching is
performed locally—a fact that makes the user privacy more effective as compared to the centralized contact tracing in which data of all individuals are
shared with the centralized server. However, there is still a vigorous debate on
the privacy and security aspects and use of these contact-tracing architectures.

5

Figure 1: Two types of contact-tracing architecture

2.2. Communication Technologies Used in Digital Contact Tracing
To enable technlogy driven social distancing, many communication technologies are adopted to enhance the effectiveness of the digital contact tracing
solutions [14], e.g., WiFi, Bluetooth, GPS, QR Codes, and Zigbee. A brief
explanation of these communication technologies used in contact-tracing applications is discussed below, and their coverage ranges and accuracy is shown in
Figure 2.
1. WiFi
WiFi is a communication technology which is very effective for contacttracing purposes especially in an indoor environment such as multi-story
building, airports, alleys, and parking garages [15]. WiFi provides high
accuracy in an indoor environment compared to GPS or other satellitebased technology, useful in an indoor environment. In a WiFi system, a
wireless transmitter known as WiFi Access Point (WAP) is required to
communicate with its user devices. One of the potential WiFi technology
applications used in contact tracing is positioning [16, 17]. This is very
useful in an indoor environment when a crowd is buildup in pandemic
6

times, especially in railway platforms and airports. It is also convenient
to use the WiFi hardware facilities due to their low-cost maintenance and
easy deployment.
2. Bluetooth
Bluetooth is a wireless communication protocol that is present in almost
every modern mobile phone. There are several versions of Bluetooth protocols. Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE) is very popular in applications due
to its less energy consumption and low cost. As the contact-tracing apps
are required to run continuously for logging the contacts, BLE low battery
consumption is very well suited. However, BLE has a short-range coverage, mostly indoors. One of the main advantages of Bluetooth technology
is that it can connect a device to multiple devices without requiring any
access point and forming an ad-hoc called piconet [18].
In Singapore, the government has developed an open-source contact-tracing
protocol called BlueTrace, which is employed in the TraceTogether app
[19]. The methodology is very simple; every time the contact-tracing app
comes within the proximity of another app, it will locally save their information mutually. They may volunteer to share this contact information
later with the health department. Most of the contact-tracing apps utilize
Bluetooth for contact-tracing.
3. Global Positioning System
The GPS navigation system uses a network of satellites to locate the
exact position of the GPS-enabled devices. Modern smartphones are GPS
enabled, which can be used for contact tracing as well. The other benefit
of GPS is its global availability. Many countries like Israel1 and Norway2
are using GPS-based contact-tracing mechanism.
GPS technology can also be used to limit the physical contact between
people, e.g., customers can shop online and get the product delivered
1 https://govextra.gov.il/ministry-of-health/hamagen-app/download-en/.
2 https://helsenorge.no/coronavirus/smittestopplastaccessed2020/05/25.

7

to their homes using Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) based on GPS
technology. Many big retail and logistic corporations are investing in
UAVs to deliver the products to customer homes like Amazon and DHL.
Therefore, the social distancing between the public can be significantly
enhanced using GPS technology.
4. QR Codes
Another method of contact tracing is the usage of QR codes where a
user will be manually contributing to the database by taking a picture of
visual computer-aided code at multiple places of business. Mobile phone
application automatically reads hidden geolocation of these QR codes and
populates the database with user details. If a person is tested positive,
their contacts at places they have visited can be identified using contacttracing based on QR codes. Such techniques are globally used, with China
being a prime example that has a far higher rate of adoption of QR codes
[20].
5. Zigbee
Zigbee is also a potential technology that can be used in maintaining social
distancing. Zigbee is a standard-based wireless communication technology used for low-cost and low-power wireless networks [21]. Zigbee-based
devices can communicate with each other in the range of about 65 feet (20
meters) and can take unlimited hops. The Zigbee control hub can determine the user’s location, which can be used for crowd control. Therefore,
the Zigbee communication technology can be used for contact-tracing purposes to avoid the spread of the virus.

2.3. Digital Contact Tracing with IoT
Internet of Things (IoT) is a system of computing devices that has the ability
to transfer data over a network without requiring human-to-human or humanto-computer interaction. In the current epidemic, the number of infected cases
is increasing day by day; therefore, it is becoming increasingly hard to rely only
on manual contact tracing.
8

Figure 2: Coverage Area and Accuracy Comparison for Different Sensing Infrastructures

Digital contact tracing based on IoT can enable a scalable, automated contacttracing system that can cope with the ever-increasing workload of contact tracing. Digital contact tracking is a technique used to aid the contact-tracing
process, which detects the contacts when a person is in the proximity of an
infected person. This can be done either by using GPS location or by Bluetooth
signal. The risk of exposure to the infection depends upon how close a person
comes close to the infected person (say less than 1 meter) and the duration of
this contact. However, proximity tracking does not provide a complete assessment in tracking contacts with an infected person because of obstacles between
two persons, such as a wall or being enclosed in personal protective equipment.
Multiple types of contact-tracing frameworks have been established following regional compatibility, acceptability, privacy, and security laws. Most of
these solutions depend on sensors to either identify the user’s close contacts
to understand the spread of the epidemic or track the location of the users
(tracking solutions). These applications require different permissions or sensory
input to either flag or alert users of imminent virus transmission threats. Tracking platforms like Google COVID-19 Community Mobility Reports3 and Apple
3 https://www.google.com/covid19/mobility/.

9

COVID-19 Mobility Trends Reports4 , take up data from millions of users with
their consent and aggregate this information anonymously. This is done to track
people and crowds’ movement, to know about the supposed hotspots, and, most
of all, to track the effectiveness of lockdowns in different places and countries.
These contact-tracing apps are meant for healthy individuals who are keen to
know about their susceptibility to getting infected if they have come across an
individual later diagnosed with COVID-19. With the application of these digital
contact tracing apps, the passenger flow can be control in the passenger waiting
areas by forecasting the transportation data [22].
More aggressive solutions have also been developed to geofence the individuals in quarantine using dedicated smartphone applications or more straightforward interaction with the user using a phone call or text message exposing the
geolocation of the user. An IoT hardware-based solution is presented in [23], in
which the information on movement and contacts of objects are captured using
RFID tags. Such implementation is more obligatory than voluntary, with noncompliance deemed as an offense. Recently a platform named as BubbleBox is
presented in [24], in which the system of integrated IoT devices and a software
platform is used to limit and detect further outbreaks of COVID-19 infections.
A BubbleBox device, a wristband, traces contacts under the safe social distance.
With a web-app, the users can pair their identity with their device, as well as
report their symptoms. In this way, they offer the authorized medical personnel a quick way to understand the infection’s spread, monitor who needs to be
tested and quickly contact patients. Finally, the collected data, anonymized,
can help researchers understand trends about the spreading of the infection.
Usability is also crucial to increase the number of people who will use the
system and, thus, maximize the coverage of the contact tracing. Finally, as different apps and systems to aid in contact tracing become popular, such systems
will be effective only if they are interoperable. Therefore, there is a need to
establish a standard for the collected data.
4 https://www.apple.com/covid19/mobility.

10

Figure 3: Key Merits of using IoT solution in combating COVID-19

IoT is an innovative technology that can help in tracking all high-risk patients
during the quarantine period. Figure 3 shows the critical merits of IoT for
COVID-19 pandemic. With the successful implementation of this technology,
we expect an improvement in medical and contact tracing staff’s efficiency with
a reduction in their workload.

3. Challenges
Since the COVID-19 crisis emerged, everyone is worried about when this
pandemic will stop, and the worldwide lockdown, which caused an unprecedented economic crisis, will come to an end. Although the use of digital contact
tracing apps has significantly increased, these contact-tracing apps are still facing issues and challenges apart from the benefits they have delivered. In this
section, we will discuss some of the challenges that impede the effectiveness of
these apps.

11

3.1. User Adaptability
The success of digital contact tracing largely depends on user adaptability.
These apps face a low penetration rate among the masses [25], e.g. Australia’s
COVIDSafe has a 28.6% penetration rate, Singapore’s TraceTogether has a 25%
penetration, India’s Aarogya Setu has 12.05%, Turkey’s Hayat Eve Sığar has
17% and UK’s NHS COVID-19 App has 28.5%, which are among the highest
and many are below the 10% adoption e.g. Japan’s COCOA has 6.09% and
France’s TousAntiCovid has 3.58%. For a penetration rate of say 25%, when
two persons meet at random, there is only a 6.25% (0.25 × 0.25) chance that
both persons have installed the app on their mobile. This is the best possible
scenario in which both persons have an app running on their mobile devices. It
is a challenge to achieve high user adaptability, given that the users are skeptical
about the privacy issues surrounding the use of data generated through these
apps.
3.2. Low Smart Phone Penetration
Another reason for less adaptability of these contract tracing apps is the low
penetration of smartphones [26]. As most of the digital contact tracing apps are
based on smartphones, users with older devices (or smartphones running outof-support versions of mobile operating systems) are unable to use these apps.
The smartphone penetration varies with countries, e.g., 24% in India, 81% in
the USA, and 95% in S. Korea [27]. Even in a country like the United States of
America, 2 out of 10 individuals do not even use smartphones; many of those
who own such a device may opt not to install the tracing app on their device.
The digital contact tracing is thus only targeting a fraction of the population
that has access to supported devices.
3.3. Global Reach
With the presence of automated and manual contact tracing frameworks,
it is critical to gauge the level of effectiveness of both systems. Manual contact tracing requires reliable government infrastructure and higher funds to run
12

the whole operation for a long duration. However, automated contact tracing
requires a modern and high-tech infrastructure. The better the technology infrastructure of a country, the better the digital contact tracing will be. We have
already discussed that smartphone penetration and user adaptability are risks
affecting the success of these apps. Moreover, the elderly and people from low
socioeconomic communities are more vulnerable to being affected by the outspread. However, these same groups are the one that is most unlikely to own a
smart device. From a global perspective, digital contact tracing may be suitable
for developed countries. However, in developing and underdeveloped countries,
digital contact tracing frameworks may not achieve their full potential [28].
3.4. Privacy and Ethical Issues
The contact-tracing process includes gathering privacy-sensitive information
of individuals. However, privacy-conscious people generally show reluctance to
share their sensitive information, obstructing the whole contact-tracing procedure. Therefore, privacy-preserving contact-tracing apps are more likely to be
adopted by a large user base. In the literature, privacy-preserving contact tracing has been proposed even before the COVID-19 pandemic. Proposals include
Efficient Privacy-preserving contact-tracing for Infection Detection (EPIC) [29]
and ENcounter-based Architecture for Contact Tracing (ENACT) [30]. These
techniques were developed for privacy-preserving contact tracing and can be
useful in the current scenario as well. Most of the well-known digital contact
tracing apps have some level of privacy built-in. The individuals’ smartphone
identities are made anonymous before sharing with other users and to the centralized database. The database can only use this anonymous identity for contact matching, risk analysis, etc.
Management of this health crisis of unprecedented magnitude requires desperate measures, but it cannot compromise civil and privacy rights [31, 32].
This may result in a restricted contact-tracing framework with lower efficiency.
Such problems with data privacy affect the contact-tracing application of a single
state or a country and questions the inter-operability of multiple contact-tracing
13

frameworks of different countries with a far higher number of people crossing
borders. Under these circumstances, organizations like the European Commission have called upon a common approach among all European governments.
A standard policy has been devised which provides multiple recommendations,
i.e., all citizen level data will be encrypted and will be erased once the pandemic is near its end, use of contact-tracing app should be voluntary instead
of compulsory. Most of all, the application will avoid using location-based data
tracking instead of proximity sensing will be used among users.
All these interventions, which, in a way or another, depending on the existence of a digitized system, always pose as a threat to ethics, privacy, and
equality. Such subsystems always remain unreachable to some masses which
do not have that level of digital literacy irrespective of the user level of digital
readiness. For example, everyone should be able to access these technologybased solutions irrespective of what mobile phone they own or which version of
the mobile operating system their devices can support [33].
3.5. Technology Limitations and Transparency
Most of the digital contact tracing apps employ the received signal strength
of Bluetooth messages for proximity estimation. This is not a very reliable
mechanism for distance estimation and may result in erroneous measurements.
An error in distance estimation, in turn, can simulate either panic or a false
sense of safety in users. Bluetooth-based proximity sensing with its faults can
alert of an infection risk even if contacts are separated by a wall, or it can induce
a false level of security even in the proximity of an infected individual who is
either not using the application at the moment or if the proximity-based sensing
fails to register the contact.
There are many instances of governments being questioned for the transparency of their solutions. A significant amount of effort has been spent on the
development of such systems. Still, they are liable to rejection by individuals if
they are not satisfied with the level of privacy and security. This can affect the
trust they have in local government and the healthcare system to uphold their
14

ethical obligations.

4. International Contact Tracing Approaches
The COVID-19 pandemic has taken the world by surprise, mainly due to
its spread rate. Governments are taking every possible measure to protect their
citizens and their economies from this disease’s effects. Many Countries have
done different modeling studies, explicitly evaluating the COVID-19 pandemic in
terms of mathematical modeling of disease transmission rate and spread pattern
[34, 35, 36].
Most of the countries have adopted digital contact solutions to support the
manual tracing processes. These apps vary in the way contact tracing is performed. Some of the apps use GPS to track the users’ movements, while others
use a more privacy-preserving design based on Bluetooth advertisements to register close contacts. Some governments have mandated the use of their apps,
while others encourage voluntary adoption. To build trust, many apps have
their source code released for public scrutiny. The list of apps used by 42 different countries with their technology adoption [7] is presented in Table 1.5 Most
of these international digital contact tracing apps are based on Bluetooth and
GPS technology, while some also use QR.
There is a more significant concern about using such tracing applications
because of the possibility of fine-grained location tracking and access to private
health records. It is essential for an application to be acceptable to the masses
that its working and policies are transparent. While some apps (mostly from
the European countries including Austria, Finland, Denmark, Norway, Estonia,
and United Kingdom) are transparent in terms of their open-source design and
codes, many contact-tracing applications such as those used by governments of
Algeria, Kuwait, and Tunisia have been questioned by Amnesty International for
their lack of transparency. The contact-tracing application of Qatar is manda5 See

also http://healthcybermap.org/WHO_COVID19/#8.

15

tory for citizens and alarmingly requires access to mobile phone photos. The
application of UAE is decentralized on the surface, yet authorities can fine the
individuals avoiding usage or registration of this application. Furthermore, the
contact-tracing application of Iran has been taken off from Google Play Store
for gathering unnecessary data. However, recent analysis has shown that the
effectiveness of these digital solutions can only be increased once the population
participates in the contact-tracing process effectively [37]. We can learn from
Australia and Singapore’s experience about why their contact-tracing apps are
unsuccessful at large and what steps can be taken to make these successful apps
[38]. Google and Apple also announced their partnership in the ”spirit of collaboration”, and build a joint effort to enable the use of Bluetooth technology
to help governments and health agencies to reduce the spread of the virus [13].
In Ref. [39], Vinuesa et al. have proposed a socio-technical framework to
evaluate the suitability of digital contact tracing applications. The authors of
this work belong to the Scandinavian countries, Sweden and Denmark. More
specifically, the framework proposed by Vinuesa et al. comprises 19 criteria
that judge the impact of digital contact tracing apps that can be grouped into
three categories (impact on citizens, technology, and governance). The authors
propose that the technology should be centralized and privacy-preserving (an
example architecture is decentralized privacy-preserving proximity tracing (DP3T)). The technology should use local and temporary encrypted storage. The
app should be easy to deactivate or remove and should have an open-source code.
In terms of governance, the app should be preferably owned by the state or a
health agency rather than from a private/commercial entity. Open data governance is preferable to opaque settings. The authors recommend that the app
should be voluntary and that the app should not be made mandatory to attend
certain places. A sunset clause—which specifies an end date when the collected
data will be destroyed unless extended by explicit processes—is preferable. The
framework also recommends concurring with the European Data Protection
Board (EDBP) guidelines that users should have a right to contest decisions
or demand human intervention. Based on this framework, the authors ana16

lyze existing applications and describe how applications such as Stopp Corona
(app from Austria), NHS COVID-19 (initial version proposed by the UK), and
TraceTogether (app from Singapore) all have low scores in governance). The
authors show that the Austrian app has maximum compliance with their suggested guidelines while NHS COVID-19 had the least compliance of the three
considered apps. Therefore, there is a need for a tool that can measure the
effectiveness of these apps in controlling the spread of the pandemic. Recently
a SIR (Susceptible-Infectious-Recovered) model is presented that can test the
impact of contact tracing apps in different scenarios using demographic, and
mobility data [40].

17

Open
Countries

App Name

Tech

Voluntary
Source

Australia

COVIDSafe

Austria

Stopp Corona

Bluetooth

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

No

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

No

Bluetooth,
Google/Apple
Bluetooth,
Bahrain

BeAware
Location
Bluetooth,

Belgium

Belgium’s app
Google/Apple

Bulgaria

ViruSafe

Canada

COVID Alert

Location
Bluetooth,
Google/Apple

Chinese health

Location, Data

code system

mining

Cyprus

CovTracer

Location,GPS

Yes

Yes

Czech

eRouska

Bluetooth

Yes

Yes

Denmark

Smittestop

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

China

Bluetooth,
Google/Apple
Bluetooth,
Estonia

Estonia’s App

DP-3T,
Google/Apple
Bluetooth,

Finland

Ketju
DP-3T
Corona-Warn-

Bluetooth,

App

Google/Apple

Germany
GH COVID-19
Ghana

Location
Tracker

18

Beat Covid
Gibraltar

TBD

No

No

Gibraltar
Hungary

VirusRadar

Bluetooth

Yes

No

Iceland

Rakning C-19

Location

Yes

Yes

India

Aarogya Setu

No

Yes

Bluetooth,
Location
Indonesia

PeduliLindungi

TBD

No

No

Iran

Mask.ir

Location

Yes

No

HSE Covid-19

Bluetooth,
Yes

No

App

Google/Apple

Israel

HaMagen

Location

Yes

Yes

Italy

Immuni

Yes

Yes

Ireland

Bluetooth,
Google/Apple
Japan

COCOA

Google/Apple

Yes

No

Kuwait

Shlonik

Location

No

No

Malaysia

MyTrace

Yes

No

Bluetooth

Yes

No

QR codes

Yes

No

StopKorona

Bluetooth

Yes

Yes

Northern

Northern

Bluetooth,
No

No

Ireland

Ireland’s app

Google/Apple

Northern

Northern

Bluetooth,
Yes

No

Ireland

Ireland’s app

Google/Apple

Norway

Smittestopp

Yes

No

Bluetooth,
Google/Apple
Mexico

CovidRadar
NZ COVID

New Zealand
Tracer
North
Macedonia

Bluetooth,
Location
Philippines

StaySafe

Bluetooth

Yes

No

Poland

ProteGO

Bluetooth

Yes

Yes

19

Bluetooth,
Qatar

Ehteraz

No

No

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

No

No

Yes

Yes

Location
Saudi Arabia

Tawakkalna

Singapore

Trace together

TBD
Bluetooth, Blue
Trace

Switzerland

Swiss

Bluetooth,

contact-tracing

DP-3T,

App

Google/Apple
Location,

Thailand

Mor Chana
Bluetooth

Tunisia

E7mi

Turkey

Hayat Eve Sığar

Bluetooth
Bluetooth,
Location

United Arab
TraceCovid

Bluetooth

United

NHS COVID-19

Bluetooth,

Kingdom

App

Google/Apple

Emirates

Table 1: List of countries using different apps and their adopted technologies.

4.1. Suspended, Replaced and Relaunched Apps
During the first wave of the pandemic, many countries launched their apps
with varying degrees of success. Finland’s one million people downloaded Finland’s app within just 24 hours after the launch, which is around 20% of their
population. This is mainly because of the high penetration rate of smartphones
in the population and prioritized individual privacy using third-party instead
of using the government platform [41]. Similarly, Ireland’s app was downloaded
by 37% of the population just two months after its launch [41]. This success
shows that people value the privacy-preserving attributes of the apps most.
However, apps of some countries are suspended by regulators, some have

20

been replaced with updated versions since their initial launch, and some have
been relaunched [42]. Iran’s AC19 app was suspended by the Google Play
store for allegedly spying on users, and Japan’s app was suspended two times
due to malfunctioning.

Some countries like Norway, Finland, and the UK

switched their apps to the Google/Apple framework for its globally available,
well-established notification system.
These challenges show that the digital contact tracing apps have several
gaps in research for the latest communication technologies, privacy preservation
methodologies, etc., which are discussed in the next sections.

5. Current Research Gaps
Digital contact tracing has the potential of playing a significant role in the
current COVID-19 pandemic; however, there are still research gaps to be addressed. Some of the current research gaps are discussed below.
5.1. Urgent Need for Well-Designed Prospective Evaluations of Digital Contact
Tracing Solutions in Real-World Epidemic Settings
There is no published or direct evidence to date (as of December 2020) that
effectively evaluates different digital contact tracing solutions on offer today
in terms of their safety and effectiveness (sensitivity and specificity), interface
accessibility, user acceptance, equitable access across different age groups and
communities, privacy protection and associated ethical issues when compared
with traditional contact tracing in real world epidemic settings [6]. Despite
their promised potential to help identify more contacts, the actual effectiveness
of digital contact tracing solutions remains unproven [43], and they are unlikely
to fit to be used as the sole method of contact tracing to rely upon during
an outbreak. Therefore, there is an urgent need to conduct robust research to
address these aspects and provide sufficient evidence about how we can best use
digital solutions alongside manual methods for optimal epidemic control.

21

5.2. Scalablity of Existing Contact Tracing Systems
The effectiveness of the current digital contact tracing applications is directly proportional to the adoption rate of these apps by the masses. This
can be increased through voluntary user adoption by expanding the current
IoT infrastructure and providing strong privacy guarantees. Singapore government has recently rolled out their COVID tracking tokens targeting population
groups with low smartphone ownership or mastery, especially the elderly who
are not tech-savvy [44]. Although there are still concerns about user data privacy with the voluntary adoptions of these technologies, scalability can be increased. Users’ confidence regarding the preservation of their privacy-sensitive
information in current digital contact tracing applications can be strengthened
to enhance the voluntary adoption of these technologies.
5.3. Improving the technological impediments
Several technological impediments restrict the use of digital contact tracing technologies. These include inaccuracy in distance estimations using BLE
signal strength values, interoperability of different apps based on different architectures, and guarantees regarding privacy and security of data collected
through these apps [8]. Research in these areas will complement the digital
contact tracing platform’s adoption rate to supplement manual contact tracing.

6. Emerging Technologies in Digital Contact Tracing
Several emerging technologies have a high potential of being useful in the
context of digital contact tracing. These emerging technologies include Computer Vision (CV), Artificial Intelligence (AI), Machine Intelligence (MI), and
various kinds of sensors (ultrasound, visible sensors, and thermal) [45]. A brief
introduction of these technologies and how they can be used for contact-tracing
purposes is provided in this section.
1. Computer Vision, Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning

22

Computer Vision (CV) is a technology in which computers are trained to
interpret and understand visual images and videos. With the application
of AI (e.g., deep learning and pattern recognition), CV can detect and classify any objects using visual data. Using the capabilities of CV based on
smart cameras, we can encourage and enforce social distancing by person
re-identification for positive cases, estimating distances between persons,
and detecting crowds. Sometimes the biases in the data can lead to the
misrepresentation of the CV algorithms. Therefore, the use of CV application in conjunction with other technologies can provide a reasonable
accuracy.
2. Ultrasound
Ultrasonic or Ultrasonic Positioning System (UPS) is an indoor environment communication technology with an accuracy of centimeters [46]. In
UPS, ultrasonic beacons or nodes are used, which periodically broadcast
ultrasonic pulses or Radio Frequency (RF) signals with unique IDs. Using
these messages, the users’ positions can be detected by the position calculation methods such as trilateration and triangulation [47]. As compared
to RF technologies, these ultrasonic pulses are not affected by electromagnetic interference. However, it is limited to the indoor environment with
short-range coverage. Therefore, UPS application in contact tracing can
be useful in an indoor environment, especially for high accuracy.
3. Visible Sensors
The emergence of Light Emitting Diodes (LEDs) has provided attractive features of visible lights such as security, privacy, and robustness
[48, 49, 50]. Visible Light Communication (VLC) has two components,
which include light transmitters and light receivers. It can provide effective measures in maintaining social distancing while providing precise
location and navigation in an indoor environment, especially in the epidemic setting, in monitoring quarantined persons and crowd detection.
Due to the low cost and ease of installation VLC receivers can be used as
tags and integrated into mobile targets such as shopping carts and robots
23

to avoid the build-up of crowds.
4. Thermal
Thermal-based positioning is classified into two main categories: Infrared
Positioning (IRP) and Thermal Imaging Camera (TIC). IRPs systems
[51, 52] is considered low-cost, short-range systems (e.g., 10 meters) that
can measure the positions of the targets, while TICs can construct the
images of the objects from heat emission and operate up to kilometers.
By combining IRPs and TICs, social distancing can be monitored in both
the indoor and outdoor environments. Based on the images of the TICs,
the position between two individuals can be calculated, and crowd forming
can be avoided.

7. Conclusions
There has been wide international adoption of digital contact tracing applications in the aftermath of the COVID-19 pandemic. Digital contact tracing is
more scalable than manual contact tracing, with the potential of picking contacts
that are otherwise untraceable manually, such as encounters with strangers in
public transport or a coffee shop. Although several research works have reviewed
contract tracing applications and techniques, we present in this paper a thorough analysis of contact tracing applications and techniques in the light of initial
deployment experiences of these digital contact tracing technologies and highlight their successes, failures, and pitfalls. Digital contact tracing applications
have faced issues, such as low mobile phone penetration, poor user adoption,
and privacy concerns, to name a few. In this regard, we discuss how different
countries and applications have made different trade-offs and have therefore experienced different amounts of success in effectively combating COVID-19. It
is noted that while digital contact tracing apps have their strengths, it is not a
panacea; a multi-pronged COVID-19 response requires digital contact tracing
along with complements such as manual contact tracing, effective coordination
and use of preventive measures such as quarantine isolation, social distancing,

24

hygiene control, and the use of face masks.

References
[1] N. Ferguson, D. Laydon, G. Nedjati Gilani, N. Imai, K. Ainslie,
M. Baguelin, S. Bhatia, A. Boonyasiri, Z. Cucunuba Perez, G. CuomoDannenburg, A. Dighe, I. Dorigatti, H. Fu, K. Gaythorpe, W. Green,
A. Hamlet, W. Hinsley, L. Okell, S. Van Elsland, H. Thompson, R. Verity, E. Volz, H. Wang, Y. Wang, P. Walker, P. Winskill, C. Whittaker,
C. Donnelly, S. Riley, A. Ghani, Report 9: Impact of non-pharmaceutical
interventions (npis) to reduce covid19 mortality and healthcare demanddoi:10.25561/77482.
URL http://spiral.imperial.ac.uk/handle/10044/1/77482
[2] S. Latif, M. Usman, S. Manzoor, W. Iqbal, J. Qadir, G. Tyson, I. Castro,
A. Razi, M. N. K. Boulos, A. Weller, et al., Leveraging data science to
combat covid-19: A comprehensive review, IEEE Transactions on Artificial
Intelligence.
[3] V. Chamola, V. Hassija, V. Gupta, M. Guizani, A comprehensive review
of the covid-19 pandemic and the role of iot, drones, ai, blockchain, and 5g
in managing its impact, IEEE Access 8 (2020) 90225–90265.
[4] F. Rahimi, A. Talebi Bezmin Abadi, Tackling the covid-19 pandemic,

Archives of Medical Research 51 (5) (2020) 468 – 470.

doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.arcmed.2020.04.012.
URL

http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/

S0188440920305257
[5] K. T. D. Eames, M. J. Keeling, Contact tracing and disease control, Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series B: Biological Sciences
270 (1533) (2003) 2565–2571. doi:10.1098/rspb.2003.2554.
URL https://doi.org/10.1098/rspb.2003.2554

25

[6] A. Anglemyer, T. H. Moore, L. Parker, T. Chambers, A. Grady, K. Chiu,
M. Parry, M. Wilczynska, E. Flemyng, L. Bero, Digital contact tracing
technologies in epidemics: a rapid review, Cochrane Database of Systematic
Reviewsdoi:10.1002/14651858.cd013699.
URL https://doi.org/10.1002/14651858.cd013699
[7] P. H. O’Neill, T. Ryan-Mosley, B. Johnson, A flood of Coronavirus Apps
are tracking us. Now it is time to keep track of them, MIT Technology
Review, 2020.
[8] N. Ahmed, R. A. Michelin, W. Xue, S. Ruj, R. Malaney, S. S. Kanhere,
A. Seneviratne, W. Hu, H. Janicke, S. Jha, A survey of COVID-19 contact tracing apps, IEEE ACCESS 10.1109/ACCESS.2020.3010226 (2020)
134577–134601.
[9] R. J. HSJ, Nhs developing coronavirus contact tracking app, https://www.
hsj.co.uk/ (Mar 2020).
[10] Pepp-pt. pan-european privacy-preserving proximity tracing., URL:https:
//www.pepp-pt.org/ (2020).
[11] Google inc. apple and google partner on COVID-19 contact tracing technology, https://www.blog.google/ (Apr 2020).
[12] Contact-tracing
19

crisis,

apps

are

not

a

solution

to

the

COVID-

https://www.brookings.edu/techstream/

inaccurate-and-insecure-why-contact-tracing-apps-could-be-a-disaster/.
[13] K. Michael, R. Abbas, Behind covid-19 contact trace apps:

The

google–apple partnership, IEEE Consumer Electronics Magazine 9 (5)
(2020) 71–76.
[14] C. T. Nguyen, Y. M. Saputra, N. V. Huynh, N. Nguyen, T. V. Khoa, B. M.
Tuan, D. N. Nguyen, D. T. Hoang, T. X. Vu, E. Dutkiewicz, S. Chatzinotas,

26

B. Ottersten, A comprehensive survey of enabling and emerging technologies for social distancing—part i: Fundamentals and enabling technologies,
IEEE Access 8 (2020) 153479–153507.
[15] C. Yang, H. Shao, Wifi-based indoor positioning, IEEE Communications
Magazine 53 (3) (2015) 150–157.
[16] S. Mazuelas, A. Bahillo, R. M. Lorenzo, P. Fernandez, F. A. Lago, E. Garcia, J. Blas, E. J. Abril, Robust indoor positioning provided by real-time
rssi values in unmodified wlan networks, IEEE Journal of Selected Topics
in Signal Processing 3 (5) (2009) 821–831.
[17] J. Lim, W. Jang, G. Yoon, D. Han, Radio map update automation for wifi
positioning systems, IEEE Communications Letters 17 (4) (2013) 693–696.
[18] N.

Todtenberg,

multi-hop

R.

networks,

Kraemer,
Ad

Hoc

A

survey

Networks

93

on

bluetooth

(2019)

101922.

doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.adhoc.2019.101922.
URL

http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/

S157087051930126X
[19] Trace together, https://www.tracetogether.gov.sg/.
[20] The

Chinese

cation.

(in

QR

code

Mandarin

scanning
Chinese),

based

contact

tracing

appli-

https://mp.weixin.qq.com/s/

amB7fBxLw8KSR9DcUsbTWg.
[21] L. Luoh, ZigBee-based intelligent indoor positioning system soft computing,
Soft Computing 18 (3) (2013) 443–456. doi:10.1007/s00500-013-1067-x.
URL https://doi.org/10.1007/s00500-013-1067-x
[22] J. Shen, H. Duan, B. Zhang, J. Wang, J. S. Ji, J. Wang, L. Pan, X. Wang,
K. Zhao, B. Ying, S. Tang, J. Zhang, C. Liang, H. Sun, Y. Lv, Y. Li, T. Li,
L. Li, H. Liu, L. Zhang, L. Wang, X. Shi, Prevention and control of covid-19
in public transportation: Experience from china, Environmental Pollution

27

266 (2020) 115291. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envpol.2020.115291.
URL

http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/

S0269749120359790
[23] L. Garg, E. Chukwu, N. Nasser, C. Chakraborty, G. Garg, Anonymity
preserving iot-based covid-19 and other infectious disease contact tracing
model, IEEE Access 8 (2020) 159402–159414.
[24] A. Polenta, P. Rignanese, P. Sernani, N. Falcionelli, D. N. Mekuria,
S. Tomassini, A. F. Dragoni, An internet of things approach to contact tracing—the bubblebox system, Information 11 (7). doi:10.3390/info11070347.
URL https://www.mdpi.com/2078-2489/11/7/347
[25] Covid

tracing

tracker

-

read

only,

https://docs.google.com/

spreadsheets/d/1ATalASO8KtZMx__zJREoOvFh0nmB-sAqJ1-CjVRSCOw/
edit#gid=0.
[26] Computing Community Consortium (CCC). Contact tracing for all? Bridging the accessibility gap for contact tracing, https://www.cccblog.org.
[27] Statista.
2018,

Smartphone

Ownership

Rate

by

Country

https://www.statista.com/statistics/539395/

smartphone-penetration-worldwide-by-country/.
[28] W. Naudé, R. Vinuesa, Data, global development, and COVID-19: Lessons
and consequences, WIDER Working Paper Series wp-2020-109, World Institute for Development Economic Research (UNU-WIDER) (2020).
URL https://ideas.repec.org/p/unu/wpaper/wp-2020-109.html
[29] T. Altuwaiyan, M. Hadian, X. Liang, EPIC: Efficient privacy-preserving
contact tracing for infection detection, in: 2018 IEEE International Conference on Communications (ICC), 2018, pp. 1–6.
[30] A. Prasad, D. Kotz, ENACT: Encounter-based architecture for contact
tracing, in: Proceedings of the 4th International on Workshop on Physical

28

Analytics, WPA ’17, Association for Computing Machinery, New York,
NY, USA, 2017, p. 37–42. doi:10.1145/3092305.3092310.
URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3092305.3092310
[31] R. Vinuesa, H. Azizpour, I. Leite, M. Balaam, V. Dignum, S. Domisch,
A. Felländer, S. D. Langhans, M. Tegmark, F. F. Nerini, The role of artificial intelligence in achieving the sustainable development goals, Nature
Communications 11 (1). doi:10.1038/s41467-019-14108-y.
URL https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-14108-y
[32] V. Dignum, Responsible Artificial Intelligence, Springer International Publishing, 2019. doi:10.1007/978-3-030-30371-6.
URL https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-30371-6
[33] J. Morley, J. Cowls, M. Taddeo, L. Floridi, Ethical guidelines for COVID19 tracing apps, Nature 582 (7810) (2020) 29–31. doi:10.1038/d41586-02001578-0.
URL https://doi.org/10.1038/d41586-020-01578-0
[34] L. Ferretti, C. Wymant, M. Kendall, L. Zhao, A. Nurtay, L. Abeler-Dörner,
M. Parker, D. Bonsall, C. Fraser, Quantifying SARS-CoV-2 transmission
suggests epidemic control with digital contact tracing, Science 368 (6491)
(2020) eabb6936. doi:10.1126/science.abb6936.
URL https://doi.org/10.1126/science.abb6936
[35] J. Fournet, A. Barrat, Epidemic risk from friendship network data: an
equivalence with a non-uniform sampling of contact networks, Scientific
Reports 6 (1). doi:10.1038/srep24593.
URL https://doi.org/10.1038/srep24593
[36] A. J. Kucharski, P. Klepac, A. Conlan, S. M. Kissler, M. Tang, H. Fry,
J. Gog, J. E. and, Effectiveness of isolation, testing, contact tracing and
physical distancing on reducing transmission of SARS-CoV-2 in different
settingsdoi:10.1101/2020.04.23.20077024.
URL https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.23.20077024
29

[37] H. Kim, A. Paul, Contact tracing: a game of big numbers in the time of
covid-19 (2020). arXiv:2004.10762.
[38] R. Abbas, K. Michael, Covid-19 contact trace app deployments: Learnings
from australia and singapore, IEEE Consumer Electronics Magazine 9 (5)
(2020) 65–70.
[39] R. Vinuesa, A. Theodorou, M. Battaglini, V. Dignum, A socio-technical
framework for digital contact tracing, Results in Engineering 8 (2020)
100163.
[40] A. Ferrari, E. Santus, D. Cirillo, M. P. de Leon, N. Marino, M. T. Ferretti,
A. S. Chadha, N. Mavridis, A. Valencia, Simulating SARS-CoV-2 epidemics
by region-specific variables and modeling contact tracing app containment,
npj Digital Medicine 4 (1). doi:10.1038/s41746-020-00374-4.
URL https://doi.org/10.1038/s41746-020-00374-4
[41] How
tact

finland
tracing

got

20%

app

in

of

its
one

population
day,

to

download

a

con-

https://qz.com/1898960/

whats-behind-finlands-contact-tracing-app-success-user-privacy/.
[42] Why some countries suspended, replaced, or relaunched their covid
apps,

https://www.technologyreview.com/2020/12/23/1015557/

covid-apps-contact-tracing-suspended-replaced-or-relaunched/.
[43] I. Braithwaite, T. Callender, M. Bullock, R. W. Aldridge, Automated and
partially-automated contact tracing: a rapid systematic review to inform
the control of COVID-19doi:10.1101/2020.05.27.20114447.
URL https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.27.20114447
[44] Singapore rolls out covid tracing tokens, https://www.bbc.com/news/av/
world-asia-54206824.
[45] C. T. Nguyen, Y. M. Saputra, N. Van Huynh, N. Nguyen, T. V. Khoa, B. M.
Tuan, D. N. Nguyen, D. T. Hoang, T. X. Vu, E. Dutkiewicz, S. Chatzinotas,

30

B. Ottersten, A comprehensive survey of enabling and emerging technologies for social distancing—part ii: Emerging technologies and open issues,
IEEE Access 8 (2020) 154209–154236.
[46] S. Holm, Airborne ultrasound data communications: the core of an indoor
positioning system, in: IEEE Ultrasonics Symposium, 2005., Vol. 3, 2005,
pp. 1801–1804.
[47] S. Holm, Ultrasound positioning based on time-of-flight and signal strength,
in: 2012 International Conference on Indoor Positioning and Indoor Navigation (IPIN), 2012, pp. 1–6.
[48] T. Komine, M. Nakagawa, Fundamental analysis for visible-light communication system using led lights, IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics
50 (1) (2004) 100–107.
[49] S. Rajagopal, R. D. Roberts, S. Lim, Ieee 802.15.7 visible light communication: modulation schemes and dimming support, IEEE Communications
Magazine 50 (3) (2012) 72–82.
[50] P. H. Pathak, X. Feng, P. Hu, P. Mohapatra, Visible light communication, networking, and sensing: A survey, potential and challenges, IEEE
Communications Surveys Tutorials 17 (4) (2015) 2047–2077.
[51] E. Aitenbichler, M. Muhlhauser, An ir local positioning system for smart
items and devices, in: 23rd International Conference on Distributed Computing Systems Workshops, 2003. Proceedings., 2003, pp. 334–339.
[52] R.
the
of
16.

A.

States,

optotrak
Medical

E.

Pappas,

3020

motion

Engineering

&

Precision

and

measurement
Technology

30

repeatability
system,
(1)

of

Journal

(2006)

11–

arXiv:https://doi.org/10.1080/03091900512331304556,

doi:10.1080/03091900512331304556.
URL https://doi.org/10.1080/03091900512331304556

31

