Development of An Assessment Benchmark for
Synchronous Online Learning for Nigerian
Universities
Modesta Ezema1, Boniface Nworgu2,3 , Deborah Ebem1 , Stephenson Echezona1,
Celestine Ugwu1 , Assumpta Ezugwu1, Asogwa. Chika1 , Ekene Ozioko4 , Elochukwu Ukwandu5

arXiv:2103.07215v1 [cs.CY] 12 Mar 2021

1

5

Dept. of Computer Science, Faculty of Physical Science, University of Nigeria, Nsukka, Nigeria.
2
Dept. of Science Education, Faculty of Education, University of Nigeria, Nsukka, Nigeria.
3
Centre for Distance and E-Learning, University of Nigeria, Nsukka, Nigeria.
4
School of Mathematical, Physics and Computational Science, University of Reading, United Kingdom.
Dept. of Computer Science, Cardiff School of Technologies, Cardiff Metropolitan University, United Kingdom.
E-mail addresses: (modesta.ezema, boniface.nworgu, debora.ebem, stephenson.echezona, celestine.ugwu
assumpta.ezugwu, chika.asogwa.181578)@unn.edu.ng
e.f.ozioko@pgr.reading.ac.uk, eaukwandu@cardiffmet.ac.uk
Corresponding author: Elochukwu Ukwandu

Abstract—In recent times, as a result of COVID-19 pandemic,
higher institutions in Nigeria have been shutdown and the
leadership of Academic Staff Union of University (ASUU) said
that Nigerian universities cannot afford to mount Online learning
platforms let alone conduct such learning system in Nigeria due
to lack of infrastructure, capacity and skill sets in the face of
COVID-19 pandemic. In the light of this, this research undertook
an online survey using University of Nigeria, Nsukka (UNN) as a
case study to know which type of online learning system ASUU
leadership is talking about - Asynchronous or Synchronous?
How did ASUU come about their facts? Did ASUU base their
assertion on facts, if YES, what are the benchmarks? Therefore,
this research project is focused on providing benchmarks to
assess if a Nigerian University has what it takes to run a
synchronous Online Learning. It includes Infrastructure needed
(Hardware, Software, Network connectivity), Skill sets from staff
(Computer literacy level). In a bid to do this, an online survey
was administered to the staff of Centre for Distance and Elearning of UNN and out of the 40 members of that section
of the University, we had 32 respondents. The survey seeks to
find whether UNN has the requisite infrastructure and the skill
sets to mount synchronous online learning. The results of the
study reveal that the infrastructure domain of the questionnaire
consist of 13 questions. Therefore, the maximum scores that a
respondent can have is 13. From Table II below, only 3 (9.4%)
respondents scored 13. This shows that the rating for excellence is
quite low among the population sampled, hence we conclude that
University of Nigeria, Nsukka does not have the infrastructure to
mount synchronous online learning. The Skills sets domain of the
questionnaire consist of 18 questions. Therefore, the maximum
scores that a respondent can have is 18. From Table I below,
only 8 (25%) respondents scored 18. This shows that the rating
for excellence is quite low among the population sampled as
they were not even up to 50%. This shows that University of
Nigeria, Nsukka does not have the skill sets required to mount
synchronous online learning.

Keywords: online learning, infrastructure, skill set, university,
benchmark

I. I NTRODUCTION
Synchronous online learning is one aspect of virtual
learning, which involves using computer technologies to
provide real-time virtualised education to those who due
to various reasons are unable to enroll for full face-to-face
academic programmes in the University. Given computer
access, it is believed that, people can then use the Information
and Communication Technology (ICT) tool to do all sorts of
things that improve their socio-economic status. This form
of education has undeniably made learning more flexible
and convenient in terms of time, cost and what is on offer.
However, in spite of the obvious advantages of this form of
education, the issue of standard and quality control remains
paramount.
According to Ilechukwu [1], the issue of quality assurance
in online learning was not in place until 2009 when the
National Universities Commission (NUC) in charge of the
quality assurance in Nigerian universities established a unit
to ensure quality in online learning according to Owoye [2].
The spontaneous growth of computers, the internet and other
electronic devices provide global opportunities for education,
especially for learning outside the school premises, according
to [3].
A key aspect of the online learning is that it does not rank
institutions, but rather acknowledges the reality that all
institutions will have aspects of strength and weakness that
can be learnt from and improved. The rapid growth in the
technologies being used, the ways that they are being applied
across an ever widening group of academic disciplines and the
evolving skills and experience of teachers and students means
that online learning is a moving target. Any benchmarking
approach that presumes particular online learning technologies

or pedagogies is unlikely to meaningfully assess a range of
institutions within a single country and beyond, according to
marshal [4].
This research through questionaire analysis is trying to find
out whether Universities in Nigeria has what it takes to do
synchronous online learning using University of Nigeria,
Nsukka as case study.
II. L ITERATURE R EVIEW
A. The concept of online learning
Eze et al. in [5] defined online learning as an aggregate
of a digitally empowered learning framework that utilises
hardware for example, Personal Computers, Tablets, digital
cameras, videos, overhead projector and so on. Software,
such as: operating systems, cloud technologies, applications,
etc and others such as: Universal Serial Bus (USB) drives,
Compact Disk textbooks, electronic content, etc., either from
a distance or face-to-face classroom setting to empower and
facilitate teacher to student interactions. In essence, online
learning moves the citadel of learning from the traditional
approach - (teacher-focused), to a module-driven, Information
and Communication Technology (ICT)-based customisable
learning approach (student-focused). Online learning provides
the framework and empowers students and teachers to
produce, progress, and share learning content in a more
regular structure [6].
Raja et al. in [7] lists the advantages of ICT and online
learning in education as follows:
• It makes the learning process more exciting for the
students.
• Helps students learn at their own pace, especially for
those in work and study programmes.
• It can serve as a great skill acquisition process for
students to learn new ICT skills they can use later in
the workplace.
• Decrease paper and photocopying costs, which is also
good for the environment and promotes the ”green
revolution” concept.
B. Online learning adoption in Nigerian institutions
Each year, a very high percentage of prospective students
seeking admission into Nigerian higher education institutions
are turned back. At the same time, those admitted are congested in large classrooms benefiting little or nothing from
their lectures. Online learning has emerged as a solution to
these challenges. Research indicates that computer technology can help support learning and useful in developing the
higher-order skills of critical thinking, analysis, and scientific
inquiry [8].
The authors in [9] investigated the availability of
facilities for e-learning and e-learning materials in Nigerian
Universities. From their study, a total of two hundred and
twenty-eight (228) students constituted the sample for the

study in the six geopolitical zones of Nigeria. They used
percentages statistics in analysing data of the study. Their
study shows that in Nigeria, a formidable obstacle to using
ICT in education and other sectors is infrastructure deficit,
known as digital poverty. The majority of the students
reported that their Universities do not have an e-learning
library domain, neither do they organise online seminars
(webinars), discussions and examination. These are perhaps
due to limited bandwidth within their school environment
as well as the requiste technical know-hows. The authors
in [5] also listed the instructors’ inability to assist students in
building up capacity and information needed to adequately
utilise e-learning facilities as a significant barrier for online
learning adoption in Nigeria.
C. Review of related literature
Different researches have been published in this field. In this
section, we will present a few of this literature. Wilson in [10],
reviewed the current state of affairs in Nigeria’s University
education policies. The author emphasised the urgent need to
revitalise the deteriorating system by introducing and standardisation of online learning platforms supported by cutting-edge
information technology tools. The author investigated some
vital issues with online learning in Nigeria, including:
• Whether or not the Nigerian government has laws and
policies to support equitable access to education at the
university level?
• Whether or not the purpose of University education
in Nigeria could be satisfied through online learning
systems?
• Whether or not an online learning system could be
rightly run to offer an alternative mode of learning and
complement the traditional university system. These are
in relation to the technological advancements around the
globe and the promotion and acceptance of such mode
of learning in developed countries?
In [11], the authors developed an e-learning strategy for
open and distance education programmes in Nigeria. They
argued that the problems confronting Nigerian education,
especially the higher education sector, demand a rethinking
in the design of learning experiences, courses and delivery
mode, teacher-student contact, and the academic role. Their
e-learning framework was tagged AASCE Framework
for Quality E-learning Strategy, while the AASCE is an
acronym for Administration, Analysis, Institutional Strategy,
Courseware Development, and Evaluation.
The author in [12] investigated e-learning acceptance and
assimilation of students in the King Khalid University,
Saudi Arabia. The author surveyed 286 participants
(students) and used structural equation modeling for
data analysis to determine the factors influencing the
learners’ intention to use e-learning. The result shows
the predicting (promoting/inhibiting) factors of e-learning
technology acceptance, while also examining some related

post-implementation interventions expected to contribute to
the acceptance and assimilation of e-learning systems. The
results also outline valuable outcomes such as managerial
interventions and controls for better organisational e-learning
management, leading to greater acceptance and effective
utilisation.
In [13], the author examined the prospects and challenges
of the New Partnership for Africa’s Development (NEPAD)
e-schools initiative. The author evaluated the prospects
and challenges the e-schools face in Africa’s collaborative
initiatives under the auspices of the NEPAD. The author
identified the need for political goodwill and African
governments’ support for the project to be fully realised.
Liverpool et al. in [14] detailed the experience the
University of Jos faced in its six-year effort to implement an
e-learning initiative in Mathematics with support from the
Carnegie Corporation of New York, Hewlett Packard, and the
World Bank-sponsored Science and Technology Education
Post-Basic (STEPB) Project.
In [15], the authors developed a model framework for
studying technology’s impact on education. Their research’s
primary outcome was to demonstrate the usefulness of the
three-part model for evaluating the impact of technology in
education.
The three-part model consists of:
• Anticipatory (such as the discourses and rhetoric of
policy, design and intentions, opinion and attitudes);
• Ongoing (processes of integration, including practices of
staff development); and
• Achieved (summative studies, particularly of technology
that is no longer considered ’novel’)
Alabi in [16], investigated the Nigerian undergraduate
students’ readiness for e-learning. The authors collected data
with the use of questions and observation methods from 1,450
undergraduate students of the University of Lagos, Nigeria.
The study showed that students are ready for e-learning, and
have the right learning attitude. The study also revealed that
about half of the students have laptop as one of the personal
technologies for e learning.
Shonola et al. in [17], examined the impact of the
educational use of mobile devices/technology in supporting
the learning process in Nigerian Universities. They sampled
240 university students with questionnaires with the aim of
exploring students’ interactions with their portable gadgets.
Their result showed increased use of mobile technology for
academic-related activities by the students.
Agbo in [18] investigated the factors that hinder the use of
ICT in teaching and learning Computer studies in Ohaukwu
Local Government Area of Ebonyi State. The study was
carried out on ten (10) secondary schools in Ohaukwu Local

Government Area and indicated some influential factors like;
the low level of accessibility and cost of ICT equipment, lack
of ICT training to teachers, Teachers and Students attitude
towards computer usage, and lack of parents and community
support as the major factors hindering the use of ICT in
teaching and learning of computer studies in Ohaukwu Local
Government Area of Ebonyi State.
Mojaye [19] examined mobile phones’ evolution in Nigeria
and its positive and negative impact on Nigerian higher
education institutions’ students. The author listed some
of the positives of mobile phone usage by students to
include; easy access to information and mobile phones as a
convenient teaching tool. The author also listed classroom
distraction, cheating, and reduced cognitive ability as some
of the Adverse effects of mobile phone usage among students.
Adedokun-Shittu in [20] examined the impact of ICT
deployment in teaching and learning in Nigeria. In the study,
survey data was sampled from 593 respondents (students
and lecturers) using a mixed-method design consisting of
qualitative and quantitative procedures. This study produced
a model conceived as a conceptual framework for researchers
on impact assessment and comprising; Positive effect,
Integration, Incentives, and Challenges.
From the above analysis none has thought of the developing
assessment benchmark for online learning in Nigerian universities.
III. M ATERIALS S ELECTION
The material selection for this work involved an ordered and
systematic process in analysing and eliminating unsuitable materials and identifying the ones which are the most suitable for
this analysis. The material used for this analysis involved the
design, development, distribution, and response collection of
questioners containing the parameters of e-learning indicators.
IV. R ESEARCH M ETHOD
The goal of this assessment benchmark is to formulate
strengths, weaknesses, and areas for enhancement through an
analysis of the current status to suggest desirable states of
affairs and contributes to the e-learning transformation process.
The questionnaire design method suggested by [21] was used.
The strategies utilised in the collection of data for this analysis
to uncover the assessment benchmark for synchronous online
learning involve 32 sample questionnaires. This methodology
contains 3 stages:
• Development of the questionnaire: The analysis parameters used in developing the questions were measured
with the approved Nigerian University Commission’s
benchmark adapted for e-learning.
• Question distribution and collection from respondents:
The sample size used were 32 staff of Center for distance
learning University of Nigeria Nsukka.

•

Comparative analysis of the results: The response from
the questionnaire were analysed using the Nation Universities Commission (NUC) benchmark to inform our
recommendation.
V. R ESULTS

This section presents the result of our analysis. The following hypotheses were tested:
H0: University of Nigeria, Nsukka has the skill set to mount
synchronous online learning.
H1: University of Nigeria, Nsukka does not have the skill
set to mount synchronous online learning.
H20: University of Nigeria, Nsukka has the infrastructure
to mount synchronous online learning.
H21: University of Nigeria, Nsukka does not have the
infrastructure to mount synchronous online learning. Table 1
below the result of the skill set readiness of University of
Nigeria, Nsukka.
TABLE I: Skill Sets Assessment Scores for Synchronous online
learning
Scores
3
8
9
10
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
Total

Frequency
2
1
1
2
2
2
2
4
7
1
8
32

Percent
6.3
3.1
3.1
6.3
6.3
6.3
6.3
12.5
21.9
3.1
25.0
100.0

Valid Percent
6.3
3.1
3.1
6.3
6.3
6.3
6.3
12.5
21.9
3.1
25.0
100.0

Cumulative Percent
6.3
9.4
12.5
18.8
25.0
31.3
37.5
50.0
71.9
75.0
100.0

The skills sets domain of the questionnaire consist of 18
questions. Therefore, the maximum score that a respondent can
have is 18. From the Table I above, only 8 (25%) respondents
scored 18. This shows that the rating for excellence is quite
low among the population sampled. They were not even up to
50%. This shows that University of Nigeria, Nsukka does not
have the skill set to mount synchronous online learning. Table
II below gives the result for infrastructural readiness.
TABLE II: Infrastructure Assessment scores for Synchronous online
learning
Scores
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
Total

Frequency
1
3
2
1
3
4
3
1
7
4
3
32

Percent
3.1
9.4
6.3
3.1
9.4
12.5
9.4
3.1
21.9
12.5
9.4
100.0

Valid Percent
3.1
9.4
6.3
3.1
9.4
12.5
9.4
3.1
21.9
12.5
9.4
100.0

Cumulative Percent
3.1
12.5
18.8
21.9
31.3
43.8
53.1
56.3
78.1
90.6
100.0

The infrastructure domain of the questionnaire consist of 13
questions. Therefore, the maximum scores that a respondent

can have is 13. From Table II above, only 3 (9.4%) respondents
scored 13. This shows that the rating for excellence is quite
low among the population sampled. They were not even up to
25%. This shows that University of Nigeria, Nsukka does not
have the infrastructure to mount online learning.
VI. R ESULT D ISCUSSIONS
This study tends to assess the infrastructural and
skills readiness of Nigerian universities to mount online
learning using University of Nigeria, Nsukka as case study.
Infrastructure is one of the benchmark for the actualisation
of online learning in any university worldwide. Nine items
were considered under infrastructure to assess the readiness
of Nigerian universities to mount online learning. We present
the descriptive findings of participants’ assessment. The
responses of the 32 respondents under the infrastructure
category are presented in Table I. The result shows that
16 respondents which represent 50% of all the respondents
agreed that during COVID-19, the entire learner support
infrastructure at University of Nigeria, Nsukka had to change
from mostly face-to-face to completely online learning while
15 respondents which represent 46.9% of all the respondents
disagreed and 1 respondent which represent 3.1% of all the
respondents were indifferent.
The result shows that 22 respondents, which represent
68.8% of all the respondents agreed that University of
Nigeria, Nsukka has e-learning laboratory for courseware
development, while only 4 respondents which represent 12.5%
of all the respondents disagreed and 6 respondents which
represent 18.8% of all the respondents were indifferent. Also,
20 respondents which represent 62.5% of all the respondents
agreed to have made use of the following authoring tools
during the courseware development: MS Powerpoint,
Microsoft Word processor, text, audio, animation, others
while 10 respondents which represent 28.1% of all the
respondents disagreed and 2 respondents which represent
6.3% of all the respondents were indifferent. Availability
of steady internet is vital to online learning and the result
indicates that University of Nigeria, Nsukka can afford steady
supply of broadband to drive online learning. 23 respondents,
which represent 71.9% of all the respondents agree that
University of Nigeria, Nsukka can afford steady supply of
broadband to drive online learning, while 7 respondents
which represent 21.9% of all the respondents disagree and 2
respondents which represent 6.3% of all the respondents were
indifferent. On the availability of adequate internet equipment,
16 respondents which represent 50.1% of all the respondents
agreed that University of Nigeria, Nsukka possesses enough
Internet equipment to drive e-learning while 14 respondents
which represent 43.8% of all the respondents disagreed and
2 respondents which represent 6.3% of all the respondents
were indifferent.
On the issue of power supply, 19 respondents which
represent 59.4% of all the respondents agreed that there is

poor power supp in University of Nigeria, Nsukka while 11
respondents which represent 34.4% of all the respondents
disagreed and 2 respondents which represent 6.3% of all the
respondents were indifferent. This suggests that there is poor
power supply in University of Nigeria, Nsukka. Computer
based test center is a key infrastructure to be considered
in assessing the readiness of a university to mount online
learning especially for examination purpose. The result of
this study reveals that 30 respondents which represent 93.7%
agree that University of Nigeria, Nsukka have Computer
based Test Center while 1 respondent which represent 3.1%
of all the respondents disagree and 2 respondents which
represent 6.3% of all the respondents were indifferent. This
result suggests that University of Nigeria Nsukka have
Computer based Test Center.
This study further reveals the capacity of the Computerbased Test Center. 25 respondents which represent 78.1%
of all the respondents agree that more than one department
can conduct examination concurrently in the computer based
center while 6 respondent which represent 15.6% of all the
respondents disagree and 1 respondent which represent 3.1%
of all the respondents were indifferent This suggests that
the Computer-based Test Center can accommodate several
departments concurrently during any examination.
For the skill set, 2 items were considered to assess the
readiness of Nigerian universities to mount online learning.
The responses of the 32 respondents under the skill set
category are presented in Table II. The result shows that 27
respondents, which represent 84.4% of all the respondents
agreed that University of Nigeria, Nsukka can boast of
qualified Technologists and Engineers to man the ICT in
their various campuses while 3 respondents which represent
9.4% of all the respondents disagreed and 2 respondents
which represent 6.3% of all the respondents were indifferent.
Also, 27 respondents which represent 84.4% of all the
respondents agreed that University of Nigeria, Nsukka can
boast of qualified content editors across all fields to drive the
courseware for e-learning while 3 respondents which represent
9.4% of all the respondents disagreed and 2 respondents
which represent 6.3% of all the respondents were indifferent.
Moreover, in order to determine the readiness of
the University for Synchronous Online Learning, both
infrastructure and skill set assessment scores were used, and
the benchmark for the score for each of the component is
100%.
From the result, it was discovered that only 8 respondents
out of 32 as shown in Table I scored the University 100%
in the aspect of skill set. This number just represents only
25% of the entire respondents. Hence, University of Nigeria,
Nsukka is not ready in the aspect of skill set for Synchronous
Online Learning.

It was equally found from the result that only 3 respondents
as shown in Table II scored the University 100% in the area
of infrastructure. The 3 respondents here represent only
9.4% of the sample size which shows also that University of
Nigeria, Nsukka is still not ready for Synchronous Online
Learning in terms of infrastructure.
Since the percentage representation of the respondents
that scored the University 100% is very far below the
100% benchmark in terms of skill set and infrastructure, we
conclude that University of Nigeria, Nsukka is not ready for
Synchronous Online Learning.
VII. R ECOMMENDATION

AND FUTURE WORK

With the outbreak of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19)
and the fast spread of the disease across the globe, there is
an urgent need for the stakeholders in education sectors to
redefine the teaching and learning methods, more especially
in developing countries like Nigeria. The government,
education board, teachers and students need to come together
to strategise on how to shift from the traditional face-to-face
learning to online learning or blended learning. This will
help to curtail the spread of the disease and also forestall the
closing down of schools occasioned by the virus. To actualise
this dream, adequate provision of online learning facilities
and continuous training and retraining lecturers, students and
all other personnel involved in teaching and learning must be
ensured.
In this paper, a pilot study was conducted to find out how
ready universities in Nigeria are for online learning using
University of Nigeria, Nsukka as a case study. The direction
of our future study will be to carry out the updated version
of the survey in which other universities with online learning
approval from Nigerian Universities Commission (NUC) will
be incorporated into our research scope. Moreover, an experimental research to establish the readiness of these universities
or their level of preparedness as regards online learning will
also be embarked upon in future work.
VIII. C ONCLUSION
In recent times, as a result of COVID-19 pandemic, higher
Institutions in Nigeria were shut down and the leadership
Academic Staff Union of Nigerian Universities (ASUU)
claimed that Nigerian University cannot afford to mount
online learning platform because of lack of infrastructure,
capacity and skill set. The research provided benchmark to
assess whether Nigerian Universities have what it takes to
run an online learning. The study used University of Nigeria,
Nsukka as a case study. From the result gotten from the
questionnaire analysis, University of Nigeria, Nsukka do not
have the skill set to mount online learning because from the
results shown in Table I above, only 8(25%) of respondents
scored 18. This shows that the rating for excellence is quite
low among the sampled population.

Also on the infrastructure level, only 3(9.4%) respondents
scored 13. This shows that the rating for excellence is quite
low among the population sampled. From these results,
University of Nigeria, Nsukka does not have staff member
with the requisite minimum skill set nor infrastructure to
mount online learning.
R EFERENCES
[1] L. C. Ilechukwu and C. C. Njoku, “Optimizing e-learning in nigerian
universities for sustainable development,” information technology (IT),
vol. 4, no. 10, 2014.
[2] J. Owoeye, “Quality assurance and relevance of distance education at
the university of ibadan distance learning centre, nigeria,” 2009.
[3] C. Mmeremikwu-Fiac and V. E. Onwukwe, “Assessment of the extent
of utilization of elearning opportunities for effective teaching and
learning in business education,” Nigerian Journal of Business Education
(NIGJBED), vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 227–237, 2018.
[4] S. Marshall and G. Mitchell, “Benchmarking international e-learning
capability with the e-learning maturity model,” in Proceedings of EDUCAUSE in Australasia, vol. 29, 2007.
[5] S. C. Eze, V. C. Chinedu-Eze, and A. O. Bello, “The utilisation of elearning facilities in the educational delivery system of nigeria: a study
of m-university,” International Journal of Educational Technology in
Higher Education, vol. 15, no. 1, p. 34, 2018.
[6] R. M. Wallace, “Online learning in higher education: A review of
research on interactions among teachers and students,” Education, Communication & Information, vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 241–280, 2003.
[7] O. A. SOLAJA and M. OLADIMEJI, “Impact of manpower development on organisational performance,” THE JOURNAL CONTEMPORARY ECONOMY, vol. 33, 2019.
[8] M. Jeremy, D. Roy, M. Christopher, D. Hoadley, and M. Barbara,
“Changing how and what children learn in school with computer based
technologies,” Computer Technology, vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 76–101, 2000.
[9] J. Anene, H. Imam, and T. Odumuh, “Problem and prospect of elearning in nigerianuniversities,” International Journal of Technology
and Inclusive Education (IJTIE), vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 320–327, 2014.
[10] W. Nwankwo, “Promoting equitable access to university education
through online learning systems,” 2018.
[11] A. O. Okorafor and C. U. Ike, “Developing and sustaining e-learning
strategy for open and distance education programs in nigeria,” International Journal of Educational Research and Development, vol. 1, no. 1,
pp. 50–57, 2012.
[12] S. S. Al-Gahtani, “Empirical investigation of e-learning acceptance and
assimilation: A structural equation model,” Applied Computing and
Informatics, vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 27–50, 2016.
[13] C. Evoh, “Policy networks and the transformation of secondary eucation
through icts in africa: The prospects and challenges of the nepad eschools initiative,” International Journal of Education and Development
using ICT, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 64–84, 2007.
[14] L. Liverpool, M. Marut, J. Ndam, and D. Oti, “Towards a model for
e-learning in nigerian heis: lessons from the university of jos ict maths
initiative,” Proceedings of the ICT Obafemi Awolowo University Ile-Ife,
2009.
[15] S. Price and M. Oliver, “A framework for conceptualising the impact of
technology on teaching and learning,” Journal of Educational Technology & Society, vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 16–27, 2007.
[16] A. Olanike et al., “E-education in nigeria: Students’ state of readiness for
e learning at the university of lagos,” in 2010 International Conference
on Information Society. IEEE, 2010, pp. 465–470.
[17] S. A. Shonola, M. S. Joy, S. S. Oyelere, and J. Suhonen, “The impact
of mobile devices for learning in higher education institutions: Nigerian
universities case study,” International Journal of Modern Education and
Computer Science, vol. 8, no. 8, p. 43, 2016.
[18] I. S. Agbo, “Factors influencing the use of information and communication technology (ict) in teaching and learning computer studies in
ohaukwu local government area of ebonyi state-nigeria.” Journal of
Education and Practice, vol. 6, no. 7, pp. 71–86, 2015.
[19] E. Mojaye, “Mobile phone usage among nigerian university students and
its impact on teaching and learning,” Global Journal of Arts Humanities
and Social Sciences, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 29–38, 2015.

[20] N. A. Adedokun-Shittu and A. J. K. Shittu, “Assessing the impacts of
ict deployment in teaching and learning in higher education,” Journal
of Applied Research in Higher Education, 2015.
[21] P. Zaharias and A. Poylymenakou, “Developing a usability evaluation
method for e-learning applications: Beyond functional usability,” Intl.
Journal of Human–Computer Interaction, vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 75–98,
2009.

