Personal Productivity and Well-being
By Jenna Butler, Mary Czerwinski, Shamsi Iqbal, Sonia Jaffe, Kate Nowak,
Emily Peloquin, Longqi Yang
Chapter 2 of The New Future of Work: Research from Microsoft into the Pandemic’s
Impact on Work Practices, edited by Jaime Teevan, Brent Hecht, and Sonia Jaffe, 1st
ed. Microsoft, 2021.

TABLE OF CONTENTS
2 Personal Productivity and Well-being .................................................................................................................. 17
2.1 Introduction ....................................................................................................................................................... 18
2.2 Productivity, Satisfaction, and Work Patterns .................................................................................................. 18
2.2.1 On average, self-reported productivity was unchanged, but it varied with role and experience. .............. 18
2.2.2 While some reported satisfaction with remote work, it varied with organization, role, and experience. .. 19
2.2.3 Average workdays got longer during COVID. .......................................................................................... 19
2.2.4 Some, but not all, employees with children struggled with childcare........................................................ 20
2.2.5 Managers appeared to be especially hard hit.............................................................................................. 20
2.2.6 The effect of remote work differed across roles and individual characteristics. ........................................ 21
2.3 Challenges and Benefits Are Closely Linked ..................................................................................................... 22
2.3.1 Remote work provided flexibility during the pandemic while also blurring the work-life boundary in
problematic ways................................................................................................................................................. 22
2.3.2 Non-work distractions increased, whereas work-related distractions decreased for many. ....................... 22
2.3.3 Many workers felt collaboratively and socially isolated. ........................................................................... 23
2.3.4 Remote work provided some benefits for worker health, but also many challenges, particularly with
regard to well-being............................................................................................................................................. 24
2.3.5 Employees worried that their hard work would not be visible to their managers. ..................................... 25
2.3.6 Conversely, there was increased concern about how their work did show up. .......................................... 25
2.4 Looking Forward ............................................................................................................................................... 25
2.4.1 Roles of managers and leaders are evolving to adapt the challenges of remote work. .............................. 25
2.4.2 Where to work once it is safe? Workers report mixed preferences but lean toward a hybrid model. ....... 26
2.4.3 Business decision-makers are considering long-term changes. ................................................................. 27

Cite as: Butler, Jenna, Mary Czerwinski, Shamsi Iqbal, Sonia Jaffe, Kate Nowak, Emily Peloquin, and Longqi Yang.
“Personal Productivity and Well-Being.” In The New Future of Work: Research from Microsoft on the Impact of the
Pandemic on Work Practices, edited by Jaime Teevan, Brent Hecht, and Sonia Jaffe, 1st ed. Microsoft, 2021.
https://aka.ms/newfutureofwork.
© Microsoft 2021

2 PERSONAL PRODUCTIVITY AND WELL-BEING
By Jenna Butler, Mary Czerwinski, Shamsi Iqbal, Sonia Jaffe, Kate Nowak, Emily Peloquin, and Longqi Yang
2.1 Introduction
We now turn to understanding the impact that COVID-19 had on the personal productivity and well-being of
information workers as their work practices were impacted by remote work. This chapter overviews people’s
productivity, satisfaction, and work patterns, and shows that the challenges and benefits of remote work are closely
linked. Looking forward, the infrastructure surrounding work will need to evolve to help people adapt to the
challenges of remote and hybrid work.
2.2 Productivity, Satisfaction, and Work Patterns
2.2.1 On average, self-reported productivity was unchanged, but it varied with role and experience.
Since information worker productivity is hard to measure, many studies looked at self-reported productivity and
satisfaction. Individually, some people flourished – and hoped to continue working from home at least part of the
time post-COVID – but others struggled. In a March survey of US-based Microsoft software engineers and program
managers, 34% said their productivity had decreased while working from home, and 34% said it had increased. In a
July survey of employees in Puget Sound, 32% agreed that returning to the office would make them more productive
and 30% disagreed [109]. Externally, we saw an initial information overload as people adjusted to new tools and
ways of working [77]. Some people reported liking the new interpersonal communication patterns while others were
hoping for a return to the “old way” [77].
Microsoft employees were more likely to report a decrease in productivity while working from home if they
reported little prior experience with remote work, a shorter tenure at the company, fewer pre-pandemic
collaborations (including meetings), or fewer standups. Also, software engineers were more likely than program
managers to report their productivity being negatively affected [46]. Geographically, employees in Puget Sound
were also more likely to report a decrease in productivity and lower satisfaction [46,128], potentially due to their
having less experience with remote collaboration. In a survey of Microsoft employees in China, perceived personal
and team productivity while working from home were significantly correlated with how one felt about physical
health and mental well-being, perceived workplaces’ setup and boundaries, meetings, team culture and workplace
status.
Externally, in a spring 2020 survey of US workers commissioned by Stanford, 35% of respondents said they could
be fully effective at their jobs while working remotely, 28% said they could do their jobs with 50 to 90% efficiency,
and 37% said that they could not do their jobs at home or would be less than 50% efficient [18]. A pre-pandemic
study [66] that used Occupational Information Network (O*NET) data on job content estimated that 37% of jobs
(representing 46% of wages) could be done remotely [38]. In addition to job characteristics, individual
circumstances mattered: a study of information workers found that whether they felt they could work from home
productively depended on 1) the layout of their workspace and 2) whether they lived with others. Those living with
others found their productivity hinged upon the needs of their co-habitants – children, partners needing help with
errands or tasks, etc. [156].
These results are in line with prior remote work experiments. Nick Bloom and colleagues ran an experiment with
call center workers who had expressed interest in working from home and found that, while the average effect of
doing so was positive, some people were negatively affected. Those who were less productive at home were more
likely to return to the office after the experiment ended [17]. A different experiment at the US Patent Office also
found positive average effects, particularly for those who chose to move to areas with lower cost of living [32].
Prior research also found that factors like personality [125] and gender [1,63] played roles in remote work outcomes.
Previous work also suggests that work that is easily codified is more amenable to remote work [14,168], but that
creative work [59], new workstreams [53,140], and tasks that require extensive collaboration will suffer when done
remotely [59,168]. Connecting these findings to the roles and types of work done at Microsoft is an important topic
for future research.
While it is hard to measure productivity objectively, there are available objective measures for short-term developer
activity; see the following chapter on Software Engineering Experiences for more details. On average, pull requests
stayed constant or increased slightly. However, according to an internal study [69], the number of pull requests per
new hire that started following the post-COVID move to remote work were 34% lower compared to pull requests
per new hire during the same period in 2019; a greater percentage of developer new hires had not completed any
18

pull requests in the first 90 days and the median time to complete a first pull request increased by 28% relative to
2019 [69]. New hires may not know the team as well, they may lack context, and it might be especially hard for
managers to manage them remotely. The same study found that vendors completed 27% fewer pull requests on
average this year compared to 2019.
2.2.2 While some reported satisfaction with remote work, it varied with organization, role, and experience.
Just as productivity varied extensively by role and experience, so did job satisfaction. In a survey of US-based
Microsoft software engineers and program managers, 31% said that their job satisfaction had decreased, but 32%
said it had increased [46]. Similarly, 33% of Microsoft Puget sound employees responding to a survey agreed that
returning to the office would improve their overall well-being while 29% disagreed [109]. In a CSEO (Core Services
Engineering and Operations) survey in November 2020, 81% of global Microsoft employees were satisfied (12%
dissatisfied) with work from home [128]; a study in OXO (Office Experience Organization) yielded similar results,
with over 60% reporting they're satisfied working from home [26].
Employees were more likely to be satisfied with working from home during COVID-19 if they had experience
working from home prior to the pandemic [46,128]; in the CSEO survey 85% of global Microsoft employees who
worked from home weekly before COVID-19 were satisfied working from home during COVID-19 (compared to
69% of those who never worked from home previously). This is also consistent with the results of an OXO survey,
in which 61% of respondents said the challenges they faced early on improved over time [26]. Some people who
worked remotely prior to COVID-19 reported that the totally-remote meetings they had in spring 2020 worked
better than meetings pre-COVID when they were remote and everyone else was in a conference room [163].
People’s satisfaction was correlated with their feelings of commitment, motivation, focus and being overworked.
Nearly one-third (31%) of respondents to an external survey who felt committed to their team goals preferred
working from home over the office, compared with 18% of those who felt disconnected from their team’s objectives
[180]. In the OXO study [26], people were less likely to report being satisfied with their work on days they
mentioned challenges with motivation, focus, or feeling overworked. The same study found that mental and physical
health, along with motivation and feeling overworked, were strongly associated with someone reporting being
satisfied on less than 60% of their nightly responses. These challenges and the relationship to job satisfaction were
not specific to working from home but could have been exacerbated by it. Managers in OXO were less likely than
individual contributors to at some point report challenges related to motivation and collaboration, but more likely to
have challenges around meetings, kids, and well-being [26].
A study from eXperience Collective Planning & Research [156] proposed five common remote work “journeys”
based on feedback collected from external information workers, a framework that could help categorize the
aforementioned experiences. The first category was the Positive experience, where people felt well-prepared for the
challenge and embraced the benefits that it presented. The second category, Growing, represented the experiences of
those who struggled initially, but then adapted and ended up feeling good. The third group, Resilient, represented
those whose productivity and attitude towards remote work varied day by day. The fourth group, Struggling,
included people who initially enjoyed the benefits of remote work, but later struggled as negative effects of isolation
and distraction crept in. Finally, the last journey, Negative, represented those who felt overwhelmed with the
challenges from the beginning and continued to have a negative experience. Of note here, the individual’s particular
“journey” was very much impacted by their job demands, workplace setup and whether they cohabitated with other
people.
2.2.3 Average workdays got longer during COVID.
On average, the workday during COVID started earlier and ran later [22,26,66,128,151]. One internal study found
that seven out of ten people experienced workweeks that expanded by at least three hours, that many people started
to skip the lunch hour, and that the share of instant messages sent between 6 pm and midnight increased by 52% on
average [3,66]. A study of external Teams users showed an 100% uptick in instant messages on Teams, particularly
after hours [6]. GitHub data on developer activity also showed a lengthening of the workday for non-Microsoft
employees [47]. In a study of information workers external to Microsoft, people reported that they found it more
difficult than expected to stop working at the end of the day [156]. Internally, the change of workdays varied by
roles [182]; sales and marketing professionals experienced shorter work days, and the changes for IT and researchers
were not significant.
We see a similar pattern globally, potentially exacerbated by time zone differences. When Microsoft China offices
switched to remote, average workday length (the time between the first and last work activity) increased. When they
19

began to return to offices, it lengthened still more [131]. In a study of India-based Microsoft employees, it was
found that the greater the time difference with collaborators, the bigger the challenge in managing the length of the
workday [83]. Many people spent much of the day on other responsibilities – such as parenting or taking care of the
household – and worked in the evenings.
Work also started extending into weekends more than it had before COVID-19. Using SwiftKey data as a proxy for
mobile users, Microsoft Customer Insights Research (MMX) analyzed how usage of Teams and Outlook changed
between February (before COVID-19 required people to work remotely) and April (after the transition to remote
work); they found that weekend usage of mobile Teams increased from 25% of weekday usage to 35%, and
weekend usage of PC Teams increased from 36% to 44%. Also, for SwiftKey users, weekend use of Outlook grew
more than weekday usage; This may suggest that some communications are extending into weekends, and that
mobile apps are seen to be more suitable for these communications.
Importantly, the observed longer workdays may be partially due to the increased interweaving of work and life tasks
(see later in this chapter), meaning that the increase in actual time spent working may be smaller than the increase in
the workday. However, this is unlikely to be the only factor. Prior research found that remote workers were more
likely to work overtime than those with more traditional workplace arrangements [122]. Remote workers may be
inclined to work more hours to signal “work devotion” in lieu of being able to do so through consistent physical
presence at the office [54].
Another potential source of additional working hours is the elimination of commutes. Microsoft survey respondents
reported an average total commute time of approximately one hour per day and about half of them said that not
having to commute was a very important benefit of working from home [46]. In a survey of Microsoft employees in
China, 59% listed commute time as a reason they continued to work from home some days after the offices opened
[176].
The previous chapter on Collaboration and Meetings provided additional detail about increases in meeting time and
after-hours meetings and communications.
2.2.4 Some, but not all, employees with children struggled with childcare.
Multiple studies reported that the additional childcare responsibilities due to COVID-19 complicated working from
home [83,156]. When asked about the top factors contributing to work stress, 24% of information and firstline
workers in India and 21% in Brazil selected “Balancing childcare or homeschooling with work,” compared to 16%
in the US, 15% in the UK, 14% in Australia, 12% in Germany and 4% in Japan [154]. In an external survey of
remote workers [35], 85% of women with childcare responsibilities reported that their caregiving responsibilities
were making it somewhat or much more difficult to attend to work, as did 70% of men who were caregivers [35].
The same survey also found other differences in the work-from-home experience of people with caregiving
responsibilities. People with childcare responsibilities commented on exhaustion, the need to work around the clock
to catch up, and challenges in homeschooling children; they were eating less healthily than before and exercising
less [35]. Overall, the study found that older males without childcare responsibilities had a more positive work from
home experience than those who had to balance work with caregiving responsibilities.
However, at Microsoft, the effect appeared to be smaller; fewer than 60% of employees with children reported
difficulty in handling childcare responsibilities. Difficulty with childcare was correlated with self-reported
productivity, but just having children was not: 43% of those who reported childcare difficulties reported their
productivity had decreased while working from home compared to 29% for those who did not have children in
school or daycare prior to COVID-19 and 23% for those with children who reported no difficulty with childcare.
There were also cultural nuances: in India, some employees reported that staying with larger family meant having to
disproportionately take on more of the household responsibilities while losing the benefits of having household help
[83]. Employees with family duties also tended to report different specific challenges. Employees who previously
had children in school or childcare were more likely to indicate major challenges of “More distractions or
interruptions” and “Less time to complete my work”, and less likely to indicate “Lack of motivation” [46]. In OXO,
5% of people consistently reported issues related to “Kids and Distractions” as the hardest part of their day for the
first 7 weeks following the move to remote work [26].
2.2.5 Managers appeared to be especially hard hit.
An internal study [69] found that while all members of a 3,500-person org were, on average, working a bit more,
managers seemed to be the hardest hit. Relative to the same period in 2019, software engineering people managers
showed a 300% increase in afterhours instant messaging; 25% increase in afterhours meetings; as well as a 24%
20

increase in completed pull requests. This suggests that people managers were both doing more to manage their
teams and doing additional IC work. Another internal study found that managers represented a disproportionate
amount of those employees who had experienced an increase in both workweek and collaboration hours [151].
These changes to manager collaboration appeared to be explained by a combination of remote work and the fact that
they were working during a pandemic, and by comparing managers who were new to remote work with managers
who were already working from home. A different study [182] found that remote work specifically increased
managers’ scheduled meetings by 5%. A study looking at Microsoft customers similarly found that increases in
business planning and direct report reach-outs had a hefty impact on managers’ collaboration hours [6]. A
potentially concerning trend for managers is the possibility that this additional workload will not subside with the
return to the office. In Microsoft China, where employees have begun to return to the workplace, the return-to-work
period has seen manager 1:1 time climb even higher than during the fully remote period [176].
2.2.6 The effect of remote work differed across roles and individual characteristics.
Remote work disrupted the ways that people spent their workdays, and the changes – like the changes in reported
productivity and satisfaction – differed by role [151,182]. Certain workers and types of work were more affected by
the transition. According to an external survey [35], people’s ability to focus was impacted by childcare
responsibilities, compared to those without childcare responsibilities. There was also a gender divide – more female
caregivers (26%) found it extremely difficult to focus, compared to 10% of male caregivers.
Causal inference on telemetry data [182] shows that while scheduled meetings for Microsoft US employees
increased, the effect attributable to an individual working from home – as opposed to COVID-19 more broadly – is
actually negative (-4%). Remote work increased unscheduled call hours (+112%), emails sent (+2.6%) and instant
messages sent (+30%). For individual contributors, the total of scheduled meeting hours + unscheduled call hours
remained flat, while unscheduled in-person interactions necessarily fell, implying a drop in synchronous
communication time. This is consistent with prior literature [1] showing that people tend to exchange less
information when moving to remote. These effects also varied across roles: they were significant for people
specialized in sales, marketing, program management, and business support, but were insignificant for researchers,
scientists, and software engineers [182].
The previous chapter on Collaboration and Meetings provided more information on how different types of meetings
have been affected by the shift to remote work.
Individual characteristics also appeared to affect how well people were able to focus and collaborate effectively
while working from home. Some challenges were particularly acute for neurodivergent professionals (such as those
with autism, ADHD, learning disabilities, or psychosocial disabilities), where sensory stimuli in the home office,
workspace setup, and getting into the mindset of working when surrounded by home could all make it difficult to
focus [100]. Actions neurodiverse professionals took to mitigate some of the challenges included avoiding placing
their desk near a window to avoid mind wandering, using timers to prevent time agnosia (inability to perceive
passage of time), using fidget spinners to help remain focused, and creating spatially separate locations for work and
life (e.g., not working in the bedroom) to compartmentalize their thought processes. Many neurodiverse individuals
worked overtime (12-14 hours) to perform their individual focused work after combating all the attentional
challenges. The flexibility that the option to work from home offers also made work more accessible to some people
with disabilities, by avoiding mobility challenges around commuting, affording more flexible scheduling, and
allowing people to have more ability to customize their work environments [163].
Video collaboration elicits a diverse range of accessibility issues. Because video calling (like remote collaboration
technology in general) relies heavily on the visual channel, it presents obvious challenges to people who are blind or
low vision. However, video calling is vital to people who rely on lip reading, especially since the pandemic response
afforded capturing frontal views of each individual, which is actually better than the view one gets in a meeting inperson. It can also be challenging for neurodivergent professionals; they often prefer having their videos off as they
occasionally perform certain activities to remain stimulated (e.g., fidgeting, pacing back and forth) or to calm down
(e.g., petting a stuffed toy) during a meeting. These activities can be misconstrued as lack of attention or can cause
distraction for other attendees. Turning off video means that they do not need to “pass” as paying attention during a
meeting [100]. See Chapter 6 on the Societal Implications of remote work for additional discussion of how
professionals with disabilities are being impacted.

21

Collaboration difficulties can also decrease the productivity of focus time. For example, in external interviews, some
people reported that they had more flexibility to focus on their solo work during the day, but the focus in isolation
sometimes led to misalignments and the need to redo tasks [15].
The previous chapter on Collaboration and Meetings provided more detail regarding general changes and variations
in collaboration patterns.
2.3 Challenges and Benefits Are Closely Linked
2.3.1 Remote work provided flexibility during the pandemic while also blurring the work-life boundary in
problematic ways.
Flexibility was reported as an important benefit of working from home across surveys in different geographies, both
inside and outside of Microsoft [26]. Many people whose flexibility increased used it to interweave life and work
(e.g., do a load of laundry between meetings, take time to cook a better lunch, or move more during the day)
[26,46,69,128,156]. In one study, a Microsoft employee expressed appreciation for having the ability to create their
own work schedule: they liked, for example, being able to split the work day into a morning block and a late
afternoon block with two hours in between to recharge and take care of home duties [66].
However, as seen in prior research on remote work [1], the downside of the flexibility of remote work, particularly
when it involves working from home, is the blurring of the boundary between work and home life that comes from
the elimination of physical boundaries separating the office and home – as well as the temporal boundary afforded
by a commute [26]; in a survey of US Microsoft employees, 72% of those who said flexibility is an important
benefit also said that “lack of boundary between work and personal life” was a challenge in working from home.
Information workers internal and external to Microsoft reported feeling ‘always on’ and having a difficult time
switching off [26,128,156]. Many find it challenging to manage household chores, the immediate needs of
dependents, and work meetings all at the same time in the same space [22,26,69,128,156]. A reminder that everyone
is experiencing the pandemic differently from a survey commissioned by Microsoft in August 2020: a higher
proportion of information and firstline workers in India, Brazil and Japan (>37%) say the lack of separation between
work duties and personal obligations has negatively impacted their well-being compared to those in the US, UK and
Australia (<26%) [154].
People also reported missing the time for quiet thinking and listening to podcasts that was afforded by their
commutes [26]. A study with external business decision makers found that leaders and managers were aware of
these challenges [62].
Unfortunately, some people taking advantage of the flexibility (e.g., to manage caregiving responsibilities during the
day and work in the evening) can make it hard for others to maintain work-life boundaries: respondents in multiple
surveys reported that the work patterns of collaborators can impact their ability to maintain temporal boundaries
between work and personal life as increasing number of work-related emails and messages are sent after hours
[26,100]. Some people reported adapting their practices to remain productive – they replaced old routines and
notions of boundaries with new structures and rituals to condition for productivity, e.g., dressed up formally even
while working from home to set the tone for productivity, or included micro mental breaks to help with context
switching when meetings are stacked [15]. Some neurodivergent survey respondents reported trying to keep nonwork related artifacts out of sight during work time to maintain the boundaries of work and non-work [100]. There
was evidence of adaptation as people settle into long-term remote work in an OXO study: the number one reported
challenge after 20 weeks of remote work was “work” while challenges such as “distractions” and “work-life
balance” became less common [26].
See Chapter 5 on Devices and Physical Ecosystems for additional discussion of physical boundaries.
2.3.2 Non-work distractions increased, whereas work-related distractions decreased for many.
About half of Microsoft software engineers and program managers surveyed said they had experienced an increase
in non-work related distractions (e.g., children, laundry, TV) [46]. In an external survey, over 65% of the
respondents reported that they find it difficult to concentrate during remote work due to external interruptions [35].
In a different external study, people specifically reported challenges in carving out time to focus [156]. This is
consistent with prior work: “Interviews with telecommuters have suggested that the ability to avoid distractions is
important to being effective as a remote worker.” [58]. Non-work related distractions can be particularly problematic
for neurodivergent individuals in a home-office setting [100]. They strive to keep workspace and personal space
completely separate so that they do not get distracted by non-work related items.
22

The picture for work distractions is more mixed. Studies have found an increase in IMs among Microsoft employees
and information workers in an external survey reported that the messaging was disruptive [156,182]. However, 40%
of US Microsoft employees surveyed said they have fewer work-related distractions while working remotely, and
only 21% said they have more [46]. Microsoft employees in China also reported the ability to focus as a big benefit
of remote work. In an OMEX study [181] some Microsoft employees reported that working from home allowed
them to focus more, but a hybrid approach would eventually be most beneficial as some tasks might be better
performed at home and other tasks are more suitable in the office (e.g., collaboration).
For neurodivergent professionals, work-related distractions can originate from the remote meeting platforms in ways
that do not affect neurotypical people [100]. For example, visual background or noise from meeting partners’ can be
particularly distracting to neurodivergent people. Some virtual backgrounds can be distracting for neurodivergent
individuals as they can get fixated on the background and lose focus on the meeting content [100]. The increasing
number of notifications also create additional challenges for neurodivergent individuals; they often turn off
notifications to maintain their focus on their ongoing activities [100], but that can result in missing time-sensitive
information, as also shown in past work [78].
The previous chapter on Collaboration and Meetings discussed the potentially distracting role of meeting chats and
other forms of multitasking. We discuss the childcare challenges specific to COVID-19 work from home later in this
chapter.
2.3.3 Many workers felt collaboratively and socially isolated.
People are missing casual water cooler conversations and reporting increased feelings of isolation and lack of
connection [5,22,26,69,128,156]. In one employee survey “Isolated”, “Disconnected” and “Lonely” were amongst
the top words Microsoft employees used to describe how they were feeling [128]. New hires may face heightened
risk of isolation: data on software engineers shows recent new hires have fewer collaboration hours and smaller
networks compared to new hires who joined Microsoft before the pandemic [69].
A study on Microsoft workers from India found that it was primarily those who were new to the workforce who
thrive on the community experience and are missing working in the office the most [83]. In other internal surveys,
46% of respondents said that their needs for spontaneous interaction were not being met and a majority of
respondents considered all types of social meetings to be least effective [138] . Many neurodivergent professionals
do not enjoy online social meetings, because often a few people do most of the talking (often those who start the
meeting) and their topic of interest may not align with everyone [100]. Also, the absence of organic side
conversations in remote calls (breakout rooms are more formal) makes participation more difficult, if the main topic
of conversation is not interesting [100].
In a global study by Qualtrics and SAP, 75% of people say they feel more socially isolated since the outbreak of the
pandemic. In an HBR report, 1 in 3 employees say their team does not maintain informal contact (e.g., asking how
each person, team, etc. is doing) while working from home. People who are lacking in informal contact are 19%
more likely to report a decline in mental well-being [143]. Another survey found that people without caregiving
responsibilities are feeling more isolated than those with such responsibilities [35]. Information workers often found
communication tools to be a poor substitute for in-person connections [156]. Earlier in the post-COVID period many
meetings included a check-in time to socialize or talk about mental, emotional and physical well-being. These have
since largely gone and are being replaced by intentional meetings for this purpose, but due to video conferencing
being draining, people are choosing not to attend these social meetings and losing out on the social opportunities
entirely [138]. An internal study found many people use gaming to try and build social capital and are gaming more
often. They also found many people (50%) are reporting doing more social capital building activities, with the most
common being listening to coworkers who need to talk [138].
A study that analyzes telemetry data [182] also shows that people are more collaboratively isolated when working
from home: more focused time and less meeting time. In a global Microsoft survey in April, 42% of employees
reported feeling less connected (22% more) and 32% feel they have fewer opportunities to collaborate during
COVID-19 (24% more); particularly employees with less prior remote work experience, those in management and
those in Puget Sound and Engineering feel less connected (>50%) [128]. In a separate study, the share of individual
contributors who reported favorably on their team connectiveness dropped from 90% in April to 74% in December;
for managers it drop from 95% to 83% [110]. Prior work suggests that these feelings of increased isolation are not
due solely to COVID-19 and quarantine. A number of studies on telecommuters prior to COVID-19 reported that
remote workers feel socially isolated from their colleagues [116,135], with in-person interaction in the office being
23

most important for maintaining workplace friendships [150]. Workers on crowdsourcing and freelancing platforms
like Mechanical Turk or Upwork, where remote work is the norm, often form off-platform social networks to
provide each other with companionship and social support. More generally, the evidence suggests that long-term
ubiquitous remote work negatively affects relationships among coworkers and teams [1,12]. Telemetry from Surface
devices around the world has shown an increase in audio website and app usage, driven largely by communication
apps, while entertainment usage has decreased since the pandemic [64]. In Western Europe, we saw an increase in
IMs that did not decrease when they returned to a hybrid office [151]. Across Microsoft we saw an increase in
emails marked as “focus” during the beginning of the pandemic, but this has since reached a new low baseline. On
the contrary, Teams usage has gone up and stayed up [166]. All of this suggests people are looking for more ways to
communicate and are using a variety of methods (emails, Teams, Zoom, WhatsApp, etc.) to do so while remote.
2.3.4 Remote work provided some benefits for worker health, but also many challenges, particularly with regard to
well-being.
In addition to increased flexibility, working from home has created other quality-of-life benefits for many. Less time
spent commuting, more time spent with family, reduced health risks from the pandemic, and improved diets were
some of the benefits mentioned in internal surveys [26,46,128]. Some people also reported more opportunities for
micro-exercise (e.g., yoga during Teams meetings with the camera off or walking 1:1s over the phone), but others
felt they had become more sedentary [26]. In the OMEX study [181] some people reported that inclusivity had
improved as team members were more tolerant of differences in working style.
In contrast with the above benefits, some employees and external information workers reported feelings of stress and
a feeling of always working [26,128,156]. About 85% of the respondents in an external survey of US-based
respondents including technology professionals, academics, marketing and public relations professionals said that
they feel nervous and stressed [35]. People are also reporting being more overworked as remote work continues
[26]; this may be aggravated by people not taking vacation since COVID-19 means they cannot travel and reporting
having a harder time getting back into work when they do [26]. Survey respondents and researchers question
whether the current work pace is sustainable and raise concerns about long-run burnout [26]. A couple of days in
May were designated “COSINE Health Days”; it seems that about two-thirds people actually took the days off and
many were appreciative: “I didn’t realize how badly I needed a break” [69].
A global study of over 2,700 employees across more than 10 industries undertaken by Qualtrics and SAP during
March and April 2020 showed that since the outbreak of the pandemic, 65% of people report higher stress, 57% are
feeling greater anxiety, and 53% say they feel more emotionally exhausted [143]. The same study showed that 40%
of people at every seniority level of a company have seen a decrease in mental well-being [143], while another study
of 1200 US full-time employees conducted by Ginger, the leader in on-demand mental healthcare, showed that 70%
of workers said the pandemic has been the most stressful time in their careers [81]. From a survey commissioned by
Microsoft in August 2020, over 30% of information and firstline workers say the pandemic has increased their sense
of burnout at work. This number jumps to 44% in Brazil and drops to 10% in Germany compared to 31% in the US.
The same survey found that causes of workplace stress differ between remote and firstline workers: lack of
separation between work and life and feeling disconnected from co-workers are the top 1 and 2 stressors for remote
workers, while the inability to socially distance/worry about getting COVID-19 and unmanageable
workload/workhours are the top 1 and 2 stressors for Firstline workers. 70% of information and firstline workers
surveyed said they think meditating could help them decrease their work-related stress. Again, this number jumps to
92% in India and 84% in Brazil, compared to 73% in the US and 53% in the UK [154].
Challenges in having to adapt in-person practices through new digital tools that may result in broken workflows also
contribute to mental stress and exhaustion. Survey respondents reported that technical challenges resulted in more
annoyance and frustration compared to in-person work, as information workers were relying so heavily on digital
tools to get their work done [156].
In addition to mental stress, there is the additional physical stress on the body from remaining in one place, as
people no longer need to walk between offices, or walk as far to the restroom or to get coffee, etc.
[26,46,128,149,163], and this is causing physical pain [26,128]. People are complaining of their eyes being sore
from staring at the screen; stiffness; aches; carpel tunnel pain; and back issues [26]. In a study of external workers,
90% reported spending more time on their electronic devices [35]. People are reporting not moving for an entire day
except for bio breaks or to get food, and this is concerning knowing the negative effects of spending most of the day
sitting (increased risk of high blood pressure, blood sugar concerns, cancer, and even premature mortality) [1]. The
decrease in movement may also be aggravated by COVID-19 causing gym closures – in one survey 75% of
24

respondents said they were getting less exercise than prior to the pandemic [35]. The potential long-term health
implications of ubiquitous remote work are serious but under-researched [1].
Lastly, brain scan-based studies provide some evidence that virtual meetings require more cognitive load, but that
the Teams Together mode may reduce load relative to the traditional grid view and could help eliminate online
meeting fatigue [79]. Another study found that an “attentional spotlight” of the audience based on their affective
responses provided presenters with a better notion of how their talk was going, and where there was agreement or
questions/confusion relative to the current Teams’ grid view of the audience or a randomly chosen spotlight of an
audience member [118]. This reduced the cognitive burden and stress from not being able to “read the room” or
know how your presentation was accepted. The previous chapter on Collaboration and Meetings discussed how the
increase in virtual meetings added to both physical and mental stress.
Chapter 5 on Devices and Physical Ecosystems describes more research on the specific physical effects of working
from home.
2.3.5 Employees worried that their hard work would not be visible to their managers.
Microsoft employees and external information workers have expressed concerns about the need to “look productive”
and the fact that their work is now less visible to their manager or team [26]. This may be aggravated by job security
concerns resulting from COVID-19’s effect on the economy, but it is also expected from the prior literature on
remote work: physical presence in the office is a typical means of signaling “work devotion,” and remote workers
before the pandemic frequently felt the need signal devotion in other ways (e.g., by working longer hours as
discussed earlier) [54,122]. In this vein, while some Microsoft employees appreciate the benefit, some have
indicated reluctance to take the Paid Pandemic School and Childcare Closure Leave [26,69]. One benefit of a
stronger desire to see and be seen may be that people are being more open to ask for help and there are more open
discussions [15].
While employees are being more demonstrative about work due to concerns about job security, a survey of external
business decision-makers found that leaders want to use KPIs and project completion to evaluate employees and are
not interested in monitoring employee behavior [62], suggesting that at least in some cases, employee concerns
about looking productive may be unwarranted. These leaders are already speculating about how to best assess
productivity and performance in a new “flexi-work” or “hybrid” work environment [62].
2.3.6 Conversely, there was increased concern about how their work did show up.
While people worried their work would not be visible, they also expressed increased concern about the fact that
traces of their work often persisted. Because technology mediates more of the work a person does when working
remotely, more interactions can end up being recorded, including written text (e.g., email or IM) and video (e.g.,
remote meetings). This made some employees more hesitant to ask potentially stupid questions while working
remotely, and when they did ask questions they sometimes spent a lot of time on wordsmithing to make sure the
question was clear (since clarifying can harder when not co-located) and made them look good [26].
“Working from home also takes away the easy access to colleagues nearby for a quick question or a "hallway
meeting". Yes, the tools to attempt to replace that are available but aren't perfect replacements. Everything is
recorded in writing (chats) or I'd have to pick up the phone and call which takes a bit more effort so I'm just
less likely to do it.” [160]

The notion of “remote work as surveilled work” gained prominence during the ubiquitous work-from-home period
[145]. Prior literature on remote work has documented employers’ desire to ensure workers are working when
expected [1], but also identified negative effects of electronic performance monitoring, including on employee
productivity, creativity, trust and well-being [11].
2.4 Looking Forward
2.4.1 Roles of managers and leaders are evolving to adapt the challenges of remote work.
There is preliminary evidence that managers may be able to help with any workday length and productivity
challenges: Microsoft employees who received prioritization support from their managers were 2.5 times more
likely to report maintaining their productivity levels and work-life balance in comparison to those who did not
receive prioritization support [110]. A study of telemetry of one organization in the company found that employees
who had the most 1:1 time with their managers saw a much smaller increases in weekly working time (1.5 hours vs.
3 hours) [4]. Similarly, a study of Microsoft employees in Denmark found that the average meeting and email load
decreased as managers’ 1:1 time increased. The inverse relationship suggests 1:1 time enabled managers to help
25

employees prioritize work and resolve issues faster [151]. Research has also shown employees who have more oneon-one time with their managers are less likely to be disengaged [121]. Leadership in OXO instituted a policy to
increase manager check-ins, which had a positive effect on 41% of survey respondents (4% negative) [26].
Managers are critical points of connection in terms of providing holistic support to employees – reducing negative
impact on physical and mental well-being, maintaining morale over reduction in force and so on, suggesting soft
skills of managers are becoming even more important than ever before [62]. Recent research of external decisionmakers has shown that the roles of managers and leaders are also evolving with the changes that remote work
brings: leaders are moving faster to make decisions to take quick action on maintaining business continuity and
stability, but with the potential negative consequences of bypassing regular checks that might emerge downstream
[62].
Alignment of the lived experience of leaders and managers is important to create a working environment that caters
to the needs of employees with different challenges. Senior leaders recognize their role in creating a more
democratized and humanized workplace and set examples of how they show up on video from home as well as
appearing to be more accessible online compared to in person [62].
A meta-analysis of past research showed a positive correlation between remote work outcomes and manager
relationship quality, but since it was cross-sectional the association could be due entirely to the fact that (under
normal circumstances) managers may only allow remote work for employees with whom they have a good
relationship [51].
2.4.2 Where to work once it is safe? Workers report mixed preferences but lean toward a hybrid model.
Multiple surveys have found that, for the post-COVID workplace, most employees want a hybrid model of work in
which people work part-time in the office and part-time from home.
In Microsoft China, where offices have reopened, a large majority of respondents to a survey preferred a hybrid
model of work (69%) compared to purely remote work (19%) or the traditional office model (11%) because it
enabled people to combine the advantages of both remote and in office [176]; the same survey found that 69% of
people thought that they were most productive in a hybrid work model. These numbers align closely with those of a
similar survey from COSINE, in which 65% of employees said they wanted a hybrid model post-COVID (vs. 26%
remote-only and 9% traditional) [69]. Additionally, from the CSEO Global Employee Satisfaction Survey (GESS) in
November 2020, 63% of Microsoft employees ideally want a hybrid model compared to 35% fully remote and 3%
never remote [128]. Similarly, 66% of Google employees want a hybrid model compared to 20% fully remote and
10% never remote [94] For some, these preferences are in spite of concerns that a hybrid model will be harder to
manage and potentially create inequality between people in the workplace and people working remotely [26].
There are differences in how people think hybrid work will work best. In a poll regarding same-room vs. hybrid vs.
remote meetings, Microsoft study participants with prior remote work experience were much less likely to support
“Prioritize same room meetings for which planning is difficult,” suggesting maybe remote workers underestimate
the value of co-location in resolving ill-defined tasks and office workers overestimate it [138]. On the other hand,
there was near-universal agreement on “Prioritize hybrid meetings in which all attendees engage fully” and
“Prioritize same-room meetings which are well-planned so that meetings are efficient.”
Results from outside Microsoft also reveal a preference for hybrid work, although the traditional model does better
in these findings. A survey of US workers found that, post-COVID, 24% would like to work from home all of the
time, 56% would like to work from home at least some of the time, and 20% would like to return to the office fulltime [18]. Interestingly, the preferences of company leaders with regards to hybrid work likely differ from those
of their employees. A survey of firms found that, on average, they only want the percent of working days worked
from home to increase from 5.5% pre-COVID to 16.6% post-COVID [2].
All of the above findings refer to workers’ self-reported preferences for a biologically-safe post-COVID world. In
the short-term, people are less positive about returning to the office, whether that is in a hybrid or in a traditional
model. In May 2020, Microsoft employees expressed concerns, anxiety, and even fear around returning to the office
given the challenges of social distancing. Some specifically mentioned they will not return to the workplace or travel
until there is a COVID-19 vaccine. In November 2020, despite soft openings across many regions, 94% of Microsoft
employees continued to work from home full-time (80% across Asia region) [128]. In an external survey of
information workers, 78% of respondents reported that they did not want to return to the workplace yet and that
cleanliness of the workplace is an important factor for them in deciding whether they want to return [35].
26

Even pre-COVID, the desire for location flexibility was prominent among young people. In a global external survey
of youths aged 16-25, 72% agreed that “My ability to choose how and when I work impacts how satisfied I am with
my job” (11% disagreed). In the same survey, 63% agreed that “I can be a productive and effective employee for an
organization without going to the workplace every day” (18% disagreed) [103]. However, many young people rely
on the office for socializing as well, meaning hybrid may still be preferred by them to fully remote work [56].
2.4.3 Business decision-makers are considering long-term changes.
Chapter 6, which covers Societal Implications, will discuss some long-term implications of companies planning for
a future with more remote work, including changes to real estate footprint and use of freelancers. Some business
leaders are being empathic in deciding who should return to work with special consideration of the physical and
mental well-being of the employees [62]. However, planning for the hybrid model is logistically complex – and
reorganizing the physical environment to support distancing needs was identified as a goal by business leaders [62]
and as a need by employees [35]. Employee well-being is quickly becoming a key priority for employers – listed as
one of the top 5 business priorities in FY21Q1 by roughly a third of Microsoft’s global customer and partners [33].
There is a latent desire among IT and Business decision makers for metrics to provide a broad understanding of the
well-being, productivity and collaboration of the employee base – without intruding on privacy [42].

27

BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
2.
3.
4.

5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.

Tammy D. Allen, Timothy D. Golden, and Kristen M. Shockley. 2015. How Effective Is Telecommuting?
Assessing the Status of Our Scientific Findings. Psychological Science in the Public Interest 16, 2: 40–68.
https://doi.org/10.1177/1529100615593273
David Altig, Jose Barrero, Nick Bloom, Steven J. Davis, Brent Meyer, Emil Mihaylov, and Nick Parker.
2020. Firms Expect Working from Home to Triple. Retrieved from
https://www.frbatlanta.org/blogs/macroblog/2020/05/28/firms-expect-working-from-home-to-triple
Erik Anderson. 2020. The human side of business continuity. Home | Work Blog from Microsoft Workplace
Insights. Retrieved from https://insights.office.com/workplace-analytics/the-human-side-of-businesscontinuity/
Erik Anderson, Abhinav Singh, and Kevin Sherman. 2020. The new manager 1:1: nurturing employee
resiliency during disruption and change. FoRW Project: Home | Work Blog from Microsoft Workplace
Insights. Retrieved from https://insights.office.com/workplace-analytics/the-new-manager-11-nurturingemployee-resiliency-during-disruption-and-change/
Andrea Briggs and Jera Nyman. 2020. BAP Studio Remote Work Culture. Microsoft (Internal).
Andrew Leach. Business Continuity Dashboard. Microsoft (Internal).
Travis Andrews. 2020. Our iPhone weekly screen time reports are through the roof, and people are ‘horrified.’
Washington Post.
App Annie. 2020. Weekly Time Spent in Apps Grows 20% Year Over Year as People Hunker Down at Home.
App Annie.
Marcus Ash, Charles Yiu, and Sean Oh. EPIC Employee Global Experience. Microsoft (Internal).
Richard A. Bales and Katherine V. W. Stone. 2020. The Invisible Web at Work: Artificial Intelligence and
Electronic Surveillance in the Workplace. Berkeley Journal of Employment &amp; Labor Law 41, 1: 1.
Kirstie Ball. 2010. Workplace surveillance: an overview. Labor History 51, 1: 87–106.
https://doi.org/10.1080/00236561003654776
Lingfeng Bao, Tao Li, Xin Xia, Kaiyu Zhu, Hui Li, and Xiaohu Yang. 2020. How does Working from Home
Affect Developer Productivity? -- A Case Study of Baidu During COVID-19 Pandemic. arXiv:2005.13167
[cs]. Retrieved January 16, 2021 from http://arxiv.org/abs/2005.13167
Lucy Barnard-Brak, DeAnn Lechtenberger, and William Lan. 2010. Accommodation Strategies of College
Students with Disabilities. The Qualitative Report 15, 2.
Sergi Basco and Martí Mestieri. 2018. Mergers Along the Global Supply Chain: Information Technologies
and Routine Tasks. Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics 80, 2: 406–433.
https://doi.org/10.1111/obes.12165
Harald Becker and Ming-Li Chai. 2020. ENVSN “A Good Day” Research - Attention, focus & flow in modern
workplace (pre & during Covid19). Microsoft (Internal).
Andrew Begel. 2020. Application-Sensitive Accessible Communication. Microsoft (Internal).
Nicholas Bloom, James Liang, John Roberts, and Zhichun Jenny Ying. 2015. Does Working from Home
Work? Evidence from a Chinese Experiment. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 130, 1: 165–218.
https://doi.org/10.1093/qje/qju032
Nick Bloom. 2020. How working from home works out. Stanford University. Retrieved from
https://siepr.stanford.edu/research/publications/how-working-home-works-out
Michael Bohan and Steven Dong. 2020. Remote work EEG research. Microsoft (Internal).
Phillippe Boutros. 2020. Nearly 80% of Business Activity is Disrupted by Coronavirus. Microsoft (Internal).
Matt Britton and Geoff Colon. 2020. Now what? Modern life reimagined - Microsoft & the U.S. Consumer
during Uncertain Times. Microsoft (Internal).
Matthew Brodsky. 2020. The Effects of COVID-19 Crisis on Commercial IT Admins. Microsoft (Internal).
Matthew Brodsky and Sarah Karmali. 2020. Microsoft 365 Admin Center: Intercept Insights on IT Admins
during the COVID-19 Crisis. Microsoft (Internal).
Douglas Broom. 2020. Coronavirus has exposed the digital divide like never before. World Economic Forum.
Retrieved May 21, 2020 from https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2020/04/coronavirus-covid-19-pandemicdigital-divide-internet-data-broadband-mobbile/

28

25.
26.

27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
40.
41.
42.
43.
44.

45.
46.

Erik Brynjolfsson, John Horton, Adam Ozimek, Daniel Rock, Garima Sharma, and Hong Yi Tu Ye. 2020.
COVID-19 and Remote Work: An Early Look at US Data. National Bureau of Economic Research.
https://doi.org/10.3386/w27344
Jenna Butler and Sonia Jaffe. 2020. Challenges and Gratitude: A Diary Study of Software Engineers Working
From Home During Covid-19 Pandemic. In Microsoft New Future of Work Symposium. Retrieved from
https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/publication/challenges-and-gratitude-a-diary-study-of-softwareengineers-working-from-home-during-covid-19-pandemic/
John T. Cacioppo, Stephanie Cacioppo, John P. Capitanio, and Steven W. Cole. 2015. The
Neuroendocrinology of Social Isolation. Annual review of psychology 66: 733–767.
https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-psych-010814-015240
Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission (CRTC) Government of Canada. 2016.
Broadband Fund: Closing the Digital Divide in Canada. Retrieved January 17, 2021 from
https://crtc.gc.ca/eng/internet/internet.htm
Pete Card, Caolan Mannion, Katherine Reed, Margrete Sævareid, Amit Saxena, Gayle Thompson, and John
Westworth. 2020. Compass customer feedback (BDM + ITDM). Microsoft (Internal).
Shuling Chen and Eric Lovelin. 2020. Device Accessory Needs when WFH. Microsoft (Internal).
Rebecca Chory, Lori E. Vela, and T. Avtgis. Organizational Surveillance of Computer-Mediated Workplace
Communication: Employee Privacy Concerns and Responses. Retrieved from
https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10672-015-9267-4
Prithwiraj Choudhury, Cirrus Foroughi, and Barbara Larson. 2019. Work-from-anywhere: The Productivity
Effects of Geographic Flexibility. SSRN Electronic Journal. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3494473
Katherine Costain. CPE Relationship Survey. Microsoft (Internal).
Sarah Coury, Jess Huang, Ankur Kumar, Sara Prince, Alexis Krivkovich, and Lareina Yee. 2020. Women in
the Workplace 2020. McKinsey & Company. Retrieved from https://www.mckinsey.com/featuredinsights/diversity-and-inclusion/women-in-the-workplace
Mary Czerwinski, Shamsi T. Iqbal, Daniel McDuff, Jina Suh, and HUE Team. 2020. Health, Well-being and
Productivity During COVID-19: A Study of Boundaries and Adaptation. Microsoft (Internal).
Beth DeCarbo. 2020. Working From Home for the Long Haul? Get the Ergonomics Right. Wall Street
Journal. Retrieved May 21, 2020 from https://www.wsj.com/articles/working-from-home-for-the-long-haulget-the-ergonomics-right-11588286604
Evan DeFilippis, Stephen Michael Impink, Madison Singell, Jeffrey T. Polzer, and Raffaella Sadun. 2020.
Collaborating During Coronavirus: The Impact of COVID-19 on the Nature of Work. National Bureau of
Economic Research. https://doi.org/10.3386/w27612
Jonathan Dingel and Brent Neiman. 2020. How Many Jobs Can be Done at Home? National Bureau of
Economic Research, Cambridge, MA. https://doi.org/10.3386/w26948
Eagle Hill Consulting. 2020. Employee Burnout from COVID-19 on the Rise, With 58% of U.S. Workers
Reporting Burnout. Retrieved from https://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/employee-burnout-fromcovid-19-on-the-rise-with-58-of-us-workers-reporting-burnout-301122967.html
Charlie Edmonds and Guo Danfeng. 2020. MMX Insights - SwiftKey mobile analytics. Microsoft (Internal).
David Encaoua, Bronwyn H. Hall, François Laisney, and Jacques Mairesse (eds.). 2000. The Economics and
Econometrics of Innovation. Springer, Boston.
Erin Arcuri, Adam Coleman, Brandon Haist, Hugh North, Tiffany Smith, and Shelly Marston. 2020.
Learnings from Enterprise customers as they navigate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. Microsoft
(Internal).
Federal Reserve Bank of Saint Louis. 2016. Job polarization. FRED Blog. Retrieved January 24, 2021 from
https://fredblog.stlouisfed.org/2016/04/job-polarization/
Anne Fitzsimmons. 2020. Global Disability Inclusion Survey Reports People with Disabilities Are More
Negatively Affected by The Economic Impact of COVID-19. Retrieved from
https://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/global-disability-inclusion-survey-reports-people-withdisabilities-are-more-negatively-affected-by-the-economic-impact-of-covid-19-301052873.html
Ramona Florea and Radu Florea. 2016. Individual and Organizational Implications of Work-related Stress.
Economy Trandisciplinarity Cognition Vol. 19, ISSN: 2067-5046: 28.
Denae Ford, Margaret-Anne Storey, Thomas Zimmermann, Christian Bird, Sonia Jaffe, Chandra Maddila,
Jenna L. Butler, Brian Houck, and Nachiappan Nagappan. 2020. A Tale of Two Cities: Software Developers
Working from Home During the COVID-19 Pandemic. arXiv:2008.11147 [cs]. Retrieved January 19, 2021
from http://arxiv.org/abs/2008.11147
29

47.
48.
49.
50.
51.
52.
53.
54.
55.
56.
57.
58.
59.
60.
61.
62.
63.

64.
65.
66.
67.
68.
69.
70.

Nicole Forsgren, Gregory Ceccarelli, Derek Jedamski, Scot Kelly, and Clair Sullivan. 2020. State of the
Octoverse: Finding balance between work and play. GitHub. Retrieved from
https://octoverse.github.com/static/github-octoverse-2020-productivity-report.pdf
Thomas Franck. 2020. Hardest-hit industries: Nearly half the leisure and hospitality jobs were lost in April.
Retrieved from https://www.cnbc.com/2020/05/08/these-industries-suffered-the-biggest-job-losses-in-april2020.html
Renate Fruchter and Marisa Ponti. 2010. Distributing attention across multiple social worlds. AI & SOCIETY
25, 2: 169–181. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00146-009-0251-0
Linda Gagner and Danny Kelly. 2020. Android Smartphone & iPhone Switcher Study. Microsoft (Internal).
Ravi S. Gajendran and David A. Harrison. 2007. The good, the bad, and the unknown about telecommuting:
Meta-analysis of psychological mediators and individual consequences. Journal of Applied Psychology 92, 6:
1524–1541. https://doi.org/10.1037/0021-9010.92.6.1524
Gartner. 2020. Forecast: PCs, Ultramobiles and Mobile Phones, Worldwide, 2018-2024, Gartner, April 2020
Update. Gartner.
Edward L Glaeser and Giacomo A.M. Ponzetto. 2007. Did the Death of Distance Hurt Detroit and Help New
York? National Bureau of Economic Research. https://doi.org/10.3386/w13710
Timothy D. Golden and Kimberly A. Eddleston. 2020. Is there a price telecommuters pay? Examining the
relationship between telecommuting and objective career success. Journal of Vocational Behavior 116:
103348. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jvb.2019.103348
Google. Google Safe Browsing – Google Transparency Report. Retrieved May 21, 2020 from
https://transparencyreport.google.com/safe-browsing/overview
Adam Gorlick. 2020. The productivity pitfalls of working from home in the age of COVID-19. Stanford
News. Retrieved January 21, 2021 from https://news.stanford.edu/2020/03/30/productivity-pitfalls-workinghome-age-covid-19/
Mark S. Granovetter. 1973. The Strength of Weak Ties. American Journal of Sociology 78, 6: 1360–1380.
https://doi.org/10.1086/225469
Christine A. Grant, Louise M. Wallace, and Peter C. Spurgeon. 2013. An exploration of the psychological
factors affecting remote e‐worker’s job effectiveness, well‐being and work‐life balance. Employee Relations
35, 5: 527–546. https://doi.org/10.1108/ER-08-2012-0059
Shane Greenstein, Chris Forman, and Avi Goldfarb. 2018. How Geography Shapes—and Is Shaped by—the
Internet. In The New Oxford Handbook of Economic Geography, Gordon L. Clark, Maryann P. Feldman,
Meric S. Gertler and Dariusz Wójcik (eds.).
Alisha Haridasani Gupta. 2020. Why Did Hundreds of Thousands of Women Drop Out of the Work Force?
The New York Times. Retrieved January 17, 2021 from https://www.nytimes.com/2020/10/03/us/jobs-womendropping-out-workforce-wage-gap-gender.html
GWI. 2020. Coronavirus Research: Multi-market research wave 2. Microsoft (Internal).
Brandon Haist, Hugh North, Shelly Marston, and Tiffany Smith. 2020. Decision-makers Study. Microsoft
(Internal).
Leslie B. Hammer, Margaret B. Neal, Jason T. Newsom, Krista J. Brockwood, and Cari L. Colton. 2005. A
longitudinal study of the effects of dual-earner couples’ utilization of family-friendly workplace supports on
work and family outcomes. The Journal of Applied Psychology 90, 4: 799–810. https://doi.org/10.1037/00219010.90.4.799
David Hands. 2020. COVID and Audio Study. Microsoft (Internal).
David Hands and Danny Kelly. 2020. Video Presence Study. Microsoft (Internal).
Christina Hegele and Abhinav Singh. 2020. Can we balance work and life under one roof? Home | Work Blog
from Microsoft Workplace Insights. Retrieved from https://insights.office.com/workplace-analytics/balancingwork-and-life-under-one-roof/
David Holman. 2002. Employee wellbeing in call centres. Human Resource Management Journal 12: 35–50.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1748-8583.2002.tb00076.x
Matthew Holt, Bradley Lang, and Steve G. Sutton. 2016. Potential Employees’ Ethical Perceptions of Active
Monitoring: The Dark Side of Data Analytics. Journal of Information Systems 31, 2: 107–124.
https://doi.org/10.2308/isys-51580
Brian Houck. 2020. COSINE Productivity During WFH. Microsoft (Internal).
Brian Houck. 2020. Onboarding new hires during COVID-19. Microsoft (Internal).

30

71.
72.
73.
74.
75.
76.
77.
78.
79.
80.
81.
82.
83.
84.
85.
86.
87.
88.
89.
90.

91.
92.
93.

Shawn Hubler, Thomas Fuller, Anjali Singhvi, and Juliette Love. 2020. Many Latinos Couldn’t Stay Home.
Now Virus Cases Are Soaring in Their Communities. The New York Times. Retrieved from
https://www.nytimes.com/2020/06/26/us/corona-virus-latinos.html
Ginger Hudson. 2020. ITDM in Commercial: Post-pandemic device considerations. Microsoft (Internal).
Ginger Hudson. 2020. Device Hygiene Study. Microsoft (Internal).
Ginger Hudson. 2020. Workstation Evolution During the Pandemic. Microsoft (Internal).
Ginger Hudson and Steven Derhammer. 2020. Devices and Remote Work Study. Microsoft (Internal).
Lori Ioannou. 2020. 1 in 4 Americans will be working remotely in 2021, Upwork survey reveals. CNBC.
Retrieved January 21, 2021 from https://www.cnbc.com/2020/12/15/one-in-four-americans-will-be-workingremotely-in-2021-survey.html
Shamsi Iqbal and Kirk Daues. 2020. Enterprise Customer Adaptation to Remote Work and Planning for a
Hybrid Future. Microsoft (Internal).
Shamsi T. Iqbal and Eric Horvitz. 2010. Notifications and awareness: a field study of alert usage and
preferences. In Proceedings of the 2010 ACM conference on Computer supported cooperative work - CSCW
’10, 27. https://doi.org/10.1145/1718918.1718926
Jared Spataro. Reimagining virtual collaboration for the future of work and learning. Retrieved from
https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/microsoft-365/blog/2020/07/08/reimagining-virtual-collaboration-futurework-learning/
Karen A. Jehn and Priti Pradhan Shah. 1997. Interpersonal relationships and task performance: An
examination of mediation processes in friendship and acquaintance groups. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology 72, 4: 775–790. https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.72.4.775
Jen Porter, Bernie Wong, and Kelly Greenwood. 2020. How to Form a Mental Health Employee Resource
Group. Harvard Business Review. Retrieved from https://hbr.org/2020/05/how-to-form-a-mental-healthemployee-resource-group
Anya Kamenetz. 2020. Families Of Children With Special Needs Are Suing In Several States. Here’s Why.
NPR. Retrieved from https://www.ijpr.org/education/2020-07-23/families-of-children-with-special-needs-aresuing-in-several-states-heres-why
Prerrna P. Kapoor, Abhijit Bairagi, and Anita Isola. 2020. Impact of COVID-19 crisis on the future of work in
India. In Microsoft New Future of Work Symposium. Retrieved from https://www.microsoft.com/enus/research/publication/impact-of-covid-19-crisis-on-the-future-of-work-in-india/
Harmeet Kaur. 2020. Why rural Americans are having a hard time working from home. CNN. Retrieved from
https://www.cnn.com/2020/04/29/us/rural-broadband-access-coronavirus-trnd/index.html
Kristi Kelly and Darren Austin. 2020. Mental Wellbeing. Microsoft (Internal).
Dawn Klinghoffer, Candice Young, and Dave Haspas. 2019. Every New Employee Needs an Onboarding
“Buddy.” Harvard Business Review. Retrieved January 21, 2021 from https://hbr.org/2019/06/every-newemployee-needs-an-onboarding-buddy
Dawn Klinghoffer, Candice Young, and Xue Liu. 2018. To Retain New Hires, Make Sure You Meet with
Them in Their First Week. Harvard Business Review. Retrieved January 21, 2021 from
https://hbr.org/2018/06/to-retain-new-hires-make-sure-you-meet-with-them-in-their-first-week
Andrew J. Ko. 2019. Why We Should Not Measure Productivity. In Rethinking Productivity in Software
Engineering, Caitlin Sadowski and Thomas Zimmermann (eds.). Apress, Berkeley, CA, 21–26.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-4221-6_3
Ella Koeze and Nathaniel Popper. 2020. The Virus Changed the Way We Internet. New York Times.
Justin Lavelle. 2020. Gartner CFO Survey Reveals 74% Intend to Shift Some Employees to Remote Work
Permanently. Gartner. Retrieved January 17, 2021 from https://www.gartner.com/en/newsroom/pressreleases/2020-04-03-gartner-cfo-surey-reveals-74-percent-of-organizations-to-shift-some-employees-toremote-work-permanently2
Heather Layne and Giancarlo Cozzi. 2020. The rise of the 30-minute meeting. Home | Work Blog from
Microsoft Workplace Insights. Retrieved from https://insights.office.com/workplace-analytics/the-rise-ofshorter-meetings-and-other-ways-collaboration-is-changing-with-remote-work/
Kyung-Hee Lee and Ellen Ernst Kossek. 2020. The coronavirus & work–life inequality: Three evidence-based
initiatives to update U.S. work–life employment policies. Behavioral Science and Policy Association.
Lydia Lee. 2020. Post-COVID, More Office Designs Include Permanent Outdoor Workspaces. Metropolis.
Retrieved January 21, 2021 from https://www.metropolismag.com/architecture/workplace-architecture/postcovid-outdoor-workspaces/

31

94.

95.

96.
97.
98.
99.
100.
101.
102.

103.
104.
105.
106.
107.

108.

109.
110.
111.
112.
113.

114.

115.

Life at Google. 2020. Most Googlers want to return to the office at some point, even if not every day. #️⃣1⃣
reason: to work face-to-face w/teammates #️⃣2⃣ reason: to socialize w/ teammates #️⃣3⃣ reason: collaboration
https://t.co/YfRdEG43Lo. @lifeatgoogle. Retrieved January 21, 2021 from
https://twitter.com/lifeatgoogle/status/1308529123984203778
Gretchen Livingston. 2018. U.S. Women More Likely to Have Children Than a Decade Ago. Pew Research
Center’s Social & Demographic Trends Project. Retrieved January 17, 2021 from
https://www.pewsocialtrends.org/2018/01/18/theyre-waiting-longer-but-u-s-women-today-more-likely-tohave-children-than-a-decade-ago/
Heather Long and Danielle Douglas-Gabriel. The latest crisis: Low-income students are dropping out of
college this fall in alarming numbers. Washington Post. Retrieved January 17, 2021 from
https://www.washingtonpost.com/business/2020/09/16/college-enrollment-down/
Angus Loten. 2020. IT Spending Forecasts Take a Hit as Coronavirus Slams Global Markets. Wall Street
Journal.
M365 Marketing. 2020. Work Trend Index. Retrieved from https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/microsoft365/work-productivity-trends-report
Chandra Maddila. 2020. Nudge study (Developer Productivity Trends during COVID-19). Microsoft
(Internal).
Maitraye Das, John Tang, Kathryn E. Ringland, and Anne Marie Piper. 2021. Towards Accessible Remote
Work: Understanding Work-from-Home Practices of Neurodivergent Professionals. In ACM CSCW ’21.
Caolan Mannion. 2020. Compass customers - WFH survey. Microsoft (Internal).
Angela J. Martin, Jackie M. Wellen, and Martin R. Grimmer. 2016. An eye on your work: How empowerment
affects the relationship between electronic surveillance and counterproductive work behaviours. The
International Journal of Human Resource Management 27, 21: 2635–2651.
https://doi.org/10.1080/09585192.2016.1225313
Matthew Ayres. 2020. Future Workforce Study. Microsoft (Internal).
Kelli McGee, Liane Scult, Sean Rintel, and Siddharth Suri. 2020. SMB Freelance Study. Microsoft (Internal).
Alison Medley. 2020. Rice University will hold classes in outdoor tents, asks students to bring own chairs.
Houston Chronicle. Retrieved January 21, 2021 from https://www.chron.com/local/article/Outdoor-tents-forclassrooms-That-s-now-the-15410068.php
Jacqueline Meijer-Irons. 2020. Compliance in the time of COVID-19. How remote work is changing the work
of compliance professionals. Microsoft (Internal).
Rob van der Meulen. Gartner CFO Survey Reveals That 62% of CFOs Plan SG&A Cuts This Year Due to
Coronavirus Related Disruptions. Gartner. Retrieved January 17, 2021 from
https://www.gartner.com/en/newsroom/press-releases/2020-04-06-gartner-cfo-survey-reveals-that-62-percentof-cfos-plan-sganda-cuts-this-year-due-to-coronavirus
André N. Meyer, Thomas Fritz, Gail C. Murphy, and Tom Zimmermann. 2014. Software Developers’
Perceptions of Productivity. In FSE ’14: Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium
on the Foundations of Software Engineering. Retrieved January 21, 2021 from
https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/publication/software-developers-perceptions-of-productivity/
Microsoft Human Resources Business Intelligence (HRBI). 2020. Microsoft Pre-Opening Planning Survey.
Microsoft (Internal).
Microsoft Human Resources Business Intelligence (HRBI). 2020. Daily Pulse Survey. Microsoft (Internal).
Microsoft Human Resources Business Intelligence (HRBI). 2020. Impact of COVID and the Future of Work.
Microsoft (Internal).
Microsoft IDC. 2020. Microsoft IDC Pre-Opening Planning Survey. Microsoft (Internal).
Ingrid Millán, Nick Noel, Lucy Pérez, and Alfonso Pulido. 2020. US Hispanic and Latino lives and
livelihoods in the recovery from COVID-19 | McKinsey. McKinsey & Company. Retrieved January 17, 2021
from https://www.mckinsey.com/industries/public-and-social-sector/our-insights/us-hispanic-and-latino-livesand-livelihoods-in-the-recovery-from-covid-19
Courtney Miller, Paige Rodeghero, Margaret-Anne Storey, Denae Ford, and Thomas Zimmermann. 2021.
“How Was Your Weekend?” Software Development Teams Working From Home During COVID-19. In
International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE) 2021. Retrieved from
https://arxiv.org/abs/2101.05877
Simon Mongey and Alex Weinberg. 2020. Characteristics of Workers in Low Work-From-Home and High
Personal-Proximity Occupations. Retrieved from https://bfi.uchicago.edu/working-paper/characteristics-ofworkers-in-low-work-from-home-and-high-personal-proximity-occupations/
32

116. Valerie J. Morganson, Debra A. Major, Kurt L. Oborn, Jennifer M. Verive, and Michelle P. Heelan. 2010.
Comparing telework locations and traditional work arrangements: Differences in work‐life balance support,
job satisfaction, and inclusion. Journal of Managerial Psychology 25, 6: 578–595.
https://doi.org/10.1108/02683941011056941
117. Danielle Muoio, Nick Niedzwiadek, and Marie J. French. 2020. Rural areas struggle with remote learning as
broadband remains elusive. Politico PRO. Retrieved January 17, 2021 from https://politi.co/3cGM5ZE
118. Prasanth Murali, Javier Hernandez, Daniel McDuff, Kael Rowan, Jina Suh, and Mary Czerwinski. 2021.
AffectiveSpotlight: Facilitating the Communication of Affective Responses from Audience Members during
Online Presentations. In ACM SIGCHI 2021.
119. E. Murphy-Hill, C. Jaspan, C. Sadowski, D. Shepherd, M. Phillips, C. Winter, A. Knight, E. Smith, and M.
Jorde. 2019. What Predicts Software Developers’ Productivity? IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering:
1–1. https://doi.org/10.1109/TSE.2019.2900308
120. Lucia Mutikani. 2020. U.S. home sales rack up record gain; tight supply, COVID-19 seen slowing
momentum. Reuters. Retrieved January 17, 2021 from https://www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-economyhousing-idUSKCN24N22B
121. Nina Shikaloff and Ryan Fuller. 2017. What great managers do daily. Microsoft Workplace Insights.
Retrieved from https://insights.office.com/productivity/what-great-managers-do-daily/
122. Mary C. Noonan and Jennifer L. Glass. 2012. The hard truth about telecommuting. Monthly Labor Review:
38–45.
123. NPD Group. 2020. March Cellular Data Usage Surges in the U.S. Amid COVID-19 Spread. NPD Group.
124. Brid O’Conaill, Steve Whittaker, and Sylvia Wilbur. 1993. Conversations Over Video Conferences: An
Evaluation of the Spoken Aspects of Video-Mediated Communication. Human–Computer Interaction 8, 4:
389–428. https://doi.org/10.1207/s15327051hci0804_4
125. Thomas A. O’Neill, Laura A. Hambley, and Angelina Bercovich. 2014. Prediction of cyberslacking when
employees are working away from the office. Computers in Human Behavior 34: 291–298.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2014.02.015
126. Namrata S. Panwar and Alok Kumar Mishra. 2020. COVID-19 crisis and urbanization, migration and
inclusive city policies in India: A new theoretical framework. Journal of Public Affairs 20, 4: e2249.
https://doi.org/10.1002/pa.2249
127. Julianne Payne. 2018. Manufacturing Masculinity: Exploring Gender and Workplace Surveillance. Work and
Occupations 45, 3: 346–383. https://doi.org/10.1177/0730888418780969
128. Emily Peloquin, Sheri Panabaker, Patty Clusserath, Nalini Iyer, Hope Idaewor, and Emily Downing. 2020.
CSEO WFH Study / GESS (Global Employee Satisfaction Survey). Microsoft (Internal).
129. Nadja Popovich, Anjali Singhvi, and Matthew Conlen. 2020. Where Chronic Health Conditions and
Coronavirus Could Collide. New York Times. Retrieved from
https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2020/05/18/us/coronavirus-underlying-conditions.html
130. Mark Powers. 2020. In China, managing people, relationships, and more meetings remotely. Home | Work
Blog from Microsoft Workplace Insights. Retrieved from https://insights.office.com/workplace-analytics/inchina-managing-teams-and-meetings-remotely/
131. Mark Powers and Jasminder Thind. 2020. Lessons from China: A return to the office, but not to the old way
of working. Workplace Analytics. Retrieved October 5, 2020 from https://insights.office.com/workplaceanalytics/lessons-from-china-a-return-to-the-office-but-not-to-the-old-way-of-working/
132. Dana Mattioli and Konrad Putzier. 2020. When It’s Time to Go Back to the Office, Will It Still Be There?
Wall Street Journal. Retrieved May 21, 2020 from https://www.wsj.com/articles/when-its-time-to-go-back-tothe-office-will-it-still-be-there-11589601618
133. Paul Ralph, Sebastian Baltes, Gianisa Adisaputri, Richard Torkar, Vladimir Kovalenko, Marcos Kalinowski,
Nicole Novielli, Shin Yoo, Xavier Devroey, Xin Tan, Minghui Zhou, Burak Turhan, Rashina Hoda, Hideaki
Hata, Gregorio Robles, Amin Milani Fard, and Rana Alkadhi. 2020. Pandemic Programming: How COVID19 affects software developers and how their organizations can help. Empirical Software Engineering 25, 6:
4927–4961. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10664-020-09875-y
134. Daniel M. Ravid, Jerod C. White, Dave L. Tomczak, Ahleah F. Miles, and Tara S. Behrend. 2020. A MetaAnalysis of the Effects of Digital Surveillance of Workers: A Psychology Focused Approach. In Microsoft
New Future of Work Symposium. Retrieved January 17, 2021 from https://www.microsoft.com/enus/research/publication/a-meta-analysis-of-the-effects-of-digital-surveillance-of-workers-a-psychologyfocused-approach/

33

135. Patricia Reaney. 2012. Sizable Minority Of Global Workers Don’t Commute To An Office. HuffPost.
Retrieved May 20, 2020 from https://www.huffpost.com/entry/workers-telecommute_n_1228004
136. Julie A. Rennecker, Alan R. Dennis, and Sean Hansen. 2010. “Invisible Whispering”: Restructuring Meeting
Processes with Instant Messaging. In Handbook of Group Decision and Negotiation, D. Marc Kilgour and
Colin Eden (eds.). Springer Netherlands, Dordrecht, 25–45. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-90-481-9097-3_3
137. Sean Rintel. 2010. Conversational management of network trouble perturbations in personal
videoconferencing. Retrieved May 20, 2020 from https://www.microsoft.com/enus/research/publication/conversational-management-of-network-trouble-perturbations-in-personalvideoconferencing/
138. Sean Rintel, Abi Sellen, Advait Sarkar, Priscilla Wong, Nancy Baym, and Rachel Bergmann. 2020. 2020
Study of Microsoft Employee Experiences in Remote Meetings During COVID-19 (Project Tahiti). Microsoft
Research. Retrieved from https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/project/meeting-during-covid-19/
139. Sean Rintel, Priscilla Wong, Advait Sarkar, and Abigail Sellen. 2020. Methodology and Participation for 2020
Diary Study of Microsoft Employees Experiences in Remote Meetings During COVID-19. Retrieved January
20, 2021 from https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/publication/methodology-and-participation-for2020-diary-study-of-microsoft-employees-experiences-in-remote-meetings-during-covid-19/
140. Elena Rocco. 1998. Trust breaks down in electronic contexts but can be repaired by some initial face-to-face
contact. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’98), 496–
502. https://doi.org/10.1145/274644.274711
141. Paige Rodeghero, Thomas Zimmermann, Brian Houck, and Denae Ford. 2020. Please Turn Your Cameras
On: Remote Onboarding of Software Developers during a Pandemic. arXiv:2011.08130 [cs]. Retrieved
January 19, 2021 from http://arxiv.org/abs/2011.08130
142. Karen Ruhleder and Brigitte Jordan. 2001. Co-Constructing Non-Mutual Realities: Delay-Generated Trouble
in Distributed Interaction. Computer Supported Cooperative Work 10, 1: 113–138.
https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1011243905593
143. Ryan Smith. 2020. How CEOs Can Support Employee Mental Health in a Crisis. Harvard Business Review.
Retrieved from https://hbr.org/2020/05/how-ceos-can-support-employee-mental-health-in-a-crisis
144. Harvey Sacks, Emanuel A. Schegloff, and Gail Jefferson. 1974. A Simplest Systematics for the Organization
of Turn-Taking for Conversation. Language 50, 4: 696–735. https://doi.org/10.2307/412243
145. Adam Satariano. 2020. How My Boss Monitors Me While I Work From Home. The New York Times.
Retrieved May 19, 2020 from https://www.nytimes.com/2020/05/06/technology/employee-monitoring-workfrom-home-virus.html
146. Abigail Sellen. 1995. Remote conversations: The effects of mediating talk with technology. Human-Computer
Interaction 10. Retrieved May 20, 2020 from https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/publication/remoteconversations-the-effects-of-mediating-talk-with-technology/
147. Teddy Seyed, Nathalie Riche, Ken Hinckley, Bill Buxton, Jonathan Goldstein, Michel Pahud, Nicolai
Marquardt, Molly Nicholas, Christian Holz, Hugo Romat, and Rojin Vishkaie. 2020. Devices at Home Survey.
Microsoft (Internal).
148. Neha Shah and Jonathan Larson. 2020. Toward resilience: Adapting to crisis through the lens of
organizational networks. Home | Work Blog from Microsoft Workplace Insights. Retrieved from
https://insights.office.com/networks/toward-resilience-adapting-to-crisis-through-the-lens-of-organizationalnetworks/
149. Kevin Sherman and Shailendra Hegde. 2020. When office work shifts to remote, what will we learn? Home |
Work Blog from Microsoft Workplace Insights. Retrieved from https://insights.office.com/workplaceanalytics/remote-work-data/
150. Patricia M. Sias, Hannah Pedersen, Erin B. Gallagher, and Irina Kopaneva. 2012. Workplace Friendship in the
Electronically Connected Organization. Human Communication Research 38, 3: 253–279.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-2958.2012.01428.x
151. Natalie Singer-Velush, Carlos Morales Torrado, and Ainize Cidoncha. 2020. In Microsoft Denmark, data and
inclusion are key to navigating disruption. Workplace Analytics. Retrieved January 16, 2021 from
https://insights.office.com/workplace-analytics/in-microsoft-denmark-data-and-inclusion-are-key-tonavigating-disruption/
152. Gurkaran Singh and David Spiers. 2020. E+D Engineering Systems Health. Microsoft (Internal).
153. Julia Sklar. 2020. ‘Zoom fatigue’ is taxing the brain. Here’s why that happens. National Geographic.
Retrieved May 20, 2020 from https://www.nationalgeographic.com/science/2020/04/coronavirus-zoomfatigue-is-taxing-the-brain-here-is-why-that-happens/
34

154. Jared Spataro and Ronnie Martin. 2020. Presentation on research behind blog post "A pulse on employees’
wellbeing, six months into the pandemic". Retrieved January 21, 2021 from https://www.microsoft.com/enus/microsoft-365/blog/2020/09/22/pulse-employees-wellbeing-six-months-pandemic/
155. Keri K. Stephens. 2012. Multiple Conversations During Organizational Meetings: Development of the
Multicommunicating Scale. Management Communication Quarterly 26, 2: 195–223.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0893318911431802
156. Meghan Stockdale, Therese Okraku, Megan Brown, Jamie Miller, Bella Chiu, and Shelly Marston. 2020.
Study of Impact on Information Worker Productivity. Microsoft (Internal).
157. Margaret-Anne Storey, Emelie Engstrom, Martin Höst, Per Runeson, and Elizabeth Bjarnason. 2017. Using a
Visual Abstract as a Lens for Communicating and Promoting Design Science Research in Software
Engineering. In 2017 ACM/IEEE International Symposium on Empirical Software Engineering and
Measurement (ESEM), 181–186. https://doi.org/10.1109/ESEM.2017.28
158. Margaret-Anne Storey, Thomas Zimmermann, Christian Bird, Jacek Czerwonka, Brendan Murphy, and Eirini
Kalliamvakou. 2019. Towards a Theory of Software Developer Job Satisfaction and Perceived Productivity.
IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering: 1–1. https://doi.org/10.1109/TSE.2019.2944354
159. Joanne Suomi, Douglas Collier, and Lou Brown. Factors Affecting the Social Experiences of Students in
Elementary Physical Education Classes. Journal of Teaching in Physical Education 22, 2: 186–202.
160. Alaina Talboy and Paula Bach. 2020. COVID-19 Impact to IWs Research Series: Communication Difficulties.
Microsoft (Internal).
161. Alaina Talboy and Paula Bach. 2020. COVID-19 Impact to IWs Research Series: Work-Life Balance
Difficulties. Microsoft (Internal).
162. Alaina Talboy and Paula Bach. 2020. COVID-19 Impact to IWs Research Series: Browser and Work Tool
Difficulties. Microsoft (Internal).
163. John Tang. 2021. Understanding the Telework Experience of People with Disabilities. In ACM CSCW ’21.
164. Jaime Teevan and Brent Hecht. 2020. How research can enable more effective remote work. Microsoft
Research. Retrieved January 20, 2021 from https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/blog/how-researchcan-enable-more-effective-remote-work/
165. Jaime Teevan and Alexander Hehmeyer. 2013. Understanding how the projection of availability state impacts
the reception incoming communication. In Proceedings of the 2013 conference on Computer supported
cooperative work - CSCW ’13, 753. https://doi.org/10.1145/2441776.2441860
166. Alan Thomas. 2020. Post-pandemic effects on e-mail. Microsoft (Internal).
167. Sarah Tian and Yonatan Dubinsky. 2020. Information Security Professionals in the time of COVID-19.
Microsoft (Internal).
168. Ozgur Turetken, Abhijit Jain, Brandi Quesenberry, and Ojelanki Ngwenyama. 2011. An Empirical
Investigation of the Impact of Individual and Work Characteristics on Telecommuting Success. IEEE
Transactions on Professional Communication 54, 1: 56–67. https://doi.org/10.1109/TPC.2010.2041387
169. U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. 2020. Frequently asked questions: The impact of the coronavirus (COVID19) pandemic on The Employment Situation for May 2020. Retrieved from
https://www.bls.gov/cps/employment-situation-covid19-faq-may-2020.pdf
170. U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. Labor force characteristics by race and ethnicity, 2019. Retrieved January 21,
2021 from https://www.bls.gov/opub/reports/race-and-ethnicity/2019/home.htm
171. US Census Bureau. 2020. Week 13 Household Pulse Survey: August 19 – August 31. Census.gov. Retrieved
January 17, 2021 from https://www.census.gov/data/tables/2020/demo/hhp/hhp13.html
172. D. Alexander Varakin, Daniel T. Levin, and Roger Fidler. 2004. Unseen and Unaware: Implications of Recent
Research on Failures of Visual Awareness for Human-Computer Interface Design. Human-Computer
Interaction 19, 4: 389–422. https://doi.org/10.1207/s15327051hci1904_9
173. Roel Vertegaal, Ivo Weevers, and Changuk Sohn. 2002. GAZE-2: an attentive video conferencing system. In
CHI ’02 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI EA ’02), 736–737.
https://doi.org/10.1145/506443.506572
174. Vicus Partners. 2020. 6 Office Design Trends For the Post Covid-19 World. Vicus Partners. Retrieved
January 16, 2021 from https://vicuspartners.com/articles/6-office-design-trends-post-covid-19/
175. Mihaela Vorvoreanu and Carl H Botan. 2000. Examining electronic surveillance in the workplace: A review
of theoretical perspectives and research findings. In the Conference of the International Communication
Association.

35

176. Yun Wang, Ying Liu, Weiwei Cui, John Tang, Haidong Zhang, Doug Walston, and Dongmei Zhang. 2020.
Returning to the Office During the COVID-19 Pandemic Recovery: Early Indicators from China. Microsoft
(Internal).
177. Mark Wilson. 2020. Move over, Zoom. This magic interface is the future of videoconferencing. Fast
Company. Retrieved May 21, 2020 from https://www.fastcompany.com/90498000/move-over-zoom-thismagic-interface-is-the-future-of-videoconferencing
178. Barbara A. Winstead, Valerian J. Derlega, Melinda J. Montgomery, and Constance Pilkington. 1995. The
Quality of Friendships at Work and Job Satisfaction. Journal of Social and Personal Relationships 12, 2: 199–
215. https://doi.org/10.1177/0265407595122003
179. Hana Wolf. 2020. Learnings from LinkedIn Online Events. LinkedIn User Experience (Internal).
180. Hana Wolf, Leslie Forman, Sunny Patel, Anton Zadorozhnyy, Lindsay Kelly, and Amulya Aradhyula. 2020.
Project Moxie. Microsoft (Internal).
181. Muiris Woulfe. 2020. OMEX Survey. Microsoft (Internal).
182. Longqi Yang, Sonia Jaffe, David Holtz, Siddharth Suri, Shilpi Sinha, Jeffrey Weston, Connor Joyce, Neha
Shah, Kevin Sherman, C.J. Lee, Brent Hecht, and Jaime Teevan. 2020. How Work-From-Home Affects Work
Practices: A Large-Scale and Quasi-experimental Study. arXiv:2007.15584 [cs]. Retrieved from
http://arxiv.org/abs/2007.15584
183. Josh Zumbrun. 2016. The Rise of Knowledge Workers Is Accelerating Despite the Threat of Automation.
WSJ. Retrieved January 24, 2021 from https://blogs.wsj.com/economics/2016/05/04/the-rise-of-knowledgeworkers-is-accelerating-despite-the-threat-of-automation/
184. 2009. Geographic Pay Differential Practices. Retrieved from https://www.shrm.org/resourcesandtools/hrtopics/compensation/pages/geographicpay.aspx
185. 2020. Labor Force Statistics from the Current Population Survey. U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. Retrieved
from https://www.bls.gov/cps/cpsaat18.htm
186. 2020. Moms reduce work more than dads during pandemic — study. Marketplace. Retrieved January 17,
2021 from https://www.marketplace.org/2020/07/16/moms-are-reducing-work-hours-4-5-times-more-thandads-during-pandemic/
187. Outdoor Education Update. Retrieved January 21, 2021 from
https://www.seattleschools.org/district/calendars/news/what_s_new/outdoor_education_update
188. Mind Share Partner’s 2019 Mental Health at Work Report. Mind Share Partners. Retrieved from
https://www.mindsharepartners.org/mentalhealthatworkreport

36

