arXiv:2103.00535v1 [cs.SI] 28 Feb 2021

A multi-objective time series analysis of community
mobility reduction comparing first and second
COVID-19 waves
Gabriela Cavalcante da Silva

Fernanda Monteiro de Almeida

Sabrina Oliveira

IMD, Universidade Federal
do Rio Grande do Norte
Natal, RN, Brazil
gabrielacavalcante@ufrn.edu.br

PPgTI, Universidade Federal
do Rio Grande do Norte
Natal, RN, Brazil
feemonteiro@ufrn.edu.br

PPGMMC, Centro Federal de Educação
Tecnológica de Minas Gerais
Belo Horizonte, MG, Brazil
oliveira.sabrina@gmail.com

Leonardo C. T. Bezerra

Elizabeth F. Wanner

IMD, Universidade Federal
do Rio Grande do Norte
Natal, RN, Brazil
leobezerra@imd.ufrn.br

DECOM, Centro Federal de Educação
Tecnológica de Minas Gerais
Belo Horizonte, MG, Brazil
efwanner@cefetmg.br

Abstract—With the logistic challenges faced by most countries
for the production, distribution, and application of vaccines for
the novel coronavirus disease (COVID-19), social distancing (SD)
remains the most tangible approach to mitigate the spread of
the virus. To assist SD monitoring, several tech companies have
made publicly available anonymized mobility data. In this work,
we conduct a multi-objective mobility reduction rate comparison
between the first and second COVID-19 waves in several localities
from America and Europe using Google community mobility
reports (CMR) data. Through multi-dimensional visualization,
we are able to compare in a Pareto-compliant way the reduction
in mobility from the different lockdown periods for each locality
selected, simultaneously considering all place categories provided
in CMR. In addition, our analysis comprises a 56-day lockdown
period for each locality and COVID-19 wave, which we analyze
both as 56-day periods and as 14-day consecutive windows.
Results vary considerably as a function of the locality considered,
particularly when the temporal evolution of the mobility reduction is considered. We thus discuss each locality individually,
relating social distancing measures and the reduction observed.

I. I NTRODUCTION
In December 2019, the World Health Organization (WHO)
Country Office in the People’s Republic of China reported
cases of pneumonia of unknown etiology. In January 2020,
WHO named SARS-CoV-2 the novel coronavirus responsible
for these cases, and the acute respiratory syndrome it caused
COVID-19. Still in January, WHO classified COVID-19 as a
public health emergency of international concern. By March
2020, COVID-19 had cases reported from all continents, and
WHO declared it a pandemic. Up to February 21th, 2021, a
fresh worldwide figure of over 110 million positive cases and
nearly 2,5 million death records signify the severity of this
viral infection, according to WHO.
Among the most relevant topics in multi-disciplinary
COVID-19 research is social distancing (SD), which WHO
actively promotes as a non-pharmaceutical intervention against
COVID-19 [1]. As the numbers of infected people and deaths

Ricardo H. C. Takahashi
DEMAT, Universidade Federal
de Minas Gerais
Belo Horizonte, MG, Brazil
taka@mat.ufmg.br

increase worldwide, and while the vaccine is not globally
available, health authorities have continued to rely on SD
measures to reduce the spread of the disease. In fact, the
lockdown policies enforced by some affected countries in 2020
helped bend the curve of the disease spread, leading to an end
of the first wave.
Despite the warnings about the consequences of premature
lifting of SD measures [2], most countries eased restrictions
and have already been hit by a second COVID-19 wave.
Indeed, many countries in Europe have been facing a second
wave COVID-19 pandemic since September 2020. It is legitimate to think that countries would manage the second wave
a lot better, given the lessons learned during the first wave.
However the reality in such countries tells a different scenario
[3]: much higher infection numbers, more patients in ICUs,
and in some countries also more deaths, implying that only a
hard lockdown can help control the pandemic.
To aid SD monitoring, information technology (IT) companies have been publishing anonymized mobile device location history data, among which Google [4]. In particular,
the community mobility reports (CMR) provided by Google
comprise over 130 countries, some of which further detailed
on a regional level. More importantly, the data for a given
locality is a collection of time series for six place categories.
Therefore, SD analysis based on CMR data requires theoretical
approaches from the fields of time series analysis (TSA) [5]
and multi-objective optimization (MO) [6]. Furthermore, the
existence of six different place types renders this a manyobjective optimization problem [7], a particularly challenging
specialization of MO.
In this paper, we employ appropriate methodology to empirically compare the community mobility reduction during the
first and second COVID-19 waves in localities from America
and Europe. Specifically, our analysis comprises localities
that experienced some of the most severe pandemic out-

breaks [8], namely Lombardia (Italy), Île-de-France (France),
and Birmingham District (United Kingdom). Furthermore,
major leader localities such as Berlin (Germany) and Toronto
Division (Canada) have also been included, for representativeness. In common, all of these cities have enforced lockdown
measures around March 2020 to contain the first wave, and
were forced backed into lockdown around November 2020
due to a second wave.
Our comparison is both (i) multi-objective, as it simultaneously considers all place categories provided, and (ii) temporal, as mobility reduction is progressively compared over a 56day period, discretized as 14-day consecutive time windows.
To compare mobility reduction from a given locality during
the first and second wave lockdowns in a Pareto-compliant
way, we employ multi-dimensional visualization through radar
charts. Furthermore, to ensure that weekday seasonal effects
do not affect our analysis, we process the data using seasonaltrend decomposition by loess (STL [5]).
Results vary as a function of the locality considered, and
hence we discuss each locality individually. Nonetheless, in
general the initial mobility reduction in lockdown periods from
the first wave was higher than in lockdown periods from the
second wave. Alarmingly, most localities presented an increase
in mobility for all categories during the December holiday
shopping season, which had not been observed during Easter
holidays. Though striking, these findings are explained by
the reluctance from societies and governments in general to
adhere to a second lockdown, specially after the significant
economical cost of the first lockdown periods.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. We
initially briefly review related work in Section II. Next, Section III discusses the methodology we adopt in this work to
enable a multi-objective social distancing analysis comparison
from mobility data. The assessment contrasting mobility reduction from different lockdown periods for each locality is
detailed in Section IV. Finally, we conclude and discuss future
work in Section V.
II. R ELATED WORK
The research on COVID-19 is marked by (i) the volume of
works from the most diverse scientific fields, and in particular
how these fields are bridged to produced relevant multidisciplinary insights, and; (ii) the speed with which works
are being made available to society, though to a very large
extent as pre-prints that have not yet undergone peer review.
In this section, we briefly discuss works that have already been
peer-reviewed. In addition, since our work compares first and
second waves data, we focus on works that concern the second
wave. We group these works into the most recurring topics.
Planning for a second wave has been the topic of works
dating as of March 2020 [2], [9]–[13]. Given how early China
was able to contain COVID-19 spread during its first wave,
[9] discuss the benefits of social distancing outside Hubei and
stress the importance of second wave planning. Building on
that work, [2] state the need to model how different nonpharmaceutical interventions such as SD individually contributed to contain or mitigate the epidemic in China. In

particular, authors emphasize understanding these individual
contributions as key to second wave prevention planning.
Outside China, where first waves were not under control until
spring 2020, second wave planning works can be identified as
of July 2020 [10]–[13]. Building on the lessons from China,
social distancing is further advocated for by [13]. In [10],
authors discuss how the second wave was expected to hit
Europe harder than the first wave, and highlight the effects
of the winter season in northern hemisphere countries. [11]
stress that until herd immunity has been achieved, not only a
second wave but multiple peaks in COVID-19 spread should
be expected. Finally, besides traditional non-pharmaceutical
approaches discussed in other works, [12] also include school
reopening as a planning factor for a second wave.
Analysis works date of after the second waves had started
across Europe [3], [14]–[19], and focus on the development
and characteristics of the second waves. Works from this
category are as early as fall 2020, but the first ones assessed
the second wave at a point where daily deaths were attenuated
in comparison to the first wave [14], [15]. In particular, [14]
performed this comparison globally, whereas [15] focused on
COVID-19 waves in Japan.
By winter 2020, the rise in the number of fatalities demonstrated that the second wave was harder than the first one [3],
[16]–[18]. Globally, [16] discuss the role of age and reinfection as distinguishing characteristics of the second wave.
Other works focus on European nation-wide realities, namely
France [17], Germany [3], and Italy [18]. More recently, [19]
assessed shifts in age distribution and nursing home fatalities
in 16 representative European Union countries, arguiging that
first and second waves are similar concerning the former, but
the latter was reduced during the second wave.
Modelling is the focus of the remaining works we identify [20]–[24]. In more detail, some of these works focus on
Europe [20], [21], whereas others target America [22]–[24].
Regarding Europe, [20] provide projections of temporal evolution of COVID-19 spread across different regions calibrated on
first wave data, and model the impact of the corresponding SD.
In [21], authors model COVID-19 second wave infections in
France and Italy via a stochastic susceptible-exposed-infectedrecovered model.
Regarding America, in [22] authors build an agent-based
model of SARS-CoV-2 transmission in the Boston metropolitan area using anonymized, geolocalized mobility data with
census, and demographic data. In particular, they show that
hard SD measures coupled with testing, contact-tracing, and
household quarantine could not only to prevent the failure of
the healthcare system but also allow the return of economic
activities. In [23], a multi-disciplinary approach employs a
Bayesian susceptible-infected-recovered model, Kalman Filter,
and machine learning techniques to investigate the effects from
SD policies in North America. In [24], considering as factors
casual and workplace contacts as well as reopening speed,
authors predict the most prudent action for controlling the
second wave of COVID-19 in Michigan, US.
As discussed, the volume and speed with which scientific
works on COVID-19 are being published is overwhelming.
Nonetheless, we have not found peer-reviewed works com-

CMR

Enrichment

Calibration

Seasonality

70-day periods

Scaling

Temporal?

Yes

Discretization

No

Aggregation

MO comparison

Fig. 1: Methodology comprising data enrichment and preparation through time series analysis and multi-objective optimization.
TABLE I: Place category descriptions from Google CMR [25].
Category
Grocery
& pharmacy
Parks
Transit stations
Retail
& recreation
Residential
Workplaces

Places
Grocery markets, food warehouses, farmers markets, specialty shops,
drug stores, and pharmacies
Parks, public beaches, marinas, dog parks, plazas, and public gardens
Public transport hubs, e.g. subway and bus stations
Restaurants, cafes, shopping centers, theme parks, museums, libraries,
and movie theaters
Places of residence
Places of work

TABLE II: Initial restriction dates for first and second waves,
in 2020, considering each locality.
Wave

Lombardia

Île-de-France

1st
2nd

Feb 23rd
Nov 6th

Mar 12nd
Oct 30th

Birmingham
District
Mar 13nd
Nov 5th

Berlin
Mar 13nd
Nov 2nd

Toronto
Division
Mar 12nd
Nov 21st

paring SD measures adopted by localities during the first
and second waves. In the next section, we describe the
methodology we propose for such an analysis.
III. M ETHODOLOGY
To compare social distancing in the first and second
COVID-19 waves, we assess the mobility data provided as
community mobility reports (CMR) by Google. In this section,
we detail data enrichment and preparation, including the time
series analysis (TSA) and multi-objective optimization (MO)
techniques we adopt for their analysis. Figure 1 summarizes
the process described in this section.
A. Data acquisition, description, and enrichment
CMR data is provided as a comma-separated values (CSV)
file comprising over 135 countries, some of which further
detailed on a regional level. Data is collected from users who
willingly enable their location history, and is anonymized as
described in [4]. CMR per-locality data comprises six time
series, one for each place category created by Google, given
in Table I. Each time series currently spans one year, having
started on February 15th , 2020. For a single timestamp and
category, the given value is computed relatively to a baseline,
namely the median value, for the corresponding day of the
week, computed for the period between January 3rd , 2020 and
February 6th , 2020 [25].
In this work, we restrict our analysis to mobility in nonresidential areas. Our rationale is that the indication that
residential mobility should be maximized is not as clear as
that mobility in non-residential places should be minimized.
More precisely, Google does not specify the space granularity
it adopts for residential places. As such, cultural traits such as
social gatherings from neighbors that live in a same building
would have to be minimized, but Google does not disclaim
how this category is processed.
As a representative sample in terms of second waves, we
select Lombardia (Italy), Île-de-France (France), and Birmingham District (United Kingdom). In addition, we also include
Berlin (Germany) and Toronto Division (Canada) to account
for localities where the second wave was not as hard and/or
are situated outside Europe. We remark that these localities

Fig. 2: Original CMR data for Lombardia. Shadowed zones
indicate the 56-day periods from each COVID-19 wave considered for the analysis, which start on the corresponding initial
restriction date (vertical dashed lines).

comprise different CMR spatial discretization granularities,
with data for Lombardia and Île-de-France representing the
second granularity level (a region) and data for the remaining
localities representing the third granularity level (e.g., a district
or a division). Nonetheless, since we only compare data from
first and second waves for each locality individually, this
difference in granularity does not affect our conclusions.
For the localities we assess, we have further enriched the
data with their initial mobility restriction dates related to
the first and second waves, given in Table II. Specifically,
in the first wave, we have used school suspension dates as
the initial restriction dates, as our preliminary assessment
showed this was the restriction measure that most significantly
affected mobility. In the second wave, since schools have
remained open in some places, the initial restriction dates
are different for each location, but not much apart from each
other. Nonetheless, since our assessment is based on days since
initial restriction dates, differences in starting dates do not
affect our conclusions. Figure 2 (left) illustrates CMR data
for Lombardia, as well as the restriction dates for each wave
for that locality (vertical dashed lines).

B. Data preparation
We follow guidelines provided by Google for the assessment of CMR data [25]. Specifically, Google recommends
(i) calibrating data in a locality-wise basis; (ii) handling noise
incurred by holidays or other exceptional circumstances, and;
(iii) balancing the difference in magnitude between categories.
To meet these guidelines, we first process the whole time
series for each locality and place category to ensure that
the data previous to the first wave first mobility restriction
date present zero mean. Next, we isolate data trend from
weekday seasonality effects and noise using seasonal-trend
decomposition by loess (STL, [5]). We remark that monthly
seasonality effects cannot be addressed with the currently
available CMR data, as the current span of the data is only
one-year long. Last, we balance the contribution of individual
place categories, i.e., data for each category is scaled to a
common range per locality, as done in the MO literature.
To compare mobility reduction during the first and second
waves, we focus on the 56-day periods in each wave after the
corresponding initial restriction date. We select this 56-day
duration for two reasons. First, the first lockdowns lasted no
longer than 60 days for the localities considered, in general. In
addition, a 56-day period can be further discretized into 14day windows, matching the maximum incubation period for
SARS-CoV-2. Figure 2 depicts the 56-day periods for Lombardia (shadowed areas) using the original data, as discussed.
To draw Pareto-compliant conclusions, we compare the prepared data from the different waves for a given locality using
radar charts. Whichever the temporal granularity considered
(whole 56-day period or 14-day consecutive windows), percategory data from different waves are aggregated using the
area under the curve (AUC) approach to enable comparison.
Given the use of prepared and aggregated data, the direct
interpretability of mobility reduction in radar charts is lost.
Yet, this approach increases the soundness of the insights we
discuss in the next section.
IV. R ESULTS
Social distancing (SD) has been promoted by WHO as
a critical non-pharmaceutical intervention against COVID19, and hence localities have proposed mobility restriction
measures to enforce it during each wave. Given the contrast
between approaches taken by each locality, we start this
section providing a unified perspective into the measures
adopted. We then proceed to a per-locality discussion, where
we first discuss results from a 56-day period perspective, and
then from a temporal evolution perspective considering 14-day
consecutive windows.
A. Social distancing measures
Though we do not compare different localities directly, we
initially discuss common SD measures adopted by localities
to provide context to the analysis we conduct next. Table III
indicates whether an SD measure affecting the mobility for
the given category has been enforced in the selected locality
during the given COVID-19 wave. We remark that we: (i) do
not include Residential, as it is not considered in our assessment; (ii) do not include Grocery & pharmacy, as no locality

has enforced measures directly related to this category, and;
(iii) include Schools as a separate column, as school closing
potentially affected multiple categories.
Two insights deserve highlighting at this point. First, for
the first wave set of measures Île-de-France and Lombardia
adopted stricter measures than the remaining European localities (especially Birmingham District). Second, comparing first
and second wave restriction measures, we notice how stricter
measures were during the first COVID-19 wave. As discussed,
this is an effect of the socioeconomical toll incurred by the
first wave, which made governments and societies less prone
to restrictions when preparing for a second wave. Nonetheless,
most of the localities later adopted stricter measures such as
school closing as of January 2021, though it was also common
to observe measures being relaxed for the December holiday
shopping season.
B. Lombardia
Italy’s most wealthy and populous region, Lombardia was
by May 2020 the hardest hit region in Europe. Until February
21th, 2021, there were over 577,000 cases and 28,000 deaths
in Lombardia according to the Johns Hopkins University,
representing almost one fifth and one third of Italian cases
and deaths, respectively. During the first wave, Lombardia
initially adopted restriction measures regionally on February,
23rd, which were later strengthened and made national by the
Italian government. Specifically, the second set of restriction
measures was decreed on March 8th, prohibiting any kind
of mobility apart from certain health or professional needs.
A third set of restriction measures was enforced in March
22nd and, among the stricter measures, any sport and physical
activity in outdoor spaces was forbidden. Regarding the second
wave, the Italian government labelled Lombardia a red zone in
November 2020, with a rising number of daily new cases. The
measures enforced prohibited in and out movement of the city,
closed shops, bars, and restaurants, among other measures.
Figure 3a provides our multi-criteria comparison of the
first (blue) and second (red) waves of Lombardia, in which
per-category data from each 56-day period is aggregated using
the area under the curve (AUC) approach. In more detail,
this polar coordinate plot depicts (i) categories as angles and
(ii) relative mobility aggregated over the given time period as
radii. More importantly, this multi-dimensional visualization
simplifies the Pareto-compliant comparison of the mobility
reduction in different waves of a same locality, as mobility
reduction from wave w1 dominates mobility reduction from
wave w2 iff the polygon given for w1 is contained by the
polygon given for w2 . This is the case in this initial analysis
given in Figure 3a, where each 56-day period is aggregated as
a whole for Lombardia. Indeed, the mobility during the first
wave is considerably reduced for all categories in comparison
to the mobility during the second wave. This is illustrated in
Figure 4a, where initial restriction dates are given as dashed
vertical lines and the 56-day periods from each wave are given
as shadowed areas.
Next, the radar charts given on the right-most part of
Figure 4a depict the multi-objective comparison when each
56-day period is discretized prior to aggregation as 14-day

TABLE III: Social distance restriction measures adopted by the selected localities during the first and second COVID-19 waves.
Locality
Berlin
Birmingham District
Île-de-France
Lombardia
Toronto Division

(a) Lombardia

Parks
X
—
X
X
X

Retail & recreation
X
X
X
X
X

1st wave
Transit stations
X
—
X
X
In part

(b) Île-de-France

Workplaces
In part
In part
X
X
In part

Schools
X
X
X
X
X

Parks
X
—
In part
In part
X

(c) Birmingham District

Retail & recreation
In part
X
X
In part
X

(d) Berlin

2nd wave
Transit stations
—
—
In part
X
In part

Workplaces
In part
In part
In part
X
In part

Schools
—
—
—
—
X

(e) Toronto Division

Fig. 3: Multi-objective comparison of the mobility reduction rates in the first (red) and second (blue) COVID-19 waves of the
selected localities. Values for each (abbreviated) place category are given by the AUC aggregation of the whole 56-day period.
Charts range from the minimum (0) to the maximum (56) possible AUC value for the period considered.

consecutive windows, which we use to assess the temporal
evolution of social distance adherence. From left to right, each
radar chart depicts a single 14-day window, with the initial day
of the window given above the chart, counted as number of
days since the corresponding initial restriction date. From the
radar charts, we observe that the mobility reduction in the
first wave dominates the reduction in the second wave for all
windows except for the first (between 0 and 13 days since each
initial restriction). As illustrated in Figure 4a (left), this is an
effect of the gradual lockdown implementation in Lombardia
during the first wave, as previously discussed. Furthermore,
having been the first Western country to face the COVID-19
pandemic, Italian society in general did not fully realize the
severity of the situation. By contrast, for the second wave the
mobility reduction starts even prior to the restriction measures
implementation, at a period that coincides with the first official
government notice of measures to come.
Finally, we make two remarks concerning scaling effects. As
observed in Figure 4a (left), the lowest values for all categories
across the whole series are observed during the first wave dates
that comprise the third and fourth windows. As a result, scaling
makes these values very close to zero, reflecting in the very
small polygons in the corresponding radar charts. By contrast,
the mobility values for Grocery & Pharmacy during the third
and fourth windows of the second wave become very close to
maximum, having reached a worrysome pre-pandemic level.
Given that the initial restriction date for the second wave in
Lombardia is early November, these windows correspond to
mid and late December, and this increase is probably explained
by the December holiday shopping season. Likewise, all other
place categories also see increases in this period, though not
to the same extent as for Grocery & pharmacy.
C. Île-de-France
The Paris-comprising region of Île-de-France records the
highest number of cases and deaths in France to date. As of
February 21st, 2021, Île-de-France reports over 70,000 positive

cases and 14,000 deaths in total, according to the Ministère
des Solidarités et de la Santé. During the first wave, Îlede-France adopted a strict lockdown approach, with school
suspension and fines for people in the streets without a valid
permit. By the end of October, the government announced
France was in the grip of a brutal second wave of the Covid19 epidemic, with Île-de-France reporting the highest daily
infection rates since the beginning of the pandemic. This time,
however, schools remained open, and different industries such
as construction and cultural were exempted from suspensions.
More surprisingly, outdoor spaces such as parks and beaches
were not closed, but access to them were restricted to nearby
residents and for a limited period of time.
Figure 3b depicts the multi-objective comparison of the first
and second waves in Île-de-France aggregating each 56-day
time period. In contrast to what was observed in Lombardia,
the mobility reduction during the first wave dominates the
reduction during the second wave, indicating a higher social
distancing adherence during the first wave. This is illustrated
in 4b (left), and confirmed for all 14-day consecutive windows
given in Figure 4b (right), where we observe that the mobility
reduction during the first wave dominates the reduction during
the second wave for all periods considered.
Another observation that is worth notice is the steep decrease in mobility for all categories during the first wave when
we progress from the first time window to the remaining. Since
first wave restrictions in France were adopted later than in
Italy, society was already more akin to believe in the need for
a lockdown, specially with the rise in the number of daily cases
and deaths. Finally, Lombardia and Île-de-France are similar
as to the mobility behavior during December, depicted in the
third and fourth windows of the second wave. In particular,
mobility in Grocery & pharmacy reach pre-pandemic levels,
and remaining categories also see an increase (though not to
the same extent).

(a) Lombardia

(b) Île-de-France

(c) Birmingham District

(d) Berlin

(e) Toronto Division

Fig. 4: Temporal mobility analysis for the different localities considered. Left: prepared time series for the different place
categories. Initial restriction dates are given as dashed vertical lines, and periods covered by the consecutive windows in
both waves are given as shadowed areas. Right: radar charts comparing first (red) and second (blue) COVID-19 wave mobility
reduction over 14-day consecutive windows. The first day in each window counted as the number of days since the corresponding
initial restriction date is given. Charts range from the minimum (0) to the maximum (14) possible AUC value for the period
considered. For brevity, place categories in both types of plots are abbreviated. W: Workspace; G&P: Grocery & Pharmacy;
P: Parks; R & R: Retail & Recreation; Ts: Transit stations.

D. Birmingham District
Birmingham District is the most populated district in England, with Birmingham being the second-largest city in England and the United Kingdom and also the second-largest
urban and metropolitan area. Being an international commercial center and an important transport hub, with an economy
dominated by the tertiary sector, its population is ethnically
mixed encompassing several cultures and religions, which
poses a challenge in terms of social distancing adherence.
Until February 19th, 2021, there were over 94,000 cases and
nearly 2,500 deaths in Birmingham city alone according to the
Gov.uk COVID-19 dashboard. During both waves, mobility
restriction measures were milder for Birminghan than for
the remaining European localities, as previously discussed.
Furthermore, the second lockdown started on November 5th
and lasted only until December 2nd, having been relaxed for
the December holiday shopping season.
Figure 3c depicts the multi-objective comparison between
the first and second waves in Birmingham District taking into
account the whole 56-day time period for each wave. Similarly
to the analysis of Île-de-France, the mobility reduction for the
first wave dominates the mobility reduction for the second
wave. However, the differences in mobility reduction for Parks
is very small, an effect of not having applied restrictive
measures regarding this category during either COVID-19
wave. These insights are illustrated in Figure 4c (left), though
we remark that mobility in Parks during the first wave is not
as constant as during the second wave.
The 14-day consecutive window analysis given in Figure 4c (right) confirms this temporal effect on Parks mobility.
In particular, only for the second window the mobility reduction during the first wave is greater than during the second.
For all other windows, Parks renders mobility reduction during
the different waves incomparable. Another important remark
contrasts with previously discussed European localities. Concerning December mobility, Birmingham district does not
present pre-pandemic mobility levels for Grocery & pharmacy,
though all categories do see an increase in mobility. Parks
is again the exception, for which the decrease observed is
explained by the heavy snowstorm that hit Birmingham in
early December, naturally restricting outdoor activities.
E. Berlin
Berlin, Germany’s capital and largest city, is also the most
populous city of the European Union, according to population
within city limits. Based on the most recent figures, as of
February 21st, 2021, Berlin had recorded the highest number
of COVID-19 cases in Germany, with nearly 127,000 cases
and over 2,700 deaths, according to Johns Hopkins University.
During the first wave, Berlin was not among the more preemptive German regions in terms of promoting social distancing
measures, though it followed the measures enforced nationally.
Nonetheless, Germany did not adopt a mandatory stay-athome measure like Île-de-France. For the second wave, Berlin
initially stated a semi-curfew and made masks mandatory
by mid-October. Given how mild these measures were, we
consider as initial restriction date the national light lockdown
enforced in early November. In particular, not all measures

employed during the first wave were applied for the light lockdown, e.g. schools were kept open. The restriction rules were
strengthened by mid-December, including school suspension.
Figure 3d depicts the multi-objective comparison of the
mobility in the first and second waves when we aggregate the
56-day period for each wave. Differently from the previously
discussed European localities, the mobility reduction rates
from both waves are considered incomparable. Mobility for
Parks was decisive for this, being much higher during the
first wave than during the second wave. This is illustrated in
Figure 4d (left), in which mobility reduction for Parks during
the second wave lasted for a very brief period, having even
reached around May a level higher than before the pandemics.
The temporal evolution of Parks is further detailed in
Figure 4d (right). While for the second wave mobility for
this category continually decreased, for the first wave it was
only reduced during the first window. From a multi-objective
perspective, mobility reduction from both waves are incomparable for all but the last window. Indeed, Figure 4d (left)
confirms the effectiveness of the stricter measures employed
by end of December, in contrast to the increased mobility
from the holiday shopping season. Regarding the first window
comparison given in Figure 4d (right), mobility reduction
from both waves are very similar for most categories, and
are considered incomparable because of Grocery & pharmacy.
When we examine Figure 4d (left), we notice that mobility for
this category indeed never reduced to the same extent as for
other categories nor European localities previously discussed.
F. Toronto Division
Toronto is the largest city in Canada and is considered a
world leader in areas such as business, finance, technology,
entertainment and culture. Toronto has a large population of
immigrants from all over the world, being a multicultural city
where enforcing social distancing should be a challenge. As of
February 20th 2021, the city of Toronto reports nearly 95,000
cases of COVID-19 and over 2,600 deaths in total according to
the Ontario Ministry of Health. During the first wave, Toronto
announced (i) schools would not resume after break in midMarch; (ii) shutting of non-essential services on the following
week, and; (iii) shutting of outdoor spaces at the end of that
month. By the end of November 2020, a variety of wide-scale
public health measures, including business and organizational
closings, were put into effect in Toronto as a last resort to
control the COVID-19 spread. In December 26th, the Ontario
government announced a province-wide shutdown applying
stricter restriction measures such as closure of schools after
the Christmas holiday.
Figure 3e depicts the multi-objective comparison of the
mobility reduction rates during the first and second waves
in Toronto Division when aggregating the 56-day period for
each wave. Similarly to most European localities, the mobility
observed in the first wave is lower than the mobility observed
in the second wave for all place categories simultaneously.
However, the temporal evolution assessment given in Figure 4e
shows that the mobility reduction during the second wave
was stronger than during the first for the initial time window
considered. This results is similar to what was observed in

Lombardia, where we observe that the decrease in mobility
during the first wave is progressive. This is likely the effect
of the incrementally announced restrictive measures, as discussed. Nonetheless, the reductions observed bring mobility
to a very low level, which is sustained almost until the end
of the first wave. This pattern is reflected on the radar charts
given for the remaining time windows (second to fourth).
At the same time, we observe that mobility during the
second wave decreases gradually from the second to the
fourth window considered. This is likely an effect of the
stricter measures adopted by late December, which correspond
to the third time window given. In fact, for the last time
window the mobility in both waves is quite similar, even if
not incomparable. More importantly, Toronto Division is the
only locality we assess where mobility in December did not
increase, with the exception of Grocery & pharmacy. In fact,
mobility for most categories often decreased, which could be
explained by the recency of restriction measures, implemented
at the end of November.
V. C ONCLUSIONS
Since the emergence in China back in December 2019 of
SARS-CoV-2, the coronavirus responsible for COVID-19, the
world has been facing a severe global health crisis. Due to
the insufficient information on the transmission patterns and
the lack of vaccines and specific pharmaceutical treatment
alternatives, non-pharmaceutical interventions such as social
distancing play an important role for COVID-19 control. Several countries have implemented a series of social distancing
measures such as closing schools, prohibiting mass gatherings,
restricting travel, and even enforcing total lockdown to reduce
virus transmission. These measures have been introduced
gradually and in differing ways, to a greater or lesser extent,
locally and globally in the different countries.
In this work, using Google community mobility reports
(CMR) data for different localities and a multi-objective time
series analysis of mobility reduction, we have compared social
distancing in the first and second COVID-19 waves in a
Pareto-compliant way. The analysis discussed comprised 56
days since the initial restriction date in each wave, and was
further detailed using 14-day consecutive windows to assess
for temporal evolution of mobility reduction. Furthermore, the
localities assessed represent severely affected regions and/or
Europe and America. Though we did not compare localities
directly, we have observed how often (i) mobility reduction
during the first wave was stronger than during the second
wave; (ii) the increase in mobility from all categories during
the December holiday shopping season, and; (iii) the contrasting results for Parks and Grocery & pharmacy.
Even if results observed are alarming, reduced mobility
observed close to the end of the second period assessed sheds
hope that more recent restriction measures could help prevent
an even stronger disaster. More importantly, it prompts other
localities where a second COVID-19 wave is still starting to
take strong action from the beginning.
R EFERENCES
[1] World Health Organization, “Advice for the public,” https://who.int/
emergencies/diseases/novel-coronavirus-2019/advice-for-public, 2020.

[2] S. Xu and Y. Li, “Beware of the second wave of COVID-19,” The Lancet,
vol. 395, 2020.
[3] H. Graichen, “What is the difference between the first and the second/third wave of Covid-19? – German perspective,” J. of Orthop., 2021.
[4] A. Aktay, S. Bavadekar, G. Cossoul, J. Davis, D. Desfontaines, A. Fabrikant, E. Gabrilovich, K. Gadepalli, B. Gipson, M. Guevara et al.,
“Google COVID-19 community mobility reports: Anonymization process description (version 1.0),” arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.04145, 2020.
[5] R. B. Cleveland, W. S. Cleveland, J. E. McRae, and I. Terpenning, “STL:
A seasonal-trend decomposition,” J. of Off. Stat., vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 3–73,
1990.
[6] E. Zitzler, L. Thiele, M. Laumanns, C. M. Fonseca, and V. G. Da Fonseca, “Performance assessment of multiobjective optimizers: An analysis
and review,” IEEE Trans. on Evol. Comput., vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 117–132,
2003.
[7] B. Li, J. Li, K. Tang, and X. Yao, “Many-objective evolutionary
algorithms: A survey,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 48, no. 1, pp. 1–35,
2015.
[8] Johns Hopkins University, “COVID-19 map: Coronavirus resource center,” https://coronavirus.jhu.edu/map.html, 2020, accessed: 17/08/2020.
[9] K. Leung, J. T. Wu, D. Liu, and G. M. Leung, “First-wave COVID19 transmissibility and severity in China outside Hubei after control
measures, and second-wave scenario planning: a modelling impact
assessment,” The Lancet, vol. 395, no. 10233, pp. 1382–1393, 2020.
[10] J. Middleton, H. Lopes, K. Michelson, and J. Reid, “Planning for a
second wave pandemic of COVID-19 and planning for winter,” Int. J.
of Public Health, vol. 65, pp. 1525–1527, 2020.
[11] R. Moghnieh, D. Abdallah, and A. R. Bizri, “COVID-19: Second wave
or multiple peaks, natural herd immunity or vaccine–we should be
prepared,” Disaster Med. and Public Health Prep., pp. 1–8, 2020.
[12] J. Panovska-Griffiths, C. C. Kerr, R. M. Stuart, D. Mistry, D. J. Klein,
R. M. Viner, and C. Bonell, “Determining the optimal strategy for
reopening schools, the impact of test and trace interventions, and the
risk of occurrence of a second COVID-19 epidemic wave in the UK: a
modelling study,” The Lancet Child & Adolescent Health, vol. 4, no. 11,
pp. 817–827, 2020.
[13] A. Wilder-Smith, Y. Bar-Yam, and D. Fisher, “Lockdown to contain
COVID-19 is a window of opportunity to prevent the second wave,” J.
of Travel Med., vol. 27, no. 5, 2020.
[14] V. Grech and S. Cuschieri, “COVID-19: A global and continental
overview of the second wave and its (relatively) attenuated case fatality
ratio,” Early Hum. Dev., 2020.
[15] S. Saito, Y. Asai, N. Matsunaga, K. Hayakawa, M. Terada, H. Ohtsu,
S. Tsuzuki, and N. Ohmagari, “First and second COVID-19 waves in
Japan: A comparison of disease severity and characteristics,” The J. of
Infect., 2020.
[16] R. S. Diaz and T. R. C. Vergara, “The COVID-19 second wave: A
perspective to be explored,” The Braz. J. of Infect. Dis., 2020.
[17] D. Contou, M. Fraissé, O. Pajot, J.-A. Tirolien, H. Mentec, and
G. Plantefève, “Comparison between first and second wave among
critically ill COVID-19 patients admitted to a French ICU: no prognostic
improvement during the second wave?” Crit. Care, vol. 25, no. 1, pp.
1–4, 2021.
[18] E. Bontempi, “The europe second wave of COVID-19 infection and the
Italy “strange” situation,” Environ. Res., vol. 193, p. 110476, 2021.
[19] J. P. Ioannidis, C. Axfors, and D. G. Contopoulos-Ioannidis, “Second
versus first wave of COVID-19 deaths: Shifts in age distribution and in
nursing home fatalities,” Environ. Res., vol. 195, p. 110856, 2021.
[20] G. Cacciapaglia, C. Cot, and F. Sannino, “Second wave COVID-19
pandemics in Europe: a temporal playbook,” Sci. Rep., vol. 10, 2020.
[21] D. Faranda and T. Alberti, “Modeling the second wave of COVID-19
infections in France and Italy via a stochastic SEIR model,” Chaos: An
Interdiscip. J. of Nonlinear Sci., vol. 30, no. 11, 2020.
[22] A. Aleta, D. Martı́n-Corral, A. Pastore y Piontti, M. Ajelli, M. Litvinova,
M. Chinazzi, N. Dean, M. Halloran, I. Longini Jr, S. Merler, A. Pentland,
A. Vespignani, E. Esteban Moro, and Y. Moreno, “Modelling the impact
of testing, contact tracing and household quarantine on second waves of
COVID-19,” Nat. Human Behav., vol. 4, pp. 964–971, 2020.
[23] S. Vaid, A. McAdie, R. Kremer, V. Vikas Khanduja, and M. Bhandari,
“Risk of a second wave of Covid-19 infections: using artificial intelligence to investigate stringency of physical distancing policies inNorth
America.” Int. Orthop., vol. 44, pp. 1581–1589, 2020.
[24] M. Renardy, M. Eisenberg, and D. Kirschnera, “Predicting the second
wave of COVID-19 in Washtenaw County, MI,” J. of Theor. Biol., vol.
507, p. 110461, 2020.
[25] Google LLC, “Google COVID-19 community mobility reports,” https:
//google.com/covid19/mobility, 2020, accessed: 17/07/2020.

