Mechanism of inhibition of SARS-CoV-2 infection by the interaction of the
spike glycoprotein with heparin.
Giulia Paiardi*1,2, Stefan Richter1, Pasqua Oreste3, Chiara Urbinati2, Marco Rusnati2, Rebecca C. Wade*1,4.
1

Molecular and Cellular Modeling Group, Heidelberg Institute for Theoretical Studies (HITS), 69118
Heidelberg, Germany,
2
Macromolecular Interaction Analysis Unit, Section of Experimental Oncology and Immunology,
Department of Molecular and Translational Medicine, 25030 Brescia, Italy,
3
Glycores 2000 Srl, Milan, Italy.
4
Zentrum für Molekulare Biologie (ZMBH), DKFZ-ZMBH Alliance and Interdisciplinary Center for
Scientific Computing (IWR), Heidelberg University, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany,
*Corresponding authors: Giulia Paiardi, Rebecca C. Wade
Email: giulia.paiardi@h-its.org, Rebecca.wade@h-its.org
Keywords: heparin, heparan sulphate proteoglycans, SARS-CoV-2 virus spike (S) glycoprotein, molecular
dynamics simulation, antiviral therapeutics
Abstract
Heparin is administered intravenously as an anticoagulant to COVID-19 patients and via aerosol to treat other
lung diseases. It has recently been found to have antiviral activity against SARS-CoV-2 as it hinders
attachment of the virus to the host cell by binding to the virus spike glycoprotein. Here, we describe molecular
dynamics simulations and experiments to investigate how heparin binds to the spike and the mechanism by
which it exerts its antiviral activity. The simulations show that heparin polyanionic chains can bind at long,
mostly positively charged patches on the spike, and thereby mask the basic residues of the receptor binding
domain (RBD) and the basic S1/S2 site, which is unique specific to SAR-CoV-2 and is important for furinmediated spike cleavage and the subsequent formation of its post-fusion conformation. Experiments
corroborated the simulation results by showing that heparin binds the basic S1/S2 site of spike, inhibiting
cleavage by furin. The simulations show that heparin can act on the hinge region responsible for the motion
of the RBD between inactive closed and active open conformations of the spike. In simulations of the closed
spike, heparin binds the RBD and the N-terminal domain of two adjacent spike subunits and hinders the
opening. In simulations of the open spike, heparin binds similarly but induces stabilization of the hinge region
and a change in RBD motion. Our results indicate that heparin is able to inhibit SARS-CoV-2 infection by
allosterically hindering binding to the host cell receptor, by directly competing with binding to the host
heparan sulfate proteoglycan co-receptors, and by preventing spike cleavage by furin. Furthermore, the
simulations provide insights into how heparan sulphate proteoglycans on the host cell can facilitate viral
infection. Our results will aid the rational optimization of heparin derivatives for SARS-CoV-2 antiviral
therapy.

1

Table of Contents Graphic

Synopsis
We identified positively charged paths along the spike surface that connect functional sites where long
heparin chains can bind and thereby directly and allosterically exert an antiviral effect.
Introduction
In the last year, the COVID-19 pandemic caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus
2 (SARS-CoV-2) has adversely affected the lives of all people around the world. SARS-CoV-2 is a lipidenveloped positive-sense RNA virus belonging to the Coronaviridae family (1,2,3). Among the SARS-CoV2 proteins, the spike S glycoprotein (spike) is highly conserved in the Coronaviridae family (76% and 96%
amino acid residue sequence similarity with SARS-CoV-1 and BatCoV-RaTG13, respectively (1)). It
possesses 22 N-linked glycans that likely contribute to protein stability and immune evasion of the virus (4).
The spike mediates the entry of the virus into human cells by binding to the angiotensin-converting enzyme
2 (ACE2) receptor (5). The prefusion spike is exposed on the virion surface as a homotrimer. Each spike
subunit is composed of two domains, S1 and S2, connected by the S1/S2 junction, and involved in virus
attachment and fusion, respectively (5). The S1/S2 junction is a novel feature of the SARS-CoV-2 spike that
consists of a multibasic sequence that is cleaved by the host furin protease (1,3,5,6). This cleavage activates
the formation of the post-fusion conformation of spike, which is necessary for SARS-CoV-2 entry into host
cells (5,6). Intriguingly, the S1/S2 site is part of a recently identified superantigen motif on the SARS-CoV2 spike that has been proposed to interact with T-cell receptors and thereby elicit a hyperinflammatory
response (7).
The heparan sulphate proteoglycans (HSPGs) on the surface of human host cells are composed of a
core protein that harbours multiple polysulfated glycosaminoglycan chains with a similar structure to heparin
(8). Experimental evidence suggests an essential role for HSPGs as co-receptors that, by binding spike, favor
SARS-CoV-2 attachment to human cells (9,10). Although heparin is currently used to treat COVID-19
patients because of its strong anticoagulant activity (11), it has been shown to have antiviral activity,
primarily in its unfractionated state (up to 15kDa corresponding to ~50 monosaccharides), likely due to its
ability to compete with HSPGs for binding to the spike (9,10,11,12,13).
The binding of spike to heparin or HSPGs is mediated by clusters of positively charged amino acid
residues in the spike (hereafter called heparin binding domains, HBDs), and negatively charged sulfate
groups on the polysaccharide chains of heparin or the HSPGs (8,9,10). To date, three HBDs have been
identified in the spike sequence: in the RBD (RBD-HBD) and at the S2’ TMPRSS2 cleavage site (14), both
of which are present in SARS-CoV-1, and at the novel S1/S2 furin cleavage site (S1/S2-HBD) (10) (Fig.
1A).
While the mechanism underlying HSPG-mediated internalization and the antiviral activity of
heparin are well understood for many HSPG-dependent viruses (15), it has only recently begun to be
investigated for SARS-CoV-2. Indeed, among the various coronaviruses, the SARS-CoV-2 spike is unique
in possessing three different HBDs that overlap with motifs that have distinct functions (RBD, TMPRSS2
and S1/S2 sites), indicating that spike-HSPG or spike-heparin interactions may have multifaceted effects on
SARS-CoV-2 infection. In this context, we here report the results of molecular modeling and simulation

2

along with biochemical assays aimed at revealing how heparin can exert its antiviral effects on SARS-CoV2 and how HSPGs can facilitate virus infection. In particular, we consider the mechanistic consequences of
the sequence features that are specific to the SARS-CoV-2 spike for the effects of heparin and HSPGs on
viral infection and inflammation.
The simulations reveal the ability of heparin to mask the S1/S2 site of spike. This finding is
corroborated by a furin cleavage assay which shows a significant reduction of spike cleavage in the presence
of heparin, suggesting the ability of heparin to prevent formation of the post-fusion spike conformation.
Beyond furin cleavage, our simulations highlight the ability of heparin to bind the basic residues in the RBD,
hindering the activation of the closed conformation by binding two adjacent spike monomers and stabilizing
the hinge responsible for the transition between the closed and open states of the spike. The results of our
study provide insights that will guide the design of therapeutic heparin derivatives and the investigation of
the mechanism by which HSPGs act as host-cell co-receptors.
Results
•

Long mostly basic patches on the spike glycoprotein accommodate heparin
We considered the inactive closed and active open prefusion conformations of the homotrimeric
SARS-CoV-2 spike head, which consists of three subunits: SA, SB and SC. In the inactive closed conformation,
the ACE2 receptor binding face on the RBD is not accessible in the three subunits, which we refer to as
down-subunits. In the active open conformation, the ACE2 binding site of the RBD is accessible only in the
SC subunit, which we refer to as the up-subunit. To investigate the binding of heparin to spike, we modelled
five systems with the spike: (i) in the closed conformation; (ii) in the closed conformation with a single
heparin chain bound; (iii) in the closed conformation with three heparin chains bound; (iv) in the open
conformation; and (v) in the open conformation with three heparin chains bound.
The model of the SARS-CoV-2 spike head (Fig. 1B) was based on the SwissModel model (available
at https://swissmodel.expasy.org/repository/species/2697049) to which we covalently attached 18 N-glycans
per subunit (4). To identify continuous positively charged paths on the protein surface at which the long
heparin chains could bind, the electrostatic potential of the spike head protein was computed for both the
closed and open conformations. Analysis of the electrostatic potential suggests that a long polyanionic
heparin chain can follow similar paths on the surfaces of the two conformations of the spike head that differ
only in the interactions with the RBD-HBD (Fig. 1B). We used the incremental docking and sliding window
method (16) to model complexes of the spike head with heparin chains of 31 monosaccharides (31mer). The
docked heparin chains run along mostly basic patches, passing partially through surface grooves, from the
S1/S2 basic motif (R682, R683, R685), via the channel between the N-terminal domain of the same spike
subunit and the RBD-HBD of an adjacent spike subunit (R346, R355, K356, R357) to the tip of the spike
head.
Due to the structural similarity between heparin and the polysaccharide chains of HSPGs, it is
expected that the latter also bind along the basic paths identified on the trimeric spike head. By burying these
basic regions, heparin can be expected to hinder the binding of HSPGs, reducing the amount of SARS-CoV2 that can tether to the cell surface, thus decreasing the binding to the ACE2 receptor and hence infection.
This model provides a mechanistic explanation for the experimental data demonstrating that heparin can
diminish SARS-CoV-2 infection (8,13).

3

Figure 1. Modeling of spike-heparin interactions. (A) Schematic diagram of the sequence of the SARS-CoV2 spike (S) glycoprotein head (residues 1-1140), which is composed of S1 and S2 subunits. The boxes along
the sequence (Uniprot P0DTC2) show the positions of the main protein domains: N-terminal domain (16291), receptor binding domain (RBD) (330-530), S1/S2 site (681-686), fusion peptide (788-806), S2’ domain
(810-816), central helix (987-1034) and connection domain (1080-1135). Three putative HBDs are indicated
by blue boxes with their corresponding sequences. The S1/S2 HBD is unique to SARS-CoV-2. (B) Side views
of the spike head homotrimer models before the MD simulations in closed (left) and open (right)
conformations with 3 heparin chains bound. Only one complete heparin chain can be seen from this view.
The SA, SB and SC subunits are shown as surfaces in blue, pink, and magenta, respectively. The dark blue surface
patches correspond to the putative HBDs. N-glycans covalently attached to the spike are shown in line
representation, colored according to the subunit to which they are attached. The 31-mer heparin chains that
span from the S1/S2 site HBD to the RBD-HBD are shown in stick representation, colored by element with
cyan carbons.
•

Heparin stabilizes the spike glycoprotein in the closed conformation
The five modelled systems were each simulated in aqueous solution in multiple 1 µs all-atom
molecular dynamics (MD) simulations (Movie S1-S3). Representative structures obtained after clustering
analysis of the spike in closed and open conformations with 3 heparin chains bound show that the heparin
chains maintain their alignment along the long positively charged surface patches on the spike during the
simulations (Fig. 2A). The spike structures reached convergence within ~2-400 ns in all simulations, as
shown by the root mean square deviation (RMSD) relative to each starting structure (Fig. 2B and Fig. S1).
Moreover, when in complex with heparin, the spike showed an approximately 1 Å lower RMSD, indicating
that the binding to heparin stabilized the homotrimer structure (Fig. 2B and Fig. S1). Further evidence of the
structural stabilization was provided by the root mean square fluctuations (RMSF), which tended to lower
values for the RBD, the hinge region associated with the opening of the RBD (see next section for further

4

details), and the S1/S2 site when bound to heparin (Fig. S2, Tab. S1-S3). Accordingly, the RMSD of heparin
indicates an induced fit along the trajectory (Fig. 2B and Fig. S1). The complementarity of the interactions
and the change in width of the basic groove in both the closed and open spike bound to heparin suggest an
induced fitting upon binding that results in the well-defined partially grooved basic path where heparin lies
(Fig. 2A).
Overall, the H-bond and Interaction fingerprint analysis (17) of all the MD simulations show that
each heparin chain maintains stable interactions with two adjacent spike subunits in both the closed and open
conformations of spike (Fig. 2A, Fig. S3, Tab. S4-S6). Heparin binds through H-bonding interactions (with
over 90% occupancy throughout all the MD trajectories) to the basic residues of the S1/S2-HBD in the first
subunit and of the RBD-HBD of the second subunit of both the open and closed spike conformations.
However, along the heparin path, additional, less specific binding regions, which differ between the open
and the closed conformations, were identified in over 75% of the MD frames and these can further stabilize
the complexes.
In the closed spike model, the binding of either one or three heparin chains hinders the opening of
spike by stabilizing the closed conformation through the simultaneous binding of the RBD of one subunit
(residues T345, R346, N354, R355, S359, N360, N450) and the N-terminal domain of the adjacent subunit
(residues N165, C166, T167, E169, V171, Q173, F220, N280, N282, T284, T286) (Fig. 2A, Fig.S3, Tab. S4
and Tab. S6). In the closed conformation of spike, the RBDs are essentially strapped into the downorientation by heparin which prevents spike activation to the open conformation. Finally, heparin binding is
also stabilized by hydrogen-bond interactions adjacent to the multibasic S1/S2 site (residues N606, S686,
S689, S690) (Fig.S3, Tab.S1 and Tab.S3).
The simulations of spike in the open state do not show any tendency for heparin to induce closure
of the spike. However, through the simultaneous binding to the up-RBD of subunit SC (residues T345, R346,
N354, R355, R357, N360) and the N-terminal domain of the adjacent subunit (residues R34, T167, E169,
Q173, L176, R190, H207, T208, F220, S221), heparin induces a change in the orientation of the RBD in the
up-subunit during the simulations (Fig 2A, Fig. S3, Tab. S5-S6 and next section for further details). As for
the closed models, some polar residues near to the multibasic S1/S2 site (N606, Y674, S686, Q689, S690)
permanently interact with the heparin chain in the open state.
Notably, the simulations of both open and closed spike with heparin bound suggest an aspecific
modulatory effect of N-glycans on the binding between spike and heparin, see Figure S4 and Movies S1-S3.

5

Figure 2. Stability of the spike-heparin complexes. (A) Representative closed (left) and open (right)
structures obtained after MD simulation of spike bound to three heparin chains are displayed as molecular
surfaces with electrostatic potential mapped onto them to show the partially grooved positively charged path
occupied by a heparin 31mer. Heparin is shown in stick representation colored by element with cyan carbons.
The yellow dashes show H-bonds between the spike and heparin. The insets highlight the H-bonding
interactions between heparin and the residues in the RBD (T345, R346, N354, R355, N360) and S1/S2
(R682, R683, R685) HBDs shown in stick representation with carbons colored according to the subunits to
which they are bound both in the closed and open conformations. (B) Structural convergence of the five
simulated systems. RMSD versus time is shown for the system components for one replica MD simulation for
each modelled system. Plots for all replica MD simulations are shown in Fig.S1.

6

•

Heparin masks the S1/S2 site, preventing cleavage by furin and formation of the post-fusion
conformation
To assess the ability of heparin to mask the novel furin cleavage site (5,6), which has been also
identified as a novel putative HBD (10) and as part of a superantigenic sequence (7) in the spike of SARSCoV-2, H-bond formation to the site was monitored along the trajectories and surface exposure of the S1/S2
site to the solvent was analyzed for representative structures after clustering (Fig. 3 and Fig. S5, Tab. S4-S7).
In the initial modelled complexes, the first monosaccharides of the heparin chain interact with the basic
residues of the S1/S2-HBD. Salt-links with R682, R683 and R685 are maintained along all the trajectories
(>90% occupancy), indicating strong interactions of the S1/S2-HBD with heparin (Fig. 3A, Tab. S4-S6). The
calculated solvent accessible surface area (SASA) of this multibasic site shows the persistence of the
interactions during the simulations of the closed spike bound to heparin (Fig. 3B and Fig. S5). Heparin
approximately halves the surface exposed in the closed models by binding directly to the S1/S2-HBD and
the three heparin chains simultaneously mask all three multibasic sites on the closed spike trimer. In the open
conformation, the reduced SASA in the presence of heparin indicates a significant shielding effect, primarily
at the S1/S2-HBD of the up-subunit, but with the heparin chains also maintaining a lower shielding level at
the S1/S2 HBDs of the down-subunits. This difference could be due to a more favourable arrangement of the
basic patches for heparin binding between the up- and down-subunits compared to that between two downsubunits.
To assess the shielding effect of heparin relative to that of spike glycosylation, the SASA of the
S1/S2-HBD calculated for the representative clusters was decomposed into the area exposed without
consideration of the N-glycans and heparin sugars, the area exposed accounting for the N-glycans, and the
area exposed accounting for both the N-glycans and heparin (Fig. 3C and Tab. S7). In agreement with the
previous analysis, these calculations indicate that heparin directly binds to the S1/S2-HBDs, halving the
exposed surfaces in both the closed and open conformations. Again, for the open conformation, the shielding
effect exerted by heparin on the S1/S2-HBDs of the two down-subunits is lower than for the same site of the
up-subunit. Moreover, the decomposition shows that the N-glycans of spike make little contribution to the
shielding of the multibasic sites.
In summary, when comparing the binding of one or three heparin chains to the spike homotrimer,
all the data point to the ability of heparin to occupy and shield the S1/S2 site without a significant shielding
contribution of the spike N-glycans. In addition, our simulations demonstrate a key role in the binding of
heparin and indicate its involvement in binding to HSPGs. The surface area analysis shows that the S1/S2HBD is exposed to the solvent and available to interact with heparin or HSPGs, supporting the hypothesis
that this novel HBD may contribute to the increased affinity of SARS-CoV-2 spike for heparin and HSPGs
compared to previous coronavirus strains. Moreover, heparin could exert the antiviral activity by masking
this site, preventing the furin cleavage and hindering the activation of the post-fusion conformation of the
spike glycoprotein. Interestingly, we observed that, in the closed spike model, a single heparin chain occupies
the S1/S2-HBD of only one subunit. This suggests that, to exert its full antiviral activity, heparin needs to be
administered at doses high enough to saturate all three HBDs of the spike trimer, otherwise some of them
will still be available for tethering to the HSPGs on the host cell surface.
To confirm the hypothesis from our simulations, we measured the effect of heparin on the cleavage
of a spike peptide fragment containing the S1/S2 site. As shown in Fig. 4A, heparin effectively inhibits spike
cleavage by furin. The effect is specific since heparin alone does not interfere with the colorimetric assays.
To assess whether the inhibition of furin cleavage is dependent on the binding of heparin to the S1/S2 basic
site, heparin was pre-incubated with the substrate-immobilized spike fragment, unbound heparin was
removed by PBS wash and then furin was added. In these experimental conditions, heparin still prevents
spike cleavage by furin, indicating that it physically associates with the immobilized spike fragment. On the
other hand, a 2M NaCl wash, known to disrupt heparin/protein interactions (18,19), completely detached
heparin from the spike fragment, restoring S1/S2 fragment cleavage by furin (Fig. 4A). The capacity of
heparin to bind spike and to inhibit SARS-CoV-2 infection is dependent on its length and degree of sulfation
(12,13). We therefore compared the inhibitory potency of unfractionated heparin (13.6 kDa, ~ 46
monosaccharide units), a low molecular weight heparin (4.0 kDa, ~ 13 monosaccharide units), and unsulfated
K5 polysaccharide (30kDa, ~150 monosaccharides). As shown in Fig. 4B, unfractionated heparin exhibits a
higher furin inhibitory potency than the low molecular weight heparin, whereas the K5 polysaccharide does
not prevent furin cleavage. These results demonstrate that, for binding to the spike fragment and protecting
it from furin cleavage, the length of the heparin chain is of importance and the presence of sulfated groups is
necessary.

7

These experiments corroborate the hypothesis that heparin exerts its antiviral activity in a lengthand dose-dependent manner by masking the S1/S2 site and thereby inhibiting furin cleavage and the
formation of the post-fusion conformation. These results also suggest that, by binding to the S1/S2 site,
heparin could affect the superantigenic character of the spike by preventing its binding to TCR cells [7].

Figure 3. Interaction of heparin with the spike S1/S2-HBD showing shielding of the furin cleavage site
by heparin in closed and open spike conformations and inhibition of furin cleavage. (A) The spike S1/S2
site in closed (left) and open (right) conformations is shown with and without heparin. The SC and SB subunits
are shown as cartoon and translucent surfaces in magenta and grey, respectively. Basic residues of S1/S2
are shown by blue surfaces. N-glycans are shown in line representation colored according to the
corresponding subunit. Heparin is shown in stick representation colored by element with cyan carbons. (B)
SASA of the S1/S2 site plotted as a function of time for one trajectory for each simulated system: closed,

8

closed with 1 heparin chain, closed with 3 heparin chains, open and open with 3 heparin chains. (C) Average
SASA of the S1/S2 site computed for the cluster representatives in the MD simulations for different factors
contributing to the burial of the S1/S2 site surface. Standard deviations are reported in Tab. S7. (D-E) Effect
of heparin on the cleavage of spike by furin. (D) Wells coated with a peptide fragment containing the S1/S2
basic site of spike were: left untreated (CTRL), incubated with 13.6 kDa heparin (10 µM) alone or exposed
to furin (25 ng/well) in the absence or presence of heparin (10 µM). In addition, the substrate immobilized
spike fragment was pre-incubated with heparin (100 µM) for 10 min., washed three times with PBS or PBS
containing 2 M NaCl (salt) and then exposed to furin. (E) Wells coated with the spike fragment were
incubated with furin in the absence or presence of 13.6 KDa heparin (UFH), 4.0 kDa low molecular weight
heparin (LMW) or unsulfated K5 polysaccharide at the indicated concentrations. At the end of the
incubations, spike cleavage was measured as described in the Material and Methods section. Each value is
the mean ± standard deviation of four to eight repetitions. *p<0.001, one-way ANOVA. See text for further
details.
•

Heparin allosterically affects the hinge region of the RBD and directly interacts with the
basic residues of the RBD-HBD
To assess the effect of heparin binding on the RBD, we analyzed the stability of the hinge region
associated with the activation of the RBD, the exposure of the up-RBD (on subunit SC) along the trajectory,
and the shielding by heparin of the residues of the RBD involved in the interaction with ACE2, hereafter
referred to as the receptor binding motif (RBm) (20).
From a comparison between the crystal structures of the spike in closed and open conformations
and the RMSFs in the simulations (data not shown), we identified residues 527-PKK-529 as the hinge region
responsible for the conformational change that induces the opening of the spike protein. Importantly, no
direct interactions were observed to occur between these residues and heparin (Tab. S4-S6), prompting us to
investigate possible allosteric effects induced in this region by the binding of heparin to spike. For this
purpose, we calculated the RMSD of the hinge region of each subunit along the trajectory and performed
dihedral principal component analysis (dPCA) for this region. As shown in Fig. 4A and Fig. S6, the complex
formed by the closed spike with three heparins bound shows structural stability of the three hinge regions
along all the simulations. The closed conformation with one heparin bound shows stabilization of the two
subunits that are directly involved in the interaction with heparin. However, the SC subunit, which does not
directly interact with heparin, shows a higher RMSD (Fig. 4A and Fig. S6) and a higher RMSF (Fig. S2, Tab.
S2), suggesting a compensatory effect due to the movement of the hinge region to maintain the closed
conformation. In agreement, dPCA of the hinge region of the closed-SC subunit in the complex with three
heparins bound shows a limited sampling of the conformational space, in line with the stability in the RMSD
plots. On the other hand, in the complex of the closed conformation with one heparin bound, dPCA shows
an increased sampling for the hinge region, further supporting the hypothesis of a compensatory effect to
maintain the closed conformation (Fig. 4B and Fig. S7). For the open spike with three heparin chains bound,
the RMSD for the hinge region shows stability for the subunits SA and SB with the down-RBD and an increased
deviation for the up-RBD of subunit SC compared to the starting structure (Fig. 4A and Fig. S6). Accordingly,
dPCA analysis shows a decrease in sampling of the conformational space of the SC in the presence of heparin
associated with the stabilization of the hinge region (Fig. 4B and Fig. S7).
To evaluate if the induced fit promoted by heparin causes the masking of the ACE2 binding residues
in the RBm, we calculated the SASA of these residues along the trajectory and their accessibility in the cluster
representatives. Both the analyses show that the heparin chains do not significantly shield the residues of the
RBm (Fig. 4C-D, Fig. S8 and Tab. S8). On one hand, these data suggest that the heparin chains act indirectly
on these domains through an induced fit mechanism as described above. On the other hand, these data are
consistent with the ability of spike to simultaneously bind HSPGs and ACE2 on the host cell surface (7).
Finally, to obtain further insights into the effect of heparin on the open RBD, we performed essential
dynamics (ED) analysis (Fig. 4E and Fig. S9). The analysis on the closed conformation shows an overall
stabilization of the spike by heparin without significant effects on the RBDs (data not shown). ED analysis
on the open spike conformation highlights a different direction of the motion of the RBm loop (residues 472489) in the up-subunit described by the first eigenvector during the simulations in the absence and presence
of heparin (Fig. S9). Despite different starting conformations and independent sampling, the up-subunits
consistently show this difference across the replica simulations. These differences suggest that the presence
of heparin (or HSPGs) could affect the motion of the RBD, possibly having a gating effect on receptor
binding.

9

Figure 4. Conformational flexibility of the spike hinge region (residues 527-529) and its effect on RBD
motion. (A) RMSD and (B) dPCA of the hinge region vs. time along a trajectory for each simulated system.
SASA of RBm along the corresponding trajectories and in the most representative cluster (standard
deviations are reported in Tab. S8) for each system are reported in (C) and (D), respectively. (E) The change
in motion of the up-RBD induced by the presence of heparin is shown by the superimposition of 10
conformations extracted at equal time intervals along the trajectories (from magenta to blue) and projected
onto the first essential dynamics eigenvector without (left) and with (right) heparin. The RBD is shown in
cartoon representation and heparin is omitted for ease of visualization.

10

Discussion
Experiments have shown that HSPGs are indispensable for SARS-CoV-2 infection (9), and that
heparin competes with host cell HSPGs for binding to the SARS-CoV-2 spike glycoprotein, exerting an
antiviral effect (9,10,12,13). Importantly, it has been demonstrated that UFH has a 150-fold higher antiviral
effect against SARS-CoV-2 than LMWH (12). Until now, molecular models to investigate the binding of
heparin or HSPGs to spike have been limited to models of short heparin chains (≃6-8 monosaccharides)
binding to the basic domain of the spike RBD without N-glycans (9,10,13). However, to understand the
antiviral effect of unfractionated heparin and the role of HSPGs, it is necessary to model the binding of long
polyanionic chains to the spike head. This is a challenging task due to the length, variable sulfation pattern
and flexibility of the polysulfated glycosaminoglycan chains, and because of the large size and flexibility of
the spike head for which some regions and N-glycans are structurally poorly defined (4,5). Therefore,
considering all available experimental data to build high-quality initial models, we first employed our
incremental docking and sliding window method (16) for docking 31mer heparin chains to models of the
spike head glycoprotein. We then performed multiple microsecond MD simulations to refine the models of
the spike head with zero, one or three heparin chains bound to study the dynamic effects of heparin binding.
Despite a total simulation length of over 20 microseconds, the sampling of the configurational space of the
spike-heparin systems was inevitably incomplete. Nevertheless, these simulations allowed us to explore the
main dynamic features associated with the predicted heparin binding modes and thus, to identify mechanisms
by which long heparin chains exert their antiviral activity and HSPGs can act as co-receptors.
We identified three key mechanisms by which heparin exerts its antiviral activity (see Figure 5): (i) heparin
directly competes with HSPGs for the same binding sites on the spike head, burying the same basic surface
regions and hindering the binding to HSPGs of both the closed and open conformations of the spike head;
(ii) heparin masks the S1/S2 multibasic site (unique to SARS-CoV-2), preventing the cleavage by furin and
the activation of the prefusion conformation of the spike, as well as modulating the triggering of the
hyperinflammatory response due to the binding to T-cell receptors of this superantigenic site (7); (iii) heparin
masks the basic residues of the RBD and allosterically acts on the hinge region that is suggested to be key
for the opening of the spike and movement of the RBD to expose the ACE2 receptor binding face. Overall,
we note that both the direct and the allosteric mechanisms require long heparin chains. To validate the results
of our simulations, we carried out an enzymatic assay that showed that heparin inhibits cleavage of a spike
fragment containing the S1/S2 site by furin in a dose-, length- and sulfation-dependent manner and that this
binding was effectively due to the binding and masking of the S1/S2 basic site by heparin.
Based on our MD simulations with heparin and on the structural similarity between heparin and the
heparan sulfate chains of HSPGs, we can infer that: (i) HSPGs bind along the same paths on the surface of
spike occupied by heparin; (ii) HSPGs do not directly induce the activation of the closed spike, suggesting
that their role in viral infection may be solely to increase the concentration of the virus on the host-cell
surface. However, HSPGs may also mediate the activation of the closed spike by exposing it to the human
ACE2 receptor on the host cell. HSPGs may also favor the formation of a ternary complex (9) with the open
spike and the ACE2 receptor by binding the basic residues of the RBD of the up-subunit while not masking
the RBm. Notably, both the open and closed spike models with heparin bound suggest a modulatory effect
of N-glycans on the binding between spike and heparin or HSPGs. Finally, emerging SARS-CoV-2 spike
glycoprotein variants have demonstrated increased infectivity (21). We cannot exclude that this capability
could in part be due to mutations near to the basic domains mentioned above that increase binding to HSPGs.
In conclusion, our models and simulations suggest one direct and two allosteric mechanisms for the
antiviral activity of heparin against SARS-CoV-2 and provide insights into how HSPGs can facilitate viral
infection. They thus provide a basis for the rational optimization of therapeutic heparin derivatives against
SARS-CoV-2.

11

Figure 5. Schematic diagram showing the proposed mechanisms by which heparin and HSPGs can affect
SARS-CoV-2 infection of a host cell. Heparin exerts antiviral activity by hindering the binding of both
closed and open conformations of spike to HSPGs. Heparin binds the S1/S2-HBD of spike in both the
conformations, preventing furin cleavage (1), hinders the opening/activation of the closed spike (2), and acts
allosterically on the hinge region associated with the movement of the RBD, while directly masking the RBDHBD (3). Moreover, based on the structural similarity between heparin and HSPGs, we expect that HSPGs
are able to bind both the closed (4) and open (5) conformations of spike, and, in the presence of the ACE2
receptor, favoring the activation of the closed spike and its interaction with the ACE2 receptor (4), and
subsequent furin cleavage and SARS-CoV-2 infection. However, we cannot exclude a possible ACE2independent SARS-CoV-2 internalization mediated by HSPGs binding to the closed spike conformation.
Materials and Methods
Modelling of the systems. The initial models of the SARS-CoV-2 spike head protein in closed and open
conformations
were
taken
from
the
SwissModel
website
(https://swissmodel.expasy.org/repository/species/2697049) and were based on two structures determined by
cryo-electron microscopy: PDBid 6ACC (seq. identity 76.47%) and PDBid: 6ACD (seq. identity 76.47%),
respectively (22). The spike models were completed by adding 18 N-glycans per subunit, covalently attached
in accordance with the experimentally determined glycomic profile (4), using the Glycam web
(http://glycam.org/) (23). Standard protonation states were used. The APBS electrostatics plugin in Pymol
(24) was used to compute the electrostatic potential surface calculated with PDB2PQR (25) at neutral pH
using PROPKA (24) and the AMBER ff14SB force (27). 31mer heparin chains spanning from the S1/S2
multibasic site to the RBD-HBD were modelled using the incremental docking and sliding window method

12

developed by Bugatti and co-workers (16) using Autodock 4.2 (28). Five model systems were generated: the
closed spike with zero, 1 or 3 heparin chains, and the open spike with zero or 3 heparin chains.
All-atom Molecular Dynamics (MD) simulation. The Amber20 package (29) was used to energy minimize,
equilibrate, and generate production trajectories for each model system. Four replica all-atom MD
production simulations of 1 µs duration in explicit solvent were run for each system.
Analysis of MD simulations. MD trajectories were analyzed using CPPTRAJ from AmberTools20 (29) and
Visual Molecular Dynamics (VMD) (30).
Details of the simulation and analysis protocols are given in Supplementary Methods.
Furin cleavage assay. The ability of heparin to inhibit cleavage at the spike S1/S2 site by furin was evaluated
by using the colorimetric assay “CoviDropTM SARS-Cov-2 targeted proprotein convertase inhibitor
screening fast kit” (Epigentek, County Blvd, Farmingdale NY).
Details of the reagents, assay and analysis protocols are given in Supporting Information.
Acknowledgments
We acknowledge PRACE for awarding us access to Marconi100 based in Italy at CINECA (Project
COVID19-54). The technical support of Alessandro Grottesi from CINECA (Italy) and Filippo Spiga from
NVIDIA is gratefully acknowledged. GP, SR and RCW. thank the Klaus Tschira Foundation and the
Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research Foundation - Project number: 458623378 to
RCW) for support. GP was supported by Erasmus+, an EMBO short-term fellowship (STF_8594) and The
Guido Berlucchi foundation young researchers mobility program.
Supporting Information
-

Material and methods, supplementary figures and tables, associated references and captions for
Movies M1-M3 (PDF)
IFPs
Movie S1 (MP4)
Movie S2 (MP4)
Movie S3 (MP4)

Author Contributions. Giulia Paiardi: Conceptualization, Methodology, Validation, Formal Analysis,
Investigation - Simulations, Writing - Original Draft, Visualization, Funding acquisition. Stefan
Richter: Software, Data Curation. Pasqua Oreste: Resources (glycosaminoglycans). Chiara Urbinati:
Investigation - Experiments. Marco Rusnati: Conceptualization, Resources, Writing - Review & Editing.
Rebecca Wade: Conceptualization, Resources, Writing - Review & Editing, Supervision, Funding
acquisition
Competing Interest Statement. The authors declare no competing interest.
Preprint server. aXriv - https://arxiv.org/abs/2103.07722
Data sharing. All simulation trajectories
platform: https://bioexcel-cv19-dev.bsc.es/#/

are

available

on

the

BioExcel

COVID-19

13

References
1. Jaimes JA, Andre NM, Chappie JS, Millet JK, Whittaker GR. Phylogenetic Analysis and Structural
Modeling of SARS-CoV-2 Spike Protein Reveals an Evolutionary Distinct and Proteolytically Sensitive
Activation Loop. J Mol Biol. 432, 3309-3325 (2020).
2. Wu F, Zhao S, Yu B, Chen YM, Wang W, Song ZG, et al. A new coronavirus associated with human
respiratory disease in China. Nature. 579, 265-269 (2020).
3. Andersen KG, Rambaut A, Lipkin WI, Holmes EC, Garry RF. The proximal origin of SARS-CoV-2. Nat
Med. 26, 450-452 (2020).
4. Watanabe Y, Allen JD, Wrapp D, McLellan JS, Crispin M. Site-specific glycan analysis of the SARSCoV-2 spike. Science. 369, 330-333 (2020).
5. Walls AC, Park YJ, Tortorici MA, Wall A, McGuire AT, Veesler D. Structure, Function, and Antigenicity
of the SARS-CoV-2 Spike Glycoprotein. Cell. 183, 1735 (2020).
6. Hoffmann M, Kleine-Weber H, Pohlmann S. A Multibasic Cleavage Site in the Spike Protein of SARSCoV-2 Is Essential for Infection of Human Lung Cells. Molecular cell. 78, 779-784 (2020)
7. Chen MH, Zhang S, Porritt RA, Rivas MN, Paschold L, et al. Superantigenic character of an insert unique
to SARS-CoV-2 spike supported by skewed TCR repertoire in patients with hyperinflammation. PNAS
117, 25254-25262 (2020).
8. Xu D, Esko JD. Demystifying heparan sulfate-protein interactions. Annu Rev Biochem. 83, 129-157 (2014).
9. Clausen TM, Sandoval DR, Spliid CB, Pihl J, Perrett HR, Painter CD, et al. SARS-CoV-2 Infection
Depends on Cellular Heparan Sulfate and ACE2. Cell. 183, 1043-1057 (2020).
10. Kim SY, Jin W, Sood A, Montgomery DW, Grant OC, Fuster MM, et al. Characterization of heparin and
severe acute respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) spike glycoprotein binding
interactions. Antiviral Res. 181, 104873 (2020).
11. Hippensteel JA, LaRiviere WB, Colbert JF, Langouet-Astrie CJ, Schmidt EP. Heparin as a therapy for
COVID-19: current evidence and future possibilities. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 319, L211-L217
(2020).
12. Tree JA, Turnbull JE, Butigieg KR, Elmore MJ, Coobes N, et al. Unfractionated heparin inhibits live
wild type SARS-CoV-2 cell infectivity at therapeutically relevant concentrations. Br J Pharmacol. 178, 626635 (2021).
13. Mycroft-West CJ, Su D, Pagani I, Rudd TR, Elli S, Gandhi NS, et al. Heparin Inhibits Cellular Invasion
by SARS-CoV-2: Structural Dependence of the Interaction of the Spike S1 Receptor-Binding Domain with
Heparin. Thromb Haemost. 120, 1700-1715 (2020).
14. Bestle D, Heindl MR, Limburg H, Lam van TV, Pilgram O, et al. TMPRSS2 and furin are both essential
for proteolytic activation of SARS-CoV-2 in human airway cells. Life Sci Alliance. 3, e202000786 (2020).
15. Cagno V, Tseligka ED, Jones ST, Tapparel C. Heparan Sulfate Proteoglycans and Viral Attachment: True
Receptors or Adaptation Bias? Viruses. 11, 596 (2019).
16. Bugatti A, Paiardi G, Urbinati C, Chiodelli P, Orro A, et al. Heparin and heparan sulfate proteoglycans
promote HIV-1 p17 matrix protein oligomerization: computational, biochemical and biological implications.
Sci Rep. 9, 15768 (2019).
17. Kokh DB, Doser B, Richter S, Ormersbach F, Cheng X, Wade RC. A Workflow for Exploring Ligand
Dissociation from a Macromolecule: Efficient Random Acceleration Molecular Dynamics Simulation and
Interaction Fingerprints Analysis of Ligand Trajectories. J Chem Phys. 158, 125102 (2020). Code deposited
at https://github.com/HITS-MCM/MD-IFP.
18. Zahn A and Allain JP. Hepatitis C virus and hepatitis B virus bind to heparin: purification of largely
IgG-free virions from infected plasma by heparin chromatography. J Gen Virol. 86, 677-685 (2005).
19. Coady B, Marshall JD, Hattie LE, Brannan AM, Fitzpatrick MN. Characterization of a peptide containing
the major heparin binding domain of human hepatic lipase. J Pept Sci. 24, e3123 (2018).
20. Lan J, Ge J, Yu J, Shan S, Zhou H, et al. Structure of the SARS-CoV-2 spike receptor-binding domain
bound to the ACE2 receptor. Nature. 581, 215-20 (2020).
21. Huang SW, Wang SF. SARS-CoV-2 Entry Related Viral and Host Genetic Variations: Implications on
COVID-19 Severity, Immune Escape, and Infectivity. Int J Mol Sci. 22, 360 (2021).
22. Song W, Gui M, Wang X, Xiang Y. Cryo-EM structure of the SARS coronavirus spike glycoprotein in
complex with its host cell receptor ACE2. PLoS Pathog. 14, e1007236 (2018).
23. Woods Group (2005-2021). GLYCAM Web. Complex Carbohydrate Research Center, University of
Georgia, Athens, GA. (http://glycam.org).

14

24. Baker NA, Sept D, Joseph S, Holst MJ, McCammon JA. Electrostatics of nanosystems: application to
microtubules and the ribosome. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 98, 10037-10041 (2001).
25. Dolinsky TJ, Nielsen JE, McCammon JA, Baker NA. PDB2PQR: an automated pipeline for the setup,
execution, and analysis of Poisson-Boltzmann electrostatics calculations. Nucleic Acids Res. 32 W665W667. (2004).
26. Li H, Robertson AD, Jensen JH. Very fast empirical prediction and rationalization of protein pKa
values. Proteins. 61, 704-21 (2005).
27. Maier JA, Martinez C, Kasavajhala K, Wickstrom L, Hauser KE, et al. ff14SB: Improving the Accuracy
of Protein Side Chain and Backbone Parameters from ff99SB. J Chem Theory Comput. 11, 3696-3713 (2015).
28. Morris GM, Huey R, Lindstrom W, Sanner MF, Belew RK, et al. AutoDock4 and AutoDockTools4:
Automated docking with selective receptor flexibility. J Comput Chem. 30, 2785-2791 (2009).
29. Case DA, Ben-Shalom IY, Brozell SR, Cerutti DS, et al. AMBER 2020. University of California, San
Francisco. 2020.
30. Humphrey W, Dalke A, Schulten K. VMD: visual molecular dynamics. J Mol Graph. 14, 33-38 (1996).

15

Supporting Information for:
Mechanism of inhibition of SARS-CoV-2 infection by the interaction of the spike
glycoprotein with heparin.
Giulia Paiardi*1,2, Stefan Richter1, Pasqua Oreste3, Chiara Urbinati2, Marco Rusnati2, Rebecca C.
Wade*1,4.
1 Molecular and Cellular Modeling Group, Heidelberg Institute for Theoretical Studies (HITS), 69118
Heidelberg, Germany,
2 Macromolecular Interaction Analysis Unit, Section of Experimental Oncology and Immunology,
Department of Molecular and Translational Medicine, 25030 Brescia, Italy,
3 Glycores 2000 Srl, Milan, Italy.
4 Zentrum für Molekulare Biologie (ZMBH), DKFZ-ZMBH Alliance and Interdisciplinary Center for
Scientific Computing (IWR), Heidelberg University, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany,
*Corresponding authors: Giulia Paiardi, Rebecca C. Wade
Email: giulia.paiardi@h-its.org, Rebecca.wade@h-its.org
Preprint server. aXriv - https://arxiv.org/abs/2103.07722
Data sharing. All simulation trajectories are available on the BioExcel COVID-19 platform: https://bioexcelcv19-dev.bsc.es/#/
This PDF file includes:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Supplementary Material and Methods ---------------------------------------------- 2-3
Supplementary Figures: S1 to S9 --------------------------------------------------- 4-12
Supplementary Tables: S1 to S8 ---------------------------------------------------- 13-22
Supplementary Movies: S1 to S3---------------------------------------------------- 24
Supplementary References ----------------------------------------------------------- 24

Other supplementary materials for this manuscript include the following:
IFPs (enlargement of single pictures of Tab.S6)
Movies S1-S3
In the following contents, a simplified nomenclature is used for the simulated systems in which they are referred
to as Model01-05 and contain the following components:
Model01

Spike in closed conformation

Model02

Closed spike + 1 heparin chain

Model03

Closed spike + 3 heparin chains

Model04

Open spike

Model05

Open spike + 3 heparin chains

1

1. Supplementary Material and Methods
All-atom Molecular Dynamics (MD) simulation. The Amber20 package (1) was used to carry out the
simulations. Parameters for the spike were assigned with the ff14SB (2) and GLYCAM-06j (3) force fields.
Heparin was parameterized following the method published by Bugatti et al. (4). All the glycoprotein models were
placed in a periodic cubic water box using the TIP3P water model (5) with 10 Å between the solutes and the edges
of the box. Na+ and Cl- ions were added to neutralize the systems and to immerse them in solvent with an ionic
strength of 150mM.
Each system was energy minimized in 14 consecutive minimisation steps, each of 100 steps of steepest
descent followed by 900 steps of conjugate gradient, with decreasing positional restraints from 1000 to 0 kcal/mol
A2 on all the atoms of the systems excluding waters, counterions and hydrogens, with a cut-off for non-bonded
interactions of 8 Å. The systems were then subjected to two consecutive steps of heating, each of 100000 steps,
from 10 to 100 K and from 100 to 310 K in an NVT ensemble with a Langevin thermostat. Bonds involving
hydrogen atoms were constrained with the SHAKE algorithm (6) and 2 fs time step was used. The systems were
then equilibrated at 310 K in 4 consecutive steps of 2.5 ns each in the NPT ensemble with a Langevin thermostat
with random velocities assigned at the beginning of each step. For each system simulated, 4 independent replica
production runs following the same protocol as for the equilibration, were carried out starting from restart files
chosen randomly from the last 5ns of equilibration. During the MD simulations, a cutoff of 8 Å for the evaluation
of short-range non-bonded interactions was used and the Particle Mesh Ewald method was employed for the longrange electrostatic interactions. The temperature was kept constant at 310 K with a Langevin thermostat.
Coordinates were written at intervals of 100 ps.
Production simulations were carried out on the Marconi100 accelerated cluster
(https://www.hpc.cineca.it/hardware/marconi100) which is based on the IBM Power9 AC922 CPU architecture
with each accelerator having four Volta V100 NVIDIA GPUs. Each simulation was carried out on a single GPU
Analysis of MD simulations. MD trajectories were analysed using CPPTRAJ from AmberTools20 (1) and
molecular graphics analysis was performed using Visual Molecular Dynamics (VMD) (7).
- Cluster analysis of the structures was carried out using CPPTRAJ (1) for the last 100 ns of all the trajectories
considering backbone C-alpha atoms for the protein residues and all the carbon, oxygen, sulfate and nitrogen
atoms for the heparin chains. N-glycans were excluded from the analysis. The hierarchical agglomerative (bottomup) approach was used with a minimum distance between the clusters of 3.0 Å and the distance between clusters
defined by the average distance between members of two clusters (Fig. 2A).
- Hydrogen bond (H-bond) analysis was performed using CPPTRAJ (1) along all the trajectories for frames at
intervals of 10 ns (coordinated collected every 100 ps collected with a stride of 100 frames) and setting 3.5 Å as
the upper distance for defining a H-bond between heavy atoms. All the atoms including the hydrogens of the
systems were considered (Fig. 2A, Fig.S3, Tab.S1 and S2).
- Interaction fingerprint analysis (IFP) was performed using the MD-IFP python scripts (8)
(https://github.com/HITS-MCM/MD-IFP). The interactions between the spike and the heparin chains were
computed along all the trajectories for frames at intervals of 10 ns (coordinates were written every 100 ps and
then analyzed with a stride of 100 frames) (Tab.S3, IFPs).
- Root mean square fluctuations (RMSF) were calculated using CPPTRAJ (1) for all C-alpha atoms of the
individual spike subunits - SA, SB, SC - and for all the carbon, oxygen, sulfate and nitrogen atoms of the heparin
chains (Fig.S2).
- Root mean square deviations (RMSD) were calculated using CPPTRAJ (1) for all C-alpha atoms of the individual
spike subunits - SA, SB, SC - and for all the carbon, oxygen, sulfate and nitrogen atoms of the heparin chains (Fig.
2B and Fig.S1). The RMSDs of the hinge regions were calculated for the C-alpha atoms of residues 527-529 for
SA, SB, and SC separately (Fig. 4A and Fig.S5).
- Solvent Accessible surface area (SASA). Two separate SASA analyses were carried out for the SA SB and SC
subunits separately: along the trajectory using CPPTRAJ (1) and for the most representative clusters using
NACCESS (9). In both the analyses, the van der Waals radius of the solvent probe was assigned a value of 1.4 Å.
For the analysis of the S1/S2 site, residues 682-685 were considered (Fig.3B-C, Fig.S4, Tab.S4). In the case of
the receptor binding residues, all the residues of the RBD (residues 330-530) were considered along the trajectory
but only the RBm residues (K417, G446, Y449, Y453, L455, F456, A475, F486, N487, Y489, Q493, G496, Q498,
T500, N501, G502, Y505) suggested by Lan and co-workers (10) for the representative clusters (Fig.4C-D, Fig.S7
and Tab.S5).
- Dihedral Principal Component Analysis (dPCA) was performed using CPPTRAJ (1). The dihedral covariance
matrix and the projection were calculated for the backbone phi/psi angles of residues 527-529 of the SC monomer.
The first four eigenvectors and eigenvalues were extracted and the first two principal components were plotted
for all of the systems. All the systems were transformed into the same principal component space to evaluate the
variance across the replicas (Fig. 4B and Fig.S6).

2

- Essential Dynamics (ED) analysis was performed using Principal Component Analysis (PCA) of the unbiased
MD simulations. PCA was performed along all the trajectories individually with CPPTRAJ (1). The principal
modes of motion were visualized using VMD. The first normalized eigenvectors for model04 and model05 were
plotted along the trajectory and the direction of motion was defined by visual inspection (Fig. 4E and Fig.S8).
Reagents. Human recombinant furin was obtained from OriGene Technologies Inc. Rockville, MD, USA.
Conventional heparin (13.6 kDa) was obtained from a commercial batch preparation of unfractionated sodium
heparin from beef mucosa (Laboratori Derivati Organici S.p.A., Milan, Italy) purified to remove contaminants
according to established methods (11). The purity was higher than 95% as assessed by electrophoresis in acidic
buffer (12), uronic acid quantitative determination (13), and high-performance liquid chromatograph analysis
(11). The 13C NMR spectrum measured following Casu et al. (14) showed 78% N-sulfate glucosamine, 80% 6-Osulfate glucosamine, and 59% 2-O-sulfate iduronic acid. Low molecular weight (LMW) beef mucosal heparins
(4.0 kDa) were obtained by controlled nitrous acid degradation of unfractionated heparin as described in (14,15).
The capsular E. coli K5 polysaccharide (30,0 kDa) has the same structure [(→4)-β-D-glucuronic acid-(1→4)-αD-N-acetyl-glucosamine-(1→)]n as the heparin precursor N-acetyl heparosan and was prepared as described in
(16). To assess their integrity, the polysaccharides were re-analyzed before the beginning of the experiments (data
not shown).
Furin cleavage assay. The ability of heparin to inhibit spike cleavage at the S1/S2 site by furin was evaluated by
using the colorimetric assay “CoviDropTM SARS-Cov-2 targeted proprotein convertase inhibitor screening fast
kit” (Epigentek, County Blvd, Farmingdale NY). Briefly, a 2.0 kDa SARS-CoV-2 spike fragment containing the
intact S1/S2 681RRAR684 HBD is tagged with polyhistidine and biotin at its N-terminus and C-terminus,
respectively. The spike fragment is then immobilized onto microplate wells through histidine/Ni-NTA. The
cleavage of the substrate at the S1/S2 site removes the C-terminal S2 fragment of spike that is linked to biotin,
causing a decrease of the signal generated by avidin/biotin binding that is detected by an appropriate colorimetric
reaction (recorded by the absorbance in a microplate spectrophotometer at a wavelength of 450 nm). Furin
cleavage inhibition blocks the reduction of the signal, consequently the extent of spike cleavage is inversely
proportional to the signal intensity. The assay was performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions
(https://www.epigentek.com/catalog/covidrop-sars-cov-targeted-proprotein-convertase-inhibitor-screening-fastkit-p-84596.html).
- Experimental procedure. The inhibitory effect of heparin was evaluated at a single dose as follows: wells coated
with an immobilized SARS-CoV-2 spike fragment containing the intact S1/S2 681RRAR684 basic domain were
(i) untreated (negative control); (ii) incubated with 13,6 kDa heparin (10 mM); (iii) exposed to furin (25 ng/well)
in the absence or in the presence of heparin (10 µM); pre-incubated with heparin (100 µM) for 10 min. at room
temperature and washed three times with (iv) PBS or (v) PBS containing 2 M NaCl and then exposed to furin.
Additionally, wells coated with the spike fragment were incubated with furin in the absence or in the presence of
13,6 KDa heparin, 4.0 kDa low molecular weight (LMW) heparin or the unsulfated K5 polysaccharide at
concentrations from 0.001 to 1000 µM with a stride of 10.

3

2. Supplementary Figures

Fig. S1 Structural convergence of the simulated systems. Root mean square deviation (RMSD (Å)) versus time
(µs) for the four replica MD trajectories of the five simulated systems. The RMSD values for the individual
subunits - SA, SB and SC - were calculated for the C-alpha atoms of residues 51-1063 and are shown in blue, pink
and magenta, respectively. The RMSD values of the three heparin chains were calculated for all the C, N and O
atoms in all monosaccharides and are colored green, light green and turquoise.

4

Fig. S2 Conformational fluctuations of the RBD and the S1/S2 site. Root mean square fluctuation (RMSF) (Å)
versus residue number of the three subunits of the spike homotrimer for the four replica MD trajectories of the
five simulated systems. The RMSF values for the individual subunits - SA, SB and SC - were calculated for the Calpha atoms of residues 1-3697 and are shown in blue, pink and magenta, respectively. The red boxes represent
the RBD (residues 330-530) of each subunit, the black arrows highlight the hinge regions (residue 527-529), and
the green arrows point to the S1/S2 residues (residues 682-685). For both the boxes and the arrows, the dashed
and continuous lines represent the regions not interacting and interacting with heparin, respectively.

5

Fig. S3 Heparin-spike hydrogen-bonding interactions. Last snapshots of spike models in closed (left) and open
(right) conformations with 3 heparins bound showed the H-bond interactions of heparin with spike subunits SB
and SC as in close-ups of the side views in Figure. 1. The labelled residues shown in sticks and colored as the
subunits were involved in H-bond interactions with heparin for more than half of the simulations of the spike in
the closed (with 1 and 3 heparin chains) or open states. The SA, SB and SC subunits are colored white, pink and
magenta, respectively, and are shown in cartoon representation with the covalently attached N-glycans in line
representation. Heparin is shown as a surface coloured by elements in green, red, yellow and blue for carbons,
oxygens, sulphates and nitrogens, respectively.

6

Fig. S4 Spike N-glycan interactions with heparin. N-glycans can modulate binding of the spike to heparin by
transiently displacing heparin from the spike surface (see Movies S1-S3). The heparin chains in both closed and
open models of spike were modelled to interact with the K444 and N448 residues, that are in close proximity to
the ACE2 binding residues. Visual inspection of the trajectories and the H-bond analysis showed that N-glycans
can aspecifically and transiently cause the detachment of a limited portion of the heparin chains from the spike.
We identified two N-glycans with key roles in this mechanism: the N-glycan attached to N-122 (in the N-terminal
domain) acts only in the closed conformation whereas the N-glycan attached to N-343 (in the RBD) is mainly
responsible for detachment in both the closed and the open conformations. The figure shows the interactions
between the N-122 (left) and N-343 (right) N-glycans with heparin in closed and open models, respectively. The
region shown in the spike is indicated by the squares in the insets. The SB and SC subunits are shown as translucent
surfaces and cartoons in pink and magenta, respectively. N-122, N-343 and the N-glycans are shown in stick
representation and colored by element with pink/magenta carbons. Heparin chains are shown in stick
representation with carbons in light green (left) and cyan (right). Dashed lines indicate the H-bond interactions
between the glycans and heparin. As SPR and circular dichroism spectroscopy experiments were done using
unfractionated heparins (13.5-15kDa - ~48 monosaccharides), we cannot exclude that longer heparin chains could
maintain the interaction with these residues (17). Our simulations suggest that N-glycans may exert a shielding
effect that results in a non-specific, partial and transient detachment of heparin from the spike.

7

Fig. S5 Exposure of the S1/S2 site during the MD simulations. Solvent Accessible Surface Area (SASA) (Å2)
of the S1/S2 site versus time (µs) for the four replica MD trajectories of the five simulated systems. The SASA of
the S1/S2 site (residues 682-685) in each spike subunit - SA, SB and SC - is shown in blue, pink and magenta,
respectively, and was computed using CPPTRAJ (1).

8

Fig. S6 Conformational changes of the hinge region during the simulations. Root mean square deviation (Å))
of the hinge region versus time (µs) for the four replica MD trajectories of the five simulated systems. The RMSD
values were calculated for the C-alpha atoms of residues 527-529 and plotted for the individual subunits - SA, SB
and SC - in blue, pink and magenta, respectively.

9

Fig. S7 Effects of heparin binding on the motion of the RBD-hinge region. Results of dihedral Principal
Component Analysis (dPCA) calculated for the Phi/Psi angles of the RBD-hinge region (residues 527-529) of the
SC subunit for the four replica MD trajectories of the five simulated systems. PC1 and PC2 are plotted on the x
and y axes, respectively. Note that the second replica of model 02 differs from the others because of the interaction
between heparin and the N-glycan at N122 and the fourth replica of model 05 differs from the others for this
system because of the interaction between heparin and the N-glycan at N343 in this trajectory.

10

Fig. S8 Exposure of the receptor binding motif (RBm) during the MD simulations. Solvent Accessible
Surface Area (SASA) (Å2) of the RBm versus time (µs) for the four replica MD trajectories of the five simulated
systems. The SASA is shown for each subunit - SA, SB and SC - in blue, pink and magenta, respectively, and was
calculated using CPPTRAJ (1).

11

Fig. S9 Differences in the spike RBD opening motion in the presence of heparin. Essential Dynamics (ED)
analysis on the SC subunit for the four replica MD trajectories of model04 and model05. (A) Values of the first
four eigenvalues for the up-subunit of Model04 and Model05. (B) Plot of the first normalized eigenvector along
the trajectory. (C) Plot of the direction of motion of the first eigenvector on the RBD of the SC subunit which can
be seen to differ between Model04 and Model05. Note that the direction for the fourth replica of Model05 differs
from the other replicas because of the interaction between heparin and the N-glycan at N343 in this trajectory.

12

3. Supplementary Tables
Tab. S1 Average root mean square fluctuation (RMSF) (Å) calculated for the C-alpha atoms of the RBD
(residues 330-530). The average fluctuation is calculated based on the average fluctuation of the single residues
in the RBD. In model02, the single heparin chains directly bind to the RBD of monomer SC. The grey boxes
represent the subunits interacting with heparin.
Subunit SA

Average
Fluctuation
RBD
residues
[Å]

Subunit SB

Subunit SC
AVG ST.DEV.
[Å]
[Å]

Rep
01

Rep
02

Rep
03

Rep
04

Rep
01

Rep
02

Rep
03

Rep
04

Rep
01

Rep
02

Rep
03

Rep
04

Model
01

10.18

9.40

9.99

9.44

10.22

11.18

13.72

13.37

11.59

11.19

11.14

10.52

10.83

1.38

Model
02

10.23

13.93

13.80

13.65

10.68

10.69

12.14

9.91

10.10

10.14

9.51

9.60

10.45

1.71

Model
03

9.39

8.83

9.38

9.19

8.51

9.77

8.52

12.05

10.79

10.30

9.93

10.88

9.57

1.06

Model
04

10.57

12.12

10.88

10.56

14.89

12.53

14.54

10.94

17.38

15.29

13.93

13.01

12.77

2.19

Model
05

10.09

9.80

9.27

12.10

9.18

11.25

9.45

14.18

15.57

14.54

12.05

16.88

11.65

2.67

Tab. S2 Average root mean square fluctuation (RMSF) (Å) calculated for the C-alpha atoms of the hinge
region (residues 527-529). The average fluctuation is calculated based on the average fluctuation of the single
residues in the hinge region. In model02, the single heparin chain allosterically acts on the hinge region of
monomer SC. The grey boxes represent the subunits interacting with heparin.
Subunit SA

Average
Fluctuation
hinge region
[Å]

Subunit SB

Subunit SC
AVG. ST.DEV.
[Å]
[Å]

Rep
01

Rep
02

Rep
03

Rep
04

Rep
01

Rep
02

Rep
03

Rep
04

Rep
01

Rep
02

Rep
03

Rep
04

Model01

1.07

0.8

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

0.06

Model02

1.14

1.2

1.07

0.8

1.12

1.1

0.7

1.0

1.3

1.15

1.15

1.3

1.13

0.18

Model03

0.94

1.0

0.94

1.0

0.9

1.07

0.7

1.07

0.97

1.07

1.04

1.0

1.0

0.10

Model04

1.4

1.1

1.34

1.67

1.24

1.3

1.3

1.24

1.5

1.5

1.27

1.27

1.3

0.15

Model05

1.5

0.7

0.7

1.04

0.8

1.0

0.7

1.34

1.4

1.04

1.07

0.97

1.02

0.28

13

Tab. S3 Average root mean square fluctuation (Å) calculated for the C-alpha atoms of the S1/S2 site
(residues 682-685). The average fluctuation is calculated based on the fluctuation of the single residues in the
S1/S2 site. In model02, the single heparin chain binds the S1/S2 site of monomer SA. The grey boxes represent
the subunits interacting with heparin.
Subunit SA

Average
Fluctuation
S1/S2
residues
[Å]

Subunit SB

Subunit SC
AVG
[Å]

ST.DEV.
[Å]

4.65

2.75

2.4

2.93

4.18

2.04

1.38

2.08

2.5

1.78

1.93

0.78

1.55

2.45

7.7

2.35

3.11

1.71

2.75

1.98

3.5

3.73

2.49

0.97

Rep
01

Rep
02

Rep
03

Rep
04

Rep
01

Rep
02

Rep
03

Rep
04

Rep
01

Rep
02

Rep
03

Rep
04

Model01

6.2

6.25

9.25

2.13

2.13

3.88

2.88

1.75

2

2.63

1.38

Model02

2.87

2.08

1.55

1.2

1.2

1.78

2

1.6

1.5

6

Model03

1.78

3.18

3

3.25

3.25

2.25

1.08

1.05

1.3

Model04

3.9

3.05

3.18

3.43

3.43

3.25

3

1.58

Model05

2.08

1.85

2.13

2.75

2.75

5.15

2.33

2.65

14

Tab. S4 Analysis of hydrogen bonds (H-bonds) between the spike and the heparin chains in Model03 for
the four replica MD trajectories using CPPTRAJ (1). Each heparin chain interacts with two adjacent subunits,
SA-SB, SB-SC or SC-SA, and the spike residues involved in the interaction are listed separately as residues of the
first subunit and of the second subunit. The yellow boxes represent the H-bonds that were stable in more than half
the simulations with an occupancy > 50% in the single trajectory considering the 3 heparin chains on each subunit.
The H-bonds for Model02 (data not shown) are not reported because they are very similar to these results.
Spike
Residues
First subunit

Rep 01
Heparin
on SA-SB
subunits

Heparin
on SB-SC
subunits

ARG_34

Heparin
on SA-SB
subunits

Heparin
on SB-SC
subunits

Rep 03
Heparin
on SC-SA
subunits

Heparin
on SA-SB
subunits

Heparin
on SB-SC
subunits

1

TYR_38
LYS_41

Rep 02
Heparin
on SC-SA
subunits

1

Rep 04
Heparin
on SC-SA
subunits

Heparin
on SA-SB
subunits

Heparin
on SB-SC
subunits

Heparin
on SC-SA
subunits

1
1

1

1

SUM
2

1

4

1

1

3

ARG_158

1

SER_162

1

1

2

ASN_164

1

1

2

ASN_165

1

CYX_166

1

3

1

THR_167

1

GLU_169

1

TYR_170
VAL_171

1

1

1

1
1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

4

1

4

1

3

1

LEU_176
ASN_180

1

1

SER_172
GLN_173

2

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

4

1

2

1

1

1

8
1

1

THR_186

2

1

ARG_190

3
1

1

1

LYS_206

1

1

3
1

HIE_207

1

1

1

1

4

THR_208

1

1

1

1

4

1

1

GLN_211
PHE_220

1

SER_221

1

1

1

1

ASP_228

1

1

1

ASN_280

1

1

THR_284

1

1

THR_286

1

1

ASP_287

1

1

8
1

1

1

1

2
1
1

1

1

1

1

1

THR_602

1

1

1

1

ASN_603

1

1

1

1

THR_604

1

SER_605

1

1

1

1

1

7

1

1

2

1

1

1

1

1

4
1

1

5
1

7

1

2

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

2

1

11

1

TYR_674
GLN_677

6

1

1

GLN_607

5
2

1

1

3
1

1

SER_690

1

ARG_682

1

ARG_683

1

ALA_684
1

SER_686

1

3
1
1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

ARG_685

4
1

1

THR_308

1

VAL_687

1

SER_689

1

SER_940

1

1

LYS_300

GLN_690

1

1

LYS_278

ASN_606

1

1

8

1

8

1

1

12

1

7

1
1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

2

4

1

3

1

1

1

1

3
1

Second subunit
ASN_334

1

LEU_335

1

1

2

1

2

PHE 338

1

1

GLY 3239

1

1

GLU_340

1

1

15

ASN_343

1

THR 345

1

1

ARG_346

1

1

ASN_353

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

ARG_355

7

1

11

1

4

1

2

1

1

11

1

1

1

1

LYS_356

1

ARG_357

1

SER_359

3
1

1

ASN_360

1
1

1

1

1
1

1

1

1
1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

4
5

1

5

ASP_364

1

1

TYR_365

1

1

SER_366

1

1

VAL_367

1

1

ASN_394

1

TYR_396
LYS_444

1

VAL_445

1

1

TYR_449

1

1

ASN_450

1

2
2

1
1

GLN_564

1

ARG_577

1

THR_581

1

1

2

1

1
1

LYS_529
GLN_563

1
1

ARG_466
ARG_509

1
1

1

1

1

1
1

1

1

3
1

16

Tab. S5 Hydrogen Bond Analysis (H-bonds) of Model05 between S glycoprotein and the heparin chains.
The data are collected for the four replicas using the H-bond analysis implemented in CPPTRAJ (1). Each heparin
chain interacts with two adjacent subunits, SA-SB, SB-SC or SC-SA, and the spike residues involved in the interaction
are listed separately as residues of the first subunit and of the second subunit. The yellow boxes represent the Hbonds that were stable in more than half the simulations with an occupancy > 50% in the single trajectory
considering the 3 heparin chains on each subunit.
Spike
Residues

Rep 01

First subunit

Heparin
on SA-SB
subunits

ARG_34

1

Heparin
on SB-SC
subunits

Rep 02
Heparin
on SC-SA
subunits

Heparin
on SA-SB
subunits

Heparin
on SB-SC
subunits

Rep 03
Heparin
on SC-SA
subunits

Heparin
on SB-SC
subunits

1

ASN_125
LYS_129

Heparin
on SA-SB
subunits

Rep 04
Heparin
on SC-SA
subunits

Heparin
on SA-SB
subunits

1

1

Heparin
on SB-SC
subunits

Heparin
on SC-SA
subunits

4

1
1

1

1

ARG_158

2

1

TYR_160

1

1

1

0

ASN_164

1

1

ASN_165

1

1

CYX_166

1

THR_167

1

GLU_169

1
1
1

3

1

1
1

1
1

1
1

1

4
1

5

1

1

1

TYR_170

4
1

1

VAL_171

1

1

SER_172

1

GLN_173

1

1

1
1

LYS_206

1
1

6
1

1

LYS_187

1

4

1

1

3

1

1

5
1
1

1

2

THR_208

0

ASN_211

1

GLN_218

1

1
1

PHE_220

1

SER 221

1

LYS_278

1

ASN_280

1

1

ASN_282

1

1

1

1

THR_284

1

1

1

1

1

THR_286

1

1

1

1

ASP_287

1

1

1

1

1

5
1
1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

8

1

5

1

6
7
1

THR_307

1

THR_604

1
1

ASN_606

1

GLN_607

1

1

TYR_674

1

1

1

ASN_679

1
1

1

1

1

ARG_682

1

1

ARG_683

1

1

ALA_684

1

ARG_685

1

1

2

1

3
1

1

2

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

SER_686

1

1

ALA_688

1

GLN_690

1

1

VAL_687
1

1

1

1

8

1

1

11

1

1

12

1

1

6

1
1

6

1
1

SER_680

1
1

SER_605

SER_689

3
1

ALA_163

HIE_207

SUM

3

1
1

1

1

1

1

5

1

1

1

1

4

Second subunit
ASN_334

1

1

CYX_336

1

1

PHE_338

1

1

GLY_339

1

1

GLU_340

1

THR_345

1

1
1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

4

1

1

1

9

ARG_346

1

SER_349

1

1

TYR_351

1

1

17

ASN_354

1

1

1

ARG_355

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

LYS_356

1

ARG_357

1

SER_359

1

1

ASN_360

1

1

1

1

4
2
1
1

1

1

1

1

1

8

1

1

6

1

1

8

1

SER_443

1

LYS_444

1

VAL_445

1

GLY_447

1

ASN_448

1
1
1

2

1

1

3

1

1

3

1

1

TYR_449

1

ASN_450

1

LEU_452

1

1

1

1
1

4
1

ARG_466

1

LYS_558

1

GLN_564

1

THR_581

5

1

ASP_364

ARG_577

1

1
1
1

1

2

1
1

2
1

18

2

Tab. S6 Interaction Fingerprint Analysis (MD-IFP) (8) between heparin and spike residues. In Model02,
one heparin chain interacts with residues of SA and SB subunits. In Models 03 and 05, each of the three heparin
chains interacts with residues of SA-SB or SB-SC or SC-SA. Histograms show the interaction in the first 10 frames,
last 10 frames and in all the frames in blue, orange and with lines, respectively. Blue and red boxes include the
NTD-RBD and S1/S2 domains, respectively. To read the residue name and number, see the attached files IFPs.
These files report the Amber numbering as follows. subunit SA residues 2-1124, subunit SB residues 1289-2411,
subunit SC residue number 2574-3696 (fasta numbering for all the subunits; residues 13-1139).

19

Tab. S7 Solvent Accessible Surface Area (SASA) (Å2) of the S1/S2 site (residues 682-685) calculated for the
most representative cluster for each trajectory using NACCESS (9) with a probe radius of 1.4 Å.

SASA S1/S2
Model 01

SASA S1/S2
Model 02

SASA S1/S2
Model 03

SASA S1/S2
Model 04

subunit SA
SASA w/o glycans

Rep 01
629.83

Rep 02
633.49

Rep 03
530.64

Rep 04
372.34

AVG [Å2]
541.575

ST.DEV. [Å2]
122.47

SASA w/ glycans
Glycan shielded Area
subunit SB
SASA w/o glycans
SASA w/ glycans
Glycan shielded Area
subunit SC
SASA w/o glycans
SASA w/ glycans
Glycan shielded Area

566.64
63.19
Rep 01
505.5
505.5
0
Rep 01
416.62
390.87
25.75

633.34
0.15
Rep 02
582.18
547.92
34.26
Rep 02
579.49
579.49
0

530.64
0
Rep 03
642.34
642.34
0
Rep 03
411.38
391.61
19.77

328.5
43.84
Rep 04
617.75
617.75
0
Rep 04
550.91
535.57
15.34

514.78
26.795
AVG [Å2]
586.9425
578.3775
8.565
AVG [Å2]
489.6
474.385
15.215

131.27
31.85
ST.DEV. [Å2]
59.65
62.93
17.13
ST.DEV. [Å2]
88.08
97.67
11.01

subunit SA
SASA w/o glycans- hepa

Rep 01
629.66

Rep 02
642.73

Rep 03
453.62

Rep 04
600.37

AVG [Å2]
581.595

ST.DEV. [Å2]
87.14

SASA w/ glycans

570.35

571.14

438.71

493.11

518.3275

64.47

SASA w/ glycans + hepa
Heparin shielded Area

281.36
288.99

315.2
255.94

239.59
199.12

239.2
253.91

268.8375
249.49

36.70
37.23

subunit SB

Rep 02
406.93
382.68
24.25
Rep 02
417
417

Rep 03
554.48
296.33
258.15
Rep 03
656.9
598.6

Rep 04
468.94
349.33
119.61
Rep 04
653.61
653.61

AVG [Å2]

ST.DEV. [Å2]

SASA w/o glycans
SASA w/ glycans
Glycan shielded Area
subunit SC
SASA w/o glycans
SASA w/ glycans

Rep 01
630.78
540.8
89.98
Rep 01
442.81
350.95

515.2825
392.285
122.9975
AVG [Å2]
542.58
505.04

97.92
105.20
98.52
ST.DEV. [Å2]
130.54
144.13

Glycan shielded Area

91.86

0

58.3

0

37.54

45.46

subunit SA

Rep 01

Rep 02

Rep 03

Rep 04

AVG [Å2]

ST.DEV. [Å2]

SASA w/o glycans- hepa

516.39

515.64

581.44

748.69

590.54

109.85

SASA w/ glycans

487.64

426.44

563.91

746.23

556.055

138.65

SASA w/ glycans + hepa

334.23

255.98

391.9

526.14

377.0625

113.93

Heparin shielded Area

153.41

170.46

172.01

220.09

178.9925

28.66

subunit SB
SASA w/o glycans- hepa
SASA w/ glycans
SASA w/ glycans + hepa
Heparin shielded Area
subunit SC
SASA w/o glycans- hepa
SASA w/ glycans
SASA w/ glycans + hepa
Heparin shielded Area

Rep 01
479.39
479.39
293.57
185.82
Rep 01
418.24
418.24
257.57
160.67

Rep 02
579.68
579.68
380.35
199.33
Rep 02
567.65
567.65
388.05
179.6

Rep 03
464.96
464.96
244.35
220.61
Rep 03
609.42
574.51
387.46
187.05

Rep 04
388.36
388.36
189.05
199.31
Rep 04
588.14
557.84
340.88
216.96

AVG [Å2]
478.0975
478.0975
276.83
201.2675
AVG [Å2]
545.8625
529.56
343.49
186.07

ST.DEV. [Å2]
78.62
78.62
81.15
14.38
ST.DEV. [Å2]
86.77
74.53
61.39
23.40

subunit SA

Rep 01

Rep 02

Rep 03

Rep 04

AVG [Å2]

ST.DEV. [Å2]

SASA w/o glycans
SASA w/ glycans
Glycan shielded Area
subunit SB
SASA w/o glycans
SASA w/ glycans
Glycan shielded Area
subunit SC
SASA w/o glycans
SASA w/ glycans
Glycan shielded Area

513.33
513.33
0
Rep 01
537.96
468.25
69.71
Rep 01
287.33
268.55
18.78

530.3
530.3
0
Rep 02
490.5
490.5
0
Rep 02
450.2
450.2
0

504.07
384.19
119.88
Rep 03
387.01
387.01
0
Rep 03
373.27
373.27
0

577.56
577.56
0
Rep 04
426.75
323.6
103.15
Rep 04
571.4
571.4
0

531.315
501.345
29.97
AVG [Å2]
460.555
417.34
43.215
AVG [Å2]
420.55
415.855
4.695

32.683
82.70
59.94
ST.DEV. [Å2]
66.93
76.70
51.73
ST.DEV. [Å2]
120.57
127.65
9.39

20

SASA S1/S2
Model 05

subunit SA
SASA w/o glycans- hepa
SASA w/ glycans
SASA w/ glycans + hepa
Heparin shielded Area
subunit SB
SASA w/o glycans- hepa
SASA w/ glycans
SASA w/ glycans + hepa
Heparin shielded Area
subunit SC
SASA w/o glycans- hepa
SASA w/ glycans
SASA w/ glycans + hepa
Heparin shielded Area

Rep 01
586.63
586.63
240.61
346.02
Rep 01
554.89
499.14
203.26
295.88
Rep 01
481.46
456.98
183.05
273.93

Rep 02
608.31
607.13
273.7
333.43
Rep 02
440.05
440.05
381.9
58.15
Rep 02
424.66
424.66
203.28
221.38

21

Rep 03
620.32
620.32
410.65
209.67
Rep 03
562.46
554.17
438.86
115.31
Rep 03
559.17
509.52
293.16
216.36

Rep 04
473.41
473.41
281.39
192.02
Rep 04
378.39
378.39
224.4
153.99
Rep 04
537.64
537.64
320.88
216.76

AVG [Å2]
572.1675
571.8725
301.5875
270.285
AVG [Å2]
483.9475
467.9375
312.105
155.8325
AVG [Å2]
500.7325
482.2
250.0925
232.1075

ST.DEV. [Å2]
67.30
67.09
74.83
80.67
ST.DEV. [Å2]
89.94
75.73
116.16
101.32
ST.DEV. [Å2]
60.37
50.88
67.21
27.97

Tab. S8 Solvent Accessible Surface Area (SASA) (Å2) of residues involved in binding with the ACE2
receptor extracted from the crystallographic data of Lan et al. (10) and calculated for the most
representative cluster using NACCESS (9) with a probe radius of 1.4 Å.

SASA RBD
Model 01

SASA RBD
Model 02

subunit SA
SASA w/o glycans
SASA w/ glycans
Glycan shielded Area
subunit SB
SASA w/o glycans
SASA w/ glycans
Glycan shielded Area
subunit SC
SASA w/o glycans
SASA w/ glycans
Glycan shielded Area

Rep 01
1535.01
1311.63
223.38
Rep 01
1332.19
1040.84
291.35
Rep 01
1144.36
793.47
350.89

Rep 02
1504.43
1122.36
382.07
Rep 02
1435.41
1039.22
396.19
Rep 02
1316.63
1216.78
99.85

Rep 03
1210.01
939.32
270.69
Rep 03
1302.66
781.12
521.54
Rep 03
1568.52
1255.32
313.2

Rep 04
1260.4
1126.82
133.58
Rep 04
1193.93
740.21
453.72
Rep 04
1352.71
1267.56
85.15

AVG [Å2]
1377.4625
1125.0325
252.43
AVG [Å2]
1316.0475
900.3475
415.7
AVG [Å2]
1345.555
1133.2825
212.2725

ST.DEV. [Å2]
166.02
152.01
103.46
ST.DEV. [Å2]
99.33
162.16
97.46
ST.DEV. [Å2]
174.24
227.57
139.28

subunit SA
SASA w/o glycans
SASA w/ glycans
Glycan shielded Area
subunit SB
SASA w/o glycans- hepa
SASA w/ glycans
SASA w/ glycans + hepa
Heparin shielded Area
subunit SC
SASA w/o glycans
SASA w/ glycans
Glycan shielded Area

Rep 01
1228.63
779.14
449.49
Rep 01
1417.49
1042.8
1042.8
374.69
Rep 01
1369.09
900.1
468.99

Rep 02
1201.1
1115
86.1
Rep 02
1206.9
985.55
985.55
221.35
Rep 02
1201.23
791.89
409.34

Rep 03
1505
1222.72
282.28
Rep 03
1274.83
1200.53
1200.53
74.3
Rep 03
1330.53
963.62
366.91

Rep 04
1519.19
1369.44
149.75
Rep 04
1329.75
1047.38
1047.38
282.37
Rep 04
1335.14
1296.57
38.57

AVG [Å2]
1363.48
1121.575
241.905
AVG [Å2]
1307.2425
1069.065
1069.065
238.1775
AVG [Å2]
1308.9975
988.045
320.9525

ST.DEV. [Å2]
172.07
250.98
160.72
ST.DEV. [Å2]
89.03
92.05
92.05
126.13
ST.DEV. [Å2]
73.87
217.56
192.86

SASA RBD
Model 03

subunit SA
SASA w/o glycans- hepa
SASA w/ glycans
SASA w/ glycans + hepa
Heparin shielded Area
Glycan shielded Area
subunit SB
SASA w/o glycans- hepa
SASA w/ glycans
SASA w/ glycans + hepa
Heparin shielded Area
Glycan shielded Area
subunit SC
SASA w/o glycans- hepa
SASA w/ glycans
SASA w/ glycans + hepa
Heparin shielded Area
Glycan shielded Area

SASA RBD
Model 04

subunit SA
SASA w/o glycans
SASA w/ glycans
Glycan shielded Area
subunit SB
SASA w/o glycans
SASA w/ glycans
Glycan shielded Area
subunit SC
SASA w/o glycans

Rep 01
1416.74
1170.23
1168.11
2.12
248.63
Rep 01
1009.43
850.01
831.2
18.81
178.23
Rep 01
1266.88
1218.42
1218.42
0
48.46

Rep 02
1050.74
671.73
659.13
12.6
391.61
Rep 02
993.37
739.51
739.51
0
253.86
Rep 02
1188.41
1000.93
1000.93
0
187.48

Rep 03
921.89
774.8
774.8
0
147.09
Rep 03
1108.68
687.97
687.97
0
420.71
Rep 03
1374.5
1097.99
1097.99
0
276.51

Rep 04
1412.17
1188.74
1136.32
52.42
275.85
Rep 04
1135.53
886.77
868.53
18.24
267
Rep 04
1259.85
1015.93
1015.93
0
243.92

AVG [Å2]
1200.385
951.375
934.59
16.785
249.01
AVG [Å2]
1061.7525
791.065
781.8025
9.2625
279.95
AVG [Å2]
1272.41
1083.3175
1083.3175
0
189.0925

ST.DEV. [Å2]
252.73
266.85
256.02
24.39
100.53
ST.DEV. [Å2]
70.85
92.95
82.77
10.70
101.67
ST.DEV. [Å2]
76.74
99.66
99.66
0
100.71

Rep 01
934.02
925.07
8.95
Rep 01
1294.16
1115.78
178.38
Rep 01
1562.47

Rep 02
1023.2
1023.2
0
Rep 02
1302.6
1302.6
0
Rep 02
1302.6

Rep 03
1331.32
1331.32
0
Rep 03
1352.26
1029.59
322.67
Rep 03
1546.65

Rep 04
925.07
925.07
0
Rep 04
1294.16
1115.78
178.38
Rep 04
1562.47

AVG [Å2]
1053.40
1051.165
2.23
AVG [Å2]
1310.795
1140.94
169.86
AVG [Å2]
1493.5475

ST.DEV. [Å2]
190.50
192.41
4.475
ST.DEV. [Å2]
27.92
115.18
132.10
ST.DEV. [Å2]
127.52

22

SASA w/ glycans
Glycan shielded Area

SASA RBD
Model 05

subunit SA
SASA w/o glycans- hepa
SASA w/ glycans
SASA w/ glycans + hepa
Heparin shielded Area
Glycan shielded Area
subunit SB
SASA w/o glycans- hepa
SASA w/ glycans
SASA w/ glycans + hepa
Heparin shielded Area
Glycan shielded Area
subunit SC
SASA w/o glycans- hepa
SASA w/ glycans
SASA w/ glycans + hepa
Heparin shielded Area
Glycan shielded Area

1562.41
0.06
Rep 01
811.23
726.13
726.13
0
85.1
Rep 01
1112.45
778.58
778.58
0
333.87
Rep 01
1512.39
1512.39
1512.39
0
0

1302.6
0

1545.93
0.72

1562.41
0.06

1493.3375
0.21

Rep 02
717.19
516.61
504.51
12.1
212.68
Rep 02
993.19
786.46
786.46
0
206.73
Rep 02
1384.55
1384.55
1351.2
33.35
33.35

Rep 03
851.27
802.55
802.55
0
48.72
Rep 03
1167.5
993.76
981.52
12.24
185.98
Rep 03
1370.12
1370.12
1370.12
0
0

Rep 04
824.47
679.78
620.42
59.36
204.05
Rep 04
1455.88
1233.6
1233.6
0
222.28
Rep 04
1356.64
1356.64
1239.3
117.34
117.34

AVG [Å2] ST.DEV. [Å2]
801.04
58.33
681.2675
120.88
663.4025
129.60
17.865
28.25
137.6375
83.08
AVG [Å2] ST.DEV. [Å2]
1139.975
196.39
890.11
214.83
883.99
214.05
0
6.12
214.505
66.13
AVG [Å2] ST.DEV. [Å2]
1405.925
71.89
1405.925
71.89
1368.2525
112.10
37.6725
55.39
37.6725
55.39

23

127.40
0.34

4. Supplementary Movies
Movie S1. Spike glycoprotein in a closed conformation with 1 heparin chain bound.
First the structure is shown, focusing on the heparin binding site, then the MD trajectory for replica 1
(corresponding to the figures in the main manuscript).
Movie S2. Spike glycoprotein in a closed conformation with 3 heparin chains bound.
The structure and how the three heparin chains bind is shown followed by the MD trajectory for replica
1 (corresponding to the figures in the main manuscript).
Movie S3. Spike glycoprotein in an open conformation with 3 heparin chains bound.
The structure and how the three heparin chains bind is shown, focusing on the binding to the open RBD,
followed by the MD trajectory for replica 1 (corresponding to the figures in the main manuscript).

5. Supplementary References
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.

17.

Case DA BK, Ben-Shalom IY, Brozell SR, Cerutti DS, et al. AMBER 2020. University of California,
San Francisco. (2020).
Maier JA, Martinez C, Kasavajhala K, Wickstrom L, Hauser KE, Simmerling C. ff14SB: Improving the
Accuracy of Protein Side Chain and Backbone Parameters from ff99SB. J Chem Theory Comput. 11,
3696-3713 (2015).
Kirschner KN, Yongye AB, Tschampel SM, Gonzalez-Outeirino J, Daniels CR, Foley BL, et al.
GLYCAM06: a generalizable biomolecular force field. Carbohydrates. J Comput Chem. 29, 622-655
(2008).
Bugatti A, Paiardi G, Urbinati C, Chiodelli P, Orro A, Uggeri M, et al. Heparin and heparan sulfate
proteoglycans promote HIV-1 p17 matrix protein oligomerization: computational, biochemical and
biological implications. Sci Rep. 9, 15768 (2019).
Pekka M, Lennart N. Structure and Dynamics of the TIP3P, SPC, and SPC/E Water Models at 298 K. J
Phys Chem A. 105, 9954–9960 (2001).
Kräutler V, Van Gunsteren WF, PH H. A fast SHAKE algorithm to solve distance constraint equations
for small molecules in molecular dynamics simulations. J Comput Chem. 22, 501-508 (2001).
Humphrey W, Dalke A, Schulten K. VMD: visual molecular dynamics. J Mol Graph. 14, 33-38 (1996).
Kokh DB, Doser B, Richter S, Ormersbach F, Cheng X, RC. W. A Workflow for Exploring Ligand
Dissociation from a Macromolecule: Efficient Random Acceleration Molecular Dynamics Simulation
and Interaction Fingerprints Analysis of Ligand Trajectories. J Chem Phys. 158, 125102 (2020). Code
deposited at https://github.com/HITS-MCM/MD-IFP.
Hubbard S, Thornton J. NACCESS V2.1.1 - Atomic Solvent Accessible Area Calculations. 1992-6.
(http://wolf.bms.umist.ac.uk/naccess/)
Lan J, Ge J, Yu J, Shan S, Zhou H, Fan S, et al. Structure of the SARS-CoV-2 spike receptor-binding
domain bound to the ACE2 receptor. Nature. 581, 215-220 (2020).
Andriuoli G, D’Altri, G, Galimberti G, Sarret M , Zoppetti G et al. Further Purification of Heparin
Reduces Its Bleeding Effects in the Mesenteric Vessels of Rats. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 556, 416–418
(1989).
Casu B, Moretti M, Oreste P, Riva A, Torri G, and Vercellotti JR. Glycosaminoglycans from pig
duodenum. Arzneim. Forsch. 30, 1889–1892 (1980).
Bitter T and Muir HM. A modified uronic acid carbazole reaction. Anal. Biochem. 4, 330–334 (1962)
Casu B, Diamantini G, Fedeli G, Mantovani M, Oreste P, et al. Retention of antilipemic activity by
periodate-oxidized non-anticoagulant heparins. Arzneim. Forsch. 36, 637–642 (1986)
Lindhal U, Backstrom G, Höök M, Thunberg L, Fransson LA, Linker A. Structure of the antithrombinbinding site in heparin. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 76, 3198–3202 (1979)
Oreste P, Zoppetti G. Semi-synthetic heparinoids. Handb Exp Pharmacol. 207, 403-22 (2012)
Mycroft-West CJ, Su D, Pagani I, Rudd TR, Elli S, Gandhi NS, et al. Heparin Inhibits Cellular Invasion
by SARS-CoV-2: Structural Dependence of the Interaction of the Spike S1 Receptor-Binding Domain
with Heparin. Thromb Haemost. 120, 1700-1715 (2020).

24

