Exploring the Drivers and Barriers to Uptake for Digital Contact Tracing
Andrew Tzer-Yeu Chen, Kimberly Thio
Koi Tū: The Centre for Informed Futures, The University of Auckland, New Zealand
Correspondence: andrew.chen@auckland.ac.nz
2 April 2021
Abstract
Digital contact tracing has been deployed as a public health intervention to help suppress the
spread of Covid-19 in many jurisdictions. However, most governments have struggled with
low uptake and participation rates, limiting the effectiveness of the tool. This paper
characterises a number of systems developed around the world, comparing the uptake rates
for systems with different technology, data architectures, and mandates. The paper then
introduces the MAST framework (motivation, access, skills, and trust), adapted from the digital
inclusion literature, to explore the drivers and barriers that influence people’s decisions to
participate or not in digital contact tracing systems. Finally, the paper discusses some
suggestions for policymakers on how to influence those drivers and barriers in order to
improve uptake rates. Examples from existing digital contact tracing systems are presented
throughout, although more empirical experimentation is required to support more concrete
conclusions on what works.
Keywords: digital contact tracing, covid-19, public health policy, behaviour change
1. Introduction
Many attempts have been made by public health authorities around the world to minimise the
spread of Covid-19 [1]. Contact tracing is a fundamental method of epidemiology to find people
(“contacts”) who may have been potentially exposed by a person who has tested positive for
an infectious disease such as Covid-19 (an “active case”) [2]. Those contacts can then be
ordered to isolate and separate themselves from the community, preventing them from
passing the disease further on [3]. This is based on two types of information – interactions
with individuals who were physically proximate to the active case, or the locations where the
active case and other individuals have been in order to infer interactions. The goal of contact
tracing is full coverage – to find all possibly infected people and cut off chains of transmission.
However, this can be challenging because manual processes rely on time-consuming
interview processes and fallible human memory. The relatively short incubation time, the high
infectiousness, and the global spread of Covid-19 make it difficult for manual contact tracing
to keep the reproduction rate down.
Digital contact tracing (DCT) introduces digital technologies into this process, with the aim of
improving the speed and completeness of contact tracing [4, 5, 6]. DCT can help identify and
alert contacts at large scales and in a semi-automated way, reducing the impact of human
capacity limitations. It is promoted in some containment models due to its effectiveness
alongside testing [7, 8], with some researchers arguing that it is imperative for containment to
take effect [9, 10]. However, theoretically simple in its logic and use, the adoption of this tool
has presented challenges, both ethically and in its effectiveness [11].
With a rapid response to the Covid-19 pandemic, there have been a large variety of tools
adopted, depending on the technological capacity of the jurisdiction, on the capacity of the
contact tracing system, on data privacy laws, and many other factors. What is common is that
most jurisdictions have found it difficult to achieve a high uptake or adoption rate, limiting the
potential effectiveness of this tool. As a relatively new tool, there is limited research on DCT –
a rapid Cochrane review found that prior to the Covid-19 pandemic, there were only six cohort
studies and six modelling studies about the use of DCT, all in relatively constrained settings
[12], so there is little evidence for policymakers to draw upon when thinking about how to best

use DCT. This paper seeks to conceptually explore the underlying drivers and barriers for why
individuals choose to participate or not in DCT through a literature review approach, and
delves into some policy suggestions for how to potentially influence those drivers and barriers
in order to improve uptake rates. While the introduction of vaccines may mark a transition to
a new phase of the Covid-19 pandemic, there may be lessons valuable for the use of DCT in
future pandemics.
2. Characteristics of Digital Contact Tracing
We separate the different approaches based on three primary characteristics: the technology
used, whether the system architecture is centralised or decentralised, and how mandatory the
use of the tool is. This Section highlights the diversity of approaches adopted in various
jurisdictions around the world, leading to differences in effectiveness. These primary
characteristics can then influence second-order characteristics, such as ease of integration
with public health systems, privacy, and equity. These characteristics may then influence
individuals’ choices on whether to participate in DCT or not, which are discussed in Section 3
and 4.
2.1 Technology
The three key parts of the technology used in DCT are the sensor technology (i.e. Bluetooth,
GPS, QR Codes via Cameras), the system hardware (i.e. smartphones, wearable devices like
smart watches or bracelets), and the software protocols that control and drive the tool
(including any algorithms used to interpret data and find contact matches). The most common
hardware approach globally relies on smartphones, with Singapore leading the use of
wearable devices [13]. There is more variation in the sensor technology, with some systems
using only one sensing technology, while there is a trend towards combining multiple
approaches in the same tool (e.g. Bluetooth-based approaches as well as QR code scanning
in the same app) [14].
Bluetooth-only DCT apps are the most common approach, such as in France (TousAntiCovid),
Australia (COVIDSafe App), and Germany (CoronaWarn). Bluetooth technology allows
smartphones and other compatible devices to keep a record of other devices that have been
in physical proximity, with an assumption that those devices are carried by individuals who
have therefore been in physical proximity with another person [15]. Therefore, when a person
tests positive for Covid-19, this list of devices can be used to identify that person’s contacts,
and they can be notified of the necessity to self-isolate and/or take a test [16]. Throughout this
paper, we interchangeably refer to people and devices as capable of being a “contact”.
Bluetooth also offers compatibility with a variety of hardware technologies. Although
smartphones are the most common, Singapore also has a wearable token that can be easily
carried by individuals without requiring any interaction with an app or smartphone system [17].
These tokens were deliberately made for people without smartphones or without the
skills/confidence to operate those smartphones, especially the more vulnerable elderly
population. The wearable tokens allow for better inclusion of individuals, increasing the uptake
rate of DCT.
Alternatively, the use of GPS on top of Bluetooth allows tracing of both the people around an
individual as well as the location of an individual. Although this approach is not as common as
Bluetooth-only approaches, some jurisdictions such as India (Aarogya Setu) and Norway
(Smittestop) use both. By using the GPS equipped on smartphones, relatively accurate
location estimates can be produced, allowing the software to determine when two phones
have been in physical proximity for enough time to be considered a contact [4]. The
combination of these two technologies can allow for more accurate tracing, and therefore more
accurate identification of contacts. Some tools also allow users to draw their paths on a map
after the fact, and the system then checks that against the GPS trails recorded for active cases
[18].

The use of QR codes is also gaining popularity for DCT globally. When using venue-based
QR code technology, buildings and public places (including public transportation) place QR
codes in visible places, such as at shopfronts or on the back of a bus seat. Individuals then
use cameras on their smartphones to scan the code when they enter a location. This approach
therefore provides location information for individuals, although at a less granular level than
GPS. New Zealand (NZ COVID Tracer) initially used QR codes only, until December 2020
when Bluetooth was introduced into the same app [19]. QR codes are also used in Singapore’s
SafeEntry app, which is intended to be used in conjunction with their TraceTogether Bluetoothbased system. More recently, each State in Australia has set up their own venue-based QR
code system that operates alongside the Federal Bluetooth-based CovidSafe app [20], and
the United Kingdom adopted and adapted New Zealand’s QR code approach alongside
Bluetooth [21].
QR Codes are also used in China, except that instead of codes being assigned to venues,
they are assigned to individuals. These are then scanned by guards at health checkpoints,
which queries a central database and returns a message indicating whether the user is healthy
(green), required to stay at home for 7 days (yellow), or needs to be quarantined (red) [22].
There is limited public information on how these colours are assigned to individuals, but it has
been reported that user location is one component used [23]. Israel has also adopted a similar
approach for vaccination certificates, although there are concerns of wide-spread forgery [24].
2.2 Data Architecture
A key characteristic is where the data in a DCT system should be stored. If a system is
centralised, then the user’s data will be generated, processed, and stored in a central server
maintained by public health authorities [25]. In a decentralised approach, the data is
generated, processed, and stored on each user’s own device, and only shared with public
health officials if necessary [26]. Centralised approaches have led to negative public opinion
due to privacy concerns stemming from the limits of trust in government. However, some
public health officials have argued that a centralised approach is necessary to allow them to
access information critical for contact tracing [27].
It has been argued that privacy can be protected in a centralised system by anonymising users
through the assignment of a unique ID code before their data is sent to the central database
[14]. Legislative protections on data use, such as those seen in Australia, can also help provide
confidence that the data collected will not be misused for other purposes [28]. Privacy
advocates tend to prefer a decentralised approach, because governments cannot easily
access a user’s list of contacts without their knowledge or permission. Instead, public health
authorities issue exposure notifications to each device, containing information about where
and when potential exposures occurred, or information about which ID numbers correspond
to individuals who were recently infectious, which are then compared against logs on the
device itself [14].
Systems that use a centralised approach include ROBERT, PEPP-PT, and BlueTrace (in its
initial approach) [25]. Some jurisdictions, such as Switzerland, initially backed a centralised
approach like PEPP-PT, but then subsequently shifted to a decentralised approach (DP-3T)
to help protect privacy [29]. Other examples of decentralised systems include TCN and the
Google-Apple Exposure Notification Framework (ENF), which is now the most commonly
adopted protocol around the world [25]. The Exposure Notification Framework takes
advantage of Google and Apple’s control of Android and iOS operating systems (which
collectively account for 99% of the world’s smartphones) to lock down data on the device and
prevent other apps from accessing Bluetooth contact logs.
2.3 Compulsion
Lastly, whether the DCT tool is made mandatory or voluntary by a government is another key
differentiating characteristic. Most jurisdictions have opted to make the app voluntary, relying
on the goodwill and initiative of the citizens, but a minority of jurisdictions have requirements

for some or all people to participate in DCT. In Turkey (Hayat Eve Sığar), it was initially only
mandatory for those who tested positive to use their app, but it is now mandatory for all of its
citizens [30]. India officially says their app (Aarogya Setu) is voluntary, but participation is
mandatory for citizens living in containment zones and for all government and private sector
employees, effectively making it mandatory for most people [31]. China (Alipay Health Code)
claims that they have not made their app mandatory, but it is required for access to enter many
buildings and public areas, making it effectively mandatory if people want to participate in
everyday society [23]. There have also been discussions of quasi-mandates or unenforced
mandates in some jurisdictions, where a government makes participation in DCT compulsory,
but does not exercise any enforcement action against individuals who do not comply. The
Google-Apple Exposure Notification Framework prohibits governments that use their
approach from making participation mandatory, and requires that users be given a genuine
opt-in choice [32].
2.4 Comparative Analysis of Uptake Rates
To help understand the impact of these three characteristics on the adoption of DCT tools, we
compiled a table of data from publicly available sources. In Table 1, we summarise tools from
14 jurisdictions, listing the sensor technology, hardware, and software protocols, whether the
tool is centralised or decentralised, whether the tool is mandatory or not, and an approximate
uptake rate. The uptake rate can be very difficult to determine as there are many ways to
interpret it. For example, do we include all people in the jurisdiction, or only adults? Do we
include all adults, or only those who have smartphones to begin with? If there are multiple
tools, will there be some people using more than one, or can we sum the participation numbers
together? Are there official statistics available from health agencies, or are we using less
reliable secondary sources? Because of these doubts, we provide an approximate range for
the uptake rate in each jurisdiction, based on desk research in December 2020 - February
2021. In most cases, we only have data on the total number of downloads, which is not
necessarily the same as the number of people who are actively using the tool and participating
on a daily basis.
2.5 The Importance of Uptake Rate
DCT is best viewed as an augmentation of manual-led contact tracing, rather than a
completely automated replacement. Scientific models have suggested how much of the
population might need to participate in a DCT system to collect enough information to be
effective in reducing the reproduction rate of Covid-19. One of the first pieces of modelling
work, by Ferretti et al, suggested that, if those over 70 were also shielded or protected by good
preventative measures, then a 56% uptake rate would be sufficient to bring the reproduction
rate below 1 and suppress the pandemic [10]. It is commonly misreported from this paper that
a 60% uptake rate is therefore required for DCT tools to be effective, when the model shows
that the protective effects could exist at every level of uptake, in that it would still reduce the
reproduction rate but could have less of an impact [33, 34]. Conversely, one model in New
Zealand recommends a higher uptake rate of at least 75%, with 90% of contacts recorded
through digital means, and accompanied by human-led contact tracing of an active case’s
contacts [35].
The Ferretti paper also suggests that DCT would need to be implemented alongside
social/physical distancing interventions [36]. Other models also show that a combination of
interventions, such as with quarantine and isolation, is required to reduce the spread of Covid19, rather than solely relying on DCT [37]. However, these models show that overall, the
uptake rate is the strongest determinant of the effectiveness of DCT in reducing the
reproduction rate. There is a notable distinction between contexts where the aim is to suppress
the number of daily cases below an acceptable level, and contexts where the aim is
elimination. A number of models suggest that for small outbreaks or scenarios with a low
number of cases, digital technology plays a larger role by improving the speed of contact

Jurisdictions
(DCT Tool)

Technology

Hardware

Protocols

Centralised / Decentralised Mandatory / Voluntary

Approximate
Uptake Rate

Qatar
(Ehteraz)

Bluetooth + GPS

Smartphones

Custom-made

Centralised

Mandatory (requires access to photos
+ must download or face prison for 3
years or max $55,000 fine)

85-95%

China (The Alipay
Health Code)

QR code

Smartphones

Alipay & Tencent

Unsure

Officially voluntary, effectively
mandatory (required access certain
public buildings or areas)

75-85%

Singapore
(TraceTogether and
SafeEntry)

Bluetooth + GPS +
QR codes

Smartphones + BlueTrace
Wearable tokens

Decentralised Bluetooth,
Centralised QR code scans

Generally voluntary, mandatory for
people attending high risk activities or
large events since Dec 2020

65-75%

New Zealand (NZ
Covid Tracer)

QR Codes, with
Bluetooth introduced
in Dec 2020

Smartphones

Google/Apple API

Decentralised

Voluntary

55-65%

Ireland (COVID
Tracker App)

Bluetooth

Smartphones

Google/Apple API

Decentralised

Voluntary

45-55%

Norway (Smittestopp) Bluetooth + GPS

Smartphones

Google/Apple API

Decentralised

Voluntary

45-55%

Iceland (Rakning C-19) GPS

Smartphones

Sensa

Decentralised

Voluntary

35-45%

Australia
(COVIDSafe App)

Bluetooth

Smartphones

Initially BlueTrace,
later Herald

Decentralised, State QR
code apps are Centralised

Voluntary

25-35%

Switzerland
(SwissCovid)

Bluetooth

Smartphones

Initially DP-3T, now Decentralised
Google/Apple API

Voluntary

25-35%

Germany
(CoronaWarn)

Bluetooth

Smartphones

Google/Apple API

Decentralised

Voluntary

25-35%

United Kingdom (NHS Bluetooth + QR
COVID-19)
Codes

Smartphones

Google/Apple API

Decentralised

Voluntary

25-35%

Uruguay
(CoronavirusUy)

Bluetooth

Smartphones

Google/Apple API

Decentralised

Voluntary

15-25%

India (Aarogya Setu)

Bluetooth + GPS

Smartphones

The Aarogya Setu Centralised
Data Access and
Knowledge Sharing
Protocol

Initially voluntary, effectively mandatory 15-25%
from April/May 2020 onwards

France
(TousAntiCovid)

Bluetooth

Smartphones

ROBERT

Centralised

Voluntary

5-15%

South Africa (COVID
Alert SA)

Bluetooth

Smartphones

Google/Apple API

Decentralised

Voluntary

0-10%

Table 1. Digital contact tracing tools in selected jurisdictions, comparing the approximate uptake rate achieved across different system characteristics, as of December 2020 - February 2021.

tracing and therefore cutting off chains of transmission faster [35, 37]. In that context, a high
uptake rate can allow a government to have more confidence in loosening lockdown
restrictions and relaxing social/physical distancing measures [38], predicated on the
assumption that contact tracing leads to effective isolation of infectious individuals. DCT may
just be one tool in pandemic response, but a high uptake rate could have a large contribution
towards managing the spread of Covid-19 on a medium-to-long-term basis [8].
Different jurisdictions have then used the modelling work to set different targets for uptake
rates, with Australia aiming for 40% of the population [32], Singapore aiming for at least 70%
of the population [33], and the United Kingdom aiming for 80% of smartphone owners [34]. As
Table 1 begins to show, the uptake rate falls below the 60-80% targets of many jurisdictions.
Some patterns show that the choices in system and policy design can have a strong influence
on the uptake rate of the app. Uptake rate is generally high when DCT is made mandatory,
yet most governments are reluctant due to fears of infringing on human rights and personal
autonomy [39]. Some jurisdictions may also have rights-based legislative frameworks that
prohibit making participation in contact tracing mandatory. This leads to questions of privacy
protection – even when the tool is voluntary, if the privacy protections are ambiguous, the
uptake rate will likely stay low [40, 41].
Technological issues can also have an impact on uptake rate. Concerns about error rates and
the potential for false positives or false negatives with Bluetooth technology may lead to
reduced confidence from potential users [16, 42, 43]. GPS-based approaches also attract
concern about accuracy indoors and in multi-level buildings [4]. GPS tracks could also be deanonymised, revealing personal information about a person’s activities or daily routines [14].
As QR codes require active participation, there are concerns that users may miss scanning
codes that turn out to be critical later on [44]. These considerations contribute towards
perceptions of unreliability, both in terms of effectiveness and protecting privacy.
The next section explores these ideas further and presents a framework for understanding the
factors that influence uptake rate by analysing the decisions that are made by individuals about
whether they participate in DCT or not.
3. Drivers and Barriers to Uptake
While DCT is a relatively new concept, there have been a few frameworks suggested already
in the literature to help evaluate DCT tools or understand individual decisions about
participation in DCT [40, 45, 46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51]. In this paper we borrow a framework from
a similar context, which appears to have originated from the UK Government’s Digital Inclusion
Strategy [52]. It views digital inclusion, a policy objective for every person to have equitable
opportunity to participate in society using digital technologies, as being built on four pillars:
access, capability, motivation, and trust. This framework has also been used by other
governments in their digital inclusion approaches [53], having developed over time from
viewing digital inclusion as an access-only problem (i.e. “just give people laptops”) to a more
sophisticated understanding of the challenges that face the digitally excluded. We see
similarities between those challenges and encouraging uptake of DCT tools because of the
digital nature of this health intervention, with similar drivers and barriers.
For the purposes of our discussion, we re-order and slightly rename the pillars into what we
have named the MAST framework: motivation, access, skills, and trust. This framing helps us
consider the factors in DCT, which has to target the entire population rather than just the
digitally excluded. While we use the MAST categories to structure this section, the drivers and
barriers are identified for DCT and may not overlap with those for digital inclusion. Obviously,
the factors do not neatly fit into only one category, and there are overlaps when considered in
context. We also note that these drivers and barriers affect each individual’s decision making
processes in different ways. The factors below were identified through discussion with
academics and civil society experts, as well as drawing upon (unpublished) opinion polling
and focus group work conducted by the New Zealand Ministry of Health on perceptions of
DCT.

3.1 Motivation
Do people want to use DCT? Are they motivated enough to spend the time and effort to
participate? This category looks at reasons that move a person to be more favourable or more
negative towards DCT generally, and therefore push them towards or away from participation.
We identify five main factors here:
3.1.1

Mandatory or Voluntary

As suggested in Section 2.4 and 2.5, whether the government mandates the use of their DCT
tool or relies on voluntary adoption appears to strongly influence the uptake. When made
mandatory, the fear of repercussions for not participating strongly motivates people to use the
tool. For example, in Qatar, their mandatory app (Ehteraz) must be downloaded and given
access to the user’s photos, otherwise the individual will face prison for up to 3 years or a fine
of up to QAR$55,000 [54]. People are required to show that they have the app before they
can access public transport or access supermarkets. Where the use of DCT is voluntary,
governments face a tougher challenge in having to motivate people through other drivers,
otherwise the default action for most people is to do nothing.
3.1.2

Changes in Perception of Risk

When there is a high and escalating number of cases in a jurisdiction, people may more easily
perceive Covid-19 as a high-risk disease, leading to greater motivation to use their
jurisdiction’s DCT tool to help protect themselves. This is sometimes analogously seen in the
sudden rush in downloads of emergency management apps after natural disasters [55]. The
opposite effect may occur when the number of cases in a jurisdiction is low, or reducing
steadily, as people feel that the risk is low and no action is required. This behaviour is well
characterised in the psychology literature as reactance [56] and has also been studied in the
Covid-19 context for face masks and vaccinations [57, 58].
Perceptions are relative and context-specific – an increase in the daily case count by one has
a much larger impact on the perception of risk in a jurisdiction that has had no cases for a
hundred days than in a jurisdiction where daily cases average in the thousands. This has been
clearly apparent in the use of New Zealand’s DCT app (NZ COVID Tracer), where usage
significantly increases whenever there are Covid-19 cases emerging in the community, and
then when there are no cases the usage reduces over time [59]. The effect of perception
changes can also evolve over time. People can also become fatigued as the pandemic
continues; hearing about COVID-19 cases and its continuous rise can have the effect of
normalising the high level of risk, consequently reducing people’s motivation to act and use
DCT [60]. However, there are dissenting views on the role of pandemic fatigue in influencing
behaviours [61, 62]. Research in Poland has also shown that the underlying ideology of
individuals (e.g. acceptance of authoritarianism) influences perceptions of personal threat and
risk, and therefore their acceptance of surveillance tools like DCT [63].
3.1.3

Changes in Perception of Effectiveness

Complementary to the perception of risk or danger, people may also evaluate whether DCT is
likely to be effective in mitigating that risk. If people believe that using DCT is effective, in that
it can reduce the likelihood that they or their community will be infected with Covid-19, or that
it could reduce the severity or duration of lockdowns, then it may increase their motivation to
participate. Conversely, a belief that the tool does not contribute to public health efforts, or that
the error rates are too significant, can reduce motivation to participate. Pandemic fatigue can
also reduce motivation, as people may perceive an ongoing growth in cases, despite
participation in DCT, as a failure of the tool to suppress the spread of the disease. In an
analysis of newspaper coverage across Germany, Austria, and Switzerland, the “functional
efficacy” of DCT tools was identified as a key topic of discussion, highlighting technical
limitations and their effect on adoption of DCT tools [64].

3.1.4

Convenience

The ease of use can have a significant effect on motivation, particularly in that poor usability
creates a barrier that individuals have to be motivated to overcome. In the iOS version of
Singapore’s TraceTogether app, the app must be constantly open in the foreground in order
to use the Bluetooth functionality, which prevents users from using their phone to do other
things and requires extra actions in comparison to other Bluetooth approaches [65]. Many
people also worry about whether using DCT apps may drain their phone batteries more quickly
or use a lot of mobile data, creating a barrier to participation even where this is only a
perception and not technical reality. For QR code-based systems, if venues do not have codes
available or codes are hard to find, then individuals are more likely to forget to scan – New
Zealand had to counter this by making it mandatory for businesses to display QR codes [66].
3.1.5

Bandwagon Effect

Most people have a cognitive bias that influences them to behave or think the same way that
they believe the crowd is [67]. Governments can make participation more visible to others,
thus encouraging them to follow suit. For example, scanning QR codes when entering a venue
forms a visual compliance that may be harder to find in systems that use passive methods like
Bluetooth or GPS. Reporting statistics that demonstrate people are participating may also
motivate others to join the crowd and avoid being left out. However, if people can see that the
participation rates are low, then they may continue to go with the crowd and stay away.
Alternatively, the theory of diffusion of innovation suggests that there will be innovators and
early adopters, and a critical mass needs to be sustained in order to reach the majority of
individuals [68].
3.2 Access
Can people get their hands on the necessary equipment to participate in DCT? Are the people
who are motivated and willing also able to afford a smartphone? Generally, there may be
higher uptake if a DCT tool is available for every motivated person to use, but there are
challenges in system design and path dependencies that can make this unachievable. This
category looks at the technological and physical barriers that people may face when trying to
participate in DCT, separated into three main categories:
3.2.1

Hardware

Most jurisdictions are relying on smartphone-based systems, but people in marginalised
groups may not own a smartphone. For example, the smartphone penetration rate in India is
only approximately 34% of the population [9], which excludes hundreds of millions of people
from participating in DCT.
There are also access challenges for those with older devices, such as incompatible operating
systems. For most of 2020, the iPhone 6, which was about 5-6 years old, did not have a new
enough operating system version to be compatible with the Apple/Google Exposure
Notification system [69]. People may also have older cell phones that serve their everyday
needs, without Bluetooth or GPS technology embedded inside the device. These barriers
exclude people by creating a monetary cost to participation by requiring individuals to
purchase newer devices in order to participate, when their existing devices may already serve
their other needs.
3.2.2

Infrastructure

Most DCT tools will require an internet connection at some point in the process, whether that
is to download an app or to communicate with government servers. While a number of
decentralised tools can operate without a live internet connection (e.g. Bluetooth-based
methods that store data locally on the device), they still need to check for exposure
notifications from central servers on a regular basis or the user won’t be notified of potential
crossovers with infectious people. This issue of infrastructure access is especially prominent

in poor or rural communities with low or no internet access. Even though the data requirements
might be quite low (a few MB per day), it still attracts a cost.
The system infrastructure should also be available for individuals to use. For example, a
venue-based QR code system requires those venues to have QR codes available for people
to scan. If the codes are not scannable because they are obscured or damaged, then people
may not be able to log that visit in the DCT tool [66]. Similarly, there have been suggestions
that venue-based Bluetooth beacons could be used to automatically log people’s visits [70],
which would also require that the beacons are available and functional.
3.2.3

Software

There may also be software compatibility issues. For example, some Android devices (e.g.
Huawei-branded smartphones) cannot access the Google Play app store due to a US trade
ban [71]. Many jurisdictions distribute their DCT apps officially through the Google Play and
Apple app stores, so users of those incompatible devices have to go to extra efforts to find
ways to download and install those apps. There have also been challenges with regional
restrictions on some apps – for example, some users were told by the app store that their
country’s DCT app was not available on their device because the device was registered as
being in another country, often because the user had previously lived in another country. This
again required extra effort to reconfigure the app store to identify the location of the user
correctly before they could participate in the DCT system.
There may also be challenges for users with disabilities, such as blind individuals who find it
difficult to scan QR codes [72]. People with disabilities may not carry the same types of devices
as others (i.e. disability assistive technologies that may not be running Android or iOS), so
unless suitable software is provided for those devices, this could also exclude these people
from participation. DCT tools that insufficiently consider the needs of people with disabilities
will therefore lower the maximum achievable uptake rate, and may also be excluding a part of
the population that is more vulnerable to Covid-19.
3.3 Skills
Do people know what DCT is and how it works? Do they know how to download an app or
scan a QR code? Is information available in an easy-to-understand format? In this category,
we discuss drivers and barriers about how difficult it can be for people to use DCT, depending
on whether they have the skills or confidence to participate.
3.3.1

Technology Skills and Confidence

The development of DCT is relatively recent, and the terminology used is still new to many
people. With a lack of familiarity comes a lack of confidence in their ability to use the DCT tool.
People may not understand or know that Bluetooth needs to be turned on all of the time to be
effective, or that permissions have to be enabled in multiple settings on their device. There
may also be more general technical skills challenges, such as some people not knowing how
to download and install an app, or not knowing how to interact with an app to turn DCT on. In
New Zealand, there were reports of people taking photos of QR codes with their smartphone
camera, rather than scanning the codes using the DCT app, meaning that they were not
contributing information to the DCT system [73]. Some people may have challenges scanning
QR codes reliably and quickly, and fear holding up other people waiting to enter a venue,
meaning that they give up. Confidence can play a large role in supporting or inhibiting a
person’s participation in DCT; people can be afraid of pushing the wrong buttons, and end up
choosing to do nothing than to do the wrong thing [74, 75].
Having sufficient technical knowledge can also help people understand how their efforts in
participating in DCT is effective towards suppressing Covid-19, which also impacts their
motivation and trust. Some interviews have revealed how people have outweighed the
concerns of privacy over the potential benefits of using digital contact tracing [76], and that
reasoning requires at least some understanding of technical concepts like data architectures.

Otherwise, people may default to their underlying values and ideology to fill the gap, which
may not align with the technical truth of how the system works. Conspiracy theories around
DCT stem, in part, from a lack of understanding, or too much complexity, leading to people
looking for simpler explanations. This intersects with the level of trust people put in the
government and experts who are explaining how these tools work.
Interestingly, a study have found that older populations and people with compromised medical
conditions are more likely to participate in DCT than younger populations [46], likely because
older populations are more vulnerable to Covid-19 and have a higher perception of risk.
Anecdotal evidence suggests that older people may have the motivation to use the app, but
are challenged by not necessarily having the access or skills to do so effectively, while younger
people may have access and skills, but lack the motivation.
3.3.2

Literacy Skills

Technical literacy isn’t the only type of skill that matters. So much of DCT is new to people,
and it has to be accompanied by strong communications plans and messaging campaigns
that explain the concepts. Active participation in DCT may require people to follow instructions,
which rely on the user’s general literacy [52]. People who do not have sufficient literacy in the
primary language of the jurisdiction they reside in may therefore find it difficult to participate.
This could include migrants, speakers of indigenous languages in colonised areas, and less
educated people, particularly where technical vocabulary is used to explain how the system
works. Users may be presented with complicated privacy statements that are hard to
understand and evaluate. These factors also affect a person’s confidence in using the app,
and therefore their motivation.
3.4 Trust
Will the system owners be able to conduct surveillance and know where I’ve been, or know
who I’ve been talking to? Do I believe that the system does what its developers say it does?
Trust allows people to feel confident that their participation in DCT is safe. This category looks
at the relationships individuals have with the various entities associated with DCT, as well as
the system itself.
3.4.1

Trust in Government

People form a relationship with their governments based on a variety of factors including
political ideology, media reporting of political affairs, and past experiences with government
agencies. That relationship informs whether individuals trust the government to handle their
data sensitively and for the stated purposes only. DCT systems in general infringe on people’s
privacy, but this is balanced against the need to manage the public health crisis of the
pandemic. Therefore, trust plays an important role in helping individuals determine whether
they will accept some loss in privacy, or if they are worried that there may be more, hidden
losses of privacy that have not been presented to them.
This threat manifested into reality in Singapore, when a Minister confirmed that police were
able to access DCT records, despite previous assurances that this data would only be used
for public health purposes. This then resulted in disappointment from the public, with many
claiming that they deleted the DCT app from their phones [77, 78]. A study found that when
people have confidence in their government’s policies and practices, they are more open to
disclosing information for contact tracing [79]. However, it can be difficult to separate out
confidence in a government’s response to Covid-19, and confidence in the public sector more
generally – the first has a short-term effect and is more volatile, while the second has a longerterm underlying effect.
Trust in government is a very personal value, and the factors that influence this vary
significantly from one person to another. For example, ethnic minorities or indigenous peoples
with personal conflicts from systemic injustices may have less trust in government [80, 81].
These relationships cannot be easily improved through advertising campaigns, and require

longer-term commitments and corrections from governments. On the other hand, state
surveillance has already been normalised in some jurisdictions, which lowers the impact of
additional surveillance on trust [82].

3.4.2

Trust in Corporations

Similar to trust in government, people form relationships with the corporations that they interact
with throughout their lives. Apple and Google have developed a large role in DCT through their
Exposure Notification Framework that has been adopted by many jurisdictions. The track
record of the big tech companies and their treatment of user data has been controversial in
recent years, with calls for more regulation and protections for consumers [83, 84]. Some
people have therefore viewed Apple and Google’s involvement in DCT with suspicion, worried
that they are harvesting data for commercial purposes or to build user profiles, regardless of
the technical reality. This is despite Apple and Google viewing themselves as protectors of
individual privacy against government overreach during the pandemic, setting restrictions on
the use of their protocol that have been criticised by some public health agencies and
governments [85, 86]. Again, this is a relationship that cannot be easily improved through
generic and impersonal marketing, and governments that want apprehensive citizens to use
an Apple/Google protocol face a difficult challenge.
3.4.3

Data Architecture

Whether a DCT system is centralised or decentralised has an impact on whether individuals
trust the system itself, separate to their relationships with the system designers or owners.
The architecture choice determines where data rests, particularly for individuals who do not
have COVID-19 and therefore do not pose any risk to the rest of the public. Some jurisdictions,
such as Germany, initially had a centralised architecture but then switched to decentralised in
order to maintain user privacy and build trust with the public [87]. While a centralised approach
could make it easier for health officials to act by providing more information for manual-led
contact tracing, decentralised approaches can help give individuals more confidence that their
data cannot be improperly used by the government because the data is not held by the
government by default.
3.4.4

Security Concerns

This primarily relates to concerns of misuse of data by third parties, such as hackers. The
digital revolution has brought with it many data breaches and security attacks, which can
reduce people’s confidence in the security of digital systems. With a very rapid response
required for the pandemic, some may worry that best practice processes may have been
poorly implemented or skipped during development. In Qatar, a security flaw in the Ehteraz
app meant that sensitive personal information of over a million users placed at risk [88]. This
threatens confidence, especially in populations that are less accustomed to using technology
and are worried about scams and data breaches, thereby creating another barrier to
participation in DCT.
3.5 Personal Agency
The drivers and barriers identified thus far interact in a complex way, ultimately leading to a
decision to participate or not in DCT. We observe a similarity between many of these factors
in a dependency on individual control. The feeling of a loss in control or agency is common
during a pandemic, where the disease is widespread and individual-level actions do not seem
to have much of an impact. This context influences the sense of control that may be gained
when an individual believes that their choices and actions can create a change in the direction
they want. Large-scale surveys in China found that a sense of control is associated with a high
perceived knowledge of Covid-19 [89]. Giving individuals knowledge about DCT so that they
can make their own decision around participating can help give them agency in a chaotic

world. Particularly where they perceive that DCT is effective, it can help people feel that they
are doing something to combat the pandemic. This approach may have benefits beyond
collecting information for DCT – it may help improve morale and happiness [90, 91, 92], which
can help with overall compliance with public health measures and therefore help keep the
overall spread of the disease under control.
4. Influencing the Drivers and Barriers
As the previous section has shown, the uptake rate of DCT is not just determined by the design
of the tool itself – there are internal and external factors that can also influence an individual’s
decision to participate. As DCT is a relatively new pandemic management tool, there has been
limited research on how to increase uptake, with most governments relying on advertising
alone. This section draws upon literature from psychology, public policy, human-computer
interaction, marketing, and other related disciplines to propose ideas for policies and
interventions that could increase uptake. Throughout this section, we have provided
references to the relevant literature for the reader to find further detail and expertise. These
suggestions are not comprehensive, and their appropriateness will depend on the context of
each jurisdiction. There is no one-size-fits-all DCT approach, and there is no one-size-fits-all
set of policy interventions to improve DCT uptake.
4.1 Behaviour
4.1.1 Changing Behaviour Norms
The limited research on DCT has thus far suggested that the strongest predictor for uptake
rate lies in building habits into people’s behaviours [46, 93]. By helping people change their
routine to the “new normal”, when DCT is adopted as a part of everyday life alongside other
habits like using hand sanitiser and social distancing, motivation barriers are reduced and
uptake rates naturally increase. Changing norms at a population level is non-trivial, and relies
on many of the other policies and interventions mentioned in this section – but the objective
of these efforts needs to point towards long-term behaviour change, not short-term spikes
driven by fear or anxiety. While nudge theory has become popular in behavioural economics
and public policy communities, there are limitations in its use for changing behaviours with
urgency, especially in complex scenarios where nudges oversimplify the problem [94, 95].
4.1.2

Goal Setting through Transparency

If the government clearly communicates targets for the uptake rate, and releases statistics on
the current uptake rate, then people can see if there is any progress. This can help contribute
towards the bandwagon effect by helping show that others are participating, motivating them
to join the crowd. Anxiety and enthusiasm can drive behaviour change when people can see
how they are, or are not, contributing towards a shared goal [96]. Conversely, there have been
examples of governments hiding participation statistics, claiming that it could risk public safety,
which has led to assumptions that the participation rates are low [97]. Related to this is
demonstrating the effectiveness of DCT by providing statistics and sharing use cases of where
the tool has tangibly assisted contact tracing efforts and helped reduce the spread of the
disease.
4.2 Policy
4.2.1 Participation Incentives
Financial rewards could be given for those participating in DCT systems in order to provide
motivation. A study has shown that even small incentives of a few dollars or euros can increase
uptake rate, with a stronger effect than providing information alone [46]. The same study found
that younger people are more responsive to incentives. The study also suggests that instead
of paying cash for downloading an app, in-app credits may be an option, particularly as it may
be easier to administer where ongoing use is to be encouraged, as long as the credits are

redeemable at places that people are interested in. Lotteries have also been suggested to
reduce the cost of providing incentives while still attracting individuals to participate.
However, incentive schemes require careful design to avoid incentivising excess mobility,
where people move more than necessary, just to receive more reward. This may be
counterproductive to suppression goals if there are active cases in the community, as extra
mobility could mean more exposure events and therefore make containing an outbreak harder.
Conversely, when there are no cases in an area the harms of incentivising mobility may be
lower. Another incentive option may be through the use of discounts, such as a 5% meal
discount for demonstrating participation in DCT, which provides a benefit for participation but
is less likely to encourage excess movement. It is important to note that incentives need to be
equitable – all people need to feel that they have an equal opportunity to earn incentives.
4.2.2

Strengthen Privacy

Stronger privacy measures can have a large influence on the drivers in the trust category. A
study conducted across five countries showed that the main factors hindering uptake are
related to trust [98]. It is therefore critical for government to demonstrate a robust commitment
to privacy. It is important to note that people’s trust or mistrust tends to relate to their
experiences with the public sector as a whole, rather than with specific agencies or
departments. Beyond assurances from senior officials, privacy can also be strengthened
through legislative protections for DCT data. In Australia, penalties have been introduced for
misuse of DCT data, also prohibiting employers from coercing their employees to share DCT
data, and requiring that data be held onshore [99]. DCT systems can also be re-designed to
collect the minimal amount of necessary and relevant data, and ensuring that data will be
deleted at a specified time or condition in the future when it is no longer needed.
4.2.3

Access Subsidies

Governments can reduce barriers to accessing the necessary hardware and infrastructure for
DCT by providing monetary subsidies. Subsidies could be 100%, making the device free –
wearable devices such as the TraceTogether Tokens used in Singapore have been distributed
in this way [100]. However, if the government issues its own devices, then the population may
view it with suspicion if they cannot inspect the device or know for sure how it works. Making
the design open and transparent, or allowing civil society technologists to inspect the design,
can assist with building trust. Alternatively, people can be given choices to acquire devices
from commercial vendors. For example, a phone discount voucher could allow individuals to
purchase a new device, while giving them the flexibility to decide what device would be most
suitable for their needs and budget.
For DCT systems that require an active internet connection, zero-rating is a technical tool that
allows specific applications to have free mobile internet access [101]. In South Africa, zerorating has been used to help those without internet access participate, although there have
been some issues in the downloading process [102]. Improving access to the necessary
hardware and infrastructure can help improve uptake rates for DCT.
4.2.4

Mandates and Compulsion

As seen in jurisdictions like Qatar, China, and Singapore, mandatory participation in DCT can
strongly motivate people and lead to a high uptake rate. However, mandates to use DCT are
often practically unenforceable, because the system runs autonomously in the background of
a smartphone and it would be time consuming and resource intensive for businesses or police
to check. DCT systems that have very visible components, such as showing a wearable device
or showing a QR code scan log, may be easier to enforce. A quasi-mandate (e.g. mandatory
but unenforced) may be better than a purely voluntary approach, as this sends a clear signal
and can help drive behaviour change. However, this may still attract criticism from “freedom”
idealogues opposed to such overt government behaviour manipulation. Large businesses and
venues (e.g. supermarkets, concerts and festivals) could be required to assign staff at

entrances to strongly encourage people to demonstrate use of DCT before entering premises,
with leniency and empathy for those who cannot participate.
A mandate without consideration for the digitally excluded may also lead to more problems for
the government. In India, as the Aarogya Setu app became compulsory, the majority of the
population did not have access to smartphones and could not access the app [103]. This has
led to criticism that the DCT tool is not effective and contributed towards reduced trust in
government. A mandate can generate a backlash in public opinion from people who cannot
participate, who feel anxious about not being able to protect themselves, and left out by their
government. A further challenge for governments is that those using the Apple/Google
Exposure Notification Framework are unable to make use of their DCT tool mandatory, as
Apple and Google’s rules prohibit compulsion and they have indicated that they will disable
access to the framework within infringing jurisdictions [104].
4.2.5

Policy Timing

As identified in 3.1.2, changes in perception of risk can be a strong motivator for people to
take action to protect themselves, potentially driving them towards participation in DCT.
Therefore, if a government has policy changes, it may be useful to time those interventions
around changes in risk levels, taking advantage of heightened motivation to mitigate risk [105,
106]. For example, changes could be introduced at a time when populations are coming out
of lockdown, or when more infectious strains of the virus have developed, so that they are
front of mind for individuals. However, governments may be criticised for sitting on good ideas
and policies and not implementing them earlier, so we view this as a weaker option for
policymakers.
4.3 Marketing
4.3.1 Advertising
Most governments have developed strong communications plans over the last year to provide
information to their populations about Covid-19, and integrating messaging about DCT is
important for developing awareness. In advertising the use of DCT, one recommendation is to
focus on making it relatable to people [107]. For example, highlighting stories of how DCT can
or has helped everyday people in the community may be more effective than simply telling
people to “download the app”. Some studies have found that relatable media, particularly on
social media, can have a stronger influence on younger populations [108, 109].
Advertisements by influencers or well-known experts can also help generate more empathy
to influence uptake [110]. In Taiwan, official messaging embraced the use of humour and
memes, aiming to make true information more easily shareable than misinformation [111]. The
literature is less clear on the value of collectivist messaging, and its suitability likely depends
on the context of each culture and jurisdiction [112, 113, 114]. Emotional messaging, both
prosocial and threatening, has been shown to be effective at changing behaviours in the
context of Covid-19 [115, 116]. Governments should be aware of the limitations of one-tomany advertising, in that it favours short messages that can make it difficult to explain nuance
or build a relationship with the public. Using a variety of messaging pushes targeted at different
communities, particularly more vulnerable or marginalised groups, can help inform all people
and avoid exclusion.
4.3.2

Education and Providing Information

Beyond advertising, the government can fund initiatives that push information more
comprehensively to the population. Going into communities to help train people for DCT
participation can be beneficial for increasing uptake, which can draw upon existing systems
for digital literacy training [110]. Rather than posting TraceTogether Tokens to individuals,
Singapore set up collection points so that staff could explain how the technology worked and
what exactly people needed to do to use it [117]. Anchoring DCT in the Covid-19 context can
also be important for ensuring that individuals appropriately perceive the level of risk and the
necessity to participate in such training [118].

Governments also have to fight misinformation and disinformation, particularly on social media
platforms. The privacy perception of an individual matters more in their decision making
process than the reality. Providing a compilation of verified information through official
channels can provide a reference point for individuals seeking more information. However,
waiting for individuals to find this information is insufficient, and governments may need to be
more proactive and pre-bunk predictable ideas that may arise [119].
4.4 Technology
4.4.1 User-centred Design
A well-designed tool with good usability is more likely to be adopted by individuals than tools
that are designed without user experience in mind [120]. Users are increasingly prioritising
convenience in their decision making, and unnecessary skills barriers will harm uptake [121,
122]. User testing is an important process for ensuring that the bias of system developers and
designers does not lead to unintended consequences with real users. Software projects, even
when delivered successfully and on time, can fail if the users are dissatisfied [123].
Software design is often an iterative process, and so if improvements are made to DCT tools
after launch, these changes should also be clearly communicated to the public who may have
had poor experiences with the tool in the past and given up. Improving the DCT system to
incorporate best practice seen in other jurisdictions, and adapting as we learn more about the
disease, is critical. Ensuring that DCT tools are designed in a way that is available to as wide
an audience as possible is also important. This may include supporting multiple languages,
compatibility for assistive technology devices, or including haptic feedback for the visuallyimpaired and/or auditory-impaired.
There has also been some suggestion of improving motivation by gamifying DCT tools,
particularly those that require active participation (e.g. scanning QR codes at venues) [39,
124]. There could be non-financial rewards like congratulatory messages, badges and
achievements for certain types of participation, and celebrating streaks for participating on
consecutive days. However, gamification carries many of the same risks as the financial
incentives described in 4.2.1, and has to be carefully designed to avoid incentivising excess
mobility. There may also be concerns that providing psychological incentive can “crowd out”
moral motivations for participation in the DCT system [125]. Simply providing feedback to
users that the system is working as intended, and that data is being logged correctly or that
matches are being made, can help influence the perception that the DCT system is effective
and therefore worth continuing to participate in.
There have also been suggestions that systems that require active participation (e.g. scanning
QR codes or confirming ongoing participation in the DCT system) could use period reminders
through smartphone notifications to prompt users to participate. However, these should also
be considered carefully as having too many notifications can lead to fatigue, where the
messages are ignored by users (or even blocked from appearing).
4.4.2

Transparency and Security

Beyond the choice of centralised or decentralised data architectures, providing transparency
on system design can be helpful for providing confidence to individuals that the DCT system
does what the government claims it does, building trust. Making the code open-source means
that it is released online to be publicly accessible, where it can be inspected by others and
potentially improved upon by the community as well [126]. Independent security and privacy
audits should also be conducted by trusted entities [127], and providing better data sovereignty
could also improve confidence and therefore trust [128, 129]. Governments should
acknowledge the limitations of the technology, and give confidence that appropriate oversight
and accountability mechanisms are in place.
5. Conclusions

Digital contact tracing has a role to play in responding to infectious disease pandemics like
COVID-19. The participation or uptake rate is a key determinant in the effectiveness of these
tools. As a new tool that has seen very limited use prior to this pandemic, there is a lack of
published literature about how to use DCT, or the most effective ways to encourage
participation. By exploring how DCT has been implemented in practice, and seeing the variety
of different technologies and approaches in each jurisdiction, we can now start to see some
trends and patterns for successful and unsuccessful introduction of DCT. Through a literature
review approach, this paper has used a Motivation, Access, Skills, and Trust framework to
help explore the drivers and barriers to uptake for DCT tools. We also look into tangible policy
actions and interventions that government could take to influence these drivers and barriers,
borrowing from the literature in related areas. More experimental research into effective policy
design is required to build an empirical evidence base for DCT. Measuring perceptions of
demographic groups and marginalised communities may also help with understanding how
the drivers and barriers differ between those groups. We hope that this work may help
policymakers with their thinking around how to build engagement and participation with the
public in DCT, both for Covid-19 and for future pandemics. The use of the MAST framework
in this paper indicates that there may also be broader opportunities for learning from the
deployment of DCT for policy efforts towards digital inclusion.
References
[1]

P. Deb, D. Furceri, J. D. Ostry and N. Tawk, “The effect of containment measures on the COVID-19 pandemic,” 5 June
2020. [Online]. Available: https://voxeu.org/article/effect-containment-measures-covid-19-pandemic.

[2]

R. A. Kleinman and C. Merkel, “Digital contact tracing for COVID-19,” Canadian Medical Association Journal, vol. 192,
no. 24, pp. E653-E656, 2020.

[3]

J. A. M. López, B. A. García, P. Bentkowski, L. Bioglio, F. Pinotti, P.-Y. Boëlle, A. Barrat, V. Colizza and C. Poletto,
“Anatomy of digital contact tracing: role of age, transmission setting, adoption and case detection,” medRxiv, 2020.

[4]

A. Trivedi and D. Vasisht, “Digital contact tracing: technologies, shortcomings, and the path forward,” ACM SIGCOMM
Computer Communication Review, vol. 50, no. 4, pp. 75-81, 2020.

[5]

R. Jalabneh, H. Zehra Syed, S. Pillai, E. Hoque Apu, M. R. Hussein, R. Kabir, S. Y. Arafat and M. A. Azim Majumder,
“Use of Mobile Phone Apps for Contact Tracing to Control the COVID-19 Pandemic: A Literature Review,” SSRN, 2020.

[6]

S. Jacob and J. Lawarée, “The adoption of contact tracing applications of COVID-19 by European governments,” Policy
Design and Practice, 2020.

[7]

M. E. Kretzschmar, G. Rozhnova, M. C. Bootsma, M. v. Boven, J. H. v. d. Wijgert and M. J. Bonten, “Impact of delays on
effectiveness of contact tracing strategies for COVID-19: a modelling study,” The Lancet Public Health, vol. 5, no. 8, pp.
e452-e459, 2020.

[8]

K. Sun and C. Viboud, “Impact of contact tracing on SARS-CoV-2 transmission,” The Lancet Infectious Diseases, vol.
20, no. 8, pp. 876-877, 2020.

[9]

C. R. MacIntyre, “Case isolation, contact tracing, and physical distancing are pillars of COVID-19 pandemic control, not
optional choices,” The Lancet Infectious Diseases, vol. 20, no. 10, pp. P1105-1106, 2020.

[10] L. Ferretti, C. Wymant, M. Kendall, L. Zhao, A. Nurtay, L. Abeler-Dörner, M. Parker, D. Bonsall and C. Fraser,
“Quantifying SARS-CoV-2 transmission suggests epidemic control with digital contact tracing,” Science, vol. 368, no.
6491, 2020.
[11] F. Lucivero, N. Hallowell, S. Johnson, B. Prainsack, G. Samuel and T. Sharon, “COVID-19 and Contact Tracing Apps:
Ethical Challenges for a Social Experiment on a Global Scale,” Journal of Bioethical Inquiry, vol. 17, pp. 835-839, 2020.
[12] A. Anglemyer, T. H. Moore, L. Parker, T. Chambers, A. Grady, K. Chiu, M. Parry, M. Wilczynska, E. Flemyng and L.
Bero, “Digital contact tracing technologies in epidemics: a rapid review,” Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews,
vol. 8, 2020.
[13] BBC News, “Singapore distributes Covid contact-tracing tokens,” 14 September 2020.
[14] D. Tokmetzis and M. Meaker, “We were told technology would end Covid-19 lockdowns, but the truth is there’s no app
for that,” The Correspondent, 1 June 2020.
[15] M. v. Kleek, “COVID-19: What is digital contact tracing, how does it work, and will it succeed?,” Human Centred
Computing, Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford, 21 May 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://hcc.cs.ox.ac.uk/news/2020/05/21/C19-Digital-Contact-Tracing.html.
[16] A. Alkhatib, “We need to talk about digital contact tracing,” ACM Interactions, vol. 27, no. 4, pp. 84-89, 2020.

[17] Z. Huang, H. Guo, H. Y. Lim and A. Chow, “Awareness, acceptance, and adoption of the national digital contact tracing
tool post COVID-19 lockdown among visitors to a public hospital in Singapore,” Clinical Microbiology and Infection,
2021.
[18] M. Luccio, “Using contact tracing and GPS to fight spread of COVID-19,” GPS World, 3 June 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://www.gpsworld.com/using-contact-tracing-and-gps-to-fight-spread-of-covid-19/.
[19] Ministry of Health, “NZ COVID Tracer app,” 25 February 2021. [Online]. Available: https://www.health.govt.nz/ourwork/diseases-and-conditions/covid-19-novel-coronavirus/covid-19-resources-and-tools/nz-covid-tracer-app. [Accessed
5 March 2021].
[20] K. McDonald, “Most states and territories now live with QR code check-in apps for contact tracing,” Pulse IT, 2
December 2020.
[21] J. Taylor, “QR codes: how an old technology could help contact tracers keep the pandemic in check,” The Guardian, 30
October 2020.
[22] P. Mozur, R. Zhong and A. Krolik, “In Coronavirus Fight, China Gives Citizens a Color Code, With Red Flags,” The New
York Times, 1 March 2020.
[23] Norton Rose Fulbright, “Contact tracing apps in China,” 11 May 2020.
[24] The Times of Israel, “Thousands reportedly attempt to obtain easily forged vaccinated certificate,” 18 February 2021.
[25] M. Ciucci and F. Gouardères, “National COVID-19 contact tracing apps,” European Parliament, May 2020.
[26] S. Rossello and P. Dewitte, “Anonymization by decentralization? The case of COVID-19 contact tracing apps,”
European Law Blog, 25 May 2020.
[27] S. Lazar and M. Sheel, “Contact tracing apps are vital tools in the fight against coronavirus. But who decides how they
work?,” The Conversation, 12 May 2020.
[28] K. Buchanan, “Australia: Privacy Protections Applicable to COVID-19 Contact Tracing App Enacted,” Library of
Congress, 29 May 2020.
[29] Swissinfo.ch, “Swiss pull out of European contact tracing App project,” 18 April 2020.
[30] Norton Rose Fulbright, “Contact Tracing Apps in Turkey,” 21 January 2021.
[31] P. H. O'Neill, “India is forcing people to use its covid app, unlike any other democracy,” MIT Technology Review, 7 May
2020.
[32] P. H. O'Neill, “Google and Apple ban location tracking in their contact tracing apps,” MIT Technology Review, 4 May
2020.
[33] P. H. O'Neill, “No, coronavirus apps don't need 60% adoption to be effective,” MIT Technology Review, 5 June 2020.
[34] J. Loughran, “Even low uptake of contact-tracing apps found to save lives and reduce infection,” IET Engineering &
Technology, 4 September 2020.
[35] M. Plank, A. James, A. Lustig, N. Steyn, R. Binny and S. Hendy, “Potential reduction in transmission of COVID-19 by
digital contact,” medRxiv, 26 August 2020.
[36] University of Oxford, “Digital contact tracing can slow or even stop coronavirus transmission and ease us out of
lockdown,” 16 April 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.research.ox.ac.uk/Article/2020-04-16-digital-contact-tracingcan-slow-or-even-stop-coronavirus-transmission-and-ease-us-out-of-lockdown.
[37] A. J. Kucharski, P. Klepac, A. J. K. Conlan, S. M. Kissler, M. L. Tang, H. Fry, J. R. Gog and W. J. Edmunds,
“Effectiveness of isolation, testing, contact tracing, and physical distancing on reducing transmission of SARS-CoV-2 in
different settings: a mathematical modelling study,” The Lancet Infectious Diseases, vol. 20, no. 10, pp. P1151-1160,
2020.
[38] S. Jeffries, N. French, C. Gilkison, G. Graham, V. Hope, J. Marshall, C. McElnay, A. McNeill, P. Muellner, S. Paine, N.
Prasad, J. Scott, J. Sherwood, L. Yang and P. Priest, “COVID-19 in New Zealand and the impact of the national
response: a descriptive epidemiological study,” The Lancet Public Health, vol. 5, no. 11, pp. E612-623, 2020.
[39] M. Klenk and H. Duijf, “Ethics of digital contact tracing and COVID-19: who is (not) free to go?,” Ethics and Information
Technology, 2020.
[40] O. Megnin-Viggars, P. Carter, G. J. Melendez-Torres, D. Weston and G. J. Rubin, “Facilitators and barriers to
engagement with contact tracing during infectious disease outbreaks: A rapid review of the evidence,” PLOS One, vol.
15, no. 10, p. e0241473, 2020.
[41] L. Bradford, M. Aboy and K. Liddell, “COVID-19 contact tracing apps: a stress test for privacy, the GDPR, and data
protection regimes,” Journal of Law and the Biosciences, vol. 7, no. 1, 2020.
[42] L. Baumgärtner, A. Dmitrienko, B. Freisleben, A. Gruler, J. Höchst, J. Kühlberg, M. Mezini, R. Mitev, M. Miettinen, A.
Muhamedagic, T. D. Nguyen, A. Penning, D. F. Pustelnik, F. Roos, A.-R. Sadeghi, M. Schwarz and C. Uhl, “Mind the
GAP: Security & Privacy Risks of Contact Tracing Apps,” arXiv, 2020.
[43] Q. Zhao, H. Wen, Z. Lin, D. Xuan and N. Shroff, “On the Accuracy of Measured Proximity of Bluetooth-Based Contact
Tracing Apps,” in International Conference on Security and Privacy in Communication Systems, 2020.
[44] N. Blake-Persen, “2.1 million download Covid Tracer app, but who is signing in?,” RNZ Checkpoint, 2 September 2020.
[45] S. Sharma, G. Singh, R. Sharma, P. Jones, S. Kraus and Y. K. Dwivedi, “Digital Health Innovation: Exploring Adoption
of COVID-19 Digital Contact Tracing Apps,” IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management, 2020.
[46] S. Munzert, P. Selb, A. Gohdes, L. F. Stoetzer and W. Lowe, “Tracking and promoting the usage of a COVID-19 contact
tracing app,” Nature Human Behaviour, vol. 5, pp. 247-255, 2021.

[47] R. Vinuesa, A. Theodorou, M. Battaglini and V. Dignum, “A socio-technical framework for digital contact tracing,” Results
in Engineering, vol. 8, 2020.
[48] A. Lodders and J. M. Paterson, “Scrutinising COVIDSafe: Frameworks for evaluating digital contact tracing
technologies,” Alternative Law Journal, vol. 45, no. 3, pp. 153-161, 2020.
[49] M. Bano, D. Zowghi and C. Arora, “Requirements, Politics, or Individualism: What Drives the Success of COVID-19
Contact-Tracing Apps?,” IEEE Software, vol. 38, no. 1, 2021.
[50] J. P. Kahn (ed), Digital Contact Tracing for Pandemic Response, Johns Hopkins University Press, 2020.
[51] S. Ribeiro-Navarrete, J. R. Saura and D. Palacios-Marqués, “Towards a new era of mass data collection: Assessing
pandemic surveillance technologies to preserve user privacy,” Technological Forecasting and Social Change, vol. 167,
p. 120681, 2021.
[52] UK Government Digital Service, “Government Digital Inclusion Strategy,” 2014.
[53] New Zealand Government, “The Digital Inclusion Blueprint - Te Mahere mō te Whakaurunga Matihiko,” 2019.
[54] Al Jazeera, “Qatar makes COVID-19 app mandatory, experts question efficiency,” 26 May 2020.
[55] T. D. Kirsch, R. Circh, R. A. Bissell and M. Goldfeder, “"Just-in-time” personal preparedness: downloads and usage
patterns of the American Red Cross Hurricane Application during Hurricane Sandy,” Disaster Medicine and Public
Health Preparedness, vol. 10, no. 5, p. 762, 2016.
[56] R. A. Wicklund, Freedom and reactance, Lawrence Erlbaum, 1974.
[57] P. Sprengholz, L. Felgendreff, R. Böhm and C. Betsch, “Vaccination Policy Reactance: Predictors, Consequences, and
Countermeasures,” PsyArXiv, 2021.
[58] S. Taylor and G. J. G. Asmundson, “Negative attitudes about facemasks during the COVID-19 pandemic: The dual
importance of perceived ineffectiveness and psychological reactance,” PLOS One, vol. 16, no. 2, p. e0246317, 2021.
[59] M. Daalder, “Beyond lockdown, scanning doesn’t stick,” Newsroom, 3 March 2021.
[60] World Health Organisation (Regional Office for Europe), “Pandemic Fatigue: Reinvigorating the public to prevent
COVID-19,” World Health Organisation, Copenhagen, 2020.
[61] S. Michie, R. West and N. Harvey, “The concept of “fatigue” in tackling covid-19,” British Medical Journal, vol. 371, 2020.
[62] S. Reicher and J. Drury, “Pandemic fatigue? How adherence to covid-19 regulations has been misrepresented and why
it matters,” British Medical Journal, vol. 372, 2021.
[63] A. Wnuk, T. Oleksy and D. Maison, “The acceptance of Covid-19 tracking technologies: The role of perceived threat,
lack of control, and ideological beliefs,” PLoS One, vol. 15, no. 9, p. e0238973, 2020.
[64] J. Amann, J. Sleigh and E. Vayena, “Digital contact-tracing during the Covid-19 pandemic: An analysis of newspaper
coverage in Germany, Austria, and Switzerland,” Plos One, vol. 16, no. 2, p. e0246524, 2021.
[65] J. Bay, J. Kek, A. Tan, C. S. Hau, L. Yongquan, J. Tan and T. A. Quy, “BlueTrace: A privacy-preserving protocol for
community-driven contact tracing across borders,” Government Technology Agency, Singapore, 2020.
[66] A. T.-Y. Chen, “How fragmentation can undermine the public health response to Covid-19,” ACM Interactions, 2021.
[67] H. A. Simon, “Bandwagon and Underdog Effects and the Possibility of Election Predictions,” The Public Opinion
Quarterly, vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 245-253, 1954.
[68] E. Rogers, Diffusion of Innovations (5th ed), Simon and Schuster, 2003.
[69] R. Albergotti, “Apple and Google launch coronavirus exposure software,” The Washington Post, 21 May 2020.
[70] A. Kehmati, G. Ramachandra and B. Krishnamachari, “CONTAIN: Privacy-oriented Contact Tracing Protocols for
Epidemics,” arXiv, 2020.
[71] L. Kelion, “Huawei seeks to get its own version of NHS Covid-19 app,” BBC News, 22 October 2020.
[72] P. Pennington, “Covid-19 tracing app 'unusable' for blind and those with low vision,” Radio New Zealand, 26 May 2020.
[73] V. Tapaleao, “Covid 19 coronavirus tracer app scans: Grandad's phone full of QR code photos,” New Zealand Herald,
28 January 2021.
[74] B. Knowles and V. L. Hanson, “The wisdom of older technology (non)users,” Communications of the ACM, vol. 61, no. 3,
p. 72, 2018.
[75] M. Lips, E. Eppel, B. Craig and S. Struthers, “Understanding, explaining, and self-evaluating digital inclusion and
exclusion among senior citizens,” Victoria University of Wellington, 2020.
[76] S. Nortes, L. S. Battaglia and S. Borowiec, “Generation app: How do different generations feel about sharing personal
data in order to tackle Covid-19? We ask people in South Korea, Spain and Italy,” Index on Censorship, vol. 49, no. 2,
pp. 18-23, 2020.
[77] A. Illmer, “Singapore reveals Covid privacy data available to police,” BBC News, 5 January 2021.
[78] H. Baharudin, “Govt reveals 350 people requested for their contact tracing data to be deleted,” The Straits Times, 4
February 2021.
[79] S. Chen, D. Waseem, Z. Xia, K. T. Tran, Y. Li and J. Yao, “To disclose or to falsify: The effects of cognitive trust and
affective trust on customer cooperation in contact tracing,” International Journal of Hospitality Management, vol. 94,
2021.
[80] K. Esmonde, “For contact tracing to work, public health authorities must regain the trust of Black communities,” Vox, 23
June 2020.

[81] L.-M. McLachlan, “Covid-19: Contact tracing app may discriminate against Māori,” Radio New Zealand, 7 May 2020.
[82] Z. Su, X. Xu and X. Cao, “What Explains Popular Support for Government Surveillance in China?,” (under review), 2020.
[83] S. Zuboff, “Big other: surveillance capitalism and the prospects of an information civilization,” Journal of Information
Technology, vol. 30, pp. 75-89, 2015.
[84] Harvard Kennedy School, “The value and challenges of regulating Big Tech,” 16 December 2020.
[85] T. Sharon, “Blind-sided by privacy? Digital contact tracing, the Apple/Google API and big tech’s newfound role as global
health policy makers,” Ethics and Information Technology, 2020.
[86] R. Albergotti and D. Harwell, “Apple and Google are building a virus-tracking system, health officials say it will be
practically useless,” The Washington Post, 16 May 2020.
[87] M. Schwartz, “Germany Backs Away From Compiling Coronavirus Contacts In A Central Database,” National Public
Radio (NPR), 27 April 2020.
[88] Amnesty International, “Qatar: Contact tracing app security flaw exposed sensitive personal details of more than one
million,” 26 May 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.amnesty.org/en/latest/news/2020/05/qatar-covid19-contacttracing-app-security-flaw/.
[89] H. Yang and J. Ma, “How an Epidemic Outbreak Impacts Happiness: Factors that Worsen (vs. Protect) Emotional Wellbeing during the Coronavirus Pandemic,” Psychiatry Research, vol. 289, 2020.
[90] C. Wilkinson, J. Briggs, K. Salt, J. Vines and E. Flynn, “In participatory budgeting we trust? Fairness, tactics and
(in)accessibility in participatory governance,” Local Government Studies, vol. 45, no. 6, pp. 1001-1020, 2019.
[91] J. Church, D. Saunders, M. Wanke, R. Pong, C. Spooner and M. Dorgan, “Citizen Participation in Health DecisionMaking: Past Experience and Future Prospects,” Journal of Public Health Policy, vol. 23, pp. 12-32, 2002.
[92] J. Newig, “Does public participation in environmental decisions lead to improved environmental quality?: towards an
analytical framework,” International Journal of Sustainability Communication, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 51-71, 2007.
[93] Y. E. Saw, E. Y.-Q. Tan, J. S. Liu and J. C. Liu, “Predicting Public Uptake of Digital Contact Tracing During the COVID19 Pandemic: Results From a Nationwide Survey in Singapore,” Journal of Medical Internet Research, vol. 23, no. 2, p.
e24730, 2021.
[94] O. Mont, M. Lehner and E. Heiskanen, “Nudging a tool for sustainable behaviour?,” The Swedish Environmental
Protection Agency, 2017.
[95] B. Ewert, “Moving beyond the obsession with nudging individual behaviour: Towards a broader understanding of
Behavioural Public Policy,” Public Policy and Administration, vol. 35, no. 3, pp. 337-360, 2019.
[96] S. B. Stolwijk, A. R. T. Schuck and C. H. d. Vreese, “How Anxiety and Enthusiasm Help Explain the Bandwagon Effect,”
International Journal of Public Opinion Research, vol. 29, no. 4, pp. 554-574, 2016.
[97] J. Taylor, “Releasing Covidsafe app usage numbers could risk public safety, government claims,” The Guardian, 19
September 2020.
[98] S. Altmann, L. Milsom, H. Zillessen, R. Blasone, F. Gerdon, R. Bach, F. Kreuter, D. Nosenzo, S. Toussaert and J.
Abeler, “Acceptability of App-Based Contact Tracing for COVID-19: Cross-Country Survey Study,” JMIR mHealth and
uHealth, vol. 8, no. 8, p. e19857, 2020.
[99] G. Greenleaf and K. Kemp, “Australia's COVIDSafe Experiment, Phase III: Legislation for Trust in Contact Tracing,”
UNSW Law Research, 2020.
[100] J. Lim, “How to collect your free TraceTogether token: 5 things to know about the device,” The Straits Times, 10
September 2020.
[101] D. Brake, “Mobile zero rating: the economics and innovation behind free data,” in Net Neutrality Reloaded: Zero Rating,
Specialised Service, Ad Blocking and Traffic Management, Internet Governance Forum, 2016, pp. 132-154.
[102] A. Comninos, D. Johnson and A. Gillwald, “Has South Africa’s COVID Alert contact tracing app been zero-rated?,”
Research ICT Africa, 25 September 2020. [Online]. Available: https://researchictafrica.net/2020/09/25/has-south-africascovid-alert-app-been-zero-rated/.
[103] A. Johari, “Aarogya Setu: Has the world’s most downloaded contact-tracing app actually been effective?,” Scroll.in, 17
November 2020.
[104] R. Ranisch, N. Nijsingh, A. Ballantyne, A. v. Bergen, A. Buyx, O. Friedrich, T. Hendl, G. Marckmann, C. Munthe and V.
Wild, “Digital contact tracing and exposure notification: ethical guidance for trustworthy pandemic management,” Ethics
and Information Technology, 2020.
[105] S. Dryhurst, C. R. Schneider, J. Kerr, A. L. J. Freeman, G. Recchia, A. M. v. d. Bles, D. Spiegelhalter and S. v. d.
Linden, “Risk perceptions of COVID-19 around the world,” Journal of Risk Research, vol. 23, no. 7-8, pp. 994-1006,
2020.
[106] S. v. d. Linden, “The social-psychological determinants of climate change risk perceptions: Towards a comprehensive
model,” Journal of Environmental Psychology, vol. 41, pp. 112-124, 2015.
[107] UK House of Commons, Public Administration and Constitutional Affairs Committee, “Oral Evidence: Data Transparency
and Accountability: Covid-19, HC 803,” 2021.
[108] A. Bleakley, A. B. Jordan, M. Hennessy, K. Glanz, A. Strasser and S. Vaala, “Do Emotional Appeals in Public Service
Advertisements Influence Adolescents’ Intention to Reduce Consumption of Sugar-Sweetened Beverages?,” Journal of
Health Communication, vol. 20, no. 8, pp. 938-948, 2015.

[109] S. Tabassum, M. G. Khwaja and U. Zaman, “Can Narrative Advertisement and eWOM Influence Generation Z Purchase
Intentions?,” MDPI Information, vol. 11, no. 12, p. 545, 2020.
[110] J.-H. Cheah, H. Ting, T. H. Cham and M. A. Memon, “The effect of selfie promotion and celebrity endorsed
advertisement on decision-making processes: A model comparison,” Internet Research, vol. 29, no. 3, pp. 552-577,
2019.
[111] K. Nabben, “Hack the Pandemic: Lessons from How the Taiwan Government Embraced the Hacker Mindset to Embrace
Digital Infrastructure and Subvert COVID-19,” SSRN, 2020.
[112] C. Airhihenbuwa, J. Iwelunmor, D. Munodawafa, C. L. Ford, T. Oni, C. Agyemang, C. Mota, O. B. Ikuomola, L. Simbayi,
M. P. Fallah, Z. Qian, B. Makinwa, C. Niang and I. Okosun, “Culture Matters in Communicating the Global Response to
COVID-19,” Preventing Chronic Disease, vol. 17, p. E60, 2020.
[113] R. Pei, D. Cosme, M. Andres, B. Mattan and E. Falk, “Cultural influence on COVID-19 cognitions and growth speed: the
role of cultural collectivism,” PsyArXiv, 2020.
[114] J. H. Liu, “Majority world successes and European and American failure to contain COVID‐19: Cultural collectivism and
global leadership,” Asian Journal of Social Psychology, 2021.
[115] J. Heffner, M.-L. Vives and O. FeldmanHall, “Emotional responses to prosocial messages increase willingness to selfisolate during the COVID-19 pandemic,” Personality and Individual Differences, vol. 170, p. 110420, 2021.
[116] W. Ishihara, K. Sum, J. Lee and D. Nathan-Roberts, “Flunking COVID out of Schools; a Systematic Review of NonPharmaceutical Interventions to Minimize Novel Coronavirus-2 in Educational Settings,” International Journal of Public
Administration, 2021.
[117] K. Chee, “TraceTogether tokens can be collected at any of 108 CCs from Feb 1; over 2.6m tokens collected so far,” The
Straits Times, 29 January 2021.
[118] P. P. Nedungadi, R. Menon, G. Gutjahr, L. Erickson and R. Raman, “Towards an inclusive digital literacy framework for
digital India,” Education + Training, vol. 60, no. 6, pp. 516-528, 2018.
[119] M. Motta, S. Sylvester, T. Callaghan and K. L. Trujillo, “Encouraging COVID-19 Vaccine Uptake through Effective Health
Communication,” SocArXiv, 2020.
[120] J. Gulliksen, B. Göransson, I. Boivie, S. Blomkvist, J. Persson and Å. Cajander, “Key principles for user-centred systems
design,” Behaviour & Information Technology, vol. 22, no. 6, pp. 397-409, 2003.
[121] RTTNews, “Convenience is Priority for Consumers: Survey,” Nasdaq, 15 January 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://www.nasdaq.com/articles/convenience-is-priority-for-consumers%3A-survey-2020-01-15.
[122] J. E. Collier and S. E. Kimes, “Only If It Is Convenient: Understanding How Convenience Influences Self-Service
Technology Evaluation,” Journal of Service Research, vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 39-51, 2012.
[123] M. Bano, D. Zowghi and F. d. Rimini, “User involvement in software development: The good, the bad, and the ugly,”
IEEE Software, vol. 35, no. 6, pp. 8-11, 2018.
[124] L. Maccari and V. Cagno, “Do we need a contact tracing app?,” Computer Communications, vol. 166, pp. 9-18, 2021.
[125] S. Bowles, The Moral Economy: Why Good Incentives Are No Substitute for Good Citizens, New Haven: Yale University
Press, 2016.
[126] F. Alarid-Escudero, E. Krijkamp, P. Pechlivanoglou, H. Jalal, S.-Y. Z. Kao, A. Yang and E. A. Enns, “A Need for Change!
A Coding Framework for Improving Transparency in Decision Modeling,” Pharmacoeconomics, vol. 37, no. 11, pp. 13291339, 2019.
[127] T. Nam, “Understanding the gap between perceived threats to and preparedness for cybersecurity,” Technology in
Society, vol. 58, 2019.
[128] M. Walter and M. Suina, “Indigenous data, indigenous methodologies and indigenous data sovereignty,” International
Journal of Social Research Methodology, vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 233-243, 2019.
[129] T. Kukutai and J. Taylor, Indigenous Data Sovereignty: Toward an agenda, ANU Press, 2016.
[130] J. Taylor, “Covidsafe app: how Australia’s coronavirus contact tracing app works, what it does, downloads and
problems,” The Guardian, 15 May 2020.
[131] H. Baharudin, “TraceTogether programme hits 70% participation among Singapore residents,” The Straits Times, 24
December 2020.
[132] L. Kelion, “Coronavirus: NHS contact tracing app to target 80% of smartphone users,” BBC News, 16 April 2020.
[133] J. M. Pearson, A. Pearson and D. Green, “https://www.nasdaq.com/articles/convenience-is-priority-for-consumers%3Asurvey-2020-01-15,” Management Research News, vol. 30, no. 11, pp. 816-828, 2007.

Dr. Andrew Tzer-Yeu Chen is a Research Fellow with Koi Tū: The Centre for Informed
Futures, a transdisciplinary think-tank at The University of Auckland, New Zealand. His
background is in computer engineering, investigating computer vision surveillance and
privacy. His research interests now sit at the intersection of digital technologies and society.
Kimberly Thio was a summer research student with Koi Tū: The Centre for Informed Futures.
She is studying psychology and global studies at The University of Auckland, New Zealand.

