Location Data and COVID-19 Contact Tracing:
How Data Privacy Regulations and Cell Service
Providers Work In Tandem

arXiv:2103.14155v2 [cs.CR] 7 Apr 2021

Callie Monroe
University of Denver
Email: Callie.Monroe@du.edu

Faiza Tazi
University of Denver
Email: Faiza.tazi@du.edu

Abstract—Governments, Healthcare, and Private Organizations in the global scale have been using digital tracking to
keep COVID-19 outbreaks under control. Although this method
could limit pandemic contagion, it raises significant concerns
about user privacy. Known as “Contact Tracing Apps” ,
these mobile applications are facilitated by Cellphone Service
Providers (CSPs), who enable the spatial and temporal realtime user tracking. Accordingly, it might be speculated that
CSPs collect information violating the privacy policies such as
GDPR, CCPA, and others. To further clarify, we conducted an
in-depth analysis comparing privacy legislations with the realworld practices adapted by CSPs. We found that three of the
regulations (GDPR, COPPA, and CCPA) analyzed defined mobile
location data as private information, and two (T-Mobile US, Boost
Mobile) of the five CSPs that were analyzed did not comply with
the COPPA regulation. Our results are crucial in view of the
threat these violations represent, especially when it comes to
children’s data. As such proper security and privacy auditing
is necessary to curtail such violations. We conclude by providing
actionable recommendations to address concerns and provide
privacy-preserving monitoring of the COVID-19 spread through
the contact tracing applications.
Index Terms—Mobile Location Data, Privacy Legislation, Privacy Regulations, COVID-19, Contact Tracing Applications, Data
Privacy.

I. I NTRODUCTION
The security and privacy of personal data are paramount for
users in today’s age of technology. Thus, understanding users’
data privacy, especially for the technological devices they use,
such as smartwatches, mobile devices, wearable Internet of
Things (IoT) devices, and smart tablets, is very critical [1],
[2], [3], [4], [5]. These devices have infiltrated everyone’s
daily lives, especially when it comes to mobile devices and
are used for multiple day-to-day activities [6]. According to
the GSMA Intelligence report in November of 2019, 91%
of United States consumers own a Smartphone device [7].
These smartphone devices are connected through Cellphone

Workshop on Usable Security and Privacy (USEC) 2021
7 May 2021, Auckland, New Zealand
ISBN 1-891562-73-8
https://dx.doi.org/10.14722/usec.2021.23010
www.ndss-symposium.org

Sanchari Das
University of Denver
Email: Sanchari.Das@du.edu

Service Providers (CSPs) who enable the network connections
to communicate and provide the internet connectivity to utilize
several smartphone features [8]. Given the nature of modern
inter-connected communication, these CSPs obtain a lot of
personal data from different types of interactions [9]. Thus,
providing transparency, and ensuring user trust in the privacy
policies implemented by these CSPs are of the utmost importance [10]. The recent class-action lawsuit against CSPs for
selling user historic movement records to third parties further
proves the criticality of such situation [11].
In addition to the existing privacy concerns, another global
phenomenon that has shaken everyone due to the stay-at-home
order is COVID-19 [12], [13], [14], [15]. COVID-19 and stayat-home orders remain a global issue for over a year [16],
where governments and private entities on a national and
international level have suggested the use of Mobile Location
Data (MLD) for COVID-19 contact tracing efforts through
mobile applications [17]. COVID-19 contact tracing applications indicate any proximity to COVID-19 affected patients or
track the symptoms of the patients [18]. These applications are
often self-reported or track the user’s location automatically
and apply Machine Learning [19], Graph Theory and Modeling [20], or Network Theory [21] to determine the spread of
the disease, given the nature of how the pandemic spreads [22].
These applications are often used by organizations to indicate
the patients’ location or those who came in contact with
them to detect and quarantine any possibility of the pandemic
spread. Although this method could limit contagion, it raises
significant concerns about user privacy [23].
In addition to the user privacy concerns, there are several ethical concerns over the application, data collection,
and algorithms of these applications [23], [24], [25]. These
concerns are primarily related to the precise user tracking of
the mobile location data, specifically individual identification
through location profiling, and being tracked by third party
organizations [10], [26]. In such regards, data regulations and
privacy legislation come handy for auditing such location
access pertaining to correct application [27], [28]. Currently,
there are few departments in the United States dedicated
explicitly to data protection, and those that do exist are at the
state level applying only to that state’s residents [29]. Among
these are the California Consumer Privacy Act (CCPA) and

the New York SHIELD Act (Stop Hacks and Improve Electronic Data Security). Additionally, the United States protects
children’s data rights through the Children’s Online Privacy
Protection Act of 1998 (COPPA) and the health data rights
of insured patients under the Health Insurance Portability and
Accountability Act (HIPAA). These acts are then enforced by
the Federal Trade Commission, whose mission is to protect
consumers and competitors
Outside of the US, on a global scale, the General Data
Protection Regulation (GDPR) of the European Union, implemented in 2018, is now used as a basis for many companies’
privacy policies [30]. According to the GDPR, MLD is defined
as personal data and thus protected under all articles which
address the privacy and security of personal data [31]. The
GDPR applies to any company servicing European citizens and
residents; as such, CSPs should be following the regulations
provided by the GDPR for European citizens, if not all
their users, despite the location of the EU citizens on which
they are based. Another national legislation, the Lei Geral
de Proteção de Dados Pessoai(LGPD), is enforced in Brazil
and for its citizens worldwide [32]. The LGPD was heavily
influenced by the GDPR and enforces similar regulations
regarding MLD [33]. Based on these regulations set forth by
both international, national, and state-level legislation, it is
claimed that data collected by CSPs should be “specified,
explicit, and legitimate” , processed with the assurance of
security [34], protected appropriately [35], and all recipients
of the data must be disclosed [36]. Thus, it is crucial to
understand what data privacy regulations exist today and how
CSPs collect, process, protect, and distribute any MLD with
our focus on the contact-tracing mobile applications.
In the wake of several privacy legislation such as the GDPR,
COPPA, and various other laws in the United States and
worldwide, we focused our research on exploring the MLD
privacy and security access by CSPs during the COVID-19
pandemic. Such location access is reflected in the COVID-19
contact tracing application usage [37], [38]. Subsequently, this
paper aims to answer the following research questions:
•

•
•

•

•

CSPs comply with these regulations, especially when it comes
to MLDs. We found that two of the five CSPs did not comply
with the COPPA regulation; however, all the CSPs complied
with the data subject’s right to know the extent of data being
collected.
This study seeks to contribute to a foundational understanding of how data protection regulations and CSP privacy
policies interact today, by analyzing the laws and policies
related to mobile location data. This paper provides the basis
of building guidelines for addressing contact tracing efforts
through the use of MLD while respecting existing regulations
and addressing the users’ privacy concerns.
II. R ELATED W ORKS
In this section, we briefly discuss previous mobile location
data protection related research. We then provide an overview
of the prior literary work while reviewing current and proposed privacy frameworks, and detail an overarching privacy
frameworks for location data while emphasizing on MLDspecific frameworks. Given our research focus, we finally
outline current works discussing COVID-19 contact tracing
efforts using mobile location data.
A. Data privacy frameworks
Data privacy frameworks are often the best way for organizations to determine how to handle sensitive data most
appropriately. From data collection to data handling, utilizing
a privacy framework is an integral part of constructing a
thorough, transparent, and user-focused privacy policy, as
well as judging a privacy policy’s effectiveness. Along these
lines, Liu proposes a framework for location data privacy
founded on location anonymization where they looked into
several security- and privacy-focused algorithms such as Kanonymity [45]. A similar concept was introduced by Beresford and Stajano [46] with a location privacy protecting
framework, based on frequently changing pseudonyms that
allow users to be anonymous. They detailed the effectiveness
of providing noise into the data set to avoid identification of
users based on precise location and user data.
Similarly, Hoepman introduced privacy design strategies [47], this notion used the existing data protection legislation as a starting point to determine 8 privacy design strategies
namely, Minimise, Hide, Separate, Aggregate, Inform,
Control, Enforce and Demonstrate. The proposed generalized
framework is used for both designing a privacy respecting
system as well as evaluating the privacy impact of existing
systems. In a different approach, Ahamed et al. proposes the
elimination of third party location anonymizers through the use
of probabilistic anonymity that is calculated based on historic
Wi-Fi Access Point data [48]. The purpose being keeping
data from being passed between parties unnecessarily, and
instead approach the storage of location data only as Wi-Fi
access point locations. In theory this will allow data subjects
to maintain anonymity from the get-go. On the other hand, Lee
et al. suggests using a location privacy preserving mechanism
which receives actual location events and outputs observations

RQ1: Are CSP’s privacy policies compliant with current
data protection legislation?
RQ2: In what ways are MLDs collected by the CSPs?
RQ3: In what ways are MLDs being processed and
protected by the CSPs?
RQ4: Which entities are provided the user MLD data
collected by CSPs? This RQ particularly wants to explore
whether third parties are granted access and if yes, then
why and how?
RQ5: Do the current policies stated by CSPs align with
COVID-19 contact tracing efforts?

In order to do so, we conducted a detailed analysis of six
privacy-focused regulations namely: GDPR [39], LGPD [40],
CCPA [41], SHIELD [42], COPPA [43], and HIPAA [44],
as well as privacy policies of the five largest American
CSPs: Verizon Wireless, AT&T Mobility, T-Mobile US, Boost
Mobile, and U.S. Cellular. After that, we evaluated how the

2

or manipulations of this event [49], the goal being to maintain
data obfuscation even after an adversary has gained access to
the data, allowing for anonymity.
Shaham et al. also introduced a privacy framework that
is specific to spatiotemporal trajectory datasets. Dubbed the
Machine Learning Anonymization (MLA) [50], this framework uses machine learning algorithms for clustering the
trajectories, to preserve the privacy of location data. While
all these frameworks provide novel solutions to creating and
upholding anonymous MLD, ultimately we were inspired from
Cavoukian’s privacy framework [51] the most, since it was
designed to evaluate the privacy impacts of IT systems. Furthermore, the proposed principles of this system are pertinent
to our study of CSPs privacy policies.
1) Proactive not Reactive; Preventative not Remedial: This
is meant to anticipate and thwart privacy infractions
before the tentative occurrences of the privacy breaches.
2) Privacy as the Default: They mention that it is highly
effective to have privacy built into the system by default
as a critical component.
3) Privacy Embedded into Design: By discussing the
design of tools and technologies Cavoukian mentions,
“Privacy by Design is embedded into the design and
architecture of IT systems and business practices” .
4) Full Functionality - Positive-Sum, not Zero-Sum: While
discussing about the functionality, usability, and privacy
trade-offs Cavoukian writes, “Privacy by Design seeks
to accommodate all legitimate interests and objectives
in a positive-sum “winwin” manner, not through a
dated, zero-sum approach, where unnecessary trade-offs
are made”
5) End-to-End Security - Life-cycle Protection: In addition
to the privacy, it is also important to understand security
of these IT systems, tools, and technologies. Though
colloquially many might mention that privacy and security are inversely proportional, this is not true. Thus, in
this framework, the author details on the development of
security measures throughout the life-cycle of the data
which the users want protected.
6) Visibility and Transparency: While discussing on some
auditing protocols, the author says that organizations
should be “operating according to the stated promises
and objectives” . This is also critical from the legal
perspectives.
7) Respect for User Privacy: This is extremely critical
from multiple vectors, such as the user side, ethical
and legal perspective, as well as software development
perspective. Thus, Cavoukian discusses, that “Above
all, Privacy by Design requires architects and operators
to keep the interests of the individual uppermost by
offering such measures as strong privacy defaults”

implications on MLD. There are few previous studies that look
at legislation specifically as it impacts MLD, and the ones that
do exist focus exclusively on the GDPR. Georgiadou et al. look
at the implementations of the GDPR and proceed to analyse
location privacy at the individual and cultural levels through
the eyes of an individual data subject "Alice" [52]. from
the perspective of the African Union’s relationship with data
protection legislation where they propose that data protection
rights should be afforded to all people, not just those of the
EU or the US.
In their paper, Reyes et al. analyze mobile applications’
compliance with COPPA, including a geo-location analysis of
these apps. The paper examines the general conformity of android applications with the COPPA regulation [43]. Similarly
Apthorpe et al. and Streiff et al. evaluated the compliance of
Internet of Things (IoT) toys’ privacy norms with COPPA [53],
[54]. Finally, Liccardy et al. show the difficulties developers
are facing to comply with the general rules of COPPA [55].
While these papers, review the general rules of COPPA, we
were unable to find a paper that specifically targets location
data as it relates to the COPPA regulation.
Ataei et al. examine the GDPR legislation in depth to
understand how certain aspects can be implemented using
user interfaces(UI), and analyze how best to comply with
GDPR regulation [56]. Consequently, Ataei et al. defined a
set of guidelines for Location Based Service(LBS) design and
development, with the goal of making it easier for developers
to create systems that are GDPR compliant. These guidelines
fall into three categories: notice, consent, and control groups.
Both Georgiadou et al. [52] Ataei et al. [56] and studies
provide a thorough analysis of GDPR policy as it affects
location. Georgiadou et al. [52] uses this analysis to encourage
privacy legislation developments in the African Union while
Ataei et al. [56] uses the analysis of the GDPR to help produce
usable UI. While the GDPR is a world leading legislation, it
limits both studies to a legislation that is enforceable only in
the European union and for EU citizens.
As discussed, the majority of these studies primarily focus
on the GDPR which can be limiting when addressing policy
issues in countries outside of the EU. While we will take
a look at the GDPR legislation, we will also look at four
additional pieces of legislation that are enforced in the US
as well as a legislation that is enforced in Brazil. The GDPR
provides an excellent framework for data privacy regulation,
however, it is critical to look at multiple legislation to get a
thorough understanding of how data privacy is protected on
the state level in the United States as well as the national
level across the world. Thus, for our analysis we have looked
into legislation which are applied in state-wide, national,
and international perspective including SHIELD ACT, CCPA,
HIPAA, COPPA, LGPD, and GDPR.

B. Analysis of location privacy laws

C. COVID-19 contact tracing efforts with MLD

Since a large portion of this study focuses on the analysis
of data privacy legislation, it is important to understand how
these regulations have previously been analysed for their

Since the emergence of COVID-19, controlling and stopping
the spread of the virus has been the primary concern of many
government officials, medical professionals, and media outlets

3

in the US and across the globe. Among these discussions,
a prevalent topic has been the use of mobile location data to
help develop accurate contact tracing methods through mobilebased applications. This proposal brings forth privacy concerns
both from the perspective of users as well as CSPs in what
data is tracked [57], how the data is collected and analyzed
[58], and whether there is any third party access involved [59].
However, since the notion of using MLD to track infection and
more specifically COVID-19 cases, is a novel concept, the
studies that have been published about this topic are sparse.
Along these concepts, Egan discusses concerns of companies adhering to their stated privacy policies as many companies began to offer up their MLD in aggregate, anonymized
forms [60]. However, Egan states that not all claims of
data anonymization are true or sufficient enough to deter all
adversaries. Egan presents the FTC’s case against Facebook
Inc. and Cambridge Analytica LLC as prime example of data
misuse despite policy claims [60]. Egan also addresses how
a private company in New York, Unacast, has already began
using “anonymous device location data” to develop a “Social
Distancing Scoreboard” in order to assess social distancing
within a certain region [60]. Unacast claims that all MLD
being used is anonymous and comes in an aggregate form [61].
On the other hand, Oliver et al. provide a more thorough
look at how MLD can help create preventative measures
during COVID-19, why it hasn’t seen widespread implementation, and how widespread implementation can become possible [62].They determine that MLD is best used to understand
which individuals have been infected and who they came in
contact with, how effective implementing mobility and social
restrictions are, and how lifting restrictions affect behavior.
However, despite these advantageous uses, there remains the
issues of overwhelming demand for government officials to
make these critical decisions, lack of data access through
CSPs, and public concerns on data privacy, protection, and the
civil liberties of the public [62]. Finally, Oliver et al. suggest
the use of mixed teams of government officials, CSPs, and
technology companies to tackle the issue of MLD for COVID19 preventative measures.
Oliver et al. and Egan provide thorough overviews of the
implementations and concerns of using MLD for COVID19 contact tracing, despite this being a very new field. Our
study furthers the contribution to this developing field by
determining if COVID-19 contact tracing efforts are within
the realm of current CSP’s privacy policies and if there have
been any recent updates to privacy policies that would make
COVID-19 contact tracing possible. We will also address
necessary adjustments to policy if any, that will help achieve
legislation compliant COVID-19 contact tracing applications.

and SHIELD) and five CSPs’ privacy policies (Verizon Wireless, AT&T Mobility, T-Mobile US, Boost Mobile, and U.S.
Cellular).
During each initial read through, all pertinent information
regarding the usage, processing, and protection of mobile
location data (MLD), was noted. With regard to the legislation,
this information included MLD definitions under the law
and the protections afforded to MLD. As for CSP privacy
policies, this included information on how MLD is collected,
processed, protected, and distributed. After the initial data
collection, a second read through was performed to insure no
vital information was missed. Finally, a thematic analysis was
conducted. An inductive approach was adopted, by developing
common themes found amongst every data privacy regulation
and CSP privacy policy.
To get a better understanding of the regulations that are
being enforced in the United States and across the world in
general, six privacy regulatory laws were analyzed, two of
which are at the state level in the United States and four at
the Global level.
1) State level:
• California: CCPA [63]
• New York: SHIELD Act [64]
2) Global level:
• EU: GDPR [65]
• Brazil: LGPD [32]
• United States: COPPA [66]
• United States: HIPAA [67]
We then analyzed privacy policies of the CSPs. Five of
the largest CSPs in the United States were selected, based
on the number of data subjects each of them has: Verizon
Wireless [68], AT&T Mobility [69], T-Mobile US [70],
Boost Mobile [71] and U.S. Cellular [72]. We collected the
official policies of the six legislations as mentioned above.
Thereafter, we focused on individual sections, which detail
mobile data and/or user location data. For example GDPR
while discussing Location access data management mentions
that: “The data subject should have the right not to be subject
to a decision... in particular to analyse or predict aspects
concerning the data subject’s ... location or movements...” .
Similarly, LGPD which takes a lot of content from the
GDPR, notes that “Activities of processing of personal data
shall be done in good faith ” this includes location data as it
is implied in the personal data definition. Additionally, other
privacy policies such as, CCPA details the mobile data location
access strategies as, “collection, use, retention, and sharing
of a consumer’s personal information shall be reasonably
necessary and proportionate...” location data is explicitly
defined as personal information in THE CCPA regulation.
Amongst the other privacy policies, COPPA primarily focuses on Children Location Data, and thus while addressing
several concerns mentions that operators must, “establish and
maintain reasonable procedures to protect the confidentiality,
security, and integrity of personal information collected from

III. M ETHODS
To answer the research questions proposed in this study
(mentioned in section I) and to compare and contrast each
data privacy legislation and CSP privacy policies, we read
through the publicly available laws and privacy policies of six
privacy legislation (GDPR, LGPD, COPPA, HIPPA, CCPA,

4

children ” . HIPAA primarily focuses on an individual’s health
related data. Thus, for our study it was interesting to see
how contact-tracing applications, built to stop the COVID-19
spread address the HIPAA concerns. It mentions “The provider
may then disclose the individual’s condition and location in
the facility to anyone asking for the individual by name ” .

collected, four legislations (LGPD, COPPA, GDPR, CCPA)
protect the subjects’ rights to delete PI, as for the right to optout, it is protected under four (LGPD, COPPA, GDPR, CCPA)
legislations. These results can be seen in table I.
In our analysis of the CSP privacy policies, we found that
all five CSPs defined MLD as PI, all five complied with
the data subjects’ rights to know, and only one CSP (AT&T
Mobility) did not comply with the data subjects’ rights to optout. However, compliance with a data subjects’ rights to delete
was less straightforward. In fact, only one CSP provided the
option to delete PI to all data subjects, where as the remaining
four CSPs only provided the right to delete to California
residents as this is required under the CCPA [63]. Two (AT&T
Mobility, Boost Mobile) of these four CSPs also provides the
opportunity to delete data of any data subject under the age
of 13, thus complying with COPPA regulation [66]. As such
only three (AT&T Mobility, Boost Mobile, U.S. Cellular) of
the five CSPs complied with COPPA’s right to delete.
Variation among CSP privacy policies are most visible in
their compliance with the legislations, as well as the methods
they collect mobile location data. When addressing how MLD
is collected, all five CSPs collect MLD automatically, but
the privacy policies phrase the collection methods differently.
Some CSPs use different means to collect MLD. As shown
in Table II, three CSPs (AT&T Mobility, Verizon Wireless,
U.S. Cellular) collect MLD through cell towers, two (AT&T
Mobility, Verizon Wireless) collect it through Wi-Fi access
points, two (AT&T Mobility, T-Mobile) collect through Bluetooth, and two collect it using GPS (AT&T Mobility, Verizon
Wireless). While these results are not representative of all
the automatic MLD collection methods stated by the CSPs’
privacy policies, it is important to understand that this analysis
was done solely on what is written in each privacy policy. In
fact, Two of the five privacy policies analyzed did not elaborate
on how MLD is automatically collected (Boost Mobile, TMobile) as such we were unable to determine if they used any
of the four most common methods. Additionally, two CSPs
policies, Verizon Wireless and AT&T Mobility, state that they
use all four methods of automatic collection [68] [69]. Three
privacy policies stated that MLD is provided by the account
holder, and each policy stated that this occurs when creating
an account for a data subject.
Privacy policies stating how MLD is protected was found
less frequently, with two CSPs (Verizon Wireless, U.S. Cellular) retaining MLD only as long as needed and four CSPs
(Verizon Wireless, T-Mobile, Boost Mobile, U.S. Cellular)
creating anonymous aggregate reports of the MLD. The ways
in which privacy policies explain how CSPs protect MLD
was less thorough with four (AT&T Mobility, T-Mobile, Boost
Mobile, U.S. Cellular) requiring some form of authentication
to access MLD, two (Boost Mobile, U.S. Cellular) creating
"incident response plans or safeguards", and two CSPs use
employee training to protect MLD (Verizon Wireless, U.S.
Cellular). These results can be seen in Table III.
When it comes to providing access to MLD, all five CSPs
provide third parties with data subject’s MLD. Only one CSP

A. Analysis
Thematic Analysis After reading through each regulation
individually, five common themes were found:
• geo-location is explicitly defined as personal information
(PI)
• geo-location is implied as PI
• the data subjects are granted the right to know
• the data subjects are granted the right to delete
• the data subjects are granted the right to opt-out
HIPAA did not provide any substantial policies that involve
MLD, rather HIPAA only protects the location of a patient
inside a hospital such as a room number or ward [67]. HIPPA
does not provide substantial information for the purposes of
this study, Therefore, it is left out of our final analysis and
results.
We conducted a thematic analysis on the privacy policies of
the five CSPs selected. We concentrated on the methods they
used to gather data and found common themes between all the
CSPs:
1) Automatic data collection: Cell Towers, WiFi, Bluetooth
and GPS.
2) User provided: Zip Code and Home address.
Additionally, we found common themes between these CSPs
describing the entities that have access to mobile location
data collected: Third parties, Emergency or legal services, and
Account holder.
However, we were unable to analyze the methods employed
by the CSPs to protect the mobile location data as the policies
provided vague information on these methods. Some of the
details in protecting user data included prevention and mitigation concepts such as: Authentication and Incident response
plans or safeguards.
IV. R ESULTS
After discarding HIPAA from the thematic analysis, we
were left with five data protection legislations: GDPR, LGPD,
CCPA, COPPA, and SHIELD. While not all definitions of PI
are uniform across the legislation, MLD can be interpreted
as PI under each legislation. Three of the five legislations
explicitly included MLD in private information definition,
whereas only two legislations include verbiage which defines
PI as "information regarding any identified or ’identifiable’
natural person" [64]. Despite the lack of an explicit definition
in New York’s SHIELD act and the LGPD, MLD is protected
under every legislation analyzed in this study as a private
information (PI).
Of the 5 legislations analyzed, only one (SHIELD act) does
not protect the right for a data subject to know what PI is being

5

Geolocation
defined
as PI

Geolocation
implied
as PI

Right to
know

Right to
delete

Right to optout

Data Privacy Regulations

Three
Legislation
(COPPA,
GDPR,
CCPA)

Two
Legislation
(SHIELD,
LGPD)

Four
Legislation
(LGPD,
COPPA,
GDPR,
CCPA)

Four
Legislation
(LGPD,
COPPA,
GDPR,
CCPA)

Four
Legislation
(LGPD,
COPPA,
GDPR,
CCPA)

CSP Privacy Policy

All Five
CSPs

All Five
CSPs

All Five
CSPs

One
CSP
(U.S.
Cellular)

Four CSPs
(Verizon
Wireless,
T-mobile
US, Boost
Mobile, U.S.
Cellular)

TABLE I
P RIVACY P ROTECTION F EATURES M ENTIONED A CROSS D ATA P RIVACY L EGISLATION (ROW 1) AND C OMPLIANCE OF THESE P RIVACY- FOCUSED
F EATURED W ITHIN P RIVACY P OLICIES D EFINED BY THE C ELLULAR S ERVICE P ROVIDERS (ROW 2).

Automatically

Provided

4

Number
of
CSPs

3

Cellphone
Towers

Wi-Fi

Bluetooth

GPS

Zip code

Consumer
Home
Address

Three CSPs
(AT&T
Mobility,
Verizon
Wireless,
U.S.
Cellular)

Two CSPs
(AT&T
Mobility,
Verizon
Wireless)

Two CSPs
(AT&T
Mobility,
T-Mobile)

Two CSPs
(AT&T
Mobility,
Verizon
Wireless)

Three
CSPs
(AT&T
Mobility,
US
Cellular,

Three
CSPs
(AT&T
Mobility,
US
Cellular)

TABLE II
T YPES OF D ATA C OLLECTION M ETHODS A PPLIED B Y THE C ELLPHONE S ERVICE P ROVIDERS TO C OLLECT C ONSUMER M OBILE L OCATION D ATA

(AT&T Mobility) did not mention in their privacy policy
that they provide MLD to emergency or legal services upon
request. Two policies (T-Mobile, U.S. Cellular) state that the
account holder is also given access to all MLD collected by
the CSP. These results are shown in Table IV.

CSPs. Similarly, these four data privacy regulations require,
the right to opt-out is adhered to by four CSPs (Verizon
Wireless, T-Mobile, Boost Mobile and U.S. Cellular). In this
sense, CSP privacy policies are majorly in compliance with
current data privacy regulations. However, the right to delete
MLD is only observed by Verizon, while four CSPs (At&T
Mobility, T-Mobile USm Boost Mobile and U.S. Cellular) only
afforded that right to Californian residents and as such are in
violation of GDPR [65] and LGPD [32] legislation.

V. D ISCUSSION
Through the thematic analysis of data privacy regulations
and CSP privacy policies, we were able to answer the five
proposed research questions of this study. First, whether CSP
privacy policies are compliant with current data protection
regulations, cannot be simply answered with a yes or a no
but rather addressed as individual clauses of each regulation.
All five CSPs explicitly define MLD as Personal Information (PI) which is in agreement with all five data protection
regulation’s definitions. As required by four data privacy
regulations (GDPR, LGPD, COPPA and CCPA), the right to
know what data is collected is properly addressed by all five

In late 2019, the United States Congress introduced the
Consumer Online Rights Privacy Act (COPRA) bill. Under
the current version of this bill, MLD is defined as “sensitive
covered data” and also protects the right to know, to delete, and
to opt-out [73]. Similar to other national data protections in the
US, the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) would then develop
a department to enforce this proposed act. The development
of a national legislation in the United States will likely rectify
this disparity between rights for California residents and the

6

Number
of CSPs

Authentication

Incident
Response
Plan/Safeguards

Retained
only as long
as needed

Anonymous
aggregate reports

Employee
Training

Four CSPs
(AT&T
Mobility, TMobile,
Boost
Mobile, U.S.
Cellular)

Two CSPs
(Boost
Mobile, U.S.
Cellular)

Two CSPs
(Verizon
Wireless,
U.S.
Cellular)

Four CSPs (Verizon
Wireless, T-Mobile,
Boost Mobile, U.S.
Cellular)

Two CSPs
(Verizon
Wireless,
U.S.
Cellular)

TABLE III
S ECURITY M EASURES I MPLEMENTED BY THE C ELLPHONE S ERVICE P ROVIDERS TO P ROCESS AND P ROTECT C ONSUMER M OBILE L OCATION D ATA AS
M ENTIONED IN THE P RIVACY P OLICIES

Number
CSPs

of

Third Parties

Emergency/Legal Services

Account Holder

All Five CSPs

Four CSPs (Verizon Wireless, TMobile, Boost Mobile, U.S. Cellular)

Two CSPs (T-Mobile,
U.S. Cellular)

TABLE IV
D ATA A CCESS P ROVIDED TO THE M OBILE L OCATED D ATA AS COLLECTED BY THE CSP S S TARTING FROM T HIRD PARTIES , E MERGENCY /L EGAL
S ERVICES , AND A CCOUNT H OLDER AS M ENTIONED IN THE P RIVACY P OLICIES .

American CSPs.
Finally, within the scope of our present user monitoring to
prevent the spread of COVID-19, none of the CSP privacy
policies explicitly detail the purpose of the MLDs collected
or mention the change of location data collection due to the
situation. However, as each policy stands, it is possible that
contact tracing could be developed without any policy change.
All but one CSP privacy policy analyzed in this study state
that they will provide MLD to emergency or legal services if
requested. Currently, this is being used primarily to convict
criminals by placing them at the scene of a crime, or by
emergency response teams to locate a person in need of help
1
. However, COVID-19 has been considered as a national
sanitary emergency by many governments 2 , therefore the
collection of MLD by emergency services for contact tracing
purposes is within the scope of these privacy policies.
CSPs also state in their privacy policies that MLD is shared
with partnered third parties, this statement itself is vague and
could also allow for CSPs to partner with future apps or
companies whose purpose is to use MLD for variety of purposes. Another way that CSPs could access MLD for contact
tracing purposes, is simply through data subject consent. If
CSPs wish to use MLD for contact tracing, it would be most
advantageous and regulation compliant to adjust their privacy
policy in order to keep each data subject informed. Thus, we
see that there are several consistency issues when it comes
to CSPs privacy policies with the data collection. Thus, we
provide a few recommendations obtained through our research

rest of US citizens.
To answer the second question of how MLD is collected,
we found that automated processes are in use most frequently,
and often are found in a combination of cell tower data, WiFi access point data, Bluetooth, and GPS data, where cell
tower data is the most common form of data collection. Less
frequently, MLD is provided by a data subject, however it
is important to note that this location data is usually in the
form of a data subject’s zip code and home address and is not
active MLD (precise location). It is vital that this information
is included in a CSP’s privacy policy, because the majority of
MLD is collected in an automated way, and it is often easy for
consumers to forget about these processes. Furthermore, MLD
received by most CSPs is anonymized in aggregate reports, but
fewer CSPs retained the MLD only as long as needed , which
can be concerning. In fact, privacy policies often do not go
into specifics in regards to data processing or protection, as
such it is difficult for the users to assess how effective and
thorough any of the details mentioned in the privacy policies
are.
Transparency in privacy policies is extremely important and
is even mandated under recital 58 of the GDPR, such that
policies must be “concise, easily accessible and easy to understand, and that clear and plain language [...] be used” [65].
All the CSPs’ privacy policies that were evaluated adhered to
this requirement, however in an area such as MLD, where
collection and processes may not be easily understandable
to the average consumer, vital information about collection
and storage processes should be explicitly mentioned, which
none of the CSPs did. In this case, only one privacy policy
(Verizon Wireless) included a notice dedicated to describing
the collection and processing of MLD [74], as such it is clear
that this level of transparency is not a common practice for

1 https://cacm.acm.org/magazines/2020/10/247585-who-has-access-to-yoursmartphone-data/fulltext
2 https://www.who.int/publications/m/item/COVID-19-public-healthemergency-of-international-concern-(pheic)-global-research-and-innovationforum

7

in the following section.

however able to assert that it is possible for CSPs to use MLD
for COVID-19 contact tracing within their privacy policies’
guidelines. Nonetheless we recommend that the CSPs update
their privacy policy if they intend to use MLD for contact
tracing. Proper security measures should also be adopted when
using contact tracing, such as encryption, anonymization, and
obfuscation [83], [23], [84]. At the time of this research, we
are not aware of any privacy policy changes made by CSPs to
allow for COVID-19 contact tracing. An update describing the
extant of MLD use in contact tracing efforts and preferably
the opportunity for a data subject to opt-out, would reflect
positively on the CSPs [85], [86].

VI. I MPLICATIONS
In this section we will address the results and observations from the analysis of our study in the realm of data
privacy frameworks, analyses of location privacy laws, and
COVID-19 contact tracing. We will also provide actionable
recommendations for the users, developers, policy makers, and
organizations, as well as policy change or update suggestions,
based on our findings from this study and several other studies.
A. Data privacy frameworks
In our study, we did not develop a new data privacy
framework, however we took into consideration many different
privacy frameworks such as the ones introduced by Ahamed
et al. [48], Lee et al. [49], and primarily Cavoukian [51] work
and conducted a comparative analysis.
Understanding how policies are written can help develop
frameworks that focus on the policies rather than on procedures. Implementing an effective and efficient privacy policy
is key [75]. In this study, we found that there was a lack
of transparency when it came to actual procedures followed
by the CSPs. As such a modular approach to transparency
in privacy policy would provide a huge improvement to
current policies [76]. We also recommend introducing the
policy in plain, easy to understand language as Kumaraguru
et al. suggests [77], using easily understandable language
is critical [78]. This level of transparency would make it
easier for common users to have a better understanding of
the implications of using a specific CSP [79], as well as make
it easier for scholars to conduct research and to determine if
actual practices align with policy [80].

VII. F UTURE W ORK

AND

L IMITATIONS

Using the methodology explained in this study, we believe
it is important to analyze more CSPs. This should provide a
better understanding of CSP privacy policy on the macro scale.
It will also be advantageous for future extension of this work
to dig deeper into the actual processes which CSPs use to
collect, process, protect, and distribute MLD rather than just
analyzing what is mentioned by them in the privacy policies. A
thorough understanding of what processes are used to collect
MLD, how and if MLD is actually anonymized, and what
reports third parties and emergency or legal services receive
through the CSPs, will help to build the bigger picture of how
CSPs interact and utilize with the MLD they collect. Finally,
we believe it is critical to develop technologies that comply
with data privacy regulations. Any future works on COVID-19
contact tracing efforts will be able to utilize the findings of the
study to determine how best to comply with legal regulations
when interacting with MLD.
VIII. C ONCLUSION

B. Analysis of location privacy laws

Since the introduction of the GDPR in 2016, the rise of data
protection regulations have become a notable force that should
be addressed by privacy policies of all organisations that
handle Personally Identifiable Information (PII). In addition,
the development of the COVID-19 pandemic demands unique
solutions to prevent further spread of the virus, such as contact
tracing applications which monitors the location of users. Such
changes, demand to see whether the CSPs are adhering to
the privacy policies and user perceptions when it comes to
handling critical data such as precise location.
In this regard, the contribution of this study is to get
a primary understanding of five big CSP’s privacy policies
as they relate to the collection, processing, protection, and
sharing of mobile location data under the scope of data protection regulations. This study analyzes state-wide, national,
and international data privacy regulations (SHIELD ACT,
CCPA, HIPAA, COPPA, LGPD, and GDPR) with the privacy
policies of five most used cellphone provider services (Verizon
Wireless, AT&T Mobility, T-Mobile US, Boost Mobile, and
U.S. Cellular) in the United States is very timely and critical.
Our study provides us with a lens to better determine the
viability of COVID-19 contact tracing under current CSP
privacy policies. While some contact tracing may be possible,

In our analysis of six data privacy legislation, we found that
most regulations have similar requirements for the protection
of MLD. Understanding that CSP privacy policies are mostly
compliant with the current leading legislation is important
because it provides more opportunities to develop widespread
and helpful legislation in the US. Implementing new national
policy in the US will continue to enforce the current model
of CSP privacy policies and lead to the development of better
consumer data protections [81], [82].
C. COVID-19 contact tracing efforts of MLD
The works of Egan and Oliver et al. discuss the importance
of COVID-19 contact tracing and the privacy concerns that
are brought to the table if MLD were used for contact
tracing efforts. We were able to contribute to their works by
analyzing CPS privacy policies and data privacy regulations to
determine if privacy concerns are viable in the instance related
to COVID-19 contact tracing.
Due to the lack of CSPs’ privacy policy transparency [28],
we were unable to collect enough data, which in turn made it
impossible to gain an in-depth understanding of the CSPs’
mobile location data collection and use processes. We are

8

we determined it is likely necessary that changes to policy and
appropriate measures to protect MLD should be implemented.
This study was limited in analyzing exclusively what was
stated in each privacy policy rather than the true practices of
CSPs which is mentioned as the future extension of this work.
Further contributions should expand by analyzing additional
CSPs privacy policies, analyzing actual processes used by
CSPs to process and share MLD, look into further policy
changes which allow the use of MLD for COVID-19 contact
tracing while minimizing privacy violations, or developing
regulation compliant technologies for contact tracing. We
conclude by providing actionable recommendations for users,
policy makers, developers, and organizations.

[15] ——, “Understanding the rise of twitter-based cyberbullying due to
covid-19 through comprehensive statistical evaluation,” in Proceedings
of the 54th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences, 2021.
[16] E. K. Jenkins, C. McAuliffe, S. Hirani, C. Richardson, K. C. Thomson,
L. McGuinness, J. Morris, A. Kousoulis, and A. Gadermann, “A portrait
of the early and differential mental health impacts of the covid-19
pandemic in canada: findings from the first wave of a nationally
representative cross-sectional survey,” Preventive Medicine, p. 106333,
2021.
[17] K. T. Eames and M. J. Keeling, “Contact tracing and disease control,”
Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series B: Biological
Sciences, vol. 270, no. 1533, pp. 2565–2571, 2003.
[18] M. J. Keeling, T. D. Hollingsworth, and J. M. Read, “Efficacy of contact
tracing for the containment of the 2019 novel coronavirus (covid-19),”
J Epidemiol Community Health, vol. 74, no. 10, pp. 861–866, 2020.
[19] S. Lalmuanawma, J. Hussain, and L. Chhakchhuak, “Applications of
machine learning and artificial intelligence for covid-19 (sars-cov-2)
pandemic: A review,” Chaos, Solitons & Fractals, p. 110059, 2020.
[20] C. Rorres, M. Romano, J. A. Miller, J. M. Mossey, T. H. Grubesic, D. E.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Zellner, and G. Smith, “Contact tracing for the control of infectious
disease epidemics: Chronic wasting disease in deer farms,” Epidemics,
We would like to acknowledge the Security and Privacy
vol. 23, pp. 71–75, 2018.
Research Lab at the University of Denver and the students of
[21] L. Hébert-Dufresne, B. M. Althouse, S. V. Scarpino, and A. Allard, “Bethe COMP 3705/4705 : Adv Topics: Human-Centered Data
yond r0: The importance of contact tracing when predicting epidemics,”
medRxiv, 2020.
Security and Privacy for their initial feedback. Any opinions,
findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in [22] K. K. Sahu, A. K. Mishra, and A. Lal, “Covid-2019: update on
epidemiology, disease spread and management,” Monaldi Archives for
this material are solely those of the authors and do and do not
Chest Disease, vol. 90, no. 1, 2020.
necessarily reflect the views of the University of Denver.
[23] L. Baumgärtner, A. Dmitrienko, B. Freisleben, A. Gruler, J. Höchst,
J. Kühlberg, M. Mezini, M. Miettinen, A. Muhamedagic, T. D. Nguyen
et al., “Mind the gap: Security & privacy risks of contact tracing apps,”
R EFERENCES
arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.05914, 2020.
[24] M. J. Parker, C. Fraser, L. Abeler-Dörner, and D. Bonsall, “Ethics of
[1] K. D. Martin, J. J. Kim, R. W. Palmatier, L. Steinhoff, D. W. Stewart,
instantaneous contact tracing using mobile phone apps in the control of
B. A. Walker, Y. Wang, and S. K. Weaven, “Data privacy in retail,”
the covid-19 pandemic,” Journal of Medical Ethics, vol. 46, no. 7, pp.
Journal of Retailing, vol. 96, no. 4, pp. 474–489, 2020.
427–431, 2020.
[2] N. Saxena, S. Grijalva, and N. S. Chaudhari, “Authentication protocol
[25] H. Cho, D. Ippolito, and Y. W. Yu, “Contact tracing mobile apps for
for an iot-enabled lte network,” vol. 16, no. 4, 2016. [Online].
covid-19: Privacy considerations and related trade-offs,” arXiv preprint
Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/2981547
arXiv:2003.11511, 2020.
[3] J. Streiff, S. Das, and J. Cannon, “Overpowered and underprotected toys
empowering parents with tools to protect their children,” in 2019 IEEE [26] D. Zeinalipour-Yazti and C. Claramunt, “Covid-19 mobile contact tracing apps (mcta): A digital vaccine or a privacy demolition?” in 2020 21st
5th International Conference on Collaboration and Internet Computing
IEEE International Conference on Mobile Data Management (MDM).
(CIC). IEEE, 2019, pp. 322–329.
IEEE, 2020, pp. 1–4.
[4] H. Hadan, N. Serrano, S. Das, and L. J. Camp, “Making iot worthy of
[27] M. Shukla, S. Lodha, G. Shroff, R. Raskar et al., “Privacy guidelines for
human trust,” Available at SSRN 3426871, 2019.
contact tracing applications,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.13328, 2020.
[5] S. R. Gopavaram, J. Dev, S. Das, and J. Camp, “Iotmarketplace:
[28] Y. Bengio, D. Ippolito, R. Janda, M. Jarvie, B. Prud’homme, J.-F.
Informing purchase decisions with risk communication,” 2019.
Rousseau, A. Sharma, and Y. W. Yu, “Inherent privacy limitations of
[6] K. Yang, “Determinants of us consumer mobile shopping services
decentralized contact tracing apps,” Journal of the American Medical
adoption: implications for designing mobile shopping services,” Journal
Informatics Association, vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 193–195, 2021.
of consumer marketing, 2010.
[29] L. A. Bygrave, “Privacy and data protection in an international perspec[7] T. Hatt and P. Jarich, “Global mobile trends 2020,”
tive,” Scandinavian studies in law, vol. 56, no. 8, pp. 165–200, 2010.
https://data.gsmaintelligence.com/research/research/research-2019/global-mobile-trends-2020,
[30] V. Mangini, I. Tal, and A.-N. Moldovan, “An empirical study on
2019.
the impact of gdpr and right to be forgotten-organisations and users
[8] D. Petzer and C. De Meyer, “The perceived service quality, satisfaction
perspective,” in Proceedings of the 15th International Conference on
and behavioural intent towards cellphone network service providers:
Availability, Reliability and Security, 2020, pp. 1–9.
A generational perspective,” African journal of business management,
[31] “Art 4. GDPR - definitions,” https://gdpr-info.eu/art-4-gdpr/, Mar 2018.
vol. 5, no. 17, pp. 7461–7473, 2011.
[32] “Brazilian general data protection law (LGPD, english translation),”
[9] J. Y. Tsai, P. G. Kelley, L. F. Cranor, and N. Sadeh, “Location-sharing
https://iapp.org/resources/article/brazilian-data-protection-law-lgpd-english-translation/
technologies: Privacy risks and controls,” Isjlp, vol. 6, p. 119, 2010.
2019.
[10] K. Sung, B. Levine, and M. Zheleva, “Zipphone: Protecting user
[33] A. Erickson, “Comparative analysis of the eu’s gdpr and brazil’s lgpd:
location privacy from cellular service providers,” arXiv preprint
Enforcement challenges with the lgpd,” Brook. J. Int’l L., vol. 44, p.
arXiv:2002.04731, 2020.
859, 2018.
[11] Case No. 19-cv-4063, Scott, Jewel, And Pontis, et al. v. AT&T Inc.;
[34] “Art. 5 GDPR – principles relating to processing of personal data,”
AT&T Services, Inc.; AT&T Mobility, LLC; Technocom Corp.;and Zuhttps://gdpr-info.eu/art-5-gdpr/, Aug 2016.
migo, Inc.
[35] “Art. 25 GDPR – data protection by design and by default,”
[12] S. Khan, R. Siddique, A. Ali, Q. Bai, Z. Li, H. Li, M. A. Shereen,
https://gdpr-info.eu/art-25-gdpr/, Mar 2018.
M. Xue, and G. Nabi, “The spread of novel coronavirus has created an
[36] “Art. 13 GDPR – information to be provided where personal data are
alarming situation worldwide,” Journal of infection and public health,
collected from the data subject,” https://gdpr-info.eu/art-13-gdpr/, Aug
vol. 13, no. 4, p. 469, 2020.
2016.
[13] S. Das, A. Kim, and S. Karmakar, “Change-point analysis of
cyberbullying-related twitter discussions during covid-19,” arXiv [37] M. Bano, D. Zowghi, and C. Arora, “Requirements, politics, or indipreprint arXiv:2008.13613, 2020.
vidualism: What drives the success of covid-19 contact-tracing apps?”
IEEE Software, vol. 38, no. 1, pp. 7–12, 2021.
[14] S. Karmakar and S. Das, “Evaluating the impact of covid-19 on
cyberbullying through bayesian trend analysis,” in Proceedings of the
[38] M. Walrave, C. Waeterloos, and K. Ponnet, “Ready or not for contact
European Interdisciplinary Cybersecurity Conference, 2020, pp. 1–6.
tracing? investigating the adoption intention of covid-19 contact-tracing

9

[39]

[40]

[41]
[42]
[43]

[44]
[45]
[46]
[47]
[48]

[49]
[50]
[51]
[52]
[53]

[54]

[55]
[56]

[57]
[58]
[59]

[60]
[61]
[62]

technology using an extended unified theory of acceptance and use of
technology model,” Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and Social Networking,
2020.
M. Marcut, “Analysis of gdpr implementation at county level,” in
Sustainable Development and Resilience of Local Communities and
Public Sector Organizations. Conference Proceedings’ Transylvanian
International Conference in Public Administration, 2018, pp. 16–18.
C. F. L. Rapôso, H. M. de Lima, W. F. de Oliveira Junior, P. A. F. Silva,
and E. E. de Souza Barros, “Lgpd-lei geral de proteção de dados pessoais
em tecnologia da informação: Revisão sistemática,” RACE-Revista de
Administração do Cesmac, vol. 4, pp. 58–67, 2019.
M. A. Rothstein and S. A. Tovino, “California takes the lead on data
privacy law,” Hastings Center Report, vol. 49, no. 5, pp. 4–5, 2019.
L. Lance Plunkett JD, “Erecting a shield against the bad guys,” New
York State Dental Journal, vol. 85, no. 6, pp. 4–7, 2019.
I. Reyes, P. Wijesekera, J. Reardon, A. E. B. On, A. Razaghpanah,
N. Vallina-Rodriguez, and S. Egelman, ““won’t somebody think of
the children?” examining coppa compliance at scale,” Proceedings on
Privacy Enhancing Technologies, vol. 2018, no. 3, pp. 63–83, 2018.
H. C. Assistance, “Summary of the hipaa privacy rule,” Office for Civil
Rights, 2003.
L. Liu, “From data privacy to location privacy: models and algorithms,”
in Proceedings of the 33rd international conference on Very large data
bases. Citeseer, 2007, pp. 1429–1430.
A. R. Beresford and F. Stajano, “Location privacy in pervasive computing,” IEEE Pervasive computing, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 46–55, 2003.
J.-H. Hoepman, “Privacy design strategies,” in IFIP International Information Security Conference. Springer, 2014, pp. 446–459.
S. Ahamed, M. Haque, and C. Hasan, “A novel location privacy
framework without trusted third party based on location anonymity
prediction,” ACM SIGAPP Applied Computing Review, vol. 12, no. 1,
pp. 24–34, 2012.
C. Lee, Y. Guo, and L. Yin, “A framework of evaluation location privacy
in mobile network,” Procedia computer science, vol. 17, pp. 879–887,
2013.
S. Shaham, M. Ding, B. Liu, S. Dang, Z. Lin, and J. Li, “Privacy
preserving location data publishing: A machine learning approach,”
IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, 2020.
A. Cavoukian, “Privacy by design the 7 foundational principles,” Jan
2011. [Online]. Available: www.privacybydesign.ca
Y. Georgiadou, R. de By, and O. Kounadi, “Location privacy in the wake
of the gdpr,” ISPRS international journal of geo-information, vol. 8,
no. 3, pp. 1–17, 2019.
N. Apthorpe, S. Varghese, and N. Feamster, “Evaluating the contextual
integrity of privacy regulation: Parents’ iot toy privacy norms versus
{COPPA},” in 28th {USENIX} Security Symposium ({USENIX} Security 19), 2019, pp. 123–140.
J. Streiff, O. Kenny, S. Das, A. Leeth, and L. J. Camp, “Who’s watching
your child? exploring home security risks with smart toy bears,” in 2018
IEEE/ACM Third International Conference on Internet-of-Things Design
and Implementation (IoTDI). IEEE, 2018, pp. 285–286.
I. Liccardi, M. Bulger, H. Abelson, D. J. Weitzner, and W. Mackay, “Can
apps play by the coppa rules?” in 2014 Twelfth Annual International
Conference on Privacy, Security and Trust. IEEE, 2014, pp. 1–9.
M. Ataei, A. Degbelo, C. Kray, and V. Santos, “Complying with privacy
legislation: From legal text to implementation of privacy-aware locationbased services,” ISPRS international journal of geo-information, vol. 7,
no. 11, p. 442, 2018.
G. M. Harari, “A process-oriented approach to respecting privacy in
the context of mobile phone tracking,” Current opinion in psychology,
vol. 31, pp. 141–147, 2020.
P. Thaichon, K. Sharma, K. Raina, and S. Kapoor, “Analysis of consumers’ intention values in the choice of a mobile service provider,”
Asian Journal of Business Research ISSN, vol. 6, no. 1, p. 2016, 2016.
M. Whaiduzzaman and A. Gani, “Measuring security for cloud service
provider: A third party approach,” in 2013 International Conference on
Electrical Information and Communication Technology (EICT). IEEE,
2014, pp. 1–6.
C. Egan, “Mobile location data tracking tools raise privacy questions
amid covid-19,” SNL Kagan Media & Communications Report, 2020.
“Privacy.” [Online]. Available: https://www.unacast.com/privacy
N. Oliver, B. Lepri, H. Sterly, R. Lambiotte, S. Deletaille, M. De Nadai,
E. Letouzé, A. A. Salah, R. Benjamins, C. Cattuto, V. Colizza,
N. de Cordes, S. P. Fraiberger, T. Koebe, S. Lehmann, J. Murillo,

[63]

[64]
[65]
[66]
[67]

[68]
[69]

[70]
[71]

[72]
[73]

[74]
[75]
[76]

[77]

[78]

[79]

[80]

[81]

[82]

[83]

[84]

[85]

10

A. Pentland, P. N. Pham, F. Pivetta, J. Saramäki, S. V. Scarpino,
M. Tizzoni, S. Verhulst, and P. Vinck, “Mobile phone data for informing
public health actions across the covid-19 pandemic life cycle,” Science
advances, vol. 6, no. 23, pp. eabc0764–eabc0764, 2020.
“California
consumer
privacy
act
of
2018,”
http://leginfo.legislature.ca.gov/faces/codes_displayText.xhtml?division=3.,
2018.
“NY state senate bill s5575b,” https://www.nysenate.gov/legislation/bills/2019/s5575,
Jul 2019.
“GDPR offical legal text,” https://gdpr-info.eu/, Sep 2019.
“Children’s
online
privacy
protection
act
of
1998,”
http://www.ftc.gov/ogc/coppa1.htm, 2020.
H.
O.
o.
t.
Secretary
and
O.
f.
C.
R.
(OCR),
“Summary
of
the
HIPAA
privacy
rule,”
https://www.hhs.gov/hipaa/for-professionals/privacy/laws-regulations/index.html,
Jul 2013.
“Get
to
know
our
privacy
policies.”
https://www.verizon.com/about/privacy/, 2020.
“Full privacy policy - at&t people: Planet: Possibilities,”
https://about.att.com/csr/home/privacy/full_privacy_policy.html,
Jun
2020.
“"t-mobile privacy policy",” https://www.t-mobile.com/privacy-center/our-practices/priva
Aug 2020.
B.
Mobile,
“Boost
mobile
privacy
policy,”
https://www.boostmobile.com/about/legal/privacy-policy.html?INTNAV=BotNav%3ALe
Dec 2019.
“Privacy statement,” https://www.uscellular.com/privacy, Sep 2020.
M.
Cantwell,
“Text
s.2968
116th
congress
(2019-2020):
Consumer
online
privacy
rights
act,”
https://www.congress.gov/bill/116th-congress/senate-bill/2968/text,
Dec 2019.
“Mobile location analytics,” https://www.verizon.com/about/privacy/mobile-location-ana
Oct 2019.
S. Das, J. Dev, and L. J. Camp, “Privacy preserving policy framework:
User-aware and user-driven,” Available at SSRN 3445942, 2019.
S. Das, J. Dev, and K. Srinivasan, “Modularity is the key a new approach
to social media privacy policies,” in Proceedings of the 7th Mexican
Conference on Human-Computer Interaction, 2018, pp. 1–4.
P. Kumaraguru, L. Cranor, J. Lobo, and S. Calo, “A survey of privacy
policy languages,” in Workshop on Usable IT Security Management
(USM 07): Proceedings of the 3rd Symposium on Usable Privacy and
Security, ACM, 2007.
N. Sadeh, A. Acquisti, T. D. Breaux, L. F. Cranor, A. M. McDonald, J. R.
Reidenberg, N. A. Smith, F. Liu, N. C. Russell, F. Schaub et al., “The
usable privacy policy project,” in Technical report, Technical Report,
CMU-ISR-13-119. Carnegie Mellon University, 2013.
C. Jensen and C. Potts, “Privacy policies as decision-making tools: an
evaluation of online privacy notices,” in Proceedings of the SIGCHI
conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 2004, pp. 471–
478.
S. Das, R. S. Gutzwiller, R. D. Roscoe, P. Rajivan, Y. Wang,
L. Jean Camp, and R. Hoyle, “Humans and technology for inclusive
privacy and security,” in Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting, vol. 64, no. 1. SAGE Publications
Sage CA: Los Angeles, CA, 2020, pp. 461–464.
E. L. Harding, J. J. Vanto, R. Clark, L. Hannah Ji, and S. C. Ainsworth,
“Understanding the scope and impact of the california consumer privacy
act of 2018,” Journal of Data Protection & Privacy, vol. 2, no. 3, pp.
234–253, 2019.
L. Reichert, S. Brack, and B. Scheuermann, “Privacy-preserving contact
tracing of covid-19 patients.” IACR Cryptol. ePrint Arch., vol. 2020, p.
375, 2020.
P. M. Hawkes, R. T. Hsu, R. Rezaiifar, G. G. Rose, P. E. Bender,
J. Wang, R. F. Quick Jr, A. C. Mahendran, and P. A. Agashe, “Method
and apparatus for security in a data processing system,” Feb. 27 2007,
uS Patent 7,185,362.
Y. Gvili, “Security analysis of the covid-19 contact tracing specifications
by apple inc. and google inc.” IACR Cryptol. ePrint Arch., vol. 2020,
p. 428, 2020.
A. Springer and S. Whittaker, “Progressive disclosure: When, why,
and how do users want algorithmic transparency information?” ACM
Transactions on Interactive Intelligent Systems (TiiS), vol. 10, no. 4, pp.
1–32, 2020.

[86] R. A. Kleinman and C. Merkel, “Digital contact tracing for covid-19,”
CMAJ, vol. 192, no. 24, pp. E653–E656, 2020.

11

