How will mass-vaccination change COVID-19 lockdown requirements in
Australia?
Cameron Zachreson,1, 2 Sheryl L. Chang,1 Oliver M. Cliff,3 and Mikhail Prokopenko1, 4
1 Centre

for Complex Systems, Faculty of Engineering, University of Sydney
2 School

of Computing and Information Systems,

The University of Melbourne, Australia
3 Centre

arXiv:2103.07061v3 [q-bio.PE] 1 Apr 2021

4 Marie

for Complex Systems, School of Physics, University of Sydney

Bashir Institute for Infectious Diseases and Biosecurity, University of Sydney
(Dated: April 2, 2021)

1

Abstract
To prevent future outbreaks of COVID-19, Australia is pursuing a mass-vaccination approach in which
a targeted group of the population comprising healthcare workers, aged-care residents and other individuals at increased risk of exposure will receive a highly effective priority vaccine. The rest of the population
will instead have access to a less effective vaccine. We apply a large-scale agent-based model of COVID19 in Australia to investigate the possible implications of this hybrid approach to mass-vaccination. The
model is calibrated to recent epidemiological and demographic data available in Australia, and accounts
for several components of vaccine efficacy. Within a feasible range of vaccine efficacy values, our model
supports the assertion that complete herd immunity due to vaccination is not likely in the Australian
context. For realistic scenarios in which herd immunity is not achieved, we simulate the effects of massvaccination on epidemic growth rate, and investigate the requirements of lockdown measures applied
to curb subsequent outbreaks. In our simulations, Australia’s vaccination strategy can feasibly reduce
required lockdown intensity and initial epidemic growth rate by 43% and 52%, respectively. The severity
of epidemics, as measured by the peak number of daily new cases, decreases by up to two orders of magnitude under plausible mass-vaccination and lockdown strategies. The study presents a strong argument for
a large-scale vaccination campaign, which would significantly reduce the intensity of non-pharmaceutical
interventions in Australia and curb future outbreaks.

I.

INTRODUCTION

The Australian response to the COVID-19 pandemic has been very effective to date. Strict
control measures, including travel restrictions and social distancing, successfully suppressed
the initial pandemic wave in Australia (March – June 2020) [1], as well as several secondary
outbreaks across the states, most notably in Victoria (June – September 2020) [2]. However,
as vaccines become available a more refined response is needed, given the need to balance
population health against the high socio-economic impacts of local, regional and nation-wide
lockdowns.
The national COVID-19 vaccine rollout strategy developed by the Australian Government
commenced in late February 2021, aiming to vaccinate a significant portion of the Australian
population (the majority of the adult population) by the end of October 2021 [3]. The first
phase of the strategy targets priority groups with the BNT162b2 (Pfizer/BioNTech) vaccine,
while the remainder of the population will receive the ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 (Oxford/AstraZeneca)
vaccine during phases two and three. Both of these vaccines have demonstrated high clinical
efficacy [4, 5]. Thus, many questions remain. Is herd immunity achievable with current vaccination approaches? To what extent can the strict lockdown rules be relaxed with a partial mass
vaccination? Is there an optimal but feasible balance between the vaccination efforts and social
distancing practice? In this work, we approach these questions with a large-scale agent-based
2

model (ABM) of COVID-19 transmission, case-targeted non-pharmaceutical interventions, lockdowns, and mass-vaccination in the context of Australia.
There are several specific challenges in modelling COVID-19 vaccination campaigns: the
complexity and burden of non-pharmaceutical interventions (NPIs); the heterogeneity of the
population; country-specific demographics; logistical and supply constraints; as well as unknown vaccine characteristics. The heterogeneity of the Australian population has been shown
to unevenly affect the spread of respiratory diseases across different social contexts and wider
jurisdictions [1, 6]. We can therefore expect complex trade-offs between NPIs and vaccination
interventions, covering overlapping but not identical parts of the population. These effects may
be difficult to predict for situations in which the vaccine efficacy differs with respect to reducing susceptibility, preventing symptoms of infection, and limiting further transmission of the
virus. Some of the available vaccines, most notably BNT162b2 (Pfizer/BioNTech), have shown
a high efficacy against documented infection, as well as symptomatic and severe disease [4].
However, comprehensive results across multiple efficacy components are still lacking. In this
work, we account for differences in vaccine efficacy for the two distinct vaccine types approved
for distribution in Australia: a priority vaccine, (e.g.., BNT162b2), and a general vaccine, (e.g.,
ChAdOx1 nCoV-19).
In order to capture population heterogeneity, we adapted a previously developed and validated high-resolution ABM of mitigation and control of the COVID-19 pandemic in Australia [1, 6]. This model included a range of dynamically adjustable NPIs, such as travel
restrictions, case isolation, home quarantine and mandated social distancing (lockdown). Here,
we extended the ABM to include several detailed vaccination measures. These extensions included an explicit account of separate components of vaccination efficacy (susceptibility, disease,
and infectiousness), and changeable levels of age-stratified mass-vaccination coverage with the
general and priority vaccines.
This paper addresses several open questions surrounding vaccination in Australia. Firstly, we
investigate the feasibility of herd immunity following a mass-vaccination campaign. This is addressed by varying vaccination coverage with different vaccine efficacy combinations. Secondly,
we quantify the benefit of the general vaccine in scenarios where all priority vaccine supplies are
consumed by considering different levels of general vaccination distributed in addition to a fixed
realistic priority vaccination coverage. Finally, we quantify to what extent mass-vaccination can
reduce or eliminate the need for lockdowns by varying lockdown compliance levels for various
extents of vaccination coverage.
3

II.

METHODS
A.

Simulating COVID-19 in Australia

Our approach to simulating COVID-19 in Australia follows that of our previous work [1],
with the following modifications to our model of COVID-19 disease natural history and case
ascertainment:
• Infectious incubation times (Tinc ) calibrated to the findings of Lauer et al. [7] who inferred
log-normally distributed incubation times with mean 5.5 days (µ = 1.62, σ = 0.418).
• An infectious asymptomatic or symptomatic period (Tsymp ), following incubation, lasting
between 7 days and 14 days (uniformly distributed), based on estimates of the replicationcompetent viral shedding period used to support guidance on case isolation periods published by the United States Centre for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC, see [8] and
references therein [9]).
• Differentiation between “asymptomatic infectivity" and “pre-symptomatic infectivity".
In the previous iteration of the model used in Chang et al. [1], asymptomatic and presymptomatic individuals had reduced infectivity to contacts. That assumption was modified in this work, for which pre-symptomatic cases are assumed to be as infectious as
symptomatic cases (with respect to viral load), while those who remain asymptomatic
throughout the course of disease have reduced infectivity (a factor of 0.5 is applied to the
force of infection exerted on contacts). This change reflects the general finding that presymptomatic transmission is responsible for a substantial amount of COVID-19 spread
(up to 50% of transmission), and allows a parsimonious calibration of disease natural
history, reproductive ratio, and generation interval [10, 11].
• To simulate the imperfect detection of cases in a scenario with high levels of voluntary
population screening, we introduce two case detection probabilities, one for symptomatic
case detection and the other for pre-symptomatic and asymptomatic detection. For symptomatic cases, the probability of detection per day is set to 0.23, while for pre-symptomatic
and asymptomatic cases, the probability of detection per day is 0.01.

B.

Model calibration

Because the models of disease natural history and case ascertainment were modified, we
re-calibrated the model used by Chang et al. [1] to approximately match the case incidence
4

data recorded during the first and second waves of COVID-19 in Australia and the global
reproduction number of R0 ≈ 2.9 95% CI [2.39, 3.44] [12] (See Supporting Information).

C.

Mass-vaccination simulations

In our mass-vaccination scenarios, we used an age-stratified vaccine allocation scheme. Starting with no individuals vaccinated, the algorithm allocates new immunisations randomly according to the following ratio: 100/10/1, which correspond to [age ≥ 65] / [18 ≤ age < 65] /
[age < 18 ]. That is, for every 100 individuals aged over 64 years, 10 individuals aged between
18 and 64 years are immunised and one individual under the age of 18 years is immunised.
This allocation ratio applies unless there are no remaining unvaccinated individuals in an age
category, in which case vaccines are allocated to the remaining age categories according to the
same specified proportions until the specified number of immunisations is depleted. The priority vaccines are distributed first, followed by the general vaccines. In practice, due to the
age distribution in our model of the Australian population (based on the 2016 ABS Census)
this means that all individuals aged over 65 years are immunised unless there are fewer than
3.9 × 106 total immunisations. In our hybrid mass-vaccination scenarios, we assume at least
5 × 106 priority immunisations, so the entire population over the age of 64 years is immunised
with the priority vaccine, while the remaining immunisations are distributed between children
and adults under 65 in a ratio of 10/1 (adults/children). All immunisations are allocated on
day 0 of each outbreak simulation.

D.

Growth rate estimation

Table II, Table S4, and Figure S3 report growth rates estimated from incidence data produce
by the ABM or collected from government case reports. To estimate growth rates, we fit each
case incidence timeseries to a delayed exponential function:
I(t) = exp(λ(t − ∆t)) ,

(1)

where λ is the exponential growth rate of case incidence, and the delay ∆t accounts for transient
stochastic effects during the early stages of outbreaks as well as delays in detection of new cases.
5

III.

RESULTS

We present our results in three sections, first covering questions related to herd immunity
and vaccine efficacy, then the effect of mass-vaccination on epidemic growth rate, and lastly the
effects of future lockdowns in conjunction with prepandemic mass-vaccination. Section III A
investigates the feasibility of achieving herd immunity given the existing known and unknown
aspects of COVID-19 vaccine efficacy. For clinical efficacy values of 0.9 and 0.6 (corresponding to
conservative estimates for the priority and the general vaccine, respectively), we use a homogeneous approximation to calculate the coverage required to achieve herd immunity as a function
of vaccine efficacy against susceptibility, symptom expression, and onward transmission. We
then compare the results of our ABM to the homogeneous approximation for a subset of vaccine
efficacy values. Section III B describes the effects of realistic simulated mass vaccination regimes
on epidemic growth rate. In scenarios where herd immunity is not achieved, we compute the
growth rate of cumulative incidence for different levels of vaccination coverage, in combination
with case-targeted NPIs. Section III C investigates outbreak suppression in mass-vaccination
scenarios and shows how vaccination can reduce the fraction of the population required to be
in lockdown to achieve suppression of case incidence.

A.

Herd immunity requirements: coverage and efficacy

For the purposes of modelling the effects of vaccination on the spread of COVID-19 and evaluating the requirements for herd immunity, three main components of vaccine efficacy constitute
important unknown factors:

• Efficacy for susceptibility (VEs) determines the level of immunity vaccination imparts
to those susceptible to the virus. In the ABM this parameter reduces the probability of
becoming infected if exposed.

• Efficacy for disease (VEd) determines the expression of illness in those who are vaccinated
and subsequently become infected. In the ABM this parameter reduces the probability
of expressing symptoms if infected.

• Efficacy for infectiousness (VEi) reduces the potential for vaccinated individuals to transmit the virus if infected. In the ABM, this parameter reduces the force of infection
produced by infected individuals who are vaccinated.
6

The practical bounds of the efficacy terms (VEs, VEi, and VEd) are only partially constrained
by the clinical efficacy (VEc) reported in clinical trials, since:
VEc = VEd + VEs − VEsVEd.

(2)

The clinical efficacy, VEc, is defined as the reduction in presentation of clinical disease in the
vaccine group relative to the control. The vaccine efficacy for an individual’s susceptibility and
disease, VEs and VEd, are constrained by the clinical efficacy, VEc, through Eq. (2); however,
the vaccine efficacy for infectiousness, VEi, is left undefined by clinical trial data. Although
unreported, it is crucial for VEi to be defined in order to compute the population-level vaccine
efficacy, VE, for a given proportion of the population vaccinated. For defined values of the input
parameters (coverage, VEi, VEs, and VEd), VE can be estimated from a homogeneous approximation of population mixing (see Supporting Information) and the necessary vaccine coverage
threshold for herd immunity can then be estimated by computing the effective reproductive
number, R, after vaccination:
R = R0 (1 − VE),

(3)

where R0 is the basic reproductive ratio in a completely susceptible population, and herd immunity is achieved when R < 1. In the Supporting Information Fig. S1, we provide herd immunity
thresholds in the VEi × coverage plane for different combinations of VEd and VEs constrained
through Eq. (2), with R0 = 2.75 to match the basic reproductive ratio used in our ABM.
These results show that, for herd immunity in a homogeneous system, the general vaccine
(with VEc = 0.6) must produce a substantial reduction in the transmission potential of infected individuals, with an efficacy for infectiousness (VEi) on the same order of efficacy for
susceptibility (VEs) and disease (VEd). On the other hand, Fig. S1b illustrates that a priority
vaccine with clinical efficacy of 90% (VEc = 0.9) could produce herd immunity with vaccination coverage between 64% and 86%. Moreover, as long as VEs ≥ VEd, this result can be
achieved without a substantial contribution from the unknown effect of the vaccine on reducing
infectiousness (i.e., VEi).
Of course, Australia is not a homogeneous system with respect to population mixing patterns,
and the true vaccine allocation strategy is intentionally heterogeneous, first prioritising those in
high-risk age groups and prioritising children last. For these reasons, we expected our ABM to
produce results differing from those estimated by the homogeneous approximation. To match
our scenarios to the Australian context, which has consistently maintained case-targeted non7

pharmaceutical interventions, we performed a systematic scan of efficacy parameters both with
and without combinations of detected case isolation, home quarantine of household contacts, and
international travel restrictions. While the proposed vaccination regime in Australia involves
both priority and general vaccines, initially we treat each separately in order to reduce the
complexity of the parameter space. Therefore, the results presented in this section are not
directly applicable to proposed vaccination levels in Australia, but can be used to guide intuition
with respect to the influence of different efficacy combinations and potential deviation from
estimates based on homogeneous approximations.
For a given mass-vaccination scenario, the ABM mimics the current government roll-out policy by allocating immunisations using an age-stratified system. In this system, individuals aged
65 and older are preferentially vaccinated, with second preference for those aged 18 - 64 years,
and third preference for those under the age of 18 (see Methods). We do not explicitly simulate partial vaccination (i.e., using one dose only), with the number of individuals immunised
corresponding to the prospective number of completed vaccine treatment schedules.
Our full results are given in the Supporting Information Tables S5 through S12, and are
summarised here below. Note that in the ABM, due to continuous introductions of cases from
overseas, the clustering of children into school contact networks, and age-stratified vaccine rollout, formal herd immunity is not possible (finite epidemic growth is observed for all parameter
combinations). However, a nonlinear reduction in epidemic severity with increasing vaccine coverage is observed, with a distinct threshold effect that agrees qualitatively with the predictions
of the homogeneous model (Figure 1). In the below, we refer to this nonlinear reduction as herd
immunity.
Our results show that the general vaccine (VEc = 0.6) alone cannot feasibly induce herd
immunity, even when combined with targeted non-pharmaceutical interventions. Specifically,
the general vaccine by itself (without case-targeted NPIs) can only produce the desired nonlinear
drop in peak case prevalence with an unrealistically high efficacy for infectiousness (VEi > 0.5)
and a vaccine coverage greater than 80% (Fig. S2a). However, there are still significant benefits
for feasible ranges of vaccine coverage and efficacy. Notably, peak prevalence can be reduced
by a factor of two without the need for case-targeted interventions, with central values of VEd
√
and VEs (i.e., when VEd = VEs = 1 − 1 − VEc = 0.368), a reasonable value of VEi ≈ 0.5,
and only 40% population coverage (Tab. S5). Referring to Fig. S2a, increasing this vaccine
coverage to approximately 80% reduces peak prevalence by 83–88% (Tab. S5) and delays the
peak by several weeks (Tab. S6). Finally, by combining case-targeted interventions with this 80%
coverage, the general vaccine can dramatically slow the spread of the virus (peak prevalence
8

a)

b)

average peak prevalence
(n = 10 ABM simulations)
General vaccine
with targeted interventions

herd immunity threshold (hom. approximation)
VEd = 0.368, VEs = 0.368
upper bound on plausible VEi range
VEi = 0.368

average peak prevalence
(n = 10 ABM simulations)

Priority vaccine
with targeted interventions

herd immunity threshold (hom. approximation)
VEd = 0.684, VEs = 0.684
upper bound on plausible VEi range
VEi = 0.684

1.0
3.6k active cases

1.0

Efficacy for infectiousness (VEi)

Efficacy for infectiousness (VEi)

2.3k active cases
0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2
0.44 M active cases

0.0

0.71 M
0.0
0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1.0

0.4

p ( vaccinated )

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1.0

p ( vaccinated )

FIG. 1. Simulations suggest that herd immunity is unlikely to be attained by either the general or the
priority vaccine alone. The epidemic severity shown here is simulated by the ABM over a range of values
for coverage and vaccine efficacy against infectiousness (VEi), for the general vaccine (a, VEc = 0.6) and
the priority vaccine (b, VEc = 0.9). Red circles correspond to mean peak prevalence levels produced by
ABM simulations. The solid black lines give the coverage thresholds for herd immunity estimated by the
homogeneous approximation, and the dashed lines illustrate conservative practical upper bounds
√ on VEi.
Here, central values of efficacy against disease and susceptibility were used (VEd = VEs = 1− 1 − VEc),
and case-targeted NPIs were applied in addition to vaccination.

delayed by approximately 60 days, Tab. S10), and reduce peak prevalence by 92% (Fig. 1a,
Tab. S9). As a baseline value, note that our simulations show case-targeted interventions alone
decrease peak prevalence by 32%.

The priority vaccine (VEc = 0.9), produces similar benefits with a vaccine coverage as low as
60% and central efficacy values of VEs = VEd = 0.684, VEi ∈ [0.5, 0.75] (Fig. S2b). However,
the current proposal for vaccination rollout in Australia constrains the maximum coverage of the
priority vaccine to around 40%. Therefore, substantial uptake of the less-effective general vaccine
will be required if the benefits of the priority vaccine are to be realised for the larger population.
In combination with targeted interventions, our simulations suggest that the priority vaccine
could produce herd immunity with a vaccine coverage of above 70%. For the more feasible
coverage (of 40%), the priority vaccine reduces the peak prevalence by 80% and delays the peak
by approximately 40 days (Fig. 1b, Tab. S12).
9

scenario

targeted NPIs

priority immunisations

general immunisations

no intervention

nil

nil

nil

targeted NPIs only

TR, CI, HQ*

nil

nil

5×

106

priority vaccine (5M)

”

nil

general vaccine (11.5M)

”

nil

11.5 × 106

priority vaccine (10M)

”

107

nil

priority 10M, general 2.5M

”

107

2.5 × 106

priority 10M, general 6.1M

”

107

6.1 × 106

priority 10M, general 10.7M

”

107

10.7 × 106

TABLE I. Selected vaccination scenarios simulated with the ABM. The numbers under “priority immunisations" and “general immunisations" correspond to the number of individuals who have undergone a
full vaccination regime (i.e., a two-dose regime for the priority vaccine). *TR: travel restrictions (ban
on international travel), CI: case isolation (in-home isolation of detected cases), HQ: home quarantine
(in-home isolation for household contacts of detected cases).

B.

Effects of mass-vaccination on epidemic growth

To investigate the possible effects of realistic mass-vaccination strategies on epidemic growth
dynamics, we selected central values of efficacy for the priority vaccine (VEi = VEs = VEd =
0.684) and general vaccine (VEi = VEs = VEd = 0.368), and simulated initial epidemic growth
in eight different scenarios (Tab. I). We find that realistic hybrid vaccination campaigns systematically reduce epidemic growth rate with increasing coverage (by up to a factor of two).
However, we do not identify a distinct coverage level beyond which growth rate decreases sharply
(i.e., a herd immunity threshold).
To improve the realism of our model for simulating hybrid vaccination scenarios, we use the
latest estimates of coverage with the priority vaccine (enough has been ordered at the time of
writing to vaccinate up to 10M individuals, or approximately 40% of the population), and the
general vaccine. We assume that the general vaccine will not be subject to supply constraints,
with coverage limited instead by uptake. To reflect the current situation in Australia where the
disease is currently controlled, we do not simulate a progressive rollout during the outbreak.
Instead, we explore different coverage levels as a proxy for timing of the next epidemic wave
between the beginning and end of the vaccination campaign. We compare scenarios ranging
from a relatively small number of priority vaccine immunisations (5M two-dose vaccinations),
to a realistic endpoint scenario with 10M priority (two-dose) immunisations and an additional
10.7M general immunisations, for coverage on the order of 90%.
For each scenario, we simulated 110 realisations of outbreaks and estimated the expected
growth rate of cumulative incidence for the first 2 000 cases (Fig. 2). To do so, we computed the
10

a)

b)
2

Case-targeted NPIs only
Priority: 10M
Priority: 10M, General: 10.7M

8
7
6
5
4
3
2

10
8
7
6
5

Priority: 10 M, General 10.7 M
Priority: 10 M, General 6.1 M
Priority: 10 M, General 2.1 M
Priority: 10 M
General 11.5 M
Priority: 5 M
Case-targeted NPIs only

4
3
2

1
0

20

40

60

80

100

cumulative incidence by age
(total = 2000 cases)

new COVID-19 cases (detected)

100

120

1400
1200
1000
800
600
400
200
0

age 0 to 18

age 19 to 64

age 65 and over

days since first detected case

FIG. 2. Hybrid vaccination programs produce up to a two-fold reduction of the epidemic growth rate.
Individual incidence trajectories are color-coded by mass-vaccination scenario (110 trajectories are shown
for each). Each trajectory ends at the time the lockdown trigger condition was reached (cumulative
incidence exceeding 2000 cases). Subplot (a) shows log-scaled incidence trajectories for each vaccination
scenario. Subplot (b) shows the distribution of the first 2000 cases in the three age groups used to
prioritise vaccination in three representative scenarios (error bars show standard deviations over 110
realisations). Summary growth rate statistics for each scenario are given in Tab. II.

incidence growth rate of each realisation (see Methods) and estimated the mean growth rate
over all realisations of each mass-vaccination scenario (Tab. II). Initial growth of case incidence
decreases gradually as vaccination levels increase (Fig. 2). With 10M priority immunisations
(maximum projected supply), the growth rate decreased by 28% relative to the rate computed
with targeted NPIs only. At a feasible endpoint condition with 88% of the population vaccinated
(10M priority and 10.7M general immunisations), the average growth rate decreases by 52%
(from 0.118 d−1 with targeted NPIs only, to 0.057 d−1 with vaccination). Log-scaled plots
of initial case incidence (Figure 2a) clearly demonstrate the lack of a defined herd immunity
threshold within the set of plausible scenarios we investigated. This is surprising given the high
levels of vaccine coverage reached. The distribution of the first 2000 cases between age groups
suggests that systematically placing children at low priority for immunisation may increase the
required threshold for nonlinear reductions in epidemic growth rate (Figure 2b). Based on the
risk-averse precedent for COVID-19 response in Australia, it is plausible that even the relatively
slow spreading rates we calculate for the endpoint vaccination scenario would lead to some level
of lockdown imposition, which we address in the following section.

11

scenario

mean growth rate

quantiles [5%, 95%]

95% CI (mean, bootstrap)

no intervention

0.137

[0.128, 0.146]

[0.1356, 0.1376]

targeted NPIs only

0.118

[0.110, 0.127]

[0.1171, 0.1189 ]

priority vaccine (5M)

0.104

[0.097, 0.112]

[0.1034, 0.1052]

general vaccine (11.5M)

0.091

[0.083 0.099]

[0.0901, 0.0917]

priority vaccine (10M)

0.085

[0.076, 0.092]

[0.0843, 0.0859]

priority 10M, general 2.5M

0.078

[0.072, 0.087]

[0.0771, 0.0787]

priority 10M, general 6.1M

0.067

[0.061, 0.072]

[0.0666, 0.0679]

priority 10M, general 10.7M

0.057

[0.052, 0.062]

[0.0562, 0.0573]

TABLE II. Growth rates of daily incidence for eight different intervention scenarios. For each scenario,
growth rates were computed for 110 realisations. The values shown here are ensemble means from each
scenario, as well as the 5% and 95% quantiles of the growth rate distribution from each set of realisations
and the 95% bootstrap confidence interval for the mean.

C.

Effects of mass-vaccination on lockdown requirements

For the realistic vaccination scenarios given in Tab. I, we estimated the level of lockdown compliance required to suppress epidemic growth. In each scenario, the population-scale physical
distancing (lockdown) measures were enacted when the epidemic reached cumulative incidence
of 2 000 cases. Figure 3 illustrates how epidemic dynamics depend on vaccination levels, and
how these dynamics respond to the implementation of lockdown restrictions. Incidence initially
increases exponentially, and the growth rate is reduced after the imposition of lockdown restrictions (occurring at approximately day 50 in Fig. 3a, and at day 120 in Fig. 3b). If enough of the
population complies with physical distancing measures, the growth rate becomes negative and
the conditions for eventual suppression are met. In concordance with our previous work [1], this
threshold lies between 60% and 70% compliance when only NPIs are considered. In these simulations, vaccination systematically decreased the fraction of the population required to maintain
physical distancing restrictions in order to suppress epidemic spread. Summary results shown
in Fig. 4 demonstrate how this compliance threshold depends on the level of vaccination. At
the endpoint condition of 10M priority immunisations and 10.7M general immunisations, the
lockdown compliance threshold drops to approximately 40% (Fig. 3b, Fig. 4). In the Supplementary Material, we show results obtained for higher general vaccine efficacy (raised from
VEc = 0.6 to VEc = 0.75, Figure S5), demonstrating that this approximate threshold was not
sensitive within this range to the precise efficacy value used for the general vaccine.
In addition to reducing the lockdown compliance threshold, vaccination reduces the growth
rate of the epidemic even in the absence of lockdown restrictions, so incidence levels during
outbreaks decrease dramatically for the same proportion of the population complying with
12

a)

b)

Case-targeted NPIs only

Priority: 10M, General: 10.7M
(with case-targeted NPIs)

% of population in lockdown

4

10

5

new COVID-19 cases (detected)

new COVID-19 cases (detected)

% of population in lockdown

[0%, 10%, 20%, 30%, 40%]
50%
60%
70%
80%
[90%, 100%]

5

10

3

10

2

10

1

10

0

10

[0%, 10%]
20%
30%
40%
50%
[60%, 70%, 80%, 90%, 100%]

4

10

3

10

2

10

1

10

0

10

10
0

50

100

150

0

simulation days

50

100

150

simulation days

FIG. 3. Our simulations suggest that realistic hybrid vaccinations strategies reduce the required intensity
of lockdowns (mandated physical distancing) by a factor of two. Timeseries plots of representative case
incidence trajectories for the scenario with targeted NPIs only (a) demonstrate a lockdown compliance
threshold for elimination lying between 60% and 70%. Similar plots for the vaccination scenario with
10M priority vaccinations (VEc = 0.9; VEi = VEs = VEd = 0.684) and 10.7M general vaccinations (VEc
= 0.6; VEi = VEs = VEd = 0.368), in addition to case-targeted NPIs, (b) show a lockdown compliance
threshold for elimination lying between 30% and 40%.

physical distancing. For example, Figure 4 demonstrates that, 60 days after the beginning of
lockdown, the complete vaccination program consistently decreases case incidence by almost
two orders of magnitude, independently to the proportion of the population complying. Such
a difference in case incidence could be expected to have a dramatic impact on the projected
strain to medical infrastructure, even without considering vaccine efficacy for severe disease.
Additionally, Figure 2 and Figure 4 demonstrate that, due to slower epidemic growth with
vaccination, case incidence at the onset of lockdown decreases from approximately 250 cases
per day (targeted NPIs only), down to 100 cases per day (completed vaccination program).
Taken together, these results indicate that vaccination would allow for shorter, less restrictive
physical distancing mandates, if such measures were required in order to suppress subsequent
outbreaks.

IV.

DISCUSSION

Stochastic agent-based models have been established as robust tools for tracing fine-grained
effects of complex intervention policies in diverse epidemic and pandemic settings [13, 14].
ABM studies have produced policy recommendations developed for the control of COVID-19
outbreaks, which have been adopted broadly by the WHO [15].
Typically, ABMs simulate each individual separately, aiming to account for heterogeneity
13

Case incidence after 60 days of lockdown
Priority: 10 M, General: 10.7 M
Priority: 10 M, General: 6.1 M
Priority: 10 M
General: 11.5 M
Priority: 5 M
Case-targeted NPIs only

5

4

5

10

4

10

10

3

3

10

10

2

2

10

10

1

1

10

10

Elimination
threshold
(approximate)

0

10

0

10

-1

new COVID-19 cases, beginning of lockdown

new COVID-19 cases, 60 days after lockdown

10

-1

10

10
0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

proportion of population in lockdown

FIG. 4. The intensity of lockdown required for gradual elimination of the virus steadily decreases with
increasing vaccination levels. Solid lines connect ensemble averages of case incidence 60 days into the
lockdown period for each scenario (left y-axis) while the values recorded from each individual simulation
are shown as symbols. Each horizontal dashed line corresponds to the average incidence at the onset of
lockdown (right y axis) for the vaccination scenario labelled with the same color. The vertical dashed
lines correspond to the approximate proportion of the population in lockdown required for case incidence
to decrease, in each vaccination scenario.

of demographic and epidemic conditions, as well as details of social interactions and mobility
patterns. This approach has a relatively high computational cost, driven by calibration of
numerous internal ABM parameters [1, 16] and reconstruction of mobility patterns. However,
ABMs offer an important advantage, combining both behavioural and mechanical adequacy of
the model mechanism. Behavioural adequacy is verified by comparing simulated and actual
epidemic patterns. Mechanical adequacy ensures, in addition, that the natural history of the
disease progresses in concordance with the known estimates of incubation periods, serial and
generation intervals, and other key parameters. Two ABMs, verified with respect to both
behavioural and mechanical adequacy, provided a strong foundation for our study: ACEMod
developed to simulate influenza pandemics [17], and AMTraC-19 created to simulate COVID19 [1].
Our early COVID-19 study [1] compared several non-pharmaceutical intervention strategies
and identified the minimal levels of social distancing required to control the pandemic. A
compliance rate below 70% was found to be inadequate for any duration of social distancing,
while a compliance at the 90% level was shown to control the disease within 13-14 weeks,
when coupled with other restrictions. In another study we modelled pre-pandemic vaccination
14

and targeted antiviral prophylaxis for influenza pandemics in Australia [18]. However, the
COVID-19 pandemic demands new intervention protocols, optimised for given vaccine efficacy
and coverage [19, 20], and accounting for logistical constraints, limited supply and hesitancy.
An early investigation by [19] modelled trade-offs between the vaccine efficacy and vaccination coverage, before and during an epidemic in the USA. The work showed that in order
to prevent an epidemic, the efficacy has to be at least 60% when vaccination coverage is perfect (100%), and when the latter reduces to 60%, the necessary efficacy threshold increases
to 80%. During an ongoing epidemic, higher efficacy thresholds were found to be needed to
significantly reduce peak severity. The study of [20] modelled several vaccine components, in
particular distinguishing between the vaccine types that may reduce susceptibility by inhibiting viral transmission (thus, indirectly protecting the individual) and the vaccine types that
directly protect only the vaccinated individual by reducing the probability of developing severe
symptoms. Importantly, this study suggested that vaccinating older age groups initially may
prevent a second wave within the UK, but only if the vaccine reduces both transmission and
disease. Even in this optimistic scenario, only a highly efficacious vaccine, delivered to at least
70% of the population, was shown to succeed without NPIs. A high level of vaccination was
also shown to be required in France, based on the ABM developed by [21] who reported that
vaccinating only priority groups (e.g., older adults) would be insufficient to lift NPIs.
Thus, while it is clear that vaccination cannot provide herd immunity without mass population coverage, to what extent coverage requirements can be alleviated by maintaining some
(relaxed) level of social distancing and other suppression measures in a highly heterogeneous demographic setting remains an open and country-specific question. This question becomes more
complex when several vaccines are considered, each with a different combination of efficacy
against susceptibility, infectiousness and disease.
In attempting to reduce uncertainty of this complex space, we considered different mass vaccination scenarios tailored to the current situation in Australia, while varying the key intervention
parameters. As a result, we identified several salient trade-offs between the (pre-pandemic) vaccination and (future) lockdown requirements. Qualitatively, these trade-offs are not dissimilar
to those reported in [19], however, the thresholds which we quantified for Australia are specific
for a more refined, hybrid, mass vaccination campaign (with priority and general vaccines). We
also reinforce the findings of [20] with respect to separate components of the vaccine efficacy:
future outbreaks become preventable only when the distributed vaccines avert transmission as
well as disease. Crucially, no combination of realistic vaccine efficacy values was found to completely eliminate the pandemic threat in Australia without population-scale NPIs, under the
15

feasible vaccination coverage extents that we simulated. This is somewhat different from the
results of [20], where such an outcome was shown to be theoretically possible in UK, but only by
adopting a highly efficacious vaccine. The necessity of partial lockdowns is in concordance with
the analysis of [21] which highlighted the difficulties in lifting NPIs under realistic vaccination
strategies considered in France.
There is a remaining uncertainty about the clinical efficacy of ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 (Oxford/AstraZeneca) vaccine. An interim analysis of four randomised controlled trials carried out
in three countries (Brazil, South Africa, and the UK) between April and November 2020 suggested a vaccine efficacy of 62.1% (95% CI: 41.0–75.7) in participants who received two standard
doses separated by four weeks [22]. When two standard doses were separated by 12 weeks or
longer, the vaccine efficacy was observed to be higher at 81.3% (95% CI: 60.3–91.2) [23]. However, the follow-up study did not explicitly account for seasonal effects and variation between
the trial countries in terms of the epidemic intensity (as well as circulating viral variants). In
addition, these trials were not designed to discriminate between vaccine efficacies by dose interval, and therefore, these encouraging “post-hoc exploratory findings could be biased” [24].
Given the reported wide confidence intervals and a possible bias, we adopted a conservative
estimate for efficacy of the general vaccine (i.e., 60%), while varying different components of
the efficacy in a broader range. Furthermore, we found that our results regarding the lockdown
compliance rate required for elimination did not change when we increased the efficacy of the
general vaccine from VEc = 0.6 to VEc = 0.75 (Figure S5).
Our finding, that herd immunity is not attained even when a large proportion (88%) of
the population is vaccinated, can be explained as a consequence of two correlated sources of
heterogeneity. The first is structural, and occurs due to the unavoidable clustering of children
in schools and classrooms. The second is imposed by the choice to place children at low priority
for immunisation (due to typically low disease severity in this cohort). In Australia, schoolaged children (aged from 5 to 18 years), comprise approximately 15% of the total population
(with about 5% composed of children under the age of 5). Therefore, even with 90% of the
population vaccinated, roughly half of the child population will remain fully susceptible to the
virus. Of those who are vaccinated, very few (if any) will receive the priority vaccine. In our
ABM, the result is an interconnected subpopulation with high susceptibility. During outbreaks,
this produces deviations from the homogeneous approximation in the form of heterogeneous
epidemic spread strongly biased towards school-aged children.
It has been widely established that children are at much lower risk of severe COVID-19
disease. However, estimates of transmission rates among children are made difficult by the
16

relatively low rate of symptom expression in young cohorts [25]. The current advice from the
United States CDC suggests an emerging consensus that transmission rates in young people are
similar to those in the adult population [26]In our model of COVID-19 transmission, we did
not truncate the susceptibility or infectiousness of children but we did assume a lower rate of
symptom expression, in line with the available evidence [1].
Taken together, these factors mean that age-stratified vaccine prioritisation represents a
trade-off: by comprehensively vaccinating older adults with the priority vaccine, the system
ensures lower levels of severe disease in the highest-risk cohort, even with low levels of coverage.
However, our results demonstrate that this may come at the cost of precluding eventual herd
immunity as the virus continues to spread slowly among the (largely asymptomatic) young
cohort. Meehan et al. simulated optimised vaccination strategies and demonstrated that in
order to achieve herd immunity, those at highest risk of transmission must be targeted for
immunisation [27]. In our model, infections in children produce a high transmission risk, despite
presenting a low risk of symptomatic disease. In this context, and given the current uncertainty
with respect to efficacy of COVID-19 vaccines on transmission, our results demonstrate that the
Australian strategy trades possible herd immunity for a reduction in severe case load potential.

A.

Limitations and future work

In comparison with [1], our model included a more refined natural history of the disease,
calibrated to recent outbreaks which occurred after the first wave in Australia. Nevertheless, the
model does not explicitly capture in-hotel quarantine, hospitalisations, and in-hospital transmissions. This limitation is offset by the fact that in Australia’s vaccination plan, healthcare and
border control professionals are included in the priority vaccination phase, carried out in a prepandemic mode. We also do not systematically quantify mortality rates, and do not elaborate
on the expanding disease surveillance capacity and standard clinical pathways in Australia [28].
As we pointed out, no herd immunity is attainable under realistic and feasible conditions.
This outcome has several ramifications beyond the direct consequences of future partial lockdowns. On the one hand, the main reason for the inadequate collective immunity is the existence
of highly clustered, networked communities (e.g., educational, religious and community groups,
etc.). This highlights the need for a more sophisticated simulation of contact networks , in
addition to the workplace/school environments generated from the census data. On the other
hand, the lack of herd immunity may affect the behaviour of the “free-riders” who typically
exploit the collective protection of mass immunisation while not committing to the vaccination themselves. This may create a feedback loop, reducing vaccine hesitancy in the near- to
17

mid-term, and generating long-term oscillatory dynamics in vaccine adoption [29].

Another

caveat is that our ABM population is matched to the latest Australian Census data, which was
collected in 2016. This produces a model population of 23.4M individuals, which is smaller
than the current Australian population by approximately 2M people. Due to this discrepancy,
the coverage proportions defined for fixed numbers of vaccines are slightly inflated in our simulations (by about 8%), relative to what would be achieved with the current population count.
Because we did not identify a threshold in epidemic severity as a function of vaccine coverage
in our hybrid scenarios, we do not expect this discrepancy to qualitatively alter our results.

V.

CONCLUSION

In this work, we extended a high-resolution agent-based model of COVID-19 mitigation
and control to simulate the effects of coupled vaccination and non-pharmaceutical strategies
on future outbreaks in Australia. We found that, combined with case-targeted interventions,
a completed mass-vaccination campaign using both a 90% effective vaccine for priority populations and a 60% effective vaccine for the general population would dramatically slow viral
spread but would not produce herd immunity. If a community transmission outbreak were to
occur during or after the vaccination campaign, population-scale non-pharmaceutical interventions (i.e., lockdown) would be necessary to curb transmission. In our simulations, the required
extent and duration of these measures decreased gradually with the level of vaccination coverage
obtained by the time of the outbreak. For realistic endpoint conditions, with 90% of the population vaccinated, the required lockdown intensity and initial epidemic growth rate decreased
by 43% and 52%, respectively. Due to coupling between these two factors (broadening of the
epidemic curve and increased effectiveness of nonpharmaceutical interventions), the severity of
epidemics as measured by the peak number of new cases over a 24hr period decreased by up to
two orders of magnitude under plausible mass-vaccination campaign endpoint conditions.
With respect to the prognosis for future outbreaks of COVID-19 in Australia, several important questions remain unaddressed by our study. Because we did not model the effect of
vaccination on hospital case load, medical infrastructure, and mortality, our results do not directly inform estimates of the trade-off between the socioeconomic costs of lockdown and the
human cost of allowing a low level of COVID-19 transmission. Finally, at the time of writing,
several SARS-CoV-2 variants of concern have been identified. Among them, variant B.1.1.7,
which emerged in the United Kingdom and has spread globally, was associated with increased
transmission potential: specifically, its R0 was estimated to be 43-90% (95% CrI: 38–130%)
higher than reproduction number of preexisting variants [30]. Variant B.1.351 (originally iden18

tified in South Africa) has been provisionally associated with lower rates of neutralisation by
polyclonal antibodies, and variant P.1 (thought to have originated in Brazil) has been associated
with a major outbreak in a population thought to be effectively immune [31, 32]. Given the
currently low level of understanding about the implications of these variants in future outbreak
scenarios, our results should be viewed as optimistic guidelines that assume the continuing
vaccination efforts can keep pace with the evolution of SARS-CoV-2.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was partially supported by the Australian Research Council grant DP200103005
(MP and SLC). Additionally, CZ is supported in part by National Health and Medical Research
Council project grant (APP1165876). We are also grateful to Nicholas Geard, Nathan Harding,
Stuart Kauffman, Stephen Leeder, Ben Marais, Emma McBryde, Jodie McVernon, Michael
Meehan, Rebecca Rockett, Vitali Sintchenko, Tania Sorrell, James Trauer, and James Wood for
their advice and useful discussions on various issues and challenges of COVID-19 epidemiology,
vaccination, and public health. AMTraC-19 is registered under The University of Sydney’s
invention disclosure CDIP Ref. 2020-018. We are thankful for support provided by HighPerformance Computing (HPC) service (Artemis) at the University of Sydney.

REFERENCES

[1] Chang SL, Harding N, Zachreson C, Cliff OM, Prokopenko M. Modelling transmission and control
of the COVID-19 pandemic in Australia. Nature Communications. 2020;11(1):1–13.
[2] Zachreson C, Mitchell L, Lydeamore MJ, Rebuli N, Tomko M, Geard N.

Risk mapping for

COVID-19 outbreaks in Australia using mobility data. Journal of the Royal Society Interface.
2021;18(174):20200657.
[3] Hanly MJ, Churches T, Fitzgerald O, McIntyre CR, Jorm L. Vaccinating Australia: How long will
it take? medRxiv. 2021.
[4] Dagan N, Barda N, Kepten E, Miron O, Perchik S, Katz MA, et al.

BNT162b2 mRNA

COVID-19 vaccine in a nationwide mass vaccination setting. New England Journal of Medicine.
2021:10.1056/NEJMoa2101765.
[5] Knoll MD, Wonodi C.

Oxford–AstraZeneca COVID-19 vaccine efficacy.

2021;397(10269):72–74.

19

The Lancet.

[6] Rockett RJ, Arnott A, Lam C, Sadsad R, Timms V, Gray KA, et al.

Revealing COVID-19

transmission by SARS-CoV-2 genome sequencing and agent based modelling. Nature Medicine.
2020;26:1398–1404.
[7] Lauer SA, Grantz KH, Bi Q, Jones FK, Zheng Q, Meredith HR, et al. The incubation period
of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) from publicly reported confirmed cases: estimation and
application. Annals of Internal Medicine. 2020;172(9):577–582.
[8] Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Interim Guidance on Duration of Isolation and Precautions for Adults with COVID-9; 2020. https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/hcp/
duration-isolation.html.
[9] Wölfel R, Corman VM, Guggemos W, Seilmaier M, Zange S, Müller MA, et al. Virological assessment of hospitalized patients with COVID-2019. Nature. 2020;581(7809):465–469.
[10] Ferretti L, Wymant C, Kendall M, Zhao L, Nurtay A, Abeler-Dörner L, et al. Quantifying SARSCoV-2 transmission suggests epidemic control with digital contact tracing. Science. 2020;368(6491).
[11] Wu JT, Leung K, Bushman M, Kishore N, Niehus R, de Salazar PM, et al. Estimating clinical severity of COVID-19 from the transmission dynamics in Wuhan, China. Nature Medicine.
2020;26(4):506–510.
[12] Billah MA, Miah MM, Khan MN. Reproductive number of coronavirus: A systematic review and
meta-analysis based on global level evidence. PloS ONE. 2020;15(11):e0242128.
[13] Germann TC, Kadau K, Longini IM, Macken CA. Mitigation strategies for pandemic influenza in
the United States. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 2006 Apr;103(15):5935–5940.
[14] Nsoesie EO, Beckman RJ, Marathe MV. Sensitivity analysis of an individual-based model for
simulation of influenza epidemics. PLOS ONE. 2012;7(10):0045414.
[15] World Health Organization. Calibrating long-term non-pharmaceutical interventions for COVID19: Principles and facilitation tools — Manila: WHO Regional Office for the Western Pacific;
Strengthening the health systems response to COVID-19: Technical guidance# 2: Creating surge
capacity for acute and intensive care, 6 April 2020 — Regional Office for Europe; 2020.
[16] Ferguson NM, Laydon D, Nedjati-Gilani G, Imai N, Ainslie K, Baguelin M, et al. Impact of
non-pharmaceutical interventions (NPIs) to reduce COVID-19 mortality and healthcare demand.
Preprint, Imperial College COVID-19 Response Team. 2020.
[17] Cliff OM, Harding M, Piraveen M, Erten Y, Gambhir M, Prokopenko M. Investigating spatiotemporal dynamics and synchrony of influenza epidemics in Australia: an agent-based modelling approach.
Simulation Modelling Practice and Theory. 2018;87:412–431.
[18] Zachreson C, Fair KM, Harding N, Prokopenko M. Interfering with influenza: nonlinear coupling of reactive and static mitigation strategies.

Journal of The Royal Society Interface.

2020;17(165):20190728.
[19] Bartsch SM, O’Shea KJ, Ferguson MC, Bottazzi ME, Wedlock PT, Strych U, et al. Vaccine efficacy
needed for a COVID-19 coronavirus vaccine to prevent or stop an epidemic as the sole intervention.
American Journal of Preventive Medicine. 2020;59(4):493–503.

20

[20] Moore S, Hill EM, Dyson L, Tildesley M, Keeling MJ. Modelling optimal vaccination strategy for
SARS-CoV-2 in the UK. medRxiv. 2020.
[21] Hoertel N, Blachier M, Limosin F, Sánchez-Rico M, Blanco C, Olfson M, et al. Optimizing SARSCoV-2 vaccination strategies in France: Results from a stochastic agent-based model. medRxiv.
2021.
[22] Voysey M, Clemens SAC, Madhi SA, Weckx LY, Folegatti PM, Aley PK, et al. Safety and efficacy
of the ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 vaccine (AZD1222) against SARS-CoV-2: an interim analysis of four
randomised controlled trials in Brazil, South Africa, and the UK. The Lancet. 2021;397(10269):99–
111.
[23] Voysey M, Clemens SAC, Madhi SA, Weckx LY, Folegatti PM, Aley PK, et al. Single-dose administration and the influence of the timing of the booster dose on immunogenicity and efficacy of
ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 (AZD1222) vaccine: a pooled analysis of four randomised trials. The Lancet.
2021;397:881–891.
[24] Hung IF, Poland GA. Single-dose Oxford–AstraZeneca COVID-19 vaccine followed by a 12-week
booster. The Lancet. 2021;397(10277):854–855.
[25] Flasche S, Edmunds WJ. The role of schools and school-aged children in SARS-CoV-2 transmission.
The Lancet Infectious Diseases. 2021;21(3):298–299.
[26] Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. COVID-19 Information for Pediatric Healthcare
Providers; 2020. https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/hcp/pediatric-hcp.html.
[27] Meehan MT, Cocks DG, Caldwell JM, Trauer JM, Adekunle AI, Ragonnet RR, et al. Age-targeted
dose allocation can halve COVID-19 vaccine requirements. medRxiv. 2020.
[28] Moss R, Wood J, Brown D, Shearer F, Black AJ, Cheng A, et al. Modelling the impact of COVID-19
in Australia to inform transmission reducing measures and health system preparedness. medRxiv.
2020.
[29] Chang SL, Piraveenan M, Prokopenko M. Impact of network assortativity on epidemic and vaccination behaviour. Chaos, Solitons & Fractals. 2020;140:110143.
[30] Davies NG, Abbott S, Barnard RC, Jarvis CI, Kucharski AJ, Munday JD, et al. Estimated transmissibility and impact of SARS-CoV-2 lineage B.1.1.7 in England. Science. 2021.
[31] Greaney AJ, Loes AN, Crawford KH, Starr TN, Malone KD, Chu HY, et al. Comprehensive mapping
of mutations in the SARS-CoV-2 receptor-binding domain that affect recognition by polyclonal
human plasma antibodies. Cell Host & Microbe. 2021.
[32] Sabino EC, Buss LF, Carvalho MP, Prete CA, Crispim MA, Fraiji NA, et al. Resurgence of COVID19 in Manaus, Brazil, despite high seroprevalence. The Lancet. 2021;397(10273):452–455.

21

S1.

SUPPORTING INFORMATION

A.

Constraints on vaccine efficacy

The efficacy of a vaccine can be decomposed into three components:
• the efficacy for susceptibility (VEs) which determines the level of immunity induced in
susceptible individuals
• the efficacy for disease (VEd) which determines protection against symptomatic illness if
a vaccinated individual is infected
• efficacy against infectiousness (VEi) which determines how contagious a vaccinated individual will be if they become infected
The clinical efficacy (VEc), which is measured in stage-3 clinical trials and corresponds to the
reported efficacy numbers for both vaccines, is a function of VEs and VEd, neither of which are
directly measured:
VEc = VEd + VEs − VEsVEd,

(S1)

while the efficacy for transmission, VE, which is the value of interest for computing herd immunity is a function of vaccine coverage (c), VEi, VEs, and VEd. Because VEi is not constrained
by VEc through Equation S1, the population-level effectiveness is currently uncertain for both
vaccines.
In the worst-case scenario, the factor VEd would account for 100% of the clinical efficacy
(VEd = VEc, VEs = 0), and the efficacy against transmission would be negligible (VEi = 0),
which would leave all unvaccinated individuals unprotected. In this scenario, herd immunity
is not possible per se (though complete coverage would provide clinical protection to the entire population). In the best-case scenario, efficacy against symptoms would be maximised
(VEd = VEc), protecting all vaccinated individuals regardless of their infection status, while
the unknown parameter VEi would take a value of 1, and all transmission from vaccinated individuals would cease, protecting both vaccinated and unvaccinated subpopulations. In reality,
the true efficacy values will lie between these extremes, and may be correlated. For example,
because symptoms may increase the contagiousness of those infected, VEd can positively influence VEi. On the other hand, symptoms can also lead to case detection and behavioural
change, which may produce a negative relationship between VEd and VEi.
S1

B.

Vaccine efficacy: homogeneous approximation

Here, we give a homogeneous approximation for vaccine efficacy and the associated herd
immunity thresholds as functions of VEs, VEi, and VEd. We derive an expression for overall
reduction to force of infection provided by a vaccination program with coverage c ∈ [0, 1] as
follows:
VE = 1 − Fvax /Fo ,

(S2)

where Fo is proportional to the overall force of infection when none of the population is vaccinated, and Fvax is the relative reduction to force of infection produced through vaccination.
For a given prevalence of infection p(infected) = Ninfected /Ntot << 1 = 1 − p(susceptible), and
assuming a negligible recovered population, we compute Fo as:
Fo = βo2 p(infected) p(susceptible) ,

(S3)

in which βo is the average force of infection produced by an infected individual who is unvaccinated:
βo = β(ps + a(1 − ps ))

(S4)

in which β is the force of infection from a symptomatic individual, ps is the probability of
expressing symptoms if infected and unvaccinated (in this work we assumed a symptomatic
fraction of 2/3) and a is the factor by which force of infection is reduced if an infected agent is
asymptomatic (for this work a = 0.3). The p(infected)p(susceptible) term in Eq. (S3) captures
the potential for interaction between susceptible and infected individuals, the potential for
transmission given interaction is given by one of the βo terms, and the infectious potential of
the newly infected individual, should transmission take place, is given by the second βo term.
The relative force of infection with vaccination, Fvax , can be found similarly by summing the
potential for contact and transmission between individuals with different vaccination status:
Fvax = Funvax→unvax + Funvax→vax + Fvax→unvax + Fvax→vax. ,

(S5)

where
Funvax→vax = ββvax (1 − VEs) p(infected, unvaccinated) p(susceptible, vaccinated) ,
S2

(S6)

in which
βvax = β(1 − VEi) [ps (1 − VEd) + a(1 − ps (1 − VEd))] ,

(S7)

is the average force of infection from a vaccinated individual who becomes infected. Note that
both VEi and VEd play a role in computing βvax . The remaining terms of Eq. (S5) are:
Fvax→unvax = βvax βo p(infected, vaccinated) p(susceptible, unvaccinated) ,

(S8)

2
Fvax→vax = βvax
(1 − VEs) p(infected, vaccinated) p(susceptible, vaccinated) .

(S9)

and

The joint probabilities
• p(infected, unvaccinated),
• p(infected, vaccinated),
• p(susceptible, unvaccinated), and
• p(susceptible, vaccinated)
can be represented as products of the conditional and independent probabilities of infection,
vaccination, and infection given vaccination:
p(infected, unvaccinated) = p(infected | unvaccinated) p(unvaccinated) ,

(S10)

p(susceptible, unvaccinated) = p(susceptible | unvaccinated) p(unvaccinated) ,

(S11)

p(infected, vaccinated) = p(infected | vaccinated) p(vaccinated) ,

(S12)

p(susceptible, vaccinated) = p(susceptible | vaccinated) p(vaccinated) ,

(S13)

p(vaccinated) = c ,

(S14)

where

S3

p(unvaccinated) = 1 − c ,

(S15)

p(susceptible | unvaccinated) = 1 − p(infected | unvaccinated) ,

(S16)

p(susceptible | vaccinated) = 1 − p(infected | vaccinated) ,

(S17)

p(infected | unvaccinated) =

p(infected) − p(infected | vaccinated) p(vaccinated)
,
1 − p(vaccinated)

(S18)

and
p(infected | vaccinated) = p(infected) (1 − VEs)

βvax
,
β

(S19)

where the ratio βvax /β gives the effect of VEd and VEi on infectiousness of vaccinated individuals
(Eq. (S7)). Here, the state denoted “infected" would more precisely be described as “infectious",
because VEi and VEd reduce transmission potential without reducing the infection probability
of vaccinated individuals.
Assuming that the effective reproductive ratio R is proportional to the force of infection
Fvax , it can be computed from the total efficacy, VE, as
R = R0 (1 − VE),

(S20)

where R0 is the basic reproductive number for the epidemic, which we set to R0 = 2.75 in the
present work. Using R0 = 2.75, Fig. S1 demonstrates the coverage threshold for herd immunity
as a function of VEi, VEs, and VEd given VEc = 0.6 (Fig. S1a), and VEc = 0.9 (Fig.S1b).
The homogeneous approximation corresponds qualitatively to the results of the ABM which
demonstrates a dramatic decrease in peak prevalence after increasing coverage crosses the R = 1
boundary estimated by evaluating Eq. (S20) for R0 = 2.75 (Fig. S2). However, while prevalence
is dramatically decreased, we still observed positive growth rates for parameter combinations
which correspond to R < 1. Furthermore, for the less-effective general vaccine, the boundary
computed through the homogeneous approximation does not correspond to a large decrease in
peak prevalence when VEi ≤ 0.5 (Fig. S2a and S2c). For the priority vaccine (VEc = 0.9), the
threshold computed through the homogeneous approximation matched the observed nonlinear
S4

a)

b)
VEc = 0.6

VEc = 0.9
1.0
VEd = 0.0, VEs = 0.60
VEd = 0.1, VEs = 0.56
VEd = 0.2, VEs = 0.50
VEd = 0.3, VEs = 0.43
VEd = 0.4, VEs = 0.33
VEd = 0.5, VEs = 0.20
VEd = 0.6, VEs = 0.0

0.8

Efficacy for infectiousness (VEi)

Efficacy for infectiousness (VEi)

1.0

0.6

Reff < 1
0.4

Reff > 1

VEd = 0.0, VEs = 0.9
VEd = 0.1, VEs = 0.89
VEd = 0.3, VEs = 0.86
VEd = 0.4, VEs = 0.83
VEd = 0.5, VEs = 0.80
VEd = 0.6, VEs = 0.75
VEd = 0.7, VEs = 0.67
VEd = 0.8, VEs = 0.5
VEd = 0.9, VEs = 0.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

Reff < 1
0.2

0.2

Reff > 1
0.0
0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

0.6

p ( vaccinated )

0.7

0.8

0.9

p ( vaccinated )

FIG. S1. Herd immunity thresholds as functions of efficacy for infectiousness (VEi) and vaccine coverage
(p(vaccinated)) computed through a homogeneous approximation of vaccine effectiveness taking into
account three forms of vaccine efficacy (VEs, VEd, and VEi). Subplot (a) shows thresholds for the
general vaccine, with clinical efficacy VEc = 0.6, while subplot (a) shows thresholds for the priority
vaccine with clinical efficacy VEc = 0.9.

decrease in peak prevalence more closely (Fig. S2b, and Fig. S2), but finite epidemics were still
observed for all cases. The boundary computed by the homogeneous approximation should
therefore be viewed as an optimistic estimate of coverage threshold.

S5

average peak prevalence
(n = 10 ABM simulations)

a)

General vaccine only

herd immunity threshold (hom. approximation)
VEd = 0.368, VEs = 0.368

b)

average peak prevalence
(n = 10 ABM simulations)
herd immunity threshold (hom. approximation)
VEd = 0.684, VEs = 0.684

Priority vaccine only

upper bound on plausible VEi range
VEi = 0.368

upper bound on plausible VEi range
VEi = 0.684

1.0
15k active cases

1.0

Efficacy for infectiousness (VEi)

Efficacy for infectiousness (VEi)

7k active cases
0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

1M active cases
0.0

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

0.6 M

0.4

1.0

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1.0

p ( vaccinated )

p ( vaccinated )

FIG. S2. Alignment of ABM results with homogeneous approximation of herd immunity thresholds for
the general (a) and priority (b) vaccines. The peak prevalence values shown here (red circles) generated
by the ABM over a range of values for coverage and vaccine efficacy against infectiousness. The solid black
lines give the coverage thresholds for herd immunity estimated by the homogeneous approximation, and
the dashed lines illustrate conservative practical upper bounds on
√ VEi. Here, central values of efficacy
against disease and susceptibility were used (VEd = VEs = 1 − 1 − VEc).

C.

Model calibration

Primary calibration was performed by first tuning disease parameters κ, and the bounds of
Tsymp for a basic reproductive number falling within the range specified in literature reports [12].
To compute R0 for a given set of parameters, we performed an age-group biased micro-simulation
Monte Carlo estimate of secondary cases produced by a typical index case as described in our
previous studies [1, 18].
We then tuned the parameters defining case-targeted NPIs to match the early incidence
data issued in Australia during the initial wave of COVID-19 in March 2020. The resulting
incidence growth rates generated by our ABM (growth rate ≈ 0.118) lie between the plausible
values estimated for the first wave of COVID-19 (growth rate ≈ [0.1, 0.2] Fig. S3a). If the first
three cases are ignored when determining the growth rate for the first wave, the calculated rate
doubles (Fig. S3a), but provides a better fit to the remaining case data. It is unclear whether
this discrepancy occurred due to ineffective case ascertainment (due to e.g., delays to initial
surveillance efforts), or to stochastic die-out of the outbreak that produced the first recorded
cases.
On the other hand, the growth rate produced by our ABM closely matches the rate estimated
S6

parameter

value

distribution

notes

κ

2.4

NA

global transmission scalar

Tinc

5.5 days (mean)

lognormal(µ = 1.62, σ = 0.418)

incubation period

Tsymp

10.5 days (mean)

uniform [7, 14]

symptomatic (or asymptomatic) period

a

0.3

NA

asymptomatic transmission scalar

p symptomatic | adult

0.67

NA

probability of symptoms (age < 18)

p symptomatic | child

0.134

NA

probability of symptoms (age 18+)

p detect | symptomatic

0.227

NA

daily case detection prob. (symptomatic)

p detect | asymptomatic

0.01

NA

daily case detection prob. (asymptomatic)

TABLE S1. Key control parameters for COVID-19 transmission model.

for the second wave, which began in early June, 2020, was confined to the state of Victoria, and
occurred mostly within the urban area of Greater Melbourne [2] (growth rate ≈ 0.123, Fig. S3b).
While our ABM simulates the entirety of Australia, early cases mostly arise in urban centres
which contain the international airports from which importations are generated [17]. Therefore,
a close match between the growth rates generated by our model and the rate observed during
the beginning of the second wave in Greater Melbourne indicates that our simulations produce
reasonable approximations to the early disease dynamics of an Australian outbreak.
The parameters defining population-scale NPIs (lockdown) were chosen to match the peak
incidence and prevalence data produced during the first wave, which was suppressed with a
national-scale lockdown (Fig. S4). While the initial incidence growth dynamics of our model
are qualitatively similar to observations from the 1st wave (Fig. S3b, Fig. S4a), and well-matched
to those observed during the second wave (Fig. S3b), there are some aspects of the observed
data from the first wave that are not reproduced well by our model. In particular, simulated
case prevalence is substantially lower than the number of active cases reported during the first
wave. This is a direct consequence of our decision to model the infectious period after symptom
onset in accordance to the period of replication competent viral shedding rather than the period
over which a case may test positive (which can be longer by 1-2 weeks [8]). Therefore, in our
model a case recovers and is no longer included in the prevalence count substantially earlier
than it would be removed from an active case count ascertained through PCR tests. In addition,
the cumulative incidence produced by our model is higher than what was observed in the first
wave during March 2020 (Fig. S4b). However, this discrepancy only becomes substantial during
the period after lockdown was implemented, so it can be interpreted as the consequence of our
conservative estimates in the efficacy of lockdown on transmission in various contexts (Table
S3). We chose conservative values for these parameters, so that our estimates of lockdown
thresholds would err on the side of caution.

S7

parameter

value

distribution

notes

pCI

0.7

NA

case isolation compliance rate

pHQ

0.5

NA

home quarantine compliance rate

THQ

14 d

NA

home quarantine duration

fhome (HQ)

2

NA

NPI transmission scalar (HQ, home)

fcommunity (HQ)

0.25

NA

NPI transmission scalar (HQ, community)

fworkplace (HQ)

0.25

NA

NPI transmission scalar (HQ, workplace)

fhome (CI)

1

NA

NPI transmission scalar (CI, home)

fcommunity (CI)

0.25

NA

NPI transmission scalar (CI, community)

fworkplace (CI)

0.25

NA

NPI transmission scalar (CI, workplace)

TABLE S2. Key control parameters for targeted NPIs. NPI transmission scalars multiply the force of
infection produced by infected individuals in the specified contexts. Compliance rates determine the
proportion of individuals who act in accordance with the specified measures (case isolation, CI; homequarantine of household contacts, HQ).

parameter

value

distribution

notes

pLD

variable

[0, 1]

lockdown compliance rate

TLD

91 d

NA

lockdown duration

fhome (LD)

1

NA

NPI transmission scalar factor (LD, home)

fcommunity (LD)

0.25

NA

NPI transmission scalar factor (LD, community)

fworkplace (LD)

0.1

NA

NPI transmission scalar (LD, workplace)

ARtrigger (LD)

2000

NA

cum. incidence triggering population-level NPIs

TABLE S3. Key control parameters for population-level NPIs (lockdown, LD).

parameter

value from ABM

target value

notes

R0

2.75 [2.71, 2.80]

2.9 [2.39, 3.44]

basic reproductive ratio [12]

Tgen

7.14 [7.05, 7.23]

7.0 days [5.8, 8.1]

generation/serial interval [11]

growth rate

0.118 [0.110, 0.127]

0.10 [0.097, 0.103]

growth rate of case incidence (1st wave)

growth rate

0.118 [0.110, 0.127]

0.201 [0.170, 0.233]

growth rate of case incidence (1st wave, from day 21)

growth rate

0.118 [0.110, 0.127]

0.123 [0.102, 0.143]

growth rate of case incidence (2nd wave, VIC)

peak prevalence

2790, range [2623, 3059]

4935

peak case prevalence (1st wave)

peak incidence

377, range [336, 415]

497

peak case incidence (1st wave)

TABLE S4. Calibration targets for key model outputs.

S8

a)

b)

recorded incidence (Australia, 1st wave)

recorded incidence (Victoria, 2nd wave)

exp. fit from first documented case ( r = 0.10, 95% CI [0.097, 0.103] )

exp. fit from June 1st, 2020
( r = 0.123 95% CI [0.102, 0.143] )

exp. fit with 21-day delay ( r = 0.20, 95% CI [0.17, 0.23] )

mean growth rate, ABM (r = 0.118)

mean growth rate, ABM (r = 0.118)
5% and 95% growth rate quantiles, ABM
(r = 0.110, r = 0.127)

2

ABM realisations (n = 110)

100

new COVID-19 case reports

new COVID-19 case reports

2

5% and 95% growth rate quantiles, ABM
(r = 0.110, r = 0.127)

3

6
5
4
3
2

10
6
5
4
3
2

ABM realisations (n = 110)

100
6
5
4
3
2

10
6
5
4
3
2

1

1
0

10

20

30

40

50

0

days since first case report

10

20

30

40

50

days since June 1st, 2020

FIG. S3. The growth rate computed by the ABM with case-targeted NPIs approximately matches the
rate computed for the 2nd wave of COVID-19 in Victoria. Incidence growth rates computed by the
model are compared to case data recorded by the Australian Department of Health for the 1st wave of
COVID-19 (beginning on Feb. 3rd, 2020) (a), and case data recorded by the Victorian Department of
Health and Human Services for the 2nd wave of COVID-19 (b).

S9

a)

b)

c)

FIG. S4. Alignment of model results with recorded case data from the first wave of COVID-19 in
Australia. Daily case incidence is shown in (a), with reported case data shown as black dots connected
by dashed lines and mean case incidence produced by the ABM shown as a solid yellow line (shaded
bands represent 95% bootstrap CI bounds). The output of individual instances of the ABM (n = 10)
are shown as transparent yellow traces. Case prevalence (active case counts) are shown in (b), and
cumulative case incidence is shown in (c). The grey shaded region corresponds to the lockdown period
used in the ABM, which utilised a lockdown compliance level of 90% to match the conditions used in
our previous work [1].

S10

D.

Sensitivity of lockdown threshold to efficacy of general vaccine

Priority: 10M, General: 10.7M
General Vaccine VEc = 0.75
(with case-targeted NPIs)
% of population in lockdown

new COVID-19 cases (detected)

5

10

[0%, 10%]
20%
30%
40%
50%
[60%, 70%, 80%, 90%, 100%]

4

10

3

10

2

10

1

10

0

10

0

50

100

150

simulation days

FIG. S5. Increasing the efficacy of the general vaccine does not substantially change the lockdown compliance threshold for elimination. Representative incidence trajectories for different lockdown compliance
rates demonstrate an elimination threshold between 30% and 40%, for a vaccination program consisting
of 10M priority vaccinations (VEc = 0.9), and 10.7M general vaccinations (VEc = 0.75; VEs = VEd =
VEi = 0.5).

S11

E.

Epidemic severity as a function of vaccine efficacy and coverage

Here we provide full ABM results for epidemic severity as measured by peak prevalence and
the timing of the prevalence peak from the start of the epidemic as functions of VEi, VEs, VEd,
and coverage.

S12

General Vaccination Only (no case-targeted NPIs), VEc = 0.6

population vaccinated: 2.3 M
VEs
0
0.15
0.368
0.529
0.6

VEd
0.6
0.529
0.368
0.15
0

0
prevalence
1694634.5
1724598.1
1662242.1
1697362.2
1708183.7

sd
114685.7
83620.22
107523
102395.5
97094.04

0.25
prevalence
1650773.5
1579926.6
1686555
1648734.5
1594540.6

sd
116179.2
47294.24
126355.4
71794.3
89800.27

0.25
prevalence
1368045.3
1410805
1413590.2
1370923.3
1420829.8

sd
94762.76
137695.8
88769.91
127794
106683.9

VEi
0.5
prevalence
1629223.3
1640835
1544641.2
1574838.6
1662164.7

sd
55700.21
123713.3
70688.95
103819.1
104520.5

0.75
prevalence
1614394.2
1609051.1
1551058.8
1558597.3
1554586.1

1
sd
prevalence
70262.99
1541667.8
71148.02
1481871.2
107626.6
1524159.7
113511
1534359.6
85596.02
1549125.5

sd
68177.1
49215.28
98149.77
76555.07
116230.9

0.75
prevalence
1251543.1
1235611.4
1267068.4
1290088.8
1295320.7

1
sd
prevalence
75210.86
1168139.9
66532.53
1202481
84236.9
1176053.8
35683.09
1215891.7
88357.57
1216827.8

sd
64141.94
48954.23
43491.7
56502.73
63557.39

0.75
prevalence
672680.2
677136.3
672488.6
650176.8
676706.8

1
sd
prevalence
25322.33
529775.9
37302.91
518185.2
43365.24
556715.8
50225.4
568369.5
50226.87
561132

sd
35912.35
45857.21
65395.3
26118.64
38072.92

0.75
prevalence
293817.3
298144.4
292381.2
290691.9
282486.3

1
sd
prevalence
25011.03
200549.8
12048.88
201873.5
24072.38
210428.5
25181.04
219565.6
27010.69
204984.3

sd
20679.61
21393.7
21119.93
18712.55
21105.98

0.75
prevalence
120268.4
111171.6
103354.3
102516.4
110274.8

1
sd
prevalence
9358.623
33475.3
12510.2
29190.7
18109.07
37918.3
17463.32
30722.7
9080.909
33057.3

sd
10663.73
11807.57
12170.94
10838.78
8625.228

0.75
prevalence
87004.4
83356.6
78322.4
79826.2
70438.5

1
sd
prevalence
15612.86
14853.8
9373.866
17043
11855.75
16497.8
14042.95
18215.6
12883.24
15481.4

sd
6745.719
7654.132
6088.752
7081.891
6302.058

population vaccinated: 4.6 M
VEs
0
0.15
0.368
0.529
0.6

VEd
0.6
0.529
0.368
0.15
0

0
prevalence
1505237.1
1520296.4
1454273.1
1482833.2
1482247.7

sd
79225.84
48832.03
59406.03
123898.6
85168.87

VEi
0.5
prevalence
1302649.1
1362716.4
1343273.5
1376196.7
1327845.5

sd
86563.75
88023.49
72415.24
55845.56
58239.02

population vaccinated: 9.2 M
VEs
0
0.15
0.368
0.529
0.6

VEd
0.6
0.529
0.368
0.15
0

0
prevalence
1124721.8
1128452.5
1073843.2
1033206.6
1031877.7

sd
49589.55
64588.07
58058.14
53213.15
33762.65

0.25
prevalence
991879.3
946942.9
929609.9
907490.2
920601.3

sd
29638.47
33731.32
21919.62
56951.44
30211.08

VEi
0.5
prevalence
827919.5
822498.2
809352.1
803713.4
785933.5

sd
39855.84
45921.16
34127.85
47486.77
37198.69

population vaccinated: 13.8 M
VEs
0
0.15
0.368
0.529
0.6

VEd
0.6
0.529
0.368
0.15
0

0
prevalence
sd
782430.4 46236.26
756981.4 28561.98
714819.4 47401.9
667972.2
33470
651102.9 31715.12

0.25
prevalence
594283.7
583797.2
545324.5
537972.8
492315.1

sd
33036.28
41563.08
20709.08
24879.08
44784.82

VEi
0.5
prevalence
455563.2
416508.9
401734
394888
395277

sd
16972.36
38520.82
23505.81
26854.35
18130.56

population vaccinated: 18.4 M
VEs
0
0.15
0.368
0.529
0.6

VEd
0.6
0.529
0.368
0.15
0

0
prevalence
sd
492845 33562.6
481244.6 33810.64
428070.1 12791.47
394573.2 15254.97
363117.6 17322.2

0.25
prevalence
340379.4
308188
282926.7
260931.3
262074.6

sd
16286.79
35561.87
24922.09
16337.89
15641.98

VEi
0.5
prevalence
211716.2
205059.2
201250.8
174307.8
157372.2

sd
19105.15
12192.24
12007.94
12003.48
17642.05

population vaccinated: 23 M
VEs
0
0.15
0.368
0.529
0.6

VEd
0.6
0.529
0.368
0.15
0

0
prevalence
455460.9
418211.5
389640.8
326542.5
322056.4

sd
28731.91
28782.53
23500.62
27672.59
19072.94

0.25
prevalence
298658.9
284518.3
255471
221718
221617.7

sd
11463.31
20471.06
13673.92
23301.02
17825.68

VEi
0.5
prevalence
sd
185596 11739.9
178650.7 9734.197
159463.3 13301.35
136824 18657.04
147733.7 8628.58

TABLE S5. Mean peak prevalence values and standard deviations produced by the ABM for various
combinations of vaccine efficacy parameters and coverage levels, assuming a clinical efficacy of VEc = 0.6
and no case-targeted NPIs (n = 10 instances per scenario).

S13

General Vaccination Only (no case-targeted NPIs), VEc = 0.6

population vaccinated: 2.3 M
VEs
0
0.15
0.368
0.529
0.6

VEd
0.6
0.529
0.368
0.15
0

0
day of peak
120.5
119.6
121
121.4
121

sd
1.649916
2.716207
1.333333
2.716207
1.154701

0.25
day of peak
121.1
120.7
121.7
122.1
124

sd
2.820559
3.155243
4.109609
3.164034
2.529822

0.25
day of peak
125.5
126.2
124.8
126.5
126.4

sd
1.37032
4.347413
2.750757
2.558211
4.966555

VEi
0.5
day of peak
sd
123.3 3.12872
121.5 1.354006
120.7 1.05935
123.9 2.998148
123.2 2.973961

0.75
day of peak
124
122.1
124
124.6
122.6

1
sd
day of peak
4.546061
122.8
2.601282
124.4
3.800585
123.8
3.306559
124.3
2.366432
125

0.75
day of peak
129.5
127.5
127.3
128.6
130.4

1
sd
day of peak
sd
0.971825
131.7 3.12872
2.460804
128.6 3.806427
4.831609
129.6 2.221111
3.339993
131 2.44949
3.893014
130.4 3.405877

sd
2.820559
3.438346
3.705851
2.750757
4.027682

population vaccinated: 4.6 M
VEs
0
0.15
0.368
0.529
0.6

VEd
0.6
0.529
0.368
0.15
0

0
day of peak
123.8
124.2
124
124.7
123.8

sd
3.308239
3.705851
3.32666
3.503966
3.470511

VEi
0.5
day of peak
128.3
125.9
127.8
128.9
128.2

sd
4.217688
3.17805
3.119829
3.314949
4.022161

population vaccinated: 9.2 M
VEs
0
0.15
0.368
0.529
0.6

VEd
0.6
0.529
0.368
0.15
0

0

day of peak
126.6
130.2
134
135
136.4

sd
3.204164
4.391912
3.018462
4.714045
2.319004

0.25
day of peak
133
133.5
136.9
140.6
137.5

VEi
0.5

sd
day of peak
4.320494
137.5
3.778595
139.2
0.994429
140.8
4.299871
142.8
3.597839
143.8

0.75
sd
day of peak
4.719934
144.8
4.565572
145
3.457681
146.9
3.614784
149.5
4.54117
146.9

1
sd
day of peak
5.593647
152.3
3.620927
150.1
2.998148
151.7
7.61942
150.6
3.034981
154.1

sd
6.272515
3.813718
8.152028
3.977716
5.646041

0.75
day of peak
161.4
167.4
167.2
167.2
169.4

1
sd
day of peak
6.131884
180
8.707596
184.7
8.879439
181.5
6.442912
178.9
9.72054
182.2

sd
10.64581
7.103207
6.883959
8.319322
5.573748

0.75
day of peak
186.2
190.2
193.4
194.6
193.6

1
sd
day of peak
6.178817
195
4.077036
195
2.674987
195
0.516398
195
2.716207
195

0.75
day of peak
194.6
193.8
195
194.8
194.9

1
sd
day of peak
0.699206
195
3.119829
195
0
195
0.421637
195
0.316228
195

population vaccinated: 13.8 M
VEs
0
0.15
0.368
0.529
0.6

VEd
0.6
0.529
0.368
0.15
0

0
day of peak
133.4
136.5
144
147.8
146.2

sd
6.239658
2.953341
4.21637
3.675746
2.440401

0.25
day of peak
140.8
144.3
152.6
151.2
152.5

sd
3.675746
2.359378
5.232378
3.645393
4.034573

VEi
0.5
day of peak
148.6
154.3
156.2
159.7
161.5

sd
4.033196
6.733828
4.022161
7.211873
0.527046

population vaccinated: 18.4 M
VEs
0
0.15
0.368
0.529
0.6

VEd
0.6
0.529
0.368
0.15
0

0
day of peak
137.8
145.4
152.6
159.7
162.9

sd
5.116422
3.134042
5.561774
4.831609
6.244108

0.25
day of peak
152.5
155.5
165.3
173.4
169.4

sd
5.967505
3.836955
4.137901
6.552353
5.232378

VEi
0.5
day of peak
168.7
168.9
176.5
181.3
187.8

sd
11.33382
5.586691
4.428443
8.393781
6.8443

sd

0
0
0
0
0

population vaccinated: 23 M
VEs
0
0.15
0.368
0.529
0.6

VEd
0.6
0.529
0.368
0.15
0

0
day of peak
139.8
143.5
150.8
164.6
164.6

sd
3.392803
3.24037
5.223877
6.686637
6.686637

0.25
day of peak
150.8
158
168.4
171.8
174.1

sd
5.028806
5.120764
7.662318
9.750214
5.3427

VEi
0.5
day of peak
171
174.8
182.3
186.9
188.7

sd
6.377042
6.425643
7.860591
7.06242
4.164666

sd

0
0
0
0
0

TABLE S6. Prevalence peak times (means and standard deviations) produced by the ABM for various
combinations of vaccine efficacy parameters and coverage levels, assuming a clinical efficacy of VEc = 0.6
and no case-targeted NPIs (n = 10 instances per scenario).

S14

Priority Vaccination Only (no case-targeted NPIs), VEc = 0.9

population vaccinated: 2.3 M
VEs
0
0.225
0.684
0.871
0.9

VEd
0.9
0.871
0.684
0.225
0

0
prevalence
1629065.7
1615009.9
1601246.1
1547327.2
1547096.5

sd
118132.4
91163.03
65987.7
97824.33
61128.53

0.25
prevalence
sd
1558927.8 84303.1
1565056.7 78768.3
1572014.1 96047.59
1525381.4 105564.3
1532795.5 67554.32

sd
43693.05
53773.69
57691.84
84833.06
48574.04

0.25
prevalence
1271002.5
1232219.5
1162648.3
1133062
1150525

VEi
0.5
prevalence
1513835.4
1538809.8
1540017.3
1446064.6
1467230

sd
59419.12
105203.4
97252.37
104216.6
72887.83

0.75
prevalence
1552729.2
1506884
1519191.9
1516560.3
1493777.1

1
sd
prevalence
70771.27
1507688.9
128797.5
1484369.8
97681.67
1456609.4
93471.38
1470250.9
52880.25
1511284.3

sd
58007.78
147577.9
89988.75
106956.8
83797.52

0.75
prevalence
1129114.7
1148032.6
1111467
1133710.4
1128339.3

1
sd
prevalence
77343.94
1012743.8
48003.87
1104527.1
62381.44
1058284.7
35693.84
1042650.4
78125.2
1119165.9

sd
61268.1
78093.73
57091.85
129981.6
68528.22

0.75
prevalence
498393.8
527691.8
500529.8
485696.6
478572.1

1
sd
prevalence
45668.48
450494.3
24908.78
429800.7
31666.51
459785.2
45628.59
472644.4
42094.62
473178.9

sd
28648.95
24720.67
30153.37
29588.81
31547.24

0.75
prevalence
191671.4
185624.9
172948.1
173010.6
159967.9

1
sd
prevalence
13430.72
137890
10953.72
129741.2
12767.79
127799.6
10550.52
139962.3
17345.61
148767.6

sd
15179.74
18029.72
14211.65
9600.772
14406.14

0.75
1
prevalence
sd
prevalence
55088.6 7576.666
18783.9
53842.6 3747.046
16543.8
41969.2 8916.66
21246.5
33887.8 7233.689
21113
32434.9 6012.33
17744.5

sd
8424.104
3916.69
7851.876
7980.867
5052.494

0.75
prevalence
34653.5
34958
16616.4
14895.1
16642.2

sd
2654.243
2170.623
3514.551
3763.814
1685.901

population vaccinated: 4.6 M
VEs
0
0.225
0.684
0.871
0.9

VEd
0.9
0.871
0.684
0.225
0

0
prevalence
1316015.6
1254482.9
1253338.8
1156430.3
1188472.4

sd
119080.1
74260.9
58968.75
71424.78
82061.35

VEi
0.5
prevalence
1193446.9
1188284.9
1167649.6
1116377
1189090.5

sd
93584.92
63330.25
79240.56
75612.76
36449.38

population vaccinated: 9.2 M
VEs
0
0.225
0.684
0.871
0.9

VEd
0.9
0.871
0.684
0.225
0

0
prevalence
785889.1
738497.3
605547
563114.5
559101.5

sd
51156.26
34135.75
36111.95
27517.63
21303.74

0.25
prevalence
675623.9
635593.1
578563
540163.2
533271.2

sd
38661.52
41766.42
36259.45
33222.46
43615.63

VEi
0.5
prevalence
589043.7
616823.8
537648.3
509098.5
506275

sd
67383.19
25531.99
33615.18
40592.38
39206.24

population vaccinated: 13.8 M
VEs
0
0.225
0.684
0.871
0.9

VEd
0.9
0.871
0.684
0.225
0

0
prevalence
397363.5
365332.3
256899.2
209773.5
201652.1

sd
24330.41
18390.4
16007.49
16926.97
14098.89

0.25
prevalence
313491.7
292478.8
225031.1
192410.8
193539.6

sd
22589.47
8246.286
18316.68
13302.96
15888.58

VEi
0.5
prevalence
sd
253450.2 18009.29
239912 18723.9
194371.7 14202.9
169416.3 12076.64
179255.5 11082.19

population vaccinated: 18.4 M
VEs
0
0.225
0.684
0.871
0.9

VEd
0.9
0.871
0.684
0.225
0

0
prevalence
147325.2
131306.2
85748
67441.2
60703.4

sd
11561.39
6567.362
5697.925
6170.463
4397.363

0.25
prevalence
112112.6
99277.4
69852.8
56792.8
54339.2

sd
7923.788
11099.41
6336.83
4767.832
4363.054

VEi
0.5
prevalence
sd
82079.7 6742.019
75408.9 6814.06
52995.8 4231.045
45490.7 10137.06
46486.5 5919.98

population vaccinated: 23 M
VEs
0
0.225
0.684
0.871
0.9

VEd
0.9
0.871
0.684
0.225
0

0
prevalence
117739.4
100089.8
63370.4
46563.9
44418.5

sd
7885.719
12422.69
7490.222
4712.144
4034.131

0.25
prevalence
85525.9
76300.6
51529.8
36837.6
36728.5

sd
8267.443
8757.573
5862.205
3878.499
7117.539

VEi
0.5
prevalence
63316.5
55531.8
38204.4
23336.4
26205.2

sd
7301.414
9586.911
5717.474
6127.356
4300.458

1
sd
prevalence
6634.042
8620.1
5518.997
10057.8
5998.315
7073.2
5990.814
7619.5
3811.702
9455.1

TABLE S7. Mean peak prevalence values and standard deviations produced by the ABM for various
combinations of vaccine efficacy parameters and coverage levels, assuming a clinical efficacy of VEc = 0.9
and no case-targeted NPIs (n = 10 instances per scenario).

S15

Priority Vaccination Only (no case-targeted NPIs), VEc = 0.9

population vaccinated: 2.3 M
VEs
0
0.225
0.684
0.871
0.9

VEd
0.9
0.871
0.684
0.225
0

0
day of peak
120.6
120.7
122.3
122.4
122.7

sd
1.837873
4.137901
1.766981
3.339993
2.406011

0.25
day of peak
122.3
122
121.9
124
121.3

sd
2.869379
3.100179
2.951459
3.852849
1.286684

0.25
day of peak
125.2
126.4
128.6
127.5
129.7

sd
2.710064
2.828427
2.469818
2.828427
3.683296

VEi
0.5
day of peak
124.1
122.5
121.7
126.7
123.6

sd
2.884826
2.013841
3.368151
2.983287
3.657564

0.75
day of peak
122.7
124.2
122.7
124.3
123.7

1
sd
day of peak
2.668749
123
5.181162
122.6
2.359378
124.5
4.498148
123.9
3.020302
125.3

sd
2.211083
3.565265
3.566822
4.175324
3.267687

0.75
day of peak
129.3
131.5
130.1
130.4
130.1

1
sd
day of peak
3.560587
130.7
3.308239
130
3.28126
129.4
2.412928
128.7
3.754997
132.5

sd
4.191261
2.581989
3.405877
3.917199
3.439961

0.75
day of peak
150.1
146.1
149.7
147
151.9

1
sd
day of peak
8.332667
151.3
5.743595
154
3.917199
152.4
4.618802
151.1
7.385421
150.3

sd
4.967673
6.63325
5.966574
3.842742
3.973523

0.75
day of peak
164.5
167.1
175.5
174.8
175.7

1
sd
day of peak
6.363961
178.2
6.539623
182.3
6.222718
179.9
5.533735
180.6
8.340663
181.1

sd
8.573862
8.512083
7.781031
7.676805
5.743595

0.75
day of peak
190.5
192.5
194.8
194.8
194.9

1
sd
day of peak
sd
5.582711
195
0
3.503966
194.9 0.316228
0.421637
194.9 0.316228
0.421637
195
0
0.316228
195
0

0.75
day of peak
194.5
194.6
195
194.9
194.9

1
sd
day of peak
0.707107
195
0.516398
195
0
195
0.316228
195
0.316228
195

population vaccinated: 4.6 M
VEs
0
0.225
0.684
0.871
0.9

VEd
0.9
0.871
0.684
0.225
0

0
day of peak
123.3
124.5
126.6
128.2
128.9

sd
4.104198
4.550946
0.843274
3.27448
3.433495

VEi
0.5
day of peak
128
126.5
130.2
129.9
128.6

sd
2.211083
3.566822
4.417138
3.928528
1.173788

population vaccinated: 9.2 M
VEs
0
0.225
0.684
0.871
0.9

VEd
0.9
0.871
0.684
0.225
0

0
day of peak
132.9
134.3
142.6
142.9
143.9

sd
4.931757
3.772709
4.115013
4.909175
4.748099

0.25
day of peak
135.9
139.8
142.6
144.9
143.6

sd
4.605552
3.705851
5.146736
3.813718
3.025815

VEi
0.5
day of peak
140.1
141.2
145.9
150.1
148.4

sd
3.665151
4.049691
4.383048
7.202623
3.565265

population vaccinated: 13.8 M
VEs
0
0.225
0.684
0.871
0.9

VEd
0.9
0.871
0.684
0.225
0

0
day of peak
141.1
146.9
160.1
162.8
161.4

sd
4.148628
6.951419
3.95671
8.954204
3.627059

0.25
day of peak
147.4
150.2
164.9
166.1
164.6

sd
5.146736
5.245104
7.40045
4.012481
8.342661

VEi
0.5
day of peak
sd
155.7 6.360468
158.2
6.8443
163.9
5.3427
169.7 8.446564
166.1 6.919377

population vaccinated: 18.4 M
VEs
0
0.225
0.684
0.871
0.9

VEd
0.9
0.871
0.684
0.225
0

0
day of peak
147.9
154.2
181.4
192.8
191.3

sd
6.261878
4.491968
6.686637
2.780887
4.164666

0.25
day of peak
158.9
165.1
186.9
193.9
194

sd
5.087021
6.62403
4.976612
0.737865
0.666667

VEi
0.5
day of peak
173.9
179.1
193.3
194.2
194.5

sd
7.894442
6.0452
3.020302
0.632456
0.527046

population vaccinated: 23 M
VEs
0
0.225
0.684
0.871
0.9

VEd
0.9
0.871
0.684
0.225
0

0
day of peak
146
159.1
182
194.3
194.3

sd
5.577734
9.243015
6.463573
0.823273
0.483046

0.25
day of peak
160.6
168.5
191.9
194.6
194.7

sd
5.521674
9.617692
3.414023
0.699206
0.483046

VEi
0.5
day of peak
180
183.1
194.1
194.8
194.7

sd
8.51143
7.549099
0.875595
0.421637
0.483046

sd

0
0
0
0
0

TABLE S8. Prevalence peak times (means and standard deviations) produced by the ABM for various
combinations of vaccine efficacy parameters and coverage levels, assuming a clinical efficacy of VEc = 0.9
and no case-targeted NPIs (n = 10 instances per scenario).

S16

General Vaccination with Case-Targeted NPIs, VEc = 0.6

population vaccinated: 2.3 M
VEs
0
0.15
0.368
0.529
0.6

VEd
0.6
0.529
0.368
0.15
0

0
prevalence
1113051.2
1103756.7
1083806.7
1081031.8
1067999.1

sd
60664.25
54021.73
49127.63
57337.99
69809.29

0.25
prevalence
1079826
1091477.2
1057838.9
1064064.2
1058287.9

sd
54690.74
55094.83
58725.81
64024.41
42640.34

0.25
prevalence
936910.2
959809.9
919686.2
878363.2
859472.1

sd
55995.69
42361.65
46109.82
36637.05
48887.51

VEi
0.5
prevalence
1074758.1
1024048.3
1028498.4
1001492.8
999627.8

sd
45207.73
64749.58
45318.65
68246.37
63958.35

0.75
prevalence
1014519.5
1000782.7
989216.4
1012250.6
961113.4

1
sd
prevalence
46393.39
985386.7
67769.31
962575.8
52658.29
977531.6
50735.45
955420.2
48361.51
965021.2

sd
63393.86
61778.18
30026.45
24936.49
44014.73

0.75
prevalence
813439.6
786742.9
789903
761069.1
780857.5

1
sd
prevalence
42875.69
757145.2
51363.3
716046.1
52008.84
745124.2
43778.51
752118.1
27292.05
734086.8

sd
41965.16
81924.8
63176.07
42142.34
55126.59

0.75
prevalence
479467.5
448719.1
425935.2
417896.2
428034.6

1
sd
prevalence
24046.08
358142.8
32054.54
352477.9
22686.69
378427.9
39176.22
360534.2
16035.04
367413.1

sd
36509.29
27744.6
22203.19
33177.56
36723.12

0.75
prevalence
253789.1
237691.2
221024.9
202051.4
194329.4

1
sd
sd
prevalence
18893.47
140313.7 21920.3
14346.11
127228.2 31439.23
17205.76
126232.7 18514.99
19410.84
130640.3 24199.2
17788.94
134565.4 34257.66

0.75
prevalence
65885.1
64213.5
46043.6
33497.3
31287.2

1
sd
prevalence
19224.41
5782.2
17065.8
7791.1
21071.76
7074.6
12365.15
8752.7
10296.76
7615.1

sd
3725.691
4056.096
2639.598
4517.487
5185.758

0.75
prevalence
51290.5
40570.6
27482.6
20954.2
17826.7

1
sd
prevalence
17471.15
3591.1
12750.37
3564.2
11159.76
3554.4
7426.625
3597.1
4490.861
2896.1

sd
2174.384
1427.981
1760.959
1883.115
1919.26

population vaccinated: 4.6 M
VEs
0
0.15
0.368
0.529
0.6

VEd
0.6
0.529
0.368
0.15
0

0
prevalence
1025677.7
973756.7
936673
931522.6
912361.7

sd
54584.45
39744.55
51559.13
54853.85
51068.59

VEi
0.5
prevalence
885363.9
861309.6
844202.4
807370.3
830125.5

sd
18324.13
33682.4
45537.43
58907.39
32412.18

population vaccinated: 9.2 M
VEs
0
0.15
0.368
0.529
0.6

VEd
0.6
0.529
0.368
0.15
0

0
prevalence
845419.6
781175.3
715839.8
669504
638651.4

sd
40563.83
49602.95
32035.17
19392.47
24022.73

0.25
prevalence
697710.9
670209.2
601371
580119.1
548672.4

sd
38958.54
46151.6
31468.07
32623.35
41779.15

VEi
0.5
prevalence
561352.9
528564.1
490079.2
489424.9
486535

sd
35756.62
48536.74
44454.85
33239.25
30413.5

population vaccinated: 13.8 M
VEs
0
0.15
0.368
0.529
0.6

VEd
0.6
0.529
0.368
0.15
0

0
prevalence
649241.7
598214.6
508853
420308.2
395432.7

sd
38376.56
21613.18
28770.99
23145.83
18894.12

0.25
prevalence
481211.5
452772.7
385809.8
339910.5
312421.2

sd
45229.99
22541.9
22758.99
17893.81
35383.36

VEi
0.5
prevalence
358196.2
332679.9
290232.5
257984.2
251914.6

sd
20149.03
17785.86
29325.04
33778.42
19649.08

population vaccinated: 18.4 M
VEs
0
0.15
0.368
0.529
0.6

VEd
0.6
0.529
0.368
0.15
0

0
prevalence
504527.6
428940
331919.5
273853.7
236792.5

sd
29175.68
48423.61
18598.22
15544.15
14609.4

0.25
prevalence
353858.8
294286.8
228494.8
196870.2
164832.4

sd
15427.77
19433.57
9453.499
10531.21
17455.76

VEi
0.5
prevalence
213013.1
184468.4
130188
114850.8
90335.7

sd
14053.28
15411.88
17802.13
7150.97
16517.35

population vaccinated: 23 M
VEs
0
0.15
0.368
0.529
0.6

VEd
0.6
0.529
0.368
0.15
0

0
prevalence
481768
407284.8
318953.1
244327.8
212925.5

sd
38162.51
39451.75
10855.92
16617.74
12623.49

0.25
prevalence
320659.9
277480
210331.6
155280.4
142729.6

sd
14579.02
6298.987
13341.43
24028
10414.58

VEi
0.5
prevalence
180345.2
156268.5
115279.6
73360.3
62763.9

sd
20400.94
23465.22
15073.09
20247.86
18131.34

TABLE S9. Mean peak prevalence values and standard deviations produced by the ABM for various
combinations of vaccine efficacy parameters and coverage levels, assuming a clinical efficacy of VEc = 0.6
and active case-targeted NPIs consisting of case isolation, home-quarantine of household contacts of
detected cases, and international travel restrictions (n = 10 instances per scenario).

S17

General Vaccination with Case-Targeted NPIs, VEc = 0.6

population vaccinated: 2.3 M
VEs
0
0.15
0.368
0.529
0.6

VEd
0.6
0.529
0.368
0.15
0

0
day of peak
133.9
134.3
136.8
134.8
135.7

sd
2.514403
4.715224
2.699794
3.966527
1.159502

0.25
day of peak
133.4
134.5
135.2
134.7
135.8

sd
845419.6
781175.3
715839.8
669504
638651.4

0.25
day of peak
sd
138.1 3.665151
137.1 4.175324
138.3
3.335
139.6 2.91357
139.6 3.627059

sd
3.806427
2.798809
2.347576
2.710064
2.440401

VEi
0.5
day of peak
136.1
134.7
136.6
135.4
137

sd
3.28126
2.750757
3.238655
2.875181
3.464102

0.75
day of peak
136.4
136
135.9
136
136.3

1
sd
day of peak
2.170509
137.1
3.800585
138.7
0.994429
137.3
3.333333
137
2.057507
136.3

sd
2.884826
3.917199
3.164034
2.494438
4.24395

0.75
day of peak
142.1
143.3
143.8
142.6
145.9

1
sd
day of peak
2.233582
145.1
5.755191
148.1
5.223877
142.1
1.505545
145
4.976612
145.1

sd
3.695342
6.505553
4.121758
3.651484
4.306326

0.75
day of peak
158
162.9
160
164.3
161.6

1
sd
day of peak
3.197221
171.6
5.801341
169.4
5.981453
166.4
6.219146
167
3.204164
167.7

sd
12.02959
6.25744
6.963396
9.225568
4.191261

0.75
day of peak
181.8
183.4
188.4
192.3
191.7

1
sd
day of peak
5.750362
193.8
8.221922
193.9
5.680376
194.7
4.522782
194.7
2.58414
194.7

sd
3.794733
3.478505
0.948683
0.674949
0.674949

population vaccinated: 4.6 M
VEs
0
0.15
0.368
0.529
0.6

VEd
0.6
0.529
0.368
0.15
0

0
day of peak
134.7
137.8
136.5
138.2
138.5

VEi
0.5
day of peak
139.5
140.9
141.6
142.5
141.4

sd
3.205897
3.60401
3.025815
3.778595
3.747592

population vaccinated: 9.2 M
VEs
0
0.15
0.368
0.529
0.6

VEd
0.6
0.529
0.368
0.15
0

0

day of peak
138
140.4
146.5
148.4
149.8

sd
2.981424
2.674987
3.27448
4.221637
4.366539

0.25
day of peak
145.5
146.5
151.4
153.5
155.9

VEi
0.5

sd
day of peak
4.062019
153.3
3.689324
154.4
4.623611
155.1
3.472111
159.2
4.840799
158.2

sd

4.24395
5.420127
4.012481
6.941021
4.315347

population vaccinated: 13.8 M
VEs
0
0.15
0.368
0.529
0.6

VEd
0.6
0.529
0.368
0.15
0

0
day of peak
143.8
148
156
165
165

sd
5.287301
3.711843
3.620927
6.815016
4.853407

0.25
day of peak
157.4
157.8
160.8
170.4
172.8

sd
8.275801
2.699794
4.756282
4.168666
4.779586

VEi
0.5
day of peak
167
169.1
176.6
180.8
181.9

sd
3.711843
6.349978
7.471427
7.083627
6.190495

population vaccinated: 18.4 M
VEs
0
0.15
0.368
0.529
0.6

VEd
0.6
0.529
0.368
0.15
0

0
day of peak
145.4
154
166.4
178.8
180.1

sd
2.674987
4.666667
3.470511
4.825856
5.839521

0.25
day of peak
160.5
166.9
180.3
186.8
194.4

sd
4.994441
3.573047
6.896859
4.638007
1.264911

VEi
0.5
day of peak
183.4
191.5
194.9
194.7
195

sd
4.835057
3.778595
0.316228
0.948683
0

0.75
day of peak
195
195
195
195
195

sd

0
0
0
0
0

1
day of peak
195
195
195
195
195

0
0
0
0
0

1
day of peak
195
195
195
195
195

sd

0
0
0
0
0

population vaccinated: 23 M
VEs
0
0.15
0.368
0.529
0.6

VEd
0.6
0.529
0.368
0.15
0

0
day of peak
147.7
154.9
167.1
179
183.7

sd
5.292552
4.408325
3.573047
5.792716
5.716448

0.25
day of peak
164.6
170.3
184
193.6
195

sd
4.526465
5.012207
4.807402
2.065591
0

VEi
0.5
day of peak
sd
187.1
6.9033
193.1 3.414023
194.7 0.948683
195
0
195
0

0.75
day of peak
195
195
195
195
195

sd

sd

0
0
0
0
0

TABLE S10. Prevalence peak times (means and standard deviations) produced by the ABM for various
combinations of vaccine efficacy parameters and coverage levels, assuming a clinical efficacy of VEc = 0.6
and active case-targeted NPIs consisting of case isolation, home-quarantine of household contacts of
detected cases, and international travel restrictions (n = 10 instances per scenario).

S18

Priority Vaccination with Case-Targeted NPIs, VEc = 0.9

population vaccinated: 2.3 M
VEs
0
0.225
0.684
0.871
0.9

VEd
0.9
0.871
0.684
0.225
0

0
prevalence
1051743.5
1030125.9
995824.4
990080.5
951071.2

sd
63317.38
61916.41
22616.14
53986.17
71087.83

0.25
prevalence
1057650.9
1001845.5
985706.7
933987.8
960617.4

sd
50639.01
60439.48
52855.1
52936.15
27908.02

0.25
prevalence
897505.5
814683.5
760709.6
705732.4
733091.5

sd
51286.25
52651.18
46142.78
49137.36
47586.25

VEi
0.5
prevalence
1010179.2
998986.2
966397.8
913596.5
921967

sd
71510.13
47807.15
57614.38
64794.04
49646.15

0.75
prevalence
977927.9
938575.1
935862.2
916175.6
922040

1
sd
prevalence
60337.52
926397.7
61106.76
957048
56592.6
915874.3
39270.72
954710.6
34846.65
923791.5

sd
81184.61
44542.66
69476.01
27399.29
49533.33

0.75
prevalence
757750.5
763880.6
728887.7
677431.4
694378.2

1
sd
prevalence
40031.17
711349.3
29210.58
721389.1
42255.63
711026.9
41430.63
689777.1
42112.63
685770

sd
31122.42
17284.03
36202.02
38106.62
26585.9

0.75
prevalence
408263.8
385424.1
315360.2
310218.4
320398.3

1
sd
prevalence
33258.87
324865.2
15527.46
321500.4
27049.78
307086.1
20025.17
304483.8
16587.88
300442.3

sd
35443.53
16956.29
20104.82
16107.64
22132.38

0.75
prevalence
185688.7
158886
122523.2
104919.6
115373.4

1
sd
prevalence
19062.73
115913.3
23808.07
106186.9
21783.72
106321.8
18888.01
95117.7
9042.581
91831.8

sd
18642.68
16301.5
22444.46
13737.44
9944.103

0.75
prevalence
45575.2
30908.4
12547.6
8967.8
9104

1
sd
prevalence
sd
13212.14
5989.5 2600.225
9537.389
6375.5 3706.461
3997.243
6950.6 2740.178
1956.474
4822.3 2295.82
2907.633
5131.5 1382.24

0.75
prevalence
31319.7
18340.4
7203.6
5387.9
4714.2

1
sd
prevalence
4416.007
3294.5
5132.497
2659.4
3522.024
2376.4
1698.449
1868.2
2141.233
2139.1

population vaccinated: 4.6 M
VEs
0
0.225
0.684
0.871
0.9

VEd
0.9
0.871
0.684
0.225
0

0
prevalence
914219.7
867342.4
774125.9
716828.5
724564.5

sd
35916.01
58677.88
42760.01
48848.86
35924.97

VEi
0.5
prevalence
791166.2
800068.7
746806.8
709034.4
716175.1

sd
44124.79
34521.81
48905.38
38968.92
24501.16

population vaccinated: 9.2 M
VEs
0
0.225
0.684
0.871
0.9

VEd
0.9
0.871
0.684
0.225
0

0
prevalence
648378.7
598804.1
437357
358295.6
357604.1

sd
29273.9
32563.13
28322.62
25336.58
8047.304

0.25
prevalence
565461.6
502990.7
398257.9
367286.2
347697.8

sd
26295.8
21178.74
22027.51
17042.53
20811.92

VEi
0.5
prevalence
489218.7
442792.7
363415.7
337421
336234.2

sd
18941.81
27128.86
24498.95
9592.737
24049.94

population vaccinated: 13.8 M
VEs
0
0.225
0.684
0.871
0.9

VEd
0.9
0.871
0.684
0.225
0

0
prevalence
sd
439183.3
25972
362355.9 24773.27
208399.2 12846.05
152516.9 8796.435
146360.6 8989.45

0.25
prevalence
334772.3
280590.7
183061.7
142644.9
140100.9

sd
28392.63
27317.39
12276.39
8257.227
13144.24

VEi
0.5
prevalence
sd
263076.5 11418.5
221842.4 25139.23
156684.1 15824.4
132220 12987.14
128913.5 9753.468

population vaccinated: 18.4 M
VEs
0
0.225
0.684
0.871
0.9

VEd
0.9
0.871
0.684
0.225
0

0
prevalence
285944.3
217278.4
81415.4
36130
27585.2

sd
13547.91
10551.26
8924.646
9858.871
7408.469

0.25
prevalence
201497.7
151968.9
57520.5
23746.8
22635.1

sd
12776.98
17399.66
6020.975
4772.083
3410.01

VEi
0.5
prevalence
134175.3
102044.4
31756.3
14857.4
16004.6

sd
9041.692
13321.98
9403.057
5940.658
4002.377

population vaccinated: 23 M
VEs
0
0.225
0.684
0.871
0.9

VEd
0.9
0.871
0.684
0.225
0

0
prevalence
250656.7
192504.3
65175.9
20195.5
17052.6

sd
19854.06
10360.06
7744.362
5969.454
2035.515

0.25
prevalence
sd
183386.7 15484.43
133458.2 8835.682
37409.5 7900.39
12711.4
2318.5
11468.9 2527.022

VEi
0.5
prevalence
114695.3
75185.1
16720.5
7255.3
7412.8

sd
12987.93
15131.4
8642.882
2048.643
1791.776

sd
1138.83
1562.184
1100.971
1163.189
855.1846

TABLE S11. Mean peak prevalence values and standard deviations produced by the ABM for various
combinations of vaccine efficacy parameters and coverage levels, assuming a clinical efficacy of VEc = 0.9
and active case-targeted NPIs consisting of case isolation, home-quarantine of household contacts of
detected cases, and international travel restrictions (n = 10 instances per scenario).

S19

Priority Vaccination with Case-Targeted NPIs, VEc = 0.9

population vaccinated: 2.3 M
VEs
0
0.225
0.684
0.871
0.9

VEd
0.9
0.871
0.684
0.225
0

0
day of peak
134
135.4
135.4
135.4
136.9

sd
1.632993
3.777124
1.429841
1.505545
3.813718

0.25
day of peak
135.3
136.8
135.3
138.2
137.3

sd
3.190263
3.197221
2.726414
5.275731
2.666667

0.25
day of peak
138.5
141.2
140.6
140.7
144.4

sd
3.497618
3.645393
3.772709
3.583915
4.029061

VEi
0.5
day of peak
135.3
136.4
135.2
137.7
136.7

sd
3.40098
3.169297
1.873796
4.270051
3.743142

0.75
day of peak
136.8
136.3
138.1
137.1
138.6

1
sd
sd
day of peak
2.936362
137.8 4.104198
2.002776
137.4 3.134042
5.087021
138.4 3.596294
2.806738
138.1
3.3483
4.221637
136.4 2.75681

0.75
day of peak
144.1
142.7
143.2
144.1
144.2

1
sd
day of peak
5.237684
146.9
3.860052
143.7
2.820559
144.9
5.40473
144.6
3.823901
145

sd
3.928528
2.790858
4.45845
4.273952
5.163978

0.75
day of peak
160.8
161.6
165.9
165.2
163.9

1
sd
day of peak
6.729702
168.2
4.788876
170
3.984693
168.2
5.865151
167.4
4.012481
166

sd
7.330302
6.666667
4.104198
4.599517
4.496913

0.75
day of peak
185.2
191.3
192.5
194.4
191.7

1
sd
sd
day of peak
6.356099
195
0
4.295993
194.8 0.632456
4.326918
194.8 0.632456
1.577621
193.8 3.794733
3.12872
195
0

population vaccinated: 4.6 M
VEs
0
0.225
0.684
0.871
0.9

VEd
0.9
0.871
0.684
0.225
0

0
day of peak
136.8
139
141.1
143.5
138

sd
5.212165
5.411921
4.087923
3.301515
4.880801

VEi
0.5
day of peak
140.8
142.2
141.5
142.4
143.2

sd
3.155243
6.696599
3.24037
3.627059
3.705851

population vaccinated: 9.2 M
VEs
0
0.225
0.684
0.871
0.9

VEd
0.9
0.871
0.684
0.225
0

0
day of peak
142.6
145.4
153.8
161.5
157.3

sd
4.427189
4.273952
4.565572
6.240548
4.24395

0.25
day of peak
148.7
152.4
160.5
163.2
162.4

sd
3.622461
4.452215
4.527693
6.285786
6.449806

VEi
0.5
day of peak
151.6
157
163.4
163.1
160

sd
5.189733
3.265986
3.339993
5.15213
5.077182

population vaccinated: 13.8 M
VEs
0
0.225
0.684
0.871
0.9

VEd
0.9
0.871
0.684
0.225
0

0
day of peak
146.9
155.1
175.3
182.4
184.7

sd
3.60401
3.212822
4.808557
5.966574
4.595892

0.25
day of peak
158
164.7
181.4
187.8
188.8

sd
5.354126
5.869885
4.623611
7.375636
4.211096

VEi
0.5
day of peak
169.2
175.1
186.4
190.3
189.1

sd
9.919677
8.157478
7.121173
4.667857
6.063552

population vaccinated: 18.4 M
VEs
0
0.225
0.684
0.871
0.9

VEd
0.9
0.871
0.684
0.225
0

0
day of peak
sd
152.9 5.15213
164 5.477226
194.8 0.421637
195
0
195
0

0.25
day of peak
sd
169.5 5.854723
180.1 7.218033
195
0
195
0
195
0

VEi
0.5
day of peak
sd
186.6 4.880801
195
0
195
0
195
0
195
0

0.75
day of peak
195
195
195
195
195

sd

0
0
0
0
0

1
day of peak
195
195
195
195
195

0
0
0
0
0

1
day of peak
195
195
195
195
195

sd

0
0
0
0
0

population vaccinated: 23 M
VEs
0
0.225
0.684
0.871
0.9

VEd
0.9
0.871
0.684
0.225
0

0
day of peak
sd
153.5 5.104464
166.3 6.429965
195
0
195
0
195
0

0.25
day of peak
sd
171.7 4.347413
182.3 5.850926
195
0
195
0
195
0

VEi
0.5
day of peak
sd
192.1 3.573047
195
0
195
0
195
0
195
0

0.75
day of peak
195
195
195
195
195

sd

sd

0
0
0
0
0

TABLE S12. Prevalence peak times (means and standard deviations) produced by the ABM for various
combinations of vaccine efficacy parameters and coverage levels, assuming a clinical efficacy of VEc = 0.9
and active case-targeted NPIs consisting of case isolation, home-quarantine of household contacts of
detected cases, and international travel restrictions (n = 10 instances per scenario).

S20

