Developing Apps for Researching the COVID-19
Pandemic with the TrackYourHealth Platform
Carsten Vogel∗ , Rüdiger Pryss∗ , Johannes Schobel† , Winfried Schlee‡ and Felix Beierle∗
∗ Institute

arXiv:2103.13954v1 [cs.SE] 25 Mar 2021

of Clinical Epidemiology and Biometry, University of Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany
Email: {carsten.vogel, ruediger.pryss}@uni-wuerzburg.de, beierle@tu-berlin.de
† DigiHealth Institute, Neu-Ulm University of Applied Sciences, Neu-Ulm, Germany
Email: johannes.schobel@hnu.de
‡ Clinic and Policlinic for Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University of Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany
Email: winfried.schlee@ieee.org

Abstract—Through lockdowns and other severe changes to
daily life, almost everyone is affected by the COVID-19 pandemic.
Scientists and medical doctors are – among others – mainly
interested in researching, monitoring, and improving physical
and mental health of the general population. Mobile health apps
(mHealth), and apps conducting ecological momentary assessments (EMA) respectively, can help in this context. However,
developing such mobile applications poses many challenges like
costly software development efforts, strict privacy rules, compliance with ethical guidelines, local laws, and regulations. In this
paper, we present TrackYourHealth (TYH), a highly configurable,
generic, and modular mobile data collection and EMA platform,
which enabled us to develop and release two mobile multiplatform applications related to COVID-19 in just a few weeks.
We present TYH and highlight specific challenges researchers
and developers of similar apps may also face, especially when
developing apps related to the medical field.
Index Terms—COVID-19, Mobile Application Development,
Ecological Momentary Assessment, Mobile Crowdsensing

I. I NTRODUCTION
In early 2020, the coronavirus spread all around the globe
and posed major challenges to all areas of society. Not only
does COVID-19 affect the respiratory system of infected
people, it also impacts the social consequences and measures
trying to contain the virus. Lockdowns, home office, restricted
everyday routines, limited freedom of movement and social
distancing take their toll on everyone. Studies have found that
overall mental health has declined [1], [2].
In order to find out about the mental and physical health of
people during sudden events like the COVID-19 pandemic,
mobile applications with ecological momentary assessment
(EMA) and mobile crowdsensing (MCS) features are a viable
solution. Employing mobile applications has two major benefits for both researchers and potentially also its users: (1) advancing research and (2) supporting people to cope. However,
in most cases, researchers demand such an app that can be
easily adapted to their needs, such as the changing COVID-19
situation might require. Besides developing the software itself,
researchers face additional challenges that are costly and time
consuming, like compliance with privacy regulations, ethical
guidelines, local laws, and platform regulations. At the same
time, while facing these challenges, unforeseen events like the
current pandemic make a short time-to-market crucial.

In this paper, we present TrackYourHealth (TYH), a modular server-client platform for mobile apps. TYH’s core features
constitute EMA – users can fill out questionnaires, data is
collected, and individualized feedback can be sent back to
the user from the backend. We present specific challenges
researchers and developers face when developing apps related
to critical health-related situations like the current pandemic.
Our findings can help gauge the effort necessary for each step.
Based on TYH, within a matter of weeks, we developed and
released two multi-platform COVID-19-related mobile apps,
which were used by 131,371 users at the time of writing. The
first one is Corona Check1 (CC), developed in collaboration
with a regional health ministry in Germany. Users can enter
their symptoms to get a first impression if they could be linked
to the coronavirus, novel at that time. The main goal of CC was
to relief the corona telephone hotlines, to reduce uncertainty
among the population by providing reliable information, and
to collect data for further research. The Corona Health2 (CH)
app was developed in cooperation with the Robert Koch
Institute (RKI), Germany’s governmental institute responsible
for disease control and prevention. The main goal of CH is
to conduct several studies on the direct and indirect effects of
the COVID-19 virus and its countermeasures on the mental
and physical health of the population.
In the following, we present the TYH platform that allowed
us to implement these apps in a matter of weeks. In Section II,
we discuss related work. In Section III, we elaborate TYH’s
core features and user privacy aspects. In Section IV, we
present the timeline for CC and CH, from the basic idea to
users being able to find the final product in the app store. In
Section V, we conclude and give an outlook on future work.
II. R ELATED W ORK
COVID-19-related tracking apps raise concerns among
users, data protection authorities, and researchers regarding
user data, security, and privacy [3], [4]. We have approached
this with transparency and strict compliance to all relevant
regulations. [5] presents an app with elaborated concepts for
1 CC:
2 CH:

https://www.coronacheck.science/en/; last accessed: 2021-02-22
https://www.corona-health.net/en/; last accessed: 2021-02-22

MCS and EMA. With [6], a framework was introduced for
time-based scheduling of EMAs and interventions. Both are
not implemented as a multi-platform and are only available
for Android.
There are some existing multi-platform frameworks for
EMA and MCS like AWARE3 , which enable sensor data tracking and offer studies with questionnaires. However, building
upon such frameworks would likely have lead us to make
several adjustments to adapt to the specific requirements of our
use cases. Additionally, compliance to regulations regarding
medical products required us to know and describe every
feature of the platform. For CC and CH, we built on the TYH
platform, which we previously used to create other EMA apps
like TrackYourTinnitus [7] or TrackYourStress [8].
III. T HE T RACK YOUR H EALTH P LATFORM
In this section, we present the TYH platform and focus on
overall requirements, core features and user privacy aspects.
A. Overall Requirements
General requirements for EMA apps are that questionnaires
with different input types are available in order to conduct
research. Additionally, we conduct MCS. Every time a users
fills out a questionnaire, data from mobile sensors of the
device, e.g., the user’s location or app usage statistics, can help
support researching behavior and health conditions. Especially
with respect to mobile sensing, data protection requirements
and regulations have to be complied with. Complementary
to data collection, for our applications, we also required a
feedback channel that responds to the user input. In the case of
CC and CH, we had additional specific requirements regarding
the delivery of corona-related news to the user, how feedback
from questionnaires is presented, etc. Further requirements in
our case were that the apps should be multilingual and that
the platform has to react to changes during live operation.
B. Architecture
TYH comprises a client-server-architecture with native mobile applications (Android and iOS), communicating JSON
data structures via HTTPS to a REST API. All structural
data and contents are JSON formatted objects provided by the
server, stored by the mobile applications locally once delivered
and refreshed if necessary. Likewise, the server itself as well
as the mobile applications are configured via JSON files.
C. Server Features
The TYH server API [9] is developed in PHP by utilizing
the Laravel framework and follows a RESTful approach.
Furthermore, a relational database (i.e., MySQL) is used
as data storage. The API itself comprises various modules,
accessible through well-defined and documented endpoints.
The API covers features like authentication and authorization
of users, provides details for currently running studies as well
as assigned questionnaires. In addition, users can send data
captured using their smart mobile devices to the server, that is
3 AWARE:

https://awareframework.com; last accessed: 2021-02-22

then appropriately validated to ensure consistently high data
quality. Furthermore, it is possible to define automatically
generated rule-based feedback that can be requested by the
mobile clients after a questionnaire has been sent. The API can
also host a messaging system that allows users to communicate
with their responsible healthcare provider (i.e., psychologist or
medical doctor). Note that the one-on-one contact to healthcare
providers was not integrated for CC and CH because of
the high number of users we expected. The client-server
data exchange strictly follows the JSON:API specification4 .
Caching, in turn, is utilized based on shallow ETags generated
by the server for every response.
D. Client Features
The mobile apps are developed in Java for Android 5+ and
with Swift for iOS 12+. They consist of several modules that
work independently. Each module is intended for a specific
functionality such as filling out questionnaires, giving feedback to the user, or managing user accounts, etc. Depending
on the use case, subsets of modules can be included into
the application and configured as desired. In general, almost
everything, from the UI theme and icons over the subset, order,
and settings of modules to the content and translations, can
be customized via configuration files. While the theme and
base layout are delivered within the application itself, some
dynamic content, like questionnaires, feedback, studies, news
etc. is loaded over the TYH API. This concept enables updates
during live operation.
The central module is the User-Account, which provides
basic authentication functionality like registration via email or
username and password or anonymously. The module handles
email validation, the login itself, providing a token and user
profile as well as various settings used by other modules. All
requests that require authentication are token-based.
The client framework provides a module that enables users
to leave and join available Studies as seen in Figure 1(a). This,
among other configurations, can also be managed by an admin
user or set as default for new users. A user participating in certain studies is automatically granted access to corresponding
content and modules. For example, one or more questionnaires
can be assigned to a study. Depending on the use case, this
way, users can decide what studies they want to take part in,
which may grant or revoke access to corresponding modules.
The Questionnaire-Module can represent multi-page questionnaires with common elements such as single/multiplechoice, text-answers, date-questions, and selection boxes or
texts in various ways and any arrangement as displayed in
Figure 1(b). Filled-out questionnaires are sent to the server
as JSON answer sheets, where they can be evaluated in
combination with the Feedback-Module by configurable rules
to generate feedback blocks accordingly. Meta and sensor data
can also be uploaded via these answer sheets. The questionnaires also provide configurable notification schedules, which
can remind the user to fill out a specific questionnaire. In
4 JSON:API:

https://jsonapi.org; last accessed: 2021-02-22

CC, the Feedback-Module is used as a COVID-19 symptom
checker, providing a first estimation based on the given answers. Because at the time of planning the application (March
2020), the information for COVID-19 regularly updated, it was
assured by design that adjustments to contents of questionnaires, feedbacks, and rules used to calculate the latter, as well
as other extensive and critical changes, must be possible during
live operation. Also, system configuration adaptions must not
lead to data inconsistencies or even wrong information for the
users, especially in edge cases, where the user is running the
app during the patch-phase either online or offline. In order to
properly test this, in addition to the complex synchronization
logic, a test version of the system ran in parallel, in which the
migration could be simulated.
Information can be presented in many ways. As a configurable format that works on both Android and iOS, HTML
files are used for static content such as the privacy policy or
legal information. News can be presented via Markdown files,
which are easy-to-edit for the editors. With this module, we
keep the user up-to-date on current topics and regulations.
Tips and FAQ are also supported by the client framework.
Here, general information about the COVID-19 pandemic
and information about protective behaviors and measures are
offered. Users can rate or like content, which, in turn, gives
the authors feedback on its usefulness.
Offline availability: If a user is offline, e.g., when no internet
connection is available, and gets a notification from the
application, the corresponding questionnaire must be available
anyway. For non-critical parts of the application, contents can
be stored locally. This does not apply to Tips and News,
because they must comply to the latest state of the pandemic’s
information and regulations, which are updated frequently.
Furthermore, feedback that may contain an individual recommendation is always loaded from the server on which the
current rules are defined.
E. User Privacy
As the data collected by the platform is highly sensitive,
protection of the acquired information is of utmost importance.
1) Privacy by Design: One important aspect is, that the user
does not login with any personal credentials. For the sake of
user privacy in the context of COVID-19, we have adapted
and enhanced the manual registration and login process on
the client-side with an automated, anonymously generated
account. In this way, the user is relieved from efforts associated
with creating a user account and disclosing personal data,
which is not even necessary for the purpose of these applications. In consequence, data is only stored anonymously and
the user does not have to remember any login data. Through
the automatically generated ID, we are still able to correlate
connected data points from the same user.
To ensure that collected data do not identify the user, they
are anonymized even before they are stored locally or sent to
the backend. The location, for example, is only recorded to
an accuracy of 11.1 km, which does not identify the user, but
is still sufficient for geographic evaluations. With the explicit

7:59

7:53

7:51

Studies

Back

Physical health for adults

Next

Done

How old are you (in years) ?

(18 years + )

24
St art :
End:

2020-01-01
2030-12-31

Part icipat e

Which gender are you?
Female

Quest ionnaires

Feedback

St udies

T ips

Live-t icker

FAQ

Set t ings

St at ist ics

Profile

M essenger

Chat bot

Welcome to the CORONA HEALTH APP survey on ment

Mental health for
adolescentsConsent
(12 to 17 years)

Male
Transgender

You hereby confirm your participation
in this study.

In which country do you currently live?
St art :
End:

Decline

Confirm
Germany

Welcome! We really appreciate that you are taking the

At the beginning, we would like to learn a little more
about potential previous illnesses. Have you suffered
from any of the following illnesses or complaints in
the past 12 months?

Recognizing st ress for
adult s(18 years and up)

Coronary heart disease of Angina Pectoris
Joined at
2021-02-04

Unsubscribe
No

1
Quest ionnaires

Yes
Info

News

St udies

About Us

12
Quest ionnaires

Feedback
FAQ

Live-T icker

St udies

M ore

I don't know

(a) Studies

(b) Questionnaire

(c) App configurator

Fig. 1: iOS in-app screenshots.
permission of the user, in the Android version, we can track
coarse, aggregated app usage statistics via UsageStats.
2) User Awareness: User data protection and privacy are
very sensitive topics in the field of EMA and MCS in general,
but especially COVID-19 related ones, which often cause
concerns by their users, as discussed in [4]. To counteract
this, we provide users with the best possible information
about data usage and let them decide what they want to
share in an anonymized way. We present exactly what data
is being collected at what point in time. By design, the user
stays anonymous and has the ability to actively opt-in to the
collection of certain data. This is done either by the OS’s
permission interface for location data and notification settings,
or app-internal. App-internal consent screens are shown before
entering the main screen and creating a database entry, and
before filling out questionnaires. The data collection only
takes place when the user actively submits a questionnaire by
clicking the Submit-Button, hence there is no background data
collection. Our privacy policy can be viewed at any time in the
About Us section of the application and on the corresponding
website.
IV. T IMELINE
In this section, we highlight some critical aspects outside the
core software development that posed challenges in releasing
CC and CH. Due to compliance with several regulations, the
development process mostly followed the standard waterfall
model. Figure 2 schematically shows a Gantt-Chart of the
development and release of CC and CH.
A. Planning Phase
During the planning phase, we defined the requirements
for the COVID-19 apps together with the other stakeholders.
The main challenge here was to map expectations onto the
feature set we already developed and to estimate the efforts
to implement new modules of features. In most cases, with
small modifications to the requirements or extensions to our
platform, we could keep the development effort low. Solely,
the News module had to be implemented from scratch. Here,

C
Month 1
(1)
(3)

Month 2

(5)

(1)

Month 3

Month 4

Month 5

M. 6

(2)

(2)

(4)
(6)

(7)

(8)

(3)

(9)

(4)
(6)

V. C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK

(10)

(5)
(7)

(8)

(9)
(10)

(1) Stakeholder definition

(2) Instruction

(4) Iterative Development

(5) Iterative Testing

(8) Application to the ethics committee

verification and indexing processes than we were used to from
our other apps such as TrackYourTinntius [7].

(3) Scheduling/Requirement Analysis
(6) SOPs

(9) Available in store

(7) Release

(10) Indexed for search

Fig. 2: Development time sequence milestones.

we have provided the editors with a platform on which
they can write and upload COVID-19-related news articles
in Markdown format. In order to prevent the publication of
misleading or incorrect information, news articles are only
published if at least three experts have approved them.
For planning and live demonstration purposes, a configurable iOS demo version allowed an application to be quickly
assembled from modules. Figure 1 (c) shows the configurator’s
drag and drop menu for the different modules. Here it is also
possible to display demo data and interact with the latter.

In this paper, we presented TrackYourHealth (TYH), a
generic, configurable EMA and MCS platform. We introduced
its core features and modules, and pointed out how we implemented user privacy and data anonymization. With TYH, we
developed and released two multi-platform COVID-19-related
apps, Corona Check and Corona Health, within a matter
of weeks. We presented the timeline for developing these
apps and highlighted the specific challenges in the processes,
including the large efforts necessary for policy compliance
with medical regulations.
For future work, we plan to add end-user programming to
improve configuration and content management. The goal is to
streamline and automate parts of the process in which external
partners are involved, especially from other disciplines.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We are grateful for the support from Marc Holfelder5 during
the certification process and for the software development
efforts by Julian and Fabian Haug for the Android applications.
R EFERENCES

B. Development and Testing Phases
During the development phase, we iteratively held consultations with medical experts and also provided assistance with
the technical specification of the questionnaires and evaluation
rules. The test phase of beta-versions began slightly offset from
these meetings. Due to the ever changing COVID-19 situation,
the requirements were adapted and therefore, the configuration
files had to be updated correspondingly. At this point in time,
some steps were not fully automated and integrated in the
grown platform. Therefore, reconfiguring the live system, in
combination with the translation process – for up to eight
languages per app – required some manual work.
C. Policy Compliance
The entire system has been validated/verified on the basis
of the IEC 62304 and IEC 82304 standards (medical device
software / healthcare apps) as well as the GAMP 5 regulations
(standard work of the pharmaceutical industry). This comes
with a huge effort in creating documentation and enforcing
security and safety measures on the platform itself. After
completing the certification, changes to the platform are associated with a lot of post-processing of the documentation and
re-testing, to restore the certification status. The documents
resulted in approx. 300 pages for CC and 860 pages for CH.
D. Ethics Committee and Store Review Process
With the completion of the certifications and the approval
of our apps by the Ethics Committee of the University of
Würzburg, we handed over the applications to the respective
store review process. Due to the amount of misinformation
about the COVID-19 and the potentially high damage that
could be caused by malicious apps in this area, the procedures
for releasing such apps are particularly strict. This led to longer

[1] C. Pieh, S. Budimir, and T. Probst, “The effect of age, gender, income,
work, and physical activity on mental health during coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) lockdown in Austria,” Journal of Psychosomatic Research,
vol. 136, p. 110186, Sep. 2020.
[2] N. Vindegaard and M. E. Benros, “COVID-19 pandemic and mental
health consequences: Systematic review of the current evidence,” Brain,
Behavior, and Immunity, vol. 89, pp. 531–542, Oct. 2020.
[3] N. Ahmed, R. A. Michelin, W. Xue, S. Ruj, R. Malaney, S. S. Kanhere,
A. Seneviratne, W. Hu, H. Janicke, and S. K. Jha, “A Survey of COVID19 Contact Tracing Apps,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 134 577–134 601,
2020.
[4] S. Borra, “COVID-19 Apps: Privacy and Security Concerns,” in Intelligent Systems and Methods to Combat Covid-19, ser. SpringerBriefs in
Applied Sciences and Technology, A. Joshi, N. Dey, and K. C. Santosh,
Eds. Springer, 2020, pp. 11–17.
[5] F. Beierle, V. T. Tran, M. Allemand, P. Neff, W. Schlee, T. Probst,
R. Pryss, and J. Zimmermann, “TYDR – Track Your Daily Routine.
Android App for Tracking Smartphone Sensor and Usage Data,” in 2018
IEEE/ACM 5th International Conference on Mobile Software Engineering
and Systems (MOBILESoft), May 2018, pp. 72–75.
[6] P. Van De Ven, H. O’Brien, R. Henriques, M. Klein, R. Msetfi, J. Nelson,
A. Rocha, J. Ruwaard, D. O’Sullivan, and H. Riper, “ULTEMAT: A
mobile framework for smart ecological momentary assessments and
interventions,” Internet Interventions, vol. 9, pp. 74–81, Sep. 2017.
[7] T. Probst, R. Pryss, B. Langguth, and W. Schlee, “Emotional states as
mediators between tinnitus loudness and tinnitus distress in daily life:
Results from the “TrackYourTinnitus” application,” Scientific Reports,
vol. 6, no. 1, p. 20382, Feb. 2016.
[8] R. Pryss, D. John, W. Schlee, W. Schlotz, J. Schobel, R. Kraft,
M. Spiliopoulou, B. Langguth, M. Reichert, T. O’Rourke, H. Peters,
C. Pieh, C. Lahmann, and T. Probst, “Exploring the Time Trend of Stress
Levels While Using the Crowdsensing Mobile Health Platform, TrackYourStress, and the Influence of Perceived Stress Reactivity: Ecological
Momentary Assessment Pilot Study,” JMIR mHealth and uHealth, vol. 7,
no. 10, p. e13978, Oct. 2019.
[9] R. Pryss, J. Schobel, and M. Reichert, “Requirements for a Flexible and
Generic API Enabling Mobile Crowdsensing mHealth Applications,” in
2018 4th International Workshop on Requirements Engineering for SelfAdaptive, Collaborative, and Cyber Physical Systems (RESACS), Aug.
2018, pp. 24–31.
5 LA2

GmbH: https://www.la2.de; last accessed: 2021-02-22

