Was there a COVID-19 harvesting effect in Northern Italy?

Augusto Cerquaa, Roberta Di Stefanob, Marco Lettaa, Sara Miccolib
a

b

Department of Social Sciences and Economics, Sapienza University of Rome
Department of Methods and Models for Economics, Territory and Finance, Sapienza University of Rome

This is a draft chapter. The final version is available in the book Regions between challenges and
unexpected opportunities.
Abstract
We investigate the possibility of a harvesting effect, i.e. a temporary forward shift in mortality,
associated with the COVID-19 pandemic by looking at the excess mortality trends of an area that
registered one of the highest death tolls in the world during the first wave, Northern Italy. We do not
find any evidence of a sizable COVID-19 harvesting effect, neither in the summer months after the
slowdown of the first wave nor at the beginning of the second wave. According to our estimates, only
a minor share of the total excess deaths detected in Northern Italian municipalities over the entire
period under scrutiny (February - November 2020) can be attributed to an anticipatory role of
COVID-19. A slightly higher share is detected for the most severely affected areas (the provinces of
Bergamo and Brescia, in particular), but even in these territories, the harvesting effect can only
account for less than 20% of excess deaths. Furthermore, the lower mortality rates observed in these
areas at the beginning of the second wave may be due to several factors other than a harvesting effect,
including behavioral change and some degree of temporary herd immunity. The very limited presence
of short-run mortality displacement restates the case for containment policies aimed at minimizing
the health impacts of the pandemic.
JEL-Codes: C21; C53; J11
Keywords: harvesting effect, machine learning, excess mortality, COVID-19, Northern Italy

1

1. Introduction
At the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, there was much speculation in Italy as elsewhere about a
potential ‘harvesting effect’ of COVID-19, i.e. a short-term increase of mortality later followed by a
corresponding decrease in deaths. The claim was that COVID-19 fatalities, whose median age was
around 80 years, were, for the vast majority, very vulnerable people who, in the absence of the
pandemic, would have ‘died anyway’ shortly after they actually did, due to other causes. According
to the proponents of this hypothesis, COVID-19 excess mortality would have been largely reabsorbed in the months after the mortality peak, as the virus would have simply anticipated a large
number of occurred deaths. Stated differently, this implies that when the spread of COVID-19
progressively slows down, one should observe a significant reduction in mortality, which would
counterbalance the abnormal increases experienced during the peak.
Albeit this position has been quickly picked up by COVID-19 ‘skeptics’ to protest against the social
distancing policies introduced by most governments, 1 research on the plausibility of this claim is still
scarce as documented in Section 2, both due to lags in data availability and the short time-span
observable so far. We investigate the possible harvesting effects of the COVID-19 pandemic by
looking at the excess all-cause mortality trends in Northern Italy, one of the areas with the highest
COVID-19 death toll in the world. Specifically, we employ the data-driven methodology introduced
by Cerqua et al. (2020) to estimate excess mortality and then investigate how it has evolved during
three separate periods: i) the peak of the first wave in Italy, February - May 2020; ii) the ‘summer
break’, i.e. the tail of the first wave, going from June to September; and iii) the beginning of the
second wave, i.e. October and November 2020.
During the summer break, a ‘negative’ excess mortality is detected. Nevertheless, this reduction in
observed mortality compared to the counterfactual mortality figures predicted by our model is far too
limited (corresponding to 16% of the total excess deaths observed during the first wave) to
compensate for the abnormally high excess mortality of the first wave. During the onset of the second
wave, new excess mortality clusters are detected, and we estimate that, as a consequence, the
harvesting effect further shrinks to less than 12% when considering the entire February - November
period. Still, we do observe a negative and statistically significant spatial autocorrelation between the
mortality patterns of the two waves in some areas (the provinces of Bergamo and Brescia, in
particular) where, remarkably, we also detect a ‘negative’ excess mortality not only during the
summer months but also in October and November. This is consistent with the well-documented
1

In Italy, early in the pandemic, there was a fierce debate, which featured heavily in media outlets, about whether COVID19 victims had died ‘with coronavirus’ or ‘from coronavirus’.

2

lower incidence of COVID-19 during the beginning of the second wave in these Lombardy provinces,
which even led some mayors to ask to be exempted from the November 3, 2020 decree, which
imposed a ‘red zone’ in the entire region. While such reversal of patterns between the two waves
could be due to several factors, such as a behavioral change and some degree of herd immunity in the
most affected areas, it is by no means enough to compensate for the mortality boom of the first wave.
Indeed, even in these hardest-hit areas, the harvesting effect can only explain up to 17% of the
COVID-19 related deaths experienced during the entire period under scrutiny.
On top of these period-by-period comparisons, we also compute the cumulative number of deaths
over the entire period under scrutiny (February - November 2020), which sums to 49,816 deaths more
than ‘expected’ in Northern Italy. This corresponds to an increase in mortality of +20% with respect
to an ‘ordinary’ year, i.e. in a ‘no-COVID’ counterfactual scenario. Overall, this evidence suggests
that, although COVID-19 has probably anticipated the death of some of the frailest individuals of the
Italian population, in the vast majority of cases, it killed relatively healthy people who did not have a
short life expectancy before the pandemic’s arrival.
2. The harvesting effect
The harvesting effect, or mortality displacement, is identified as an increase in deaths followed by
fewer deaths than expected after the mortality crisis. During exogenous shocks such as heat waves or
cold spells, the selective mortality among the frailest individuals increases the deaths among the total
population and leaves a relevant proportion of strong survivors (Luy et al. 2020). After the shock, the
number of deaths is below the expected number, and, therefore, a compensation in mortality can be
observed between the crisis and the following period (Toulemon and Barbieri 2008).
Several scholars studied the harvesting effect caused by particular events, such as heat waves or cold
spells (e.g. Baccini, Kosatsky and Biggeri 2013; Cheng et al. 2018; Grize et al. 2005; Qiao et al. 2015;
Stafoggia et al. 2009; Toulemon and Barbieri 2008), seasonal influenza (e.g. Lytras et al. 2019) or air
pollution (Rabl 2005). Lytras et al. (2019) found out that the influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 affected the
frailties individuals that would have died in the short-term because of other causes, while influenza
A(H3N2) and type B caused an excess of influenza deaths among people who would not have died
in the same year. Stafoggia et al. (2009), studying deaths that occurred in Rome between 1987-2005,
figured out that high levels of mortality during winter periods can reduce the effect of heat waves on
mortality compared with years of winters with low levels of mortality.
To our knowledge, only a few papers assess the potential presence of the harvesting effect during the
COVID-19 pandemic. Rivera et al. (2020) stated that in the US, the very high mortality due to
3

COVID-19 spans over a more extended period than other influenza or pandemic, and probably no
harvesting would be observed in periods following the worst waves of the COVID-19 pandemic. In
fact, in a study that analyzes the 2020 life expectancy decrease in the US, Andrasfay and Goldman
(2021) did not find evidence of a harvesting effect due to COVID-19. Alicandro et al. (2020) indicated
the possible presence of a harvesting effect at the end of the first wave of the pandemic in Italy, except
for the Lombardy region, where this effect was less pronounced at that time. Similarly, Scortichini et
al. (2020), by analyzing excess mortality across Italian provinces, suggested the possible presence of
harvesting effect in some areas of Central and Southern Italy at the end of the first wave of the
pandemic. The Italian National Institute of Statistics (Istat) and Istituto Superiore di Sanità (ISS)
(2020b) reported some evidence of harvesting effect in some areas of Northern Italy during the
summer months when the infections were minor. In contrast, the recent study by Canoui-Poitrine et
al. (2021), who estimate the number of excess deaths among nursing home residents during the first
wave of the pandemic in France, finds no evidence harvesting effects up to the end of August.
3. Data and methodological approach
To determine the potential presence of a harvesting effect in Northern Italy, we first estimate the
excess all-cause mortality due (directly or indirectly) to the COVID-19 pandemic at the municipalitylevel and then investigate its evolution over time across the three different periods described above.
The first step is made necessary by the lack of reliable data on the deaths caused by COVID-19,
especially at a disaggregated level. Indeed, official data on the death toll of COVID-19 at the local
level are scarce, 2 and they are likely to suffer from substantial underreporting (Ghislandi et al., 2020).
Excess mortality is defined as the difference between the observed mortality in the presence of a
pandemic and the counterfactual scenario of mortality in the pandemic’s absence. It includes the
number of deaths due directly to COVID-19 infections as well as the deaths due indirectly to COVID19, i.e. the collateral effects of the lockdown. During the lockdown, the likelihood of dying for road 3
and workplace accidents, pollution-related diseases, or criminal activities decreases. At the same
time, the likelihood of dying for the stress on the public health system increases. The estimation of
excess mortality is made possible thanks to the data released on February 3, 2021, by Istat on the

2

In Italy, official data on SARS-CoV-2 reported cases are released only at the provincial level (the number of infected
people) or at the regional level (the number of COVID-19 deaths).
3

The Istat - ACI (2020) report records a decrease in victims due to road accidents in the period January - September 2020
of 1,788 (-26.3%). The percentage increases to 34% by considering the period January - June 2020.

4

number of daily certified deaths for the period January 1, 2015 – November 30, 2020, for all Italian
municipalities. 4
An accurate estimation of excess mortality requires the construction of a reliable counterfactual
scenario. In the context of the pandemic mortality estimation, different approaches were used. 5 The
most common is what we call the ‘intuitive’ approach. It consists of using the simple average of the
numbers of deaths observed for the same unit in the past. This approach has been adopted by several
national and international institutions and employed in many scientific works. It is a simple approach
that does not employ any model, but it may provide excess mortality estimates which are too sensitive
to outliers. Another possible approach is the use of the counterfactual approaches, such as the
difference-in-differences or the synthetic control method estimators. However, these approaches are
ill-suited in a setting where it is hard to find plausible control groups, i.e. municipalities potentially
not affected (directly or indirectly via containment measures) by the pandemic for several months.
An attractive methodological solution to such an estimation problem is the recently developed
machine learning control method (MLCM) inspired by the train-test-treat-compare process proposed
by Varian (2016). In the context of COVID-19, the MLCM can be applied by drawing on the
predictive ability of ML algorithms to generate a no-COVID counterfactual scenario for each unit by
using exclusively pre-pandemic information (Cerqua and Letta, 2020). In our setting, the use of the
MLCM is made possible by constructing a comprehensive time-series cross-sectional database on
Italian municipalities.
The reason to prefer MLCM over the ‘intuitive’ approach lies in its ability to estimate more accurate
counterfactual scenarios. Cerqua et al. (2020) demonstrate that considering the Mean Squared Error
(MSE), on average, there is a sizable gain in terms of estimation accuracy compared with the intuitive
estimates, especially for small and medium-sized municipalities. For this reason, we investigate the
presence of the harvesting effect on Northern Italy by applying the MLCM approach used by Cerqua
et al. (2020) to retrieve excess mortality estimates at the municipality-level. The mortality scenario
without the pandemic, i.e. the cumulative number of deaths per 10,000 inhabitants in an ordinary

4

Due to the creation of Mappano as a new administrative unit in 2017 and to the lack of mortality data for all years, we
cannot analyze six municipalities: Borgaro Torinese, Caselle Torinese, Leini, Mappano, and Settimo Torinese. Besides,
as 2020 is a leap year, we decided to ignore the deaths on February 29 for comparability with data from previous years.

5

See Section 2 of Cerqua et al. (2020) for a review of the methodologies used to estimate excess mortality during
pandemics.

5

situation, is estimated using 16 selected covariates from 2015 to 2019, including the demographic,
health system, economic, and contamination (air pollution) features. 6
For each considered period (in our case, the peak of the first wave, the summer break, and the
beginning of the second wave), we train and test our random forest algorithm on the pooled 20152019 (on which, as typical in the ML literature, we apply a random split and use 80% of the full
sample as the training set and the remaining 20% as the testing sample) dataset to predict, for the
2020 sample, estimates of local mortality in a counterfactual scenario without the pandemic. It is then
easy to retrieve excess mortality as the difference between observed and predicted mortality.
Cerqua et al. (2020) use three ML algorithms: Least Absolute Shrinkage and Selection Operator
(LASSO), random forest, and stochastic gradient boosting. In this work, we apply the ML using the
random forest algorithm, a fully non-linear technique based on the aggregation of many decision trees
(1000, in our case), as Cerqua et al. (2020) demonstrate that it performs well for all municipality
sizes. The choice to circumscribe the analysis only on Northern Italy is dictated by the fact that it was
the epicenter of the pandemic in Italy during the peak of the first wave (February - May 2020) and
one of the mortality hotspots in Europe. As such, we deem it a representative case study to test for a
potential COVID-19 harvesting effect. 7 We investigate how all-cause deaths have evolved during
three separate periods: i) the peak of the first wave in Italy, February - May 2020; ii) the ‘summer
break’, i.e. the tail of the first wave, going from June to September; iii) the beginning of the second
wave, October and November 2020, according to the division made by the fourth report Istat, ISS
(2020a).
We do so by showing the choropleth maps of each separate period as well as by using one of the most
important indexes for studying spatial relationships: the Moran’s I. Moran’s I can be of two types:
the global bivariate Moran’s I and local bivariate Moran’s I (bivariate Local Indicators of Spatial
Association, or more simply bivariate LISA). The former provides summary statistics for overall
spatial clustering. It varies between +1 and -1: a value close to +1 indicates a strong positive spatial
autocorrelation. Otherwise, a value close to -1 reveals that the spatial autocorrelation is negative,

6

The full list of covariates is the following: the share of men in the population, the share of those aged 65+ (overall as
well as only men), the share of those aged 80+ (overall as well as only men), the resident population, the overall number
of deaths in the previous year, the overall number of deaths in the 7 weeks before the COVID-19 outbreak in Italy, the
number of employees, the share of employment in manufacturing, the PM-10 as a measure of air quality, the population
density, the degree of urbanization of the municipality, the dummy of the presence of a hospital in the municipality, the
dummy of the presence of a hospital in at least one of the neighboring municipalities, and the number of deaths due to
road accidents in the previous year. For more details, see Cerqua et al. (2020).
7

On the contrary, the excess mortality observed during the peak of the first wave in Central and Southern Italy could be
too mild and uneven to determine a harvesting effect.

6

while 0 indicates a random spatial pattern. The bivariate LISA is instead applied to depict the
spatiality of how the value of one variable is surrounded by values of a second variable (Anselin
1995). Basically, the bivariate LISA measures the relationships between spatial units and their
neighboring spatial units and maps statistically significant clusters of the phenomena under analysis.
The neighboring structure across municipalities is measured by a spatial weights matrix based on the
inverse geographical (Euclidean) distances between municipalities’ centroids. 8 The weight matrix is
then standardized such that its rows sum to unity (in order to compute neighborhood averages) and
have zeros along the leading diagonal (see Maddison, 2006).
Thanks to the bivariate LISA, we will identify the following types of association: positive
autocorrelation, which occurs where high values of variable 1 are surrounded by high values of
variable 2 (high–high hotspots, HH) or where there is a concentration of low values (low–low
coldspots, LL); or negative spatial autocorrelation, namely places where low values of variable 2
surround high values of variable 1 (High–Low clusters, HL), or vice versa (Low-High clusters, LH).
As in Frigerio et al. (2015), we will use 999 random permutations to determine the statistical
significance for each cluster.
In our analysis, we will use the global bivariate Moran’s I to study the overall spatial correlation of
excess mortality values of the first wave on the summer break (second wave) in Northern Italy and
the bivariate LISA to measure the clustering patterns of excess mortality values of the first wave and
the summer break (second wave). We will investigate whether the patterns of similarity and
dissimilarity in the clustering of excess mortality values remained stable across the three time periods.
4. Results
4.1 Excess mortality estimates
The excess mortality estimates from all-cause deaths relative to the first phase of the pandemic, the
so-called peak of the first wave from February 21 to May 31, are shown in Figure 1 for Northern
Italy. Compared with the counterfactual scenario, the municipalities with the highest excess mortality
are located in the provinces of Bergamo, Brescia, Cremona, Lodi in the Lombardy region. Quite
impressively, 40.9% of the Lombardy municipalities recorded excess mortality of over 100%. Wide
clusters of municipalities with excess mortality above 100% are also present in Piacenza and Parma
provinces in the Emilia Romagna region and the Lombardy region. Clusters of municipalities with an
excess of deaths over 50% are located in Milan, Mantova and Pavia (Lombardy), again in Piacenza

8

The distance threshold is 15.1 km, which is the minimum threshold in order to avoid neighborless municipalities.

7

and Parma provinces (Emilia Romagna), but also in the provinces of Imperia (Liguria), Cuneo and
Alessandria (Piedmont), and Trento (Trentino Alto-Adige). In many municipalities of the Liguria
region and the provinces of Turin (Piedmont), Reggio Emilia, Rimini, and Forlì-Cesena (Emilia
Romagna), the excess mortality is between 20% and 50%. During the first wave, 126,896 deaths were
recorded in Northern Italy, and we estimate 41,586 excess deaths in this period. This corresponds to
an increase of +48.7% in the number of deaths due directly or indirectly to the pandemic during the
peak of the first wave in Northern Italy.
In the summer break from June 1 to September 30, defined by Istat, ISS (2020a) as a transition phase,
there are few municipalities with excess mortality over 50%, as displayed in Figure 2. Most of the
municipalities in Northern Italy do not record excess mortality, and small clusters of municipalities
with an excess of deaths above 50% are located in the Aosta Valley region and Turin and Cuneo
provinces in Piedmont. Our estimates confirm the evolution described by Istat, ISS (2020a), which
has connected the presence of ‘negative’ excess mortality with the lower number of deaths recorded
in this period in comparison with the average deaths in the years 2015-2019. During the summer
break, 94,382 deaths were recorded in Northern Italy, 6,608 less than predicted by our random forest
model for a no-COVID counterfactual scenario. This evidence might suggest a moderate presence of
harvesting effect during the summer months. However, this reduction in the number of all-cause
deaths is extremely limited with respect to the massive number of deaths observed in the first wave,
as it only accounts for less than 16% (6,608/41,586) of the total excess deaths of the first wave.
At the onset of the second wave, many Northern Italy municipalities register a relevant excess of
deaths, but the geographical pattern is different from what was observed during the first wave of the
pandemic. As shown in Figure 3, broad clusters of municipalities with excess mortality above 100%
are located in Cuneo (Piedmont) and Belluno (Veneto), and the Aosta Valley region. In various
provinces of Piedmont, Trentino Alto-Adige, and Lombardy, many municipalities have an excess of
deaths over 50%. Notably, the areas of Lombardy which had been most affected during the first wave
of the pandemic, such as the provinces of Bergamo, Brescia, Cremona, and Lodi, experience low or
even no levels of excess mortality. In the province of Milan, which had already been severely affected
by the virus during the first wave, there are many municipalities with excess mortality of over 20%.
In the most affected areas of Emilia Romagna during the first wave, namely Piacenza and Parma
provinces, most municipalities record negative excess mortality or low levels, while in areas
surrounding Bologna, more municipalities record an excess of deaths over 20% in comparison to the
first wave. In Liguria, a cluster of municipalities with a mortality excess above 50% is located around
Genova. In October and November 2020, there were 67,865 deaths in Northern Italy, and we estimate
14,838 excess deaths, i.e. an increase of +28.0% with respect to a ‘no-COVID’ scenario. For Northern
8

Italy as a whole, therefore, the harvesting effect during the entire February - November period can
only account for a small portion of the total excess deaths detected.
At the beginning of the second wave, the excess mortality is lower in some particular areas harshly
hit by the deaths’ increase during the first wave, and it is exceptionally high in areas that did not
experience a very high excess mortality in the first period of the pandemic. During the first wave, the
areas with the highest rate of infection were well-defined and less widespread in comparison to the
summer break and the second wave.
Figure 1 - Percentage of municipal excess deaths detected during the peak of the first wave with
respect to the counterfactual scenario estimated via random forest

9

Figure 2 - Percentage of municipal excess deaths detected during the ‘summer break’ with respect to
the counterfactual scenario estimated via random forest

Figure 3 - Percentage of municipal excess deaths detected during the onset of the second wave with
respect to the counterfactual scenario estimated via random forest

4.2 Spatial correlation indexes
Our starting point is the spatial correlation between the excess mortality values of the first wave and
the summer break. The global bivariate Moran’s I statistic is -0.053, indicating low negative spatial
autocorrelation. This means that, on average, in the North of Italy, the spatial association between
10

excess mortality values of the first wave and the summer break has only a small degree of spatial
clustering. However, the global statistic can mask substantial local variation in spatial autocorrelation.
Hence, we also computed bivariate LISA to map spatial autocorrelation for each municipality. The
resulting maps are displayed in Panel A of Figure 4, which maps bivariate LISA clusters, and in Panel
B of Figure 4, which shows their statistical significance at the 5%, 1%, or 0.1% significance levels.
Overall, this analysis demonstrates that there are a few distinct geographic patterns of spatial
clustering.
In the map in Panel A, the HH hotspots (dark red) are areas where municipalities with higher-thanaverage excess mortality in the first wave are surrounded by municipalities with higher-than-average
excess mortality in the summer break. As evident from the map, very few municipalities exhibit high
excess mortality in both considered periods.
The high–low (HL) clusters (salmon-colored) are areas where municipalities with high excess
mortality in the first wave have neighboring municipalities with low excess mortality in the summer
break. These clusters are most prominent in the Bergamo and Brescia provinces, harshly hit by the
virus during the first phase of the pandemic.
The low–high (LH) and low–low (LL) clusters also demarcate places of bivariate extremes. The LH
clusters represent areas with low excess mortality in the first wave, with neighboring municipalities
with high excess mortality in the summer break. LH clusters are present in Aosta Valley and
Piedmont, while tracts in LL clusters appear primarily in the areas around Trento. These places have
the lowest levels of excess mortality in the first wave as well as in the summer break.
We then investigate the spatial correlation between the excess mortality values of the first wave and
the onset of the second wave. The global bivariate Moran’s I statistic stays negative and low (-0.091).
We then use the bivariate LISA to identify clusters of the excess mortality values of the first and
second waves and report them in Figure 5. Two relevant patterns emerge: i) some areas which were
only moderately hit during the first wave experienced high levels of excess mortality in October and
November. In particular, these areas are concentrated in the provinces of Varese, Como, and Milan
in Lombardy, Belluno in Veneto, Udine in Friuli-Venezia Giulia, Cuneo and Biella in Piedmont; ii)
the municipalities surrounding Bergamo and Brescia, the most harshly hit during the first wave in
Italy, exhibit low levels of excess deaths at the beginning of the second wave.

11

Figure 4 - Bivariate LISA of excess mortality values of the peak of the first wave and the summer
break. Panel a Cluster map and Panel b Cluster significance
Panel a

Panel b

12

Figure 5 - Bivariate LISA of excess mortality values of the peak of first wave and the onset of the
second wave. Panel a Cluster map and Panel b Cluster significance
Panel a

Panel b

Overall, while our examination of overall trends in excess deaths for Northern Italy suggests very
limited evidence of relevant harvesting effects, our spatial analysis gives compelling evidence that
the areas of Northern Italy which were -hit the hardest in the first phase of COVID-19, then
experienced a decrease in the number of deaths of a larger magnitude, and over a longer time-span,
with respect to the majority of the other Northern Italy municipalities. Let us, therefore, take a closer
look at excess mortality dynamics in these most affected areas. By focusing on the provinces of
Bergamo and Brescia, in the first wave, we observed excess mortality of +164% (16,754 individuals
13

died in front of an ‘expected’ number of deaths of 6,351), during the summer break, a drop in the
number of deaths of -17.2% (6,579 individuals died in front of an ‘expected’ number of deaths of
7,948) and at the onset of the second wave a drop in the number of deaths of -5.1% (3,936 individuals
died in front of an ‘expected’ number of deaths of 4,147). Remarkably, in these areas, the all-cause
mortality balance sign is negative even at the beginning of the second wave. This evidence suggests
a somewhat more pronounced harvesting effect in the most affected areas of Northern Italy during
the first wave. Of the 10,403 excess deaths that occurred during the first wave in these areas, we
estimate that 1,580 individuals would have died anyway by the end of November 2020. However,
this still means that over 83% of the deaths due (directly or indirectly) to COVID-19 concern
relatively healthy people that did not have a short life expectancy before the pandemic’s arrival.
5. Conclusion
By studying mortality dynamics in the immediate aftermath of the first COVID-19 wave in Northern
Italy, one of the hardest-hit territories of the world, we find only limited evidence of a COVID-19
harvesting effect. The impressive COVID-19 first-wave excess mortality in Northern Italian
municipalities was only marginally ‘compensated for’ by a subsequent decline in mortality. In line
with Canoui-Poitrine et al. (2021) findings for nursing home residents in France, we do not find that
COVID-19 only affected those whose health was already inevitably compromised. The vast majority
of COVID-19 deaths are not ‘anticipated’ deaths but sudden and ‘unexpected’ ones.
We document a slight reduction in total mortality during the summer months and new excess
mortality clusters at the beginning of the second wave. When considering these dynamics jointly, for
Northern Italy as a whole, the harvesting effect can account only for a minor share of the total excess
deaths detected over the entire period. We also detect a statistically significant and negative spatial
autocorrelation between the mortality trend of the first wave and that of the second, and a negative
mortality balance at the beginning of the second wave, in some territories such as the provinces of
Bergamo and Brescia. In these areas, the most severely affected ones during the first wave, less than
20% of the COVID-related deaths might have occurred anyway by the end of November 2020.
However, these inverse dynamics are likely the joint outcome of a combination of causal factors, such
as some degree of temporary herd immunity coupled with long-lasting behavioral consequences of
the pandemic, rather than an exclusive outcome of the harvesting effect. In this respect, the recent reexplosion of cases and hospitalizations in the area of Brescia in the second half of February 2021,
which led to the rapid imposition of ad hoc more severe restrictive measures, is a telltale sign that
COVID-19 did not exhaust its impetus with the first wave in these territories.

14

Finally, excess mortality estimates computed over the entire February - November 2020 period
confirm that subsequent reductions did not counterbalance the initial boom in Northern Italy
mortality. Indeed, total excess mortality over this time-span is still 20% above what would have
happened under ‘ordinary’ conditions.
Two caveats are in order regarding the credibility of our findings. While COVID-19 incidence was
extremely low throughout the summer in Italy, including Northern regions, there is a possibility that
many COVID-19 survivors from the first wave may have been fatally weakened by the virus and died
several months later (Canoui-Poitrine et al., 2021). We acknowledge that this mechanism may be at
play, but at the same time, we do not deem it to be so substantial to significantly alter the overall
mortality trend, let alone reverse the sign of the excess mortality detected. Second, we only focus on
the very short-run. Even though the harvesting effect is intrinsically a short-run phenomenon, the few
months for which we have data may not be sufficient for the reabsorption to arise, and mortality
displacement could take place over a longer time span.
Still, the very limited presence of COVID-19-induced mortality displacement in the short-run makes
the health costs of the pandemic even more dramatic, suggests that COVID-19 can significantly
shorten life expectancy, and restates once more the case for containment policies aimed at minimizing
as much as possible the sanitary emergency and the death toll of the pandemic.
Our evidence is indeed preliminary. We look at a circumscribed area, Northern Italy, and focus on
the very short-run due to current data availability. Further research should extend this type of analysis
to other parts of Italy, other countries, and other waves of the current pandemic. When COVID-19 is
eventually brought under control, it will be possible to provide a definitive answer on whether the
pandemic played a significant anticipatory role and triggered a substantial mortality displacement or
not. For the moment, the answer seems to be no.

15

References
Alicandro, G., Remuzzi, G., & La Vecchia, C. (2020). Italy’s first wave of the COVID-19 pandemic
has ended: no excess mortality in May, 2020. The Lancet, 396(10253), e27-e28.
Andrasfay, T., & Goldman, N. (2021). Reductions in 2020 US life expectancy due to COVID-19 and
the disproportionate impact on the Black and Latino populations. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 118(5).
Anselin, L. (Apr. 1995). Local indicators of spatial association – LISA. Geographical Analysis, 27(2),
93–115.
Baccini, M., Kosatsky, T., & Biggeri, A. (2013). Impact of summer heat on urban population
mortality in Europe during the 1990s: an evaluation of years of life lost adjusted for harvesting. PLoS
One, 8(7), e69638.
Canoui-Poitrine, F., Rachas, A., Thomas, M., Carcaillon-Bentata, L., Fontaine, R., Gavazzi, G., ... &
Robine, J. M. (2021). Magnitude, change over time, demographic characteristics and geographic
distribution of excess deaths among nursing home residents during the first wave of COVID-19 in
France: a nationwide cohort study. medRxiv.
Cerqua, A. Di Stefano, R., Letta M., & Miccoli S. (2020) - Local estimates during the COVID-19
pandemic in Italy. GSSI Discussion Paper Series in Regional Science & Economic Geography 202006.
Cerqua, A. & Letta, M (2020). Local economies amidst the COVID-19 crisis in Italy: A tale of
diverging trajectories, COVID Economics 60: 142-171.
Cheng, J., Xu, Z., Bambrick, H., Su, H., Tong, S., & Hu, W. (2018). Heatwave and elderly mortality:
An evaluation of death burden and health costs considering short-term mortality displacement.
Environment International, 115, 334-342.
Frigerio, I., Carnelli, F., Cabinio, M., & De Amicis, M. (2018). Spatiotemporal pattern of social
vulnerability in Italy. International Journal of Disaster Risk Science, 9(2), 249-262.
Ghislandi, S., Muttarak, R., Sauerberg, M., & Scotti, B. (2020). News from the front: Estimation of
excess mortality and life expectancy in the major epicenters of the COVID-19 pandemic in Italy.
medRxiv.
Grize, L., Huss, A., Thommen, O., Schindler, C., & Braun-Fahrlander, C. (2005). Heat wave 2003
and mortality in Switzerland. Swiss Medical Weekly, 135(13-14), 200-205.

16

Istat, ACI (2020) Incidenti stradali. Stima preliminare. Gennaio-settembre 2020. 16 December 2020,
Rome.

Available

at

https://www.istat.it/it/files//2020/12/REPORT_STIMA-PRELIMINARE-

INCIDENTI-STRADALI_2020.pdf
Istat, ISS (2020a). Decessi per il complesso delle cause. Periodo gennaio-novembre 2020. 30
December 2020, Rome. Available at https://www.istat.it/it/files//2020/12/Rapp_Istat_Iss.pdf
Istat, ISS (2020b) Impatto dell’epidemia COVID-19 sulla mortalità totale della popolazione residente
periodo

gennaio-maggio

2020.

9

July

2020,

Rome.

Available

at

www.istat.it/it/files//2020/07/Rapp_Istat_Iss_9luglio.pdf
Luy, M., Di Giulio, P., Di Lego, V., Lazarevič, P., & Sauerberg, M. (2020). Life expectancy:
frequently used, but hardly understood. Gerontology, 66(1), 95-104.
Lytras, T., Pantavou, K., Mouratidou, E., & Tsiodras, S. (2019). Mortality attributable to seasonal
influenza in Greece, 2013 to 2017: variation by type/subtype and age, and a possible harvesting effect.
Eurosurveillance, 24(14), 1800118.
Maddison, D. (2006). Environmental Kuznets curves: A spatial econometric approach. Journal of
Environmental Economics and Management, 51(2), 218-230.
Qiao, Z., Guo, Y., Yu, W., & Tong, S. (2015). Assessment of short-and long-term mortality
displacement in heat-related deaths in Brisbane, Australia, 1996–2004. Environmental Health
Perspectives, 123(8), 766-772.
Rabl, A., Spadaro, J. V., & van der Zwaan, B. (2005). Uncertainty of Air Pollution Cost Estimates:
To What Extent Does It Matter? Environmental Science & Technology, 39(2), 399-408.
Rivera, R., Rosenbaum, J. E., & Quispe, W. (2020). Excess mortality in the United States during the
first three months of the COVID-19 pandemic. Epidemiology & Infection, 148.
Scortichini, M., Dos Santos, R. S., De’Donato, F., De Sario, M., Michelozzi, P., Davoli, M., ... &
Gasparrini, A. (2020). Excess mortality during the COVID-19 outbreak in Italy: a two-stage
interrupted time-series analysis. International Journal of Epidemiology.
Stafoggia, M., Forastiere, F., Michelozzi, P., & Perucci, C. A. (2009). Summer temperature-related
mortality: effect modification by previous winter mortality. Epidemiology, 575-583.
Toulemon, L., & Barbieri, M. (2008). The mortality impact of the August 2003 heat wave in France:
investigating the ‘harvesting’ effect and other long-term consequences. Population Studies, 62(1),
39-53.
Varian, H. R. (2016). Causal inference in economics and marketing. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 113(27), 7310-7315.
17

