Reasons
behind
growing
adoption of Cloud after Covid-19
Pandemic and Challenges ahead
Mayank Gokarna
IBM India Pvt Ltd, Manyata Tech Park,
Bangalore, India
Email: mayank123manit@gmail.com

Abstract
There are many sectors which have moved to
Cloud and are planning aggressively to move
their workloads to Cloud since the world
entered Covid-19 pandemic. There are various
reasons why Cloud is an essential irresistible
technology and serves as an ultimate solution
to access IT software and systems. It has
become a new essential catalyst for Enterprise
Organisations which are looking for Digital
Transformation. Remote working is a common
phenomenon now across all the IT companies
making the services available all the time.
Covid-19 has made cloud adoption an
immediate priority for Organisation rather than
a slowly approached future transformation. The
benefits of Cloud lies in the fact that employees
rather engineers of an enterprise are no more
dependent on the closed hardware-based IT
infrastructure and hence eliminates the
necessity of working from the networked office
premises. This has raised a huge demand for
skilled Cloud specialist who can manage and
support the systems running on cloud across
different regions of the world. In this research,
the reasons for growing Cloud adoption after
pandemic Covid-19 has been described and the
challenges which Organization will face is also
explained. This study also details the most used
cloud services during the pandemic considering
Amazon Web Services as the cloud provider.

Keywords: Cloud Computing, Covid-19, Remote
working, Cloud adoption, SaaS, Cloud Benefits

Introduction
Cloud Computing is no more a new word in IT
industry as it has been there since many years
now but what is Cloud computing and why its
adoption among IT organizations has been
increasing at a much faster rate than ever? Why
pandemic like Covid-19 has forced certain
Organizations to think and plan to adopt Cloud
computing.? Cloud computing is the availability
of various computing services which includes
primarily compute, storage and network over
the internet to enable flexibility to access, faster
innovation, lower infrastructure costs and
making your end user systems highly available
and scalable with increased security. It reduces
the burden of maintaining the on-premise
infrastructure and since it’s an on-demand
delivery model you pay-as-you-go.

Essential benefits of Cloud during
Pandemic situation
1, Remote Working Solution
Getting the work done from anywhere is
remote working. This practise has been there
since years with some of the large enterprise
companies but the real benefit or the
importance of it was realised when the
workforce across the world was forced to stay
home post Covid-19 outbreak in March 2020 as
the lockdown imposed was the only way
appeared to stop the spread of the virus. The
pandemic affected every aspect of life at every
level and corporate work culture was not an
exception however enterprises with Cloud
based infrastructure and capabilities were able
to sustain this drastic change at workplace since
they had the remote working solution in

practise. Not only some but a huge number of
enterprises started leveraging the benefits of
cloud adoption during this pandemic situation
and the rest of the businesses started realising
that Cloud capabilities are a solution to their
problems [1].

2, Business continuity
Enterprises with robust IT infrastructure based
on Cloud were able to function well even in the
times of pandemic when each and every
business was getting adversely affected.
Secured and quick access to protected data is
an important factor to continue business.
Having data stored in the cloud always ensures
that it is safe and secured irrespective of the
location from where you are accessing it [2].
With pandemic spread across the world since
March 2020, various Governments started
enforcing lockdown measures to the entire
cities, towns and countries. With this different
business started getting adversely impacted as
the physical appearance of employees was
restricted with only a very few exceptions. This
triggered the surge in the use of virtual tools
and techniques to stay connected with the
business within this short time frame. Various
online meeting platforms like Google Meet,
Zoom, Microsoft Teams, Webex, etc reported
sudden increase of revenue specifically with
Zoom being more than 100% increase in
revenue due to the sudden surge in the use of
their digital virtual technologies [3].

3, Efficient Collaboration
Any business having more than few employees
need to make an essential daily collaboration in
order to perform as an efficient team. Its rather
one of the top priorities to keep the team
members collaborated and connected during
the working hours. Cloud made this
collaboration much simpler in terms of the

complexity it delivers. They can connect over
video conferences, share content and
information, discuss in a group securely over a
cloud-based platform. Collaboration may be
possible without a cloud computing solution but
keeping this collaboration easy and seamless is
an important factor when different employees
work from different geographical locations.
If your business has two employees or more,
then you should be making collaboration a top
priority. After all, there isn't much point to
having a team if it is unable to work like a team.
Cloud computing makes collaboration a simple
process. Team members can view and share
information easily and securely across a cloudbased platform. Some cloud-based services
even provide collaborative social spaces to
connect employees across your organisation,
therefore increasing interest and engagement.
Collaboration may be possible without a cloudcomputing solution, but it will never be as easy,
nor as effective as with a Cloud based solution.
This is done in order to improve efficiency and
performance.

4, Remote Education
Covid-19 pandemic has forced Government
authorities to lock down schools and colleges
and the students are made to study at home by
virtual means. Educators have enabled virtual
solutions for teachers and students in the wake
of pandemic by implementing virtual solutions
[23] like Microsoft Teams which not only
provides video-enabled remote classes but also
a platform to study and share documents and
homework according to the age groups[4]. With
these platforms teachers are able to develop
closer connection with their students. It is a
convenient way of attending the online classes
from any place and if needed recordings can
help to review the content taught in the live
online class. With video enabled e-learning
platforms teachers and students are kept

engaged during the classes and parents too can
see the attention and performance shown while
attending the online classes [5].

5, Cybersecurity
With Cloud computing the infrastructure
belongs to the Cloud provider and is managed
and administered by them. The Cloud adopting
companies or Organizations always have certain
level of concerns over the security of their data
and files since they do not know where and
how secured is their data with the cloud
provider. Public and private organizations have
invested millions in security products and
incident response personnel but have not
tested the efficiency of these safeguards and
people using actual attack techniques. They
generally lack a comprehensive approach to
understanding and operationalizing cyber
threat intelligence. The result is a weak security
defence posture that undermines investments
in threat detection and protection. But Cloud
providers have ascertained that they monitor
the Client’s data and files all the times with
latest security policies and services. With a
shared responsibility model followed on cloud,
it is essential for an enterprise to monitor,
identify and remediate on any potential threats
and misconfigurations on their provisioned
cloud resources. Data breaches and improper
Identity and Access management are the
important factors to be considered before going
for cloud adoption [6]. There are certain
obvious common security concerns as well with
both
on-premise
and
Cloud
based
infrastructure. With Cloud adoption, RapidScale
claims that 94% of businesses saw an
improvement in security and 91% said the cloud
makes it easier to meet government compliance
requirements [7].

6, Scaling
Cloud based Infrastructure is a great solution
for enterprises as it enables them to scale
up/down their IT resources efficiently and
quickly, according to the business demands
[19]. It is ideal for enterprises with fluctuating
demands. As demands rise the cloud will
provision the needed infrastructure and
services without having to bother about the
physical infrastructure. This agility of cloud
enables an enterprise to manage their cost
efficiently and without keeping any of the
resources idle. Organisation that adopt Cloud
solutions always has a real advantage over their
competitors.
Cloud based solutions are ideal for businesses
with growing or fluctuating bandwidth
demands. If your business demands increase,
you can easily increase your cloud capacity
without having to invest in physical
infrastructure. This level of agility can give
businesses using cloud computing a real
advantage over competitors [8].
The auto scaling capabilities of Cloud eliminates
the risks associated with on-premise
infrastructure operational and maintenance
issues. One of the biggest advantages of it is
that it has no upfront cost involved and you can
control your Cloud expenditures as per your
business and budget.

7, Everlasting advantages of Cloud
adoption
While Cloud was born to provide certain
essential features like High Availability,
Scalability, Business Continuity, Fault Tolerance,
Disaster Recovery, Automatic Software
Updates, Flexibility etc, over the time, a lot of
new features and services have emerged with
the growing interest in the adoption of Cloud by
various enterprises. Originally Amazon Web
Services emerged as a sustainable Cloud

provider but now there are various other Cloud
providers too like Microsoft’s Azure, Google
Cloud, IBM Cloud, Oracle etc. Each of these
providers have an edge over the other Cloud
provider in terms of different areas like
Network,
Storage,
Security,
Compute,
Availability etc.

Most used Cloud Services during
Covid-19
Enterprises using Cloud for hosting their
applications to be accessible over internet
securely used a variety of Cloud services. The
table below in Figure 1. shows Cloud services
which were used most by 4 different
Organisation using AWS (Amazon Web Services)
as the Cloud Provider for their 3 applications.
S.No. AWS
Cloud Service type
Services
1.
S3
Simple
Storage
Service
2.
EC2
Virtual Machines
3.
Cloudfront
Global
Content
Delivery Service
4.
RDS
Relational Database
Service
5.
SNS
Simple Notification
Service
6.
IAM
Identity and Access
Management
7.
VPC
Virtual Private Cloud
8.
AutoScaling
Scaling Service
9.
Elastic
Load Traffic Distribution
Balancers
Service
10.
Beanstalk
Platform as a Service
11.
Lambda
Serverless
Computing Platform
Figure 1. Most used AWS Cloud services

Types of Clouds
Public Cloud: It’s a type of hosting in which
cloud services are delivered over a network for

public use, in a shared Infrastructure model.
Customers do not have any control over the
location of the infrastructure in Public Cloud
and the cost is shared and are either free or in
the form of a license policy like pay per user.
Public Clouds are great for organizations that
require managing the host applications

Private Cloud: It’s a Cloud infrastructure that
is solely used dedicatedly by one organization. It
gives Organizations greater control over
security and data which is managed internally.
It can be hosted internally or externally. Private
clouds are great for organizations that have
high security demands, high management
demands and uptime requirements.

Hybrid Cloud: It uses both private and public
clouds but can remain separate entities or
isolated from each other [26]. Resources are
managed and can be provided either internally
or by external providers. A hybrid cloud is great
for scalability, flexibility and security.

Community Cloud:

A Cloud computing
model with a collaborative effort in which
infrastructure is shared between different
organizations of a specific community with
common objectives and managed internally or
by a third-party and the Cloud can also be
hosted internally or externally.

Cloud computing
Models:

operational

Figure 2. below shows different Cloud Service
Models with the level of administration possible
at each of the Models and the type of user
responsible for managing the administration.

servers, operating systems etc. It is one of the
most flexible cloud computing models in which
resources are available as services. In this
model, the complete control over the
infrastructure lies with the user Organization. It
is highly scalable and dynamic. Examples of IaaS
services are Amazon Web Services EC2
instances, Google Cloud Compute Engine, Cisco
Metacloud etc.
Figure 2. Cloud Computing Operational Service
Models

Cloud is the new normal
SaaS: Software as a Service
SaaS services are accessible over internet on a
browser and is a quick way to get your business
leverage these services for use according to
requirements [21]. SaaS services are managed
by the vendors and frees up the technical staff
of your business which could otherwise be
needed to manage it. It doesn’t require any
application or software to be downloaded at
the client side and is easily accessible [20].
Examples of SaaS services are dropbox,
salesforce, GoToMeeting [9].

PaaS: Platform as a Service
PaaS services is a delivery of a framework which
a business can use to further build upon it the
application based on the customizations
needed [25]. It gives a base platform quickly to
start building your application upon. While
developers are responsible for their own
custom application, the servers, storage and
networking of the platform is managed by the
third-party service provider. Examples of PaaS
services are Google App engine, AWS Elastic
Beanstalk, Openshift etc.

IaaS: Infrastructure as a Service
IaaS services is a delivery of cloud computing
infrastructure which includes network, storage,

Cloud has been evolving since over 2 decades
and the enterprise arguments on its security
and resiliency has been proven time and again
as one of the largest U.S. Defence Department
project called JEDI worth $10 billion has been
bagged by Microsoft’s Azure [10]. Seeing the
Cloud adoption benefits, it was evident that
Cloud will become the future enterprise
technology infrastructure and all organisations
need to slowly embrace the cloud [17].
However, there has been compressed cloud
adoption curve since the pandemic Covid-19
started back in March 2020. A lot of
Organisations already experienced and realised
the power and benefits of Cloud to make their
business operations more resilient and highly
available.
Cloud computing has been playing an increasing
role in ensuring the seamless provision of
services, and this has been demonstrated
throughout the Covid-19 pandemic, not only
this but it has also enabled the opportunity to
provide additional new services in seamless
fashion [11]. In response to Covid-19, in the
month of April 2020, Google made their online
meeting platform Google Meet to be free for a
duration of first 60 minutes in the free version
of this SaaS application. Usage of lot of other
videoconferencing tools has also increased
drastically since the Covid-19 outbreak.

Microsoft Teams and Zoom have also seen the
daily number of users skyrocket since then and
Google Meet is no exception. Everyday use of
such SaaS application video conferencing tools
is now thirty times higher than before Covid-19.
Millions of users are increasingly joining these
services to keep their businesses up and
running [12].
Data prepared by US Department of Labour,
O’Net Center shows which occupations carry
the most risk of infection from Covid-19. Below

Figure 3. shows the visual representation of the
study conducted [13]. This study shows that IT
occupations such as computer engineers,
architects, programmers, developers fall in the
lowest risk percentage ranging from 0-20%. This
obviously is attributed to the remote working
capabilities provided in the IT infrastructure
adopted by most Organizations. A further
increase in digital transformation and Cloud
adoption can further bring down the risk factor
caused by Covid-19 infections. This is a signal to
prepare better for future pandemic situations.

Figure 3. Various Occupational Risk score

Challenges ahead

3, Skills shortage

Though there are numerous advantages of
Cloud adoption as compared to on-premise
infrastructure, however there are some obvious
challenges which should be taken care over the
period of time in this emerging trend. Australian
Government has published various risk issues
posed by the adoption of Cloud and a need to
conduct a risk assessment before going to
decide on the shared responsibilities of Cloud
Provider and the end user [14].

Hiring and retaining talent with strong Cloud
skills is another burden for Cloud adoption. Any
cloud migration project introduces new
capacities and benefits over the traditional
architecture however if it’s not done properly
then it may turn into a source of unexpected
vulnerabilities. Having skilled and Cloud
certified professionals in the Organization to
kick off the cloud journey process is of utmost
importance and scarcity of such engineers is a
huge challenge to continue with this journey.

1, Security and Data Protection

Conclusion

It is critical to decide on how the data will be
stored and what security features will be
applied to it before giving control to the Cloud
provider [22]. The extent of security depends on
the level of confidential data you currently own.
The measures to ensure data security and how
it will be accessed should be clearly defined and
made known to the Organization by the service
provider [18]. Data at transit and at rest should
be encrypted and the level of encryption can be
decided mutually [27]. Data security in the
cloud world is more complicated than data
security in the on-premise or traditional
information systems for the fact that data is
scattered at different places in different
devices.

It is evident during Covid-19 that Cloud is an
essential enabler for remote data access,
storage and perform operations from remote
location which ensured business continuity and
risk mitigation for the production systems. It is
also seen that Organisations with strong Cloud
capabilities performed much better compared
to the Organisation with on-premise
infrastructure during these pandemic times.

2, Data Location
It is important to know where the data will
physically reside as there are privacy and
security laws that apply to the data in many
countries. Sometimes the data is required to be
made present at more than one continent to
make it highly available [15] however the local
privacy and security laws cannot be ignored.

Many Organisations have accelerated their
Cloud journey to a much faster pace than ever.
The Covid-19 experience has highlighted the
Cloud’s value as a crucial element for risk
mitigation for the businesses. It has not only
provided service continuity but has also enabled
remote
working
capabilities
for
the
Organizations and eliminated the need to be
physically present in an office workplace.
Many large and mid-size enterprises are
reviewing their future mode of work strategy as
Cloud has been considered as a key enabler to
define it. Cloud comes with certain new
responsibilities of obeying privacy and security
laws [24] of the local region and ensuring
proper security mechanism including encryption
and vulnerability management. With some
known challenges it is inevitable to adopt Cloud
for new projects and migration of legacy

applications [16] as the current pandemic
situation has made the future more uncertain
and volatile for business continuity.

Availability of data and material
The author declare that data supporting the
findings of this study are available within the
article
https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2020/04/oc
cupations-highest-covid19-risk/ sourced from
https://www.onetcenter.org/
under
the
sponsorship of the U.S. Department of
Labor/Employment
and
Training
Administration.

Competing interests
The author declare that they have no
competing interests.

Cloud managed and unmanaged services. He
specializes in IaaS, PaaS and SaaS services. He
received his BTech in Electronics &
Communication engineering from National
Institute of Technology, Bhopal.

Acknowledgements
I thank Cloud Consultant Neetu Singh from IBM,
India for her support in gathering data from
different Organizations for mostly used cloud
services using AWS (Amazon Web Services)
Cloud provider.

References
[1]https://www.rackspace.com/enin/blog/cloud-computing-lifeline-businessesduring-covid19 Accessed 23 Dec 2020.
[2]https://www.business.qld.gov.au/runningbusiness/it/cloud-computing/benefits Accessed
23 Dec 2020.

Funding
Not applicable.

Authors' contributions
Mayank Gokarna has written this paper and
have done the research which supports it.

Authors' information and details
Mayank Gokarna is a Lead DevOps and Cloud
Architect at IBM India Pvt. Ltd. He is a Google
certified Professional Cloud Architect and
Engineer, AWS Certified Solutions Architect
with a decade of experience working on DevOps
tools and technologies. He has immense
interest in implementing DevOps and best
practices around it defining the Governance and
maturity models. He has onboarded more than
50 applications on cloud platform using various

[3]https://investors.zoom.us/newsreleases/news-release-details/zoom-reportsfirst-quarter-results-fiscal-year-2021 Accessed
23 Dec 2020.
[4]https://news.microsoft.com/enin/features/indian-schools-remote-learningmicrosoft-teams-covid-19/ Accessed 23 Dec
2020.
[5] Linda Craig. 2015. Engagement Techniques
for Online Education. eLearn 2015, 10, Article 1
(10-01-2015),
1
pages.
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/2836081.2836033
[6] D. R. Bharadwaj, A. Bhattacharya and M.
Chakkaravarthy, "Cloud Threat Defense – A
Threat Protection and Security Compliance
Solution," 2018 IEEE International Conference

on Cloud Computing in Emerging Markets
(CCEM), Bangalore, India, 2018, pp. 95-99, doi:
10.1109/CCEM.2018.00024.
[7]https://systemizenetworks.com/2018/07/26
/94-of-businesses-benefit-from-cloud-securityand-you-cantoo/#:~:text=RapidScale%20found%2094%25%2
0of%20businesses,91%25%20found%20govern
ment%20compliance%20easier Accessed 23
Dec 2020.
[8]
https://www.globaldots.com/blog/cloudcomputing-benefits Accessed 23 Dec 2020.
[9] https://www.bmc.com/blogs/saas-vs-paasvs-iaas-whats-the-difference-and-how-tochoose/#ref1 Accessed 23 Dec 2020.
[10]https://www.cnbc.com/2019/10/25/micros
oft-wins-major-defense-cloud-contract-beatingout-amazon.html Accessed 23 Dec 2020.
[11]https://www.iif.com/Portals/0/Files/conten
t/32370132_iif_cloud_computing_resilience.pdf
Accessed 23 Dec 2020.
[12]
https://www.techzine.eu/news/collaboration/4
6446/google-meet-is-now-free-for-all-users/
Accessed 23 Dec 2020.
[13]
https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2020/04/oc
cupations-highest-covid19-risk/ Accessed 23
Dec 2020.
[14] https://www.business.qld.gov.au/runningbusiness/it/cloud-computing/risks Accessed 23
Dec 2020.
[15] Yunchuan Sun, Junsheng Zhang, Yongping
Xiong, Guangyu Zhu “Data Security and Privacy

in
Cloud
Computing“
https://doi.org/10.1155/2014/190903
[16] Gokarna, Mayank (2020): DevOps phases
across Software Development Lifecycle.
TechRxiv.
Preprint.
https://doi.org/10.36227/techrxiv.13207796.v1
[17]https://www.rackspace.com/enin/solve/cloud-beyond-covid-19-cloudadoption-will-see-businesses-emerge-stronger
Accessed 23 Dec 2020.
[18] P. Grover and R. Johari, "BCD: BigData,
cloud computing and distributed computing,"
2015 Global Conference on Communication
Technologies (GCCT), Thuckalay, 2015, pp. 772776, doi: 10.1109/GCCT.2015.7342768.
[19] C. Lin and S. Lu, "Scheduling Scientific
Workflows Elastically for Cloud Computing,"
2011 IEEE 4th International Conference on
Cloud Computing, Washington, DC, 2011, pp.
746-747, doi: 10.1109/CLOUD.2011.110.
[20] Mayank Gokarna and Raju Singh. 2020.
DevOps A Historical Review and Future Works.
Retrieved
from
https://arxiv.org/abs/2012.06145
[21] Omar Sabri. 2015. Measuring is Success
Factors of Adopting Cloud Computing from
Enterprise Overview. In Proceedings of the The
International Conference on Engineering & MIS
2015 (ICEMIS '15). Association for Computing
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 3, 1–5.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1145/2832987.2832993
[22] Babak Bashari Rad, Tinankoria Diaby, and
Muhammad Ehsan Rana. 2017. Cloud
Computing Adoption: A Short Review of Issues
and Challenges. In Proceedings of the 2017
International Conference on E-commerce, EBusiness and E-Government (ICEEG 2017).

Association for Computing Machinery, New
York,
NY,
USA,
51–55.
DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1145/3108421.3108426
[23] N. Boukil and A. Ibriz, "Architecture of
remote virtual labs as a service in cloud
computing," 2015 International Conference on
Cloud
Technologies
and
Applications
(CloudTech), Marrakech, 2015, pp. 1-6, doi:
10.1109/CloudTech.2015.7337014.
[24] S. U. Khan, "Elements of Cloud Adoption,"
in IEEE Cloud Computing, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 7173, May 2014, doi: 10.1109/MCC.2014.7.
[25] R. Dua, A. R. Raja and D. Kakadia,
"Virtualization vs Containerization to Support
PaaS," 2014 IEEE International Conference on
Cloud Engineering, Boston, MA, 2014, pp. 610614, doi: 10.1109/IC2E.2014.41.
[26] D. S. Linthicum, "Emerging Hybrid Cloud
Patterns," in IEEE Cloud Computing, vol. 3, no.
1,
pp. 88-91,
Jan.-Feb.
2016,
doi:
10.1109/MCC.2016.22.
[27] L. Jian, "Research on Data Access Security
Control Mechanism under Cloud Environment,"
2015 International Conference on Intelligent
Transportation, Big Data and Smart City, Halong
Bay,
2015,
pp.
633-636,
doi:
10.1109/ICITBS.2015.161.

