Identification and Development of
Therapeutics for COVID-19
This manuscript (permalink) was automatically generated from greenelab/covid19review@66bf7c0 on March 1, 2021. It represents one section of a larger evolving review on
SARS-CoV-2 and COVID-19 available at https://greenelab.github.io/covid19-review/
This in progress manuscript is not intended for the general public. This is a review paper
that is authored by scientists for an audience of scientists to discuss research that is in
progress. If you are interested in guidelines on testing, therapies, or other issues related to your
health, you should not use this document. Instead, you should collect information from your
local health department, the CDC’s guidance, or your own government.

Authors
•

Halie M. Rando 0000-0001-7688-1770 rando2 tamefoxtime Department of Systems
Pharmacology and Translational Therapeutics, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, United States of America; Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Genetics, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, Colorado, United States of
America; Center for Health AI, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora,
Colorado, United States of America · Funded by the Gordon and Betty Moore Foundation
(GBMF 4552)

•

Nils Wellhausen 0000-0001-8955-7582 nilswellhausen Department of Systems
Pharmacology and Translational Therapeutics, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, United States of America

•

Soumita Ghosh 0000-0002-2783-2750 soumitagh Institute of Translational Medicine and
Therapeutics, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, United States of America

•

Alexandra J. Lee 0000-0002-0208-3730 ajlee21 Department of Systems Pharmacology
and Translational Therapeutics, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania,
United States of America · Funded by the Gordon and Betty Moore Foundation (GBMF
4552)

•

Anna Ada Dattoli 0000-0003-1462-831X aadattoli aadattoli Department of Systems
Pharmacology & Translational Therapeutics, Perelman School of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA

•

Fengling Hu 0000-0003-1081-5038 hufengling hufengling Department of Biostatistics,
Epidemiology and Informatics, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania,
United States of America

•

James Brian Byrd 0000-0002-0509-3520 byrdjb thebyrdlab University of Michigan School
of Medicine, Ann Arbor, Michigan, United States of America · Funded by NIH
K23HL128909; FastGrants

•

Diane N. Rafizadeh 0000-0002-2838-067X dianerafi Perelman School of Medicine,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of America;
Department of Chemistry, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United
States of America · Funded by NIH Medical Scientist Training Program T32 GM07170

•

Yanjun Qi 0000-0002-5796-7453 qiyanjun Department of Computer Science, University of
Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, United States of America

•

Yuchen Sun kevinsunofficial Department of Computer Science, University of Virginia,
Charlottesville, VA, United States of America

•

Jeffrey M. Field 0000-0001-7161-7284 Jeff-Field Department of Pharmacology, Perelman
School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA

•

Marouen Ben Guebila 0000-0001-5934-966X marouenbg marouenbg Department of
Biostatistics, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of
America

•

Nafisa M. Jadavji 0000-0002-3557-7307 nafisajadavji nafisajadavji Biomedical Science,
Midwestern University, Glendale, AZ, United States of America; Department of
Neuroscience, Carleton University, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada · Funded by the American
Heart Association (20AIREA35050015)

•

Ronan Lordan 0000-0001-9668-3368 RLordan el_ronan Institute for Translational
Medicine and Therapeutics, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA 19104-5158, USA

•

Ashwin N. Skelly 0000-0002-1565-3376 anskelly Perelman School of Medicine,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of America; Institute
for Immunology, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia,
United States of America · Funded by NIH Medical Scientist Training Program T32
GM07170

•

Bharath Ramsundar 0000-0001-8450-4262 rbharath rbhar90 The DeepChem Project,
https://deepchem.io/

•

Christian Brueffer 0000-0002-3826-0989 cbrueffer cbrueffer Department of Clinical
Sciences, Lund University, Lund, Sweden

•

Jinhui Wang 0000-0002-5796-8130 jinhui2 Perelman School of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of America

•

Rishi Raj Goel https://orcid.org/0000-0003-1715-5191 rishirajgoel rishirajgoel Institute for
Immunology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, United States of America

•

YoSon Park 0000-0002-0465-4744 ypar yoson Department of Systems Pharmacology
and Translational Therapeutics, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania,
United States of America · Funded by NHGRI R01 HG10067

•

COVID-19 Review Consortium

•

Simina M. Boca 0000-0002-1400-3398 SiminaB Innovation Center for Biomedical
Informatics, Georgetown University Medical Center, Washington, District of Columbia,
United States of America

•

Anthony Gitter 0000-0002-5324-9833 agitter anthonygitter Department of Biostatistics
and Medical Informatics, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin, United
States of America; Morgridge Institute for Research, Madison, Wisconsin, United States of
America · Funded by John W. and Jeanne M. Rowe Center for Research in Virology

•

Casey S. Greene 0000-0001-8713-9213 cgreene GreeneScientist Department of Systems
Pharmacology and Translational Therapeutics, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, United States of America; Childhood Cancer Data Lab, Alex’s Lemonade
Stand Foundation, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of America; Department of
Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora,
Colorado, United States of America; Center for Health AI, University of Colorado School of
Medicine, Aurora, Colorado, United States of America · Funded by the Gordon and Betty
Moore Foundation (GBMF 4552); the National Human Genome Research Institute (R01
HG010067)

COVID-19 Review Consortium: Vikas Bansal, John P. Barton, Simina M. Boca, Christian
Brueffer, James Brian Byrd, Stephen Capone, Shikta Das, Anna Ada Dattoli, John J. Dziak,
Jeffrey M. Field, Soumita Ghosh, Anthony Gitter, Rishi Raj Goel, Casey S. Greene, Marouen
Ben Guebila, Fengling Hu, Nafisa M. Jadavji, Sergey Knyazev, Likhitha Kolla, Alexandra J. Lee,
Ronan Lordan, Tiago Lubiana, Temitayo Lukan, Adam L. MacLean, David Mai, Serghei Mangul,
David Manheim, Lucy D'Agostino McGowan, YoSon Park, Dimitri Perrin, Yanjun Qi, Diane N.
Rafizadeh, Bharath Ramsundar, Halie M. Rando, Sandipan Ray, Michael P. Robson, Elizabeth
Sell, Lamonica Shinholster, Ashwin N. Skelly, Yuchen Sun, Gregory L Szeto, Ryan Velazquez,
Jinhui Wang, Nils Wellhausen
Authors with similar contributions are ordered alphabetically.

Abstract
After emerging in China in late 2019, the novel Severe acute respiratory syndrome-like
coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) spread worldwide and as of early 2021, continues to significantly
impact most countries. Only a small number of coronaviruses are known to infect humans, and
only two are associated with the severe outcomes associated with SARS-CoV-2: Severe acute
respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus, a closely related species of SARS-CoV-2 that
emerged in 2002, and Middle East respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus, which emerged in
2012. Both of these previous epidemics were controlled fairly rapidly through public health
measures, and no vaccines or robust therapeutic interventions were identified. However,

previous insights into the immune response to coronaviruses gained during the outbreaks of
severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) and Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS) have
proved beneficial to identifying approaches to the treatment and prophylaxis of novel
coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19). A number of potential therapeutics against SARS-CoV-2
and the resultant COVID-19 illness were rapidly identified, leading to a large number of clinical
trials investigating a variety of possible therapeutic approaches being initiated early on in the
pandemic. As a result, a small number of therapeutics have already been authorized by
regulatory agencies such as the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in the United States, and
many other therapeutics remain under investigation. Here, we describe a range of approaches
for the treatment of COVID-19, along with their proposed mechanisms of action and the current
status of clinical investigation into each candidate. The status of these investigations will
continue to evolve, and this review will be updated as progress is made.

Importance
The COVID-19 pandemic is a rapidly evolving crisis. With the worldwide scientific community
shifting focus onto the SARS-CoV-2 virus and the disease it causes, a large number of possible
pharmaceutical approaches for treatment and prevention have been proposed. What is known
about each of these potential interventions evolved rapidly throughout 2020 and early 2021. In
March 2020, we began monitoring a range of candidates and have continued to update this
manuscript as new information has become available. Some therapeutics have been supported,
others have been revealed to be unlikely to confer any therapeutic benefits, and most require
more data before a conclusion can be drawn. This rapidly changing area of research provides
important insight into how the ongoing pandemic can be managed and also demonstrates the
power of interdisciplinary collaboration to rapidly understand a virus and match its
characteristics with existing or novel pharmaceuticals.

Introduction
The novel coronavirus Severe acute respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2)
emerged in late 2019 and quickly precipitated the worldwide spread of novel coronavirus
disease 2019 (COVID-19). COVID-19 is associated with symptoms ranging from none
(asymptomatic) to mild to severe, with approximately 2% of patients dying from COVID-19related complications, such as acute respiratory disease syndrome (ARDS) [1]. The virus is
likely spread between people primarily by droplets, with the role of contact and aerosol
transmission still in question [2,3]. As a result, public health guidelines have been critical to
efforts to control the spread of the virus. However, as of early 2021, COVID-19 remains a
significant worldwide concern (Figure 1), with cases in some places surging far above the
numbers reported during the initial outbreak in early 2020. Due to the continued threat of the
virus and the severity of the disease, the identification and development of prophylactic and
therapeutic interventions have emerged as significant international priorities. Both approaches
hold valuable potential for controlling the impact of the disease. Prophylactics bolster immunity
to prevent an individual from contracting a disease, whereas therapeutics treat a disease in
individuals who have already been infected. While a number of vaccines have recently been
developed, approved, or are currently being evaluated by the US Food and Drug Administration

and other regional and international bodies, vaccination programs only started being rolled out
at the very end of 2020 and beginning of 2021, meaning that treatments that palliate symptoms
and prevent the most severe outcomes have been necessary for much of 2020 and will continue
to be necessary for the foreseeable future [4]. Fortunately, prior developments during other
recent pandemics, especially those caused by human coronaviruses (HCoV), have provided a
number of hypotheses guiding a biomedical approach to the novel coronavirus infection.
2,525,401 COVID-19 deaths had been reported worldwide as of February 27, 2021 (Figure 1).

Figure 1: Cumulative global COVID-19 deaths since January 22, 2020. Data are from the
COVID-19 Data Repository by the Center for Systems Science and Engineering at Johns
Hopkins University [5].

Lessons from Prior HCoV Outbreaks
SARS-CoV-2’s rapid shift from an unknown virus to a significant worldwide threat closely
parallels the emergence of Severe acute respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus (SARS-CoV1). The first documented case of COVID-19 was reported in Wuhan, China in November 2019,
and the disease quickly spread worldwide during the early months of 2020. Similarly, the first
case of SARS was reported in November 2002 in the Guangdong Province of China, and it
spread within China and then into several countries across continents over the following months
[6,7]. In fact, genome sequencing quickly revealed the virus causing COVID-19 to be a novel
betacoronavirus closely related to SARS-CoV-1 [8].

There are many similarities but also some differences in the characteristics of the two viruses
that determine how they spread. SARS-CoV-1 infection is severe, with an estimated death rate
for SARS of 9.5% [6], while estimates of the death rate associated with COVID-19 are much
lower, at approximately 2% [1]. SARS-CoV-1 is highly contagious via droplet transmission and
has a basic reproduction number (R0) of 4 (i.e., each person infected was estimated to infect
four other people) [6]. SARS-CoV-2 also appears to be spread primarily by droplet transmission
[2,3], and most estimates of its R0 fall between 2.5 and 3 [1]. However, the 17-year difference in
the timing of these two outbreaks has led to some major differences in the tools available for the
international community’s response. At the time that SARS-CoV-1 emerged, no new HCoV had
been identified in almost 40 years [7]. The identity of the virus underlying the SARS disease
remained unknown until April of 2003, when the SARS-CoV-1 virus was characterized through a
worldwide scientific effort spearheaded by the World Health Organization (WHO) [7]. In contrast,
the SARS-CoV-2 genomic sequence was released on January 3, 2020 [8], only days after the
international community became aware of the novel pneumonia-like illness now known as
COVID-19. While SARS-CoV-1 belonged to a distinct lineage from the two other HCoVs known
at the time of its discovery [6], SARS-CoV-2 is closely related to SARS-CoV-1 and a more
distant relative of another HCoV characterized in 2012, Middle East respiratory syndromerelated coronavirus [9,10].
Despite their phylogenetic similarity, SARS-CoV-2 emerged under very different circumstances
than SARS-CoV-1 in terms of scientific knowledge about HCoVs. The trajectories of the
pandemics associated with each of the viruses have also diverged significantly. By July 2003,
the SARS outbreak was officially determined to be under control, with the success credited to
infection management practices such as mask wearing [7]. In contrast, Middle East respiratory
syndrome (MERS) is still circulating and remains a concern; although the fatality rate is very
high at almost 35%, the disease is much less easily transmitted, as its R0 has been estimated to
be 1 [6]. The low R0 in combination with public health practices allowed for its spread to be
contained [6]. Neither of these trajectories are comparable to that of SARS-CoV-2, which
remains a serious threat worldwide more than a year after the first cases of COVID-19 emerged.
Current results suggest that pharmaceutical interventions for COVID-19 appear to be more
successful than the previous efforts to develop therapeutics for SARS and MERS. Care for
SARS and MERS patients prioritized supportive care and symptom management [6]. To the
extent that clinical treatments for SARS and MERS were explored, there is generally a lack of
evidence supporting their efficacy. For example, Ribavirin is an antiviral that was often used in
combination with corticosteroids and sometimes interferon (IFN) medications to treat SARS and
MERS [7], but its effects have been found to be inconclusive in retrospective and in vitro
analyses of SARS and the SARS-CoV-1 virus, respectively [7]. IFNs and Ribavirin have shown
promise in in vitro analyses of MERS, but their clinical effectiveness remains unknown [7].
Therefore, only limited pharmaceutical advances from prior HCoV outbreaks can be adopted to
COVID-19. Importantly, though, prior analyses of the virological and pathogenic properties of
SARS-CoV-1 and Middle East respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus (MERS-CoV) have
provided a strong foundation for the development of hypotheses about SARS-CoV-2 that have
served to accelerated the development and identification of potential therapeutic approaches.
Even during the early months of the pandemic, a number of studies have emerged investigating
the potential effects of drugs with mechanisms suggested based on prior understanding of

coronavirus-host interactions. Initially, these were primarily observational studies, which simply
compare groups of patients who did and did not receive a treatment to determine whether it may
have an effect. However, these studies are subject to confounding, and randomized controlled
trials are the standard means of assessing the effects of medications. In randomized controlled
trials, patients are prospectively and randomly assigned to treatment conditions, allowing for
much stronger interpretations to be drawn; however, data from these trials takes much longer to
collect. Both have proven to be important sources of information during the COVID-19 crisis, but
as more results are released from randomized controlled trials, more definitive answers are
becoming available about various proposed therapeutics.

Overview of Therapeutic Approaches
Therapeutic approaches to the current pandemic can utilize two potential avenues: they can
reduce the symptoms that are harmful to COVID-19 patients, or they can directly target the virus
to hinder the spread of infection. The goal of the former is to reduce the severity and risks of an
active infection, while for the latter, it is to inhibit the replication of the virus once an individual is
infected. A variety of symptom profiles with a range of severity are associated with COVID-19,
many of which are not life-threatening. A study of COVID-19 patients in a hospital in Berlin,
Germany found that the symptoms associated with the highest risk of death included infectionrelated symptoms, such as sepsis, respiratory symptoms such as ARDS, and cardiovascular
failure or pulmonary embolism [11]. Therapeutics that reduce the risks associated with these
severe outcomes hold particular potential to reduce the pandemic death toll, while therapeutics
that directly target the virus itself would hold the potential to prevent people infected with SARSCoV-2 from developing potentially damaging symptoms. The treatments in this latter category
typically fall into the broad category of antivirals. Antiviral therapies hinder the spread of a virus
within the host, rather than destroying existing copies of the virus, and these drugs can vary in
their specificity to a narrow or broad range of viral targets. For both categories, uncertainty often
surrounds the treatments’ exact mechanisms of action, as most therapies have secondary or
off-target effects.
A large number of clinical trials investigating a range of possible therapeutics for COVID-19 are
currently in progress or have already been completed (Figure 2). The purpose of this review is
to critically appraise the literature surrounding a subset of clinical trials and to evaluate a range
of approaches to repurpose existing or develop novel approaches to the mitigation and
treatment of coronavirus infections. The treatments evaluated here are classified according to
their biological properties, specifically whether they are biologics (produced from components of
organisms) or small molecules. Small molecule drugs include drugs targeted at viral particles,
drugs targeted at host proteins, and broad spectrum pharmaceuticals, while biologics include
antibodies and interferons. As we cover vaccines in a separate manuscript [4], we only consider
therapies for the prevention of SARS-CoV-2 infection or COVID-19 in a very limited context
here, for example when a drug is studied to see whether it can prevent infection or disease in
recently-exposed individuals. As results become available from additional clinical trials, we will
continue to update this manuscript to keep pace with the current understanding of which
therapeutics may be effective against SARS-CoV-2 or COVID-19.

Figure 2: COVID-19 clinical trials. There are 6,417 COVID-19 clinical trials of which 3,706 are
interventional. The study types include only types used in at least five trials. Interventional trials
only are analyzed in the figures depicting status, phase, and intervention. Of the interventional
trials, 98 trials had reported results as of November 9, 2020. Recruitment status and trial phase
are shown only for interventional trials in which the status or phase is recorded. The common
interventions are all interventions used in at least ten trials. Combinations of interventions, such
as Hydroxychloroquine + Azithromycin, are tallied separately from the individual interventions.
Trials data are from the University of Oxford Evidence-Based Medicine Data Lab’s COVID-19
TrialsTracker [12].

Small Molecule Drugs
Small molecules are synthesized compounds of low molecular weight, typically less than 1
kilodalton (kDa) [13]. Small-molecule pharmaceutical agents have been a backbone of drug
development since the discovery of penicillin in the early twentieth century [14]. It and other
antibiotics have long been among the best known applications of small molecules to
therapeutics, but biotechnological developments such as the prediction of protein-protein
interactions have facilitated advances in precise targeting of specific structures using small
molecules [14]. Small molecule drugs today encompass a wide range of therapeutics beyond
antibiotics, including antivirals, protein inhibitors, and many broad-spectrum pharmaceuticals.

Small Molecule Antivirals
Antiviral drugs against SARS-CoV-2 are designed to inhibit replication of a virus within an
epithelial host cell. This process requires inhibiting the replication cycle of a virus by disrupting

one of six fundamental steps [15] (Figure 3). In the first of these steps, the virus attaches to and
enters the host cell through endocytosis. Then the virus undergoes uncoating, which is
classically defined as the release of viral contents into the host cell. Next, the viral genetic
material enters the nucleus where it gets replicated during the biosynthesis stage. During the
assembly stage, viral proteins are translated, allowing new viral particles to be assembled. In
the final step new viruses are released into the extracellular environment. Many antiviral drugs
are designed to inhibit the replication of viral genetic material during the biosynthesis step.
Unlike DNA viruses, which can use the host enzymes to propagate themselves, RNA viruses
like SARS-CoV-2 depend on their own polymerase, the RNA-dependent RNA polymerase
(RdRP), for replication [16,17]. Targeting the RdRP is therefore an effective strategy for
antivirals against RNA viruses and is the proposed mechanism underlying the treatment of
SARS and MERS with Ribavirin [18]. However, although antivirals are designed to target a
virus, they can also impact other processes in the host and may have unintended effects.
Therefore, these therapeutics must be evaluated for both efficacy and safety.

Nucleoside and Nucleotide Analogs
Favipiravir
Favipiravir (Avigan), also known as T-705, was discovered by Toyama Chemical Co., Ltd. [19].
The drug was found to be effective at blocking viral amplification in several influenza subtypes
as well as other RNA viruses, such as Flaviviridae and Picornaviridae, through a reduction in
plaque formation [20] and viral replication in Madin-Darby canine kidney cells [21]. Furthermore,
inoculation of mice with favipiravir was shown to increase survival of influenza infections [20,21].
In 2014, the drug was approved in Japan for the treatment of influenza that was resistant to
conventional treatments like neuraminidase inhibitors [22]. Favipiravir (6-fluoro-3-hydroxy-2pyrazinecarboxamide) acts as a purine and purine nucleoside analogue that inhibits viral RNA
polymerase in a dose-dependent manner across a range of RNA viruses, including influenza
viruses [23,24,25,26,27]. Nucleotides and nucleosides are the natural building blocks for RNA
synthesis. Because of this, modifications to nucleotides and nucleosides can disrupt key
processes including replication [28]. Biochemical experiments showed that favipiravir was
recognized as a purine nucleoside analogue and incorporated into the viral RNA template. A
single incorporation does not influence RNA transcription; however, multiple events of
incorporation lead to the arrest of RNA synthesis [29]. Evidence for T-705 inhibiting viral RNA
polymerase are based on time-of-drug addition studies that found that viral loads were reduced
with the addition of favipiravir in early times post-infection [23,26,27].
The effectiveness of favipiravir for treating patients with COVID-19 is currently under
investigation. An open-label, nonrandomized, before-after controlled study was recently
conducted [30]. The study included 80 COVID-19 patients (35 treated with favipiravir, 45
control) from the isolation ward of the National Clinical Research Center for Infectious Diseases
(The Third People’s Hospital of Shenzhen), Shenzhen, China. The patients in the control group
were treated with other antivirals, such as lopinavir and ritonavir. It should be noted that
although the control patients received antivirals, two subsequent large-scale analyses, the WHO
Solidarity trial and the Randomized Evaluation of COVID-19 Therapy (RECOVERY) trial,
identified no effect of lopinavir or of a lopinavir-ritonavir combination, respectively, on the

metrics of COVID-19-related mortality that each assessed [31,32,33]. Treatment was applied on
days 2-14; treatment stopped either when viral clearance was confirmed or at day 14. The
efficacy of the treatment was measured by, first, the time until viral clearance using KaplanMeier survival curves, and, second, the improvement rate of chest computed tomography (CT)
scans on day 14 after treatment. The study found that favipiravir increased the speed of
recovery, measured as viral clearance from the patient by RT-PCR, with patients receiving
favipiravir recovering in four days compared to 11 days for patients receiving antivirals such as
lopinavir and ritonavir. Additionally, the lung CT scans of patients treated with favipiravir showed
significantly higher improvement rates (91%) on day 14 compared to control patients (62%, p =
0.004). However, there were adverse side effects in 4 (11%) favipiravir-treated patients and 25
(56%) control patients. The adverse side effects included diarrhea, vomiting, nausea, rash, and
liver and kidney injury. Despite the study reporting clinical improvement in favipiravir-treated
patients, several study design issues are problematic and lower confidence in the overall
conclusions. For example, the study was neither randomized nor blinded. Moreover, the
selection of patients did not take into consideration important factors such as previous clinical
conditions or sex, and there was no age categorization. Additionally, it should be noted that this
study was temporarily retracted and then restored without an explanation [34].
In late 2020 and early 2021, the first randomized controlled trials of favipiravir for the treatment
of COVID-19 released results [35,36,37]. The first [35] used a randomized, controlled, openlabel design to compare two drugs, favipiravir and baloxavir marboxil, to standard of care (SOC)
alone. Here, SOC included antivirals such as lopinavir/ritonavir and was administered to all
patients. The primary endpoint analyzed was viral clearance at day 14. The sample size for this
study was very small, with 29 total patients enrolled, and no significant effect of the treatments
was found for the primary or any of the secondary outcomes analyzed, which included mortality.
The second study [36] was larger, with 96 patients enrolled, and included only individuals with
mild to moderate symptoms who were randomized into two groups: one receiving chloroquine
(CQ) in addition to SOC, and the other receiving favipiravir in addition to SOC. This study
reported a non-significant trend for patients receiving favipiravir to have a shorter hospital stay
(13.29 days compared to 15.89 for CQ, p = 0.06) and less likelihood of progressing to
mechanical ventilation (p = 0.118) or to an oxygen saturation < 90% (p = 0.129). These results,
combined with the fact that favipiravir was being compared to CQ, which is now widely
understood to be ineffective for treating COVID-19, thus do not suggest that favipiravir was
likely to have had a strong effect on these outcomes. On the other hand, another trial of 60
patients reported a significant effect of favipiravir on viral clearance at four days (a secondary
endpoint), but not at 10 days (the primary endpoint) [37]. This study, as well as a prior study of
favipiravir [38], also reported that the drug was generally well-tolerated. Thus, in combination,
these small studies suggest that the effects of favipiravir as a treatment for COVID-19 cannot be
determined based on the available evidence, but additionally, none raise major concerns about
the safety profile of the drug.

Remdesivir
Remdesivir (GS-5734) is an intravenous antiviral that was proposed by Gilead Sciences as a
possible treatment for Ebola virus disease (EVD). At the outset of the COVID-19 pandemic, it
did not have any have any FDA-approved use. However, on May 1, 2020, the FDA issued an

Emergency Use Authorization (EUA) for remdesivir for the treatment of hospitalized COVID-19
patients [39]. The EUA was based on information from two clinical trials, NCT04280705 and
NCT04292899 [40,41,42,43]. Remdesivir is metabolized to GS-441524, an adenosine analog
that inhibits a broad range of polymerases and then evades exonuclease repair, causing chain
termination [44,45,46]. A clinical trial in the Democratic Republic of Congo found some evidence
of effectiveness against EVD, but two antibody preparations were found to be more effective,
and remdesivir was not pursued [47]. Remdesivir also inhibits polymerase and replication of the
coronaviruses MERS-CoV and SARS-CoV-1 in cell culture assays with submicromolar IC50s
[48]. It has also been found to inhibit SARS-CoV-2, showing synergy with CQ in vitro [46].
Remdesivir was first used on some COVID-19 patients under compassionate use guidelines
[49,50]. All were in late stages of COVID-19 infection, and initial reports were inconclusive about
the drug’s efficacy. Gilead Sciences, the maker of remdesivir, led a recent publication that
reported outcomes for compassionate use of the drug in 61 patients hospitalized with confirmed
COVID-19. Here, 200 mg of remdesivir was administered intravenously on day 1, followed by a
further 100 mg/day for 9 days [43]. There were significant issues with the study design, or lack
thereof. There was no randomized control group. The inclusion criteria were variable: some
patients only required low doses of oxygen, while others required ventilation. The study included
many sites, potentially with variable inclusion criteria and treatment protocols. The patients
analyzed had mixed demographics. There was a short follow-up period of investigation. Eight
patients were excluded from the analysis mainly due to missing post-baseline information; thus,
their health was unaccounted for. Therefore, even though the study reported clinical
improvement in 68% of the 53 patients ultimately evaluated, due to the significant issues with
study design, it could not be determined whether treatment with remdesivir had an effect or
whether these patients would have recovered regardless of treatment. Another study comparing
5- and 10-day treatment regimens reported similar results but was also limited because of the
lack of a placebo control [52]. These studies did not alter the understanding of the efficacy of
remdesivir in treating COVID-19, but the encouraging results provided motivation for placebocontrolled studies.
Remdesivir was later tested in a double-blind placebo-controlled phase 3 clinical trial performed
at 60 trial sites, 45 of which were in the United States [41,42]. The trial recruited 1,062 patients
and randomly assigned them to placebo treatment or treatment with remdesivir. Patients were
stratified for randomization based on site and the severity of disease presentation at baseline
[42]. The treatment was 200 mg on day 1, followed by 100 mg on days 2 through 10. Data was
analyzed from a total of 1,059 patients who completed the 29-day course of the trial, with 517
assigned to remdesivir and 508 to placebo [42]. The two groups were well matched
demographically and clinically at baseline. Those who received remdesivir had a median
recovery time of 10 days, as compared with 15 days in those who received placebo (rate ratio
for recovery, 1.29; 95% confidence interval (CI), 1.12 to 1.49; p < 0.001). The Kaplan-Meier
estimates of mortality by 14 days were 6.7% with remdesivir and 11.9% with placebo, with a
hazard ratio (HR) for death of 0.55 and a 95% CI of 0.36 to 0.83, and at day 29, remdesivir
corresponded to 11.4% and the placebo to 15.2% (HR: 0.73; 95% CI, 0.52 to 1.03). Serious
adverse events were reported in 131 of the 532 patients who received remdesivir (24.6%) and
in 163 of the 516 patients in the placebo group (31.6%). This study also reported an association
between remdesivir administration and both clinical improvement and a lack of progression to

more invasive respiratory intervention in patients receiving non-invasive and invasive ventilation
at randomization [42]. Largely on the results of this trial, the FDA reissued and expanded the
EUA for remdesivir for the treatment of hospitalized COVID-19 patients ages twelve and older
[39]. Additional clinical trials [46,53,54,55,56] are currently underway to evaluate the use of
remdesivir to treat COVID-19 patients at both early and late stages of infection and in
combination with other drugs (Figure 2). As of October 22, 2020, remdesivir received FDA
approval based on three clinical trials [57].
However, results suggesting no effect of remdesivir on survival were reported by the WHO
Solidarity trial [31]. This large-scale, open-label trial enrolled 11,330 adult in-patients at 405
hospitals in 30 countries around the world [31]. Patients were randomized in equal proportions
into four experimental conditions and a control condition, corresponding to four candidate
treatments for COVID-19 and SOC, respectively; no placebo was administered. The 2,750
patients in the remdesivir group were administered 200 mg intravenously on the first day and
100 mg on each subsequent day until day 10 and assessed for in-hospital death (primary
endpoint), duration of hospitalization, and progression to mechanical ventilation. There were
also 2,708 control patients who would have been eligible and able to receive remdesivir were
they not assigned to the control group. A total of 604 patients among these two cohorts died
during initial hospitalization, with 301 in the remdesivir group and 303 in the control group. The
rate ratio of death between these two groups was therefore not significant (0.95, p = 0.50),
suggesting that the administration of remdesivir did not affect survival. The two secondary
analyses similarly did not find any effect of remdesivir. Additionally, the authors compared data
from their study with data from three other studies of remdesivir (including [42]) stratified by
supplemental oxygen status. A meta-analysis of the four studies yielded an overall rate ratio for
death of 0.91 (p = 0.20). These results thus do not support the previous findings that remdesivir
reduced median recovery time and mortality risk in COVID-19 patients.
In response to the results of the Solidarity trial, Gilead, which manufactures remdesivir, released
a statement pointing to the fact that the Solidarity trial was not placebo-controlled or doubleblind and at the time of release, the statement had not been peer reviewed [58]; these
sentiments have been echoed elsewhere [59]. Other critiques of this study have noted that
antivirals are not typically targeted at patients with severe illness, and therefore remdesivir could
be more beneficial for patients with mild rather than severe cases [33,60]. However, the
publication associated with the trial sponsored by Gilead did purport an effect of remdesivir on
patients with severe disease, identifying an 11 versus 18 day recovery period (rate ratio for
recovery: 1.31, 95% CI 1.12 to 1.52) [42]. Additionally, a smaller analysis of 598 patients, of
whom two-thirds were randomized to receive remdesivir for either 5 or 10 days, reported a small
effect of treatment with remdesivir for five days relative to standard of care in patients with
moderate COVID-19 [61]. These results suggest that remdesivir could improve outcomes for
patients with moderate COVID-19, but that additional information would be needed to
understand the effects of different durations of treatment. Therefore, the Solidarity trial may
point to limitations in the generalizability of other research on remdesivir, especially since the
broad international nature of the Solidarity clinical trial, which included countries with a wide
range of economic profiles and a variety of healthcare systems, provides a much-needed global
perspective in a pandemic [33]. On the other hand, only 62% of patients in the Solidarity trial
were randomized on the day of admission or one day afterwards [31], and concerns have been

raised that differences in disease progression could influence the effectiveness of remdesivir
[33]. Despite the findings of the Solidarity trial, remdesivir remains available for the treatment of
COVID-19 in many places. Remdesivir has also been investigated in combination with other
drugs, such as baricitinib, which is an inhibitor of Janus kinase 1 and 2 [62]; the FDA has issued
an EUA for the combination of remdesivir and baricitinib in adult and pediatric patients [63].
Follow-up studies are needed and, in many cases, are underway to further investigate
remdesivir-related outcomes.
Similarly, the extent to which the remdesivir dosing regimen could influence outcomes continues
to be under consideration. A randomized, open-label trial compared the effect of remdesivir on
397 patients with severe COVID-19 over 5 versus 10 days [40,52], complementing the study
that found that a 5-day course of remdesivir improved outcomes for patients with moderate
COVID-19 but a 10-day course did not [61]. Patients in the two groups were administered 200
mg of remdesivir intravenously on the first day, followed by 100 mg on the subsequent four or
nine days, respectively. The two groups differed significantly in their clinical status, with patients
assigned to the 10-day group having more severe illness. This study also differed from most
because it included not only adults, but also pediatric patients as young as 12 years old. It
reported no significant differences across several outcomes for patients receiving a 5-day or 10day course, when correcting for baseline clinical status. The data did suggest that the 10-day
course might reduce mortality in the most severe patients at day 14, but the representation of
this group in the study population was too low to justify any conclusions [52]. Thus, additional
research is also required to determine whether the dosage and duration of remdesivir
administration influences outcomes.
In summary, remdesivir is the first FDA approved anti-viral against SARS-CoV-2 as well as the
first FDA approved COVID-19 treatment. Early investigations of this drug established proof of
principle that drugs targeting the virus can benefit COVID-19 patients. It also shows proof of
principle that SARS-CoV-2 can be targeted at the level of viral replication, since remdesivir
targets the viral RNA polymerase at high potency. Moreover, one of the most successful
strategies for developing therapeutics for viral diseases is to target the viral replication
machinery, which are typically virally encoded polymerases. Small molecule drugs targeting
viral polymerases are the backbones of treatments for other viral diseases including human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and herpes. Notably, the HIV and herpes polymerases are a
reverse transcriptase and a DNA polymerase, respectively, whereas SARS-CoV-2 encodes an
RdRP, so most of the commonly used polymerase inhibitors are not likely to be active against
SARS-CoV-2. In clinical use, polymerase inhibitors show short term benefits for HIV patients,
but for long term benefits they must be part of combination regimens. They are typically
combined with protease inhibitors, integrase inhibitors, and even other polymerase inhibitors.
Additional clinical trials of remdesivir in different patient pools and in combination with other
therapies will refine its use in the clinic.

Protease Inhibitors
Several studies showed that viral proteases play an important role in the life cycle of viruses,
including coronaviruses, by modulating the cleavage of viral polyprotein precursors [64]. Several
FDA-approved drugs target proteases, including lopinavir and ritonavir for HIV infection and
simeprevir for hepatitis C virus infection. In particular, serine protease inhibitors were suggested

for the treatment of SARS and MERS viruses [65]. Recently, a study [66] suggested that
camostat mesylate, an FDA-approved protease inhibitor could block the entry of SARS-CoV-2
into lung cells in vitro. Thus far, investigation of possible protease inhibitors that could work
against SARS-CoV-2 has been driven by computational predictions.
Computer-aided design allowed for the development of a Michael acceptor inhibitor, now known
as N3, to target a protease critical to SARS-CoV-2 replication. Discovery of the N3 mechanism
arose from interest in the two polyproteins encoded by the SARS-CoV-2 replicase gene, pp1a
and pp1ab, that are critical for viral replication and transcription [67]. These polyproteins must
undergo proteolytic processing. This processing is usually conducted by Mpro, a 33.8-kDa
SARS-CoV-2 protease that is therefore fundamental to viral replication and transcription. N3
was designed computationally [68] to bind in the substrate binding pocket of the Mpro protease
of SARS-like coronaviruses [69], therefore inhibiting proteolytic processing. Subsequently, the
structure of N3-bound SARS-CoV-2 Mpro was solved [67], confirming the computational
prediction. N3 was tested in vitro on SARS-CoV-2-infected Vero cells, which belong to a line of
cells established from the kidney epithelial cells of an African green monkey, and was found to
inhibit SARS-CoV-2 [67].
Although N3 is a strong inhibitor of SARS-CoV-2 in vitro, its safety and efficacy still need to be
tested in healthy volunteers and patients. After the design and confirmation of N3 as a highly
potent Michael acceptor inhibitor and the identification of Mpro’s structure [67,70], 10,000
compounds were screened for their in vitro anti-Mpro activity. The six leads that were identified
were ebselen, disulfiram, tideglusib, carmofur, and PX-12. In vitro analysis revealed that
ebselen had the strongest potency in reducing the viral load in SARS-CoV-2-infected Vero cells
[67]. Ebselen is an organoselenium compound with anti-inflammatory and antioxidant properties
[71]. It has been proposed as a possible treatment for conditions ranging from bipolar disorder
to diabetes to heart disease [71], and a preliminary investigation of ebselen as a treatment for
noise-induced hearing loss provided promising reports of its safety [72]. For COVID-19, the
NSP5 in SARS-CoV-2 contains a cysteine at the active site of Mpro, and ebselen is able to
inactivate the protease by bonding covalently with this cysteine to form a selenosulfide [71,73].
Interestingly there has been some argument that selenium deficiency may be associated with
more severe COVID-19 outcomes [74,75,76], possibly indicating that its antioxidative properties
are protective [73]. On the other hand, ebselen and the other compounds identified are likely to
be promiscuous binders, which could diminish their therapeutic potential [67]. While there is
clear computational and in vitro support for ebselen’s potential as a COVID-19 therapeutic,
results from clinical trials are not yet available for this compound. However, as of July 2020,
phase II clinical trials commenced to assess the effects of SPI-1005, an investigational drug
from Sound Pharmaceuticals that contains ebselen [77], on 60 adults presenting with each of
moderate [78] and severe [79] COVID-19.
In summary, N3 is a computationally designed molecule that inhibits the viral transcription
through inhibiting Mpro. Ebselen is both a strong Mpro inhibitor and strong inhibitor of viral
replication in vitro that was found to reduce SARS-CoV-2 viral load even more effectively than
N3. Ebselen is a promising compound since its safety has been demonstrated in other
indications. However, ebselen may be a false positive, since it is a promiscuous compound that
can have many targets [80]. Therefore, the results of ongoing clinical trials are expected to help
establish whether compounds with higher specificity are required.

Broad-Spectrum Pharmaceuticals
When a virus enters a host, the host becomes the virus’s environment. Therefore, the state of
the host can also influence the virus’s ability to replicate and spread. Traditionally, viral targets
have been favored for pharmaceutical interventions because altering host processes is likely to
be less specific than targeting the virus directly [81]. On the other hand, targeting the host offers
potential for a complementary strategy to antivirals that could broadly limit the ability of viruses
to replicate [81]. As a result, therapeutic approaches that target host proteins have become an
area of interest for SARS-CoV-2. Viral entry receptors in particular have been identified as a
potential target. Entry of SARS-CoV-2 into the cell depends on binding to angiotensinconverting enzyme 2 (ACE2), which is catalyzed by the enzyme encoded by TMPRSS2 [66]. In
principle, drugs that reduce the expression of these proteins or sterically hinder viral interactions
with them might reduce viral entry into cells.
Due to the urgent nature of the COVID-19 pandemic, many of the pharmaceutical agents that
have been widely publicized as having possible therapeutic or prophylactic effects are broadspectrum pharmaceuticals that pre-date the COVID-19 pandemic. These treatments are not
specifically targeted at the virus itself or at the host receptors it relies on, but rather induce
broad shifts in host biology that are hypothesized to be potential inhibitors of the virus. In most
cases, interest in particular candidate medications arises because they are already available for
other purposes. However, the fact that the targets of these agents are non-specific means that
the mechanism of action can appear to be relevant to COVID-19 without a therapeutic or
prophylactic effect being observed in clinical trials. This category of drugs has also received
significant attention from the media and general public, often before rigorous testing has been
able to determine their effectiveness against SARS-CoV-2.

ACE Inhibitors and Angiotensin II Receptor Blockers
Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors and angiotensin II receptor blockers (ARBs)
are among today’s most commonly prescribed medications, often being used to control blood
pressure [82,83]. In the United States, for example, they are prescribed well over 100,000,000
times annually [84]. Data from some animal models suggest that several, but not all, ACE
inhibitors (ACEIs) and several ARBs increase ACE2 expression in the cells of some organs [85].
Clinical studies have not established whether plasma ACE2 expression is increased in humans
treated with these medications [86]. While randomized clinical trials are ongoing, a variety of
observational studies have examined the relationship between exposure to ACEIs or ARBs and
outcomes in patients with COVID-19. An observational study of the association of exposure to
ACEIs or ARBs with outcomes in COVID-19 was retracted from the New England Journal of
Medicine [87] due to concerns related to data availability [88]. Clinical trials are needed because
the findings of the various observational studies bearing on this topic cannot be interpreted as
indicating a protective effect of the drug [89,90]. Several clinical trials testing the effects of
ACEIs or ARBs on COVID-19 outcomes are ongoing [91,92,93,94,95,96,97].
Two of these analyses [91,97] have reported no effect of continuing or discontinuing ARBs and
ACEIs on patients admitted to the hospital for COVID-19. The first, known as REPLACE COVID
[98], was a randomized, open-label study that enrolled patients who were admitted to the

hospital for COVID-19 and were taking an ACEI at the time of admission. They enrolled 152
patients at 20 hospitals across seven countries and randomized them into two arms,
continuation (n=75) and discontinuation (n=77). The primary outcome evaluated was a global
rank score that integrated several dimensions of illness. The components of this global rank
score, such as time to death and length of mechanical ventilation, were evaluated as secondary
endpoints. This analysis reported no differences between the two groups in the primary or any
of the secondary outcomes.
Similarly, a second study [99] used a randomized, open-label design to examine the effects of
continuing versus discontinuing ARBs and ACEIs on patients hospitalized for mild to moderate
COVID-19 at 29 hospitals in Brazil. This study enrolled 740 patients but had to exclude one trial
site from all analyses due to the discovery of violations of Good Clinical Trial practice and data
falsification. After this exclusion, 659 patients remained, with 334 randomized to discontinuation
and 325 to continuation. In this study, the primary endpoint analyzed was the number of days
that patients were alive and not hospitalized within 30 days of enrollment. The secondary
outcomes included death (including in-hospital death separately), number of days hospitalized,
and specific clinical outcomes such as heart failure or stroke. Once again, no significant
differences were found between the two groups. Initial studies of randomized interventions
therefore suggest that ACEIs and ARBs are unlikely to affect COVID-19 outcomes. These
results are also consistent with findings from observational studies (summarized in [98]).
Additional information about ACE2, observational studies of ACEIs and ARBs in COVID-19, and
clinical trials on this topic have been summarized [100]. Therefore, despite the promising
potential mechanism, initial results have not provided support for ACEIs and ARBs as therapies
for COVID-19.

Hydroxychloroquine and Chloroquine
CQ and hydroxychloroquine (HCQ) are lysosomotropic agents, meaning they are weak bases
that can pass through the plasma membrane. Both drugs increase cellular pH by accumulating
in their protonated form inside lysosomes [101,102]. These drugs are used for the treatment and
prophylaxis of malaria, as well as the treatment of lupus erythematosus and rheumatoid arthritis
in adults [103]. This shift in pH inhibits the breakdown of proteins and peptides by the
lysosomes during the process of proteolysis [102]. A number of mechanisms have been
proposed through which these drugs could influence the immune response to pathogen
challenge. For example, CQ/HCQ can interfere with digestion of antigens within the lysosome
and inhibit CD4 T-cell stimulation while promoting the stimulation of CD8 T-cells [102]. CQ/HCQ
can also decrease the production of certain key cytokines involved in the immune response,
including interleukin-6 (IL-6), and inhibit the stimulation of Toll-like receptors (TLR) and TLR
signaling [102]. The drugs also have anti-inflammatory and photoprotective effects and may also
affect rates of cell death, blood clotting, glucose tolerance, and cholesterol levels [102].
Interest in CQ and HCQ for treating COVID-19 was catalyzed by a mechanism observed in in
vitro studies of both SARS-CoV-1 and SARS-CoV-2. In one study, CQ inhibited viral entry of
SARS-CoV-1 into Vero E6 cells, a cell line that was derived from Vero cells in 1968, through the
elevation of endosomal pH and the terminal glycosylation of ACE2 [104]. Increased pH within
the cell, as discussed above, inhibits proteolysis, and terminal glycosylation of ACE2 is thought
to interfere with virus-receptor binding. An in vitro study of SARS-CoV-2 infection of Vero cells

found both HCQ and CQ to be effective in inhibiting viral replication, with HCQ being more
potent [105]. Additionally, an early case study of three COVID-19 patients reported the presence
of antiphospholipid antibodies in all three patients [106]. Antiphospholipid antibodies are central
to the diagnosis of the antiphospholipid syndrome, a disorder that HCQ has often been used to
treat [107,108,109]. Because the 90% effective concentration (EC90) of CQ in Vero E6 cells
(6.90 μM) can be achieved in and tolerated by rheumatoid arthritis (RA) patients, it was
hypothesized that it might also be possible to achieve the effective concentration in COVID-19
patients [110]. Additionally, clinical trials have reported HCQ to be effective in treating HIV [111]
and chronic Hepatitis C [112]. Together, these studies triggered initial enthusiasm about the
therapeutic potential for HCQ and CQ against COVID-19. HCQ/CQ has been proposed both as
a treatment for COVID-19 and a prophylaxis against SARS-CoV-2 exposure, and trials often
investigated these drugs in combination with azithromycin (AZ) and/or zinc supplementation.
However, as more evidence has emerged, it has become clear that HCQ/CQ offer no benefits
against SARS-CoV-2 or COVID-19.

Trials Assessing Therapeutic Administration of HCQ/CQ
The initial study evaluating HCQ as a treatment for COVID-19 patients was published on March
20, 2020 by Gautret et al. [113]. This non-randomized, non-blinded, non-placebo clinical trial
compared HCQ to SOC in 42 hospitalized patients in southern France. It reported that patients
who received HCQ showed higher rates of virological clearance by nasopharyngeal swab on
days 3-6 when compared to SOC. This study also treated six patients with both HCQ + AZ and
found this combination therapy to be more effective than HCQ alone. However, the design and
analyses used showed weaknesses that severely limit interpretability of results, including the
small sample size and the lack of: randomization, blinding, placebo (no “placebo pill” given to
SOC group), Intention-To-Treat analysis, correction for sequential multiple comparisons, and
trial pre-registration. Furthermore, the trial arms were entirely confounded by hospital and there
were false negative outcome measurements (see [114]). Two of these weaknesses are due to
inappropriate data analysis and can therefore be corrected post hoc by recalculating the pvalues (lack of Intention-To-Treat analysis and multiple comparisons). However, all other
weaknesses are fundamental design flaws and cannot be corrected for. Thus, the conclusions
cannot be generalized outside of the study. The International Society of Antimicrobial
Chemotherapy, the scientific organization that publishes the journal where the article appeared,
subsequently announced that the article did not meet its expected standard for publications
[115], although it has not been officially retracted.
Because of the preliminary data presented in this study, HCQ treatment was subsequently
explored by other researchers. About one week later, a follow-up case study reported that 11
consecutive patients were treated with HCQ + AZ using the same dosing regimen [116]. One
patient died, two were transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU), and one developed a
prolonged QT interval, leading to discontinuation of HCQ + AZ administration. As in the Gautret
et al. study, the outcome assessed was virological clearance at day 6 post-treatment, as
measured from nasopharyngeal swabs. Of the ten living patients on day 6, eight remained
positive for SARS-CoV-2 RNA. Like in the original study, interpretability was severely limited by
the lack of a comparison group and the small sample size. However, these results stand in
contrast to the claims by Gautret et al. that all six patients treated with HCQ + AZ tested

negative for SARS-CoV-2 RNA by day 6 post-treatment. This case study illustrated the need for
further investigation using robust study design to evaluate the efficacy of HCQ and/or CQ.
On April 10, 2020, a randomized, non-placebo trial of 62 COVID-19 patients at the Renmin
Hospital of Wuhan University was released [117]. This study investigated whether HCQ
decreased time to fever break or time to cough relief when compared to SOC [117]. This trial
found HCQ decreased both average time to fever break and average time to cough relief,
defined as mild or no cough. While this study improved on some of the methodological flaws in
Gautret et al. by randomizing patients, it also had several flaws in trial design and data analysis
that prevent generalization of the results. These weaknesses include the lack of placebo, lack of
correction for multiple primary outcomes, inappropriate choice of outcomes, lack of sufficient
detail to understand analysis, drastic disparities between pre-registration [118] and published
protocol (including differences in the inclusion and exclusion criteria, the number of
experimental groups, the number of patients enrolled, and the outcome analyzed), and small
sample size. The choice of outcomes may be inappropriate as both fevers and cough may
break periodically without resolution of illness. Additionally, for these outcomes, the authors
reported that 23 of 62 patients did not have a fever and 25 of 62 patients did not have a cough
at the start of the study, but the authors failed to describe how these patients were included in a
study assessing time to fever break and time to cough relief. It is important to note here that the
authors claimed “neither the research performers nor the patients were aware of the treatment
assignments.” This blinding seems impossible in a non-placebo trial because at the very least,
providers would know whether they were administering a medication or not, and this knowledge
could lead to systematic differences in the administration of care. Correction for multiple primary
outcomes can be adjusted post hoc by recalculating p-values, but all of the other issues were
design and statistical weaknesses that cannot be corrected for. Additionally, the observation of
drastic disparities between pre-registration and published protocol could indicate p-hacking
[119]. The design limitations mean that the conclusions cannot be generalized outside of the
study.
A second randomized trial, conducted by the Shanghai Public Health Clinical Center, analyzed
whether HCQ increased rates of virological clearance at day 7 in respiratory pharyngeal swabs
compared to SOC [120]. This trial was published in Chinese along with an abstract in English,
and only the English abstract was read and interpreted for this review. The trial found
comparable outcomes in virological clearance rate, time to virological clearance, and time to
body temperature normalization between the treatment and control groups. The small sample
size is one weakness, with only 30 patients enrolled and 15 in each arm. This problem suggests
the study is underpowered to detect potentially useful differences and precludes interpretation of
results. Additionally, because only the abstract could be read, other design and analysis issues
could be present. Thus, though these studies added randomization to their assessment of HCQ,
their conclusions should be interpreted very cautiously. These two studies assessed different
outcomes and reached differing conclusions about the efficacy of HCQ for treating COVID-19;
the designs of both studies, especially with respect to sample size, meant that no general
conclusions can be made about the efficacy of the drug.
Several widely reported studies on HCQ also have issues with data integrity and/or provenance.
A Letter to the Editor published in BioScience Trends on March 16, 2020 claimed that numerous
clinical trials have shown that HCQ is superior to control treatment in inhibiting the exacerbation

of COVID-19 pneumonia [121]. This letter has been cited by numerous primary literature, review
articles, and media alike [122,123]. However, the letter referred to 15 pre-registration identifiers
from the Chinese Clinical Trial Registry. When these identifiers are followed back to the registry,
most trials claim they are not yet recruiting patients or are currently recruiting patients. For all of
these 15 identifiers, no data uploads or links to publications could be located on the preregistrations. At the very least, the lack of availability of the primary data means the claim that
HCQ is efficacious against COVID-19 pneumonia cannot be verified. Similarly, a recent
multinational registry analysis [124] analyzed the efficacy of CQ and HCQ with and without a
macrolide, which is a class of antibiotics that includes Azithromycin, for the treatment of COVID19. The study observed 96,032 patients split into a control and four treatment conditions (CQ
with and without a macrolide; HCQ with and without a macrolide). They concluded that
treatment with CQ or HCQ was associated with increased risk of de novo ventricular arrhythmia
during hospitalization. However, this study has since been retracted by The Lancet due to an
inability to validate the data used [125]. These studies demonstrate that increased skepticism in
evaluation of the HCQ/CQ and COVID-19 literature may be warranted, possibly because of the
significant attention HCQ and CQ have received as possible treatments for COVID-19 and the
politicization of these drugs.
Despite the fact that the study suggesting that CQ/HCQ increased risk of ventricular arrhythmia
in COVID-19 patients has now been retracted, previous studies have identified risks associated
with HCQ/CQ. A patient with systemic lupus erythematosus developed a prolonged QT interval
that was likely exacerbated by use of HCQ in combination with renal failure [126]. A prolonged
QT interval is associated with ventricular arrhythmia [127]. Furthermore, a separate study [128]
investigated the safety associated with the use of HCQ with and without macrolides between
2000 and 2020. The study involved 900,000 cases treated with HCQ and 300,000 cases treated
with HCQ + AZ. The results indicated that short-term use of HCQ was not associated with
additional risk, but that HCQ + AZ was associated with an enhanced risk of cardiovascular
complications (such as a 15% increased risk of chest pain, calibrated HR = 1.15, 95% CI, 1.05
to 1.26) and a two-fold increased 30-day risk of cardiovascular mortality (calibrated HR = 2.19;
95% CI, 1.22 to 3.94). Therefore, whether studies utilize HCQ alone or HCQ in combination with
a macrolide may be an important consideration in assessing risk. As results from initial
investigations of these drug combinations have emerged, concerns about the efficacy and risks
of treating COVID-19 with HCQ and CQ have led to the removal of CQ/HCQ from SOC
practices in several countries [129,130]. As of May 25, 2020, WHO had suspended
administration of HCQ as part of the worldwide Solidarity Trial [131], and later the final results of
this large-scale trial that compared 947 patients administered HCQ to 906 controls revealed no
effect on the primary outcome, mortality during hospitalization (rate ratio: 1.19; p = 0.23)
Additional research has emerged largely identifying HCQ/CQ to be ineffective against COVID19 while simultaneously revealing a number of significant side effects. A randomized, openlabel, non-placebo trial of 150 COVID-19 patients was conducted in parallel at 16 governmentdesignated COVID-19 centers in China to assess the safety and efficacy of HCQ [132]. The trial
compared treatment with HCQ in conjunction with SOC to SOC alone in 150 infected patients
who were assigned randomly to the two groups (75 per group). The primary endpoint of the
study was the negative conversion rate of SARS-CoV-2 in 28 days, and the investigators found
no difference in this parameter between the groups (estimated difference between SOC plus

HCQ and SOC 4.1%; 95% CI, –10.3% to 18.5%). The secondary endpoints were an
amelioration of the symptoms of the disease such as axillary temperature ≤36.6°C, SpO2 >94%
on room air, and disappearance of symptoms like shortness of breath, cough, and sore throat.
The median time to symptom alleviation was similar across different conditions (19 days in HCQ
+ SOC versus 21 days in SOC, p = 0.97). Additionally, 30% of the patients receiving SOC+HCQ
reported adverse outcomes compared to 8.8% of patients receiving only SOC, with the most
common adverse outcome in the SOC+HCQ group being diarrhea (10% versus 0% in the SOC
group, p = 0.004). However, there are several factors that limit the interpretability of this study.
Most of the enrolled patients had mild-to-moderate symptoms (98%), and the average age was
46. SOC in this study included the use of antivirals (Lopinavir-Ritonavir, Arbidol, Oseltamivir,
Virazole, Entecavir, Ganciclovir, and Interferon alfa), which the authors note could influence the
results. Thus, they note that an ideal SOC would need to exclude the use of antivirals, but that
ceasing antiviral treatment raised ethical concerns at the time that the study was conducted. In
this trial, the samples used to test for the presence of the SARS-CoV-2 virus were collected
from the upper respiratory tract, and the authors indicated that the use of upper respiratory
samples may have introduced false negatives (e.g., [133]). Another limitation of the study that
the authors acknowledge was that the HCQ treatment began, on average, at a 16-day delay
from the symptom onset. The fact that this study was open-label and lacked a placebo limits
interpretation, and additional analysis is required to determine whether HCQ reduces
inflammatory response. Therefore, despite some potential areas of investigation identified in
post hoc analysis, this study cannot be interpreted as providing support for HCQ as a
therapeutic against COVID-19. This study provided no support for HCQ against COVID-19, as
there was no difference between the two groups in either negative seroconversion at 28 days or
symptom alleviation, and in fact, more severe adverse outcomes were reported in the group
receiving HCQ.
Additional evidence comes from a retrospective analysis [134] that examined data from 368
COVID-19 patients across all United States Veteran Health Administration medical centers. The
study retrospectively investigated the effect of the administration of HCQ (n=97), HCQ + AZ
(n=113), and no HCQ (n=158) on 368 patients. The primary outcomes assessed were death
and the need for mechanical ventilation. Standard supportive care was rendered to all patients.
Due to the low representation of women (N=17) in the available data, the analysis included only
men, and the median age was 65 years. The rate of death was 27.8% in the HCQ-only
treatment group, 22.1% in the HCQ + AZ treatment group, and 14.1% in the no-HCQ group.
These data indicated a statistically significant elevation in the risk of death for the HCQ-only
group compared to the no-HCQ group (adjusted HR: 2.61, p = 0.03), but not for the HCQ + AZ
group compared to the no-HCQ group (adjusted HR: 1.14; p = 0.72). Further, the risk of
ventilation was similar across all three groups (adjusted HR: 1.43, p = 0.48 (HCQ) and 0.43, p =
0.09 (HCQ + AZ) compared to no HCQ). The study thus showed evidence of an association
between increased mortality and HCQ in this cohort of COVID-19 patients but no change in
rates of mechanical ventilation among the treatment conditions. The study had a few limitations:
it was not randomized, and the baseline vital signs, laboratory tests, and prescription drug use
were significantly different among the three groups. All of these factors could potentially
influence treatment outcome. Furthermore, the authors acknowledge that the effect of the drugs
might be different in females and pediatric subjects, since these subjects were not part of the
study. The reported result that HCQ + AZ is safer than HCQ contradicts the findings of the

previous large-scale analysis of twenty years of records that found HCQ + AZ to be more
frequently associated with cardiac arrhythmia than HCQ alone [128]; whether this discrepancy is
caused by the pathology of COVID-19, is influenced by age or sex, or is a statistical artifact is
not presently known.
Finally, findings from the RECOVERY trial were released on October 8, 2020. This study used a
randomized, open-label design to study the effects of HCQ compared to SOC at 176 hospitals
in the United Kingdom [135]. This large study enrolled 11,197 hospitalized patients whose
physicians believed it would not harm them to participate. Patients were randomized into either
the control group or one of the treatment arms, with twice as many patients enrolled in the
control group as any treatment group. Of the patients eligible to receive HCQ, 1,561 were
randomized into the HCQ arm, and 3,155 were randomized into the control arm. The
demographics of the HCQ and control groups were similar in terms of average age (65 years),
proportion female (approximately 38%), ethnic make-up (73% versus 76% white), and
prevalence of pre-existing conditions (56% versus 57% overall). In the HCQ arm of the study,
patients received 800 mg at baseline and again after 6 hours, then 400 mg at 12 hours and
every subsequent 12 hours. The primary outcome analyzed was all-cause mortality, and patient
vital statistics were reported by physicians upon discharge or death, or else at 28 days following
HCQ administration if they remained hospitalized. The secondary outcome assessed was the
combined risk of progression to invasive mechanical ventilation or death within 28 days. By the
advice of an external data monitoring committee, the HCQ arm of the study was reviewed early,
leading to it being closed due a lack of support for HCQ as a treatment for COVID-19. The rates
of COVID-19-related mortality reported in the RECOVERY trial did not differ between the control
and HCQ arms (rate ratio, 1.09; 95% CI, 0.97 to 1.23; p = 0.15), but patients receiving HCQ
were slightly more likely to die due to cardiac events (0.4 percentage points). Patients who
received HCQ also had a longer duration of hospitalization than patients receiving usual care,
being less likely to be discharged alive within 28 days (rate ratio 0.90; 95% CI, 0.83 to 0.98),
and were more likely to progress to mechanical ventilation or death (risk ratio 1.14; 95% CI,
1.03 to 1.27). This large-scale study thus builds upon studies in the United States and China to
suggest that HCQ is not an effective treatment, and in fact may negatively impact COVID-19
patients due to its side effects. Therefore, though none of the studies have been blinded,
examining them together makes it clear that the available evidence points to significant dangers
associated with the administration of HCQ to hospitalized COVID-19 patients, without providing
any support for its efficacy.

HCQ for the Treatment of Mild Cases
One additional possible therapeutic application of HCQ considered was the treatment of mild
COVID-19 cases in otherwise healthy individuals. This possibility was assessed in a
randomized, open-label, multi-center analysis conducted in Catalonia (Spain) [136]. This
analysis enrolled adults 18 and older who had been experiencing mild symptoms of COVID-19
for fewer than five days. Participants were randomized into an HCQ arm (N=136) and a control
arm (N=157), and those in the treatment arm were administered 800 mg of HCQ on the first day
of treatment followed by 400 mg on each of the subsequent six days. The primary outcome
assessed was viral clearance at days 3 and 7 following the onset of treatment, and secondary
outcomes were clinical progression and time to complete resolution of symptoms. No significant

differences between the two groups were found: the difference in viral load between the HCQ
and control groups was 0.01 (95% CI, -0.28 to 0.29) at day 3 and -0.07 (95% CI -0.44 to 0.29) at
day 7, the relative risk of hospitalization was 0.75 (95% CI, 0.32 to 1.77), and the difference in
time to complete resolution of symptoms was -2 days (p = 0.38). This study thus suggests that
HCQ does not improve recovery from COVID-19, even in otherwise healthy adult patients with
mild symptoms.

Prophylactic Administration of HCQ
An initial study of the possible prophylactic application of HCQ utilized a randomized, doubleblind, placebo-controlled design to analyze the administration of HCQ prophylactically [137].
Asymptomatic adults in the United States and Canada who had been exposed to SARS-CoV-2
within the past four days were enrolled in an online study to evaluate whether administration of
HCQ over five days influenced the probability of developing COVID-19 symptoms over a 14-day
period. Of the participants, 414 received HCQ and 407 received a placebo. No significant
difference in the rate of symptomatic illness was observed between the two groups (11.8%
HCQ, 14.3% placebo, p = 0.35). The HCQ condition was associated with side effects, with
40.1% of patients reporting side effects compared to 16.8% in the control group (p < 0.001).
However, likely due to the high enrollment of healthcare workers (66% of participants) and the
well-known side effects associated with HCQ, a large number of participants were able to
correctly identify whether they were receiving HCQ or a placebo (46.5% and 35.7%,
respectively). Furthermore, due to a lack of availability of diagnostic testing, only 20 of the 107
cases were confirmed with a PCR-based test to be positive for SARS-CoV-2. The rest were
categorized as “probable” or “possible” cases by a panel of four physicians who were blind to
the treatment status. One possible confounder is that a patient presenting one or more
symptoms, which included diarrhea, was defined as a “possible” case, but diarrhea is also a
common side effect of HCQ. Additionally, four of the twenty PCR-confirmed cases did not
develop symptoms until after the observation period had completed, suggesting that the 14-day
trial period may not have been long enough or that some participants also encountered
secondary exposure events. Finally, in addition to the young age of the participants in this study,
which ranged from 32 to 51, there were possible impediments to generalization introduced by
the selection process, as 2,237 patients who were eligible but had already developed symptoms
by day 4 were enrolled in a separate study. It is therefore likely that asymptomatic cases were
over-represented in this sample, which would not have been detected based on the diagnostic
criteria used. Therefore, while this study does represent the first effort to conduct a randomized,
double-blind, placebo-controlled investigation of HCQ’s effect on COVID-19 prevention after
SARS-CoV-2 exposure in a large sample, the lack of PCR tests and several other design flaws
significantly impede interpretation of the results. However, in line with the results from
therapeutic studies, once again no evidence was found suggesting an effect of HCQ against
COVID-19.
A second study [138] examined the effect of administering HCQ to healthcare workers as a preexposure prophylactic. The primary outcome assessed was the conversion from SARS-CoV-2
negative to SARS-CoV-2 positive status over the 8 week study period. This study was also
randomized, double-blind, and placebo-controlled, and it sought to address some of the
limitations of the first prophylactic study. The goal was to enroll 200 healthcare workers,

preferentially those working with COVID-19 patients, at two hospitals within the University of
Pennsylvania hospital system in Philadelphia, PA. Participants were randomized 1:1 to receive
either 600 mg of HCQ daily or a placebo, and their SARS-CoV-2 infection status and antibody
status were assessed using RT-PCR and serological testing, respectively, at baseline, 4 weeks,
and 8 weeks following the beginning of the treatment period. The statistical design of the study
accounted for interim analyses at 50 and 100 participants in case efficacy or futility of HCQ for
prophylaxis became clear earlier than completion of enrollment. The 139 individuals enrolled
comprised a study population that was fairly young (average age 33) and made of largely of
people who were white, women, and without pre-existing conditions. At the second interim
analysis, more individuals in the treatment group than the control group had contracted COVID19 (4 versus 3), causing the estimated z-score to fall below the pre-established threshold for
futility. As a result, the trial was terminated early, offering additional evidence against the use of
HCQ for prophylaxis.

Summary of HCQ/CQ Research Findings
Early in vitro evidence indicated that HCQ could be an effective therapeutic against SARS-CoV2 and COVID-19, leading to significant media attention and public interest in its potential as both
a therapeutic and prophylactic. Initially it was hypothesized that CQ/HCQ might be effective
against SARS-CoV-2 in part because CQ and HCQ have both been found to inhibit the
expression of CD154 in T-cells and to reduce TLR signaling that leads to the production of proinflammatory cytokines [139]. Clinical trials for COVID-19 have more often used HCQ rather
than CQ because it offers the advantages of being cheaper and having fewer side effects than
CQ. However, research has not found support for a positive effect of HCQ on COVID-19
patients. Multiple clinical studies have already been carried out to assess HCQ as a therapeutic
agent for COVID-19, and many more are in progress. To date, none of these studies have used
randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled designs with a large sample size, which would be
the gold standard. Despite the design limitations (which would be more likely to produce false
positives than false negatives), initial optimism about HCQ has largely dissipated. The most
methodologically rigorous analysis of HCQ as a prophylactic [137] found no significant
differences between the treatment and control groups, and the WHO’s global Solidarity trial
similarly reported no effect of HCQ on mortality [31]. Thus, HCQ/CQ are not likely to be effective
therapeutic or prophylactic agents against COVID-19. Additionally, one study identified an
increased risk of mortality in older men receiving HCQ, and administration of HCQ and HCQ +
AZ did not decrease the use of mechanical ventilation in these patients [134]. HCQ use for
COVID-19 could also lead to shortages for anti-malarial or anti-rheumatic use, where it has
documented efficacy. Despite significant early attention, these drugs appear to be ineffective
against COVID-19. Several countries have now removed CQ/HCQ from their SOC for COVID19 due to the lack of evidence of efficacy and the frequency of adverse effects.

Dexamethasone
Dexamethasone (9α-fluoro-16α-methylprednisolone) is a synthetic corticosteroid that binds to
glucocorticoid receptors [140,141]. It was first synthesized in the late 1950s as an antiinflammatory and has been used to treat RA and other inflammatory conditions [142,143],
including allergies and asthma [144]. Steroids such as dexamethasone are widely available and

affordable, and they are often used to treat community-acquired pneumonia [145]. A clinical trial
that began in 2012 recently reported that dexamethasone may improve outcomes for patients
with ARDS [146]. However, a meta-analysis of a small amount of available data about
dexamethasone as a treatment for SARS suggested that it may, in fact, be associated with
patient harm [147]; these findings may have been biased by the fact that all of the studies
examined were observational and a large number of inconclusive studies were not included
[148].
Dexamethasone works as an anti-inflammatory agent by binding to glucocorticoid receptors with
higher affinity than endogenous cortisol [149]. In order to understand how dexamethasone
reduces inflammation, it is necessary to consider the stress response broadly. In response to
stress, corticotropin-releasing hormone stimulates the release of neurotransmitters known as
catecholamines, such as epinephrine, and steroid hormones known as glucocorticoids, such as
cortisol [150,151]. While catecholamines are often associated with the fight-or-flight response,
the specific role that glucocorticoids play is less clear, although they are thought to be important
to restoring homeostasis [152]. Immune challenge is a stressor that is known to interact closely
with the stress response. The immune system can therefore interact with the central nervous
system; for example, macrophages can both respond to and produce catecholamines [150].
Additionally, the production of both catecholamines and glucocorticoids is associated with
inhibition of proinflammatory cytokines such as IL-6, IL-12, and tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α)
and the stimulation of anti-inflammatory cytokines such as IL-10, meaning that the stress
response can regulate inflammatory immune activity [151]. Administration of dexamethasone
has been found to correspond to dose-dependent inhibition of IL-12 production, but not to affect
IL-10 [153]; the fact that this relationship could be disrupted by administration of a
glucocorticoid-receptor antagonist suggests that it is regulated by the receptor itself [153]. Thus,
the administration of dexamethasone for COVID-19 is likely to simulate the release of
glucocorticoids endogenously during stress, resulting in binding of the synthetic steroid to the
glucocorticoid receptor and the associated inhibition of the production of proinflammatory
cytokines. In this model, dexamethasone reduces inflammation by stimulating the biological
mechanism that reduces inflammation following a threat such as immune challenge.
Immunosuppressive drugs such as steroids are typically contraindicated in the setting of
infection [154], but because COVID-19 results in hyperinflammation that appears to contribute
to mortality via lung damage, immunosuppression may be a helpful approach to treatment [155].
The decision of whether and/or when to counter hyperinflammation with immunosuppression in
the setting of COVID-19 was an area of intense debate, as the risks of inhibiting antiviral
immunity needed to be weighed against the beneficial anti-inflammatory effects [156]. As a
result, guidelines early in the pandemic typically recommended avoiding treating COVID-19
patients with corticosteroids such as dexamethasone [147].
The application of dexamethasone for the treatment of COVID-19 was evaluated as part of the
multi-site RECOVERY trial in the United Kingdom [157]. Over 6,000 hospitalized COVID-19
patients were assigned into the SOC or treatment (dexamethasone) arms of the trial with a 2:1
ratio. At the time of randomization, some patients were ventilated (16%), others were on noninvasive oxygen (60%), and others were breathing independently (24%). Patients in the
treatment arm were administered dexamethasone either orally or intravenously at 6 mg per day
for up to 10 days. The primary end-point was the patient’s status at 28-days post-randomization

(mortality, discharge, or continued hospitalization), and secondary outcomes analyzed included
the progression to invasive mechanical ventilation over the same period. The 28-day mortality
rate was found to be lower in the treatment group than in the SOC group (21.6% vs 24.6%, p <
0.001). However, this finding was driven by differences in mortality among patients who were
receiving mechanical ventilation or supplementary oxygen at the start of the study. The report
indicated that dexamethasone reduced 28-day mortality relative to SOC in patients who were
ventilated (29.3% versus 41.4%) and among those who were receiving oxygen supplementation
(23.3% versus 26.2%) at randomization, but not in patients who were breathing independently
(17.8% versus 14.0%). One possible confounder is that patients receiving mechanical
ventilation tended to be younger than patients who were not receiving respiratory support (by 10
years on average) and to have had symptoms for a longer period. However, adjusting for age
did not change the conclusions, although the duration of symptoms was found to be significantly
associated with the effect of dexamethasone administration. These findings also suggested that
dexamethasone may have reduced progression to mechanical ventilation, especially among
patients who were receiving oxygen support at randomization. Thus, this large, randomized, and
multi-site, albeit not placebo-controlled, study suggests that administration of dexamethasone to
patients who are unable to breathe independently may significantly improve survival outcomes.
Additionally, dexamethasone is a widely available and affordable medication, raising the hope
that it could be made available to COVID-19 patients globally.
The results of the RECOVERY trial’s analysis of dexamethasone suggest that this therapeutic is
effective primarily in patients who had been experiencing symptoms for at least seven days and
patients who were not breathing independently [158]. A meta-analysis that evaluated the results
of the RECOVERY trial alongside trials of other corticosteroids, such as hydrocortisone,
similarly concluded that corticosteroids may be beneficial to patients with severe COVID-19 who
are receiving oxygen supplementation [159]. Thus, it seems likely that dexamethasone is useful
for treating inflammation associated with immunopathy or cytokine release syndrome (CRS),
which is a condition caused by detrimental overactivation of the immune system [1]. In fact,
corticosteroids such as dexamethasone are sometimes used to treat CRS [160]. It is not
surprising that administration of an immunosuppressant would be most beneficial when the
immune system was dysregulated towards inflammation. However, it is also unsurprising that
care must be taken in administering an immunosuppressant to patients fighting a viral infection.
In particular, the concern has been raised that treatment with dexamethasone might increase
patient susceptibility to concurrent (e.g., nosocomial) infections [161]. Additionally, the drug
could potentially slow viral clearance and inhibit patients’ ability to develop antibodies to SARSCoV-2 [147,161], with the lack of data about viral clearance being put forward as a major
limitation of the RECOVERY trial [162]. Furthermore, dexamethasone has been associated with
side effects that include psychosis, glucocorticoid-induced diabetes, and avascular necrosis
[147], and the RECOVERY trial did not report outcomes with enough detail to be able to
determine whether they observed similar complications. The effects of dexamethasone have
also been found to differ among populations, especially in high-income versus middle- or lowincome countries [163]. However, since the RECOVERY trial’s results were released, strategies
have been proposed for administering dexamethasone alongside more targeted treatments to
minimize the likelihood of negative side effects [161]. Given the available evidence,
dexamethasone is currently the most promising treatment for severe COVID-19.

Biologics
Biologics are produced from components of living organisms or viruses. They include
treatments such as humanized monoclonal antibodies, tocilizumab (TCZ), and neutralizing
antibodies (nAbs), and can also include prophylactics such as vaccines [4]. Historically
produced from animal tissue, biologics have become increasingly feasible to produce as
recombinant DNA technologies have advanced [164]. Often, they are glycoproteins or peptides
[165], but whole viruses can also be used therapeutically or prophylactically, not only for
vaccines but also as vectors for gene therapy or therapeutic proteins or for oncolytic virotherapy
[166]. They are typically catabolized by the body to their amino acid components [165]. There
are many differences on the development side between biologics and synthesized
pharmaceuticals, such as small molecule drugs. Biologics are typically orders of magnitude
larger than small molecule drugs, and their physiochemical properties are often much less
understood [165]. They are often heat sensitive, and their toxicity can vary, as it is not directly
associated with the primary effects of the drug [165]. However, this class includes some
extremely significant medical breakthroughs, including insulin for the management of diabetes
and the smallpox vaccine. As a result, biologics are another possible avenue through which the
pharmacological management of SARS-CoV-2 infection can be approached.

Tocilizumab
TCZ is a receptor antibody that was developed to manage chronic inflammation caused by the
continuous synthesis of the cytokine IL-6 [167]. IL-6 is a pro-inflammatory cytokine belonging to
the interleukin family, which is comprised by immune system regulators that are primarily
responsible for immune cell differentiation. Often used to treat conditions such as RA [167], TCZ
has become a pharmaceutical of interest for the treatment of COVID-19 because of the role IL-6
plays in this disease. It has also been approved to treat CRS caused by CAR-T treatments
[168]. While secretion of IL-6 can be associated with chronic conditions, it is a key player in the
innate immune response and is secreted by macrophages in response to the detection of
pathogen-associated molecular patterns and damage-associated molecular patterns [167]. An
analysis of 191 in-patients at two Wuhan hospitals revealed that blood concentrations of IL-6
differed between patients who did and did not recover from COVID-19. Patients who ultimately
died had higher IL-6 levels at admission than those who recovered [169]. Additionally, IL-6
levels remained higher throughout the course of hospitalization in the patients who ultimately
died [169]. This finding provided some early evidence that COVID-19 deaths may be induced by
the hyperactive immune response, often referred to as CRS or cytokine storm syndrome (CSS),
as IL-6 plays a key role in this response [170]. In this context, the observation of elevated IL-6 in
patients who died may reflect an over-production of proinflammatory interleukins, suggesting
that TCZ could potentially palliate some of the most severe symptoms of COVID-19 associated
with increased cytokine production.
Human IL-6 is a 26-kDa glycoprotein that consists of 184 amino acids and contains two
potential N-glycosylation sites and four cysteine residues. It binds to a type I cytokine receptor
(IL-6Rα or glycoprotein 80) that exists in both membrane-bound (IL-6Rα) and soluble (sIL-6Rα)
forms [171]. It is not the binding of IL-6 to the receptor that initiates pro- and/or anti-inflammatory
signaling, but rather the binding of the complex to another subunit, known as IL-6Rβ or

glycoprotein 130 (gp130) [171,172]. Unlike membrane-bound IL-6Rα, which is only found on
hepatocytes and some types of leukocytes, gp130 is found on most cells [173]. When IL-6 binds
to sIL-6Rα, the complex can then bind to a gp130 protein on any cell [173]. The binding of IL-6
to IL-6Rα is termed classical signaling, while its binding to sIL-6Rα is termed trans-signaling
[173,174,175]. These two signaling processes are thought to play different roles in health and
illness. For example, trans-signaling may play a role in the proliferation of mucosal T-helper TH2
cells associated with asthma, while an earlier step in this proliferation process may be regulated
by classical signaling [173]. Similarly, IL-6 is known to play a role in Crohn’s Disease via trans-,
but not classical, signaling [173]. Both classical and trans-signaling can occur through three
independent pathways: the Janus-activated kinase-STAT3 pathway, the Ras/Mitogen-Activated
Protein Kinases pathway and the Phosphoinositol-3 Kinase/Akt pathway [171]. These signaling
pathways are involved in a variety of different functions, including cell type differentiation,
immunoglobulin synthesis, and cellular survival signaling pathways, respectively [171]. The
ultimate result of the IL-6 cascade is to direct transcriptional activity of various promoters of proinflammatory cytokines, such as IL-1, TFN, and even IL-6 itself, through the activity of NF-κB
[171]. IL-6 synthesis is tightly regulated both transcriptionally and post-transcriptionally, and it
has been shown that viral proteins can enhance transcription of the IL-6 gene by strengthening
the DNA-binding activity between several transcription factors and IL-6 gene-cis-regulatory
elements [176]. Therefore, drugs inhibiting the binding of IL-6 to IL-6Rα or sIL-6Rα are of
interest for combating the hyperactive inflammatory response characteristic of CRS/CSS. TCZ
is a humanized monoclonal antibody that binds both to the insoluble and soluble receptor of IL6, providing de facto inhibition of the IL-6 immune cascade.
Tocilizumab is being administered either as an intervention or as concomitant medication in 77
interventional COVID-19 clinical trials (Figure 2). No randomized, placebo-controlled studies of
TCZ have currently released results. Therefore, no conclusions can be drawn about its efficacy
for the treatment of COVID-19. However, early interest in TCZ as a possible treatment for
COVID-19 emerged from a very small retrospective study in China that examined 20 patients
with severe symptoms in early February 2020 and reported rapid improvement in symptoms
following treatment with TCZ [177]. Subsequently, a number of retrospective studies have been
conducted in several countries. Many studies use a retrospective, observational design, where
they compare outcomes for COVID-19 patients who received TCZ to those who did not over a
set period of time. For example, one of the largest retrospective, observational analyses
released to date [178], consisting of 1,351 patients admitted to several care centers in Italy,
compared the rates at which patients who received TCZ died or progressed to invasive medical
ventilation over a 14-day period compared to patients receiving only SOC. Under this definition,
SOC could include other drugs such as HCQ, azithromycin, lopinavir-ritonavir or darunavircobicistat, or heparin. While this study was not randomized, a subset of patients who were
eligible to receive TCZ were unable to obtain it due to shortages; however, these groups were
not directly compared in the analysis. After adjusting for variables such as age, sex, and SOFA
(sequential organ failure assessment) score, they found that patients treated with TCZ were less
likely to progress to invasive medical ventilation and/or death (adjusted HR = 0.61, CI 0.40-0.92,
p = 0.020); analysis of death and ventilation separately suggests that this effect may have been
driven by differences in the death rate (20% of control versus 7% of TCZ-treated patients). The
study reported particular benefits for patients whose PaO2/FiO2 ratio, also known as the

Horowitz Index for Lung Function, fell below a 150 mm Hg threshold. They found no differences
between groups administered subcutaneous versus intravenous TCZ.
Another retrospective observational analysis of interest examined the charts of patients at a
hospital in Connecticut, USA where 64% of all 239 COVID-19 patients in the study period were
administered TCZ based on assignment by a standardized algorithm [179]. They found that TCZ
administration was associated with more similar rates of survivorship in patients with severe
versus nonsevere COVID-19 at intake, defined based on the amount of supplemental oxygen
needed. They therefore proposed that their algorithm was able to identify patients presenting
with or likely to develop CRS as good candidates for TCZ. This study also reported higher
survivorship in Black and Hispanic patients compared to white patients when adjusted for age.
The major limitation with interpretation for these studies is that there may be clinical
characteristics that influenced medical practitioners decisions to administer TCZ to some
patients and not others. One interesting example therefore comes from an analysis of patients
at a single hospital in Brescia, Italy, where TCZ was not available for a period of time [180]. This
study compared COVID-19 patients admitted to the hospital before and after March 13, 2020,
when the hospital received TCZ. Therefore, patients who would have been eligible for TCZ prior
to this arbitrary date did not receive it as treatment, making this retrospective analysis
something of a natural experiment. Despite this design, demographic factors did not appear to
be consistent between the two groups, and the average age of the control group was older than
the TCZ group. The control group also had a higher percentage of males and a higher incidence
of comorbidities such as diabetes and heart disease. All the same, the multivariate HR, which
adjusted for these clinical and demographic factors, found a significant difference between
survival in the two groups (HR=0.035, CI=0.004-0.347, p = 0.004). The study reported
improvement of survival outcomes after the addition of TCZ to the SOC regime, with 11 of 23
patients (47.8%) admitted prior to March 13th dying compared to 2 of 62 (3.2%) admitted
afterwards (HR=0.035; 95% CI, 0.004 to 0.347; p = 0.004). They also reported a reduced
progression to mechanical ventilation in the TCZ group. However, this study also holds a
significant limitation: the time delay between the two groups means that knowledge about how
to treat the disease likely improved over this timeframe as well. All the same, the results of
these observational retrospective studies provide support for TCZ as a pharmaceutical of
interest for follow-up in clinical trials.
Other retrospective analyses have utilized a case-control design to match pairs of patients with
similar baseline characteristics, only one of whom received TCZ for COVID-19. In one such
study, TCZ was significantly associated with a reduced risk of progression to ICU admission or
death [181]. This study examined only 20 patients treated with TCZ (all but one of the patients
treated with TCZ in the hospital during the study period) and compared them to 25 patients
receiving SOC. For the combined primary endpoint of death and/or ICU admission, only 25% of
patients receiving TCZ progressed to an endpoint compared to 72% in the SOC group (p =
0.002, presumably based on a chi-square test based on the information provided in the text).
When the two endpoints were examined separately, progression to invasive medical ventilation
remained significant (32% SOC compared to 0% TCZ, p = 0.006) but not for mortality (48%
SOC compared to 25% TCZ, p = 0.066). In contrast, a study that compared 96 patients treated
with TCZ to 97 patients treated with SOC only in New York City found that differences in
mortality did not differ between the two groups, but that this difference did become significant

when intubated patients were excluded from the analysis [182]. Taken together, these findings
suggest that future clinical trials of TCZ may want to include intubation as an endpoint.
However, these studies should be approached with caution, not only because of the small
number of patients enrolled and the retrospective design, but also because they performed a
large number of statistical tests and did not account for multiple hypothesis testing. In general,
caution must be exercised when interpreting subgroup analyses after a primary combined
endpoint analysis. These last findings highlight the need to search for a balance between
impairing a harmful immune response, such as the one generated during CRS/CSS, and
preventing the worsening of the clinical picture of the patients by potential new viral infections.
Though data about TCZ for COVID-19 is still only just emerging, some meta-analyses and
systematic reviews have investigated the available data. One meta-analysis [183] evaluated 19
studies published or released as preprints prior to July 1, 2020 and found that the overall trends
were supportive of the frequent conclusion that TCZ does improve survivorship, with a
significant HR of 0.41 (p < 0.001). This trend improved when they excluded studies that
administered a steroid alongside TCZ, with a significant HR of 0.04 (p < 0.001). They also found
some evidence for reduced invasive ventilation or ICU admission, but only when excluding all
studies except a small number whose estimates were adjusted for the possible bias introduced
by the challenges of stringency during the enrollment process. A systematic analysis of sixteen
case-control studies of TCZ estimated an odds ratio of mortality of 0.453 (95% CI 0.376–0.547,
p < 0.001), suggesting possible benefits associated with TCZ treatment [184]. Although these
estimates are similar, it is important to note that they are drawing from the same literature and
are therefore likely to be affected by the same potential biases in publication. A different
systematic review of studies investigating TCZ treatment for COVID-19 analyzed 31 studies that
had been published or released as pre-prints and reported that none carried a low risk of bias
[185]. Therefore, the present evidence is not likely to be sufficient for conclusions about the
efficacy of TCZ.
On February 11, 2021, a preprint describing the first randomized control trial of TCZ was
released as part of the RECOVERY trial [186]. Of the 21,550 patients enrolled in the
RECOVERY trial at the time, 4,116 adults hospitalized with COVID-19 across the 131 sites in
the United Kingdom were assigned to the arm of the trial evaluating the effect of TCZ. Among
them, 2,022 were randomized to receive TCZ and 2,094 were randomized to SOC, with 79% of
patients in each group available for analysis at the time that the initial report was released. The
primary outcome measured was 28-day mortality, and TCZ was found to reduce 28-day
mortality from 33% of patients receiving SOC alone to 29% of those receiving TCZ,
corresponding to a rate ratio of 0.86 (95% CI 0.77-0.96; p = 0.007). TCZ was also significantly
associated with the probability of hospital discharge within 28 days for living patients, which was
47% in the SOC group and 54% in the TCZ group (rate ratio 1.22, 95% CI 1.12-1.34, p <
0.0001). A potential statistical interaction between TCZ and corticosteroids was observed, with
the combination providing greater mortality benefits than TCZ alone, but the authors note that
caution is advisable in light of the number of statistical tests conducted. Combining the
RECOVERY trial data with data from seven smaller randomized control trials indicates that TCZ
is associated with a 13% reduction in 28-day mortality (rate ratio 0.87, 95% CI 0.79-0.96, p =
0·005) [186]. While this initial report did not include the full results expected from the
RECOVERY trial, this large-scale, randomized controlled trial therefore offers strong evidence
that TCZ may offer benefits for COVID-19 patients, even at this initial stage of analysis.

There are possible risks associated with the administration of TCZ for COVID-19. TCZ has been
used for over a decade to treat RA [187], and a recent study found the drug to be safe for
pregnant and breastfeeding women [188]. However, TCZ may increase the risk of developing
infections [187], and RA patients with chronic hepatitis B infections had a high risk of hepatitis B
virus reactivation when TCZ was administered in combination with other RA drugs [189]. As a
result, TCZ is contraindicated in patients with active infections such as tuberculosis [190].
Previous studies have investigated, with varying results, a possible increased risk of infection in
RA patients administered TCZ [191,192], although another study reported that the incidence
rate of infections was higher in clinical practice RA patients treated with TCZ than in the rates
reported by clinical trials [193]. In the investigation of 544 Italian COVID-19 patients, the group
treated with TCZ was found to be more likely to develop secondary infections, with 24%
compared to 4% in the control group (p < 0.0001) [178]. Reactivation of hepatitis B and herpes
simplex virus 1 was also reported in a small number of patients in this study, all of whom were
receiving TCZ. A July 2020 case report described negative outcomes of two COVID-19 patients
after receiving TCZ, including one death; however, both patients were intubated and had
entered septic shock prior to receiving TCZ [194], likely indicating a severe level of cytokine
production. Additionally, D-dimer and sIL2R levels were reported by one study to increase in
patients treated with TCZ, which raised concerns because of the potential association between
elevated D-dimer levels and thrombosis and between sIL2R and diseases where T-cell
regulation is compromised [179]. An increased risk of bacterial infection was also identified in a
systematic review of the literature, based on the unadjusted estimates reported [183]. In the
RECOVERY trial, however, only three out of 2,022 participants in the group receiving TCZ
developed adverse reactions determined to be associated with the intervention, and no excess
deaths were reported [186]. TCZ administration to COVID-19 patients is not without risks and
may introduce additional risk of developing secondary infections; however, while caution may be
prudent when treating patients who have latent viral infections, the results of the RECOVERY
trial indicate that adverse reactions to TCZ are very rare among COVID-19 patients broadly.
In summary, approximately 33% of hospitalized COVID-19 patients develop ARDS [195], which
is caused by an excessive early response of the immune system which can be a component of
CRS/CSS [179,190]. This overwhelming inflammation is triggered by IL-6. TCZ is an inhibitor of
IL-6 and therefore may neutralize the inflammatory pathway that leads to the cytokine storm.
While the mechanism suggests TCZ could be beneficial for the treatment of COVID-19 patients
experiencing excessive immune activity, no randomized controlled trials are available assessing
its effect. However, small initial studies have found preliminary indications that TCZ may reduce
progression to invasive medical ventilation and/or death. It should be noted that SOC varied
widely across retrospective studies, with one study administering HCQ, lopinavir-ritonavir,
antibiotics, and/or heparin as part of SOC. Interest in TCZ as a treatment for COVID-19 was
supported by two meta-analyses [183,196], but a third meta-analysis found that all of the
available literature carries a risk of bias, with even the largest available TCZ studies to date
carrying a moderate risk of bias under the ROBINS-I criteria [185]. Additionally, different studies
used different dosages, number of doses, and methods of administration. Ongoing research
may be needed to optimize administration of TCZ [197], although similar results were reported
by one study for intravenous and subcutaneous administration [178]. Clinical trials that are in
progress are likely to provide additional insight into the effectiveness of this drug for the
treatment of COVID-19 along with how it should be administered.

Monoclonal Neutralizing Antibodies
Monoclonal antibodies have revolutionized the way we treat human diseases. They have
become some of the best-selling drugs in the pharmaceutical market in recent years [198].
There are currently 79 FDA approved mAbs on the market, including antibodies for viral
infections (e.g. Ibalizumab for HIV and Palivizumab for RSV) [198,199]. Virus-specific
neutralizing antibodies commonly target viral surface glycoproteins or host structures, thereby
inhibiting viral entry through receptor binding interference [200,201]. This is predicted to reduce
the viral load, mitigate disease, and reduce overall hospitalization. While polyclonal antibodies
from convalescent plasma can be used as a treatment for COVID-19, this section focuses on
current efforts in developing monoclonal neutralizing antibodies (nAbs) against SARS-CoV-2
(excellent reviews regarding convalescent plasma therapy can be found here [202,203]).
Specifically, we focus on monoclonal antibodies that have recently been granted emergency
use authorization and discuss the challenges in the successful development of monoclonal
neutralizing antibodies.
During the first SARS epidemic in 2002, nAbs were found in SARS-CoV-1-infected patients
[204,205]. Several studies following up on these findings identified various S-glycoprotein
epitopes as the major targets of nAbs against SARS-CoV-1 [206]. Coronaviruses use trimeric
spike (S) glycoproteins on their surface to bind to the host cell, allowing for cell entry [66,207].
Each S glycoprotein protomer is comprised of an S1 domain, also called the RBD, and an S2
domain. The S1 domain binds to the host cell while the S2 domain facilitates the fusion between
the viral envelope and host cell membranes [206]. The genomic identity between the RBD of
SARS-CoV-1 and SARS-CoV-2 is around 74% [208]. Due to this high degree of similarity,
preexisting antibodies against SARS-CoV-1 were initially considered candidates for neutralizing
activity against SARS-CoV-2. While some antibodies developed against the SARS-CoV-1 spike
protein showed cross-neutralization activity with SARS-CoV-2 [209,210], others failed to bind to
SARS-CoV-2 spike protein at relevant concentrations [211]. Cross-neutralizing activities were
dependent on whether the epitope recognized by the antibodies were conserved between
SARS-CoV-1 and SARS-CoV-2 [209].
The first human monoclonal neutralizing antibody specifically against the SARS-CoV-2 S
glycoprotein was developed using hybridoma technology [212], where antibody-producing Bcells developed by mice are inserted into myeloma cells to produce a hybrid cell line (the
hybridoma) that is grown in culture. The 47D11 antibody clone was able to cross-neutralize
SARS-CoV-1 and SARS-CoV-2. This antibody (now ABVV-47D11) has recently entered clinical
trials in collaboration with AbbVie. Since then, an extensive monoclonal neutralizing antibody
pipeline has been developed to combat the ongoing pandemic, with over 50 different antibodies
in clinical trials [213] and two treatments recently receiving emergency use authorization by the
FDA.

Bamlanivimab (LY-CoV555) and Etesevimab (LY-CoV016)
Bamlanivimab is a human monoclonal antibody that was derived from convalescent plasma
donated by recovered COVID-19 patient, evaluated in research by the National Institute of
Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID), and subsequently developed by AbCellera and Eli Lilly.

The neutralizing activity of bamlanivimab was initially demonstrated in vivo using a nonhuman
primate model [214]. In these studies, prophylactic Ly-CoV555 infusions protected rhesus
macaques from SARS-CoV-2 infection. Based on the positive preclinical data, Eli Lilly initiated
the first human clinical trial for a monoclonal antibody against SARS-CoV-2. The phase 1 trial,
which was conducted in hospitalized COVID-19 patients, was completed in August 2020 [215].
Estesevimab (LY-CoV016 or JS-016) is also a monoclonal neutralizing antibody against the
spike protein of SARS-CoV-2. It was initially developed by Junshi Biosciences and later licensed
and developed through Eli Lilly. A phase 1 clinical trial to assess the safety of etesevimab was
completed in October 2020 [216]. Etesevimab was shown to bind a different epitope on the
spike protein than bamlanivimab, suggesting that the two antibodies used as a combination
therapy would further enhance their clinical use compared to a monotherapy [217].
To assess the efficacy and safety of bamlanivimab alone or in combination with etesevimab for
the treatment of COVID-19, a phase 2/3 trial (BLAZE-1) [218] was initiated. The interim analysis
of the phase 2 portion suggested that bamlanivimab alone was able to reduce accelerate the
reduction in viral load [219]. However, more recent data suggests that only the
bamlanivimab/etesevimab combination therapy is able to reduce viral load in COVID-19 patients
[217]. Based on this data, the combination therapy received emergency use authorization for
COVID-19 from the FDA in February of 2021.

Casirivimab and Imdevimab (REGN-COV2)
Casirivimab (REGN10933) and imdevimab (REGN10987) are two monoclonal antibodies
against the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein. They were both developed by Regeneron in a parallel
high-throughput screen to identify neutralizing antibodies from either humanized mice or patientderived convalescent plasma [220]. In these efforts, multiple antibodies were characterized for
their ability to bind and neutralize the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein. The authors hypothesized that
an antibody cocktail, rather than each individual antibody, could increase the therapeutic
efficacy while minimizing the risk for virus escape. Therefore, the authors tested pairs of
individual antibodies for their ability to simultaneously bind the RBD of the spike protein. Based
on this data, casirivimab and imdevimab were identified as the lead antibody pair, resulting in
the initiation of two clinical trials [221,222]. Data from this phase 1-3 trial published in the New
England Journal of Medicine shows that the REGN-COV2 antibody cocktail reduced viral load,
particularly in patients with high viral load or whose endogenous immune response had not yet
been initiated [223]. However, in patients who already initiated an immune response, exogenous
addition of REGN-COV2 did not improve the endogenous immune response. Both doses were
well tolerated with no serious events related to the antibody cocktail. Based on this data, the
FDA granted emergency use authorization for REGN-COV2 in patients with mild to moderate
COVID-19 who are at risk to develop severe disease. Ongoing efforts are trying to evaluate the
efficacy of REGN-COV2 to improve clinical outcomes in hospitalized patients [221].

Viral Resistance to Neutralizing Antibodies
With the ongoing global spread of new SARS-CoV-2 variants, there is a growing concern that
mutations in SARS-CoV-2 spike protein could escape antibody neutralization, thereby reducing
the efficacy of monoclonal antibody therapeutics and vaccines. A comprehensive mutagenesis

screen recently identified several amino acid substitutions in the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein that
can prevent antibody neutralization [224]. While some mutations result in resistance to only one
antibody, others confer broad resistance to multiple monoclonal antibodies as well as polyclonal
human sera, suggesting that some amino acids are “hotspots” for antibody resistance. However,
it was not investigated whether the resistant mutations identified result in a fitness advantage.
Accordingly, an impact on neutralizing efficiency has been reported for the emerging UK
(B.1.1.7) and South Africa (B.1.351) variants [225,226,227]. While the reported impact on
antibody neutralization needs to be confirmed in vivo, it suggests that some adjustments to
therapeutic antibody treatments may be necessary to maintain the efficacy that was reported in
previous clinical trials.
Antibody cocktails such as REGN-COV2, CT-P59, and AZD7442 have been developed to
overcome the risk for attenuation of neutralizing activity of a single monoclonal antibody. These
cocktails consist of antibodies that recognize different epitopes on the spike protein, decreasing
the likelihood that a single amino acid change can cause resistance to all antibodies in the
cocktail. However, neutralizing resistance can emerge even against an antibody cocktail if the
individual antibodies target subdominant epitopes [226].
Another strategy is to develop broadly neutralizing antibodies that target structures that are
highly conserved, as these are less likely to mutate [228,229] or to target epitopes that are
insensitive to mutations [230]. One such antibody (ADG-2) has recently been reported [231].
This antibody targets a highly conserved epitope that overlaps the hACE2 binding site of all
clade 1 sarbecoviruses. Prophylactic administration of ADG-2 in an immunocompetent mouse
model of COVID-19 resulted in protection against viral replication in the lungs and respiratory
burden. Since the epitope targeted by ADG-2 represents an Achilles’ heel for clade 1
sarbecoviruses, this antibody might be a promising candidate against all circulating variants as
well as emerging SARS-related coronaviruses.
In just under a year since the structure of the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein was first published, an
impressive pipeline of monoclonal antibodies targeting SARS-CoV-2 has entered clinical trials,
with hundreds more candidates in preclinical stages. Technological advances in antibody drug
design as well as in structural biology massively accelerated the discovery of novel antibody
candidates and the mechanisms by which they interact with the target structure. One of the
biggest challenges remains identifying antibodies that not only bind to their target, but also
prove to be beneficial for disease management. Thus far, two antibody cocktails (REGN-COV2
and LY-CoV555/LY-COV016) have been granted emergency use authorization by the FDA.
However, their current use is limited to people with mild to moderate disease that are not
hospitalized. Therefore, it has yet to be determined whether monoclonal antibodies can be used
as a successful treatment option for severe COVID patients.

Interferons
IFNs are a family of cytokines critical to activating the innate immune response against viral
infections. Interferons are classified into three categories based on their receptor specificity:
types I, II and III [170]. Specifically, IFNs I (IFN-𝛼 and 𝛽) and II (IFN-𝛾) induce the expression of
antiviral proteins [232]. Among these IFNs, IFN-𝛽 has already been found to strongly inhibit the

replication of other coronaviruses, such as SARS-CoV-1, in cell culture, while IFN-𝛼 and 𝛾 were
shown to be less effective in this context [232]. There is evidence that patients with higher
susceptibility to ARDS indeed show deficiency in IFN-𝛽. For instance, infection with other
coronaviruses impairs IFN-𝛽 expression and synthesis, allowing the virus to escape the innate
immune response [233]. On March 18 2020, Synairgen plc received approval to start a phase II
trial for SNG001, an IFN-𝛽-1a formulation to be delivered to the lungs via inhalation [234].
SNG001, which contains recombinant interferon beta-1a, was previously shown to be effective
in reducing viral load in an in vivo model of swine flu and in vitro models of other coronavirus
infections [235]. In July, a press release from Synairgen stated that SNG001 reduced
progression to ventilation in a double-blind, placebo-controlled, multi-center study of 101
patients with an average age in the late 50s [236]. These results were subsequently published
in November 2020 [237]. The study reports that the participants were assigned at a ratio of 1:1
to receive either SNG001 or a placebo that lacked the active compound, by inhalation for up to
14 days. The primary outcome they assessed was the change in patients’ score on the WHO
Ordinal Scale for Clinical Improvement (OSCI) at trial day 15 or 16. SNG001 was associated
with an odds ratio of improvement on the OSCI scale of 2.32 (95% CI 1.07 – 5.04, p = 0.033) in
the intention-to-treat analysis and 2.80 (95% CI 1.21 – 6.52, p = 0.017) in the per-protocol
analysis, corresponding to significant improvement in the SNG001 group on the OSCI at day
15/16. Some of the secondary endpoints analyzed also showed differences: at day 28, the OR
for clinical improvement on the OSCI was 3.15 (95% CI 1.39 – 7.14, p = 0.006), and the odds of
recovery at day 15/16 and at day 28 were also significant between the two groups. Thus, this
study suggested that IFN-𝛽1 administered via SNG001 may improve clinical outcomes.
In contrast, the WHO Solidarity trial reported no significant effect of IFN-𝛽1a on patient survival
during hospitalization [31]. Here, the primary outcome analyzed was in-hospital mortality, and
the rate ratio for the two groups was 1.16 (95% CI, 0.96 to 1.39; p = 0.11) administering IFN-𝛽1a to 2050 patients and comparing their response to 2,050 controls. However, there are a few
reasons that the different findings of the two trials might not speak to the underlying efficacy of
this treatment strategy. One important consideration is the stage of COVID-19 infection
analyzed in each study. The Synairgen trial enrolled only patients who were not receiving
invasive ventilation, corresponding to a less severe stage of disease than many patients
enrolled in the SOLIDARITY trial, as well as a lower overall rate of mortality [238]. Additionally,
the methods of administration differed between the two trials, with the SOLIDARITY trial
administering IFN-𝛽-1a subcutaneously [238]. The differences in findings between the studies
suggests that the method of administration might be relevant to outcomes, with nebulized IFN𝛽-1a more directly targeting receptors in the lungs. A trial that analyzed the effect of
subcutaneously administered IFN-β-1a on patients with ARDS between 2015 and 2017 had also
reported no effect on 28-day mortality [239], while a smaller study analyzing the effect of
subcutaneous IFN administration did find a significant improvement in 28-day mortality for
COVID-19 [240]. At present, several ongoing clinical trials are investigating the potential effects
of IFN-𝛽-1a, including in combination with therapeutics such as remdesivir [241] and
administered via inhalation [234]. Thus, as additional information becomes available, a more
detailed understanding of whether and under which circumstances IFN-𝛽-1a is beneficial to
COVID-19 patients should develop.

Discussion
With the emergence of the COVID-19 pandemic caused by the coronavirus SARS-CoV-2, the
development and identification of therapeutic and prophylactic interventions became issues of
international urgency. In previous outbreaks of HCoV, namely SARS and MERS, the
development of these interventions was very limited. As research has progressed, several
potential approaches to treatment have emerged (Figure 3). Most notably, remdesivir has been
approved by the FDA for the treatment of COVID-19, and dexamethasone, which was approved
by the FDA in 1958, has been found to improve outcomes for patients with severe COVID-19.
Other potential therapies are being still being explored and require additional data (Figure 2). As
more evidence becomes available, the potential for existing and novel therapies to improve
outcomes for COVID-19 patients will become better understood.

Figure 3: Mechanism of Action for Potential Therapeutics Potential therapeutics currently
being studied can target the SARS-CoV-2 virus or modify the host environment through many
different mechanisms. Here, the relationship between the virus and several therapeutics
described above are visualized.
Insights into the pathogenesis of and immune response to SARS-CoV-2 (see [1]) have also
guided the identification of potential prophylactics and therapeutics. As cases have become
better characterized, it has become evident that many patients experience an initial immune
response to the virus that is typically characterized by fever, cough, dyspnea, and related
symptoms. However, the most serious concern is CRS, when the body’s immune response
becomes dysregulated, resulting in an extreme inflammatory response. The RECOVERY trial, a
large-scale, multi-arm trial enrolling about 15% of all COVID-19 patients in the United Kingdom,
was the first to identify that the widely available steroid dexamethasone seems to be beneficial
for patients suffering from this immune dysregulation [157]. The results of efforts to identify

therapeutic treatments to treat patients early in the course of infection have been more
ambiguous. Early interest in the drugs HCQ and CQ yielded no promising results from studies
with robust experimental designs. On the other hand, the experimental drug remdesivir, which
was developed as a candidate therapeutic for EVD, has received enough support from early
analyses to receive FDA approval, although results have been mixed. The potential for other
drugs, such as tocilizumab, to reduce recovery time remains unclear, but some early results
were promising.
One additional concern is that the presentation of COVID-19 appears to be heterogeneous
across the lifespan. Many adult cases, especially in younger adults, present with mild symptoms
or even asymptomatically, while others, especially in older adults, can be severe or fatal. In
children, the SARS-CoV-2 viral infection can present either as a respiratory illness comparable
to COVID-19 or as an inflammatory condition, known as multisystem inflammatory syndrome in
children, for which presentation is similar to Kawasaki Disease [242]. The therapeutics and
prophylactics discussed here were primarily tested in adults, and additional research is needed
to identify therapeutics that address the symptoms characteristic of pediatric COVID-19 and
MIS-C cases.

Potential Avenues of Interest for Therapeutic Development
Given what is currently known about these therapeutics for COVID-19, a number of related
therapies beyond those explored above may also prove to be of interest. For example, the
demonstrated benefit of dexamethasone and the ongoing potential of tocilizumab for treatment
of COVID-19 suggests that other anti-inflammatory agents might also hold value for the
treatment of COVID-19. Current evidence supporting the treatment of severe COVID-19 with
dexamethasone suggests that the need to curtail the cytokine storm inflammatory response
transcends the risks of immunosuppression, and other anti-inflammatory agents may therefore
benefit patients in this phase of the disease. While dexamethasone is considered widely
available and generally affordable, the high costs of biologics such as tocilizumab therapy may
present obstacles to wide-scale distribution of this drug if it proves of value. At the doses used
for RA patients, the cost for tocilizumab ranges from $179.20 to $896 per dose for the IV form
and $355 for the pre-filled syringe [243]. Several other anti-inflammatory agents used for the
treatment of autoimmune diseases may also be able to counter the effects of the cytokine storm
induced by the virus, and some of these, such as cyclosporine, are likely to be more costeffective and readily available than biologics [244]. While tocilizumab targets IL-6, several other
inflammatory markers could be potential targets, including TNF-α. Inhibition of TNF-α by a
compound such as Etanercept was previously suggested for treatment of SARS-CoV-1 [245]
and may be relevant for SARS-CoV-2 as well. Another anti-IL-6 antibody, sarilumab, is also
being investigated [246,247]. Baricitinib and other small molecule inhibitors of the Janusactivated kinase pathway also curtail the inflammatory response and have been suggested as
potential options for SARS-CoV-2 infections [248]. Baricitinib, in particular, may be able to
reduce the ability of SARS-CoV-2 to infect lung cells [249]. Clinical trials studying baricitinib in
COVID-19 have already begun in the US and in Italy [250,251]. Identification and targeting of
further inflammatory markers that are relevant in SARS-CoV-2 infection may be of value for
curtailing the inflammatory response and lung damage.

In addition to immunosuppressive treatments, which are most beneficial late in disease
progression, much research is focused on identifying therapeutics for early-stage patients. For
example, although studies of HCQ have not supported the early theory-driven interest in this
antiviral treatment, alternative compounds with related mechanisms may still have potential.
Hydroxyferroquine derivatives of HCQ have been described as a class of bioorganometallic
compounds that exert antiviral effects with some selectivity for SARS-CoV-1 in vitro [252].
Future work could explore whether such compounds exert antiviral effects against SARS-CoV-2
and whether they would be safer for use in COVID-19. Another potential approach is the
development of antivirals, which could be broad-spectrum, specific to coronaviruses, or targeted
to SARS-CoV-2. Development of new antivirals is complicated by the fact that none have yet
been approved for human coronaviruses. Intriguing new options are emerging, however. BetaD-N4-hydroxycytidine is an orally bioavailable ribonucleotide analog showing broad-spectrum
activity against RNA viruses, which may inhibit SARS-CoV-2 replication in vitro and in vivo in
mouse models of HCoVs [253]. A range of other antivirals are also in development.
Development of antivirals will be further facilitated as research reveals more information about
the interaction of SARS-CoV-2 with the host cell and host cell genome, mechanisms of viral
replication, mechanisms of viral assembly, and mechanisms of viral release to other cells; this
can allow researchers to target specific stages and structures of the viral life cycle. Finally,
antibodies against viruses, also known as antiviral monoclonal antibodies, could be an
alternative as well and are described in detail in an above section. The goal of antiviral
antibodies is to neutralize viruses through either cell-killing activity or blocking of viral replication
[254]. They may also engage the host immune response, encouraging the immune system to
hone in on the virus. Given the cytokine storm that results from immune system activation in
response to the virus, which has been implicated in worsening of the disease, an nAb may be
preferable. Upcoming work may explore the specificity of nAbs for their target, mechanisms by
which the nAbs impede the virus, and improvements to antibody structure that may enhance the
ability of the antibody to block viral activity.
Some research is also investigating potential therapeutics and prophylactics that would interact
with components of the innate immune response. For example, TLRs are pattern recognition
receptors that recognize pathogen- and damage-associated molecular patterns and contribute
to innate immune recognition and, more generally, promotion of both the innate and adaptive
immune responses [255]. In mouse models, poly(I:C) and CpG, which are agonists of Toll-like
receptors TLR3 and TLR9, respectively, showed protective effects when administered prior to
SARS-CoV-1 infection [256]. Therefore, TLR agonists hold some potential for broad-spectrum
prophylaxis.
Given that a large number of clinical trials are currently in progress, more information about the
potential of these and other therapeutics should become available over time. This information,
combined with advances in understanding the molecular structure and viral pathogenesis of
SARS-CoV-2, may lead to a more complete understanding of how the virus affects the human
host and what strategies can improve outcomes. To date, investigations of potential
therapeutics for COVID-19 have focused primarily on repurposing existing drugs. This approach
is necessary given the urgency of the situation as well as the extensive time required for
developing and testing new therapies. However, in the long-term, new drugs specific for
treatment of COVID-19 may also enter development. Development of novel drugs is likely to be

guided by what is known about the pathogenesis and molecular structure of SARS-CoV-2. For
example, understanding the various structural components of SARS-CoV-2 may allow for the
development of small molecule inhibitors of those components. Currently, crystal structures of
the SARS-CoV-2 main protease have recently been resolved [67,257], and efforts are already in
place to perform screens for small molecule inhibitors of the main protease, which have yielded
potential hits [67]. Much work remains to be done to determine further crystal structures of other
viral components, understand the relative utility of targeting different viral components, perform
additional small molecule inhibitor screens, and determine the safety and efficacy of the
potential inhibitors. While still nascent, work in this area is promising. Over the longer term, this
approach and others may lead to the development of novel therapeutics specifically for COVID19 and SARS-CoV-2.

Conclusions
Table 1: Summary table of candidate therapeutics examined in this manuscript. The FDA status
is provided where available. The evidence available is based on the progression of the
therapeutic through the pharmaceutical development pipeline, with randomized control trials
(RCT) as the most informative source of evidence. The effectiveness is summarized based on
the current available evidence; large trials such as RECOVERY and Solidarity are weighted
heavily in this summary. This table was last updated on February 17, 2021.
Treatment

Category

FDA Status

Evidence
Available

Favipiravir

Small
molecule,
antiviral,
nucleoside
analog

None

RCT

Not supported: RCTs do not
show significant
improvements for
individuals taking this
treatment, good safety
profile

Remdesivir

Small
molecule,
antiviral,
adenosine
analog

Approved for
COVID-19 (and
EUA for
combination with
baricitinib)

RCT

Conflicting evidence from
large WHO-led Solidarity
trial vs US-focused RCT
and other studies

N3

Small
molecule,
protease
inhibitor

None

Computational
prediction, in
vitro studies

Unknown

ARBs & ACEIs

Small
molecule,
broad
spectrum

None

Observational
studies and
some RCTs

Not supported:
Observational study
retracted, RCTs suggest no
association

HCQ/CQ

Small
molecule,
broad
spectrum

None

RCT

Not supported, possibly
harmful: Non-blinded RCTs
showed no improvement
over SOC, safety profile
may be problematic

Suggested Effectiveness

Dexamethasone

Small
molecule,
broad
spectrum

Used off-label

RCT

Supported: RCT shows
improved outcomes over
SOC, especially in severe
cases such as CRS

Tocilizumab

Biologic,
monoclonal
antibody

Approved for
CRS resulting
from CAR-T
therapy

RCT

Mixed results from RCTs: It
appears that TCZ may work
well in combination with
dexamethasone in severe
cases, but not as
monotherapy

Casirivimab and
imdevimab

Biologic,
monoclonal
antibodies

EUA

RCT

Supported: Reduced viral
load at interim analysis

Bamlanivimab
and etesevimab

Biologic,
monoclonal
antibodies

EUA

RCT

Supported: Phase 2 clinical
trial showed reduction in
viral load

SNG001

Biologic,
interferon

None

RCT

Mixed results: support from
initial RCT but no effect
found in WHO’s Solidarity
trial

Due to the large number of clinical trials currently under examination (Figure 2), not all
candidates are examined here (Table 1). Instead, this review seeks to provide an overview of
the range of mechanisms that have been explored and to examine some prominent candidates
in the context of the pathogenesis of and immune response to SARS-CoV-2. As more research
becomes available, this review will be updated to include additional therapeutics that emerge
and to include new findings that are released about those discussed here. While no therapeutics
or vaccines were developed for SARS-CoV-1 or MERS-CoV, the current state of COVID-19
research suggests that the body of literature produced before and after the emergence of these
viruses has prepared the biomedical community for a rapid response to novel HCoV like SARSCoV-2. As the COVID-19 pandemic continues to be a topic of significant worldwide concern,
more information is expected to become available about pharmaceutical mechanisms that can
be used to combat this, and possibly other, HCoV. These advances therefore not only benefit
the international community’s ability to respond to the current crisis, but are also likely to shape
responses to future viral threats.

Additional Items
Competing Interests
Author

Competing Interests

Last
Reviewed

Halie M. Rando

None

2021-01-20

Nils Wellhausen

None

2020-11-03

Soumita Ghosh

None

2020-11-09

Alexandra J. Lee

None

2020-11-09

Anna Ada Dattoli

None

2020-03-26

Fengling Hu

None

2020-04-08

James Brian Byrd

Funded by FastGrants to conduct a COVID-19-related clinical
trial

2020-11-12

Diane N. Rafizadeh

None

2020-11-11

Yanjun Qi

None

2020-07-09

Yuchen Sun

None

2020-11-11

Jeffrey M. Field

None

2020-11-12

Marouen Ben
Guebila

None

2020-11-11

Nafisa M. Jadavji

None

2020-11-11

Ronan Lordan

None

2020-11-03

Ashwin N. Skelly

None

2020-11-11

Bharath Ramsundar

None

2020-11-11

Christian Brueffer

Employee and shareholder of SAGA Diagnostics AB.

2020-11-11

Jinhui Wang

None

2021-01-21

Rishi Raj Goel

None

2021-01-20

YoSon Park

Now employed by Pfizer (subsequent to contributions to this
project)

2020-01-22

COVID-19 Review
Consortium

None

2021-01-16

Simina M. Boca

None

2020-11-07

Anthony Gitter

Filed a patent application with the Wisconsin Alumni Research
Foundation related to classifying activated T cells

2020-11-10

Casey S. Greene

None

2021-01-20

Author Contributions
Author

Contributions

Halie M. Rando

Project Administration, Writing - Original Draft, Writing - Review & Editing

Nils Wellhausen

Project Administration, Visualization, Writing - Original Draft, Writing Review & Editing

Soumita Ghosh

Writing - Original Draft

Alexandra J. Lee

Writing - Original Draft, Writing - Review & Editing

Anna Ada Dattoli

Writing - Original Draft

Fengling Hu

Writing - Original Draft, Writing - Review & Editing

James Brian Byrd

Writing - Original Draft, Writing - Review & Editing

Diane N. Rafizadeh

Project Administration, Writing - Original Draft, Writing - Review & Editing

Yanjun Qi

Visualization

Yuchen Sun

Visualization

Jeffrey M. Field

Writing - Original Draft, Writing - Review & Editing

Marouen Ben Guebila

Writing - Original Draft

Nafisa M. Jadavji

Supervision, Writing - Original Draft, Writing - Review & Editing

Ronan Lordan

Project Administration, Writing - Original Draft, Writing - Review & Editing

Ashwin N. Skelly

Writing - Review & Editing

Bharath Ramsundar

Writing - Review & Editing

Christian Brueffer

Project Administration, Writing - Review & Editing

Jinhui Wang

Writing - Original Draft

Rishi Raj Goel

Writing - Review & Editing

YoSon Park

Writing - Review & Editing

COVID-19 Review
Consortium

Project Administration

Simina M. Boca

Project Administration, Writing - Review & Editing

Anthony Gitter

Project Administration, Software, Visualization, Writing - Review & Editing

Casey S. Greene

Project Administration, Writing - Review & Editing

Acknowledgements
We thank Nick DeVito for assistance with the Evidence-Based Medicine Data Lab COVID-19
TrialsTracker data and Vincent Rubinetti and Daniel Himmelstein for feedback on and support
with Manubot. We thank Yael Evelyn Marshall who contributed writing (original draft) as well as
reviewing and editing of pieces of the text but who did not formally approve the manuscript, as
well as Ronnie Russell, who contributed text to and helped develop the structure of the
manuscript early in the writing process and Matthias Fax who helped with writing and editing
text related to diagnostics. We are grateful to the following contributors for reviewing pieces of
the text: Nadia Danilova, James Eberwine and Ipsita Krishnan.

References
1. Pathogenesis, Symptomatology, and Transmission of SARS-CoV-2 through analysis of
Viral Genomics and Structure
Halie M. Rando, Adam L. MacLean, Alexandra J. Lee, Sandipan Ray, Vikas Bansal, Ashwin N.
Skelly, Elizabeth Sell, John J. Dziak, Lamonica Shinholster, Lucy D’Agostino McGowan, …
Casey S. Greene
arXiv (2021-02-15) https://arxiv.org/abs/2102.01521
2. Airborne Transmission of SARS-CoV-2
Michael Klompas, Meghan A. Baker, Chanu Rhee
JAMA (2020-08-04) https://doi.org/gg4ttq
DOI: 10.1001/jama.2020.12458

3. Exaggerated risk of transmission of COVID-19 by fomites
Emanuel Goldman
The Lancet Infectious Diseases (2020-08) https://doi.org/gg6br7
DOI: 10.1016/s1473-3099(20)30561-2 · PMID: 32628907 · PMCID: PMC7333993
4. Vaccine Development Strategies for SARS-CoV-2
COVID-19 Review Consortium
Manubot (2021-02-19) https://greenelab.github.io/covid19review/v/d9d90fd7e88ef547fb4cbed0ef73baef5fee7fb5/#vaccine-development-strategies-forsars-cov-2
5. COVID-19 Data Repository
Center for Systems Science and Engineering at Johns Hopkins University
GitHub https://github.com/CSSEGISandData/COVID19/tree/master/csse_covid_19_data/csse_covid_19_time_series
6. Three Emerging Coronaviruses in Two Decades
Jeannette Guarner
American Journal of Clinical Pathology (2020-04) https://doi.org/ggppq3
DOI: 10.1093/ajcp/aqaa029 · PMID: 32053148 · PMCID: PMC7109697
7. SARS and MERS: recent insights into emerging coronaviruses
Emmie de Wit, Neeltje van Doremalen, Darryl Falzarano, Vincent J. Munster
Nature Reviews Microbiology (2016-06-27) https://doi.org/f8v5cv
DOI: 10.1038/nrmicro.2016.81 · PMID: 27344959 · PMCID: PMC7097822
8. A Novel Coronavirus Genome Identified in a Cluster of Pneumonia Cases — Wuhan,
China 2019−2020
Wenjie Tan, Xiang Zhao, Xuejun Ma, Wenling Wang, Peihua Niu, Wenbo Xu, George F. Gao,
Guizhen Wu, MHC Key Laboratory of Biosafety, National Institute for Viral Disease Control and
Prevention, China CDC, Beijing, China, Center for Biosafety Mega-Science, Chinese Academy
of Sciences, Beijing, China
China CDC Weekly (2020) https://doi.org/gg8z47
DOI: 10.46234/ccdcw2020.017
9. Genomic characterisation and epidemiology of 2019 novel coronavirus: implications
for virus origins and receptor binding
Roujian Lu, Xiang Zhao, Juan Li, Peihua Niu, Bo Yang, Honglong Wu, Wenling Wang, Hao
Song, Baoying Huang, Na Zhu, … Wenjie Tan
The Lancet (2020-02) https://doi.org/ggjr43
DOI: 10.1016/s0140-6736(20)30251-8
10. Isolation of a Novel Coronavirus from a Man with Pneumonia in Saudi Arabia
Ali M. Zaki, Sander van Boheemen, Theo M. Bestebroer, Albert D. M. E. Osterhaus, Ron A. M.
Fouchier
New England Journal of Medicine (2012-11-08) https://doi.org/f4czx5
DOI: 10.1056/nejmoa1211721 · PMID: 23075143

11. Causes of Death and Comorbidities in Patients with COVID-19
Sefer Elezkurtaj, Selina Greuel, Jana Ihlow, Edward Michaelis, Philip Bischoff, Catarina Alisa
Kunze, Bruno Valentin Sinn, Manuela Gerhold, Kathrin Hauptmann, Barbara Ingold-Heppner, …
David Horst
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory (2020-06-17) https://doi.org/gg926j
DOI: 10.1101/2020.06.15.20131540
12. Evidence-Based Medicine Data Lab COVID-19 TrialsTracker
Nick DeVito, Peter Inglesby
GitHub (2020-03-29) https://github.com/ebmdatalab/covid_trials_tracker-covid
DOI: 10.5281/zenodo.3732709
13. Small Molecules vs Biologics | Drug Development Differences
Nuventra Pharma Sciences2525 Meridian Parkway, Suite 200 Durham
PK / PD and Clinical Pharmacology Consultants (2020-05-13)
https://www.nuventra.com/resources/blog/small-molecules-versus-biologics/
14. Drug Discovery: A Historical Perspective
J. Drews
Science (2000-03-17) https://doi.org/d6bvp7
DOI: 10.1126/science.287.5460.1960 · PMID: 10720314
15. Introduction to modern virology
N. J. Dimmock, A. J. Easton, K. N. Leppard
Blackwell Pub (2007)
ISBN: 9781405136457
16. Coronaviruses
Helena Jane Maier, Erica Bickerton, Paul Britton (editors)
Methods in Molecular Biology (2015) https://doi.org/ggqfqx
DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4939-2438-7 · PMID: 25870870 · ISBN: 9781493924370
17. The potential chemical structure of anti-SARS-CoV-2 RNA-dependent RNA
polymerase
Jrhau Lung, Yu-Shih Lin, Yao-Hsu Yang, Yu-Lun Chou, Li-Hsin Shu, Yu-Ching Cheng, Hung Te
Liu, Ching-Yuan Wu
Journal of Medical Virology (2020-03-18) https://doi.org/ggp6fm
DOI: 10.1002/jmv.25761 · PMID: 32167173
18. Broad-spectrum coronavirus antiviral drug discovery
Allison L. Totura, Sina Bavari
Expert Opinion on Drug Discovery (2019-03-08) https://doi.org/gg74z5
DOI: 10.1080/17460441.2019.1581171 · PMID: 30849247 · PMCID: PMC7103675
19. Favipiravir
DrugBank
(2020-06-12) https://www.drugbank.ca/drugs/DB12466

20. In Vitro and In Vivo Activities of Anti-Influenza Virus Compound T-705
Y. Furuta, K. Takahashi, Y. Fukuda, M. Kuno, T. Kamiyama, K. Kozaki, N. Nomura, H. Egawa,
S. Minami, Y. Watanabe, … K. Shiraki
Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy (2002-04) https://doi.org/cndw7n
DOI: 10.1128/aac.46.4.977-981.2002 · PMID: 11897578 · PMCID: PMC127093
21. Efficacy of Orally Administered T-705 on Lethal Avian Influenza A (H5N1) Virus
Infections in Mice
Robert W. Sidwell, Dale L. Barnard, Craig W. Day, Donald F. Smee, Kevin W. Bailey, Min-Hui
Wong, John D. Morrey, Yousuke Furuta
Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy (2007-03) https://doi.org/dm9xr2
DOI: 10.1128/aac.01051-06 · PMID: 17194832 · PMCID: PMC1803113
22. Favipiravir (T-705), a broad spectrum inhibitor of viral RNA polymerase
Yousuke FURUTA, Takashi KOMENO, Takaaki NAKAMURA
Proceedings of the Japan Academy, Series B (2017) https://doi.org/gbxcxw
DOI: 10.2183/pjab.93.027 · PMID: 28769016 · PMCID: PMC5713175
23. Mechanism of Action of T-705 against Influenza Virus
Yousuke Furuta, Kazumi Takahashi, Masako Kuno-Maekawa, Hidehiro Sangawa, Sayuri
Uehara, Kyo Kozaki, Nobuhiko Nomura, Hiroyuki Egawa, Kimiyasu Shiraki
Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy (2005-03) https://doi.org/dgbwdh
DOI: 10.1128/aac.49.3.981-986.2005 · PMID: 15728892 · PMCID: PMC549233
24. Activity of T-705 in a Hamster Model of Yellow Fever Virus Infection in Comparison
with That of a Chemically Related Compound, T-1106
Justin G. Julander, Kristiina Shafer, Donald F. Smee, John D. Morrey, Yousuke Furuta
Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy (2009-01) https://doi.org/brknds
DOI: 10.1128/aac.01074-08 · PMID: 18955536 · PMCID: PMC2612161
25. In Vitro and In Vivo Activities of T-705 against Arenavirus and Bunyavirus Infections
Brian B. Gowen, Min-Hui Wong, Kie-Hoon Jung, Andrew B. Sanders, Michelle Mendenhall,
Kevin W. Bailey, Yousuke Furuta, Robert W. Sidwell
Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy (2007-09) https://doi.org/d98c87
DOI: 10.1128/aac.00356-07 · PMID: 17606691 · PMCID: PMC2043187
26. Favipiravir (T-705) inhibits in vitro norovirus replication
J. Rocha-Pereira, D. Jochmans, K. Dallmeier, P. Leyssen, M. S. J. Nascimento, J. Neyts
Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications (2012-08) https://doi.org/f369j7
DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.07.034 · PMID: 22809499
27. T-705 (Favipiravir) Inhibition of Arenavirus Replication in Cell Culture
Michelle Mendenhall, Andrew Russell, Terry Juelich, Emily L. Messina, Donald F. Smee,
Alexander N. Freiberg, Michael R. Holbrook, Yousuke Furuta, Juan-Carlos de la Torre, Jack H.
Nunberg, Brian B. Gowen
Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy (2011-02) https://doi.org/cppwsc
DOI: 10.1128/aac.01219-10 · PMID: 21115797 · PMCID: PMC3028760

28. The evolution of nucleoside analogue antivirals: A review for chemists and nonchemists. Part 1: Early structural modifications to the nucleoside scaffold
Katherine L. Seley-Radtke, Mary K. Yates
Antiviral Research (2018-06) https://doi.org/gdpn35
DOI: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2018.04.004 · PMID: 29649496 · PMCID: PMC6396324
29. The Ambiguous Base-Pairing and High Substrate Efficiency of T-705 (Favipiravir)
Ribofuranosyl 5′-Triphosphate towards Influenza A Virus Polymerase
Zhinan Jin, Lucas K. Smith, Vivek K. Rajwanshi, Baek Kim, Jerome Deval
PLoS ONE (2013-07-10) https://doi.org/f5br92
DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0068347 · PMID: 23874596 · PMCID: PMC3707847
30. Experimental Treatment with Favipiravir for COVID-19: An Open-Label Control Study
Qingxian Cai, Minghui Yang, Dongjing Liu, Jun Chen, Dan Shu, Junxia Xia, Xuejiao Liao,
Yuanbo Gu, Qiue Cai, Yang Yang, … Lei Liu
Engineering (2020-10) https://doi.org/ggpprd
DOI: 10.1016/j.eng.2020.03.007 · PMID: 32346491
31. Repurposed Antiviral Drugs for Covid-19 — Interim WHO Solidarity Trial Results
WHO Solidarity Trial Consortium
New England Journal of Medicine (2020-12-02) https://doi.org/ghnhnw
DOI: 10.1056/nejmoa2023184 · PMID: 33264556 · PMCID: PMC7727327
32. Lopinavir–ritonavir in patients admitted to hospital with COVID-19 (RECOVERY): a
randomised, controlled, open-label, platform trial
Peter W Horby, Marion Mafham, Jennifer L Bell, Louise Linsell, Natalie Staplin, Jonathan
Emberson, Adrian Palfreeman, Jason Raw, Einas Elmahi, Benjamin Prudon, … Martin J
Landray
The Lancet (2020-10) https://doi.org/fnx2
DOI: 10.1016/s0140-6736(20)32013-4 · PMID: 33031764 · PMCID: PMC7535623
33. A Large, Simple Trial Leading to Complex Questions
David P. Harrington, Lindsey R. Baden, Joseph W. Hogan
New England Journal of Medicine (2020-12-02) https://doi.org/ghnhnx
DOI: 10.1056/nejme2034294 · PMID: 33264557 · PMCID: PMC7727323
34. Retracted coronavirus (COVID-19) papers
Retraction Watch
(2020-04-29) https://retractionwatch.com/retracted-coronavirus-covid-19-papers/
35. Clinical Outcomes and Plasma Concentrations of Baloxavir Marboxil and Favipiravir
in COVID-19 Patients: An Exploratory Randomized, Controlled Trial
Yan Lou, Lin Liu, Hangping Yao, Xingjiang Hu, Junwei Su, Kaijin Xu, Rui Luo, Xi Yang, Lingjuan
He, Xiaoyang Lu, … Yunqing Qiu
European Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences (2021-02) https://doi.org/ghx88n
DOI: 10.1016/j.ejps.2020.105631 · PMID: 33115675 · PMCID: PMC7585719

36. Efficacy of favipiravir in COVID-19 treatment: a multi-center randomized study
Hany M. Dabbous, Sherief Abd-Elsalam, Manal H. El-Sayed, Ahmed F. Sherief, Fatma F. S.
Ebeid, Mohamed Samir Abd El Ghafar, Shaimaa Soliman, Mohamed Elbahnasawy, Rehab
Badawi, Mohamed Awad Tageldin
Archives of Virology (2021-01-25) https://doi.org/ghx874
DOI: 10.1007/s00705-021-04956-9 · PMID: 33492523 · PMCID: PMC7829645
37. AVIFAVIR for Treatment of Patients With Moderate Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID19): Interim Results of a Phase II/III Multicenter Randomized Clinical Trial
Andrey A Ivashchenko, Kirill A Dmitriev, Natalia V Vostokova, Valeria N Azarova, Andrew A
Blinow, Alina N Egorova, Ivan G Gordeev, Alexey P Ilin, Ruben N Karapetian, Dmitry V
Kravchenko, … Alexandre V Ivachtchenko
Clinical Infectious Diseases (2020-08-09) https://doi.org/ghx9c2
DOI: 10.1093/cid/ciaa1176 · PMID: 32770240 · PMCID: PMC7454388
38. A review of the safety of favipiravir – a potential treatment in the COVID-19
pandemic?
Victoria Pilkington, Toby Pepperrell, Andrew Hill
Journal of Virus Eradication (2020-04) https://doi.org/ftgm
DOI: 10.1016/s2055-6640(20)30016-9 · PMID: 32405421 · PMCID: PMC7331506
39. Remdesivir EUA Letter of Authorization
Denise M Hinton
(2020-05-01) https://www.fda.gov/media/137564/download
40. A Phase 3 Randomized Study to Evaluate the Safety and Antiviral Activity of
Remdesivir (GS-5734™) in Participants With Severe COVID-19
Gilead Sciences
clinicaltrials.gov (2020-12-15) https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT04292899
41. A Multicenter, Adaptive, Randomized Blinded Controlled Trial of the Safety and
Efficacy of Investigational Therapeutics for the Treatment of COVID-19 in Hospitalized
Adults
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID)
clinicaltrials.gov (2020-12-05) https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT04280705
42. Remdesivir for the Treatment of Covid-19 — Final Report
John H. Beigel, Kay M. Tomashek, Lori E. Dodd, Aneesh K. Mehta, Barry S. Zingman, Andre C.
Kalil, Elizabeth Hohmann, Helen Y. Chu, Annie Luetkemeyer, Susan Kline, … H. Clifford Lane
New England Journal of Medicine (2020-11-05) https://doi.org/dwkd
DOI: 10.1056/nejmoa2007764 · PMID: 32445440 · PMCID: PMC7262788
43. Compassionate Use of Remdesivir for Patients with Severe Covid-19
Jonathan Grein, Norio Ohmagari, Daniel Shin, George Diaz, Erika Asperges, Antonella
Castagna, Torsten Feldt, Gary Green, Margaret L. Green, François-Xavier Lescure, … Timothy
Flanigan

New England Journal of Medicine (2020-06-11) https://doi.org/ggrm99
DOI: 10.1056/nejmoa2007016 · PMID: 32275812 · PMCID: PMC7169476
44. The antiviral compound remdesivir potently inhibits RNA-dependent RNA polymerase
from Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus
Calvin J. Gordon, Egor P. Tchesnokov, Joy Y. Feng, Danielle P. Porter, Matthias Götte
Journal of Biological Chemistry (2020-04) https://doi.org/ggqm6x
DOI: 10.1074/jbc.ac120.013056 · PMID: 32094225
45. Coronavirus Susceptibility to the Antiviral Remdesivir (GS-5734) Is Mediated by the
Viral Polymerase and the Proofreading Exoribonuclease
Maria L. Agostini, Erica L. Andres, Amy C. Sims, Rachel L. Graham, Timothy P. Sheahan,
Xiaotao Lu, Everett Clinton Smith, James Brett Case, Joy Y. Feng, Robert Jordan, … Mark R.
Denison
mBio (2018-03-06) https://doi.org/gc45v6
DOI: 10.1128/mbio.00221-18 · PMID: 29511076 · PMCID: PMC5844999
46. Remdesivir and chloroquine effectively inhibit the recently emerged novel
coronavirus (2019-nCoV) in vitro
Manli Wang, Ruiyuan Cao, Leike Zhang, Xinglou Yang, Jia Liu, Mingyue Xu, Zhengli Shi,
Zhihong Hu, Wu Zhong, Gengfu Xiao
Cell Research (2020-02-04) https://doi.org/ggkbsg
DOI: 10.1038/s41422-020-0282-0 · PMID: 32020029 · PMCID: PMC7054408
47. A Randomized, Controlled Trial of Ebola Virus Disease Therapeutics
Sabue Mulangu, Lori E. Dodd, Richard T. Davey, Olivier Tshiani Mbaya, Michael Proschan,
Daniel Mukadi, Mariano Lusakibanza Manzo, Didier Nzolo, Antoine Tshomba Oloma, Augustin
Ibanda, … the PALM Writing Group
New England Journal of Medicine (2019-12-12) https://doi.org/ggqmx4
DOI: 10.1056/nejmoa1910993 · PMID: 31774950
48. Broad-spectrum antiviral GS-5734 inhibits both epidemic and zoonotic coronaviruses
Timothy P. Sheahan, Amy C. Sims, Rachel L. Graham, Vineet D. Menachery, Lisa E. Gralinski,
James B. Case, Sarah R. Leist, Krzysztof Pyrc, Joy Y. Feng, Iva Trantcheva, … Ralph S. Baric
Science Translational Medicine (2017-06-28) https://doi.org/gc3grb
DOI: 10.1126/scitranslmed.aal3653 · PMID: 28659436 · PMCID: PMC5567817
49. Did an experimental drug help a U.S. coronavirus patient?
Jon Cohen
Science (2020-03-13) https://doi.org/ggqm62
DOI: 10.1126/science.abb7243
50. First 12 patients with coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) in the United States
Stephanie A. Kujawski, Karen K Wong, Jennifer P. Collins, Lauren Epstein, Marie E. Killerby,
Claire M. Midgley, Glen R. Abedi, N. Seema Ahmed, Olivia Almendares, Francisco N. Alvarez,
… The COVID-19 Investigation Team

Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory (2020-03-12) https://doi.org/ggqm6z
DOI: 10.1101/2020.03.09.20032896
51. First Case of 2019 Novel Coronavirus in the United States
Michelle L. Holshue, Chas DeBolt, Scott Lindquist, Kathy H. Lofy, John Wiesman, Hollianne
Bruce, Christopher Spitters, Keith Ericson, Sara Wilkerson, Ahmet Tural, … Satish K. Pillai
New England Journal of Medicine (2020-03-05) https://doi.org/ggjvr6
DOI: 10.1056/nejmoa2001191 · PMID: 32004427 · PMCID: PMC7092802
52. Remdesivir for 5 or 10 Days in Patients with Severe Covid-19
Jason D. Goldman, David C. B. Lye, David S. Hui, Kristen M. Marks, Raffaele Bruno, Rocio
Montejano, Christoph D. Spinner, Massimo Galli, Mi-Young Ahn, Ronald G. Nahass, … Aruna
Subramanian
New England Journal of Medicine (2020-11-05) https://doi.org/ggz7qv
DOI: 10.1056/nejmoa2015301 · PMID: 32459919 · PMCID: PMC7377062
53. A Phase 3 Randomized Study to Evaluate the Safety and Antiviral Activity of
Remdesivir (GS-5734™) in Participants With Moderate COVID-19 Compared to Standard
of Care Treatment
Gilead Sciences
clinicaltrials.gov (2021-01-21) https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT04292730
54. Multi-centre, adaptive, randomized trial of the safety and efficacy of treatments of
COVID-19 in hospitalized adults
EU Clinical Trials Register
(2020-03-09) https://www.clinicaltrialsregister.eu/ctr-search/trial/2020-000936-23/FR
55. A Trial of Remdesivir in Adults With Mild and Moderate COVID-19 - Full Text View ClinicalTrials.gov https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT04252664
56. A Phase 3 Randomized, Double-blind, Placebo-controlled, Multicenter Study to
Evaluate the Efficacy and Safety of Remdesivir in Hospitalized Adult Patients With
Severe COVID-19.
Bin Cao
clinicaltrials.gov (2020-04-13) https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT04257656
57. FDA Approves First Treatment for COVID-19
Office of the Commissioner
FDA (2020-10-22) https://www.fda.gov/news-events/press-announcements/fda-approves-firsttreatment-covid-19
58. Gilead Sciences Statement on the Solidarity Trial https://www.gilead.com/news-andpress/company-statements/gilead-sciences-statement-on-the-solidarity-trial
59. Conflicting results on the efficacy of remdesivir in hospitalized Covid-19 patients:
comment on the Adaptive Covid-19 Treatment Trial
Leonarda Galiuto, Carlo Patrono

European Heart Journal (2020-12-07) https://doi.org/ghp4kw
DOI: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehaa934 · PMID: 33306101 · PMCID: PMC7799042
60. The “very, very bad look” of remdesivir, the first FDA-approved COVID-19 drug
Jon Cohen, Kai KupferschmidtOct. 28, 2020, 7:05 Pm
Science | AAAS (2020-10-28) https://www.sciencemag.org/news/2020/10/very-very-bad-lookremdesivir-first-fda-approved-covid-19-drug
61. Effect of Remdesivir vs Standard Care on Clinical Status at 11 Days in Patients With
Moderate COVID-19
Christoph D. Spinner, Robert L. Gottlieb, Gerard J. Criner, José Ramón Arribas López, Anna
Maria Cattelan, Alex Soriano Viladomiu, Onyema Ogbuagu, Prashant Malhotra, Kathleen M.
Mullane, Antonella Castagna, … for the GS-US-540-5774 Investigators
JAMA (2020-09-15) https://doi.org/ghhz6g
DOI: 10.1001/jama.2020.16349 · PMID: 32821939 · PMCID: PMC7442954
62. Baricitinib plus Remdesivir for Hospitalized Adults with Covid-19
Andre C. Kalil, Thomas F. Patterson, Aneesh K. Mehta, Kay M. Tomashek, Cameron R. Wolfe,
Varduhi Ghazaryan, Vincent C. Marconi, Guillermo M. Ruiz-Palacios, Lanny Hsieh, Susan Kline,
… John H. Beigel
New England Journal of Medicine (2020-12-11) https://doi.org/ghpbd2
DOI: 10.1056/nejmoa2031994 · PMID: 33306283 · PMCID: PMC7745180
63. Letter of Authorization: EUA for baricitinib (Olumiant), in combination with remdesivir
(Veklury), for the treatment of suspected or laboratory confirmed coronavirus disease
2019 (COVID-19)
Denise M. Hinton
Food and Drug Administration (2020-01-19) https://www.fda.gov/media/143822/download
64. Proteases Essential for Human Influenza Virus Entry into Cells and Their Inhibitors as
Potential Therapeutic Agents
Hiroshi Kido, Yuushi Okumura, Hiroshi Yamada, Trong Quang Le, Mihiro Yano
Current Pharmaceutical Design (2007-02-01) https://doi.org/bts3xp
DOI: 10.2174/138161207780162971 · PMID: 17311557
65. Protease inhibitors targeting coronavirus and filovirus entry
Yanchen Zhou, Punitha Vedantham, Kai Lu, Juliet Agudelo, Ricardo Carrion, Jerritt W.
Nunneley, Dale Barnard, Stefan Pöhlmann, James H. McKerrow, Adam R. Renslo, Graham
Simmons
Antiviral Research (2015-04) https://doi.org/ggr984
DOI: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2015.01.011 · PMID: 25666761 · PMCID: PMC4774534
66. SARS-CoV-2 Cell Entry Depends on ACE2 and TMPRSS2 and Is Blocked by a
Clinically Proven Protease Inhibitor
Markus Hoffmann, Hannah Kleine-Weber, Simon Schroeder, Nadine Krüger, Tanja Herrler,
Sandra Erichsen, Tobias S. Schiergens, Georg Herrler, Nai-Huei Wu, Andreas Nitsche, …
Stefan Pöhlmann

Cell (2020-04) https://doi.org/ggnq74
DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2020.02.052 · PMID: 32142651 · PMCID: PMC7102627
67. Structure of Mpro from SARS-CoV-2 and discovery of its inhibitors
Zhenming Jin, Xiaoyu Du, Yechun Xu, Yongqiang Deng, Meiqin Liu, Yao Zhao, Bing Zhang,
Xiaofeng Li, Leike Zhang, Chao Peng, … Haitao Yang
Nature (2020-04-09) https://doi.org/ggrp42
DOI: 10.1038/s41586-020-2223-y · PMID: 32272481
68. Design of Wide-Spectrum Inhibitors Targeting Coronavirus Main Proteases
Haitao Yang, Weiqing Xie, Xiaoyu Xue, Kailin Yang, Jing Ma, Wenxue Liang, Qi Zhao, Zhe
Zhou, Duanqing Pei, John Ziebuhr, … Zihe Rao
PLoS Biology (2005-09-06) https://doi.org/bcm9k7
DOI: 10.1371/journal.pbio.0030324 · PMID: 16128623 · PMCID: PMC1197287
69. The newly emerged SARS-Like coronavirus HCoV-EMC also has an “Achilles’ heel”:
current effective inhibitor targeting a 3C-like protease
Zhilin Ren, Liming Yan, Ning Zhang, Yu Guo, Cheng Yang, Zhiyong Lou, Zihe Rao
Protein & Cell (2013-04-03) https://doi.org/ggr7vh
DOI: 10.1007/s13238-013-2841-3 · PMID: 23549610 · PMCID: PMC4875521
70. Crystal structure of SARS-CoV-2 main protease provides a basis for design of
improved α-ketoamide inhibitors
Linlin Zhang, Daizong Lin, Xinyuanyuan Sun, Ute Curth, Christian Drosten, Lucie Sauerhering,
Stephan Becker, Katharina Rox, Rolf Hilgenfeld
Science (2020-04-24) https://doi.org/ggp9sb
DOI: 10.1126/science.abb3405 · PMID: 32198291 · PMCID: PMC7164518
71. Ebselen, a promising antioxidant drug: mechanisms of action and targets of
biological pathways
Gajendra Kumar Azad, Raghuvir S. Tomar
Molecular Biology Reports (2014-05-28) https://doi.org/f6cnq3
DOI: 10.1007/s11033-014-3417-x · PMID: 24867080
72. Safety and efficacy of ebselen for the prevention of noise-induced hearing loss: a
randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, phase 2 trial
Jonathan Kil, Edward Lobarinas, Christopher Spankovich, Scott K Griffiths, Patrick J Antonelli,
Eric D Lynch, Colleen G Le Prell
The Lancet (2017-09) https://doi.org/gbwnbv
DOI: 10.1016/s0140-6736(17)31791-9
73. Potential therapeutic use of ebselen for COVID-19 and other respiratory viral
infections
Helmut Sies, Michael J. Parnham
Free Radical Biology and Medicine (2020-08) https://doi.org/ghdx7s
DOI: 10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2020.06.032 · PMID: 32598985 · PMCID: PMC7319625

74. Selenium Deficiency Is Associated with Mortality Risk from COVID-19
Arash Moghaddam, Raban Arved Heller, Qian Sun, Julian Seelig, Asan Cherkezov, Linda
Seibert, Julian Hackler, Petra Seemann, Joachim Diegmann, Maximilian Pilz, … Lutz
Schomburg
Nutrients (2020-07-16) https://doi.org/gg5kbc
DOI: 10.3390/nu12072098 · PMID: 32708526 · PMCID: PMC7400921
75. Selenium and viral infection: are there lessons for COVID-19?
Giovanna Bermano, Catherine Méplan, Derry K. Mercer, John E. Hesketh
British Journal of Nutrition (2020-08-06) https://doi.org/ghdx7w
DOI: 10.1017/s0007114520003128 · PMID: 32758306 · PMCID: PMC7503044
76. Selenium and selenoproteins in viral infection with potential relevance to COVID-19
Jinsong Zhang, Ramy Saad, Ethan Will Taylor, Margaret P. Rayman
Redox Biology (2020-10) https://doi.org/ghdx7t
DOI: 10.1016/j.redox.2020.101715 · PMID: 32992282 · PMCID: PMC7481318
77. FDA Clears SPI’s Ebselen For Phase II COVID-19 Trials
Contract Pharma
https://www.contractpharma.com/contents/view_breaking-news/2020-08-31/fda-clears-spisebselen-for-phase-ii-covid-19-trials/
78. A Phase 2, Randomized, Double-Blind, Placebo-Controlled, Dose Escalation Study to
Evaluate the Safety and Efficacy of SPI-1005 in Moderate COVID-19 Patients
Sound Pharmaceuticals, Incorporated
clinicaltrials.gov (2020-11-06) https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT04484025
79. A Phase 2, Randomized, Double-Blind, Placebo-Controlled, Dose Escalation Study to
Evaluate the Safety and Efficacy of SPI-1005 in Severe COVID-19 Patients
Sound Pharmaceuticals, Incorporated
clinicaltrials.gov (2020-11-06) https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT04483973
80. Target discovery of ebselen with a biotinylated probe
Zhenzhen Chen, Zhongyao Jiang, Nan Chen, Qian Shi, Lili Tong, Fanpeng Kong, Xiufen
Cheng, Hao Chen, Chu Wang, Bo Tang
Chemical Communications (2018) https://doi.org/ggrtcm
DOI: 10.1039/c8cc04258f · PMID: 30091742
81. Curing a viral infection by targeting the host: The example of cyclophilin inhibitors
Kai Lin, Philippe Gallay
Antiviral Research (2013-07) https://doi.org/f4237c
DOI: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2013.03.020 · PMID: 23578729 · PMCID: PMC4332838
82. Lisinopril - Drug Usage Statistics
ClinCalc DrugStats Database
https://clincalc.com/DrugStats/Drugs/Lisinopril

83. Hypertension Hot Potato — Anatomy of the Angiotensin-Receptor Blocker Recalls
J. Brian Byrd, Glenn M. Chertow, Vivek Bhalla
New England Journal of Medicine (2019-04-25) https://doi.org/ggvc7g
DOI: 10.1056/nejmp1901657 · PMID: 30865819 · PMCID: PMC7066505
84. ACE Inhibitor and ARB Utilization and Expenditures in the Medicaid Fee-For-Service
Program from 1991 to 2008
Boyang Bian, Christina M. L. Kelton, Jeff J. Guo, Patricia R. Wigle
Journal of Managed Care Pharmacy (2010-11) https://doi.org/gh294c
DOI: 10.18553/jmcp.2010.16.9.671 · PMID: 21067253
85. Hypertension, the renin–angiotensin system, and the risk of lower respiratory tract
infections and lung injury: implications for COVID-19
Reinhold Kreutz, Engi Abd El-Hady Algharably, Michel Azizi, Piotr Dobrowolski, Tomasz Guzik,
Andrzej Januszewicz, Alexandre Persu, Aleksander Prejbisz, Thomas Günther Riemer, JiGuang Wang, Michel Burnier
Cardiovascular Research (2020-08-01) https://doi.org/ggtwpj
DOI: 10.1093/cvr/cvaa097 · PMID: 32293003 · PMCID: PMC7184480
86. Angiotensin converting enzyme 2 activity and human atrial fibrillation: increased
plasma angiotensin converting enzyme 2 activity is associated with atrial fibrillation and
more advanced left atrial structural remodelling
Tomos E. Walters, Jonathan M. Kalman, Sheila K. Patel, Megan Mearns, Elena Velkoska,
Louise M. Burrell
Europace (2016-10-12) https://doi.org/gbt2jw
DOI: 10.1093/europace/euw246 · PMID: 27738071
87. Cardiovascular Disease, Drug Therapy, and Mortality in Covid-19
Mandeep R. Mehra, Sapan S. Desai, SreyRam Kuy, Timothy D. Henry, Amit N. Patel
New England Journal of Medicine (2020-06-18) https://doi.org/ggtp6v
DOI: 10.1056/nejmoa2007621 · PMID: 32356626 · PMCID: PMC7206931
88. Retraction: Cardiovascular Disease, Drug Therapy, and Mortality in Covid-19. N Engl
J Med. DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa2007621.
Mandeep R. Mehra, Sapan S. Desai, SreyRam Kuy, Timothy D. Henry, Amit N. Patel
New England Journal of Medicine (2020-06-25) https://doi.org/ggzkpj
DOI: 10.1056/nejmc2021225 · PMID: 32501665 · PMCID: PMC7274164
89. Response by Cohen et al to Letter Regarding Article, “Association of Inpatient Use of
Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme Inhibitors and Angiotensin II Receptor Blockers With
Mortality Among Patients With Hypertension Hospitalized With COVID-19”
Jordana B. Cohen, Thomas C. Hanff, Andrew M. South, Matthew A. Sparks, Swapnil Hiremath,
Adam P. Bress, J. Brian Byrd, Julio A. Chirinos
Circulation Research (2020-06-05) https://doi.org/gg3xsg
DOI: 10.1161/circresaha.120.317205 · PMID: 32496917 · PMCID: PMC7265880

90. Sound Science before Quick Judgement Regarding RAS Blockade in COVID-19
Matthew A. Sparks, Andrew South, Paul Welling, J. Matt Luther, Jordana Cohen, James Brian
Byrd, Louise M. Burrell, Daniel Batlle, Laurie Tomlinson, Vivek Bhalla, … Swapnil Hiremath
Clinical Journal of the American Society of Nephrology (2020-05-07) https://doi.org/ggq8gn
DOI: 10.2215/cjn.03530320 · PMID: 32220930 · PMCID: PMC7269218
91. Elimination or Prolongation of ACE Inhibitors and ARB in Coronavirus Disease 2019 Full Text View - ClinicalTrials.gov https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT04338009
92. Stopping ACE-inhibitors in COVID-19 - Full Text View - ClinicalTrials.gov
https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT04353596
93. Losartan for Patients With COVID-19 Not Requiring Hospitalization - Full Text View ClinicalTrials.gov https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT04311177
94. Losartan for Patients With COVID-19 Requiring Hospitalization - Full Text View ClinicalTrials.gov https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT04312009
95. The CORONAvirus Disease 2019 Angiotensin Converting Enzyme
Inhibitor/Angiotensin Receptor Blocker InvestigatiON (CORONACION) Randomized
Clinical Trial
Prof John William McEvoy
clinicaltrials.gov (2020-06-26) https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT04330300
96. Ramipril for the Treatment of COVID-19 - Full Text View - ClinicalTrials.gov
https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT04366050
97. Angiotensin Receptor Blockers and Angiotensin-converting Enzyme Inhibitors and
Adverse Outcomes in Patients With COVID19 - Full Text View - ClinicalTrials.gov
https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT04364893
98. Continuation versus discontinuation of renin–angiotensin system inhibitors in
patients admitted to hospital with COVID-19: a prospective, randomised, open-label trial
Jordana B Cohen, Thomas C Hanff, Preethi William, Nancy Sweitzer, Nelson R RosadoSantander, Carola Medina, Juan E Rodriguez-Mori, Nicolás Renna, Tara I Chang, Vicente
Corrales-Medina, … Julio A Chirinos
The Lancet Respiratory Medicine (2021-01) https://doi.org/fvgt
DOI: 10.1016/s2213-2600(20)30558-0 · PMID: 33422263 · PMCID: PMC7832152
99. Effect of Discontinuing vs Continuing Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme Inhibitors and
Angiotensin II Receptor Blockers on Days Alive and Out of the Hospital in Patients
Admitted With COVID-19
Renato D. Lopes, Ariane V. S. Macedo, Pedro G. M. de Barros E Silva, Renata J. MollBernardes, Tiago M. dos Santos, Lilian Mazza, André Feldman, Guilherme D’Andréa Saba
Arruda, Denílson C. de Albuquerque, Angelina S. Camiletti, … BRACE CORONA Investigators
JAMA (2021-01-19) https://doi.org/gh2tw5
DOI: 10.1001/jama.2020.25864 · PMID: 33464336 · PMCID: PMC7816106

100. The Coronavirus Conundrum: ACE2 and Hypertension Edition
Matthew Sparks, Swapnil Hiremath
NephJC http://www.nephjc.com/news/covidace2
101. Lysosomotropic agents as HCV entry inhibitors
Usman A Ashfaq, Tariq Javed, Sidra Rehman, Zafar Nawaz, Sheikh Riazuddin
Virology Journal (2011-04-12) https://doi.org/dr5g4m
DOI: 10.1186/1743-422x-8-163 · PMID: 21481279 · PMCID: PMC3090357
102. New concepts in antimalarial use and mode of action in dermatology
Sunil Kalia, Jan P Dutz
Dermatologic Therapy (2007-07) https://doi.org/fv69cb
DOI: 10.1111/j.1529-8019.2007.00131.x · PMID: 17970883 · PMCID: PMC7163426
103. PLAQUENIL- hydroxychloroquine sulfate tablet
DailyMed
(2020-08-12) https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=34496b43-05a2-45fba769-52b12e099341
104. Chloroquine is a potent inhibitor of SARS coronavirus infection and spread
Martin J Vincent, Eric Bergeron, Suzanne Benjannet, Bobbie R Erickson, Pierre E Rollin,
Thomas G Ksiazek, Nabil G Seidah, Stuart T Nichol
Virology Journal (2005) https://doi.org/dvbds4
DOI: 10.1186/1743-422x-2-69 · PMID: 16115318 · PMCID: PMC1232869
105. In Vitro Antiviral Activity and Projection of Optimized Dosing Design of
Hydroxychloroquine for the Treatment of Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome
Coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2)
Xueting Yao, Fei Ye, Miao Zhang, Cheng Cui, Baoying Huang, Peihua Niu, Xu Liu, Li Zhao,
Erdan Dong, Chunli Song, … Dongyang Liu
Clinical Infectious Diseases (2020-08-01) https://doi.org/ggpx7z
DOI: 10.1093/cid/ciaa237 · PMID: 32150618 · PMCID: PMC7108130
106. Coagulopathy and Antiphospholipid Antibodies in Patients with Covid-19
Yan Zhang, Meng Xiao, Shulan Zhang, Peng Xia, Wei Cao, Wei Jiang, Huan Chen, Xin Ding,
Hua Zhao, Hongmin Zhang, … Shuyang Zhang
New England Journal of Medicine (2020-04-23) https://doi.org/ggrgz7
DOI: 10.1056/nejmc2007575 · PMID: 32268022 · PMCID: PMC7161262
107. Mechanism of Action of Hydroxychloroquine in the Antiphospholipid Syndrome
Nadine Müller-Calleja, Davit Manukyan, Wolfram Ruf, Karl Lackner
Blood (2016-12-02) https://doi.org/ggrm82
DOI: 10.1182/blood.v128.22.5023.5023
108. 14th International Congress on Antiphospholipid Antibodies Task Force Report on
Antiphospholipid Syndrome Treatment Trends
Doruk Erkan, Cassyanne L. Aguiar, Danieli Andrade, Hannah Cohen, Maria J. Cuadrado,

Adriana Danowski, Roger A. Levy, Thomas L. Ortel, Anisur Rahman, Jane E. Salmon, …
Michael D. Lockshin
Autoimmunity Reviews (2014-06) https://doi.org/ggp8r8
DOI: 10.1016/j.autrev.2014.01.053 · PMID: 24468415
109. What is the role of hydroxychloroquine in reducing thrombotic risk in patients with
antiphospholipid antibodies?
Tzu-Fei Wang, Wendy Lim
Hematology (2016-12-02) https://doi.org/ggrn3k
DOI: 10.1182/asheducation-2016.1.714 · PMID: 27913551 · PMCID: PMC6142483
110. COVID-19: a recommendation to examine the effect of hydroxychloroquine in
preventing infection and progression
Dan Zhou, Sheng-Ming Dai, Qiang Tong
Journal of Antimicrobial Chemotherapy (2020-07) https://doi.org/ggq84c
DOI: 10.1093/jac/dkaa114 · PMID: 32196083 · PMCID: PMC7184499
111. Hydroxychloroquine treatment of patients with human immunodeficiency virus type
1
Kirk Sperber, Michael Louie, Thomas Kraus, Jacqueline Proner, Erica Sapira, Su Lin, Vera
Stecher, Lloyd Mayer
Clinical Therapeutics (1995-07) https://doi.org/cq2hx9
DOI: 10.1016/0149-2918(95)80039-5
112. Hydroxychloroquine augments early virological response to pegylated interferon
plus ribavirin in genotype-4 chronic hepatitis C patients
Gouda Kamel Helal, Magdy Abdelmawgoud Gad, Mohamed Fahmy Abd-Ellah, Mahmoud Saied
Eid
Journal of Medical Virology (2016-12) https://doi.org/f889nt
DOI: 10.1002/jmv.24575 · PMID: 27183377 · PMCID: PMC7167065
113. Hydroxychloroquine and azithromycin as a treatment of COVID-19: results of an
open-label non-randomized clinical trial
Philippe Gautret, Jean-Christophe Lagier, Philippe Parola, Van Thuan Hoang, Line Meddeb,
Morgane Mailhe, Barbara Doudier, Johan Courjon, Valérie Giordanengo, Vera Esteves Vieira,
… Didier Raoult
International Journal of Antimicrobial Agents (2020-07) https://doi.org/dp7d
DOI: 10.1016/j.ijantimicag.2020.105949 · PMID: 32205204 · PMCID: PMC7102549
114. Making the Best Match: Selecting Outcome Measures for Clinical Trials and
Outcome Studies
W. J. Coster
American Journal of Occupational Therapy (2013-02-22) https://doi.org/f4rf5s
DOI: 10.5014/ajot.2013.006015 · PMID: 23433270 · PMCID: PMC3628620

115. Official Statement from International Society of Antimicrobial Chemotherapy
Andreas Voss
(2020-04-03) https://www.isac.world/news-and-publications/official-isac-statement
116. No evidence of rapid antiviral clearance or clinical benefit with the combination of
hydroxychloroquine and azithromycin in patients with severe COVID-19 infection
J. M. Molina, C. Delaugerre, J. Le Goff, B. Mela-Lima, D. Ponscarme, L. Goldwirt, N. de Castro
Médecine et Maladies Infectieuses (2020-06) https://doi.org/ggqzrb
DOI: 10.1016/j.medmal.2020.03.006 · PMID: 32240719
117. Efficacy of hydroxychloroquine in patients with COVID-19: results of a randomized
clinical trial
Zhaowei Chen, Jijia Hu, Zongwei Zhang, Shan Jiang, Shoumeng Han, Dandan Yan, Ruhong
Zhuang, Ben Hu, Zhan Zhang
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory (2020-04-10) https://doi.org/ggqm4v
DOI: 10.1101/2020.03.22.20040758
118. Therapeutic effect of hydroxychloroquine on novel coronavirus pneumonia (COVID19)
Chinese Clinical Trial Registry
(2020-02-12) http://www.chictr.org.cn/showprojen.aspx?proj=48880
119. The Extent and Consequences of P-Hacking in Science
Megan L. Head, Luke Holman, Rob Lanfear, Andrew T. Kahn, Michael D. Jennions
PLOS Biology (2015-03-13) https://doi.org/4z7
DOI: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1002106 · PMID: 25768323 · PMCID: PMC4359000
120. A pilot study of hydroxychloroquine in treatment of patients with common
coronavirus disease-19 (COVID-19)
CHEN Jun, LIU Danping, LIU Li, LIU Ping, XU Qingnian, XIA Lu, LING Yun, HUANG Dan,
SONG Shuli, ZHANG Dandan, … LU Hongzhou
Journal of Zhejiang University (Medical Sciences) (2020-03) https://doi.org/10.3785/j.issn.10089292.2020.03.03
DOI: 10.3785/j.issn.1008-9292.2020.03.03
121. Breakthrough: Chloroquine phosphate has shown apparent efficacy in treatment of
COVID-19 associated pneumonia in clinical studies
Jianjun Gao, Zhenxue Tian, Xu Yang
BioScience Trends (2020-02-29) https://doi.org/ggm3mv
DOI: 10.5582/bst.2020.01047 · PMID: 32074550
122. Targeting the Endocytic Pathway and Autophagy Process as a Novel Therapeutic
Strategy in COVID-19
Naidi Yang, Han-Ming Shen
International Journal of Biological Sciences (2020) https://doi.org/ggqspm
DOI: 10.7150/ijbs.45498 · PMID: 32226290 · PMCID: PMC7098027

123. SARS-CoV-2: an Emerging Coronavirus that Causes a Global Threat
Jun Zheng
International Journal of Biological Sciences (2020) https://doi.org/ggqspr
DOI: 10.7150/ijbs.45053 · PMID: 32226285 · PMCID: PMC7098030
124. RETRACTED: Hydroxychloroquine or chloroquine with or without a macrolide for
treatment of COVID-19: a multinational registry analysis
Mandeep R Mehra, Sapan S Desai, Frank Ruschitzka, Amit N Patel
The Lancet (2020-05) https://doi.org/ggwzsb
DOI: 10.1016/s0140-6736(20)31180-6 · PMID: 32450107 · PMCID: PMC7255293
125. Retraction—Hydroxychloroquine or chloroquine with or without a macrolide for
treatment of COVID-19: a multinational registry analysis
Mandeep R Mehra, Frank Ruschitzka, Amit N Patel
The Lancet (2020-06) https://doi.org/ggzqng
DOI: 10.1016/s0140-6736(20)31324-6 · PMID: 32511943 · PMCID: PMC7274621
126. Life Threatening Severe QTc Prolongation in Patient with Systemic Lupus
Erythematosus due to Hydroxychloroquine
John P. O’Laughlin, Parag H. Mehta, Brian C. Wong
Case Reports in Cardiology (2016) https://doi.org/ggqzrc
DOI: 10.1155/2016/4626279 · PMID: 27478650 · PMCID: PMC4960328
127. Keep the QT interval: It is a reliable predictor of ventricular arrhythmias
Dan M. Roden
Heart Rhythm (2008-08) https://doi.org/d5rchx
DOI: 10.1016/j.hrthm.2008.05.008 · PMID: 18675237 · PMCID: PMC3212752
128. Safety of hydroxychloroquine, alone and in combination with azithromycin, in light
of rapid wide-spread use for COVID-19: a multinational, network cohort and selfcontrolled case series study
Jennifer C.E.Lane, James Weaver, Kristin Kostka, Talita Duarte-Salles, Maria Tereza F.
Abrahao, Heba Alghoul, Osaid Alser, Thamir M Alshammari, Patricia Biedermann, Edward
Burn, … Daniel Prieto-Alhambra
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory (2020-04-10) https://doi.org/ggrn7s
DOI: 10.1101/2020.04.08.20054551
129. Chloroquine diphosphate in two different dosages as adjunctive therapy of
hospitalized patients with severe respiratory syndrome in the context of coronavirus
(SARS-CoV-2) infection: Preliminary safety results of a randomized, double-blinded,
phase IIb clinical trial ( CloroCovid-19 Study )
Mayla Gabriela Silva Borba, Fernando Fonseca Almeida Val, Vanderson Souza Sampaio,
Marcia Almeida Araújo Alexandre, Gisely Cardoso Melo, Marcelo Brito, Maria Paula Gomes
Mourão, José Diego Brito-Sousa, Djane Baía-da-Silva, Marcus Vinitius Farias Guerra, …
CloroCovid-19 Team
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory (2020-04-16) https://doi.org/ggr3nj
DOI: 10.1101/2020.04.07.20056424

130. Heart risk concerns mount around use of chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine for
Covid-19 treatment
Jacqueline Howard, Elizabeth Cohen, Nadia Kounang, Per Nyberg
CNN (2020-04-14) https://www.cnn.com/2020/04/13/health/chloroquine-risks-coronavirustreatment-trials-study/index.html
131. WHO Director-General’s opening remarks at the media briefing on COVID-19
World Health Organization
(2020-05-25) https://www.who.int/dg/speeches/detail/who-director-general-s-opening-remarksat-the-media-briefing-on-covid-19---25-may-2020
132. Hydroxychloroquine in patients mainly with mild to moderate COVID–19: an open–
label, randomized, controlled trial
Wei Tang, Zhujun Cao, Mingfeng Han, Zhengyan Wang, Junwen Chen, Wenjin Sun, Yaojie Wu,
Wei Xiao, Shengyong Liu, Erzhen Chen, … Qing Xie
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory (2020-05-07) https://doi.org/ggr68m
DOI: 10.1101/2020.04.10.20060558
133. Detection of SARS-CoV-2 in Different Types of Clinical Specimens
Wenling Wang, Yanli Xu, Ruqin Gao, Roujian Lu, Kai Han, Guizhen Wu, Wenjie Tan
JAMA (2020-03-11) https://doi.org/ggpp6h
DOI: 10.1001/jama.2020.3786 · PMID: 32159775 · PMCID: PMC7066521
134. Outcomes of hydroxychloroquine usage in United States veterans hospitalized with
Covid-19
Joseph Magagnoli, Siddharth Narendran, Felipe Pereira, Tammy Cummings, James W. Hardin,
S. Scott Sutton, Jayakrishna Ambati
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory (2020-04-21) https://doi.org/ggspt6
DOI: 10.1101/2020.04.16.20065920 · PMID: 32511622 · PMCID: PMC7276049
135. Effect of Hydroxychloroquine in Hospitalized Patients with Covid-19
The RECOVERY Collaborative Group
New England Journal of Medicine (2020-11-19) https://doi.org/ghd8c7
DOI: 10.1056/nejmoa2022926 · PMID: 33031652 · PMCID: PMC7556338
136. Hydroxychloroquine for Early Treatment of Adults With Mild Coronavirus Disease
2019: A Randomized, Controlled Trial
Oriol Mitjà, Marc Corbacho-Monné, Maria Ubals, Cristian Tebé, Judith Peñafiel, Aurelio Tobias,
Ester Ballana, Andrea Alemany, Núria Riera-Martí, Carla A Pérez, … Martí Vall-Mayans
Clinical Infectious Diseases (2020-07-16) https://doi.org/gg5f9x
DOI: 10.1093/cid/ciaa1009 · PMID: 32674126 · PMCID: PMC7454406
137. A Randomized Trial of Hydroxychloroquine as Postexposure Prophylaxis for Covid19
David R. Boulware, Matthew F. Pullen, Ananta S. Bangdiwala, Katelyn A. Pastick, Sarah M.
Lofgren, Elizabeth C. Okafor, Caleb P. Skipper, Alanna A. Nascene, Melanie R. Nicol, Mahsa
Abassi, … Kathy H. Hullsiek

New England Journal of Medicine (2020-08-06) https://doi.org/dxkv
DOI: 10.1056/nejmoa2016638 · PMID: 32492293 · PMCID: PMC7289276
138. Efficacy and Safety of Hydroxychloroquine vs Placebo for Pre-exposure SARS-CoV2 Prophylaxis Among Health Care Workers
Benjamin S. Abella, Eliana L. Jolkovsky, Barbara T. Biney, Julie E. Uspal, Matthew C. Hyman,
Ian Frank, Scott E. Hensley, Saar Gill, Dan T. Vogl, Ivan Maillard, … Prevention and Treatment
of COVID-19 With Hydroxychloroquine (PATCH) Investigators
JAMA Internal Medicine (2021-02-01) https://doi.org/ghd6nj
DOI: 10.1001/jamainternmed.2020.6319 · PMID: 33001138 · PMCID: PMC7527945
139. Mechanisms of action of hydroxychloroquine and chloroquine: implications for
rheumatology
Eva Schrezenmeier, Thomas Dörner
Nature Reviews Rheumatology (2020-02-07) https://doi.org/ggzjnh
DOI: 10.1038/s41584-020-0372-x · PMID: 32034323
140. Synthesis and Pharmacology of Anti-Inflammatory Steroidal Antedrugs
M. Omar F. Khan, Henry J. Lee
Chemical Reviews (2008-12-10) https://doi.org/cmkrtc
DOI: 10.1021/cr068203e · PMID: 19035773 · PMCID: PMC2650492
141. Drug vignettes: Dexamethasone
The Centre for Evidence-Based Medicine
https://www.cebm.net/covid-19/dexamethasone/
142. 16-METHYLATED STEROIDS. I. 16α-METHYLATED ANALOGS OF CORTISONE, A
NEW GROUP OF ANTI-INFLAMMATORY STEROIDS
Glen E. Arth, David B. R. Johnston, John Fried, William W. Spooncer, Dale R. Hoff, Lewis H.
Sarett
Journal of the American Chemical Society (2002-05-01) https://doi.org/cj5c82
DOI: 10.1021/ja01545a061
143. Treatment of Rheumatoid Arthritis with Dexamethasone
Abraham Cohen
JAMA (1960-10-15) https://doi.org/csfmhc
DOI: 10.1001/jama.1960.03030070009002 · PMID: 13694317
144. dexamethasone- Dexamethasone tablet dexamethasone- Dexamethasone solution,
concentrate dexamethasone- Dexamethasone solution
DailyMed
(2007-10-25) https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=537b424a-3e07-4c81978c-1ad99014032a
145. Potential benefits of precise corticosteroids therapy for severe 2019-nCoV
pneumonia
Wei Zhou, Yisi Liu, Dongdong Tian, Cheng Wang, Sa Wang, Jing Cheng, Ming Hu, Minghao

Fang, Yue Gao
Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy (2020-02-21) https://doi.org/ggqr84
DOI: 10.1038/s41392-020-0127-9 · PMID: 32296012 · PMCID: PMC7035340
146. Dexamethasone treatment for the acute respiratory distress syndrome: a
multicentre, randomised controlled trial
Jesús Villar, Carlos Ferrando, Domingo Martínez, Alfonso Ambrós, Tomás Muñoz, Juan A
Soler, Gerardo Aguilar, Francisco Alba, Elena González-Higueras, Luís A Conesa, … Jesús
Villar
The Lancet Respiratory Medicine (2020-03) https://doi.org/ggpxzc
DOI: 10.1016/s2213-2600(19)30417-5
147. Clinical evidence does not support corticosteroid treatment for 2019-nCoV lung
injury
Clark D Russell, Jonathan E Millar, J Kenneth Baillie
The Lancet (2020-02) https://doi.org/ggks86
DOI: 10.1016/s0140-6736(20)30317-2 · PMID: 32043983 · PMCID: PMC7134694
148. On the use of corticosteroids for 2019-nCoV pneumonia
Lianhan Shang, Jianping Zhao, Yi Hu, Ronghui Du, Bin Cao
The Lancet (2020-02) https://doi.org/ggq356
DOI: 10.1016/s0140-6736(20)30361-5 · PMID: 32122468 · PMCID: PMC7159292
149. Pharmacology of Postoperative Nausea and Vomiting
Eric S. Zabirowicz, Tong J. Gan
Elsevier BV (2019) https://doi.org/ghfkjw
DOI: 10.1016/b978-0-323-48110-6.00034-x
150. Non-traditional cytokines: How catecholamines and adipokines influence
macrophages in immunity, metabolism and the central nervous system
Mark A. Barnes, Monica J. Carson, Meera G. Nair
Cytokine (2015-04) https://doi.org/f65c59
DOI: 10.1016/j.cyto.2015.01.008 · PMID: 25703786 · PMCID: PMC4590987
151. Stress Hormones, Proinflammatory and Antiinflammatory Cytokines, and
Autoimmunity
ILIA J. ELENKOV, GEORGE P. CHROUSOS
Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences (2002-06) https://doi.org/fmwpx2
DOI: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2002.tb04229.x · PMID: 12114286
152. Recovery of the Hypothalamic-Pituitary-Adrenal Response to Stress
Arantxa García, Octavi Martí, Astrid Vallès, Silvina Dal-Zotto, Antonio Armario
Neuroendocrinology (2000) https://doi.org/b2cq8n
DOI: 10.1159/000054578 · PMID: 10971146
153. Modulatory effects of glucocorticoids and catecholamines on human interleukin-12
and interleukin-10 production: clinical implications.

IJ Elenkov, DA Papanicolaou, RL Wilder, GP Chrousos
Proceedings of the Association of American Physicians (1996-09)
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8902882
PMID: 8902882
154. Prevention of infection caused by immunosuppressive drugs in gastroenterology
Katarzyna Orlicka, Eleanor Barnes, Emma L. Culver
Therapeutic Advances in Chronic Disease (2013-04-22) https://doi.org/ggrqd3
DOI: 10.1177/2040622313485275 · PMID: 23819020 · PMCID: PMC3697844
155. COVID-19: consider cytokine storm syndromes and immunosuppression
Puja Mehta, Daniel F McAuley, Michael Brown, Emilie Sanchez, Rachel S Tattersall, Jessica J
Manson
The Lancet (2020-03) https://doi.org/ggnzmc
DOI: 10.1016/s0140-6736(20)30628-0
156. Immunosuppression for hyperinflammation in COVID-19: a double-edged sword?
Andrew I Ritchie, Aran Singanayagam
The Lancet (2020-04) https://doi.org/ggq8hs
DOI: 10.1016/s0140-6736(20)30691-7 · PMID: 32220278 · PMCID: PMC7138169
157. Effect of Dexamethasone in Hospitalized Patients with COVID-19 – Preliminary
Report
Peter Horby, Wei Shen Lim, Jonathan Emberson, Marion Mafham, Jennifer Bell, Louise Linsell,
Natalie Staplin, Christopher Brightling, Andrew Ustianowski, Einas Elmahi, … RECOVERY
Collaborative Group
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory (2020-06-22) https://doi.org/dz5x
DOI: 10.1101/2020.06.22.20137273
158. Dexamethasone in Hospitalized Patients with Covid-19 — Preliminary Report
The RECOVERY Collaborative Group
New England Journal of Medicine (2020-07-17) https://doi.org/gg5c8p
DOI: 10.1056/nejmoa2021436 · PMID: 32678530 · PMCID: PMC7383595
159. Corticosteroids for Patients With Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) With
Different Disease Severity: A Meta-Analysis of Randomized Clinical Trials
Laura Pasin, Paolo Navalesi, Alberto Zangrillo, Artem Kuzovlev, Valery Likhvantsev, Ludhmila
Abrahão Hajjar, Stefano Fresilli, Marcus Vinicius Guimaraes Lacerda, Giovanni Landoni
Journal of Cardiothoracic and Vascular Anesthesia (2021-02) https://doi.org/ghzkp9
DOI: 10.1053/j.jvca.2020.11.057 · PMID: 33298370 · PMCID: PMC7698829
160. Current concepts in the diagnosis and management of cytokine release syndrome
Daniel W. Lee, Rebecca Gardner, David L. Porter, Chrystal U. Louis, Nabil Ahmed, Michael
Jensen, Stephan A. Grupp, Crystal L. Mackall
Blood (2014-07-10) https://doi.org/ggsrwk
DOI: 10.1182/blood-2014-05-552729 · PMID: 24876563 · PMCID: PMC4093680

161. Dexamethasone for COVID-19? Not so fast.
T. C. Theoharides
JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL REGULATORS AND HOMEOSTATIC AGENTS (2020-08-31)
https://doi.org/ghfkjx
DOI: 10.23812/20-editorial_1-5 · PMID: 32551464
162. Dexamethasone in hospitalised patients with COVID-19: addressing uncertainties
Michael A Matthay, B Taylor Thompson
The Lancet Respiratory Medicine (2020-12) https://doi.org/ftk4
DOI: 10.1016/s2213-2600(20)30503-8 · PMID: 33129421 · PMCID: PMC7598750
163. Dexamethasone for COVID-19: data needed from randomised clinical trials in Africa
Helen Brotherton, Effua Usuf, Behzad Nadjm, Karen Forrest, Kalifa Bojang, Ahmadou Lamin
Samateh, Mustapha Bittaye, Charles AP Roberts, Umberto d’Alessandro, Anna Roca
The Lancet Global Health (2020-09) https://doi.org/gg42kx
DOI: 10.1016/s2214-109x(20)30318-1 · PMID: 32679038 · PMCID: PMC7833918
164. Formulation and manufacturability of biologics
Steven J Shire
Current Opinion in Biotechnology (2009-12) https://doi.org/cjk8p6
DOI: 10.1016/j.copbio.2009.10.006 · PMID: 19880308
165. Early Development of Therapeutic Biologics - Pharmacokinetics
A. Baumann
Current Drug Metabolism (2006-01-01) https://doi.org/bhcz79
DOI: 10.2174/138920006774832604 · PMID: 16454690
166. Deriving Immune Modulating Drugs from Viruses—A New Class of Biologics
Jordan R. Yaron, Liqiang Zhang, Qiuyun Guo, Michelle Burgin, Lauren N. Schutz, Enkidia Awo,
Lyn Wise, Kurt L. Krause, Cristhian J. Ildefonso, Jacek M. Kwiecien, … Alexandra R. Lucas
Journal of Clinical Medicine (2020-03-31) https://doi.org/ghdx73
DOI: 10.3390/jcm9040972 · PMID: 32244484 · PMCID: PMC7230489
167. IL-6 in Inflammation, Immunity, and Disease
T. Tanaka, M. Narazaki, T. Kishimoto
Cold Spring Harbor Perspectives in Biology (2014-09-04) https://doi.org/gftpjs
DOI: 10.1101/cshperspect.a016295 · PMID: 25190079 · PMCID: PMC4176007
168. ACTEMRA- tocilizumab injection, solution, concentrate ACTEMRA- tocilizumab
injection, solution ACTEMRA ACTPEN- tocilizumab injection, solution
DailyMed
(2020-12-17) https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=2e5365ff-cb2a-4b16b2c7-e35c6bf2de13
169. Clinical course and risk factors for mortality of adult inpatients with COVID-19 in
Wuhan, China: a retrospective cohort study
Fei Zhou, Ting Yu, Ronghui Du, Guohui Fan, Ying Liu, Zhibo Liu, Jie Xiang, Yeming Wang, Bin

Song, Xiaoying Gu, … Bin Cao
The Lancet (2020-03) https://doi.org/ggnxb3
DOI: 10.1016/s0140-6736(20)30566-3
170. Into the Eye of the Cytokine Storm
J. R. Tisoncik, M. J. Korth, C. P. Simmons, J. Farrar, T. R. Martin, M. G. Katze
Microbiology and Molecular Biology Reviews (2012-03-05) https://doi.org/f4n9h2
DOI: 10.1128/mmbr.05015-11 · PMID: 22390970 · PMCID: PMC3294426
171. Hall of Fame among Pro-inflammatory Cytokines: Interleukin-6 Gene and Its
Transcriptional Regulation Mechanisms
Yang Luo, Song Guo Zheng
Frontiers in Immunology (2016-12-19) https://doi.org/ggqmgv
DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2016.00604 · PMID: 28066415 · PMCID: PMC5165036
172. IL-6 Trans-Signaling via the Soluble IL-6 Receptor: Importance for the ProInflammatory Activities of IL-6
Stefan Rose-John
International Journal of Biological Sciences (2012) https://doi.org/f4c4hf
DOI: 10.7150/ijbs.4989 · PMID: 23136552 · PMCID: PMC3491447
173. Interleukin-6 and its receptor: from bench to bedside
Jürgen Scheller, Stefan Rose-John
Medical Microbiology and Immunology (2006-05-31) https://doi.org/ck8xch
DOI: 10.1007/s00430-006-0019-9 · PMID: 16741736
174. Plasticity and cross-talk of Interleukin 6-type cytokines
Christoph Garbers, Heike M. Hermanns, Fred Schaper, Gerhard Müller-Newen, Joachim
Grötzinger, Stefan Rose-John, Jürgen Scheller
Cytokine & Growth Factor Reviews (2012-06) https://doi.org/f3z743
DOI: 10.1016/j.cytogfr.2012.04.001 · PMID: 22595692
175. Soluble receptors for cytokines and growth factors: generation and biological
function
S Rose-John, PC Heinrich
Biochemical Journal (1994-06-01) https://doi.org/ggqmgd
DOI: 10.1042/bj3000281 · PMID: 8002928 · PMCID: PMC1138158
176. Interleukin-6; pathogenesis and treatment of autoimmune inflammatory diseases
Toshio Tanaka, Masashi Narazaki, Kazuya Masuda, Tadamitsu Kishimoto
Inflammation and Regeneration (2013) https://doi.org/ggqmgt
DOI: 10.2492/inflammregen.33.054
177. Effective treatment of severe COVID-19 patients with tocilizumab
Xiaoling Xu, Mingfeng Han, Tiantian Li, Wei Sun, Dongsheng Wang, Binqing Fu, Yonggang
Zhou, Xiaohu Zheng, Yun Yang, Xiuyong Li, … Haiming Wei

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences (2020-05-19) https://doi.org/ggv3r3
DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2005615117 · PMID: 32350134 · PMCID: PMC7245089
178. Tocilizumab in patients with severe COVID-19: a retrospective cohort study
Giovanni Guaraldi, Marianna Meschiari, Alessandro Cozzi-Lepri, Jovana Milic, Roberto Tonelli,
Marianna Menozzi, Erica Franceschini, Gianluca Cuomo, Gabriella Orlando, Vanni Borghi, …
Cristina Mussini
The Lancet Rheumatology (2020-08) https://doi.org/d2pk
DOI: 10.1016/s2665-9913(20)30173-9 · PMID: 32835257 · PMCID: PMC7314456
179. Tocilizumab Treatment for Cytokine Release Syndrome in Hospitalized Patients With
Coronavirus Disease 2019
Christina C. Price, Frederick L. Altice, Yu Shyr, Alan Koff, Lauren Pischel, George Goshua,
Marwan M. Azar, Dayna Mcmanus, Sheau-Chiann Chen, Shana E. Gleeson, … Maricar Malinis
Chest (2020-10) https://doi.org/gg2789
DOI: 10.1016/j.chest.2020.06.006 · PMID: 32553536 · PMCID: PMC7831876
180. Impact of low dose tocilizumab on mortality rate in patients with COVID-19 related
pneumonia
Ruggero Capra, Nicola De Rossi, Flavia Mattioli, Giuseppe Romanelli, Cristina Scarpazza,
Maria Pia Sormani, Stefania Cossi
European Journal of Internal Medicine (2020-06) https://doi.org/ggx4fm
DOI: 10.1016/j.ejim.2020.05.009 · PMID: 32405160 · PMCID: PMC7219361
181. Tocilizumab therapy reduced intensive care unit admissions and/or mortality in
COVID-19 patients
T. Klopfenstein, S. Zayet, A. Lohse, J.-C. Balblanc, J. Badie, P.-Y. Royer, L. Toko, C. Mezher,
N. J. Kadiane-Oussou, M. Bossert, … T. Conrozier
Médecine et Maladies Infectieuses (2020-08) https://doi.org/ggvz45
DOI: 10.1016/j.medmal.2020.05.001 · PMID: 32387320 · PMCID: PMC7202806
182. Outcomes in patients with severe COVID-19 disease treated with tocilizumab: a
case–controlled study
G Rojas-Marte, M Khalid, O Mukhtar, AT Hashmi, MA Waheed, S Ehrlich, A Aslam, S Siddiqui,
C Agarwal, Y Malyshev, … J Shani
QJM: An International Journal of Medicine (2020-08) https://doi.org/gg496t
DOI: 10.1093/qjmed/hcaa206 · PMID: 32569363 · PMCID: PMC7337835
183. Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of Case-Control Studies from 7,000 COVID-19
Pneumonia Patients Suggests a Beneficial Impact of Tocilizumab with Benefit Most
Evident in Non-Corticosteroid Exposed Subjects.
Abdulla Watad, Nicola Luigi Bragazzi, Charlie Bridgewood, Muhammad Mansour, Naim
Mahroum, Matteo Riccò, Ahmed Nasr, Amr Hussein, Omer Gendelman, Yehuda Shoenfeld, …
Dennis McGonagle
SSRN Electronic Journal (2020) https://doi.org/gg62hz
DOI: 10.2139/ssrn.3642653

184. The efficacy of IL-6 inhibitor Tocilizumab in reducing severe COVID-19 mortality: a
systematic review
Avi Gurion Kaye, Robert Siegel
PeerJ (2020-11-02) https://doi.org/ghx8r4
DOI: 10.7717/peerj.10322 · PMID: 33194450 · PMCID: PMC7643559
185. Rationale and evidence on the use of tocilizumab in COVID-19: a systematic review
A. Cortegiani, M. Ippolito, M. Greco, V. Granone, A. Protti, C. Gregoretti, A. Giarratano, S.
Einav, M. Cecconi
Pulmonology (2021-01) https://doi.org/gg5xv3
DOI: 10.1016/j.pulmoe.2020.07.003 · PMID: 32713784 · PMCID: PMC7369580
186. Tocilizumab in patients admitted to hospital with COVID-19 (RECOVERY):
preliminary results of a randomised, controlled, open-label, platform trial
Peter W Horby, Guilherme Pessoa-Amorim, Leon Peto, Christopher E Brightling, Rahuldeb
Sarkar, Koshy Thomas, Vandana Jeebun, Abdul Ashish, Redmond Tully, David Chadwick, …
RECOVERY Collaborative Group
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory (2021-02-11) https://doi.org/fvqj
DOI: 10.1101/2021.02.11.21249258
187. New insights and long-term safety of tocilizumab in rheumatoid arthritis
Graeme Jones, Elena Panova
Therapeutic Advances in Musculoskeletal Disease (2018-10-07) https://doi.org/gffsdt
DOI: 10.1177/1759720x18798462 · PMID: 30327685 · PMCID: PMC6178374
188. Tocilizumab during pregnancy and lactation: drug levels in maternal serum, cord
blood, breast milk and infant serum
Jumpei Saito, Naho Yakuwa, Kayoko Kaneko, Chinatsu Takai, Mikako Goto, Ken Nakajima,
Akimasa Yamatani, Atsuko Murashima
Rheumatology (2019-08) https://doi.org/ggzhks
DOI: 10.1093/rheumatology/kez100 · PMID: 30945743
189. Short-course tocilizumab increases risk of hepatitis B virus reactivation in patients
with rheumatoid arthritis: a prospective clinical observation
Le-Feng Chen, Ying-Qian Mo, Jun Jing, Jian-Da Ma, Dong-Hui Zheng, Lie Dai
International Journal of Rheumatic Diseases (2017-07) https://doi.org/f9pbc5
DOI: 10.1111/1756-185x.13010 · PMID: 28160426
190. Why tocilizumab could be an effective treatment for severe COVID-19?
Binqing Fu, Xiaoling Xu, Haiming Wei
Journal of Translational Medicine (2020-04-14) https://doi.org/ggv5c8
DOI: 10.1186/s12967-020-02339-3 · PMID: 32290839 · PMCID: PMC7154566
191. Risk of adverse events including serious infections in rheumatoid arthritis patients
treated with tocilizumab: a systematic literature review and meta-analysis of randomized
controlled trials
L. Campbell, C. Chen, S. S. Bhagat, R. A. Parker, A. J. K. Ostor

Rheumatology (2010-11-14) https://doi.org/crqn7c
DOI: 10.1093/rheumatology/keq343 · PMID: 21078627
192. Risk of serious infections in tocilizumab versus other biologic drugs in patients with
rheumatoid arthritis: a multidatabase cohort study
Ajinkya Pawar, Rishi J Desai, Daniel H Solomon, Adrian J Santiago Ortiz, Sara Gale, Min Bao,
Khaled Sarsour, Sebastian Schneeweiss, Seoyoung C Kim
Annals of the Rheumatic Diseases (2019-04) https://doi.org/gg62hx
DOI: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2018-214367 · PMID: 30679153
193. Risk of infections in rheumatoid arthritis patients treated with tocilizumab
Veronika R. Lang, Matthias Englbrecht, Jürgen Rech, Hubert Nüsslein, Karin Manger, Florian
Schuch, Hans-Peter Tony, Martin Fleck, Bernhard Manger, Georg Schett, Jochen Zwerina
Rheumatology (2012-05) https://doi.org/d3b3rh
DOI: 10.1093/rheumatology/ker223 · PMID: 21865281
194. Use of Tocilizumab for COVID-19-Induced Cytokine Release Syndrome
Jared Radbel, Navaneeth Narayanan, Pinki J. Bhatt
Chest (2020-07) https://doi.org/ggtxvs
DOI: 10.1016/j.chest.2020.04.024 · PMID: 32343968 · PMCID: PMC7195070
195. Incidence of ARDS and outcomes in hospitalized patients with COVID-19: a global
literature survey
Susan J. Tzotzos, Bernhard Fischer, Hendrik Fischer, Markus Zeitlinger
Critical Care (2020-08-21) https://doi.org/gh294r
DOI: 10.1186/s13054-020-03240-7 · PMID: 32825837 · PMCID: PMC7441837
196. The Efficacy of IL-6 Inhibitor Tocilizumab in Reducing Severe COVID-19 Mortality: A
Systematic Review
Avi Kaye, Robert Siegel
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory (2020-07-14) https://doi.org/gg62hv
DOI: 10.1101/2020.07.10.20150938
197. Utilizing tocilizumab for the treatment of cytokine release syndrome in COVID-19
Ali Hassoun, Elizabeth Dilip Thottacherry, Justin Muklewicz, Qurrat-ul-ain Aziz, Jonathan
Edwards
Journal of Clinical Virology (2020-07) https://doi.org/ggx359
DOI: 10.1016/j.jcv.2020.104443 · PMID: 32425661 · PMCID: PMC7229471
198. Development of therapeutic antibodies for the treatment of diseases
Ruei-Min Lu, Yu-Chyi Hwang, I-Ju Liu, Chi-Chiu Lee, Han-Zen Tsai, Hsin-Jung Li, Han-Chung
Wu
Journal of Biomedical Science (2020-01-02) https://doi.org/ggqbpx
DOI: 10.1186/s12929-019-0592-z · PMID: 31894001 · PMCID: PMC6939334
199. Broadly Neutralizing Antiviral Antibodies
Davide Corti, Antonio Lanzavecchia

Annual Review of Immunology (2013-03-21) https://doi.org/gf25g8
DOI: 10.1146/annurev-immunol-032712-095916 · PMID: 23330954
200. Ibalizumab Targeting CD4 Receptors, An Emerging Molecule in HIV Therapy
Simona A. Iacob, Diana G. Iacob
Frontiers in Microbiology (2017-11-27) https://doi.org/gcn3kh
DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2017.02323 · PMID: 29230203 · PMCID: PMC5711820
201. Product review on the monoclonal antibody palivizumab for prevention of
respiratory syncytial virus infection
Bernhard Resch
Human Vaccines & Immunotherapeutics (2017-06-12) https://doi.org/ggqbps
DOI: 10.1080/21645515.2017.1337614 · PMID: 28605249 · PMCID: PMC5612471
202. Convalescent plasma as a potential therapy for COVID-19
Long Chen, Jing Xiong, Lei Bao, Yuan Shi
The Lancet Infectious Diseases (2020-04) https://doi.org/ggqr7s
DOI: 10.1016/s1473-3099(20)30141-9 · PMID: 32113510 · PMCID: PMC7128218
203. Convalescent Plasma to Treat COVID-19
John D. Roback, Jeannette Guarner
JAMA (2020-04-28) https://doi.org/ggqf6k
DOI: 10.1001/jama.2020.4940 · PMID: 32219429
204. Chronological evolution of IgM, IgA, IgG and neutralisation antibodies after infection
with SARS-associated coronavirus
P.-R. Hsueh, L.-M. Huang, P.-J. Chen, C.-L. Kao, P.-C. Yang
Clinical Microbiology and Infection (2004-12) https://doi.org/cwwg87
DOI: 10.1111/j.1469-0691.2004.01009.x · PMID: 15606632
205. Neutralizing Antibodies in Patients with Severe Acute Respiratory SyndromeAssociated Coronavirus Infection
Nie Yuchun, Wang Guangwen, Shi Xuanling, Zhang Hong, Qiu Yan, He Zhongping, Wang Wei,
Lian Gewei, Yin Xiaolei, Du Liying, … Ding Mingxiao
The Journal of Infectious Diseases (2004-09) https://doi.org/cgqj5b
DOI: 10.1086/423286 · PMID: 15319862
206. Potent human monoclonal antibodies against SARS CoV, Nipah and Hendra viruses
Ponraj Prabakaran, Zhongyu Zhu, Xiaodong Xiao, Arya Biragyn, Antony S Dimitrov, Christopher
C Broder, Dimiter S Dimitrov
Expert Opinion on Biological Therapy (2009-04-08) https://doi.org/b88kw8
DOI: 10.1517/14712590902763755 · PMID: 19216624 · PMCID: PMC2705284
207. Structure, Function, and Antigenicity of the SARS-CoV-2 Spike Glycoprotein
Alexandra C. Walls, Young-Jun Park, M. Alejandra Tortorici, Abigail Wall, Andrew T. McGuire,
David Veesler

Cell (2020-04) https://doi.org/dpvh
DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2020.02.058 · PMID: 32155444 · PMCID: PMC7102599
208. SARS-CoV-2 and SARS-CoV Spike-RBD Structure and Receptor Binding
Comparison and Potential Implications on Neutralizing Antibody and Vaccine
Development
Chunyun Sun, Long Chen, Ji Yang, Chunxia Luo, Yanjing Zhang, Jing Li, Jiahui Yang, Jie
Zhang, Liangzhi Xie
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory (2020-02-20) https://doi.org/ggq63j
DOI: 10.1101/2020.02.16.951723
209. Fruitful Neutralizing Antibody Pipeline Brings Hope To Defeat SARS-Cov-2
Alex Renn, Ying Fu, Xin Hu, Matthew D. Hall, Anton Simeonov
Trends in Pharmacological Sciences (2020-11) https://doi.org/gg72sv
DOI: 10.1016/j.tips.2020.07.004 · PMID: 32829936 · PMCID: PMC7572790
210. Cross-neutralization of SARS-CoV-2 by a human monoclonal SARS-CoV antibody
Dora Pinto, Young-Jun Park, Martina Beltramello, Alexandra C. Walls, M. Alejandra Tortorici,
Siro Bianchi, Stefano Jaconi, Katja Culap, Fabrizia Zatta, Anna De Marco, … Davide Corti
Nature (2020-05-18) https://doi.org/dv4x
DOI: 10.1038/s41586-020-2349-y · PMID: 32422645
211. Cryo-EM structure of the 2019-nCoV spike in the prefusion conformation
Daniel Wrapp, Nianshuang Wang, Kizzmekia S. Corbett, Jory A. Goldsmith, Ching-Lin Hsieh,
Olubukola Abiona, Barney S. Graham, Jason S. McLellan
Science (2020-03-13) https://doi.org/ggmtk2
DOI: 10.1126/science.abb2507 · PMID: 32075877
212. A human monoclonal antibody blocking SARS-CoV-2 infection
Chunyan Wang, Wentao Li, Dubravka Drabek, Nisreen M. A. Okba, Rien van Haperen, Albert
D. M. E. Osterhaus, Frank J. M. van Kuppeveld, Bart L. Haagmans, Frank Grosveld, BerendJan Bosch
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory (2020-03-12) https://doi.org/ggnw4t
DOI: 10.1101/2020.03.11.987958
213. An update to monoclonal antibody as therapeutic option against COVID-19
Paroma Deb, Md. Maruf Ahmed Molla, K. M. Saif-Ur-Rahman
Biosafety and Health (2021-02) https://doi.org/gh4m7h
DOI: 10.1016/j.bsheal.2021.02.001 · PMID: 33585808 · PMCID: PMC7872849
214. LY-CoV555, a rapidly isolated potent neutralizing antibody, provides protection in a
non-human primate model of SARS-CoV-2 infection
Bryan E. Jones, Patricia L. Brown-Augsburger, Kizzmekia S. Corbett, Kathryn Westendorf,
Julian Davies, Thomas P. Cujec, Christopher M. Wiethoff, Jamie L. Blackbourne, Beverly A.
Heinz, Denisa Foster, … Ester Falconer
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory (2020-10-09) https://doi.org/gh4sjm
DOI: 10.1101/2020.09.30.318972 · PMID: 33024963 · PMCID: PMC7536866

215. A Study of LY3819253 (LY-CoV555) in Participants Hospitalized for COVID-19 - Full
Text View - ClinicalTrials.gov https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT04411628
216. A Phase 1, Randomized, Placebo-Controlled Study to Evaluate the Tolerability,
Safety, Pharmacokinetics, and Immunogenicity of LY3832479 Given as a Single
Intravenous Dose in Healthy Participants
Eli Lilly and Company
clinicaltrials.gov (2020-10-07) https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT04441931
217. Effect of Bamlanivimab as Monotherapy or in Combination With Etesevimab on Viral
Load in Patients With Mild to Moderate COVID-19
Robert L. Gottlieb, Ajay Nirula, Peter Chen, Joseph Boscia, Barry Heller, Jason Morris, Gregory
Huhn, Jose Cardona, Bharat Mocherla, Valentina Stosor, … Daniel M. Skovronsky
JAMA (2021-02-16) https://doi.org/ghvnrr
DOI: 10.1001/jama.2021.0202 · PMID: 33475701 · PMCID: PMC7821080
218. A Study of LY3819253 (LY-CoV555) and LY3832479 (LY-CoV016) in Participants With
Mild to Moderate COVID-19 Illness - Full Text View - ClinicalTrials.gov
https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT04427501
219. SARS-CoV-2 Neutralizing Antibody LY-CoV555 in Outpatients with Covid-19
Peter Chen, Ajay Nirula, Barry Heller, Robert L. Gottlieb, Joseph Boscia, Jason Morris, Gregory
Huhn, Jose Cardona, Bharat Mocherla, Valentina Stosor, … Daniel M. Skovronsky
New England Journal of Medicine (2021-01-21) https://doi.org/fgtm
DOI: 10.1056/nejmoa2029849 · PMID: 33113295 · PMCID: PMC7646625
220. Studies in humanized mice and convalescent humans yield a SARS-CoV-2 antibody
cocktail
Johanna Hansen, Alina Baum, Kristen E. Pascal, Vincenzo Russo, Stephanie Giordano,
Elzbieta Wloga, Benjamin O. Fulton, Ying Yan, Katrina Koon, Krunal Patel, … Christos A.
Kyratsous
Science (2020-08-21) https://doi.org/fcqh
DOI: 10.1126/science.abd0827 · PMID: 32540901 · PMCID: PMC7299284
221. A Master Protocol Assessing the Safety, Tolerability, and Efficacy of Anti-Spike (S)
SARS-CoV-2 Monoclonal Antibodies for the Treatment of Hospitalized Patients With
COVID-19
Regeneron Pharmaceuticals
clinicaltrials.gov (2021-02-03) https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT04426695
222. A Master Protocol Assessing the Safety, Tolerability, and Efficacy of Anti-Spike (S)
SARS-CoV-2 Monoclonal Antibodies for the Treatment of Ambulatory Patients With
COVID-19
Regeneron Pharmaceuticals
clinicaltrials.gov (2021-02-18) https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT04425629

223. REGN-COV2, a Neutralizing Antibody Cocktail, in Outpatients with Covid-19
David M. Weinreich, Sumathi Sivapalasingam, Thomas Norton, Shazia Ali, Haitao Gao, Rafia
Bhore, Bret J. Musser, Yuhwen Soo, Diana Rofail, Joseph Im, … George D. Yancopoulos
New England Journal of Medicine (2021-01-21) https://doi.org/gh4sjh
DOI: 10.1056/nejmoa2035002 · PMID: 33332778 · PMCID: PMC7781102
224. Identification of SARS-CoV-2 spike mutations that attenuate monoclonal and serum
antibody neutralization
Zhuoming Liu, Laura A. VanBlargan, Louis-Marie Bloyet, Paul W. Rothlauf, Rita E. Chen,
Spencer Stumpf, Haiyan Zhao, John M. Errico, Elitza S. Theel, Mariel J. Liebeskind, … Sean P.
J. Whelan
Cell Host & Microbe (2021-01) https://doi.org/gh4m7j
DOI: 10.1016/j.chom.2021.01.014 · PMID: 33535027 · PMCID: PMC7839837
225. SARS-CoV-2 variants show resistance to neutralization by many monoclonal and
serum-derived polyclonal antibodies
Michael Diamond, Rita Chen, Xuping Xie, James Case, Xianwen Zhang, Laura VanBlargan,
Yang Liu, Jianying Liu, John Errico, Emma Winkler, … Pavlo Gilchuk
Research Square (2021-02-09) https://doi.org/gh4sjz
DOI: 10.21203/rs.3.rs-228079/v1 · PMID: 33594356 · PMCID: PMC7885928
226. Impact of the B.1.1.7 variant on neutralizing monoclonal antibodies recognizing
diverse epitopes on SARS–CoV–2 Spike
Carl Graham, Jeffrey Seow, Isabella Huettner, Hataf Khan, Neophytos Kouphou, Sam Acors,
Helena Winstone, Suzanne Pickering, Rui Pedro Galao, Maria Jose Lista, … Katie J Doores
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory (2021-02-03) https://doi.org/gh4sjq
DOI: 10.1101/2021.02.03.429355 · PMID: 33564766 · PMCID: PMC7872354
227. Antibody Resistance of SARS-CoV-2 Variants B.1.351 and B.1.1.7
Pengfei Wang, Manoj S. Nair, Lihong Liu, Sho Iketani, Yang Luo, Yicheng Guo, Maple Wang,
Jian Yu, Baoshan Zhang, Peter D. Kwong, … David D. Ho
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory (2021-02-12) https://doi.org/gh4sjp
DOI: 10.1101/2021.01.25.428137 · PMID: 33532778 · PMCID: PMC7852271
228. HIV-1 Broadly Neutralizing Antibody Extracts Its Epitope from a Kinked gp41
Ectodomain Region on the Viral Membrane
Zhen-Yu J. Sun, Kyoung Joon Oh, Mikyung Kim, Jessica Yu, Vladimir Brusic, Likai Song,
Zhisong Qiao, Jia-huai Wang, Gerhard Wagner, Ellis L. Reinherz
Immunity (2008-01) https://doi.org/ftw7t3
DOI: 10.1016/j.immuni.2007.11.018 · PMID: 18191596
229. Antibody Recognition of a Highly Conserved Influenza Virus Epitope
D. C. Ekiert, G. Bhabha, M.-A. Elsliger, R. H. E. Friesen, M. Jongeneelen, M. Throsby, J.
Goudsmit, I. A. Wilson
Science (2009-04-10) https://doi.org/ffsb4r
DOI: 10.1126/science.1171491 · PMID: 19251591 · PMCID: PMC2758658

230. Identification and characterization of novel neutralizing epitopes in the receptorbinding domain of SARS-CoV spike protein: Revealing the critical antigenic determinants
in inactivated SARS-CoV vaccine
Yuxian He, Jingjing Li, Lanying Du, Xuxia Yan, Guangan Hu, Yusen Zhou, Shibo Jiang
Vaccine (2006-06) https://doi.org/b99b68
DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2006.04.054 · PMID: 16725238 · PMCID: PMC7115380
231. Broad and potent activity against SARS-like viruses by an engineered human
monoclonal antibody
C. Garrett Rappazzo, Longping V. Tse, Chengzi I. Kaku, Daniel Wrapp, Mrunal Sakharkar, Deli
Huang, Laura M. Deveau, Thomas J. Yockachonis, Andrew S. Herbert, Michael B. Battles, …
Laura M. Walker
Science (2021-02-19) https://doi.org/fsbc
DOI: 10.1126/science.abf4830 · PMID: 33495307
232. The antiviral effect of interferon-beta against SARS-Coronavirus is not mediated by
MxA protein
Martin Spiegel, Andreas Pichlmair, Elke Mühlberger, Otto Haller, Friedemann Weber
Journal of Clinical Virology (2004-07) https://doi.org/cmc3ds
DOI: 10.1016/j.jcv.2003.11.013 · PMID: 15135736
233. Coronavirus virulence genes with main focus on SARS-CoV envelope gene
Marta L. DeDiego, Jose L. Nieto-Torres, Jose M. Jimenez-Guardeño, Jose A. Regla-Nava,
Carlos Castaño-Rodriguez, Raul Fernandez-Delgado, Fernando Usera, Luis Enjuanes
Virus Research (2014-12) https://doi.org/f6wm24
DOI: 10.1016/j.virusres.2014.07.024 · PMID: 25093995 · PMCID: PMC4261026
234. A Randomised Double-blind Placebo-controlled Trial to Determine the Safety and
Efficacy of Inhaled SNG001 (IFN-β1a for Nebulisation) for the Treatment of Patients With
Confirmed SARS-CoV-2 Infection
Synairgen Research Ltd.
clinicaltrials.gov (2020-08-25) https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT04385095
235. Synairgen to start trial of SNG001 in COVID-19 imminently
Synairgen plc press release
(2020-03-18)
http://synairgen.web01.hosting.bdci.co.uk/umbraco/Surface/Download/GetFile?cid=23c9b12c508b-48c3-9081-36605c5a9ccd
236. Synairgen announces positive results from trial of SNG001 in hospitalised COVID-19
patients
Synairgen plc press release
(2020-07-20)
http://synairgen.web01.hosting.bdci.co.uk/umbraco/Surface/Download/GetFile?cid=1130026e0983-4338-b648-4ac7928b9a37

237. Safety and efficacy of inhaled nebulised interferon beta-1a (SNG001) for treatment of
SARS-CoV-2 infection: a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, phase 2 trial
Phillip D Monk, Richard J Marsden, Victoria J Tear, Jody Brookes, Toby N Batten, Marcin
Mankowski, Felicity J Gabbay, Donna E Davies, Stephen T Holgate, Ling-Pei Ho, … Pedro MB
Rodrigues
The Lancet Respiratory Medicine (2021-02) https://doi.org/ghjzm4
DOI: 10.1016/s2213-2600(20)30511-7 · PMID: 33189161 · PMCID: PMC7836724
238. Nebulised interferon beta-1a for patients with COVID-19
Nathan Peiffer-Smadja, Yazdan Yazdanpanah
The Lancet Respiratory Medicine (2021-02) https://doi.org/ftmj
DOI: 10.1016/s2213-2600(20)30523-3 · PMID: 33189160 · PMCID: PMC7833737
239. Effect of Intravenous Interferon β-1a on Death and Days Free From Mechanical
Ventilation Among Patients With Moderate to Severe Acute Respiratory Distress
Syndrome
V. Marco Ranieri, Ville Pettilä, Matti K. Karvonen, Juho Jalkanen, Peter Nightingale, David
Brealey, Jordi Mancebo, Ricard Ferrer, Alain Mercat, Nicolò Patroniti, … for the INTEREST
Study Group
JAMA (2020-02-25) https://doi.org/ghzkww
DOI: 10.1001/jama.2019.22525 · PMID: 32065831
240. A Randomized Clinical Trial of the Efficacy and Safety of Interferon β-1a in
Treatment of Severe COVID-19
Effat Davoudi-Monfared, Hamid Rahmani, Hossein Khalili, Mahboubeh Hajiabdolbaghi,
Mohamadreza Salehi, Ladan Abbasian, Hossein Kazemzadeh, Mir Saeed Yekaninejad
Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy (2020-08-20) https://doi.org/gg5xvm
DOI: 10.1128/aac.01061-20 · PMID: 32661006 · PMCID: PMC7449227
241. A Multicenter, Adaptive, Randomized Blinded Controlled Trial of the Safety and
Efficacy of Investigational Therapeutics for the Treatment of COVID-19 in Hospitalized
Adults (ACTT-3)
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID)
clinicaltrials.gov (2021-02-04) https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT04492475
242. COVID-19 PICU guidelines: for high- and limited-resource settings
Saraswati Kache, Mohammod Jobayer Chisti, Felicity Gumbo, Ezekiel Mupere, Xia Zhi, Karthi
Nallasamy, Satoshi Nakagawa, Jan Hau Lee, Matteo Di Nardo, Pedro de la Oliva, … Joseph
Carcillo
Pediatric Research (2020-07-07) https://doi.org/gg4f3p
DOI: 10.1038/s41390-020-1053-9 · PMID: 32634818 · PMCID: PMC7577838
243. Table 1, Cost-Comparison Table for Biologic Disease-Modifying Drugs for
Rheumatoid Arthritis
National Center for Biotechnology Information, U. S. National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville
Pike, Bethesda MD, 20894 Usa
(2015-08) https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK349513/table/T43/

244. A Cost Comparison of Treatments of Moderate to Severe Psoriasis
Cheryl Hankin, Steven Feldman, Andy Szczotka, Randolph Stinger, Leslie Fish, David Hankin
Drug Benefit Trends (2005-05) https://escholarship.umassmed.edu/meyers_pp/385
245. TNF-α inhibition for potential therapeutic modulation of SARS coronavirus infection
Edward Tobinick
Current Medical Research and Opinion (2008-09-22) https://doi.org/bq4cx2
DOI: 10.1185/030079903125002757 · PMID: 14741070
246. Sanofi and Regeneron begin global Kevzara® (sarilumab) clinical trial program in
patients with severe COVID-19
Sanofi
(2020-03-16) http://www.news.sanofi.us/2020-03-16-Sanofi-and-Regeneron-begin-globalKevzara-R-sarilumab-clinical-trial-program-in-patients-with-severe-COVID-19
247. Sarilumab COVID-19 - Full Text View - ClinicalTrials.gov
https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT04327388
248. COVID-19: combining antiviral and anti-inflammatory treatments
Justin Stebbing, Anne Phelan, Ivan Griffin, Catherine Tucker, Olly Oechsle, Dan Smith, Peter
Richardson
The Lancet Infectious Diseases (2020-04) https://doi.org/dph5
DOI: 10.1016/s1473-3099(20)30132-8 · PMID: 32113509 · PMCID: PMC7158903
249. Baricitinib as potential treatment for 2019-nCoV acute respiratory disease
Peter Richardson, Ivan Griffin, Catherine Tucker, Dan Smith, Olly Oechsle, Anne Phelan,
Michael Rawling, Edward Savory, Justin Stebbing
The Lancet (2020-02) https://doi.org/ggnrsx
DOI: 10.1016/s0140-6736(20)30304-4 · PMID: 32032529 · PMCID: PMC7137985
250. Lilly Begins Clinical Testing of Therapies for COVID-19 | Eli Lilly and Company
https://investor.lilly.com/news-releases/news-release-details/lilly-begins-clinical-testingtherapies-covid-19
251. Baricitinib Combined With Antiviral Therapy in Symptomatic Patients Infected by
COVID-19: an Open-label, Pilot Study
Fabrizio Cantini
clinicaltrials.gov (2020-04-19) https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT04320277
252. Design and Synthesis of Hydroxyferroquine Derivatives with Antimalarial and
Antiviral Activities
Christophe Biot, Wassim Daher, Natascha Chavain, Thierry Fandeur, Jamal Khalife, Daniel
Dive, Erik De Clercq
Journal of Medicinal Chemistry (2006-05) https://doi.org/db4n83
DOI: 10.1021/jm0601856 · PMID: 16640347

253. An orally bioavailable broad-spectrum antiviral inhibits SARS-CoV-2 in human
airway epithelial cell cultures and multiple coronaviruses in mice
Timothy P. Sheahan, Amy C. Sims, Shuntai Zhou, Rachel L. Graham, Andrea J. Pruijssers,
Maria L. Agostini, Sarah R. Leist, Alexandra Schäfer, Kenneth H. Dinnon, Laura J. Stevens, …
Ralph S. Baric
Science Translational Medicine (2020-04-29) https://doi.org/ggrqd2
DOI: 10.1126/scitranslmed.abb5883 · PMID: 32253226 · PMCID: PMC7164393
254. Antiviral Monoclonal Antibodies: Can They Be More Than Simple Neutralizing
Agents?
Mireia Pelegrin, Mar Naranjo-Gomez, Marc Piechaczyk
Trends in Microbiology (2015-10) https://doi.org/f7vzrf
DOI: 10.1016/j.tim.2015.07.005 · PMID: 26433697 · PMCID: PMC7127033
255. Molecular biology of the cell
Bruce Alberts (editor)
Garland Science (2002)
ISBN: 9780815332183
256. Intranasal Treatment with Poly(I{middle dot}C) Protects Aged Mice from Lethal
Respiratory Virus Infections
J. Zhao, C. Wohlford-Lenane, J. Zhao, E. Fleming, T. E. Lane, P. B. McCray, S. Perlman
Journal of Virology (2012-08-22) https://doi.org/f4bzfp
DOI: 10.1128/jvi.01410-12 · PMID: 22915814 · PMCID: PMC3486278
257. Main protease structure and XChem fragment screen
Diamond
(2020-05-05) https://www.diamond.ac.uk/covid-19/for-scientists/Main-protease-structure-andXChem.html

