Combat COVID-19 Infodemic Using Explainable
Natural Language Processing Models
Jackie Ayoub
Industrial and Manufacturing Systems Engineering, University of Michigan-Dearborn

arXiv:2103.00747v1 [cs.CL] 1 Mar 2021

4901 Evergreen Road, Dearborn, MI 48128

X. Jessie Yang
Industrial and Operations Engineering, University of Michigan
1205 Beal Avenue, Ann Arbor, MI 48015

Feng Zhou∗
Industrial and Manufacturing Systems Engineering, University of Michigan-Dearborn
4901 Evergreen Road, Dearborn, MI 48128

Manuscript accepted by Information Processing and Management

Abstract
Misinformation of COVID-19 is prevalent on social media as the pandemic unfolds, and the associated risks are extremely high. Thus, it is critical to detect
and combat such misinformation. Recently, deep learning models using natural
language processing techniques, such as BERT (Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers), have achieved great successes in detecting misinformation. In this paper, we proposed an explainable natural language processing
model based on DistilBERT and SHAP (Shapley Additive exPlanations) to combat misinformation about COVID-19 due to their efficiency and effectiveness.
First, we collected a dataset of 984 claims about COVID-19 with fact checking.
By augmenting the data using back-translation, we doubled the sample size of
the dataset and the DistilBERT model was able to obtain good performance
(accuracy: 0.972; areas under the curve: 0.993) in detecting misinformation
∗ Corresponding

author
Email address: fezhou@umich.edu (Manuscript accepted by Information Processing and
Management)

Preprint submitted to Journal of LATEX Templates

March 2, 2021

about COVID-19. Our model was also tested on a larger dataset for AAAI2021
- COVID-19 Fake News Detection Shared Task and obtained good performance
(accuracy: 0.938; areas under the curve: 0.985). The performance on both
datasets was better than traditional machine learning models. Second, in order to boost public trust in model prediction, we employed SHAP to improve
model explainability, which was further evaluated using a between-subjects experiment with three conditions, i.e., text (T), text+SHAP explanation (TSE),
and text+SHAP explanation+source and evidence (TSESE). The participants
were significantly more likely to trust and share information related to COVID19 in the TSE and TSESE conditions than in the T condition. Our results
provided good implications in detecting misinformation about COVID-19 and
improving public trust.
Keywords: COVID-19, misinformation detection, trust, BERT, DistilBERT,
SHAP

1. Introduction
“The best way to prevent COVID-19 is actually traditional Chinese medicine”;
“COVID-19 came from Chinese people eating bat soup”; “Coronavirus is an
engineered bioweapon”; “Coronavirus is just like the flu” [1]. Such false and
misleading information about COVID-19 has been widely disseminated in digital spaces and is even promoted by famous public figures, including celebrities
and politicians. The focus has been going beyond prevention and treatment to
include its origin and conspiracy theories. The World Health Organization announced a massive “infodemic” that made it difficult for us to find trustworthy
sources and reliable advice amid this horrific pandemic [2]. What is lacking is
how to distinguish true information from false claims timely with rapid changes
of the COVID-19 pandemic and provide explanations in order to mitigate the
risks associated with COVID-19 to improve public trust through digital spaces
[3]. Hence, there is an urgent need to develop prediction models to debunk false
claims and to provide timely and trustworthy information to the general public.

2

The failure to meet this need represents an important issue amid the COVID19 pandemic, as without it both misuse and disuse of such misinformation will
continue to exist.
In order to avoid the spread of misinformation, researchers have been focusing on machine learning-based NLP (Natural Language Processing) techniques.
For example, Ozbay and Alatas [4] used twenty-three supervised machine learning models to identify misinformation. Recently, more successful models based
on deep learning techniques have been used to detect misinformation. For example, Aggarwal et al. [5] detected misinformation using BERT with very
minimal text pre-processing, but obtained very good performance. It was also
reported that by April 2020 Facebook removed more than fifty million posts related to COVID-19 since they were classified as misinformation using machine
learning-based NLP techniques [6]. Other big social media companies, including Google and Twitter also removed scammers of ads related to face masks,
hand sanitizers, and manipulative posts related to COVID-19 using these deep
learning-based models [6]. Hence, in this study, we proposed an NLP machine
learning model based on BERT [7] to detect misinformation about COVID-19.
BERT is a deeply bidirectional, unsupervised language model, and was pretrained using a huge amount of text corpus. One of the disadvantages of BERT
is that it is computationally intensive, which might be difficult to be deployed
without advanced computational resources. Thus, we made use of DistilBERT
which was able to maintain almost similar performance of BERT with fewer
parameters [7].
Despite the efforts using deep learning models in debunking misinformation
about COVID-19, there is a lack of research on how to help the general public
detect misinformation and improve their trust at the same time. In addition,
NLP techniques based on machine learning are usually black-box models. The
trust in and acceptance of such models are often compromised without revealing
the domain knowledge, i.e., explainability, contained in the data [8]. Compared
to other domains, the importance of explainability in decision making with high
risks is even greater, such as COVID-19 in the medical area [9] and fatigue
3

detection in driving . On the contrary, if the insights captured by such models
are revealed, it can help improve trust and acceptance and potentially attain
the intended purposes. For example, Gilpin et al. [10] showed that explainable
machine learning models achieved a higher level of acceptance and trust. Thus,
it is crucial for the black-box machine learning models to provide explanations
about their decisions.
In order to improve the trustworthiness of the model, we proposed to explain the reasoning process of distilBERT using SHAP (SHapley Additive exPlanations). SHAP capitalizes on the Shapley value from cooperative game
theory [11] to calculate individual contributions of the features in the prediction
model. It has many desirable properties in explaining machine learning models,
including local accuracy, missingness, and consistency [12]. Furthermore, we
designed a between-subjects experiment to evaluate the proposed explainable
NLP models in three conditions (i.e., text (T), text+SHAP explanation (TSE),
and text+SHAP explanation+source and evidence (TSESE)) in terms of trust
and willingness to share the information. As a summary, the contributions of
this paper includes 1) building a prediction model based on state-of-the-art NLP
techniques, i.e., DistilBERT, 2) explaining model predictions using SHAP in order to improve public trust, and 3) conducting a human-subject experiment to
evaluate trust in model prediction and willingness to share information.

2. Related work
In order to reduce the negative effects of misinformation, researchers developed different prediction models to automatically detect misinformation. Machine learning models using various features are dominant, such as linguistic
features (e.g., styles of writing, subjectivity, and authenticity) and social contextual features (e.g., user characteristics and credibility, content, and social networks) [13]. These machine learning-based methods can be further categorized
into supervised and semi-supervised methods. Gilda [14] evaluated different supervised models on misinformation classification and the best performance was

4

obtained with stochastic gradient descent. Ozbay and Alatas [4] assessed the
performance of twenty-three supervised machine learning models (e.g., logistic
model tree, stochastic gradient descent, classification via clustering, bagging, decision tree). The decision tree model achieved the best performance. With the
existing computational capabilities and a large amount of data, supervised deep
learning models provide better performance compared to traditional machine
learning models. Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) and convolutional neural
networks (CNNs) were explored by multiple researchers to handle misinformation detection [15]. Ma et al. [16] proposed a RNN model with well-designed
recurrent units and extra hidden layers to learn the latent features of the contextual information of microblogs over time and their model performed better
than online rumor debunking services. Ruchansky et al. [17] proposed a hybrid
deep RNN model that incorporated three modules, including capture, score,
and integrate, which obtained better results in fake news detection. Yang et al.
[18] proposed a CNN-based model by including text and images as features for
the model. Bahad et al. [19] proposed a bi-directional long short-term memory
(LSTM) model to detect misinformation. The model was capable of detecting
complex patterns in text data by examining a sentence bi-directionally and thus
performed better than unidirectional LSTM models. Ma et al. [20] proposed
a model based on generative adversarial learning to detect misinformation on
Twitter, in which a generator was used to produce conflicting information in
order for the discriminator to learn better representations to detect rumors. For
a more detailed review on fake news detection, please refer to [21, 22].
The main limitation of the supervised method is to label a huge amount of
data to train the model, which is laborious and time-consuming. Therefore, in
search for an alternative to the supervised method, semi-supervised methods
learn domain knowledge from a small set of labeled data on top of a pre-trained
unsupervised model. Gaucho et al. [23] proposed a semi-supervised contentbased approach to detect misinformation, using tensor embedding and label
propagation. Benamira et al. [24] introduced a content-based semi-supervised
approach by capturing contextual similarities using a graph learning task. Shu
5

et al. [25] focused not only on news content features but also on publisher bias
and user engagement to detect misinformation using a semi-supervised linear
classifier to guide the misinformation detection process. Dong et al. [26] implemented a two-paths semi-supervised deep learning approach based on three
CNNs, where both the labeled and unlabeled data were used to train the model.
One of the powerful deep learning semi-supervised methods in detecting misinformation is BERT [7]. BERT is composed of two stages, i.e., unsupervised
pre-training and supervised fine-tuning. Aggarwal et al. [5] showed that BERT
outperformed LSTM and gradient boosted tree models even with minimal text
pre-processing. To improve the performance of BERT, Jwa et al. [27] proposed
a model that classified the data using weighted cross-entropy. They pre-trained
BERT on additional news data and obtained better results than BERT.
However, the BERT model is computationally expensive and contains millions of parameters (i.e., 110 million parameters for BERT base and 340 million parameters for BERT large) [7], which makes it difficult to apply in real
time without accelerated hardware, such as GPUs and TPUs. In contrast, in
this paper, we attempted to address this problem by distilling the knowledge
from BERT to detect misinformation [28]. DistilBERT was shown to be 60%
faster than BERT while retaining over 95% of BERT’s performance [28]. Another difficulty is the lack of labeled data in fine-tuning the model for a domain
specific task. Therefore, we proposed a data augmentation method using backtranslation, which helped to double the size of the training data collected by
ourselves and to improve the model performance. For example, Xie et al. [29]
showed that sentences generated by back-translation reached a significant improvement in text classification.
Furthermore, in the case of fact checking related to COVID-19 claims, both
understanding and trust are necessary for the adoption of the predictions. Very
few studies focused on improving trust in model prediction by incorporating
model explanation [30]. However, according to Rudin et al. [31], an inaccurate
explanation limits the trust in the model. Therefore, it was suggested that we
should not only show the model performance but also include explanations about
6

the predictions [30]. There are two approaches to explain a machine learning
model including example- and feature-based methods [30]. The example-based
approach is based on criticisms and prototypes [32]. This method was proved
to improve human understanding and reasoning. For example, Shu et al. [33]
proposed a sentence-comment co-attention sub-network to detect fake news and
used the top-k user comments as contextual information to explain why they
were fake. However, example-based methods are often limited to improve the
interpretability when the claims do not have contextual information [34], where
claims about COVID-19 lack specific contexts to tell if they are true or fake.
In the feature-based approach (e.g., SHAP), each feature is characterized by an
importance value for a particular prediction [12]. For example, Reis et al. [35]
examined a large and diverse set of features of fake news and found some features were very effective to detect certain types of fake news, which were used to
explain model decisions to help detect fake news. The feature-based approach
can provide two major advantages, including global and local interpretability.
The global interpretation aims to show how much each feature contributed to
the overall prediction and the local interpretation explains individual predictions, which tends to be more helpful to improve user understanding and trust.
Therefore, we proposed to use SHAP to explain the prediction of DistilBERT
locally to improve trust and acceptance as a feature-based explanation method.
To further evaluate the explanations provided by SHAP, a between-subjects
experiment was designed with three conditions i.e., T, TSE, and TSESE.

3. Methods
Data Preprocessing
Raw Data

Backtranslation
English
German
English

AAAI2021 - COVID19
Fake News Detection
Shared Task

Model Explanation Model Evaluation

Model Building
Data Preparation

Fine Tuning

Distilling Knowledge

10 fold cross validation BertBinaryClassifier
Tokenization

Fine tuned BERT

Move to GPU

Between-Subject
Experiment

Predict raw logits

Convert tokens to IDs Create Adam optimizer
Padding

SHAP Explainer

Train for 3 epochs

Train Logistic
Regression

Data cleaning/analysis

Masking

Figure 1: Summary of the proposed misinformation detection process.

7

The summary of the proposed method is illustrated in Figure 1 with the
following steps:
(1) Data Preprocessing: We collected a dataset and manually labeled the
data with fact checking from different trustworthy sources. Then, we doubled
the size of the dataset using back-translation. In addition, we included another
large dataset for AAAI2021 - COVID-19 Fake News Detection Shared Task [36]
to further test our proposed method.
(2) Model Building: We transformed (i.e., tokenization, padding, masking)
the dataset into the shape needed to fine-tune the BERT model. After that, the
PyTorch-Pretrained-BERT library was used to build the BERT model. Then
the BERT model was fine-tuned with our labeled data or the COVID-19 Fake
News dataset [36]. Then, we distilled the knowledge from the BERT model by
training a logistic regression model.
(3) Model Explanation: To improve user trust in the distilled BERT model,
SHAP was used to explain the predictions locally.
(4) Model Evaluation: To evaluate user trust in the model predictions and
the provided SHAP explanations, we conducted a between-subjects experiment with three conditions on Amazon Mechanical Turk (AMT, Seattle, WA,
www.mturk.com).
3.1. Data Preprocessing
We collected and labeled our own misinformation of COVID-19 dataset with
lateral reading and verification [37] and fact checking from different trustworthy websites. We collected our claims (in sentences rather than in long news
articles, see Table 1) in English about COVID-19 from well-edited sources, including Cable News Network (i.e., CNN, www.cnn.com), Word Health Organization (i.e., WHO, www.who.int), Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (i.e., CDC, https://www.cdc.gov), and Aljazeera (www.aljazeera.com), and
facts check websites, including Snopes (www.snopes.com), FactCheck (www.factcheck.org),
and Poynter (www.poynter.org/covid-19-poynter-resources). The reasons that
we collected the claims from these sources are that 1) these sources are trust8

worthy and 2) individual tweets, posts, or reports without verification are less
reliable, especially at the early stage of the COVID-19 pandemic when knowledge about the virus was not well-established.
Then, we developed a back-translation augmented method to increase the
sample size of our own collected data by using a high-quality translation app
(www.deepl.com/en/translator). Back-translation is simply translating a text
back to the original language (i.e., English) after translating it into another
language (i.e., German) [29]. This resulted in new sentences differed from what
we started with. For example, using the back-translation technique, two original claims, i.e., “Consuming boiled ginger with an empty stomach can kill the
coronavirus” and “Several viral tweets purporting that snorting cocaine would
sterilize one’s nostrils of the coronavirus spread around Europe and Africa” became “Eating cooked ginger on an empty stomach can kill coronavirus” and “In
Europe and Africa, several viral tweets spread claiming that snorting cocaine
would rid one’s nostrils of coronavirus”, respectively. Although the new claims
had nearly the same meaning as the original ones, the key words and some of
the word orders were different. We collected 984 claims (575 true and 409 fake)
about COVID-19, and doubled the sample size with back-translation.
The COVID-19 Fake News dataset [36] had 10,700 claims. However, only
the training and validation dataset with 8,560 claims (4,480 true and 4,080 fake)
were available and used in this paper. They were directly used in the BERT
and DistilBERT models. However, for traditional machine learning models (see
Table 2), we prepared both this dataset and our own labeled dataset using tokenization, lemmatization, removing stop words and punctuation, and converting
the textual representation into a vector space model using the term frequencyinverse document frequency.
3.2. Model Building
Fine-tuning with BERT: BERT produced state-of-the-art results in a
wide variety of NLP tasks (e.g., question answering, translation, and text classification). It was first pre-trained on a huge amount of text data (800M words
9

Table 1: Examples of collected COVID-19 claims

Label

Source

Date

Claims

Fake

FactCheck

Jan. 28, 2020

“Chinese spy team” working in
a Canadian government lab sent
“pathogens to the Wuhan facility”
prior to the coronavirus outbreak in
China.

Fake

Snopes

March 2, 2020

Sales of Corona beer dropped sharply
in early 2020 because consumers mistakenly associated the brand name
with the new coronavirus

Fake

Poynter

Jan. 22, 2020

Chinese influencer caused the new
coronavirus outbreak after eating bat
soup.

Fake

WHO

March 20, 2020

COVID-19 only affects the old.

True

CNN

April 9, 2020

There’s no evidence to support
the theory that 5G networks cause
COVID-19 or contribute to its spread

True

WHO

March 20, 2020

Being able to hold your breath for 10
seconds or more without coughing or
feeling discomfort DOES NOT mean
you are free from COVID-19

True

CDC

April 11, 2020

Stay home for 14 days after your
last contact with a person who has
COVID-19.

True

FactCheck

March 16, 2020

Gargling water with salt won’t ‘eliminate’ coronavirus

10

from the BooksCorpus and 2,500M words from the English Wikipedia) [7]. The
basic transformer relied on an encoder to read the text and a decoder to produce a prediction. To prepare the needed input to the BERT encoder, the
data was passed into three embedding layers including a token, segment, and
position embedding layers. In the first step of the processing, sentences were
tokenized and after that each input token was passed through a token embedding layer to transform it into a vector representation of fixed dimension (i.e.,
768-dimensional vector). Additionally, extra classification [CLS] and separator
[SEP] tokens were added to the start and end of the tokenized sentence to serve
as an input representation and a sentence separator for the classification task.
The segment embedding layer helps in classifying a text given a pair of input
texts. The positional embedding layer learns the relative position of tokens in a
sentence using a sinusoidal function. The final input embedding is a summation
of the three embeddings. The summed input was passed to the transformer. In
this study, we used the PyTorch-Pretrained-BERT library to build the BERT
model. Then, we fine-tuned its linear layer and the sigmoid activation to obtain
the predictions with the labeled COVID-19 dataset. During the fine-tuning process, Adam optimizer was used with a learning rate of 3 × 10−6 and a batch size
of 12. We fine-tuned the model on the collected COVID-19 dataset for three
epochs.
DistilBERT: It is an approximation method of BERT that uses only 60%
of the number of BERT model parameters (i.e., 66 million parameters instead
of 110 million). The main benefit of DistilBERT is its capability of almost
reproducing the behavior of BERT by compressing the big BERT model. In this
study, we made use of the knowledge distillation process in DistilBERT, defined
as a compression technique in which the student (i.e., DistilBERT) is trained to
mimic the teacher’s behavior (i.e., BERT) [28]. The BERT predictions were first
used to train a smaller model, DistilBERT, by learning the inner representation
with raw predictions (i.e., predictions before the final activation function) rather
than the hard target probabilities. Then, the knowledge was transferred to the
student with a cross-entropy on the raw target probabilities of the teacher and
11

the distillation loss of the training process is as follows:
L=

X

ti ∗ log(si )

(1)

i

where ti and si are the probabilities estimated by the teacher and the student,
respectively. We ran a distillation for three epochs with a learning rate 3 × 10−6
and a batch size of 12 using the Adam optimizer on Google Colaboratory.
Logistic regression: It is a supervised classification technique that is characterized by a logistic function to model a probability (i.e., sigmoid function) of
a prediction given a set of features. In this paper, we distill the knowledge from
the BERT model by training a logistic regression model, which might result
in a slight loss of accuracy in order to improve the explainability of the model
predictions using SHAP.
3.3. Model Explanation
SHAP was used in this paper to explain the output of the DistilBERT model
by assigning each feature with an importance value related to a particular prediction [38]. SHAP is built on Shapley value derived from coalitional game
theory [11], in which each player is assigned with payouts depending on their
contribution to the total payout when all of them cooperate in a coalition. It
combines optimal allocation with local explanations using the classic Shapley
values. Studies have shown that it is often easier for the users to trust prediction
models not only by providing what the prediction is, but by also providing why
and how the prediction is made [39, 40]. In this paper, SHAP is used to explain
DistilBERT (logistic regression) model. The units of the SHAP values are in the
log-odds space, which was then transformed into predicted truth probabilities
(see Figure 2).
The SHAP value for the i-th feature-value set is calculated as follows:
ϕi = βi .(xi − E[xi ])

(2)

where βi is the weight corresponding to feature i, xi is a feature value, E[xi ]
is the mean effect estimate for feature i. For example, if we want to predict if
12

a given claim represents a misinformation or not, each feature (i.e., word) will
have its contribution to push the final prediction away from the base value (see
Figure 2). By aggregating all the features for one instance marginalized over all
other features that are not included in the set S, we can calculate the overall
SHAP value [38],
Z
fx (S) = E[f (x)|xS ] =

ˆ
fˆ(x1 , ..., xP )dPx∈S
/ − E(f (x)),

(3)

where P is the number of the words in the instance, and S is the set of non-zero
indexes of words in the dataset and x = [x1 , ..., xP ]. E[f (x)|xS ] indicates the
expected value of the function conditioned on the subset S of the input words
in the model. Then, according to the coalitional game theory [11], the Shapley
value of the i-th feature-value set is defined as its contribution to the payout,
weighted and summed over all possible feature-value combinations as follows:
φi (f ) =

X
S⊆N \{i}

|S|!(P − |S| − 1)!
(fx (S ∪ {i}) − fx (S)),
P!

(4)

where N is the set of all the input words and N \{i} indicates the set that
does not include i-th word. In order to estimate both E[f (x)|xS ] and φi (f )
efficiently, we adopted the TreeSHAP algorithm proposed in [38].
3.4. Model Evaluation
To evaluate the provided SHAP explanations, we conducted a betweensubjects experiment on AMT. AMT is a web-based survey company, operated
by Amazon Web Services. The survey was created with Qualtrics (Provo, UT,
www.qualtrics.com), web-based survey software, and was integrated with AMT.
We investigated participants’ trust in model predictions and their willingness to
share the provided information in three conditions, i.e., T, TSE, and TSESE,
as shown in Figure 2 using a 7-point Likert scale. The source and evidence
information was manually collected during our own the data collection process
and we included the source and evidence and information as a third condition,
i.e., TSESE, to further test if such information was needed, comparing with the
TSE condition.
13

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 2: Three conditions involved in the between-subjects experiment: (a) Condition T
(Text); (b) Condition TSE (Text+SHAP Explanation ); (c) Condition TSESE (Text+SHAP
Explanation+Source and Evidence.

We designed a between-subjects experiment where each participant was randomly assigned to one of the conditions. In condition T, participants were given

14

(a)

(b)
Figure 3: Examples of a (a) true claim: (“Men have higher concentrations of angiotensinconverting enzyme 2 (ACE2) in their blood than women, which may help to explain why men
are more vulnerable to COVID-19 than women”) and (b) false claim: “Consuming alcoholic
beverages may help reduce the risk of infection by the novel coronavirus” explained by SHAP.

a classifier prediction (i.e, true, false) about a claim related to COVID-19 (see
Figure 2(a)). In condition TSE, in addition to the claim and the model prediction, SHAP explanation was provided to increase the model transparency in
making predictions (see Figure 2(b)). In addition to the information provided in
condition TSE, evidence and source of the claims were presented to the participants in condition TSESE (see Figure 2(c)). In the three conditions, participants
reported their degree of trust in model predictions by answering “Based on the
given explanation, what is your degree of trust in the model prediction”) and
their willingness to share by answering “Based on the given explanation, how
much are you willing to share this claim with your friends and/or families”)
using a 7-point Likert scale. In the given SHAP explanations, participants were
explained with three main points, including 1) the output value which represents
the predicted truth probability (i.e., if it is close to 0 the claim is more likely to
be false, whereas if it is close to 1 it is more likely to be true), 2) a base value
which represents the mean predicted truth probability, and 3) words represented
in red (i.e., pushing the prediction to be true) and blue (i.e., pushing the predic15

tion to be false). In each condition, there were 10 claims, including 5 true and 5
false, about COVID-19 randomly selected from our own labeled dataset. After
going through a training session and correctly answering two attention-check
questions, the participant was eligible to take part in the survey. One qualitative question was also designed at the end of each condition in the survey,
which asked the participants to state the reasons behind trusting/distrusting
the model predictions and willingness/unwillingness to share the information.
A total number of 300 participants in the USA filled in the survey with 100 in
each condition. In order to complete the survey, participants needed to be 18
years old and above. We further removed participants who did not answer the
third attention question correctly at the end of the survey. We ended up with
84 participants in condition T and 80 participants each in conditions TSE and
TSESE. Participants were compensated with $1 upon completion of the survey.

4. Results
4.1. Model Performance
The performance of the different tested models, including precision, recall,
F1 score, accuracy, and area under the receiver operating characteristic curve
(short for AUC) using a 10-fold cross-validation process is shown in Table 2.
The BERT model had a slightly better performance (see Table 2) than the
DistilBERT model while the DistilBERT model is more efficient and has better
explainability to improve its trustworthiness using SHAP (see Figure 3). Since
our model distilled BERT with a much simpler model, i.e., logistic regression,
which was much more efficient and without losing much performance compared
to BERT, we compared the performance of the augmented DistilBERT with
other traditional machine learning models that were also more efficient than
BERT. We used Python in Google Colaboratory. The augmented DistilBERT
method performed the best among all the selected traditional machine learning
models, including classification tree, logistic regression, and random forest (see
Table 2).

16

Table 2: Summary of model performance on our own collected dataset
Model
BERT

Precision

Recall

F1-score

(False/True)

(False/True)

(False/True)

0.998/0.990

0.985/0.998

0.991/0.994

Accuracy

AUC

0.993

0.999

DistilBERT (Logistic)

0.772/0.876

0.836/0.824

0.803/0.849

0.829

0.887

Aug-BERT

0.994/0.994

0.991/0.996

0.993/0.995

0.994

0.999

Aug-DistilBERT (Logistic)

0.961/0.980

0.972/0.972

0.967/0.976

0.972

0.993

Classification Tree

0.721/0.794

0.707/0.805

0.714/0.800

0.764

0.756

Logistic Regression

0.835/0.894

0.853/0.880

0.844/0.887

0.869

0.922

Random Forest

0.775/0.864

0.817/0.831

0.795/0.848

0.825

0.920

Aug-Classification Tree

0.872/0.918

0.886/0.908

0.879/0.913

0.899

0.897

Aug-Logistic Regression

0.949/0.957

0.939/0.964

0.944/0.961

0.954

0.992

Aug-Random Forest

0.930/0.947

0.925/0.950

0.928/0.949

0.940

0.987

BERT*

0.998/0.989

0.988/0.998

0.993/0.994

0.993

1.000

DistilBERT (Logistic)*

0.923/0.952

0.949/0.928

0.936/0.940

0.938

0.985

Classification Tree*

0.897/0.900

0.889/0.907

0.893/0.903

0.898

0.900

Logistic Regression*

0.926/0.941

0.936/0.931

0.931/0.936

0.934

0.984

Random Forest*

0.880/0.947

0.946/0.883

0.912/0.914

0.913

0.977

Note “Aug-” denotes the model was augmented by extra data using back-translation
tested with our own labeled dataset. Models with ”*” indicate the performance on
the COVID-19 Fake News Detection dataset [36]

4.2. SHAP Explanation
To show how SHAP explained individual predictions, we randomly selected
two observations as shown in Figure 3. The figure shows the different features
contributing to pushing the predicted truth probability from the base value.
Factors pushing the prediction to be true are shown in red (i.e., words in red
increase the predicted truth probability) while those pushing the prediction to
be false are shown in blue (i.e., words in blue decrease the predicted truth
probability). The first example (see Figure 3(a)) represents a true claim with
a predicted truth probability of 0.99. Words that contributed to producing the
given prediction are “help”, “angiotensin”, “converting”, “enzyme”, “women”,
“ace2”, and “higher”. The second example (see Figure 3(b)) represents a false
claim with a predicted truth probability of 0.02. The words that contributed to

17

producing the given prediction are “novel”, “coronavirus”, “alcoholic”, “help”,
and “reduce”. These words help explain why the model predicted such results
in order to improve its trustworthiness.
4.3. Survey Results
A one-way ANOVA model was used to analyze the survey data with a significance level of α = 0.05. A post-hoc analysis was used with a Tukey HSD
correction. Figure 4 summarizes the mean and standard error of trust and willingness to share the information under the three conditions. The main effects
of the three conditions on trust (F (2, 241) = 5.628, p = .004) and willingness to
share the information (F(2, 241) = 10.730, p = .000) were significant. Trust in
the model decision was shown to be significantly higher in the TSE condition
(p = .031) and the TSESE condition (p = .005) than the control condition.
Willingness to share was shown to be significantly higher in the TSE condition
(p = .001) and the TSESE condition (p = .000) than the control condition.
However, there were no significant differences between the TSE and TSESE
conditions both for trust and willingness to share.

5. Discussions
5.1. DistilBERT-based NLP Models
We showed previously in the results (see Table 2) that the performance of
DistilBERT was reasonably well compared with BERT while having 40% fewer
parameters. In addition to the good performance, DistilBERT was 60% faster
than BERT. We also showed that distilling the knowledge from BERT by training a logistic regression model outperformed other traditional machine learning
models (e.g., classification tree, logistic regression, and Random Forest). One
of the reasons for this performance was that DistilBERT was built on BERT,
which learned deep representation of the words by pre-training on contextual
representation using a large corpus with bidirectionality, whereas the traditional models used the term frequency-inverse document frequency. A model

18

6

**
*

Mean Value

5

***

**

4
3
2
1
0
T

TSE

TSESE

Condition Type
Trust

Willingness

Figure 4: The effects of three conditions on trust and willingness to share the information.
Note “T”, “TSE”, and “TSESE” denote “text”, “text+SHAP explanation”, and “text+SHAP
explanation+source and evidence”, respectively; “*”, “**”, and “***” indicate p < .05, p <
.01, and p < .001, respectively.

with good performance is important, especially in the situation of the COVID19 pandemic, since participant’s trust in model prediction can be improved with
higher predicted accuracy [30].
5.2. SHAP-Explanations and User Trust
Compared to the control condition (i.e., the T condition), we showed that
participants’ trust and willingness to share was significantly enhanced by adding
SHAP explanations in the TSE condition. This result proved the effectiveness
of SHAP explanation to help improve trust in COVID-19 related claims. This
was also supported by participants’ qualitative responses, such as “The predictions confirm my beliefs”. Furthermore, by adding the source and evidence of
the information in the TSESE condition, participants’ trust and willingness to
share information were also significantly higher than those in the control condition (one participant stated in the TSESE condition, “I trusted the predictions
if the claims were backed up by reliable resources and evidence”). Such results
were consistent with previous research that providing more explanations (e.g.,
feature importance, predicted probabilities, sources, and evidence) improved
19

participant’s trust in the model [29]. The increase in willingness to share information is also related to the increase in trust in the information as Mosleh et al.
[41] showed that self-reported willingness to share information on social media
reflected the actual intentions of trust, which further supported the effectiveness
of our proposed model.
However, there was no significant difference between the TSE and TSESE
conditions in terms of trust and willingness to share. In order to investigate the
reasons, we further examined the answers to the qualitative questions at the end
of the survey. We did find that 31% of the participants in the TSESE condition
confirmed that they built their trust in the model predictions based on the
source of information and evidence. This showed the effectiveness of the source
of information and evidence in helping build trust, which was supported by
previous research that a primary evaluation of verifiable claims was by checking
the source of the information and evidence [37]. However, this percentage was
not big enough and it was unclear whether the addition of source and evidence
could influence their trust and willingness to share information significantly on
top of the model explanation augmented by SHAP. On the other hand, 16% of
the participants stated that they trusted the model predictions when they had
prior knowledge about the claims (e.g, “I trust/distrust the prediction if I have
previous knowledge/read about it before”), which indicated that the pre-exposure
to COVID-19 claims in the experiment could potentially mitigate the influence
of extra source and evidence of the information. In order to understand the
insignificance between the TSE and TSESE conditions, we further ran a one-way
ANOVA (Note we first ran a 3 (explanation, i.e., T, TSE, TSESE) by 2 (claim
nature, i.e., true and false) two-way ANOVA and found no main effects for claim
nature or interaction effects. Then we ran a two one-way ANOVA models) to
compare the three conditions for the false claims and the true claims separately.
For the false claims, the main effects of the three conditions on trust (F(2, 241) =
7.984, p = .000) and willingness to share (F(2, 241) = 11.918, p = .000) were
significant. As for the true claims, the main effect of the three conditions on
trust (F(2, 241) = 2.158, p = .118) was not significant, but it was significant on
20

the willingness to share (F(2, 241) = 6.208, p = .002). This indicated that model
explanation help improve trust for the false claims more than the true claims,
which might be explained by the fact that 11% of the participants trusted the
claims based on what was true or untrue (e.g, “I trust/distrust it based on what
I know to be true or untrue”). In this situation, there was no need for them
to further check the source or evidence for true claims. Furthermore, since we
only tested 10 randomly selected claims in our dataset, one should be cautious
to interpret the insignificant results between the TSE and TSESE conditions.
As a summary, the fact that we did not find significant differences between the
TSE and TSESE conditions for trust did not necessarily indicate that sources
and evidence information is not useful in helping build trust in claims associated
with COVID-19. More studies are needed to further understand when sources
and evidence are not needed and when they are needed in building trust in
specific claims about COVID-19.
As for willingness, the majority of the participants (40%) were willing to
share only true information (e.g, “If the information is almost guaranteed to be
true, I would probably post”). We had half of false claims in the experiment
and this could potentially reduce the effects of extra sources and evidence on
their willingness to share information. In addition, there were no significant
differences between the TSE and TSESE conditions on willingness to share for
either false claims or true claims, separately, despite the significant main effects
among the three conditions. This was probably explained by the fact that 21%
of the participants in the TSESE condition were not willing to share any kind
of information on social media (e.g, “I do not share any sort of information
like this with my friends or family”). Therefore, a calibration process about
their tendency to share information on social media might be included in future
studies to better examine the effects of extra sources and evidence on participants’ willingness to share. Another possible reason could be associated with
the specific content of claims about COVID-19 in the experiment and we should
include more claims in future studies to further examine whether there is any
difference between the TSE and TSESE conditions.
21

5.3. Implications
The risks associated with false and misleading information about COVID-19
are especially high with the rapid changing situation of the pandemic. Examples
include 1) misinformation and false claims about different methods of prevention, treatment, testing, diagnosis, and miracle cures of the disease, and 2) false
claims of conspiracy theories about its origins, bioweapons, and population control schemes. Thus, it is extremely important to provide a trustworthy model
for the general public to verify whether such claims are true or not. We made
use of the state-of-the-art NLP machine learning models with explanations to
improve both accuracy and trustworthiness of the application. As machine
learning models are impacting our everyday lives, it is crucial not only to improve their performance but also to develop a better understanding of how they
work. In addition, we investigated participants’ trust in the model predictions
and their willingness to share the model predictions under three conditions. As
our study showed, improvement in trust can be achieved through explanations
offered by SHAP. To convince the public that the given information is trustworthy, we need to provide explanations of how the model made the prediction and
potentially the source and evidence of the information as well. Although no significant difference was found between the TSE and TSESE conditions, further
studies should be investigated to see if sources and extra evidence actually help
improve trust and willingness to share information.

6. Conclusion and Future Work
We built a trustworthy prediction model to debunk false claims of COVID19 by capitalizing DistilBERT and SHAP. Our results have demonstrated the
effectiveness of the proposed method and provided good implications in detecting misinformation about COVID-19 and improving public trust. Among the
three conditions, participants were significantly more likely to trust and share
information related to COVID-19 in the TSE and TSESE conditions than in
the T condition.

22

One of the limitations in building such a machine learning model is to potentially verify a large number of claims about COVID-19. Our model is built on a
small dataset collected by April 2020 and the COVID-19 Fake News Detection
dataset [36]. Thus, it might be limited to detect new misinformation related
to COVID-19. In order to maintain and help improve the trustworthiness of
the proposed model, it is imperative to include more data as the pandemic
unfolds over time, such as the COVID-19 Healthcare Misinformation Dataset
[42]. In addition, although BERT aims to learn contextualized representation
across a wide range of NLP tasks, it is still challenging to leverage BERT (i.e.,
it has almost no understanding of COVID-19) without domain knowledge about
COVID-19. This is mainly due to the fact that there is a limited labeled number
of claims about COVID-19 to fine-tune BERT to ensure full task-awareness of
the system. Thus, in the future we plan to increase the domain task awareness
with an unsupervised training method by making use of the COVID-19 Open
Research Dataset (CORD-19) and strengthen the end task awareness using supervised fine-tuning by labeling and augmenting the claims. In this research,
we recruited participants using AMT. Therefore, the selected sample may not
be well-representative of the population. In addition, we were not able to calibrate participants’ political and ideological biases related to COVID-19 claims,
which could potentially have a significant effect on their belief and/or disbelief
in such claims, although we tried to minimize such an effect through randomly
assigning participants into three conditions. Future studies should include extra
survey questions in order to calibrate such biases. Managing the quality of the
survey data from AMT was also challenging. We removed the invalid participants by examining their responses on the three designed attention questions.
However, the quality could also be affected by the compensation rate. Another
limitation of this study was the limited knowledge about the participants’ demographic information, which can also influence the results in this study. Further
investigation should include demographic factors. In addition, interpreting the
explanations provided by SHAP can be challenging for the first time. Even
though we provided a training section at the beginning of the survey, some par23

ticipants found it confusing to make predictions based on individual words. In
the future, more intuitive explanations should be explored to better improve
trust.

References
[1] CDC, Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), cited on 2020-08-07. URL:
https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/index.html.
[2] N. Kassam, Disinformation and coronavirus: The dilution of information on
the internet is currently posing a risk to global health and safety., cited on
2020-05-31. URL: https://www.lowyinstitute.org/the-interpreter/
disinformation-and-coronavirus.
[3] E. Beaunoyer, S. Dupéré, M. J. Guitton, Covid-19 and digital inequalities: Reciprocal impacts and mitigation strategies, Computers in Human
Behavior (2020) 106424.
[4] F. A. Ozbay, B. Alatas, Fake news detection within online social media
using supervised artificial intelligence algorithms, Physica A: Statistical
Mechanics and its Applications 540 (2020) 123174.
[5] A. Aggarwal, A. Chauhan, D. Kumar, M. Mittal, S. Verma, Classification
of fake news by fine-tuning deep bidirectional transformers based language
model, EAI Endorsed Transactions on Scalable Information Systems Online
First; EAI: Ghent, Belgium (2020).
[6] R.

Sumbaly,

E. Strauss,

M.

Mahalia,

G. Szilvasy,

H.

Shah,

M. Puri,

T.

Khatkevich,

P. Manadhata,

E.

Luo,

B. Graham,

M. Douze, Z. Yalniz, H. Jehou, Using AI to detect COVID-19 misinformation and exploitative content,

cited on 2020-06-21. URL:

https://ai.facebook.com/blog/using-ai-to-detect-covid-19misinformation-and-exploitative-content/.

24

[7] J. Devlin, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, K. Toutanova, Bert: Pre-training of deep
bidirectional transformers for language understanding, in: Proceedings of
the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1
(Long and Short Papers), 2019, pp. 4171–4186.
[8] F. Doshi-Velez, B. Kim, Towards a rigorous science of interpretable machine
learning, arXiv preprint arXiv:1702.08608 (2017).
[9] F. Zhou, T. Chen, B. Lei, Do not forget interaction: Predicting fatality of
covid-19 patients using logistic regression, arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.16942
(2020).
[10] L. H. Gilpin, D. Bau, B. Z. Yuan, A. Bajwa, M. Specter, L. Kagal, Explaining explanations: An overview of interpretability of machine learning,
in: 2018 IEEE 5th International Conference on data science and advanced
analytics (DSAA), IEEE, 2018, pp. 80–89.
[11] L. S. Shapley, A value for n-person games, Contributions to the Theory of
Games 2 (1953) 307–317.
[12] S. M. Lundberg, S.-I. Lee, A unified approach to interpreting model predictions, in: Advances in neural information processing systems, 2017, pp.
4765–4774.
[13] K. Shu, A. Sliva, S. Wang, J. Tang, H. Liu, Fake news detection on social
media: A data mining perspective, ACM SIGKDD explorations newsletter
19 (2017) 22–36.
[14] S. Gilda, Evaluating machine learning algorithms for fake news detection,
in: 2017 IEEE 15th Student Conference on Research and Development
(SCOReD), IEEE, 2017, pp. 110–115.
[15] W. Y. Wang, “liar, liar pants on fire”: A new benchmark dataset for
fake news detection, in: Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the

25

Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Papers), 2017,
pp. 422–426.
[16] J. Ma, W. Gao, P. Mitra, S. Kwon, B. J. Jansen, K. F. Wong, M. Cha,
Detecting rumors from microblogs with recurrent neural networks, in: IJCAI International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 2016,
2016, pp. 3818–3824.
[17] N. Ruchansky, S. Seo, Y. Liu, Csi: A hybrid deep model for fake news
detection, in: Proceedings of the 2017 ACM on Conference on Information
and Knowledge Management, 2017, pp. 797–806.
[18] Y. Yang, L. Zheng, J. Zhang, Q. Cui, Z. Li, P. S. Yu, TI-CNN: convolutional
neural networks for fake news detection, CoRR abs/1806.00749 (2018).
[19] P. Bahad, P. Saxena, R. Kamal, Fake news detection using bi-directional
lstm-recurrent neural network, Procedia Computer Science 165 (2019) 74–
82.
[20] J. Ma, W. Gao, K.-F. Wong, Detect rumors on twitter by promoting
information campaigns with generative adversarial learning, in: The World
Wide Web Conference, 2019, pp. 3049–3055.
[21] V. Pérez-Rosas, B. Kleinberg, A. Lefevre, R. Mihalcea, Automatic detection of fake news, in: Proceedings of the 27th International Conference on
Computational Linguistics, 2018, pp. 3391–3401.
[22] X. Zhou, R. Zafarani, A survey of fake news: Fundamental theories, detection methods, and opportunities, ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR) 53
(2020) 1–40.
[23] G. B. Guacho, S. Abdali, E. E. Papalexakis, Semi-supervised contentbased fake news detection using tensor embeddings and label propagation,
in: Proc. SoCal NLP Symposium, 2018.

26

[24] A. Benamira, B. Devillers, E. Lesot, A. K. Ray, M. Saadi, F. D. Malliaros,
Semi-supervised learning and graph neural networks for fake news detection, in: 2019 IEEE/ACM International Conference on Advances in Social
Networks Analysis and Mining (ASONAM), IEEE, 2019, pp. 568–569.
[25] K. Shu, S. Wang, H. Liu, Beyond news contents: The role of social context
for fake news detection, in: Proceedings of the twelfth ACM international
conference on web search and data mining, 2019, pp. 312–320.
[26] X. Dong, U. Victor, L. Qian, Two-path deep semi-supervised learning for
timely fake news detection, arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.00763 (2020).
[27] H. Jwa, D. Oh, K. Park, J. M. Kang, H. Lim, exbake: Automatic fake
news detection model based on bidirectional encoder representations from
transformers (bert), Applied Sciences 9 (2019) 4062.
[28] V. Sanh, L. Debut, J. Chaumond, T. Wolf, Distilbert, a distilled version of
bert: smaller, faster, cheaper and lighter, arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.01108
(2019).
[29] Q. Xie, Z. Dai, E. Hovy, M.-T. Luong, Q. V. Le, Unsupervised data augmentation for consistency training, arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.12848 (2019).
[30] V. Lai, C. Tan, On human predictions with explanations and predictions
of machine learning models: A case study on deception detection, in: Proceedings of the Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency,
2019, pp. 29–38.
[31] C. Rudin, Stop explaining black box machine learning models for high
stakes decisions and use interpretable models instead, Nature Machine
Intelligence 1 (2019) 206–215.
[32] B. Kim, R. Khanna, O. O. Koyejo, Examples are not enough, learn to
criticize! criticism for interpretability, in: Advances in neural information
processing systems, 2016, pp. 2280–2288.

27

[33] K. Shu, L. Cui, S. Wang, D. Lee, H. Liu, defend: A system for explainable
fake news detection, in: Proceedings of the 28th ACM International Conference on Information and Knowledge Management, 2019, pp. 2961–2964.
[34] C. Molnar, Interpretable Machine Learning A Guide for Making Black
Box Models Explainable, 2020. URL: https://christophm.github.io/
interpretable-ml-book/example-based.html.
[35] J. C. Reis, A. Correia, F. Murai, A. Veloso, F. Benevenuto, Explainable
machine learning for fake news detection, in: Proceedings of the 10th ACM
conference on web science, 2019, pp. 17–26.
[36] P. Patwa, S. Sharma, S. PYKL, V. Guptha, G. Kumari, M. S. Akhtar,
A. Ekbal, A. Das, T. Chakraborty, Fighting an infodemic: Covid-19 fake
news dataset, arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.03327 (2020).
[37] S. Wineburg, S. McGrew,

Lateral reading and the nature of exper-

tise: Reading less and learning more when evaluating digital information.,
Teachers College Record 121 (2019) n11.
[38] S. M. Lundberg, G. G. Erion, S.-I. Lee, Consistent individualized feature
attribution for tree ensembles, arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.03888 (2018).
[39] B. Kovalerchuk, N. Neuhaus, Toward efficient automation of interpretable
machine learning, in: 2018 IEEE International Conference on Big Data
(Big Data), IEEE, 2018, pp. 4940–4947.
[40] J. Ayoub, X. J. Yang, F. Zhou, Modeling dispositional and initial learned
trust in automated vehicles with predictability and explainability, Transportation Research Part F: Traffic Psychology and Behaviour 77 (2021)
102–116.
[41] M. Mosleh, G. Pennycook, D. G. Rand, Self-reported willingness to share
political news articles in online surveys correlates with actual sharing on
twitter, Plos one 15 (2020) e0228882.

28

[42] L. Cui, D. Lee, Coaid: Covid-19 healthcare misinformation dataset, arXiv
preprint arXiv:2006.00885 (2020).

29

