The evolving ecosystem of COVID-19 contact tracing applications

Benjamin Levy†,* , Matthew Stewart†,*

arXiv:2103.10585v1 [cs.CY] 19 Mar 2021

†

Harvard University, John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences

Abstract
Since the outbreak of the novel coronavirus, COVID-19, there has been increased interest
in the use of digital contact tracing as a means of stopping chains of viral transmission,
provoking alarm from privacy advocates. Concerning the ethics of this technology, recent
studies have predominantly focused on (1) the formation of guidelines for ethical contact
tracing, (2) the analysis of specific implementations, or (3) the review of a select number
of contact tracing applications and their relevant privacy or ethical implications. In this
study, we provide a comprehensive survey of the evolving ecosystem of COVID-19 tracing
applications, examining 152 contact tracing applications and assessing the extent to which
they comply with existing guidelines for ethical contact tracing. The assessed criteria
cover areas including data collection and storage, transparency and consent, and whether
the implementation is open source. We find that although many apps released early in the
pandemic fell short of best practices, apps released more recently, following the
publication of the Apple/Google exposure notification protocol, have tended to be more
closely aligned with ethical contact tracing principles. This dataset will be publicly
available and may be updated as the pandemic continues.
Keywords:

COVID-19, contact tracing, exposure notification, ethics, privacy

Media Summary
Contact tracing is an essential epidemiological tool in the fight against COVID-19. However, the
magnitude and transmissibility of the disease has far outstripped the capacity of health authorities
to track, trace, and treat infections as they arise. In response, digital contact tracing applications
have emerged as a means to augment traditional manual contact tracing. Beginning with Singapore’s TraceTogether — a Bluetooth-based app that gained significant attention as a part of the
government’s pandemic strategy — the number of digital contact tracing applications has exploded
over the course of the pandemic. Concurrently, privacy advocates have been raising the alarm that
these apps may lead to an erosion of individual liberties.
Corresponding authors. Both authors contributed equally.
benjaminlevy@g.harvard.edu, matthew_stewart@g.harvard.edu
*

This article is © 2021 by author(s) as listed above. The article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY 4.0) International license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/legalcode),
except where otherwise indicated with respect to particular material included in the article. The article
should be attributed to the author(s) identified above.

The evolving ecosystem of COVID-19 contact tracing applications

2

In this article, we provide a comprehensive review of digital contact tracing applications around
the world. We collect data on 152 applications from 77 different countries and evaluate those applications according to their compliance with established ethical principles outlined by the World
Health Organization. We find that there is considerable heterogeneity between regions, countries,
and apps in terms of their adherence to best practices. Notably, the release of Apple and Google’s
exposure notification protocol seems to have encouraged a movement towards applications with
stronger privacy protections. Although this is an encouraging development, it is difficult to determine whether these applications have had or will have an impact on the spread of the disease.
Therefore, we provide an open dataset of these applications, with the hope that subsequent work
may be better situated to evaluate their efficacy and uptake to help inform the implementation of
future digital public health interventions.

Introduction
The outbreak of SARS-CoV-2, the virus responsible for COVID-19, has resulted in an ongoing
global pandemic that has, as of February 1, 2021, infected over 100 million people and killed more
than 2 million people (Senn, 2021). As an early response, many countries implemented temporary
stay-at-home measures compelling non-essential workers to remain indoors under quarantine, as
well as enforcing social distancing measures and the wearing of masks in public places. While these
measures proved effective in the short run when met with high public adherence levels, they have not
proved a feasible and effective long-term solution for controlling the virus’s spread in most countries.
Full lockdown measures come with significant economic, social, educational, psychological, and
medical ramifications; for instance, unemployment in May in the United States was estimated to
be as high as 16% as a result of the pandemic (Kochhar, 2020). A practical and proven method for
counteracting the spread of transmissible diseases is through contact tracing: using social networks
to determine contacts who have had recent interactions with an infected individual. These contacts
can then be quarantined, tested, or instructed to self-isolate for 14 days, the putative upper bound
on the incubation period of the virus (Linton et al., 2020).
Traditional contact tracing relies on many human workers to track down and reach out to each
potential contact. It can therefore be prohibitively expensive, slow, and challenging to scale (Hart et
al., 2020). Many countries and private organizations turned to smartphones as an alternative source
for personal contact history. There has been a rapid development of mobile applications designed to
aid contact tracing to suppress transmission of COVID-19. These applications typically use GPS or
Bluetooth data to detect a device’s proximity to nearby devices. Although manual contact tracing
is expected to have higher effectiveness at reducing transmission rates than digital contact tracing
for a fixed number of individuals (Kucharski et al., 2020), the scalability afforded by digital contact
tracing coupled with its relatively low cost makes large-scale implementations more feasible than
manual contact tracing.
Naturally, the prospect of large-scale monitoring of the public using contact tracing applications
has alarmed privacy advocates (Gillmor, 2020). The hasty implementations of such systems in
response to the pandemic’s rapid proliferation and severity raised concerns about whether potential ethical and privacy implications were sufficiently considered during the rollout of applications.
Further privacy concerns have arisen from contact tracing applications utilizing geolocation data,
centralized storage systems, closed source implementations, and government coercion (Shukla et
al., 2020). Consumer advocates fear that a disproportionate emphasis on health over privacy could

The evolving ecosystem of COVID-19 contact tracing applications

3

undermine the protection of civil liberties far beyond the stated intentions of these applications,
similar to the vast expansion of state surveillance in the United States post-9/11 (Guariglia, 2020;
Hart et al., 2020). In turn, such concerns may negatively impact adoption rates and thus reduce
the effectiveness of contact tracing. Simulations have shown that the efficacy of contact tracing
applications is highly dependent on adoption rates, with a level around 50-60% necessary to limit
the spread of COVID-19 (Ferretti et al., 2020). Survey results from Canada and the United States
have supported the notion that privacy is a significant reason people may be hesitant to use digital
contact tracing apps (Rheault & Musulan, 2020; Zhang et al., 2020), and has remained consistent
throughout the pandemic (Simko et al., 2020). Although polls have demonstrated a high willingness
to download contact tracing apps (Altmann et al., 2020), short of coercion, maximizing adoption
rates can only be achieved if individuals do not perceive the application to encroach unreasonably
upon civil liberties. While there may seemingly be exceptions to this rule, such as South Korea’s
government-backed centralized approach, deviations may be at least partially explained by factors
unique to South Korea, such as (1) societal support for government interventions due to prior exposure to outbreaks like Middle East Respiratory Syndrome (MERS), and (2) rapid implementation
that had little time to garner negative press and may have instead dampened uptake in other
countries (Park et al., 2020).
Digital contact tracing is inherently multidisciplinary and draws upon public health, epidemiology, computer science, and data science. Each of these fields contains multiple sets of ethical
guidelines. Several attempts have been made to combine these to form an appropriate set of guidelines for ethical contact tracing (Morley et al., 2020; Parker et al., 2020; WHO, 2020). However,
the difficulty in realizing these guidelines in practice lies in the fact that there are already many
existing contact tracing applications (at least 124 released, by our estimation) and a multitude
of public, private, and academic actors involved in their development. These factors can lead to
a lack of coordination due to these various actors’ competing interests and discordant practices,
resulting in no universally observed standard for ethical contact tracing. Although vaccines are
now available and being distributed to the public, there is still a lack of consensus and unanswered
questions about how future contact tracing programs should be conducted to balance the utilization
of data and preservation of individual privacy. In this paper, we conduct an exhaustive survey of
contact tracing applications and assess the adherence of these applications to established ethical
contact tracing guidelines. Our main contributions are a database of contact tracing applications,
an assessment of how well these applications conform with the aforementioned ethical principles
based on their synthesis into a single 8-point scale (which we denote the “Ethical Alignment Score”),
and a comparative analysis of applications based on location, release date, and other variables of
interest.

The evolving ecosystem of COVID-19 contact tracing applications

4

Data collection and coding
In their interim guidance report on ethical contact tracing, the World Health Organization
(WHO) outlined 17 principles to which contact tracing applications should adhere (WHO, 2020).
These guidelines dovetail with other ethical contact tracing guidelines (Morley et al., 2020; Parker
et al., 2020) and provide a set of criteria upon which existing contact tracing applications can be assessed. The proposed principles are summarized under the following 17 categories: time limitation,
testing and evaluation, proportionality, data minimization, use restriction, voluntariness, transparency and explanability, privacy-preserving data storage, security, limited retention, infection
reporting, notification, tracking of COVID-19-positive cases, accuracy, accountability, civil society
and public engagement, and independent oversight. For a more detailed explanation of these categories, we refer the reader to the original WHO article (2020). The remainder of this paper uses
these guidelines as a basis for a set of questions that can be answered with publicly available data
about each contact tracing application. The responses to these questions are combined into a single
value, which we denote the Ethical Alignment Score.
We compiled a list of COVID-19 contact tracing applications by conducting independent research
on applications found in following sources:
(1) Wikipedia page on COVID-19 apps
(2) Privacy International
(3) Open source community document on COVID-19 contact tracing technologies (Stop-COVID.tech,
COVIDWatch, Mitra Ardron)
(4) New Zealand Office of the Privacy Commissioner: Overview of COVID-19 Contact Tracing
Apps – 12 May 2020
(5) Amnesty International
(6) Crowdsourced list of projects related to COVID-19 contact tracing
(7) MIT Technology Review Covid Tracing Tracker
(8) list of countries using Google and Apple’s Contact Tracing API (XDA Developers)
(9) Publicly-available Exposure Notifications apps (Google API)
(10) FIPRA Europe COVID-19 Tracing App Tracker
(11) Google searching for terms “covid-19”, “contact tracing”, “bluetooth contact tracing app”,
“gps contact tracing app”
Using these resources and the materials put out by the makers of the applications themselves,
we extracted a set of features for each app (when information was available) based on a subset of
the ethical principles set out by the ethical contact tracing guidelines outlined previously (see table
1). We collected application release dates from appannie.com, a service for distributing statistics
on mobile applications and websites, and approximate download numbers from the Google Play
Store, when available.
To evaluate contact tracing applications based on the criteria provided in the previous section,
we propose the concept of an "Ethical Alignment Score". The Ethical Alignment Score of an
application is a value in the range 0-8 representing the extent to which the application meets
principles of ethical contact tracing, as outlined in table 1. A score of zero indicates that the
application fails to even partially fulfill any of the criteria, while a score of eight is the ideal case
indicating that the app conforms with all principles of ethical contact tracing that we were able to
assess under this framework. Each principle in table 1 corresponds to a single point in the app’s
score. The full dataset, as well as an interactive map showing all the applications, is available here:
https://benjaminlevy.ca/covid-apps. This dataset also further breaks down each principle into 2 or

The evolving ecosystem of COVID-19 contact tracing applications

5

Table 1. Principles and definitions for scoring apps. These principles are based on Morley
et al. (Morley et al., 2020) and principles from the WHO (2020).
Features

Definition

Clearly defined
lifetime and
documented
decommissioning
process; limited data
retention
Opt-in with informed
consent for download,
use, sharing of data;
not tied to other
benefits
Minimal data is
collected; only one
form of tracking at
minimally granular
level
Open source code,
documentation, and
privacy policy with
clear explanations
Freely available to all
with no paywall

The scope of the application is limited to the
current pandemic and no data is stored longer
than deemed necessary to perform reliable and
accurate contact tracing.

Principle
Temporary

Consensual

Minimal

Transparent

Equal Access

Data Ownership

Decentralized storage;
control of data lies
with user; encrypted
and secured data

Re-identification

Fully anonymous; uses
decentralized
matching (DP-3T,
Apple/Google, TCN)
Application uses
accurate technology
for contact tracing

Accuracy

Download and use the application is entirely
voluntary and not tied to benefits such as access
to healthcare or other services; application
practices informed consent for any significant
events involving a user’s data.
Only uses BLE or GPS for purposes of tracking
contacts with no additional tracking; no
personally identifiable information (PII)
collected.
All aspects of the application should practice
high levels of transparency in the form of code,
documentation, and policies in clearly
articulated language.
Application should be freely available for
Android and iOS (in countries where iPhones
are common) with no associated costs or
contingencies.
An individual’s data should not be kept in a
centralized storage system and individual’s
should have full control of their data at all
times; data should be secured and encrypted
during transmission and at rest.
An individual’s data is matched in a
decentralized manner (on user devices) and is
fully anonymous such that no individual can be
re-identified if their data is compromised.
Bluetooth/Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE) used
for establishing contacts and only test-verified
cases reported.

3 more specific sub-principles, on the basis of which we evaluated each app. We hope to keep this
dataset updated as new applications are developed and released, as well as when new information
comes to light about how these apps and protocols function. As such, it is possible that the apps
displayed in the interactive map and data table may be different from the ones used in the present

The evolving ecosystem of COVID-19 contact tracing applications

6

analysis, since only those two elements will be updated over time. All analyses were completed
using Python v3.8.2.

The state of the contact tracing ecosystem
We collected data on a total of 152 applications from 77 different countries (counting the EU as
a separate country for apps that are EU-wide). Of these, 124 are released on Apple’s App Store or
the Google Play Store (or are available as web-based platforms), while 17 have been cancelled and
11 are still in development at the time of writing. The app release dates span from mid-February
(Singapore’s TraceTogether was released on February 18, 2020) until January (Louisiana’s COVID
Defense was released on January 18, 2021).
Figure 1 shows the progression of app releases in each WHO region (with Canada and the US
separated out from Latin America in the North America region). Initially, most new applications
came from the Western Pacific region (including Singapore), Southeast Asia, and the EU. There
has since been an explosion of apps released across the world, particularly in the EU, Eastern
Mediterranean, and North America.

Figure 1. Released contact tracing apps, grouped by WHO region. North America (U.S.
and Canada) is separated from Latin America, although normally the WHO groups both
into a single Americas region. The total number of apps reflects only those apps that could
be assigned to a single country or region.

Comparison of contact tracing/exposure notification protocols. The choice of contact tracing protocol (or lackthereof) has varied substantially throughout the course of the pandemic. Early
on, most apps did not employ an established protocol. By the beginning of September, this had
shifted such that the majority of new applications employed the Apple/Google exposure notification
protocol (see figure 2).

The evolving ecosystem of COVID-19 contact tracing applications

7

Figure 2. Number of contact tracing apps implementing different protocols. The major
protocols include Apple/Google, and the closely-related DP3T/TCN, both of which are
decentralized protocols. Other protocols are combined into a single category for brevity,
and include OpenTrace, SafePaths, ROBERT, PEPP-PT, ReCoVer, Whisper, and Safe2.
Figure 3 disaggregates the apps by region and protocol. The dominance of the Apple/Google
exposure notification protocol later in the pandemic is mainly localized to Europe and North America, whereas other regions, such as Southeast Asia, Western Pacific, and Eastern Mediterranean
mainly developed apps without a protocol early in the pandemic.
Comparison of Government-based Applications. 110 applications (72%) were developed or
backed by government entities. The corresponding ethical alignment scores for these applications,
averaged by country, are provided in ranked order in Figure 4. Switzerland, Italy, and Belgium
were among the countries with the highest average scores (8), while Hong Kong, Vietnam, Qatar,
and China received the lowest scores (1). Although most countries have a single government-backed
application, two notable outliers are the United States and India, with 24 and 7 government-backed
apps released, respectively. Whereas the United States’ apps were released late in the pandemic (all
on or after August 3rd , 2020) all of India’s apps were developed relatively early, within the period
from March 7th to May 9th .
Common factors that resulted in lower alignment scores included (1) the use of a centralized
database to store user data, (2) GPS tracking of individuals, and (3) lack of informed consent
associated with the collection, storage, or use of individual data. While none of these applications
received the worst possible score of zero, only 3 applications received a perfect score of 8. Among
the applications with near-perfect scores (7.5), the most common reason for losing points was not
having a clearly defined lifetime for the application (13/15).
Comparison of Non-Government-Based Applications. In our dataset, 42 applications were
not directly associated with a governmental entity. Of these, 20 have been released, 15 have been
cancelled, and 7 are either still in development or have an indeterminate status. The countries with

The evolving ecosystem of COVID-19 contact tracing applications

8

Figure 3. Number of released contact tracing apps implementing different protocols, disaggregated by WHO region.
the most non-governmental applications of any operational status are the United States (11), Germany (8), Canada (4), the Philippines (2), and Italy (2). Most non-governmental applications were
released before June (62%) and all were released before July. When compared to the governmentbacked applications, these non-governmental applications score lower on average in almost every
question (see table 2), with the exception that slightly more non-governmental apps are open source
(30%) than governmental apps (28%).
Time Evolution of Ethical Alignment. To distinguish any trends in ethical alignment scores
over time, we examined the ethical alignment scores of different applications as a function of application release dates. As shown by Figure 5, there was initially high variation in scores among
apps, while later in the pandemic, apps have tended to have much higher ethical alignment scores.
Disaggregated scores can be seen in Figure 6. Two criteria that are consistently less satisfied
than the others regardless of the date are whether the app is open source and whether the app has
a clearly defined lifetime.
Apps in the United States. Apps in the United States can be neatly divided into two groups
shown in Figure 7: (1) private apps released early in the pandemic and (2) government-backed apps
released late in the pandemic. The large number of government-backed apps in the US relative to
other countries is due to the fact that apps have been developed at the state level, as opposed to
the national level in most other countries.
Limitations of Analysis. The assessment of contact tracing applications was limited in scope by
the public availability of data which made analysis of some action points from the WHO ethical
contact tracing guidelines difficult. In an effort to counter this, emails were sent to application
developers for all applications examined in this study, where possible, with a 17-point questionnaire

The evolving ecosystem of COVID-19 contact tracing applications

9

Figure 4. (A) Average Ethical Alignment Score for each country with a government-backed
app. (B) Number of government-backed apps per country. Countries whose apps conform
most closely with principles of ethical digital contact tracing include Switzerland, Italy, and
Belgium. Countries/Territories with the lowest average score include Hong Kong, Viet Nam,
Qatar, and China. The United States and India far outpace other countries in terms of how
many government-backed apps have been released.

covering the items that were not able to be assessed using public information. The response rate
to this questionnaire was approximately 20%, which was deemed too low to make generalizations
due to the possibility of self-selected sampling.
Because of the international scope of this work, many apps did not have English-language documentation readily available. Although we attempted to mitigate this with Google Translate, it is
likely that certain aspects of these apps were lost in translation.

The evolving ecosystem of COVID-19 contact tracing applications

10

Table 2. Comparison of government-backed vs. non-governmental applications; only released apps. Figures are reported as total count (%) for individual questions and average
for the score.
Non-government Government
Question
1.1. App has defined lifetime
1.2. Data storage is time-limited
2.1. Opt-in download and use
2.2. Opt-in data sharing
2.3. Not tied to other benefits
3.1. Data used only for establishing contacts
3.2. No PII collection
4.1. Open source
4.2. Published privacy policy
5.1. Freely available
5.2. Android and iOS (when necessary)
6.1. Decentralized storage
6.2. Can erase data
7.1. Decentralized matching
7.2. Rotating randomized beacon
8.1. Contact accuracy (BLE, not GPS or other)
8.2. Positive cases verified by test
Average score

0 (0%)
10 (50%)
14 (70%)
14 (70%)
7 (35%)
7 (35%)
4 (20%)
6 (30%)
13 (65%)
16 (80%)
16 (80%)
7 (35%)
11 (55%)
4 (20%)
5 (25%)
6 (30%)
6 (30%)
4.31

17 (16%)
75 (72%)
88 (85%)
86 (83%)
68 (65%)
65 (62%)
57 (55%)
29 (28%)
80 (77%)
104 (100%)
104 (100%)
69 (66%)
71 (68%)
55 (53%)
64 (62%)
69 (66%)
76 (73%)
5.31

Figure 5. Ethical alignment scores of applications as a function of release date. The grey
line indicates a LOWESS curve fitted to the data.

Finally, it may be the case that apps that implement the Apple/Google exposure notification
protocol are overrepresented in the dataset relative to non-Apple/Google apps. This is likely due
to the presence of lists of apps that implement the Apple/Google protocol, such as one curated by
Google itself. Conversely, apps that do not implement the protocol may be harder to find, which
would contribute to their apparent scarcity later in the pandemic.

The evolving ecosystem of COVID-19 contact tracing applications

11

Figure 6. App scores disaggregated by question and release date. Each column represents
a single application, while each dot represents the value of that application for each question
(rows); blue indicates the app satisfies the criterion, red indicates the app does not satisfy
the criterion.

Figure 7. Ethical alignment scores vs. release date for contact tracing apps released in the
United States. Color denotes government (orange) or non-government (blue).
Discussion and significance
In this paper, we have provided a synthesis of existing databases of contact tracing applications,
supplemented with additional apps found in the course of research, creating, to our knowledge,
the most comprehensive collection and evaluation of COVID-19 contact tracing applications to
date. Figure 1 indicates the existence of several waves of contact tracing applications. The first
applications were developed in March 2020, coinciding with the first wave of national lockdowns

The evolving ecosystem of COVID-19 contact tracing applications

12

around the world. The period of April-May 2020 saw a precipitous rise in applications, somewhat
evenly split between WHO regions, with the exception of the United States and Canada. The
period of June saw the release of several more applications, but this quickly stagnated in July until
an influx of new applications, predominantly from North America and Europe, during the period
August-November. The cause of the temporary stagnation during July is unclear. However, it may
be related to incorporating privacy-preserving contact tracing into new applications following the
release of the Apple-Google implementation in late May 2020, as well as the possibility that our
data collection procedure may have missed some apps that were released in this period.
Figure 4 illustrates the wide variance in country-level differences in ethical alignment scores for
government-backed applications. We advance several possible explanations for these disparities.
First, there may be intrinsic reasons why a country’s apps scored higher, such as higher cultural
value placed on privacy vs. public health. Similarly, the large number of high-scoring apps implementing the Apple/Google protocol in European and North American countries may indicate
greater cultural appropriateness of that particular protocol to Western nations or greater appeal of
the protocol to Western governments. Second, the variance in ethical alignment between countries
may also reflect a government’s speed of innovation. Figures 5 and 6 show an apparent disparity
between the ethical alignment scores of early implementations, released before June 2020, and those
released subsequently. The disparity bisects applications into two opposing categories: data-centric
and privacy-centric (Fahey & Hino, 2020). Early implementations tended to exhibit lower ethical
alignment scores and placed more emphasis on data collection than individual privacy. In contrast,
later implementations tended to exhibit higher ethical alignment scores, emphasizing individual
privacy as well as greater transparency. This transition roughly coincided with the Apple-Google
contact tracing implementation in April 2020 (Apple, 2020), which upon release was touted by
some as well-formulated privacy-preserving contact tracing (ACLU, 2020). By September 2020,
applications reached an asymptote corresponding to an ethical alignment score of 7, on average.
Therefore, paradoxically, the governments that were more innovative and willing to experiment
with digital technologies for combating COVID-19 may have been more likely to implement apps
with sub-optimal privacy features, whereas governments that waited to roll out their own contact
tracing application may have benefited from the development of privacy-preserving protocols like
the Apple/Google Exposure Notification protocol.
Both Germany and the United States are notable for having a large number of non-governmental
contact tracing applications relative to other countries, with 8 and 11, respectively. In Germany,
many of these applications were developed as part of the WirVsVirus hackathon, which took place
from March 20th to 22nd and whose goal was to bring together coders to rapidly prototype digital
tools to help confront the challenges posed by COVID-19, including contact tracing applications
(Menger, 2020). In the United States, the significant number of independent applications may be a
result of both a huge capacity to produce digital solutions (e.g. Apple and Google, the producers of
the eventually dominant Exposure Notification protocol, are located in the United States) and a hesitancy of governmental authorities to develop or sanction their own apps. Figure 7, which contrasts
different contact tracing implementations in the United States, shows a clear distinction between
government-backed and non-governmental contact tracing implementations. Non-governmental applications tended to exhibit lower ethical alignment scores (as was the case across the world; see table
2) and were developed significantly faster than government-backed applications, with a three-month
gap between the release of the last non-governmental application and the first government-backed
application. This delayed response may be due to a general mistrust of public health measures or
technologies that have the capacity to infringe privacy or track individuals. According to the Best

The evolving ecosystem of COVID-19 contact tracing applications

13

Countries survey conducted by U.S. News, the United States ranks near the bottom in terms of the
citizenry’s trust in the government with respect to matters of healthcare (McPhillips, 2020). Another possible explanation is the generally decentralized nature of the United States’ public health
infrastructure, illustrated by the fact that multiple apps have been rolled out independently by
different states, as opposed to a single federal app.
Future Implications. The evolution of these applications throughout the COVID-19 pandemic
has several important implications on the future of large-scale epidemiological monitoring. If effective, such a large-scale system could prevent or contain large numbers of infections in the event
of an outbreak while avoiding the worst impacts of an indiscriminate lockdown. Conversely, the
same system could be used under normal circumstances to detect and monitor yearly flu outbreaks.
Monitoring flu outbreaks would invariably save lives, but the frequent mutation of flu strains also
provides a convenient justification to perpetuate the existence of contact tracing applications without end. In this scenario, the potential exists for governments and companies to abuse contact
tracing to perform mass surveillance of civilians using seemingly justified means. The implementation of ethical contact tracing minimizes this possibility by empowering civilians with control over
the collection and disclosure of their data and ensuring radical transparency, accountability, and
data security. All of these factors are instrumental in building public trust, which, if the situation ever arises, would be minimally necessary for an environment where some degree of digital
surveillance is required for public protection against the outbreak of an infectious disease.
Another implication of these analyses is the way in which standards around privacy and ethics
are set. In lieu of a central authority to enforce strong standards early in the pandemic, Apple
and Google effectively became the arbiter of ethical contact tracing, in some instances indirectly
pressuring governments to adopt their protocols (in the case of the UK’s NHS app) (Sabbagh &
Hern, 2020) or outright banning apps that did not conform to their standards (in the case of Iran’s
ac19r app) (Sato, 2020). Although Apple and Google’s protocol did enforce strong protections for
individual rights, in our view, it is crucial that future decisions around public health technologies
be made in a way that involves multiple stakeholders, including public health authorities, elected
representatives, and the general public.
Conclusion
Now that vaccines have been approved for widespread distribution, we are likely to see a gradual return to the normalcy of public life and an easing of government restrictions. However, the
virus will likely remain with us still for an indefinite period until a sufficient level of immunity is
reached through vaccination. Using mobile phone data to track, trace, and quickly respond to new
infections and flare-ups has drawn much attention as a potential solution. However, high levels
of public adoption are critical to the success of contact tracing applications. Since coercing the
public into using these applications would constitute an unacceptable violation of several critical
ethical principles, the main avenue to promote adoption is building public trust. It is vital that
the public feel that they are in control of their data at all times. Thus, we are heartened to see
that most applications – especially those released later in the pandemic – use non-coercive, opt-in,
decentralized, and anonymous contact tracing schemes.
It is arguably still too early to tell whether the use of the contact tracing applications discussed
here has altered the course of the pandemic in a meaningful way, especially since many applications
have been released somewhat recently. However, it is clear from the data presented here that there
has been significant heterogeneity, both within and between regions, and across the evolution of the
pandemic, in terms of the ethicality of these applications. Crucial to investigating whether these

REFERENCES

14

apps have proved efficacious or not would be the release of precise download numbers from the
app developers, which would allow researchers to determine whether uptake reached the thresholds
theorized to ameliorate the spread of infection. We hope that future work can build off the database
we have assembled to further probe whether these apps have been helpful and how the use of similar
technology in future public health crises can be better managed.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Professors Jim Waldo and Mike Smith of the School of Engineering and
Applied Sciences at Harvard University for their guidance during the initial stages of this research
work, as well as Andrés Colubri of MIT, for his assistance in obtaining relevant data on contact
tracing applications.
Disclosure Statement. The authors have no conflicts of interest to declare.
References
ACLU. (2020). Aclu comment on apple/google covid-19 contact tracing effort. https://www.aclu.
org/press-releases/aclu-comment-applegoogle-covid-19-contact-tracing-effort
Altmann, S., Milsom, L., Zillessen, H., Blasone, R., Gerdon, F., Bach, R., Kreuter, F., Nosenzo, D.,
Toussaert, S., & Abeler, J. (2020). Acceptability of app-based contact tracing for covid-19:
Cross-country survey evidence. medRxiv. https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.05.20091587
Apple. (2020). Apple and google partner on covid-19 contact tracing technology. https://www.
apple.com/newsroom/2020/04/apple- and- google- partner- on- covid- 19- contact- tracingtechnology/
Fahey, R. A., & Hino, A. (2020). Covid-19, digital privacy, and the social limits on data-focused
public health responses. International Journal of Information Management, 55, 102181.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2020.102181
Ferretti, L., Wymant, C., Kendall, M., Zhao, L., Nurtay, A., Abeler-Dörner, L., Parker, M., Bonsall,
D., & Fraser, C. (2020). Quantifying sars-cov-2 transmission suggests epidemic control with
digital contact tracing. Science, 368 (6491). https://doi.org/10.1126/science.abb6936
Gillmor, D. K. (2020). Principles for technology-assisted contact-tracing. https://www.aclu.org/
report/aclu-white-paper-principles-technology-assisted-contact-tracing
Guariglia, M. (2020). The dangers of covid-19 surveillance proposals to the future of protest. EFF.
https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2020/04/some- covid- 19- surveillance- proposals- couldharm-free-speech-after-covid-19
Hart, V., Siddarth, D., Cantrell, B., Tretikov, P. L., Langford, J., Leibrand, S., Kakade, S., Latta, S.,
Lewis, D., Tessaro, S., et al. (2020). Outpacing the virus: Digital response to containing the
spread of covid-19 while mitigating privacy risks. https://ethics.harvard.edu/outpacingvirus
Kochhar, R. (2020). Unemployment rose higher in three months of covid-19 than it did in two years
of the great recession. Pew Research, 11. https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2020/
06/11/unemployment-rose-higher-in-three-months-of-covid-19-than-it-did-in-two-yearsof-the-great-recession/
Kucharski, A. J., Klepac, P., Conlan, A. J. K., Kissler, S. M., Tang, M. L., Fry, H., Gog, J. R.,
Edmunds, W. J., Emery, J. C., Medley, G., Munday, J. D., Russell, T. W., Leclerc, Q. J.,
Diamond, C., Procter, S. R., Gimma, A., Sun, F. Y., Gibbs, H. P., Rosello, A., . . . Simons,
D. (2020). Effectiveness of isolation, testing, contact tracing, and physical distancing on
reducing transmission of sars-cov-2 in different settings: A mathematical modelling study.
The Lancet Infectious Diseases. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1473-3099(20)30457-6

REFERENCES

15

Linton, N. M., Kobayashi, T., Yang, Y., Hayashi, K., Akhmetzhanov, A. R., Jung, S.-m., Yuan, B.,
Kinoshita, R., & Nishiura, H. (2020). Incubation period and other epidemiological characteristics of 2019 novel coronavirus infections with right truncation: A statistical analysis of
publicly available case data. Journal of clinical medicine, 9 (2), 538. https://doi.org/10.
3390/jcm9020538
McPhillips, D. (2020). Survey: Majority of americans don’t trust government with their health.
U.S. News. https://www.usnews.com/news/best-countries/articles/2020-03-26/surveyshows-potential-link-between-trust-in-government-coronavirus-response
Menger, M.-E. (2020). “wirvsvirus” – erfahrungen beim hackathon. Information - Wissenschaft &
Praxis, 71 (4), 236–238. https://doi.org/10.1515/iwp-2020-2097
Morley, J., Cowls, J., Taddeo, M., & Floridi, L. (2020). Ethical guidelines for covid-19 tracing apps.
https://doi.org/10.1038/d41586-020-01578-0
Park, S., Choi, G. J., & Ko, H. (2020). Information technology–based tracing strategy in response
to covid-19 in south korea—privacy controversies. Jama, 323 (21), 2129–2130. https://doi.
org/10.1001/jama.2020.6602
Parker, M. J., Fraser, C., Abeler-Dörner, L., & Bonsall, D. (2020). Ethics of instantaneous contact
tracing using mobile phone apps in the control of the covid-19 pandemic. Journal of Medical
Ethics, 46 (7), 427–431. https://doi.org/10.1136/medethics-2020-106314
Rheault, L., & Musulan, A. (2020). Explaining support for covid-19 cell phone contact tracing.
https://doi.org/10.31235/osf.io/8wcgz
Sabbagh, D., & Hern, A. (2020). Uk abandons contact-tracing app for apple and google model. The
Guardian. https://www.theguardian.com/world/2020/jun/18/uk- poised- to- abandoncoronavirus-app-in-favour-of-apple-and-google-models
Sato, M. (2020). Why some countries suspended, replaced, or relaunched their covid apps. MIT
Technology Review. https://www.technologyreview.com/2020/12/23/1015557/covid-appscontact-tracing-suspended-replaced-or-relaunched/
Senn, M. (2021). Covid-19 dashboard by the center for systems science and engineering (csse) at
johns hopkins university (jhu). https://coronavirus.jhu.edu/map.html
Shukla, M., A, R. M., Lodha, S., Shroff, G., & Raskar, R. (2020). Privacy guidelines for contact
tracing applications.
Simko, L., Chang, J. L., Jiang, M., Calo, R., Roesner, F., & Kohno, T. (2020). Covid-19 contact
tracing and privacy: A longitudinal study of public opinion.
WHO. (2020). Ethical considerations to guide the use of digital proximity tracking technologies for
covid-19 contact tracing. https://doi.org/10.13140/RG.2.2.33925.58083
Zhang, B., Kreps, S., McMurry, N., & McCain, R. M. (2020). Americans’ perceptions of privacy
and surveillance in the covid-19 pandemic. Plos one, 15 (12), e0242652. https://doi.org/10.
1371/journal.pone.0242652

