The Burden of Being a Bridge:
Understanding the Role of Multilingual Users during the COVID-19 Pandemic
Ninghan Chen1 , Zhiqiang Zhong1 , Xihui Chen2 , Jun Pang1,2
1

arXiv:2104.04331v1 [cs.SI] 9 Apr 2021

Faculty of Sciences, Technology and Medicine,
University of Luxembourg, L-4364 Esch-sur-Alzette, Luxembourg
2
Interdisciplinary Centre for Security, Reliability and Trust,
University of Luxembourg, L-4364 Esch-sur-Alzette, Luxembourg
Abstract
The outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic triggers infodemic
over online social networks. It is thus important for governments to ensure their official messages outpace misinformation and efficiently reach the public. Some countries and regions that are currently worst affected by the virus including
Europe, South America and India, encounter an additional
difficulty: multilingualism. Understanding the specific role of
multilingual users in the process of information diffusion is
critical to adjust their publishing strategies for the governments of such countries and regions. In this paper, we investigate the role of multilingual users in diffusing information
during the COVID-19 pandemic on popular social networks.
We collect a large-scale dataset of Twitter from a populated
multilingual region from the beginning of the pandemic. With
this dataset, we successfully show that multilingual users act
as bridges in diffusing COVID-19 related information. We
further study the mental health of multilingual users and show
that being the bridges, multilingual users tend to be more negative. This is confirmed by a recent psychological study stating that excessive exposure to social media may result in a
negative mood.

1

Introduction

The current coronavirus COVID-19 pandemic is a global
health crisis of our time. The outbreak of the COVID-19
pandemic leads to an outbreak of information on major online social networks (OSNs), including Twitter, Facebook,
Instagram, and YouTube (Cinelli et al. 2020). In this massive COVID-19 outbreak and constantly changing situation,
OSNs, thanks to their globally available services, have become essential for people all over the world to seek up-tothe-minute and local information. Moreover, due to the curfew measures and social distancing, people have been spending much more time on OSNs. As a result, social networks
have joined conventional media, e.g., TV and radio, to become an indispensable channel for governments and news
agents to publish COVID-19 related information. A recent
study demonstrated the existence of infodemic on social media during the COVID-19 pandemic and its negative impact
on the control of the virus (Cinelli et al. 2020). The term
infodemic outlines the danger of misinformation during epidemic disease outbreak. As a result, it is very important for
governments (and new agents) to design effective strategies

to ensure that their official message outpace misinformation
and efficiently reach the public.
Some regions that are worst affected by the virus, including European Unions, America and India, have one additional difficulty, that is, their nature of multilingualism.
Cross-language channels should be created for people to
receive trustworthy information no matter which language
they speak. As studied in the literature, multilingual users on
social media can work as bridges between language communities (Eleta and Golbeck 2012; Hale 2014). Understanding
of the role of multilingual users in information diffusion is
thus crucial in practice for governmental departments to design their information release strategy. As far as we know, in
spite of the extensive studies explaining and predicting information diffusion (Wang et al. 2017; Chen et al. 2019), it is
still unclear whether multilingual users also play a bridging
role in information diffusion on social media as they do in
social network connections, i.e., whether they act as bridges
connecting message originators and message receivers.
The information on OSNs can reflect reality, but the infodemic it triggers can also affect people. Frequent exposure to
social media is likely associated with an increase in mental
health problems (Gao et al. 2020), including vicarious traumatisation (Liu and Liu 2020), depression (Zhong, Huang,
and Liu 2020) and anxiety (Zhong, Huang, and Liu 2020;
Amsalem, Dixon, and Neria 2020). Based on these psychological findings, if multilingual users indeed play a critical
role in information diffusion, then the resulted excessive exposure to COVID-19 related information may make multilingual users become more stressed or anxious, compared
to monolingual users. If this is the case, additional attention
should be devoted to multilingual users’ mental health.
To sum up, in this paper, we aim to answer the following
two research questions:
RQ1: What role do multilingual users play in the diffusion
of COVID-19 related information?
RQ2: Are multilingual users more negative than monolingual users during the COVID-19 pandemic? If yes, is the
negativity related to their role in information diffusion?
The information outbreak on social media incurred by the
COVID-19 pandemic provides us with valuable data to answer these two questions. We crawled data from Twitter
for almost 7 months since the beginning of the COVID-19

pandemic which come from a multilingual region severely
hit by the virus: the Greater Region of Luxembourg (GR).
GR is a cross-border region centred with Luxembourg and
composed of its adjacent regions of Belgium, Germany and
France. Luxembourg is famous for its multilingualism, as
most Luxembourgish people can speak four languages and
about 50% of its population are foreigners1 Luxembourg is
severely affected by the virus and ranked in the top three
countries in Europe in terms of the number of new infections in every 100,000 inhabitants.
Based on the dataset we collected from Twitter, we
examine the bridging role of users in information diffusion by quantifying their influences within information cascades (Chen et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2017). More specifically, we propose two new cascade bridging measures,
which allow us to comprehensively understand and quantify how much an OSN user plays the role of as a bridge in
COVID-19 related information diffusion. Then we continue
to analyse users’ mental health status, i.e., being negative or
positive, based on the sentiment of their posted tweets during
the collection period. In the end, we investigate the correlation between users’ role in information diffusion and their
mental health.
Our contributions of this paper can be listed as follows:
• We empirically and quantitatively demonstrate the bridging role of multilingual users in the diffusion of COVID19 related information.
• We analyse users’ mental status from the sentiment of
their posted messages during the pandemic and discover
that multilingual users are more likely to be negative.
• We validate the result of a recent psychological study on
social media, revealing the positive correlation of a user’s
exposure to social media with her/his anxiety. Indeed, we
find that users’ mental health is strongly correlated with
their bridging performance in information diffusion, but
has weak or no correlation with their topological properties in the social network.

2

The GR-ego Twitter Dataset

In this section, we describe how we build our GR-ego Twitter dataset, referred to as GR-ego dataset in the rest of the
paper. In addition to its popularity and large number of active users, we have three other reasons to select Twitter. First,
the language of tweets is provided and we can use it to identify multilingual users. If a user only retweets tweets in one
single language, we consider her/him as monolingual. Otherwise, this user is multilingual. Second, the user-input locations of the posters can be used to find users located in GR.
Last, it allows us to track the diffusion process of a Twitter
message. Specifically, the ID number of the original message is attached if a message is retweeted. We can use it
to find other users retweeting the same message and with
the retweeting time stamps, we can approximately simulate
the diffusion cascade of the message. We give in Table 1 a
crawled Twitter message as an example.

Table 1: A GR Twitter message.
Attribute
Time
Status
(Original/Retweeted)
Tweet id
Full text
User id
User geo orginal
User geo
Original tweet id
Original user id
Language

https://bit.ly/3fdhgwj

12319668395******
RT @******:The Diamond
princess is a UK ship managed
by the US. #coronavirus
u9181074902*****
Moselle
Moselle, Lorraine, France
134515******
103*****
en

Our GR-ego dataset consists of two components: (i) the
social network of GR users which records GR users and the
following relations between them; (ii) the tweets posted or
re-tweeted by GR users during the pandemic. As we will
shown in the following sections, these two types of information allow us to capture the diffusion process of COVID-19
related tweets as well as to analyse users’ mental sentiment.
We perform three steps to collect our GR-ego dataset.
Step 1. Meta data collection. At this step, we aim to collect a set of seed users in GR who are actively involved in
COVID-19 discussions.
Due to the poor efficiency to crawl tweets according to
keywords, we make use of a public dataset of COVID-19 related tweets (Chen, Lerman, and Ferrara 2020). Restricted
by privacy policies, this dataset only consists of tweet IDs.
With these IDs, we subsequently crawl their content through
the Twitter API. We extract the messages posted in the period between the early stage of the pandemic (January 22nd,
2020) and the end of the first wave of the pandemic (mid
July, 2020), for about 7 months. In Twitter, geography information, e.g., the locations of the posters and the original users if messages are re-tweeted, is provided by Twitter
users themselves. As a result, they are usually ambiguous
and do not have a unified format. We leverage the geocoding APIs, Geopy2 and ArcGis Geocoding3 to regularise the
location format and remove the ambiguity. For instance, the
location of the poster of the example message in Table 1, i.e.,
Moselle, is transformed to a preciser and machine-parsable
address: Mosselle, Lorraine, France. With the transformed
geo-locations, we collect the Twitter messages from the
greater region. In the end, we obtain 128,310 tweets in total from 8,872 GR users.
Step 2. Social network construction. At this step, our purpose is to search more GR users from the seed users and
construct the GR-ego social network.
We use an iterative approach to gradually enrich the social
graph until it stops growing. We start with the seed users. For
each user, we obtain their followers and only keep the ones
that have a mutual following relation with the seed user. The
2

1

Value
2020-04-28 17:00:09+00:00
Retweeted

3

https://bit.ly/3gfW2PP
https://bit.ly/3f9OUDa

reason is that such users have much larger probabilities to
reside in GR, which ensures a good efficiency of construction. The locations of the new users are obtained through
their posts and processed in the same way as in the previous
step. Only users from GR are added to the social network as
new nodes together with their following relations with other
existing users. Specifically, if user u follows u0 , a directed
edge from node u0 to u will be added.
After the first round, we continue going through the newly
added users one after another by adding their mutually followed friends that do not exist in the current social network.
This process will continue until no new users are added into
the network. In our case, it takes 5 iterations before termination. We take the largest weakly connected component of
the constructed social network as the GR-ego social network.
Table 2 summarises its main statistics.
#node
#edge
Average degree
Average local clustering coefficient

 ( Q J O L V K
 ) U H Q F K
 2 W K H U
 * H U P D Q
 6 S D Q L V K
 3 R U W X J X H V H
 , Q G R Q H V L D Q
 7 D J D O R J
 - D S D Q H V H
 7 X U N L V K
 , W D O L D Q
 $ U D E L F
 ' X W F K
 7 K D L
 . R U H D Q
 + D L W L D Q

 

Data Processing

We conduct two processing steps to obtain information required for our analysis.

3.1

Cascade computation

A cascade records the process of the diffusion of a message.
It stores all activated users (in our dataset, users retweeting
the message) and when they are activated, e.g., the order of
activation. In this paper, we adopt a widely accepted model
to represent the cascade of a message: cascade tree (Wang
et al. 2017).
The user who first posts the message is the root of a cascade tree. The users who retweet the message but have no

u1

u1

u3

u2
u2

Table 2: Statistics of the GR-ego social network.

3

  H 

Figure 1: Distribution of different languages of GR Twitter
messages.

5,808,938
12,511,698
2.15
0.04

Step 3. Timeline tweets crawling. At this step, we collect tweets posted or re-tweeted during the pandemic by GR
users to construct the dataset of Twitter messages. Recall
that these past tweets will be used to analyse the mental status of the posters during the pandemic.
According to the Twitter policy, we can only download the
last 3,200 tweets in a user’s timeline. Even with this limit,
it is still rather time-consuming to download the tweets of
all the users in the GR-ego social network constructed in the
previous step. Therefore, we select a subset of representative
users with a sufficiently large size and crawl their tweets.
Specifically, we choose the 8,872 users in the meta dataset
together with their followers and followees, which add up to
15,255 users. From these users, we collect 10,994,189 Twitter messages in total. Figure 1 presents the numbers of the
tweets in different languages. We can see that the collected
tweets are posted in a very diverse set of languages. English,
as a universal language, is still the dominant language and
the distribution of other languages are consistent with that
of the nationalities of the GR inhabitants.

 
 
 
 1 X P E H U  R I  W Z H H W V

u3

u4
u7

u8

u7

u5

(a) A social graph

u6

u4

u6

u8

(b) A cascade

Figure 2: Example of a cascade.

followers retweeting the message comprise the leaf nodes.
An edge from u to u0 is added to the cascade if u0 follows
u and u0 re-tweeted the message after u. If many users who
u0 follows retweeted the message, then we select the last
one retweeting the message as the parent node of u0 . Figure 2(b) shows a cascade example for the social network as
depicted in Figure 2(a). In this example, user u4 can be activated by the messages retweeted by either u1 or u3 . Since u3
retweeted after u1 , we add the edge from u3 to u4 to indicate
that the retweeting of u3 has activated u4 .
We denote the root node of a cascade C by r(C). We call
a path that connects the root and a leaf node a cascade path,
which is actually a sequence of nodes ordered by their activation time. For instance, (u1 , u3 , u4 ) is a cascade path
in our example indicating that the diffusion of a message
started from u1 and reached u4 in the end through u3 . In
the rest of this paper, we represent a cascade tree as a set
of cascade paths for the purpose of simplicity. For instance,
the cascade in Figure 2(b) is denoted by the following set
{(u1 , u2 , u7 , u8 ), (u1 , u3 , u4 ), (u1 , u3 , u6 )}.
We follow the method in (Kupavskii et al. 2012; Tsur and
Rappoport 2012) to construct cascades. Recall that when a
tweet’s status is ‘Retweeted’, the ID number of the original tweet is attached to the retweeted message (see in Table 1). We first create a set of original tweets consisting
of the tweets in our meta data with the status as ‘Original’. Second, for each original tweet, we collect the user
IDs that have retweeted the message. At last, we generate

Table 3: Cascade statistics.
#cascade
%cascade with multilingual users
#cascade per multilingual user
#cascade per monolingual user
#participant
%multilingual participants
#user per cascade (with multilingual users)
#user per cascade (only monolingual users)

3.2

29,710
68.5%
13.11
5.69
83,900
5.04%
7.2
5.2

Sentiment analysis

Previous works (Zhou, Jin, and Zafarani 2020) leverage
user-provided mood (e.g., angry, excited) or status to analyse
users’ mental status. However, such information is not available in most popular social networks (e.g., Twitter). Fortunately, with the recent fast advance of sentiment analysis
methods (Balahur and Turchi 2012; Devlin et al. 2018), we
can still obtain users’ sentiment by analysing their posted
Twitter messages. Sentiment analysis for multilingual text
faces a serious lack of resources (Balahur and Turchi 2012).
Most works choose to translate the original language into
a resource-rich language, such as English, and then analyse
with existing lexicons or annotated dataset (Denecke 2008).
Transformer-based representation learning methods (Devlin
et al. 2018) allow us to obtain users’ sentiment by analysing
their posted tweet without translation. In this paper, we make
use of the methods for polarity sentiment analysis. In other
words, we only classify the sentiment of a message as negative or positive.
We build an end-to-end deep learning model to conduct
the classification which is composed of three components.
As the first component, we use XLM-RoBERTa (Ou and
Li 2020), a pre-trained multilingual language model, to obtain the embedding of tweet content text. The embedding results are feed into our second component, a fully-connected
ReLU layer with dropout. At last, we add a linear layer on
top of the pre-trained model’s outputs for regression with an
activation function, i.e., sigmoid. We use cross-entropy as
our loss function and optimise it with the Adam optimizer in
our representation learning process.
We train our model on the Sentiment140 dataset (Go,
Bhayani, and Huang 2009). The dataset contains 1.6 million
tweets collected with keywords. All tweets are annotated

  H 

    

     
    
 1 X P E H U  R I  W Z H H W V

the cascade based on the following relationship in our GRego social network and their retweeting time stamps. We
eliminate cascades with only two users where a message is
just retweeted once. Table 3 summarises the statistics of the
collected cascades. In total, 29,710 cascades are built with
83, 904 users involved. An interesting observation is that
multilingual users are very active in diffusing COVID-19 related information. Among all the participants, only 5.04%
are multilingual users but they participate in 68.5% of the
cascades. On average, each multilingual user diffuses 13.11
messages, which is 2 times more than that of monolingual
users. Another observation is that the cascades with multilingual users have 2 more users on average.

 

    

     
    
    

         

    

    

    

    

 

     
 

 

 3 R V L W L Y H  1 H J D W L Y H
 & 2 9 , '   

 

 3 R V L W L Y H  1 H J D W L Y H
 7 L P H O L Q H

Figure 3: Sentiment distribution of diffused COVID-19 related information (left) and users’ timeline tweets (right):
Negative COVID-19 information is diffused while users
tend to be positive.
with a binary sentiment value indicating positive or negative. We split the dataset and take the first 80% of the tweets
as the training set and the rest 20% for testing. We assign
other training parameters following the common principle
used in existing works. Specifically, we run 10 epochs with
the maximum string length set to 128 and dropout ratio to
0.5. When tested with Micro-F1 score and accuracy metrics,
we get an accuracy of 85.48% and F1 Score 84.11%.
Before applying our sentiment classification model, we
clean the tweet contents by removing all URLs, mentioned
usernames and the word ‘RT’. Figure 3 summarises the results for the COVID-19 related tweets and the user timeline
tweets. The results from users’ timeline tweets are consistent with the existing work (Pak and Paroubek 2010), i.e.,
users tend to post positive messages in online social media.
It is also reasonable that 62.8% COVID-19 related tweets are
negative considering the continuous large-scale infections.

4

Bridging Role of Multilingual Users in
Information Diffusion

In this section, we will answer the first research question
(RQ1). Specifically, we will quantitatively analyse the role
of multilingual users in the diffusion of COVID-19 related
information. We will check whether multilingual users act
as bridges between the originator and activated users. We
propose two new measures to quantify multilingual users’
importance in information diffusion from two different levels. The first one is defined from the level of users and evaluates an individual user’s overall performance in COVID19 information diffusion. It allows us to compare users in
terms of their overall bridging importance. The second one
focuses on the level of cascades. It compares the bridging
performance of multilingual users and monolingual users, as
two separate groups, for each cascade. It can be used verify
whether the multilingual group outperforms the other group.

4.1

User information diffusion importance

We evaluate each user’s overall performance in the diffusion
of all observed Twitter messages. As a user can participate in

the diffusion of many messages, before calculating the user’s
overall performance, we start with her/his importance on the
diffusion of one single message and then combine her/his
importance of all messages into one single measurement.
Intuitively, we consider a user as more important in the
diffusion of a message according to three criteria:
1. the user participates a larger number of cascade paths;
2. the cascade paths with the users have larger lengths;
3. more users get activated directly from him.
The first two criteria assign more importance to users who
can activate more users with her/his information sharing behaviour. It has been pointed out in the literature (Zhou et al.
2010) that cascades tend to be wide but not deep and wider
cascades can facilitate the receipt of the message by more diverse people. In the scenario of multilingualism, more users
activated directly by a multilingual user will imply a larger
chance of diffusion across different language communities.
Given a cascade path S = (u1 , u2 , . . . , un ), we use
S ∗ (ui ) (1 ≤ i < n) to denote the subsequence composed
of the nodes after ui (including ui ), i.e., (ui , ui+1 , . . . , un ).
For any u that does not exist in S, we have S ∗ (u) = ε where
ε represents an empty sequence and its length| ε |= 0.
Definition 1 (Cascade bridging value) Given a cascade
tree C and a user u (u 6= r(C)), the cascade bridging value
of u in C is calculated as:
P
|S ∗ (u)|
αC (u) =

S∈C

|S|

|C |

Note that our purpose is to evaluate the importance of users
being a transmitter or sharer of a message. Therefore, the
concept of cascade bridging value is not applicable to the
root user, i.e., the message originator.
Example 1 We take user u3 in Figure 2(b) as an example.
He participates two out of the three cascade paths, i.e., S1 =
(u1 , u3 , u4 ) and S2 = (u1 , u3 , u6 ). Thus S1∗ = (u3 , u4 ) and
≈ 0.44.
S2∗ = (u3 , u6 ). We then have αC (u3 ) = 2/3+2/3
3
Note that we do not simply use the proportion of users
that get activated from a user in a cascade to evaluate her/his
bridging role. This is because it cannot distinguish users
with directly activated followers. Taking u2 in Figure 2(b) as
an example, according to our definition, αC (u2 ) = 0.25 is
smaller than αC (u3 ) because u3 directly activated two users.
However, if we take the proportion of activated users, the
values of these two users will be the same.
With a user’s bridging value calculated in each cascade,
we define user bridging magnitude to evaluate her/his overall importance in the diffusion of a given set of observed
messages. Intuitively, we first add up the bridging values of
a user in all his/her participated cascades and then normalise
the sum by the maximum number of cascades participated
by a user. It captures not only the bridging value of a user in
each participated cascade, but also the number of cascades
he participated in. This means, a user who is more active in
sharing COVID-19 related information is considered more
important in information diffusion.

Definition 2 (User bridging magnitude (UBM)) Let C be
a set of cascades on a social network and U be the set of
users that participate at least one cascade in C. A user u’s
information diffusion importance is calculated as the average cascade bridging value over the cascades in C, i.e.,
P
C∈C αC (u)
ωC (u) =
.
maxu0 ∈U |{C ∈ C|αC (u0 ) > 0}|
With this measure, for any two users, we can compare their
UBM values and learn which one plays a more important
role in information diffusion.
Empirical verification. We analyse and compare the
overall importance of multilingual and monolingual users
in information diffusion during the pandemic based on their
UBM values. If multilingual users play a more important
bridging role, we should have i) multilingual users normally
have larger UBM values; and ii) a larger proportion of multilingual users should have good UBM values than monolingual users. We will verify whether these two expectations
can be observed in our GR-ego dataset. Figure 4 shows the
UBM distribution of the two groups of users from three perspectives. The first general observation is that over 97% of
users’ UBM values lie in the range between 0.0 and 0.4.
We consider UBM that is smaller than 0.1 as weak and that
larger than 0.2 as strong.
From the box plots on the left, we can see that the median
and mean (labelled by green triangles in the boxes) of multilingual users’ UBM values are over 2 times as big as those
of monolingual users. This indicates that in general multilingual users have larger UBM values.
We show the complementary cumulative density function
(CDDF) in the middle and the probability density function
(PDF) of UBM on the right. We have two observations. First,
for a significantly large proportion of monolingual users (approximately 78%), their UBM values are weak, i.e., smaller
than 0.1. By contrast, only 46% multilingual users have
weak UBM values. This indicates that a large number of
monolingual users cannot effectively activate other users to
diffuse messages. Second, it is clear that compared to monolingual users, more multilingual users have large UBM values. About 23% of multilingual users hold strong UBMs
which is over 3 times more than monolingual users.
From the above analysis, we can see that our two expectations are observed in our dataset. Therefore, we conclude
that multilingual users can activate more users in diffusing
COVID-19 related messages.

4.2

Cascade bridging magnitude

Our first measure focuses on the level of users and evaluates
their overall performance across all observed information
cascades. It does not consider the relative bridging performance of multilingual users and monolingual users within
the cascades. We take an example to explain this.
Example 2 We still take the cascade in Figure 2(b) as an
example. Suppose u2 is the only multilingual user. After
calculating the cascade bridging values, we can learn that
αC (u2 ) = 0.25, and as a multilingual user, u2 plays a more
important role in diffusing the message than all monolingual

0.8

0.3

CDDF

0.6

UBM

0.2

0.4

0.1
0.0

0.2
Monolingual

Multilingual

0.00.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0

Monolingual
12.5
Multilingual
10.0
7.5
5.0
2.5
0.00.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0

Probability density

1.0

UBM

UBM

Figure 4: UBM distributions. The box plot (left) shows that multilingual users in general have larger UBM values. The CDDF
(middle) and PDF (right) demonstrate together that a larger proportion of multilingual users have good UBM values.
users except for u3 with αC (u3 ) = 0.44. In this example, we
still cannot say multilingual users as a whole play a more
important bridging role in this cascade.
Therefore, we propose a second measure to compare the performance of multilingual users to monolingual users.
Given a cascade C with multilingual users, we use UCmul
to denote the set of multilingual users and UCmon the set of
monolingual users in the cascade. Then we calculate an integrated value through a function γ from the bridging values of multilingual users and that of the monolingual users,
mul
mon
represented by αC
and αC
, respectively. The integrated
value can be the mean, median or maximum. Formally,
mul
αC
mon
αC

Table 4: The cascade bridging magnitude of multilingual
users. Multilingual users have performed dominantly better
in all the three integration functions.
Operation
Maximum
Median
Mean

= γ({αC (u) | u ∈ UCmul }),
= γ({αC (u) | u ∈ UCmon })

Note that the integration function γ should be instantiated
according to practical requirements. We say multilingual
mul
>
users play a bridging role in a cascade C when αC
mon
αC . In the end, we use the notion cascade bridging magnitude (CBM) to quantify the importance of multilingual
users as a whole in information diffusion.
Definition 3 (Cascade bridging magnitude (CBM)) Let
Cmul ⊆ C be the set of cascades involving at least one
multilingual user. Then the bridging magnitude is calculated
as the following:
P
1(αCmul > αCmon )
M = C∈Cmul
|Cmul |
where 1(x < y) is an indicator function which returns 1
when x < y and 0, otherwise.
Experimental evaluation. In Table 4, we list the results
about the CBM values calculated with our GR-ego dataset.
In our analysis, we instantiate the integration function γ with
maximum, media and mean.
Instead of just showing the cascade bridging magnitude
of multilingual users, we also present the statistics in another two cases. Specifically, we use the term ‘hold’ to indicate the case when multilingual users play a more immul
mon
portant bridging role in the cascade (i.e., αC
> αC
),
while ‘not hold’ indicates the opposite case. When multilingual users and monolingual users have the same integrated

hold
not hold
uncertain
hold
not hold
uncertain
hold
not hold
uncertain

#cascade
18,908
9,545
1,257
18,903
9,540
1,267
18,914
9,557
1,239

%cascade
63.64%
32.13%
4.23%
63.63%
32.11%
4.26%
63.66%
32.17%
4.17%

bridging value, it is ‘uncertain’ who are more important in
the cascade. Before analysing the statistics, we will set a
criterion that if multilingual users performs better in more
than 50% cascades with multilingual participants, we will
say the bridging role of multilingual users in the level of
cascades strongly holds. If it is between 30% and 50%, considering the comparably small number, we say the bridging
role weakly hold. Otherwise, the bridging role does not hold.
The obvious observation from Table 4 is that multilingual
users has a cascade bridging magnitude of 63.64% on average under all the three integration functions (i.e., maximum,
mean and median). This means that multilingual users play a
more important bridging role in about 65% cascades, which
almost doubles that of monolingual users. Considering the
small percentage of multilingual users in all the participants
(i.e., 5.04%), we can conclude that multilingual users’ bridging role in COVID-19 related information diffusion in the
level of individual cascades strongly holds.
Summary of the section. From the above discussion, we
can see that multilingual users perform dominantly better
at both the user level and the cascade level. Therefore, we
conclude that multilingual users play an important bridging
role in COVID-19 related information diffusion.

5

The Burden of Being a Bridge

In the previous section, we have succeeded in demonstrating that multilingual users play a bridging role in diffusing

0.6

CDDF

SWB

1.5

0.8

0.5

1.0

0.4

0.0
0.5

Probability density

1.0

1.0

0.2
Mono

Multi

0.01.0

Monolingual
Multilingual
0.5 0.0 0.5

SWB

0.5

1.0

0.01.0

0.5

0.0

SWB

0.5

1.0

Figure 5: Distribution of SWB values. The box plot (left) shows that multilingual users are about 2 times more negative. The
CDDF (middle) and PDF (right) distributions demonstrate that a much smaller proportion of multilingual users have a relatively
good SWB value.
COVID-19 related information. In this section, we proceed
with answering our second research question (RQ2), i.e., to
check whether multilingual users are more negative and the
correlation with their bridging role.

5.1

Multilingualism results in negativity

As we mentioned previously, we analyse the mental wellbeings of users based on the sentiments of their posted messages and verify whether multilingual users are more negative. In Section 3, we have obtained the sentiments of users’
timeline messages. We make use of the notion of subjective well-being score (SWB) proposed in (Zhou, Jin, and Zafarani 2020) to quantify the extent of mental positivity of a
user based on their past posts.
Definition 4 (Subjective well-being score (SWB)) We use
Np (u) and Nn (u) to denote the number of positive posts
and the number of negative posts of a user u, respectively.
The subjective well-being score of u, represented by swb(u),
is calculated as:
swb(u) =

Np (u) − Nn (u)
Np (u) + Nn (u)

A larger SWB value indicates the corresponding user is
more positive.
Empirical verification. We proceed to compare the mental well-beings of the two groups of users. We say a user
is consistently positive if her/his SWB value is larger than
0.5 and a user is consistently negative if her/his SWB value
is smaller than 0.0. We select the value of 0.5 as only 20%
users in our dataset have larger SWB values.
Similar to the previously analysis, we first give our criteria that will be used to determine whether multilingual users
tend to be more negative. Three conditions should be simultaneously satisfied. First, in general, multilingual users
are more likely to be negative. Second, a larger proportion
of multilingual users have consistent negative mental status.
Third, a smaller proportion of multilingual users are consistently positive.
Figure 5 presents the distributions of the SWB values of
multilingual and monolingual users. We now go through the
three conditions one after another. From the plot box on the

left, we can clearly see that the mean and median SWB value
of multilingual users are over two times smaller. This implies that multilingual users are generally more negative than
monolingual users. From the rest two distributions, we can
get about 20% multilingual users are consistently negative
while only 8% monolingual users are consistently negative.
Furthermore, about 5% multilingual users are consistently
positive which is only one fourth of that of monolingual
users. Therefore, the last two conditions are satisfied.
From the above analysis, we conclude that multilingual
users are indeed more negative than monolingual users.

5.2

Correlation to users’ bridging role

We continue to understand whether the comparatively larger
negativity of multilingual users actually results from their
dual bridging role in social network connections and information diffusion. To achieve this goal, we verify whether a
user’s sentiment is correlated to their bridging role. In terms
of global network connections, we take the in-degree and
out-degree of nodes, i.e. the number of followees and followers, to represent users’ topology features, as commonly
used in the literature (Zhou et al. 2010; Agarwal et al. 2020).
With respect to the bridging role in information diffusion,
we use the measure user bridging magnitude as we focus on
the correlation of a user’s bridging performance with her/his
own mental sentiment.
In Table 5, we show the correlation coefficients calculated
for the three selected features. It is clear that the out-degrees
have no relation with users’ SWB values due to the small
correlation coefficient 0.008. With the correlation coefficient
of −0.69, we can interpret that users’ information diffusion
bridging performance quantified by our proposed measure
is strongly correlated to their mental well-being. According
to the correlation coefficient of 0.08, the in-degrees have a
weak correlation with SWBs. We visualise the correlation
of UBM values and in-degrees with SWB values in Figure 6
for the purpose of cross-checking. As we discussed previously, 97% of users’ SWB values mainly span between 0
and 0.4. Thus, we can only concentrate the part lying in this
range. We can see that UBM decreases almost linearly when
SWB increases while the in-degree remains unchanged. This
means in-degrees actually do not correlate to SWB values.

0.5
0.4

UBM

0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0

0.5

0.0

0.5

SWB

(a) User bridging magnitude.

In Degree

100
80
60

are written in a language different from English (Hong, Convertino, and Chi 2011). With their ability to cross the language barrier on social networks, bilingual and multilingual
users have attracted special attention from researchers (Eleta
and Golbeck 2014, 2012; Kim et al. 2014) as well.
Hale (Hale 2014) studied multilingual users from the view
of the topological structure of social networks and found that
without multilingual users, social networks will be disconnected. This implies multilingual users play a bridging role
in the connectivity of the network. Eleta et al. (Eleta and
Golbeck 2012) discovered that multilingual users also act as
bridges between communities speaking different languages.
With regard to information diffusion, it is studied that nonnative English speakers have higher influence than native
English users (Kim et al. 2014). Agarwal et al.(Agarwal
et al. 2020) showed that multilingual users play a special
role in cross-lingual diffusion and multilingual users select
the language for their tweet according to audiences (Johnson
2013; Murthy et al. 2015; Nguyen, Trieschnigg, and Cornips
2015). Different from the existing works in the literature,
in this paper, we investigate multilingual users’ importance
in diffusing messages, namely whether messages can reach
more user due to the participation of multilingual users.

7

40
20
0.5

0.0

0.5

SWB
(b) In-degree.

Figure 6: Correlation between users’ sentiment and their
UBM/in-dgree.
In summary, we conclude that a user’s mental sentiment
during the COVID-19 pandemic is strongly correlated to
her/his user bridging magnitude but is not correlated with
their topology properties in the social network, e.g., indegree and out-degrees.
Table 5: Correlations between users’ SWB and their UBM
and structural properties (in-degree and out-degree).
[SWB, user bridging magnitude]
[SWB, in-degree (#followees)]
[SWB, out-degree (#followers)]

6

Correlation Coefficient
-0.69 (p < 0.005)
0.49 (p < 0.005)
0.08 (p < 0.005)

Related Work

The role of being undisputed universal lingua franca of information diffusion on a global level for English has been
questioned in the COVID-19 outbreak (Piller, Zhang, and Li
2020). It has been found that on Twitter nearly 49% of posts

Conclusion

In this paper, we have successfully answered two research
questions. The first question is what role multilingual users
play in COVID-19 information diffusion. The second is
whether multilingual users’ mental health will be negatively
affected by their role in information diffusion during the
pandemic. In the following, we briefly describe our findings
and discuss their potential value in practice.
For the first question, through the Twitter dataset we collected during the COVID-19 pandemic, we have empirically
shown multilingual users have been playing an important
bridging role in diffusing COVID-19 related information.
Thanks to their active participation and influence, COVID19 information can be spread to more users. Our finding is
of great value in practice for the multilingual countries and
regions to fight against infodemic and mitigate its damage.
Official messages should be released in a carefully designed
manner so that a large number of multilingual users could
be activated in the early stage of the diffusion process. An
interesting piece of future work along this direction is thus
to study optimal approaches to activate multilingual users as
many as possible within a given time window.
For the second question, we discovered multilingual users
are at higher risk of being affected by infodemic compared to
monolingual users due to their repeated exposure to COVID19-related information (Holmes et al. 2020). At the time of
writing, the pandemic is still evolving. We believe that this
could draw special public attention on the mental health on
multilingual users and may incur studies in the multilingual
countries and regions that are badly hit by the virus on new
approaches to mitigate this potential mental health crisis.
In this paper, our study is based on the data during the
COVID-19 pandemic. One of our future works is thus to
check whether our findings in this paper also hold in the
general information diffusion process.

References
Agarwal, P.; Garimella, K.; Joglekar, S.; Sastry, N.; and
Tyson, G. 2020. Characterising user content on a multilingual social network. In Proceedings of the 14th International AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media (ICWSM),
volume 14, 2–11.
Amsalem, D.; Dixon, L. B.; and Neria, Y. 2020. The
coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) outbreak and mental health: current risks and recommended actions. JAMA
Psychiatry .
Balahur, A.; and Turchi, M. 2012. Multilingual sentiment
analysis using machine translation? In Proceedings of the
3rd Workshop in Computational Approaches to Subjectivity
and Sentiment Analysis, 52–60.
Chen, E.; Lerman, K.; and Ferrara, E. 2020. COVID-19:
The first public coronavirus Twitter dataset. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2003.07372 .
Chen, X.; Zhang, K.; Zhou, F.; Trajcevski, G.; Zhong, T.;
and Zhang, F. 2019. Information Cascades Modeling via
Deep Multi-Task Learning. In Proceedings of the 42nd International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval (SIGIR), 885–888. ACM.
Cinelli, M.; Quattrociocchi, W.; Galeazzi, A.; Valensise,
C. M.; Brugnoli, E.; Schmidt, A. L.; Zola, P.; Zollo, F.; and
Scala, A. 2020. The COVID-19 social media infodemic.
Scientific Reports 10(1): 16598.
Denecke, K. 2008. Using sentiwordnet for multilingual
sentiment analysis. In Proceedings of the Workshops at
the 24th International Conference on Data Engineering
(ICDE), 507–512.
Devlin, J.; Chang, M.-W.; Lee, K.; and Toutanova, K. 2018.
Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805 .
Eleta, I.; and Golbeck, J. 2012. Bridging languages in social
networks: How multilingual users of Twitter connect language communities? Proceedings of the American Society
for Information Science and Technology 49(1): 1–4.
Eleta, I.; and Golbeck, J. 2014. Multilingual use of Twitter: Social networks at the language frontier. Computers in
Human Behavior 41: 424–432.
Gao, J.; Zheng, P.; Jia, Y.; Chen, H.; Mao, Y.; Chen, S.;
Wang, Y.; Fu, H.; and Dai, J. 2020. Mental health problems
and social media exposure during COVID-19 outbreak. Plos
One 15(4): e0231924.
Go, A.; Bhayani, R.; and Huang, L. 2009. Twitter sentiment
classification using distant supervision. CS224N project report, Stanford 1(12): 2009.
Hale, S. A. 2014. Global connectivity and multilinguals in
the Twitter network. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 833–842.
Holmes, E. A.; O’Connor, R. C.; Perry, V. H.; Tracey, I.;
Wessely, S.; Arseneault, L.; Ballard, C.; Christensen, H.; Silver, R. C.; Everall, I.; et al. 2020. Multidisciplinary research
priorities for the COVID-19 pandemic: a call for action for
mental health science. The Lancet Psychiatry .

Hong, L.; Convertino, G.; and Chi, E. 2011. Language matters in twitter: A large scale study. In Proceedings of the 5th
International AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media
(ICWSM), volume 5.
Johnson, I. 2013. Audience design and communication accommodation theory: Use of Twitter by Welsh-English biliterates. Social Media and Minority Languages: Convergence
and the Creative Industries 99–118.
Kim, S.; Weber, I.; Wei, L.; and Oh, A. 2014. Sociolinguistic
analysis of Twitter in multilingual societies. In Proceedings
of the 25th ACM conference on Hypertext and Social Media,
243–248.
Kupavskii, A.; Ostroumova, L.; Umnov, A.; Usachev, S.;
Serdyukov, P.; Gusev, G.; and Kustarev, A. 2012. Prediction of retweet cascade size over time. In Proceedings of
the 21st ACM international conference on Information and
knowledge management (CIKM), 2335–2338.
Liu, C.; and Liu, Y. 2020. Media exposure and anxiety
during COVID-19: The mediation effect of media vicarious
traumatization. International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health 17(13): 4720.
Murthy, D.; Bowman, S.; Gross, A. J.; and McGarry, M.
2015. Do we tweet differently from our mobile devices?
a study of language differences on mobile and web-based
twitter platforms. Journal of Communication 65(5): 816–
837.
Nguyen, D.; Trieschnigg, D.; and Cornips, L. 2015. Audience and the use of minority languages on Twitter. In Proceedings of the 9th nternational AAAI Conference on Web
and Social Media (ICWSM), volume 9.
Ou, X.; and Li, H. 2020. YNU OXZ @ HaSpeeDe 2 and
AMI : XLM-RoBERTa with Ordered Neurons LSTM for
Classification Task at EVALITA 2020. In Proceedings of the
7th Evaluation Campaign of Natural Language Processing
and Speech Tools for Italian.
Pak, A.; and Paroubek, P. 2010. Twitter as a Corpus for Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining. In Proceedings of the
International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation, LREC. European Language Resources Association.
Piller, I.; Zhang, J.; and Li, J. 2020. Linguistic diversity
in a time of crisis: Language challenges of the COVID-19
pandemic. Multilingua 39(5): 503–515.
Tsur, O.; and Rappoport, A. 2012. What’s in a hashtag? Content based prediction of the spread of ideas in microblogging
communities. In Proceedings of the 5th ACM International
Conference on Web Search and Data Mining (WSDM), 643–
652.
Wang, Y.; Shen, H.; Liu, S.; Gao, J.; and Cheng, X. 2017.
Cascade Dynamics Modeling with Attention-based Recurrent Neural Network. In Proceedings of the 26th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI),
2985–2991. ijcai.org.
Zhong, B.; Huang, Y.; and Liu, Q. 2020. Mental health toll
from the coronavirus: Social media usage reveals Wuhan

residents’ depression and secondary trauma in the COVID19 outbreak. Computers in Human Behavior 114: 106524.
Zhou, X.; Jin, S.; and Zafarani, R. 2020. Sentiment Paradoxes in Social Networks: Why Your Friends Are More Positive Than You? In Proceedings of the 14th International
AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media (ICWSM), 798–
807. AAAI Press.
Zhou, Z.; Bandari, R.; Kong, J. S.; Qian, H.; and Roychowdhury, V. P. 2010. Information resonance on Twitter: watching
Iran. In Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Social Network
Mining and Analysis (SNAKDD), 123–131. ACM.

