Modeling the COVID-19 pandemic: A primer and
overview of mathematical epidemiology

arXiv:2104.08118v1 [q-bio.PE] 16 Apr 2021

Fernando Saldañaa , Jorge X. Velasco-Hernándeza
a

Instituto de Matemáticas, Campus Juriquilla, 76230, Universidad Nacional Autónoma
de México, Quéretaro, Mexico

Abstract
Since the start of the still ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, there have been
many modeling efforts to assess several issues of importance to public health.
In this work, we review the theory behind some important mathematical
models that have been used to answer questions raised by the development
of the pandemic. We start revisiting the basic properties of simple KermackMcKendrick type models. Then, we discuss extensions of such models and
important epidemiological quantities applied to investigate the role of heterogeneity in disease transmission e.g. mixing functions and superspreading
events, the impact of non-pharmaceutical interventions in the control of the
pandemic, vaccine deployment, herd-immunity, viral evolution and the possibility of vaccine escape. From the perspective of mathematical epidemiology,
we highlight the important properties, findings, and, of course, deficiencies,
that all these models have.
Keywords: Mathematical modeling, COVID-19, SARS-CoV-2, Epidemic
model, R0 , Kermack-McKendrick models

1. Introduction
According to the World Health Organization (WHO), the COVID-19
pandemic has caused a dramatic loss of human life and presents an unprecedented challenge to public health. The pandemic has also disrupted
the global economy, the food system, education, employment, tourism, and
Email addresses: fernando.saldana@im.unam.mx (Fernando Saldaña),
jx.velasco@im.unam.mx (Jorge X. Velasco-Hernández)
Preprint submitted to Elsevier

April 19, 2021

several other aspects of life. In response to the COVID-19 crisis, the scientific community has acted fast to better understand the epidemiological, biological, immunological, and virological aspects of the SARS-CoV-2.
Mathematical models have played a significant role to support public health
preparedness and response efforts against the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic
[3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 20, 22, 24, 25, 32, 34, 35, 36, 41, 51, 56, 66, 83, 85, 87, 88].
From the start of the pandemic, modelers have attempted to forecast the
spread of COVID-19 in terms of the expected number of infections, deaths,
hospital beds, intensive care units, and other health-care resources. However,
although models are useful in many ways, their predictions are based on a
set of hypotheses both mathematical and epidemiological for two complex
evolving biological entities, populations of hosts and pathogens. Therefore,
simulation models are far from perfect and their forecasts, predictions, and
scenarios should be taken cautiously [31, 91]. There is a group of models
that have played a significant role in the COVID-19 epidemic. This group
is the one of the so-called compartmental models, either deterministic or
stochastic, that subdivide a given human population into sets of individuals
distinguished by their disease status. So we can, for example, have susceptible, infected, recovered, immune hosts where each of these classes can be
further subdivided as necessary. In the COVID-19 pandemic it has been
useful, for example, to consider several classes of infectious individuals as are
confirmed, asymptomatic infected, symptomatically infected, isolated, and so
on. Infection occurs when an infectious individual enters into contact with
a susceptible one and pathogen transmission ensues. In infectious disease
models, perhaps the most important component is the one that describes
this infection process, the so-called mixing function. The mixing function
introduces one of the basic properties of epidemic systems: heterogeneity.
This heterogeneity is expressed in the different ages, tastes, activities, and
other sexual, behavioral, social, genetic, and physiological traits that define
an individual and a group of individuals in a population. We do not mix
randomly because we tend to mix and interact with people that are like us
in some particular, specific way. The evolution of the present pandemic has
been driven mainly by heterogeneity. All around the World, mitigation measures were implemented to control disease spread. The level of enforcement
and compliance of such measures, however, widely varied across the globe.
Moreover, at times when mitigation measures were partially relaxed, flareups and secondary or tertiary outbreaks have occurred. Many have been
associated with so-called superspreading events. These are characterized as
2

periods of time where large numbers of individuals congregate in close contact increasing the average transmission. These events then become foci of
infections when individuals return to their homes or communities and start,
by doing so, a new wave of local disease transmission. The understanding
and modeling of superspreading events constitute a present challenge of significant importance for the control of disease spread [6, 32, 45, 62, 51, 56].
At the beginning of the pandemic, given the lack of treatments or effective
vaccines, we have relied on the implementation of non-pharmaceutical interventions to prevent disease spread. These types of measures can be rather
effective in diminishing transmission but largely rely on individual customs,
beliefs, and education. Vaccines on the other hand, available since the beginning of 2021, present problems of their own. One is the interplay between
coverage, efficacy, and design. The vaccines that are in the market as this
work is being written, are designed for the viral variants prevalent in the first
six months of the epidemic. Now we have several new variants (that, curiously, arose in the countries where the epidemic has been worse: UK, USA,
Brazil) that have higher transmissibility and the same type of mutations,
facts that present worrisome perspectives regarding the possibility of virus
variants evolving to escape the action of vaccine. Coverage is a problem too
since there has been limited vaccine supply. Without sufficient coverage, the
epidemic will linger for many more months with the consequent burden on
the economy and public health of many countries. Mathematical tools are
being used to provide criteria for the deployment and vaccine roll-out and
the impact of these on epidemic evolution. Finally, a problem of interest
and where modeling is necessary is the analysis of syndemic diseases, that is,
diseases that co-circulate in the same region, time, and populations. As an
example, we have the interaction between influenza and COVID-19 that so
far has resulted rather benign since the mitigation measures that have only
reduced the prevalence of SARS-CoV-2, have practically eliminated influenza
in the season October 2020-March 2021 in the Northern hemisphere [2].
This work has as the main objective to review particular models that have
been or are being used to address the list of problems commented upon in this
Introduction. We will highlight the most important properties, findings, and,
of course, deficiencies, that all these models have. The perspective is that of
two mathematical epidemiologists involved in the Public Health application
of models. We hope the approach and perspective will be of interest to a
general mathematical audience.

3

2. Kermack-McKendrick models and key epidemiological parameters
The classical work of Kermack & McKendrick published in 1927 [54] is
a milestone in the mathematical modeling of infectious diseases. The model
introduced in [54] is a complex age of infection model that involves integrodifferential equations and the now very famous compartmental SIR model as
a special case:
Ṡ = −βSI,
(1)
I˙ = βSI − γI,
Ṙ = γI.
The variables S, I, R, in system represent the number of susceptible, infectious and recovered individuals in the constant total population N =
S + I + R. The parameter γ is the recovery rate and β = cφ, is the effective contact rate which is product of the number of contacts c and the
probability of infection given a contact.
A well known result for system (1) is that the mean infectious period is
Z ∞
1
(2)
γt exp(−γt)dt =
γ
0
and therefore the residence times in the infectious state are exponentially
distributed. In other words, the probability of recovery per unit of time is
constant, regardless of the time elapsed since infection [96]. Using (2), we
can write the basic reproduction number as
R0 =

β
S0 .
γ

(3)

R0 measures the expected number of infections generated by a single (and
typical) infected individual during his/her entire infectious period (1/γ) in
a population where all individuals are susceptible to infection (βS0 = βN ).
At the early phase of the outbreak,
I˙ = γ(R0 − 1)I,

and I(t) = I(0) exp (γ(R0 − 1)t)

(4)

so the infectious class grows initially if R0 > 1 and goes to zero otherwise.
Furthermore, r = γ(R0 − 1) is the grow rate of the epidemic and
r
R0 = 1 + .
γ
4

(5)

Observe that formula (5) provides a natural method to compute R0 without
the need of estimate the initial susceptible population S0 . Another fundamental property of the SIR model (1) is that


Z t
lim S(t) = lim S(0) exp −β
I(s)ds = S∞ > 0, lim I(t) = 0 (6)
t→∞

t→∞

t→∞

0

so the outbreak will end leaving susceptible individuals who escape infection.
Moreover, direct computations allow us to obtain a relationship between the
total number of cases S(0) − S∞ and the cumulative number of infections at
time t, denoted C(t),
Z
γ t
I(s)ds
(7)
C(t) = −(log S(t) − log S0 ) =
β 0
and

γ
S0
=
C(∞) = lim C(t) = log
t→∞
S∞
β

Z

∞

I(s)ds

(8)

1
C(∞)
R0

(9)

0

Then we obtain the final size equation
S(0) exp (−R0 C(∞)) = S(0) + I(0) −

that allow us to estimate the expected number of total cases C(∞) given R0
and the size of the initial susceptible population.
It is important to remark that compartmental Kermack-McKendric-type
models rely on specific assumptions that should be taken with care when
models are applied to real-life problems such as modeling the COVID-19
pandemic. For example, from (2) we deduce that the SIR model assumes
that the time during which an infectious individual can transmit the disease
is constant and equal to the recovery period. This is an acceptable approximation for some diseases but, for others, especially those whose recovery
time is long, it is not. In general, the capacity of infectious individuals to
infect another person will depend on the age of infection [54]. Let i(a, t)da
be the density of infectious individuals at time t with an age of infection
between a and a + da, the evolution of such population is governed by the
McKendrick-von Foester equation
∂
∂
i(a, t) +
i(a, t) + γ(a)i(a, t) = 0,
∂t
∂a
5

(10)

where the recovery rate now depends on the age of infection a. The boundary
and initial conditions are
Z ∞
β(a)i(a, t)da,
(11)
i(a, 0) = φ(a), i(0, t) = B(t) =
0

where β(a) is the effective contact rate as function of the age of infection and
φ(a) is the age of infection initial distribution. For the simple case in which
the solution of (10) is separable i.e. i(a, t) = T (t)A(t), one can see that
(10) has a solution if there is a unique r ∈ R that satisfies the characteristic
equation
Z ∞
Ra
e−ra β(a)e(− 0 γ(s)ds) da = 1.
(12)
0

The parameter r now is interpreted as the intrinsic growth rate of the
epidemic and is directly related with the epidemic doubling time, the amount
of time in which the cumulative incidence doubles, Td = log 2/r ≈ 1/r. If
there is an increase in the doubling time then the transmission is decreasing.
To obtain the basic reproduction number, we need to look at the expression
K(a) = β(a)e−

Ra
0

γ(s)ds

(13)

which is the product of the contact rate and the probability of remain infectious at the age of infection a. Hence, K(a) gives the number of secondary
infections generated by an individuals of age of infection a and
Z ∞
K(a)da.
(14)
R0 =
0

In the SIR model (1), the probability of being infectious at time t is exponential, and the transmission rate at the beginning of the epidemic βS0 is
independent from the age of infection, thus
Z ∞
Z ∞
β
(15)
R0 =
K(a)da = βS0
e−γt dt = S0
γ
0
0
and we recover the expression (5).
The function K(a) has also been called the distribution of the generational
interval. This is one of the fundamental concepts for the computation of R0 .
However, it has been largely neglected in the mathematical community due to
the almost exclusive attention to the computation of reproduction numbers
6

based on compartmental epidemic models. Estimates of the reproduction
number together with the generation interval distribution can provide insight
into the speed with which a disease will spread as shown in [36] for the case
of COVID-19. The density of the generational interval is defined as
G(a) =

K(a)
,
R0

(16)

clearly, 0 ≤ G(a) ≤ 1 for all a. Function G(a) measures the time between the
infection of a primary case and one of its secondary cases [53, 98]. In other
words, the generational interval G(a) is the age of infection that separates
the infector from the infectee. From (12) and the definition of G(a), we
obtain that the inverse of the R0 is the result of the Laplace transform, or
moment-generating function, of the distribution of the generational interval
evaluated at the intrinsic grow rate
Z ∞
1
.
(17)
M (r) =
e−ra G(a)da =
R0
0
The generation interval of an epidemic outbreak is calculated directly
from incidence data, using the symptom onset date as an approximation to
the contagion date, and making extensive use of screening and contact tracing
methods [36, 73, 81]. This approximation is known as the serial interval. We
must remark that the mean of the distribution for the serial or generational
interval does not necessarily coincide with the infectious period which is only
an approximation particular to Kermack-McKendrick type models. Using
(17), we can calculate R0 for different distributions for the serial interval [98].
For example, let Tg be the mean serial interval, a straightforward computation allow us to see that for the exponential distribution G(a) = γ exp(−γt)
we obtain
r
1
=1+
(18)
R0 =
M (r)
γ
where Tg = 1/γ and again we deduced (5). For a normal distribution we
have
1
1
2
2
2 2
e(a−1/γ) /4σ , R0 =
G(a) = √
= er/γ−σ r /2
(19)
M (r)
2πσ
so, in this case, an increase in the variance decreases the value of the basic
reproduction number. For new emerging diseases as COVID-19, the natural
way to obtain R0 is from the observed initial growth rate r of the epidemic.
7

However, as we have shown, the equation relating these two parameters varies
concerning the distribution of the infection period so one must be careful
since the distribution of the generation interval must be known before we
can apply a given relationship for the infection understudy [42, 98].
3. Mixing functions and disease spread
The SIR model (1) is one of the simplest that can be written for a communicable disease. As explained before, it makes the overly simplifying assumption that the mass action law, expressed in the product SI, is a good
approximation of the mixing of the population that results in infectious contacts. However, this hypothesis is only a very rough approximation to what
really happens. To illustrate this consider the spread of a SI disease in a
population subdivided into n disjoint groups first presented in [58]. Each
group is homogeneous in itself meaning that the recovery rates are the same
for all the individuals belonging to that group and their contacts between
individuals are function only of the group they belong to. Define as βij the
effective contact rate of the susceptible individuals in the group i with infectious individuals in the group j, Ni is the total population size of the group
i, and γi is the recovery rate of infected individuals in the group i. Another
hypothesis is that βij = βji , so contacts are symmetric although this may
not be always true. We will show a more general condition on the contacts
rates later in this section. Note that since Si = Ni − Ii we need only write
the equations for the infected individuals in each group i, giving
I˙i = −γi Ii +

n
X

βij Ni Ij −

j=1

n
X

βji Ii Ij ,

(20)

j=1

which is studied in the set Ω = Πni=1 [0, Ni ]. This system has a globally
asymptotically stable disease-free equilibrium at I = (I1 , · · · In ) = 0 and
another endemic equilibrium, with I = k with k a constant vector, that
is globally asymptotically stable when the disease-free equilibrium loses its
stability. We form the matrix A = (aij ) where aij = βij when i 6= j, and
aij = βijP− γi if i = j and define the column vector B(I) with components
Bi = − nj=1 βji Ii Ij , then equation (20) can be rewritten [58] as
I˙i = AI + B(I).
The main result of [58] is the following:
8

(21)

Theorem 3.1. Consider the system given by (21) where A is an n × n
irreducible matrix and B is continuously differentiable in a region D of Rn .
Assume that
• the compact convex set C ⊂ D contains the origin and is positively
invariant for (21),
• limI→0

||B(I)||
||I||

= 0,

• There exists λ > 0 and a real eigenvector v of AT such that v ·v ≥ λ||I||
for all I ∈ C,
• v · B(I) ≤ 0 for all I ∈ C,
• Either I = 0 is globally asymptotically stable in C, or for any I0 ∈
C − 0 the solution φ(t, I0 ) of (21) satisfies limt→∞ ||φ(t, I0 )|| ≥ m, m
independent of I0 . Lastly, there exist a constant solution of (21) I = k,
k ∈ C − 0.
In biological terms, this result simply states that if the basic reproductive
number R0 < 1, then the disease-free equilibrium is unique and asymptotically stable, but if R0 > 1, then it is unstable and there exists another
equilibrium, the endemic equilibrium, that is globally asymptotically stable.
The Lajmanovich and York model as the system (20) is known, was one of
the first multigroup models that shows that its dynamics can be fully characterized in terms of the fundamental parameter R0 and the transcritical
bifurcation that the equilibria suffer at the critical value R0 = 1 [48]. Several studies have shown, however, that epidemiological models that follow
the Lajmanovich and York characterization are not that general. They are
limited in the hypothesis regarding the total population, which is assumed
constant, and the mixing pattern among population subgroups. The existence of subthreshold endemic states, that is, endemic states that exist even
when R0 < 1, have been shown for directly transmitted diseases and vector
transmitted diseases (see, for example, [29, 43, 57, 37, 84, 97]). A simple example of this type of behavior is illustrated in a generalization of the model
first published in [57] that is pertinent for the study of vaccination policies
during the present pandemic. A close variant of this model is briefly presented now. Let S, I, V , and R denote the subpopulations of susceptible,
infectious, vaccinated, and immune individuals respectively. Let β be the
effective contact rate, σ the proportion of reduction in the contact rate due
9

to the vaccine, ω the waning rate of both vaccine and natural immunity, γ
the recovery rate, and Λ, µ the equal birth and mortality rates, respectively.
The model stands
I
− (µ + φ)S + ωV,
N
I
− (µ + ω)V,
V̇ = φV − (1 − σ)V
N
I
I˙ = β (S + (1 − σ)V ) − (γ + µ)I,
N
Ṙ = γI − (ω + µ)R.
Ṡ = Λ − βS

(22)

Using model (22), one can show that, besides the well-known forward bifurcation in which R0 < 1 is a necessary and sufficient condition for disease
elimination, epidemic models may present a backward bifurcation where a
stable endemic equilibrium (EE) co-exists with an unstable EE and a stable disease-free equilibrium for R0 < 1 [57]. In figure 1 we present and
schematic representation of the backward bifurcation phenomena. In terms
of disease control, a backward or subcritical bifurcation implies that R0 has
to be reduced below a value lower than one and, in some cases, difficult to
estimate. Hence, a backward bifurcation is usually considered a undesirable
phenomenon since control polices turn out to be more complicated [10].
1.0

stable equilibria
unstable equilibria

Equilibrium prevalence

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.00

0.25

0.50

0.75

1.00

1.25

1.50

1.75

2.00

0

Figure 1: Schematic representation of a typical backward bifurcation in epidemic models.
The basic reproduction number R0 is showed in the horizontal axis and the vertical axis
is the prevalence of the infection (fraction) at the equilibrium. Solid blue lines represent
stable equilibria and dotted red lines represent unstable equilibria.

Another factor that alters the neat result in Theorem 3.1 by Lajmanovich
10

and Yorke is the fact that the effective contact rates are not constant. They,
of course, can vary when subject to climatic variability but there is a more
basic reason why they are variable: effective contact rates depend on the
sizes of the groups that form the population and, more importantly, on the
mixing preferences of those groups. Busenberg and Castillo-Chavez [18] after
the pioneering work of [50] constructed an axiomatic framework that clearly
defines the conditions that contact rates should satisfy to be consistent with
the dynamics of epidemiological processes. Following [18], define cij the proportion of contacts that individuals from group i have with those in group j.
Then these contact rates must satisfy the following conditions to be consistent with the epidemic dynamics:
1. cij ≥ 0,
Pn
2.
j=1 cij = 1 for j = 1, ..., n.,
3. ai Ni cij = aj Nj cji ,
where Ni is the size of group i and ai is the activity or risk level of group i.
Two particular contact patterns satisfy the above axioms. The proportional
mixing where contacts between groups i and j are separable cij = cai cbj which
implies, using axioms 2 and 3 above, that cij = Ccbj = ĉj with
aj Nj
.
ĉj = Pn
i=1 ai Ni
Proportionate mixing refers to the fact that contacts are distributed according to the proportion of each group in the overall population. The other
important contact function is the so-called preferential mixing. Here we divide the contacts of group i into two parts: a fraction of the contacts, i , is
reserved for within group contacts (group i) and the other fraction 1 − i , is
distributed among all other groups according to the following formula
(1 − j )aj Nj
cij = i δij + (1 − i ) Pn
,
i=1 (1 − j )ai Ni
with δij = 0 if i 6= j and δij = 1 if i = j. Many of the contact matrices that
have been evaluated in the POLYMOD study [68, 79] show a pattern similar
to that of preferential mixing characterized for being diagonally dominant
since most population groups tend to share a high proportion of their contacts
within the same group, in this case, defined by age classes. However, special
11

interaction as those of children and adults which tend to have strong subdiagonal components, and work settings where age groups are bounded above
and below, do not arise from the preferential mixing formula. Glasser and
coworkers [39] have generalized contact matrices and the preferential mixing
function to other situations.
4. Modeling the early phase of the COVID-19 epidemic outbreak
An important feature of the COVID-19 disease is the incubation period,
which is the time between exposure to the virus and symptom onset. The
average incubation period is 5-6 days but can be as long as 14 days [59]. The
SEIR model
Ṡ = −βIS,
Ė = βIS − σE,
I˙ = σE − γI,

(23)

Ṙ = γI,
allow us to incorporate the mean incubation period (1/σ) via the compartment E that includes exposed individuals who had been infected but are still
not infectious. The epidemic grow rate r of the SEIR model (23) can be
obtained exploring the local asymptotic stability of disease-free equilibrium
(DFE) E◦ = (N (0), 0, 0, 0). In particular, r is computed as the dominant
eigenvalue of the Jacobian of system (23) evaluated at E0 . In this case, R0
and r are related as follows:



r
r
1+
(24)
R0 = 1 +
σ
γ
The approximation for the serial interval of the SIR model is Tg = 1/γ;
for the SEIR model is Tg = 1/γ + 1/σ. Hence, the conceptual approximation
of the serial interval given by the SEIR model is more accurate in the sense
that incorporates, both, the incubation and the recovery periods. To have
a better understanding of how the model assumptions and data may affect
the estimation of R0 , let us consider the following example in the COVID-19
context. Consider an average incubation period of 1/σ = 5 days [59] and recovery time of 1/γ = 10 days. The epidemic doubling time at the early phase
of the epidemic in Hubei Province, where SARS-CoV-2 was first recognized,
12

has been approximated to be Td = 2.5 days [69] so r = log 2/Td = 0.277 so the
SIR model estimates R0 = 2.77 and the SEIR model estimates R0 = 3.8364.
On the other hand, the estimated serial interval in Hubei from contact tracing data has a median of 4.6 days [103]; hence, using the real serial interval
the SIR model predicts R0 = 2.27. The overestimation of the serial interval
leads to the overestimation of R0 , which in turn overestimates the growth
rate r. This implies that Kermack-McKendrick-type models may erroneously
anticipate the epidemic peak time (the date of maximum incidence) and also
overestimate the final epidemic size (see Fig. 2).
0.6

0=5
0 = 3.5
0 = 2.3
0 = 1.8

Infected individuals

0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0

0

20

40

60
Time /days

80

100

120

Figure 2: Theoretical evolution of the epidemic curve (percentage prevalence of the infection) for different values of the basic reproduction number.

Standard deterministic Kermack-McKendrick type models that neglect
demographic dynamics predict a single epidemic wave (see Fig. 2); however,
rather than a single peak and near-symmetric decline, the COVID-19 epidemic in several cities have shown plateau-like states followed by epidemic
rebounds [66, 90, 88, 100]. This phenomenon is in part due to changes in
transmission induced by lockdowns and other non-pharmaceutical interventions implemented by public health officers to reduce the epidemic burden.
Besides, individuals are constantly changing their behavior and mobility patterns depending on the perceived risk of acquiring the infection, so they may
reduce their contacts at times of high incidence [100]. How awareness-driven
behavior modulates the epidemic shape has been investigated in [100] modi-

13

fying the SEIR model (23) as follows:
βIS
,
1 + (δ/δc )k
βIS
Ė =
− σE,
1 + (δ/δc )k
I˙ = σE − γI,
Ṡ = −

(25)

Ṙ = (1 − f )γI,
Ḋ = f γI
where D measures the number of deaths in the population. The parameter f
measures the mean fraction of people who die after contracting COVID-19.
The transmission rate is affected by the death-awareness social distancing
rate δ = Ḋ, the half-saturation constant δc ≥ 0, and the sharpness of change
in the force of infection k ≥ 1 [100]. The introduction of awareness in the
SEIR model (23) renders scenarios in which a plateau-like behavior appears,
that is, the number of daily infections decreases at a very slow pace after the
peak (see Fig. 3).

k=1
k=2
k=4

Infections (proportion)

0.06
0.05
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01
0.00
0

50

100
150
Time /days

200

250

Figure 3: Plateau-like states induced by death-awareness social distancing. Epidemiological parameters are fixed to mimic COVID-19 dynamics as follows: β = 0.5 days−1 ,
1/σ = 5 days, 1/γ = 10 days, f = 0.02, k varies and we assume δc = 5 × 10−5 .

4.1. The role of asymptomatic transmission
Another important feature of infection by SARS-CoV-2 is that some people are infected and can transmit the virus, but do not experience any symp14

toms [75]. Current evidence suggests that asymptomatic carriers will transmit the infection to fewer people than symptomatic individuals but their real
contribution to transmission is difficult to estimate since they are expected
to have more contacts than symptomatic carriers [19]. These factors may
have an impact on disease dynamics. Hence, we extend the SEIR model (23)
to illustrate the role of the asymptomatic carriers.
The model is given by the following system of non-linear differential equations:
Ṡ = −(βA A + βI I)S,
Ė = (βA A + βI I)S − σE,
Ȧ = (1 − p)σE − γA A,
I˙ = pσE − γI I,

(26)

Ṙ = γA A + γI I,
where the class A, represents asymptomatic infectious individuals. The total
population at time t, is now N (t) = S(t) + E(t) + A(t) + I(t) + R(t) = 1.
The parameters βA and βI represent the effective contact rates of the asymptomatic and symptomatic infectious classes, respectively. A proportion p
of the exposed individuals E will transition to the symptomatic infectious
class I at a rate σ, while the other proportion 1 − p will enter the asymptomatic infectious class A. The mean infectious periods in the asymptomatic
and symptomatic infectious classes are 1/γA , and 1/γI , respectively. These
individuals gain permanent immunity and move to the recovered class R.
However, we remark that this assumption is only valid when studying the
first outbreak because to date, it is still unknown how long natural immunity will last and there have been already confirmed cases of coronavirus
reinfections [77, 86, 92, 101].
4.1.1. Basic properties of the SEAIR model
A common first step in analyzing compartmental epidemic models is finding the equilibrium points. Setting the right-hand side of system (26) equal
to zero, we see that there is a continuum of DFE of the form
E0 = (S ∗ , E ∗ , A∗ , I ∗ , R∗ ) = (N (0), 0, 0, 0, 0)

(27)

where N (0) = S(0) is the number of susceptible individuals at the initial
time. For model (26), there is no endemic equilibrium. This is because
15

an endemic equilibrium needs a continuous supply of susceptible individuals
that generally occur via births into the susceptible population or through the
waning of immunity [12]. However, model (26) assumes permanent immunity
and does not consider demographic dynamics i.e. births and deaths in the
population.
From the model equations (26), it is easy to see that Ṅ = Ṡ + Ė + Ȧ + I˙ +
Ṙ = 0, therefore the total population is a constant N (t) = N (0) for all t and
the solutions of system (26) are bounded. The biologically feasible region is

Ω = (S, E, A, I, R) ∈ R5+ : S(t) + E(t) + A(t) + I(t) + R(t) = N (t) .
Let X(t) be the solution of system (26) for a well-defined initial condition
X(0) ∈ Ω. Since Xi = 0, implies Ẋi ≥ 0 for any state variable, then X(t) ∈
Ω for all t > 0. Thus, solutions trajectories satisfy the usual positiveness
and boundedness properties and the model is both epidemiologically and
mathematically well posed [47].
The local stability of the DFE is usually explored via the basic reproduction number. As we have mentioned, the mathematical expression for R0
depends directly on the model assumptions and structure. There are several
tools for the computation of the basic reproduction number [46]. Probably, the most popular is the next-generation approach [28] using the method
of [95]. Under this approach, it is necessary to study the subsystem that
describes the production of new infections and changes among infected individuals. The Jacobian matrix J of this subsystem at the DFE is decomposed
as J = F − V, where F is the transmission part and V describe changes in
the infection status. The next-generation matrix is defined as K = FV−1 ,
and R0 = ρ(K), where ρ(·) denotes spectral radius.
For system (26), we obtain




0 βA S(0) βI S(0)
σ
0 0
 , V =  −(1 − p)σ γA 0  .
0
0
F= 0
0
0
0
−pσ
0 γI
Therefore, the basic reproduction number is given by


(1 − p)βA pβI
+
S(0).
R0 =
γA
γI

(28)

R0 is a weighted average determined by the proportion, p, of symptomatic
infected individuals. If there are no asymptomatic carriers i.e. p = 1, we
16

recover the R0 formula found in the SIR model. As a consequence of the
Van den Driessche & Watmough Theorem [95], we establish the following
result regarding the local stability of the DFE.
Theorem 4.1. The continuum of DFE of system (26) given by E0 in (27) is
locally asymptotically stable if the basic reproduction number satisfies R0 < 1
and unstable if R0 > 1.
From the basic reproduction number (28), it is evident that asymptomatic
carriers may play an important role in the spread of COVID-19 within a population depending on their ability to transmit the infection (βA ) and their
frequency in comparison with symptomatic carriers (p). Early estimates at
the beginning of the pandemic suggested that approximately 80% of infections were asymptomatic [16]. More recent evidence suggests only between
17% and 20% do not present any symptoms [19]. The authors in [19] also
found that the transmission risk from asymptomatic cases appeared to be
lower than that of symptomatic cases, but there was considerable uncertainty
in the extent of this (relative risk 0.58; 95% CI 0.335 to 0.994). Nevertheless,
asymptomatic individuals may have more contacts than symptomatic people. There are still different opinions of the true magnitude of asymptomatic
infections and their impact on the pandemic [80]. Finally, we must remark
that although model (26) considers asymptomatic transmission, it is still a
very simplified model that ignores the existence of a pre-symptomatic stage.
As remarked in [44], infectiousness usually starts 2.5 days before symptoms
onset with a high transmission rate. So besides the non-infectious exposed
period and the fully asymptomatic class, some authors have also considered
a class for the pre-symptomatic stage [5, 24]
5. The impact of non-pharmaceutical interventions
The SEAIR model (26) is proposed to study the early phase of the outbreak and therefore assumes that at the start of the pandemic no interventions were applied to control the spread of SARS-CoV-2. This makes sense
for the first stage of the pandemic which, except for China, was driven by
imported cases. However, as levels of local transmission began to increase,
sanitary emergency measures were implemented by health authorities in several countries. Given the absence of a vaccine or effective treatment against
COVID-19 at the beginning of the pandemic, preventive measures pertained

17

to non-pharmaceutical interventions (NPIs) such as wearing a mask in public, staying at home, avoiding places of mass gathering, social distancing,
ventilating indoor spaces, washing hands often, etc.
To have a full picture of the effect of NPIs, it is necessary to formulate
mechanistic mathematical models that explicitly take into account the impact
induced by such sanitary measures. There are different approaches to incorporate NPIs into compartmental models, see, for example, [3, 4, 5, 26, 30, 71,
74, 76, 85, 88, 93, 94]. Here, we formulate a compartmental mathematical
model that explicitly incorporates: (i) isolation of infectious individuals and
(ii) mitigation measures that reduce the number of contacts among the individuals in the population, namely, temporary cancellation of non-essential
activities, lockdown, and social distancing. One of the key tasks throughout
this pandemic has been the use of mathematical models and epidemiological
data to forecast excess hospital demand. Hence, we also incorporate appropriate compartments to monitor the required hospital beds, including the
number of intensive care units (ICU) during the outbreak. The new model
is an extension of the SEAIR model (26) and is given by the following set of
differential equations:
Ṡ = −(t)(βA A + βI I)S,
Ė = (t)(βA A + βI I)S − σE,
Ȧ = (1 − p)σE − γA A,
I˙ = pσE − γI I,
Q̇ = αγI I − δQ,

(29)

Ḣ = δ(1 − ψ)Q − γH H,
Ċ = δψQ − γC C,
Ṙ = γA A + (1 − α)γI I + γH (1 − µ)H + γC (1 − µ)C,
Ḋ = γH µH + γC µC.
In model (29), after infection, a fraction α of the symptomatic individuals
develop severe symptoms and are therefore isolated entering the home quarantine compartment Q, the other fraction recovers from the disease and enter
the immune class R. The model assumes that once isolated, infectious individuals no longer contribute to the force of infection. Individuals expend an
average of 1/δ days in the home quarantine class and then a fraction ψ of
them develop symptoms that require hospitalization H or an intensive care
18

unit C. The average time individuals expend in the classes H and C are
1/γH and 1/γC , respectively, and a fraction µ of such individuals experiment
COVID-19 induced death. The function 0 ≤ (t) ≤ 1 measured the reduction
at a specific time t in the transmission rates achieved by the implementation
of a lockdown or any social distancing measures that reduce the number of
contact among the population.
0.006

Q
H
C
D

Infections (proportion)

0.005
0.004

Total relaxation

0.003

Lockdown

0.002

Partial relaxation

0.001
0.000
0

50

100

150
200
Time /days

250

300

350

Figure 4: Evolution of the daily number of home quarantine infected individuals Q, hospitalizations H, ICU occupancy C, and cumulative deaths D depending on the relaxation of
lockdowns and social distancing (isolation of infected individuals is not relaxed). Epidemiological parameters are fixed to mimic COVID-19 dynamics as follows: βI = 0.5 days−1 ,
βA = 0.4 days−1 , 1/σ = 5 days, p = 0.7, 1/γI = 10 days, 1/γA = 14 days, α = 0.1,
δ = 1/7 days, ψ = 0.3, 1/γH = 1/γC = 7 days, µ = 0.01.

In Figure 4, we performed numerical simulations aimed to show how the
implementation and relaxation of lockdowns impacted the transmission dynamics of COVID-19. For illustration purposes, we are considering a rather
simple form for the function (t). We assume that for the first 40 days after
the emergence of SARS-CoV-2 in the population no mitigation measures are
implemented, so (t) = 1 for 0 ≤ t < 40. After this, health authorities implement a very strict lockdown, for approximately two months, that reduces
significantly (90% in our simulations) the number of contact within the population, thus  = 0.1 for 30 ≤ t < 100. The reduction in the prevalence
of the infection due to lockdown implementation is very clear (see Figure
4). After this period, there is a partial relaxation of the lockdown to reflect
the need for reactivating social and economical activities, so (t) = 0.5 for
100 ≤ t ≤ 160. This causes a new increment in the number of new infections
and the start of the second wave of the epidemic (see Figure 4). Finally, after
19

two months of partial relaxation, if health authorities decided to completely
lift social distancing measures as we assume i.e. (t) = 1 for t > 160, the
result is an exponential increase in the prevalence of the infection that may
increase healthcare system pressure.
5.1. Optimization of non-pharmaceutical interventions
The effectiveness of non-pharmaceutical interventions to control the epidemic has been an important aim of recent work [9, 15, 87, 102]. The economic and social cost of lockdowns, bans of public events or closures of
restaurants, commercial centers, etc., must be limited to reduce economic
costs. Designing optimal transitory NPIs that reduce disease spread at the
lower cost is a key issue that has been investigated in [7] using a simple SIR
model. Following these authors, the design of adequate NPIs involve a tradeoff between minimizing the economic cost of their implementation and the
reduction or minimization of deaths due to insufficient health support. In
mathematical terms, they assume that NPIs may reduce the effective contact
rate β by a control term (1 − u), u ∈ [0, 1]. Note that u = 1 implies an effective contact rate of zero. However, such aim is unrealistic and thus an upper
bound for u, defined as umax ∈ (0, 1), is postulated; hence an admissible control must now satisfy u ∈ [0, umax ]. In this approach the control is acting on
the nonlinear term of the SIR model. The authors’ also assume that health
services can adequately manage up to a maximum prevalence Imax ∈ [0, 1).
This implies that the action of NPIs measured by u must maintain disease
prevalence below Imax . The model is governed by the following equations:
Ṡ = −(1 − u)βSI,
I˙ = (1 − u)βSI − γI,

(30)

Ṙ = γI.
Since it is assumed that S(t) + I(t) + R(t) = 1 the problem is reduced to the
S − I plane. If the optimal NPIs problem has a solution u∗ , then u∗ (S, I)
gives the optimal reduction in the effective contact rate that the NPIs should
achieve given that the epidemic is in the state (S, I). The main result of
Angulo et al [7] is a complete analytical characterization of the optimal NPIs
in the SIR model (30). Their analysis shows that the solution to the optimal

20

intervention is fully characterized by the separating curve

∗
∗
if S ≥ S ∗
 Imax + R−1
c In(S/S ) − (S − S )
Φ(S) =

∗
Imax
if R−1
0 ≤ S ≤ S
where S ∗ = min {Rc , 1}, and Rc = (1 − umax )R0 is a controlled reproduction
number. Note that the shape of the separating curve depends on Imax and Rc .
If Rc ≤ 1, the separating curve is the straight line Φ(S) = Imax . When Rc >
1, the separating curve becomes nonlinear. The optimal control intervention
is characterized by the separating curve as follows:
(1) an optimal intervention exists if and only if the initial state (S0 , I0 ) lies
below this separating curve, that is, I0 ≤ Φ(S0 )
(2) if it exist, the optimal intervention

0





umax
u∗ (S, I) =





1 − 1/(R0 S) if

u∗ takes the feedback form
if

I < Φ(S) or S ≤ R−1
0

if

I = Φ(S) and S ≥ S ∗

I = Φ(S) and S ∗ ≥ S > R−1
0

Hence, the optimal intervention starts when I(t) reaches Φ(S(t)), and then
it slides I(t) along Φ(S) until reaching the region where S ≤ R−1
0 . Observe
that once the trajectory reaches this region, the prevalence of the infection
will decrease without the need of further control [7].
6. Vaccination policies, herd-immunity and the effective reproduction number
Besides being an indicator of the severity of an epidemic, the basic reproduction number R0 is a powerful tool to estimate the control effort needed to
eradicate a disease. Consider an infection in a population that mixes homogeneously with R0 > 1. If at least R0 − 1 of these individuals are protected
from the infection either through naturally acquired immunity after infection
or through vaccine-induced immunity, then the epidemic cannot grow [52].
Hence, the infection can be eradicated if a fraction of individuals greater than
q = (R0 − 1)/R0 = 1 − 1/R0
21

(31)

has been afforded lifelong protection. Under these conditions, a considerable fraction of the population is immune providing indirect protection to
those still susceptible. Hence, on average, a typical infectious individual no
longer generates more than one secondary infection and herd immunity is
established. Estimations of the basic reproduction number for SARS-CoV-2
usually range between 2.0 − 4.5, so for example, if R0 = 2.5 as estimated
for Mexico by [85] (although there are several other estimates for this parameter e.g., [3, 66]) a vaccination program aiming to attain herd immunity
must immunize at least 60% of the population. This result is only valid for a
perfect vaccine that prevents infection with 100% efficacy; however, for most
infections, vaccines only confer partial protection. For the case of SARSCoV-2 infection, vaccine developers behind the Pfizer/BioNTech, Moderna,
and Gamaleya vaccines have announced that their vaccines have efficacy
above 90%, but other developers such as the AstraZeneca and Sinovac teams
have vaccines with efficacy way below 90% [55]. For vaccines with efficacy
0 < ψ < 1 (ψ = 1 means 100% efficacy), if health authorities vaccine a
fraction v of the population and the remaining fraction of the population are
susceptible s, then Rv = sR0 + (1 − ψ)vR0 is the mean number of infections
generated by a typical infectious person in this partially immunized population. So the minimum level of vaccination needed to eradicate the infection
(the minimum v such that Rv < 1) becomes v = q/ψ = (1 − 1/R0 )/ψ.
In the absence of mitigation measures, herd immunity is achieved when
the effective reproduction number Re (also denoted Rt ) is equal to unity
which in turn corresponds to the time when the peak of the epidemic is
reached [100]. The effective reproduction number Re quantifies the mean
number of infections produced by a typical infectious case in a partially immune or protected (via isolation, quarantine, etc) population [27]. Unlike,
R0 , the effective reproduction number does not assume a fully susceptible
population and changes over time depending on the population’s immune
status and the impact of non-pharmaceutical interventions or vaccination
programs in the mitigation of further disease transmission. Under the classical homogeneous mixing assumption, the effective reproduction number at
a particular time t can be approximated as
Re (t) ≈ (1 − pc (t))R0 S(t)/N (t),

(32)

where pc (t) is the reduction in the transmission rate due to mitigation measures where the effectiveness of such measures may vary at a particular time.
The depletion of the susceptible pool decreases the value of Re . Observe
22

that without mitigation measures (pc = 0), at the beginning of the outbreak,
Re (0) = R0 .
The time-dependent effective reproduction number Re (t) has been of
paramount importance to assess the impact of mitigation measures against
COVID-19 and to guide the easing of such restrictions. There are several methodologies to estimate the value of Re from data, see, for example [11, 23, 22, 72, 99]. Probably, the most simple mathematical formulation to obtain the time-dependent effective reproduction number directly
from epidemiological data is the method recently proposed by Contreras and
coworkers [22]. This method considers that, in real-life situations, during an
epidemic outbreak, the effective contact rate β is not constant as assumed in
(1). Instead, it is plausible to assume that β(t) is a function that varies in
time depending on several circumstances, for example, the impact of mobility
restrictions and other mitigation measures to control disease’s spread. Then,
the effective reproduction number is
Re (t) =

β(t) S(t)
.
γ N (t)

(33)

Considering the SIR model equations (1) with a time-dependent β(t), a direct
computation using the chain rule allow us to obtain [22]
dI
1
= −1 +
.
dS
Re (t)

(34)

The equation (34) is discretized in an interval [ti−1 , ti ] where it is assumed
that Re (t) = Re (ti ) is constant, thus
Re (ti ) =

1
∆i I
+1
∆i S

(35)

An extension of the SIR model considering the number of deaths and a
population balance implies that discrete differences satisfy ∆i S +∆i I +∆i r +
∆i D = 0, hence
∆i I
Re (ti ) =
+ 1.
(36)
∆i R + ∆i D
As remarked in [22], if we note that ∆i I = (−∆i S) − (∆i R + ∆i D), that is,
the change in the prevalence, ∆i I, equals new infections, −∆i S, minus new
23

recoveries plus new deaths, (∆i R + ∆i D), therefore
Re (ti ) =

−∆i S
New infections
=
.
∆i R + ∆i D
New recoveries + New deaths

(37)

The features, advantages, limitations, and practical application of this methodology to obtain Re for COVID-19 is studied in more detail in [22, 65]
6.1. COVID-19 vaccine prioritization
Deployment of COVID-19 vaccines was initiated in several countries at
the beginning of January 2021. As expected, there has been a high demand
for the limited supplies of COVID-19 vaccines, so the optimization of vaccine
allocation to maximize public health benefit has been a problem of interest
[33]. Mathematical models have also been used to guide public health policies on the optimization of vaccine allocation [13, 14, 20, 41, 89, 33]. It is well
known that a vaccine directly protects those vaccinated but also indirectly
protects those that are not, the more efficacious is the vaccine the greater
and more beneficial the indirect protection will be. Recently, Bubar et al.
[13] developed a suite of mathematical models geared to evaluate age-specific
vaccine prioritization policies. Several of the vaccines currently available have
high levels of efficacy (above 90%) which means that they can be effective
in blocking transmission. On the other hand, influenza is a well-known respiratory infection for which vaccination policies do exist and may therefore
serve as an important reference to those for SARS-CoV-2. However, the agespecific probability of infection and the age-specific mortality are different in
these two diseases with a higher burden for older than 60 years old people
[33].
The model used by Bubar et al [13] is an age-structured SEIR model with
a force of infection, λi , for a susceptible individual in age group i given as
follows:
n
X
Ij + Ivj + Ixj
λi = φ i
cij
Nj − Dj
j=1
where φi is the probability of a successful transmission given contact with an
infectious individual, cij is the daily contact rate of individuals in age group
i with individuals in age group j, Ij is the number of infectious unvaccinated
individuals, Ivj are individuals who are vaccinated yet infectious, and Ixj is
the number of infectious individuals that are ineligible for vaccination for the
personal hesitancy of due to a positive serological test, Nj is the number of
24

individuals in the age group j and Dj are the individuals of age group j who
have died.
Bubar et al [13] incorporated vaccine hesitancy assuming limited vaccine
uptake such that at most 70% of any age group was eligible to be vaccinated.
Such constrain was performed assuming that 30% of each class for each age
group was initialized as ineligible for vaccination. Moreover, in their more
parsimonious model, they assumed the vaccine to be both, transmission- and
infection- blocking, and to work with variable efficacy. In particular, they
considered two ways to implement vaccine efficacy (ve): as an all-or-nothing
vaccine, where the vaccine yields perfect protection to a fraction ve of people who receive it, or as a leaky vaccine, where all vaccinated people have
reduced probability ve of infection after vaccination. To incorporate agedependent vaccine efficacy, they parameterized the relationship between age
and vaccine efficacy via an age-efficacy curve with (i) a baseline efficacy, an
age at which efficacy begins to decrease (hinge age), and a minimum vaccine
efficacy vem for adults 80+. This was done assuming that ve is equal to a
baseline value for all ages younger than the hinge age, then decreases stepwise in equal increments for each decade to the specified minimum vem for
the 80+ age group. Finally, existing seroprevalence estimates were Incorporated varying the basic reproduction number and the percentage cumulative
incidence reached.
The model outcomes used to compare the performance of different vaccine allocation strategies were the cumulative number of infections, deaths,
and years of life lost. Bubar et al [13] concluded that although vaccination
targeted to younger people (20-50 years old) minimized cumulative incidence,
mortality and years of life lost were minimized when applied first to older
people. These results were based on numerical simulations with a time horizon of one year after the date of the vaccine introduction arguing that this
allowed them to focus on the early prioritization phase of the COVID-19
vaccination programs.
7. Superspreading events
In the beginning of the epidemic, surveillance made extensive use of the
basic reproduction number R0 to characterize the average number of secondary infections. Nevertheless, R0 may hide a large variation at the individual level. Indeed, after more than one year into the pandemic, there have
been several reports of superspreading events (SSEs) in which many individ25

uals are infected at once by one or few infectious carriers (see, for example,
[32, 56, 60, 62, 70, 88] and the references therein). Current reports suggest
that a small group of infections generate most of secondary cases[51]. In
other words, even if R0 ≈ 2 − 3, most individuals are not infecting 2 or 3
other people; instead, a tiny number of people dominate transmission while
an average person do not transmit the virus at all [6]. Current data suggest
that prolonged indoor gatherings with poor ventilation are one of the main
factors inducing SSEs. Hence, crowded closed places are hotspots for SSEs
and a source of COVID-19 infections. More factors may lead to SSEs. For
example, events in which a huge number of people temporarily cluster, so
the number of contacts suddenly increases far above their mean [6]. The
existence of superspreaders, that is, individuals having biological features
that cause them to shed more virus than others, is another issue that has
attracted attention [61].
To understand the role of individual variation in outbreak dynamics,
Lloyd-Smith et al [63], introduced the individual reproduction number, ν,
as a random variable that assess the average number of secondary cases generated by a particular infected individual. Then ν values can be estimated
from a continuous probability distribution with a population mean R0 . In
this context, SSEs are realizations from the right-hand tail of a distribution
of ν. A Poisson process is used to describe the stochastic essence of the transmission process; hence, the expected number of secondary infected generated
by each case, Z, is approximated by an offspring distribution P(Z = k) where
Z ∼ P oisson(ν). Lloyd-Smith et al. considered three possible distributions
of ν generating three candidate models for the offspring distribution:
(1) Generation-based models neglecting individual variation, i.e. ν = R0
for all cases, yielding Z ∼ P oisson(R0 ).
(2) Differential-equation models with homogeneous mixing transmission
and constant recovery rates, ν is exponentially distributed yielding
Z ∼ geometric(R0 ).
(3) ν is gamma-distributed with mean R0 and dispersion parameter k,
yielding Z ∼ N B(R0 , k) (NB= Negative Binomial).
Observe that the NB model includes the Poisson (k → ∞) and geometric
(k = 1) models as special cases. It has variance R0 (1 + R0 /k), so smaller
values of k indicate greater heterogeneity. Althouse et al [6] showed that an
26

epidemic outbreak dominated by SSEs and an NB distribution of secondary
infections with small k has very different transmission dynamics in comparison to a Poisson model outbreak with the same R0 . For the NB model,
secondary infections are over-dispersed causing early transmission dynamics that are more stochastic. Hence, in this case, an epidemic outbreak has
lower probability to grow into a huge epidemic. Nevertheless, if the outbreak
takes off under the NB model, the incidence starts showing stable exponential growth, with a growth rate approaching that of a model with the same
R0 , but a Poisson distribution of secondary infections i.e., an NB model with
k → ∞. However, during the early phase of an NB outbreak that takes off,
disease incidence will look more intense in the first few generations when
SSEs will generate the most of secondary infections, making it possible to
spin out large infection clusters in few generations, whereas a Poisson model
cannot [6, 63].
In the context of COVID-19, Endo et al [32] presented the first study (to
the authors’ knowledge) estimating the level of overdispersion in COVID19 transmission by using a mathematical model that is characterized by
R0 and the overdispersion parameter k of a NB branching process. Their
results suggest a high degree of individual-level variation in the transmission
of COVID-19. Assuming that the R0 lies between 2−3, Endo et al. estimated
an overdispersion parameter k to be around 0.1 (median estimate 0.1; 95%
CrI: 0.05 − 0.2 for R0 = 2.5), suggesting that 80% of secondary transmissions
may have been caused by a small fraction of infectious individuals ( 10%).
Other studies have also estimated k values and their results suggest that k
lies in the range 0.04 − 0.3 [45, 62, 51].
8. Viral evolution and vaccine escape mutants
As of April 2021, several variants of the SARS-CoV-2 have been reported
globally [1, 21, 67, 78]. RNA viruses, such as the coronavirus SARS-CoV-2,
will naturally mutate over time so such variants are not unexpected. Moreover, most mutations are irrelevant in an epidemiological context. Nevertheless, of the multitude of variants circulating worldwide, at the time of
writing (April 2021), health experts are mainly worried about three variants
that have undergone changes to the spike protein and are maybe more infectious and threatening [35]. The first of them is the B.1.1.7 variant that was
first identified in the United Kingdom (UK) and seems to be more transmissible than other variants currently circulating. This variant has also been
27

linked with an increased risk of death but there is still uncertainty surrounding this result. The South-African variant B.1.351 emerged independently
from B.1.1.7 but share some of its mutations. The third is the Brazilian
variant P.1 that contains some additional mutations that and may be able
to overcome the immunity developed after infection by other variants [1].
Current COVID-19 vaccines were developed before the emergence of the
above-mentioned variants. Hence, another major concern is the possibility
that variants will make vaccines less effective. Some preliminary results by
leading vaccine developers suggest that vaccines can still protect against the
new variants [35]. However, the vaccine-induced immune response may not
be as strong or long-lasting [82]. Apart from these problems, the initial
and limited vaccine supply has raised some discussion on how to distribute
COVID-19 vaccines [20, 25, 41, 49, 64, 86]. Beyond prioritizing healthcare
workers and the elderly, the optimal strategy for the general public remains
complex. Some countries, including Canada and the UK, had proposed to
delay the second dose of the vaccine as an attempt to increase the number of
individuals receiving at least one dose and therefore gaining more protection
within the population. Delaying the second dose could create conditions that
promote the evolution of vaccine escape, namely, viral variants resistant to
the antibodies created in response to vaccination [83]. Escape variants have
the potential of creating more infections, deaths and prolong the pandemic.
In general, the start of vaccination programs all around the world, whilst the
pandemic is still ongoing, may rapidly exert selection pressure on the SARSCoV-2 virus and lead to mutations that escape the vaccine-induced immune
response [40]. At this time, there is uncertainty around the strength of such
selection and the probability of vaccine escape, so more studies are needed in
this direction. Recently, Gog et al [40] studied how considerations of vaccine
escape risk might modulate optimal vaccine priority order. They found two
main insights: (i) vaccination aimed at reducing prevalence could be more
effective at reducing disease than directly vaccinating the vulnerable; (ii) the
highest risk for vaccine escape can occur at intermediate levels of vaccination.
They also remarked that vaccinating most of the vulnerable and only a few
of the low-risk individuals could be extremely risky for vaccine escape. Their
results are based on a two-population model with differing vulnerability and
contact rates.
The existence of geographic regions of the human population where the
vaccine is scarce is another concern. It can be argued that regions that do
not have access to the vaccine can serve as evolutionary reservoirs from which
28

vaccine escape mutations may arise. This hypothesis has been explored by
Gerrish et al [38] using a simple two-patch deterministic epidemic model as
follows. They considered COVID-19 epidemics in two neighboring regions
or patches. Assuming that only one patch has access to the vaccine, they
investigated if the presence of the unvaccinated patch affects the probability
of vaccine escape in the vaccinated one.
The model follows the SIR structure for both patches augmented to consider vaccine escape mutants. The governing equations are as follows:

S˙j = −

n
X

βkj Ik Sj − φj Sj ,

I˙j =

k

V˙j = φj Sj ,

n
X

βjk Ij Sk − (γ + µ)Ij ,

k

Ėj = µIj − γEj ,

(38)

Ṙj = γ(Ij + Ej ),

where Sj , Vj , Ij , Ej , and Rj are the fraction of the population that are
susceptible, vaccinated, infected, infected with escape mutant, and recovered,
respectively, in patch j; βij is the transmission rate from patch i to patch j,
φj is vaccination rate in patch j; γ is recovery rate; µ is a composite per-host
mutation rate from wildtype virus to escape mutant virus; n is the number
of patches but they explored only the simple two-patches case (n = 2).
Escape mutants are not considered explicitly, because, under normal conditions, they will always have a strong selective advantage in a vaccinated
population. Thus the model focuses on the timing of the first infection event
in which a new host is infected with an escape mutant.
The time of the first infection event in which a new host in patch j
is infected by an escape mutant that arose in patch i will occur at a rate
rij (t) = βij Ei (t)(Sj (t) + σVj (t)), where σ allows for varying levels of escape
and ranges from σ = 0, no escape mutations, to full escape σ = 1 [38].
It is also assumed that intra-patch transmission rates are equal, βjj = β,
and inter-patch transmission rates are equal too, βij i6=j = β0 . Assuming
β0 < β i.e., inter-patch transmission is much less frequent than intra-patch
transmission, the random variable Tf is defined as the time at which the last
infected individual recovers. Gerrish et al [38] showed that the probability
of vaccine escape can be orders of magnitude higher if vaccination is fully
allocated to one patch and no vaccination allocated to the other. On the
contrary, equal vaccination on the two patches gives the lowest probability of
vaccine escape. In other words, unequal distribution of COVID-19 vaccines
may lead to vaccine escape and hence, support arguments for vaccine equity
29

at all scales.
9. Conclusions
Once the pandemic potential of the SARS-CoV-2 became established in
early 2020, there have been many modeling efforts by scientific and public
health communities to improve our understanding of the underlying mechanism of SARS-CoV-2 transmission and control [91]. Mathematical and computational models have been key tools in the fight against the COVID-19
pandemic helping to forecast hospital demand, evaluate the impact of nonpharmaceutical interventions, guide lockdown exit strategies, the potential
reach of herd-immunity levels, evaluate the optimal allocation of COVID-19
vaccines, and in general to provide guidance to policy-makers about the development of the epidemic [4, 5, 20, 22, 31, 41, 64, 65, 66, 71, 85, 86, 88, 100].
In this work, we have discussed the role of the so-called compartmental
models to gain insight into epidemiological aspects of virus transmission and
the possibilities for its control. The main objective has been to present an
overview of the mathematical methods behind some important aspects of
the general theory of infectious disease modeling. We started revisiting simple deterministic compartmental models closely connected with the classical
work of Kermack & McKendrick and important epidemiological quantities
such as the basic and effective reproduction numbers. Then, we explored the
role of the so-called mixing function which allows introducing heterogeneity
in epidemic models and is, therefore, a key component in disease modeling.
Then we investigated a number of compartmental epidemic models to study
the early phase of the COVID-19 epidemic outbreak, how awareness-driven
behavior modulates the epidemic shape and the role of asymptomatic carriers in disease transmission. The impact of non-pharmaceutical interventions
for COVID-19 control is also discussed. We also revisited important results
related to vaccination policies, herd-immunity, and the effective reproduction
number together with a simple method to perform real-time estimation of
this last quantity. We also discussed the presence of superspreading events in
the pandemic, the possibility of viral evolution and vaccine escape mutants.
One important topic that is not discussed in this review is the interaction
of COVID-19 with other respiratory illnesses. Co-circulation of SARS-CoV2 and other endemic respiratory viral infections is a potential reality that
can bring more challenges to public health. Currently, there have been some
concerns about the interaction between SARS-CoV-2 and influenza viruses
30

and preliminary results suggest that an initial infection with the influenza
A virus strongly enhances the infectivity of SARS-CoV-2 [8]. Some studies
have also already reported proportions of SARS-CoV-2 co-infections with
other respiratory viruses [17]. Co-infection mechanisms are common in nature and the previously mentioned studies highlight the risk of influenza virus
and SARS-CoV-2 co-infection to public health. Tailoring epidemic models to
incorporate the most important features of COVID-19 such as the existence
of asymptomatic carriers, the use of non-pharmaceutical interventions, the
recent introduction of vaccinations, and the emergence of new variants of
SARS-CoV-2 together with co-circulation with other pathogens will result in
very complex dynamics. Therefore, developing realistic mathematical models
to study the co-circulation of SARS-CoV-2 and other respiratory infections
presents one important challenge for disease modelers [2]. There are other
topics that are not treated in this review. For example, simulation models for
the spatial spread of SARS-CoV-2, age and risk structure, the role of human
behavior on disease dynamics, parameter estimation techniques to calibrate
models with official data, exploration of long-term epidemiological outcomes
such as the possibility of recurrent seasonal outbreaks, among others. Nevertheless, we believe we have given at least a brief overview of key modeling
efforts and current challenges related to COVID-19.
The immense number of publications related to the ongoing COVID-19
pandemic has confirmed a fundamental fact: the strategic use of mathematical modeling in public health is a multidisciplinary activity that requires a
critical judgment in the interpretation of the underlying model’s assumptions
and their impact on the projections and outcomes. The use of mathematical models to evaluate contingency plans is essential to overcome a public
health emergency. However, a considerable effort is still needed to improve
the credibility and usefulness of epidemiological so we are better to prepare
to respond to future epidemics.
Acknowledgments
We acknowledge support from DGAPA-PAPIIT-UNAM grants IV100220
(proyecto especial COVID-19) and IN115720.
References
[1] Abdool Karim, S. S. and de Oliveira, T. (2021). New sars-cov-2 variants:
Clinical, public health, and vaccine implications. New England Journal of
31

Medicine.
[2] Acuña Zegarra, M. A., Lopez, M. N., Cibrian, M. S., Garcia, A. C., and
Velasco-Hernandez, J. X. (2021). Co-circulation of sars-cov-2 and influenza
under vaccination scenarios. medRxiv, pages 2020–12.
[3] Acuña-Zegarra, M. A., Santana-Cibrian, M., and Velasco-Hernandez,
J. X. (2020). Modeling behavioral change and covid-19 containment in
mexico: A trade-off between lockdown and compliance. Mathematical Biosciences, page 108370.
[4] Aguiar, M., Ortuondo, E. M., Van-Dierdonck, J. B., Mar, J., and Stollenwerk, N. (2020). Modelling covid 19 in the basque country from introduction to control measure response. Scientific reports, 10(1):1–16.
[5] Aleta, A., Martin-Corral, D., y Piontti, A. P., Ajelli, M., Litvinova, M.,
Chinazzi, M., Dean, N. E., Halloran, M. E., Longini Jr, I. M., Merler, S.,
et al. (2020). Modelling the impact of testing, contact tracing and household quarantine on second waves of covid-19. Nature Human Behaviour,
4(9):964–971.
[6] Althouse, B. M., Wenger, E. A., Miller, J. C., Scarpino, S. V., Allard,
A., Hébert-Dufresne, L., and Hu, H. (2020). Superspreading events in the
transmission dynamics of sars-cov-2: Opportunities for interventions and
control. PLoS biology, 18(11):e3000897.
[7] Angulo, M. T., Castaños, F., Moreno-Morton, R., Velasco-Hernandez,
J. X., and Moreno, J. A. (2021). A simple criterion to design optimal
nonpharmaceutical interventions for epidemic outbreaks. Royal Society
Interface.
[8] Bai, L., Zhao, Y., Dong, J., Liang, S., Guo, M., Liu, X., Wang, X.,
Huang, Z., Sun, X., Zhang, Z., et al. (2021). Coinfection with influenza a
virus enhances sars-cov-2 infectivity. Cell research, pages 1–9.
[9] Bairagi, A. K., Masud, M., Munir, M. S., Nahid, A.-A., Abedin, S. F.,
Alam, K. M., Biswas, S., Alshamrani, S. S., Han, Z., Hong, C. S., et al.
(2020). Controlling the outbreak of covid-19: A noncooperative game
perspective. IEEE Access, 8:215570–215581.

32

[10] Barradas, I. and Vázquez, V. (2019). Backward bifurcation as a desirable phenomenon: Increased fecundity through infection. Bulletin of
mathematical biology, 81(6):2029–2050.
[11] Bettencourt, L. M. and Ribeiro, R. M. (2008). Real time bayesian estimation of the epidemic potential of emerging infectious diseases. PloS
one, 3(5):e2185.
[12] Blackwood, J. C. and Childs, L. M. (2018). An introduction to compartmental modeling for the budding infectious disease modeler. Letters
in Biomathematics, 5(1):195–221.
[13] Bubar, K. M., Reinholt, K., Kissler, S. M., Lipsitch, M., Cobey, S., Grad,
Y. H., and Larremore, D. B. (2021). Model-informed covid-19 vaccine
prioritization strategies by age and serostatus. Science, 371(6532):916–
921.
[14] Buckner, J. H., Chowell, G., and Springborn, M. R. (2021). Dynamic
prioritization of covid-19 vaccines when social distancing is limited for essential workers. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 118(16).
[15] Bugalia, S., Bajiya, V. P., Tripathi, J. P., Li, M.-T., and Sun, G.Q. (2020). Mathematical modeling of covid-19 transmission: the roles
of intervention strategies and lockdown. Mathematical Biosciences and
Engineering, 17(5):5961–5986.
[16] Buitrago-Garcia, D., Egli-Gany, D., Counotte, M. J., Hossmann, S.,
Imeri, H., Ipekci, A. M., Salanti, G., and Low, N. (2020). Occurrence and
transmission potential of asymptomatic and presymptomatic sars-cov-2
infections: A living systematic review and meta-analysis. PLoS medicine,
17(9):e1003346.
[17] Burrel, S., Hausfater, P., Dres, M., Pourcher, V., Luyt, C.-E., Teyssou,
E., Soulié, C., Calvez, V., Marcelin, A.-G., and Boutolleau, D. (2021). Coinfection of sars-cov-2 with other respiratory viruses and performance of
lower respiratory tract samples for the diagnosis of covid-19. International
Journal of Infectious Diseases, 102:10–13.
[18] Busenberg, S. and Castillo-chavez, C. (1991). A general solution of
the problem of mixing of subpopulations and its application to risk- and
33

age-structured epidemic models for the spread of AIDS. Mathematical
Medicine and Biology, 8(1):1–29.
[19] Byambasuren, O., Cardona, M., Bell, K., Clark, J., McLaws, M.-L., and
Glasziou, P. (2020). Estimating the extent of true asymptomatic covid19 and its potential for community transmission: systematic review and
meta-analysis. Available at SSRN 3586675.
[20] Castro, M. C. and Singer, B. (2021). Prioritizing covid-19 vaccination
by age. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 118(15).
[21] Chen, A. T., Altschuler, K., Zhan, S. H., Chan, Y. A., and Deverman,
B. E. (2021). Covid-19 cg enables sars-cov-2 mutation and lineage tracking
by locations and dates of interest. Elife, 10:e63409.
[22] Contreras, S., Villavicencio, H. A., Medina-Ortiz, D., Saavedra, C. P.,
and Olivera-Nappa, Á. (2020). Real-time estimation of rt for supporting
public-health policies against covid-19. Frontiers in public health, 8.
[23] Cori, A., Ferguson, N. M., Fraser, C., and Cauchemez, S. (2013). A new
framework and software to estimate time-varying reproduction numbers
during epidemics. American journal of epidemiology, 178(9):1505–1512.
[24] Day, T., Gandon, S., Lion, S., and Otto, S. P. (2020). On the evolutionary epidemiology of sars-cov-2. Current Biology, 30(15):R849–R857.
[25] De la Sen, M. and Ibeas, A. (2021). On an se (is)(ih) ar epidemic model
with combined vaccination and antiviral controls for covid-19 pandemic.
Advances in Difference Equations, 2021(1):1–30.
[26] de León, U. A.-P., Pérez, Á. G., and Avila-Vales, E. (2020). An seiard
epidemic model for covid-19 in mexico: mathematical analysis and statelevel forecast. Chaos, Solitons & Fractals, 140:110165.
[27] Delamater, P. L., Street, E. J., Leslie, T. F., Yang, Y. T., and Jacobsen,
K. H. (2019). Complexity of the basic reproduction number (r0). Emerging
infectious diseases, 25(1):1.
[28] Diekmann, O., Heesterbeek, J. A. P., and Metz, J. A. (1990). On the definition and the computation of the basic reproduction ratio r 0 in models
for infectious diseases in heterogeneous populations. Journal of mathematical biology, 28(4):365–382.
34

[29] Dushoff, J., Huang, W., and Castillo-Chavez, C. (1998). Backwards
bifurcations and catastrophe in simple models of fatal diseases. Journal of
Mathematical Biology, 36(3):227–248.
[30] Eikenberry, S. E., Mancuso, M., Iboi, E., Phan, T., Eikenberry, K.,
Kuang, Y., Kostelich, E., and Gumel, A. B. (2020). To mask or not to
mask: Modeling the potential for face mask use by the general public to
curtail the covid-19 pandemic. Infectious Disease Modelling.
[31] Eker, S. (2020). Validity and usefulness of covid-19 models. Humanities
and Social Sciences Communications, 7(1):1–5.
[32] Endo, A. et al. (2020). Estimating the overdispersion in covid-19 transmission using outbreak sizes outside china. Wellcome Open Research, 5.
[33] Fitzpatrick, M. C. and Galvani, A. P. (2021). Optimizing age-specific
vaccination. Science, 371(6532):890–891.
[34] Flaxman, S., Mishra, S., Gandy, A., Unwin, H. J. T., Mellan, T. A., Coupland, H., Whittaker, C., Zhu, H., Berah, T., Eaton, J. W., et al. (2020).
Estimating the effects of non-pharmaceutical interventions on covid-19 in
europe. Nature, 584(7820):257–261.
[35] Fontanet, A., Autran, B., Lina, B., Kieny, M. P., Karim, S. S. A., and
Sridhar, D. (2021). Sars-cov-2 variants and ending the covid-19 pandemic.
The Lancet.
[36] Ganyani, T., Kremer, C., Chen, D., Torneri, A., Faes, C., Wallinga, J.,
and Hens, N. (2020). Estimating the generation interval for coronavirus
disease (covid-19) based on symptom onset data, march 2020. Eurosurveillance, 25(17):2000257.
[37] Garba, S. M., Gumel, a. B., and Abu Bakar, M. R. (2008). Backward
bifurcations in dengue transmission dynamics. Mathematical biosciences,
215(1):11–25.
[38] Gerrish, P. J., Saldaña, F., Galeota-Sprung, B., Colato, A., Rodriguez,
E. E., and Hernández, J. X. V. (2021). How unequal vaccine distribution
promotes the evolution of vaccine escape. medRxiv.

35

[39] Glasser, J., Feng, Z., Moylan, A., Del Valle, S., and Castillo-Chavez, C.
(2012). Mixing in age-structured population models of infectious diseases.
Mathematical Biosciences, 235(1):1–7.
[40] Gog, J. R., Hill, E. M., Danon, L., and Thompson, R. (2021). Vaccine
escape in a heterogeneous population: insights for sars-cov-2 from a simple
model. medRxiv.
[41] Goldstein, J. R., Cassidy, T., and Wachter, K. W. (2021). Vaccinating
the oldest against covid-19 saves both the most lives and most years of
life. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 118(11).
[42] Gostic, K. M., McGough, L., Baskerville, E. B., Abbott, S., Joshi, K.,
Tedijanto, C., Kahn, R., Niehus, R., Hay, J. A., De Salazar, P. M., et al.
(2020). Practical considerations for measuring the effective reproductive
number, r t. PLoS computational biology, 16(12):e1008409.
[43] Gumel, A. B. (2012). Causes of backward bifurcations in some epidemiological models. Journal of Mathematical Analysis and Applications,
395(1):355–365.
[44] He, X., Lau, E. H., Wu, P., Deng, X., Wang, J., Hao, X., Lau, Y. C.,
Wong, J. Y., Guan, Y., Tan, X., et al. (2020). Temporal dynamics in viral
shedding and transmissibility of covid-19. Nature medicine, 26(5):672–675.
[45] Hébert-Dufresne, L., Althouse, B. M., Scarpino, S. V., and Allard, A.
(2020). Beyond r 0: heterogeneity in secondary infections and probabilistic epidemic forecasting. Journal of the Royal Society Interface,
17(172):20200393.
[46] Heffernan, J. M., Smith, R. J., and Wahl, L. M. (2005). Perspectives
on the basic reproductive ratio. Journal of the Royal Society Interface,
2(4):281–293.
[47] Hethcote, H. W. (2000a). The mathematics of infectious diseases. SIAM
review, 42(4):599–653.
[48] Hethcote, H. W. (2000b). The mathematics of infectious Diseases. SIAM
Review, 42(4):599–653.

36

[49] Iboi, E. A., Ngonghala, C. N., and Gumel, A. B. (2020). Will an imperfect vaccine curtail the covid-19 pandemic in the us? Infectious Disease
Modelling, 5:510–524.
[50] Jacquez, J. A., Simon, C. P., Koopman, J., Sattenspiel, L., and Perry,
T. (1988). Modeling and analyzing HIV transmission: the effect of contact
patterns. Mathematical Biosciences, 92(2):119–199.
[51] Kain, M. P., Childs, M. L., Becker, A. D., and Mordecai, E. A. (2021).
Chopping the tail: How preventing superspreading can help to maintain
covid-19 control. Epidemics, 34:100430.
[52] Keeling, M., Tildesley, M., House, T., and Danon, L. (2013). The mathematics of vaccination. Math. Today, 49:40–43.
[53] Kenah, E., Lipsitch, M., and Robins, J. M. (2008). Generation interval contraction and epidemic data analysis. Mathematical biosciences,
213(1):71–79.
[54] Kermack, W. O. and McKendrick, A. G. (1927). A contribution to
the mathematical theory of epidemics. Proceedings of the royal society
of london. Series A, Containing papers of a mathematical and physical
character, 115(772):700–721.
[55] Kim, J. H., Marks, F., and Clemens, J. D. (2021). Looking beyond
covid-19 vaccine phase 3 trials. Nature medicine, pages 1–7.
[56] Kochańczyk, M., Grabowski, F., and Lipniacki, T. (2020). Superspreading events initiated the exponential growth phase of covid-19
with R0 higher than initially estimated. Royal Society open science,
7(9):200786.
[57] Kribs-Zaleta, C. M. and Velasco-Hernandez, J. (2000). A simple vaccination model with multiple endemic states. Mathematical Biosciences,
164(2):183–201.
[58] Lajmanovich, A. and Yorke, J. A. (1976). A deterministic model for
gonorrhea in a nonhomogeneous population. Mathematical Biosciences,
28(3-4):221–236.

37

[59] Lauer, S. A., Grantz, K. H., Bi, Q., Jones, F. K., Zheng, Q., Meredith,
H. R., Azman, A. S., Reich, N. G., and Lessler, J. (2020). The incubation period of coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) from publicly reported
confirmed cases: estimation and application. Annals of internal medicine,
172(9):577–582.
[60] Lemieux, J. E., Siddle, K. J., Shaw, B. M., Loreth, C., Schaffner, S. F.,
Gladden-Young, A., Adams, G., Fink, T., Tomkins-Tinch, C. H., Krasilnikova, L. A., et al. (2020). Phylogenetic analysis of sars-cov-2 in the
boston area highlights the role of recurrent importation and superspreading events. medRxiv.
[61] Lewis, D. (2021). Superspreading drives the covid pandemic — and
could help to tame it. https://www.nature.com/articles/d41586-02100460-x. Accessed 22-03-2021.
[62] Liu, Y., Eggo, R. M., and Kucharski, A. J. (2020). Secondary attack
rate and superspreading events for sars-cov-2. The Lancet, 395(10227):e47.
[63] Lloyd-Smith, J. O., Schreiber, S. J., Kopp, P. E., and Getz, W. M.
(2005). Superspreading and the effect of individual variation on disease
emergence. Nature, 438(7066):355–359.
[64] Makhoul, M., Ayoub, H. H., Chemaitelly, H., Seedat, S., Mumtaz,
G. R., Al-Omari, S., and J Abu-Raddad, L. (2020). Epidemiological impact of sars-cov-2 vaccination: mathematical modeling analyses. Vaccines,
8(4):668.
[65] Medina-Ortiz, D., Contreras, S., Barrera-Saavedra, Y., Cabas-Mora, G.,
and Olivera-Nappa, Á. (2020). Country-wise forecast model for the effective reproduction number rt of coronavirus disease. Frontiers in Physics,
8:304.
[66] Mena, R. H., Velasco-Hernandez, J. X., Mantilla-Beniers, N. B.,
Carranco-Sapiéns, G. A., Benet, L., Boyer, D., and Castillo, I. P. (2020).
Using the posterior predictive distribution to analyse epidemic models:
Covid-19 in mexico city. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.02294.
[67] Mercatelli, D. and Giorgi, F. M. (2020). Geographic and genomic distribution of sars-cov-2 mutations. Frontiers in microbiology, 11:1800.
38

[68] Mossong, J., Hens, N., Jit, M., Beutels, P., Auranen, K., Mikolajczyk,
R., Massari, M., Salmaso, S., Tomba, G. S., Wallinga, J., Heijne, J.,
Sadkowska-Todys, M., Rosinska, M., and Edmunds, W. J. (2008). Social Contacts and Mixing Patterns Relevant to the Spread of Infectious
Diseases. PLoS Medicine, 5(3):1.
[69] Muniz-Rodriguez, K., Chowell, G., Cheung, C.-H., Jia, D., Lai, P.-Y.,
Lee, Y., Liu, M., Ofori, S. K., Roosa, K. M., Simonsen, L., et al. (2020).
Doubling time of the covid-19 epidemic by province, china. Emerging
infectious diseases, 26(8):1912.
[70] Ndairou, F., Area, I., Nieto, J. J., and Torres, D. F. (2020). Mathematical modeling of covid-19 transmission dynamics with a case study of
wuhan. Chaos, Solitons & Fractals, page 109846.
[71] Ngonghala, C. N., Iboi, E., Eikenberry, S., Scotch, M., MacIntyre, C. R.,
Bonds, M. H., and Gumel, A. B. (2020). Mathematical assessment of the
impact of non-pharmaceutical interventions on curtailing the 2019 novel
coronavirus. Mathematical Biosciences, page 108364.
[72] Nishiura, H. and Chowell, G. (2009). The effective reproduction number
as a prelude to statistical estimation of time-dependent epidemic trends. In
Mathematical and statistical estimation approaches in epidemiology, pages
103–121. Springer.
[73] Nishiura, H., Linton, N. M., and Akhmetzhanov, A. R. (2020). Serial
interval of novel coronavirus (covid-19) infections. International journal
of infectious diseases, 93:284–286.
[74] Okuonghae, D. and Omame, A. (2020). Analysis of a mathematical
model for covid-19 population dynamics in lagos, nigeria. Chaos, Solitons
& Fractals, 139:110032.
[75] Park, S. W., Cornforth, D. M., Dushoff, J., and Weitz, J. S. (2020a).
The time scale of asymptomatic transmission affects estimates of epidemic
potential in the covid-19 outbreak. Epidemics, 31:100392.
[76] Park, S. W., Sun, K., Viboud, C., Grenfell, B. T., and Dushoff, J.
(2020b). Potential role of social distancing in mitigating spread of coronavirus disease, south korea. Emerging infectious diseases, 26(11):2697.
39

[77] Parry, J. (2020). Covid-19: Hong kong scientists report first confirmed
case of reinfection.
[78] Phan, T. (2020). Genetic diversity and evolution of sars-cov-2. Infection,
genetics and evolution, 81:104260.
[79] Prem, K., Cook, A. R., and Jit, M. (2017). Projecting social contact
matrices in 152 countries using contact surveys and demographic data.
PLoS computational biology, 13(9):e1005697.
[80] Qiu, X., Nergiz, A. I., Maraolo, A. E., Bogoch, I. I., Low, N., and Cevik,
M. (2021). Defining the role of asymptomatic and pre-symptomatic sarscov-2 transmission–a living systematic review. Clinical microbiology and
infection.
[81] Rai, B., Shukla, A., and Dwivedi, L. K. (2020). Estimates of serial
interval for covid-19: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Clinical
epidemiology and global health.
[82] Roberts, M. (2021). What are the brazil, south africa and uk variants
and will vaccines work? urlhttps://www.bbc.com/news/health-55659820.
Accesed 16-03-2021.
[83] Saad-Roy, C. M., Morris, S. E., Metcalf, C. J. E., Mina, M. J., Baker,
R. E., Farrar, J., Holmes, E. C., Pybus, O. G., Graham, A. L., Levin,
S. A., et al. (2021). Epidemiological and evolutionary considerations of
sars-cov-2 vaccine dosing regimes. Science.
[84] Saldaña, F. and Barradas, I. (2019). The role of behavioral changes
and prompt treatment in the control of stis. Infectious Disease Modelling,
4:1–10.
[85] Saldaña, F., Flores-Arguedas, H., Camacho-Gutiérrez, J. A., and Barradas, I. (2020). Modeling the transmission dynamics and the impact of
the control interventions for the covid-19 epidemic outbreak. Mathematical
Biosciences and Engineering, 17(4):4165–4183.
[86] Saldana, F. and Velasco-Hernandez, J. X. (2020). The trade-off between
mobility and vaccination for covid-19 control: a metapopulation modeling
approach. medRxiv.

40

[87] Santamarı́a-Holek, I. and Castaño, V. (2020). Possible fates of the
spread of sars-cov-2 in the mexican context. Royal Society open science,
7(9):200886.
[88] Santana-Cibrian, M., Acuña-Zegarra, M. A., and Velasco-Hernandez,
J. X. (2020). Lifting mobility restrictions and the effect of superspreading
events on the short-term dynamics of covid-19. Mathematical Biosciences
and Engineering, 17(5):6240–6258.
[89] Schmidt, H., Pathak, P., Sönmez, T., and Ünver, M. U. (2020). Covid19: how to prioritize worse-off populations in allocating safe and effective
vaccines. bmj, 371.
[90] Solbach, W., Schiffner, J., Backhaus, I., Burger, D., Staiger, R., Tiemer,
B., Bobrowski, A., Hutchings, T., and Mischnik, A. (2020). Antibody
profiling of covid-19 patients in an urban low-incidence region in northern
germany. Frontiers in Public Health, 8:575.
[91] Thompson, R. N., Hollingsworth, T. D., Isham, V., Arribas-Bel, D.,
Ashby, B., Britton, T., Challenor, P., Chappell, L. H., Clapham, H., Cunniffe, N. J., et al. (2020). Key questions for modelling covid-19 exit strategies. Proceedings of the Royal Society B, 287(1932):20201405.
[92] To, K. K.-W., Hung, I. F.-N., Chan, K.-H., Yuan, S., To, W.-K., Tsang,
D. N.-C., Cheng, V. C.-C., Chen, Z., Kok, K.-H., and Yuen, K.-Y. (2020).
Serum antibody profile of a patient with covid-19 reinfection. Clinical
infectious diseases: an official publication of the Infectious Diseases Society
of America.
[93] Tocto-Erazo, M. R., Espı́ndola-Zepeda, J. A., Montoya-Laos, J. A.,
Acuña-Zegarra, M. A., Olmos-Liceaga, D., Reyes-Castro, P. A., and
Figueroa-Preciado, G. (2020). Lockdown, relaxation, and acme period
in covid-19: A study of disease dynamics in hermosillo, sonora, mexico.
PloS one, 15(12):e0242957.
[94] Ullah, S. and Khan, M. A. (2020). Modeling the impact of nonpharmaceutical interventions on the dynamics of novel coronavirus with
optimal control analysis with a case study. Chaos, Solitons & Fractals,
139:110075.

41

[95] Van den Driessche, P. and Watmough, J. (2002). Reproduction numbers
and sub-threshold endemic equilibria for compartmental models of disease
transmission. Mathematical biosciences, 180(1-2):29–48.
[96] Vergu, E., Busson, H., and Ezanno, P. (2010). Impact of the infection
period distribution on the epidemic spread in a metapopulation model.
PloS one, 5(2):e9371.
[97] Villavicencio-Pulido, G. and Barradas, I. (2008). Latency and quarantine vs. backward bifurcation. ecological modelling, 214(1):59–64.
[98] Wallinga, J. and Lipsitch, M. (2007). How generation intervals shape the
relationship between growth rates and reproductive numbers. Proceedings
of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 274(1609):599–604.
[99] Wallinga, J. and Teunis, P. (2004). Different epidemic curves for severe
acute respiratory syndrome reveal similar impacts of control measures.
American Journal of epidemiology, 160(6):509–516.
[100] Weitz, J. S., Park, S. W., Eksin, C., and Dushoff, J. (2020). Awarenessdriven behavior changes can shift the shape of epidemics away from peaks
and toward plateaus, shoulders, and oscillations. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 117(51):32764–32771.
[101] West, J., Everden, S., and Nikitas, N. (2021). A case of covid-19
reinfection in the uk. Clinical Medicine, 21(1):e52.
[102] Xing, G.-R., Li, M.-T., Li, L., and Sun, G.-Q. (2020). The impact of
population migration on the spread of covid-19: A case study of guangdong
province and hunan province in china. Frontiers in Physics, 8:488.
[103] Yang, L., Dai, J., Zhao, J., Wang, Y., Deng, P., and Wang, J. (2020).
Estimation of incubation period and serial interval of covid-19: analysis of
178 cases and 131 transmission chains in hubei province, china. Epidemiology & Infection, 148.

42

