High efficacy of layered controls for reducing
transmission of airborne pathogens
Laura Fiercea , Alison Robeya,b , and Cathrine Hamiltona,b

arXiv:2104.02683v1 [physics.med-ph] 6 Apr 2021

b

a
Environmental & Climate Sciences Department, Brookhaven National Laboratory
Science Undergraduate Laboratory Internships, U.S. Department of Energy Office of Science

In the past two decades, novel viruses capable of airborne
transmission have emerged with alarming frequency, including SARS-CoV-1 in 2003, H1N1 in 2009, MERS in 2012, and
SAR-CoV-2 in 2019. Yet, in many countries, controls on airborne transmission were not widely adopted until the COVID19 pandemic. To optimize strategies for curbing the transmission of existing airborne viruses and to prepare for outbreaks
of novel viruses in the future, the efficacy of three key controls
— face masks, ventilation, and physical distancing — must be
well understood. In this study, we used the new Quadraturebased model of Respiratory Aerosol and Droplets (QuaRAD) to
quantify the efficacy of controls across thousands of scenarios
that represent the wide variability in factors governing airborne
transmission. We show that, while the efficacy of any individual
control was highly variable among scenarios, the combination of
universal mask-wearing and distancing of at least 1 m reduced
the median risk of initial infection in the susceptible person by
99% relative to a close (0.5 m), unmasked conversation. Increasing ventilation rates by 4 air changes per hour led to further reductions in the median risk of infection by more than 70% if the
two people were distanced by 2 m or more. The combination
of face masks, distancing, and increased ventilation reduced the
risk of infection by more than 98% in more than 95% of scenarios. These findings suggest that layering controls is highly
effective for reducing transmission of airborne pathogens and
will be critical for curbing outbreaks of novel viruses in the future.
respiratory aerosol | ventilation | face masks | SARS-CoV-2 | COVID-19

A
mask on
susceptible
person only

B
mask on
infectious
person only

C
increase
ventilation
by 4 ACH

Fig. 1. Steady-state virion concentrations after a 3-hour, face-to-face conversation
between an infectious person (left) and a susceptible person (right) in an example scenario. The susceptible person’s exposure may be reduced if (A) they wear
a mask, (B) the infectious person wears a mask, or (C) the ventilation rate is increased.

Correspondence: lfierce@bnl.gov

Introduction
The spread of SARS-CoV-2 led to rapid deployment of controls designed to limit airborne transmission. SARS-CoV-2,
like influenza, measles, and tuberculosis, is transmitted predominantly through the inhalation of infectious particles (1).
Controls like face masks, ventilation, and distancing reduce
the likelihood that a susceptible person inhales virus-laden
particles, but their efficacy depends on factors that are inherently variable and, often, poorly constrained (2). For example, rates of viral shedding, characteristics of expiratory
jets, room conditions, and immune responses are all highly
variable (2, and references therein). This uncertainty can be
represented in models by simulating ensembles of scenarios,
but models well-suited for simulating the evolution of respiratory particles in indoor spaces are often computationally
expensive, limiting their representation of parametric uncertainty.
To represent the inherent variability in factors govern-

ing airborne transmission, we developed and applied
the Quadrature-based model of Respiratory Aerosol and
Droplets (QuaRAD) (2), an efficient framework for simulating the life cycle of virus-laden particles, from their initial
creation in the respiratory system to their eventual removal
from the room or deposition into the nasal cavity of a new
host. QuaRAD simulates the evolution of respiratory aerosol
and associated viral loads within indoor spaces by combining
a quadrature-based aerosol model with a Gaussian puff dispersion model, where the Gaussian puff is propelled by the
expiratory jet of the infectious person. Where possible, distributions in model parameters were constrained using measurements. As the viral loading within expired particles of
different sizes has not yet been quantified for SARS-CoV-2,
we used measured virion expiration rates for influenza (3),
which has a viral shedding pattern similar to SARS-CoV-2
(4). These virion expiration rates were combined with measurements of respiratory aerosol size distributions (5) to estimate variation in viral loading with particle size. The parFierce et al.

|

bioRχiv

|

April 7, 2021

|

1–4

ticle size distribution, its evolution, and the resulting spatiotemporal variation in virion concentrations are simulated
in QuaRAD using only six weighted particles. This efficient
representation enables simulation of many cases that span the
variability in model input parameters. The combined model
predicts the risk of initial infection in a susceptible person as
a function of their proximity to an infectious person and the
duration of the encounter, which was used here to quantify
the impact of controls on airborne transmission.

A

Results

C

Focusing on SARS-CoV-2, we simulated thousands of scenarios with QuaRAD to quantify the individual and combined
efficacy of face masks, ventilation, and distancing. We focused on non-medical surgical masks only and applied the
size-resolved mask efficiencies measured by (6), where the
mask efficiency curve with respect to size was varied among
scenarios to reflect the standard deviation of the measurements. To quantify changes in the risk of infection with ventilation, we simulated each scenario with its baseline (low)
ventilation rate and at a ventilation rate elevated by four
air changes per hour (ACH). The absolute ventilation rates
for the high and low ventilation cases varied among scenarios, but the difference between the two ventilation rates was
held to 4 ACH. This 4-ACH increase was chosen to approximately represent the impact of widely opening several windows (7), though the true impact of natural ventilation on
ACH is highly variable depending on the particular building
and the local meteorology. We focused on asymptomatic or
presymptomatic transmission, with each scenario representing an infectious person speaking continuously in an indoor
space for three hours. We first present the efficacy of face
masks and ventilation in reducing initial infection in a susceptible person as a function of distance from an infectious
person, then demonstrate the impact of combining these controls with social distancing.
Face masks and ventilation. An infectious person speak-

ing in an indoor space expels virions that may be inhaled by
someone else. The risk of transmitting infectious particles
can be reduced through the use of face masks and ventilation, which is particularly important when infection rates of
airborne viruses are high.
If a susceptible person is in a room with an infectious person,
they may be exposed to high concentrations of virions (see
Fig. 1a) depending on their respective locations and the conditions within the room. When the susceptible person wears
a mask, their exposure to virions is reduced. The mask on the
susceptible person captures some of the infectious particles,
with an overall collection efficiency that depends on the size
distribution of the particles and the size-resolved efficiency of
the mask. The median risk of infection at the same distancing is reduced by 50% if the susceptible person is wearing a
mask (Fig. 2a). However, this relative risk is highly variable,
with 90% confidence intervals ranging from a relative risk
of nearly 0 (eliminate risk entirely) to 1 (no change in risk).
Unsurprisingly, we find this variability in efficacy is driven
2

mask on
susceptible
person only

B

mask on
infectious
person only

increase
ventilation
by 4 ACH

Fig. 2. Mean (solid line), quartiles (boxes), and 5%–95% confidence intervals
(whiskers) in the relative risk of infection as a function of distance downwind of
an infectious person when (A) the susceptible person wears a face mask and the
infectious person does not, (B) the infectious person wears a face mask and the
susceptible person does not, and (C) neither person wears a mask but ventilation
is increased by 4 air changes per hour.

predominantly by variability in the relative performance of
the mask, such that the relative risk decreases with increasing mask performance.
In general, mask use by the infectious person has greater benefits than mask use by the susceptible person (comparison
between Fig. 2a and 2b), resulting from the larger collection
efficiencies upon exhalation relative to inhalation (6). Mask
use by the infectious person leads to a reduction in virion
concentrations in their expiratory jet and throughout the room
(see Fig. 1). Wearing a face mask also reduces the velocity
of expelled particles (8), which reduces the horizontal extent
of their expiratory jet (2). The efficacy of face mask use by
the infectious person was also highly variable, again driven
by the overall performance of the face mask.
Whereas face masks reduce the relative risk both near and far
from an infectious person, the efficacy of ventilation in reducing transmission risk depends strongly on the distance between the infectious and the susceptible person. While many
of the virions are carried in small particles that remain suspended and affect virion concentrations throughout the room,
virion concentrations are greatest in the region directly downwind of the infectious individual. If the infectious person
is unmasked, but the ventilation rate is increased by 4 ACH
(Fig. 1c), far-field virion concentrations are reduced while
concentrations in the expiratory jet of the infectious individual remain virtually unchanged. Consequently, increasing the
ventilation rate does little to reduce near-field transmission.
On the other hand, with distancing of 2 m or more, increasing the ventilation rate by 4 ACH reduces the median risk of
transmission by more than 70%. Under these distanced conditions, the efficacy of increasing ventilation was highly variable among cases. This variability is controlled by the baseline ventilation rate and the volume of the room, where increasing ventilation tends be most beneficial in small, poorly
ventilated spaces.
Fierce et al.

Methods
Quadrature-based model of Respiratory Aerosol and
Droplets. QuaRAD is an efficient framework for simulating

the evolution of virus-laden particles after they are expired
from an infectious individual, the deposition of these particles to the nasal cavity of a new host, and the resulting risk of
initial infection. The model replaces the continuous aerosol
and droplet size distribution with a quadrature approximation
of six weighted particles (2). For each particle, the model
simulates changes in particle size and virion viability as a
function of time, and dispersion of each quadrature point is
Fierce et al.

(90% CI)
(0.05, 0.62)

0.09

(0.03, 0.40)

0.04

(0.01, 0.28)

H L H L

0.19

(0.02, 0.36)

0.16

(0.01, 0.29)

0.05

(0.01, 0.20)

0.02

(0.00, 0.12)

H L H L

0.01

(0.00, 0.12)

0.00

(0.00, 0.10)

0.00

(0.00, 0.04)

0.00

(0.00, 0.02)

1m

none

m

median
0.39
0.33

2m
1m

susceptible

2m
1m

both

2m

In this study, we showed that layered controls are highly effective in reducing transmission of airborne pathogens like
SARS-CoV-2. The combination of social distancing, masking, and increasing ventilation led to a reduction in the median risk of infection by more than 99%. The efficacy of individual controls depends on the other controls that are in use.
For example, ventilation reduces the risk of infection only
when used in combination with social distancing; the risk of
infection during a close conversation is governed by the nearfield exposure to virions in the expiratory jet, which are not
strongly impacted by the ventilation rate, but ventilation does
impact long-range virion exposure. On the other hand, increasing distancing from 1 m (≈ 3 feet) to 2 m (≈ 6 feet) has
a smaller impact when all parties are masked than when all
are unmasked, which may explain the similarity in infection
rates in schools with 3-foot and 6-foot distancing between
masked students (9). Without universal masking, increasing
distancing from 1 m to 2 m is critical for minimizing the risk
of infection.
We showed that variability in the efficacy of face masks
among scenarios was controlled predominantly by the overall
mask efficiency, suggesting that mitigation strategies should
encourage not only widespread use of masks, but use of
masks that are efficient and well-fitting. Measurements show
that surgical masks tend to have higher collection efficiencies
than microfiber or cotton masks (6, 10), while layering a surgical mask with a cotton mask has been shown to be even
more effective (11). Reductions in risk will likely be greater
than reported in this study if either party is wearing an N95
respirator (10) or layering a well-fitting cotton mask on top
of a non-medical surgical mask (12).
These findings suggest that many lives lost to COVID-19
could have been prevented with earlier and wider adoption
of controls on airborne transmission. Further, the lack of
controls during the COVID-19 pandemic has enabled SARSCoV-2 to mutate to form variants that are more severe, more
infectious, and better able to evade immune defences, vaccinations, and treatments (13) — if the virus is not transmitted, it cannot replicate; if it cannot replicate, it cannot
mutate. Wide adoption of layered controls could dramatically reduce transmission of existing airborne viruses, such
as SARS-CoV-2, and will be critical to control outbreaks of
novel airborne viruses in the future.

as
di ks
sta
H L H L ve n cin
nt g
ila
tio
n

Discussion

(0.02, 0.48)

Fig. 3. Median (solid line), quartiles (boxes), and 90% confidence interval
(whiskers) of the risk of initial infection when employing different combinations of
controls relative to the risk of initial infection during a close (0.5 m) conversation at
the baseline (low) ventilation rates, computed from 2000 scenarios. The median
and 90% confidence intervals of the relative risk are also shown in the adjoining
table.

simulated using a Gaussian puff within a turbulent jet model.
The combined model is used to predict the size distribution of
virus-laden particles and its spatiotemporal evolution, which
is used to predict the virion exposure to a new host as a function of their location relative to the infectious person and the
duration of the encounter. For a given viral dose, we then
predict the risk of initial infection. A detailed description of
QuaRAD, including references for key model components,
is provided in (2). The model is available open source at
https://github.com/lfierce2/QuaRAD.
Ensembles of scenarios to represent uncertainty in
model input parameters. To represent the wide range of

conditions within indoor spaces and the wide variety of physiological properties among the general population, we performed thousands of model simulations with QuaRAD. We
used Latin Hypercube Sampling from the Python Design
of Experiments library (https://pythonhosted.org/pyDOE/) to
sample uncertainty in model input parameters, where the distributions from which input parameters were sampled are
given in (2). In each scenario, the size distribution of respiratory aerosol was represented by three superimposed lognormal modes that correspond to sites of origin in the respiratory
system, following (5). The size distribution parameters and,
consequently, quadrature points and weights were varied between scenarios. The viral load of particles in each mode
was estimated by combining the size distribution measurements of (5) with measurements of virion number from (3),
such that the assumed viral loads were also varied to represent variation in measurements. Parameters of the expiratory
jet and room conditions were also constrained using measurements, where possible, as described in (2).
The baseline scenario was the same as the baseline scenario
in (2), but the ventilation rate in this study was adjusted to the
3

ensemble median of 1.5 air changes per hour.
Dp (µm)
0.5
0.7
1
2
5

CEin
0.3084
0.3209
0.3489
0.4953
0.8691

σin
0.1745
0.1745
0.1682
0.1620
0.1059

CEout
0.4206
0.6542
0.7227
0.7570
0.9283

σout
1.159
0.9657
0.7913
0.6729
0.1495

Table 1. Mean and standard deviation (σ ) of collection efficiency (CE) of a surgical
mask measured in (6). Surgical masks also reduce expiration velocity by an average
of 53% (σ = 0.12) (8).

Quantifying efficacy of controls in each scenario. In

each scenario, we compared the risk of initial infection in
the susceptible person for cases without controls (low ventilation, no masks) and for cases with different combinations
of controls, and quantified the impact of distancing in Fig. 3
by comparing the risk of infection at 1 m or 2 m with the risk
of infection at 0.5 m. We adjusted input parameters within
QuaRAD to represent the impact of controls on transmission
rates. To simulate a susceptible person wearing a mask while
an infectious person is not, we assumed that some of the particles, depending on their size, were captured in the mask;
these captured particles are unable to deposit into the nasal
cavity of the susceptible person and cause infection. To estimate the size-dependent collection efficiency upon inhalation, we used the measurements from (6). (6) provides the
mean and standard deviation of mask collection efficiency at
each size. Using these distributions, we represented a separate mask collection efficiency curve for each scenario. To
ensure continuous efficiency curves with respect to size, we
assumed the relative performance (in terms of standard deviations from the mean) was the same for each scenario. Similarly, we represented a face mask on the infectious person
by modifying the number of virus-laden particles that are expelled, according to the scenario- and size-dependent mask
collection efficiency upon exhalation, where the mask efficiency upon exhalation was also estimated from (6). We
represented the reduction in expiration velocity according to
measurements by (8), while also adjusting the effective diameter of the jet orifice to maintain the same flow rate. Increasing the ventilation rate was represented by modifying
the removal rate in the wall reflection terms in QuaRAD (2).

a consortium of DOE national laboratories focused on response to COVID-19, with funding provided by the Coronavirus CARES Act. This project was supported in part by
the U.S. Department of Energy through the Office of Science, Office of Workforce Development for Teachers and
Scientists (WDTS) under the Science Undergraduate Laboratory Internships Program (SULI) and the Environmental and
Climate Sciences Department under the BNL Supplemental
Undergraduate Research Program (SURP). The quadraturebased model was originally developed for simulation of atmospheric aerosol with support from the DOE Atmospheric
System Research program at Brookhaven National Laboratory, a multiprogram national laboratory supported by DOE
Contract DE-SC0012704.
1. Jonathan M Samet, Kimberly Prather, Georges Benjamin, Seema Lakdawala, John-Martin
Lowe, Arthur Reingold, John Volckens, and Linsey C Marr. Airborne transmission of severe
acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2): What we know. Clinical Infectious
Diseases, 2021.
2. L Fierce, A Robey, and C Hamilton. Simulating near-field enhancement in transmission of
airborne viruses with a quadrature-based model. arXiv:2104.01219 [physics.med-ph], 2021.
3. Donald K Milton, M Patricia Fabian, Benjamin J Cowling, Michael L Grantham, and James J
McDevitt. Influenza virus aerosols in human exhaled breath: particle size, culturability, and
effect of surgical masks. PLoS pathogens, 9(3):e1003205, 2013.
4. Damien Jacot, Gilbert Greub, Katia Jaton, and Onya Opota. Viral load of sars-cov-2 across
patients and compared to other respiratory viruses. Microbes and infection, 22(10):617–
621, 2020.
5. GR Johnson, Lidia Morawska, ZD Ristovski, Megan Hargreaves, Kerrie Mengersen,
Christopher Yu Hang Chao, MP Wan, Y Li, Xaiojan Xie, David Katoshevski, et al. Modality
of human expired aerosol size distributions. Journal of Aerosol Science, 42(12):839–851,
2011.
6. Jin Pan, Charbel Harb, Weinan Leng, and Linsey C Marr. Inward and outward effectiveness
of cloth masks, a surgical mask, and a face shield. Aerosol Science and Technology, pages
1–17, 2021.
7. Cynthia Howard-Reed, Lance A Wallace, and Wayne R Ott. The effect of opening windows
on air change rates in two homes. Journal of the Air & Waste Management Association, 52
(2):147–159, 2002.
8. Blake Maher, Reynaldo Chavez, Gabriel CQ Tomaz, Thien Nguyen, and Yassin Hassan. A
fluid mechanics explanation of the effectiveness of common materials for respiratory masks.
International Journal of Infectious Diseases, 99:505–513, 2020.
9. Polly van den Berg, Elissa M Schechter-Perkins, Rebecca S Jack, Isabella Epshtein,
Richard Nelson, Emily Oster, and Westyn Branch-Elliman. Effectiveness of three versus six
feet of physical distancing for controlling spread of covid-19 among primary and secondary
students and staff: A retrospective, state-wide cohort study. Clinical Infectious Diseases,
2021.
10. Sima Asadi, Christopher D Cappa, Santiago Barreda, Anthony S Wexler, Nicole M Bouvier,
and William D Ristenpart. Efficacy of masks and face coverings in controlling outward
aerosol particle emission from expiratory activities. Scientific reports, 10(1):1–13, 2020.
11. Frank Drewnick, Julia Pikmann, Friederike Fachinger, Lasse Moormann, Fiona Sprang, and
Stephan Borrmann. Aerosol filtration efficiency of household materials for homemade face
masks: Influence of material properties, particle size, particle electrical charge, face velocity,
and leaks. Aerosol Science and Technology, 55(1):63–79, 2020.
12. John T Brooks, Donald H Beezhold, John D Noti, Jayme P Coyle, Raymond C Derk, Francoise M Blachere, and William G Lindsley. Maximizing fit for cloth and medical procedure
masks to improve performance and reduce sars-cov-2 transmission and exposure, 2021.
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, 70(7):254, 2021.
13. Carmen Elena Gómez, Beatriz Perdiguero, and Mariano Esteban. Emerging sars-cov-2
variants and impact in global vaccination programs against sars-cov-2/covid-19. Vaccines,
9(3):243, 2021.
14. Emanuele Borgonovo. A new uncertainty importance measure. Reliability Engineering &
System Safety, 92(6):771–784, 2007.

Global sensitivity analysis. To identify the variables that
most affect variability in efficacy of an individual control, we
used the global sensitivity indicator δ of (14). Under this
framework, δ = 0 indicates no dependence of the output parameter on the input parameter, whereas δ = 1 if uncertainty
in the output is explained entirely by a combination of model
parameters. We computed δ using the Sensitivity Analysis
Library in Python (https://salib.readthedocs.io/en/latest/).

Acknowledgements
This research was supported by the DOE Office of Science through the National Virtual Biotechnology Laboratory,
4

Fierce et al.

