Whether the Health Care Practices For the Patients With
Comorbidities Have Changed After the Outbreak of COVID19; Big Data Public Sentiment Analysis
Bilal Ahmada,b, Sun Juna,d
a

Department of Internet of Things, Jiangnan University, Wuxi, China
b
bilalrouf@yahoo.com, cbilalrouf@gmail.com
d
sunjun_wx@hotmail.com

Abstract
After the pandemic of SARS-CoV-2, it has influenced health care practices of all the world. Initial
investigations indicate that patients with comorbidities are more fragile to this SARS-CoV-2 infection. They
suggested postponing the routine treatment of cancer patients. However, few meta-analyses suggested
evidence are not sufficient to hold the claim of the frailty of cancer patients to COVID-19 and they are not
in the favour of shelving the scheduled procedures. There are recent studies in which medical professionals,
according to their competence, are referring to change the routine practices on how to manage the
applicable therapeutic resources judiciously to combat against this viral infection. This is a different study
which reveals the cancer patients’ viewpoint about how health care practices have been changed in their
opinion? Are they satisfied with their treatment or not? To serve the purpose, we gathered more than 60000
relevant tweets from twitter to analyse the sentiment of cancer patients around the world. Our findings
demonstrate that there is a surge in the argument about cancer and its treatment after the outbreak of COVID19. Most of the tweets are reasonable (52.6%) compared to negative ones (24.3%). We developed polarity
and subjectivity distribution to better recognize the positivity/negativity in the sentiment. which reveals that
the polarity range of positive tweets is within the range of 0 to 0.5. which means the tendency in the tweets
is not so much positive. It is a modest statistical evidence in the support of how natural language processing
(NLP) can be accepted to better understand the patient's behaviour in real-time and it may facilitate the
medical professionals to make better decision to organize the routine management of cancer patients.

Key Words
Natural Language Processing; NLP; Sentiment Analysis; Patients Behaviour; Big Data Sentiment
Analysis.

Introduction
This pandemic situation has set the stage for artificial intelligence, machine learning and natural language
processing (NLP) tools to assist the health care professionals to prove their worth as a supporting tool.
Unstructured data is increasing with an immense speed around the globe on the internet. NLP has been used
to extract useful information from the growing amount of data automatically. Primary research related to
sentiment analysis was to understand the consumer’s feedback towards services they were being offered. It
was mostly a business strategy in the past, it is now used in every field of life that carries from landscape
management of community to medical resources administration. Following are few studies in various fields
which
have
used
natural
language
processing
(NLP).
Richad A. discovered the effect of gardens on community sentiment. He built up a quantitive measure that
characterizes the individuals' positive/negative point of view while they are in and outside the park. He found
that people in some areas of New York tweets positively while they are inside the park as compared to when

they are outside the park (Plunz et al., 2019). During the outbreak of pandemic H1N1, Chew C. used the
twitter data to classify the tweets into sarcasm and humour. The objectives of the study included validating
whether Twitter can be adopted as real-time sentiment analyzer or not (Chew & Eysenbach, 2010). Sunir G.
used the sentiment analysis of patients feedback and with the help of machine learning algorithms, they tried
to predict how comfortable patients’ visit to the hospital was? Whether they treated well the patient and if he
would recommend this hospital to others? (Gohil et al., 2018)
Recent studies are stating that patients with comorbidities are frailer to the COVID-19 and clinical practice
for those patients should be changed to reduce the risk of being infected with SARS-CoV-2(Landman et al.,
2020). Some researchers showed some concerns that shreds of evidence are not enough to stat that patients
with comorbidities are more fragile to SARS-CoV-2(H. Wang & Zhang, 2020). Later on, metadata analysis
in different countries suggested that there are few, not all, comorbidities such as diabetes, hypertension,
cardiovascular and COPD are most common in COVID-19 patients and medical experts have suggested
various practices they are observing to handle their routine patients(Richardson et al., 2020; B. Wang et al.,
2020).
All the research till now presents the medical experts’ perspective about COVID-19 patients with
comorbidities. We don’t find; to the best of our knowledge, any study addressing the issue in patients’
perspective. What do they think how frequent their regular appointments for the treatment are cancelling or
rescheduling during the pandemic days? Whether the regular standard procedures for their treatment has been
changed in the view of cancer patients and the people who are associated with them? We tried to get the
statistical evidence based on available data to address the above-mentioned questions with the help of NLP.
To obtain the public perspective we did sentiment analysis of twitter data which includes tweets more than
60000.

Design & Data Collection
We used Jupyter notebook as code editor and code is written in the python programming language. Ethical
approval was waived off owing to the anonymity of data. We started collecting tweets dataset related to
comorbidities from 25th to 30th April. We used the “Twitterscraper” tool in the command line to retrieve the
61400 tweets related to coronavirus and cancer published in the range of January 1, 2020, to April 25, 2020.
We started writing our code on 1st May 2020. We made the following 15 search queries to search the relevant
tweets.
1.‘Covid-19 and cancer’ 2.‘Coronavirus and cancer’ 3.‘Covid-19 and oncology’ 4.‘Coronavirus and
oncology’ 5.‘Cancer and surgery’ 6.‘Cancer and radiotherapy’ 7.‘Coronavirus and radiotherapy’
8.‘Coronavirus and cancer treatment’ 9.‘Cancer treatment appointment’ 10.‘Chronic diseases and COVID19’ 11.‘Chronic disease and coronavirus’ 12.‘Coronavirus and cancer surgery’ 13.‘Chemotherapy and covid19’ 14.‘Chemotherapy appointment cancelled’ 15.‘Radiotherapy appointment cancelled’. Queries are not
case sensitive. Twitterscraper, unlike many other APIs, has the advantage to retrieve the tweets which are
older
than
7
days(TwitterScraper,
n.d.).

Data Processing
At this stage, hashtags, meaningless words, special characters, retweets and duplicate tweets were removed.
We got 41642 tweets after cleaning the dataset. The number of tweets published each month within the range
of search terms indicates that there is an increase in discussion among public related to comorbidities &
cancer after the outbreak of COVID-19. The phenomenon can be observed in figure 1 which presents the
number of tweets published each week including all search terms, after removing the duplicate and retweets.

Figure 1.

Number of tweets published per week from January 1, 2020, to April 25, 2020

Figure 2. Number of positive, negative and neutral Tweets after the sentiment analysis. Positive = 21928;
Negative= 10134; Neutral= 9580

Dominant
positive
sentiment
distribution

Figure 3.

Public tweeting
facts

Public tweeting
opinions

Polarity and subjectivity distribution of tweets.

Sentiment Analysis & Discussion
The measure of any kind of opinion & fact in the text is called subjectivity. Its scope varies from 0 to 1. The
value near 1 indicates the text is more likely an opinion, and near to 0 shows a fact. Polarity is the measure
of emotion in the text. The basic emotions are either positive, negative or neutral and are measured in the
range of -1 to 1 quantitively, where 0 indicates a neutral emotion. To measure the subjectivity & polarity
quantitively, we used the TextBlob python library. Here is a basic description of how does TextBlob works.
In this library each word has given some id called “WordNet ID” and it gives each WordNet Id a different
polarity and subjectivity. A single word may have different quantitative polarity & subjectivity value
according to the sense it conveys. A word “great”, for example, is assigned the values of 0.4 & 0.2 for polarity
and subjectivity respectively if it conveys the sense of large in size or big in number. The same word “great”,
however, would be assigned the values of polarity & subjectivity equal to 0.8 each and different WordNet id
if it reveals the perceiving of remarkable, extraordinary or greater in effect.(TextBlon, n.d.)
Figure 2 illustrates that most numbers of retrieved tweets were positive (21928 out of 41642). Negative &
neutral tweets were approximately equal in number (negative=10134, neutral=9580). Any value of polarity
higher than 0 is weighed as positive sentiment and in this situation, most of the polarity values lie between 0
to 0.5. Polarity and subjectivity distribution in figure 3, produces the further precise picture of sentiment. It
is apparent from figure 3(a) that polarity of tweets ranges from -0.5 to 0.5. Positive sentiment has bit higher
amplitude, a spike can be observed at the pointed out the region of figure 3(a) in the range of 0. 0.5. We can
infer from this narrow range of polarity people are tweeting positively about their treatment. However, it is
bear a minimum positive range of sentiment. Figure 3(b) indicates there is a range of opinion (0.2-0.8) in the
tweets of public including some facts as well. A sharp spike at 0 in figure 3(b)indicates public perhaps would
be stating facts about COVID-19 and higher amplitude at 0.5 indicates people are expressing their emotions
and
opinions.
Both
points
are
highlighted
in
figure
3(b).
Figure 4 represents the cloud words of all the 60000+ tweets. Larger the font size, greater the frequency of

the word in the tweets. The most frequent words in the word cloud are the search queries which were used to
retrieve the tweets and most common discussion topic words. The word cloud indicates that people are
speaking more about breast and lung cancer, although breast cancer and lung cancer were never in the search
terms. It makes sense, as one of them is the most common type of cancer and the other one is directly linked
with
the
symptoms
of
COVID-19
patients.
It would suggest people are worried about their regular treatment or rescheduling of their routine visits If the
world cloud figure would have contained words such as alarmed, worried, delayed, postponed or cancelled
etc. Increase in the number of tweets related to comorbidities (figure 1), most positive number of tweets
(figure 2), polarity & subjectivity distribution analysis (figure 3) and word cloud image (figure 4), all these
four supports the statements that there is an increase in discussion among the public from January to April
25, 2020, about the comorbidities and COVID-19. But cancer patients or the individuals associated with them
don’t think their regular treatment is affected by COVID-19. Even if it is affected, they are not talking about
it negatively on public forums and social media platforms.

Figure 4.

Word Cloud image from the tweets dataset.

Limitations & Future Aspects of Study
The tool, “Twitterscraper”, we used in our investigation to elicit the tweets has the advantage (able to fetch
tweets older than 7 days) over several APIs but it got some limitations as well. It doesn’t fetch all the tweets
published & associated with searched terms. Infect, Twitter doesn’t support any API to squeeze all the tweets
for any search query. Moreover, the privacy settings of twitter users also play an important role in whether
to permit an API to retrieve the tweets. So the dataset is incomplete in a sense it doesn’t have all the tweets
published
by
public
related
to
comorbidities.
As investigation’s results reflect the positive sentiment of public about their treatment, we tried to be more
skeptical owing to the fact dataset was incomplete and to reduce the bias if there was any in the dataset, we
included the inquiry queries such as “Radiotherapy appointment cancelled” and “Chemotherapy appointment

cancelled”, which indicates the negative sentiment. Although, the privacy settings and probability of less
retrieval of data would affect the tweets with positive and negative sentiment, equally.
Machine learning and deep learning algorithms can be trained to classify the sentiment more than 3 basic
classes, to serve the purpose only labelled data is required to feed these networks.
With due code of ethics and the consent of patients, medical experts may observe patients’ behaviour to
understand the effect of specific medication in real-time with the help of social media & NLP.
Instead of general observation of patients, the experts can extend this practice to various geographic regional
levels to relate to the other communal, economical, social factors in human behaviour. Standard working
procedures would be required to develop to protect patient privacy and to get permission from social media
firms to access public content for research purpose.

Conclusion
After the outbreak of COVID-19, there is an increase in the discussion on social media about patients with
comorbidities. 52% positive sentiment tweets (figure 2), their further polarity & subjectivity distribution
(figure 3) and words cloud of tweets (figure 4) indicate that routine practices for cancer patients has not been
affected very much in patients’ point of view. Even if their appointments are rescheduled or cancelled they
are not expressing it on social media just as a positive gesture to the patients who are suffering from SARSCoV-2. It is a modest statistical evidence in the support of how natural language processing (NLP) can be
accepted to better understand the patient’s behaviour in real-time and it may facilitate the medical
professionals to make a better decision to organize the routine management of cancer patients.

Conflict of Interest
We declare no competing interests.

References
Chew, C., & Eysenbach, G. (2010). Pandemics in the age of Twitter: Content analysis of
tweets during the 2009 H1N1 outbreak. PLoS ONE, 5(11), 1–13.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0014118
Gohil, S., Vuik, S., & Darzi, A. (2018). Sentiment analysis of health care tweets: Review
of the methods used. Journal of Medical Internet Research, 20(4).
https://doi.org/10.2196/publichealth.5789
Landman, A., Feetham, L., & Stuckey, D. (2020). Cancer patients in SARS-CoV-2
infection : a nationwide analysis in China. 2045(20), 335–337.
https://doi.org/10.1016/S1470-2045(20)30096-6
Plunz, R. A., Zhou, Y., Carrasco Vintimilla, M. I., Mckeown, K., Yu, T., Uguccioni, L.,
& Sutto, M. P. (2019). Twitter sentiment in New York City parks as measure of
well-being. Landscape and Urban Planning, 189(July 2018), 235–246.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.landurbplan.2019.04.024
Richardson, S., Hirsch, J. S., Narasimhan, M., Crawford, J. M., McGinn, T., Davidson,
K. W., Barnaby, D. P., Becker, L. B., Chelico, J. D., Cohen, S. L., Cookingham, J.,
Coppa, K., Diefenbach, M. A., Dominello, A. J., Duer-Hefele, J., Falzon, L., Gitlin,
J., Hajizadeh, N., Harvin, T. G., … Zanos, T. P. (2020). Presenting Characteristics,

Comorbidities, and Outcomes Among 5700 Patients Hospitalized With COVID-19
in the New York City Area. Jama, 10022, 1–8.
https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2020.6775
TextBlon. (n.d.). TextBlob Python Library. https://textblob.readthedocs.io/en/dev/
TwitterScraper. (n.d.). https://github.com/taspinar/twitterscraper
Wang, B., Li, R., Lu, Z., & Huang, Y. (2020). Does comorbidity increase the risk of
patients with covid-19: Evidence from meta-analysis. Aging, 12(7), 6049–6057.
https://doi.org/10.18632/AGING.103000
Wang, H., & Zhang, L. (2020). Risk of COVID-19 for patients with cancer. The Lancet
Oncology, 21(4), e181. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1470-2045(20)30149-2

