ALMA Memo 618

The ObsMode 2020 Process
Satoko Takahashi (ObsMode2020 lead, JAO/NAOJ),
Edward B. Fomalont (NRAO/ JAO), Yoshiharu Asaki (NAOJ/ JAO), Geoff Crew
(MIT Haystack Observatory), Lynn D. Matthews (MIT Haystack Observatory), Paulo
Cortes (JAO/ NRAO), Baltasar Vila-Vilaro (JAO/ ESO), Tim Bastian (NRAO),
Masumi Shimojo (NAOJ), Andy Biggs (ESO), Hugo Messias (JAO/ ESO), Antonio
Hales (JAO/ NRAO), Eric Villard (ESO), and Elizabeth Humphreys (JAO/ ESO)
Submitted February 5, 2021; Published April 1, 2021

The ObsMode2020 Process

ALMA Memo 618

Table of Contents
Introduction
Definition and purpose

Acronyms
Description
ObsMode2020 process

3
4

4
4
5

ObsMode2020 Timelines
Documentation and regular communications

5
6

Additional Considerations

7

Covid-19 Pandemic
Prioritizations and resources
Phased array observing mode

7
7
8

Roles and Responsibilities
ObsMode2020 leads and contacts

8
9

Review Process
Procedure
ObsMode2020 Reviewers
Reviewed documents

10
10
11
11

ObsMode2020 Go/no-go Review Process
Capability-based summary

12
12

Polarization capabilities
Phased array mode
Astrometry
Solar capabilities
Baseline correlator (Online related topics)
High frequency observing capabilities
High frequency and Long Baseline

12
13
14
14
14
15
15

Subsystem Readiness

15

User documentation

16

Summary

17

References

18

Acknowledgement

18

Document classification: Public

The ObsMode2020 Process

ALMA Memo 618

Abstract
ObsMode is a yearly process which aims at preparing capabilities for future Observing
cycles. The process has been running for a number of years tied to each ALMA observing cycle,
with various leaderships. This document specifically summarizes the ObsMode2020 process (AprilOctober 2020) with a new scheme, which is based on a proposal by E. Villard (the former head of
APG/ JAO). Some improvements and the actual implementation were performed by S. Takahashi
(the ObsMode lead/ JAO).
In the ObsMode2020 process, seven capabilities are identified as high priority items, for
which it was originally aimed to be ready for Cycle 9. However, because of the observatory
shutdown due to the covid-19 pandemic, we were not able to obtain any test data. This forced us to
revise our timelines and delay the testing plan by one year. After the revision of the timelines, the
ObsMode2020 process was adjusted for preparation of the new Cycle 8, which starts from October
2021. In reality, most of the capabilities became no-go for Cycle 8 due to the lack of test data.
These have been carried over to the ObsMode2021 process, which aims to be ready for Cycle 9.
Our time in 2020 was spent carefully preparing for the commissioning test plans, revisiting
previously obtained test data sets, and working on subsystem requirements and implementations.
The ObsMode review process was implemented for the first time, and test plan documents and
technical summary reports were reviewed by experts from outside of the commissioning team.
While no new data were obtained during the observatory shutdown, verifications using the
existing data allowed us to offer the 7m-array polarization capability (in ACA standalone mode,
single field rather than mosaicking) for Cycle 8 starting from October, 2021. In addition, subsystem
readiness and policy-side preparations for the phased array observing mode were improved for
Cycle 8. Other high priority items were decided to be carried over to ObsMode2021.

Document classification: Public

The ObsMode2020 Process

1.

Introduction

1.1.

Definition and purpose

ALMA Memo 618

ObsMode is a yearly process which aims at preparing capabilities for future ALMA
Observing cycles. The process has been running for a number of years tied to each ALMA
observing cycle, with various leaderships. In 2020, we decided to implement a new ObsMode
process, which is better tied to the yearly ALMA Cycle as well as ALMA subsystem
implementation timelines. This idea was originally proposed by E. Villard (the former head of
APG/ JAO) and approved by the ALMA Deputy Director and the Head of DSO. The actual
implementation was performed by S. Takahashi (the ObsMode lead/ JAO) with additional
considerations, adjustments, and improvements. This ALMA memo summarizes the ObsMode2020
process run between April and October 2020.

1.2.

Acronyms

ACA
ALMA
APG
APP2
ARC
ASAC
B2B
DMG
DRM
DSO
EDM
EHT
EOC
FDM
FWHM
GMVA
ICT
ISOpT
JAO
MIT
NA
NRAO
OT
P2G
PG
SSG
SSR
SSS
TDM
THB
VLBI

Atacama Compact Array
Atacama Large Millimeter/submillimeter Array
Array Performance Group
ALMA Phasing Project 2
ALMA Regional Center
The ALMA Scientific Advisory Committee
Band-to-Band
Data Management Group
Data Reduction Manager
Department of Science Operation
(ALMA) Electronic Document Management (http://edm.alma.cl)
Event Horizon Telescope
Extension and Optimization of Capabilities
Frequency Division Mode
Full width half maximum
The Global mm-VLBI Array
Information and Communication Technology
Integrated Science Operation Team
Joint ALMA Observatory
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
North America
National Radio Astronomical Observatory
Observing Tool
Phase2 Group
Proposer’s Guide
Subsystem Group
Science Software Requirements
Subsystem Scientist
Time Division Mode
Technical Hand Book
Very Long Baseline Interferometry

Document classification: Public

The ObsMode2020 Process

2.

Description

2.1.

ObsMode2020 process

ALMA Memo 618

The ObsMode2020 process was originally started in order to focus on Cycle 9 capability
testing and development. E. Villard (head of APG) presented the preliminary ObsMode2020
priorities and timeline in February 2020 to EOC colleagues (JAO and ARC colleagues who focus
on technically-oriented work and who are involved in development work). This provided
notification and a discussion opportunity across the ALMA project. Candidate
capabilities/observing modes were then presented at the ASAC meeting in early March 2020 in
order to be compared with the interests of the community, and they were properly prioritized
according to community requests. The final priorities for Cycle 9 capabilities were officially
decided after feedback from the ASAC members. The outcome consisted of seven capabilities.
Please note that each observing capability is identified as an equally high priority item, led by an
independent technical lead. Sometimes more than one observing mode was identified as being
associated with a particular capability. In this case, the modes have a relative priority based on
community interest.

2.2.

ObsMode2020 Timelines

Starting from 2020, the ObsMode process aligns better with the ALMA ONLINE/OFFLINE
subsystem release timelines, which are also tied to the ALMA Cycles. This facilitates better
collaborative work between the ObsMode process and SSGs, particularly with the OT Phase I and
Phase II requirement deadlines. For this, the ObsMode process changed to an October-October
timeline (from an April/May-December timeline). Year 2020 was the first year for which we
adopted the new timeline, hence the process was shorter than will take place in future.
ObsMode2020 started in April 2020 and concluded in October 2020. The ObsMode annual time
schedule that was shared in April 2020, is presented in Table 1.
Table 1: ObsMode2020 annual timeline presented on April 6, 2020 in the ObsMode-SSG kick off
telecon, and later adjusted with the new situation in 2020. The schedule presented here is the
timeline we followed for the ObsMode2020 process.
Date
2020-04-06

Contents
ObsMode-SSG kick off telecon to start the
ObsMode2020 process
ObsMode2021 test plan review (Group A)
ObsMode2021 test plan review (Group B)
Test plan document submission
Test plan review process starts

Person in charge
ObsMode lead

2020-06-19

Requirement deadline for ONLINE subsystem (for the
2020JUL RELEASE)

Tech. leads

2020-07-22

ObsMode-SSG telecon: Mid-term progress review

Tech. leads

2020-04-16
2020-04-17
2020-04-21
2020-04-21

Document classification: Public

Tech. leads
Tech. leads
Tech. leads
Tech. leads and
reviewers

The ObsMode2020 Process

2020-07-27

OT Phase I/II requirement discussion (capability bases)

2020-07-28

OT Phase I/II requirement discussion (capability bases)

2020-09-11
2020-09-12

Technical report submission for group A
Technical summary review process start (until Go/no-go
telecon on Sep. 29)
OT phase I/II requirement deadline (group A) for
2020NOV release
Go/no-go telecon for group A
Final report submission for the group A capabilities

Tech. leads
Tech. leads and
reviewers
OT SSS and Tech.
leads
All
Tech. leads

2020-10-28
2020-10-30

Technical report submission for group B
Technical summary review process start (until Go/no-go
telecon on Oct. 28)
OT phase I/II requirement deadline (group B) for
2020DEC release
Go/no-go telecon for group B
Final report submission for the group B capabilities

Tech. leads
Tech. leads and
reviewers
OT SSS and Tech.
leads
All
Tech. leads

2020-11-27
2020-12-01

Requirements submission to the OFFLINE system
Send data reduction method (Cycle 8) to ADAPT

Tech. leads
ObsMode lead

2020-12-17

ALMA Cycle 8 pre-announcement

DSO head

2020-12-31

Cycle 8 THB and PG (ObsMode related) change
submission deadline to the editors.

Tech. leads

2021-01-15

ObsMode2020 summary report circulation to
stakeholders

ObsMode lead

2020-09-14
2020-09-29
2020-10-02
2020-10-16
2020-10-17
2020-10-19

2.3.

ALMA Memo 618

OT and SSR SSSs
and Tech. leads
OT and SSR SSSs
and Tech. leads

Documentation and regular communications

While the ObsMode process is led by JAO, global involvement and contributions are key.
Therefore it is needed to interact with ALMA colleagues across teams physically-located in
different places and working in different time zones. Facilitating regular communication is vital for
the success of the Obsmode process. To this end, the ObsMode lead made all information available
in written format and shared it in the project internal website (a confluence page). Furthermore, in
order to create more verbal communication across the teams, a monthly ObsMode telecon (see
Table 2) was organized in addition to the decision-making telecons. This frequent interaction
triggered specific discussion items, such as ObsMode near/mid/long-terms priorities, which require
experts from different areas within the projects (Commissioning experts, subsystem scientists, ICT
staff, Science operation side experts). Finally, the review process was implemented systematically
and on a capability basis for the first time in the ObsMode process. The test plan document and
Document classification: Public

The ObsMode2020 Process

ALMA Memo 618

technical summary report were reviewed by external experts in order to support the commissioning
teams’s activities properly as well as to make the ObsMode process more visible to colleagues from
various stakeholders (see Section 4).
Table 2. Summary of topics discussed in the ObsMode monthly telecon.
Date
2020-06-8
2020-07-13
2020-08-12
2020-09-09
2020-10-13
2020-11-10

2.4.

Discussion Topics
APDM and ASDM change request
ObsMode inputs for Cycle 9 capabilities
ObsMode2021 preparations
Amplitude calibration
Optimization for the pointing observations
OT Phase I/II requirements for Cycle 8
Selfcalibration
ObsMode2021 priorities

Participants
ObsMode, SSGs, ICTs
ObsMode
ObsMode and SSGs
ObsMode
ObsMode and SSGs
ObsMode and SSGs

Additional Considerations
2.4.1. Covid-19 Pandemic

Due to the covid-19 pandemic situation in 2020, ALMA decided to shut down the
observatory in March, 2020. The shutdown significantly affected the ObsMode process since this
hampered obtaining test data following the original timeline. An extraordinary “countdown”
meeting was held on May 22, 2020 for pan-ALMA coordination. Following a meeting with the
ALMA Board, the observatory decided to extend Cycle 7 one more year and delay the ObsMode
timelines accordingly. From the ObsMode point of view, the originally-planned ObsMode2020
(before the covid-19 pandemic) was tied to Cycle 9 capability developments. After the covid-19
pandemic with revised timelines, ObsMode2020 was now tied to the new Cycle 8, aiming to offer
some capabilities for PI science observations starting in October, 2021. In reality, we did not obtain
any test data during the observatory shutdown in 2020. Hence the majority of the items from
ObsMode2020 were carried over to ObsMode2021 (see Section 5). These will be tested in 2021
with the goal of offering them in Cycle 9 science observations, starting in October 2022 (see Figure
1).
In this document, we use the term of “Cycle 8” for the newly-defined Cycle 8 after
timeline revision, which will start in October 2021. Cycle 8 which was originally defined to be
started in October 2020 (before the pandemic situation required a new timeline) will be stated
as (old) Cycle 8 hereafter.
2.4.2. Prioritization and resources
Overall ObsMode priorities were identified following the procedure described in section
2.1. However, limited availability of human resources as well as difficulty scheduling tests
restricted making progress on specific capabilities. This therefore forced us to change the original
priorities and timelines. In particular, two capabilities listed below had to change their timelines.
Document classification: Public

The ObsMode2020 Process

ALMA Memo 618

●

VLBI capabilities (GMVA and EHT): Due to the pandemic this year, no coordinated
observations, originally scheduled in April and October, 2020, had happened. Therefore the
entire test plan had to be postponed to 2021.

●

Online software capability: To develop this capability, direct support from developers is
critical in addition to the ObsMode side of activity. We had to drop part of the plan due to the
limited availability of human power from the developers group and this delayed the plan by
one year.

Figure 1: ObsMode2020 annual time schedule before (upper panel) and after (lower panel) the
covid-19 pandemic re-scheduling.
2.4.3. Phased array observing mode
The phased array observing mode is one of the capabilities that was already offered in 2019
as a part of the (old) Cycle 8 capability, mainly in order to observe pulsars. As with last year’s
preparations, software requirements and common software changes were discussed. However, the
preparation process was running late with respect to the (old) Cycle 8 implementation timelines. In
the end, the change was not ready for (old) Cycle 8. In the extraordinary meeting on May 22, 2020
(and in follow up discussion by ISOpT), it was officially decided to change the observing mode
name from “Pulsar observing mode” to “Phased array mode”. It was also decided that
Document classification: Public

The ObsMode2020 Process

ALMA Memo 618

ObsMode2020 would take care of all changes required on the subsystem side, as well as in the
common software, for using a new project code “.P”. The policy for the observing mode, such as
the scope of the science cases using this observing mode and the quality assurance procedure, were
better determined (Section 5.1.2). Documentation of this observing mode was updated accordingly
for Cycle 8, starting from October, 2021.

3.

Roles and Responsibilities

In 2020, the ObsMode process was organized as an APG-led process. The head of APG at
that moment, Eric Villard, prepared an initial framework for the process,including annual timelines
and set priorities. In March 2020, Satoko Takahashi (a JAO operations astronomer) was assigned as
the ObsMode2020 lead. Since then, she has been coordinating and running the entire ObsMode2020
process. The role of the ObsMode lead includes presenting the ObsMode2020 priorities, running the
ObsMode review processes in order to assist the commissioning team in preparation of good test
plans, and also supporting the commissioning team to make go/no-go decisions. Moreover, the
ObsMode lead regularly communicates with the ObsMode technical leads (listed below) to track
their work progress. She also communicates with subsystem scientists to make sure that the
subsystem side of developments and preparations are also on track for the ObsMode2020-identified
capabilities. In addition, the ObsMode lead also communicated with the head of APG (E. Villard)
until July 2020, and the head of Science Operations (E. Humphreys) after August in order to make
sure that the ObsMode efforts consistently align with the observatory-wide priorities, timelines, and
activities.
Seven capabilities were identified as part of ObsMode2020. We identified technical leads
for the seven capabilities as listed below. Roles of the technical leads are to create the
commissioning team (small group of experts working on identified observing modes), lead
commissioning test plan activities, prepare for the test plan documents, subsystem requirements,
and technical summary reports to be ready for the capability go/no-go process. In addition, a few
contacts (friends of some capabilities) are identified. They play the role of liaison between the
external commissioning experts and JAO.

3.1.
●

ObsMode2020 leads and contacts
ObsMode lead
o Satoko Takahashi (JAO operations astronomer)
▪

●

Coordinator of the ObsMode2020 process

Technical leads
o Paulo Cortes (JAO operations astronomer)
▪
o

Technical lead of the polarization capabilities

Tim Bastian (NRAO) and Masumi Shimojo (NAOJ)
▪

Technical lead of the solar capabilities

Document classification: Public

The ObsMode2020 Process

o

Satoko Takahashi (JAO operations astronomer)
▪

o

Technical lead of the VLBI capabilities

Baltasar Vila-Vilaro (JAO system astronomer)
▪

●

Technical lead of the VLBI capabilities

Lynn Matthews (MIT Haystack Observatory)
▪

o

Technical lead of the astrometry capabilities

Geoff Crew (MIT Haystack Observatory)
▪

o

Technical lead of the long baseline capabilities

Ed Fomalont (Astronomer - Visitor program, NRAO, JAO)
▪

o

Technical lead of the high frequency capabilities

Yoshiharu Asaki (Commissioning scientist NAOJ, JAO)
▪

o

ALMA Memo 618

Technical lead of the online software capabilities

Contact (friends of some capabilities)
o Antonio Hales (JAO operations astronomer)
▪
o

JAO contact point for the solar capabilities

Hugo Messias (JAO operations astronomer)
▪

JAO contact point for the VLBI and phased array capabilities

4.

Review Process

4.1.

Procedure

For the ObsMode2020 process, the peer review process was newly implemented in order to
receive extensive comments from technical experts within the project. Comments and feedback
from the reviewers were provided for (i) the test plan documents and for (ii) the technical summary
report.
The ObsMode test plan from each commissioning team was presented in the ObsMode-SSG
telecons first in mid-April 2020, then the test plan documents from each team were submitted to the
ObsMode lead on April 20, 2020. The test plan document review process was organized afterwards.
Submitted test plan documents by the technical leads were circulated to the assigned ObsMode
reviewers (Table 3). The reviewers had about a month to review the test plan document, and make
first feedback to the commissioning team. Each commissioning team then spent time to discuss and
finalize their test plan document. All the test plan documents are finalized by August, 2020 after a
few iterations between the commissioning team and reviewers.
The technical summary reports submitted by the technical lead were also reviewed by the
assigned reviewers. The reviewers had about two weeks to read and give feedback to the
commissioning team before having the final capability go/no-go decision telecon in September and
October, 2020.
Document classification: Public

The ObsMode2020 Process

ALMA Memo 618

The interactions between the commissioning team and reviewers were made via email,
while telecon(s) could be set up to follow up some discussions, if necessary. All the inputs from the
reviewers should be taken into account and properly addressed by the commissioning team before
submitting the requested document as the final version.
The VLBI review process, including the selection of reviewers, requires approval from the
AMT, which was coordinated with the deputy director (S. Corder). This is because the VLBI
review process was formally requested by the ALMA board.

4.2.

ObsMode2020 Reviewers

Reviewers selected for each capability are listed in Table 3. The reviewers were mostly
selected by recommendations and suggestions from the technical leads. Additional suggestions were
sometimes made by the ObsMode lead and head of APG to balance the specialties of the reviewers.
The reviewers were technical experts of specific capabilities or those subsystem scientists who need
to work closely with specific observing capabilities. Reviewers were mostly selected within the
project (JAO or ARCs) and coordination was done between the ObsMode lead and their line
managers. A few external reviewers were coordinated individually after approval from the head of
DSO (E. Humphreys).
Table 3: ObsMode2020 reviewers
Capability
Baseline correlator
Solar (interferometer)
Solar (single dish)
Polarization
High frequency
Long baseline
Astrometry
VLBI

4.3.

Reviewer
Tsuyoshi Sawada (JAO), Alejandro Saez (JAO), and Dirk Petry (ESO)
Paulo Cortes (JAO) and Ed Fomalont (JAO)
Richard Hills (Univ. of Cambridge) and Brian Mason (NRAO)
Amanda Kepley (NRAO), Rosita Paladino (Italian ARC node), and George
Moellenbrock (NRAO)
Bill Dent (JAO), Baltasar Vila-Vilaro (JAO), and Neil Phillips (ESO)
Todd Hunter (NRAO), Catherine Vlahakis (NRAO), and Andy Biggs (ESO)
Ruediger Kneissl (JAO) and Leonid Petrov (NASA)
Jim Braatz (NRAO), Seiji Kameno (JAO), Neil Phillips (ESO), Hiroshi Nagai
(NAOJ), and Violette Impellizzeri (JAO→ Leiden ARC node)

Reviewed documents

Reviewed documents are available on the ALMA internal web site. All the ALMA
colleagues are able to access the information.

Document classification: Public

The ObsMode2020 Process

5.

ALMA Memo 618

ObsMode2020 Go/no-go Review Process

In order to review ObsMode2020 progress and decide which tested new capabilities can be
offered for Cycle 8, Go/No-go reviews and telecons were undertaken. The review process was
performed dividing the capabilities into two groups: namely Group A and Group B. The Group A
review process included Solar, Polarization, and Astrometry capabilities, while the Group B review
process included Baseline correlator, VLBI, High frequency, and Long baseline. The review
processes include technical report submissions (two weeks before the Go/no-go telecon). Review
and iteration processes took place between the commissioning teams and reviewers, then the
go/no-go review was held to conclude whether each capability would be offered in Cycle 8.
Due to the covid-19 pandemic in 2020, all the ObsMode2020 identified
capabilities/observing modes were unable to obtain any test data on sky before the go/no-go review.
Hence it is natural that most ObsMode2020 capabilities were carried over to the ObsMode2021
process. It means that all the new capabilities except one described below are confirmed to be
no-go for Cycle 8.
The one capability that passed the go/no-go telecon, recommending it for an additional
Cycle 8 capability, is the 7m-array standalone full polarization observing mode (single-field
limited). In addition, preparations for the phased array mode (Section 2.4.3) and the definition of
the current astrometry observing mode have been better clarified. These updates are available for
observatory provided tools and user documentation.
In the following section, we describe progress and the current situation of each group. Note
that these are only part of the capabilities/observing modes identified in the ObsMode2020 high
priority items. No progress has been made for those not listed here due to the observatory shutdown
(no commissioning activities have been made). Those prioritized items have been carried over to
the ObsMode2021 process.

5.1.

Capability-based summary

5.1.1. Polarization capabilities
The polarization commissioning team made progress on the following two items following
the ObsMode2020 process.
●

7m-array full polarization capabilities (single-field, stand-alone mode)
This is one of the highest priority items based on feedback from ASAC. The test data were
obtained in 2019 in Band 3. The data were independently calibrated by two experts from the
commissioning team (P. Cortes using CASA and S. Kameno using his own software), and a
consistency check was made. In addition, ALMA calibrator surveys have been performed using full
polarization mode and the database maintained by S. Kameno (AMAPOLA) has been used to select
polarization calibrators for 12m-array PI science observations. Based on the test results and
Document classification: Public

The ObsMode2020 Process

ALMA Memo 618

observatory experience, it was agreed that the 7m-array full polarization observing mode is
technically ready for the single-pointing case. According to the decision, a OT requirement to
activate this observing mode was accommodated in the Cycle 8 OT on time, and the capability was
recommended to be offered for Cycle 8. Note that the mosaic test has not been completed yet, hence
the mosaic capability will be carried over to the ObsMode2021 process.
ISOpT made the decision to support offering this capability at Cycle 8. However, in
recognition of the work needed to process the data, ISOpT decided to consult with the DRMs to
determine if there should be a cap placed on the number of hours offered to the community for this
mode, and what that cap should be. This assessment was made within the DRM group (led by T.
Nakos, the head of DMG) . On December 15, 2020, ISOpT accepted DMG’s recommendation for a
75 hours cap (Cycle 8 decision).

●

Frequency setups for the mosaic linear polarization offered in (old) Cycle 8
The 12m-array continuum mosaic observing mode with linear polarization capability was
offered last year (Hull et al. 2020 PASP). While most of the testing was completed using TDM
mode by the commissioning team, the observatory allowed PI to select FDM spectral setups (in
order to allow for accurate removal of line contamination from the continuum emission) with
arbitrary frequency. This could be a potential issue if a PI might select a frequency set up which is
not optimized for continuum emission (or possibly observing line polarization, which is not offered
in Cycle 8 yet). In ObsMode2020, we consulted experts within the project to determine the optimal
frequency setups and the channel widths needed to reliably subtract the continuum emission from
possible contamination by the line emission. After inputs, we agreed to use the single continuum
setup with 1.8 GHz FDM windows in Cycle 8 (TDM mode is also available in the OT if the PI
asks). This function is also updated in the Cycle 8 OT.
Whether arbitrary frequency setups can be allowed for the future depends on the progress of
spectral line mosaic modes commissioning.

5.1.2. Phased array mode
The ALMA phased array mode allows us to phase-up all of the 12m antennas to function as
a single telescope. This capability was already offered in (old) Cycle 8 in Band 3 and included in
the call for proposals of March 2020. The phased array mode uses the same phasing technology
that allows us to remove the requirement that VLBI targets have a flux density greater than 500
mJy.
Software and subsystem regard: Technical readiness was validated in the last two years by the
VLBI commissioning team. However,
subsystem and common software sides of the
implementations were not ready yet and the policy side of the discussion since the last call needed
advancement. During the ObsMode2020 process, we focused on improving these points. Integration
into the common software was fully done in the 2020 December release (for Cycle 8). Most
subsystems are now adopted to the phased array mode (using a new project code .p). The data
Document classification: Public

The ObsMode2020 Process

ALMA Memo 618

archive system might need some work to ingest PSRFITS, which is the standard data format for the
pulsar community. The work is in progress.
QA2 and user documentation: Last year (old Cycle 8), the project decided to not perform QA2 for
the phased array mode. However, following discussion between the commissioning team and
ISOpT on the potential impact of not performing QA2, and how the delivered data can be used for
science, ISOpT decided following two points
● Cycle 8 phased array observing mode is only limited for observing known pulsars and also
for pulsar searches. The mode will not be offered for non-pulsar science.
● At the time of writing this document, it is currently intended that ALMA will perform the
light (quick) QA2 for the Cycle 8 phased array projects. Final decision will come from
ISOpT.
Note that consulted stakeholders included the ALM A Deputy Director, the ALMA Friend of VLBI,
the head of the DRM/DMG and the Obsmode Lead. The updated information will be updated on the
user documentation before the Cycle 8 call for proposal will be released.
5.1.3. Astrometry
ALMA has not officially offered the astrometry observing mode (with extra calibrations
such as better determining the antenna positions including atmospheric effect). There will be no
change in Cycle 8. At the same time, the Cycle 8 OT has a scheme to auto-detect an “astrometry
project”, as indicated by users. The purpose is to auto-detect such projects instead of finding a key
word of “astrometry” from >1800 proposals. This does not mean that we will guarantee the
astrometric observing accuracy requested by the users, but the observatory will make best efforts to
prepare the observations to have the best possible positional accuracies with the given conditions.
The updates to the OT also align with planned future updates when an astrometric observing mode
will be enabled, possibly in a few Cycles from now.
The technical lead (E. Fomalont) together with the OT Phase II group lead (H. Messias)
collected recent data sets to reevaluate achievable astrometric accuracies with the phase referencing
method currently used in ALMA science observations. This typically produces an astrometric
accuracy of roughly 10% of FWHM beam size. Their analysis was also compared with those
independently evaluated numbers by other experts, and the agreed number was updated in the Cycle
8 user documentation.
5.1.4. Solar capabilities
In Cycle 8, there will be no additional capabilities. The solar team has been working on
expansion of solar observing capabilities such as the addition of polarimetry and improvement of
the total power observations. These require major changes in the subsystems (some progress was
made in 2020) and also a series of verification tests on sky (no recent progress due to the
observatory shutdown in 2020).
Document classification: Public

The ObsMode2020 Process

ALMA Memo 618

5.1.5. Baseline correlator (Online related topics)
In Cycle 8, there are no updates for the baseline correlator projects, which are intended to
improve the sensitivity and calibration accuracy of the scientific data sets. The test plans are carried
over to the ObsMode2021 process.
.
5.1.6. High frequency observing capabilities
No progress was made on the commissioning due to the observatory shutdown in 2020,
hence there will be no changes for the higher frequency observations (Band 8, 9, and 10) in the
ACA 7m-array as well as the 12m-array observations with configurations C1 to C7 in Cycle 8. In
ObsMode2021, the commissioning team will aim to enable the band-to-band observing mode,
which observes the phase calibrator in lower frequency bands than that used for the science target.
We determine the phase offset between the low- and high- frequency bands using the diff-gain
-calibration source, then we apply the measured phase offset and scale with frequency to the phase
calibrator and apply the calibration to obtain the high frequency science image. A significant
advantage to observe the phase calibrator in the lower frequency band is to increase the availability
of a closer calibrator to the science target. As an example, the typical angular distance ratio between
finding the phase calibrator at high and low frequencies is about ~3 for Band 9 observations
assuming the 2 GHz bandwidth. For Band 10, we do not always find a suitable phase calibrator for
the ACA 7m-array. Commissioning the Band-to-band observing mode will be critical particularly
for 7m-array observations in order to dramatically increase the number of high frequency science
observations in the near future.
5.1.7. High frequency and Long Baseline
No progress was made on the commissioning due to the observatory shutdown in 2020. The
commissioning team has been working on the B2B observation capability for high frequency (Band
8, 9, and 10) and long baseline configurations (Configs 8, 9, and 10, up to 16 km baselines) for
observations to be ready for the near future Cycles. In order to make this capability ready, the
commissioning team has been focusing on how to choose proper observing conditions as well as
optimizing the observing parameters of the band-to-band method. Some of the initial test results
obtained from previous years are available in published journals (Asaki et al. 2020 ApJS, Asaki et
al. 2020 AJ, Maud et al. 2020 ApJS). From these previous studies, we more accurately determine
the separation angle limitation and the switching cycle between the phase calibrator and target that
will provide better quality of images. Further verifications and the subsystem side of
implementations that are required to offer the high frequency long baseline capability will be tested
in ObsMode2021.

Document classification: Public

The ObsMode2020 Process

6.

ALMA Memo 618

Subsystem Readiness

The subsystem side of preparations and implementations are equally important as the
technical readiness of each observing capability and observing mode. While no test data has been
obtained due to the observatory shutdown, the time has been spent in discussing the subsystem side
of preparations and implementations. Some of the most critical subsystems in terms of running
ALMA observations are the OT (an offline subsystem) and the SSR (an online subsystem), which
produce the scheduling block and make real time decisions (such as performing queries during
observations) , respectively. These two subsystems communicate with each other. Without these two
subsystems accepting the new observing capabilities and observing modes, even basic tests cannot
be performed during the ObsMode process. This was the first year that all the ObsMode technical
leads met with the subsystem scientists of the OT (A. Biggs) and the SSR (A. Hirota) and that
requirements were coordinated among us. This resulted in not only implementing the necessary
functions for Cycle 8 PI science observations, but also implementing necessary functions for future
capabilities (i.e., capabilities prioritised for both ObsMode2020 and ObsMode2021). These new
functions will be tested in the commissioning version of the OT in order to optimize the observing
parameters. After a “go” decision for each capability, the finalized observing parameters will be
migrated to the OT, which will be officially used for the corresponding ALMA Cycle.

Document classification: Public

The ObsMode2020 Process

7.

ALMA Memo 618

User documentation

Based on the ObsMode2020 progress and Go/No-go telecon outcomes (Section 5), the
technical handbook (THB) and proposers guide (PG) will be updated for Cycle 8. Items requiring
updates (only ObsMode related topics) are collected by the ObsMode lead (Table 4).
After discussing with T. Remijan (former THB editor), P. Cortes (Cycle 8 THB editor) and
J. Braatz (PG working group lead), we agreed on that only delta-changes will be performed for the
Cycle 8 documentation because the Cycle 8 documentation work was already completed February
2020 (for old Cycle 8). Items listed in Table 4 are the minimum changes required based on work
done during ObsMode2021. The changes are not only necessary from the technical side, but also
include the policy side of decisions and clarifications. In order to make sure that the revisions are
made appropriately, a few colleagues involved in each discussion played the role of a reviewer for
the document revised by the technical leads. The finalized descriptions were delivered to the Cycle
8 THB editor (P. Cortes) and the PG working group lead (J. Braatz).
Table 4: PG and THB work assignments
Topics
Astrometry
Linear
polarization
mosaic
7m-array
polarization
SACA
Phased array
VLBI

Authors
Hugo Messias (JAO) and Ed Fomalont
(JAO)
Paulo Cortes (JAO)

PG reviewers
C. Vlahakis (NRAO), S. Martin (JAO), A.
Biggs (ESO), and S. Takahashi (JAO)
A. Biggs (ESO), H. Nagai (NAOJ), and S.
Takahashi (JAO)

Paulo Cortes (JAO)

H. Nagai (NAOJ), E. Humphreys (JAO),
and T. Nakos (JAO)

Hugo Messias (JAO), Lynn Matthews
(MIT), and Geoff Crew (MIT)

M. Fukagawa (NAOJ), J. Braatz (NRAO),
and S. Kameno (JAO)

Hugo Messias (JAO), Lynn Matthews
(MIT), and Geoff Crew (MIT)

H. Nagai (NAOJ), J. Braatz (NRAO), S.
Kameno (JAO), and V. Impellizzeri
(Leiden ARC node)

Document classification: Public

The ObsMode2020 Process

8.

ALMA Memo 618

Summary

The ObsMode2020 process took place between April to October, 2020.
●

Seven capabilities were identified as high priority items for Cycle 9. Due to the observatory
shutdown, the annual Cycle was delayed for one year. The ObsMode process also aligned with
the change , hence the ObsMode2020 was adjusted to work for the Cycle 8preparations,
however most of the identified capabilities have been carried over to ObsMode 2021, aiming
to be offered for Cycle 9.

●

The ObsMode review process has been implemented for the first time. A few (2-3) external
reviewers were selected for each capability to review the test plan document and technical
summary report provided by the technical leads. The reviewers also participated in the key
ObsMode meetings and the go/no-go telecon to directly feedback their comments to the
commissioning teams, in addition to email based iterations. The finalized reports are shared
with colleagues in the ALMA project internal page as official ObsMode documents.

●

The Cycle 8 go/no-go telecons were held on September 29 and October 28, 2020. The 7m-array
polarization capability with ACA standalone mode (single- pointing) was recommended to be
offered for Cycle 8 based on technical and subsystem readiness. Manual data processing will be
performed for this mode, hence a 75-hour cap was recommended by the DRMs in order to not
be overwhelmed with this task. ICT and the subsystem side performed preparations for
accepting a new observing code, .P, for the phased array mode during ObsMode2020, and the
mode will be ready for the Cycle 8. What can be provided for the astrometry observing mode
was better defined and documented for Cycle 8. All the other high priority items had to be
carried over to the ObsMode2021process (aiming to be ready for Cycle 9) due to the
observatory shutdown in 2020. aiming to be ready for Cycle 9.

●

The delta changes should be updated in the user documentation, which was coordinated with
the editors of THB (Paulo Cortes) and PG (Jim Braatz).

●

This ALMA memo is based on an ALMA EDM document (internal document:
ALMA-90.00.00.00-0034-A-SPE) located at
http://edm.alma.cl/forums/alma/dispatch.cgi/changereq/docProfileFol/103439

Document classification: Public

The ObsMode2020 Process

9.

ALMA Memo 618

References
● Hull, C. L. H., Cortes, P. C., Gouellec, V. J. M. Le, Girart, J. M., Ngai, H., Nakanishi, K.,
Kameno, S., Fomalont, E. B., Brogan, C. L., Moellenbrock, G. A., Paladino, R., and Villard
E., “Characterizing the Accuracy of ALMA Linear-polarization Mosaics”, Publications of
the Astronomical Society of the Pacific, Volume 132, Issue 1015, id.094501 (2020)
● Asaki, Y., Maud, L. T., Fomalont, E. B., Phillips, N. M., Hirota, A., Sawada, T.,
Barcos-Munoz, L., Richard, A. M. S., Dent, W. R. F., Takahashi, S., Corder, S., Carpenter, J.
M., Villard, E., and Humphreys, E. M., “ALMA High-frequency Long Baseline Campaign in
2017: Band-to-band Phase Referencing in Submillimeter Waves” The Astrophysical Journal
Supplement Series, Volume 247, Issue 1, id.23, 22 pp. (2020)
● Asaki, Y., Maud, L. T., Fomalont, E.B., Dent W. R. F., Barcos-Munos, L., Phillips, N.,
Hirota, A., Takahashi, S., Corder, S., Carpenter, J. M., and Villard, E., “ALMA Band-to-band
Phase Referencing: Imaging Capabilities on Long Baselines and High Frequencies”, The
Astronomical Journal, Volume 160, Issue 2, id.59 (2020)
● Maud, L. T., Asaki, Y., Fomalont, E., Dent, W. R. F., Hirota, A., Matsushita, S., Phillips, N.
M., Carpenter, J. M., Takahashi, S., Villard, E., Sawada, T., Corder, S., “ALMA
High-frequency Long-baseline Campaign in 2017: A Comparison of the Band-to-band and
In-band Phase Calibration Techniques and Phase-calibrator Separation Angles”, The
Astrophysical Journal Supplement Series, Volume 250, Issue 1, id.18, 26 pp. (2020)
● Takahashi S., Summary of the ObsMode2020 Process, ALMA EDM document,
ALMA-90.00.00.00-0034-A-SPE (2021)

10.

Acknowledgement

ObsMode process requires global involvement from all the executives including various
stakeholders. The authors are grateful to all the ALMA colleagues who are directly and indirectly
involved in the ObsMode2020 process. We particularly thank all the subsystem scientists for their
support to the ObsMode activities. S. T. would like to thank Catherine Vlahakis (NRAO), Hiroshi
Nagai (NAOJ), and Luke Maud (ESO), for their support to coordinate ObsMode activities with each
ARC as a liaison. ST also thanks to John Carpenter (JAO) for providing us helpful comments and
suggestions for this document.

Document classification: Public

