Methodology proposal for proactive detection of network
anomalies in e-learning system during the COVID-19
scenario
Ivan Cvitić[0000-0003-3728-6711], Dragan Peraković1[0000-0002-0476-9373], Marko Periša1[0000-00021775-0735]
and Anca D. Jurcut2[0000-0002-2705-1823]
1

University of Zagreb, Faculty of Transport and Traffic Sciences, Vukelićeva 4, 10000 Zagreb,
Croatia
ivan.cvitic@fpz.unizg.hr, dragan.perakovic@fpz.unizg.hr,
marko.perisa@fpz.unizg.hr
2 University College Dublin, School of Computer Science and Informatics Belfield, Dublin 4,
Ireland
anca.jurcut@ucd.ie

Abstract. In specific conditions and crisis situations such as the pandemic of
coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2), or the COVID-19 disease, e-learning systems became crucial for the smooth performing of teaching and other educational processes. In such scenarios, the availability of e-learning ecosystem elements is
further highlighted. An indicator of the importance for securing the availability
of such an ecosystem is evident from the DDoS (Distributed Denial of Service)
attack on AAI@EduHr as a key authentication service for number of e-learning
users in Republic of Croatia. In doing so, numerous users (teachers/students/administrators) were prevented from implementing and participating in the planned teaching process. Given that DDoS as an anomaly of network
traffic has been identified as one of the key threats to the e-learning ecosystem
in crisis scenarios, this research will focus on overview of methodology for developing a model for proactive detection of DDoS traffic. The challenge in detection is to effectively differentiate the increased traffic intensity and service
requests caused by legitimate user activity (flash crowd) from the illegitimate
traffic caused by a DDoS attack. The DDoS traffic detection model developed
by following analyzed methodology would serve as a basis for providing further
guidelines and recommendations in the form of response to events that may
negatively affect the availability of e-learning ecosystem elements such as
DDoS attack.
Keywords: Availability, Cyber-threats, DDoS, SARS-CoV-2, Pandemic.

1

Introduction

Anomaly represents samples in the data that deviate from the previously defined normal behavior of the observed phenomenon. Observed from the aspect of information
and communication system, anomalies in communication, i.e. network traffic are
generally generated by one or several network devices. This is often a result from
illegitimate network activities in the system, with the anomalies of network traffic

2

having the potential of negatively affecting the operation of the information and
communication system or services [1]. One of the frequent causes of anomalies in the
network traffic is DDoS (Distributed Denial of Service) attack. Over the last two decades numerous studies have been directed to the development of methods, models and
systems that can detect DDoS traffic in real time. Nevertheless, the number of DDoS
attacks and the amount of DDoS traffic is constantly increasing, which is the reason
for further research in the area of the detection of security threats of this kind [2].
Despite continuous research into network traffic anomalies, cyber-attacks such as
DDoS attacks are still frequent and can have numerous negative effects on the predicted performance of IC (Information and Communication) systems and the availability of IC services. The pandemic of coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2) highlighted the
importance of the availability of e-learning systems and services. Goal of this research
is to propose research methodology for development of DDoS traffic detection models at the attack target in scenario where flash events generated traffic represents legitimate traffic, such as e-learning services during COVID-19 pandemic.

2

Previous research

Previous researches define several approaches to DDoS traffic detection. Generally,
they can be divided into two basic categories, based on the samples and based on the
anomalies [3]. Research [4], apart from the previous ones, identifies also the approach
based on entropy, and research [5] mentions the possibilities of applying the hybrid
approach to DDoS traffic detection. The methods based on the sample apply the comparison of the incoming traffic with the pre-defined profiles and samples of the known
network anomalies [6]. The detection of DDoS attack based on the sample can be
carried out in three ways; based on the signature of the known attacks, based on the
rule (if-then) and based on the condition and transition [7]. The advantage of this
method of detection is a high rate of detection of the already known DDoS attacks
with a low number of false positive and false negative results. The drawback is the
impossibility to detect new and unknown attacks, i.e. those attacks that are not included in the database which is used for the comparison with the samples of the incoming
traffic. Because of the dynamics of the problem area, it is of great importance that the
detection methods be able to detect unknown samples of DDoS traffic [3].
On the contrary, the approach based on the detection of the network traffic anomalies
uses the pre-defined models of normal traffic which are then used to compare the
incoming traffic [5]. This approach to detection has been developed in order to overcome the drawbacks of the detection approach based on the samples [4]. If the incoming traffic significantly differs from the defined model of normal traffic, then the incoming traffic is identified as anomaly, i.e. as DDoS traffic [8]. The advantage of
detection of network traffic anomalies related to the detection based on samples is the
possibility of discovering unknown attacks. The main drawback of detection based on
anomalies is the problem of determining the threshold values between normal traffic
and anomaly [5], [9]. The anomalies of network traffic are detected when the values
of the current traffic flow or other selected parameters exceed the pre-defined thresh-

3

old of the normal traffic model. A low defined threshold results in a large number of
false positive results, and high defined threshold leads to a large number of false
negative results [10]. Numerous scientific methods have been used for the detection
of DDoS traffic [11]. The current academic literature most frequently applies the statistical methods, machine learning methods and softcomputing methods [12], [13],
[14]. In today's big data concept environments, high performances in cyber-attack
detection and response are demonstrated by machine learning and artificial intelligence methods.

3

Methodology for DDoS traffic detection model development

Despite continuous research into network traffic anomalies, cyber-attacks such as
DDoS attacks are still frequent and can have numerous negative effects on the predicted performance of IC systems and the availability of IC services. The pandemic of
coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2) highlighted the importance of the availability of elearning systems and services. Crisis situations such as the mentioned pandemic result
in the need for isolation of users (students/teachers/administrators) whereby education
and supporting processes rely on the reliable work of the e-learning system and all his
elements. On March 16th, 2020 there was a DDoS attack on AAI@EduHr system
responsible for authenticating users to access various e-learning services (Merlin,
webinar, e-learning center, Dabar, Hrčak, filesender and others) in Republic of Croatia [15]. The conducted attack indicated the need to research and find solutions for
cyber threats (primarily DDoS) that are applicable in specific scenarios.
According to data from the Croatian University Computing Center (Srce) during
March 2020, in the month in which remote education began due to the COVID-19
pandemic, the AAI@EduHr system recorded 11,214,236 successful authentications
for 517,453 unique users (Fig. 1.). In comparison, in March 2019, the AAI@EduHr
system had a total of 3,220,212 successful authentications of 252,974 unique users,
which can be seen in Fig. 2. Authentication through AAI@EduHr was most commonly used to access MS Office 365 systems for schools, Loomen, and Srce systems:
Merlin - a remote learning system for students and teachers, and the ISVU Information System for Higher Education (primary the Studomat module) [16].
The presented data indicate the occurrence of the flash crowd phenomenon. This occurs when legitimate requests to access a web-based service exceed the statistically
normal number of legitimate requests [17]. Accordingly, flash crowds may adversely
affect the performance of DDoS attack detection models based on machine learning
methods that use data sets created during the period when the number of service requests is common. Such models are often detecting flash crowd traffic as a DDoS
attack traffic, even though it represents a legitimate service request. Some authors are
researching solutions that can differentiate flash crowd and DDoS traffic by using
human behavior and interaction, but such solutions are not acceptable to users [18].

4

Fig. 1. Number of successful authentications in March 2020 by day [16]

In order to achieve effective detection of DDoS and thus for reaction to such attacks
in specific cases of flash crowd phenomena under crisis situations such as a coronavirus pandemic, the detection model should be based on the ability to distinguish
between DDoS traffic and traffic generated under flash crowd conditions. One of
research direction followed by this project proposal is to identify the unique characteristic of flash crowd traffic vis-à-vis DDoS traffic as a basis for development of
DDoS traffic detection model [19].

Fig. 2. Number of successful authentications March 2019 and 2020 comparation [16]

5

Implementation of efficient and effective research for dealing with described problem
requires well-structured research methodology.

Problem detection

Theoretical analysis
of detected problem

Laboratory environment
formation

DDoS traffic
generation

Legitimate falsh crowd
traffic generation

Data aquisition

Analisys of available
machine learning
frameworks and tools

Data preprocessing
Development DDoS
traffic detection model

Development of public
dataset repository

Testing the applicability
of the developed model
trough case study
scenarion

Analisys of available
machine learning methods

Fig. 3. Activities through research phases

6

We propose research implementation through four phase methodology, and activities
shown in Fig. 3. as follows: (1) analysis of existing elements of the e-learning ecosystem and establishing the theoretical basis and differences between DDoS and flash
crowd traffic, (2) forming of a laboratory environment, the collection of network traffic, processing and preparation of collected data for further analysis, (3) development
of DDoS traffic detection model, validation and performance evaluation of the developed DDoS traffic detection model, (4) analysis of the applicability of the developed
anomaly detection model and the reaction capabilities based on the operation of the
developed model.
3.1

Establishing the theoretical basis and differences between DDoS and flash
crowd traffic

In the first phase of the research the current scientific literature will analyze for the
purpose of identifying the elements of the e-learning ecosystem, architecture, communication topologies and technologies, and other relevant characteristics of such
environments. The purpose of the aforementioned research activities is to provide
adequate recommendations and guidelines in the last phase of the research with the
purpose of ensuring the availability of e-learning services and minimizing the negative impacts of the emergence and realization of cyber threats such as DDoS attacks.
The analysis of the current scientific literature will also determine the current research
findings related to the characteristics of network traffic generated as a result of flash
crowd activity and current research achievements regarding the development of models and systems that can distinguish DDoS and flash crowd traffic.
3.2

Formation of laboratory environment and data collection

Second phase should include establishing a laboratory environment for generating and
collecting legitimate (flash crowd) and illegitimate (DDoS) traffic. The laboratory
environment is planned to be established at the Department of Information and Communication Traffic at the FPZ within the Laboratory for Security and Forensic Analysis of the Information and Communication System (LSF). Flash crowd and DDoS
traffic generation is planned with the implementation of the dedicated hardware platform. Such a platform is able to simulate realistic flash crowd and DDoS traffic and
also provides advanced management and defining features of the generated traffic at
different layers of the OSI (The Open Systems Interconnection) model. The next
planned activity is to collect and store the generated traffic on the dedicated computers in .pcap format files, which is suitable for further manipulation in the form of
analysis and extraction of the traffic features values. Further research activities in this
phase are relate to the pre-processing and preparation of data for further analysis. This
implies the filtering of the collected data and extraction of the network traffic features
that can be use in network anomaly detection model and adequate labeling of feature
vectors. Considered will be exclusively the packet header values, i.e. statistical features of traffic while the packet content will not be considered because of the application of cryptographic methods in the communication processes. In this phase, the

7

independent traffic features will be selected based on which it is possible to differentiate the observed traffic on legitimate and DDoS. Also, the level of connection with
the dependent feature will be determined and those independent features with the
highest level of connection with the dependent feature will be selected. The selected
features will be used for the purpose of defining the model in the next research phase.
Final output of second phase will be datasets containing legitimate traffic generated as
a result of flash crowd activities on e-learning ecosystem elements (simulated trough
dedicated network generator hardware) and DDoS traffic as an network traffic anomaly generated as a result of DDoS attack (simulated trough dedicated network traffic
generator hardware). By collecting generated legitimate and illegitimate traffic, a
unique dataset will be formed. Such dataset will be published on a publicly available
server (on FPZ’s servers) in original and in the processed form for academic community with purpose of further research of detection and reaction on DDoS attacks in
specific scenarios.
3.3

Development of DDoS traffic detection model

Previously carried out activities laid the foundation for the third phase of planed research. This phase encompasses the development of the network traffic anomalies
detection model. The first step in this phase is to analyze and select adequate supervised machine learning method from the set of ensemble methods that will suit the
solving of binary classification problem. In solving such a problem, the objective is to
check the congruence of the generated new traffic sample with the sample of the legitimate traffic. The incongruity of the traffic features values with the values of the features of legitimate traffic above the defined threshold will mean that the device generates DDoS traffic within the observed time. Based on previous mentioned, following
activity is development of network anomaly detection model using supervised machine learning methods. For implementation of chosen method available machine
learning platform will be used such as TensorFlow, Weka, KNIME, Orange, Hadoop,
Apache Spark, Neo4ji, R or similar. The last step of this phase is to validate the model
performances through standard validation measures for classification models (accuracy, precision, specificity, kappa coefficient, rate of false and true positive results,
confusion matrix, etc.).
3.4

Applicability of the developed anomaly detection model

In the final, fourth research phase the applicability of the developed model in real
scenario through case study will be analyzed. Also, the guidelines and recommendations for response to the anomalies detected with the developed model will be defined. Purpose of this activity is minimizing the negative effects of cyberthreats such
as DDoS on availability of e-learning services particularly in crisis situations such as
pandemic of SARS-CoV-2 virus when such services are critical for the undisturbedly
running of educational and supporting processes.

8

4

Discussion and conclusion

Using proposed methodology for developing model of network traffic anomaly detection as well as guidelines and recommendations for reaction to detected anomalies
provide the potential for further practical application, as well as strong socioeconomic benefits from several aspects. The research implementation within the
framework of the proposed project is significant for the development of the research
area since it considers the challenges in a specific scenario of using e-learning services resulted from COVID-19 pandemic. In proposed research it is planned to form
open and public data set repositories containing network traffic (in raw and preprocessed format) generated simulating flash crowd scenarios and DDoS attacks. Such
repository will benefit other researchers for the purpose of further research of behaving flash crowd traffic, how to distinguish it from other types of traffic such as DDoS
or some other type of traffic anomalies. Planed extensive use of machine learning,
especially ensemble type of machine learning methods will potentially result with
developed anomaly detection model that can proactively detect cyber-threat and adequately react on such a threat. In that way it will give possibility to secure availability
of e-learning ecosystem and its services when it is needed the most, and that is in the
crisis scenarios such as pandemic of coronavirus and similar. Securing availability of
e-learning services that are becoming critical will increase user satisfaction on every
level (students/teachers/administrators) and allow undisturbedly running of educational and supporting processes. Furthermore, this kind of research would open variety of related research problems and it would enable knowledge transfer between divers’ research teams and e-learning system operators as a response to high-risk situations and crisis scenarios that may occur in the future.
There are several results that are expected trough implementation of proposed methodology. First expected result is determined theoretical basis of characteristics and
main differences between traffic generated during flash crowd events and DDoS attacks discovered by other researchers. Second expected result is formed laboratory
environment at LSF for the purpose of generating legitimate and illegitimate network
traffic. Third expected result is collected dataset of legitimate and illegitimate traffic
adequately labelled and prepared for further analysis and research. Fourth expected
result is repository of datasets of collected legitimate and illegitimate traffic available
for further research to academic community. Fifth expected result is developed network traffic anomaly detection model that is based on ensemble methods of supervised machine learning. Sixth expected result is defined guidelines and recommendation for reaction on detected cyberthreats for minimizing negative impact on availability of e-learning services in crisis scenarios (such as COVID-19 pandemic) when such
services are crucial in effective implementation of the educational and supporting
processes.

9

References
1. Aggarwal CC. Outlier Analysis. Artificial Intelligence Review. 2017;24(2):379–84. Available from http://link.springer.com/10.1007/978-3-319-18123-3%0A
2. Deka RK, Bhattacharyya DK. Self-similarity based DDoS attack detection using Hurst parameter. Security and Communication Networks. 2016;9(17):4468–81.
3. Tan Z, Jamdagni A, He X, Member S, Nanda P, Member S, et al. Detection of Denial-ofService Attacks Based on Computer Vision Techniques. IEEE Transactions on Computers.
2015;64(9):1–14.
4. David J, Thomas C. DDoS Attack Detection Using Fast Entropy Approach on FlowBased Network Traffic. Procedia Computer Science. 2015;50:30–6. Available from
http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S1877050915005086
5. Mirkovic J, Reiher P. A taxonomy of DDoS attack and DDoS defense mechanisms. ACM
SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review. 2004;34(2):39. Available from
http://portal.acm.org/citation.cfm?doid=997150.997156
6. Bhuyan MH, Bhattacharyya DK, Kalita JK. Network Anomaly Detection: Methods, Systems and Tools. IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials. 2014;16(1):303–36.
7. Bhattacharyya DK, Kalita JK. DDoS Attacks: Evolution, Detection, Prevention, Reaction
and Tolerance. Boca Raton, USA: CRC Press; 2016.
8. Zeb K, AsSadhan B, Al-Muhtadi J, Alshebeili S. Anomaly detection using Wavelet-based
estimation of LRD in packet and byte count of control traffic. In: Proceedings of 7th International Conference on Information and Communication Systems (ICICS). IEEE; 2016. p.
316–21.
9. Xiang Y, Li K, Zhou W. Low-rate DDoS attacks detection and traceback by using new information metrics. IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security.
2011;6(2):426–37.
10. Zargar ST, Joshi J, Tipper D. A survey of defense mechanisms against distributed denial of
service (DDOS) flooding attacks. IEEE Communications Surveys and Tutorials.
2013;15(4):2046–69.
11. Cvitić I, Peraković D, Periša M, Husnjak S. An Overview of Distributed Denial of Service
Traffic Detection Approaches. PROMET - Traffic&Transportation. 2019;31(4):453–64.
Available from https://traffic.fpz.hr/index.php/PROMTT/article/view/3082
12. Bhuyan MH, Kashyap HJ, Bhattacharyya DK, Kalita JK. Detecting Distributed Denial of
Service Attacks: Methods, Tools and Future Directions. The Computer Journal.
2014;57(4):537–56.
13. Cvitić I, Peraković D, Periša M, Botica M. Novel approach for detection of IoT generated
DDoS traffic. Wireless Networks. 2019;25:1–4.
14. Peraković D, Periša M, Cvitić I, Husnjak S. Model for detection and classification of
DDoS traffic based on artificial neural network. Telfor Journal. 2017;9(1):26-31.
15. SRCE. Povećano opterećenje sustava AAI@EduHr | Srce [Internet]. Available from
https://www.srce.unizg.hr/vijesti/povecano-opterecenje-sustava-aaieduhr/objav2020-03-16
[accessed 2020 Apr 4]
16. SRCE. Rekordan broj autentikacija putem SSO servisa sustava AAI@EduHr | Srce [Internet]. Available from https://www.srce.unizg.hr/vijesti/rekordan-broj-autentikacija-putemsso-servisa-sustava-aaieduhr/objav2020-04-02 [accessed 2020 Apr 4]
17. Behal S, Kumar K, Sachdeva M. Discriminating flash events from DDoS attacks: A comprehensive review. International Journal of Network Security. 2017;19(5):734–41.

10
18. Yu S, Zhou W, Jia W, Guo S, Xiang Y, Tang F. Discriminating DDoS attacks from flash
crowds using flow correlation coefficient. IEEE Transactions on Parallel and Distributed
Systems. 2012;23(6):1073–80.
19. Bhandari A, Sangal AL, Kumar K. Characterizing flash events and distributed denial-ofservice attacks: an empirical investigation. Security and Communication Networks.
2016;9:2222–39. Available from http://doi.wiley.com/10.1002/sec.1472

