ROC: An Ontology for Country Responses
towards COVID-19
Jamal Al Qundus [0000−0002−8848−1632] , Ralph
Schäfermeier
, Naouel Karam [0000−0002−6762−6417] , Silvio
[0000−0001−5716−1540]
Peikert
, and Adrian Paschke [0000−0003−3156−9040]

arXiv:2104.07345v1 [cs.DL] 15 Apr 2021

∗[0000−0002−4349−6726]

Fraunhofer FOKUS, Kaiserin-Augusta-Allee 31, 10589 Berlin, Germany
ralph.schaefermeier@fokus.fraunhofer.de

Abstract. The ROC ontology for country responses to COVID-19 provides a model for collecting, linking and sharing data on the COVID-19
pandemic. It follows semantic standardization (W3C standards RDF,
OWL, SPARQL) for the representation of concepts and creation of vocabularies. ROC focuses on country measures and enables the integration of data from heterogeneous data sources. The proposed ontology
is intended to facilitate statistical analysis to study and evaluate the
effectiveness and side effects of government responses to COVID-19 in
different countries. The ontology contains data collected by OxCGRT
from publicly available information. This data has been compiled from
information provided by ECDC for most countries, as well as from various repositories used to collect data on COVID-19.
Keywords: Ontology Engineering · Semantic Web Technologies · Covid19 Ontology · Novel Coronavirus Ontology · Covid-19 Responses · Pandemic Country Responses

1

Introduction

Almost all countries are affected by the (second wave) COVID-19 pandemic.
Many organisations have setup systems and projects to collect and publish global
data on the impact of the virus allowing to monitor the pandemic. Most countries
have implemented responsive measures as reaction to COVID-19. The impact
of the pandemic and policies implemented differ widely among countries. Meanwhile data on the infection spread and government responses during the first
phase of the pandemic (March to July 2020) is available to enable research on
the effects of individual policies.
Policy makers face tough decisions on how to deal with the pandemic, since
responses considered most effective have also significant negative impacts on
economy and social life. This is strongly reflected in the measures implemented
by the countries. The policies implemented and the reactions of society vary
greatly among countries and cities. While many people support their government
strategy, others reject measures included. Empirical studies need to be conducted
to support decision-makers and information campaigns. Which responses have
Copyright © 2021 for this paper by its authors.
Use permitted under Creative Commons License Attribution 4.0 International (CC BY 4.0).

2

Al Qundus et al.

proven to be effective in containing COVID-19 and what are their effects on the
economy and society? are questions that apply to individual countries as well as
to cultural, political and geographical regions.
To enable empirical research, global data on infections, recoveries, death rates
and policies implemented in various countries and regions is published via various sources. The challenge for data scientists and epidemiologists is that these
data sources do not share common standards or methodologies for reporting
their data. The reported data is influenced by time zones/holidays, different political and/or economic incentives, variation in counting methods1 , discovered
/ undiscovered numbers, etc. In addition, in many cases country’s reports differ depending on the reporting institute. For example, the numbers of infected
people in Germany differs between Johns Hopkins Coronavirus Resource Center2 (USA) and Robert Koch institute3 (GER). Unfortunately, this difference is
not comprehensible. To study this valuable information and perform statistical
analysis on it, a common standard for harmonizing and reporting the data is
required.
Many researchers are taking up this challenge, and the first solutions to this
problem have already been developed. The COviD-19 ontology (CODO) is an
ontology for organizing cases data and patient information and aims to use the
technology of knowledge graphs to analyse the pandemic [3]. Our work follows the
same approach to ontology design and has a common motivation. Nevertheless,
it focuses on areas not yet covered, government responses to the pandemic, and
therefore this work is equally unique in this field. The ontology developed in this
paper addresses the following goals:
• serve as a reference scheme for use in reporting COVID-19 related data.
• provide a common conceptualization and thereby abstract from heterogeneous structures of existing sources of (static) data and provide a common
linking schema, which is essential for data accessibility.
• provide a defined data structure with a fixed semantics for further analysis
or monitoring systems.
• offer a supplement of the existing ontologies in order to build a common
global data model.
• offer a template to organize data from other pandemics or nationwide events
or measures.
• (as a follow-up outcome) enable countries to make coordinated strategic
decisions while avoiding lockdowns and their entailed risks
For the ontology development process, we followed a hybrid approach, which
is driven by available data on the one hand and questions of interest that should
be answerable by the ontology on the other hand. We mainly collected data from
1
2
3

cause and place of death -at home or in hospitalhttps://coronavirus.jhu.edu/map.html
https://rki.de/DE/Content/InfAZ/N/Neuartiges_Coronavirus/Fallzahlen.
html

ROC: An Ontology for Country Responses towards COVID-19

3

OxCGRT4 , ILO5 and ECDC6 . ECDC provides data on infection rates, OxCGRT
systematically monitors government actions related to the pandemic and ILO
provides economic indicators focused on the labour market. The modeling of the
data consisted of the following steps: manual review and merging of the data.
Concepts were extracted and linked using logical relationships. To design and
create the ontology, we used Protégé and then ingested the data based on the
ROC ontology.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 contains a review
on related work. Section 3 describes the development methodology. Section 4
introduces the ROC ontology and its concepts. Section 5 describes the data
ingestion process and querying capabilities. Section 6 concludes the paper with
a short summary and future work.

2

Related Work

This section provides an overview on related work investigating ontologies related
to diseases, especially relevant to COVID-19.
The Human Disease Ontology (DO)7 classifies thousands of human diseases
moving to a multi-editor model in web ontology language enabling collaboration
of several working groups, and has recently been extended by DOID8 including COVID-19 concepts [7]. The Infectious Disease Ontology (IDO) [2] and the
Ontology of Coronavirus Infectious Disease (CIDO) [5] define vocabulary relating to infectious diseases such as flu, malaria, and brucellosis. CIDO additionally
represents comparative analysis of COVID-19 and other diseases wrt. symptoms,
drugs, clinical trials etc.
One of the most relevant work is the Ontology for cases and patient information (CODO)9 , which initiated the development of CIDO. It provides a
standards-based and comprehensive open source model for data collection on
the COVID 19 pandemic. The ontology is very well suited for the integration
of data from heterogeneous data sources and thus represents one of the major
inspirations for our work. Furthermore, our methodology follows the procedure
for term definition described in the work. This is based on the reuse of concepts
from other leading vocabularies and the use of the W3C standards RDF, OWL,
SWRL and SPARQL. The evaluation of CODO was conducted on the basis of
data received from the Indian government [3].
Of course, the ontologies (COVIDCRFRAPID)10 of the World Health Organization (WHO) as data model for the case COVID-19 RAPID, the ontologies
Kg-COVID-1911 for the creation of knowledge graphs including SARS-COV-2
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11

https://www.bsg.ox.ac.uk/
https://www.ilo.org/global/lang--en/index.htm
https://www.ecdc.europa.eu/
http://www.disease-ontology.org
https://disease-ontology.org/term/DOID:11725/
https://github.com/biswanathdutta/CODO
https://bioportal.bioontology.org/ontologies/COVIDCRFRAPID
https://github.com/Knowledge-Graph-Hub/kg-covid-19

4

Al Qundus et al.

and the ontology Linked-Data COVID-1912 are also relevant. These ontologies
contain conceptualizations (and partially instance data) related to COVID-19
cases and are primarily aimed at software applications such as question & answering or monitoring dashboards [3]. However, to our knowledge, the work described in this paper is the first work to take into account government responses
and link them to epidemiolical data, such as case data.
All these works support the containment of the pandemic, but more importantly, the works build on and complement each other. The focus so far has been
mainly on gathering cases, symptoms and information from infected people, for
example to identify and isolate hot spots. However, one field has not been covered so far, namely the field of countries government responses. It is precisely
this knowledge gap that our work with the ROC ontology aims to fill.
In the next sections we describe the methodology for the development of
the ROC ontology based on the state-of-the-art principles, its structure and
evaluation.

3

Methodology

The artifact created and investigated in this work is an ontology authored using
the Web Ontology Language 2 (OWL 2)13 , the semantics of which are based on
description logics.
The main purpose of the ontology, as pointed out in Section 1, is the integration of public data on national responses to the COVID-19 pandemic and
to provide a layer of interoperability between different and diverse resources as
well as to answer interesting questions from the data. The development of the
ontology was therefore bottom-up data-driven as well as top-down application
driven. A further requirement was the integration of existing ontologies in the
domain of COVID-19 in order to avoid redundancy as well as to leverage knowledge gained from the integration of existing knowledge (such as the combination
of data about national responses with case data).
A multitude of ontology development methods exist, comprising, but not limited to METHONTOLOGY [4] and On-To-Knowledge [9], both of which provide
general ontology development guidelines and principles, Diligent [11], which defines an argumentation-based development process as well as agile development
methods, such as RapidOWL [1].
The selection of the ontology development method was driven by the nonfunctional requirements to (a) integrate existing data sources and (b) integrate
existing ontological sources as well as (c) by content-related requirements, which
are formulated in the form of competency questions.
We decided to use the NeOn methodology [8], since it provides guidelines for
either of the above-mentioned requirement types and allows combining them.
NeOn identifies a set of scenarios and provides an ontology development method
12
13

https://zenodo.org/record/3765375#.XraWJmgzbIU
https://www.w3.org/TR/owl2-overview/

ROC: An Ontology for Country Responses towards COVID-19

5

for each scenario. The scenarios applicable to the development of the ROC ontology are scenario 1 “From specification to implementation” (which involves
requirement engineering and is suitable for our non-functional requirement (c)),
scenario 2 “Reusing and re-engineering non-ontological resources” , as we use
external, non-ontological data sources (item (a)) and scenario 3 “Reusing ontological resources”, since we reuse concepts from the CODO ontology and align
concepts derived from the external data sources with existing ones in the CODO
ontology manually (item (b)).
The ontology development process therefore consists of three main activities, which start in parallel and which are divided into subtasks, some of which
interact (see Figure 1):
Requirements Analysis

Data-driven development

CODO integration

T1.1-1.3
Purpose, scope,
language, users

T2.1
Data gathering

T3.1-3.3
External statement
selection

T1.4-1.7
Requirements /
CQs

T2.2
Conceptual
abstraction

T3.4
External statement
mapping

T1.8
Terminology
extraction

T2.3
Information
exploration

T3.5
Consistency check

T2.7-2.8
Formalization,
implementation

ROC

T2.4-2.6
Transformation and
refinement
CODO Alignment

Fig. 1: The development process of the ROC ontology
Activities 2 and 3 resulted in the ROC ontology, while activity 3 resulted in
a set of import and mapping axioms (which are also part of the ROC ontology).

4

The ROC Ontology

The ontology14 was designed around a set of competency questions, for instance,
one can ask the following:
CQ1 Which countries do establish a certain response?
CQ2 At which incidence level do individual countries establish certain responses
/ response levels?
CQ3 How long do individual countries keep their response measures active?
CQ4 Were countries which established responses at low incidence levels able to
avoid high incidence rates?
CQ5 Is there an effect of certain responses on infection rates? Can we measure
effect or delay of effect?
14

The current version 1.0 of the ROC ontology is publicly available at
http://qurator-csi.de/ontologies/roc

6

Al Qundus et al.

The ontology consists of 27 OWL classes, 10 object properties, 42 data properties and 3 annotation properties. Its expressivity is ALEHI(D), i.e., AL with
full existential qualification, role hierarchy, inverse roles and data types, making it a member of the OWL 2 DL profile. The central domain concepts of the
ROC ontology are the indicators as defined by the Oxford Covid-19 Government
Response Tracker (OxCGRT) mentioned in Section 1.
The values for each of these indicators is acquired and stored in a data
record. A record is represented in the ROC ontology as an instance of the class
ResponseStatistics, which is a subclass of the CODO class CountryWiseStatistics
(see Figure 2a).
In alignment with the structure of the data sources, which assign numerical
values to each of these indicators, we modeled these indicators as data properties.
We established a data property hierarchy reflecting the taxonomy of OxCGRT
coding categories (containment and closure (C), economic response (E), health
systems (H), and miscellaneous (M)) (see Figure 2b). Creating common super
properties for each category of response values allows for a Description Logic
reasoner to infer that if any of the response values in a certain category has
a value, then the super data property (representing the whole category) has a
value.

(b) The hierarchy of data
properties
representing
the OxCGRT response
(a) A response statistics instance with acquired response values
values

5

ROC in use

This section describes how the ontology is used to ingest a set of data collected
from multiple sources. It outlines the data transformation process and how to
query the resulting RDF knowledge base (KB) to answer competency questions.

ROC: An Ontology for Country Responses towards COVID-19

5.1

7

Data ingestion

We manually reviewed and merged data collected from OxCGRT, ILO and
ECDC. We then transformed data coming from those different sources into RDF
based on the ROC ontology. The resulting KB serves as an integrated view to
answer queries spreading over all required sources. For data transformation, we
made use of the Karma integration tool [10]. The tool offers a user interface
(as depicted in Figure 3) for mapping different types of structured data and
publish it in an RDF format. It automatically generates an R2RML15 mapping
model based on users input. The model can be stored and reused on similarly
structured data.

Fig. 3: A peek at the data mapping and transformation interface
The resulting KB contains 1850 instances with data for Germany, Jordan
and Sweden collected between January and the beginning of November 2020.
We loaded the RDF data into the Virtuoso16 triple store, making it accessible
and queryable through the SPARQL endpoint.
5.2

Data querying

We devised an initial set of queries to answer the competency questions over
the RDF data. As an example, for the question ”List the countries and their
respective health responses?” the corresponding query would be the one depicted
in Listing 1.

PREFIX roc : <\ protect \ vrule width0pt \ protect \ href { http :// qurator - csi . de / ontologies / covid / responses #}{ http ://
PREFIX codo : <\ protect \ vrule width0pt \ protect \ href { http :// www . isibang . ac . in / ns / codo #}{ http :// www . isibang . ac .
SELECT ? country AVG (? te sting_po licy ) AVG (? co nt ac t _t ra c in g )
SUM (? i n v e s t m e n t _ h e a l t h c a r e ) SUM (? i n v e s t m e n t _ i n _ v a c c i n e s )
AVG (? f a c i a l _ c o v e r i n g s )
WHERE {
? country codo : c o u n t r y W i s e S t a t i s t i c s ? stats .
? stats roc : h 2 _ t e s t i n g _ p o l i c y ? tes ting_po licy ;
15
16

https://www.w3.org/TR/r2rml/
https://virtuoso.openlinksw.com/

8

Al Qundus et al.
roc : h 3 _ c o n t a c t _ t r a c i n g ? co nt ac t _t ra ci n g ;
roc : h 4 _ e m e r g e n c y _ i n v e s t m e n t _ i n _ h e a l t h c a r e ? i n v e s t m e n t _ h e a l t h c a r e ;
roc : h 5 _ i n v e s t m e n t _ i n _ v a c c i n e s ? i n v e s t m e n t _ i n _ v a c c i n e s ;
roc : h 6 _ f a c i a l _ c o v e r i n g s ? f a c i a l _ c o v e r i n g s .

}
GROUP BY ? country

Listing 1: SPARQL query for question:”List the countries and their respective
health responses?”

The query results are depicted in Figure 4. We can see for instance that Germany has a higher testing policy index and the highest emergency investments
in healthcare and vaccines. We can also note that Sweden did not implement
a facial covering policy. Based on the correlation between countries stringency
and actual statistics, the effectiveness or failure of implemented measures can
be derived, informing government future decisions.

Fig. 4: SPARQL query results

6

Summary and Next Steps

The present work focuses on country responses against COVID-19 and proposes
a novel ontology ROC to enable the integration of data from heterogeneous data
sources and answer interesting questions. This facilitates statistical analysis to
investigate and evaluate the effectiveness and side effects of such responses. The
ontology consists of 27 OWL classes, 10 object properties, 42 data properties and
3 annotation properties. The data collected by OxCGRT, ILO and ECDC were
manually reviewed and merged. Then we converted data from these different
sources into RDF based on the ROC ontology. The resulting RDF serves as an
integrated view to answer queries that span all required sources. The resulting
KB contains 1850 instances of data for Germany, Jordan and Sweden collected
between January and early November 2020. We uploaded the RDF data to the
Virtuoso Triple Store and made it accessible and queryable through a SPARQL
endpoint.
Given the fact that most experts are not familiar with SPARQL nor with
Semantic Web technologies, we plan to connect our Controlled Natural Language
querying system [6], offering a user-friendly interface for querying the KB.

ROC: An Ontology for Country Responses towards COVID-19

9

Other factors could influence the effectiveness of country responses. These are
either difficult to capture17 or relatively easy to determine18 . Consideration of
such factors would lead to the extension of the properties of the concepts/terms
in order to increase the semantic expressiveness of the ontology.
Lastly, a technical and a goal-based evaluation of the effectiveness of the
approach is a challenge to be addressed by future work.

Acknowledgements
The research presented in this article is partially funded by the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF) through the project QURATOR (Unternehmen Region, Wachstumskern, grant no. 03WKDA1F). http:
//qurator.ai

References
1. Auer, S., Herre, H.: RapidOWL — An Agile Knowledge Engineering Methodology. In: Virbitskaite, I., Voronkov, A. (eds.) Perspectives of Systems Informatics,
vol. 4378, pp. 424–430. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg (2007)
2. Babcock, S., Cowell, L.G., Beverley, J., Smith, B.: The infectious
disease ontology in the age of covid-19. OSF Preprints (2020).
https://doi.org/10.31219/osf.io/az6u5
3. Dutta, B., DeBellis, M.: Codo: An ontology for collection and analysis of covid-19
data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.01210 (2020)
4. Fernández, M., Gómez-Pérez, A., Juristo, N.: METHONTOLOGY: from Ontological Art towards Ontological Engineering. In: Proceedings of the AAAI97 Spring
Symposium. pp. 33–40. Stanford, USA (Mar 1997)
5. He, Y., Yu, H., Ong, E., Wang, Y., Liu, Y., Huffman, A., Huang, H.h., Beverley, J.,
Hur, J., Yang, X., et al.: Cido, a community-based ontology for coronavirus disease
knowledge and data integration, sharing, and analysis. Scientific Data 7(1), 1–5
(2020)
6. Karam, N., Streibel, O., Karjauv, A., Coskun, G., Paschke, A.: Answering controlled natural language questions over RDF clinical data. In: The Semantic Web:
ESWC 2020 Satellite Events, Heraklion, Crete, Greece, May 31 - June 4, 2020.
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 12124, pp. 129–134. Springer (2020).
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-62327-2 22
7. Kibbe, W.A., Arze, C., Felix, V., Mitraka, E., Bolton, E., Fu, G., Mungall, C.J.,
Binder, J.X., Malone, J., Vasant, D., Parkinson, H., Schriml, L.M.: Disease Ontology 2015 update: an expanded and updated database of human diseases for linking biomedical knowledge through disease data. Nucleic Acids Research 43(D1),
D1071–D1078 (10 2014). https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gku1011
17

18

such as culture, acceptance of people, discipline, people’s perseverance, family structure, types of contacts in society, etc.
such as public events during the pandemic, foreign trade, tourism, weather, country’s
experience of pandemics, time (how long the reactions will last), government system,
structure, infrastructure, relationship between people and government (trust), etc

10

Al Qundus et al.

8. Suárez-Figueroa, M.C., Gómez-Pérez, A., Fernández-López, M.: The NeOn
Methodology for Ontology Engineering. In: Suárez-Figueroa, M.C., Gómez-Pérez,
A., Motta, E., Gangemi, A. (eds.) Ontology Engineering in a Networked World,
pp. 9–34. Springer (2012). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-24794-1 2
9. Sure, Y., Staab, S., Studer, R.: On-To-Knowledge Methodology (OTKM). In:
Staab, P.D.S., Studer, P.D.R. (eds.) Handbook on Ontologies, pp. 117–132. International Handbooks on Information Systems, Springer Berlin Heidelberg (Jan
2004)
10. Taheriyan, M., Knoblock, C.A., Szekely, P., Ambite, J.L.: Learning the semantics
of structured data sources. Journal of Web Semantics 37-38, 152 – 169 (2016).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.websem.2015.12.003
11. Tempich, C., Simperl, E., Luczak, M., Studer, R., Pinto, H.S.: ArgumentationBased Ontology Engineering. IEEE Intelligent Systems 22(6), 52–59 (Nov 2007)

