1

Preventing and Controlling Epidemics through
Blockchain-Assisted AI-Enabled Networks

arXiv:2104.13224v1 [cs.CR] 25 Apr 2021

Safa Otoum, Member, IEEE, Ismaeel Al Ridhawi, Senior Member, IEEE, and Hussein T.
Mouftah, Life Fellow, IEEE

F

Abstract—The COVID-19 pandemic, which spread rapidly in late
2019, has revealed that the use of computing and communication
technologies provides significant aid in preventing, controlling, and
combating infectious diseases. With the ongoing research in nextgeneration networking (NGN), the use of secure and reliable communication and networking is of utmost importance when dealing
with users’ health records and other sensitive information. Through
the adaptation of Artificial Intelligence (AI)-enabled NGN, the shape
of healthcare systems can be altered to achieve smart and secure
healthcare capable of coping with epidemics that may emerge at
any given moment. In this article, we envision a cooperative and
distributed healthcare framework that relies on state-of-the-art computing, communication, and intelligence capabilities, namely, Federated Learning (FL), mobile edge computing (MEC), and Blockchain,
to enable epidemic (or suspicious infectious disease) discovery, remote monitoring, and fast health-authority response. The introduced
framework can also enable secure medical data exchange at the edge
and between different health entities. Such a technique, coupled with
the low latency and high bandwidth functionality of 5G and beyond
networks, would enable mass surveillance, monitoring and analysis to
occur at the edge. Challenges, issues, and design guidelines are also
discussed in this article with highlights on some trending solutions.
Index Terms—Artificial Intelligence, Machine, Learning, Epidemic
diseases, Blockchain, Explainable AI, Plug-and-Play AI.

1

I NTRODUCTION

T

HE healthcare sector was hit hard in the years 2020
and 2021 due to the spread of COVID-19 worldwide, causing a global pandemic. Hospital beds were
completely full in certain cities, and intensive care units
(ICU) were overcrowded. The grim scenario has led
governments, industries, institutions, and researchers to
rethink and adopt new innovative solutions to prevent,
control, and combat such infectious diseases through new
healthcare models driven by emerging technological innovations. Although some efforts were introduced that
relied heavily on the use of IoT devices for symptom

•
•
•

S. Otoum is with Zayed University, UAE. E-mail: safa.otoum@zu.ac.ae
I. Al Ridhawi is with Kuwait College of Science and Technology,
Kuwait. E-mail: i.alridhawi@kcst.edu.kw
H. T. Mouftah is with University of Ottawa, Canada. E-mail: mouftah@uottawa.ca

monitoring, such as connected Unmanned Ariel Vehicles
(UAVs) and device positioning systems, those solutions
are simply temporal and do not provide ongoing sustainability, disease preventiveness, patient data privacy and
overall system reliability. Therefore, a novel solution that
considers the concepts of distributivity (but also provides
secure data sharing), self-learnability (but also provides
explainability features), and autonomy needs to be considered to revolutionize healthcare systems and achieve
new levels of quality healthcare for citizens globally.
Recent developments in wireless communication, Machine Learning (ML), and decentralized transaction processing techniques like Blockchain, have led to significant
changes in all governmental and industrial sectors. The
emergence of Beyond 5G (B5G) networks is now leading
such sectors to allow for intelligent and on-demand service provisioning. Today, AI is already being adopted in
a multitude of healthcare applications, aiding specialists
in early-stage disease detection, such as diabetes and
cancer. For instance, several medical devices combined
with AI have been applied to oversee early-stage heart
disease, enabling specialists to better monitor and detect
any potential life-threatening cases at earlier and more
treatable stages.
Although such AI-supported solutions have been
adapted in different areas of the health sector, this integration is very limited and would require significant
efforts to enable a real shift towards Healthcare Industry
4.0 [1], illustrated in Figure 1. Such shift will enable prehospital emergency care in both urban and geographically
remote areas. With that said, a huge amount of data will be
generated through these applications, allowing for more
in-depth training and analysis. But, communicating and
sharing this data requires utmost care due to its sensitivity
and privacy. Patients need to feel more secure in using
applications that would reveal very sensitive and private
information and at the same time be able to understand
the autonomous diagnosis that may be determined by AIcapable applications. Moreover, the exchange of information across multiple distributed entities will in no doubt
lead to better quality level healthcare, but at the same
time, such frameworks need to ensure data privacy and

Intelligent Edge Devices

Intelligent Edge Devices

Cloud
Data Center

Public
Blockchain

Federated
Learning

Fog

Global Deep
Learning
Private
Blockchain

Edge Node

Public
Blockchain

Fog
Edge Node

Fig. 1. An Overview of a healthcare industry 4.0 scenario that integrates intelligent edge devices, blockchain technology, and machine learning
with next generation networking.

integrity.
To ensure reliable early-stage warning, prevention,
control and combatant of infectious diseases, rejuvenated
health-care systems must consider efficient and reliable
storage, processing, and sharing of massive real-time data
being collected at the edge. Moreover, when dealing with
complex data processing and sharing, such systems must
consider and fulfill the diversified security and privacy
requirements, which may be enforced either by citizens
or government authorities. Given the advances and sophistication of today’s edge devices, most of the training
and learning can actually be accomplished in a distributed
and decentralized manner, namely, Federated Learning
(FL) and plug-and-play artificial intelligence (PNP-AI).
Such a technique enables the training of a common model
to occur with minimal aid of a centralized entity, whilst
maintaining all the sensitive data to reside locally (i.e.
local health institutions or patient devices). Furthermore,
with the aid of Blockchain, secure data sharing and identity security are maintained, and greater transparency
for autonomous diagnosis solutions can also be attained
using explainable-AI.

ing three infectious diseases a week ahead of time. In [3],
a solution for medical imaging applications was developed using next-generation methods for federated, secure
and privacy-preserving artificial intelligence. A predictive
analysis method for epidemic diseases to identify and
locate infected areas by using a back-propagation method
was introduced in [4]. The solution-focused on classifying
the epidemic disease spreading factors as the elements for
weight adjustment on the prediction of epidemic disease
occurrences.
Furthermore, some research works have focused on
analyzing the epidemic trends of Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS) to validate their solutions. For
instance, in [5], the authors introduced three mathematical
models, namely, the Logistic model, Bertalanffy model
and Gompertz model. The results have then been utilized
to analyze the situation of COVID-19. The authors in [6]
investigated a deep reinforcement learning mechanism
to automatically learn prevention strategies in the context of pandemic influenza. Their work proves that deep
reinforcement learning can be an efficient solution for
mitigation strategies in complex epidemiological models
with a large state space.

2 E PIDEMIC D ISEASE M ANAGEMENT THROUGH
I NTELLIGENT L EARNING

2.1

Adopting ML in healthcare systems enables machines to
learn various parameters such as behaviours, symptoms
and pathological variables related to patients and diseases. AI-enhanced diagnostics and treatments have been
adopted in various healthcare-steered applications. In [2],
a framework was developed to optimize the parameters
of Deep Learning (DL) techniques in order to predict infectious diseases whilst considering big data. The solution
adopted a deep neural network (DNN) along with longshort term memory (LSTM) learning models for predict-

In FL, a shared ML model is built using distributed data
from various devices in which the end-devices train the
model using their local data, and subsequently share the
model parameters with the coordinating entity, which in
essence arranges the model training and gathers the contributions from all devices, without sharing its own local
data. A centralized server then builds the global model by
aggregating and averaging all collected parameters and
broadcasts the new updated model to all end-devices.
Each device will then upload its own local model to

Federated Learning (FL)

TABLE 1
Comparing centralized and federated learning solutions when incorporated in a healthcare framework.

Data
ship

Owner-

Privacy/Security
Data Availability
Data Quality
Performance

Centralized Learning
May remain with the user/source agency.
May be transferred to the centralized entity.
Shared for data control.
All data must be communicated with the central
entity.
Frequent data retrieval to ensure accurate model.
Collected data from local devices is validated.
More reliable data.
Load is placed on the centralized entity.
Poor performance when considering scalability.

the server and download the global model. The concept
behind decentralized learning is to replace centralized
communication with peer-to-peer (P2P) communication.
FL is very crucial for modernized healthcare systems.
The most important advantage of using FL in critical
healthcare applications is that patient data is not shared
with other devices and nodes, hence, remaining at the
patient’s device. This will guarantee the desired level
of patient data privacy. Furthermore, the use of FL is
more convenient and cheaper than traditional centralized
learning approaches, due to the minimal need for data
updates and the no latency issues given that the model is
at the end-users’ devices, allowing for real-time inference.
A comparison between the centralized learning approach
and that of the federated learning approach when incorporated in a healthcare framework is summarized in Table
1.
2.1.1 Improving FL Efficiency and Effectiveness
Various tactics can be adapted to improve the effectiveness of FL on the healthcare framework and its efficiency,
such as adopting various models to various users, acquiring better optimization algorithms, and upgrading the
communication efficiency.
•

Viral infectious diseases, such as COVID-19, are
characterized as viruses that mutate, resulting in
different variants and strains. As such, the idea
of adapting personalized solutions for different
types of end-users becomes very powerful and
efficient. The use of different and various models
for different end-users would outperform the use
of a shared global model. Personalization through
featurization is a example of this technique, where
different end-users run different model gradients
(i.e. parameters). Furthermore, multi-task learning
is another approach that can be accomplished by
considering each client’s local issue as a distinct
task (instead of as a shared one). Any multi-task
learning algorithm will be applicable in that case.
Additionally, fine-tuning is a technique that starts
with FL as a single model and applies that model
to all end-users. The main difference in fine-tuning
is that before the shared model is utilized to make
predictions on the end-devices, an additional final

Federated Learning
Remains at the user/source agency level.
No need for shared data control.
Model updates only.
Data is not communicated with other entities.
Access to data is always available which ensures accurate local
model.
Dependent on the local device.
Some data used in the learning process may be unreliable.
Load is distributed among local devices.
Can accommodate for larger set of user/source agencies.

•

•

training process is considered in order to personalize the model to the users’ local data-set.
The goal of FL is to identify a global model that
dismisses the risk function over the training dataset, which is, the federation of the data among all
end-users. Since the total number of end-devices
in FL is significant, the necessity for client-sampling
algorithms (that necessitate a handful of clients
to contribute to each round) is essential. Furthermore, each end-device is expected to participate
only once in the model training, which raises the
need for state-less algorithms. On the other hand,
the optimization algorithms have to be composable
with other techniques. This is very crucial for a
healthcare framework used to combat infectious
diseases. Up-to-date data must be gathered to
create local models and then shared globally to
create accurate models that reflect the situation
at different distributed ends. By adapting clientsampling algorithms, faster decisions can be taken
to avoid the further spread of disease.
Since wireless edge communication for enddevices may be unreliable and operates at low
data rates at certain times, wireless communication
could be a crucial bottleneck for FL. This drawback has led to substantial interest in lowering
the communication bandwidth, in which a tradeoff between communication and accuracy exists in
FL. With that being said, with today’s 5G wireless
communication technology, such a bottleneck will
be eliminated to provide enhanced and improved
edge communication to support the FL process.

Table 2 summarizes some of the benefits and drawbacks of adapting FL to preventive healthcare systems
over a distributed learning approach.
2.1.2 Maintaining Patient Data Privacy
The major issue that faces any healthcare framework is
the patient data privacy policy enforced by governments.
FL provides a novel technique to address privacy and
data governance challenges. It enables ML to occur on
non-co-located data. In FL settings, the owner of the local
data controls and defines its own governance processes
and the associated privacy policies. It also controls entities

TABLE 2
Comparing federated learning and distributed learning in terms of their advantages and disadvantages when adapted to critical
infrastructures like healthcare frameworks.
Distributed Learning
Data Distribution and
Accessibility
Data Availability
Model Setting

Centralized storage of patient data.
Patient data is accessible by end-users.
All participating patients are assumed to be available.
Training is conducted on a large data-set.
End-users are nodes in a cluster or data-center.

Federated Learning
Patient data is generated and preserved locally.
Decentralized storage of patient data.
Patients do not have access to data stored at other enddevices (either local or shared).
Only a fraction of patients must be available at any point
of time.
Training is conducted using a local dataset on patients’
end-devices.
Communication cost is considered high (wide-area communication).
Consistent connection with end-users.

Communication

Communication cost is low.
No wide-area communication.

Drawbacks

Computation is processed at the data-center.
Global model is not highly accurate since patient
data is not retrieved frequently.

Diversified end-device capabilities may cause issues with
computation and communication.

Advantages

Few end-user failures.

Local models are constantly accurate, leading to a more
accurate global model.
Highly effective for infectious disease scenarios.

that may have access to the data and have the ability to
revoke accessibility at any moment. With that said, different governmental jurisdictions can enforce their rules and
policies on the healthcare framework in a distributed and
decentralized manner. End-user FL participants will need
to abide by the local governed rules in regards to data
sharing.
By moving the model to the data and not vice versa,
allows for high-dimensional storage-intense data to remain stored locally without the need for data communication and duplication. If for instance, certain regional
government policies dictate that medical data be stored
locally within the health region, the local training of
the FL process can also occur at the regional level. As
such, the proposed healthcare framework is very flexible
and can accommodate real-world healthcare scenarios,
especially those that require fast and immediate attention,
such as in the prevention and control of epidemics. Some
threats may still arise with the use of FL. For instance, an
adversary may try to stop a model from being learned
or might bias a model under training to generate the
adversary’s preferred inferences. Therefore, FL requires
rigorous protection against such threats. Threat models
might arise from the end users’ devices or even from the
centralized entities. Table 3 presents some examples of
such threats.

3 S ECURE
B LOCKCHAIN

DATA

S HARING

THROUGH

A distributed Healthcare framework, where data is collected from patients, filtered, trained, analyzed and processed either locally or through neighbouring nodes, will
require a secure and private communication mechanism,
that not only is secure but also reliable to ensure data
and transaction authenticity and integrity. Additionally,
with such a cooperative healthcare framework, in which
local and centralized healthcare entities may require realtime access to a collection of patients’ records in order

to provide timely response to ensure responsive actions
towards suspicious infectious disease. Hence, privacypreserving schemes are essential to ensure proper system integration of all healthcare entities. Data access, the
tracking of users’ identity, and raw data disclosure are
also considered mandatory aspects for any state-of-the-art
distributed and intelligent healthcare framework.
Blockchain is highly essential for such cooperative and
distributed frameworks, where the healthcare system will
be comprised of a significant number of organizations
and users having different roles (e.g. patients, healthcare
workers, pharmacies, health insurance companies, etc.).
It provides a secure mechanism to exchange and store
sensitive medical data in a distributed and decentralized
manner. Blockchain transactions are considered fast and
can provide a mechanism to aggregate policies of different
and diversified healthcare entities. This will allow for
such diversified entities to cooperate and share a unique
model among different healthcare sectors. The adopted
blockchain consensus algorithm will make it nearly impossible to modify transaction records, since most of the
participants need to verify each block of data [7]. This will
in essence eliminate cyber-attacks that may occur on data
storage sites in a traditional centralized entity scenario.
Many researchers, companies and agencies across the
globe started developing blockchain-supported applications to aid in countering the COVID-19 pandemic disease. Such applications can validate the continuously
changing data, which is quite effective in handling the
rapidly escalating COVID-19 situations. In [8], the authors
launched a Blockchain-supported application, namely
Civitas, which is considered a safety system for controlling the impact of COVID-19 by associating people’s IDs
with Blockchain records in order to verify whether a person in self-quarantining or not. By adopting blockchain
to this application, it ensures the security and privacy of
patients’ data. Another blockchain-supported application,
MiPasa, has been introduced in [9], which is a data
streaming platform that is able to facilitate the sharing of

TABLE 3
FL-based threats that may arise as a result of malicious attacks on the healthcare framework.
Targeted Entity

Data Accessibility

End-users

Authorized entities that have
access to the end-devices.

Central
Server

Authorized entities that have
access to the server.

Communication
Channel

Anyone

Trained
Models

Developers, data scientists,
and software architects.

Global
Models

Anyone

Threat Scenario
Decentralized storage of patient local data may lead to the exploitation of model
parameters and training data by attackers.
Malicious devices might have unauthorized access to the learned models.
Some end-users may leverage the benefits of the FL healthcare framework by accessing
global models without contributing to the training process.
Unavailability of participant end-users may yield inefficient results in training the global
model.
Attacks on the central server may lead to vulnerability of initial model parameters,
aggregated local models and shared global models.
FL requires significant amount of communication over the network, where a non-secure
communication channel is open to vulnerability through eavesdropping attacks.
Malicious end-users may use patient data poisoning attacks on the global model by
manipulating the training process.
Malicious end-users may modify the updated local models before sending them to the
central server.
Data reconstruction attacks may lead to global data vulnerability.
Abnormality in local model updates from suspicious end-users may go unnoticed,
making the global model vulnerable.

verified health information between people, agencies, and
hospitals. It works by gathering the information offered
by medical organizations.
3.1 Current Trends in Blockchain-Based Healthcare
Systems
Numerous attempts to secure distributed health-care systems using blockchain have been considered lately. Such
attempts consider applying the use of blockchain at either
the health-care institutions’ side (such as hospitals and
clinics) or at the patient side. Institution-based blockchain
solutions do not involve patients in the secure data sharing and transaction processing aspect, but rather allow
them to interact with health institutions to acquire services that have been authorized and authenticated. On
the contrary, patient-based blockchain-solutions allow patients to participate in both data sharing and processing
transactions. As such, patients are directly involved in
the healthcare service provisioning process. Such architectures would require the use of both public and private
blockchains. We would assume that involving patients
(or even users that contribute and share collected healthrelated data) requires the use of public blockchains to
offer such a decentralized framework. On the contrary,
institution-based blockchain solutions would adopt a private blockchain framework solution to allow only authenticated or verified individuals to get involved in data
sharing and processing transactions.
3.1.1 Scalability Issues
Current blockchain-based healthcare system trends face
major issues in regards to the storage of patient health
information and learnt models. For instance, in [10],
the authors proposed a framework for blockchain-based
personal health information sharing among healthcare
institutions for faster and more reliable disease diagnosis. They integrate two blockchains in their solution,

namely, private and consortium blockchains. The private blockchain of healthcare institutions stores raw encrypted patient health information, while the consortium
blockchain stores records of the secure indices of patients’
health information. Proof of conformance is used for the
blockchains as the consensus mechanism. The solution
limits the collection and sharing of data among healthcare
service providers only and requires patients’ approval.
Such a technique although is promising, would create
storage scalability issues as more data is collected from
patients.

3.1.2

Latency Issues

Other issues that may face blockchain-based healthcare
solutions is the excessive amount of time needed for
health authorities to respond to critical infectious disease events through data collected at the patients’ side,
then shared and communicated to other participants at
the edge through public blockchains. By the time this
information is shared with the healthcare providers and
government authorities, epidemics might have gone out
of control. For instance, in [11], the authors tackled the
security issues that may arise as a result of transferring and logging data transactions in healthcare systems.
Permissioned, consortium-based blockchains are used to
execute smart contracts to evaluate information collected
from patients. Alerts are triggered for patients and healthcare providers under critical conditions. Although such
a solution might provide a mechanism to collect data
from patients in real-time, then authenticate this data and
communicate it to the health authorities to take action, especially in epidemic related cases, the time needed to filter
and analyze the collected information at the healthcare
provider side would result in unsatisfactory outcomes.

3.2

Hybrid Blockchain-Based Healthcare Framework

Hybrid solutions which would assign certain roles to
institutions and other roles to users would provide a more
optimal strategy towards data collection, sharing, and
transaction processing. We envision a healthcare environment that relies heavily on data collection, aggregation,
filtering and partial analysis (i.e. Federated Learning)
that is achieved using a public blockchain. Data storage
and service composition may also be achieved at the
edge. Moreover, the healthcare framework would also
rely on private blockchains to link various medical parties
for data sharing to achieve faster and wider service responsiveness, especially for epidemic outbreak scenarios.
Figure 2 depicts a solution that adopts such a hybrid
blockchain solution. This approach will not only link the
different users at the edge layer, or the institution layer
separately, but it will also allow for blockchain system
links to occur between patients and doctors. This can be
achieved through customized smart contracts, allowing
for patients to have on-demand medical data when moving between different healthcare institutions [12]. Adopting FL in the Blockchain-based healthcare system helps
in parallelizing the computation capacity of numerous
parameters’ updates over numerous end-devices. Additionally, this learning environment is an asynchronous
learning style where each end-user is independently involved at random occasions which eliminates the need
for a global synchronization entity while improving scalability.
Institution Layer

Healthcare Provider and
Governmental Institutions

Core Cloud
Secure Storage

Global Deep
Learning

Use Private
Blockchain

Patient/User Layer

Distributed Patient/User
Data Collection

Apply Federated Learning
on Collected Data

Use Public
Blockchain

Fig. 2. An Overview of a hybrid blockchain solution. The solution
adopts a decentralized data collection and federated learning aspect
which is applied to a public blockchain for secure sharing and transaction authentication. Healthcare institutions use the collected information and epidemic alerts to provide healthcare services to concerned
communities and share data securely with other institutions through
private blockchain.

There have been a number of recent attempts to
address issues related to scalability and latency for
blockchain-based healthcare systems. Shamim et al. [13]
developed a mass surveillance strategy at the network
edge to monitor human social distancing, mask-wearing,
and body temperature readings. The data is analyzed at
the edge by relying on 5G network edge servers. Addi-

tionally, data collected in hospitals such as chest x-rays,
CT scans, and ultrasound, is also analyzed at the edge.
Both data collected from users and hospitals is trained
on the cloud using deep learning (DL) models, namely,
ResNet50, deep tree, and Inception v3. The trained models
are downloaded to the edge during off-peak hours. New
data collected either from users or hospitals is sent to
the DL models available at the edge. But prior to the
data being sent, it is applied on a blockchain to both authenticate and secure the data. Such an approach ensures
that the system is scalable in terms of both storage and
the number of participants, in addition to providing fast
responsiveness for infectious disease diagnosis, results
and alerts.

4

F UTURE I NSIGHTS

We envision that in addition to its critical role in patient
data exchange among different health entities, blockchain
could be used today for setting check-up stations for
testing individuals who show symptoms related to an
infectious disease. The number of conducted tests in the
stations can be managed over the blockchain which can
assist in getting reliable reports on the number of conducted tests as well as the number of positive cases. It
can help health agencies fight disease spread in areas that
have a high number of positive cases. Blockchain can be
trusted by healthcare agencies due to its aspect of being
immutable. Furthermore, blockchain along with federated
learning could be used to store the patients’ records, who
tested positive to an infectious disease, to contain all their
details (e.g. gender, region, age, close contact, etc.) as
individual instances, where federated learning could be
used to learn and better understand the disease expansion
pattern along with facilitating the prediction property.
4.1

Explainable and Plug-and-Play AI

Given the diversity and abundant numbers in both edge
and core network devices having advanced processing,
storage, and communication capabilities, and given that
FL is an optimal choice for decentralized and secure
health-care systems capable of adapting to the changing
health conditions at different health districts, the adoption
of a generalized AI technique that is adaptable to a wide
range of devices and applications is highly necessary,
namely plug-and-play (PnP) [14]. The vision of a simplified and generalized learning solution that may be
adapted to any problem and domain, is one that may
accelerate the technological advancements in AI and will
have a high impact on healthcare provisioning.
Generalized AI refers to a system that can autonomously decide the type of ML algorithm, the training
and the processing of the data-set, as well as the reasoning
of the data-set selection for optimal feature extraction.
Moreover, generalized AI is able to autonomously perform the training and fine-tuning in order to provide
an optimal level of generality at the end-devices. Given
that all participating end-devices are part of the learning

process, PnP-AI would simplify and speed up the FL
process. The goal of the PnP-AI solution is to be adaptable
to a wide range of edge and IoT devices. PnP-AI is more
beneficial when adapted to resource-limited IoT devices,
as it gives support to edge devices. The solution is adaptable in the FL context and is highly beneficial, where the
learning process is offloaded to end-devices.

with reasoning to provide more of a glass-box solution
style, thus enabling transparency. This will ensure that
results presented to the end-user are justified to overcome
any safety and health concerns.

In health-related scenarios, the type of diagnosis mechanism needs to first be identified before applying a particular ML algorithm. For instance, in a case where a patient
is showing flu-like symptoms, such as high fever, coughing, and low levels of oxygen, which are identified either
through body sensors or the use of cooperative devices
distributed in a given environment, the type of problem
and the input data to be used for training purposes needs
to be determined. Such determination of the problem and
input data needs to be achieved without user intervention.
Then, the training on the data-set, whether performed
locally (i.e. distributed) or through FL, the labelling and
models are all selected and performed autonomously.
Such an approach will require two layers of learning,
namely, one that focuses on accurate identification of the
configurations and learning mechanisms for the given
health-related problem to diagnose the disease, and the
other focuses on the problem domain to determine the
treatments and actions to be taken, whether locally or by
the local healthcare authorities.

With the advances in 5G and beyond networks in terms of
their mobility and scalability support, mass surveillance
and data acquisition at the edge will enable rapid and
on-demand health decisions and actions to be considered frequently. Real-time data analysis achieved with
the support of roaming end-devices and ultra-fast wireless communication will provide reliable health-decision
outcomes in both regional and global avenues [15]. Large
multi-dimensional datasets and/or locally trained models
generated in areas considered highly infectious can be exchanged across 5G networks to generate global models or
used by DNNs across different governmental jurisdictions
for model training. Medical staff will be able to effectively
and promptly respond to urgent cases and have access
to regional medical information while roaming across
different networks. This will minimize the risk of coming
into contact with those that have been infected and will
be able to dispatch medical support remotely.
Vertical training, where cooperative machine learning
can occur at both the edge and cloud can be conducted
more efficiently (in terms of reduced latency and accurate
modeling) with the support of B5G. Edge servers with
the support of edge caches and edge nodes can provide
fast decision-making and monitoring near regional health
facilities. Trained models at the edge can be shared with
the cloud for further and more accurate global DL. Results
can then be rapidly deployed to different jurisdictions
globally to ensure synchronized community-based health
cooperation. Drug and vaccine manufacturers can determine the frequency and number of vaccines that need to
be rolled out to different communities.

With autonomy, comes some disadvantages in terms of
system transparency. PnP-AI will further widen the gap
between the end-user and the mechanisms involved in
decision-making. Both authorities and patients are reluctant to involve the use of AI in medical applications. For
AI to be rolled out at a much faster pace in the healthcare sector, and due to the sensitivity of the information
and decisions/actions made, providing detailed insight
into the training, learning, and decision-making process
of AI systems is necessary. Explainable AI is a mechanism
that would enable such transparency, allowing for AI
techniques to be defined, implemented, and interpreted
to improve user trust in ML. To achieve a high standard
of ethics in AI, explanations of the systems’ decisions
made by ML algorithms need to be provided to the users.
Explainability needs to be adapted at different layers of
the system and interpreted for different users according
to their expertise. This will ensure user verification, safety
and trust of AI results. For instance, decisions made in
regards to infectious diseases need to be explained to
different categories of healthcare workers and patients.
Figure 3 provides an overview of a healthcare framework that adapts both an explainable and PnP-AI solution. Explainable models need to be created to match the
problem domain (e.g. infectious diseases) and the expertise level of the user (e.g. infectious disease specialist,
family doctor, nurse, patient, etc.) to describe the data
labelling and model selection processes. Since this stage is
very critical to ensure accurate diagnosis and actions, the
set of users need to be accurately defined. The selection of
the ML algorithm will also need to be justified to the user

4.2

5

B5G Network Support

L ESSONS L EARNED AND C ONCLUDING R E -

MARKS

The COVID-19 pandemic has greatly affected and temporally suppressed the majority of healthcare systems
globally. This has influenced researchers from different
disciplines to develop new techniques and solutions that
would enable epidemic discovery ahead of time, remote
monitoring, and fast health-authority response. In this
article, we envisioned a distributed and decentralized
healthcare framework for epidemic diseases’ screening,
monitoring and rapid reaction. The framework relies
on Federated Learning (FL) and Blockchain technology
which enable a cooperative and distributed healthcare
system. We proposed a PnP-AI solution that is capable
of adapting to changing device specifications and health
conditions. Additionally, we proposed that explainability
be adapted to health systems to ensure system decision
transparency to all users according to their expertise level.

Explainable and PnP-AI
Supported Framework
Training data and models
are selected according to
the input data and the
given health concern.

Cloud

ML algorithm is
automatically.

Data Center

Fog

Fog

Input Data
Edge Node

Edge Node

Global and Edge
Deep Learning
Selecting Training
Data & Models

Select Machine
Learning Algorithm

Disease Domain

Federated Learning
Data is collected
from end-users and
healthcare entities.

System provides
justifications and reasons of
selecting the models, ML
algorithm, and actions to
Explainable Models,
users according to their
Algorithms and Results
domain knowledge.

Hospital Tests, Body Sensors and
Cooperative Devices

Fig. 3. An Overview of an integrated explainable and PnP-AI solution for distributed healthcare frameworks in a cooperative environment to
prevent and support fast control and combat of infectious diseases.

For FL-enabled healthcare frameworks to be implemented efficiently, the training process should occur in
a distributed manner (i.e. local device training). As such,
the adaptation of a PnP-AI solution would ensure proper
training and learning to occur at the edge. The implementation of such a solution is indeed complex and
is only at its early stages. The concept of achieving a
PnP-AI solution would in itself require two layers of
learning. One that targets the problem domain and another which targets the management aspect of machine
learning. This is considered resource-consuming. As such,
the management layer needs to be decentralized and
distributed, which would require collaboration between
different health entities. Furthermore, the application of
blockchain at two levels, namely, user and institution,
will provide an opportunity for Electronic Health Records
(EHR) to be shared only among those that are given
access to the intended data with limited on-chain data
storage. The hash of the data is also stored on-chain, thus
preserving patient data security. Although such a system
is considered complex, we believe that such a proposal
will create novel and efficient solutions that are more
convenient not only for health authorities but also for
patients and citizens.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research was supported by the Faculty of Technological Innovation, Zayed University (ZU), under grant
number STG-046.

R EFERENCES
[1]

Y. A. Qadri, A. Nauman, Y. B. Zikria, A. V. Vasilakos, and
S. W. Kim, “The future of healthcare internet of things: A survey of emerging technologies,” IEEE Communications Surveys
Tutorials, vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 1121–1167, 2020.
[2] S. Chae, S. Kwon, and D. Lee, “Predicting infectious disease
using deep learning and big data,” International Journal of
Environmental Research and Public Health, vol. 15, p. 1596, 07
2018.
[3] K. G. A., M. M. R., R. D., and B. R. F., “Secure, privacypreserving and federated machine learning in medical imaging,” Nat Mach Intell 2, p. 305–311, 2020.
[4] N. Ibrahim, N. S. M. Akhir, and F. H. Hassan, “Predictive analysis effectiveness in determining the epidemic disease infected
area,” AIP Conference Proceedings, vol. 1891, no. 1, p. 020064,
2017.
[5] L. Jia, K. Li, Y. Jiang, X. Guo, and T. zhao, “Prediction and
analysis of coronavirus disease 2019,” 2020.
[6] P. Libin, A. Moonens, T. Verstraeten, F. Perez-Sanjines, N. Hens,
P. Lemey, and A. Nowé, “Deep reinforcement learning for largescale epidemic control,” 2020.
[7] B. Cao, Y. Li, L. Zhang, L. Zhang, S. Mumtaz, Z. Zhou, and
M. Peng, “When internet of things meets blockchain: Challenges
in distributed consensus,” IEEE Network, vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 133–
139, 2019.
[8] T. Wright. Blockchain app used to track covid-19 cases in latin
america. [Online]. Available: https://cointelegraph.com/news/
blockchain-app-used-to-track-covid-19-cases-in-latin-america
[9] B. P. I. B. Blog. Mipasa project and ibm blockchain team on
open data platform to support covid-19 response. [Online].
Available: https://www.ibm.com/blogs/blockchain/2020/03/
mipasa-project-and-ibm-blockchain-team-on-open-data-platfo/
/rm-to-support-covid-19-response/
[10] A. Zhang and X. Lin, “Towards secure and privacy-preserving
data sharing in e-health systems via consortium blockchain,”
Journal of Medical Systems, vol. 42, no. 8, Jun. 2018.
[11] K. N. Griggs, O. Ossipova, C. P. Kohlios, A. N. Baccarini, E. A.
Howson, and T. Hayajneh, “Healthcare blockchain system using
smart contracts for secure automated remote patient monitoring,” Journal of Medical Systems, vol. 42, no. 7, Jun. 2018.

[12] R. Wang, H. Liu, H. Wang, Q. Yang, and D. Wu, “Distributed security architecture based on blockchain for connected health: Architecture, challenges, and approaches,” IEEE
Wireless Communications, vol. 26, no. 6, pp. 30–36, 2019.
[13] M. S. Hossain, G. Muhammad, and N. Guizani, “Explainable
AI and mass surveillance system-based healthcare framework
to combat COVID-19 like pandemics,” IEEE Network, vol. 34,
no. 4, pp. 126–132, 2020.

[14] I. A. Ridhawi, S. Otoum, M. Aloqaily, and A. Boukerche, “Generalizing AI: Challenges and opportunities for plug and play AI
solutions,” IEEE Network, vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 372–379, 2021.
[15] V. Balasubramanian, F. Zaman, M. Aloqaily, I. A. Ridhawi,
Y. Jararweh, and H. B. Salameh, “A mobility management
architecture for seamless delivery of 5G-IoT services,” in ICC
2019 - 2019 IEEE International Conference on Communications
(ICC), 2019, pp. 1–7.

