Heads in the Clouds: Measuring the Implications of
Universities Migrating to Public Clouds
Tobias Fiebig∗ , Seda Gürses∗ , Carlos H. Gañán∗ , Erna Kotkamp∗ , Fernando Kuipers∗ ,
Martina Lindorfer ¶ , Menghua Prisse∗ , Taritha Sari∗
∗ TU

Delft, Netherlands

{T.Fiebig,F.S.Gurses,C.HernandezGanan,E.Kotkamp,F.A.Kuipers,P.T.Sari}@tudelft.nl, M.M.G.C.Prisse@student.tudelft.nl
¶ TU

Wien, Austria

arXiv:2104.09462v2 [cs.CY] 20 Apr 2021

martina.lindorfer@tuwien.ac.at

Abstract—With the emergence of mandatory remote education
and work in universities due to COVID-19, the ‘zoomification’ of
higher education, i.e., the migration of universities to the clouds,
reached the public discourse. Ongoing discussions reason about
how this shift will take control over students’ data away from
universities, and may ultimately prevent privacy from being an
attainable goal for researchers and students alike. However, there
has been no comprehensive measurement of universities’ use of
public clouds and reliance on Software-as-a-Service offerings to
assess how far this migration has already progressed.
In this paper, we perform a longitudinal study of the migration
to public clouds among universities in the U.S. and Europe, as
well as institutions listed in the Times Higher Education (THE)
Top100 between January 2015 and December 2020. We find
that cloud-adoption differs between countries, with one cluster
(Germany, France, Austria, Switzerland) showing a limited move
to clouds, while the other cluster (U.S., U.K., the Netherlands,
THE Top100) frequently migrates universities’ core functions and
services to public clouds—starting long before the COVID-19
pandemic. We attribute this clustering to several socio-economic
factors in the respective countries, including the general culture of
higher education and the administrative paradigm taken towards
running universities.
We then analyze and interpret our results, finding that the
implications reach beyond individuals’ privacy towards questions
of academic independence and integrity.

the past year, for example, much debacle surrounded the use
of Zoom as the now de facto standard for remote lectures and
events. Zoom only started to systematically attend to privacy
and security concerns raised by educational institutions when
pressure was handed down to the company from investors [57].
At the same time, universities that adopted Zoom for their
remote lectures practically reduced students’ consent choices
to either using Zoom, and having their personal data processed
by Zoom, or not participating in lectures.
The infrastructural and data control acquired by companies
like Zoom have a knock on effect on academic freedom.
In 2020, Zoom ultimately prevented faculty and students
at New York University from conducting a guest lecture—
incidentally on censorship by Zoom and other tech companies—
using their Zoom license [67]. The question hence expands
beyond ‘what private data do universities share with cloud
platforms,’ to include ‘in what way can these cloud platforms
use their infrastructural position and data practices to influence
academic processes in universities.’
The adoption of educational technology (’EdTech’), i.e., the
use of “market-facing digital technologies in education” [62],
has already prompted critical studies from the social sciences,
warning about blurring lines between public educational
I. Introduction
institutions and private corporations as a threat to academic
Over the past decade, we have seen a shift in IT operations self-governance [48, 62, 79, 87]. Despite these concerns for
towards the use of cloud infrastructures [58, 83]. Instead of privacy and academic freedom, there are no comprehensive
running IT services with on-site teams and on infrastructure measurements of how reliant universities are on public cloud
owned by organizations, services are now often deployed infrastructures. Hence, in this paper, we address this gap by
on public cloud infrastructure. Especially for web services, measuring cloud adoption in universities over the past six years
the model of using Software-as-a-Service (SaaS) has become in seven countries (the U.S., the U.K., Germany, Switzerland,
prominent. However, this operational paradigm shift also leads Austria, the Netherlands, and France) and in the Times Higher
to a change in control. While, before, user data would remain Education (THE) Top100. We do this by measuring universities’
on infrastructure controlled by an organization, this data is now hosting on cloud platforms as well as their use of cloud-based
stored and processed by an external operator.
email providers; cloud-based learning management systems
For universities using cloud infrastructures, this leads to hard (LMS); and, cloud-based video and lecturing tools.
challenges. These stretch from limiting universities’ ability to
We find that universities in the Netherlands, the U.K., the U.S.
audit or implement privacy by design, e.g., privacy guaran- and those in the THE Top100 are significantly more prone to detees ensured through technical means, or ensure privacy-as- pend on cloud infrastructures, while especially those in France
compliance, e.g., in terms of following privacy regulations [25, and Germany rely far more on in-house services. We attribute
94], to impacting a universities’ ability to obtain meaningful these differences to a diverse set of socio-economic factors,
informed consent when they employ cloud operators. During including a historically different understanding of what higher

education means, the university functions (research, education, A. Education
administration) the IT infrastructure is commonly aligned with,
IT infrastructure for education includes all tools that enable
and the value placed on academic independence in these students to learn. Traditionally, this means all systems used
countries. Furthermore, we observe that universities’ migration for assessment and learning management systems (LMS), as
to centralized cloud infrastructures (Google/Amazon/Microsoft) for example Moodle [14]. While educational software for
does not show a clear pandemic effect as observed for the remote teaching already received attention before the COVIDInternet as a whole [33]. The notable exception here are video 19 pandemic in the context of blended learning and MOOCs
conferencing tools (apart from Skype-for-Business), where we (Massive Open Online Courses), COVID-19 increased the
see a clear uptick of adoption across the board, except for the importance of learning infrastructure like video chat tools
U.S., where especially Zoom adoption was on the rise years and streaming solutions, as well as examination and proctoring
before the pandemic.
software. In most universities, these tools are offered institutionwide as centralized services, usually with the support of a
In summary, we make the following contributions:
central IT department. In addition, specific programs might
• We are the first to map out the cloud dependence of
need additional infrastructure, e.g., a program on system and
universities in Europe, the U.S., and the THE Top100, network engineering may also need dedicated server rooms and
and find that this is an ongoing process that predates the networking labs [15], often offered in a decentralized manner.
COVID-19 pandemic.
Several vendors offer cloud-based LMS (see Section VI),
which allow universities to outsource one of their largest (in
• We document severe differences in cloud adoption between
countries and trace this back to fundamental differences terms of users) systems to an SaaS provider. Even though tools
in how these countries approach university IT and higher for self-hosted remote lectures exist, the common perception,
especially since COVID-19, associates remote lecturing mainly
education.
with Zoom, and—to a lesser extent—other cloud-based plat• We demonstrate how an increasing reliance on cloud
forms like Microsoft Teams and WebEx. Similarly, proctoring
infrastructure may ultimately prevent privacy from being
solutions—already a concept of questionable ethics [23]—that
an attainable goal in universities.
became prominent during the COVID-19 pandemic are almost
• We find that questions of data and infrastructure control
exclusively provided as cloud-hosted services.
have implications beyond privacy, including threatening
B. Research
academic freedom as a core value of universities.
In contrast to educational tooling, research IT infrastructure
Structure: In Section II, we provide an overview of university is often more dependent on the individual needs of researchers,
IT. We introduce our general methodology in Section III, and and therefore tends to be decentralized. Applications here range
present an overview of cloud use in Section IV. Next, we zoom from the—in our field—common experimental systems (IoT
into universities’ use of cloud-based email solutions (Section V), test labs, network measurement infrastructure, and machines
cloud-based learning management systems (Section VI), and vulnerable to certain exploits) to IT systems used to control a ditheir use of cloud-based video communication and lecturing verse set of research instruments, such as electron microscopes
tools (Section VII). Finally, we contextualize our findings and or chemical processing lines. In addition, super computing
provide recommendations for researchers and universities in capabilities [37], data storage/open data platforms [106], and
research software that support quantitative and qualitative
Section VIII, and conclude in Section XI.
methods, e.g., survey and statistical analysis tools [70] are
often centrally provided.
II. University IT
Cloud services can replace both types of research infrastrucGenerally speaking, universities are organizations with a ture. Researchers may use Platform-as-a-Service infrastructure
purpose or function, which can be supported by IT pillars [93]. for running measurement and experimental systems, and
Commonly, these major functions are: (1) Education, (2) especially GPU supported compute is often outsourced to
Research, and to enable these two, (3) Administration [84]. cloud platforms. Furthermore, universities may opt to use
Note that while these functions may seem intuitively discrete, outsourced and cloud-hosted instances of survey and interview
they partially overlap, also in the tools and applications used platforms to provide this service to their researchers. Especially
to address the needs associated with each function.
Amazon’s Mechanical Turk has become a common tool in
In terms of cloud adoption, universities look towards cloud human factors and human subject related work, ranging from
infrastructure as a way to reduce their own IT investments, the social sciences to usable security and privacy [71].
and potentially even a chance to free up and monetize assets
bound there, e.g., IPv4 addresses [3, 69]. While the use of C. Administration
specific tools may lead the university to enter into agreements
The administrative function of a university entails all
with a multitude of companies, many of these tools themselves services and operations needed by a university to support (not
are hosted on one of the three largest cloud platforms: The execute) its primary functions for education and research. This
offerings of Google, Amazon EC2, and Microsoft Azure.
means budgeting and accounting tools, HR systems including

2

Table I: List of data fields in the Farsight SIE dataset.

personnel management databases and applicant management
systems, and—arguably—also student application management.
Field Name
Description
Example
Furthermore, this entails foundational services like email, and
count
Number of times the unique tuple of
12
rrname/rrtype/bailiwick/rdata has been seen.
the operation of a universities’ network. Similarly, telephony
time_first
Unix timestamp of the first occurrence of the
1422251650
and business communication tools—before the pandemic tools
unique tuple during the data slice.
time_last
Unix timestamp of the last occurrence of the
1422251650
like Skype-for-Business (SfB), Microsoft Sharepoint, as well
unique tuple during the data slice.
as Microsoft Teams and other video chat solutions that now
rrname
Requested name in the DNS.
www.example.com
rrtype
Requested RRtype of the query.
A
overlap with educational tooling—traditionally fall into this
bailiwick
Zone authoritative for the DNS reply.
example.com
category.
rdata
List of all responses received in a single
["93.184.216.34"]
query.
Applications for specific use cases (hiring, student admission,
finance and accounting) are inherently complex and highly
business critical. Hence, outsourcing allows universities to not
only reduce the needed local expertise to run these tools, but (ii) For France, 16 domains, all of which belong to other
also allows the outsourcing of responsibility in case these listed institutions and are remnants from before the merging
tools become inoperable. Especially for highly business critical processes of French universities in the late 1990s and early
applications, as for example email (see Section V) or security 2000s, (iii) In the U.K., 28 domains, 27 of which belong to
universities that are included in the dataset with other domains
management, cloud setups promise higher reliability.
they predominantly use, e.g., ox.ac.uk. being used instead
III. Methodology Overview
of oxford.ac.uk. and the remaining one being the Courtauld
In this section, we describe our general methodology in Institute of Art, and (iv) For Austria four domains, one of
terms of the dataset we use and which institutions we selected. which is a secondary domain for the University of Salzburg,
We describe the more specific aspects of our methodology for which is included via its mainly used domain uni-salzburg.at,
and three small private Universities in Vienna.
the individual services in the corresponding sections.
B. Dataset

A. Selection of Institutions

We use the Farsight Security Information Exchange (SIE)
To investigate cloud usage in higher education institutes, we
focus on universities (PhD awarding institutions) in the global dataset [32] to measure (1) to what extent universities depend
north, specifically the U.S., Germany, Switzerland, Austria, the on cloud infrastructure, and, (2) how this dependency developed
U.K., the Netherlands and France. In addition, we also include over time.
The Farsight SIE dataset is collected via recursive resolvers
the institutions listed in the Times Higher Education Top100
for 2020 [88]. Please see Appendix A-H for the full list of of ISPs. Collaborating ISPs can install a sensor, which sends
all DNS cache misses [51, 63] of their clients to Farsight.
institutions and corresponding domains for each category.
For the U.S., we selected all R1 [19] and R2 [20] univer- Farsight explicitly chose to only collect cache misses and filters
sities based on the Carnegie Classification of Institutions of additional data that might reveal the identity of individual
Higher Education, as also referenced in the corresponding clients, thereby limiting the chance of accidentally collecting
Wikipedia article [98]. For the remaining countries, i.e., for personally identifiable information (PII) [32]. Nevertheless, we
Germany [100], the U.K. [103], Switzerland [101], Austria [99], handled the data following established best practices [4].
In our study, we use a historic dataset spanning from
France [97], and the Netherlands [102], we utilized the corresponding Wikipedia pages listing universities. We argue that January 1, 2015 to December 18, 2020 in per-month slices. The
Wikipedia is a sufficiently reliable source for this information, dataset contains all cache misses observed by participating DNS
given the general nature of this information, and that we resolvers during this timeframe, where a unique cache miss is
manually investigated each listed university to identify their defined by the tuple of <rrname, rrtype, bailiwick, rdata>
associated domain name(s). Furthermore, we do not claim (see Table I). As we only receive cache misses, we cannot make
completeness, but instead try to estimate a lower bound with statements about the popularity of names seen in the Farsight
our measurements, see Section IX. If a university uses multiple SIE dataset. Therefore, we focus our analysis on establishing a
domains, or used a different domain in the past—especially lower bound on the use of cloud resources, or, to put it into
common in France due to a history of reorganization of the more practical terms, we determine if an organization utilizes
university system—we check all domains and aggregate the specific cloud resources, but not how much they utilize it.
results under the name of the institution.
In comparison to actively collected large-scale DNS datasets,
Thereafter we filtered out all institutions for which we did for example, OpenINTEL [40, 73], the Farsight dataset enables
not see at least ten distinct names in at least one month within us to look deeper into the DNS tree of individual organizations.
our six year dataset. We do this to ensure that our data is As we see all names that were requested by clients behind
not influenced by institutions into which we only have limited DNS recursors participating as sensors, we can see applicationvisibility. In total, this lead to the following exclusions: (i) In specific names (e.g., application.example.com.) that are not
the Netherlands the Theological University Apeldoorn, a small part of the set of names gathered by active measurement
topic-specific university with no considerable IT infrastructure, platforms (as prior knowledge on these names is necessary).

3

At the same time, this also means that we might miss specific
names or institutions, as the corresponding DNS resources have
not been requested by a client behind a sensor contributing to
the Farsight SIE dataset. However, this does not pose a problem
in the context of our objective to identify a lower bound of
cloud usage in universities, as those records we do observe are
certainly there.
For a complete discussion of the limitations in our dataset,
how we address them, and what impact they have on how our
results should be interpreted, please see Section IX.

services hosted at Amazon. For the other two major cloud
operators (Google, Microsoft), we find that the U.S. developed
towards a situation where all of the three major operators are
used at universities at the same time, rising from 79 institutions
(30.38%) in January 2015 to 213 (81.92%) in December 2020.
For the Netherlands and U.K., we see a lower share of Google
over time, starting at 30 (26.09%) of all institutions for the U.K.
and 4 (21.05%) for the Netherlands in January 2015, reaching
59 (51.30%) for the U.K. and 7 (36.84%) for the Netherlands
in 2020, almost exclusively in a setting where all three major
providers are used. Instead, a combination of Amazon and
IV. Universities and Public Clouds
Microsoft based hosting is more common than in the U.S..
France, Germany and Austria form a clear contrast to this
In this section, we provide a first overview of universities’
reliance on cloud infrastructure of the ‘Big Three‘ (Amazon, picture. All three of these countries have a lower cloud usage,
Google, and Microsoft). We want to understand to which with less than 50% of universities relying on cloud providers
extent names under universities’ domains point toward these for any services (2 (2.47%) to 37 (45.68%) for Germany, 10
infrastructures, regardless of their popularity. This way, we do (13.51%) to 23 (31.08%) for France, and 0 to 11 (32.35%)
not only capture the most frequented names—for example the for Austria from January 2015 to December 2020). Note that
main website, or resources commonly used by students—but the uptick of Microsoft-related cloud infrastructure use for
also capture, e.g., HR and administration tools, along with German universities in December 2020 relates to the sudden
systems used for research. Hence, in this section, we look at introduction of names like (lync)autodiscover.example.com
whether universities have at least one name under one of their pointing to Microsoft Azure addresses. Without this increase,
Germany was at 24 (29.63%) of institutions using public
domains that points to each of the three providers above.
cloud infrastructure in November 2020. Switzerland, starting
A. Methodology
at 5 (35.71%) in January 2015 and 8 (57.14%) in December
To identify universities’ hosting in cloud infrastructure, we 2020 forms a middle ground between these two clusters. We
first collect all A, AAAA, and CNAME resource records (RRs) for conjecture, also see Section VII, that this connects to the
each university domain from the dataset. We then try to resolve wider introduction of Microsoft Teams (the specific name is a
all CNAME RRs from the dataset of the corresponding month necessary condition for using Skype-for-Business use, but may
in which they were observed. If we are unable to resolve a also occur for an Office365 or Microsoft Teams deployment).
CNAME to an IPv4 or IPv6 address, we match RRs for products
In general, we find that cloud infrastructure dependence
regularly hosted in certain infrastructure to IP addresses of the across all sampled countries is on the rise. However, in the
corresponding hoster. For example, we will consider CNAMEs like Netherlands, the U.S., the THE Top100, and the U.K., we find
www.example.com. IN A ec2-203-0-113-25.compute-1.amazo that this increase occurs on a high level, i.e., especially U.S.,
naws.com. as a resource hosted by Amazon.
U.K., Dutch, and THE Top100 universities already frequently
Subsequently, we use the Team Cymru bulk DNS service to used cloud infrastructure before the start of our measurement
associate the identified IP addresses’ announcing Autonomous period on January 2015. Nevertheless, we do find an increase
System (AS). Note that we performed this resolution on in the number of cloud providers used for these countries.
January 19, 2021 and Team Cymru does not offer a historic
We note that we do not find a ‘pandemic effect’ [33] in
WHOIS service. Hence, our data may over-report historic cloud the use of cloud infrastructure across institutions. Instead,
usage, with numbers becoming more reliable the closer we get the migration of higher education seems to be an ongoing
to the current date. Nevertheless, the error we may incur with process that started more than five years ago. Furthermore,
this is an over-reporting error, i.e., historic numbers may seem we find that the use of cloud resources fundamentally differs
higher than they are, while an increase over time is unlikely between countries. We revisit this pattern in our discussion in
to be caused by this, as cloud providers accumulate addresses Section VIII, as we can observe similar effects for other facets
and do not trade them away, given the increasing IPv4 address of cloud infrastructure as well.
exhaustion [69].
V. Cloud-Based Email Infrastructure
B. Results
In this section, we investigate universities’ use of cloud-based
email infrastructure. Email is arguably one of the most essential
services on the Internet for professional communication. It
regularly carries significant PII, when students have questions
on courses, or seek advice in professional and personal matters.
It serves as the transport for grades and course assignments,
but also job applications, research data, academic discourse,
and ideas.

We present an overview of our findings in Figure 1. On a
macroscopic level, we already see major differences between
institutions from different countries. Having at least one system
located at a major cloud provider is common for the U.S.,
the U.K., and the Netherlands. The THE Top100 also show a
pattern similar to that of the U.S.. Cloud usage in these three
countries and the THE Top100 shows a high share of using

4

Figure 1: Overview of universities’ use of ‘the Big Three’ cloud providers (Amazon, Google, Microsoft) from January 2015 to December 2020.

Figure 2: Overview of email providers used by universities between January 2015 and December 2020.

5

Table II: Overview of selected MX domains.
Operator

MX Domains

Microsoft
Google
Verisign
Cisco
Other

outlook.com, hotmail.com
google.com, googlemail.com, smtp.goog
pphosted.com
iphmx.com
trendmicro.eu, messagelabs.com, schlund.de, spamfighters.net,
mailcontrol.com,
spamhero.com,
emailsrvr.com,
mailspamprotection.com,
fireeyecloud.com,
mailanyone.net,
secureserver.net,
mailgun.org,
icritical.com,
barracudanetworks.com

If the rua or ruf of a university points to an email address under
emaildefense.proofpoint.com., we assume that this university
uses Proofpoint’s services.
If we do not find an MX record that points to hosts under a
cloud providers’ domain, or a DMARC record indicating the use
of Proofpoint, we count the institution as ‘Other/Private’. We
acknowledge, that this approach may under-match the number
of cloud providers we find. Furthermore, if we are unable to
observe an MX record for an institution included in our dataset
for a given month, we mark this as ‘No MX.’

While there are—commonly unused (or unusable) [80]—
methods to encrypt emails to ensure contents remain confidential, security, reliability, and control are also significant
dimensions of using email in this context. Email is a common
gateway for attackers to convince users to install malware [95]
and extract credentials [28]. Hence, spam and malware filtering
are common services offered by outsourced email platforms,
and usually a significant selling point in moving to cloud-based
email providers [26]. However, as Patrick Breyer, a member of
the European Parliament, recently noted this also means that
the operator gets in control of which emails are and which
are not delivered to users.1 Given the strict inbound rules of
major providers, which can lead to false positives [35, 61],
this means that universities relying on these services may not
only outsource their email service, but also the decision about
which emails reach their faculty and students.

B. Results

When looking at the results of our measurements, we find
that they align with our observations from Section IV. The
U.S., the U.K., the Netherlands, and the THE Top100 are again
the countries with the most frequent use of cloud-based email
providers, reaching 96 (83.48%) for the U.K., 81 (81.00%)
for the THE Top100, and 13 (68.42%) for the Netherlands in
December 2020. In the U.S., a total of five companies control
email services for 242 (93.07%) of all R1 and R2 universities
in 2020. Again, Germany and France have a lower use of cloud
resources, with neither of those countries exceeding 25% in
December 2020 (11 (13.58%) for Germany and 11 (14.86%)
for France). Both Austria and Switzerland see a higher adoption
of cloud-based email services than Germany and France among
universities, with 6 (42.86%) for Switzerland, and 13 (38.24%)
for Austria in December 2020, with both of them staying well
A. Methodology
below 50% adoption. We see a slight upward trend in cloud
To identify whether universities use a cloud-based mail email service adoption in the U.S. and the THE Top100, and
service, we investigate their MX records. Note, that we only a notable increase in the U.K. (from 67 (58.26%) in January
measure who handles inbound email for a university. Their 2015 to 89 (77.39%) in December 2020). For the remaining
user mail access and mail storage may be handled on-site or countries, adoption of cloud email services seems to stagnate
via another cloud-based solution. Still, this means that all mail over the measurement period.
The two most prominent operators are Google, most likely
to this institution flows via the identified service operator.
To identify the used operators, we first check if, for any of the with their classroom product—a work-suite containing email,
second-level domains (SLDs) of a university (see Appendix A- document handling and integration with Chrome Books—
H) any of the MXrecords points to a domain associated with a as well as Microsoft with their cloud-hosted Exchange/Ofcloud-based email provider (see Table II). If we do not find an fice365/Teams product. Other cloud providers only play a
MX record for any of the SLDs, we decent further down the DNS notable role in the U.K., where they occupy around 17.39%
tree. This happens, for example, if an institution has dedicated of the market in December 2020. The most prominent smaller
sub-domains for email, similar to using staff.example.com. cloud providers here are FireEye and Trend Micro. Furthermore,
and students.example.com. Only if the SLD does not have an we find that Proofpoint as a product is most prominent in the
MX record, we consider the university as using a cloud provider U.S. and major institutions in the THE Top100, where we
if at least one of their third-level domains’ MX records matches see the service being used by 38 (14.61%) and 17 (17.00%)
institutions in December 2020 respectively. We also see a slow
a known cloud provider.
In addition, we also check whether a university uses move into the Dutch market by this company, where between
Proofpoint’s email security solution. Contrary to the cloud September 2019 and December 2020 the first two organizations
products, e.g., from Cisco, Proofpoint uses a dual approach, deployed the product.
where they place an appliance on-site, which pre-inspects
VI. Cloud-Based Learning Management Systems
emails. Attachments and links included in emails are then
In this section, we take a look at universities’ use of cloudanalyzed in Proofpoint’s cloud infrastructure. We indirectly
measure this by evaluating universities’ DMARC [50] records. based Learning Management Systems (LMS). Learning management systems are—as most academics should be familiar
1“Incredible: Microsoft decides which e-mail Members of the European with—online tools that allow lecturers to manage and automate
Parliament get to read in their inbox. It’s called Outlook spam filter and cannot
be disabled.”, Patrick Breyer, MEP, https://twitter.com/echo_pbreyer/status/ courses, reaching from course registration, via providing course
1363854606132858882 (February, 22, 2021)
contents, to assessment and examination of enrolled students.

6

Figure 3: Overview of cloud-hosted Learning Management Systems used by universities from January 2015 to December 2020.

As such, these systems provide some of the core functionality
of what a university does. It also means that these systems
hold some of the most sensitive data a university stores on
their students: Grades, course deliverables, and overall study
performance.
Putting these systems into cloud infrastructure potentially
provides access to this confidential data to unauthorized
entities, e.g., via the cloud act [76]. At the same time, it
also prevents students from effectively consenting to their
data being processed by cloud companies, as an opt-out is
only possible by not studying at a university using one of
these products. Furthermore, these systems are also especially
susceptible if a cloud provider decides to enforce their own
policies and principles. If, for example, a U.S.-based LMS
provider decides to enforce U.S. sanctions against citizens of
specific countries for an LMS, including customers outside
the U.S., it can effectively dictate which students a university
enrolls by controlling the ‘means of study.’ Given the precedent
of GitHub [1] restricting accounts for developers located in
Crimea, Cuba, Iran, North Korea, and Syria to comply with
U.S. trade sanctions this is by far no hypothetical scenario.

their services by having a name in a university’s zone
pointing a CNAME to their own infrastructure. For example:
canvas.example.com. IN CNAME example-com.instructure.com.

Hence, to measure whether a university uses one of these LMS,
we have to check whether we find a CNAME with a target that
is below one of the domains used by the above cloud LMS.
Naturally, we do not see whether and which on-site LMS, like
Moodle, a university uses, or if it uses—for example—a locally
hosted version of Blackboard.
B. Results

We find that cloud-hosted LMS are mostly relevant in the
U.S., the U.K., and the Netherlands. We find no instances
of cloud-hosted LMS in Germany, France, and Austria. In
Switzerland, we only find a single Canvas instance at the
University of St. Gallen, which has been in operation since
January 2019. We revisit the question what universities in these
countries are then using instead in Section VIII. For the THE
Top100, we find that the use of cloud-hosted LMS is mostly
related to U.S. universities. In fact, 35 of the 56 universities
in the THE Top100 that use a cloud-based LMS in December
2020 are U.S. universities, while U.S. universities only make
A. Methodology
up 40 universities in the THE Top100. The remaining 22
In our measurements we focus on the four largest institutions using cloud-based LMS in the THE Top100 are
providers of cloud-based LMS: Brightspace (Desire2Learn, from the Netherlands (6), the U.K. (5), Canada and Australia
brightspace.com), Courseleaf (courseleaf.com), Blackboard (3 each), Hong Kong (2), Singapore, and Sweden (1 each).
(blackboard.com), and, Canvas (Instructure, instructure.com). Courseleaf seems to be exclusively catering to the U.S. market,
What these tools have in common is that they provision as we find no instances outside of the U.S..

7

Table III: Overview of permutations on university domain names checked
below zoom.us, webex.com, and adobeconnect.com for the example of Zoom.

For all four groups which we find to be using cloud-based
LMS, we find a steady growth over time between January
2015 to December 2020: in the U.S. from 87 (33.46%) to 174
(66.92%), in the U.K. from 15 (13.04%) to 57 (49.57%), in
the Netherlands from 5 (26.32%) to 12 (63.16%), and in the
THE Top100 from 24 (24.00%) to 56 (56.00%).
Note that the use of LMS ties in with our observations in
Section IV. While the cloud instances of Blackboard are hosted
on Microsoft Azure, those for Brightspace, Courseleaf, and
Instructure are located in Amazon EC2.

Input

Permutation

Resulting Service Domain

example.com

Second Level
Dot Replacement
SLD + -live

example.zoom.us
example-com.zoom.us
example-live.zoom.us

sub-domain does not use a university’s SSO, but the university
itself links to that Zoom domain in its documentation.
To establish if a university uses SfB, we check for required DNS entries when operating SfB [60], specifically
VII. Zoom et al.
lyncdiscover.example.com, with example.com being replaced
Tools for video chatting and VoIP solutions have already car- by a university’s domain. Note that this overlaps with the prior
ried longstanding significance in professional communications, product name of SfB, Microsoft Lync.
Finally, we check for universities which may be using
especially in the form of Skype-for-Business (SfB). However,
Microsoft
Teams. Unlike SfB, Microsoft Teams does not require
with the emergence of COVID-19, these tools—especially
special
DNS
entries that make its use uniquely identifiable [59],
Zoom—have gained significant public attention, with academic
even
though
using
the voice components of Teams is common,
core activities—teaching, research meetings, and conferences—
which
requires
the
same DNS entries as SfB [60]. However, to
heavily relying on these tools. In fact, the discussion around
be
able
to
use
Microsoft
Teams, an operator still has to set a
the reliance of universities and education on commercial
Microsoft
cloud
verification
token of the form MS=ms12345678.
infrastructure often frames this as the ‘zoomification’ of
Even
though
the
presence
of
this record does not mean a site
education. Also, as mentioned in Section I, Zoom—as one of
does
use
Microsoft
Teams—it
may be using a cloud-hosted
the more prominent video chat platforms—has been a source
Microsoft
Exchange
instance
or
Office365 as well—we also
of incidents around the issue of academic freedom [67].
count the number of sites using this token and report the
Hence, in this section, we review universities’ reliance on
number of additional universities that may be exclusively using
centralized/cloud-hosted video chat solutions. Following our
Microsoft Teams, i.e., that do not use any of the other tools
reflection on universities’ IT setups in Section II, we look
(SfB, Zoom, WebEx, Adobe Connect).
at traditionally more business-focused toolchains—Skype-forBusiness, Cisco WebEx, and Adobe Connect—but also the B. Results
(relative) newcomer Zoom. Finally, we also estimate the use of
Taking a macroscopic look at our data, we again see a similar
Microsoft Teams, however, due to the way it is implemented, segmentation as with the previous cases of general cloud usage,
we are limited to an upper-bound estimate in this case.
email, and cloud-based LMS, see Figure 4. We see a heavy
adoption of SfB (from 2015 to 2020) in the Netherlands (one
with a large increase mid-2015 to 11 (57.89%)), the U.S. (110
To identify universities’ use of centralized video chat (42.31%) to 176 (67.69%)), the U.K. (9 (7.83%) to 73 (64.48%))
solutions, we follow three different approaches, based on and the THE Top100 (30 (30.00%) to 67 (67.00%)). At the
the platform we are looking at. For Zoom (zoom.us), Cisco same time we see close to no SfB instances in France, and
WebEx (webex.com), and Adobe Connect (adobeconnect.com), limited adoption in the remaining countries with 5 (35.71%)
we follow the naming scheme of these services for clients to in Switzerland, 11 (32.35%) in Austria, and 25 (30.86%) in
match universities to names under these domains. Specifically, Germany. Note that in Germany we observed an increase of 20
we check if we find a RR under these services’ domains that institutions using SfB between November and December 2020,
starts with (1) the second-level domain of a university, (2) most likely due to the introduction of Microsoft Teams, which
the full domain name of a university (second-level + top-level partially uses DNS entries overlapping with those for SfB.
domain) with dots replaced by hyphens, or (3) the second-level We conjecture that this overall picture connects to different
domain of a university appended with -live (see Table III). If operational paradigms between universities in these two clusters,
we find a corresponding name lookup in our dataset during a also in terms of administrative centralization (see Section II),
month, we consider a university as using this service during that and we revisit this point in our discussion in Section VIII.
month. In addition, we also consider a university as using Zoom
When we look at the adoption of the other three video chat
if we observe a TXT record that starts with ZOOM_verify, i.e., a platforms, we find an interesting picture, also in relation to the
Zoom domain verification token. To get an indication of the COVID-19 pandemic. In the U.S., we find that the adoption
reliability of this approach, we manually verified all Zoom links of Zoom and—to a slightly lower extent—WebEx has been an
we encountered via the page branding and used Single-Sign- ongoing process that already started back in 2016 leading to
On (SSO) system. Among the 363 Zoom links we identified, 205 (78.88%) U.S. universities using Zoom and 85 (32.68%)
12 (3.31%) were incorrectly attributed to an organization or using WebEx in December 2020. However, in comparison
could not be verified through other channels, e.g., if a Zoom to December 2019 these numbers only rose by 61 from 144
A. Methodology

8

Figure 4: Overview of video chat solutions used by universities between January 2015 and December 2020.

for Zoom and by 17 from 68 for WebEx, meaning that the
pandemic effect is not as large as in other countries, mostly
due to the already high adoption of Zoom in the U.S.. Adobe
Connect, in general, has a market share similar to WebEx,
with 64 (25.00%) of U.S. universities using it in December
2020. We also note that U.S. universities seem to generally be
using a multitude of video chat solutions, with 103 (39.62%)
using two, 75 (28.85%) three, and 11 (4.23%) all four of the
surveyed tools in December 2020.

is also—contrary to other European countries where we also
observe an increase in WebEx use—highly focused on Zoom.
In the end, we find that in December 2020 Zoom/WebEx
use in German universities is at 41 (50.61%)/44 (54.32%),
in the U.K. 44 (38.26%)/20 (17.39%), in the Netherlands 10
(52.63%)/2 (10.52%), in Austria 13 (38.24%)/11 (32.35%),
in Switzerland 11 (78.86%)/5 (35.71%), and in France 26
(35.14%)/10 (13.52%).
Looking at the possible upper bound for universities using
Microsoft Teams without using the SfB/voice and video chat
component, we find that this number is close to zero for the
U.S. (5/1.92%), Germany (1/1.23%), and Switzerland (0) in
December 2020. In the U.K. (7/6.09%), the THE Top100
(9/9.00%), Austria (3/8.82%), and the Netherlands (2/10.53%)
we see a modest number of additional institutions that might
be using Microsoft Teams. France is the only country where
we find a comparatively large amount of potential Microsoft
Teams users who do not use any of the other solutions of SfB,
with 14 (18.91%) institutions in December 2020. However, this
difference is relatively static over the past years, and likely
not related to an increase in Microsoft Teams adoption by
universities not already using Microsoft cloud services (or
providing access to Microsoft software licenses to users from
their domain) in the beginning of 2020.

This effect can be—again—found to a similar extent in the
THE Top100. Please note that only 40 universities in the THE
Top100 are U.S. universities. Here, we also see a continuous
adoption of Zoom starting in 2016, leading up to 72 (72.00%)
institutions using Zoom in December 2020. We also observe
an apparent lack of a significant pandemic effect, and a large
diversity of employed tools across universities, with 35 using
two, 30 three, and 4 all of the surveyed video chat solutions.
With the remaining countries, we do see a pandemic effect,
especially in terms of Zoom adoption. While Zoom played
essentially no role in European universities before February
2020, its adoption quickly increased with the sudden onset of
remote teaching. Interesting observations here are that most
European universities are much more discrete in their choice
of video teaching platform—either Zoom or WebEx, and that
the onset of these tools was sudden, i.e., within a month in
the beginning of 2020. The only remarkable outlier here is
France, which shows a comparatively slow increase, which

VIII. Discussion
In this section, we discuss the implications of our findings
and provide additional context and recommendations.

9

check for bbb, bigbluebutton, scalelite (the load balancer
component of BigBlueButton), and greenlight (a common
BigBlueButton frontend).
We find that 75.31% (61) of universities in Germany have
Moodle or Stud.IP related names vs. 35.77% (93) in the U.S.
for Moodle alone, see Figure 5. Similarly, we find that 54
(66.67%) universities in Germany have BigBlueButton related
names under their domain, while this is the case for less than
10% in the U.S., see Figure 6. We see a clear pandemic effect
for the adoption of BigBlueButton in Germany, starting in
February 2020.
Please note that our matching is fuzzy, as we might overmatch on hostnames that contain these product names without
running the associated service, while we may also undermatch
when universities host these tools under different names. For
example, in Germany, we often found BigBlueButton systems
being called konferenz, the German word for conference,
explaining the difference between our measured 66.67% and
the 90% reported in the media [21].
We tie the higher share of self-hosting in German universities
to multiple factors:
• Strong commitment to academic freedom and selfgovernance [30, 75] rooted in the events of the ’68 student
revolution [46].

Figure 5: Share of universities with at least one name containing ‘moodle’ or
‘studip’ for Germany and the U.S. (January 2015 to December 2020).

•

Historic prevalence of university datacenters aligned with
research and education [52, 85].

•

Several institutions showing strong leadership in terms
of self-sovereign learning environments, as for example
the University of Osnabrück with the Center Virtuos [47],
which has also significantly contributed to Stud.IP and—
since the onset of the pandemic—BigBlueButton opensource development.

•

A societal understanding of universities as public infrastructures [7].

Figure 6: Share of universities with at least one BigBlueButton related DNS
entry for Germany and the U.S. (January 2015 to December 2020).

A. Cloud Adoption in Europe: The German Case

The differences we observe in Section IV to Section VII beg
• A collaborative and active operators community at German
the question what digital learning tools universities use instead
universities supported by the DFN (German Research Netof cloud products, e.g., in Germany. Hence, we look at the
work),
leading to a strong exchange about self-sovereign
use of common self-hosted alternatives for LMS (Moodle [14]
educational
tooling [34].
and Stud.IP [5, 38]) and video chats (BigBlueButton [9]) in
Germany, which are reportedly deployed in 90% of higher
These factors may help explain the significant difference
education institutions [21]. Self-hosted tools may—by default— between Germany and, other countries. However, we also find
not be necessarily more privacy preserving than offerings of an uptick in cloud use in Germany in December 2020. This
large cloud providers. However, control over data nevertheless may indicate that, with the COVID-19, universities are starting
remains with the university hosting them, and they are able to to shift away from this paradigm (not just due to the sudden
audit and—if necessary—reconfigure and patch these tools to introduction of cloud-based remote teaching tools), similar to
conform to privacy regulations and requirements. This could, the slow introduction of Zoom in France (see Section VII),
for example, be seen with BigBlueButton, where the user group which—on a national level—also implemented a strict opearound German universities made significant contributions source software favoring policy [2].
towards the privacy preserving operation of BigBlueButton
once privacy limitations in its design became apparent [8, 41]. B. Cloud Infrastructures and Power
To estimate self-hosted LMS and BigBlueButton use in
The last decade has seen big tech companies, and especially
Germany and the U.S., we count the number of universities that Amazon and Microsoft, honing in on cloud infrastructures as
either have Moodle/Stud.IP or BigBlueButton related names an alternative source of growth to the somewhat saturated adunder their domain. For Moodle and Stud.IP, these are names based business [31, 90]. Growth for these new markets relies on
containing either moodle or studip. For BigBlueButton we two effects: Realizing the value proposition of reducing costs

10

in terms of Capital Expenses (CapEx) and local Operational
Expenses (OpEx) for lower OpEx paid in service charges
to a cloud provider, and—for individual cloud providers—
by attaining a market position that makes them ‘the default’
platform to be used [96].
The increasing dependency of big tech on cloud computing
for their financial success means that the companies use
political, economic and technical resources to ensure that the
clouds are the ’default’ infrastructure in as many domains as
possible. Their political force is brought to bare using international initiatives, e.g., New Pedagogies for Deep Learning
is a global partnership between the OECD, Gates Foundation,
Pearson and Microsoft [104]; government partnerships, e.g.,
the U.K. government has incentivised schools to opt for
platforms that are both free to use and bundled up with
government-funded technical assistance [104]; and lobbying
efforts [65]. Cloud providers use economic mechanisms for
the move to the cloud by mounting the benefits of economies
of scale, financing and physically migrating data to the cloud,
and by providing free services that can also bypass regular
procurement rules. Through their economic incentives, these
companies can capture educational IT either by providing
storage, compute, communication platforms, or by becoming
the default infrastructure for smaller EdTech companies [45].

C. Cloud Use vs. Academic Freedom
The increasing dependence of universities on cloud platforms
for teaching, communication, and research that we observed
has serious implications in terms of academic freedom. If
education and research depend on an external cloud service,
researchers may become bound to comply with requirements
set by these organizations. We could recently observe Google’s
handling of Timnit Gebru’s involvement in a paper not ‘deemed
worthy for publication’ by the company [66], as well with other
instances of Google telling its researchers to put a positive
spin on ’sensitive topics,’2 or remove references to Google
products [27]. One might argue that this concerns employees of
Google, but it also begs the question of whether cloud operators
could leverage their power over universities to influence critical
research in a similar way. In fact, Google has already been in the
spotlight for sponsoring favorable research that is in line with
its business and policy interests [64], both in the U.S. [17], and
Europe [18].3 In the field of educational technology research
particularly, Mirrlees and Alvi [62] observed a lack of critical
research, likely because of “...little incentive to ’bite the hand
that feeds”’ [78].
It may certainly be conceivable that a major cloud provider
simply indicates that a continued business relation with a
university may not be desirable in case the institution and its
researchers continue to voice positions critical of that cloud
provider. That institution would then face the dilemma of either
‘aligning’ their researchers, or—suddenly—having to migrate
essential services like their LMS, email, or (currently essential)
remote teaching setup away from its current provider. Such a
migration could easily cost millions while severely interrupting
research and teaching. And, hypotheticals aside, this did already
occur twice with Zoom [67].
Similar cases can be made for cloud operators enforcing
their business rules in terms of, e.g., global sanctions. A case
similar to that of GitHub [1] may effectively put universities
in a position where they either bar their Iranian (or any
other potentially sanctioned country) students from attending
the university, or at least from using their digital learning
environment. Thereby, the centralization of power we currently
observe may indeed inadvertently threaten core functions of
universities.
The ultimate question we have to ask here as academics is
not whether cloud operators would use these powers. Instead,
we have to ask ourselves if we are willing to risk that they
could do this.

The trend of big tech monopolies shifting from “being
mere owners of information, ... to becoming owners of the
infrastructures of society” [81] has prompted an ongoing public
discussion about the implications of this ’platform capitalism’
on different aspects of society [13, 22, 81], yet without zooming
in on its implications on higher education. At first sight, the
political economic advantages put forth by cloud companies
make good fellows with the economized management of
universities. However, this also comes with power shifts.
Mirrlees and Alvi [62] argue that universities focus on cutting
costs, while allowing the big five (Apple, Alphabet/Google,
Amazon, Microsoft, Facebook) and a growing ecosystem of
start-ups, e.g., in the area of MOOCs, to compete with—
and ultimately replace—public education. Most universities
do not have the economic or political power to insert their own
values and interests in such a market, unless they coordinate
on these issues. The international initiatives these companies
support make up informal policy networks that increasingly
dominate educational policy [91]. Aside from potential impact
on democratic societies and educational values, these networks
are likely to promote certain forms of education, e.g., the D. Privacy and Academia
individualised pursuit of mastery’ enacted primarily through
The move to the cloud raises a number of concerns with
adaptive software, in favor of education that, for example, respect to the application of privacy by design or compliance.
promotes interpersonal dialogue and relations with others [104]. Past studies have shown that educational institutions do not
In the bigger scheme of things, there are also concerns about
’platform imperialism:’ US-based companies providing the
2Sensitive topics include the oil industry, China, Iran, Israel, COVID-19,
global digital infrastructure could be used as a tool for ‘soft home security, insurance, location data, religion, self-driving vehicles, telecoms
power’ and economic control that influences global norms and and systems that recommend or personalize web content. [27]
3We note that the reports published as part of the Google Transparency
values of digital cultures [43], including control over curriculum Project [17, 18] by the Campaign for Accountability have also drawn criticism
and research activities.
as they seem to be largely funded by Google’s competitor Oracle [74].

11

fare well in making transparent the data collection and we argue that SfB adoption can serve as a proxy to assess the
processing practices of cloud providers to their faculty, staff general operational paradigm of a university, i.e., if it is run
and students [44, 53, 56]. This can, for example, happen more like an enterprise network or a university network.
when a university implements a blanket privacy policy for
This mechanic of administrative alignment of IT infrasall digital tooling, including all cloud services. Depending on tructures with administration leading to centralization and
the diversity of data collection and processing these services organizations behaving in a similar way is also a well
entail, privacy policies may become very generic, potentially documented effect in the field of Information Systems (IS).
falling short of legal transparency requirements [72]. It may DiMaggio and Powell [29] discuss how bureaucratization—
also not be clear to the university what data is going to the via coercive, memetic, and normative processes—leads to a
cloud. Universities may evaluate and make data agreements structural alignment of organizations within a market, see also
with cloud providers, but ensuring these are effective can be a Scott for a more recent comprehensive reflection on these
challenge. Aside from having vague privacy policies [49], cloud theories [77]. This institutional perspective was transferred
services come with the promise of being plug-and-play, and to the introduction of IT systems and their connection to
recursively, they leverage the benefit of service architectures, organizational change by Avgerou [6]. To synthesize, the
and often bundle dozens of third parties [36]. As a result, findings from IS indicate an effect in organizations where
even cloud service providers may fail to make their data flows administrative alignment leads to IT transformation as a goal
transparent. The promise of plug-and-play also means that in in itself, lacking “adequate legitimacy” [6], without any
university IT departments are often not given the time or the “contribution to the process of organizational change.” [6]
resources to evaluate these services. Even when they generate
Following SfB as a proxy, we conjecture that we observe an
privacy evaluations, these happen against the backdrop of digital increased adoption of cloud technology for countries in which
branding efforts of the university and the partnerships between the university system has seen a stronger commoditization—
public institutions and cloud providers [104], which may trump the U.S., the U.K., the Netherlands, and THE Top100—as
privacy concerns.
also discussed by Bosetti and Walker [12]. In these countries,
In addition, when students, faculty and administrators ac- organizational alignment lead to a situation where academic
cess these services, they are not asked for explicit consent. leaders governing a body of scholars have been replaced by
Universities can, for example in the case of GDPR [94], use administrators and business managers who oversee university
legitimate interest or performance of a contract to justify all operations. These new managers have imported and integrated
the data flows that come with cloud services. This means that enterprise tools and culture into the heart of public education
students and faculty may not have a (meaningful) option to institutions, leading towards greater cloud adoption.
opt-out of these services. When there is an opt-out process,
people may be incentivized not to use them, e.g., reserving F. Recommendations for Decentralization
them for “severe cases” and with time and capacity burdens
Following our discussion of the impact of cloud usage
for faculty and staff. When incentive structures are set up by- among universities and exploration of the Germany case
design and by-policy to push people onto cloud infrastructures, study, we identified four recommendations for researchers and
it is hard to speak of choice. Especially when their resources universities to counteract these developments and preserve
are limited, public education institutions end up leveraging academic freedom. Specifically, these are:
their structures to on-board students, faculty, and staff as cloud
• Invest Into Self-Hosted Open-Source Tools: Tools to
service consumers [53].
enable self-sovereign IT operations for universities exist.
If universities continue to outsource core functions to cloud
By favoring Open Source during procurement [21] and
platforms, students will no longer have a choice on whether
contributing to their development, universities can fill their
they want to expose some of their most private information—
role as public infrastructures.
their academic development during their most formative years—
to these major cloud providers. Considering that these cloud
• Local Capacity Building: Using self-hosted tools heavservices are economically under pressure to monetize either the
ily relies on local capacity in terms of resources and
data they collect (e.g., by creating a recruiting business [86]),
skilled system operations departments within universities.
or the infrastructural dependency they create, the practices
Hence, universities should build and sustain their local IT
that are being established here are concerning. Universities
departments.
may have to consider whether it is ethical or legal to create
• Organize: In the German case we saw the importance
an environment where informed consent to data collection is,
of collaboration (DFN) and universities investing into
essentially, no longer possible.
open-source tools to provide these to other universities
with
a smaller infrastructure focus (Virtuos). This way,
E. Universities as Enterprise Networks
universities
can attain scale-effects they are hoping to
In Section VII we observe a correlation between the early
leverage
by
migrating
to public clouds.
adoption of SfB and universities’ general adoption of cloud
platforms. Revisiting Section II, we noted that tools like SfB
would be expected for centralized enterprise IT setups. Hence,

12

•

Align IT Operations with Core Functions: By aligning
IT operations closer with their core functions, i.e., teaching

and research, universities can refocus their IT from a
purely supportive function to an element in which they
demonstrate leadership [47].
Especially the last point is crucial, as it begs the question what
role universities want to play in the development of our digital
society: Do they want to lead, or follow.
IX. Limitations
Here we list the limitations of our work. The Farsight SIE
dataset may not contain all cloud related names, if these are not
queried from a client behind a sensor. While those instances of
cloud hosting we identify are certainly there, more universities
may be using major cloud providers without it being recorded
in the dataset. Similarly, Farsight SIE only collects DNS cache
misses [32]. Hence, we cannot provide information on the
popularity of the names we observe. Furthermore, the number
of universities among the surveyed countries differs (14 in
Switzerland, 260 in the U.S.). This may amplify the effect of
individual institutions’ choices in smaller countries. Our work
relies, in several places, on heuristics, e.g., in the identification
of Zoom/WebEx/Adobe Connect domains in Section VII, the
use of Proofpoint’s email security system, and the estimation of
Moodle, Stud.IP, and BigBlueButton instances in Section VIII.
To address this, we manually verified a set of our heuristics,
e.g., for Zoom in Section VII finding no significant error, and
outline the impact of these limitations in the corresponding
sections.
Given the large effect sizes we observe, the general alignment
of ratio changes between smaller and larger countries, our
additional spot-checks, and our generally good coverage of
domain names, we are confident that our results paint an
accurate picture of universities’ cloud use since January 2015.
X. Related Work
In this section, we discuss related work on measuring
cloud infrastructures and usage, the impact of the COVID19 pandemic on the Internet, and discusses the implications of
public cloud infrastructure in the educational sector.
A. Cloud Infrastructure Measurements
Similar to us, Borgolte et al. [11] also use the Farsight SIE
dataset to identify domains pointing at cloud infrastructure.
Jacquemart et al. [42] performed their own active DNS
measurements on the most popular domains according to
Alexa to measure the adoption of cloud services from 2013–
2018. Furthermore, Portier et al. [68] and van der Toorn et
al. [89] identify cloud service usage via TXT records. Streibelt
et al. [82] and Calder et al. [16] use the EDNS0 extension to
map cloud infrastructure. Henze et al. [39] focused on the
adoption of cloud-based email services and identified them
based on email headers on a dataset collected from mailing lists,
spam traps, and volunteer users. As we essentially conduct
a form of targeted asset discovery using a passive dataset,
a comprehensive picture of recent related work can also be
obtained from Vermeer et al.’s taxonomy of asset discovery
techniques [92].

13

B. COVID-19 and the Internet
With the emergence of COVID-19, it became apparent that
the continued lock-down situation would have an extended
effect on the Internet. As such, several researchers studied
this effect, including the increased utilization of cloud based
services. Feldmann et al. [33] studied the impact of COVID19 through the lens of a major Internet Exchange Point from
a European perspective, while Liu et al. [54] performed a
similar study on changes in network traffic patterns in the U.S..
Boettger et al. [10] provide a similar perspective from the
vantage point of the Facebook social network. Along the same
lines, Lutu et al. [55] investigate the impact of COVID-19 on
mobile network traffic.
C. Educational Technology in the Cloud
Cohney et al. [24] perform a study into the privacy implications of virtual classroom technology. Contrary to us,
they root their evaluation of technology use in a self-reported
study among 49 educators in U.S. universities, obtaining
results similar to our Internet measurement data. In addition, they also analyze privacy policies of common virtual
classroom tools. Similar to us, Komljenovic [48] theoretically
analyzes the implications of the progressing centralization and
platformization of educational technology, particularly noting
the de-institutionalization of public education accelerated by
centralized platforms. Zeide and Nissenbaum [105] analyze—
before the COVID-19 pandemic—learner privacy in MOOCs
and virtual education, finding it to often violate established
norms in terms of privacy and education, supporting our
assessment that the ‘zoomification’ of education is a longstanding process predating the COVID-19 pandemic. Besides
these major related publications, several small-scale evaluations
often limited to specific tools (usually Zoom) were undertaken
during the last year. For brevity, we refer to the summary of
Cohney et al. [24].
XI. Conclusion
In this paper, we investigated the reliance of universities
in seven countries and in institutions listed in the Times
Higher Education Top100 on cloud infrastructure. We found
that the continuous move to cloud infrastructures has been an
ongoing process for the past several years, and—apart from
video lecturing tools—not heavily influenced by the COVID-19
pandemic. Our results also highlight that university systems
highly differ in their susceptibility to migrate to the cloud. We
conjecture that this ties in with a multitude of factors, including
the academic and administrative culture, and the history of
university IT in the corresponding countries. Furthermore, we
discuss the potential impact of this progressing development
on the very essence of academic freedom.
In the end, as academics, we have to ask ourselves: Now
that we know, do we want this? If we are content with this
development, we also have to ask whether we can live with
the broader implications we outline in Section VIII. If not,
we have to find ways to counteract these developments, by
building and funding decentralized capabilities for independent
research and teaching infrastructure, learning from—certainly
not perfect—cases like Germany.

Acknowledgments
This work has been supported by the European Commission
through the H2020 program in project CyberSecurity4Europe
(Grant No. #830929). Our work was enabled by the use of
Slack (hosted on Amazon EC2), Overleaf (hosted on Google
cloud infrastructure), GitHub (owned and hosted by Microsoft),
and a self-hosted BigBlueButton instance. We thank Farsight
Security, Inc. for providing access to the Farsight Security
Information Exchange’s passive DNS data feed. Without this
data, the project would not have been possible. Any opinions,
findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in
this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of their host institutions, Farsight Security,
Inc., or those of the European Commission.
References
[1] 1995parham. A Message to GitHub. 1, 2019. url: https://github.com/
1995parham/github-do-not-ban-us (visited on 03/21/2021).
[2] Adrian Offerman. Issues in open source procurement in the European
public sector II. 13, 2012. url: https://joinup.ec.europa.eu/collec
tion/open- source- observatory- osor/document/issues- open- sourceprocurement-european-public-sector-ii (visited on 12/13/2020).
[3] Aftab Siddiqui. MIT Goes on IPv4 Selling Spree. 31, 2017. url:
https://www.internetsociety.org/blog/2017/05/mit- goes- on- ipv4selling-spree/ (visited on 03/21/2021).
[4] Mark Allman and Vern Paxson. “Issues and Etiquette Concerning Use
of Shared Measurement Data”. In: Proceedings of the 7th Internet
Measurement Conference (IMC). 2007.
[5] Hans-Jürgen Appelrath, Dietrich Boles, Norbert Kleinefeld, Ivan
Marcos, Dennis Reil, Matthias Runge, Markus Schmees, and Stefan
Willer. “Einsatz des Open-Source-Lernmanagementsystems Stud. IP
zur Unterstützung der Präsenzlehre der Universität Oldenburg”. In:
Beiträge der 36. Jahrestagung der Gesellschaft für Informatik eV (GI)
(2006).
[6] Chrisanthi Avgerou. “IT and Organizational Change: An Institutionalist
Perspective”. In: Information Technology & People 13.4 (2000).
[7] Marian Beise and Harald Stahl. “Public Research and Industrial
Innovations in Germany”. In: Research Policy 28.4 (1999).
[8] BigBlueButton. BigBlueButton Privacy Documentation. url: https:
//docs.bigbluebutton.org/admin/privacy.html (visited on 03/21/2021).
[9] BigBlueButton. Engage Your Online Students. url: https://bigbluebutt
on.org/ (visited on 03/21/2021).
[10] Timm Boettger, Ghida Ibrahim, and Ben Vallis. “How the Internet
reacted to Covid-19: A perspective from Facebook’s Edge Network”.
In: Proceedings of the 20th Internet Measurement Conference (IMC).
2020.
[11] Kevin Borgolte, Tobias Fiebig, Shuang Hao, Christopher Kruegel,
and Giovanni Vigna. “Cloud Strife: Mitigating the Security Risks of
Domain-Validated Certificates”. In: Proceedings of the 25th Network
and Distributed System Security Symposium (NDSS). 2018.
[12] Lynn Bosetti and Keith Walker. “Perspectives of UK Vice-Chancellors
on Leading Universities in a Knowledge-Based Economy”. In: Higher
Education Quarterly 64.1 (2010).
[13] Ingrid Brodnig. Übermacht im Netz. Warum wir für ein gerechtes
Internet kämpfen müssen. Brandstätter, 2019. isbn: 978-3710603662.
[14] Alex Büchner. Moodle 3 Administration. Packt Publishing Ltd., 2016.
isbn: 978-1783289714.
[15] Mark Burgess and Karst Koymans. “Master Education Programmes
in Network and System Administration”. In: Proceedings of the 21st
USENIX Large Installation System Administration Conference (LISA).
2007.
[16] Matt Calder, Xun Fan, Zi Hu, Ethan Katz-Bassett, John Heidemann,
and Ramesh Govindan. “Mapping the Expansion of Google’s Serving
Infrastructure”. In: Proceedings of the 13th Internet Measurement
Conference (IMC). 2013.

14

[17] Campaign for Accountability. Google Academics Inc. 11, 2017. url:
https://www.techtransparencyproject.org/articles/google-academicsinc (visited on 04/13/2021).
[18] Campaign for Accountability. Google’s Academic Influence in Europe.
15, 2018. url: https : / / www . techtransparencyproject . org / articles /
googles-academic-influence-in-europe (visited on 04/13/2021).
[19] Carnegie Classification of Institutions of Higher Education. R1 Doctoral
Universities. url: https://carnegieclassifications.iu.edu/lookup/srp.php?
clq=%7B%22basic2005_ids%22%3A%2215%22%7D (visited on
04/06/2021).
[20] Carnegie Classification of Institutions of Higher Education. R2 Doctoral
Universities. url: https://carnegieclassifications.iu.edu/lookup/srp.php?
clq=%7B%22basic2005_ids%22%3A%2216%22%7D (visited on
04/06/2021).
[21] Christian Füller. Open-Source-Software an Universitäten: Angst vor
Microsoft. 5, 2020. url: https://taz.de/Open- Source- Software- anUniversitaeten/!5686650/ (visited on 06/05/2020).
[22] Wolfie Christl and Sarah Spiekermann. Networks of Control. A Report
on Corporate Surveillance, Digital Tracking, Big Data & Privacy.
Facultas, 2016. isbn: 978-3708914732.
[23] Simon Coghlan, Tim Miller, and Jeannie Paterson. “Good proctor or
“Big Brother”? AI Ethics and Online Exam Supervision Technologies”.
In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.07647 (2020).
[24] Shaanan Cohney, Ross Teixeira, Anne Kohlbrenner, Arvind Narayanan,
Mihir Kshirsagar, Yan Shvartzshnaider, and Madelyn Sanfilippo. “Virtual Classrooms and Real Harms”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.05867
(2020).
[25] Adrian Dabrowski, Georg Merzdovnik, Johanna Ullrich, Gerald
Sendera, and Edgar Weippl. “Measuring Cookies and Web Privacy in
a Post-GDPR World”. In: Proceedings of the 14th Passive and Active
Measurement Conference (PAM). 2019.
[26] Emmanuel Gbenga Dada, Joseph Stephen Bassi, Haruna Chiroma,
Adebayo Olusola Adetunmbi, Opeyemi Emmanuel Ajibuwa, et al.
“Machine Learning for E-mail Spam Filtering: Review, Techniques and
Trends”. In: Heliyon 5.6 (2019).
[27] Paresh Dave and Jeffrey Dastin. Google told its scientists to ’strike
a positive tone’ in AI research - documents. 23, 2020. url: https:
/ / www . reuters . com / article / us - alphabet - google - research - focus idUSKBN28X1CB (visited on 04/15/2021).
[28] Rachna Dhamĳa, J Doug Tygar, and Marti Hearst. “Why Phishing
Works”. In: Proceedings of the 2006 ACM SIGCHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI). 2006.
[29] Paul J. DiMaggio and Walter W. Powell. “The Iron Cage Revisited:
Institutional Isomorphism and Collective Rationality in Organizational
Fields”. In: American Sociological Review (1983).
[30] Michael Dobbins. “Einfluss der 68er-Studentenrevolte auf die politischen Strukturen deutscher Universitäten”. In: Forschung Frankfurt:
Das Wissenschaftsmagazin der Goethe-Universität 35.1 (2018).
[31] Markus Eurich, Andrea Giessmann, Tobias Mettler, and Katarina
Stanoevska-Slabeva. “Revenue Streams of Cloud-based Platforms:
Current State and Future Directions”. In: Proceedings of the 17th
Americas Conference on Information Systems (AMCIS). 2011.
[32] Farsight Inc. Farsight - Security Information Exchange (SIE). url:
https : / / www . farsightsecurity . com / solutions / security - information exchange/.
[33] Anja Feldmann, Oliver Gasser, Franziska Lichtblau, Enric Pujol,
Ingmar Poese, Christoph Dietzel, Daniel Wagner, Matthias Wichtlhuber, Juan Tapiador, Narseo Vallina-Rodriguez, Oliver Hohlfeld, and
Georgios Smaragdakis. “The Lockdown Effect: Implications of the
COVID-19 Pandemic on Internet Traffic”. In: Proceedings of the 20th
Internet Measurement Conference (IMC). 2020.
[34] Fred Dixon. BigBlueButton Road Map. 5, 2021. url: https://opencast.
beuth-hochschule.de/paella/ui/watch.html?id=0a8bf26f-732c-4250b989-6127c6a322a8 (visited on 03/21/2021).
[35] Google. Prevent mail to Gmail users from being blocked or sent to
spam. url: https://support.google.com/mail/answer/81126 (visited on
03/21/2021).
[36] Seda Gürses and Joris van Hoboken. “Privacy after the Agile Turn”.
In: The Cambridge Handbook of Consumer Privacy. Cambridge Law
Handbooks. Cambridge University Press, 2018.

[37] Georg Hager and Gerhard Wellein. Introduction to High Performance
Computing for Scientists and Engineers. CRC Press, 2010. isbn: 9781439811924.
[38] Kai-Christoph Hamborg, Melanie Brummerloh, Martin Gieseking, and
Jan Wegner. Befunde zur Akzeptanz des Lernmanagement-Systems Stud.
IP an der Universität Osnabrück. Tech. rep. Universität Osnabrück,
2014.
[39] Martin Henze, Mary Peyton Sanford, and Oliver Hohlfeld. “Veiled in
Clouds? Assessing the Prevalence of Cloud Computing in the Email
Landscape”. In: Proceedings of the 2017 Network Traffic Measurement
and Analysis Conference (TMA). 2017.
[40] Oliver Hohlfeld. “Poster: Operating a DNS-based Active Internet
Observatory”. In: Proceedings of the 2018 ACM SIGCOMM Conference
(SIGCOMM). 2018.
[41] ichdasich. [Privacy Issue] RAW recordings are created and stored,
even if the meeting isn’t recorded. 22, 2020. url: https://github.com/
bigbluebutton/bigbluebutton/issues/9202 (visited on 03/21/2021).
[42] Quentin Jacquemart, Clément Pigout, and Guillaume Urvoy-Keller.
“Inferring the Deployment of Top Domains over Public Clouds using
DNS Data”. In: Proceedings of the 2019 Network Traffic Measurement
and Analysis Conference (TMA). 2019.
[43] Dal Jong Jin. Digital Platforms, Imperialism and Political Culture.
Routledge, 2015. isbn: 978-1138097537.
[44] Kyle ML Jones, Andrew Asher, Abigail Goben, Michael R Perry,
Dorothea Salo, Kristin A Briney, and M Brooke Robertshaw. ““We’re
being tracked at all times”: Student perspectives of their privacy in
relation to learning analytics in higher education”. In: Journal of the
Association for Information Science and Technology 71.9 (2020).
[45] Peter Judge. Zoom makes multi-year commitment to AWS. 2, 2020.
url: https://www.datacenterdynamics.com/en/news/zoom- makesmulti-year-commitment-aws/ (visited on 04/14/2021).
[46] Martin Klimke. The Other Alliance: Student Protest in West Germany
and the United States in the Global Sixties. Princeton University Press,
2009. isbn: 978-0691152462.
[47] Andreas Knaden and Martin Gieseking. “Organisatorische Umsetzung
eines E-Learning-Konzepts einer Hochschule am Beispiel des Zentrums
virtUOS der Universität Osnabrück”. In: Digitaler Campus: Vom
Medienprojekt zur nachhaltigen Mediennutzung auf dem Digitalen
Campus. 2003.
[48] Janja Komljenovic. “The Rise of Education Rentiers: Digital Platforms,
Digital Data and Rents”. In: Learning, Media and Technology (2021).
[49] Anantaa Kotal, Karuna Pande Joshi, and Anupam Joshi. “ViCLOUD:
Measuring Vagueness in Cloud Service Privacy Policies and Terms of
Services”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE 13th International Conference
on Cloud Computing (CLOUD). 2020.
[50] Murray Kucherawy and Elizabeth Zwicky. Domain-based Message
Authentication, Reporting, and Conformance (DMARC). RFC 7489.
IETF, 2015. url: http://tools.ietf.org/rfc/rfc7489.txt.
[51] David Lawrence, Warren Kumari, and Puneet Sood. Serving Stale
Data to Improve DNS Resiliency. RFC 8767. IETF, 2020. url: http:
//tools.ietf.org/rfc/rfc8767.txt.
[52] Volker Leib and Raymund Werle. “Wissenschaftsnetze in Europa und
den USA: Die Rolle staatlicher Akteure bei ihrer Bereitstellung”. In:
Modell Internet? Entwicklungsperspektiven neuer Kommunikationsnetze
(1997).
[53] Maria Lindh and Jan Nolin. “Information We Collect: Surveillance
and Privacy in the Implementation of Google Apps for Education”. In:
European Educational Research Journal 15.6 (2016).
[54] Shinan Liu, Paul Schmitt, Francesco Bronzino, and Nick Feamster.
“Characterizing Service Provider Response to the COVID-19 Pandemic
in the United States”. In: Proceedings of the 16th Passive and Active
Measurement Conference (PAM). 2021.
[55] Andra Lutu, Diego Perino, Marcelo Bagnulo, Enrique Frias-Martinez,
and Javad Khangosstar. “A Characterization of the COVID-19 Pandemic Impact on a Mobile Network Operator Traffic”. In: Proceedings
of the 20th Internet Measurement Conference (IMC). 2020.
[56] Michael W. Marek and Stan Skrabut. “Privacy in Educational Use of
Social Media in the US”. In: International Journal on E-Learning
16.3 (2017).

15

[57] Mathew Finnegan. Zoom hit by investor lawsuit as security, privacy
concerns mount. 9, 2020. url: https: // www.computerworld .com/
article/3537193/zoom- hit- by- investor- lawsuit- as- security- privacyconcerns-mount.html (visited on 04/09/2020).
[58] Peter Mell and Tim Grance. NIST Special Publication 800-145: The
NIST Definition of Cloud Computing. Tech. rep. National Institute of
Standards and Technology (NIST), 2011.
[59] Microsoft. Add DNS records to connect your domain. url: https :
//docs.microsoft.com/en- us/microsoft- 365/admin/get- help- withdomains/create-dns-records-at-any-dns-hosting-provider (visited on
03/21/2021).
[60] Microsoft. DNS requirements for Skype for Business Server. url:
https : / / docs . microsoft . com / en - us / skypeforbusiness / plan - your deployment/network-requirements/dns (visited on 03/21/2021).
[61] Microsoft. Services for Senders and ISPs. url: https://sendersupport.
olc.protection.outlook.com/pm/services.aspx (visited on 03/21/2021).
[62] Tanner Mirrlees and Shahid Alvi. EdTech Inc: Selling, Automating
and Globalizing Higher Education in the Digital Age. Routledge, 2019.
isbn: 978-0367359898.
[63] Paul V. Mockapetris. Domain names - implementation and specification.
RFC 1035. IETF, 1987. url: http://tools.ietf.org/rfc/rfc1035.txt.
[64] Brody Mullins and Jack Nicas. Paying Professors: Inside Google’s
Academic Influence Campaign. 14, 2017. url: https : / / www . wsj .
com/articles/paying-professors-inside-googles-academic-influencecampaign-1499785286 (visited on 04/13/2021).
[65] Paul Nemitz. “Constitutional Democracy and Technology in the age
of Artificial Intelligence”. In: Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences 376.2133
(2018).
[66] Nitasha Tiku. Google hired Timnit Gebru to be an outspoken critic of
unethical AI. Then she was fired for it. 23, 2020. url: https://www.
washingtonpost.com/technology/2020/12/23/google-timnit-gebru-aiethics/ (visited on 03/21/2021).
[67] NYU-AAUP Executive Committee. Statement from the NYU-AAUP on
Zoom Censorship Today. 23, 2020. url: https://academeblog.org/2020/
10/23/statement- from- the- nyu- aaup- on- zoom- censorship- today/
(visited on 03/21/2021).
[68] Adam Portier, Henry Carter, and Charles Lever. “Security in Plain
TXT: Observing the Use of DNS TXT Records in the Wild”. In:
Proceedings of the 16th Conference on Detection of Intrusions and
Malware & Vulnerability Assessment (DIMVA). 2019.
[69] Lars Prehn, Franziska Lichtblau, and Anja Feldmann. “When Wells Run
Dry: The 2020 IPv4 Address Market”. In: Proceedings of the 16th ACM
Conference on emerging Networking EXperiments and Technologies
(CoNEXT). 2020.
[70] Elissa M. Redmiles, Yasemin Acar, Sascha Fahl, and Michelle L.
Mazurek. A Summary of Survey Methodology Best Practices for
Security and Privacy Researchers. Tech. rep. University of Maryland,
2017.
[71] Elissa M. Redmiles, Sean Kross, and Michelle L. Mazurek. “How Well
Do My Results Generalize? Comparing Security and Privacy Survey
Results from MTurk, Web, and Telephone Samples”. In: Proceedings
of the 40th IEEE Symposium on Security & Privacy (S&P). 2019.
[72] Joel R. Reidenberg, Jaspreet Bhatia, Travis D. Breaux, and Thomas B.
Norton. “Ambiguity in Privacy Policies and the Impact of Regulation”.
In: Journal of Legal Studies 45.S2 (2016).
[73] Roland van Rĳswĳk-Deĳ, Mattĳs Jonker, Anna Sperotto, and Aiko
Pras. “A High-Performance, Scalable Infrastructure for Large-Scale
Active DNS Measurements”. In: IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in
Communications 34.6 (2016).
[74] Adam Rogers. Google’s Academic Influence Campaign: It’s Complicated. 14, 2017. url: https://www.wired.com/story/googles-academicinfluence-campaign-its-complicated/ (visited on 04/13/2021).
[75] Anne Rohstock. “Nur ein Nebenschauplatz: Zur Bedeutung der
“68er”-Protestbewegung für die westdeutsche Hochschulpolitik”. In:
Reform und Revolte: Politischer und gesellschaftlicher Wandel in der
Bundesrepublik vor und nach 1968. 2011.
[76] Marcin Rojszczak. “CLOUD act agreements from an EU perspective”.
In: Computer Law & Security Review 38 (2020).

[77] W. Richard Scott. “Approaching Adulthood: The Maturing of Institutional Theory”. In: Theory and Society 37.5 (2008).
[78] Neil Selwyn. “Technology and Education—Why It’s Crucial to be
Critical”. In: Critical Perspectives on Technology and Education. 2015.
[79] Neil Selwyn, Thomas Hillman, Rebecca Eynon, Giselle Ferreira, Jeremy
Knox, Felicitas Macgilchrist, and Juana M. Sancho-Gil. “What’s next
for Ed-Tech? Critical hopes and concerns for the 2020s”. In: Learning,
Media and Technology 45.1 (2020).
[80] Steve Sheng, Levi Broderick, Colleen Alison Koranda, and Jeremy J
Hyland. “Why Johnny Still Can’t Encrypt: Evaluating the Usability of
Email Encryption Software”. In: Proceedings of the 2nd Symposium
On Usable Privacy and Security (SOUPS). 2006.
[81] Nick Srnicek. Platform Capitalism. Wiley & Sons, 2017. isbn: 9781509504862.
[82] Florian Streibelt, Jan Böttger, Nikolaos Chatzis, Georgios Smaragdakis,
and Anja Feldmann. “Exploring EDNS-Client-Subnet Adopters in
your Free Time”. In: Proceedings of the 13th Internet Measurement
Conference (IMC). 2013.
[83] Jayachander Surbiryala and Chunming Rong. “Cloud Computing:
History and Overview”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Cloud Summit.
2019.
[84] Carsten Svensson and Hans-Henrik Hvolby. “Establishing a Business
Process Reference Model for Universities”. In: Procedia Technology 5
(2012).
[85] Hermann Swalve, Erich Bruns, Horst Brandt, and Peter Glodek. “Die
Rolle des Anwenders aus der Sicht eines naturwissenschaftlichen Universitätsinstitutes”. In: Org. und Betrieb von DV-Versorgungssystemen.
1995.
[86] Sydney Johnson. Invasive or Informative? Educators Discuss Pros and
Cons of Learning Analytics. 1, 2017. url: https://www.edsurge.com/
news/2017- 11- 01- invasive- or- informative- educators- discuss- prosand-cons-of-learning-analytics (visited on 04/11/2021).
[87] Marko Teräs, Juha Suoranta, Hanna Teräs, and Mark Curcher. “PostCovid-19 Education and Education Technology ‘Solutionism’: a Seller’s
Market”. In: Postdigital Science and Education 2.3 (2020).
[88] Times Higher Education. World University Rankings 2020. url: https:
//www.timeshighereducation.com/world- university- rankings/2020/
world-ranking#!/page/0/length/100/sort_by/rank/sort_order/asc/cols/
stats (visited on 04/06/2021).
[89] Olivier van der Toorn, Roland van Rĳswĳk-Deĳ, Tobias Fiebig, Martina
Lindorfer, and Anna Sperotto. “TXTing 101: Finding Security Issues
in the Long Tail of DNS TXT Records”. In: Proceedings of the 5th
International Workshop on Traffic Measurements for Cybersecurity
(WTMC). 2020.
[90] José Van Dĳck. “Seeing the Forest for the Trees Visualizing Platformization and Its Governance”. In: New Media & Society (2020).
[91] José van Dĳck, Martĳn de Waal, and Thomas Poell. The Platform
Society: Public Values in a Connective World. Oxford University Press,
2018. isbn: 978-0190889777.
[92] Mathew Vermeer, Jonathan West, Alejandro Cuevas, Shuonan Niu,
Nicolas Christin, Michel van Eeten, Tobias Fiebig, Carlos Hernandez
Ganan, and Tyler Moore. “SoK: A Framework for Asset Discovery:
Systematizing Advances in Network Measurements for Protecting
Organizations”. In: Proceedings of the 6th IEEE European Symposium
on Security & Privacy (EuroS&P). 2021.
[93] Gerrit Versteeg and Harry Bouwman. “Business Architecture: A New
Paradigm to Relate Business Strategy to ICT”. In: Information Systems
Frontiers 8.2 (2006).
[94] Paul Voigt and Axel von dem Bussche. The EU General Data Protection
Regulation (GDPR): A Practical Guide. Springer, 2017. isbn: 9783319579597.
[95] Jingguo Wang, Tejaswini Herath, Rui Chen, Arun Vishwanath, and
H. Raghav Rao. “Research Article Phishing Susceptibility: An Investigation Into the Processing of a Targeted Spear Phishing Email”. In:
IEEE Transactions on Professional Communication 55.4 (2012).
[96] Richard Waters. Best coast tech is top and looking to the clouds for
growth. 8, 2016. url: https://www.ft.com/content/3e11fdb8- 5a4911e6-9f70-badea1b336d4 (visited on 04/14/2021).

16

[97] Wikipedia. List of public universities in France. url: https : / / en .
wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_public_universities_in_France (visited on
04/06/2021).
[98] Wikipedia. List of research universities in the United States. url:
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_research_universities_in_the_
United_States (visited on 04/06/2021).
[99] Wikipedia. List of universities in Austria. url: https://en.wikipedia.
org/wiki/List_of_universities_in_Austria (visited on 04/06/2021).
[100] Wikipedia. List of universities in Germany. url: https://en.wikipedia.
org/wiki/List_of_universities_in_Germany (visited on 04/06/2021).
[101] Wikipedia. List of universities in Switzerland. url: https://en.wikipedia.
org/wiki/List_of_universities_in_Switzerland (visited on 04/06/2021).
[102] Wikipedia. List of universities in the Netherlands. url: https:// en.
wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_universities_in_the_Netherlands (visited
on 04/06/2021).
[103] Wikipedia. List of universities in the United Kingdom. url: https :
//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_universities_in_the_United_Kingdom
(visited on 04/06/2021).
[104] Ben Williamson and Anna Hogan. Commercialisation and Privatisation
in/of Education in the Context of COVID-19. Tech. rep. Education
International, 2020.
[105] Elana Zeide and Helen Nissenbaum. “Learner Privacy in MOOCs and
Virtual Education”. In: Theory and Research in Education 16.3 (2018).
[106] Anneke Zuiderwĳk and Helen Spiers. “Sharing and Re-Using Open
Data: A Case Study of Motivations in Astrophysics”. In: International
Journal of Information Management 49 (2019).

Appendix
A. Investigated Institutions in Austria
1)
2)
3)
4)
5)
6)
7)

Akademie der Bildenden Künste Wien: akbild.ac.at
Anton Bruckner Privatuniversistät: bruckneruni.at
Bertha von Suttner Privatuniversität: suttneruni.at
Central European University: ceu.edu
Danube Private University: dp-uni.ac.at
Graz University of Technology: tugraz.at
Jam Music Lab - Privatuniversität für Jazz und Popularmusik Wien:
jammusiclab.com

8) Johannes Kepler Universität Linz: jku.at
9) Karl Landsteiner Privatuniversität für Gedundheitswissenschaften:
kl.ac.at

10)
11)
12)
13)
14)
15)
16)
17)
18)
19)
20)
21)
22)
23)
24)
25)
26)
27)
28)
29)
30)
31)
32)
33)
34)

Katholische Privatuniversistät Linz: ku-linz.at
Kunst Uni Graz: kug.ac.at
Kunst Universität Linz: ufg.ac.at
Medizinische Universität Graz: medunigraz.at
Medizinische Universität Innsbruck: i-med.ac.at
Medizinische Universität Wien: meduniwien.ac.at
Modul University Vienna: modul.ac.at
Montanuniversität Leoben: unileoben.ac.at
Paracelsus Medizinische Privatuniversität: pmu.ac.at
Privatuniversität Schloss Seeburg: uni-seeburg.at
The Tyrolean Private University: umit.at
University of Graz: uni-graz.at
University of Innsbruck: uibk.ac.at
University of Klagenfurt: uni-klu.ac.at
University of Vienna: univie.ac.at
Universität Mozarteum Salzburg: moz.ac.at
Universität Salzburg: uni-salzburg.at
Universität für Bodenkultur Wien: boku.ac.at
Universität für Musik und Darstellende Kunst Wien: mdw.ac.at
Universität für Weiterbildung Krems: donau-uni.ac.at
Universität für angewandte Kunst Wien: dieangewandte.at
Veterinärmedizinische Universität Wien: vetmeduni.ac.at
Vienna University of Economics and Business: wu.ac.at
Vienna University of Technology: tuwien.ac.at
Webster Vienna Private University: webster.ac.at

B. Investigated Institutions in France
1)
2)
3)
4)

Institut
Institut
Institut
Institut

Catholique de Lyon: ucly.fr, univ-catholyon.fr
Catholique de Paris: icp.fr
Catholique de Toulouse: ict-toulouse.fr
National Universitaire Champollion: univ-jfc.fr

5) La Rochelle Université: univ-larochelle.fr
6) Sorbonne Université: paris-sorbonne.fr, sorbonne-universite.fr,

70)
71)
72)
73)
74)

univ-paris4.fr

Universität Paris 8 Vincennes-Saint-Denis: univ-paris8.fr
Universität Paris III Sorbonne Nouvelle: univ-paris3.fr
Universität des Oberelsass: uha.fr
Université Blaise Pascal Clermont-Ferrand II: univ-bpclermont.fr
Université Bordeaux Montaigne: u-bordeaux-montaigne.fr
Université Bretagne Sud: univ-ubs.fr
Université Catholique de Lille: univ-catholille.fr
Université Catholique de l’Ouest: uco.fr
Université Claude-Bernard-Lyon-I: univ-lyon1.fr
Université Francois Rabelais de Tours: univ-tours.fr
Université Grenoble Alpes: u-grenoble3.fr, ujf-grenoble.fr,
univ-grenoble-alpes.fr, upmf-grenoble.fr
18) Université Jean-Monnet-Saint-Etienne: univ-st-etienne.fr
19) Université Jean-Moulin-Lyon-III: univ-lyon3.fr
20) Université Lille Nord de France: cue-lillenorddefrance.fr,
univ-lille.fr, univ-lille1.fr, univ-lille2.fr, univ-lille3.fr,
7)
8)
9)
10)
11)
12)
13)
14)
15)
16)
17)

1)
2)
3)
4)
5)
6)
7)
8)
9)
10)
11)
12)
13)
14)
15)
16)
17)
18)
19)
20)
21)
22)
23)
24)
25)
26)
27)
28)
29)
30)
31)
32)
33)
34)
35)
36)
37)
38)
39)
40)
41)
42)
43)
44)
45)
46)
47)
48)
49)
50)
51)
52)
53)
54)
55)
56)
57)
58)
59)
60)
61)
62)
63)
64)
65)
66)
67)

pantheonsorbonne.fr,

univ-paris1.fr

23) Université Paris 2 Panthéon-Assas: u-paris2.fr
24) Université Paris-Est Marne-la-Vallée: univ-mlv.fr
25) Université
Paris-Nanterre:
parisnanterre.fr,

u-paris10.fr,

univ-paris10.fr

26)
27)
28)
29)
30)
31)
32)
33)
34)
35)
36)
37)
38)
39)

Université Paris-Sud: u-psud.fr
Université Paul Cézanne Aix-Marseille III: univ-cezanne.fr
Université Paul Sabatier Toulouse III: univ-tlse3.fr, ups-tlse.fr
Université Savoie Mont Blanc: univ-savoie.fr
Université Savoie-Mont-Blanc: univ-smb.fr
Université Sorbonne Paris Nord: univ-paris12.fr, u-pec.fr
Université Toulouse 1 Sciences Sociales: univ-tlse1.fr, ut-capitole.fr
Université ToulouseJean Jaurès: univ-tlse2.fr
Université d’Angers: univ-angers.fr
Université d’Artois: univ-artois.fr
Université d’Avignon et des Pays de Vaucluse: univ-avignon.fr
Université d’Orléans: univ-orleans.fr
Université d’Evry: univ-evry.fr
Université
de
Bordeaux:
u-bordeaux.fr,
u-bordeaux1.fr,
u-bordeaux4.fr

40)
41)
42)
43)
44)
45)
46)
47)
48)
49)
50)
51)
52)
53)
54)
55)
56)
57)
58)
59)
60)
61)
62)
63)
64)
65)
66)
67)
68)
69)

des Antilles et de la Guyane: univ-ag.fr
du Havre: univ-lehavre.fr
du Maine: univ-lemans.fr
d’Aix-Marseille: univ-amu.fr
d’Auvergne Clermont-Ferrand: uca.fr, u-clermont1.fr

C. Investigated Institutions in Germany

univ-littoral.fr

21) Université Lumière Lyon 2: univ-lyon2.fr
22) Université Paris 1 Panthéon-Sorbonne:

Université
Université
Université
Université
Université

Université de Bourgogne: u-bourgogne.fr
Université de Caen Basse-Normandie: unicaen.fr
Université de Cergy-Pontoise: cyu.fr, u-cergy.fr
Université de Franche-Comté: univ-fcomte.fr
Université de Haute Bretagne Rennes 2: univ-rennes2.fr
Université de La Réunion: univ-reunion.fr
Université de Limoges: unilim.fr
Université de Lorraine: univ-lorraine.fr
Université de Lyon: universite-lyon.fr
Université de Montpellier: umontpellier.fr, univ-montp1.fr,
univ-montp2.fr, univ-montp3.fr
Université de Nantes: univ-nantes.fr
Université de Nice Sophia-Antipolis: unice.fr
Université de Nmes: unimes.fr
Université
de
Paris:
univ-paris5.fr,
univ-paris7.fr,
univ-paris-diderot.fr, u-paris.fr
Université de Pau et des Pays de l’Adour: univ-pau.fr
Université de Perpignan Via Domitia: univ-perp.fr
Université de Picardie Jules Verne: u-picardie.fr
Université de Poitiers: univ-poitiers.fr
Université de Provence Aix-Marseille I: univ-provence.fr
Université de Reims Champagne-Ardenne: univ-reims.fr
Université de Rennes 1: univ-rennes1.fr
Université de Rouen: univ-rouen.fr
Université de Strasbourg: u-strasbg.fr, unistra.fr
Université de Toulon: univ-tln.fr
Université de Valenciennes: univ-valenciennes.fr
Université de Versailles-Saint-Quentin-en-Yvelines: uvsq.fr
Université de la Mediterranée Aix-Marseille II: univmed.fr
Université de la Nouvelle-Calédonie: unc.nc
Université de la Polynésie francaise: upf.pf
Université de technologie de Compiègne: utc.fr

17

Brandenburgische Technische Universität: b-tu.de
Europa-Universität Viadrina Frankfurt (Oder): euv-ffo.de
FU Berlin: fu-berlin.de
FernUni Hagen: fernuni-hagen.de
Friederich-Alexander University Erlangen: fau.de
HU Berlin: hu-berlin.de
Heinrich-Heine-Universität Düsseldorf: hhu.de
Jacobs University Bremen: jacobs-university.de
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology: kit.edu
Katholische Universität Eichstätt-Ingolstadt: ku.de
RWTH Aachen: rwth-aachen.de
Ruhr Uni Bochum: ruhr-uni-bochum.de
TU Berlin: tu-berlin.de
TU Braunschweig: tu-braunschweig.de
TU Chemnitz: tu-chemnitz.de
TU Clausthal: tu-clausthal.de
TU Darmstadt: tu-darmstadt.de
TU Dortmund: tu-dortmund.de
TU Dresden: tu-dresden.de
TU Freiberg: tu-freiberg.de
TU Hamburg: tuhh.de
TU Ilmenau: tu-ilmenau.de
TU Munich: tum.de
Uni Augsburg: uni-augsburg.de
Uni Bamberg: uni-bamberg.de
Uni Bayreuth: uni-bayreuth.de
Uni Bielefeld: uni-bielefeld.de
Uni Bonn: uni-bonn.de
Uni Bremen: uni-bremen.de
Uni Duisburg/Essen: uni-due.de
Uni Erfurt: uni-erfurt.de
Uni Flensburg: uni-flensburg.de
Uni Frankfurt: uni-frankfurt.de
Uni Freiburg: uni-freiburg.de
Uni Giessen: uni-giessen.de
Uni Goettingen: uni-goettingen.de
Uni Greifswald: uni-greifswald.de
Uni Halle (Saale): uni-halle.de
Uni Hamburg: uni-hamburg.de
Uni Hannover: uni-hannover.de
Uni Heidelberg: uni-heidelberg.de
Uni Hohenheim: uni-hohenheim.de
Uni Jena: uni-jena.de
Uni Kaiserslautern: uni-kl.de
Uni Kassel: uni-kassel.de
Uni Kiel: uni-kiel.de
Uni Koblenz: uni-koblenz-landau.de
Uni Koeln: uni-koeln.de
Uni Konstanz: uni-konstanz.de
Uni Leipzig: uni-leipzig.de
Uni Luebeck: uni-luebeck.de
Uni Magdeburg: ovgu.de
Uni Mainz: uni-mainz.de
Uni Mannheim: uni-mannheim.de
Uni Marburg: uni-marburg.de
Uni Muenchen: uni-muenchen.de
Uni Münster: uni-muenster.de
Uni Oldenburg: uni-oldenburg.de, uol.de
Uni Osnabrueck: uni-osnabrueck.de, uos.de
Uni Paderborn: uni-paderborn.de
Uni Passau: uni-passau.de
Uni Regensburg: uni-regensburg.de
Uni Reutlingen: reutlingen-university.de
Uni Rostock: uni-rostock.de
Uni Saarbruecken: uni-saarland.de
Uni Siegen: uni-siegen.de
Uni Speyer: uni-speyer.de

68)
69)
70)
71)
72)
73)
74)
75)
76)
77)
78)
79)
80)
81)

Uni Stuttgart: uni-stuttgart.de
Uni Trier: uni-trier.de
Uni Tuebingen: uni-tuebingen.de
Uni Ulm: uni-ulm.de
Uni Vechta: uni-vechta.de
Uni Weimar: uni-weimar.de
Uni Witten/Herdecke: uni-wh.de
Uni Wuerzburg: uni-wuerzburg.de
Uni Wuppertal: uni-wuppertal.de
Univ. d. Bundeswehr Munich: unibw.de
Univ. d. Kuenste Berlin: udk-berlin.de
Universität Lüneburg: leuphana.de
Universität der Bundeswehr Hamburg: hsu-hh.de
Zeppelin University: zu.de

22)
23)
24)
25)
26)
27)
28)
29)
30)
31)
32)
33)
34)
35)
36)
37)
38)
39)
40)
41)
42)
43)
44)
45)
46)
47)
48)
49)
50)
51)
52)
53)
54)
55)
56)
57)
58)
59)
60)
61)
62)
63)
64)
65)
66)
67)
68)
69)
70)
71)
72)
73)
74)
75)
76)
77)
78)
79)
80)
81)
82)
83)
84)
85)
86)
87)
88)
89)
90)
91)
92)
93)
94)
95)

D. Investigated Institutions in Switzerland
1)
2)
3)
4)
5)
6)
7)
8)
9)
10)
11)
12)
13)
14)

EPFL: epfl.ch
ETH Zürich: ethz.ch
FernUni Schweiz: fernuni.ch
Graduate Institute Geneva: graduateinstitute.ch
Universita della Svizzera italiana: usi.ch, unisi.ch
University Basel: unibas.ch
University Bern: unibe.ch
University Fribourg: unifr.ch
University Geneva: unige.ch
University Lausanne: unil.ch, idheap.ch
University Luzern: unilu.ch
University Neuchatel: unine.ch
University St. Gallen: unisg.ch
University Zürich: uzh.ch

E. Investigated Institutions in the Netherlands
1)
2)
3)
4)
5)
6)
7)
8)
9)
10)
11)
12)
13)
14)
15)
16)
17)
18)
19)

Erasmus Universiteit Rotterdam: eur.nl
Maastricht School of Management: msm.nl
Maastricht University: maastrichtuniversity.nl
Nyenrode Business Universiteit: nyenrode.nl
Open Universiteit: ou.nl
Protestantse Theologische Universiteit: pthu.nl
Radboud Universiteit: ru.nl
Rĳksuniversiteit Groningen: rug.nl
TIAS School for Business and Society: tias.edu
Technische Universiteit Delft: tudelft.nl
Technische Universiteit Eindhoven: tue.nl
Tilburg University: uvt.nl
Universiteit Leiden: leidenuniv.nl, universiteitleiden.nl
Universiteit Twente: utwente.nl
Universiteit Utrecht: uu.nl
Universiteit van Amsterdam: uva.nl
Universiteit voor Humanistiek: uvh.nl
Vrĳe Universiteit Amsterdam: vu.nl
Wageningen Universiteit & Research: wur.nl

F. Investigated Institutions in the THE Top100 (Alphabetical)
1)
2)
3)
4)
5)
6)
7)
8)
9)
10)
11)
12)
13)
14)
15)
16)
17)
18)
19)
20)
21)

Australian National University: anu.edu.au
Boston University: bu.edu
Brown University: brown.edu
California Institute of Technology: caltech.edu
Carnegie Mellon University: cmu.edu
Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin: charite.de
Chinese University of Hong Kong: cuhk.edu.hk
Columbia University: columbia.edu
Cornell University: cornell.edu
Dartmouth College: dartmouth.edu
Delft University of Technology: tudelft.nl
Duke University: duke.edu
ETH Zurich: ethz.ch
Emory University: emory.edu
Erasmus University Rotterdam: eur.nl
Georgia Institute of Technology: gatech.edu
Harvard University: harvard.edu
Heidelberg University: heidelberg.edu
Humboldt University of Berlin: hu-berlin.de
Imperial College London: imperial.ac.uk
Johns Hopkins University: jhu.edu

18

KU Leuven: kuleuven.be
Karolinska Institute: ki.se
King’s College London: kcl.ac.uk
Kyoto University: kyoto-u.ac.jp
LMU Munich: uni-muenchen.de
Leiden University: universiteitleiden.nl, leidenuniv.nl
London School of Economics and Political Science: lse.ac.uk
Lund University: lu.se
Massachusetts Institute of Technology: mit.edu
McGill University: mcgill.ca
McMaster University: mcmaster.ca
Michigan State University: msu.edu
Monash University: monash.edu, monash.edu.au
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore: ntu.edu.sg
National University of Singapore: nus.edu.sg
New York University: nyu.edu
Northwestern University: northwestern.edu
Ohio State University (Main campus): osu.edu
Paris Sciences et Lettres PSL Research University Paris: psl.eu
Peking University: pku.edu.cn
Penn State (Main campus): psu.edu
Princeton University: princeton.edu
Purdue University West Lafayette: purdue.edu
RWTH Aachen University: rwth-aachen.de
Seoul National University: snu.ac.kr
Sorbonne Université: univ-paris4.fr, sorbonne-universite.fr
Stanford University: stanford.edu
Sungkyunkwan University (SKKU): skku.edu
Technical University of Munich: tum.de
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology: ust.hk
The University of Chicago: uchicago.edu
The University of Queensland: uq.edu.au
The University of Tokyo: u-tokyo.ac.jp
Tsinghua University: tsinghua.edu.cn
UCL: ucl.ac.uk
UNSW Sydney: unsw.edu.au
University of Amsterdam: uva.nl
University of Basel: unibas.ch
University of Bristol: bris.ac.uk
University of British Columbia: ubc.ca
University of California, Berkeley: berkeley.edu
University of California, Davis: ucdavis.edu
University of California, Irvine: uci.edu
University of California, Los Angeles: ucla.edu
University of California, San Diego: ucsd.edu
University of California, Santa Barbara: ucsb.edu
University of Cambridge: cam.ac.uk
University of Edinburgh: ed.ac.uk
University of Freiburg: uni-freiburg.de
University of Glasgow: gla.ac.uk
University of Groningen: rug.nl
University of Helsinki: helsinki.fi
University of Hong Kong: hku.hk
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign: illinois.edu
University of Manchester: manchester.ac.uk
University of Maryland, College Park: umd.edu
University of Melbourne: unimelb.edu.au
University of Michigan-Ann Arbor: umich.edu
University of Minnesota: umn.edu
University of Montreal: umontreal.ca
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill: unc.edu
University of Oxford: ox.ac.uk
University of Pennsylvania: upenn.edu
University of Science and Technology of China: ustc.edu.cn
University of Southern California: usc.edu
University of Sydney: sydney.edu.au
University of Texas at Austin: utexas.edu
University of Toronto: utoronto.ca
University of Tübingen: uni-tuebingen.de
University of Warwick: warwick.ac.uk
University of Washington: wustl.edu
University of Wisconsin-Madison: wisc.edu
University of Zurich: uzh.ch
Utrecht University: uu.nl

96)
97)
98)
99)
100)

Wageningen University & Research: wur.nl
Washington University in St Louis: uw.edu
Yale University: yale.edu
Ecole Polytechnique: polytechnique.edu
Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne: epfl.ch

68)
69)
70)
71)
72)
73)
74)
75)
76)
77)
78)
79)
80)
81)
82)
83)
84)
85)
86)
87)
88)

G. Investigated Institutions in the United Kingdom
1)
2)
3)
4)
5)
6)
7)
8)
9)
10)
11)
12)
13)
14)
15)
16)
17)
18)
19)
20)
21)
22)
23)
24)
25)
26)
27)
28)
29)
30)
31)
32)
33)
34)
35)
36)
37)
38)
39)
40)
41)
42)
43)
44)
45)
46)
47)
48)
49)
50)
51)
52)
53)
54)
55)
56)
57)
58)
59)
60)
61)
62)
63)
64)
65)
66)
67)

Abertay University: abertay.ac.uk, tay.ac.uk
Aberystwyth University: aber.ac.uk
Anglia Ruskin University: anglia.ac.uk
Aston University: aston.ac.uk
Bangor University: bangor.ac.uk
Bath Spa University: bathspa.ac.uk
Birkbeck University of London: bbk.ac.uk, birkbeck.ac.uk
Birmingham City University: bcu.ac.uk, uce.ac.uk
Bournemouth University: bournemouth.ac.uk
Brunel University London: brunel.ac.uk
Canterbury Christ Church University: cant.ac.uk
Cardiff Metropolitan University: uwic.ac.uk, cardiffmet.ac.uk
Cardiff University: cardiff.ac.uk, cf.ac.uk
City University of London: city.ac.uk
Coventry University: coventry.ac.uk
Cranfield University: cranfield.ac.uk
De Montfort University: dmu.ac.uk
Durham University: dur.ac.uk, durham.ac.uk
Edinburgh Napier University: napier.ac.uk
Glasgow Caledonian University: gcal.ac.uk
Goldsmiths University of London: gold.ac.uk, goldsmiths.ac.uk
Harper Adams University: harper-adams.ac.uk
Heriot-Watt University: hw.ac.uk
Imperial College London: ic.ac.uk, imperial.ac.uk
Institute of Cancer Research: icr.ac.uk
Keele University: keele.ac.uk
King’s College London: kcl.ac.uk
Kingston University: king.ac.uk, kingston.ac.uk
Lancester University: lancaster.ac.uk, lancs.ac.uk
Leeds Beckett University: lmu.ac.uk
Liverpool John Moores University: livjm.ac.uk
London Business School: london.edu
London Metropolitan University: londonmet.ac.uk
London School of Economics: lse.ac.uk
London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine: lshtm.ac.uk
London South Bank University: lsbu.ac.uk
Loughborough University: lboro.ac.uk, loughborough.ac.uk
Manchester Metropolitan University: mmu.ac.uk
Middlesex University: mdx.ac.uk
Newcastle University: ncl.ac.uk, newcastle.ac.uk
Northumbria University: northumbria.ac.uk, unn.ac.uk
Nottingham Trent University: ntu.ac.uk
Open University: open.ac.uk
Oxford Brookes University: brookes.ac.uk
Queen Margaret University: qmuc.ac.uk
Queen Mary University: qmw.ac.uk, qmul.ac.uk
Queen’s University Belfast: qub.ac.uk
Robert Gordon University: rgu.ac.uk
Royal Academy of Music: ram.ac.uk
Royal Central School of Speech and Drama: cssd.ac.uk
Royal College of Art: rca.ac.uk
Royal Holloway: rhbnc.ac.uk, rhul.ac.uk, royalholloway.ac.uk
School of Oriental and African Studies: soas.ac.uk
Sheffield Hallam University: shu.ac.uk
Staffordshire University: staffs.ac.uk
Swansea Uniiversity: swan.ac.uk, swansea.ac.uk
Teesside University: tees.ac.uk
Ulster University: ulst.ac.uk, ulster.ac.uk
University College London: ioe.ac.uk, ucl.ac.uk, ulsop.ac.uk
University of Aberdeen: abdn.ac.uk
University of Bath: bath.ac.uk
University of Bedfordshire: beds.ac.uk
University of Birmingham: bham.ac.uk, birmingham.ac.uk
University of Bradford: brad.ac.uk, bradford.ac.uk
University of Brighton: brighton.ac.uk, bton.ac.uk
University of Bristol: bris.ac.uk, bristol.ac.uk
University of Buckingham: buckingham.ac.uk

University of Cambridge: cam.ac.uk
University of Central Lancashire: uclan.ac.uk
University of Derby: derby.ac.uk
University of Dundee: dundee.ac.uk
University of East Anglia: uea.ac.uk
University of East London: uel.ac.uk
University of Edinburgh: eca.ac.uk, ed.ac.uk, edinburgh.ac.uk
University of Essex: essex.ac.uk, sx.ac.uk
University of Exeter: ex.ac.uk, exeter.ac.uk
University of Glasgow: gla.ac.uk, glasgow.ac.uk
University of Gloucestershire: glos.ac.uk
University of Greenwich: gre.ac.uk, greenwich.ac.uk
University of Hertfordshire: herts.ac.uk
University of Huddersfield: hud.ac.uk
University of Hull: hull.ac.uk
University of Kent: kent.ac.uk, ukc.ac.uk
University of Leeds: leeds.ac.uk
University of Leicester: le.ac.uk, leicester.ac.uk
University of Lincoln: lincoln.ac.uk
University of Liverpool: liv.ac.uk, liverpool.ac.uk
University of Manchester: man.ac.uk, manchester.ac.uk, mcc.ac.uk,
umist.ac.uk

89)
90)
91)
92)
93)
94)
95)
96)
97)
98)
99)
100)
101)
102)
103)
104)
105)
106)
107)
108)
109)
110)
111)
112)
113)
114)
115)

University of Northampton: northampton.ac.uk
University of Nottingham: nott.ac.uk, nottingham.ac.uk
University of Oxford: ox.ac.uk
University of Plymouth: plym.ac.uk, plymouth.ac.uk
University of Portsmouth: port.ac.uk
University of Reading: rdg.ac.uk, reading.ac.uk
University of Roehampton: roehampton.ac.uk
University of Salford: salford.ac.uk
University of Sheffield: shef.ac.uk, sheffield.ac.uk
University of South Wales: newport.ac.uk
University of Southampton: soton.ac.uk, southampton.ac.uk
University of St Andrews: st-and.ac.uk, st-andrews.ac.uk
University of Stirling: stir.ac.uk
University of Strathclyde: strath.ac.uk
University of Sunderland: sund.ac.uk, sunderland.ac.uk
University of Surrey: surrey.ac.uk
University of Sussex: sussex.ac.uk, susx.ac.uk
University of Wales Trinity Saint David: lamp.ac.uk
University of Warwick: warwick.ac.uk
University of West London: tvu.ac.uk
University of Westminster: westminster.ac.uk, wmin.ac.uk
University of Wolverhampton: wlv.ac.uk
University of Worcester: worc.ac.uk
University of the Arts London: arts.ac.uk, linst.ac.uk
University of the West of England Bristol: uwe.ac.uk
University of the West of Scotland: paisley.ac.uk
Universiy of York: york.ac.uk

H. Investigated Institutions in the United States
1) Air Force Institute of Technology Graduate School of Engineering &
Management: afit.edu
2) American University: american.edu
3) Arizona State University: asu.edu
4) Arkansas State University: astate.edu
5) Auburn University: auburn.edu
6) Azusa Pacific University: apu.edu
7) Ball State University: bsu.edu
8) Baylor University: baylor.edu
9) Binghamton University: binghamton.edu
10) Boise State University: boisestate.edu
11) Boston College: bc.edu
12) Boston University: bu.edu
13) Bowling Green State University: bgsu.edu
14) Brandeis University: brandeis.edu
15) Brigham Young University: byu.edu
16) Brown University: brown.edu
17) CUNY City College: cuny.edu
18) California Institute of Technology: caltech.edu
19) Carnegie Mellon University: cmu.edu
20) Case Western Reserve University: case.edu
21) Catholic University of America: catholic.edu
22) Central Michigan University: cmich.edu

19

23)
24)
25)
26)
27)
28)
29)
30)
31)
32)
33)
34)
35)
36)
37)
38)
39)
40)
41)
42)
43)
44)
45)
46)
47)
48)
49)
50)
51)
52)
53)
54)
55)
56)
57)
58)
59)
60)
61)
62)
63)
64)
65)
66)
67)
68)
69)
70)
71)
72)
73)

Chapman University: chapman.edu
Claremont Graduate University: cgu.edu
Clark Atlanta University: cau.edu
Clark University: clarku.edu
Clarkson University: clarkson.edu
Clemson University: clemson.edu
Cleveland State University: csuohio.edu
College of William and Mary: wm.edu
Colorado School of Mines: mines.edu
Colorado State University: colostate.edu
Columbia University: columbia.edu
Cornell University: cornell.edu
Dartmouth College: dartmouth.edu
DePaul University: depaul.edu
Delaware State University: desu.edu
Drexel University: drexel.edu
Duke University: duke.edu
Duquesne University: duq.edu
East Carolina University: ecu.edu
East Tennessee State University: etsu.edu
Eastern Michigan University: emich.edu
Emory University: emory.edu
Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University: famu.edu
Florida Atlantic University: fau.edu
Florida Institute of Technology: fit.edu
Florida International University: fiu.edu
Florida State University: fsu.edu
Fordham University: fordham.edu
Gallaudet University: gallaudet.edu
George Mason University: gmu.edu
George Washington University: gwu.edu
Georgetown University: georgetown.edu
Georgia Institute of Technology: gatech.edu
Georgia Southern University: georgiasouthern.edu
Georgia State University: gsu.edu
Hampton University: hamptonu.edu
Harvard University: harvard.edu
Howard University: howard.edu
Idaho State University: isu.edu
Illinois Institute of Technology: iit.edu
Illinois State University: illinoisstate.edu
Indiana University Purdue University Indianapolis: iupui.edu
Indiana University Bloomington: indiana.edu
Iowa State University: iastate.edu
Jackson State University: jsums.edu
Johns Hopkins University: jhu.edu
Kansas State University: k-state.edu
Kennesaw State University: kennesaw.edu
Kent State University at Kent: kent.edu
Lehigh University: lehigh.edu
Louisiana State University and Agricultural & Mechanical College:
lsu.edu

74)
75)
76)
77)
78)
79)
80)
81)
82)
83)
84)
85)
86)
87)
88)
89)
90)
91)
92)
93)
94)
95)
96)

Louisiana Tech University: latech.edu
Loyola Marymount University: lmu.edu
Loyola University Chicago: luc.edu
Marquette University: marquette.edu
Marshall University: marshall.edu
Massachusetts Institute of Technology: mit.edu
Mercer University: mercer.edu
Miami University: miamioh.edu
Michigan State University: msu.edu
Michigan Technological University: mtu.edu
Mississippi State University: msstate.edu
Missouri University of Science and Technology: mst.edu
Montana State University: montana.edu
Montclair State University: montclair.edu
Morgan State University: morgan.edu
New Jersey Institute of Technology: njit.edu
New Mexico State University: nmsu.edu
New York University: nyu.edu
North Carolina A & T State University: ncat.edu
North Carolina State University: ncsu.edu
North Dakota State University: ndsu.edu
Northeastern University: northeastern.edu
Northern Arizona University: nau.edu

20

97)
98)
99)
100)
101)
102)
103)
104)
105)
106)
107)
108)
109)
110)
111)
112)
113)
114)
115)
116)
117)
118)
119)
120)
121)
122)
123)
124)
125)
126)
127)
128)
129)
130)
131)
132)
133)
134)
135)
136)
137)
138)
139)
140)
141)
142)
143)
144)
145)
146)
147)
148)
149)
150)
151)
152)
153)
154)
155)
156)
157)
158)
159)
160)
161)
162)
163)
164)
165)
166)
167)
168)
169)
170)

Northern Illinois University: niu.edu
Northwestern University: northwestern.edu
Nova Southeastern University: nova.edu
Oakland University: oakland.edu
Ohio State University[4]: osu.edu
Ohio University-Main Campus: ohio.edu
Oklahoma State University: okstate.edu
Old Dominion University: odu.edu
Oregon State University: oregonstate.edu
Pennsylvania State University: psu.edu
Ponce Health Sciences University: psm.edu
Portland State University: pdx.edu
Princeton University: princeton.edu
Purdue University: purdue.edu
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute: rpi.edu
Rice University: rice.edu
Rochester Institute of Technology: rit.edu
Rockefeller University: rockefeller.edu
Rowan University: rowan.edu
Rutgers University: rutgers.edu
SUNY College of Environmental Science and Forestry: esf.edu
Saint Louis University: slu.edu
San Diego State University: sdsu.edu
Seton Hall University: shu.edu
South Dakota State University: sdstate.edu
Southern Illinois University: siue.edu, siu.edu, siumed.edu
Southern Methodist University: smu.edu
Stanford University: stanford.edu
Stevens Institute of Technology: stevens.edu
Stony Brook University: stonybrook.edu
Syracuse University: syracuse.edu
Temple University: temple.edu
Tennessee State University: tnstate.edu
Tennessee Technological University: tntech.edu
Texas A&M University: tamu.edu
Texas A&M UniversityCorpus Christi: tamucc.edu
Texas A&M UniversityKingsville: tamuk.edu
Texas Christian University: tcu.edu
Texas Southern University: tsu.edu
Texas State University: txstate.edu
Texas Tech University: ttu.edu
The New School: newschool.edu
Thomas Jefferson University: jefferson.edu
Tufts University: tufts.edu
Tulane University: tulane.edu
University at Albany: albany.edu
University at Buffalo: buffalo.edu
University of Akron Main Campus: uakron.edu
University of Alabama: ua.edu
University of Alabama at Birmingham: uab.edu
University of Alabama in Huntsville: uah.edu
University of Alaska Fairbanks: uaf.edu
University of Arizona: arizona.edu
University of Arkansas: uark.edu
University of Arkansas at Little Rock: ualr.edu
University of California, Berkeley: berkeley.edu
University of California, Davis: ucdavis.edu
University of California, Irvine: uci.edu
University of California, Los Angeles: ucla.edu
University of California, Merced: ucmerced.edu
University of California, Riverside: ucr.edu
University of California, San Diego: ucsd.edu
University of California, Santa Barbara: ucsb.edu
University of California, Santa Cruz: ucsc.edu
University of Central Florida: ucf.edu
University of Chicago: uchicago.edu
University of Cincinnati: uc.edu
University of Colorado Boulder: colorado.edu
University of Colorado Colorado Springs: uccs.edu
University of Colorado Denver: ucdenver.edu
University of Connecticut: uconn.edu
University of Dayton: udayton.edu
University of Delaware: udel.edu
University of Denver: du.edu

171)
172)
173)
174)
175)
176)
177)
178)
179)
180)
181)
182)
183)
184)
185)
186)
187)
188)
189)
190)
191)
192)
193)
194)
195)
196)
197)
198)
199)
200)
201)
202)
203)
204)
205)
206)
207)
208)
209)
210)
211)
212)
213)
214)
215)

University
University
University
University
University
University
University
University
University
University
University
University
University
University
University
University
University
University
University
University
University
University
University
University
University
University
University
University
University
University
University
University
University
University
University
University
University
University
University
University
University
University
University
University
University

of
of
of
of
of
of
of
of
of
of
of
of
of
of
of
of
of
of
of
of
of
of
of
of
of
of
of
of
of
of
of
of
of
of
of
of
of
of
of
of
of
of
of
of
of

Florida: ufl.edu
Georgia: uga.edu
Hawaii: hawaii.edu
Houston: uh.edu
Idaho: uidaho.edu
Illinois at Chicago: uic.edu
Illinois at UrbanaChampaign: illinois.edu
Iowa: uiowa.edu
Kansas: ku.edu
Kentucky: uky.edu
Louisiana at Lafayette: louisiana.edu
Louisville: louisville.edu
Maine: umaine.edu
Maryland, Baltimore County: umbc.edu
Maryland, College Park: umd.edu
Maryland, Eastern Shore: umes.edu
Massachusetts Amherst: umass.edu
Massachusetts Boston: umb.edu
Massachusetts Dartmouth: umassd.edu
Massachusetts Lowell: uml.edu
Memphis: memphis.edu
Miami: miami.edu
Michigan: umich.edu
Minnesota: umn.edu
Mississippi: olemiss.edu
Missouri: missouri.edu
MissouriKansas City: umkc.edu
MissouriSt. Louis: umsl.edu
Montana: umt.edu
Nebraska at Omaha: unomaha.edu
NebraskaLincoln: unl.edu
Nevada, Las Vegas: unlv.edu
Nevada, Reno: unr.edu
New England: une.edu
New Hampshire: unh.edu
New Mexico: unm.edu
New Orleans: uno.edu
North Carolina Wilmington: uncw.edu
North Carolina at Chapel Hill: unc.edu
North Carolina at Charlotte: uncc.edu
North Carolina at Greensboro: uncg.edu
North Dakota: und.edu
North Texas: unt.edu
Notre Dame: nd.edu
Oklahoma: ou.edu

216)
217)
218)
219)
220)
221)
222)
223)
224)
225)
226)
227)
228)
229)
230)
231)
232)
233)
234)
235)
236)
237)
238)
239)
240)
241)
242)
243)
244)
245)
246)
247)
248)
249)
250)
251)
252)
253)
254)
255)
256)
257)
258)
259)
260)

21

University of Oregon: uoregon.edu
University of Pennsylvania: upenn.edu
University of Pittsburgh: pitt.edu
University of Puerto Rico: upr.edu
University of Rhode Island: uri.edu
University of Rochester: rochester.edu
University of San Diego: sandiego.edu
University of South Alabama: southalabama.edu
University of South Carolina: sc.edu
University of South Dakota: usd.edu
University of South Florida: usf.edu
University of Southern California: usc.edu
University of Southern Mississippi: usm.edu
University of Tennessee: utk.edu
University of Texas Rio Grande Valley: utrgv.edu
University of Texas at Arlington: uta.edu
University of Texas at Austin: utexas.edu
University of Texas at Dallas: utdallas.edu
University of Texas at El Paso: utep.edu
University of Texas at San Antonio: utsa.edu
University of Toledo: utoledo.edu
University of Tulsa: utulsa.edu
University of Utah: utah.edu
University of Vermont: uvm.edu
University of Virginia: virginia.edu
University of Washington: washington.edu
University of WisconsinMadison: wisc.edu
University of WisconsinMilwaukee: uwm.edu
University of Wyoming: uwyo.edu
Utah State University: usu.edu
Vanderbilt University: vanderbilt.edu
Villanova University: villanova.edu
Virginia Commonwealth University: vcu.edu
Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University: vt.edu
Wake Forest University: wfu.edu
Washington State University: wsu.edu
Washington University in St. Louis: wustl.edu
Wayne State University: wayne.edu
West Virginia University: wvu.edu
Western Michigan University: wmich.edu
Wichita State University: wichita.edu
Worcester Polytechnic Institute: wpi.edu
Wright State University: wright.edu
Yale University: yale.edu
Yeshiva University: yu.edu

