The Effects of Air Quality on the Spread of the COVID-19.
An Artificial Intelligence Approach.
Andrea Loreggia, 1 Anna Passarelli 2

arXiv:2104.12546v1 [cs.CY] 9 Apr 2021

1

European University Institute
2
University of Padova

Abstract
The COVID-19 pandemic considerably affects public health
systems around the world. The lack of knowledge about the
virus, the extension of this phenomenon, and the speed of
the evolution of the infection are all factors that highlight
the necessity of employing new approaches to study these
events. Artificial intelligence techniques may be useful in analyzing data related to areas affected by the virus. The aim
of this work is to investigate any possible relationships between air quality and confirmed cases of COVID-19 in Italian districts. Specifically, we report an analysis of the correlation between daily COVID-19 cases and environmental factors, such as temperature, relative humidity, and atmospheric
pollutants. Our analysis confirms a significant association of
some environmental parameters with the spread of the virus.
This suggests that machine learning models trained on the
environmental parameters to predict the number of future infected cases may be accurate. Predictive models may be useful for helping institutions in making decisions for protecting
the population and contrasting the pandemic.

Introduction
The new coronavirus SARS-CoV-2 is responsible of the respiratory disease named COVID-19. It was first identified on
9th January 2020 by the Municipal Health Commission of
Wuhan (China) which reported to the World Health Organization (WHO) a cluster of pneumonia cases of unknown origin in the city of Wuhan, in the Chinese province of Hubei.
The spread of COVID-19 was then declared a global pandemic by WHO on 11th March 2020 (World Health Organization 2020). On 18th January 2021, the World Health Organization reported the number of confirmed global cases
of COVID-19 exceeds 90 million, with more than 2 million
deaths. At that date in Italy, more than 2.3 million positive
cases and almost 82 thousand deaths have been recorded 1 .
The scale of the public health emergency caused by
COVID-19 has no precedent in recent decades and it will
surely have serious social and economic consequences. Indeed, the rapid spread of this global pandemic has immediately raised urgent issues, which need a coordinated study to
slow down the evolution of the disease. In this context, Artificial Intelligence (AI) techniques can represent a great support for government institutions and health organizations, in
1

https://covid19.who.int/

order to provide information on the mechanisms which describe how the virus spread and, possibly, on the methodologies to be adopted to contrast it in the most effective way.
If properly implemented and used, machine learning algorithms can help in analyzing data relating to some areas affected by the infection (see for instance, (Vaishya et al. 2020;
Jamshidi et al. 2020; Lalmuanawma, Hussain, and Chhakchhuak 2020)). Analyzing the available historical data, machine learning models can be trained to predict possible developments of the pandemic as well as the impacts on the
population.
Understanding a complex system such as the spread of
the pandemic is an important challenge in a country’s sustainable development process. The concept of sustainable
development has spread widely in recent decades and generally consists of a combination of three goals: the social goal,
the economic goal, and the environmental goal. Policy makers play a key role in these scenarios in order to reach these
goals, but they have to be properly informed in order to make
the right decision. This process may be helped and improved
adopting the right technology such as artificial intelligence
techniques. During the last months, the attention of many researchers has moved to this new challenge that has involved
the entire planet. For instance, a group of researchers and engineers has created a global collaboration, called CORD-19,
which collects thousands of scientific publications focused
on the new coronavirus (Wang et al. 2020b).
Identifying the main factors that contribute to the spread
of the SARS-CoV-2 virus is certainly one of the current
public health goals. However, the complexity of the phenomenon and the scarce availability of information make
this study particularly difficult. The possible relationship between fine particulate matter (PM) and SARS-CoV-2 immediately aroused particular interest, especially if one compares the distribution of infections and pollutants.
Becchetti et al. (2020) show that areas with high concentration of pollutants (i.e., dark blue districts in Figure 1b)
mostly coincide with areas with high number of positive
cases of COVID-19 (i.e., Figure 1a). Unfortunately, the time
window used in the two figures is different, mostly due to
a lack of information for Italian districts in 2019 and 2020
about the pollutants. However, this observation motivates the
interest in investigating the possible correlations between air
quality and daily confirmed cases of COVID-19. In addition,

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: (1a) The choropleth map shows the distribution of COVID-19 total cases in the Italian districts (as of 3rd October
2020). The data is divided into quartiles. (1b) The choropleth map shows the average PM10 concentrations of 2018 in the Italian
districts. The data is divided into quartiles. (Becchetti et al. 2020)
the graph of the new daily cases in Italy (Figure 2) shows an
important decrease of infections during the summer months.
This leads us to think that there may be a relationship between the environmental temperature and the spread of the
pandemic. In this work we focus on the study of possible
relationships among the number of new daily infected cases
and the air quality. To do that, we collect data related to some
Italian districts.
Contribution. In this work, we provide a set of 8 different datasets for 8 different Italian districts. Data include the
daily measurements of air pollutants and climatic conditions
of the considered areas, and the number of new registered
infected COVID-19 cases. We conducted a statistical analysis that confirms possible correlations among the number
of daily cases and several factors related to the air quality.
We designed, developed and compared three different supervised learning models. We trained these models to predict the number of new cases of COVID-19, showing the
number of infected cases can be computed in advance with
good accuracy. This can be used to enrich the set of information available to governments and institutions for helping
in making decisions to protect the population and stemming
the pandemic.

Related Works
The rapid spread of the COVID-19 pandemic has attracted
the attention of numerous scholars and researchers from
many different disciplines. The aim is twofold: on one side,
scholars want to understand the modalities of transmission
of the SARS-CoV-2 virus and its mechanisms of interaction with the host. On the other side, they want to investi-

Figure 2: Number of diagnosed cases of COVID-19 in Italy
by test/diagnosis date (from 24th of February 2020 to 18th
of January 2021).

gate all possible contributing causes that may have played
a key role in the number of infections and in the mortality rate of the disease. Currently, evidence indicates that the
SARS-CoV-2 virus spreads mainly from person to person
through the inhalation of respiratory droplets, which are normally released when an infected person speaks, coughs or
sneezes (La Rosa et al. 2020). However, it is hypothesized
that the virus may be aerosolized during certain activities
or procedures and may remain active for prolonged periods
(Van Doremalen et al. 2020). On 30th January 2020, the Istituto Superiore di Sanità (ISS) confirmed the first two cases
of SARS-CoV-2 infection in Italy: two tourists from Wuhan
landed in Milan, and then hospitalized in Rome. The first
autochthonous positive case was confirmed on 21st February 2020 and was a patient hospitalized in serious condition in Lodi. Always on 21st February 2020 the first death

of COVID-19 in the country was reported; he was a man
from Vo’ (Padova). From 23rd February 2020, 11 municipalities in northern Italy (in Lombardy and Veneto) were quarantined and from 10th March 2020 the lockdown was extended to the entire country, until 3rd June 2020. Of course,
the taken measures may have influenced the progress of the
pandemic. The study by Lavezzo et al. (2020), for example,
shows that containment measures have helped to decrease
the transmission of SARS-CoV-2 in the municipality of Vo’.
The review of the literature, conducted on the variables
that influence seasonal viruses affecting the respiratory system, underlines that there are a multitude of factors that
can influence the behaviour of viruses, including humidity,
pollution, human behaviour, physiological and demographic
characteristics, human mobility, as well as climate change
(Sloan, Moore, and Hartert 2011). Each of these factors is
important as it affects virus survival, virulence, and transmissibility between individuals. From several studies, that
have examined the mechanisms underlying the seasonal nature of respiratory viral infections, it has been deduced that,
in general, the two main factors contributing to the spread of
virus infections are identifiable in changes in environmental parameters and in human behaviours. A recent investigation (Moriyama, Hugentobler, and Iwasaki 2020) analysed
the mechanisms of action of viruses and it shows how the
combination of favourable winter levels of humidity, temperature, and solar radiation can compromise our antiviral
defence mechanisms, resulting in a greater susceptibility of
the host to respiratory viruses. Furthermore, various studies (Ciencewicki and Jaspers 2007; Xing et al. 2016; Grigg
2018) report evidence in favour of an association between
exposure to air pollutants and the increased risk of respiratory viral infections, although the potential cellular and
molecular mechanisms underlying the increased susceptibility are still largely unknown.
The scientific literature that has investigated the possible relationships between environmental factors and SARSCoV-2 is very large and there are also conflicting opinions.
The Position Paper of SIMA (Setti et al. 2020b) shows how
the PM10 limit exceedances may be compatible with a role
of particulate matter as virus carrier. This hypothesis is also
supported by the discovery of the presence of SARS-CoV-2
RNA on atmospheric particulate matter (Setti et al. 2020a).
Furthermore, the results of a survey on 120 Chinese cities
(Yongjian et al. 2020) reveal significantly positive associations between daily measurements of atmospheric particulate matter and nitrogen dioxide and COVID-19 confirmed
cases, while sulphur dioxide is negatively associated.
Regarding ozone, many studies (Murray et al. 2008; Hudson, Sharma, and Vimalanathan 2009; Tseng and Li 2008)
claim that it is particularly lethal against viruses due to
its high oxidizing property. However, there are no studies
confirming the role of ozone in the specific inactivation of
SARS-CoV-2. Anyway, it was effective in killing the SARSCoV virus of the 2003 epidemic (Zhang et al. 2004) and
therefore it could also be lethal against SARS-CoV-2 as both
viruses come from the same group and have similar structures. This hypothesis, however, would not seem to agree
with the results of a recent research (Yongjian et al. 2020)

that found a significantly positive association between ozone
concentrations and daily COVID-19 confirmed cases.
Finally, the scientific literature argues that high temperature and relative humidity affect the environmental resistance of SARS-CoV-2, reducing its spread. Two different
studies (Magurano et al. 2020; Chin et al. 2020) show that
virus viability decayed more rapidly at higher temperatures,
indicating that viral infectivity can be altered with the increase of temperature. Furthermore, a recent research (Sobral et al. 2020) claims the existence of a negative correlation between the average temperature by country and the
number of SARS-CoV-2 infections. Regarding relative humidity, another study (Wang et al. 2020a) supports the existence of robust negative associations between humidity and
transmission of COVID-19.

Background
In this work, we conducted an analysis on the collected data,
studying the correlation between environmental features and
the target variable (i.e., the number of new daily infected
cases).

Correlation Analysis
This work reports a correlation analysis (Franzese and Iuliano 2019), which is a statistical study that evaluates the
strength and the sign of a relationship between two variables. The Pearson’s correlation coefficient r was adopted
as correlation index. Given two vectors of values X and Y,
the Pearson correlation index can be calculated as follows:
n−1
X

(xi − x̂)(yi − ŷ)

i=0

r= v
un−1
uX
t
(xi − x̂)2 (yi − ŷ)2
i=0

where n is the number of samples, xi and yi are the samples, and x̂ and ŷ correspond to the average values of X and
Y respectively.
The value of r is in [−1, 1] and it describes the relationship between the variables. Specifically, a high value, close
to +1, indicates a positive correlation, while a low value,
close to −1, indicates a negative correlation. A positive correlation exists when the increase in the value of one variable
makes also increase the value of the other variable. On the
other hand, if a negative correlation exists, then as the value
of one variable increases, the value of the other variable decreases. Furthermore, when the index value is close or equal
to 0 there is a poor or no correlation between the two variables, which means that increasing or decreasing one variable does not affect the value of the other variable.
It is important to remember that the correlation analysis
does not provide any indication of a cause-effect relationship between the variables. To establish a true causal condition, the variables should be completely isolated from any
other possible confounding variable. If a correlation is found
between air quality and SARS-CoV-2 infection, this would

Variable
date
humidity
no2 max
no2 median
o3
pm10 median
pm10 max
pm2.5 median
pm2.5 max
so2
temp min
temp max
temp median
total cases
new cases

Description
Date
Daily median of the relative humidity
Daily maximum concentration of NO2 (nitrogen dioxide)
Daily median concentration of NO2 (nitrogen dioxide)
Daily maximum concentration of O3 (ozone)
Daily median concentration of PM10
Daily maximum concentration of PM10
Daily median concentration of PM2.5
Daily maximum concentration of PM2.5
Daily maximum concentration of SO2 (sulfur dioxide)
Daily minimum temperature
Daily maximum temperature
Daily median temperature
Cumulative number of COVID-19 cases in the province
Number of new daily cases of COVID-19 in the province

Measure
percentage
µg/m3
µg/m3
µg/m3
µg/m3
µg/m3
µg/m3
µg/m3 .
µg/m3
Celsius degrees
Celsius degrees
Celsius degrees

Source
ARPA
ARPA
ARPA
ARPA
ARPA
ARPA
ARPA
ARPA
ARPA
ARPA
ARPA
ARPA
Italian Civil Protection
Italian Civil Protection

Table 1: List of considered variables in the datasets.
constitute just one more proof to be able to subsequently
support any scientific demonstration.

Machine Learning Techniques
Machine learning is a branch of AI, which studies and develops learning algorithms able to model intrinsic characteristics or relationships in the data. Usually, machine learning algorithms have a bottom-up approach, which means
that they infer information from a collection of data called
dataset, which describes the studied scenario. Thus, a dataset
is an M × N matrix in which each column corresponds to
a variable (also called “feature”) that describes a specific
characteristic of the domain, and each row corresponds to
a sample ci = (xi ; yi ) where xi = (xi,1 , xi,2 , . . . , xi,N )
and yi represents the “label” of the sample (i.e., the value
of a variable that we want to predict), which is not always
known a priori. The problem addressed in this paper is a supervised learning problem. The term “supervised” refers to
the fact that in the set of samples the labels y1 , . . . , yM are
already known. In this approach, we assume that there exists
an ideal function f : X → Y such that f (xi ) = yi , where
X is the space of all possible samples and Y is the set of
all possible outputs. Supervised learning tries to find a function f¯ : X → Y that approximates f as closely as possible,
finding the same labels as f for most of the samples.
In this work we adopt the following models: Random Forest, XGBoost, and Neural Network.
Random Forest The Random Forest algorithm (Breiman
2001) is based on decision trees and applies the bagging
technique. This consists in training multiple decision trees
on distinct partition of the dataset by sub-sampling it with
re-insertion. Random Forest typically has better generalization performance than a single decision tree, thanks to randomness which helps to contain the over-fitting problem, reducing model variance.
XGBoost XGBoost is based on Friedman’s original Gradient Boosting (Friedman 2002, 2001). It introduces a reg-

ularization term to control over-fitting, obtaining better performance results. The Gradient Boosting technique creates
a final model based on a combination of single models such
as Random Forest, but it builds them sequentially by giving
more weight to instances with incorrect predictions. Specifically, in each learning cycle, prediction errors are used to
calculate the gradient, i.e. the partial derivative of the loss
function with respect to the prediction, and build a new tree
capable of predicting gradients. Then, the prediction values
are updated. After the learning phase, XGBoost derives the
final predictions of the target variable by adding the average
calculated in the initial step to all the residuals predicted by
the trees, multiplied by the learning rate.
Neural Network Neural Network (Shalev-Shwartz and
Ben-David 2014) is made up of stacks of neurons. A neuron
is a processing unit connected to different inputs xi , each
of which is associated with a weight wi . The neuron computes the weighted sum of the input vector z = w1 x1 +
w2 x2 + ... + wm xm = wT x and applies a threshold function σ to it. The set of nodes of the network can be decomposed into a union of disjoint subsets V0 , V1 ..., VT , called
“layers”, such that each edge connects some node in Vt−1 to
some node in Vt . The lower level, V0 , is called “input layer”,
the levels V1 , ..., VT −1 are called “hidden layers”, while the
upper level VT is called “output layer”. During the learning phase, the neural network adopts a back-propagation approach, which repeatedly updates the weights, minimizing
the loss function. At the end of this phase, it uses the forward propagation to calculate the prediction.

Empirical Study
In this section we describe how we collected data and built
the datasets. We also report a detailed description about the
training process of the chosen predictive models. In the final
part of this section, we report the results of the correlation
analysis and the performances of the predictive models.

Data Collection
The data used in this work comes from two different sources.
One contains the daily details of the pandemic and the other
contains the environmental information of different districts
or geographical areas around the world.
Italian data about the pandemic has been made available
in a GitHub repository under a CC-BY-4.0 license from the
Italian Civil Protection Department 2 . In this repository, the
number of total cases is available at the level of each Italian district. For security and privacy reasons, information at
lower levels (i.e., the number of infected cases in a specific
city or town) are stored and protected in a platform of the Integrated Surveillance and thus accessible only by authorized
persons 3 . Therefore, only the daily number of total cases of
COVID-19 in different areas is used to describe the progress
of the pandemic in Italy.
The time window of this study goes from 1st January
2020 to 18th January 2021. We collected environmental data
from the Air Quality Open Data Platform (AQODP) (World
Air Quality Index Project 2020). This platform was created
by the World Air Quality Index project team and contains
meteorological and air quality information of major cities
around the world, but it is worth noting that not all the data is
validated. Data of the Italian districts contained in AQODP
is provided by the ARPA (Agenzia Regionale per la Protezione Ambientale). The AQODP platform publishes information about 12 districts of Italy. Unfortunately, many fields
of 4 out of the 12 districts have missing values. Thus, we
decided to focus exclusively on the eight districts with the
most complete set of data. Specifically, we used data about
Bologna, Brescia, Milan, Modena, Naples, Parma, Prato,
Rome. For each of these districts, we built a dataset in which
each row contains information about environmental data and
the number of new infected cases for a specific date. All the
variables of the proposed dataset are summarized in Table 1.

Data Analysis
We performed an initial analysis on all available dates and
we observed that in October 2020 as the number of confirmed cases of COVID-19 began to increase (see for instance Figure 2) the correlation between the number of infected cases and environmental factors tends to disappear.
We conjecture that this might due to the reopening of schools
and offices that happened in September, resulting in a greater
amount of people who daily commute. On one side this
might increase the number of people exposed to a possible
infection and on the other side this might weaken the role of
the environmental factors.
For this reason, we decide to focus our correlation analysis and the machine learning approach to the data collected
from 1st January and 3rd October 2020.
We performed a pre-processing task which removed all
negative values for the new cases variable. These negative
2
https://github.com/pcm-dpc/COVID-19 - Last visited on 18th
of January 2021
3
https://www.epicentro.iss.it/en/coronavirus/sars-cov-2integrated-surveillance-data - Last visited on 18th of January
2021

values happened because sometimes the Italian Civil Protection Department adjusted the daily data about total cases for
some areas, resulting in a reduced number of infected people compared to the number of the previous day. This was
probably due to errors in the positive cases count. In addition, all records with missing values were removed before
starting the correlation analysis.
In order to perform an accurate correlation analysis, it is
necessary to take into account a probable incubation period
of the virus. Moreover, an additional delay time is due to the
bureaucracy related to the execution and analysis of the nasopharyngeal swab. This value was not known to us a priori.
This means that a specific environmental configuration may
influence the spread of the virus, but consequences may be
evident only some days later. Therefore, we shift the number of new daily cases of i positions in the datasets (with i
varying from −29 to 0). This is done to compare the environmental data of a given day with the number of new infected
cases after i days. In this way, we looked for the maximum
correlation value of each environmental parameter in a time
window of one month.

Correlation Analysis Results
As we expected, depending on the area, we have different
results. Among all the analyzed districts, results for Brescia dataset show a strong negative correlation with the minimum, maximum and median temperature variables. The different values of the correlation indexes are reported in Figure 3. This means that as the daily temperature increases,
the number of daily infections decreases. In particular, the
correlation peak between temperature and new COVID-19
cases occurred for i = 17 (r = −0.77, p value < 0.001).
This means that there is a negative relationship between the
values of the temperature and the number of new infected
cases after 17 days the temperature was measured. On the
other hand, the number of new infected cases and the concentration of the main air pollutants (i.e., N O2 , P M2.5 ,
P M10 , and O3 ) show a maximum of the correlation value
after 15 days the environmental measurement was taken.
Specifically, the median concentrations of N O2 , P M2.5 and
P M10 are positively correlated and the values of the correlation coefficients at i = 15 are, respectively, r = 0.39
(p value < 0.001), r = 0.49 (p value < 0.001) and r0.43
(p value < 0.001). These results indicate that a higher median daily concentration of these pollutants is associated
with a greater number of people contracting the infection.
Instead, ozone has a negative correlation with COVID-19
cases (r = − 0.55, p value < 0.001). Therefore, an increase
in the maximum concentration of ozone in the atmosphere is
associated with a decrease in positive cases. Similar results
were also obtained with data regarding the areas of Milan,
Bologna, Parma and Modena.
Instead, the values of the correlation indexes for the district of Prato are much weaker, although the sign of the correlation coefficients are in line with those of the other northern provinces. For instance, the correlation index between
the median concentration of PM10 and the positive cases
registered 15 days later is r = 0.25 (p value < 0.001),
while the correlation index between the median tempera-

Figure 3: Area of Brescia: correlations between environmental data and new daily infected cases, sliding the time window from
−29 to 0.
ture and the cases reported after 16 days is r = − 0.28
(p value < 0.001).
The results obtained analyzing the datasets of Rome (Figure 4) and Naples differ in the correlation with temperature and ozone. In these two datasets they are not significantly correlated with the data of new infections, except for
the minimum temperature in the province of Rome which
shows the correlation peak at i = 17. Furthermore, the maximum correlation with atmospheric particulate matter in the
provinces of Rome and Modena seems to be a few days earlier than in the other districts. This difference in the delay
time could reflect a faster response of local authorities in
identifying positive cases during the observed period. Instead, the lack of correlation with ozone in the area of Rome
could be due to the low daily concentrations of O3 during
the observed period, which therefore did not affect the number of COVID-19 cases with the suspected virucidal action
of ozone.
Finally, the poor or absent correlation with temperature
in Rome and Naples could be caused by a set of co-factors
probably not considered in this study. Moreover, all the other
considered areas are in the Po Valley. It is worth noting that
the Po Valley is surrounded by the Alps and the Apennines.
The wind is rare and the air is colder in the plains than in
the mountains, causing emissions stay above Po Valley and
making harder for natural and artificial emissions to be dissolved. This may be one of the reasons why the atmospheric
pollutants seem to have more effects on the spread of the
virus in areas of Po Valley than in other Italian areas which
instead are close to the sea like Rome or Naples.
The correlation peak occurs at distance of different days

depending on the parameter analyzed: atmospheric particulate matter, median nitrogen dioxide and ozone are more related to new cases registered after 14-15 days from the environmental measurements, while temperature is more related
to cases identified 16-17 days later. This difference could
be due to a different effect of these factors on the virus. Indeed, the temperature could take a few days to decrease the
environmental resistance of SARS-CoV-2, while the contribution of atmospheric particulate to the spread of the virus
could be more immediate.

Machine Learning Models
Given the statistically significant correlation of some variables with COVID-19 cases, we developed and trained some
regressors for predicting the number of new infected cases
based on the values of the environmental parameters. The
machine learning algorithms used in this work estimate the
impact of the environmental factors on the spread of the
COVID-19 pandemic. The aim of these models is to predict the number of confirmed cases given the measurements
of the atmospheric variables.
The simulations are developed in Python 3.7. We adopted
RandomForestRegressor by Scikit-learn, XGBRegressor by
XGBoost and Sequential Model by Keras for Neural Network.
The configuration of the used neural network is reported
in Table 2. Moreover, for this model data were standardized using StandardScaler() by Scikit-learn. Each model
was trained separately for each of the eight districts for both
the value of i corresponding to the pollutant correlation peak
(e.g., i = 15) and for that corresponding to the temperature

Figure 4: Area of Rome: correlations between environmental data and new daily infected cases, sliding the time window from
−29 to 0.
Layers Shape
Dense (None, 100)
Dense (None, 50)
Dense (None, 10)
Dense (None, 1)
Total params
Trainable params

Learnable
1300
5050
510
11
6,871
6,871

Act. Function
ReLu
ReLu
ReLu
Linear

Table 2: Neural network configuration.

correlation peak (e.g., i = 17). This was done to compare the
results from different trainings in order to determine which
is the best delay time for predicting new cases in each district.
In order to estimate the generalization performance, we
adopted the holdout approach, i.e. the dataset was divided
into two disjoint sets, called training sets and test sets. The
training set contains 70% of the instances of the original
dataset and it was used to train the model. The test dataset
contains the remaining 30% of the samples, and it was used
to test the generalization level of the regressor. The split of
the instances was done randomly.
For RandomForestRegressor a tuning phase of the hyperparameters was performed in order to obtain the best possible accuracy. To do that, we adopted a grid search approach
(i.e., a list of allowed values is specified for each hyperparameters and then they are evaluated through a 5-fold cross
validation to determine the best combination). We chose to
optimize the following parameters:

• max depth, that is the maximum depth that each tree can
have. Values for this parameter were searched in the interval [3,7)
• n estimators, that is the number of trees. Values for this
parameter were searched in {10, 50, 100 and 1000}.
In order to evaluate and compare the different models, we
compute the Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE), the Mean
Absolute Error (MAE), and the R2 score on the test set. Assuming that yˆi is the predicted value of the i-th sample and yi
is the corresponding observed value, then the three metrics
are defined as follows:
v
u n−1
u1 X
RM SE(y, ŷ) = t
(yi − yˆi )2
n i=0
n−1

1X
|yi − yˆi |
n i=0
Pn
(yi − yˆi )2
2
R (y, ŷ) = 1 − Pi=1
n
2
i=1 (yi − ȳ)
M AE(y, ŷ) =

where n is the number of samples and ȳ is the average
of the observed values of the target variable. The quadratic
exponent in the RMSE allows to heavily penalize large errors. However, this makes Root Mean Squared Error more
sensitive to outliers than Mean Absolute Error.
RMSE and MAE are measures of error, therefore when
we compare two regression models on the same dataset, the
one with the lowest values is the one with the best predictions. In contrast, R2 score or coefficient of determination

represents the proportion of variance of y that has been described by the independent variables of the model. This metric provides an indication of the goodness of fit and thus it
is a measure of the likelihood that samples never seen by
the model are predicted correctly. The best possible score is
1 and it occurs when it is possible to predict exactly what
the value of the target variable will be, knowing the values
of the independent variables. A constant model that always
predicts the expected value of y, ignoring the input features,
has a R2 score equal to 0. The value of R2 can also be negative as the model can be arbitrarily worse than a constant
model. Therefore, if we compare two regression models on
the same dataset, the model with the greater R2 score will
be the one with the highest predictive power.
Furthermore, the Mean 5-Fold Cross Validation score was
computed over the entire dataset. This latter approach of
evaluation combines the 5-fold cross validation technique
with the R2 score in order to obtain a more generalized result.

Prediction Results
As expected, the results obtained for each province are different. The province with the highest correlation values and
also a greater predictive capacity of the models is Brescia
(Table 3), followed by Milan. The maximum performance
for both provinces was achieved with the Random Forest algorithm. However, for Brescia, the best delay time due to
the identification of the disease was found to be 17 days
(although good results were obtained even with i = 15),
while for Milan there was better performance with cases reported 15 days after the environmental measurements. Figure 5 shows the comparison graph of the daily cases of the
province of Brescia observed and predicted by Random Forest (when i = 17 and the Cross Validation accuracy is 81
%, DS = 18%). Observing the figure, it can be seen that the
predictions are very good, even if in some days the predicted
cases are slightly higher than those observed.

On the other hand, performances of Bologna, Modena,
Parma and Rome were weaker, with Cross Validation accuracy values ranging between 52 % and 68 %. In general, the
models that performed better were XGBoost and Random
Forest, while the neural network performed worst. Although
the performances obtained in the latter provinces are not sufficient to predict future cases with good accuracy, they are
nevertheless encouraging to carry out further more in-depth
and precise studies.
The low accuracy values of the models could hide a dependence of the target variable, that is the number of daily
COVID-19 cases, on many factors, probably not observable
from the available data. Indeed, it must be taken into account
that the main modality of transmission of the virus is direct
contact between people. Consequently, the behavior of the
population and containment measures could affect the number of infections. Another important factor is certainly the
number of swabs carried out daily in each district. Unfortunately this information is not available at district level.

Limitations
In this paper we tried to understand, on the basis of current knowledge and available data, whether air quality may
play a role in the spread of the COVID-19 pandemic and, in
particular, on the number of recorded daily cases in several
Italian districts. Of course, the spread of a viral infection is
a complex and multi-factor system. Therefore, our analysis
includes some limitations:
• Open-source datasets: open source datasets containing
official information at district level are very little, poor or
completely missing for some areas. Although numerous
research studies on the COVID-19 pandemic have been
published so far, in most cases the databases used have not
been made available or they include data only at national
level, such as the well-known dataset by Johns Hopkins
University 4 . Furthermore, almost all the information at
provincial level about the spread of the pandemic in Italy
is stored in a platform accessible only to the Istituto Superiore della Sanità (ISS) and other authorized entities.
• Data accuracy: the Civil Protection Department has repeatedly corrected past data, published in the repository,
modifying the daily data. Of course, the inaccuracy in the
number of documented infected can cause a significant increase in the uncertainty of the estimate provided by the
prediction models based on historical data. In addition,
environmental measurements may also be subject to error. Indeed, the World Air Quality Index project team has
underlined that not all data have been validated (World
Air Quality Index Project 2020).

Figure 5: RandomForest on the area of Brescia: Predicted
number of new infected cases compared with the real number of infected cases. i = 17.

• Missing dimensions: for the sake of simplicity, this study
does not take into account (or at least very marginally) the
time axis. We only consider the data for a given day and
we are not taking into account any restriction that the government enacted during the pandemic. We presume that
the information of previous days may influence the daily
4
https://coronavirus.jhu.edu/map.html - Last visited on 18th of
January 2021

i value
15
15
15
17
17
17

Model
XGBoost
Neural Network
Random Forest
XGBoost
Neural Network
Random Forest

R2 score
0,67
0,48
0,74
0,78
0,44
0,83

RMSE
62,06
77,25
55,12
36,48
57,89
31,73

MAE
28,86
44,98
28,39
24,72
32,47
21,92

5-fold CV score
0,65 ± 0,20
0,54 ± 0,22
0,73 ± 0,16
0,77 ± 0,09
0,68 ± 0,10
0,81 ± 0,18

Table 3: Performance of the models on the dataset of the province of Brescia.
data. Thus considering the time dimension might improve
the performance of regressors.
• Confounding factors: factors capable of generating spurious associations, which could have altered the results.
For instance, the restrictive measures and the rigor with
which they have been observed is a possible confounding
factor. As well as the number of daily swabs which varied
considerably over the time.
• Lack of knowledge: this work is based on a still uncertain understanding of the phenomenon. There are many
questions that the research has yet to answer. For example, it is not clear to what extent surfaces and aerosols
favor the transmission of the virus and whether it is actually possible that SARS-CoV-2 can travel incorporated
into air pollution particles while maintaining its vitality.
• Data availability, quality and representativeness: machine learning algorithms require a large amount of data
to be able to accurately learn the relationships between
variables. A small dataset could be poorly representative
of the variability of interactions and could consequently
lead to low predictive performance. The limited observation period, due to the recent discovery of the virus, could
therefore represent a further limitation of the empirical
study.

Conclusion
This work describes a possible relationship among environmental parameters, geographical distribution and the spread
of the COVID-19 pandemic. The analysis highlights a possible diagnostic delay period. It has also shown that machine
learning techniques can be applied to make useful predictions on the number of COVID-19 cases per day as a function of environmental data measurements. For instance, the
possibility of predicting future new infected cases could be
useful to make adequate decisions on the management of the
pandemic, avoiding the overload of the health system.
This work can be seen as a first step towards understanding a complex system, which deserves to be investigated
through in-depth scientific studies. Future epidemiological
investigations should be based on sufficiently extensive and
comprehensive data. In addition, further studies aimed at investigating the possible mechanisms of interaction of environmental factors with SARS-CoV-2 are needed.
In the future, the analysis will be extended to other geographical areas and additional co-factors will be included
in the dataset in order to improve the performance of the

models. We plan to investigate the application of recurrent
neural networks to take into account the time dimension in
the analysis.

References
Becchetti, L.; Conzo, G.; Conzo, P.; and Salustri, F. 2020.
Understanding the heterogeneity of adverse COVID-19 outcomes: the role of poor quality of air and lockdown decisions. SSRN 3572548 .
Breiman, L. 2001. Random forests. Machine learning 45(1):
5–32.
Chin, A. W.; Chu, J. T.; Perera, M. R.; Hui, K. P.; Yen, H.-L.;
Chan, M. C.; et al. 2020. Stability of SARS-CoV-2 in different environmental conditions. The Lancet Microbe 1(1):
e10.
Ciencewicki, J.; and Jaspers, I. 2007. Air pollution and respiratory viral infection. Inhalation toxicology 19(14): 1135–
1146.
Franzese, M.; and Iuliano, A. 2019. Correlation Analysis.
In Encyclopedia of Bioinformatics and Computational Biology, 706 – 721. Oxford: Academic Press.
Friedman, J. H. 2001. Greedy function approximation: a
gradient boosting machine. Annals of statistics 1189–1232.
Friedman, J. H. 2002. Stochastic gradient boosting. Computational statistics & data analysis 38(4): 367–378.
Grigg, J. 2018. Air pollution and respiratory infection: an
emerging and troubling association.
Hudson, J. B.; Sharma, M.; and Vimalanathan, S. 2009. Development of a practical method for using ozone gas as a
virus decontaminating agent. Ozone: science & engineering
31(3): 216–223.
Jamshidi, M.; Lalbakhsh, A.; Talla, J.; Peroutka, Z.; Hadjilooei, F.; Lalbakhsh, P.; Jamshidi, M.; La Spada, L.; Mirmozafari, M.; Dehghani, M.; et al. 2020. Artificial intelligence and COVID-19: deep learning approaches for diagnosis and treatment. IEEE Access 8: 109581–109595.
La Rosa, G.; Bonadonna, L.; Lucentini, L.; Kenmoe, S.; and
Suffredini, E. 2020. Coronavirus in water environments: Occurrence, persistence and concentration methods-A scoping
review. Water Research 115899.
Lalmuanawma, S.; Hussain, J.; and Chhakchhuak, L. 2020.
Applications of machine learning and artificial intelligence
for Covid-19 (SARS-CoV-2) pandemic: A review. Chaos,
Solitons & Fractals 110059.

Lavezzo, E.; Franchin, E.; Ciavarella, C.; CuomoDannenburg, G.; Barzon, L.; Del Vecchio, C.; Rossi,
L.; Manganelli, R.; Loregian, A.; Navarin, N.; et al. 2020.
Suppression of a SARS-CoV-2 outbreak in the Italian
municipality of Vo’. Nature 584(7821): 425–429.
Magurano, F.; Baggieri, M.; Marchi, A.; Rezza, G.; Nicoletti, L.; Group, C.-. S.; et al. 2020. SARS-CoV-2 infection:
the environmental endurance of the virus can be influenced
by the increase of temperature. medRxiv .
Moriyama, M.; Hugentobler, W. J.; and Iwasaki, A. 2020.
Seasonality of respiratory viral infections. Annual review of
virology 7.
Murray, B. K.; Ohmine, S.; Tomer, D. P.; Jensen, K. J.; Johnson, F. B.; Kirsi, J. J.; Robison, R. A.; and O’Neill, K. L.
2008. Virion disruption by ozone-mediated reactive oxygen
species. Journal of virological methods 153(1): 74–77.
Setti, L.; Passarini, F.; De Gennaro, G.; Barbieri, P.; Perrone,
M. G.; Borelli, M.; Palmisani, J.; Di Gilio, A.; Torboli, V.;
Fontana, F.; et al. 2020a. SARS-Cov-2RNA Found on Particulate Matter of Bergamo in Northern Italy: First Evidence.
Environmental Research 109754.
Setti, L.; Passarini, F.; de Gennaro, G.; Di Gilio, A.;
Palmisani, J.; Buono, P.; Fornari, G.; Perrone, M. G.; Piazzalunga, A.; Barbieri, P.; et al. 2020b. Evaluation of the potential relationship between particulate matter (PM) pollution
and COVID-19 infection spread in Italy 1–6.
Shalev-Shwartz, S.; and Ben-David, S. 2014. Understanding
machine learning: From theory to algorithms. Cambridge
university press.
Sloan, C.; Moore, M. L.; and Hartert, T. 2011. Impact of pollution, climate, and sociodemographic factors on spatiotemporal dynamics of seasonal respiratory viruses. Clinical and
translational science 4(1): 48–54.
Sobral, M. F. F.; Duarte, G. B.; da Penha Sobral, A. I. G.;
Marinho, M. L. M.; and de Souza Melo, A. 2020. Association between climate variables and global transmission
of SARS-CoV-2. Science of The Total Environment 729:
138997.
Tseng, C.; and Li, C. 2008. Inactivation of surface viruses
by gaseous ozone. Journal of environmental health 70(10):
56–63.
Vaishya, R.; Javaid, M.; Khan, I. H.; and Haleem, A. 2020.
Artificial Intelligence (AI) applications for COVID-19 pandemic. Diabetes & Metabolic Syndrome: Clinical Research
& Reviews .
Van Doremalen, N.; Bushmaker, T.; Morris, D. H.; Holbrook, M. G.; Gamble, A.; Williamson, B. N.; Tamin, A.;
Harcourt, J. L.; Thornburg, N. J.; Gerber, S. I.; et al. 2020.
Aerosol and surface stability of SARS-CoV-2 as compared
with SARS-CoV-1. New England Journal of Medicine
382(16): 1564–1567.
Wang, J.; Tang, K.; Feng, K.; and Lv, W. 2020a. High
temperature and high humidity reduce the transmission of
COVID-19. SSRN .

Wang, L. L.; Lo, K.; Chandrasekhar, Y.; Reas, R.; Yang,
J.; Eide, D.; Funk, K.; Kinney, R. M.; Liu, Z.; Merrill, W.;
Mooney, P.; Murdick, D.; Rishi, D.; Sheehan, J.; Shen, Z.;
Stilson, B. B. S.; Wade, A. D.; Wang, K.; Wilhelm, C.;
Xie, B.; Raymond, D. M.; Weld, D. S.; Etzioni, O.; and
Kohlmeier, S. 2020b. CORD-19: The Covid-19 Open Research Dataset. ArXiv .
World Air Quality Index Project. 2020.
Air Quality
Open Data Platform. URL https://aqicn.org/data-platform/
covid19/. Accesed 3rd October 2020.
World Health Organization. 2020. WHO Director-General’s
opening remarks at the media briefing on COVID-19-11
March 2020.
Xing, Y.-F.; Xu, Y.-H.; Shi, M.-H.; and Lian, Y.-X. 2016.
The impact of PM2. 5 on the human respiratory system.
Journal of thoracic disease 8(1): E69.
Yongjian, Z.; Jingu, X.; Fengming, H.; and Liqing, C. 2020.
Association between short-term exposure to air pollution
and COVID-19 infection: Evidence from China. Science of
the total environment 138704.
Zhang, J.-m.; ZHENG, C.-y.; XIAO, G.-f.; ZHOU, Y.-q.;
and GAO, R. 2004. Examination of the efficacy of ozone
solution disinfectant in inactivating SARS virus. Chinese
Journal of Disinfection 1.

