Enhancing Safety for Students with Mobile Air
Filtration during School Reopening from COVID-19

arXiv:2104.14418v1 [cs.RO] 29 Apr 2021

Haoguang Yang, Mythra V. Balakuntala, Abigayle E. Moser, Jhon J. Quiñones, Ali Doosttalab,
Antonio Esquivel-Puentes, Tanya Purwar, Richard M. Voyles, Luciano Castillo, and Nina Mahmoudian
Nebulizer with
Electrostatic Spray
Disposition Technique

Abstract—The paper discusses how robots enable occupantsafe continuous protection for students when schools reopen.
Conventionally, fixed air filters are not used as a key pandemic
prevention method for public indoor spaces because they are
unable to trap the airborne pathogens in time in the entire
room. However, by combining the mobility of a robot with air
filtration, the efficacy of cleaning up the air around multiple
people is largely increased. A disinfection co-robot prototype
is thus developed to provide continuous and occupant-friendly
protection to people gathering indoors, specifically for students in
a classroom scenario. In a static classroom with students sitting in
a grid pattern, the mobile robot is able to serve up to 14 students
per cycle while reducing the worst-case pathogen dosage by 20%
and with higher robustness, compared to a static filter. The extent
of robot protection is optimized by tuning the passing distance
and speed, such that a robot is able to serve more people given
a threshold of worst-case dosage a person can receive.

Bernoulli Air Filtration
Module with UVC
Disinfection

Disinfecting Spray Module

Omnidirectional
Mobile Base

(a)

I. I NTRODUCTION
Robots were initially proposed as a protective measure for
healthcare workers during the the Ebola outbreak in 2014 [1],
[2] – by performing risky but low-skill tasks such as cleaning.
During the COVID-19 pandemic, the urban infrastructure of
the hot-spots enable wider and more effective use of robots
– from aerial to ground robots – to enhance people’s safety
and reduce the spread [3]. Among them, clinical care robots
emerged mostly during the onset phase of COVID-19, as
in prior pandemics. They were superceded by robots for
public safety as the pandemic spreads and policies evolve into
quarantine phase. Finally, as we enter the reopening phase,
robots for workplaces and schools become significant.
As PPE supplies catches up and eases pressure on medical
staff, community spread becomes the focus of suppressing and
reopening from the pandemic. While the exposure rate to virus
is low in non-hospital facilities, the risk is accumulated by the
long exposure time and number of people involved. Therefore,
the necessity lies in preparing educators and essential workers to safely move within suddenly hazardous environments.
Driven by these requirements, the Purdue Campus Patrol
H. Yang, M. V. Balakuntala, J. J. Quiñones, and R. M. Voyles
({yang1510, mbalakun, quinone3, rvoyles}@purdue.edu)
are with Polytechnic Institute, Purdue University.
A. E. Moser (aemoser@iastate.edumoser34@purdue.edu) is with
Dept. of Aerospace Engineering, Iowa State University, and Dept. of Mechanical Engineering, Purdue Uiversity.
A. Doosttalab, A. Esquivel-Puentes, T. Purwar, L. Castillo, and N.
Mahmoudian
({adoostta, hesquiv, tpurwar, castil63,
ninam}@purdue.edu) are with Dept. of Mechanical Engineering, Purdue
University.
This manuscript has been accepted by 2021 IEEE International Conference
on Robotics and Automation (ICRA).

(b)

Fig. 1. The Purdue Campus Patrol Robot (PCPR). (a) The overall assembly
and effective disinfection payloads; (b) A physical figure of the robot showing
the setup of the Bernoulli Air Filtration Module.

Robot (PCPR) is developed (Fig. 1) to protect people in indoor
public places using multimodal disinfection. Among which,
the occupant-friendly robotic air filtration fills an urgent need
as schools reopen and gatherings in classrooms pose dangerous
spreading occasions of the virus through bioaerosol created
when sneezing, coughing, or even breathing.
Previous literature featuring robot for disinfection involves
either chemical spraying [4], [5], or ultraviolet (UV) light
exposure [6], [7]. While these methods kills the pathogens
directly and are also involved in our robot design, they poses
irritation to people around it, hence they are not suitable
for full-time protection of indoor personnel. Conventionally,
stationary air filtration systems alone is not effective for
epidemic prevention [8], because the pathogen may find its
victim before being circulated to and trapped by the filtration
system. On the other hand, the effect of combining an air
filtration system with a moving robot has not been studied
before. This paper shows that the mobility of robots augments
air filtration to achieve well-covered protection of indoor
people against scattered sources of airborne pathogen.
As an overview, the contributions of this paper are:
•

Designed and built the Purdue Campus Patrol Robot – a
prototype for indoor mobile air filtration, which promotes
effective, continuous and occupant-friendly protection in
a classroom setting.

(m)
1.5
1

A

Cleaning Path

B

0

C

D

1

Source 2
@𝑇𝑇 = 0

Robot
@𝑇𝑇 = 2s

-1.5
0

*

Source 1
@𝑇𝑇 = 0

-1

Fig. 2.
people

* - Locations of risk assessment

Robot,
Speed
𝑣𝑣 = 0.5m/s

*

Proposes a class of parameterized trajectory in a robotfriendly classroom arrangement, and optimizes the parameter to minimize the infection risk of people adjacent
to the source, given the total number of people the robot
is servicing.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section
II gives an overview of the urgency of the problem and the
PCPR setup. The spreading dynamics of bioaerosol and the
risks involved is further analyzed in Section III with numerical
simulation. Section IV builds a generalizable model of virus
spreading in classrooms, where the efficacy of our robot is
analyzed and optimized. Section V compares the optimization
results with that obtained in an experiment using a mimicked
source. Finally, Section VI draws the conclusion.
•

2

3

Return Path
4

5

6

7

8 (m)

A simple trajectory of the robot when cleaning a space with four

A

B

C

D

II. OVERVIEW OF THE P URDUE C AMPUS PATROL ROBOT
FOR M OBILE D ISINFECTION
The PCPR (Purdue Campus Patrol Robot) integrates
robotics into indoor public settings tasked to carry out repetitive and occupant-safe disinfection procedures. Due to the
covert and contagious nature of the virus, symptom-less people
still pose risk of spreading the virus to the susceptible,
posing persistent pressure to sporadic outbreaks. Therefore,
well-covered, efficient disinfection when people are gathering indoors is essential to suppressing community spread.
Specifically, the classroom scenario serves as a simple but
typical model for the types of disinfection during the reopening
phase. The people are statically located while obeying social
distancing, while the transmission through both bioaerosol
and contact of contaminated surfaces exist. The variety of
transmission paths require a variety of complementary capabilities of periodical and effective disinfection during hours of
operation.
A. Problem Statement
Schools have been taking measures in arrangement to
prevent community spreads during reopening. For example,
Purdue University mandated seating spacing in classrooms of
2 meters longitudinally and 1.5 meters laterally. Some classrooms have additional fans set up at the doors for ventilation.
However, the social distancing guidelines are based on either
emperical guess or over-simplified assumptions, which may
result to failure in protection [9]. As static air filtration and
venting methods become an assistive measure to keep the
indoor pathogen concentration low, they have coverage issues
– the source can be in any possible locations in the room,
which means ideal airflow to vent or clean the pathogens is
not guaranteed. On the other hand, placing an air filter in front
of every occupant in the room is costly and not feasible when
the number of occupants scale. Therefore, we are interested
in how robots can suppress the spread by combining mobility
with air filtration.
A simple comparative simulation is set up as Fig. 2 to
illustrate the problem more intuitively: 4 people (A, B, C,
and D) are placed in a room of 3 m×8 m with coordinates
as specified to follow social distancing guidelines, and all

Robotic Filter

(a) Robotic Filter Case

A

B

C

D

Static Filter

(b) Static Filter Case
Fig. 3. Saliva droplet distribution comparison at 1 minute after emission
from two simulated coughing sources.

people faces to the right. In one case, a static filter is set
at the geometric center to ensure least sum of distances to the
four people, while in another case, the same filter is placed on
a mobile robotic base that moves cyclically on the specified
path across the middle points between people, with a specified
velocity of v = 0.5 m/s. Since every person can possibly be
the source, we specifically make persons A and C be the
source of virus and they cough simultaneously. We evaluate the
spreading pattern in the two cases using Computational Fluid
Dynamics (CFD) simulation, which will be elaborated in Sec.
III. The distribution of particles after 1 minute, in both cases,
are compared side by side in Fig. 3, which clearly shows the
advantage of the robotic filter over the static filter in cleaning
speed and coverage. For persons B and D, slower cleaning
of the plume means longer and faster accumulation of their
dosages of the virus, hence poses higher risks of infection.
The simple simulation signifies the improvements of a mobile
robotic filter over a static filter, when multiple people are in
the room without proper ventilation.
B. Robot Composition
The PCPR consists of three main parts: a holonomic mobile
base, a spraying system, and an air filtration unit with internal

UV disinfection. The omnidirectional holonomic base handles
the navigation and obstacle avoidance with a planar LiDAR
and two RealSense cameras. Its capability of holonomic motion eases constraints on path planning for directional payloads
such as air filtration unit. Core safety techniques for collision
avoidance are inbuilt to the base, ensuring the robot stops and
circles around if it gets too close to any obstacle. With three
parts combined, the robot can effectively perform autonomous
multimodal disinfection on air and surfaces in an indoor space.
The remainder of this section describes the two forms of
non-contact disinfection that the robot is capable of performing
– disinfectant spraying and mobile air filtration, among which
mobile air filtration is novel. The spraying module has a
static coverage radius, while the coverage dynamics of the
air filtration system is not obvious. Hence, the analysis on the
efficacy of air filtration will be expanded in Section IV.
1) Disinfecting Spray Module: Spraying disinfectants is a
hospital-proven measure of epidemic prevention [12]. However, it is a labor-intensive job performed by staffs, who are
exposed to two-fold hazard risks without extensive protection
– disinfectants usually cause irritation to human body, and the
contaminated surfaces poses risks of infections. The spraying
system on the robot uses a novel nanoparticle disinfectant
solution and micro-spray system that can run either prescheduled or teleoperated, which removes staffs from the harsh
working environment. The spray module has nozzles on both
sides and rear of the robot, since spraying from the frontal side
interferes with the perception sensors. The nozzles produce
a cone-shaped micro-droplet cloud of disinfectant with an
average droplets size of ∼ 50 µm, covering a radius of up
to 2.25 m from the robot. An optional Electrostatic Spray
Deposition (ESD) sprayer can be added to enhance coverage
in corners and hard-to-reach areas.
2) Novel Bernoulli Air Filtration Module: Infectious
bioaerosol droplets with diameters ranging from 0.1 to 10 µm,
which can suspend in air for hours, pose a major threat
for horizontal transmission through inhalation. The PCPR
employs a novel air filtration module to increase the effectiveness of robotic filtration. The Bernoulli air filtration module
brings medical-grade air treatment—a combination of particle
filtration (a High Efficiency Particulate Air (HEPA) filter) and
UV disinfection—to public indoor spaces, aiming to inactivate
infectious bioaerosol droplets.
In our setup, the filtration efficiency, measured in percentage
of the captured particles, is higher than 99.3% for particles
larger than 0.3 µm, with capacity of 47 L/s air. In the cylindrical air duct of the Bernoulli filter, two germicidal 2.5 W
UV lamps with surfaces irradiation of 5 mW/cm2 are adopted.
Being contained inside the cylinder, the UV light poses no
exposure risk to passersby.
The flow tract design of the Bernoulli module, i.e. the
AeroMINE™(Motionless, INtegrated Extraction) technology,
originates from wind energy applications [13]. Using a pair of
mirrored perforated airfoils and a perforated cylindrical tower,
a low pressure zone is created between the airfoils which
helps to drive the air from surroundings into the intake of

the system, which then will be driven by an axial fan in the
cylinder through an filter. This design achieves large intake
area without using a large-diameter fan, thus improves energy
efficiency. The large intake area creates a large swept volume
to trap the pathogen as the robot moves, which is ideal for
robotic disinfection.
III. T RANSMISSION PATTERN OF A IRBORNE PATHOGEN
AND D OSAGE A SSESSMENT
To investigate the transport and dispersion of saliva droplets
in an indoor environment and cast insight on how robots
can help, CFD simulations of a single coughing source were
performed. Based on which, we extracted the evaluation
metrics to differentiate the robotic filter versus a conventional
stationary filter, and created snapshots for estimating the
effects of a robotic filter.
A. CFD Simulation Setup for Single Coughing Source
Respiratory pathogens can be emitted in the form of
bioaerosol when an infected person sneeze, cough, or even
breathe. Specifically, we are interested in the coughing case
since it is more covert and frequent compared to sneezing,
while having similar emission magnitude (in terms of jet
velocity) in some conditions [14]. We also consider a worstcase scenario when no facial coverings is present, as people
tend to relax caution on the rules over time. The results from
the CFD simulation provide building blocks for optimizations
afterwards, and to show that 2 m (6 ft) of social distancing is
not always sufficient.
With ANSYS Fluent 2019, the room geometry is built as
a rectangular domain of 3 m × 8 m × 3.5 m (width × length
× height). For simulating the turbulent airflow of coughing
cases, the Reynolds Average Navier-Stokes (RANS) with the
Renormalization Group (RNG) k-ε turbulence model was used
in the simulations for its accuracy, computing efficiency, and
robustness [15]. The Lagrangian method was used to track
saliva droplets with hybrid implicit and trapezoidal schemes.
To emulate a real human cough, saliva droplets are ejected
from the mouth with velocity profiles based on previously performed measurements [16], [17]. In our case, 14000 droplets
with diameters ranging from 2rP = 1 µm to 500 µm and
following Rosin-Rammler distribution [18], were injected from
the inlet for the coughing event. The coughing jet lasts 0.61 s
with a peak velocity around 22.06 m/s occurring at 0.066 s.
The total time of analysis is 5 minutes with non-uniform
time steps for both discrete (droplets) and continuous phases
(air), to show that the particles can spread over 2 m of distance,
as shown in Fig. 4. Since the velocity has been dissipated,
the infectious plume will cause continuous exposure to the
adjacent people. These results reveal the need for air filtration
that can effectively capture the droplets before dispersion.
B. Dosage Criteria
Realistic data is used to evaluate the risk of a person
during the spreading process of the saliva plume of pathogen.
Since the saliva is diluted in the air, the virus concentration,

coughing
Particle Diameter
4.90e-04
4.41e-04

(a) T = 1s

(b) T = 300s

3.92e-04

e

2.94e-04
2.45e-04
1.96e-04

*

1.47e-04
9.83e-05
4.93e-05
2 (ml

0

0

2 (ml

Fig. 4. Saliva droplet spreading from a coughing source (blue arrow) at (a)
T = 1s and (b) T = 300s after the emission. The horizontal scale denotes
2 m social distancing.

measured in PFU/m3 of air, is averaged in a grid-wise manner
in the horizontal plane because the particles Pi are discrete
objects. Since the robot and people move in a 2-D plane, the
3-D virus concentration can be further averaged vertically for
evaluation. The averaging range is the entire room height H,
in case of possible vertical perturbation of the air. Denote the
concentration of virus in saliva as c, the averaging grid size
as 2l, the concentration C of virus in the air at time t at grid
centered (x, y) is thus generated from the particle distribution
P as:
CP (x, y, t) =

4π
kc
·
2
4Hl
3

X

rP3 i , (1)

Pi (t)∈{(x−l,x+l)×(y−l,y+l)}

where k is the scaling value due to liquid evaporation (hence
virus consolidation) in the droplets, and rP denotes the radius
of the particles. Here, we set c = 106 PFU/mL [19] and k = 10
[17] in the analysis followed.
Since a normal human has a tidal volume of about V = 0.5L
and breathing rate of 12 per minute at rest. Because the tidal
volume equivalents to that of a sphere with diameter of 0.1 m,
we set the grid size to be 2l = 0.1m. The “capture grid” is
defined as a grid where an observer stands. The dosage per
breathing of the observer is derived from the average particle
concentration on the capture grid over 5 seconds. Hence the
total dosage the observer receives through an exposure period
of te (seconds) is obtained:

DP (x, y)obs =

te /5−1 Z 5
X
i=0

0

CP (x, y, 5i + t)V
dt.
5

(2)

To increase the robustness of the dosage estimation with
respect to location error of the observer, a max dosage
D̂P (x, y)obs is taken as the maximum dosage on the 3-by3 grids centered at (x, y). As a reference for severity of
exposure, studies of SARS-CoV indicates an at most 5%
chance of developing illness from the virus when exposed
under virus dosage of 10 PFU [20]. Under this criteria, we
will build a generalizable model on mobile air filtration in
classroom setting in Section IV.

*

3.91e-07

*

( m)

*

*

3.43e-04

Assumptions:
• Occupants sittin
dimensions spec
Robot
Purdue regulatio
• Occupants all fa
same direction.
FL People
L
• Plume does not
at Risk
opposite directio
Source
• Location of the s
FC
@𝑇𝑇 = 0
• People around th
Robot
to the front and s
𝑑𝑑𝑦𝑦
𝑟𝑟
@𝑇𝑇 = 𝑇𝑇𝐶𝐶 ≡ 𝑛𝑛𝑇𝑇1
highest risk of in
• Motion of the rob
R
𝑑𝑑𝑥𝑥
FR
disturb the macr
Robot
the particles.
Speed
• Robot Path: No
𝑣𝑣
straight line in fro
with distance 𝑟𝑟 a
* - Locations of risk assessment
• Simplest pa
front of ever
Fig. 5. Geometric parameters of the indoor spread and cleaning model.
room.
• People to Service: 𝑁𝑁
• Robot Cycle Time: 𝑇𝑇 = 𝑁𝑁𝑇𝑇1
• Average Service Time per
person: 𝑇𝑇1 = 𝑑𝑑𝑦𝑦 /𝑣𝑣

Observers are the people at risk with red asterisks.

IV. P REDICTIVE A SSESSMENTS OF C LASSROOM S OCIAL
D ISTANCING & ROBOTIC F ILTRATION
Based on the CFD simulation results, this section assess the
risk of virus spreading to the adjacent people. Specifically, the
classroom seating model and periodic cleaning model are built,
providing parameterized design and optimization approach to
efficient robotic air filtration servicing specified number of
people.
A. Modeling of Transmission and Robotic Cleaning of Airborne Pathogen in a Classroom Setting
Without losing commonality, occupants (students) are assumed to be static, sitting in a grid with specified and fixed
spacing (dx , dy ), and facing the same (+dx , or right as seen
in the figure) direction. As a result, we assume the plume of
particles from an emission event does not spread backwards.
The virus carrier is unaware of becoming the source of spread,
hence the exact source location is unknown. However, when an
emission does occur, we identify the five people seated to the
front and sides of the source to be the most vulnerable, based
on the spreading pattern of the plume as shown in Section
III. These people are denoted as “observers”, whose infection
risks of are evaluated with virus dosage as (2).
Since robotic filtration works by proactively moving to and
cleaning up the plume before it spreads, the robot needs to
pass by every occupant in the room to achieve the cleaning
task. The reason for cleaning the space near every individual
is two folds: only humans can emit the infectious plume, and
the virus carrier is randomly hidden among the occupants. For
occupants seated in a grid pattern, the simplest pattern of robot
motion that traverses each occupant is sequentially passing
by the front of each row (from left to right of one person,
or vice versa) at distance r ∈ (0, dx ), in a straight line and
uniform speed v, before turning around to clean the next row,
as shown in Fig. 5. Compared to moving in column direction,
row-directional motion enables the robot to pass in front of
each occupant, where the probable concentration of particles
is the maximum. We neglect the time the robot spend to switch
rows or return after a cycle, because they are relatively fixed

(3)

where T1 is the service time for each person, further bounded
by the lateral spacing of the occupants dy and the velocity of
the robot. We further assume that the robot has a quantum
release time, such that if the source emits at T = 0, the
possible times that the robot happens to be in front of the
source are TC = nT1 , n = 0, 1, · · · , N − 1. Since the robot
cleans the room periodically, passing N people has the worstcase latency of TC,max = (N − 1)T1 after the emission from
the source.
B. Optimization of Path Parameters
The efficacy of the air filtration is defined as the reduction
ratio of maximum cumulative dosage per emission event
among the five observers, compared to the case without any
filtration (i.e. natural precipitation and natural diffusion). Since
the exact time of emission is unknown, the objective is set to
minimize the maximum dosage for all cleaning delays TC ,
given a fixed N . The parameterized path of the robot left us
with two variables to tune – robot speed v and distance r from
each row of people. Therefore, the optimization formula can
be expressed as:


∗
∗
}=
arg min
max D̂Pn (x, y)obs :
, rN
{vN
(4)
v∈(0,vmax ),r∈(0,dx )
(x, y) ∈ {(0, ±dy ), (dx , 0), (dx , ±dy )}; Pn |∀TC
Since CFD simulation of exact particle distribution is extremely computationally-intense and time-consuming, it is impossible to perform iterative computation for path optimization
of the robotic filter. Therefore, a low-order approximation is
developed for the evaluation of the optimization objective.
As a preliminary assumption for path parameter optimization,
we assume the spread of the plume is not macroscopically
affected by the motion of the robot given that the robot is
moving slowly. From Section III-A we identified that the initial
momentum of the particles dissipated quickly after emission,
therefore the spread can be approximated with a decayed
diffusion to extrapolate the CFD data with step size ∆t:

C(x, y, t + ∆t) = kt∆t C(x, y, t) + kd ∆t · ∇2 C(x, y, t) ,
(5)
where C is the field to be diffused. kd is the equivalent
diffusivity, and kt is the time constant of the exponential decay,
both estimated using distribution of virus concentration from
the CFD results in the time range from 30 to 60 seconds. The
estimated values are kd ≈ 0.003 m2 /s and kt ≈ 0.98, but the
actual values depend on the air flow of the room.
During each dosage accumulation time step, the effect of
the robotic air filter is simplified by decreasing a factor of
kf = Q∆t/Vr on the virus concentration and influx at each
discretized grid that is within the footprint of the robot. Here
Q is the flow rate of the filter, and Vr is the volume of the
column formed by the robot footprint. The decrements are also

1.3

N=18

1.25

N=14
N=12

1.2

N=10

1.15
1.1

N=6

1.05

N=8

N=4

1
0.95

N=2

0.9
0.85
0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

Robot Speed (m/s)

(a) Dosage vs. Speed,
assume passing at r = 1.3 m.

1

Estimated 600s Cumulative Dosage (PFU)

τ ≡ N T1 = N dy /v

1.4

1.35

Estimated 600s Cumulative Dosage (PFU)

depending on the room layout, hence can be added afterwards
as overhead. To summarize, the cycle time of the robot, τ is
bounded by the total number of people N the robot is passing:

1.3

N=20

1.2

N=12
N=10

1.1
1

N=8
N=2

0.9

N=6

0.8

N=4

0.7
0.6
0

0.5

1

1.5

2

Passing Distance (m)

(b) Dosage vs. Passing Distance,
assume passing at v = 0.5 m/s.

Fig. 6. Projected trend of cumulative dosage with a robotic filter during a
single cough event, at Front Center point, with respect to design parameters
and people serviced.

decayed and diffused using (5) before propagating to the next
dosage accumulation time step.
The dosage evaluation ranges from 0 to 600 s for convergence, and uses a step size of 1 s. The evaluation is implemented in MATLAB with the optimization process realized
through the fmincon function. CFD result from a single
source is referred to in the time range of 0 to 60 s, as
the velocity of the plume after 60 s is small and therefore
susceptible to perturbations. The optimization results show that
the efficacy of the robot, with a given N , increases with r and
v. The efficacy of the robot decreases monotonically with the
increase of cleaning cycle τ , i.e. the number of people N it
is passing. However, with large passing distance the cleaning
delay TC becomes less sensitive. The optimization result also
show that among the five observers, the one in the Front Center
position is the most vulnerable, in that it receives the highest
dosage.
The projected cumulative dosage per emission for the Front
Center position, under different passing distance and velocities, is shown in Fig. 6. An experiment is carried out to validate
the optimization result in real-world indoor airflow, and using
a mimicked source.
V. E XPERIMENTAL VALIDATION ON THE E FFICACY OF
ROBOTIC M OBILE A IR F ILTRATION
Although optimizations in IV showed promising results
that the robot is able to reduce the dosage received by the
people closest to the source, the real-world airflow may affect
the results drastically. As a validation, we carried out an
experiment, physically duplicating the case in Fig. 5 in a
realistic indoor environment.
As shown in Fig. 7, we align chairs in a room of 5 m×6 m,
following social distancing guidelines at Purdue, with dx =
2.0 m and dy = 1.5 m. We assume the center seat at the rear
is the source, and five article counters (ExTech VPC300) are
placed at the observer (Front Left, Front Center, Front Right,
Left, and Right) locations. Since the magnitude of emission
velocity affects spreading speed of the plume, hence affects
the cleaning efficacy of the robot, the horizontal velocity of

FL
L

FC

Source
FR
R
Fig. 7. Experiment with PCPR and a mimicked source. The airfoils of the
Bernoulli Air Filter were removed to match the simulation and optimization
assumptions. The red arrows indicate the robot’s cleaning and return paths.

the emission should match that of a normal human cough
as discussed in Section III. The number of particles emitted,
however, can be scaled up to obtain better signal to noise ratio
over the background particle counts.
In the experiment we use a vector fogger with pitch-up
angle of 65◦ and copper mesh at the nozzle to obtain a
peak horizontal speed of 22 m/s. A plastic bag loosely covers
around the nozzle and the mesh to collect the backflow and the
droplets within. The source was turned on for 2 s each, and the
measurements at the five observers last for 10 minutes. The
particle counter reads the accumulative counts for particles
of diameters 0.3, 0.5, 1.0, 2.5, 5.0, and 10 µm, hence the
total 10-minute dosage based on volume of inhaled particles
can be calculated with (2). The background is measured and
subtracted prior to the start of each cumulative measurement
series. Since the number of particles is scaled up compared
to a normal human cough, we compare the relative dosage by
scaling the highest value observed down to 1.
Following the guidelines obtained from Section IV, we set
the passing distance of the robot to be r = 1.3 m, which is
the maximum distance without the robot hitting the legs of the
chairs in the front row. The speed of the robot moving through
the cleaning zone (i.e. between the two rows) is set to be
v = 0.5 m/s. After completing each pass, the robot moves out
of the cleaning zone and circulates back to the starting point
within specified time. The circulation behavior simulates the
cleaning of other spaces, with the cycle time set to τ = 30s,
36s, and 42s, corresponding to N = 10, 12, 14, respectively.
The source is released such that the cleaning delay TC =
τ − 3, the maximum cleaning delay possible. Three additional
cases are set up as comparisons: A) “Near Static Filter”: the
static filter is placed at 1.3 m in front of the source; B) “Far
Static Filter”: the static filter is placed 2 m in front of the
Front Center person, simulating a centralized filter placed at
the center of a larger room; C) no air filtration is provided.
The normalized dosages at the five observers in different
cases are shown in Fig. 8. From the results we conclude that
our robot setup is able to decrease the dosage that people
around the emission source receive by at least 20% when
servicing 14 people, which is the capacity of an average
classroom when social distancing guidelines are observed. The

Normalized 10-minute Dosage

Robot

1
FL
FC
FR
L
R

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0

No Filter

Far Static
Filter

Near Static
Filter

Robotic,
N=10

Robotic,
N=12

Robotic
N=14

Cases

Fig. 8. Cumulative dosage comparison of the five assessment locations under
different filtration settings.

cumulative dosage slightly decreased as N goes from 10 to
14, which as we interpret, is due to increased background
that drowns out the tail of the dosage accumulation, as these
experiments happens in chronological order. The experimental
result outperforms that obtained from the optimization simulation, and the dosage distribution among the five observers
are not always symmetric, which we discuss as follows:
1) Wake of the robot attracts particles to boost cleaning
effects: The motion of the robot creates a low-pressure zone
behind the robot that traps particles along with the robot. The
effect was seen through CFD simulation as well. The wake,
as a bonus from mobility, improves cleaning efficacy while
also poses design considerations on the shape of the robot.
The airfoils of the Bernoulli filter is an example that utilizes
the wake to keep stable traction to the particles as the robot
moves.
2) Volatility of indoor airflow: Some of the experiment
results show biased dosage distribution to the right, which is
due to the design of air conditioning system in the room. The
volatility of indoor airflow also demonstrated the robustness
of the robotic filter, compared to the Near Static Filter case, in
cleaning particles that deviated from their theoretical positions.
3) Considerations on classroom arrangements: In order to
utilize the N most effectively, for robotic filtration, classrooms
should be arranged in the lateral direction to reduce row
switching time for the robot.
4) Real-time environment assessment for pathogens to optimize cleaning efficiency: PCPR seeks to integrate biosensors
for pathogen detection, which in real time assess the robot
surroundings. The real-time environment information will be
invaluable to dynamic planning and optimizing the efficiency
of air and surface disinfection,
VI. C ONCLUSIONS
The Purdue Campus Patrol Robot combines mobility in
robots with air filtration, which achieves effective, robust, and
occupant-friendly cleaning of classrooms. The robot, capable
of serving more than 10 students at once, effectively reduces
worst-case dosage that a people can receive in case of a cough
in a classroom. As a result, the safety of students can be
further enhanced while sporadic outbreak further prevented

during school reopening from COVID-19. The workflow of
modeling and optimization provides insights to future design
of the robot and arrangement of robot-friendly classrooms.
VII. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was funded in part by Intel Corp COVID-19
fund, the Indiana Manufacturing Institute, the NSF RoSe-HuB
Center, and NSF under CNS-1439717.
R EFERENCES
[1] K. Kraft, “Robots against infectious diseases,” in 2016 11th ACM/IEEE
International Conference on Human-Robot Interaction (HRI), 2016, pp.
627–628.
[2] “Ebola robot workshop at Texas A&M: my report out,” Nov
2014, retrieved on Aug 12, 2020. [Online]. Available: https:
//crasar.org/ebola-robot-workshop-my-assessment/
[3] R. R. Murphy and V. Gandudi, “How robots are being used for
covid-19,” July 2020, retrieved on Aug 31, 2020. [Online]. Available:
http://roboticsforinfectiousdiseases.org/how-robots-are-being-used.html
[4] B. Ramalingam, J. Yin, M. Rajesh Elara, Y. K. Tamilselvam,
M. Mohan Rayguru, M. A. V. J. Muthugala, and B. Félix Gómez, “A
human support robot for the cleaning and maintenance of door handles
using a deep-learning framework,” Sensors, vol. 20, no. 12, 2020.
[Online]. Available: https://www.mdpi.com/1424-8220/20/12/3543
[5] F. E. Cepolina and G. G. Muscolo, “Design of a robot for hygienization
of walls in hospital environments,” in ISR/Robotik 2014; 41st International Symposium on Robotics, 2014, pp. 1–7.
[6] J.-H. Yang, U.-I. Wu, H.-M. Tai, and W.-H. Sheng, “Effectiveness
of an ultraviolet-c disinfection system for reduction of healthcareassociated pathogens,” Journal of Microbiology, Immunology and
Infection, vol. 52, no. 3, pp. 487 – 493, 2019. [Online]. Available:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1684118217302001
[7] R. Bogue, “Robots in a contagious world,” Industrial Robot,
vol. 47, no. 5, pp. 642–673, 2020. [Online]. Available: https:
//doi.org/10.1108/IR-05-2020-0101
[8] B. U. Lee, “Life comes from the air: A short review on bioaerosol
control,” Aerosol and Air Quality Research, vol. 11, no. 7, pp. 921–927,
2011.
[9] L. Setti, F. Passarini, G. De Gennaro, P. Barbieri, M. G. Perrone,
M. Borelli, J. Palmisani, A. Di Gilio, P. Piscitelli, and A. Miani,
“Airborne transmission route of covid-19: Why 2 meters/6 feet
of inter-personal distance could not be enough,” International
journal of environmental research and public health, vol. 17,
no. 8, p. 2932, Apr 2020, 32340347[pmid]. [Online]. Available:
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32340347

[10] R. Holmberg and O. Khatib, “Development and control of a holonomic
mobile robot for mobile manipulation tasks,” The International Journal
of Robotics Research, vol. 19, no. 11, pp. 1066–1074, 2000. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1177/02783640022067977
[11] C. Rösmann, W. Feiten, T. Wösch, F. Hoffmann, and T. Bertram, “Efficient trajectory optimization using a sparse model,” in 2013 European
Conference on Mobile Robots, 2013, pp. 138–143.
[12] J. Otter, S. Yezli, T. M. Perl, F. Barbut, and G. French, “The role of
‘no-touch’automated room disinfection systems in infection prevention
and control,” Journal of Hospital Infection, vol. 83, no. 1, pp. 1–13,
2013.
[13] B. C. Houchens, D. V. Marian, S. Pol, and C. H. Westergaard, “A novel
energy-conversion device for wind and hydrokinetic applications,” in
Fluids Engineering Division Summer Meeting, vol. 59070. American
Society of Mechanical Engineers, 2019, p. V004T04A013.
[14] J. W. Tang, A. D. Nicolle, C. A. Klettner, J. Pantelic, L. Wang,
A. B. Suhaimi, A. Y. L. Tan, G. W. X. Ong, R. Su, C. Sekhar,
D. D. W. Cheong, and K. W. Tham, “Airflow dynamics of human
jets: Sneezing and breathing - potential sources of infectious aerosols,”
PLOS ONE, vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 1–7, 04 2013. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0059970
[15] J. Hang, Y. Li, and R. Jin, “The influence of human walking on the
flow and airborne transmission in a six-bed isolation room: Tracer gas
simulation,” Building and Environment, vol. 77, pp. 119–134, 2014.
[16] J. Gupta, C.-H. Lin, and Q. Chen, “Flow dynamics and characterization
of a cough,” Indoor air, vol. 19, no. 6, pp. 517–525, 2009.
[17] A. A. Aliabadi, S. N. Rogak, S. I. Green, and K. H. Bartlett, “Cfd
simulation of human coughs and sneezes: a study in droplet dispersion,
heat, and mass transfer,” in ASME International Mechanical Engineering
Congress and Exposition, vol. 44441, 2010, pp. 1051–1060.
[18] W. G. Lindsley, T. A. Pearce, J. B. Hudnall, K. A. Davis, S. M. Davis,
M. A. Fisher, R. Khakoo, J. E. Palmer, K. E. Clark, I. Celik, C. C. Coffey,
F. M. Blachere, and D. H. Beezhold, “Quantity and size distribution of
cough-generated aerosol particles produced by influenza patients during
and after illness,” Journal of occupational and environmental hygiene,
vol. 9, no. 7, pp. 443–449, 2012, 22651099[pmid]. [Online]. Available:
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22651099
[19] J. F. Schijven, L. C. Vermeulen, A. Swart, A. Meijer, E. Duizer,
and A. M. de Roda Husman, “Exposure assessment for airborne
transmission of sars-cov-2 via breathing, speaking, coughing and
sneezing,” medRxiv, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.medrxiv.
org/content/early/2020/07/05/2020.07.02.20144832
[20] T. Watanabe, T. A. Bartrand, M. H. Weir, T. Omura, and C. N. Haas,
“Development of a dose-response model for sars coronavirus,” Risk
Analysis, vol. 30, no. 7, pp. 1129–1138, 2010. [Online]. Available: https:
//onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/j.1539-6924.2010.01427.x

