Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021

COVID-N ET CT-S: 3D C ONVOLUTIONAL N EURAL
N ETWORK A RCHITECTURES FOR COVID-19 S EVER ITY A SSESSMENT USING C HEST CT I MAGES
Hossein Aboutalebi1,3 , Saad Abbasi2 , Mohammad Javad Shafiee2,3 , Alexander Wong2,3
Department of Computer Science, University of Waterloo, Canada
2
Department of Systems Design Engineering, University of Waterloo, Canada
3
Waterloo Artificial Intelligence Institute, University of Waterloo, Canada
{haboutal, srabbasi, mjshafiee, a28wong}@uwaterloo.ca

arXiv:2105.01284v1 [eess.IV] 4 May 2021

1

A BSTRACT
The health and socioeconomic difficulties caused by the COVID-19 pandemic
continues to cause enormous tensions around the world. In particular, this extraordinary surge in the number of cases has put considerable strain on health care
systems around the world. A critical step in the treatment and management of
COVID-19 positive patients is severity assessment, which is challenging even for
expert radiologists given the subtleties at different stages of lung disease severity.
Motivated by this challenge, we introduce COVID-Net CT-S, a suite of deep convolutional neural networks for predicting lung disease severity due to COVID-19
infection. More specifically, a 3D residual architecture design is leveraged to learn
volumetric visual indicators characterizing the degree of COVID-19 lung disease
severity. Experimental results using the patient cohort collected by the China National Center for Bioinformation (CNCB) showed that the proposed COVID-Net
CT-S networks, by leveraging volumetric features, can achieve significantly improved severity assessment performance when compared to traditional severity
assessment networks that learn and leverage 2D visual features to characterize
COVID-19 severity.

1

I NTRODUCTION

The coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic has challenged the world at every level, from
the health crisis to the social disruption and the economic collapse. Due to globalization and urbanization, the speed of the spread of the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2)
that caused the COVID-19 pandemic has been continuously exceeding estimations around the world.
Since March 2020, when the virus was for the first time declared a pandemic due to the death toll
and the number of positive cases by the World Health Organization Jebril (2020), the economic
impacts of this disease has been enormous. Closure of small businesses, reduction in the workforce
on the sites, trade disruption, and a sharp decline in the tourism industry are just a few early impacts
of the economic consequences of this pandemic Pak et al. (2020). In this regard, the International
Monetary Fund announced that the global economy was contracted by more than 3% in 2020 due to
the uncertainty, lower activity, and lack of productivity Brodeur et al. (2020).
More importantly, from a global healthcare perspective, the impact of this pandemic has been devastating for healthcare systems around the world. The dramatic increase of patients with COVID-19
symptoms has overwhelmed hospitals and clinics. As the demand has exceeded hospital capacities,
problems ranging from the lack of PPEs and limited personnel to supply issues and increasing demand for ventilator machines and oxygen therapies have emerged. As a result, healthcare providers
are in a difficult situation to be selective in the admission process of patients Azoulay et al. (2020).
A critical step in the COVID-19 clinical workflow is severity assessment, which provides clinicians with the information needed to support decisions related to the treatment and management
of COVID-19 positive patients, ranging from Intensive Care Unit (ICU) admission to ventilator usage Tyrrell et al. (2021). Providing a robust and consistent COVID-19 severity assessment system is
therefore essential for boosting the quality of healthcare services and can potentially reduce the death
1

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021

toll caused by the pandemic. However, assessing disease severity of COVID-19 positive patients is
quite challenging even for expert clinicians given the subtleties at different stages of lung disease
severity. Motivated by this, we introduce COVID-Net CT-S, a suite of deep convolutional neural
networks for predicting the lung disease severity due to COVID-19 infection based on computed
tomography (CT) volumes.

1.1

R ELATED WORK

From the early days of the pandemic, deep learning provided a new angle to overcome the pandemic
challenges. Using deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) as a screening tool for early detection
of the disease has been a great area of research interesting. COVID-Net, which was proposed by
Wang et al. (2020), was among the first screening tools which leveraged deep CNNs. In that work,
CNNs were leveraged to analyze chest x-ray (CXR) images to distinguish COVID-19 infections
from non-COVID-19 pneumonia and normal cases. Jain et al. (2020) performs the same task on
three different CNNs, including Inception network Szegedy et al. (2015), on the Kaggle repository
of CXR images. In another work by Sahlol et al. (2020), a hybrid model was proposed combining a
CNN with a swarm-based feature selection algorithm to increase detection accuracy.
COVID-Net CT, which was proposed by proposed by Gunraj et al. (2021), leveraged computed
tomography (CT) images to perform the same task. One advantage of COVID-Net CT is that it was
trained on over a patient cohort of more than 4000 patients from different countries. In another work
by He et al. (2020), the authors propose a sample efficient framework for diagnosing COVID-19.
They significantly leverage self-supervising transfer learning to avoid overfitting while getting high
accuracy when the data is scarce. In the proposed approach by Zhang et al. (2020), introduced a new
dataset on CT images from Chinese hospitals as well as developed an AI system that comprised of
an image segmentation algorithm followed by a classification neural network to detect COVID-19
cases. One of the main initiatives of this work is to utilize image segmentation to reduce the noise
of the inputs for the classification task.
There is also a stream of work focused on performing image segmentation to detect areas of COVID19 infection. Yan et al. (2020) propose a deep learning framework for detecting affected ares in
CT images. In particular, they propose a new feature variation block to elevate the segmentation
performance by adaptively adjusting the features’ global properties. Müller et al. (2020), propose
a new segmentation framework to overcome small dataset problem. In particular, they leveraged a
3D U-Net combined with the generation of unique and random image patches for training datasets
to further increase image segmentation’s performance on CT images.
While there are numerous works on applying deep learning to screening and image segmentation,
an area that is much less explored is deep learning for COVID-19 severity assessment. The seminal
works in this area are COVID-Net S, a tailored deep convolutional neural network proposed by
Wong et al. (2020) to predict geographic and opacity extent severity scores from CXR images, and
the study by Cohen et al. (2020) where they used a pretrained DenseNet Huang et al. (2017) model
to predict severity scores. In this regard, while it is common to use 2D architecture to handle CT
images for COVID-19 detection like the works proposed in Gunraj et al. (2021); Zhang et al. (2020),
in this work, we are motivated to leverage 3D architectures for the severity analysis to better capture
the information across the depth dimension.
Here, the proposed COVID-Net CT-S networks leverage a 3D residual architecture design to predict
COVID-19 severity based on CT volumes to better capture volumetric visual indicators characterizing the degree of COVID-19 lung disease severity. The proposed neural networks are trained
and tested based on the patient cohort collected by the China National Center for Bioinformation
(CNCB) Zhang et al. (2020), comprising of CT volumes and associated clinical severity scores. To
illustrate the effectiveness of the proposed COVID-Net CT-S networks, we compare their performance to traditional severity assessment networks that leverage 2D visual features to characterize
COVID-19 severity. The results show that taking advantage of volumetric information for characterizing COVID-19 infection characteristics can boost performance significantly. Furthermore, given
the challenging nature of training 3D convolutional neural networks on volumetric CT scans captured under different settings and the imbalance nature of the patient cohorts, we describe a training
regimen to improve generalization under such scenarios.
2

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021

Figure 1: Core architecture of the proposed COVID-Net CT-S for lung disease severity assessment
of COVID-19 positive patients.

2

M ETHODOLOGY

Network Architecture. The proposed COVID-Net CT-S architectures possess 3D residual deep
convolutional neural network architectures to better capture subtle volumetric visual indicators characterizing COVID-19 lung disease severity. More specifically, the three COVID-Net CT-S networks
are comprised of 16, 33, and 50 3D convolutional layers, followed by the same number of 3D residual blocks for COVID-Net CT-S50, CT-S100, and CT-S152, respectively. The output of the stack
of 3D residual blocks is then fed into a ReLU layer, a dropout layer, and finally a softmax layer for
making the final COVID-19 disease severity score (corresponding to low, medium, and high severity). Figure 1 illustrates the core architecture of the proposed COVID-Net CT-S neural network
architecture.
Training regimen. Given the challenges of training such a 3D deep convolutional neural network
on volumetric scans with high capture setup diversity, limited patient count, and highly imbalanced
patient cohorts, we leveraged the following training regimen to greatly improve generalization:
• Volumetric uniformization: As mentioned earlier, CT images are captured using different
CT scanners with different protocols, different hardware configurations, and the anatomical characteristics of patients (e.g., patient size) can vary greatly. To alleviate this issue,
we took inspiration from Zunair et al. (2020) and introduced a volumetric uniformization
process based on spline interpolation to reconstruct all patient volumes in the cohort used
in this study to a standardized volume depth of 40.
• Dropout Regularization: Throughout extensive experiments, we observed that using
dropout regularization can significantly improve severity assessment accuracy by as much
as 10%. Therefore, we leverage dropout layers in all tested networks.
• Uniform Batch Sampling: As the severity levels amongst the patient cohort is highly
unbalanced, we leverage a uniform batch sampling technique where a uniform number of
samples from each severity level is drawn to construct a batch for each training iteration.
This greatly increased the stability and convergence speed of the training process, as well
as improved the generalization of the proposed networks.
• Preprocessing: For preprocessing the CT volumes, we employed similar steps as those
introduced in Gunraj et al. (2021), but modified the cropping process to preserve more of
the patient’s body area while still maintaining patient table mitigation. Figure 2 shows the
effect of the preprocessing step on an image slice from a CT volume.

3

E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS AND D ISCUSSION

To evaluate the efficacy of the proposed COVID-Net CT-S networks, We performed all our experiments on the CNCB dataset Zhang et al. (2020). In the dataset, there are a total of 267 patients with
annotated severity analysis, and the resulting distribution of severity levels is shown in Figure 3. A
total of 53 of the patient cases in the dataset are leveraged for testing and evaluation. While the
severity annotations have a dynamic range of 1 to 6, with 1 being least severe and 6 being the most
severe, for the purpose of this study we have grouped them into 3 severity levels: 1) low (severity
scores of 1-2), 2) medium (score of 3), and 3) high (scores of 4-6). This was chosen given clinical
similarities between these severity score groups in terms of the treatment and management regimen
within these groups, and as such allows for clearer guidelines that link to the course of action to
take.
3

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021

(a) Raw CT image

(b) Post-Processed CT image

Figure 2: Comparison of CT image before (a) and after (b) preprocessing.

Figure 3: Patient distribution for different severity levels in the CNCB dataset.
One of the main architecture design choices for the proposed COVID-Net CT-S networks revolve
around the hypothesis that leveraging of 3D convolutions can better characterize and learn the visual
indicators associated with the degree of COVID-19 disease severity when compared to traditional
severity assessment networks that leverage 2D convolutions. Therefore, in this study we also trained
a 50 layer residual network architecture comprised of 2D convolutions for performing COVID-19
severity assessment on a patient’s condition by making predictions on all slices within a patient
volume and performing majority vote on the predictions to determine the final severity level.
The performance of the tested models are evaluated based on the accuracy metric and is shown in
Table 1. Furthermore, Table 2 shows the confusion matrix for COVID-Net CT-S. It can be observed
from Table 1 that the proposed COVID-Net CT-S architectures outperform the traditional 2D architecture used in severity assessment networks by as much as 19.5%, with the variant of COVID-Net
CT-S sharing the same depth as the 2D architecture achieving 13% higher accuracy. Furthermore,
we can observe that using COVID-Net CT-S152 with dropout gives the best performance. Based on
the experimental results, it can be clearly observed that the proposed COVID-Net CT-S networks
can achieve strong severity assessment performance when compared to traditional 2D severity assessment approaches.

Table 1: Accuracy results on CNCB dataset
Model
2D CT-S50 He et al. (2016)
COVID-Net CT-S152
COVID-Net CT-S100
COVID-Net CT-S50

Table 2: Confusion Matrix for COVID-Net CT-S

Accuracy
59.0
78.5
75.0
72.0

Low
Medium
High

4

Low
85%
10%
13%

Medium
8%
79%
15%

High
7%
11%
72%

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021

4

C ONCLUSION

In this paper, we introduced COVID-Net CT-S, a suite of deep convolutional neural networks to
predict the lung disease severity of COVID-19 positive patients based on CT image volumes. While
a 2D convolutional architecture has been one of the dominant architectures for COVID-19 assessment, in this paper we showed that for the case of severity assessment based on CT volumes, a 3D
convolutional architecture could achieve improved prediction performance by better characterizing
volumetric visual indicators associated with severity levels of COVID-19 infection. Furthermore,
we demonstrated that the use of a customized training regimen can improve the performance and
generalization of networks when trained with a patient cohort with imbalanced severity levels and
high equipment and protocol variance.

R EFERENCES
Azoulay, Elie, Beloucif, Sadek, Guidet, Bertrand, Pateron, Dominique, Vivien, Benoit, & Le Dorze,
Matthieu. 2020. Admission decisions to intensive care units in the context of the major COVID-19
outbreak: local guidance from the COVID-19 Paris-region area. Critical Care, 24(1), 1–6.
Brodeur, Abel, Gray, David M, Islam, Anik, & Bhuiyan, Suraiya. 2020. A Literature Review of the
Economics of COVID-19.
Cohen, Joseph Paul, Dao, Lan, Roth, Karsten, Morrison, Paul, Bengio, Yoshua, Abbasi, Almas F,
Shen, Beiyi, Mahsa, Hoshmand Kochi, Ghassemi, Marzyeh, Li, Haifang, et al. 2020. Predicting
covid-19 pneumonia severity on chest x-ray with deep learning. Cureus, 12(7).
Gunraj, Hayden, Sabri, Ali, Koff, David, & Wong, Alexander. 2021. COVID-Net CT-2: Enhanced
Deep Neural Networks for Detection of COVID-19 from Chest CT Images Through Bigger, More
Diverse Learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.07433.
He, Kaiming, Zhang, Xiangyu, Ren, Shaoqing, & Sun, Jian. 2016. Deep residual learning for image
recognition. Pages 770–778 of: Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and
pattern recognition.
He, Xuehai, Yang, Xingyi, Zhang, Shanghang, Zhao, Jinyu, Zhang, Yichen, Xing, Eric, & Xie,
Pengtao. 2020. Sample-efficient deep learning for covid-19 diagnosis based on ct scans. MedRxiv.
Huang, Gao, Liu, Zhuang, Van Der Maaten, Laurens, & Weinberger, Kilian Q. 2017. Densely
connected convolutional networks. Pages 4700–4708 of: Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
computer vision and pattern recognition.
Jain, Rachna, Gupta, Meenu, Taneja, Soham, & Hemanth, D Jude. 2020. Deep learning based
detection and analysis of COVID-19 on chest X-ray images. Applied Intelligence, 1–11.
Jebril, Nadia. 2020. World Health Organization declared a pandemic public health menace: A systematic review of the coronavirus disease 2019 “COVID-19”, up to 26th March 2020. Available
at SSRN 3566298.
Müller, Dominik, Rey, Iñaki Soto, & Kramer, Frank. 2020. Automated Chest CT Image Segmentation of COVID-19 Lung Infection based on 3D U-Net. arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.04774.
Pak, Anton, Adegboye, Oyelola A, Adekunle, Adeshina I, Rahman, Kazi M, McBryde, Emma S,
& Eisen, Damon P. 2020. Economic consequences of the COVID-19 outbreak: the need for
epidemic preparedness. Frontiers in public health, 8.
Sahlol, Ahmed T, Yousri, Dalia, Ewees, Ahmed A, Al-Qaness, Mohammed AA, Damasevicius,
Robertas, & Abd Elaziz, Mohamed. 2020. COVID-19 image classification using deep features
and fractional-order marine predators algorithm. Scientific Reports, 10(1), 1–15.
Szegedy, Christian, Liu, Wei, Jia, Yangqing, Sermanet, Pierre, Reed, Scott, Anguelov, Dragomir,
Erhan, Dumitru, Vanhoucke, Vincent, & Rabinovich, Andrew. 2015. Going deeper with convolutions. Pages 1–9 of: Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition.
5

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021

Tyrrell, Carina SB, Mytton, Oliver T, Gentry, Sarah V, Thomas-Meyer, Molly, Allen, John Lee Y,
Narula, Antony A, McGrath, Brendan, Lupton, Martin, Broadbent, Jo, Ahmed, Aliko, et al. 2021.
Managing intensive care admissions when there are not enough beds during the COVID-19 pandemic: a systematic review. Thorax, 76(3), 302–312.
Wang, Linda, Lin, Zhong Qiu, & Wong, Alexander. 2020. Covid-net: A tailored deep convolutional
neural network design for detection of covid-19 cases from chest x-ray images. Scientific Reports,
10(1), 1–12.
Wong, Alexander, Lin, Zhong Qiu, Wang, Linda, Chung, Audrey G., Shen, Beiyi, Abbasi, Almas,
Hoshmand-Kochi, Mahsa, & Duong, Timothy Q. 2020. COVIDNet-S: Towards computer-aided
severity assessment via training and validation of deep neural networks for geographic extent and
opacity extent scoring of chest X-rays for SARS-CoV-2 lung disease severity.
Yan, Q, Wang, B, Gong, D, Luo, C, Zhao, W, Shen, J, Shi, Q, Jin, S, Zhang, L, & You, Z.
2020. COVID-19 Chest CT Image Segmentation–A Deep Convolutional Neural Network Solution. arXiv 2020. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.10987.
Zhang, Kang, Liu, Xiaohong, Shen, Jun, Li, Zhihuan, Sang, Ye, Wu, Xingwang, Zha, Yunfei, Liang,
Wenhua, Wang, Chengdi, Wang, Ke, et al. 2020. Clinically applicable AI system for accurate
diagnosis, quantitative measurements, and prognosis of COVID-19 pneumonia using computed
tomography. Cell, 181(6), 1423–1433.
Zunair, Hasib, Rahman, Aimon, Mohammed, Nabeel, & Cohen, Joseph Paul. 2020. Uniformizing
Techniques to Process CT Scans with 3D CNNs for Tuberculosis Prediction. Pages 156–168 of:
International Workshop on PRedictive Intelligence In MEdicine. Springer.

6

