Divided We Rule: Influencer Polarization on Twitter During Political Crises in
India
Saloni Dash, 1 Dibyendu Mishra, 1 Gazal Shekhawat,1 Joyojeet Pal 1
1

arXiv:2105.08361v1 [cs.SI] 18 May 2021

Microsoft Research
Bengaluru, India
t-sadash@microsoft.com, v-dibmis@microsoft.com, t-gshekhawat@microsoft.com, joyojeet.pal@microsoft.com

Abstract
Influencers are key to the nature and networks of information
propagation on social media. Influencers are particularly important in political discourse through their engagement with
issues, and may derive their legitimacy either solely or partly
through online operation, or have an offline sphere of expertise such as entertainers, journalists etc. To quantify influencers’ political engagement and polarity, we use Google’s
Universal Sentence Encoder (USE) to encode the tweets of
6k influencers and 26k Indian politicians during political
crises in India. We then obtain aggregate vector representations of the influencers based on their tweet embeddings,
which alongside retweet graphs help compute the stance and
polarity of these influencers with respect to the political issues. We find that while on COVID-19 there is a confluence
of influencers on the side of the government, on three other
contentious issues around citizenship, Kashmir’s statehood,
and farmers’ protests, it is mainly government-aligned fan
accounts that amplify the incumbent’s positions. We propose
that this method offers insight into the political schisms in
present-day India, but also offers a means to study influencers
and polarization in other contexts.

Introduction
As social media raises concerns of polarizing politics,
worldwide, questions arise on the role of public figures
who wield the ability to influence the political discourse. In
parts of the west, there is an inherent tension between what
are largely seen as liberal mainstream celebrities (Demaine
2009) and an emerging group of hyper-partisan microcelebrities (Lewis 2020). Meanwhile in India, the role of influencers has been complex, especially among mainstream
offline celebrities who have leaned more towards the nationalist incumbent, which has a much better organized online
social media presence (Lalani, Kommiya Mothilal, and Pal
2019), while public figures speaking against the government
have faced online harassment, trolling, and attacks to their
livelihoods (Singh 2020; Menon 2020).
In this paper, we study the role of influencers in amplifying political polarization in India, by quantifying the partisan engagement of Twitter handles of Indian entertainers,
sportspersons, journalists and other public figures alongside
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

handles of politicians from two major national parties in India – the national incumbent BJP (Bharatiya Janata Party)
and the opposition party INC (Indian National Congress).
We do this by examining influencer engagement on four issues that have dominated the news and seen divisive political
activism during 2019-2021. In the order of their onset, they
are as follows –
• Abrogation of Article 370: The central government’s
unilateral abrogation of article 370 of the Indian Constitution, which had secured autonomy for India’s only
Muslim majority state, Jammu & Kashmir. The region,
which is also part of a major international dispute, was
broken into two union territories, with no consultation
with the state’s residents. Hotly debated actions following
the abrogation included cutting of communication lines in
Kashmir, imprisoning politicians, imposing a curfew, and
increasing armed forces on the ground.
• Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA): The Act, which
disqualified Musims from qualifying for refugee status
when entering from India’s neighboring countries, was
enacted alongside the government’s plans to conduct a nationwide exercise to identify “illegal foreigners” living in
India by requiring historical documentation of residency.
Since such an exercise would automatically exclude people of certain faiths from scrutiny and intensify attention
towards others, it stoked fears of lost citizenship among
India’s Muslims and led to widespread protests all around
the country.
• COVID-19: We studied the tweets surrounding the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic in India up until March 2021,
before the second wave of the crisis began. The first wave
period was marked by the government announcing a nationwide lockdown, which triggered an exodus of lowincome migrant workers from Indian cities to hinterlands,
often on foot, since transport lines were closed. The migrant crisis and economic impacts, as well as the health
concerns and practices were part of the contentious issues
in these conversations.
• Farmers’ Protests: The Indian Farm Bills which were
passed in parliament in September 2020, targeted pricing and subsidies and allowed the entry of corporates into
certain domains of crop trading. This led to protests by
farmers, particularly in states of North India where the
new configurations of crops and purchase prices brought

threats to livelihoods.
Our analysis builds on past work about Twitter-driven political outreach strategies in India, particularly by the ruling party BJP and its leader, Prime Minister Narendra Modi
(Pal 2015; Sinha 2017; Neyazi, Kumar, and Semetko 2016).
The four events we study here bear elements of communication and outreach both for and against the government’s
position, while three events are related to responses on specific government initiatives (Article 370, CAA, Farm Bills).
The COVID-19 related discourse, while marked by a few
key events, is an ongoing issue with longer term sustained
social media communication.

Figure 1: Influencers’ Timeline of Retweeting BJP (Top)
and INC (Bottom) Politicians.
Figure 1 shows us a weekly timeline (January 2019 March 2021) of influencers retweeting politicians, with the
peaks corresponding to key events in India. We see that
the four events studied here all see peaks, and that in general, influencer tweets on both sides tend to spike around
the same events with the exception of a few events, such as
”Howdy Trump” when the ruling party mobilized more influencers, while influencers on the opposition side mostly ignored it. Table 1 offers some insight into influencers retweetParty
BJP
INC

[1,50]
3265
3144

Retweet Range
(50,100] (100,150]
(150,max]
214
99
272 (max-10053)
185
62
151 (max-54301)

Total
3850
3542

Table 1: Distribution of Influencers Retweeting BJP and
INC Politicians.
ing politicians. We see that most individual influencers have
generally engaged with politicians in small measure (1-50
times). The major difference we see is among the influencers who have engaged with politicians’ content more
than 150 times. We see a larger number of influencers engaging with BJP – 272, compared with 151 influencers who
have retweeted INC politicians, though the overall maximum engagement is of an influencer retweeting INC’s content 54k times. This concentration of influencers on the high
end underlines the importance of a loyal set of accounts that
actively promote a party’s political content. We also find that
the influencers who most engage with politicians tend to be

platform celebrities (those with no other known sources of
renown other than for their social media presence) or media
houses rather than mainstream journalists, entertainers etc.
(refer to Data for the categories of influencers in this study).

Related Work
In their formative study of political polarization, Conover
et al. (2011) explain the homophily on social media through
partisan user behavior in the US. The authors particularly
find the retweet network of their sample to be highly polarized, with limited interaction between the two camps. A
body of work also suggests that influencers exacerbate polarization on social media by endorsing and spreading partisan content. In an experiment with Democrats and Republicans, Becker, Porter, and Centola (2019) demonstrated that
polarization does not spread in egalitarian networks where
all individuals have equal influence throughout the network.
They argue that partisan bias is amplified on social media
platforms like Twitter because these networks are organised
around few key influencers (Centola 2020) and the ability
to obtain central positions could allow extremists to generate and sustain belief polarization in social media networks
(Becker, Porter, and Centola 2019). Additionally, Garibay
et al. (2019) found through their simulations that polarization in social media helps influencers gain more influence.
Moreover, studying the elections in the US and Spain,
Barberá and Rivero (2015) find that ideologically motivated
Twitter users create disproportionately more content than
moderate ones. In India, studies of Modi’s political campaigning have particularly noted the use of celebrities on
Twitter for image building (Pal 2015). By interacting with
key influencers, Modi was able to successfully attach his
brand with that of leading entertainers and sportspersons.
Neyazi, Kumar, and Semetko (2016) find Twitter networks
in India to be highly polarizing, especially in BJP’s political
campaigning. This polarization also affects traditional communication platforms due to the increasingly hybrid nature
of media systems with digital platforms acting in conjunction with traditional media in politicians’ campaigns (Chadwick 2017).
In their study of the Brazillian presidential election that
brought far-right politician Jair Bolsonaro to power, Recuero, Soares, and Gruzd (2020) find a strong connection
between polarization and disinformation spread on Twitter.
This degree of polarization also has parallels in offline developments of the region. Here, the authors observed that the
pro-Bolsonaro camp was asymmetrically polarized and note
that the escalation of ‘hyperpartisanship’ also led to the peripheralization of traditional media. In such scenarios, partisan media houses, that defy traditional notions of balance
and detachment from the contested subject, gain prominence
(Faris et al. 2017). The degree of polarization also varies on
the nature of the crises, and politics is especially distinct in
its contribution (Barberá and Rivero 2015).

Method
We now outline our data collection and polarity score computation methodology.

Data
We use a publicly available dataset (Panda et al. 2020) of
Indian politicians and their twitter handles. The dataset also
has party annotations for each of the politicians, which we
use to obtain the accounts of 14,094 BJP politicians and
12,341 INC politicians. We then collect tweets 1 from these
26,435 accounts between January 2019 - March 2021.
To build the set of influencers we iteratively collect the
friends of the filtered politicians. From the resultant list,
we remove all the politicians, non-Indian global figures
etc., such that we are left with Twitter accounts that are
highly followed by Indian politicians. Our process being
built ground up from the friends of politicians means that
our definition of influencer biases towards those accounts
that are of interest to politicians - ie for instance, if our seed
set had started with sportspersons, it is likely we would have
ended up with several highly followed sports management
companies or commentators in our set, or likewise for other
domains. In essence, a journalist with 3000 followers, of
which 200 followers are politicians would be included in
our set, as opposed to say a PR agent with 300k followers,
but with few politicians following them.
The iterative process helps mitigate this bias, and our
team’s contextual knowledge of India is used to ensure that
known public figures are included in the sample as far as
possible. Thus, we are confident that the vast majority of ’A
List’ public figures such as film stars, sportspersons, businesspersons etc. are included in our sample, but as Table 2
shows, we capture a relatively high number of journalists
and media houses, since their work is of obvious importance
to politicians. We categorized every influencer account into
only one category, whichever they are primarily known by,
thus a major sportsperson with business interests is nonetheless categorized under sports.
Category
Academia
Activist
Business
Entertainment
Fan Account
Journalist
Law & Policy
Media House
Platform Celebrity
Social Work
Sports
Writer

Count
172
81
208
1251
36
3551
141
550
126
63
348
99

Total

6626

prominent members of nonprofits, affiliates of religious or
quasi-religious organizations who present themselves as activists, or any who self-identify with the label. The Business
category includes accounts of commercial establishments,
their founders, and key employees. The Entertainment segment refers to people engaged in films, television, music,
and fashion. Fan Accounts have to do with profiles that
distinctly avow to support public figures or organizations,
and includes unofficial accounts dedicated to actors, politicians and political parties. Journalist refers to individuals
who work in the reporting and production of news, features
and commentary. The Law & Policy category is for lawyers,
judges, and public policy practitioners. Media Houses are
platforms, both digital and conventional that produce news,
entertainment or other content, and thus this category also
includes newspapers, websites, and TV channels. Like Fan
Accounts, the Platform Celebrity category captures a digital
phenomenon of accounts whose popularity stems from their
online presence and content creation, rather than the offline
work of the individuals involved. The Social Work category
refers to the non-profit sector and includes accounts of its
employees. Sports captures both athletes, as well as the accounts of teams, tournaments, and governing bodies. Writer
is a category for published authors of fiction and non-fiction,
it does not include columnists who are employed by news
platforms.

Tweet Classification
In order to capture event specific tweets, we use a Word2Vec
(Mikolov et al. 2013) bag of words based technique to classify the collected tweets (Vijayaraghavan, Vosoughi, and
Roy 2016). We first define a set of high precision keywords
that are indicative of the event. We then filter tweets that
contain at least one of the keywords, and consequently train
a Word2Vec model on the filtered tweets. After obtaining a
vector representation of all the words, we expand each of the
keywords from the seed set, by computing the cosine similarity of pairs of words for all words in the vocabulary. We
then iteratively add words to the seed set according to the
cosine similarity based criteria defined in Vijayaraghavan,
Vosoughi, and Roy (2016). Some of the keywords identified
by the Word2Vec model are showed in Table 3.
Keywords & Hashtags
Article 370
CAA/NRC
COVID-19
Farmers’ Protest

Table 2: Influencers by Category
The final set of influencers is divided into a 12 categories. Academia refers to accounts that largely work with
higher education institutes and conduct research. The Activist category includes grassroots organizers, leaders or
1

Using Tweepy - https://www.tweepy.org/

#jammuandkashmir, #article370, 35a, abrogation, kashmiri
#caanrc,
#citizenshipamendmentact,
#caanrcnpr, #anticaa, #caanrcprotest
covid2019, #covidpandemic, #coronapandemic, #coronacrisis
#farmersprotests, #farmersagitation, #delhichalo, #farmersdelhiprotest

Table 3: Top 5 Keywords/Hashtags by Event.
In order to obtain a rough estimate of the performance of
our classification pipeline, we randomly select a representative sample (n = 100) and manually annotate whether the
tweet is related to the particular event or not. We report pre-

cision values of 87.0%, 98.0%, 100% and 97% for Article
370, CAA/NRC, COVID-19 and Farmer’s Protests respectively. Overall, we obtain a combined precision of 95.6%.
While these precision values are noisy estimates of the true
precision values, it provides a sanity check for the classification methodology.

User Embeddings
Given a set of accounts and their tweets for an event, we
obtain user embeddings based on aggregate tweet embeddings (Rashed et al. 2020). We use Google’s Universal Sentence Encoder (USE) (Cer et al. 2018) to obtain high dimensional vector representations of the tweets by a user for
a given event, and average out all the tweet embeddings to
represent a single user. The user embeddings are projected
to a two dimensional space using UMAP (McInnes, Healy,
and Melville 2020) and clustered using hierarchical density
based clustering (HDB-SCAN) (McInnes and Healy 2017).
According to Rashed et al. (2020), this method results in
clusters indicative of users’ stance on the specific event.

User Polarity
We then use the clusters to compute polarity scores of users.
Let V be the set of all users who have tweeted about a particular event. We partition V into two groups, X and Y based
on the clusters returned by HDB-SCAN. We partition V in
a way such that partitions X and Y predominantly consist
of pro-INC users and pro-BJP users respectively.
Retweet Polarity We construct an undirected retweet
graph G with users in V as vertices. An edge eij exists between users vi and vj ∈ V, if vi and vj have at least two
retweets between them, i.e. if either vi has retweeted vj at
least twice, or vi has retweeted vj at least once and vice
versa or vj has retweeted vi at least twice, ∀i, j = 1...|V|.
We choose 2 retweets as our threshold based on the experiments by Garimella et al. (2018) to avoid unreliable results.
We then use the Random Walk Controversy (RWC) score
(Garimella et al. 2018) to define a retweet based user polarity score.
Let X∗ and Y∗ be the set of top k (=100) high degree
vertices, i.e. the top k users with the most number of retweet
edges, from partitions X and Y respectively. Let luX as defined in Garimella et al. (2018) be the expected hitting time
for a vertex u ∈ V, i.e. the expected number of steps for
a random walk starting with vertex u and ending in a high
degree vertex in X∗ . Therefore p(u)X is defined as the fraction of vertices v ∈ V for which the expected hitting time is
more than that of vertex u, i.e. luX < lvX . Therefore a score of
r(u)X ≈ 1 indicates that the vertex u is close to a high degree vertex in X∗ . Subsequently, r(u)Y is defined similarly,
leading to retweet polarity score r(u) being defined as:
r(u) = r(u)X − r(u)Y

∈ (−1, 1)

(1)

where a score close to 1 indicates that a user is more likely
to be retweeted by another user with a pro-INC stance, while
a score close to -1 indicates that the user is more likely to be
retweeted by a user with a pro-BJP stance.

Content Polarity We adopt the cultural axis generation
procedure described by Waller and Anderson (2020). We
compute a partisan axis in the high dimensional user embedding space, by taking the difference of vector embeddings of
the top n (=10) INC and BJP politicians, sorted by retweet
polarity scores. Briefly, let x̃ and ỹ be the high dimension
embedding vectors representing INC and BJP politicians respectively. For any user u, with a high dimension embedding
vector ũ, the content polarity score c(u) is defined as the cosine similarity of the user with the partisan axis:
c(u) =

ũ · (x̃ − ỹ)
kũk kx̃ − ỹk

∈ (−1, 1)

(2)

where a score close to 1 indicates a user’s stance on the particular issue is highly pro-INC, whereas a score close to -1
signifies that the user’s stance on the issue is highly pro-BJP.

Experiments
We capture event specific tweets based on the classification pipeline discussed previously. The number of tweets for
Topic
Article 370
CAA/NRC
COVID-19
Farmers’ Protest

Users
14,050
13,744
20,871
12,224

Tweets
346,197
527,702
3,069,851
269,742

Table 4: Users and Tweets by Event
each event, including the number of users who have tweeted
about that particular event are enumerated in Table 4.

Stance Detection With Polarized Clusters
To compute the stance of user for a given event, we use the
user’s tweets related to that event to obtain user embeddings.
We do this for all the users who have tweeted about the
event, and then cluster their embeddings using HDB-SCAN.
As shown in Figure 2, the users are clustered according to
their stance. We see two clusters across all the events, one
for each of the stances (pro-INC and pro-BJP). We see that
INC and BJP politicians lie in separate clusters across all the
events, which reaffirms the polarizing nature of the events.
Moreover, we observe that majority of the influencers (INF)
also lie in either of the two clusters, confirming our hypothesis that the influencers engage with these issues in a partisan manner. We observe that for all of the events except
COVID-19, majority of the influencers are in the pro-INC
cluster, whereas for COVID-19 majority of the influencers
are in the pro-BJP cluster.
To understand this pattern further, we manually studied
the individual tweets. The overall clustering of influencers
towards the INC is explained by the engagement of journalistic content by the opposition party, and the reliance of
the ruling party on relatively more influential, but less numerous platform celebrities, or mainstream celebrities. Thus
while the overall number of influencers seem to cluster much
higher on the INC side, this finding needs to be seen alongside the retweet polarity scores (Figure 8) which help understand the size and scope of influencer engagement. We

observed also that the relatively larger clustering on the INC
side is a result its politicians’ tendency to engage with influencers on account of their criticism of the BJP – this does not
mean those individuals are politically aligned with the INC,
simply that they are critical of the ruling party. The BJP’s
engagements and the resultant clusters, on the other hand,
are closest to accounts who advocate for the party.
These patterns speak to the larger state of politics in India,
where political opposition on a national level is weak, and
civil society members and journalists, rather than the INC,
have emerged as popular critics of the government. Our section on categorical analysis further explains the distinctiveness of the COVID-19 clustering.

(a) Article 370

(b) CAA/NRC

(c) COVID-19

(d) Farmers’ Protests

Figure 2: Clusters by Event.
Figure 3 shows the wordclouds, based on prominence
scores (Rashed et al. 2020), for each of the stances and helps
underscore the differences. On Article 370 and CAA/NRC,
the INC side focuses on the act being “undemocratic” while
the pro-BJP tweets celebrate them as “historic”, having citizen support, and highlighting Hindu or refugee-related issues. In essence, we see here shades of populism, where
one side attempts to speak of the issue in legalistic terms,
while another focuses on the partisan appeal of the act. On
COVID-19, a less divisive issue (at the time), INC sympathizing influencers engage on “unemployment” and “failure”, while on the side of the ruling party, the engagements
are more utilitarian, focusing on the “fight” against the Coronavirus. With the Farm Bills, we see a different form of populist engagement, in which the INC side uses terms such as
“draconian”, and “anti-farmer” while the BJP side highlights
farmers as heroic using brand terms like “aatmanirbhar”
(self-reliant), “hardworking” etc. Unlike with CAA/NRC
and 370, where there is a clear nativist appeal in creating
an “other” in those that oppose the act, the discourse with
the farm bill is a bit different, since the ruling party would
rather not demonize farmers, and must toe a careful line in
countering opposition online.

Quantifying Polarization Using Clusters
We further use the clusters to quantify two aspects of polarization – retweet polarity which captures which “side” of the
issue is more likely to endorses the influencer, and content
polarity which signifies the extent to which the influencers’
stance resembles that of either parties on a particular issue.
To compute retweet polarity scores, we first construct the
retweet graph for all the events in Figure 4. Each node represents users who are either politicians or influencers and the
edges represent retweets between them. The graph is color
partitioned as INC in blue, BJP in orange and influencers in
pink. The graph is visualised using the Force Atlas 2 layout
in Gephi (Bastian, Heymann, and Jacomy 2009), where we
set gravity rules for node attraction using their edge strength
to further clarify the clusters. The size of the nodes indicates their degree centrality. Overall, similar to the clusters
above, we observe that for all events with the exception of
COVID-19, most influencers engage with INC and a small
fraction of them engage with BJP. Whereas, in the case of
COVID-19, maximum engagement of influencers is with the
incumbent party, BJP. While top leaders from either parties
including Members of Parliament and Members of Legislative Assemblies have high degree centrality in all events, IT
cell presidents wield significant influence as well. Amongst
the influencers, we see journalists, fan accounts and media
houses comprising some of the larger nodes.
Based on the clusters and retweet graphs from above, we
calculate retweet and content polarity scores for all the influencers for a particular event. The distributions of the polarity
scores in Figure 5 show that a number of influencers highly
side with the narratives of a certain party for each topic. For
COVID19 the median scores for influencers is closer to the
median of BJP politicians, while for Article 370, CAA/NRC
and Farmers’ Protest it is closer to the median of INC politicians.

Analysis of Polarity Scores
In this section we use the computed polarity scores to gain
insights into the partisan engagement of influencers across
all four events. We first explore whether the polarity scores
display meaningful patterns with respect to the number of
followers and median retweet rates for an influencer. We
then show how the retweet and content polarity scores vary
according to the area of expertise of the influencers across
all the events.

Aggregate Trends
Here we use the absolute values of the polarity scores because we are interested in how the magnitude of the scores
vary with attributes like number of followers etc. We assign
an aggregate polarity score to an influencer by taking the
median of the absolute polarity scores across all events.
By Followers Count To analyse the polarity scores by
the number of followers, we categorize the influencers by
their number of followers. We categorize an influencer as
Very Low if the number of followers lies in the first quartile of the followers count distribution across all influencers,
Low if it lies in the second quartile, Medium if it lies in the

(a) Article 370

(b) CAA/NRC

(c) COVID-19

(d) Farmers’ Protests

Figure 3: WordClouds of BJP (Right, in Orange) and INC (Left, in Green) Clusters by Event
third quartile and High in the fourth quartile. We then plot
the median retweet polarity scores for each of the categories.
Overall, we see that the retweet polarity score increases with
the number of followers. However, we see a sharp decrease
in the polarity scores between Medium influencers and High
influencers. A Welsch’s t-test between the scores of these
two categories results in a p-value of 0.0684 which is a statistically significant difference with a threshold of 0.1. The
p-values for scores between Very Low, Medium and Low,
Medium are 0.0000 and 0.0081 respectively indicating that
the distribution of retweet polarity scores for Medium influencers is statistically different from all the other categories.

(a) Article 370

(b) CAA/NRC

(c) COVID-19

(d) Farmers’ Protests

Figure 4: Retweet Graph by Events.

We also plot the median of content polarity scores for each
category, where we observe that Very Low and Low influencers have the highest content polarity. A Welsch’s t-test
between Low and Very Low gives a p-value > 0.1 indicating
that the two categories are not statistically different, whereas
t-tests between the scores of Low and Medium and Low and
High give p-values of < 0.0001 indicating that the scores for
Very Low and Low are statistically different from Medium
and High.
Overall we observe that there is a twilight zone for influencer polarization with respect to number of followers,
wherein influencers with a certain range of followers are
significantly more polarizing than other groups. In terms of
retweet polarity, which quantifies how likely an influencer’s
tweet is to be retweeted by either side, influencers with
Medium followers have the highest polarity scores. Whereas
in terms of content polarity, which signifies how extreme an
influencer’s stance is, those with Very Low and Low followers seem to have the highest scores.
Moreover, we find that from 20 of the influencers with
the highest number of followers - mostly entertainers and
sportspersons - only two were retweeted by the INC. This
confirms suggestions in past work that the ruling party has
a much stronger grip on the social media output of A-list
celebrities (Lalani, Kommiya Mothilal, and Pal 2019).
By Retweet Count We fit a regression model with retweet
polarity and content polarity as the independent variables
and the logarithm of median retweet count as the dependent
variable. Regression results are displayed in Table 5. Overall, we observe that the median retweet rate is higher for
influencers with higher retweet polarity scores, potentially
implying that polarized influencers are retweeted more in
comparison to less polarizing ones. To explore this further,
we filter out influencers whose retweet polarity scores lie in
the fourth quartile. We then calculate the median retweet rate

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

(g)

(h)

Figure 5: Distribution of Polarity Scores by Event. Subfigures (a) - (d) depict retweet polarity scores and (e) - (h) depict
content polarity scores for Article 370, CAA/NRC, COVID-19 and Farmers’ Protests respectively
higher retweets as compared to other tweets.

rt polarity
content polarity

log rt count

R2

pvalue

2.1450 (0.157)
0.2973 (0.491)

0.196
0.009

<0.001
>0.1

Table 5: Regression Analysis. Log of Median Retweet
Count (log rt count) is the dependent variable. The regression coefficient along with the standard error, R2 values and
p-values are displayed. Statistically significant results are
highlighted in bold.
Figure 6: Average Retweet Polarity Scores By Followers
Category. We observe that influencers with Medium number
of followers have the highest median retweet polarity score.

Figure 7: Average Content Polarity Scores By Followers
Category. Influencers with Very Low and Low number of
followers have the highest content polarity and those with
High number of followers have the lowest content polarity.

for their polarizing tweets and median retweet rate of the rest
of their tweets. We observe that 84% of the influencers have
a higher median retweet rate for tweets related to polarizing
events as compared to their other tweets, potentially implying that polarized tweets are more likely to be rewarded with

Categorical Analysis
Retweet Polarity For each of the four events, we show in
Figure 8 how the retweet polarity scores vary with the area
of expertise of influencers. A close examination of the top
20 polarized accounts towards either side in each category
reveals that, barring COVID-19, the INC side overwhelmingly retweets journalists on the three political issues. For
instance, in the activity after the abrogation of 370, 18 of the
top 20 accounts with polarity towards the party are journalists. The BJP’s most proximate accounts have varied profiles
in comparison, including platform celebrities, businesses,
fan accounts, sports, and journalists. Unlike other issues in
which voices on the ground of journalists, academics etc
are key to the political discourse, on the 370 issue, there
is no representation of Muslim Kashmiris from the Valley
on-ground among top accounts on either side. From the top
pro-INC accounts, only one is from Kashmir. Among the
pro-BJP ones, the discussions forwarded include three Kashmiri Pandits, a Hindu community whose exodus from the
valley in the early 1990s has been cited as a justification
for the need to ‘integrate’ the region within the nation-state.
The absence of on-ground accounts can partly be attributed
to the shutdown of internet services and jailing of Kashmiri
politicians, but nonetheless points to the lack of representa-

tive voices in the discourse.
Except journalists and activists, other categories of influencers are less likely to take stances critical of the government. We speculate that certain professions are more hesitant to be critical and are thus disproportionately retweeted
by the BJP side. Here, de-politicized fields such as sports,
businesses and entertainment have also shown tilts towards
the ruling government. The entertainment category polarizes towards INC only during the CAA protests, which is
in step with the on-ground developments in the movement
when film industry figures spoke out against the Modi government’s for the first time in significant numbers.
The lower ratio of journalists in the BJP’s top polarity
scorers is an interesting trend that has connections to the nature of Modi’s political campaign. As Chakravartty and Roy
(2015) note, in Modi’s populist rhetoric, liberal media has
remained as a prominent antagonistic signifier, ever since
the press covered his role in the 2002 Gujarat riots where
Muslims died in disproportionate numbers. This aversion
also translates to the lack of press conferences and interviews given by the leader, and as our study shows, permeates to the ruling party’s social media strategy after coming
to power. Of the top media-related accounts the party centres, many are linked to partisan media houses, especially
online portals that have gained prominence as vocal defendants of right-wing ideology. Our finding is relevant with the
Recuero, Soares, and Gruzd (2020) study that observed the
distancing of hyperpartisan Twitter clusters in Brazil from
mainstream media. With INC, we observe that the top accounts are not as much supportive of the party as they are
critical of the ruling government.
The dissimilar polarity scores on the COVID-19 crisis
also indicate a unique set of responses it set off among Twitter influencers. We attribute the shift in polarity scores towards the BJP, to the change in the type of the crisis, as pandemic foremost raised concerns about public health and preparedness, which is a bipartisan issue. Here it is likely, that
rather than being critical actors that invite accusations of being dispiriting, influencers were engaged in raising morale as
part of government’s campaigning and disseminating frontline information and resources. We also see journalists and
media houses disproportionately amplified by the BJP, indicating a trend of relative cooperation with the government in
the face of a global health emergency.
Content Polarity A category-wide content polarity analysis in Figure 9 for the four events produces distinct results.
Of the four issues, we see that Article 370 draws some of
the most uniform scores between categories, that are lower
on content polarity. Kashmir as a territory is considered
central to India’s narratives of national security and territorial claims. Historically, conversations about the region are
sensitive and regulated, attracting legal prosecution (Bose
2009). This context seems relevant in understanding these
scores. The overall lower scores can imply multiple strands
at play. While political voices opposed to the national government’s move were censored due to the communications
shutdown, or deliberately ignored by the mainstream parties as taboo, what we see here also raises questions about
a chilling effect of self-censorship. Within these relatively

low scores, the top accounts in terms of content polarity, are
journalists and academics critical of the move. That the high
score on the government’s side is driven by fan accounts and
platform celebrities calls to question the role of hyperpartisan voices, who may not have proven credentials of on the
ground knowledge of the topic.
CAA/NRC protests score high on content polarity in comparison. Of the top 20 polarizing accounts, an overwhelming proportion has to do with journalism, including reporters
and media houses, largely those critical of the government.
We see the presence of Indian public service broadcasters
(e.g @DDNational, @DD Bharati, @PBNS India), which
in principle, are meant remain autonomous and neutral. Content from these accounts have relayed the official line and are
thus engaged significantly by BJP politicians.
COVID-19 has had the most mixed reaction between the
categories in terms of the content, possibly because on the
whole it is a less polarizing event. The relatively polarized
accounts here are often explicitly aligned with one of another party.
On the farmers’ protests, the top 20 accounts are divided between supporters and opponents of the government
with a cross-category representation. Here too, governmentaligned accounts, in the form of public broadcasters and industrial consortia are prominent. Somewhat exceptionally,
businesses, who protesters see as the real beneficiaries of the
policy, have a high polarity score on this issue. Our analysis
of tweets from the highest-scoring accounts in this category
shows how business houses, while avoiding explicit political keywords, have used a mediated, corporate vocabulary to
convey the benefits of the farm bills, which intersects with
a lot of the official language on the issue. Sports-persons
have also only had higher polarity scores on this topic. Entertainers have scored mildly on all issues except for the
CAA. Note that we use the absolute values of content polarity scores for this categorical analysis, as the median signed
scores for each category did not yield interpretable results in
the experiments.

Discussion
In this work, we present an important, non-western case of
partisan engagement in a polarized political environment.
While our findings are immediately of relevance in understanding the political economy of social media in India, they
are likewise relevant to approaching the role of influencers
of various kinds in political engagement.
Our findings show that the differences in clustering
around topics are themselves insightful in understanding the
larger patterns in the discourse. Focusing our examination
around key events, helps understand the periods of elevated
activity, i.e. those in which political parties may resort to engaging the various outreach resources at their behest, including celebrities. In this work, we have shown that the ruling
party has unique advantages over the opposition in some aspects, but that the opposition gains tailwind from the work
of journalists and commentators, who on the whole, tend to
dissent with the government. We also find that there is significant difference between the four events, and the kinds of
influencers that can engage in each of those.

(a) Article 370

(b) CAA/NRC

(c) COVID-19

(d) Farmers’ Protests

Figure 8: Median Retweet Polarity Scores by Influencer Category. Length of stem indicates retweet polarity score and
bubble size indicates median retweet count.

(a) Article 370

(b) CAA/NRC

(c) COVID-19

(d) Farmers’ Protests

Figure 9: Median Content Polarity Scores by Influencer Category.Length of stem indicates absolute content polarity score
and bubble size indicates median retweet count.

These findings lay the ground for future work. There is a
need to study various kinds of influencers, their relationship
with the government, and what that does to their online behavior. While we studied the intersection of influencer and
politician behavior during crises, it is equally important to
extend such work into its typical daily patterns.

References
Barberá, P.; and Rivero, G. 2015. Understanding the political representativeness of Twitter users. Social Science Computer Review 33(6): 712–729.
Bastian, M.; Heymann, S.; and Jacomy, M. 2009. Gephi: An
Open Source Software for Exploring and Manipulating Networks. URL http://www.aaai.org/ocs/index.php/ICWSM/
09/paper/view/154.
Becker, J.; Porter, E.; and Centola, D. 2019. The wisdom
of partisan crowds. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences 116(22): 10717–10722.
Bose, S. 2009. Kashmir: Roots of conflict, paths to peace.
Harvard University Press.
Centola, D. 2020.
Why Social Media Makes
Us More Polarized and How to Fix It.
URL
https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/why-socialmedia-makes-us-more-polarized-and-how-to-fix-it/.
Cer, D.; Yang, Y.; Kong, S.-y.; Hua, N.; Limtiaco, N.; John,
R. S.; Constant, N.; Guajardo-Céspedes, M.; Yuan, S.; Tar,
C.; et al. 2018. Universal sentence encoder. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1803.11175 .
Chadwick, A. 2017. The hybrid media system: Politics and
power. Oxford University Press.
Chakravartty, P.; and Roy, S. 2015. Mr. Modi goes to Delhi:
Mediated populism and the 2014 Indian elections. Television
& New Media 16(4): 311–322.
Conover, M.; Ratkiewicz, J.; Francisco, M.; Gonçalves, B.;
Menczer, F.; and Flammini, A. 2011. Political polarization
on twitter. In Proceedings of the International AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media, volume 5.
Demaine, L. J. 2009. Navigating policy by the stars: The
influence of celebrity entertainers on federal lawmaking. JL
& Pol. 25: 83.
Faris, R.; Roberts, H.; Etling, B.; Bourassa, N.; Zuckerman,
E.; and Benkler, Y. 2017. Partisanship, propaganda, and
disinformation: Online media and the 2016 US presidential
election. Berkman Klein Center Research Publication 6.
Garibay, I.; Mantzaris, A. V.; Rajabi, A.; and Taylor, C. E.
2019. Polarization in social media assists influencers to become more influential: analysis and two inoculation strategies. Scientific reports 9(1): 1–9.
Garimella, K.; Morales, G. D. F.; Gionis, A.; and Mathioudakis, M. 2018. Quantifying controversy on social media. ACM Transactions on Social Computing 1: 1–27.
Lalani, F. M.; Kommiya Mothilal, R.; and Pal, J. 2019. The
Appeal of Influencers to the Social Media Outreach of Indian Politicians. In Conference Companion Publication of

the 2019 on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing, 267–271.
Lewis, R. 2020. “This is what the news Won’t show you”:
YouTube creators and the reactionary politics of microcelebrity. Television & New Media 21(2): 201–217.
McInnes, L.; and Healy, J. 2017. Accelerated hierarchical density based clustering. In 2017 IEEE International
Conference on Data Mining Workshops (ICDMW), 33–42.
IEEE.
McInnes, L.; Healy, J.; and Melville, J. 2020. UMAP: Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection for Dimension Reduction.
Menon, N. 2020. Hindu Rashtra and Bollywood: A New
Front in the Battle for Cultural Hegemony. South Asia Multidisciplinary Academic Journal (24/25).
Mikolov, T.; Chen, K.; Corrado, G.; and Dean, J. 2013. Efficient estimation of word representations in vector space.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1301.3781 .
Neyazi, T. A.; Kumar, A.; and Semetko, H. A. 2016. Campaigns, digital media, and mobilization in India. The International Journal of Press/Politics 21(3): 398–416.
Pal, J. 2015. Banalities turned viral: Narendra Modi and the
political tweet. Television & New Media 16(4): 378–387.
Panda, A.; Gonawela, A.; Acharyya, S.; Mishra, D.; Mohapatra, M.; Chandrasekaran, R.; and Pal, J. 2020. NivaDuck A Scalable Pipeline to Build a Database of Political Twitter
Handles for India and the United States. In International
Conference on Social Media and Society, SMSociety’20,
200–209. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing
Machinery. ISBN 9781450376884. doi:10.1145/3400806.
3400830. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3400806.3400830.
Rashed, A.; Kutlu, M.; Darwish, K.; Elsayed, T.; and
Bayrak, C. 2020. Embeddings-Based Clustering for Target
Specific Stances: The Case of a Polarized Turkey. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2005.09649 .
Recuero, R.; Soares, F. B.; and Gruzd, A. 2020. Hyperpartisanship, disinformation and political conversations on Twitter: The Brazilian presidential election of 2018. In Proceedings of the international AAAI conference on Web and social
media, volume 14, 569–578.
Singh, R. 2020. The Politics Of Offense: The Phenomena Of
Censorship In The Contemporary Discourse Of Literature
And Media. Literary Herald 6(3): 145–153.
Sinha, S. 2017. Fragile hegemony: Modi, social media and
competitive electoral populism in India. International Journal of Communication 11(2017): 4158–4180.
Vijayaraghavan, P.; Vosoughi, S.; and Roy, D. 2016. Automatic detection and categorization of election-related
tweets. In Proceedings of the International AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media, volume 10.
Waller, I.; and Anderson, A. 2020. Community embeddings
reveal large-scale cultural organization of online platforms.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.00590 .

