Relationship among state reopening policies, health outcomes and economic
recovery through first wave of the COVID-19 pandemic in the U.S.
Alexandre K. Ligo1,2, Emerson Mahoney1, Jeffrey Cegan1, Benjamin D. Trump1, Andrew
S. Jin,1 Maksim Kitsak3, Jesse Keenan5, Igor Linkov1,4,
1: US Army Corps of Engineers, Engineer Research and Development Center, USA
2: University of Virginia, Department of Engineering Systems and Environment, USA
3: Delft University of Technology, Faculty of Electrical Engineering, Mathematics and
Computer Science, Netherlands
4: Carnegie Mellon University, Department of Engineering and Public Policy, USA
5: Tulane University, School of Architecture, USA
Abstract
State governments in the U.S. have been facing difficult decisions involving tradeoffs
between economic and health-related outcomes during the COVID-19 pandemic. Despite
evidence of the effectiveness of government-mandated restrictions mitigating the spread of
contagion, these orders are stigmatized due to undesirable economic consequences. This tradeoff
resulted in state governments employing mandates at widely different ways. We compare the
different policies states implemented during periods of restriction (“lockdown”) and reopening
with indicators of COVID-19 spread and consumer card spending at each state during the first
“wave” of the pandemic in the U.S. between March and August 2020. We find that while some
states enacted reopening decisions when the incidence rate of COVID-19 was minimal or
sustained in its relative decline, other states relaxed socioeconomic restrictions near their highest
incidence and prevalence rates experienced so far. Nevertheless, all states experienced similar
trends in consumer card spending recovery, which was strongly correlated with reopening
policies following the lockdowns and relatively independent from COVID-19 incidence rates at
the time. Our findings suggest that consumer card spending patterns can be attributed to
government mandates rather than COVID-19 incidence in the states. This result highlights the
important role of state policies in minimizing health impacts while promoting economic recovery
and helps planning effective interventions in subsequent waves and immunization efforts.
1. Introduction
The COVID-19 disease pandemic caused by the SARS-CoV-2 virus prompted U.S. states
to develop policies restricting population mobility and economic activity, with vastly different
timelines and degrees of intensity [1]. Even with considerable uncertainty in the early months of
the pandemic regarding viral pathogenicity and downstream health outcomes, U.S. state policy
(inspired by the Guidelines to Reopen America Again [2]) sought to limit socioeconomic
activities with varying degrees of risk as vectors of viral transmission – with hopes of gradual

relaxing of policy restrictions as (a) genomic and pandemic surveillance improved through more
rigorous testing, and (b) the incidence and prevalence rates declined to a level suggesting
community spread was a minimal risk at most [2]. The tangential intent of such policy measures
was to limit any economic disruption to brief periods of time (e.g., 15 to 30 days). What
occurred, however, was a divergence in the duration and intensity of socioeconomic and mobility
restrictions, as well as controversy regarding the socioeconomic and public health consequences
that such restrictions (colloquially, “lockdowns”) may have such as reduction in spending and
increase in COVID-19 incidence over time.
This paper examines how critical economic indicators such as consumer card spending
vary based upon the timing of state decisions to enter and exit socioeconomic and mobility
lockdowns, and how the economic trends and lockdown policy measures differ based on SARSCoV-2 incidence rates. Our analysis sheds light on how much the temporal differences in
incidence rates, lockdowns and reopening decisions across states are associated with their
economic recovery. This paper examines the first wave of responses to the COVID-19 pandemic
in the U.S. between mid-March and early August of 2020 and discusses deviations from
expected outcomes in several U.S. states. We find strong evidence among existing literature and
in our findings that state regulations are not the sole cause for all the economic and behavioral
changes that persist during the pandemic.
Studies show that COVID-related lockdowns have a variety of different effects (both
qualitatively and quantitatively) in public health and the economy [3], [4], and the impact of
restrictions on COVID-19 incidence, prevalence rates and economic outcomes might not be
straightforward. Fowler et al. show that counties that implemented lockdown orders saw a
decline in new COVID-19 cases by 30 percent after just one week [1]. Furthermore, Abouk and
Heydari show a 37 percent decrease in new cases fifteen days after a county implemented
lockdown measures [5]. Amuedo-Dorantes et al. [6] estimate that implementing the lockdown
dates by one day earlier would have reduced nationwide COVID-19 death rates by 2.4 percent.
Others have reviewed the early economic consequences of SARS-CoV-2 in the United
States and globally, and report controversial findings. For example, Lin and Meissner [4] show
that states did not have statistically different employment outcomes depending on whether or not
“lockdown” orders were implemented. Chetty et al. [7] conducted a case study of differences in
partial reopening between five states, and they found no significant differences when looking at
unemployment and spending as outcomes. They also discussed whether consumer spending has
recovered as a result of the economic stimulus implemented through the CARES Act [8], and
noted that the stimulus alone could not account for spending increases of the magnitude
observed. Although the stimulus payments could have played an important role in creating more
optimistic consumer mindsets and rebounding consumer spending levels, other factors should
explain the amount of consumer spending recovery. Goolsbee and Syverson [9] found that only
seven points of the 60 percent decline in consumer traffic came from lockdown orders,
suggesting that individual choices and fear of infection were more important than legal
restrictions.

In contrast, Coibion et al. [10] deployed a survey-based study to analyze how consumers
would react to lockdowns in terms of spending habits and macroeconomic expectations in April
2020. They found that respondents in lockdown-afflicted households expected the
unemployment rate to be 13 percent higher over the following twelve months and higher
unemployment rates for three to five more years as compared to households that did not go into
lockdowns. They also expect low inflation, higher uncertainty, low mortgage rates, and they
moved out of foreign stocks to more liquid forms of investment. While the effect of restrictive
policies on economic collapse and subsequent recovery was often measured at the industry level
[4] and at the county level, aggregated by U.S. counties of different incomes [7], it is
quantitatively unclear how the effect of those policies on economic recovery varied with
individual state interventions.
While the aforementioned literature focuses on relevant aspects of COVID-19 spread,
public policy, and economic impact, the contribution of this paper is on addressing the effect of
these three dimensions on each other. We analyze restrictions and reopening non-pharmaceutical
interventions (NPI) and how those decisions were related both with COVID-19 spread and with
economic indicators in the states examined. The analysis targets the impact of the lockdown on
consumer card spending in each state, and the rate of spending recovery once state restrictions
were lifted. The main research question that we address is how critical indicators of economic
activity vary based upon state decisions to enter and exit lockdowns and trends in COVID-19
incidence. This is important because reopening decisions implemented too early may have
resulted in increased spread of COVID-19, while states that reopened too late may have caused
unnecessary economic hardship. Furthermore, we discuss whether economic disruption and
recovery is affected by state decisions or COVID-19 incidence.
2. Results
In this section we describe the variation of COVID-19 incidence and consumer card
spending over time. Consumer card spending was previously identified as a representative proxy
for economic activity and a reasonable tracker of consumer spending during the pandemic [7]
(not including durable goods such as automobiles or housing). We also present the correlations
between COVID-19 incidence and consumer card spending, and the relationship between these
variables and state restrictions. The main results are shown in Fig. 1, 2, 3, and 4. Those figures
highlight the results of four states that serve as examples: New York, Michigan, California and
Arizona. These examples were chosen because they differed both in the duration of lockdowns
and timing of reopening, and in the evolution of the spread of SARS-CoV-2. These states as
illustrative of trends in most of the states we analyzed and we discuss how these states represent
the general trends amongst the U.S. overall. Trends and correlations for all U.S. states are shown
in the Supplementary Information (Fig. S5 to Fig. S10).
For 37 states we were able to identify the level of socioeconomic and mobility
restrictions over time and classify those levels into the reopening phases defined in The White

House/CDC guidelines [2]. For each of those states a “phase” is assigned at each day in the
period between March and August 2020. Each state and day are assigned either phase 1, 2, or 3,
according to The White House/CDC guidelines, or “lockdown,” indicating a level of restrictions
higher than phase 1 in the state.
2.1. Temporal Patterns of COVID Caseload and Policy Response
Patterns of evolution in COVID-19 incidence were different in different states, as
illustrated in Fig. 1 for New York, Michigan, California and Arizona. Fig. 1A shows the
evolution of COVID-19 incidence over time, where each point corresponds to the daily count of
new COVID-19 cases in the state (7-day moving average of new confirmed cases per 100,000
people). The colors of the points represent our manual classification of state restriction and
reopening policies according to the White House/CDC guidelines [2]. The black points represent
the lockdown mandates, while the red, orange and blue points represent phases 1, 2 and 3 of
reopening, respectively, according with the interventions enacted in each state. Fig. S5 shows
COVID-19 incidence over time for all 50 states.
COVID-19 incidence rates started and evolved differently with several states
experiencing a relatively early peak of infections and other states having cases grow only at a
later time. While New York and Michigan experienced a clear peak followed by a fast decline in
the number of new confirmed cases per day, California and Arizona exhibited a monotonic
growth in the number of confirmed infections through most of the observation period.
Our data shows that lockdown policies in all states were quick to mimic those of states
like New York where COVID-19 incidence rates were relatively high early in the first wave of
the pandemic. In fact, all 37 states where we obtained data on restriction and reopening policies
implemented a lockdown at dates ranging from 3/19 to 4/7. On March 19th, California was the
first state to implement the orders, and South Carolina was the last on April 7th.
However, it is evident that many states began to reopen at different paces into phases 1,
2, and 3 with respect to the level of COVID-19 in each state. Despite heterogeneity in states’
incidence rates, many states moved forward with reopening decisions, as seen in Fig 1A. States
like New York and Michigan, amongst others, reopened only when incidence rates were clearly
decreasing. Not only was the incidence decreasing in Michigan and New York, but it was also
far below the peak incidence rate during the lockdown for each of the respective states.
Moreover, others found that lockdowns helped reduce the spread of COVID-19. For example,
Amuedo-Dorantes et al. [6] noted that mortality is not uniform across states and in the U.S.
Northeast1, which experienced aggressive early spread of SARS-CoV-2, accelerating lockdown
implementation by the equivalent one day could have decreased COVID-19 deaths by 7.6
percent.

1

States of Connecticut, Maine, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, Rhode Island, Vermont, New Jersey, New
York, and Pennsylvania.

On the other hand, states like Arizona and California advanced in reopening only to then
experience marked increases in COVID-19 incidence rates. These states both reopened at or
close to the highest incidence rate throughout the lockdown period. This type of policy action
was not unique to Arizona and California but was similar to several other states such as Florida,
North Carolina or South Dakota. Thus, it leads to the question of whether it gave consumers a
false sense of health security and confidence to being resuming normal activity.
2.2. Patterns of Consumer Economic Behavior
We examine the consumer card spending activity as a function of time and policy
response phase for the example states in Fig. 1B, and for all 50 states in Fig. S6. Each daily point
represents the seven-day moving average of change in consumer card spending in the state, deseasonalized and relative to January 2020 as a pre-pandemic reference. (A value of zero means
that card spending in that day is equivalent to the level in January 2020. The details about the
definition of this variable are described in the Supplementary Information.) We find a universal
trend of sharp spending reductions right after COVID-19 arrived in the U.S. followed by steady
increases almost unanimously throughout the states. Consumer card spending start to go down
even before lockdown orders were implemented and bottom in most of the states in late Marchmid April. After states entered the lockdown, there was a clear upward trajectory of consumer
card spending as time passed for the four states shown in Fig. 1B. The sharpest recovery in
spending takes place in the period between the lockdown and phase 1 of reopening. Additionally,
recovery in card spending continues from phase 1 through phase 2 for most states, although such
a trend is less clear for phase 3. This contradicts patterns of COVID-19 incidence in different
states, which are further discussed below.
2.3. Correlation of Policy Response and Consumer Economic Behavior
Figures 1A and 1B show a pattern of COVID-19 incidence that is different in each state,
while the decline and recovery in consumer card spending is relatively homogeneous across
states. Because of this we observe contrasting trends. Consumer card spending recovered when
COVID-19 incidence rates were declining in some states, whereas in others spending and
COVID-19 increased together. Such a contrast is shown in Fig. 1C, which displays card
spending as a function of new infections for New York, Michigan, California and Arizona. It
shows a negative correlation between COVID-19 incidence and consumer card spending for
some states but a positive correlation for others. In New York and Michigan, we observe that
consumer card spending is indeed negatively correlated with COVID-19 daily incidence rates.
The Pearson correlation is −0.95 for New York and −0.66 for Michigan. This suggests that
consumer card spending declined when the pandemic was at its worst and then gradually
recovered after the peak of the first wave passed. These observations are in a sharp contrast with
patterns observed for California and Arizona, both of which display a positive correlation (0.72

and 0.59, respectively) between consumer card spending and COVID-19 incidence, implying,
counterintuitively, that consumers spend more when COVID-19 incidence is highest in these
states. These patterns are not specific to the states of California and Arizona but are also
observed in other states, as seen in Fig. S7. Besides, consumer card spending on food and
groceries are relatively less correlated with COVID-19 incidence in the example states (as shown
in Fig. S9), indicating that spending on non-food categories varied more with the spread of
SARS-CoV-2 than food-related categories.
We examined whether the pattern of correlation between consumer card spending and
COVID-19 (negative correlation for New York and Michigan and positive for California and
Arizona) are specific to incidence rates, and we found that the same pattern applies when
COVID-19 deaths are used instead of incidence (as shown in Fig. S10).
We examine in more detail the relationship between policy interventions and consumer
card spending, which is illustrated in Fig. 2. For this graph we average the daily change in
spending for each of the four phases (lockdown and phases 1, 2, and 3) in each of the example
states. Consumer card spending decreases sharply and rebounds gradually in all states examined,
regardless the differences in COVID-19 incidence rates observed across the states.
The pattern of relative similarity in consumer card spending across states suggests that
government mandates are the primary factor in the consumer’s spending decisions over time,
motivating us to examine the discrepancy between government mandates and the progression of
the COVID-19 pandemic.

Figure 1. Temporal Patterns between March 13 and August 9, 2020 for New York,
Michigan, California and Arizona of (A) seven-day moving average of new confirmed daily

COVID-19 cases per 100,000 people over time. (B) seven-day moving average of deseasonalized change in consumer card spending (relative to January 2020) over time. (C)
Consumer card spending as a function of COVID-19 incidence rate. The colors represent our
classification of state policies into lockdown restrictions and the three phases of the White
House/CDC reopening guidelines.

Figure 2 – Average change in consumer card spending per phase in New York, Michigan,
California and Arizona. Each bar represents the average change in consumer card spending (deseasonalized and relative to January 2020) observed in the lockdown (black) and each phase of
reopening defined by the White House/CDC guidelines. Each data point in the averaging
represents the seven day moving average of the change in consumer card spending, deseasonalized and relative to January 2020, in each state.
3.4. Effectiveness of Policy Response:
To better understand the effect of state interventions on COVID-19 spread and economic
recovery, we examine the timing of reopening interventions and how they overlap with trends of
COVID-19 incidence rates in each state. Regarding lockdown orders, there was relatively little
temporal variation across states. In contrast, there is significant temporal variation in states
transitioning to reopening from the lockdown. There is also wide variation in the trends
regarding COVID-19 incidence when states decided to reopen. This heterogeneity in time and
COVID-19 incidence rates is evident in Fig. 3. Fig. 3A shows the date each state transitioned
from the lockdown to phase 1, as a function of the date with the highest seven-day moving
average of COVID-19 incidence during the lockdown. In case the peak was not observed during
the lockdown phase, we consider the lockdown peak date to be equal to that of the reopening
date. Complementary to reopening dates, we also analyze the daily infection rates observed at the
reopening and compare them to those at the COVID-19 peak of incidence, which is shown in

Fig. 3B. Intuitively, the further below the diagonal line of both Fig. 3A and Fig. 3B a state is, the
better the timing was for their reopening in terms of mitigating the spread of COVID-19. A state
reopening before the incidence of COVID-19 reaches the peak is observed places the state on the
diagonal, which is the case of California and Arizona. Conversely, one expects a state reopening
to take place long after the COVID-19 peak when the daily incidence rate is substantially lower
that that at the peak, placing the state far from the diagonal in Figs. 3A, B, such as New York,
Michigan, and Massachusetts.
Among the states shown, Vermont and Maine are the first two to reopen on April 20th and
New York is the last state on June 6th. The mean of new daily cases per 100,000 people was 8.07
on the dates that states transitioned to phase 1, with significant dispersion. The standard
deviation of 7.83, with New Jersey having 27 new daily cases per 100,000 people at reopening.
This reflects the differences in reopening strategy from state to state, with respect to whether
they decided to reopen when COVID-19 incidence rates were increasing or decreasing. This is
further illustrated in Fig. 4, which shows the daily incidence at reopening (Fig. 4A) as well the
rate of change in daily incidence (Fig. 4B) at reopening as a function of the date when incidence
peaked (in the lockdown period). The horizontal axis of Fig. 4 illustrates the variation in the
dates when states experienced the first peak of incidence rates. Perhaps more importantly, while
Fig. 4A shows that the majority of states decided to reopen when COVID-19 incidence rates
where no higher than 10 new cases per day, Fig. 4B shows wide variation with respect of the
trend of incidence at the time of reopening. States such as New York, Michigan, and several
others decided to start reopening when the rate of change was negative, meaning that daily
incidence was decreasing. On the other hand, many other states such as Arizona and California
started reopening when the rate of change was positive, meaning that daily COVID-19 incidence
was increasing during reopening.

A

B

Figure 3 - (A) Date of reopening to Phase 1 as a function of date of peak 7-day average of
COVID-19 incidence during the lockdown, for the states where we classified phase information
according to the White House/CDC guidelines (MI, NY, CA, AZ highlighted in red). (B) 7-day
average of COVID-19 incidence per 100,000 people at reopening to Phase 1 as a function of
peak 7-day average of COVID-19 incidence per 100,000 during the state lockdown, for the states
examined.
A

B

Figure 4 – (A) 7-day average of COVID-19 incidence per 100,000 people at reopening to
Phase 1 as a function of date of peak 7-day average of COVID-19 incidence per 100,000 people
during the lockdown, for the states with phase information categorized. (B) 7-day average of rate

of change of COVID-19 incidence per 100,000 people at reopening to Phase 1 as a function of
date of peak 7-day average of COVID-19 incidence during the state lockdown.

3. Discussion
We have analyzed publicly available data to assess how consumer card spending, as an
important indicator of economic activity, varied based upon state decisions to enter and exit
lockdowns and trends in COVID-19 incidence. First, we find little consistency across states
regarding the trend in COVID-19 incidence when lockdown and reopening decisions were made.
While some experienced high spread in the beginning of the pandemic, other states had cases
growing relatively later. Despite this difference, lockdowns were mandated in most states within
a relatively short time window, probably following the actions of early-hit states such as New
York rather than being triggered by situation of COVID-19 at the time in the state. For the states
which we have reopening information, the majority of them decided to reopen when COVID-19
incidence was below 10 new cases per day, which at the time was considered a situation of
“minimal community spread” [11]. However, states differed with respect to the trend of COVID19 incidence preceding reopening. New York, Michigan, Massachusetts and other states decided
to cautiously reopen when new daily cases were decreasing, while California, Arizona and many
others started reopening with growing COVID-19 incidence. In those states, policymakers may
have relied only on the low incidence levels and may not have had full visibility of the upward
trends in incidence or in projecting the implications of different speeds of reopening on the
health security of the people in their states.
We have compared trends of COVID-19 spread and each state’s lockdown and reopening
mandates with data on consumer card spending in order to assess how differences in policy
timing impacted economic recovery. While the pandemic evolution and interventions varied,
consumer card spending increased almost uniformly across the states examined. As a result,
during the reopening process people spent progressively more money as COVID-19 incidence
decreased in some of the states we examined such as New York and Michigan, while new cases
underwent sharp increases upon or after reopening in others (such as California and Arizona).
Although this recovery in card spending might benefit many people and businesses who were
negatively impacted by the pandemic when it comes to the jobs lost or decline in revenues, it
reflects the heterogeneity in correlations between the level of COVID-19 in a state and the
timing of its NPI.
Our observations are consistent with previous studies [7], and they suggest that the
following hypothesis could be true: consumer card spending was not driven by the level of
COVID-19 in a given state but by government mandates imposed by the state. We find that
consumer card spending was strongly correlated with the reopening of a state, as mandated by
state and local governments. Contrasting with our expectations, however, the finding that not all
states reopened after COVID-19 incidence rates were under control suggest that the economic

recovery might have been more related with reopening mandates than with the COVID-19
situation when those mandates were implemented.
What drove the nearly uniform rise in card spending throughout the states, if not a decline
of COVID-19 incidence rates? Several factors may explain the uniformity in consumer card
spending trends. One possibility is the implementation of lockdown orders in states with high
COVID-19 incidence creating a transmission of fear to other state governments that proceeded to
take similar policy action. Consequently, this domino-effect in policy implementation may have
created spillover in the form of over-precautionary consumer behavior and fear in many states.
This phenomenon could be a factor in the nationwide, rapid decline in card spending early on in
the pandemic, even in states that experienced relatively lower peaks of COVID-19 incidence
during the lockdown period [12]. This is consistent with the logic of Goolsbee and Syverson [9],
who find that fear was an important factor in deterring people from spending. In contrast, state
reopening decisions apparently led to card spending resurgence, despite levels of COVID-19
incidence rates. Mid-April was around the time that consumer card spending shifted from a
sharp, negative downward trend to a gradual upward trend in the case of the four example states
shown in Fig. 1 and others. One factor may be the influence of media on consumer confidence.
Fellow et al. [13] assert that decreases in mobility may have come from perceived risk and other
factors such as media coverage, and Marzouki et al. [14] found that social media played an
important role in the public perception of uncertainty regarding the evolution of the pandemic.
Moreover, a decline in compliance to orders may have affected states differently. The University
of Oxford have developed a “stringency index” by which states can be compared at their level of
policy stringency [15]. According to this metric, New York began with as high of a stringency
level when the pandemic began, and it slightly reduced its level of stringency beginning in June
through the rest of the summer, reflecting their long lockdown period and the prolonged
measures they took to make sure they did not reopen too early. Michigan began the pandemic at
an average level of stringency and slowly reduced its policy stringency only after the first wave
receded. The level remained relatively constant during the first wave. On the other hand,
California’s level of stringency remained constant until late May when there was a sudden drop,
and Arizona began the pandemic at a slightly below average level of stringency, but quickly
experienced a sharp decline almost immediately before the first wave. This can be explained by
their immediate transition from lockdown to phase two of the reopening process.
Previous work may shed light in demographics differences with respect to stringency to
restrictions. Amuedo-Dorantes [6] take into account the local political alignment, i.e. which
counties were republican or democrat. They found that NPI adoption speed was a less relevant
factor in republican counties. In addition, Alexander and Karger found that while republican
counties had slower adoptions of NPI, they had nearly identical responses in mobility once
restrictions were adopted, indicating that county-level traits producing differences in policy
response were not symbolic of how populations would behave once policy was enacted [16].
Alternatively, Fan et al. found that democrats were more likely to limit socializing and gathering,
and they were more likely to take precautions like wiping groceries, washing their hands, and

wearing masks [17]. Furthermore, they found that controlling for political affiliation and news
consumption eliminated statistical differences in COVID-19 related beliefs.
If COVID-19 incidence rates were high but state governments mandates were eased, it is
likely that many people would have felt safer increasing mobility and resuming more normal
activity, therefore, contributing to higher levels of consumer card spending. This would explain
why policy mandates seemed to have such a domineering effect on consumer card spending,
even over factors like COVID-19 incidence.
Using illustrative examples of states’ strategies for reopening, we can get a glance into
the heterogeneity across states in reopening decisions and outcomes. In an article published on
April 14th, the governor of California indicated six factors for modifying lockdown policies, four
of which were related to health risks, one based on social distancing capacity, and the last was
the ability of the state to reinstitute previously mandated health safety measures [18]. The
governor placed a strong emphasis on the science and data when determining whether or not to
reopen. California’s lockdown orders succeeded in mitigating COVID-19 incidence, which by
mid-April was the lowest among the 25th top percentile of most densely populated states [19].
However, the fact that they relied on science and data to inform their decisions did not by any
means ensure optimal policy action on reopening. In fact, California opened when the incidence
trajectory was upwards, and the end result was even higher incidence rates per capita. As a
consequence, the governor, praised for his actions early in the pandemic, has been later met with
protests [20] and threatened with a recall. Possible reasons for reopening with increasing
COVID-19 incidence rates include (i) decisions considered inconsistent or discordant with
science and data; (ii) vanishing popular support, perhaps caused by disagreement with political,
non-profit and private organizations (e.g. disobedience of companies such as Tesla that openly
refused to follow restrictions) [21], [22]. Such a decline in support for restriction measures was
also observed in other states that replaced lockdown orders for testing and contact tracing as their
primary strategies to contain the spread of SARS-CoV-2 [23]. Another example of a state with
sharp increase in the spread of SARS-CoV-2 virus following the reopening is Arizona. Possible
causes are believed to be related to premature reopening decisions combined with the lack of a
statewide mask mandate [24].
Comparatively, New York represents a case where the population adhered strictly to
lockdown policies for an extensive period of time. For example, nearly 90% of people in New
York City believed that their city’s restrictions were either “the right balance or not restrictive
enough” [25]. Moreover, most adults from New York City admitted in the survey that they
would not feel safe if lockdown orders and business closures were removed. Relative to Arizona,
there was less pressure on the government to reopen businesses and lift lockdown orders quickly
when New York was being hit by the first wave. Keeping measures in place may have been
easier from a policy making standpoint due to public support.
Did these different courses of action between states result in different outcomes? Despite
rising cases, California proceeded to reopen further to phase 2, which induced a higher rate of
infection. This forced California to revert back to phase 1, eventually leading to the abating of

the first wave of COVID-19 in California. Contrastingly, we see that New York, which did not
veer far from its initial plan, fared much better when reopening their economy. Transitioning into
phase 1 close to their target for the incidence rates, they did not experience an increase in
COVID-19 incidence or prevalence. In fact, they avoided the summer spike in COVID-19
incidence that California, Arizona and several other states experienced, without seeing a
significant spike in cases until the resurgence of COVID-19 on a national scale after October.
The findings and hypotheses discussed above inform scholars and policymakers on the
response to future public health crises. In particular, understanding the timing of state decisions
regarding reopening and the relationship between those mandates and the economic recovery
may help policymakers estimate how both COVID-19 and government interventions improve
affect economic recovery while minimizing the impact on public health. The idea of fear as a
primary driver of the sharp reduction in consumer card spending during the emergence of the
pandemic is supported by the data and related literature.
On the other hand, our main finding is that the recovery in consumer card spending
following the first wave of the pandemic was mostly related to state decisions to reopen from the
lockdowns, rather than the trends in the spread of SARS-CoV-2 at the time. In this case,
reopening decisions are a powerful mechanism to influence population behavior, and the timing
of these decisions may affect both the economic and the health outcomes in the current and
future pandemics.

4. Data and Methods
We have gathered data at the state level from publicly available sources to examine the
relationship between state interventions, COVID-19 spread and economic impact during early
restrictions and reopening interventions in the U.S. Our approach is described briefly in this
section and in more detail in the Supplementary Information.
Trends and Pearson correlation coefficients between daily card spending )*+,-(/) and
COVID-19 new confirmed infections per day were calculated for each state and the period
between March 13 and August 9, 2020, in order to assess the degree of linear relationship
between COVID-19 spread and economic recovery. This period is selected because lockdown
orders were implemented after March 13 for all 37 states where data about state policies were
clearly available, and none of those states were experiencing a second major peak of COVID-19
incidence before the first week of August. Therefore, the correlations and analysis in this paper
focus on the first wave of infections in the U.S. The outcome of this approach is a comparison
between the lockdown and reopening mandates enacted in the selected states and a discussion of
relationship among these actions and the subsequent trends in COVID-19 incidence and
consumer card spending.
We have gathered over 100 indicators of COVID-19 spread, as well as economic activity
and behavior such as mobility and mental health. Among the COVID-19 variables we have

chosen new confirmed cases per 100,000 people in each state. We have chosen incidence rather
than COVID-19 confirmed deaths because the latter is a lagged variable that could make it
difficult to examine the relationship of COVID-19 spread with policies and economic outcomes.
Among the indicators of economic activity we have chosen consumer card spending reported
daily by Opportunity Insights for the analysis of trends and correlations in this paper, because for
most of the states examined the other variables of economic activity (unemployment, business
activity, etc.) represent similar trends as card spending. Moreover, consumer card spending has
been found to be a reasonable proxy for consumer spending during the pandemic and its impact
on the U.S. economy (not including housing expenses such as rent or mortgages, or durable
goods such as automobile purchases) [7].
Acknowledgments
The work is resulted from author’s work at FEMA/HHS Region 1 COVID Task Force.
The authors are grateful to Captain W. Russell Webster, USCG (Ret.), CEM, Region 1
Administrator, who requested these analyses in support of his decision making and to Gary
Kleinman, HHS/ASPR Regional Administrator whose leadership inspired us. Our special thanks
to Drs. Melissa Surette and Susan Cibulsky for leading the Data Analytics team. This study was
funded in parts by the US Army Engineer Research and Development Center FLEX-4 Project
on Systemic Resilience.
Disclaimer
The views and conclusions contained herein are those of the authors and should not be
interpreted as representing the policies or endorsements, either expressed or implied, of their
employers. The U.S. government is authorized to reproduce and distribute reprints for
government purposes, notwithstanding any copyright annotations thereon. Certain commercial
entities, equipment, or materials may be identified in this document to describe an
experimental procedure or concept adequately. Such identification is not intended to
imply recommendation or endorsement by the authors or their employers, nor is it intended to
imply that the entities, materials, or equipment are necessarily the best available for the purpose.
Bibliography
[1]
[2]
[3]

J. H. Fowler, S. J. Hill, R. Levin, and N. Obradovich, “The Effect of Stay-at-Home Orders
on COVID-19 Cases and Fatalities in the United States,” Working Paper-medRxiv, 2020.
doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.13.20063628.
The White House and Center for Disease Control and Prevention, “Opening Up America
Again,” 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.whitehouse.gov/openingamerica/
(accessed: 12/15/2020).
R. Chetty, J. N. Friedman, N. Hendren, and M. Stepner, “How Did COVID-19 and
Stabilization Policies Affect Spending and Employment? A New Real-Time Economic
Tracker Based on Private Sector Data,” NBER Working Paper 27431, 2020. [Online].
Available: http://www.nber.org/papers/w27431.

[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]

[8]
[9]
[10]
[11]

[12]
[13]

[14]
[15]
[16]
[17]
[18]

Z. Lin and C. M. Meissner, “Health vs. Wealth? Public Health Policies and the Economy
During Covid-19,” NBER Working Paper 27099, 2020. [Online]. Available:
http://salus.adapt.it/wp-content/uploads/2020/05/w27099.pdf.
R. Abouk and B. Heydari, “The Immediate Effect of COVID-19 Policies on Social
Distancing Behavior in the United States,” SSRN, Apr. 2020. doi: 10.2139/ssrn.3571421.
C. Amuedo-Dorantes, N. Kaushal, and A. Muchow, “Is the Cure Worse than the Disease?
County-Level Evidence from the COVID-19 Pandemic in the United States,” Natl. Bur.
Econ. Res., Aug. 2020, doi: 10.3386/w27759.
R. Chetty, J. N. Friedman, N. Hendren, M. Stepner, and the Opportunity Insights Team,
“The Economic Impacts of COVID-19: Evidence from a New Public Database Built
Using Private Sector Data,” Opportunity Insights Working Paper, 2020. [Online].
Available: https://opportunityinsights.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/05/tracker_paper.pdf.
116th Congress, S.3548: CARES Act. 2020.
A. Goolsbee and C. Syverson, “Fear, Lockdown, and Diversion: Comparing Drivers of
Pandemic Economic Decline 2020,” NBER Working Paper 27432, 2020. [Online].
Available: https://www.nber.org/system/files/working_papers/w27432/w27432.pdf.
O. Coibion, Y. Gorodnichenko, and M. Weber, “The Cost of the Covid-19 Crisis:
Lockdowns, Macroeconomic Expectations, and Consumer Spending,” NBER Working
Paper 27141, 2020. [Online]. Available: http://www.nber.org/papers/w27141.
Arizona Department of Health Services, “COVID-19 Guidance for Businesses,” 2020.
Accessed: Mar. 01, 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://www.azdhs.gov/documents/preparedness/epidemiology-disease-control/infectiousdisease-epidemiology/novel-coronavirus/community/guidance-for-businesses.pdf.
E. Glaeser, G. Z. Jin, B. Leyden, and M. Luca, “Learning from Deregulation: The
Asymmetric Impact of Lockdown and Reopening on Risky Behavior During COVID-19,”
Working Paper 27650, Aug. 2020. doi: 10.3386/w27650.
I. E. Fellows, R. B. Slayton, and A. J. Hakim, “The COVID-19 Pandemic, Community
Mobility and the Effectiveness of Non-pharmaceutical Interventions: The United States of
America, February to May 2020,” arXiv 2007.12644, 2020. [Online]. Available:
http://arxiv.org/abs/2007.12644.
Y. Marzouki, F. S. Aldossari, and G. A. Veltri, “Understanding the Buffering Effect of
Social Media Use on Anxiety During the COVID-19 Pandemic Lockdown,” Humanit.
Soc. Sci. Commun., vol. 8, no. 1, p. 47, 2021, doi: 10.1057/s41599-021-00724-x.
L. Hallas, A. Hatibie, S. Majumdar, M. Pyarali, and T. Hale, “Variation in US states’
responses to COVID-19,” BSG Working Paper 2020/034, 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://www.bsg.ox.ac.uk/sites/default/files/2020-08/BSG-WP-2020-034.pdf.
D. Alexander and E. Karger, “Do Stay-at-Home Orders Cause People to Stay at Home?
Effects of Stay-at-Home Orders on Consumer Behavior,” Federal Reserve Bank of
Chicago Working Paper 2020-12, 2020. doi: 10.21033/wp-2020-12.
Y. Fan, A. Y. Orhun, and D. Turjeman, “Heterogeneous Actions, Beliefs, Constraints and
Risk Tolerance During the COVID-19 Pandemic,” NBER Working Paper 27211, 2020.
State of California, “Governor Newsom Outlines Six Critical Indicators the State will
Consider Before Modifying the Stay-at-Home Order and Other COVID-19 Interventions,”
2020. https://www.gov.ca.gov/2020/04/14/governor-newsom-outlines-six-criticalindicators-the-state-will-consider-before-modifying-the-stay-at-home-order-and-othercovid-19-interventions/ (accessed Nov. 17, 2020).

[19]
[20]
[21]
[22]

[23]
[24]
[25]

A. I. Friedson, D. McNichols, J. J. Sabia, and D. Dave, “Shelter-in-Place Orders and
Public Health: Evidence from California During the COVID-19 Pandemic,” J. Policy
Anal. Manag., 2021, doi: 10.1002/pam.22267.
O. Dyer, “Covid-19: Trump Stokes Protests Against Social Distancing Measures,” BMJ,
2020. doi: 10.1136/bmj.m1596.
G. Duran, “What CA Governor Newsom Must do to Fix Coronavirus Response,”
Sacramento Bee, Jul. 2020, Accessed: Feb. 08, 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://www.sacbee.com/podcasts/california-nation/article244410997.html.
M. Singh, “California’s Governor, Once Praised, Faces Backlash Over Pandemic
Response,” Guard., Feb. 2021, Accessed: Feb. 09, 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2021/feb/07/california-coronavirus-gavin-newsompandemic-response.
J. R. Vest, J. Blackburn, and V. A. Yeager, “Challenges in Translating National and State
Reopening Plans Into Local Reopening Policies During the COVID-19 Pandemic,” Public
Health Rep., vol. 136, no. 2, Dec. 2020, doi: 10.1177/0033354920971721.
S. L. Feldman and P. A. Mayer, “Arizona Health Care Systems’ Coordinated Response to
COVID-19—‘In It Together,’” JAMA Heal. Forum, vol. 1, no. 8, p. e201064, Aug. 2020,
doi: 10.1001/jamahealthforum.2020.1064.
M. É. Czeisler et al., “Public Attitudes, Behaviors, and Beliefs Related to COVID-19,
Stay-at-Home Orders, Nonessential Business Closures, and Public Health Guidance —
United States, New York City, and Los Angeles, May 5–12, 2020,” Morb. Mortal. Wkly.
Rep., 2020, [Online]. Available: https://www.hrsa.gov/rural-health/about-us/.

Relationship among state reopening policies, health outcomes and economic
recovery through first wave of the COVID-19 pandemic in the U.S.
Alexandre K. Ligo1,2, Emerson Mahoney1, Jeffrey Cegan1, Benjamin D. Trump1, Andrew
S. Jin,1 Maksim Kitsak3, Jesse Keenan5, Igor Linkov1,4,
Supplementary Information
S1. Data and Methods
We have gathered time series data at the state level from publicly available sources to
examine the relationship between state interventions, COVID-19 spread and economic impact.
The sources and operations performed to integrate and analyze the data are described below.
S1.1. Economic data, including consumer spending
We have included daily data on consumer card spending, time spent at residential, work
and other locations as an estimate of mobility, small business activity, as well as weekly data on
unemployment insurance claims and job postings made available by Harvard University [1], [2].
We have also collected daily travel data from the Bureau of Transportation Statistics. Moreover,
we have used data collected weekly or biweekly by the U.S. Census Household Pulse Survey [3]
on reported food and housing insecurity, mental health and internet availability, and data
collected monthly by the U.S. Census Current Population Survey [4] on weekly hours worked by
gender and race, as a proxy estimate of gender and race inequality with respect to the pandemic
impact. The list of time series data and their sources are described in Table S.1.
Among the economic and mobility variables examined, we have chosen an indicator of
consumer card spending for the analysis of economic activity in this paper, which is an indicator
from Opportunity Insights of the de-seasonalized, seven-day average change (relative to January
2020) in consumer card spending at each state.
This indicator is calculated for each day t as follows [2]. First, raw data on consumer card
spending for each day s(t) is taken as the 7-day moving average of card spending. The moving
average is then seasonally adjusted by dividing s(t) by the value of the corresponding day in
2019 ! !"#$ :
"(!)
"%&' (!) =
&"(! !"#$ )
Finally, the seasonally-adjusted value "%&' (!) is used to calculate the change in consumer
card spending relative to January 2020 as
" (!)
"'()*(!) = %&' &+++++++++
"%&' (!)
+++++++++
where "%&' (!) is the average spending over the January 4-31 reference period. The
variable "'()*(!) is the indicator used in this paper. This indicator was obtained by Opportunity
Insights from credit and debit card transactions processed by Affinity Solutions, which
represents about 10 percent of total consumer card spending in the U.S. The sources and

calculations of this and other indicators from Opportunity Insights are described in detail in [2],
which found that "'()*(!) closely follows the trends in consumer card spending during the
pandemic. We have chosen an indicator of consumer spending for the analysis of economic
activity in this paper because for most of the states examined the other variables of economic
activity (unemployment, business activity, etc.) represent similar trends as consumer card
spending.
S1.2. COVID-19 data
For the analysis in this paper, we have used new COVID-19 confirmed infections per day
(incidence) as an indicator of the disease spread. We have chosen incidence rather than COVID19 confirmed deaths because the latter is a lagged variable that could make it difficult to examine
the relationship of COVID-19 spread with policies and economic outcomes. We have used daily
COVID-19 data reported by the New York Times.
This indicator is calculated as follows. First, raw data on COVID-19 incidence for each
day and state is gathered and the seven-day moving average is calculated. The moving average is
then divided by the 2019 census estimate of the state population [3], resulting in the seven-day
moving average of new confirmed infections of COVID-19 per 100,000 people used in our
analysis.
Moreover, we have calculated three derived indicators. The first is the peak number of
new COVID-19 infections in every state, defined as the maximum seven-day average of
COVID-19 incidence between the start and end date of the lockdown phase. (Section S.1.3
below describe how data on lockdown start and end in each state was gathered and standardized.)
The second indicator is the rate of change in new case infections, defined as the sevenday moving average of the rate of change in new cases in each state. The rate of change in day t
for state i is defined as the derivative of daily COVID-19 incidence ,)-(!):
* ,)-(!)0
.( (!) =
*!
The third derived indicator is the duration, in days, of the lockdown phase in all states.
S1.3. Classification of state policy interventions
After gathering consumer card spending and COVID-19 data, we then classified policies
into categories denoting the level of restrictions over time in each state at each point over time.
The policies used to make these categorizations included state mandates on business closings or
re-openings, social distancing, group gathering size guidelines and other health related policies
on a state by state basis. We then matched the timeseries of COVID-19 spread and economic
variables with policy interventions enacted in each state. Since each state differs on the timing
and exact nature of each intervention, we applied a manual standardization procedure in order to
be able to compare policy interventions across states and their effects on COVID-19 infections
and consumer card spending. The procedure consisted in identifying state and/or local policy
interventions in state government websites and then manually mapping them into the phases
recommended in the “Guidelines for Opening Up America Again” released by the federal

government [5]. In other words, each policy intervention has been classified either as “shelter in
place” (“lockdown”) or one of the three reopening phases (1, 2 or 3) from the White House/CDC
Guidelines. This step was performed for the 37 states shown in Fig. 3. These are the states where
we have found enough data to enable a clear identification of lockdown and phased reopening,
which we believe are representative of the situation of all U.S. regions with respect to the public
health and economic outcomes of the COVID-19 pandemic. Consumer card spending and
COVID-19 data for all 50 states are shown in Figs. S5-S7.

S2. Results - Trends on COVID-19 spread and consumer card spending for all 50 states
(see figures below
S.3. Limitations
The limitations of this analysis must be considered when our results are interpreted. One
limitation is our classification of state lockdown and reopening interventions into categories
based on the CDC/White House guidelines. State decisions do not always match the guidelines
perfectly. One issue is that each phase of the CDC/White House guidelines includes a number of
different requirements, and for some states it is not obvious to determine the exact date when all
requirements for a phase transition were satisfied. Moreover, in Pennsylvania and several other
states interventions were not implemented in all counties at the same time and were often
conditional on the state of COVID-19 spread or other factors. Another limitation is the
retrospective and observational nature of data in this and other COVID-19 studies, which makes
it difficult to identify the effect of unobserved factors [6]. In particular, the variation in consumer
card spending may not be related with government mandates alone but affected also by other
state-specific factors such as unemployment levels, population densities, local incidence and
prevalence of COVID-19, changing hospital capacities, or even an over-emphasis on attempting
to return to a sense of normality.

Figure S5. Seven-day moving average of new daily COVID-19 cases per 100,000 people per
state. The colors represent our classification of state interventions into the three phases of the
White House/CDC reopening guidelines (where phase classification could be performed).

Figure S6. Seven-day moving average of de-seasonalized change in consumer card spending
(relative to January 2020) over time. The colors represent our classification of state interventions
where phase classification could be performed.

Figure S7. Seven-day moving average of de-seasonalized change in consumer card spending
(relative to January 2020) as a function of seven-day moving average of new daily COVID-19
cases per 100,000 people.

Figure S8. Duration of lockdown (in days) per state between March 13 and August 9, 2020 for
the 37 states where we were able to identify state transitions. The states highlighted (blue) are the
examples described in Fig. 1.

Figure S9. (A) Seven-day moving average of de-seasonalized change in consumer card
spending on groceries and food stores (relative to January 2020) as a function of seven-day
moving average of new confirmed daily COVID-19 cases per 100,000 people. (B) Seven-day
moving average of de-seasonalized change in consumer card spending (all categories relative to
January 2020) as a function of seven-day moving average of new confirmed daily COVID-19
cases per 100,000 people, in the period between March 13 and August 9, 2020 for New York,
Michigan, California and Arizona. The colors represent our classification of state policies into
lockdown and the three phases of the White House/CDC reopening guidelines.

Figure S10. Temporal Patterns between March 13 and August 9, 2020 for New York,
Michigan, California and Arizona of (A) seven-day moving average of daily COVID-19 deaths
per 100,000 people over time. (B) seven-day moving average of de-seasonalized change in
consumer card spending (relative to January 2020) over time. (C) Consumer card spending as a
function of COVID-19 deaths. The colors represent our classification of state policies into
lockdown and the three phases of the White House/CDC reopening guidelines. The Pearson
correlations in (C) are -0.84 for New York, -0.69 for Michigan, 0.25 for California, and 0.53 for
Arizona.

S.4. References
[1]
[2]

[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]

the Opportunity Insights Team, “Economic Tracker,” 2020. https://opportunityinsights.org
(accessed Mar. 12, 2020).
R. Chetty, J. N. Friedman, N. Hendren, M. Stepner, and the Opportunity Insights Team,
“The Economic Impacts of COVID-19: Evidence from a New Public Database Built
Using Private Sector Data,” Opportunity Insights Working Paper, 2020. [Online].
Available: https://opportunityinsights.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/05/tracker_paper.pdf.
United States Census Bureau, “Household Pulse Survey Data Tables,” 2021.
https://www.census.gov/programs-surveys/household-pulse-survey/data.html (accessed
Jan. 12, 2021).
IPUMS, “IPUMS CPS,” 2020. https://cps.ipums.org/cps/ (accessed Jan. 12, 2021).
The White House and Center for Disease Control and Prevention, “Opening Up America
Again,” 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.whitehouse.gov/openingamerica/
(accessed: 12/15/2020).
J. M. Brauner et al., “Inferring the Effectiveness of Government Interventions Against
COVID-19,” Science (80-. )., Dec. 2020, doi: 10.1126/science.abd9338.

